<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Gene Cluster Profile Vectors: a method to infer functionally related gene sets by grouping proximity-based gene clusters</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:S2. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-S2-S2"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Vikas Rao Pejaver"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

PROCEEDINGS

Open Access

Gene Cluster Profile Vectors: a method to infer
functionally related gene sets by grouping
proximity-based gene clusters
Vikas Rao Pejaver, Sun Kim*
From IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine 2010
Hong Kong, P. R. China. 18-21 December 2010

Abstract
Background: Proximity-based methods and co-evolution-based phylogenetic profiles methods have been
successfully used for the identification of functionally related genes. Proximity-based methods are effective for
physically clustered genes while the phylogenetic profiles method is effective for co-occurring gene sets. However,
both methods predict many false positives and false negatives. In this paper, we propose the Gene Cluster Profile
Vector (GCPV) method, which combines these two methods by using phylogenetic profiles of whole gene clusters.
The GCPV method is, currently, the only genome comparison based method that allows for the characterization of
relationships between gene clusters based profiles of individual genes in clusters.
Results: The GCPV method groups together reasonably related operons in E. coli about 60% of the time. The
method is not sensitive to the choice of a reference genome set used and it outperforms the conventional
phylogenetic profiles method. Finally, we show that the method works well for predicted gene clusters from C.
crescentus and can serve as an important tool not only for understanding gene function, but also for elucidating
mechanisms of general biological processes.
Conclusions: The GCPV method has shown to be an effective and robust approach to the prediction of
functionally related gene sets from proximity-based gene clusters or operons.

Background
Introduction

Next generation sequencing technology has caused an
explosion in the genomic data that is available to the
research community. As a consequence, the annotation
of such large numbers of diverse genomes has now
become a major challenge. More specifically, in order to
elucidate novel biological processes in certain organisms,
assigning functions to the genes involved and understanding their interplay have become key problems. To
address these challenges, several methods of function
assignment have been proposed over the past decade.
These range from simple homology-based strategies
* Correspondence: sunkim2@indiana.edu
School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University, 150 S Woodlawn
Ave, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

(BLAST [1], bi-directional best hits, etc.) to comparative
genomics-based methods such as the gene cluster
method [2], the phylogenetic profiles method [3], and
the gene fusion [4] method.
In the case of prokaryotes, the gene cluster method
has been very effective as functionally related genes tend
to be physically clustered together on the genome and
these arrangements tend to be conserved due to selection pressures [5]. However, conservation of genes is
highly sensitive to the set of reference genomes and
their phylogenetic relationship. In general, gene clusters
are correct, in terms of functional relationship of component genes, but gene clusters are small and fragmented when clusters conserved in many genomes are
sought. In addition, proximity-based clusters are often
fragmented since not all genes in a functionally related
gene set are physically co-located.

© 2011 Pejaver and Kim; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

Another technique called the phylogenetic profiles
method has been effective for co-evolving gene sets.
However, this method is prone to false positives. Moreover, both these methods do not help understand the
underlying mechanisms of biological processes. In order
to establish such higher-level functions for both genes
and gene clusters, we adopt a novel approach that
involves the identification of functionally related gene
clusters. To the best of our knowledge, this identification problem has not been addressed before. In this
paper, we propose a novel method called the Gene Cluster Profile Vector (GCPV) method that combines
strength of both techniques. GCPV takes, as an input, a
set of gene clusters that are stringently defined and then
group clusters based on the similarity of two clusters
defined as the occurrence profiles of individual genes of
the clusters in a set of genomes. We evaluate the GCPV
method’s effectiveness in grouping together related
operons in Escherichia coli and also assess the performance of the GCPV method in comparison to the single-gene phylogenetic profiles method. We then test its
performance on predicted gene clusters from Caulobacter crescentus.
Motivation

Genes whose products that contribute to the same biological process tend to form small clusters in prokaryotes.
However, these clusters themselves, tend to be spread out
through the entire genome. Simple proximity-based methods would be unable to identify functional relatedness in
such cases. Moreover, although certain biological processes are observed in certain organisms, the corresponding clusters related to them may be fragmented into
smaller clusters. On the other hand, although the phylogenetic profiles method has been successfully used for gene
function assignment, it is based on the assumption that
genes with related functions would have similar evolutionary profiles. This assumption tends to lead to false positives due to spurious matches. We propose a method that
combines the advantages of the proximity and evolutionary constraints inherent in these two methods. Previous
attempts at combining these methods, used individual
scores for a gene, based on proximity and on co-evolution
and combined these scores to assign it a function [6].
Since the goal of this study is not only to assign specific
functions to genes but to also identify functional relationships between whole gene clusters, such score-based
methods cannot be used. We, therefore, propose a more
intuitive combination of the phylogenetic profiles and
gene cluster methods.
Problem description

The problem being addressed in this paper can be
described as follows. Given a target genome, a set of

Page 2 of 10

gene clusters in the target genome (as predicted by any
cluster prediction algorithm [7-11]) and a reference genome set, the goal is to identify functionally related gene
clusters in the target genome and thus, generate clusters
of gene clusters that contain gene clusters with similar
biological functions, i.e.
Input: (1) GT , a target genome; (2) C, a set of gene
clusters predicted by a proximity-based method in GT ;
(3) G, a set of reference genomes that are at varying
evolutionary distances from GT.
Output: L, a set of clusters of gene clusters where
each cluster contains functionally related gene clusters.
The main reason behind the use of proximity-based
gene clusters as input is that, gene clusters, when predicted with stringent parameters, are generally accurate
but are fragmented as small sets. Thus, we have
designed the GCPV method to group together such
tight, fragmented clusters.
Challenges

In order to address the above problem, several challenges have to be overcome. First, no prior information
on gene or cluster functions is known. Second, in order
to identify functionally related gene clusters, both proximity and conservation information in these clusters
need to be considered. Third, when considering phylogenetic profiles of gene clusters, the method needs to be
independent of the size of gene clusters. Finally, comparative genomics methods like the phylogenetic profiles
methods are typically dependent on the size and nature
of the reference genome set used and such dependence
needs to be minimized. Thus, the design and implementation of a novel method to identify functionally related
gene clusters is not trivial.

Results and discussion
Evaluating the GCPV method - operons from E. coli

The best approximation for a gene cluster is an operon
as operons are also sets of genes that are constrained by
proximity to each other. However, it must be noted that
an operon corresponds to a set of co-transcribed and
co-regulated genes. We have used a set of known operons in Escherichia coli K-12 substr. MG1655 (NCBI
RefSeq: NC_000913) that have been verified by experiments. This dataset was obtained by filtering out computationally predicted operons from RegulonDB (Release
6.7) [12]. Subsequently, there were 1299 genes represented in 379 operons from E. coli. This data, along
with single gene phylogenetic profile information was
input into the GCPV workflow. Note that for this and
all the following experiments, only prokaryotic species
were used as reference genomes and these were downloaded from NCBI. The resulting clusters of operons
were evaluated using SEED broad categories.

Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

We found that, on average for each starting reference
set (ranging from 20 to 210 genomes), about 87 clusters
of operons were produced. About 60% of the clusters of
operons had scores of at least 0.3 at the broad category
level (Fig. 1) and about 40% at the SEED subsystem
level (which is more specific as it comprises natural language identifiers). Note that we have used a less stringent cutoff simply because our evaluation method itself

Page 3 of 10

is harsh on smaller clusters (especially clusters containing merely three operons). Fig. 1 also shows that there
is very little correlation between performance of the
method and the number of genomes used in the original
reference set. As can be seen in Additional File 1, clusters of operons are fairly consistent across reference sets
of different sizes. Although some of these clusters show
slight differences in their members, there tend to be a

Figure 1 Correlation of the validation scores of clusters of operons obtained by the GCPV method with the number of genomes used
in the original reference set The x-axis represents the reference genome set size and the y-axis represents the fraction of clusters of operons
with scores greater than 0.3. The slope of the line in the figure is -0.00008997 which indicates that there is very little dependence between the
two variables.

Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

core set of operons common to all genome sets. There
are also a number of clusters that are unique to each
set. These tend to be smaller clusters broken down from
larger clusters of operons. We believe both these issues
can be explained by the fixed tree-cut height we use
during hierarchical clustering.
In order to get some sense of the effect of the phylogenetic relationships among genomes in different reference sets, we broke the reference sets in Fig. 1 down to
the phylogenetic classes of each genome. Fig. 2 shows
that although in some reference sets, all classes are not
represented, the results are still similar. Note that these
original sets were randomly devised and certain classes
like Gammaproteobacteria and Firmicutes are wellrepresented in all sets due to inherent biases in public
databases.
Comparing performance with single-gene phylogenetic
profiles method

We further sought to test the usefulness of the GCPV
method in the characterization of novel genes. For this,
a comparison was made with respect to an in-house
implementation of the single-gene phylogenetic profiles
(SGPP) method. The same dataset and the same validation approach was used as in the benchmarking tests.
However, in order to make a fair comparison, the dataset of operons was mixed with ‘artificial’ gene clusters
(containing at least three genes) generated with intracluster distance cutoff of 300 bp [2]. This increased the
number of genes in the dataset to 3709, which is closer
to the total number of genes in the genome. Additionally, the evaluation method was slightly changed to
enable validation at the gene level as opposed to the
cluster level. This was achieved by skipping the step
where the union of categories of genes within a cluster
were assigned to the whole cluster (See Evaluation subsection in Methods). As shown in Fig. 3, on average, the
GCPV method performs 10 times better than the SGPP
method for identical reference genome sets even with a
strict cutoff of 0.5. The SGPP implementation is as
described in Step 1 in the Methods section and is a
baseline implementation. Although subsequent work has
improved upon the SGPP method through different variants of the method, we believe if similar variations were
to be applied to the GCPV method, its performance
would improve similarly.
Testing the GCPV method - gene clusters
from C. crescentus

For this experiment, we used gene clusters from Caulobacter crescentus NA1000 (NCBI RefSeq: NC_011916),
predicted to be conserved in four other members of the
Alphaproteobacteria class by the PhyloEGGS algorithm
(unpublished). This dataset contained 300 genes

Page 4 of 10

represented in 66 gene clusters. A reference genome set
of size 100 was used and evaluation was done using
KEGG pathway information [13]. This was done because
the target genome was relatively new and no SEED
information was available for it at the time of the study.
Since this dataset was much smaller, a lower number of
clusters of gene clusters was obtained (14 clusters). Of
these 14 predicted clusters, about 79% of them showed
scores greater than 0.5 (Fig. 4). This indicates that the
GCPV method does group together functionally related
gene clusters effectively and can be used on larger datasets with gene clusters that are not well-characterized.
Case studies

An interesting example is the CCNA_02239 gene in C.
crescentus which is annotated as a hypothetical protein.
PhyloEGGS predicted it to be a part of a two-gene cluster also containing a translation initiation inhibitor
(CCNA_02241). The GCPV method included this gene
cluster in a cluster of cluster of size three with the
remaining two clusters being assigned similar KEGG
pathways (ccs00190 and ccs01100). The latter is a general metabolic pathway while the former deals with oxidative phosphorylation. Based on this, one can conclude
that CCNA_02239 may play a role in oxidative phosphorylation or a similar pathway. This would not have
been evident through a simple BLAST search or by just
using the cluster context. This highlights the use of the
GCPV method as an effective annotation tool.
Another case study involves genes responsible for the
various steps in the flagellar assembly process. Table 1
shows the different clusters of operons that contain flagellum-related operons from E. coli. Cluster 23 seems to
be the most specific to flagellar assembly while the
other clusters do not entirely contain operons involved
in flagellar assembly. Interestingly, the justification for
the fact that flgAMN, flhDC and fliDST are not grouped
into cluster 23 along with the other operons is that
these operons consist of genes that produce early or late
gene products in the flagellar assembly process. Thus,
the GCPV method also enables the possible distinction
between genes that contribute to a process at different
time stages. The fliAZY operon is isolated probably
because it has been established that the fliZ and fliY
genes from this operon are not required for motility
[14]. Thus, the GCPV method also enables the identification of genes that are involved but are perhaps not
instrumental to a particular process.

Conclusions
We have established an effective and robust method for
the detection of functionally related gene clusters and
thus, genes, with no prior information on function provided. The GCPV method shows minimum dependence

Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

Page 5 of 10

Figure 2 Breakdown of the reference sets in Fig. 1 and their effect on the results from the GCPV method The x-axis represents the 20
starting reference genome sets and the y-axis is the same as in Fig. 1. Although further studies are required, this plot does indicate that the
nature of the reference set does not affect the GCPV method drastically.

Figure 3 Comparison of the GCPV (maroon) and the SGPP (orange) methods for a dataset of known operons and artificial gene
clusters in E. coli The x-axis represents the reference genome set size and the y-axis represents the fraction of clusters of clusters with scores
greater than 0.5.

Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

Page 6 of 10

Figure 4 Distribution of KEGG pathway scores for clusters of gene clusters predicted by the GCPV method in C. crescentus

Table 1 Clusters of operons from E. coli with a reference genome set of 120 genomes
Identifier for cluster of operon

Operons

Cluster 13

ackA-pta, argT-hisJQMP, artPIQM, fliAZY, glnHPQ, metNIQ

Cluster 40

fimAICDFGH, flgAMN, flhDC, slp-dctR, smtA-mukFEB

Cluster 43

flgBCDEFGHIJ,flgKL,flhBAE,fliLMNOPQR,motAB-cheAW

Cluster 163

csgDEFG, fliDST, yeaGH

Operons involved in flagellar assembly are marked in bold and identifiers are those in Additional File 1

Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

on the reference genome set used and has been shown
to outperform the basic phylogenetic profiles method
which is in agreement with previous work in this area
[15]. However, our work serves as an improvement over
the work in [15] as our method can accommodate gene
clusters of any size. A limitation of the GCPV method is
that genomic coverage may not span the entire genome
as not all genes are present in as parts of clusters.
This was aimed to be a pilot study and future work
includes the use of more sophisticated clustering techniques to further improve performance. This is particularly important in the context of improving
consistency at the individual cluster level. Interestingly,
in its current form, the GCPV method still groups
together functionally similar clusters/operons as indicated by the evaluation scores. This implies that
although individual clusters may not be reference-set
independent, the GCPV method generates clusters
containing functionally related gene clusters and can
be used for function assignment. Additionally, the
GCPV method can be adapted to any gene set other

Page 7 of 10

than proximity-based gene clusters, as long as the
intra-set coupling is tight. In general, the GCPV
method holds the potential to play a role not only in
genome annotation but also in testing hypotheses for
roles of previously uncharacterized genes in metabolic
pathways, protein-protein interactions and general biological processes.

Methods
Description of the Gene Cluster Profile Vector method

The basic idea behind the GCPV method involves the
use of phylogenetic profiles of whole gene clusters.
These vectors serve as numerical representations of
both proximity and conservation information. Each step
of the GCPV workflow is discussed in detail below and
the workflow itself is illustrated in Fig. 5.
Step 1: Construction of Gene Cluster Profile Vectors

In order to construct GCPVs, for a target genome, single gene phylogenetic profiles for all genes and gene
cluster information need to be provided. For this study,
a gene in the target genome is considered to be present

Figure 5 Schematic representation of the Gene Cluster Profile Vector method

Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

in a reference genome if its single best BLAST match
from that genome has an E-value lower than 1E–10[16].
Once the single gene phylogenetic profiles are built,
they are grouped together based on the gene cluster
information provided. Then, for each cluster, a GCPV is
constructed based on the frequencies of the gene
presences in the reference genomes. Formally, if there
are n genes in a cluster, then:

aj

∑
=

n
i =1

b ij

n

where aj is the jth value in the GCPV and bij is one if
the gene is present in the jth genome & zero otherwise.
Two examples of this are shown in Fig. 6.
Therefore, for a given gene cluster, its profile vector is
a numeric vector where each element represents the
extent of conservation of genes from that cluster in a
specific reference genome. For example in Fig. 6 the
third element in the GCPV on the left is 0.5, it means
that the third genome contains only half the genes from
that cluster.
Step 2: Comparison of GCPVs by cosine similarity
calculations

For a given gene cluster, its profile vector provides a
succinct numeric representation that allows for its comparison with profile vectors of other gene clusters in the
target genome, i.e. GCPVs can be used in the calculation of a measure of functional relatedness or similarity
between gene clusters. In the case of GCPVs, vectors
with similar elements occurring in the same specific
order would need to be regarded as being more related
to each other than those with elements that break order.
The cosine similarity measure is ideal for this condition
to be satisfied. Moreover, cosine similarities have been

used previously in the context of single gene phylogey
netic profiles [6]. For two vectors and
of sizes m, the
cosine similarity is given by the following equation:
 
s( x , y) =

∑

∑

m

i =1

m
i =1

x i2

x iy i

∑

m
i =1

y i2

An example of this has been explained in Fig. 6 where
two hypothetical gene clusters, one with four genes and
one with five are considered. The cosine similarity of
their GCPVs turns out to be 0.9949 which indicates a
high similarity. This is reasonable because gene cluster
Y is exactly identical to cluster X in its structure except
for the addition of a fifth gene g 15 . It can also be
observed that the profiles of g11 and g15 are identical to
each other. Thus, this fifth gene does not affect the

Page 8 of 10

conservation profile of the cluster as a whole and this
results in a high cosine similarity value.
Step 3: Generation of sub-profiles

As mentioned earlier, one of the key challenges in a
comparative genomics method is reducing the dependence of the method on the reference genome
set used. In order to address this challenge, an intermediate step has been incorporated into the GCPV
workflow. This step basically involves the random generation of new reference genome subsets from the original reference genome set. These subsets vary in size
(with the original reference genome set being the largest) and result in the generation of GCPVs of different lengths. For a given reference genome set, these
can loosely be termed as ‘sub-profiles’ and cosine similarities can be calculated for GCPVs generated from
each of these sub-profiles. In these study, the minimum sub-profile size was 12 and the increase in profile size occurred in increments of 12.
The idea behind this is that during the subsequent
steps in the workflow, these cosine similarities would be
combined to improve the method in two ways. First, as
mentioned earlier, the use of cosine similarities from
reference genome subsets would help reduce the
dependence of performance on the reference genome
set. Second, by randomly generating smaller reference
genome subsets, one can account for lineage-specific coevolution whose effects often arise in the phylogenetic
profiles method.
Step 4: Construction of cosine similarity matrices and the
weighted matrix approach

The steps outlined previously result in a single value
between zero and one for a given pair of gene clusters
within the target genome. This is done for all pairs of
gene clusters to generate a cosine similarity matrix. If
there are k gene clusters, this matrix would have k rows
and k columns with all entries in the diagonal being
unity (since the cosine similarity calculated for a gene
cluster and itself is one). This is repeated for each reference genome subset and would result in many such
cosine similarity matrices.
In order to meaningfully combine these matrices to
provide clearer functional relationships between gene
clusters, a weighted average approach is adopted. Each
cosine similarity matrix is weighted based on the phylogenetic relationships between each of the reference genomes used and the target genome. More specifically, a
weight for a matrix is the mean of the normalized phylogenetic distances (16S rRNA sequence dissimilarities)
between each reference genome and the target genome.
This calculation is done by the APE package [17]. This
method of weight assignment is most intuitive when
considering the fact that one of the aims is to reduce

Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

Page 9 of 10

Figure 6 Schematic representation that depicts the construction of profile vectors for two hypothetical gene clusters and the
calculation of cosine similarity between them Individual genes in each cluster are represented by g and the reference genomes used are
represented by G. The vectors marked in bold are the resulting GCPVs.

the effects of phylogeny on the results of the GCPV
method. Mathematically, the entire procedure can be
written as:
M=

w1M(1) + w 2 M(2) +  + w t M(t )
w1 + w 2 +  + w t

where M is the final combined cosine similarity
matrix, M (i) is the cosine similarity matrix resulting
from the reference genome subset i and wi is the weight
for the matrix M(i).
Step 5: Divisive hierarchical clustering

The final result of the GCPV method is a reasonable
grouping of gene clusters that reflects their functional
relatedness to each other. After having experimented
with various clustering techniques, it was found that
density-based methods fail because cosine similarities
seem to be distributed evenly and the Markov Cluster
method results in a smaller number of larger clusters.
The divisive hierarchical clustering technique seems
to give the most reasonable results. It basically assumes

that all data points belong to one large cluster and then
proceeds to break the cluster down into smaller units
based on intra-cluster and inter-cluster distances.
Evaluation method

In order to establish the effectiveness of the GCPV
method, we have performed experiments on both real
and predicted data. For validation purposes we have
used either the SEED [18] or the KEGG [13] broad categories. The validation methodology involves the calculation of a score for each cluster of cluster generated.
Mathematically, the validation procedure can be
explained as follows. Consider a cluster of gene clusters
C containing K gene clusters denoted by c 1 , c2 ,…, cK .
Let the number of genes in each cluster be n1, n2,…, nK.
Let the broad categories for one such gene cluster cx by
denoted by Bcx and for its genes be denoted by Bg1, Bg2,
…, Bgnx. Then:
B c x = B g1  B g 2    B g n

x

Pejaver and Kim BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 2):S2
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S2/S2

Now, once all K gene clusters have been assigned a set
of broad categories, the score for cluster of gene cluster
C is calculated as follows:

∑ ∑
Score for C =
K −1

K

i =1

j =i +1

E ij

⎛K⎞
⎜ ⎟
⎝2⎠

⎧1
⎪
where E ij = ⎨
⎪0
⎩

if B ci  B cj > 0
if B ci  B cj = 0

Authors contributions
SK devised and developed the method and also designed
the experiments. VRP devised and developed the
method and performed the experiments. Both authors
prepared the manuscript.
Additional material

Page 10 of 10

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.

Additional file 1: Comparison of clusters of operons generated for
E. coli Each entry corresponds to a cluster of operon for the particular
reference set size. Clusters from each set were manually compared and
placed together in the same row. The clusters are mostly reproduced
even with changes in set size. Most of the clusters unique to certain
reference sets are a result of cluster-splitting due to the fixed tree-cut
height used during hierarchical clustering.

Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by a US National Science Foundation
grant (NSF MCB-0731950) and the Microbial Systems Node in the METACyt
Initiative from the Lilly Foundation.
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 12
Supplement 2, 2011: Selected articles from the IEEE International Conference
on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine 2010. The full contents of the
supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/14712164/12?issue=S2.

16.

17.
18.

Enault F, Suhre K, Claverie J: Phydbac “Gene Function Predictor”: a gene
annotation tool based on genomic context analysis. BMC bioinformatics
2005, 6:247.
Yang Q, Sze S: Large-scale analysis of gene clustering in bacteria. Genome
research 2008, 18(6):949.
Fujibuchi W, Ogata H, Matsuda H, Kanehisa M: Automatic detection of
conserved gene clusters in multiple genomes by graph comparison and
P-quasi grouping. Nucleic acids research 2000, 28(20):4029.
Calabrese P, Chakravarty S, Vision T: Fast identification and statistical
evaluation of segmental homologies in comparative maps. Bioinformatics
2003, 19(Suppl 1):i74.
Kim S, Bhan A, Maryada B, Choi K, Brun Y: EGGS: Extraction of gene
clusters using genome context based sequence matching techniques.
Bioinformatics and Biomedicine, 2007. BIBM 2007. IEEE International
Conference on, IEEE 2007, 23-28.
Chae H, Ashki H, Choi K, Kim S: EGGSlicer: Predicting biologically
meaningful gene sets from gene clusters using gene ontology
information. Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, 2010. BCB 2010. ACM
International Conference on, ACM 2010, 448-450.
Gama-Castro S, Jiménez-Jacinto V, Peralta-Gil M, Santos-Zavaleta A,
Penaloza-Spinola M, Contreras-Moreira B, Segura-Salazar J, Muniz-Rascado L,
Martinez-Flores I, Salgado H, et al: RegulonDB (version 6.0): gene
regulation model of Escherichia coli K-12 beyond transcription, active
(experimental) annotated promoters and Textpresso navigation. Nucleic
acids research 2007.
Kanehisa M, Goto S: KEGG: Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes.
Nucleic acids research 2000, 28-27.
Mytelka D, Chamberlin M: Escherichia coli fliAZY operon. Journal of
bacteriology 1996, 178:24.
Zheng Y, Roberts R, Kasif S: Genomic functional annotation using coevolution profiles of gene clusters. Genome Biol 2002, 3(11):1-0060.
Date S, Marcotte E: Discovery of uncharacterized cellular systems by
genome-wide analysis of functional linkages. Nature Biotechnology 2003,
21(9):1055-1062.
Paradis E, Claude J, Strimmer K: APE: analyses of phylogenetics and
evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 2004, 20(2):289.
Overbeek R, Begley T, Butler R, Choudhuri J, Chuang H, Cohoon M, de
Crecy-Lagard V, Diaz N, Disz T, Edwards R, et al: The subsystems approach
to genome annotation and its use in the project to annotate 1000
genomes. Nucleic acids research 2005, 33(17):5691.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-S2-S2
Cite this article as: Pejaver and Kim: Gene Cluster Profile Vectors: a
method to infer functionally related gene sets by grouping proximitybased gene clusters. BMC Genomics 2011 12(Suppl 2):S2.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 27 July 2011
References
1. Altschul S, Gish W, Miller W, Myers E, Lipman D: Basic local alignment
search tool. Journal of molecular biology 1990, 215(3):403-410.
2. Overbeek R, Fonstein M, DŚouza M, Pusch G, Maltsev N: The use of gene
clusters to infer functional coupling. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 1999, 96(6):2896.
3. Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: Protein
phylogenetic profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 1999, 96(8):4285-4288.
4. Marcotte E, Pellegrini M, Ng H, Rice D, Yeates T, Eisenberg D: Detecting
protein function and protein-protein interactions from genome
sequences. Science 1999, 285(5428):751.
5. Demerec M, Hartman P: Complex loci in microorganisms. Annual Reviews
in Microbiology 1959, 13:377-406.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
