<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genome-wide characterization of the biggest grass, bamboo, based on 10,608 putative full-length cDNA sequences</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-116"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Zhenhua Peng, Tingting Lu, Lubin Li, Xiaohui Liu, Zhimin Gao, Tao Hu, Xuewen Yang, Qi Feng, Jianping Guan, Qijun Weng, Danlin Fan, Chuanrang Zhu, Ying Lu, Bin Han, Zehui Jiang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Genome-wide characterization of the biggest
grass, bamboo, based on 10,608 putative
full-length cDNA sequences
Research article

Zhenhua Peng†1,3, Tingting Lu†2, Lubin Li†1, Xiaohui Liu†2, Zhimin Gao3, Tao Hu1, Xuewen Yang3, Qi Feng2,
Jianping Guan2, Qijun Weng2, Danlin Fan2, Chuanrang Zhu2, Ying Lu2, Bin Han*2,4 and Zehui Jiang*1,3

Abstract
Background: With the availability of rice and sorghum genome sequences and ongoing efforts to sequence genomes
of other cereal and energy crops, the grass family (Poaceae) has become a model system for comparative genomics
and for better understanding gene and genome evolution that underlies phenotypic and ecological divergence of
plants. While the genomic resources have accumulated rapidly for almost all major lineages of grasses, bamboo
remains the only large subfamily of Poaceae with little genomic information available in databases, which seriously
hampers our ability to take a full advantage of the wealth of grass genomic data for effective comparative studies.
Results: Here we report the cloning and sequencing of 10,608 putative full length cDNAs (FL-cDNAs) primarily from
Moso bamboo, Phyllostachys heterocycla cv. pubescens, a large woody bamboo with the highest ecological and
economic values of all bamboos. This represents the third largest FL-cDNA collection to date of all plant species, and
provides the first insight into the gene and genome structures of bamboos. We developed a Moso bamboo genomic
resource database that so far contained the sequences of 10,608 putative FL-cDNAs and nearly 38,000 expressed
sequence tags (ESTs) generated in this study.
Conclusion: Analysis of FL-cDNA sequences show that bamboo diverged from its close relatives such as rice, wheat,
and barley through an adaptive radiation. A comparative analysis of the lignin biosynthesis pathway between bamboo
and rice suggested that genes encoding caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase may serve as targets for genetic
manipulation of lignin content to reduce pollutants generated from bamboo pulping.
Background
We rely on grasses more than any other groups of plants
for food and potential renewable energy. With the number of genome sequences growing much more rapidly
than any other plant family, the grass family (Poaceae)
becomes an ideal system for comparative studies of gene
and genome structure and function [1-6]. To develop the
system, it is critical to accumulate genomic resources for
all major lineages of the grass family. The majority of
large subfamilies of grasses have already had a great deal
* Correspondence: bhan@ncgr.ac.cn, Jiangzehui@caf.ac.cn
2

National Center for Gene Research & Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology
and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200233, PR China
2 Chinese Academy of Forestry, Wanshou Shan, Beijing 100091, PR China
† Contributed equally

of genomic or expressional data available primarily
because they possess crop species. The only exception is
the subfamily of bamboos, Bambusoideae, which contains more than 1,000 species but has little data available
in DNA or protein sequence databases [4,7]. By January
of 2009, the number of ESTs deposited in the GenBank
ranged from 436,535 to 2,018,337 for rice, wheat, maize,
barley, sorghum, sugarcane, and switchgrass, but only
3,087 for bamboo. This creates a major missing link in the
grass family for comparative genomics.
More serious than the missing link for comparative
analyses is the lack of genomic resources of bamboo. This
hampers biological investigations of this group of morphologically and physiologically unique and ecologically
and economically important grasses. Unlike the majority
of ~10,000 grass species that are herbaceous and occupy

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Peng et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

Page 2 of 13

open habitats such as grassland, bamboo represents the
only major lineage of grasses that lives exclusively in forests and grows large woody culms up to 30 cm in diameter and 12 m in height [8]. In addition to remarkable sizes
and woodiness, bamboo has rather striking life history
characterized by a prolonged vegetative phase lasting up
to more than 100 years before flowering.
With these unique features, bamboos are important
components of tropical and subtropical forest ecosystems, especially in Asia, where they have had a long history of being utilized as garden ornamentals and forest
products for making construction material, paper pulp,
and furniture. With the realization that bamboo produces
high-quality fibers and can be harvested repeatedly without severe destruction of the ecosystems, it becomes an
increasingly valuable forest product that could replace a
substantial portion of tree-based timber and paper pulp
plantation. This highlights another important economic
value of grasses in addition to food and renewable energy.
In this study, we cloned and sequenced more than ten
thousand putatively unique FL-cDNA derived primarily
from vegetative tissues of Moso bamboo, Phyllostachys
heterocycla cv. Pubescens, a large woody bamboo with the
highest ecological, economic, and cultural values of all
bamboos in Asia and accounting for ~70% of total area of
bamboo growth and 5 billion US dollars of annual forest
production in China [9] (Additional file 1). The
sequences reported in this study represent the third largest collection of FL-cDNA sequences of all plant species,
only smaller in number than those of Arabidopsis and
rice. It provides the first large sequence dataset for studying the structure and function of a substantial portion of
bamboo genes, and fills the gap in the grass family for
comparative genomics. A multiple-gene phylogeny
inferred from these data shed light on the evolutionary
relationships within the grass family. Comparative analyses of the bamboo sequence data with those of rice, barley, and wheat yielded new insights into gene evolution
associated with rapid and marked phenotypic and ecological divergence between bamboo and closely related
grasses. Comparison of bamboo cDNAs and rice genes
involved in lignin biosynthesis suggested that genes
encoding caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase may serve as
effective targets for genetic manipulation of lignin con-

tent to reduce pollutants generated from bamboo pulping.

Results
Structure of bamboo cDNA sequences

From screening and sequencing five cDNA libraries, a
total of 37,797 5'-end sequences comprised of at least 100
consecutive nucleotides with a Phred score above 20 were
obtained and assembled into 10,669 singletons and 3,373
contigs. The average and maximal sizes of contigs were 8
and 288 cDNA clones, respectively. All singletons and
one representative of each contig were fully sequenced
and further filtered for redundancy, which yielded 10,608
putatively unique FL-cDNA sequences. The average
length of these FL-cDNAs was 1,092 bp, and 8,695 (82%)
cDNAs had open reading frames (ORFs) longer than 100
amino acids, similar to 87% in soybean [10] and 91% in
poplar [11].
The characteristics of these 8,695 cDNAs were compared with 37,165 FL-cDNAs of rice and 17,390 FLcDNAs of Arabidopsis also with predicted ORFs longer
than 100 amino acids. The mean GC content of the 8,695
bamboo FL-cDNAs is 54.0%, ranging from 30.1 to 72.1%,
with the highest GC content of 69.2% at the third codon
position (Table 1). The mean GC content also varies
among 5' untranslated regions (UTRs), ORFs, and 3'
UTRs, with that in 3' UTRs lower than the other two
regions (Additional file 2). Bamboo codon usages are calculated and compared with those of rice and Arabidopsis
(Additional file 3).
Approximately 24% of the 8,695 bamboo cDNAs contain at least one single sequence repeat (SSR), which is
the same as the percentage found in Arabidopsis and
lower than the 44% found in rice. The frequencies of specific types of SSRs found in the bamboo, rice, and Arabidopsis cDNA sequences are illustrated in Figure 1, of
which mono-, di-, and tri-nucleotide repeats are predominant. With regard to the location of SSRs, mono-nucleotide repeats are most frequent in 5' and 3' UTRs, dinucleotide repeats are most frequent in 5' UTRs, and trinucleotide repeats have a relatively high frequency in
ORFs (Figure 1).

Table 1: Mean percentage of GC content of bamboo, rice, and Arabidopsis FL-cDNAs.
Number

Length

5'UTR

3'UTR

ORF

1st

2nd

3rd

Bamboo

8,695

54.0

56.8

42.3

58.1

59.1

46.0

69.2

Rice

37,165

52.0

54.0

41.4

55.2

57.9

45.1

62.7

Arabidop
sis

17,390

43.5

42.9

38.6

45.6

51.4

41.8

43.5

Codon usage is compared in 5' and 3' UTRs, and the three codon positions of ORFs.

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Types and frequency of occurrence of simple sequence repeats (SSRs) in cDNAs of bamboo, rice, and Arabidopsis. (A) Percentage
of SSRs in different period sizes. Relative abundance of different types of SSRs is classified according to repeat length. (B) Frequency of SSR sequences
in different types. Relative frequency of 14 most abundant repeat sequences of SSRs is shown. (C) Frequency and position of mono-, di-, and tri-nucleotide SSRs. Frequency distribution of mono-, di-, and tri-nucleotide SSRs are calculated along the predicted transcribed regions.

Alternative splicing, natural antisense transcripts, and
transposable elements

With the absence of bamboo genome sequences, we identified putative alternative splicing (AS) patterns based on
six major AS types and the GT-AG rule of exon/intron
boundaries (Additional file 4A). A total of 304 cDNA
groups were predicted to have AS, of which 138 were
putative intron retention (IntronR) or Alternative position (AltP) types, including 6 with GC-AG exon/intron
boundaries, and 92, 29, 15 and 14 were putative ExonO,
ExonS, AltA and AltD types, respectively (Additional file
4B). Of these, 16 cDNA groups have more than one AS
patterns.
Natural antisense transcripts (NATs) overlap partially
the sequences of other endogenous sense transcripts in
the opposite direction. Overlapping genes involving exon
regions are known as cis-encoded natural sense-antisense

gene pairs [12,13]. Of the 10,608 FL-cDNAs, 25 were
identified to be sense-antisense transcripts (Additional
file 5). The average overlapping length was 467 bp, with a
range from 73 to 960 bp. Thirteen had predicted ORFs
longer than100 amino acid and 10 had predicted ORFs
between 30 and 100 amino acid, while one failed to have
predicted ORFs.
BLASTX searches of the bamboo cDNAs against plant
transposable element (TE) database revealed that 53 of
10,608 cDNA or 0.5% showed significant match to TEs, of
which 32, 10, and 10 were homologous to polyproteins,
transposases of class-I DNA elements (Mutators), and
class-II RNA elements (non-long terminal repeat, nonLTR), respectively. One matched to a TE in the reverse
orientation, which might be a result of genomic contamination or read-through from neighboring retrotransposons [14].

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

Functional annotation and genes involved in lignin
biosynthesis

A total of 9,496 (89.5% of ) bamboo FL-cDNAs matched
proteins of known or unknown functions based on
BLASTX against NCBI non-redundant database (nrDB).
A total of 5,404 (50.9%) cDNAs showed similarity with
PFAM protein families in the InterPro database, of which
those belonging to the top 20 most abundant families are
shown in Additional file 6. A total of 387 (3.6%) cDNAs
were predicted to be putative transcription factors
according to nrDB, of which those in the top 10 most
abundant classes are shown (Additional file 7). The InterPro Gene Ontology (GO) assignment identified 4,594
cDNA with GO terms associated with molecular functions in 11 categories (Additional file 8).
To take a snapshot on the functional representation of
the cDNAs, we identified from the 10,608 FL-cDNAs
genes encoding nine key enzymes involved in lignin biosynthesis
(KEGG
PATH:
ko00940,
http://
www.genome.jp/kegg/. A total of 35 cDNAs were identified, with at least one and as many as nine cDNAs found
for each of the nine enzymes (Table 2). For each enzyme,
we compared the number of putatively unique bamboo
cDNAs isolated in this study with the number of rice
genes identified from the genome sequences. The ratio of
the number of rice genes to that of bamboo cDNAs
showed a wide range of variation from 1.1 to 13, with an
average of 5 (Table 2). For each enzyme, a phylogeny was
inferred based on the aligned nucleotide sequences
between the bamboo cDNAs and rice genes (Additional
file 9).
Comparative and phylogenetic analyses with other grasses

Sequence similarity search was conducted between bamboo and eight other grasses with the largest amount data
available in TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies. They represent three of the four large subfamilies with more than

Page 4 of 13

100 species: rice (Oryza sativa) from the subfamily
Ehrhartoideae with >100 species; wheat (Triticum aestivum), barley (Hordeum vulgare), and Brachypodium distachyon from Pooideae with >3,000 species; and maize
(Zea mays), sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum), and switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) from Panicoideae with >3,000 species. As bamboo
represents the subfamily Bambusoideae with >1,000 species, Chloridoideae with >1,000 species is the only large
subfamily not represented in this study due to the lack of
sufficient amount of genomic data for informative comparative analysis (maximal ~20,000 ESTs for a single species).
Search for nucleotide sequence similarity with a relatively high stringency (E-value < 1e-10 in BLASTn)
showed that 49.2% of bamboo cDNAs had similarity hits
to rice transcripts, the highest among the grasses (Additional file 10). This compares to 81.2% and 58.1% of
cDNAs that had similarity hits to rice and Arabidopsis,
respectively, when the search was conducted for amino
acid sequences under a less stringent condition (E-value <
1e-6 in tBLASTx) [15]. The higher proportion of bamboo
cDNAs had hits to Arabidopsis than Branchypodium and
switchgrass was due to the relatively small number of
transcripts available for these two grasses. Similarity
search was also conducted between the bamboo FLcDNAs and the genome sequences of rice, sorghum, Arabidopsis, and poplar with both nucleotide and amino acid
sequences under different stringencies. The proportions
of similarity hits were somewhat lower than those hit the
transcript database (Additional file 11).
To find a set of orthologous sequences for phylogenetic
analysis of the grass family, we further increased the
search stringency by keeping those with one-to-one
match in nucleotide sequences between bamboo and
another species (see Methods). With this conservative
criterion, we identified 43 putative orthologs among the

Table 2: Number of bamboo FL-cDNAs and number of genes found in the rice genome that encode nine key enzymes in
the lignin biosynthesis pathway.
Enzymes

Bamboo cDNAs

4-coumarate-CoA ligase (4CL)

2

Rice genes
26

Ratio (R/B)
13.0

Caffeoyl caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase (CCoAOMT)

9

10

1.1

Cinnamoyl-CoA reductase (CCR)

7

18

2.7

Caffeic acid O-methyltransferase (COMT)

2

10

5.0

Cinnamate-4-hydroxylase (C4H)

1

4

4.0

Cinnamoyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD)

6

21

3.5

Laccase

5

23

4.6

5-hydroxyconiferyl aldehyde O-methyltransferase (AldOMT)

1

7

7.0

3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthase (DAHPS)

2

8

4.0

The ratio of the number of rice genes to the number of bamboo cDNAs (R/B) is calculated.

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

nine grass species plus Arabidopsis serving as an outgroup (Additional file 12). The concatenated alignment of
these 43 sequences was 38,418 bp long, and was subjected to phylogenetic analyses using three methods. The
resulting phylogenetic trees differed in the relationship
between subfamilies, Bambusoideae (bamboo), Pooideae
(barley, wheat, Brachypodium), and Ehrhartoideae (rice)
(Figure 2). The trees generated by maximum likelihood
and Bayes inference were the same and supported a
closer relation between Bambusoideae and Pooideae,
which then formed a sister group with Ehrhartoideae.
The tree resulted from the Neighour Joining analysis,
however, supported a closer relationship between Bambusoideae and Ehrhartoideae. Each of the three trees was
fully resolved and well supported, with all branches
including those incongruent between trees supported by
bootstrap values higher than 80% or Bayes probability of
1.0.
The close relationship of Bambusoideae with Pooideae
and Ehrhartoideae provides an opportunity for comparing gene evolution between these three groups of grasses.
Given the wealthy of rice genome data, we examined at
first the proportion of bamboo FL-cDNAs that matched
rice databases at the nucleotide sequence level. A total of
5961 or 56.2% of bamboo cDNAs matched rice
sequences, while 43.2% had no hit to rice sequences (Fig-

Page 5 of 13

ure 3A). We then conducted the similar search against
databases of wheat, barley, and Brachypodium and found
that 4453 or 42% of bamboo cDNAs that had homologs
with rice also had homologs in wheat, barley, and Brachypodium. Of 4,647 bamboo cDNAs that did not match any
of the rice sequences, 420 had homologs with wheat, barley, and Brachypodium, which left 4227 or 39.8% of bamboo cDNAs without homologs found in any of the closely
related species.
We then compared the functional classification
between two groups of bamboo cDNAs, one including
shared homologs with other two subfamilies and the
other being unique to bamboo (Figure 3B). It is noteworthy that shared cDNAs are relatively abundant in catalytic
molecules, structural molecules, and transporters. In
contrast, cDNAs unique to bamboo are relatively abundant in groups with binding activities and regulatory
functions.
We then compared the bamboo cDNAs with the large
collection of rice FL-cDNAs. For 5,961 pairs of aligned
sequences between bamboo and rice, synonymous (KS)
and nonsynonymous (KA) sequence divergences were calculated (Additional file 13). For previously identified 43
sequences that were presumably orthologous among
grasses, the average KS between bamboo and rice was

Figure 2 Phylogeny of grasses inferred from concatenated alignment of 43 putative orthologous cDNA sequences. (A) Tree inferred from
maximal likelihood method. Bayes inference yielded the same topology. (B) Tree inferred from neighbor joining method. Branch length is proportional
to estimated sequence divergence measured by scale bars. Numbers associated with branches are bootstrap percentages. Arabidopsis was used as
outgroup. Subfamily affiliation of the grasses is indicated at right.

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

Page 6 of 13

Figure 3 Bamboo cDNA similarity comparison and functional classification. (A) Similarity search of bamboo sequence against closely related
grasses. Right half of the pie, the proportion of bamboo cDNAs with homologs in rice, of which the proportion that also hit barley, wheat, and Brachypodium is colored blue. Left half, bamboo cDNAs with no homologs found in rice, of which the proportion that also had no hit in the barley, wheat,
and Brachypodium is colored gray. (B) Functional classification of bamboo cDNAs with and without homologs with other grasses. Blue bars represent
cDNAs from the blue portion of the pie shared by all grasses compared, and gray bars represent cDNAs from the gray portion of the pie which is presumably bamboo unique.

0.368. We thus examined sequence pairs with KS < 0.75,
which should encompass the vast majority of sequences
pairs that are likely orthologous between bamboo and
rice (Figure 4). This included 3,757 bamboo-rice pairs, of
which only four had KA/KS >1.0. The chromosomal distribution of rice homologs with different divergence of
bamboo homologs suggested that the isolated bamboo

genes in this study were likely random arcross the
genome (figures shown in additional file 14).
Databasing FL-cDNAs and ESTs of Moso bamboo and EST
redundancy analysis

To facilitate the access and utilization of the bamboo
cDNA sequences, we developed a Moso bamboo cDNA

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

Page 7 of 13

Figure 4 Distribution and functional classification of bamboo cDNAs according to sequence divergence compared with rice cDNAs. Red
curve shows distribution of bamboo cDNAs according to synonymous divergence (KS) with rice homologs. Dots, corresponding nonsynonymous divergence (KA). Only cDNAs with KS < 0.75 are shown.

database (MBCD), including 10,608 putative FL-cDNAs
and nearly 38,000 ESTs. The database is hosted on a REDHAT LINUX server accessible at the URL http://
www.ncgr.ac.cn/MBCD/ (Additional file 15). The source
code is available at http://www.ncgr.ac.cn/mbcd/code/ or
http://www.ncgr.ac.cn/mbcd/res/down.php The database
has the following features: 1) FL-cDNA clone list search.
Given cDNA clone ID or NCBI accession number,
MBCD will display the cDNA sequences with predicted
ORF information, library (tissue) sources, clone ID, Genbank accession numbers, and corresponding ESTs; 2)
Sequence search. Blast is provided for sequence alignment search against the cDNA database. Conserved
domain search is also available when putative function
information (Pfam) is entered; 3) FTP download links.
The cDNA sequences, annotations, and corresponding
ESTs can be downloaded as compressed files of gzip or
bzip; and 4) Other useful web links. Other database websites and research institutes related to bamboo research
are conveniently accessible through this website.
Taking advantage of the database, we took a snapshot
on the genome redundancy of Moso bamboo by identifying and analyzing EST clusters. BLASTN searches of all
ESTs of Moso bamboo were conducted against the FLcDNAs. We used stringent criteria to identify EST clusters that contained at least 6 homologous ESTs with each
sequence polymorphism supported by at least two ESTs.
A total of 2,728 clusters were identified, which included
21,497 ESTs.
To better understand the nature of the redundancy, we
calculated sequence divergence and estimated divergence
time among members of a random sample of the clusters.
To ensure a consistent estimation, only those high-quality
ESTs covering the entire coding regions were sampled.

This random sample included 215 clusters, of which 100
contained only two types of homologs. We then calculated the synonymous sequence divergence between the
two homolog types for the 100 clusters, and estimated the
time of divergence using the divergence rate of 6.5 × 10-9
mutations per synonymous site per year [16]. The number of EST clusters with homologs diverged in the range
of estimated time intervals is illustrated in Figure 5.

Discussion
Bamboo genes and genome

In comparison with a large number of plant ESTs deposited in public database (NCBI ESTs of plants >100 millions), only a small fraction of high-quality sequencefinished FL-cDNAs have been generated. Prior to this
study, rice and Arabidopsis were the only plant species
with more than 10,000 fully sequenced FL-cDNAs avail-

Figure 5 Distribution of divergence time. X axis is the divergence
time (mya) of homologous pairs, Y axis is the number of detected EST
clusters.

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

able in the public databases [17-19]. Thus, here we report
the third largest FL-cDNA collection of a plant species.
Given the estimate that the fully-sequenced genomes of
rice and sorghum had approximately 35,000 - 38,000
genes [20,21], the 10,608 putative FL-cDNAs are likely to
represent more than a quarter of bamboo genes. One
should note this cDNA collection was from various vegetative tissues while the floral tissues were not available for
this study because Moso bamboo flowers every 67 years
on average. Nevertheless, these data provide a valuable
resource for the first glance at bamboo gene diversity and
for comparative genomic studies among grasses.
GC content is an important characteristic of genomic
composition, reflecting various genome features, such as
gene density and structure, codon usage, repeat element
distribution, and methylation patterns [15,22,23]. Here
we found that bamboo had the highest overall GC content as well as the highest GC content at the third codon
position in comparison to rice and Arabidopsis (Table 1;
[24,25]). Further, the third codon position of bamboo and
rice both displays the highest GC content, followed by the
first and then the second positions, whereas Arabidopsis
has the highest GC content at the first codon position.
With regard to the distribution of GC content in the 5'
UTR, ORF, and 3' UTR, we found similarities between
the two grasses that differed from Arabidopsis (Additional file 2). The distributions of GC content in the 5'
UTR and ORF are rather flat or slightly bimodal for bamboo and rice, but clearly unimodal for Arabidopsis.
The codon usages of bamboo and rice also share considerable similarities in comparison to that of Arabidopsis (Additional file 2). Given the much higher GC content
of bamboo and rice cDNAs, it is not surprising that they
use G and C more frequently whereas A and T appear at a
higher frequency for the same codons in Arabidopsis.
There has been evidence that high GC content and corresponding codon usage bias of rice might have influenced
the level of gene expression and the mechanisms of gene
evolution [26]. The even higher GC content found in
Bamboo could have played a role in the genetic and
genomic divergence of the large, woody grass.
The type and distribution of SSRs of bamboo are also
more similar to those of rice than Arabidopsis. The trinucleotide SSRs are more abundant than mono- and dinucleotide SSRs in bamboo and rice, whereas mononucleotide SSRs are the most abundant in Arabidopsis
(Figure 1). Of tri-nucleotide SSRs of bamboo and rice that
occur predominantly in ORFs, the CCG/CGG type is
much more abundant than others. This is perhaps correlated with the higher GC content of the grasses, and may
have allowed frequently insertion/deletion of certain
amino acids without causing frame shift mutations [27].
Interestingly, bamboo has higher frequency of all three
major SSRs in 5' UTRs from the start codon to 150 bp

Page 8 of 13

upstream than rice and Arabidopsis, implying that SSRs
may have played an important role in regulating gene
expression in bamboo.
Alternative splicing may be involved in posttranscriptional regulations that increase protein diversity and
affect mRNA stability [28,29]. According to the previous
classification of AS [30], we found two types of AS,
IntronR and single exon overlapping (sExonO), were
more abundant than others. We calculated the length
between two continuous exons of each cDNA pair in the
IntronR type, which gave an estimate of mean intron size
of 218 bp, comparing to 461 bp and 158 bp of the mean
intron sizes of rice and Arabidopsis, respectively [19,31].
After the BLASTX searching against NCBI nrDB, 672
bamboo FL-cDNAs had no hit in the database, some of
which may be new genes. Functional annotation of transcription factors indicated that ERF was the most abundant among bamboo cDNAs, which was followed by
MYB, Zinc finger, WRKY, homeobox, bZIP, bHLH, and
NAC. This differs from what was found in a rice cDNA
collection where Zinc finger was much more abundant
than other transcription factors, whereas ERF was ranked
as the third abundant, fewer than Myb [18]. The difference could be due to differential amplification of various
families of transcription factors during the evolutionary
divergence between bamboo and rice. But it is possible
that at least a part of the difference is due to an artifact of
cDNA isolation from different tissues at different developmental stages between the two studies.
Because we filtered gene redundancy by selecting one
cDNA clone from a contig for full-length sequencing, the
sequences of FL cDNAs could not be used to evaluate the
genome redundancy. Because the Moso bamboo was
considered to be a tetraploid [32], we went back to analyze the ESTs to take a snapshot at the genome redundancy. From a total of 100 sampled EST clusters, the
divergence times estimated between two homologous
EST types within clusters had an interesting distribution
(Figure 5). The abrupt increase in redundancy around 15
million years ago (mya) or more recent is probably a
result of genome duplication through polyploid formation. With the EST data, we were unable to determine
whether this was an autopolyploidy or allopolyploidy
event. In any case, it seems like that the two diploid
genomes have diverged for less than 15 million years
according to this estimation. The actual divergence time,
however, could be longer given that the Moso Bamboo
has a longer generation time than most of grasses from
which the synonymous substitution rate was calculated.
Genes involved in lignin biosynthesis

The lignin content of bamboo is comparable to that of
woody plants and higher than most herbaceous plants,
which has contributed to high culm rigidity that allows

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

bamboo to grow into a large forest [33]. The lignin content of mature culms of Moso bamboo, estimated at
about 23% of dry biomass [34], is nearly twice as high as
that of rice straw (12.5%, [35]). The high lignin content,
however, has a negative impact on paper production from
bamboos because removal of lignin during pulping
results in hazardous waste. A better under understanding
of lignin biosynthesis is important for manipulation
lignin content or composition through genetic engineering.
On average, bamboo cDNAs for lignin biosynthesis
enzymes isolated in this study are one fifth of the total
number of rice genes encoding lignin biosynthesis
enzymes. This is not surprising because the cDNAs may
represent only one third to one fourth of bamboo genes.
From these ratios as well as the phylogenetic inference, it
seems likely that there has not been a large-scale duplication of lignin biosynthesis genes in bamboo after it
diverged from rice (Additional file 9). Whereas gene
duplication might have played a role in altering certain
physiological properties, such as drought tolerance in
sorghum [21], it was probably not a major reason for the
increased lignin content of bamboo in comparison to
rice.
Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the number of
cDNAs found for caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase
(CCoAOMT) was nearly the same as that of rice genes.
This much higher than average ratio could be a result of
duplication of genes encoding this particular enzyme in
bamboo. It is also possible that the majority of genes for
CCoAOMT had high expression levels so that a larger
proportion of the cDNA population was captured for
sequencing. Either case could support an important role
of CCoAOMT in lignin biosynthesis of Moso bamboo.
Interestingly, CCoAOMT was identified as key enzyme
that determined lignin content in woody trees such as
poplar [36]. Furthermore, the repression of CCoAOMT
by antisense led to significant reduction of lignin content
of transgenic popular but did not affect normal growth of
the transgenic plants [36]. These findings together suggested that CCoAOMT may serve as an effective target
for genetic manipulation to reduce pollutants generated
from bamboo pulping.
Phylogeny and evolutionary divergence of bamboo from
other grasses

The cloning and sequencing of more than ten thousand
bamboo putative FL-cDNAs generated the largest set of
unlinked nuclear loci to date for phylogenetic analysis of
major grass lineages. Even with 43 sequences, the relationship of bamboo was not unambiguously resolved.
Different methods of phylogenetic analyses disagreed
whether bamboo was more closely related to rice or barley and wheat. While the disagreement was relatively well

Page 9 of 13

supported in the respective phylogenies, the branch leading to either grouping was short (Figure 2), suggesting
that the three subfamilies, Bambusoideae, Pooideae, and
Ehrhartoideae, diverged rapidly from each other, possibly
through a process known as adaptive radiation.
In the similar cases where adaptive radiation was
involved, lineage sorting posed a major problem to correct reconstruction of the species phylogeny from individual gene sequences, and as a consequence a large
number of independent molecular markers were required
to resolve the phylogenetic relationships [37]. In the previous phylogenetic studies of the grass family based on
only a few chloroplast and nuclear genes, there seemed to
have been a consensus that Bambusoideae and Ehrhartoideae were sister groups, i.e., a closer relationship
between bamboo and rice [8,38], until a recent study suggesting that Bamboideae and Pooideae (wheat and barley)
were more closely related [39]. Our analysis of the 43
putative orthologous genes demonstrates that the relationship among these three subfamilies remains unresolved and this is mostly likely due to rapid diversification
of these grasses. The finding raises an intriguing question
of what evolutionary forces drove the rapid diversification of bamboo from other grasses and its adaptation to a
very different habitat.
Although a direct answer to this question requires
long-term research using integrative approaches, some
insights may be gained by analyzing the patterns and
rates of gene evolution between bamboo and its close relatives. We found that the number of FL-cDNAs with and
without homologs in rice, wheat, and barley is nearly
equal (Figure 3A). Interestingly, the shared genes encode
mostly enzymes, transporters, and structure proteins,
whereas genes unique to bamboo encode more frequently
binding and regulatory factors. This suggests that regulatory factors evolved more rapidly than enzymes and
structural proteins following the divergence of bamboo
from other grasses. It has been widely observed that rapid
phenotypic evolution of plants at population and species
levels was controlled primarily by regulatory genes [4042]. The characteristics of gene evolution between bamboo and related subfamilies may represent a signature of
this evolutionary mechanism at a higher taxonomic level.
We thus hypothesize that rapid evolution of regulatory
genes could have played an important role during the
rapid adaptive diversification of bamboo from other
grasses.
For nearly 6,000 bamboo cDNAs with homologs in rice,
there are on ly a few pairs that had a KA/KS ratio larger
than 1, a threshold measuring positive selection. The lack
of gene with high KA/KS values is likely a result of sufficiently long divergence time between bamboo and rice
that has obscured the signal of positive selection driving

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

adaptation. When the KA/KS ratio was compared in a
finer scale, we found that genes encoding enzymes, transporters, and structural proteins were more abundant in
the categories with the KA/KS ratio smaller than 0.2. In
contrast, a larger number of genes encoding binding and
regulatory factors had the KA/KS ratio between 0.2 and 0.3
(Additional file 14B). This is consistent with the finding
when the overall level of divergence was considered,
together indicating that regulatory factors not only
evolved more rapidly but were more likely to have
evolved in response to natural selection driving rapid
adaptive divergence of these grasses. It was probably the
rapid divergence of regulatory genes that allowed drastic
morphological and physiological evolution of bamboos
and rapid adaptation to the new forest habitats.

Conclusion
This study generated the first large collection of bamboo
FL-cDNAs and ESTs and the first genomic resource database for bamboos. This is the initial effort to sequence
and analyze the genome of Moso bamboo, which has
gained increasingly important ecological and economical
values. The analyses of yielded putative FL-cDNAs provided the first glance at the structural and functional features of bamboo genomes. Phylogenetic analyses of the
bamboo sequences with those of rice, barley, and wheat
yielded suggested that bamboo has diverged from these
morphologically and physiologically different relatives
possibly through an adaptive radiation. Comparative
analyses of bamboo cDNAs and rice genes involved in
lignin biosynthesis indicated that genes encoding
caffeoyl-CoA O-methyltransferase may serve as effective
targets for genetic manipulation of lignin content to
reduce pollutants resulting from bamboo pulping. The
sequences of the FL-cDNAs and ESTs generated in this
study will close a critical gap existing in grass comparative genomics and consequently allow the more efficient
development of the grass system for evolutionary and
functional studies of plant genes and genomes.
As similar study in other plants, we here provided an
enriched putative full-length cDNA data collection and
corresponding amino acid sequence information as a
start of genomic research. More precise transcripts
would be confirmed in coming gene cloning and functional research in bamboo.
Methods
Plant materials and cDNA library construction

Five cDNA libraries were constructed for Phyllostachys
heterocycla cv. pubescens from shoots just breaking out
from ground, shoots reaching a height of ~40 cm, young
leaves, and shoots and roots removed from germinating
seeds (Additional file 1). For the first three libraries,

Page 10 of 13

shoots and leaves were collected in April from plants naturally grown in the Tianmu-Mountain National Nature
Reserve in Zhejiang province of China and immediately
preserved in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80°C in
the lab until RNA extraction. Shoots were dug out, and
non-lignified tissues at the top of shoots with their roots
were sampled. From germinating seeds, 1-2 cm shoots
and roots were cut and pooled for library construction.
Another cDNA library was constructed from leaves of
Bashania fangiana, collected in May from the Wolong
National Nature Reserve in Sichuan province of China. A
Cap-Tagging method was used to construct putative fulllength enriched cDNA libraries [19].
Sequencing and assembling FL-cDNA clones

Approximately 50,000 cDNA clones were randomly
selected from the five libraries for 5' end single-pass
sequencing using BigDye Terminator Cycle sequencing
V2.0 Ready Reaction (Applied Biosystems). PHRED and
PHRAP [43,44] were used to generate and assemble raw
data. Vector sequences were filtered automatically and
low-quality bases (quality value <20) were removed. All 5'
tagged ESTs were clustered into contigs or singletons
using TIGR Gene Indices clustering tools [45,46]. If
sequences share >95% similarity over 80 consecutive
bases, they were clustered into one contig. All singletons
and one randomly chosen clone from each contig were
fully sequenced in both directions, with internal sequencing primers designed for clones longer than 1 kb. To minimize sequence errors, all assembled sequences were
manually checked. Programs CAP3 and BLAST were
then used to filter redundant sequences judged by having
99% or higher identity [47].
Sequence analysis

ORFs were predicted using the "getorf" program of
EMBOSS package [48], with the longest ORF extracted
for each FL-cDNA. ORFs longer than 100 amino acids
were analyzed further for codon usage and SSR using the
CUSP program implemented in EMBOSS and a perl
script, MISA http://pgrc.ipk-gatersleben.de/misa/, respe
ctively. For comparison, cDNA data of Arabidopsis and
rice were downloaded from public databases PlantGDB
http://www.plantgdb.org/AtGDB/ and NCBI ftp://ftp.
ncbi.nih.gov, respectively.
To identify putative alternative splicing variants, program CAP3 [47] was first used to filter singletons with
default parameters. The remaining sequences assembled
to contigs were subjected to a BLASTN analysis against
themselves. Those with sequence identity higher than
99% for at least 100 bp were extracted. The GT-AG rule
of exon/intron boundary was then applied using program
BLAST2 followed by manual check. To identify putative
sense-antisense transcript pairs, all sequences were

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

searched against themselves using BLASTN. Those with
plus and minus matching pairs that were at least 50
nucleotide long and had less than 2 bp mismatches were
recognized.
A database of plant transposable element peptide
sequences was retrieved from the GenBank non-redundant protein database using keywords, including transpose, retro, non-LTR, en/spm, ac/ds, gypsy, copia,
polyprotein, mutator, and mudr [24,49]. The bamboo FLcDNA sequences were then searched against this database using BLASTx with E-value lower than 1e-20.
All bamboo putative full-length cDNA sequences were
searched against NCBI nrDB using BLASTX (E-value <
1e-10). The InterPro database was used for identifying
putative protein domains [50]. Functional classification
followed PFAM [51] and GO terms attached to the InterPro domain names.
Comparative and phylogenetic analyses with other grasses

Similarity searches were performed with BLASTn and
tBLASTx (version 2.2.14) [52] against the public database
TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies http://plantta.tigr.org/
; [53]) (including Oryza sativa, Triticum aestivum, Zea
mays, Zea mays B73, Hordeum vulgare, Sorghum bicolor,
Saccharum officinarum, Brachypodium distachyon, and
Panicum virgatum, and Arabidopsis thaliana), with an Evalue cutoff of 10-10 (BLASTn) and 10-6 (tBLASTx),
respectively. The bamboo cDNAs were also compared
with currently available genome sequences of Arabidopsis http://www.plantgdb.org/AtGDB/, rice (IRGSP version 4.0: http://rgp.dna.affrc.go.jp/IRGSP/, Sorghum
bicolor http://www.gramene.org/Sorghum_bicolor/index.
html, and Populus trichocarpa http://www.ornl.gov/sci/
ipgc/ with BLASTn and tBLASTn, with the E-value cutoff
of 10-1 (BLASTn) and 10-7 (tBLASTn), respectively.
Finally, the bamboo cDNAs were searched against NCBI
ntDB ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov using BLASTN (E-value < 1e10). For nucleotide similarity search, homologs were recognized as with >75% sequence identity for >50% bamboo FL-cDNA sequences. For tBLASTn and tBLASTx
search of amino acid sequences, homologs were recognized as with >60% sequence identity and for >50 consecutive amino acids.
To identify putative orthologs for phylogenetic analyses, we applied a stringent criterion requiring that there
was only one homolog identified in any other species
when a bamboo cDNA was used as the query in the
BLAST search and vice versa. Identification of orthologs
in other species was carried out in three steps. 1) Three
hits with the best E-value in BLAST were selected. Their
DNA sequences were re retrieved from public database
by their accession number. 2) The selected sequences
were put into ORF prediction again because we found
some of them do not carry entire ORF. 3) The predicted

Page 11 of 13

amino acid sequences were aligned to the corresponding
sequence from bamboo. Only ONE sequence with the
highest identity in alignment was considered as a putative
ortholog.
For phylogenetic analysis, DNA sequences were aligned
using program ClustalW with the default settings [54].
Phylogenetic trees were inferred by maximum likelihood
(ML), Neighbour joining (NJ), and Bayesian inference
(BI). ML and NJ were implemented with PAUP 4.0b10
[55] and the branch-and-bound algorithm was used for
tree searching. BI was employed for phylogenetic reconstruction using the MrBayes software of version 3.1 [56].
For sequence divergence, synonymous (KS) and nonsynonymous (KA) distances were estimated using program
PAL2NAL [57].
Analysis of EST clusters for gene/genome duplication

ESTs of Moso bamboo were aligned with the putative FLcDNAs using the ungapped BLASTN search at the highest E-value of 0.0. For those FL-cDNAs with at least six
EST counter parts, the corresponding ESTs were aligned
with CLUSTAL 2.0.11 http://software.informer.com/getfree-clustalx2-cite/; [58]). For the resulting EST clusters,
we retained those with any given sequence polymorphism supported by at least two members of the ESTs to
avoid artifacts of sequence errors. Only those EST clusters that covered the entire predicted coding regions of
the FL-cDNA were sampled for estimating sequence
divergence. Synonymous substitutions (KS) between
homologs were calculated [59,60]. Divergence time were
estimated based on T = KS/2r using the divergence rate r
= 6.5 × 10-9 mutations per synonymous site per year [16].
Databasing ESTs and FL-cDNAs of Moso bamboo

To facilitate the access and utilization of putative FLcDNA and EST sequences generated for Moso bamboo,
we developed a database to store and search these
sequences and their annotations. The web interface of
this database was constructed in PHP script and the data
were stored in a relational database management system,
MYSQL. Search function and display were built with a
combination of SQL commands and PHP script.
Sequence data from this article can be found in the
GenBank under accession numbers FP091249-FP101855.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Forest, habitat, and morphology of Moso bamboo.
Upper left, bamboo forest in South area (Yibin City) of Sichuan Province,
China. Lower left and upper right, mature individuals. Lower right, young
shoots.
Additional file 2 Comparison of GC content in 5'-UTR, coding, and 3'UTR regions among rice, Arabidopsis, and bamboo. Figure A, B, and C
show the GC content in 5'-UTR, coding, and 3'-UTR regions, respectively.
The red curve exhibits the frequency for that of Arabidopsis, green for rice,
and blue for bamboo.

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

Additional file 3 Codon usage estimated from bamboo, rice, and Arabidopsis FL-cDNAs.
Additional file 4 Putative alternative splicing. A. Illustration of alternative splicing types. Exons are represented by boxes and introns by lines.
Constitutive exons are shown in gray. B. Relative frequency of putative alternative splicing types of bamboo cDNAs.
Additional file 5 Sense-antisense pairs found in bamboo FL-cDNAs.
Additional file 6 Top 20 most common protein families identified
from bamboo FL-cDNAs according to PFAM database.
Additional file 7 Top 10 most abundant transcription factors found in
bamboo FL-cDNAs.
Additional file 8 GO molecular functions of bamboo FL-cDNAs.
Additional file 9 Phylogeny of bamboo and rice genes encoding nine
key enzymes in the lignin biosythesis pathway. Phylogeny of each gene
was inferred from Neighbor Joining method. Each sequence is named by
its GenBank accession number. Asterisks indicate bamboo cDNAs. Scales
measuring branch length of corresponding gene trees indicate 10 nucleotide substitutions.
Additional file 10 Putative homologs of bamboo cDNA identified in
TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies dataset.
Additional file 11 Putative homologs of bamboo cDNA identified in
genome sequences of other plants.
Additional file 12 43 groups of putative orthologs identified among
bamboo, rice, maize, wheat, Sorghum, Sugarcane, barley, Brachypodium, switchgrass, and Arabidopsis.
Additional file 13 Distribution of KA, KS, and KA/KS of bamboo cDNAs
according to their divergence with rice cDNAs. A. Distribution of KA and
KS of rice-bamboo ortholog pairs. Red line represented that cDNAs are
arranged with synonymous divergence. Blue dots indicated corresponding
nonsynonymous divergence. B. Distribution of and of KS and KA/KS.
Additional file 14 Predicted chromosomal distribution and functional classification of cDNAs with different rice-bamboo divergence.
(A) Distribution of rice cDNAs on chromosomes. Red represents cDNAs with
KS < 0.375 and blue represents cDNAs with 0.375 <KS < 0.75, in comparison
with bamboo. We compared chromosomal distribution of rice homologs
that diverged at rates between KS < 0.375 and 0.375 <KS < 0.75. For every 5
Mb interval of rice chromosomes, the number of genes between the two
categories are significantly correlated (r2 = 0.70, P < 0.001), indicating that
chromosomal location did not affect KS which represents neutral evolutionary rates. Furthermore, we tested whether the rice homologs of the bamboo cDNAs are randomly distributed on rice chromosomes. We found that
for every 5 Mb the distribution of the homologs were significantly correlated with that of all rice genes (r2 = 0.25, P < 0.001), suggesting bamboo
genes isolated in this study are likely to have been sampled randomly
across the genome (data not shown). (B) Functional classification of cDNAs
with KA/KS < 0.1, between 0.1 and 0.2, and between 0.2 and 0.3. We compared the functional classification of sequence pairs with KA/KS in the following intervals: 0 - 0.1, 0.1 - 0.2, and 0.2 - 0.3. This accounted for the vast
majority of sequence pairs and partitioned them into the following categories: 1,445 pairs, 38.5% (0.0-0.1), 1,434 pairs, 38.2% (0.1-0.2), and 595 pairs,
15.8% (0.2-0.3). While there is no clear difference in frequency distribution
of the functional classification for more than half of gene types, sequence
pairs with the lowest KA/KS values are more abundant in structural molecules whereas sequences with the highest KA/KS values are more abundant
in regulators.
Additional file 15 Homepage of the Moso bamboo cDNA database on
website. The database and source code are available at http://
www.ncgr.ac.cn/mbcd/.
Authors' contributions
ZJ, ZP, and BH designed the project. LL, XL, and ZG prepared plant materials. XL,
T H, and XY constructed cDNA libraries. QF, JG, QW, and DF conducted DNA
sequencing. TL, YL, CZ, and BH analyzed data. TL, BH, ZP, and ZJ wrote the
paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank Xinhui Zou and Xuehui Huang for assistance with phylogenetic and
statistical analyses. We thank Tao Sang for critical reading the manuscript and

Page 12 of 13

correction. This work was supported by the Forestry Project of the Ministry of
Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China (Grant No.
200704001) and by the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Author Details
1Chinese Academy of Forestry, Wanshou Shan, Beijing 100091, PR China,
2National Center for Gene Research & Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology
and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200233, PR China, 3International Network for Bamboo and
Rattan, 8 Fu Tong Dong Da Jie, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100102, PR China
and 4Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100029, PR China
Received: 30 September 2009 Accepted: 18 June 2010
Published: 18 June 2010
© 2010 Peng available article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116
BMC articleBiology 2010, 10:116
Plant is et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

References
1. Gale MD, Devos KM: Comparative genetics in the grasses. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1998, 95:1971-1974.
2. Gaut BS: Evolutionary dynamics of grass genomes. New Phytologist
2001, 154:15-28.
3. Bennetzen JL: Patterns in grass genome evolution. Curr Opin in Plant Biol
2007, 10:176-181.
4. Buell CR: Poaceae genomes: Going from unattainable to becoming a
model clade for comparative plant genomics. Plant Physiol 2009,
149:111-116.
5. Messing J: Synergy of two reference genomes for the grass family.
Plant Physiol 2009, 149:117-124.
6. Paterson AH, Bowers JE, Feltus FA, Tang H, Lin L, Wang X: Comparative
genomics of grasses promises a bountiful harvest. Plant Physiol 2009,
49:125-131.
7. Das M, Bhattacharya S, Singh P, Filgueiras T, Pal A: Bamboo taxonomy
and diversity in the era of molecular markers. Adv Bot Res 2008,
47:225-267.
8. Barker NP, Clark LG, Davis JI, Duvall MR, Guala GF, Hsiao C, Kellogg EA,
Linder PH: Phylogeny and subfamilial classification of the grasses
(Poaceae). Ann Missouri Bot Garden 2001, 88:373-457.
9. Jiang ZH: Bamboo and rattan in the world. LiaoNing Science and
Technology Published House 2002.
10. Umezawa T, Sakurai T, Totoki Y, Toyoda A, Seki M, Ishiwata A, Akiyama K,
Kurotani A, Yoshida T, Mochida K, Kasuga M, Todaka D, Maruyama K,
Nakashima K, Enju A, Mizukado S, Ahmed S, Yoshiwara K, Harada K,
Tsubokura Y, Hayashi M, Sato S, Anai T, Ishimoto M, Funatsuki H, Teraishi M,
Osaki M, Shinano T, Akashi R, Sakaki Y, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K, Shinozaki
K: Sequencing and analysis of approximately 40,000 soybean cDNA
clones from a full-length-enriched cDNA library. DNA Res 2008,
15:333-346.
11. Ralph SG, Chun HJ, Cooper D, Kirkpatrick R, Kolosova N, Gunter L, Tuskan
GA, Douglas CJ, Holt RA, Jones SJ, Marra MA, Bohlmann J: Analysis of
4,664 high-quality sequence-finished poplar full-length cDNA clones
and their utility for the discovery of genes responding to insect
feeding. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:57.
12. Zhang Y, Liu XS, Liu QR, Wei L: Genome-wide in silico identification and
analysis of cis natural antisense transcripts (cis-NATs) in ten species.
Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:3465-3475.
13. Chen J, Sun M, Kent WJ, Huang X, Xie H, Wang W, Zhou G, Shi RZ, Rowley
JD: Over 20% of human transcripts might form sense-antisense pairs.
Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:4812-4820.
14. Elrouby N, Bureau TE: A novel hybrid open reading frame formed by
multiple cellular gene transductions by a plant long terminal repeat
retroelement. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:41963-41968.
15. Yu J, Hu S, Wang J, Wong GK, Li S, Liu B, Deng Y, Dai L, Zhou Y, Zhang X,
Cao M, Liu J, Sun J, Tang J, Chen Y, Huang X, Lin W, Ye C, Tong W, Cong L,
Geng J, Han Y, Li L, Li W, Hu G, Huang X, Li W, Li J, Liu Z, Li L, Liu J, Qi Q, Liu
J, Li L, Li T, Wang X, Lu H, Wu T, Zhu M, Ni P, Han H, Dong W, Ren X, Feng X,
Cui P, Li X, Wang H, Xu X, Zhai W, Xu Z, Zhang J, He S, Zhang J, Xu J, Zhang
K, Zheng X, Dong J, Zeng W, Tao L, Ye J, Tan J, Ren X, Chen X, He J, Liu D,
Tian W, Tian C, Xia H, Bao Q, Li G, Gao H, Cao T, Wang J, Zhao W, Li P, Chen
W, Wang X, Zhang Y, Hu J, Wang J, Liu S, Yang J, Zhang G, Xiong Y, Li Z,
Mao L, Zhou C, Zhu Z, Chen R, Hao B, Zheng W, Chen S, Guo W, Li G, Liu S,
Tao M, Wang J, Zhu L, Yuan L, Yang H: A draft sequence of the rice
genome (Oryza sativa L. ssp. indica). Science 2002, 296:79-92.

Peng et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:116
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/116

16. Gaut BS, Morton BR, McCaig BC, Clegg MT: Substitution rate
comparisons between grasses and palms: synonymous rate
differences at the nuclear gene Adh parallel rate differences at the
plastid gene rbcL. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 19:10274-10279.
17. Seki M, Narusaka M, Kamiya A, Ishida J, Satou M, Sakurai T, Nakajima M,
Enju A, Akiyama K, Oono Y, Muramatsu M, Hayashizaki Y, Kawai J, Carninci
P, Itoh M, Ishii Y, Arakawa T, Shibata K, Shinagawa A, Shinozaki K:
Functional annotation of a full-length Arabidopsis cDNA collection.
Science 2002, 296:141-145.
18. The Rice Full-Length cDNA Consortium: Collection, mapping, and
annotation of over 28,000 cDNA clones from japonica rice. Science
2003, 301:376-379.
19. Liu X, Lu T, Yu S, Li Y, Huang Y, Huang T, Zhang L, Zhu J, Zhao Q, Fan D, Mu
J, Shangguan Y, Feng Q, Guan J, Ying K, Zhang Y, Lin Z, Sun Z, Qian Q, Lu Y,
Han B: A collection of 10,096 indica rice full-length cDNAs reveals
highly expressed sequence divergence between Oryza sativa indica
and japonica subspecies. Plant Mol Biol 2007, 65:403-415.
20. International Rice Genome Sequencing Project: The map-based
sequence of the rice genome. Nature 2005, 436:793-800.
21. Paterson AH, Bowers JE, Bruggmann R, Dubchak I, Grimwood J, Gundlach
H, Haberer G, Hellsten U, Mitros T, Poliakov A, Schmutz J, Spannagl M,
Tang H, Wang X, Wicker T, Bharti AK, Chapman J, Feltus FA, Gowik U,
Grigoriev IV, Lyons E, Maher CA, Martis M, Narechania A, Otillar RP,
Penning BW, Salamov AA, Wang Y, Zhang L, Carpita NC, Freeling M, Gingle
AR, Hash CT, Keller B, Klein P, Kresovich S, McCann MC, Ming R, Peterson
DG, Mehboob-ur-Rahman Ware D, Westhoff P, Mayer KF, Messing J,
Rokhsar DS: The Sorghum bicolor genome and the diversification of
grasses. Nature 2009, 457:551-556.
22. Galtier N, Piganeau G, Mouchiroud D, Duret L: GC- content evolution in
mammalian genomes: the biased gene conversion hypothesis.
Genetics 2001, 159:907-911.
23. Ingvarsson PK: Molecular evolution of synonymous codon usage in
Populus. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:307.
24. Kuhl JC, Cheung F, Yuan Q, Martin W, Zewdie Y, McCallum J, Catanach A,
Rutherford P, Sink KC, Jenderek M, Prince JP, Town CD, Havey MJ: A
unique set of 11,008 onion expressed sequence tags reveals expressed
sequence and genomic differences between the monocot orders
Asparagales and Poales. Plant Cell 2004, 16:114-125.
25. Wang HC: Hickey DARapid divergence of codon usage patterns within
the rice genome. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:S6.
26. Guo X, Bao J, Fan L: Evidence of selectively driven codon usage in rice.
Implications for GC content evolution of Gramineae genes. FEBS Letters
2007, 581:1015-1021.
27. Lawson MJ, Zhang L: Distinct patterns of SSR distribution in the
Arabidopsis thaliana and rice genomes. Genome Biol 2006, 7:R14.
28. Lareau LF, Green RE, Bhatnagar RS, Brenner SE: The evolving roles of
alternative splicing. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2004, 14:273-282.
29. Stamm S, Ben-Ari S, Rafalska I, Tang Y, Zhang Z, Toiber D, Thanaraj TA,
Soreq H: Function of alternative splicing. Gene 2005, 344:1-20.
30. Wang BB, Brendel V: Genomewide comparative analysis of alternative
splicing in plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:7175-7180.
31. Hong X, Scofield DG, Lynch M: Intron Size, Abundance, and Distribution
within Untranslated Regions of Genes. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:2392-2404.
32. Gui Y, Wang S, Quan L, Zhou C, Long S, Zheng H, Jin L, Zhang X, Ma N, Fan
L: Genome size and sequence composition of moso bamboo: a
comparative study. Sci China C Life Sci 2007, 50:700-705.
33. Scurlock JMO, Dayton DC, Hames B: Bamboo: an overlooked biomass
resource? Biomass Bioenergy 2000, 19:229-244.
34. Li XB, Shupe TF, Peter GF, Hse CY, Eberhardt TL: Chemical changes with
maturation of the bamboo species Phyllostrachys pubescens. J Trop
Forest Sci 2007, 19:6-12.
35. Pauly M, Keegstra K: Cell-wall carbohydrates and their modification as a
resource for biofuels. Plant J 2008, 54:559-568.
36. Zhong R, Morrison WH, Himmelsbach DS, Poole FL, Ye ZH: Essential role
of caffeoyl coenzyme A O-methyltransferase in lignin biosynthesis in
woody poplar plants. Plant Physiol 2000, 124:563-578.
37. Zou XH, Zhang FM, Zhang JG, Zang LL, Tang L, Wang J, Sang T, Ge S:
Analysis of 142 genes resolves the rapid diversification of the rice
genus. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R49.
38. Kellogg EA: Evolutionary history of the grasses. Plant Physiol 2001,
125:1198-1205.

Page 13 of 13

39. Bouchenak-Khelladi Y, Salamin N, Savolainen V, Forest F, Van Der Bank M,
Chase MW, Hodkinson TR: Large multi-gene phylogenetic trees of the
grasses (Poaceae): Progress towards complete tribal and generic level
sampling. Mol Phylogent Evl 2008, 47:488-505.
40. Doebley JF, Lukens L: Transcriptional regulators and the evolution of
plant form. Plant Cell 1998, 10:1075-1082.
41. Doebley JF, Gaut BS, Smith BD: The molecular genetics of crop
domestication. Cell 2006, 127:1309-1321.
42. Kellogg EA: Progress and challenges in studies of the evolution of
development. J Exp Bot 2006, 57:3505-3516.
43. Ewing B, Green P: Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using
PHRED. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res 1998, 8:186-194.
44. Ewing B, Hillier L, Wendl MC, Green P: Base-calling of automated
sequencer traces using PHRED. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res
1998, 8:175-185.
45. Chou HH, Holmes MH: DNA sequence quality trimming and vector
removal. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:1093-1104.
46. Pertea G, Huang X, Liang F, Antonescu V, Sultana R, Karamycheva S, Lee Y,
White J, Cheung F, Parvizi B, Tsai J, Quackenbush J: TIGR gene indices
clustering tools (TGICL): a software system for fast clustering of large
EST datasets. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:651-652.
47. Huang X, Madan A: CAP3: A DNA sequence assembly program. Genome
Res 1999, 9:868-877.
48. Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: the European molecular biology
open software suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16:276-277.
49. Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Wheeler DL: GenBank.
Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:23-27.
50. Apweiler R, Attwood TK, Bairoch A, Bateman A, Birney E, Biswas M, Bucher
P, Cerutti L, Corpet F, Croning MD, Durbin R, Falquet L, Fleischmann W,
Gouzy J, Hermjakob H, Hulo N, Jonassen I, Kahn D, Kanapin A,
Karavidopoulou Y, Lopez R, Marx B, Mulder NJ, Oinn TM, Pagni M, Servant
F, Sigrist CJ, Zdobnov EM: The InterPro database, an integrated
documentation resource for protein families, domains and functional
sites. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:37-41.
51. Bateman A, Coin L, Durbin R, Finn RD, Hollich V, Griffiths-Jones S, Khanna
A, Marshall M, Moxon S, Sonnhammer EL, Studholme DJ, Yeats C, Eddy SR:
The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:138-141.
52. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang JH, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman
DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search Programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
53. Childs KL, Hamilton JP, Zhu W, Ly E, Cheung F, Wu H, Rabinowicz PD, Town
CD, Buell CR, Chan AP: The TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies database.
Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D846-D851.
54. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: Improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
55. Swofford DL: PAUP*: Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and
Other Methods). Sinauer, Sunderland, MA; 2002.
56. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogeny.
Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
57. Suyama M, Torrents D, Bork P: PAL2NAL: robust conversion of protein
sequence alignments into the corresponding codon alignments.
Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:W609-W612.
58. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
ClustalX windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:4876-4882.
59. Yang Z, Nielsen R: Estimating synonymous and nonsynonymous
substitution rates under realistic evolutionary models. Mol Biol Evol
2000, 17:32-43.
60. Zhang Z, Li J, Zhao XQ, Wang J, Wong GK, Yu J: KaKs_Calculator:
calculating Ka and Ks through model selection and model averaging.
Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2006, 4:259-263.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-116
Cite this article as: Peng et al., Genome-wide characterization of the biggest
grass, bamboo, based on 10,608 putative full-length cDNA sequences BMC
Plant Biology 2010, 10:116

</pre>
</body>
</html>
