<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Predictors for reproductive isolation in a ring species complex following genetic and ecological divergence</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-194"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ricardo J Pereira"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Predictors for reproductive isolation in a ring
species complex following genetic and ecological
divergence
Pereira et al.
Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194 (6 July 2011)

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Predictors for reproductive isolation in a ring
species complex following genetic and ecological
divergence
Ricardo J Pereira1,2,3*, William B Monahan4 and David B Wake1

Abstract
Background: Reproductive isolation (RI) is widely accepted as an important “check point” in the diversification
process, since it defines irreversible evolutionary trajectories. Much less consensus exists about the processes that
might drive RI. Here, we employ a formal quantitative analysis of genetic interactions at several stages of
divergence within the ring species complex Ensatina eschscholtzii in order to assess the relative contribution of
genetic and ecological divergence for the development of RI.
Results: By augmenting previous genetic datasets and adding new ecological data, we quantify levels of genetic
and ecological divergence between populations and test how they correlate with a restriction of genetic
admixture upon secondary contact. Our results indicate that the isolated effect of ecological divergence between
parental populations does not result in reproductively isolated taxa, even when genetic transitions between
parental taxa are narrow. Instead, processes associated with overall genetic divergence are the best predictors of
reproductive isolation, and when parental taxa diverge in nuclear markers we observe a complete cessation of
hybridization, even to sympatric occurrence of distinct evolutionary lineages. Although every parental population
has diverged in mitochondrial DNA, its degree of divergence does not predict the extent of RI.
Conclusions: These results show that in Ensatina, the evolutionary outcomes of ecological divergence differ from
those of genetic divergence. While evident properties of taxa may emerge via ecological divergence, such as
adaptation to local environment, RI is likely to be a byproduct of processes that contribute to overall genetic
divergence, such as time in geographic isolation, rather than being a direct outcome of local adaptation.

Background
In a Darwinian sense, species formation is an outcome of
a continuum of gradual evolution, from ecological races
and biotypes, to hybridizing taxa and, ultimately, to
“good” biological species that no longer cross [1]. The
long disagreement over species concepts is the best
demonstration of such a continuum between populations, at a proximal scale, to the ultimate extreme of
reproductively isolated species [2]. The different biological properties of species upon which several of the alternative concepts are based, such as distinct adaptive
zones, fixed character traits or reproductive isolation
* Correspondence: ricardojn.pereira@gmail.com
1
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology and Department of Integrative Biology,
3101 Valley Life Sciences Building, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720-3160, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

(RI), arise at different times during the process of species
formation and do not necessarily occur in a predictable
order [3]. Moreover, empirical examples increasingly
show that evolution of these properties does not occur in
one predetermined direction. Taxa may remain genetically isolated without approaching full RI, as, for example, by forming hybrid zones maintained by a balance
between dispersal and selection.
Alternatively, if selection is strong, reinforcement of
reproductive barriers may lead to full RI (e.g. green-eyed
tree-frog [4]) or, if the strength of selection decreases due
to environmental change, gene flow might fully reverse
the differentiation process by homogenizing the parental
taxa into a single gene pool (e.g. three-spined stickleback
[5]; cichlids fish [6]). In spite of the ongoing discussion of
the relative importance of RI in the continuum that culminates in the formation of new species (see [1]), there is

© 2011 Pereira et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

a consensus that the effect of RI is to cause divergence
along that continuum. Therefore, once RI is complete
(establishment of post-zygotic mechanisms barring successful genetic interactions [7]), the evolution of closely
related taxa is no longer reversible and they are bound to
follow independent evolutionary trajectories, even in the
face of environmental change.
Reproductive isolating mechanisms are generally understood to accumulate gradually as a function of molecular
genetic distance, a surrogate for time since divergence [8].
Substitutions that are neutral or beneficial on one genetic
background may be deleterious on another, and postzygotic isolation may often reflect such negative epistatic interactions. Experimental studies strongly favor this view,
showing that mutations in coevolving gene complexes can
rapidly cause hybrid incompatibilities in closely related
species [9].
Alternatively, non-neutral processes such as ecological
divergence may incidentally cause RI [10-12], either due to
pre- or post-zygotic mechanisms. If fitness is habitatdependent, rather than a consequence of the overall genomic composition, it would be lower for immigrants from
alternative habitats or for individuals that are intermediate
for ecologically relevant traits. Two central predictions of
ecological species formation [13] are 1) ecologically divergent pairs of populations will exhibit greater levels of RI
than ecologically similar pairs of populations of similar age;
and 2) traits under divergent selection, or those genetically
correlated with them, should incidentally affect RI (e.g.
mate preference, hybrid fitness). The recent accumulation
of ecological and genetic data in natural populations
enables this hypothesis to be formally tested using comparative approaches that separate the effects of genetic and
ecological divergence. Meta-analyses across plant and animal taxa that statistically remove the effect of time since
divergence show that, as the degree of ecological divergence increases, so too does their degree of RI [14]. However, this study relies on broad taxonomic comparisons
across plant and animal species, which are neither historically nor biologically related. This hypothesis has been
further evaluated using comparisons of closely related units
with known genealogy, extending that approach to a phylogenetic scale that is more appropriate for the scale at which
RI develops (i.e. intra specific level). However, this has only
been tested in organisms that experienced parallel evolution, in which ecological divergence between sympatric
populations repeatedly results in assortative mating, resulting in taxa with little or no genetic differentiation (e.g.
sticklebacks [15], and Gambusia fishes [16]). Yet, these
results might not be generalizable to taxa that do not
evolve in situ, such as those in which geography is an
important component of the process of species formation
leading to spatial fragmentation, genetic and ecological
divergence, and secondary contact.

Page 2 of 14

Ring species were initially hypothesized as a single species that expands along two pathways around a geographic barrier, with terminal forms gradually diverging
and eventually behaving as two species when they meet
on the other side (Stejneger in [17]). The persistence of
two reproductively isolated forms, connected by a chain
of intermediate populations, demonstrate the linkage
between micro-evolutionary processes and formation of
reproductively isolated taxa, i.e. “good” biological species.
Only a few species complexes are known to meet these
criteria, including Ensatina eschscholtzii [18], Phylloscopus trochiloides [19], and Platycercus elegans [20]. In
spite of the varying degrees of regional extinction or present connectivity between intermediate populations, all
these examples are natural demonstrations of the continuum between population- and species-level divergences.
Therefore, ring species are excellent candidates for studies of genetic interactions at different stages of divergence, in a natural setting, and for investigating how
species properties such as RI might arise.
The plethodontid salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii is
a well characterized ring species complex, with an almost
complete ring distribution. Gradual genetic and morphologic transitions occur between intermediately derived
forms around the ring, whereas abrupt changes occur
between the most divergent forms at the terminus
(Figure 1a), with rare hybridization restricted to few generations of hybrids or even full RI [21,22]. The complex
originated in northern California, probably during the
late Miocene [23-25], and expanded southwards around
the Central Valley, which constitutes a long standing geographic barrier, first as a lake and more recently as ecologically unsuitable habitat. During the climatic change of
the Holocene [26], a presumed temporary corridor across
the Central Valley enabled the coastal populations to
colonize the foothills of the Sierra Nevada, providing a
second closure of the ring approximately midway along
the ring distribution. Molecular studies brought strong
support for the colonization around the Central Valley
(Figure 1b), but also indicate that historical periods of
geographic isolation, more or less prolonged, occurred
between populations around the ring, due to the dynamic
geographic history of California [21,24,27]. These studies
suggest that time since divergence might have strongly
contributed to the continuum of genetic interactions
observed in the ring species, but the contribution of ecological factors promoting local adaptation in Ensatina
remains to be evaluated.
As the species expanded its range, it colonized habitats in the coastal and inland ranges of California that
are substantially different in ecology. Distinctive and different color patterns resulted from the evolution of
alternative predator avoidance strategies [18,28,29] that
are more extreme at the southern closure of the ring.

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

Page 3 of 14

Figure 1 Divergence processes in the ring species Ensatina eschscholtzii. a) Ecomorphotypes in Ensatina defined by color pattern. b) Nei’s
(1972) genetic distances based in 26 allozyme loci (adapted from [34]), showing increased differentiation towards the terminus of the ring (red)
and lower genetic divergence between populations around the ring (black). c) Floristic provinces of California (adapted from [30]); different
colors refer to distinct plant associations.

The distinct color patterns are presently recognized
as seven subspecies (Figure 1a) that do not correspond
to the deepest genetic breaks [22], suggesting that the
evolution of coloration cannot be explained by neutral
processes (mutation and drift). Moreover, this high phenotypic variability in color pattern is strongly regionalized in areas with ecologically similar habitat (Figure 1c;
[30]). Cryptic and mimetic color patterns are hypothesized to be advantageous with respect to predation in
their own habitats, resulting in strong selection against
inter-population migration or hybridization between
alternative color morphs [29]. Field experiments support
fitness differences for alternative color patterns [31], and
strong selection occurs at a hybrid zone between taxa
with mimetic and cryptic coloration in the area of the
mid-closure of the ring [32]. These facts suggest that
the ecologically diverse landscape of California plays an
important role in the diversification of this complex and
in the limitation of genetic interactions among lineages

[29]. Thus, in addition to the genetic differentiation
around the Central Valley, adaptation to local habitat
conditions might also be correlated with the continuum
of RI observed in this ring species.
Episodes of geomorphological and climate change led
to varying degrees of geographic isolation and ecological
divergence around the ring, in particular to the ring-like
geographic range with mid-way and terminal closures,
offering a natural replication of secondary contacts along
the continuum of species formation. Previous work
showed an association between genetic differentiation in
allozymes and RI, but did not consider whether other cooccurring indices of genetic divergence (such as mtDNA)
and major ecological factors known to be important for
Ensatina might explain the observed levels of RI. We
take advantage of the multiple contact zones in the Ensatina ring species (Figure 2) to employ a quantitative framework to infer the processes restricting genetic
interaction upon secondary contact, which may result in

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

Page 4 of 14

Figure 2 Sampling of secondary contacts in the ring species Ensatina eschscholtzii. The distribution of Ensatina in California is colored
according to the assignment of individuals collected throughout its entire range and genotyped for 22 to 27 allozyme loci (see [22] for details).
The seven main colors (inset) correspond to the distinct color patterns, taxonomically recognized as subspecies. Different shades of those main
colors refer to the genetically distinct units identified within each subspecies (outset), and were drawn considering the geographic coordinates
of sampling. Localities with genetically admixed individuals or sympatry of pure forms are represented by overlapping ranges of the pure
parental populations. Black dots mark the 20 parental populations, black lines mark the 13 pairwise comparisons considered in this study, and
white circles mark the localities used to estimate degrees of genetic admixture at each contact zone.

full RI. Using previously published datasets on allozymes
from all extant populations around the California’s Central Valley [22], we distinguished allopatric populations
that are not affected by recent introgression from regions
of secondary contact where localized genetic introgression occurs. By augmenting genetic datasets and collecting new ecological data on the allopatric ranges, we now
estimate levels of genetic and ecological divergence in all
populations, prior to secondary contact. By measuring
the frequency of genetically admixed individuals at the
center of each secondary contact we estimate the degree
of RI between pairs of parental population contacting
around and across the ring species distribution, and how
it is predicted by the several axes of divergence between
parental populations. Our results indicate that the isolated effect of ecological divergence between parental

populations does not result in reproductively isolated
taxa. Instead, processes related with overall genetic divergence are the best predictors of reproductive isolation.

Results
Sampling and study units

Although most of the 20 genetically distinct populations
interact in zones of secondary contact around the Central
Valley [22], there are a few gaps around the ring that
either represent real distributional gaps (e.g. Mohave
Desert) or possible sampling deficits (e.g. Lassen Peak,
Pajaro river). Our sampling detected 13 contacts around
the ring, plus one at the mid-ring and two others at the
terminus, for a total of 16 contacts. However, because
three of the contacts around the ring involved parental
populations with low genetic divergence (DN < 0.1), we

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

Page 5 of 14

consider a total of 13 contacts in our analysis of RI
(Table 1). These contacts involved 19 different pure parental populations, of which 15 were used in a single pairwise comparison, and only four were used in two
comparisons (Figure 2).
Contributors to Genetic Divergence

As expected given the known phylogeography of the Ensatina complex based on mtDNA [24,33], genetic distances
in nDNA are in agreement with the ring species scenario
[21,34]. Populations that diverged along the same side of
the Central Valley are more similar in nDNA, compared
to those that diverged on opposite sides of the ring. The
new individuals sequenced for cyt b recover some new
sequences nested within the clades already described for
the whole species complex [24]. The parental populations
as defined by allozymes do not share any haplotype in
mtDNA. However, the degree of genetic divergence in
mtDNA across secondary contacts does not match that in
nDNA, showing that these two genetic distances are not
correlated. While the higher nuclear genetic distances only
occur between taxa that contact across the ring, higher
genetic distances in mtDNA are found between coastal
populations within the ring (Table 1).

Contributors to Ecological Divergence

In California, the climatic space occupied by Ensatina as
defined by PC1 and PC2 captures 73.7% of the variation
in the entire distributional data (Additional file 1). Pure
parental populations that contact around or across the
ring distribution of Ensatina have little or no overlap in
climatic space (Figure 3a, black bars). However, the
degree of dissimilarity between the focal comparisons of
parental populations matches the underlying climatic
variation intrinsic of California (Figure 3a, white bars).
Despite the heterogeneity of climatic space in California,
the highest degrees of climatic dissimilarity between
Ensatina populations are found in northwestern California, along the Sierra Nevada, and near the terminus of
the ring distribution (Table 1).
In contrast with climate, the focal parental pairs of Ensatina are generally associated with similar types of vegetation (Figure 3b). This pattern does not reflect the
background variation of vegetation in California, which
has areas with very similar and very dissimilar vegetation.
A few of our focal contacts occur between populations
with high dissimilarity in vegetation (Table 1), such as in
the northwestern coast of California and in southern
Sierra Nevada.

Table 1 Predictor and response variables for development of reproductive isolations in the ring species Ensatina
eschscholtzii
Population
comparison

N

Response Variable
Degree of Genetic
Admixture (%)

Predictor Variables
Genetic Divergence

Ecological Divergence

Time since Divergence

Climatic
dissimilarity (%)

mtDNA distance
(corrected PiXY)

Vegetation
dissimilarity (%)

82.9

nDNA distance
(DN)

contacts around the
ring:
plat a vs croc
9

88.9

2.9

0.11

51.9

plat a vs plat b

6

100.0

8.6

0.25

82.5

16.4

plat c vs plat d

11

81.8

5.5

0.17

100.0

33.3

oreg a vs oreg b

8

87.5

6.8

0.17

71.3

36.1

oreg b vs pict

23

56.5

3.1

0.39

93.1

47.6

oreg c vs oreg e

10

100.0

1.6

0.13

100.0

39.4

oreg d vs oreg e

8

100.0

11.0

0.16

85.3

32.0

oreg f vs xant a
oreg g vs xant b

6
8

100.0
50.0

13.8
11.0

0.31
0.21

80.2
58.0

29.3
29.0

xant a vs xant b

9

75.0

5.6

0.12

100.0

13.8

323

35.9

12.9

0.4

86.3

4.6

mid-ring contact:
xant c vs plat b

contacts at the terminus of the ring:
esch vs klau b

18

11.1

10.1

0.56

94.7

60.3

esch vs klau a

88

5.7

10.5

0.6

100.0

24.0

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

Page 6 of 14

rarely reproduce and therefore are not contributing for
gene flow between parental populations.
Model for Reproductive Isolation

When the four kinds of divergence between pairs of parental populations (in mitochondrial and nuclear DNA, climate and vegetation) are taken together in a multiple
regression as independent variables, we obtain a model
that predicts the degree of genetic admixture observed
within Ensatina ring species (R2= 0.733, P= 0.02). After
statistically correcting for the correlation between predictors (Figure 4), genetic distance, as determined in nDNA,
is the only predictor that shows a prominent negative relationship with the degree of genetic admixture (slope =
-2.063 +/-0.549, mean +/- se, t13, 0.05 = -3.76, P = 0.006),
as expected for divergence processes associated with the
development of RI. The isolated effect of ecological dissimilarity (both in climate and vegetation) and mitochondrial divergence is not associated with a decrease of
genetic admixture in secondary contacts.

Figure 3 Indices of climatic (a) and vegetation (b) dissimilarity
between populations of Ensatina within California. White bars
correspond to all possible pairwise comparisons between the 20
populations and reflect the underlying ecological variation intrinsic
to the geographic area occupied by Ensatina in California. Black bars
correspond to the dissimilarity indices from pairs of populations that
contact around or across the ring distribution.

Degree of Genetic Admixture in secondary contacts

The frequency of admixed individuals fits our expectation for a ring species (see also [21,22]). In contacts
around the ring we generally found a high frequency of
hybrids (above 75%), with a couple of exceptions between
groups that are genetically and morphologically divergent
(Table 1). Reproductive isolation is nearly complete at
the southernmost contact across the ring, where 5.7% of
88 individuals sampled in sympatry were hybrids. In the
mid-ring contact, the frequency of hybrids (35.9%) was
intermediate to values found in contacts around the ring
and at the terminus. The hybrid individuals sampled in
the 13 secondary contacts consist almost entirely of backcrosses of second or older generations (not assigned to
F1 or first generational backcross with pp> 0.9). The
exceptions are at the two terminal contacts of the ring,
where the few hybrids detected (11.1 and 5.7%) are
assigned to F1 hybrids or first generational backcrosses,
suggesting that in addition to the nearly complete level of
RI between parental populations, hybrid individuals

Discussion
We predicted that divergence in properties of parental
populations that cause RI, or that are associated with
them, should be correlated with a decrease in the degree
of genetic admixture, i.e. percentage of hybrids in contact
zones. Traits of parental populations related to genetic
divergence, particularly nuclear genetic distance, are the
best predictors of RI. In contrast, divergence in the ecological traits measured here (climate and vegetation) is
unlikely to result in reproductively isolated units. Previous analysis using data from species pairs across plants
and animals [14], after statistically removing the effect of
time (genetic distance), found ecological divergence to be
associated with RI. However, we did not detect such an
association within Ensatina, which suggests that taxa
subjected to ecological divergence may fail to achieve
complete RI. Instead, the complete cessation of genetic
interactions between closely related taxa is strongly associated with the overall genetic divergence in nuclear markers, which likely reflect selectively neutral processes.
Discordance between genetic divergence in mt and nDNA

The degree of mitochondrial divergence is a widespread
criterion in phylogeography that is often used to make
predictions about the evolutionary independence of
lineages and ultimately their taxonomic status. Even
though simulation and empirical studies strongly discourage applying single-gene criteria for species discovery (e.g.
[35]) this approach has motivated ongoing data collection
across the entire tree of life (i.e. “DNA-barcoding”). In our
comparative study within Ensatina, while we find a good
qualitative agreement between mitochondrial and nuclear
markers (i.e. major mtDNA lineages encompass distinct

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

Page 7 of 14

Figure 4 Isolated effect of each of the four predictors for the development of reproductive isolation in the Ensatina ring species: a)
mitochondrial DNA, b) nuclear DNA, c) climate, and d) vegetation. Data points are pairwise comparisons between populations that contact
around the ring (ten light grey points), at the mid-ring (one dark grey point) and at the terminus (two black points). Solid black lines represent
the best-fit line for each predictor variable, dashed red lines designate contours of the predicted formula, and respective probabilities are
denoted in the corner of each plot.

nDNA genetic clusters), we also find a quantitative disagreement in the depth of genetic divergence across pairs
of populations (Figure 4a and 4b). Thus, the degree of
divergence in mtDNA does not predict the degree of RI
between parental populations, whereas average divergence
across nuclear markers does.
Whereas mitochondrial genetic distances effectively
reflect the evolutionary history of a single non-recombining locus, the multi-locus perspective from nuclear
genetic distances was calculated using 22 to 27 physically
unlinked allozyme loci [22]. In addition, the mitochondrial molecule has an effective population size four times
lower than the nuclear markers, and therefore is more
subjected to the effect of genetic drift, leading to a rapid

fixation of the most common alleles in populations that
are spatially fragmented or that experience low migration
rates. An alternative explanation is that mtDNA is not
evolving neutrally and therefore does not reflect time
since divergence in geographic isolation. Studies in allopatric ranges of Ensatina populations do not detect
molecular signatures of selection in mtDNA [24]. However, studies of secondary contacts show that steep parapatric transitions between mitochondrial lineages are
accompanied by leaky borders for allozymes [22,32], suggesting that selection might prevent introgression of the
mitochondrial genome.
Although obtaining mtDNA data is fast, inexpensive and
is a useful source of genetic information on population

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

structure, conclusions about the degree of RI drawn from
mitochondrial genetic distances can be misleading. In contrast, information on the degree of divergence determined
using several autosomal loci is more informative in predicting the degree of genetic interactions in secondary
contacts.
Ecological Divergence as a factor in Reproductive
Isolation

Adaptation to distinct environments via natural selection
is doubtless a major process that can drive species diversification [36], and it has deservedly received attention from
both theoretical and empirical biologists (see [37,38]). In
association with development of the modern synthesis and
the biological species concept, RI became regarded as the
main property of species that would assure genetic integrity, and therefore evolutionary independence [39,40]. RI
evolves as the pleiotropic effect of loci under divergent
natural selection, or the direct effect of loci in linkage disequilibrium [41]. Therefore, a central prediction of ecological species formation is that ecologically divergent pairs of
populations will exhibit greater levels of reproductive isolation than ecologically similar populations of the same
age [13].
Integrating ecological and genetic data into the framework used here has provided a powerful way to evaluate
the relative contribution of genetic and ecological divergence for the development of isolating mechanisms
between closely related taxa (see also [13,14,42]). By analyzing ecological and genetic data from inter-specific comparisons, across plants and animals, Funk et al. [14] found
an association between ecological divergence and RI, after
correcting for genetic divergence. However, when we
extend that same approach to intra-specific comparisons
within the Ensatina ring species, no such association is
detected (Figure 4). Our results should be taken as an indication that generalizations are premature, and that for taxa
in which geography conditions genetic and ecologic divergence, the development of RI might differ from the known
examples of parallel speciation [15,16]. Polytypic species
and species complexes provide a multitude of comparisons
of units of known genealogy, and enable testing the
hypothesis at various temporal scales during the progression of species formation.
The selected ecological predictors, climate and vegetation, are proxies for two distinct processes that are putatively important for the diversification of Ensatina,
respectively adaptation to physiological challenges and
specialization to particular habitats. In other systems,
divergence in color pattern is known to lead to RI due to
physical genetic linkage with loci controlling for assortative mating [43]. Also, divergence in diet or micro-habitat
choice is known to affect RI by pleiotropic effects [44]. At
the spatiotemporal scale considered here, divergence in

Page 8 of 14

climate and vegetation is not associated with a decrease of
genetic interactions upon secondary contact (Figure 4).
Accordingly, their isolated effect does not result in RI barriers. However, both color pattern and habitat choice are
likely to constitute complex traits in habitat-dependent
organisms such as Ensatina. Thus, it is possible that both
climate and vegetation might affect RI at a finer spatial
scale, more proximate to the scale at which the organism
uses the habitat (e.g. a few meters), or at an older time
scale, during which vicariance within the ring species complex likely occurred (e.g. during glacial cycles). The possibility remains that other ecological parameters not
evaluated here, such as local predators or microhabitat
characteristics, might be associated with the evolution of
RI. Testing those new hypotheses will require extending
this approach to other ecological factors and spatial scales
appropriate to the population biology of this salamander,
such as neighborhood size and dispersal rate.
Ecological Divergence and genomic heterogeneity

Ecological diversification without complete RI is commonly observed in nature (e.g. Heliconius butterflies [45],
cichlid fishes [6], Darwin finches [46]) and is often considered an indication of “incomplete speciation” [42].
Our results in Ensatina question the almost generalized
expectation that RI is also a property of species formed
by ecological divergence, and support the observation
that “ecological species” might not develop complete
reproductive barriers [47]. Despite the lack of RI, divergent natural selection on traits between environments is
likely to result in other properties that are generally
assigned to species, such as morphological diagnosability,
an ecological niche, a stable geographic range, and eventually genetic distinctiveness in neutral loci. However, RI
might be a product only of geographic isolation, rather
than a direct consequence of divergent selection for ecologically relevant traits. Spatial contact between ecologically divergent taxa, rather than resulting in RI, might
more often lead to the formation of hybrid zones (i.e.
stable boundaries between hybridizing taxa), which are
generally located in ecotones where individuals with
parental traits will have intermediate fitness and may cooccur [48]. As long as divergent selection between parentals remains stable, parental taxa, or the properties we
recognize in them (e.g. phenotype, genetic diagnosability
at certain loci), are preserved without approaching complete RI.
The lack of RI in “ecological species” might not represent a lack of integrity or stability through time. Hybrid
zones are likely to constitute important selective filters to
gene flow, allowing locally adapted alleles to remain in
the environments where they are most fit, while neutral
alleles might introgress. Reports of genomic divergence
across sister species that diverged ecologically show a

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

consistent pattern of highly heterogeneous genomes (e.g.
[49-52]). This is hypothesized to happen because the few
genes under selection or physically linked to loci experiencing strong disruptive selection can diverge, whereas
gene flow will homogenize the remainder of the genome,
resulting in isolated “genomic islands of speciation” (e.g.
[49]). At an extreme, genomes of sister ecological species
might be completely homogeneous, with the exception
of those areas that initiated ecological divergence (e.g.
Heliconius butterflies [53,54]).
The genic view of species postulates that “species are
groups that are differentially adapted and, upon contact,
are not able to share genes controlling these adaptive
characters, by direct exchanges or through intermediate
hybrid populations. These groups may or may not be differentiated elsewhere in the genome” [55]. Our results
are in agreement, and suggest that ecological divergence
per se does not result in reproductively isolated taxa. The
patterns of clinal genetic variation or weak genotypic
clustering commonly found between ecologically divergent taxa (ecological species) in nature probably result
from processes similar to those in Ensatina. The fact that
we consider species formation to be “incomplete” results
only from our assumption that species will only endure
in time in the presence of RI, rather than being genetically isolated in most of their genomes, or particular
genomic regions controlling for ecologically relevant
traits. Hybrid zones between ecological taxa (species,
races or populations) where transition in ecological traits
remains abrupt despite the lack of complete RI or absolute restrictions to gene flow, constitute the evidence that
RI is not necessary, or even advantageous, for ecological
differentiation. While it is irrefutable that natural selection is an important force in species diversification, that
process may well be uncorrelated with the development
of RI.

Conclusions
Since the time of the modern synthesis, we have made
major progress in understanding how RI may arise in
various geographic contexts (sympatric, parapatric, allopatric). Whereas RI is the ultimate test as to whether two
populations should be considered species, this process
only reflects a single axis of the whole process of species
formation. This limitation has been both technological
and conceptual. However, recent technological advances
now allow us to operate not only at the level of the
organism, but also on the genes responsible for the traits
we attribute to species, and how they interact with the
local environment. Extending this same approach to
other response variables that are now more tractable,
such as restriction of gene flow in selected versus neutral
loci, and comparison across several hybrid zones with different levels of divergence, will soon enable us to break

Page 9 of 14

from assumptions of what a “good” species should be,
and directly illuminate the multidimensional nature of
species formation.

Methods
To determine the best predictors for the development of
reproductive isolation we followed a three-step approach.
First, we distinguish the range of pure parental populations (i.e. not affected by ongoing gene flow) from areas of
secondary contact (i.e. where genetic introgression occurs).
Second, we focus on the ranges of pure parental populations to infer the amount of genetic and ecological divergence (predictor variables) prior to secondary contact and
without the confounding effect of genetic and ecological
intermediates. Third, we focus on individuals collected at
the center of secondary contacts to determine the frequency of genetic admixture (response variable) and statistically infer relationships between predictors and the
response variable.
Sampling and study units

Because we want to predict how reproductive isolation
(RI) develops along the whole continuum of species
formation, our operational units need to be at any diagnosable stage of divergence along the gradient from
genetically distinct populations, ecomorphological
groups (subspecies), and reproductively isolated taxa. In
Ensatina, ecologically and morphologically distinct
groups are subdivided into several genetically distinct
units, with varying degree of genetic divergence [22].
Therefore, we chose to discard any a priori taxonomic
status and operate with every kind of genetically distinct
population. A population is here defined as a genetically
homogeneous group of individuals that is in mutationdrift equilibrium, irrespective of their spatial range or
the extent of genetic differentiation between them.
The range of a ring species complex comprises areas of
genetic homogeneity, where genetically pure parental
individuals occur, linked by areas of secondary contact,
where genetically admixed individuals occur as a consequence of recent genetic interactions. In the Ensatina
complex, as in other organisms with low dispersal,
genetic variability has a fractal spatial structure [24,27].
Morphologically homogeneous groups (subspecies) that
occupy a large range can be subdivided in smaller genetically homogeneous groups, which, using appropriate
genetic markers, might be further dissected into families
or even individuals. Patterns of genetic variation of 22-27
allozyme loci, in 1130 individuals collected throughout
the entire ring distribution, enable recognition of at least
20 genetically distinct “parental populations” around the
Central Valley [22]: 2 within klauberi, croceater, 4 within
platensis, 8 within oregonensis, picta, 2 coastal plus a
third inland population of xanthoptica, and eschscholtzii.

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

The individual multilocus genotypes were assigned to
groups maximizing Hardy-Weinberg (HW) and linkage
equilibria at a uniform level of diagnosability (see [22] for
details), using the Bayesian clustering algorithm implemented in the software STRUCTURE [56].
In this study, we use the population structure analysis
from Pereira and Wake [22] to distinguish the ranges of
the 20 genetically pure parental populations, which are
not affected by ongoing gene flow, from the areas of
secondary contact around and across the ring, where
genetic admixture occurs. Using assignment tests,
genetically pure individuals are assigned to a single cluster with high posterior probability (pp close to 1, while
admixed individuals have intermediate pp of belonging
to two clusters (e.g. F1 hybrid would have 0.5 pp). For
purposes of this study, localities with a mean assignment
to a single cluster higher than 0.8 pp were considered
“parental localities”, while those with assignments lower
than 0.8 pp were considered “admixed localities”. Polygons encompassing parental localities represent the
range of genetically pure “parental populations” (N =
20), whereas intervening polygons represent areas of
“secondary contact” (N = 16; Figure 2). The spatial
boundaries of those polygons were robust to variation
around the 0.8 pp threshold.
In addition to these previously published genetic data
[22], we include data from two other studies that focus on
the midrange closure of the ring, between inland xanthoptica and platensis (Additional file 2). To determine the
amount of genetic divergence, we used new data from 121
individuals sampled within the range of genetically pure
populations along the Sierra Nevada (23 geographic localities), genotyped for 24 allozyme loci. To estimate the
degree of genetic admixture we used published data from
three independent transects on that hybrid zone [32],
which included 323 individuals genotyped for 8 allozyme
loci diagnostic for those parental populations.
Subsequent to this analysis, genetic data from individuals collected within the range of “parental populations”
and individuals collected within areas of “secondary contacts” were treated in separate datasets to measure genetic
divergence and degree of admixture independently.
Contributors to Genetic Divergence

In a ring species, the accumulation of genetic divergence
depends both on the bidirectional colonization around
the main geographic barrier, and on restrictions to gene
flow caused by periods of geographic isolation. At the
level of this analysis, we cannot always differentiate
between the effect of time and space, but both factors are
known to affect the diversification process in Ensatina.
Phylogeographic studies using mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) support the ring species hypothesis, in particular the pattern of clade origin in northern coastal

Page 10 of 14

California, and southwards colonization around the
Central Valley [24,33]. Moreover, since the beginning of
its diversification in the late Miocene, Ensatina has been
subjected to the dynamic geologic history of California.
The formation of island isolates together with the movement of tectonic plates resulted in periods of geographic
isolation having varying lengths between populations
around the ring [21]. As a consequence of time in geographic isolation, high genetic differentiation exists in
allozymes and mtDNA between morphologically similar
populations that contact across previous geological barriers [21,22,24]. We recognize that genetic divergence
among populations is a function of divergence time and
historical introgression (i.e. prior to the current secondary contact). Nonetheless, overall genetic divergence
should be a valid predictor of current RI, as estimated
from the frequency of hybrids in the present contact
zones [8]. Here, we use two measures of genetic distance
commonly used in the literature: divergence at one mitochondrial gene, and divergence averaged across several
nuclear loci.
a) Genetic distance in mitochondrial DNA

In order to determine divergence in mtDNA, we analyzed
genetic variation in an 802 bp fragment of cytochrome b
(cyt b) from 344 salamanders sampled in 212 unique sites
within the range of the 20 pure parental populations. We
used previously published data from 263 individuals [24]
(GenBank accession numbers FJ151653 - FJ152002; see
Additional file 3) and sequenced another 81 individuals
following the same protocol to represent all extant populations of Ensatina and intra-population variability.
Sequences were visually aligned in SEQUENCHER (Gene
Codes, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) and deposited in GenBank
(accession numbers JN022615 - JN022695). We calculated
corrected average pairwise differences between pure parental populations (PiXY [57]) using the Tamura-Nei
model of sequence divergence implemented in ARLEQUIN v.3.11 [58].
b) Genetic distance in nuclear DNA

To estimate divergence across nuclear genes (nDNA), we
used the 22 to 27 allozymic loci described above, which
are selectively neutral based on Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium [22] and are not likely to directly affect reproductive isolation. Because genetic divergence decreases due
to gene flow after secondary contact, we restricted this
analysis to our genetically pure parental populations, by
combining all the “pure” individuals assigned to the same
population (assignment pp≥0.95) and calculating Nei’s D
[59] with GENETIX [60].
Contributors to Ecological Divergence

During the southwards expansion of the complex, Ensatina colonized disparate habitats throughout California,
from wet and cold climates characteristic of northern

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

California, to arid habitats in the southern part of the
range. These steep climatic gradients are likely to constitute important physiological challenges for ectothermal
and lungless organisms such as Ensatina. Moreover, California is marked by distinct physiographic regions that are
characterized by specific plant communities [30].
Although the distribution of Ensatina is contiguous across
most vegetation types, changes in color pattern, and therefore subspecies limits, are spatially concordant with turnover of vegetation composition. We here account for the
putative effect of ecological divergence by independently
evaluating the effect of climate and vegetation, since they
would be attributed to distinct ecological processes important to Ensatina and are generally recognized as major
ecological factors that could drive RI.
We evaluated ecological divergence with respect to
current climate and vegetation using the distribution of
Ensatina around the main geographic barrier that defines
the ring, the Central Valley. We gathered observation
points of Ensatina in California by compiling information
from field records at the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology
(UC Berkeley) and surveying herpetological collections
from most North American natural history museums
using HerpNET on 5 May 2009. From a total of 12,366
observations, we accounted for sampling biases by reducing the number of points to spatially unique samples defined according to the georeferences associated with the
specific localities of the specimens. Samples were assigned
to pure parental populations or contact zones in between,
using polygons defined by the genetic data (above). We
then queried the samples for 19 continuous bioclimatic
variables (1-km2 spatial resolution [61]) and 55 binary
vegetation variables (0.01-km2 spatial resolution, California
Wildlife Habitat Relationships System). Ecological divergence was calculated based on 3,404 assigned spatially
unique observations of Ensatina around the Central Valley
of California. Because we did not find associations
between these traits and RI, we did not consider possible
confounding effects of interaction between climate and
vegetation any further.
a) Climatic Dissimilarity

We first described the entire climatic space occupied by
Ensatina in California using a principal component analysis (PCA) on the 19 bioclimatic variables, which includes
records in areas occupied by parental populations and
contact zones. Using the first two principal components
(PC axes), we then calculated the area of climatic space
occupied by each parental population. Using the subset of
records assigned to each of the 20 pure parental populations, we calculated their respective climatic areas by using
a kernel density function [62] (bivariate normal kernel,
95% density, 500 × 500 pixel grid); this method of estimating area in the PCA was preferable to a minimum convex
polygon, which would have included large areas devoid of

Page 11 of 14

any sampling points. Finally, we computed the percentage
of area overlap in climatic space between each focal pair
of parental populations, where overlap was defined as the
area intersect divided by the area union. Climatic dissimilarity was calculated as 1- climatic overlap and expressed
as a percentage, so that 0% corresponds to population
pairs with the same climate, and 100% to the populations
occupying completely dissimilar climates.
b) Vegetation Dissimilarity

To estimate vegetation divergence between pure parental
populations, we again used a dissimilarity index, here
based on the presence or absence of every vegetation variable or class. For each pairwise comparison between populations, we first calculated the percentage of the number of
localities of Ensatina that were associated with the vegetation classes unique to either of the two focal populations.
We then divided this tally by the total number of localities
in the two populations, expressed as a percentage. This
generated vegetation dissimilarity values ranging from 0%
for populations associated with identical vegetation variables to 100% for populations associated with completely
different vegetation variables.
Degree of Genetic Admixture in secondary contacts

As a proxy for the development of reproductive isolation,
we now focus on the individuals collected at secondary
contacts to measure the degree of genetic admixture
observed at contact zones at the several levels of divergence present around and across the ring complex. When
RI between parental taxa is complete, or almost complete,
due either to pre- or post-zygotic mechanisms or both, we
expect that most of the individuals in areas of sympatry
will genetically resemble those from parental populations.
On the other hand, if isolating mechanisms are not fully
developed, we expect that a few generations of random
mating will quickly produce admixed individuals that are
genetic mosaics of more than one parental genome (herein
“hybrids”). Here, the use of the word “hybrid” referring to
a genetically admixed individual does not imply any a
priori knowledge about the degree of RI between the
respective parental taxa, but only that those taxa are
genetically diagnosable at the level of our analysis.
We assessed the frequency of genetically admixed individuals based on their multilocus genotypes for the allozyme
data described above, using the Bayesian assignment test
implemented in the program NEW HYBRIDS [63]. This
method uses multilocus genotypes to assign each individual to genetic categories (i.e. parental A, parental B, F1
hybrid, or backcrosses), without a priori assumptions of
their ancestry or location, while it estimates allele frequencies in parental populations trying to maximize HW and
linkage equilibria. To calculate the degree of genetic
admixture between each pair of populations we classified
individuals from the sampling locality in the center of

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

each secondary contact (see Table 1) into genetic categories, using a threshold of 0.9 pp, and calculated the frequency of hybrids (F1 and backcrosses).
Because the program works under a two-population
model, we performed individual runs for each contact,
including the samples from localities within the secondary
contact as our query sample, and from localities in the
range of both parental populations as reference samples
for the assignment. Because the limits of some contact
zones are better defined as a genetic gradient rather than
an abrupt change, we did not discriminate our reference
samples as genetically pure (z and s options off, see manual), basing the assignment solely on the multilocus genotypes. We pseudo-replicated the Markov chain Monte
Carlo from different starting points and ran the analysis
long after reaching stability to assure convergence to the
same result. Although the assignment test implemented in
NEW HYBRIDS is mainly driven by HW and linkage
equilibria, genetic differentiation between parental populations is known to affect the power of discriminating
admixed individuals. Therefore, we did not compute frequency of admixture in secondary contacts between populations that diverged less that 0.1 (DN) in allozyme loci.
Because we have more than one transect across some
hybrid zones (contact zones across the ring), we calculated
the frequency of hybrids by pooling individuals and computed means across the multiple transects.
Model for Reproductive Isolation

Because genetic and ecological differentiation between
parental populations often co-occur, we used the multiple contacts within the ring species to statistically isolate
the association between different processes that might
result in RI [42]. We employed a multiple regression
model, implemented in the statistical package JMP 5.0
(SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC, USA), by defining the
degree of genetic admixture as the response variable, and
the four kinds of distances or dissimilarities between parental populations as the predictors (genetic distance as
measured by mtDNA and nDNA, and dissimilarity in climate and vegetation). By using leverage or partial residual plots to examine the isolated effect of each predictor
variable on the degree of genetic admixture, we expect to
distinguish which processes are associated with the evolution of reproductive barriers between taxa. We predict
that divergence in traits of parental populations that
cause RI, or in those associated with them, will be negatively correlated with the degree of genetic admixture.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Principal component analysis on 19 climatic
variables for spatially unique observations of Ensatina within
California. PC1 is responsible for 41.2% of the climatic variation and

Page 12 of 14

reflects wet and cold gradients (Mean Temperature of Coldest Quarter,
Mean Temperature of Wettest Quarter, Min Temperature of Coldest
Period, and Precipitation Seasonality; variables listed in decreasing order
of importance). PC2 is responsible for 32.5% of the variation and reflects
drier and warmer gradients (Mean Temperature of Warmest Quarter,
Mean Temperature of Driest Quarter, Max Temperature of Warmest
Period, Temperature Annual Range, and Temperature Seasonality;
variables listed in decreasing order of importance). Colors and labels are
in agreement with Figure 1; grey points refer to sampling within
secondary contacts; lines demark 50% density ellipses.
Additional file 2: Collecting localities for allozymic data, sample
sizes, and geographic location. Underlined names represent localities
at the center of the contact zones.
Additional file 3: Collecting localities for mtDNA data, geographic
location and GenBank Accession numbers.

List of abbreviations
RI: reproductive isolation; HW: Hardy-Weinberg; mtDNA: mitochondrial DNA;
nDNA: nuclear DNA; PC: principal component.
Acknowledgements and Funding
We thank the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (University of California, Berkeley),
California Academy of Sciences and the Smithsonian Institution for providing
access to their Herpetological collections through HerpNET portal. We also
thank R. Damasceno, S. Rovito, T. Devitt, J. Kolbe, M. Tonione, M. Bedwell, and
M. Koo for their help during data collection and analysis. We thank C. Moritz,
Moritz lab, D. Buckley, I. Martinez-Solano, M. Melo, C. Pinho, S. Baird and
anonymous reviewers for their comments on the early versions of this
manuscript. We also thank J. Thorne for providing GIS data on the geographic
subdivisions of California. This work was supported by National Science
Foundation grant EF 0334939 and DEB 0641078. R. Pereira was supported by
“Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia” grant SFRH/BD/18073/2004.
Links:
HerpNet http://www.herpnet.org
Author details
1
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology and Department of Integrative Biology,
3101 Valley Life Sciences Building, University of California, Berkeley, CA
94720-3160, USA. 2CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e
Recursos Genéticos, Universidade do Porto, Campus Agrário de Vairão, 4485661 Vairão, Portugal. 3Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de Ciências da
Universidade do Porto, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal. 4National Park Service,
Inventory and Monitoring Division, 1201 Oakridge Drive, Fort Collins, CO
80525-5589 USA.
Authors’ contributions
RJP carried out the design of the study, compiled published genetic data,
collected new genetic sequences, analyzed the data, interpreted the results
and drafted the manuscript. WBM collected the ecological data, preformed
spatial analyses and participated in the interpretation of the results. DBW
contributed with new allozymic data and interpretation of the results. All
authors participated in the preparation of the manuscript and approved its
final version.
Received: 26 January 2011 Accepted: 6 July 2011 Published: 6 July 2011
References
1. Mallet J: Mayr’s view of Darwin: was Darwin wrong about speciation? Biol
J Linn Soc 2008, 95(1):3-16.
2. de Queiroz K: Species concepts and species delimitation. Syst Biol 2007,
56(6):879-886.
3. de Queiroz K: The general lineage concept of species, species criteria,
and the process of speciation: A conceptual unification and
terminological recommendations. In Endless forms: Species and speciation.
Edited by: Howard DJ. New York: Oxford University Press; 1998:57-75.
4. Hoskin CJ, Higgie M, McDonald KR, Moritz C: Reinforcement drives rapid
allopatric speciation. Nature 2005, 437(7063):1353-1356.

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

5.

6.

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.

Taylor EB, Boughman JW, Groenenboom M, Sniatynski M, Schluter D,
Gow JL: Speciation in reverse: morphological and genetic evidence of
the collapse of a three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus)
species pair. Mol Ecol 2006, 15(2):343-355.
Seehausen O, Terai Y, Magalhaes IS, Carleton KL, Mrosso HDJ, Miyagi R, van
der Sluijs I, Schneider MV, Maan ME, Tachida H, et al: Speciation through
sensory drive in cichlids fish. Nature 2008, 455:620-626.
Coyne JA, Orr HA: Speciation Sunderland: Sinauer; 2004.
Coyne J, Orr H: Patterns of speciation in Drosophila. Evolution 1989,
43(2):362-381.
Tang S, Presgraves DC: Evolution of the Drosophila nuclear pore complex
results in multiple hybrid incompatibilities. Science 2009,
323(5915):779-782.
Mayr E: Ecological factors in speciation. Evolution 1947, 1(1):263-288.
Schluter D, Nagel LM: Parallel speciation by natural selection. American
Naturalist 1995, 146:292-301.
Muller HJ: Isolating mechanisms, evolution and temperature. Biological
Symposia 1942, 6:71-125.
Nosil P, Harmon L: Niche dimensionality and ecological speciation. In
Speciation and patterns of diversity. Edited by: Butlin R, Bridle J, Schluter D.
New York: Cambridge University Press; 2009:127-154.
Funk DJ, Nosil P, Etges WJ: Ecological divergence exhibits consistently
positive associations with reproductive isolation across disparate taxa.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(9):3209-3213.
Rundle HD, Nagel L, Boughman JW, Schluter D: Natural selection and
parallel speciation in sympatric sticklebacks. Science 2000, 287:306-308.
Langerhans RB, Gifford ME, Joseph EO: Ecological speciation in Gambusia
fishes. Evolution 2007, 61(9):2056-2074.
Jordan DS: The origin of species through isolation. Science 1905,
22(566):545-562.
Stebbins RC: Speciation in salamanders of the plethodontid genus
Ensatina. University of California Publications in Zoology 1949, 48:377-526.
Ticehurst CB: A systematic review of the genus Phylloscopus. London:
Trustees of the British Museum; 1938.
Joseph L, Dolman G, Donnellan S, Saint KM, Berg ML, Bennett AT: Where
and when does a ring start and end? Testing the ring-species
hypothesis in a species complex of Australian parrots. Proc Biol Sci 2008,
275(1650):2431-2440.
Wake DB: Incipient species formation in salamanders of the Ensantina
complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:7761-7767.
Pereira RJ, Wake DB: Genetic leakage after adaptive and non-adaptive
divergence in the Ensatina eschscholtzii ring species. Evolution 2009,
63(9):2288-2301.
Parks DS: Phylogeography, historical distribution, migration, and species
boundaries in the salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii as measured with
mitochondrial DNA sequences. PhD Berkeley: University of California; 2000.
Kuchta SR, Parks DS, Mueller RL, Wake DB: Closing the ring: historical
biogeography of the salamander ring species Ensatina escholtzii. J
Biogeogr 2009, 36:982-995.
Vieites DR, Min MS, Wake DB: Rapid diversification and dispersal during
periods of global warming by plethodontid salamanders. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2007, 104(50):19903-19907.
Davis OK: Pollen analysis of a late-glacial and Holocene sediment core
from Mono Lake, Mono County, California. Quaternary Research 1999,
52(2):243-249.
Kuchta SR, Parks DS, Wake DB: Pronounced phylogeographic structure on
a small spatial scale: geomorphological evolution and lineage history in
the salamander ring species Ensatina eschscholtzii in central coastal
California. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2009, 50(2):240-255.
Kuchta SR, Krakauer AH, Sinervo B: Why does the Yellow-eyed ensatina
have yellow eyes? Batesian mimicry of Pacific newts (genus Taricha) by
the salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii xanthoptica. Evolution 2008,
62(4):984-990.
Brown CW: Hybridization among the subspecies of the plethodontid
salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii. University of California Publications in
Zoology 1974, 98:211-256.
Hickman JC: Jepson manual: higher plants of California. Berkeley:
University of California Press; 1993.
Kuchta SR: Experimental support for aposematic coloration in the
salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii xanthoptica: Implications for mimicry
of Pacific Newts. Copeia 2005, , 2: 265-271.

Page 13 of 14

32. Alexandrino J, Baird SJE, Lawson L, Macey JR, Moritz C, Wake DB: Strong
selection against hybrids at a hybrid zone in the Ensantina ring species
complex and its evolutionary implications. Evolution 2005,
59(6):1334-1347.
33. Moritz C, Schneider CJ, Wake DB: Evolutionary relationships within the
Ensantina eschscholtzii complex confirm the ring species interpretation.
Syst Biol 1992, 41(3):273-291.
34. Wake DB, Yanev KP: Geographic variation in allozymes in a “ring species”,
the plethodontid salamander Ensantina eschscholtzii of western North
America. Evolution 1986, 40(4):702-715.
35. Hickerson MJ, Meyer CP, Moritz C: DNA barcoding will often fail to
discover new animal species over broad parameter space. Systematic
Biology 2006, 55(5):729-739.
36. Darwin C: On the Origin of Species. London: John Murray; 1859.
37. Schluter D: The ecology of adaptive radiation. New York: Oxford University
Press; 2000.
38. Butlin RK, Bridle JR, Schluter D: Speciation and patterns of diversity.
Cambride: Cambridge University Press; 20096.
39. Mayr E: Systematics and the origin of species. New York: Columbia
University Press; 1942.
40. Dobzhansky T: Genetics and the origin of species. New York: Columbia
University Press; 1937.
41. Schluter D: Ecology and the origin of species. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 2001, 16(7):372-380.
42. Nosil P, Harmon LJ, Seehausen O: Ecological explanations for (incomplete)
speciation. TREE 2009, 24(3):145-156.
43. Kronforst MR, Young LG, Kapan DD, McNeely C, O’Neill RJ, Gilbert LE:
Linkage of butterfly mate preference and wing color preference cue at
the genomic location of wingless. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103(17):6575-6580.
44. Feder JL: The apple maggot fly, Rhagoletis pomonella flies in the face of
conventional wisdom about speciation? In Endless forms: Species and
speciation. Edited by: Howard DJ, Berlocher SH. New York: Osford University
Press; 1998:130-144.
45. Mallet J, Beltr Aacute NM, Neukirchen W, Linares M: Natural hybridization
in heliconiine butterflies: the species boundary as a continuum. BMC
Evol Biol 2007, 7(1):28.
46. Grant BR, Grant PR: Fission and fusion of Darwin’s finches populations.
Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 2008, 363(1505):2821-2829.
47. van Valen L: Ecological species, multispecies, and oaks. Taxon 1976, 25(2/
3):233-239.
48. Endler JA: Geographic variation, speciation, and clines. Monogr Popul Biol
1977, 10:1-246.
49. Turner TL, Hahn MW, Nuzhdin SV: Genomic islands of speciation in
Anopheles gambiae. PLoS Biol 2005, 3(9):e285.
50. Nosil P, Funk DJ, Ortiz-Barrientos D: Divergent selection and
heterogeneous genomic divergence. Molecular Ecology 2009,
18(3):375-402.
51. Michel AP, Sim S, Powell THQ, Taylor MS, Nosil P, Feder JL: Widespread
genomic divergence during sympatric speciation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2010, 107(21):9724-9729.
52. Nosil P, Egan SP, Funk DJ: Heterogeneous genomic differentiation
between walking-stick ecotypes: “Isolation by adaptation” and multiple
roles for divergent selection. Evolution 2008, 62(2):316-336.
53. Counterman BA, Araújo-Pérez F, Hines HM, Baxter SW, Morrison CM,
Lindstrom DP, Papa R, Ferguson L, Joron M, Ffrench-Constant RH, et al:
Genomics hoptspots for adaptation: The populatioon genetics of
Müllerian erato. PLoS Genet 2010, 6(2):e1000796.
54. Baxter SW, Nadeau NJ, Maroja LS, Wilkinson P, Counterman BA, Dawson A,
Beltran M, Perez-Espona S, Chamberlain N, Ferguson L, et al: Genomic
Hotspots for Adaptation: The Population Genetics of Mullerian Mimicry
in the Heliconius melpomene Clade. Plos Genetics 2010, 6(2).
55. Wu C-I: The genetic view of the process of speciation. J Evol Biol 2001,
14:851-865.
56. Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data. Genetics 2000, 155(2):945-959.
57. Nei M: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics. New York,: Columbia University
Press; 1987.
58. Excoffier L, Laval G, Schneider S: Arlequin (version 3.0): An integrated
software package for population genetics data analysis. Evol Bioinform
Online 2005, 1:47-50.

Pereira et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:194
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/194

Page 14 of 14

59. Nei M: Genetic distance between populations. Am Nat 1972,
106(949):283-292.
60. Belkhir K, Borsa P, Chikhi L, Raufaste N, Bonhomme F: GENETIX 4.02,
logiciel sous Windows TM pour la génétique des populations.
Montpellier: Laboratoire Génome, Populations, Interactions, CNRS, Université
de Montpellier II; 2001.
61. Hijmans RJ, Cameron SE, Parra JL, Jones PG, Jarvis A: Very high resolution
interpolated climate surfaces for global land areas. International Journal
of Climatology 2005, 25:1965-1978.
62. Worton BJ: Kernel methods for estimating the utilization dirstibution in
home-range studies. Ecology 1989, 70:164-168.
63. Anderson EC, Thompson EA: A model-based method for identifying
hybrids using multilocus genetic data. Genetics 2002, 160:1217-1229.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-194
Cite this article as: Pereira et al.: Predictors for reproductive isolation in a
ring species complex following genetic and ecological divergence. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:194.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
