<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genome-wide analysis of eukaryote thaumatin-like proteins (TLPs) with an emphasis on poplar</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-33"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Benjamin Petre"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Genome-wide analysis of eukaryote thaumatinlike proteins (TLPs) with an emphasis on poplar
Benjamin Petre1, Ian Major2, Nicolas Rouhier1, Sébastien Duplessis1*

Abstract
Background: Plant inducible immunity includes the accumulation of a set of defense proteins during infection
called pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins, which are grouped into families termed PR-1 to PR-17. The PR-5 family is
composed of thaumatin-like proteins (TLPs), which are responsive to biotic and abiotic stress and are widely
studied in plants. TLPs were also recently discovered in fungi and animals. In the poplar genome, TLPs are overrepresented compared with annual species and their transcripts strongly accumulate during stress conditions.
Results: Our analysis of the poplar TLP family suggests that the expansion of this gene family was followed by
diversification, as differences in expression patterns and predicted properties correlate with phylogeny. In particular,
we identified a clade of poplar TLPs that cluster to a single 350 kb locus of chromosome I and that are
up-regulated by poplar leaf rust infection. A wider phylogenetic analysis of eukaryote TLPs - including plant, animal
and fungi sequences - shows that TLP gene content and diversity increased markedly during land plant evolution.
Mapping the reported functions of characterized TLPs to the eukaryote phylogenetic tree showed that antifungal
or glycan-lytic properties are widespread across eukaryote phylogeny, suggesting that these properties are shared
by most TLPs and are likely associated with the presence of a conserved acidic cleft in their 3D structure. Also, we
established an exhaustive catalog of TLPs with atypical architectures such as small-TLPs, TLP-kinases and small-TLPkinases, which have potentially developed alternative functions (such as putative receptor kinases for pathogen
sensing and signaling).
Conclusion: Our study, based on the most recent plant genome sequences, provides evidence for TLP gene family
diversification during land plant evolution. We have shown that the diverse functions described for TLPs are not
restricted to specific clades but seem to be universal among eukaryotes, with some exceptions likely attributable to
atypical protein structures. In the perennial plant model Populus, we unravelled the TLPs likely involved in leaf rust
resistance, which will provide the foundation for further functional investigations.

Background
Plants respond to challenge from pathogens by activating an inducible protein-based defense system that
includes 17 families of pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins termed PR-1 to PR-17 [1,2]. Proteins of the PR-5
family have high sequence identity with thaumatins,
which are sweet-tasting proteins isolated from the West
African shrub Thaumatococcus daniellii and are thus
referred to as thaumatin-like proteins (TLPs) [3]. For
decades, TLPs have been studied extensively in plants
* Correspondence: duplessi@nancy.inra.fr
1
INRA†/Nancy Université, Unité Mixte de Recherche 1136 ‘Interactions
Arbres/Micro-organismes’, Centre INRA de Nancy, F-54280 Champenoux,
France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

for their antifungal properties. The recent identification
of TLPs in animals [4] and fungi [5] indicates that these
proteins are more widely distributed and not only
restricted to plants [6].
Molecular studies of TLP expression, localisation and
activity support a role for TLPs in host defense during
pathogen infection. TLP up-regulation has been
described in many higher plants infected by pathogens
such as bacteria, oomycetes and fungi [7,8]. Localisation
studies revealed that plant pathogen-inducible TLPs are
secreted into the apoplast [9,10]. More than 20 TLPs
from animals, fungi and plants have been shown to
exhibit an antifungal activity [7], although the mechanisms by which TLPs exert this activity remain unclear.
Several antifungal modes of action have been described

© 2011 Petre et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

such as membrane permeabilization [11], b-glucan binding and degradation [5], inhibition of enzymes such as
xylanases [12], a-amylase, or trypsin [13], as well as an
apoptosis-inducing mechanism reported in yeast [14].
Other functional properties have been reported for
TLPs, including antifreeze activity [15], protection from
abiotic stress [16] and binding to proteins such as actin,
viral CMV-1 protein, yeast glycoproteins and G-Protein
Coupled Receptor (GPCR) or to hormones such as cytokinins [7].
Most typical TLPs described to date have a molecular
weight ranging from 20 to 26 kDa, and generally possess
16 conserved cysteine residues that form eight disulfide
bonds [17]. Recently, small TLPs (sTLPs) have been
identified in monocots and conifers. These are characterized by a smaller molecular weight (around 17 kDa)
and only 10 conserved cysteine residues that form five
disulfide bonds [18-20]. Seven TLP structures have been
solved so far, revealing a strongly conserved 3D organisation with a characteristic acidic cleft domain that
comprises the five highly conserved amino acids
REDDD that are dispersed in the primary sequence [21].
Despite good conservation of these amino acids in sTLP
primary sequences, they do not organize into an acidic
cleft at the 3D level [22]. Unusual TLP and protein
kinase fusion proteins referred to as PR5-kinase or TLPkinase (TLP-K) have also been reported in a few plant
species [23,7].
The analysis of the Populus trichocarpa ’Nisqually-1’
genome revealed a substantial over-representation of
genes encoding disease resistance proteins compared
with annual species such as Arabidopsis thaliana, and
this increase is not solely attributable to the genome
expansion in Populus [24]. In particular, 55 putative
TLP genes were initially identified in P. trichocarpa versus 24 for A. thaliana [24]. Populus spp. are economically important and hybrid poplars in particular are used
extensively worldwide for wood production. Breeding
programs particularly target resistance to Melampsora
spp. fungi, which are responsible for leaf rust, a major
disease of poplars that severely impacts tree growth and
wood production [25]. With the availability of both
P. trichocarpa and M. larici-populina genome sequences,
the biotrophic poplar-rust interaction is emerging as a
model pathosystem in forest biology [26]. Several transcriptome-based studies revealed transcriptional reprogramming in poplar leaves infected by Melampsora spp.,
including the up-regulation of many PR proteins [26]. In
particular, transcript profiling of poplar leaves during an
incompatible interaction (i.e. host-specific resistance)
with M. larici-populina established a set of host-defense
marker genes, including several TLPs [27].
The present study describes the annotation of 42 TLP
gene models in the P. trichocarpa ’Nisqually-1’ genome

Page 2 of 16

version 2.0. In addition, comparison of expression studies conducted on poplar subjected to biotic (i.e. Melampsora spp. infection) and abiotic stresses identified
stress-responsive clades. The comparison of 598 complete eukaryote TLP amino acid sequences, of which
410 come from the 18 plant genome sequences currently available, allowed us to establish a link between
function and phylogeny by systematically mapping functional data mined from the literature to the phylogenetic
tree. In silico structural analysis confirmed that, with the
exception of sTLPs, the acidic cleft domain is strongly
conserved among eukaryote TLPs.

Results
Annotation, phylogeny, genomic distribution and gene
expression of poplar TLPs

In contrast to Tuskan and collaborators [24], we identified a total of 59 putative TLP genes in the P. trichocarpa ’Nisqually-1’ genome version 1.1. In version 2.0 of
the genome, now integrated in the Phytozome portal
[28,29], 17 of these TLP gene models are not validated.
These 17 invalidated models include 11 predicted alleles
that were previously considered to be independent
genes and six probable pseudogenes that are interrupted
by stop codons (Additional file 1). The remaining 42
TLP genes that are validated in version 2.0 of the genome comprise 38 typical TLPs and four genes with
strong homology to TLP-K from A. thaliana, including
fusion to a putative protein kinase (Pfam: PF00069)
([23], Additional file 2).
A phylogenetic tree constructed with the validated
poplar TLPs reveals four well-defined clades, numbered
here from 1 to 4. Among these clades, the REDDD residues are highly conserved with only small variations for
five TLPs (Figure 1). The size of the proteins varies
from 225 to 319 amino acids (~24 to 34 kDa) for the 38
typical TLPs and is approximately 650 amino acids
(~73 kDa) for the four TLP-Ks. The predicted isoelectric
points vary from 4.15 to 9.07 and correspond well with
the TLP phylogeny (Figure 1). Analysis of the protein
domain organisation showed that the thaumatin domain
(Pfam: PF00314) covers almost 95% of the entire mature
TLPs, except 10 TLPs in clades 3 and 4 that have
approximately 40 additional amino acids in their
C-terminal region. The four TLP-Ks are grouped in a
specific branch of clade 3, suggesting that they are
monophyletic in poplar. The gene structure of poplar
TLPs is well conserved within clades 1-3, with genes
belonging to clade 1 formed by a single exon, TLPs
from clade 2 by two exons and TLPs of clade 3 by three
exons (Figure 1); clade 4 is an exception with genes
composed of one, two or three exons.
The version 2.0 of the P. trichocarpa genome incorporates a greatly improved physical map compared with

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Thaumatin-like proteins (TLPs) from poplar. (A), Neighbour-joining tree of Populus trichocarpa TLPs. Branch lengths are proportional
to phylogenetic distances. (B), Protein characteristics and natural selection of poplar TLPs. MW: mass weight in kDa; Ip: predicted iso-electric
point; ns: neutral selection [39]. (C), Regulation of poplar TLPs during stress. Transcriptome analyses of 3 different studies on poplar leaves
infected by Melampsora spp. are summarized [27,30,31]. Changes considered to be significant by the respective authors are in bold. I48:
incompatible interaction at 48 hour post-inoculation (hpi); C48: compatible interaction at 48 hpi; Mmd: compatible interaction at 6 dpi; Mlp:
compatible interaction at 6 dpi; Mxt: Mmd+Mlp; 1d, 3d, 7d, 9d: compatible interaction respectively at 1, 3, 7 and 9 dpi. Summarized data for
expression during stress conditions were mined from the PopGenIE database [58] (non-underlined letters) or from the literature (underlined
letters). ‘up’: up-regulated gene or increased protein accumulation; ‘down’: down-regulated gene; ns: no significant regulation; a letter alone
indicates that the corresponding protein has been reported but no regulation information is available; a to d: ozone, UV, drought and cold stress
respectively; e: wind exposed leaves; f: wounding; g: Populus/Melampsora compatible interaction; h: sap extract; i: sap extract after wounding;
j: wood regeneration; k: copper stress. Corresponding references: [60,65-71] (D), Protein domain organisation and CDS structure. Light grey box:
thaumatin domain; dark grey box: protein kinase domain; black box: exon. ‘-’ in (A), (B) and (C) indicates missing information. aAccession number
of the best Arabidopsis thaliana homolog.

version 1.1. This helped localise 41 of the 42 annotated
TLP genes on 13 of the 19 chromosomes (i.e. scaffolds 1
to 19 on the Phytozome portal [29]) (Figure 2). Scaffold
1 contains 16 TLP genes, including all 11 TLP genes
from clade 2 which are located within a 350 kb segment
that encodes TLPs exclusively. We named this region the
TLP cluster. Transposable elements (TE) cover 52% of
this 350 kb region, with a particular over-representation
of long terminal repeat (LTR) Gypsy elements that cover
37% of the cluster (Figure 2 and Additional file 3).
Results compiled from three different previously published transcriptome analyses of poplar leaves infected
by Melampsora spp. fungi [27,30,31] indicate that, of
the 42 TLP genes, 14 are significantly up-regulated and
two are significantly down-regulated (Figure 1). Among
the 14 up-regulated TLP transcripts, 12 belong to clades
1 and 2 and 11 of these are located on scaffold 1 (Figure
1 and 2). Interestingly, five TLP genes are up-regulated
during an incompatible poplar/rust interaction, of which

three are grouped in clade 1. Under abiotic stress conditions, five poplar TLP transcripts showed differential
accumulation. In addition, six TLPs were identified by
different proteomic studies, of which four were shown
to accumulate during biotic or abiotic stress (Figure 1).
More specifically, the PopTLP1 gene (P. trichocarpa
geneID Poptr_0001s09570) from clade 1 is associated
with several biotic and abiotic stresses and we confirmed
with a detailed time-course analysis by RT-qPCR that
PopTLP1 expression increases in poplar leaves challenged by M. larici-populina (Additional file 4).
TLPs in green plant genome sequences

We performed an exhaustive genomic analysis of plant
TLPs by collecting TLP gene models from 18 sequenced
plants available at the Phytozome portal [29]. Models
encoding proteins with an incomplete thaumatin
domain were ignored (Table 1). A single but incomplete
TLP gene was identified in the unicellular green algae

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Representation of genomic loci of TLP genes in the genome of Populus trichocarpa ’Nisqually-1’. (A), Position of TLP genes on
scaffold 1. Transposable element coverage of the TLP cluster is presented below scaffold 1 (dark grey: LTR-retrotransposon; light grey: DNA
transposon). (B), position of TLP genes on scaffolds 2 to 21. Black lines: scaffolds; triangles: TLP genes; triangles in rectangles: TLP-kinase genes.
Grey and white triangles respectively correspond to regulated and non-regulated genes in rust-infected poplar leaves as shown in Figure 1.

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, which represents the evolutionary starting point of viridiplantae, and thus makes
the origin of complete TLPs in the green lineage unclear
(Table 1). Three complete TLP genes were identified in
the moss Physcomitrella patens and 12 were found in
the vascular plant Selaginella moellendorffii, indicating
that an important gene expansion occurred in the transition from bryophytes to tracheophytes. Among the 15
angiosperm genomes, the TLP gene number varies from
16 in the barrel clover Medicago truncatula to 42 in the
black cottonwood P. trichocarpa, whereas A. thaliana
has 22 TLP genes. An average of 26 TLP genes are present in angiosperms, with similar numbers of TLPs in
dicots or monocots (Table 1). sTLP-encoding genes
were identified exclusively in monocots (from 2 in Zea
mays to 9 in Sorghum bicolor), whereas TLP-Ks have
been identified in both monocots and dicots, although
dicot TLP-Ks were restricted to the A. thaliana and
P. trichocarpa genomes. To identify the genes that are
most similar to TLP-Ks in the remaining dicots, we performed homology searches with the kinase domain of

TLP-Ks and retrieved only lectin-kinase genes, confirming the absence of TLP-Ks in these dicot genomes (data
not shown). In S. bicolor, a small-TLP-kinase (here
termed sTLP-K) composed of a N-terminal sTLP
domain and a C-terminal protein kinase domain, separated by a predicted transmembrane (TM) domain, was
identified (Additional file 5). The origin of this arrangement is puzzling and has apparently evolved independently of TLP-Ks. To our knowledge, this is the first
report of such a domain organisation.
Eukaryote TLPs: linking phylogeny with protein structure
and function

To achieve an accurate and complete phylogeny of
eukaryote TLPs, we retrieved an additional 188
sequences with a complete thaumatin domain from
the NCBI protein database [32] and combined them
with the 410 plant sequences that we identified earlier
(Additional file 6). These include several sequences from
fungi (basidiomycetes and ascomycetes) and invertebrate
animals (nematods and arthropods), as well as other

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

Page 5 of 16

Table 1 TLP gene content in sequenced plant species
organism

code

common
organism name

phylum

class

order

TLP blast
resulta

complete TLP
domainc

small-TLP/
TLP-Kd

Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii

Chlre

Green algae

Chlorophyte

Chlorophyceae

Volvocales

1

0

0/0

Physcomitrella
patens

Phypa

Moss

Bryophyte

Bryopsides

Funariales

5

3

0/0

Selaginella
moelledorffii

Selmo

Lycophyte

Tracheophyte Sellaginellopsides Selaginellales 18

12

0/0

Oryza sativa

Orysa

Rice

Angiosperm

Monocotyledon

Cyperales

37

26

4/1

Brachypodium
distachyon

Bradi

Purple false brome

Angiosperm

Monocotyledon

Poales

32

24

3/2

Sorghum bicolor

Sorbi

Sorghum

Angiosperm

Monocotyledon

Poales

45

36

9/1(1e)

Zea mays
Mimulus guttatus

Angiosperm
Angiosperm

Monocotyledon
Dicotyledon

Poales
Lamiales

38
33

29
23

2/2
0/0

Vitis vinifera

Zeama Maize
Mimgu Common monkeyflower
Vitvi
Grapevine

Angiosperm

Dicotyledon

Rosales

27

18

0/0

Carica papaya

Carpa

Papaya tree

Angiosperm

Dicotyledon

Brassicales

18

16

0/0

Arabidopsis thaliana Arath

Thale cress

Angiosperm

Dicotyledon

Brassicales

30

22

0/3

Cucumis sativus

Cucsa

Cucumber

Angiosperm

Dicotyledon

Cucurbitales

29

28

0/0

Glycine max

Glyma

Soya

Angiosperm

Dicotyledon

Fabales

58

38

0/0

Medicago
truncatula

Medtr

Barrel clover

Angiosperm

Dicotyledon

Fabales

21

16

0/0

Prunus persica

Prupe

Peach tree

Angiosperm

Dicotyledon

Rosales

37

28

0/0

Manihot esculenta

Manes

Manioc

Angiosperm

Dicotyledon

Malpighiales

34

27

0/0

Ricin communis
Populus trichocarpa

Ricco
Poptr

Castor oil plant
Poplar

Angiosperm
Angiosperm

Dicotyledon
Dicotyledon

Malpighiales
Malpighiales

24
59b

22
42

0/0
0/4

a

Number of putative TLP genes identified by amino acid homology searches of plant genome sequences on the Phytozome portal [29].
Number of putative TLP genes identified from version 1.1 of the Populus trichocarpa ’Nisqually-1’ genome on the JGI website [55].
c
TLP sequences with a complete thaumatin domain.
d
Proportion of sTLP and TLP-K with a complete thaumatin domain.
e
small-TLP/kinase domain fusion (sTLP-K).
b

plants from mainly the asterid and conifer divisions. We
report for the first time the identification of sTLP genes
in basidiomycetes, precisely in the pucciniales M. laricipopulina and Puccinia graminis f.sp. tritici. Fungal
sTLPs appear to be monophyletic, suggesting that sTLPs
evolved independently in pucciniales, monocots and
conifers or that sTLPs were lost during evolution from
other phyla such as dicots and animals (Additional file
7). Overall, a total of 598 sequences were retrieved from
100 different species (12 animals, 12 fungi and 76 green
plants) and were used for comparative genomic analyses.
The phylogeny of these eukaryote TLPs reveals three
major monophyletic groups (Figure 3). TLP subgroup I
consists of 211 sequences and includes highly specific
clades, such as a fungal clade containing TLPs from
both ascomycetes and basidiomycetes, as well as plant
clades that are specific to conifers, monocots, monocot
sTLPs, monocot TLP-Ks, dicots or asterids. TLP subgroup II is composed of 341 sequences and includes an
animal-specific clade with distinct sub-clades for nematodes and arthropods. Because of their over-representation, a large clade of plant sequences constitutes the
vast majority of TLP subgroup II, with several subclades

composed of relatively balanced numbers of monocot
and dicot sequences (Figure 3). TLP subgroup II notably
includes a clade enriched in rosid and tree TLPs that in
particular contains the poplar TLP cluster. Dicot TLPKs also belong to TLP subgroup II. TLP subgroup III
contains only 46 sequences from 20 different plant species, with a large number of sequences from the vascular
plant S. moellendorffii (Figure 3).
An alignment with 18 representative TLP sequences
from the major sub-clades shows the diversity of eukaryote TLPs (Figure 4). The thaumatin domain of ascomycetes is almost 30% longer than that of typical TLPs
(~280 versus ~215 amino acids), mainly due to three
insertions in less-conserved regions of the domain. By
contrast, sTLPs are almost 30% smaller than typical
TLPs (~150 versus ~215 amino acids) due to a large
deletion. The 16 cysteine residues (10 for sTLPs) are
extremely well conserved, except for 1-2 residues in
ascomycete and basidiomycete sTLPs and in some animal sequences (Figure 4). The REDDD motif or its
equivalent (i.e. amino acids with similar biochemical
properties) is fully conserved in 13 of the 18 representative sequences. Similarly, the amino acids forming the

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

Page 6 of 16

Figure 3 Neighbour-joining tree of 598 thaumatin domains of TLP sequences from 100 eukaryote species. Branch lengths are
proportional to phylogenetic distances. For clarity, protein names are not indicated but can be retrieved from individual phylogenetic trees of
subgroups I, II and III respectively in Figure 5, Additional files 9 and 10. Red stars indicate sequences used for the alignment presented in
Figure 4. Annotations of subgroups and clades are discussed in the text.

bottom of the acidic cleft and those at each extremity of
the thaumatin domain are generally well conserved.
Information about the biological and/or biochemical
properties were compiled for 26 TLPs with a complete
amino acid sequence from an exhaustive survey of the literature (Additional file 8). These data were added systematically to the phylogenetic sub-trees of TLP
subgroups I (Figure 5) and II (Additional file 9). Among
these 26 TLPs, 21 have antifungal activity and nine have
endo-b-1,3-glucanase activity. Surprisingly, antifungal
TLPs are widespread among eukaryotes, as 13 are present
in TLP subgroup I and 8 are in TLP subgroup II.
A similar widespread assortment across TLP subgroups I
and II was obtained for TLPs that exhibit endo-b-1,3-glucanase or antifreeze activities. Compared with the large
amount of information available concerning asterid TLPs
(many functions have been described for two TLPs of
subgroup I: tobacco osmotin, Nicta-1709500, and maize

zeamatin, Zeama-grmzm2g394771), there is almost no
functional characterization of conifer and fungal TLPs or
sTLPs. One exception is TLX1, a sTLP from wheat
(Triae-110836639), which is the only sTLP characterized
to date and the only TLP shown to have xylanase inhibitor activity (Additional files 7 and 8). Among poplar
TLPs, only the four TLPs from the poplar clade 1 (Figure
1) belong to the eukaryote TLP subgroup I (Figure 5).
Proteins from TLP subgroup II have been poorly characterized, except for the rosid-specific and tree-enriched
clade, which contains several proteins with described
antifungal or endo-b-1,3-glucanase activities (Additional
file 9). Thirty-one poplar TLPs are distributed in TLP
subgroup II, including the 11 TLPs that form the poplar
TLP cluster and which are assembled in the treeenriched clade. To our knowledge, none of the proteins
from subgroup III have been characterized at the functional level so far (Additional file 10).

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

Page 7 of 16

Figure 4 Alignment of thaumatin domains of selected eukaryote TLPs. Amino acid sequence comparison was carried out with ClustalW on
MEGA 4 software with the parameters described by [6]. The alignment was then adjusted manually when necessary. aComplete protein
reference: Glyma-Glyma11g14970.1.

To estimate how TLP structural diversity influences
biological and biochemical functions, a 3D structure
alignment (3D-SA) was performed with the phylogenetically most distinct TLP structures available among the
seven solved to date: the tobacco PR-5d (Nicta-1709500;
PDB: 1AUN) from TLP subgroup I and the cherry Pru
Av 2 (Pruav-1729981; PDB: 2AHN) from TLP subgroup
II (Figure 6). In general, the 3D structures of these TLPs
superimpose well, especially the region forming the
acidic cleft. Indeed, this region, as well as two hydrophobic or aromatic residues (generally Phe or Tyr), are
important for the antifungal or lytic activities of TLPs
(Figure 6, [21]). However, although well conserved,
some residues of the REDDD and FF motifs adopt

slightly different positions in these two TLPs. For example in the Pru Av 2 structure, the side chain of the
aspartate at position 289 (D289) is oriented outside the
acidic cleft and the phenylalanine residue F 119 is
replaced by a small non-aromatic residue (Gly) that is
positioned differently. It is not clear whether these small
differences have a significant impact on the substrate
selectivity or protein function. Primary sequence alignment mapping on 3D structures (AM-3D) of PR-5d and
Pru Av 2 with sequences from subgroups I and II,
respectively, confirmed that the acidic cleft is the most
conserved region among eukaryote TLPs (Figure 6). By
contrast, although the REDDD amino acids are conserved in most sTLPs, AM-3D of several sTLP

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

Page 8 of 16

Figure 5 Neighbour-joining tree of the 211 thaumatin domains of TLP subgroup I. Functionally characterized TLPs and corresponding
functions are indicated. Poplar sequence names are in red. The 5 letter code before each protein ID corresponds to the 3 first letters of the
genus name followed by the 2 first letters of the species name. The red arrow indicates PR-5d used for 3D structure alignment and black arrows
indicate sequences used for alignment mapping on 3D Structure (see Figure 6). The red star indicates the Small-TLP-Kinase from Sorghum bicolor
(Sb03g025670). The two columns successively indicate proteins with demonstrated antifungal activity and other functions. a: protection against
abiotic stress; b: antifreeze activity; c: membrane permeabilization activity; d: xylanase inhibitor; e: a-amylase/trypsin inhibition; f: apoptosisinducing in yeast; g: GPCR binding; h: CMV1-a binding; i: glycoprotein binding; j: endo-b-1,3-glucanase activity; k: solved 3D structures. References
corresponding to these data are summarized in Additional file 8. Branch lengths are proportional to phylogenetic distances.

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

Page 9 of 16

Figure 6 3D structure alignment (3D-SA) and alignment mapping on 3D structure (AM-3D) of eukaryote TLPs. Amino acids of the
REDDD and FF motifs are represented with side-chains in balls and sticks. Color code of side-chains, red: negatively charged; blue: positively
charged; yellow: hydrophobic. White dashed-lines indicate acidic cleft limits. (A), 3D-SA of tobacco PR-5d and cherry Pru av 2. Protein backbone
color code, red: identical amino acids; blue: different amino acids; grey: unaligned residues, green: glycine/phenylalanine residues discussed in
the text. Disulfide bonds are in orange. (B), AM-3D of 9 subgroup I TLPs using the PR-5d structure as template. The four-color code of the
protein backbone (from red to blue) corresponds to a decrease in amino acid conservation. (C), AM-3D of 15 subgroup II TLPs using the Pru Av
2 structure as template. Color code and annotations are as in B. Amino acids under diversifying selection [39] are indicated by white asterisks.
(D, E and F), Highlights of b-sheets forming the acidic cleft in A, B and C respectively. Color code is similar to that in A, B and C. In D, the
residues forming the REDDD and FF motifs are numbered as in Figure 4. White arrows indicate motif differences discussed in the text. (G), AM3D of the 9 small-TLPs indicated in Additional file 7 using the TLX1 structure as template. Color code is similar to that in B. A white dashed
ellipse marks the missing acidic cleft.

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

sequences with the recently solved structure of wheat
TLX1 (PDB: 1KWN) revealed neither an acidic cleft
nor any particular conserved region which could
be linked to the reported xylanase inhibitor function
(Figuer 6, [12]).
Alignment of the 14 TLP-Ks identified from six different plant species (two dicots and four monocots),
including the four poplar TLP-Ks, revealed that the
thaumatin domain of TLP-Ks is similar to that of typical
TLPs, possessing both the conserved residues involved
in the acidic cleft and the cysteine residues (Figure 7).
The protein kinase domain of TLP-Ks is extremely well
conserved, even among monocots and dicots, and contains two fully conserved residues D740 and D758 known
to be part of the catalytic motif [33]. A predicted TM
domain is present between the thaumatin and the

Page 10 of 16

protein kinase domains in all TLP-K sequences (Figure
7, Additional file 5), except Bradi-2g01200, which might
be due to an erroneous interdomain annotation in the
Brachypodium distachyon genome.

Discussion
The recent release of the P. trichocarpa genome, the
first tree genome available, paved the way for highthroughput genomic and computational analyses of
multigene families, and has defined Populus as a model
organism in forest biology [34]. Considering that leaf
rust fungi are responsible for considerable damage in
poplar plantations, the Populus/Melampsora interaction
has emerged as a model pathosystem in forest pathology [26]. In order to decipher the molecular basis of
poplar resistance against this biotrophic fungus, in-

Figure 7 Amino acid sequence comparison of plant TLP-kinases (TLP-Ks). (A), Neighbour-joining tree of the 14 TLP-Ks identified in plants.
Branch lengths are proportional to phylogenetic distances. Black star: sTLP-K from Brachypodium distachyon; grey star: TLP-K from Arabidopsis
thaliana described in [51]. (B), ClustalW amino acid alignment using the parameters described by [6] and manually adjusted. Thaumatin and
protein kinase domains are respectively underlined in dark grey and black. Phobius [72] predicted transmembrane domain is underlined in light
grey. Shaded boxes indicate highly conserved sequences. The arrow indicates the end of the predicted signal peptide. Vertical bars indicate
cysteine residues in the thaumatin domain and aspartate residues forming the catalytic site of the kinase domain.

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

depth and exhaustive studies of defense-related functions require a reliable annotation of gene families
before we can understand their structural and functional diversity. We have therefore performed a genome-wide analysis of the TLP multigene family, which
comprises many stress-inducible proteins in P. trichocarpa. Extension of the phylogenetic analysis to
include TLPs from other eukaryotes extends our
knowledge about the evolution of TLPs.
TLPs in plant genomes: an evolutionary diversification

The history of TLP multigene families retraced from 18
plant genome sequences shows a strong evolutionary
diversification from the green alga C. reinhardtii to the
black cottonwood tree P. trichocarpa (Table 1). In the
co-evolution of host-microbe interactions, plants and
fungi acquire new weapons that promote their resistance
or virulence, respectively [35]. As a consequence of this
arms race, the size of some multigene families involved
in resistance (such as NB-LRRs) has greatly increased in
poplar and other higher plants [36]. It is accepted that
this increase, sometimes specific to certain organisms,
represents an important means for generating functional
diversity via sub- or neo-functionalization of paralogs
[37]. Analysis of natural selection is increasingly used in
plant pathology to estimate how evolutionary forces
impact genes and corresponding proteins, from the scale
of amino acid sites to gene families [38]. Poplar TLP
genes have recently been investigated for natural selection. The four TLP-Ks and 10 of the 11 TLPs that
belong to clade 2 (i.e. the poplar TLP cluster) were
shown to be driven by diversifying (positive) selection
(Figure 1, [39]). More precisely, several exposed amino
acids of TLPs are under diversifying selection, whereas
amino acids forming the acidic cleft are under purifying
(negative) selection and thus well-conserved (Figure 6).
Conservation of the acidic cleft could be necessary to
maintain antifungal activity, whereas diversification of
exposed amino acids could avoid recognition by pathogen enzyme-inhibitors or proteases [40].
Is the antifungal activity of TLPs a universal property?

Historically, TLPs have been described as biotic and
abiotic stress-responsive proteins and were called TLPs/
PR5 or osmotin/osmotin-like proteins (OLPs), depending on the stress condition (i.e. biotic or abiotic stress,
respectively) in which these proteins or their closest
homologs were first described. As already suggested by
Shatters and collaborators [6], phylogenetic analyses do
not support this separate nomenclature that generates
semantic confusion in the literature [41]. Our broad
sequence analysis of eukaryote TLPs confirms that there
is no clear difference among TLPs and OLPs, since different TLP functions are not separated by distinct

Page 11 of 16

phylogenetic clades. In fact, the major biochemical properties of TLPs such as antifungal or endo-b-1,3-glucanase activity are widespread among eukaryotes (Figure 5
and Additional file 9). At the structural level, most TLPs
are predicted to share a conserved acidic cleft, which is
usually associated with an antifungal property, suggesting that this property is universal among eukaryote
TLPs (Figure 6). Although more subtle conformational
differences might explain the large variety of properties
described so far for TLPs, the phylogenetic and functional data do not justify adoption of a distinct nomenclature between biotic- and abiotic-responsive TLPs. An
exception to this statement might be considered for
TLPs with different domain organisations such as sTLPs
or TLP-Ks. Indeed, sTLPs are assumed to act as xylanase inhibitors and no antifungal activity has yet been
reported [12]. This functional divergence is consistent
with the important structural differences observed and
in particular with the absence of a well-defined acidic
cleft (Figure 6).
Poplar TLPs: stress-responsive proteins, but not only

The release of the P. trichocarpa genome version 2.0
and its integration into the Phytozome portal enabled a
drastic improvement of TLP gene annotation and the
validation of more than 70% of the 59 TLP gene models
from the Populus genome version 1.1 [Additional file 1,
[24]). The expression analysis of TLPs during biotic and
abiotic stresses supports the idea that TLPs, like other
PR proteins, belong to a general plant stress response
pathway rather than being specific to distinct stresses, as
often hypothesized [1]. This is exemplified by PopTLP1,
whose expression is induced by diverse environmental
constraints such as high ozone, UV-B, drought, copper
and infection by rust fungi (Figure 1 and Additional file
4). In addition, PopTLP1 is the closest homolog of
A. thaliana Atosm34 (At4g11650), which also accumulates during both biotic and abiotic stress conditions
[8,42]. The RT-qPCR expression profile of PopTLP1 in
rust-infected poplar leaves confirmed transient transcript accumulation during host-specific resistance
(Additional file 4). This profile is in accordance with
results obtained by similar approaches for several PR
proteins in this pathosystem [27] and confirms the
involvement of TLPs in poplar defense.
However, the fact that only 19 of the 42 poplar TLPs
are transcriptionally regulated in the stress conditions
investigated suggests that their role in poplar might not
be restricted to stress response but that they could have
other roles, such as during development. Indeed, some
TLPs have been reported to accumulate during plant
developmental stages or conditions such as in ovular
secretions or during leaf aging [43,44]. In addition, TLPs
have been extensively described as ripening-associated

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

proteins that accumulate strongly in fruit during
maturation [45,46]. It has been shown recently in hybrid
poplars that two TLPs belonging to the tree-specific and
stress-responsive TLP cluster (Figure 1 and 2) are present in the phloem of healthy non-stressed plants [47].
Taken together, these results suggest that the expansion
of this multigene family in poplar could also be related
to tree-specific developmental stages.
The poplar TLP cluster contains tree-specific and stressresponsive proteins

The poplar TLP cluster is an assembly of 11 successive
genes on scaffold 1 and is considerably enriched in TE
for a gene-containing genomic region. Indeed, TE
account for 52% of the TLP cluster region compared
with an average coverage of 42% in the whole genome
[24]. Moreover, LTR TE from the Gypsy class are specifically over-represented, covering 37% of the TLP cluster
compared with 5% in the whole P. trichocarpa genome
sequence (Figure 2, [24]). This class of TE might be a
source of genome plasticity in plants [48]. The very
well-conserved exon-intron structure of the genes in the
TLP cluster supports a mechanism of tandem duplication from a unique ancestral gene (Figure 1). Taken
together, these results strongly suggest that this cluster
likely resulted from recent tandem duplications driven
by TE activity. Futhermore, the TLP cluster appears to
be highly responsive to fungal infection in poplar and
belongs to a rosid-specific and tree-enriched clade in
our complete phylogeny of eukaryote TLPs (Figure 1,
Figure 3 and Additional file 9). TLPs from cherry, chestnut, apple and peach trees that exhibit antifungal and/or
endo-b-1,3-glucanase activities (Additional file 8 [49,50])
also belong to this clade. Thus, the TLP cluster appears
to be a tree-specific and rust-responsive group of TLPs
that are of outstanding interest for further analyses
focusing on tree and TLP specificities in defense against
pathogens. More precisely, two TLPs recently identified
at the protein level in the phloem of hybrid poplar constitute excellent candidates for future investigations
([47], Figure 1).

Page 12 of 16

strong homology of the kinase domain between TLP-K
and some lectin-kinases reinforces the speculation about
the potential role of TLP-K in the induction of the
defense system, since a rice lectin-kinase has been
shown to confer resistance to the rice blast [52]. In the
P. trichocarpa genome, three TLP-Ks are organized in
tandem on scaffold 4 and are interspersed by other protein kinase-encoding genes. This genomic region is
referred to as the ‘TLP-K cluster’ (Figure 2). Genetic
and physical mapping of Melampsora rust resistance
genes in natural populations of P. trichocarpa identified
a locus encoding two TLP-K genes on chromosome 4,
which possibly corresponds to the TLP-K cluster in
scaffold 4 of the P. trichocarpa genome sequence [53].
Hence, although evidence is still needed to clarify the
exact role of these TLP-Ks in poplar, this opens interesting perspectives concerning new RLK types related to
poplar defense against Melampsora spp. rust pathogens.

Conclusion
TLPs are eukaryote proteins that constitute small and
monophyletic families in invertebrate animals and fungi
whereas they are more diverse and are organized in
large multigene families in plants. Regardless of their
origin, it appears that many typical TLPs possess an
antifungal activity, which is probably linked to a conserved acidic cleft in their 3D structure. In plants, TLPs
have undergone a drastic evolutionary diversification
including the evolution of tree-enriched clades and of
TLPs fused to protein kinase domains. The poplar
genome encodes 42 validated TLP gene models, including four TLP-kinases. Some poplar TLP transcripts
accumulate specifically under abiotic or biotic stress
conditions, which can be strongly correlated with their
phylogeny. In the poplar genome, a tree-specific and
stress-responsive cluster of tandemly-duplicated TLP
genes should be of interest for understanding the unique
attributes of defense against pathogen attacks that have
evolved in trees.
Methods

TLP-Ks: defense proteins recruited for signaling?

Identification and annotation of TLP genes in
P. trichocarpa

TLP-Ks result from the fusion between two genes coding for a TLP and a protein kinase. They have been
hypothesized to act as receptor-like kinases (RLKs),
where the extracellular TLP could sense pathogens and
the cytoplasmic kinase could relay downstream signaling
[23]. This assumption was strengthened by the demonstration that plants overexpressing an A. thaliana
TLP-K showed a delay in the appearance of disease
symptoms [51]. The ability of plants to recruit defense
proteins to form a RLK involved in pathogen sensing
has already been suggested for PR1 and PR3 [1]. The

TLP genes were identified in the P. trichocarpa ’Nisqually-1’ genome using thaumatin and osmotin keywords
and amino acid sequence homology searches. Manual
gene annotation was performed by finding missing start/
stop codons, by defining correct exon/intron borders, by
analyzing perfectly matching ESTs and by taking into
account the amino acid conservation of the thaumatin
domain (Pfam: PF00314) and in particular the position
of conserved cysteines. Alignments with closest homologs in the Phytozome portal were used to reconstruct
gene structure and corresponding amino acid sequences.

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

Allelic versions detected by the Phytozome annotation
(two adjacent genes in the genome assembly v1.1 that
correspond to a single locus in the v2.0 assembly) or
incomplete genes were discarded and not considered for
further analysis. Transposable element analysis was carried out with the CENSOR software available on the
Giri database [54].
Search for TLP in public genomic databases and
sequence analyses

The 18 plant genome sequences available on the Phytozome portal [29] (June 2010) were mined using
sequence homology searches. Only TLP gene models
encoding a complete TLP domain were reserved for
sequence comparison. The NCBI protein database [32]
was mined using sequence homology and keyword
searches (i.e. thaumatin and osmotin). TLP sequences
from non-sequenced plants, fungi and animals were
individually examined and amino acid sequences with a
complete thaumatin family domain were retained for
further analyses. Sequences from M. larici-populina and
P. graminis f.sp. tritici were retrieved from the Joint
Genome Institue (JGI, [55]) and the Broad Institute [56]
websites, respectively.
Sequence alignment and construction of
phylogenetic tree

For all amino acid sequence comparisons, the thaumatin
domain covering almost 95% of the mature TLP protein
was considered. Limits of the TLP domain were defined
as N-x-C-x(3)-V/I-W and Y-x-I/V-x-F-C-x in the
N- and C-terminal ends, respectively. Amino acid
sequence alignments were performed using ClustalW as
described by [6], DIALIGN (http://dialign-tx.gobics.de/)
as well as MAFFT (http://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/server/
) methods. In all cases, the raw output alignments
required deep manual re-adjustment to proceed further
with phylogenetic reconstruction. Raw alignments were
thus imported into the Molecular Evolutionary Genetics
Analysis (MEGA) package 4.1 [57] and manually
adjusted. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted using
the Neighbour-Joining method with the pairwise deletion option for handling alignment gaps and the Poisson
correction model for distance computation. Bootstrap
tests were conducted using 1,000 replicates. Branch
lengths are proportional to phylogenetic distances.
Expression of poplar TLPs

Transcriptional data for Populus/Melampsora interaction were extracted from published studies with significant fold-changes as described by the respective authors
(Figure 1, [27,30,31]). Other information pertaining to
the poplar transcriptome during stress-related situations
were extracted from the PopGenIE portal [58,59] and

Page 13 of 16

from the literature. Proteomic data for Populus/Melampsora interaction were retrieved from the PROTICdb
database [60,61] and from the literature for other stressrelated situations.
3D structure analyses

3D-SA and MA-3D were carried out with Cn3D software
[62]. Sequences were manually aligned using the integrated sequence viewer in editor mode and reference
structures were retrieved from NCBI structure database
[32]. For MA-3D, sequence conservation has been estimated with a four level color code from red to blue,
reporting a respectively strong to weak amino acid variety.
RT-qPCR analyses

Isolates 98AG31 (virulent, pathotype 3-4-7) and 93ID6
(avirulent, pathotype 3-4) of M. larici-populina were used
in this study. Rust urediniospore multiplication and plant
inoculation procedures were performed as previously
described [27], using the same inoculum doses (100,000
urediniospores/ml), leaf plastochron indexes for detached
P. trichocarpa X Populus deltoides ’Beaupré’ leaves and
identical culture conditions. For time-course infection analyses, leaves were harvested at the following time-points: 0,
12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 36, 48, 72, 96, 120 and 168 hpi. RNA
extraction, quality control and cDNA synthesis were performed as previously described in [27]. In order to assess
transcript levels by RT-qPCR, specific primers for the
PopTLP1 gene (Poptr_0001s09570 in P. trichocarpa genome; 5’ CCAGACTTGGTATCTTAATG; 3’ GTTACCAAACTGATTTAACG) were designed and quantitative
PCR was carried out as previously described [63], with
technical and biological duplicates. Transcript expression
was normalized to a reference ubiquitin transcript
(Poptr_0015s01600 in P. trichocarpa genome; 5’ GCAGGGAAACAGTGAGGAAGG; 3’ TGGACTCACGAGGACAG) using ratio calculation as described in [64].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Annotation of TLP genes in the Populus
trichocarpa ’Nisqually-1’ genome sequence. aTLP gene models
retrieved in the Populus trichocarpa ’Nisqually-1’ genome version 1.1 from
the JGI website [55]. bTLP gene models retrieved in the P. trichocarpa
’Nisqually-1’ genome version 2.0 from the Phytozome portal [29].
Additional file 2: List of amino acid sequences deduced from the 42
P. trichocarpa TLP gene models. Stop codons are represented by
asterisks.
Additional file 3: Transposable element (TE) features of the TLP
cluster. aPercentage of the 350 kb total length of the TLP cluster
covered by TE.
Additional file 4: PopTLP1 RTqPCR expression profile. Total RNA was
isolated from mock-inoculated or inoculated leaves of Populus
trichocarpa X Populus deltoides ’Beaupré’ with either compatible (white
diamonds, strain 98AG31) or incompatible (black diamonds, strain 93ID6)
strains of Melampsora larici-populina between 12 and 168 hours post-

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

inoculation (hpi). RT-qPCR results are presented as expression ratios.
Populus ubiquitin transcripts were as a reference gene for normalization.
n = 2 (except for I168, n = 1), error bar: standard deviation.
Additional file 5: Small-TLP-kinase domains and features. The signal
peptide and the transmembrane domain of the small-TLP-kinase of
Sorghum bicolor (Sb03g025670) are predicted by the Phobius program
[72].
Additional file 6: Protein accession numbers and phylogenetic
classification of corresponding species used in this study. aOrganism
code used in the study, corresponding to the 3 first letters of the genus
name followed by the 2 first letters of the species name (ex.: Arabidopsis
thaliana = Arath), except for Nepenthes species pluralis (Nep.spp) and
Melampsora larici-populina (Mel.la.po). bNumber of TLP sequences used in
this study. CAccession numbers are preceded by the organism code.
Sequences retrieved from the NCBI protein database [32] are in black,
those retrieved from the Phytozome portal [29] are in red. The 3
sequences of M. larici-populina were retrieved from the JGI genome
website [55] and are labelled with JGI protein IDs.
Additional file 7: Neighbour-joining tree of eukaryote small-TLPs.
Branch lengths are proportional to phylogenetic distances. Branch color
and protein ID codes correspond to those in Figures 3 and 5,
respectively. Supplemental sequences from the Puccinia graminis f.sp.
tritici genome sequence were retrieved from the Broad Institute website
[56] (gene IDs PGTG_00965.2; PGTG_00963.2; PGTG_19613.2;
PGTG_19646.2). Black star: small-TLP-Kinase from Sorghum bicolor; grey
star: TLX 1 from Triticum aestivum; black arrows: sequences used for the
structural analysis in Figure 6.
Additional file 8: List of functionally characterized TLPs described in
this study. In some cases, several studies participated to the
characterization of a given TLP function. For clarity, only one reference is
given per function and per protein (most relevant, otherwise first
published). aGPCRs: G-Protein-Coupled Receptors. bNumbers refer to the
complete reference in the text.
Additional file 9: Neighbour-joining tree of the 341 thaumatin
domains of TLP Subgroup II. Functionally characterized TLPs and
corresponding functions are indicated. Poplar sequence names are in
red. The five-letter code before proteins IDs indicate genus and species.
Red arrows indicate protein structures used for 3D structure alignment
while black arrows indicate sequences used for alignment mapping on
3D structure in Figure 6. Antifungal column includes both in vitro- and
transgenic-based antifungal demonstrations. In the other column, a:
transgenic abiotic stress protection; b: antifreeze activity; c: membrane
permeabilization activity; d: xylanase inhibitor; e: a-amylase/trypsin
inhibition; f: apoptosis-inducing in yeast; g: GPCR binding; h: CMV1-a
binding; i: glycoprotein binding; j: endo-b-1,3-glucanase activity; k: 3D
structure solved. References corresponding to these data are summarized
in Additional file 8. Branch lengths are proportional to phylogenetic
distances.
Additional file 10: Neighbour-joining tree of uncharacterized
eukaryote TLPs from TLP subgroup III. Branch lengths are
proportional to phylogenetic distances. Branch color and protein IDs
codes correspond to those in Figures 3 and 5, respectively. Poplar
sequence names are in red.

Abbreviations
TLP: thaumatin-like protein; PR: pathogenesis-related; GPCR: G proteincoupled receptor; sTLP: small-TLP; TM: transmembrane domain; TLP-K: TLPkinase; CDS: coding DNA sequence; sTLP-K: small-TLP-kinase; TE: transposable
element; 3D-SA: 3D structure alignment; AM-3D: alignment mapping on 3D
structure; OLP: osmotin-like protein; JGI: joint genome institute; RLK;
receptor-like kinase; EST: expressed sequence tag; hpi: hour-post inoculation;
NB-LRR: nucleotide binding-leucine rich repeat; LTR: long terminal repeat.
Ackowledgements
We warmly thank our colleagues Francis Martin, Annegret Kohler and Pascal
Frey at INRA Nancy for regular and fruitful discussions about the poplar/rust

Page 14 of 16

pathosystem and gene family annotation in the poplar genome. We also
thank Christine Delaruelle and Patrice Vion for great technical help during
RNA extraction and poplar culture respectively, Claude Murat for valuable
advice on transposable elements and phylogenetic analyses, Bénédicte Favre
for M. larici-populina spore conservation and Stéphane Hacquard for very
helpful discussions on genome annotation and quantitative PCR. This work
was funded by the ‘Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique’, ‘Région
Lorraine’ and support grants to Sébastien Duplessis and Nicolas Rouhier.
Author details
1
INRA†/Nancy Université, Unité Mixte de Recherche 1136 ‘Interactions
Arbres/Micro-organismes’, Centre INRA de Nancy, F-54280 Champenoux,
France. 2Plant Research Laboratory, 122 Plant Biology Laboratory, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, 48864, USA.
Authors’ contributions
BP and SD performed conceptual and experimental designs. BP carried out
experimental procedures, in silico analyses and drafted the manuscript. IM
compiled transcriptional data concerning Populus-Melampsora interactions
from the literature. SD and NR supervised the work and helped with
conceptual design and data analysis. All authors participated in depth
reading and revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 3 September 2010 Accepted: 15 February 2011
Published: 15 February 2011
References
1. Van Loon LC, Rep M, Pieterse CMJ: Significance of Inducible Defenserelated Proteins in Infected Plants. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2006, 44:135-62.
2. Dodds PN, Rathjen JP: Plant immunity: towards an integrated view of
plant-pathogen interactions. Nat Rev Genet 2010, 11:538-548.
3. Van Der Wel H, Loeve K: Isolation and Characterization of Thaumatin I
and II, the Sweet-Tasting Proteins from Thaumatococcus daniellii Benth.
Eur J Biochem 1972, 31:221-225.
4. Brandazza A, Angeli S, Tegoni M, Cambillau C, Pelosi P: Plant stress
proteins of the thaumatin-like family discovered in animals. FEBS Letters
2004, 572:3-7.
5. Sakamoto Y, Watnabe H, Nagai M, Nakade K, Takahashi M, Sato T: Lentinula
edodes tlg1 Encodes a Thaumatin-Like Protein That Is Involved in
Lentinan Degradation and Fruiting Body Senescence. Plant Physiol 2006,
141:793-801.
6. Shatters RG Jr, Boykin LM, Lapointe SL, Hunter WB, Weathersbee AA:
Phylogenetic and Structural Relationships of the PR5 Gene Family
Reveal an Ancient Multigene Family Conserved in Plants and Select
Animal Taxa. J Mol Evol 2006, 63:12-29.
7. Liu JJ, Sturrock R, Ekramoddoullah AKM: The superfamily of thaumatin-like
proteins: its origin, evolution, and expression towards biological
function. Plant Cell Rep 2010, 29:419-436.
8. Mukherjee AK, Carp MJ, Zuchman R, Ziv T, Horwitz BA, Gepstein S:
Proteomics of the response of Arabidopsis thaliana to infection with
Alternaria brassicicola. Journal of Proteomics 2010, 73:709-720.
9. Islam MA, Sturrock RN, Holmes A, Ekramoddoullah AKM: Ultrastructural
studies of Phellinus sulphurascens infection of Douglas-fir roots and
immunolocalization of host pathogenesis-related proteins. Mycol Res
2009, 113:700-712.
10. Wang X, Tang C, Deng L, Cai G, Liu X, Han Q, Buchenauer H, Wei G, Han D,
Huang L, Kang Z: Characterization of a pathogenesis-related thaumatinlike protein gene TaPR5 from wheat induced by stripe rust fungus.
Physiol Plant 2010, 139:27-38.
11. Vigers AJ, Roberts WK, Selitrennikoff CP: A new family of plant antifungal
proteins. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 1991, 4:315-23.
12. Fierens E, Rombouts S, Gebruers K, Goesaert H, Brijs K, Beaugrand J,
Volckaert G, Van Campenhout S, Proost P, Courtin CM, Delcour JA: TLX1, a
novel type of xylanase inhibitor from wheat (Triticum aestivum)
belonging to the thaumatin family. Biochem J 2007, 403:583-591.
13. Schimoler-O’Rourke R, Richardson M, Selitrennikoff CP: Zeamatin Inhibits
Trypsin and α-Amylase Activities. Appl Env Microbiol 2001, 67:2365-2366.
14. Narasimhan ML, Coca MA, Jin J, Yamauchi T, Ito Y, Kadowaki T, Kim KK,
Pardo JM, Damsz B, Hasegawa PM, Yun DJ, Bressan RA: Osmotin Is a

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

15.

16.

17.
18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

Homolog of Mammalian Adiponectin and Controls Apoptosis in Yeast
through a homolog of Mammalian Adiponectin Receptor. Mol Cell 2005,
17:171-180.
Hon WC, Griffith M, Mlynarz A, Kwok YC, Yang DSC: Antifreeze Proteins in
Winter Rye Similar to Pathogenesis-Related Proteins. Plant Physiol 1995,
109:879-889.
Rajam MV, Chandola N, Saiprasad Goud P, Singh D, Kashyap V,
Choudhary ML, Sihachakr D: Thaumatin gene confers resistance to fungal
pathogen as well as tolerance to abiotic stresses in transgenic tobacco
plants. Biol Plant 2007, 51:135-141.
Ghosh R, Chakrabarti C: Crystal structure analysis of NP24-I: a thaumatinlike protein. Planta 2008, 228:883-890.
Fierens E, Gebruers K, Courtin CM, Delcour JA: Xylanase Inhibitors Bind to
Nonstarch Polysaccharides. J Agri Food Chem 2008, 56:564-570.
Fierens E, Gebruers K, Voet ARD, De Maeyer M, Courtin CM, Delcour JA:
Biochemical and structural characterization of TLXI, the Triticum
aestivum L. thaumatin-like xylanase inhibitor. J Enz Inhibit Med Chem
2009, 24:646-654.
Liu JJ, Zamani A, Ekramoddoullah AKM: Expression profiling of a complex
thaumatin-like protein family in western white pine. Planta 2010,
231:637-651.
Koiwa H, Kato H, Nakatsu T, Oda J, Yamada Y, Sato F: Crystal Structure of
Tobacco PR-5d Protein at 1,8 Å Resolution Reveals a Conserved Acidic
Cleft Structure in Antifungal Thaumatin-Like Proteins. J Mol Biol 1999,
286:1137-1145.
Vandermarliere E, Lammens W, Schoepe J, Rombouts S, Fierens E,
Gebruers K, Volckaert G, Rabijns A, Delcours JA, Strelkov SV, Courtin CM:
Crystal structure of the noncompetitive xylanase inhibitor TLX1, member
of the small thaumatin-like protein family. Proteins 2010, 78:2391-2394.
Wang X, Zafian P, Choudhary M, Lawton M: The PR5K receptor protein
kinase from Arabidopsis thaliana is structurally related to a family of
plant defense proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1996, 93:2598-2602.
Tuskan GA, Difazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U,
Putnam N, Ralph S, Rombauts S, Salamov A, Schein J, Sterck L, Aerts A,
Bhalerao RR, Bhalerao RP, Blaudez D, Boerjan W, Brun A, Brunner A, Busov V,
Campbell M, Carlson J, Chalot M, Chapman J, Chen GL, Cooper D,
Coutinho PM, Couturier J, Covert S, Cronk Q, et al: The genome of black
cottonwood, Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 2006,
313:1596-1604.
Pinon J, Frey P: Interactions between poplar clones and Melampsora
populations and their implications for breeding for durable resistance. In
Rust Diseases of Willow and Poplar. Edited by: MH Pei and AR McCracken.
CAB International, Wallingford; 2005:139-154.
Duplessis S, Major I, Martin F, Séguin A: Poplar and Pathogen Interactions:
Insights from Populus Genome-Wide Analyses of Resistance and Defense
Gene Families and Gene Expression Profiling. Crit Rev Plant Sci 2009,
28:309-334.
Rinaldi C, Kohler A, Frey P, Duchaussoy F, Ningre N, Couloux A, Wincker P,
Le Thiec D, Fluch S, Martin F, Duplessis S: Transcript Profiling of Poplar
Leaves upon Infection with Compatible and Incompatible Strains of the
Foliar Rust Melampsora larici-populina. Plant Physiol 2007, 144:347-366.
Street NR, Tsai CJ: Populus Resources and Bioinformatics. In Genetics and
Genomics of Populus. Edited by: S Jansson. Plant Genetics and Genomics:
Crops and Models; .
Phytozome portal. [http://www.phytozome.net/].
Miranda M, Ralph SG, Mellway R, White R, Heath MC, Bohlmann J,
Constabel CP: The Transcriptionnal Response of Hybrid Poplar (Populus
trichocarpa x P. deltoides) to infection by Melampsora medusae Leaf Rust
Involves Induction of Flavonoid Pathway Genes Leading to the
Accumulation of Proanthocyanidins. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2007,
20:816-83147.
Azaiez A, Boyle B, Levée V, Séguin A: Transcriptome Profiling in Hybrid
Poplar Following Interactions with Melampsora Rust Fungi. Mol Plant
Microbe Interact 2009, 22:190-200.
NCBI database. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/].
Hanks SK, Quinn AM: Protein Kinase Catalytic Domain Sequence
Database: Identification of Conserved Features of Primary Structure and
Classification of Family Members. Methods Enzymol 1991, 200:38-62.
Yang X, Kalluri UC, DiFazio SP, Wullschleger SD, Tschaplinski TJ, Cheng ZM,
Tuskan GA: Poplar Genomics: State of the Science. Crit Rev Plant Sci 2009,
28:285-308.

Page 15 of 16

35. Burdon JJ, Thrall PH: Coevolution of Plants and Their Pathogens in
Natural Habitats. Science 2009, 324:755-756.
36. Kohler A, Rinaldi C, Duplessis S, Baucher M, Geelen D, Duchaussoy F,
Meyers BC, Boerjan W, Martin F: Genome-wide identification of NBS
resistance genes in Populus trichocarpa. Plant Mol Biol 2008, 66:619-636.
37. Paterson AH, Freeling M, Tang H, Wang X: Insights from the Comparison
of Plant Genome Sequences. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2010, 61:349-372.
38. Ellegren H: Comparative genomics and the study of evolution by natural
selection. Mol ecol 2008, 17:4586-4596.
39. Zhao JP, Su XH: Patterns of molecular evolution and predicted function
in thaumatin-like proteins of Populus trichocarpa. Planta 2010,
232:949-962.
40. Misas-Villamil JC, van der Hoorn RAL: Enzyme-inhibitor interactions at the
plant-pathogen interface. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2008, 11:380-388.
41. Monteiro S, Barakat M, Piçarra-Pereira MA, Teixeira AR, Ferreira RB: Osmotin
and Thaumatin from Grape: A Putative General Defense Mechanism
Against Pathogenic Fungi. Biochem Cell Biol 2003, 93:1505-1512.
42. Arabidopsis eFP Browser. [http://www.bar.utoronto.ca/efp/cgi-bin/efpWeb.
cgi].
43. O’Leary SJB, Poulis BAD, Von Aderkas P: Identification of two thaumatinlike proteins (TLPs) in the pollination drop of hybrid yew that may play
a role in pathogen defence during pollen collection. Tree Physiol 2007,
27:1649-1659.
44. Capelli N, Diogon T, Greppin H, Simon P: Isolation and characterization of
a cDNA clone encoding an osmotin-like protein from Arabidopsis
thaliana. Gene 1997, 191:51-56.
45. Kim YS, Park JY, Kim KS, Ko MK, Cheong SJ, Oh BJ: A thaumatin-like gene
in nonclimateric pepper fruit used as molecular marker in probing
resistance, ripening, and sugar accumulation. Plant Mol Biol 2002,
49:125-135.
46. Tattersall DB, van Heeswijck R, Hoj PB: Identification and Characterization
of a Fruit-Specific, Thaumatin-Like Protein That Accumulates at Very
high Levels in Conjunction with the Onset of Sugar Accumulation and
Berry Softening in Grapes. Plant Physiol 1997, 114:759-769.
47. Dafoe NJ, Gowen BE, Constabel P: Thaumatin-like proteins are
differentially expressed and localized in phloem tissues of hybrid poplar.
BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:191.
48. Zedek F, Smerda J, Smarda P, Bures P: Correlated evolution of LTR
retrotransposons and genome size in the genus Eleocharis. BMC Plant
Biology 2010, 10:265.
49. Menu-Bouaouiche L, Vriet C, Peumans WJ, Barre A, Van Damme EJM,
Rougé P: A molecular basis for the endo-β-1,3-glucanase activity of the
thaumatin-like proteins from edible fruits. Biochimie 2003, 85:123-131.
50. Palacin A, Tordesillas L, Gamboa P, Sanchez-Monge R, Cueast-Herranz J,
Sanz ML, Barber D, Salcedo G, Diaz-Perales A: Characterization of peach
thaumatin-like proteins and their identification as major peach
allergens. Clin Exp Allergy 2010, 40:1422-1430.
51. Guo Z, Bonos S, Meyer WA, Day PR, Belanger FC: Transgenic creeping
bentgrass with delayed dollar spot symptoms. Mol Breeding 2003,
11:95-101.
52. Chen X, Shang J, Chen D, Lei C, Zou Y, Zhai W, Liu G, Xu J, Ling Z, Ma B,
Wang Y, Zhao X, Zhu L: A B-lectin receptor kinase gene conferring rice
blast resistance. Plant J 2006, 46:794-804.
53. Yin TM, Difazio SP, Gunter LE, Jawdy SS, Boerjan W, Tuskan GA: Genetic
and physical mapping of Melampsora rust resistance in Populus and
characterization of linkage disequilibrium and flanking genomic
sequence. New Phytol 2004, 164:95-105.
54. Giri website. [http://www.girinst.org/censor/].
55. Joint Genome Institute. [http://www.jgi.doe.gov/].
56. Broad Institute. [http://www.broadinstitute.org/].
57. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
58. PopGenIE: The Populus Genome Integrative Explorer.
[http://www.popgenie.org/].
59. Sjödin A, Street NR, Sandberg G, Gustafsson P, Jansson S: PopGenIE: The
Populus Genome Integrative Explorer. A new tool for exploring the
Populus genome. New Phytol 2009, 182:1013-1025.
60. PROTICdb. [http://www.cbib.u-bordeaux2.fr/outils/Protic/home/].
61. Ferry-Dumazet H, Houel G, Montalent P, Moreau L, Langella O, Negroni L,
Vincent D, Lalanne C, de Daruvar A, Plomion C, Zivy M, Joets J: PROTICdb:

Petre et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/33

62.
63.

64.
65.

66.
67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.
73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.
80.

81.

82.

A web-based application to store, track, query, and compare plant
proteome data. Proteomics 2005, 5:2069-2081.
Hogue CW: Cn3D: a new generation of three-dimensional molecular
structure viewer. Trends Biochem Sci 1997, 8:314-316.
Hacquard S, Delaruelle C, Legué V, Kohler A, Frey P, Martin F, Duplessis S:
Laser capture microdissection of uredinia formed by Melampsora laricipopulina revealed a transcriptionnal switch between biotrophic and
sporulation phase. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2010, 23:1275-1286.
Pfaffl MW: A new mathematical model for relative quantification in realtime RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:2002-2007.
Dafoe NJ, Zamani A, Ekramoddoullah AKM, Lippert D, Bohlmann J,
Constabel CP: Analysis of the Poplar Phloem Proteome and Its Response
to Leaf Wounding. J Proteome Res 2008, 8:2341-2350.
Dafoe NJ, Constabel CP: Proteomic analysis of hybrid poplar xylem sap.
Phytochemistry 2009, 70:856-853.
Du J, Xie HL, Zhang DQ, He XQ, Wang MJ, Li YZ, Cui KM, Lu MZ:
Regeneration of the secondary vascular system in poplar as a novel
system to investigate gene expression by a proteomic approach.
Proteomics 2006, 6:881-895.
Christopher ME, Miranda M, Major IT, Constabel CP: Gene expression
profiling of systematically wound-induced defenses in hybrid poplar.
Planta 2004, 219:936-947.
Gupta P, Duplessis S, White H, Karnosky DF, Martin F, Podila GK: Gene
expression patterns of trembling aspen trees following long-term
exposure to interacting elevated CO2 and tropospheric O3. New Phytol
2003, 167:129-142.
Bogeat-triboulot MB, Brosché M, Renaut J, Jouve L, Le Thiec D, Fayyaz P,
Vinocur B, Witters E, Laukens K, Teichmann T, Altman A, Hausman JF,
Polle A, Kangasjärvi J, Dreyer E: Gradual Soil Water Depletion Results in
Reversible Changes of Gene Expression, Protein Profiles, Ecophysiology,
and Growth Performance in Populus euphratica, a poplar growing in
Arid Regions. Plant Physiol 2007, 143:876-892.
Guerra F, Duplessis S, Kohler A, Martin F, Tapia J, Lebed P, Zamudio F,
Gonzàlez E: Gene expression analysis of Populus deltoides roots subjected
to copper stress. Env Exp Bot 2009, 67:335-344.
Phobius: A combined transmembrane topology and signal peptide
predictor. [http://phobius.sbc.su.se/].
Hu X, Reddy ASN: Cloning and expression of a PR5-like protein from
Arabidopsis: inhibition of fungal growth by bacterially expressed protein.
Plant Mol Biol 1997, 34:949-959.
Garcia-Casado G, Collada C, Allona I, Soto A, Casado R, Rodriguez-Cerezo E,
Gomez L, Aragoncillo C: Characterization of an apoplastic basic
thaumatin-like protein from recalcitrant chestnut seeds. Physiol Plant
2000, 110:172-180.
Wang L, Duman JG: A Thaumatin-like Protein from Larvae of the Beetle
Dendroides canadensis Enhances the Activity of Antifreeze Proteins.
Biochemistry 2006, 45:1278-1284.
Krebitz M, Wagner B, Ferreira F, Peterbauer C, Campillo N, Witty M,
Kolarich D, Steinkellner H, Scheiner O, Breiteneder H: Plant-based
Heterologous Expression of Mal d 2, a Thaumatin-like Protein and
Allergen of Apple (Malus domestica), and its Characterization as an
Antifungal Protein. J Mol Biol 2003, 329:721-730.
Barre A, Peumans WJ, Menu-Bouaouiche L, Van Damme EJM, May GD,
Fernandez Herrera A, Van Leuven F, Rougé P: Purification and structural
analysis of an abundant thaumatin-like protein from ripe banana fruit.
Planta 2000, 211:791-799.
Leone P, Menu-Bouaouiche L, Peumans WJ, Payan F, Barre A, Roussel A,
Van Damme EJM, Rougé P: Resolution of the structure of the allergenic
and antifungal banana fruit thaumatin-like protein at 1.7-Å. Biochimie
2006, 88:45-52.
Grenier J, Potvin C, Trudel J, Asselin A: Some thaumatin-like proteins
hydrolyse polymeric β-1,3-glucans. Plant J 1999, 19:473-480.
Woloshuk CP, Meulenhoff JS, Sela-Buurlage M, van den Elzen PJM,
Cornelissen BJC: Pathogen-Induced Proteins with Inhibitory Activity
toward Phytophtora infestans. Plant Cell 1991, 3:619-628.
Narasimhan ML, Damsz B, Coca MA, Ibeas JI, Yun DJ, Pardo JM,
Hasegawa PM, Bressan RA: A plant Defense Response Effector Induces
Microbial apoptosis. Mol Cell 2001, 8:921-930.
D’Angeli S, Altamura MM: Osmotin induces cold protection in olive trees
by affecting programmed cell death and cytoskeleton organisation.
Planta 2007, 225:1147-1163.

Page 16 of 16

83. Abad LR, D’Urzo MP, Liu D, Narasimhan ML, Reuveni M, Zhu JK, Niu X,
Singh NK, Hasegawa PM, Bressan RA: Antifungal activity of tobacco
osmotin has specificity and involves plasma membrane
permeabilization. Plant Sci 1996, 118:11-23.
84. Ibeas JI, Yun DJ, Damsz B, Narasimhan ML, Uesono Y, Ribas JC, Lee H,
Hasegawa PM, Bressan RA, Pardo JM: Resistance to the plant PR-5 protein
osmotin in the model fungus Saccharomyces cerevisiae is mediated by
the regulatory effects of SSD1 on cell wall composition. Plant J 2001,
25:271-280.
85. Min K, Ha SC, Hasegawa PM, Bressan RA, Yun DJ, Kim KK: Crystal Structure
of Osmotin, a Plant Antifungal Protein. Proteins 2004, 54:170-173.
86. Koiwa H, Kato H, Nakatsu T, Oda J, Yamada Y, Sato F: Purification and
Characterization of Tobacco Pathogenesis-Related Protein PR-5d, an
Antifungal Thaumatin-like Protein. Plant Cell Physiol 1997, 38:783-791.
87. Velazhahan R, Muthukrishnan S: Transgenic tobacco plants constitutively
overexpressing a rice thaumatin-like protein (PR-5) show enhanced
resistance to Alternaria alternata. Biol Plant 2003, 47:347-354.
88. Dall’Antonia Y, Pavkov T, Fuchs H, Breiteneder H, Keller W: Crystallization
and preliminary structure determination of the plant food allergen Pru
av 2. Acta Cryst 2005, 61:186-188.
89. Newton SS, Duman JG: An osmotin-like cryoprotective protein from the
bittersweet nightshade Solanum dulcamara. Plant Mol Biol 2000,
44:581-589.
90. Fagoaga C, Rodrigo I, Conejero V, Hinarejos C, Tuset JJ, Arnau J, Pina JA,
Navarro L, Peña L: Increased tolerance to Phytophthora citrophthora in
transgenic orange plants constitutively expressing a tomato
pathogenesis related protein PR-5. Mol Breeding 2001, 7:175-185.
91. Pressey R: Two isoforms of NP24: A Thaumatin-Like Protein in Tomato
Fruit. Phytochemistry 1997, 44:1241-1245.
92. Campos M de A, Silva MS, Magalhaes CP, Ribeiro SG, Sarto RPD, Vieira EA,
Grossi de Sa MF: Expression in Escherichia coli, purification, refolding and
antifungal activity of an osmotin from Solanum nigrum. Microbe Cell Fact
2008, 7:7.
93. Ogata CM, Gordon PF, de Vos AM, Kim SH: Crystal structure of a sweet
tasting protein thaumatin I, at 1.65 Å Resolution. J Mol Biol 1992,
228:893-908.
94. Schestibratov KA, Dolgov SV: Transgenic strawberry plants expressing a
thaumatin II gene desmonstrate enhanced resistance to Botrytis cinerea.
Sci Hortic 2005, 106:177-189.
95. Kuwabara C, Takezawa D, Shimada T, Hamasa T, Fujikawa S, Arakawa K:
Abscisic acid- and cold-induced thaumatin-like protein in winter wheat
has an antifungal activity against snow mould, Microdochium nivale.
Physiol Plant 2002, 115:101-110.
96. Altincicek B, Knorr E, Vilcinskas A: Beetle immunity: Identification of
immune-inducible genes from the model insect Tribolium castaneum.
Dev Comp Immunol. 2008, 32:585-595, .
97. Roberts WK, Selitrennikoff CP: Zeamatin, an antifungal protein from maize
with membrane-permeabilizing activity. J Gen Microbiol 1990,
136:1771-1778.
98. Huynh QK, Borgmeyer JR, Zobel JF: Isolation and Characterization of a 22
kDa Protein with Antifungal Properties from Maize Seeds. Bioch Biophys
Res Com 1992, 182:1.
99. Batalia MA, Monzingo AF, Ernst S, Roberts W, Robertus JD: The crystal
structure of the antifungal protein Zeamatin, a member of the
thaumatin-like, PR-5 protein family. Nat Struct Biol 1996, 3:19-23.
doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-33
Cite this article as: Petre et al.: Genome-wide analysis of eukaryote
thaumatin-like proteins (TLPs) with an emphasis on poplar. BMC Plant
Biology 2011 11:33.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
