<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>gb-2009-10-5-106.qxd</title>
<meta name="Author" content="hopk02"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="PScript5.dll Version 5.2.2"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 6.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Comment

Render unto Darwin
Gregory A Petsko
Address: Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454-9110, USA.
Email: petsko@brandeis.edu

Published: 1 June 2009

Genome Biology 2009, 10:106 (doi:10.1186/gb-2009-10-5-106)
The electronic version of this article is the complete one and can be
found online at http://genomebiology.com/2009/10/5/106
© 2009 BioMed Central Ltd

You probably haven’t encountered a website for something
called BioLogos. If you have, you will undoubtedly already
have formed a strong opinion about it - it’s that kind of site.
If you haven’t, you really ought to check it out
[http://www.biologos.org]. It’s the website for something
called the BioLogos Foundation. According to its mission
statement, “The BioLogos Foundation promotes the search
for truth in both the natural and spiritual realms seeking
harmony between these different perspectives.” The
foundation was established by Francis Collins with a grant
from the John Templeton Foundation, a much older
organization with a similar mission. And that, apart from its
intrinsic interest, is why you should check it out, and why
I’m wagering you will have strong opinions when you do.
Francis Collins is the scientist who headed the publicly
funded Human Genome Sequencing Project in the 1990s.
Until last August he was the head of the National Human
Genome Institute at the National Institutes of Health (NIH),
which continues that work and funds much of the genome
biology in the United States. And he just might be the next
director of the NIH, the largest scientific research funding
organization in the world.
In a public statement, Collins said that he established the
BioLogos Foundation “to address the escalating culture war
between science and faith in the United States. On one end of
the spectrum, ‘new atheists’ argue that science removes the
need for God. On the other end, religious fundamentalists
argue that the Bible requires us to reject much of modern
science. Many people - including scientists and believers in
God - do not find these extreme options attractive. BioLogos
represents the harmony of science and faith. It addresses the
central themes of science and religion and emphasizes the
compatibility of Christian faith with scientific discoveries
about the origins of the universe and life. To communicate
this message to the general public and add to the ongoing
dialog, The BioLogos Foundation created BioLogos.org.”
Let’s dissect this statement, because if ever there was a
statement that needed dissecting, this is one. I completely

agree with Collins that there is a culture war between science
and faith in the United States. But I do not agree that the war
is due primarily to the clash between the extremists on both
sides. Take the “new atheists”, for example. There are many
atheists in the United States, and some of them are
scientists. But only a handful would take the extreme - and,
to my mind, incorrect - position that science disproves the
existence of God. The British scientist Richard Dawkins
might, but he doesn’t speak for the majority of scientists I
know, and his eloquent but strident voice has only served to
inflame the opposition by preaching to the converted. There
are many more agnostics, who simply believe that there is no
compelling evidence to believe in any deity.
Now let’s look at that opposition, the “religious fundamentalists” who argue that “the Bible requires us to reject much
of modern science”. There are a lot more of those, especially
in the United States, but - and this is a crucial distinction, as
we shall see - they are almost entirely evangelical Christians,
not “religious fundamentalists” in general. Evangelical
Christians often take the Bible literally, and a literal reading
of the Bible is certainly incompatible with many of the
findings of science.
One of the missions of the BioLogos website is to advance
the idea of theistic evolution, a concept discussed in depth in
Collins’ book The Language of God, which is also promoted
on biologos.org. Essentially, theistic evolution means that
evolution is the way God created life. I was first clued into
this website by Jonathan Eisen, an evolutionary biologist
and open access publishing maven at the University of
California, Davis. Eisen, whose blog The Tree of Life
[http://phylogenomics.blogspot.com/] is a delightful and
thoughtful commentary on the worlds of both genomics and
scientific publishing, wrote about BioLogos on 5 May. So
that you will know where he’s coming from, here’s his
opening statement: “I am all for trying to have discussions
about science and religion. But I do not think the two topics
are really compatible in the sense of merging them together.
Science (and medicine) should be about, well, science. And

Genome Biology 2009, 10:106

Genome Biology 2009,

http://genomebiology.com/2009/10/5/106

religion can be about whatever it wants to be. And when we
can get religious and scientific leaders together to talk about
the implications of each area on the other and on the world,
fine too. But merging the two together into one hybrid such
as Christian Science and Creation Science? Not for me.”
He goes on to make a pointed criticism of the underlying
logic - or lack thereof, in his view - behind BioLogos. “The
details of Collins’ attempt to merge science and religion into
a version of theistic evolution are really unclean. Basically,
he is trying to argue that on the one hand science and
religion are completely separate activities (I support this)
but at the same time argues that God can intervene in the
setting up of natural laws and in providing some guidance
here and there in order to, for example, produce human
beings in his image. The website repeats some things from
Collins’ book that are equally illogical - such as saying that
altruism can be explained by science (and even specifically
saying that science is the way to explain the natural world)
but then turning around and saying that science cannot
explain extreme forms of altruism (and therefore implying
that actually, the natural world cannot be explained by
science). Which is it? Is science for the natural world or
not?” Eisen is right that this, and some of BioLogos’ other
talking points, smack of setting up a straw man.
But in the end, BioLogos aims to show that the findings of
science are not inconsistent with the existence of God. And
not just any God. BioLogos is all about the Christian God. It
even says so: “The creation story of BioLogos is compatible
with many faith traditions, and there is no way to give a
scientific proof for one monotheistic faith over another.
Therefore, this response will simply show the compatibility
of Christianity with BioLogos.” And again, more forcefully,
in their mission statement: “the website is a reliable source
of scholarly thought on contemporary issues in science and
faith that highlights the compatibility of modern science
with traditional Christian beliefs.”
Here’s another example: “For believers, these [scientific]
discoveries must ultimately be compatible with the truth
that is revealed in the Bible, and it is the conviction of
BioLogos that this compatibility is not only desirable but
also possible. The limitation is that our access to all forms of
truth, including scientific and religious, is at best partial.”
The statement that it is Biblical truth that science must be
compatible with (and there are other comments that make it
clear BioLogos means the Christian Bible, especially the New
Testament) marks a clear attempt to link science with one
brand of religion.
The creators of BioLogos have every right to make the
foundation and website about whatever they want. And I
suppose you could argue that, as I see it, because it is
evangelical Christians that are the chief opponents of modern
science, especially evolution, it is sensible for scientists to

Volume 10, Issue 5, Article 106

Petsko 106.2

promote the compatibility of science with Christian beliefs.
But I don’t agree. I think it’s a huge mistake.
GK Chesterton, a devout Roman Catholic, has his priestdetective Father Brown say, in the superb short story The
Sign of the Broken Sword, “When will people understand
that it is useless for a man to read his Bible unless he also
reads everybody else’s Bible? A printer reads the Bible for
misprints. A Mormon reads his Bible and finds polygamy; a
Christian Scientist reads his and finds we have no arms and
legs.” I’ve always liked this quotation, and not just because I
agree that one huge problem with putting your faith in the
literal reading of a book is that you can find justification in
that book for almost any form of behavior, from altruism to
genocide to slavery. I like it for a reason that Chesterton
probably never intended: it reminds me that there are many
more religions than Christianity, and many more people of
faith than monotheists. I think if you are going to understand people of faith and try to see how we as scientists can
find common ground with them, it is discriminatory - and
possibly something worse - to focus on Christians or even
monotheists (which, in the modern world, pretty much
consists of Muslims, Christians and Jews - Zoroastrians
being in short supply nowadays - and I’m pretty sure that the
BioLogos folks would not include Islam in their mission,
given that faith’s denial of the divinity of Christ). If you are
going to read the Christian Bible you should also read the
Jewish Bible. And the Book of Mormon. And the Koran. And
the Bhagavad Gita. If you really care about making contact
with people of faith you should not exclude most of them just
because they worship different gods from yours.
In some temples in India, during services the priest will read
from the Hebrew or Christian Bible and the Muslim Koran
as well as the Hindu Gita, moving from one to the other as
though it did not matter what precise words were being
spoken as long as there was something greater than the
individual self that was being worshipped. How can we as
scientists find common ground with people of faith unless
we recognize the commonalities they share with each other?
At its best, all religion is about a love for the natural world, a
desire to help other people, and a sense that life is well lived
only when it is not lived selfishly and pettily - values that
typically underlie most scientific research. At its worst,
religion is about unquestionable certainty, authoritarianism,
exclusion and discrimination - things that have no place in
science either. Scientists can make common cause with
people of faith through the values we share, but must reject
the extremist, intolerant views that poison both spheres.
And in the end, that’s my big problem with BioLogos - at its
heart, it strikes me as implicitly exclusionary (plus I agree
with Eisen that its logic is shaky). I would have much preferred a clearcut effort to emphasize the non-connectedness
of science and faith: that science is about evidence and
testable hypotheses, whereas religion is about believing in

Genome Biology 2009, 10:106

Genome Biology 2009,

http://genomebiology.com/2009/10/5/106

things for which there is no evidence whatsoever, and cannot
be. That would place them in separate realms, but with
common ground as I defined it above. The moment you start
trying to say that data from science is compatible with the
Christian religion in particular, you imply that, for example,
polytheistic religions are wrong, and maybe not just as a
matter of faith, but as a matter of science.
Nothing is more dangerous than such absolutism. It sets one
type of religion as being true and therefore can be used to
support the branding of all the others as false. However wellintentioned, BioLogos isn’t likely to bring peace to the war
between science and religion if it is oriented so strongly
towards one religion.
I would have loved to see the resources that the Templeton
and BioLogos Foundations spent on biologos.com - both
financial and in terms of human effort - devoted to clarifying
and promoting the distinctions between science and religion
and to a search for a common ground that does not exclude
anyone of faith. That’s something I could support (and, I bet,
something that Jonathan Eisen and possibly Charles Darwin
could support, too). But the idea that science provides
information that cannot be explained by science alone - and
therefore that science ‘needs’ the Christian God for a complete description of the universe - strikes me as the wrong
thing to do. Render unto Darwin the things that are Darwin’s,
and unto God the things that are God’s. But for God’s sake (or
should that be Darwin’s?), don’t mix them together.

Genome Biology 2009, 10:106

Volume 10, Issue 5, Article 106

Petsko 106.3

</pre>
</body>
</html>
