<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Emergence of zoonotic arboviruses by animal trade and migration</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-3-35"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Martin Pfeffer, Gerhard Dobler"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

Open Access

REVIEW

Emergence of zoonotic arboviruses by animal
trade and migration
Review

Martin Pfeffer1 and Gerhard Dobler*2

Abstract
Arboviruses are transmitted in nature exclusively or to a major extend by arthropods. They belong to the most
important viruses invading new areas in the world and their occurrence is strongly influenced by climatic changes due
to the life cycle of the transmitting vectors. Several arboviruses have emerged in new regions of the world during the
last years, like West Nile virus (WNV) in the Americas, Usutu virus (USUV) in Central Europe, or Rift Valley fever virus
(RVFV) in the Arabian Peninsula. In most instances the ways of introduction of arboviruses into new regions are not
known. Infections acquired during stays in the tropics and subtropics are diagnosed with increasing frequency in
travellers returning from tropical countries, but interestingly no attention is paid on accompanying pet animals or the
hematophagous ectoparasites that may still be attached to them. Here we outline the known ecology of the
mosquito-borne equine encephalitis viruses (WEEV, EEEV, and VEEV), WNV, USUV, RVFV, and Japanese Encephalitis
virus, as well as Tick-Borne Encephalitis virus and its North American counterpart Powassan virus, and will discuss the
most likely mode that these viruses could expand their respective geographical range. All these viruses have a different
epidemiology as different vector species, reservoir hosts and virus types have adapted to promiscuous and robust or
rather very fine-balanced transmission cycles. Consequently, these viruses will behave differently with regard to the
requirements needed to establish new endemic foci outside their original geographical ranges. Hence, emphasis is
given on animal trade and suitable ecologic conditions, including competent vectors and vertebrate hosts.
Background
During the last decades the appearance of new infectious
diseases and an increasing invasion of diseases into new
areas created a new category of pathogens: emerging and
re-emerging pathogens. Most of the emerging viruses are
zoonotic which means they can infect both animals and
humans [1]. As outlined in detail in the examples provided below, humans are dead-end hosts in most cases.
Hence, in the case of emerging viruses, zoonotic is mainly
defined as transmission of viruses from animals to
humans rather than vice versa [2]. Among emerging
viruses, arboviruses play a major role. Arboviruses are
defined as viruses that survive in nature by transmission
from infected to susceptible hosts (vertebrates) by certain
species of arthropods (mosquitoes, ticks, sandflies,
midges etc.). The viruses multiply within the tissues of
* Correspondence: gerharddobler@bundeswehr.org
2 Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology, Neuherbergstrasse 11, 80937 Munich,
Germany

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

the arthropod to produce high titres of virus in the salivary glands and are then passed on to vertebrates
(humans and animals) by the bites of the arthropods [3].
To establish and maintain an arbovirus transmission
cycle three factors are essential: the arbovirus, the arthropod, and the vertebrate. Usually, these three components
have a rather complex relationship including factors such
as the vector competence for the particular virus and the
susceptibility of the vertebrate host for the virus (producing a high-level viremia to allow other vectors to become
infected). As prerequisite for continuous circulation of
the virus between arthropod vector and vertebrate host,
all factors must be available in sufficient numbers, at the
same time and at the same place. Scientifically speaking, a
formula describing the vector capacity has to yield high
positive values to lead to reproduction rates above 1 for
the particular arbovirus [4-7]. Taking all this together, the
chance for such a scenario, i.e. the establishment of a new
endemic transmission cycle, are very low in general and
reports about a new "intruder" are rare. However, the

© 2010 Pfeffer and Dobler; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Com-

BioMed Central mons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

recent introduction of e.g. West Nile virus into the Americas, Chikungunya virus into Italy or Usutu virus into
Austria are examples of the vulnerability of our modern
societies for arboviruses [3,8,9]. Sometimes the ways of
introduction of arboviruses are obvious as in the case of
Chikungunya virus in Italy, which was introduced by a
viremic traveller returning from India. In other cases they
remain obscure like the introduction of West Nile virus
into the Americas [10]. Principally, two mechanisms of
importation have to be discussed, the import by viremic
vertebrates (humans, animals) and import by virus-bearing arthropods. While the introduction of new arthropod
species, mainly mosquito species (e.g. Aedes albopictus,
Aedes japonicus), is well-known and, in several countries,
is under close observation, the risk and the importance of
animal trade for the importation of arboviruses has not
been studied extensively [11]. Vertebrate hosts, including
humans, may play a role as vehicles for importation and
the maintenance by amplifying various arboviruses.
Animals may be introduced into new areas intentionally or by their natural migration activities. The latter naturally varies tremendously depending on the annual
migration patterns of the particular species. In Germany,
for example, 1322 neozoon species have been registered
since 1492, with 262 species that have established permanent and robust population numbers [12]. Regarding the
establishment of a new arbovirus transmission cycle,
these species may be suitable hosts to permit continuous
viral transmission. Although not an arbovirus, the introduction of monkeypox virus into North America in 2003
via a Gambian giant rat from Africa is yet another example for animal trade contributing to the global spread of
zoonotic diseases [13]. So far, the trade of animals has
been rarely incriminated as means of importation of
arboviruses. However, animals are traded for different
reasons across the entire world, for food and food production, for scientific, educational and conservation reasons or as companion or, as in the case of the Gambian
giant rats, pet animals, and also for touristic reasons
[2,11,14]. The magnitude of global movement of animals
is immense. From 2000 to 2004, more than a billion animals from 163 countries were legally imported into the
United States of America [15]. This equals almost 600000
animals per day, but disease screening for arboviruses is
mandatory only in limited cases. Likewise, hematophagous ectoparasites on imported animals which may act as
vectors or which are already infected are likely to go
unnoticed. Other data emphasise the potential of animal
movement in the context of exotic pathogens. For the
year 2002 it was estimated that 49 million amphibians
and 1.9 million reptiles have been imported into the USA
[16], providing a fair chance to import pathogens due to a
lack of clinical symptoms in these animals [for review see
[17]]. Introduction of animals by chance may play a major

Page 2 of 15

role in the introduction of arthropods. Several examples
are prominent like the introduction of Aedes albopictus
into the United States of America by used tyres or by
bamboo plants into the Netherlands [8,18].
The last International Catalogue of Arboviruses listed
more than 500 arboviruses and related viruses [[10];
http://www2.ncid.cdc.gov/arbocat/index.asp]. More than
150 of these are known to cause human and/or animal
diseases. For many of those viruses, only limited information is available regarding their vector and host spectrum.
Hence, we have chosen some prominent examples of
important arboviruses causing human and animal diseases, which belong to the genera alphaviruses (family
Togaviridae), flaviviruses (family Flaviviridae), and phleboviruses (family Bunyaviridae) to discuss the animal
aspect in virus dispersal.
Western Equine Encephalomyelitis virus

Western Equine Encephalomyelitis (WEE) is caused by
the Western equine encephalomyelitis virus (WEEV)
which belongs to the genus Alphavirus in the family
Togaviridae [19]. The virus occurs through most of the
American continent, with virological and/or serological
evidence of occurrence in the western parts of Canada,
the U.S.A., in Mexico and throughout parts of Southern
America (Guyana, Ecuador, Brazil, Uruguay and Argentina) [20,21]. WEEV is maintained in North America in a
natural transmission cycle involving domestic and wild
birds as the most important maintenance and amplifying
vertebrate hosts and mosquito vectors, primarily Culex
tarsalis [[21], Figure 1]. However, WEEV was isolated or
detected in at least 14 mosquito species of the genus
Aedes and six species of the genus Culex [22]. In South
America, an additional mosquito-rodent cycle is postulated, involving mosquitoes of the genus Aedes and vertebrate hosts including rice rats (Oryzomys spp.), rabbits
and introduced European hares (Lepus europaeus) [2326]. Humans and horses do not develop viremias high
enough to infect blood-sucking mosquitoes [19]. Therefore, they may not serve as maintenance or amplifying
hosts and will not be able to sustain a transmission cycle
in nature.
In humans, WEEV causes severe encephalitis with
higher manifestation rates in children and in elderly persons. Fatality rates may be up to 5% [21]. WEEV is an
important pathogen of horses where it causes a severe
form of encephalomyelitis which may be fatal in up to 10
to 50% [21]. WEEV has constantly been declining in
North America over the last decades and no veterinary
nor human cases have been reported in 2009, with only
one submitted mosquito pool testing positive for WEEV
(http://diseasemaps.usgs.gov/; as of December 8th 2009).
Less land irritation and consequently less breading
opportunities for vector mosquito species have been

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

Page 3 of 15

endemic transmission cycles

EEEV
(North Amercia)

EEEV
(South America)

Culiseta
melanura

Culiseta
melanura

WEEV

Culex
tarsalis

VEEV former
subtypes ID-IF, II-VI

Culex
spp.

epidemic transmission (cycles)

Selection through
E2 T213R mutation
in VEEV ID & IE
Promiscuous feeding
Mosquitoes: Culex,
Ochlerotatus, Aedes,
Coquillettidia spp., etc.

Ochlerotatus
melanimon

VEEV subtypes
IAB/IC

Psorophora,
Ochlerotatus
taeniorhynchus

Figure 1 Schematic drawing of the endemic and epidemic transmission cycles of eastern (EEEV), western (WEEV), and Venezuelan equine
encephalitis viruses (VEEV).

claimed for the fading of the virus. To some extent the use
of vaccines, which are available for equines but not for
humans, might have attributed to this situation. Nevertheless, WEEV has been used to develop chimeric vaccines in combination with other alphaviruses such as
Sindbis or eastern equine encephalitis viruses [[27]; see
below].
WEEV may be introduced to Europe or to other parts
outside the Americas by different routes. Infected adult
mosquitoes or infected Aedes eggs (Aedes dorsalis) may
be possible means of importation [22]. WEEV may also
be introduced into Europe by viremic birds or by viremic
rodents. As there are no major bird migration routes
between the American and European continents, a natural introduction via infected birds seems unlikely. However, some long distance migrating bird species may share
breeding grounds in the arctic with a slight chance of
exchanging arboviruses, providing suitable vector mosquito species are present. Sick humans or horses do not
develop viremias high enough to infect mosquitoes and
thus cannot serve for the establishment of a new transmission cycle. Although studies on the vector compe-

tence of European mosquito species for the transmission
of WEEV are missing, WEEV could be isolated from
Culex pipiens and from Aedes vexans. Both mosquito
species form a major part of the Central European mosquito fauna. For a natural transmission cycle, WEEV is
dependent on passerine birds and possibly also on small
wild mammals. Both groups of animals are abundant in
Europe and although no data are available on the potential of European species to serve as natural maintenance
or amplifying hosts, there are no obvious reasons to argue
against a potential for transmission in European species.
Hence, the risk of the introduction of WEEV into Europe
seems to be low, although the required components for a
natural transmission cycle of WEEV seem to be available
(Table 1).
Eastern Equine Encephalomyelitis Virus

Eastern equine encephalomyelitis (EEE) is caused by eastern equine encephalomyelitis virus (EEEV) which is also a
member of the genus Alphavirus in the family Togaviridae. EEEV causes severe disease in humans, in horses and
in some game animals [28]. In humans, fatality rates of up

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

Page 4 of 15

Table 1: Qualitative estimation of the impact of zoonotic arboviral diseases with a non-zero likelihood of evolving in
response to animal trade, animal migration and climate change.
Arbovirus

Chances for
dispersal

Major mode of
dispersal

Chances for
establishing
new endemic
foci (c)

Chances to be
eliminated
again (d)

Impact
on public
health (e)

Impact on
veterinary
public
health (e)

Occurrence and
distribution
influenced by
climate (f)

WEEV

Moderate

Long distance
(viremic birds)

Moderate to high

Low to
moderate

Low

Low

Yes

EEEV

Moderate

Long distance
(viremic birds)

Moderate to high

Low to
moderate

Low

Low

Yes

VEEV

Moderate to
high (a)

Short distance
(mosquitoes,
rodents)

Moderate

Low to
moderate

Low

Low to
moderate (a)

Yes

WNV

Moderate to
high

Long distance
(viremic birds)

Moderate to high

Zero to low

Moderate to
high

Low

Yes

JEV

Moderate

Long
distance(viremic
birds)

Moderate

Low to
moderate

Moderate to
high

Low to
moderate

Yes

RVFV

Moderate to
high

Short to long
distance
(livestock
animals)

Moderate to high

Low to
moderate

Moderate

Moderate to
high

Yes

USUV

Moderate to
high

Long distance
(viremic birds)

Moderate to high

Zero to low

Negligible

Low

Yes

TBEV

Low to
moderate

Short distance
(ticks, rodents) (b)

Moderate to high

Zero to low

Low

Negligible

Yes

POWV

Low to
moderate

Short distance
(ticks, rodents) (b)

Moderate to high

Zero to low

Low

Negligible

Yes

(a) = Depending on the VEEV subtype involved.
(b) = When ticks are attached to birds, the respective viruses can as well be carried over long distances.
(c) = Because the mechanisms allowing a successful establishing of new endemic foci are poorly understood, the estimates provided are
speculative despite for the viruses where this happened in recent history, e.g. WNV in America. Expansion of the geographic range of tick-borne
TBEV and POWV mainly occurs on a different scale than with mosquito-borne arboviruses.
(d) = The general rule "the earlier the detection of the alien virus, the better the chance to successfully terminate it" applies for both mosquitoand tick-borne viruses, but due to the life cycle of mosquitoes and the availability of efficient larvicides and adulticides, their abundance can be
better addressed with an integrated pest management and mosquito control program than fighting ticks in a tick habitat.
(e) = TBEV and JEV cause diseases in humans that can be prevented by applying safe and efficient vaccines. There is an inactivated vaccine
available for the three equine encephalitis viruses and WNV.
(f) = The distribution of all arboviruses depends to a major part of the abundance of suitable vector species. Since their life cycle is strongly
influenced by the weather, climate is an important issue in the occurrence and spread of arboviruses.

to 70% may be observed during some epidemics [29]. In
horses, fatality rates of EEV infection may approach up to
near 100% [19]. EEEV infections cause neurological disease in introduced bird species, like the sparrow, the ringnecked pheasant, the domestic pigeon and emus [30].
Emus and pheasants seem to serve as amplifying vertebrate hosts and epizootics in these animal stocks are
observed with high fatality rates and enormous economic
losses [31]. Besides birds, EEEV could be isolated from
bats; however no transmission was detected in bats. Furthermore EEEV was isolated or infection was serologically proven in amphibians and reptiles. They can yield
high viremias for several months and therefore are candi-

dates for overwintering of EEEV virus in temperate climates [29,32]. An effective vaccine for use in equines is
commercially available, but there is no approved EEEV
vaccine
for
humans
to
date.
EEEV occurs in North and South America. While the
natural transmission cycle(s) in South America are not
well understood, transmission in Eastern North America
is mainly dependent on ornithophilic mosquitoes of the
species Culiseta melanura and passerine and wading
birds of different species (Figure 1). The cycle is mainly
maintained in coastal and inland swamps. Human and
equine cases occur if large populations of mosquitoes of
other species are abundant after heavy rains. These mos-

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

quito species may serve as bridging vectors, transmitting
the EEEV obtained from viremic birds to horses and
humans due to their more non-catholic feeding behaviour [[33], Figure 1]. EEEV was isolated from more than
20 different mosquito species, among them Culex pipiens
and Aedes vexans which also occur in Central Europe and
many other parts of the world (see: http://data.gbif.org/
species/13452448/). The results of studies of transovarial
transmission of EEEV in mosquitoes are conflicting.
Probably EEEV is not transmitted via infection of eggs to
the next mosquito generation while for Coquilletidia perturbans transovarial transmission could be proved [34].
The risk of an importation of EEEV into Europe or
other areas outside of the American continent seems to
be low. Basically, an importation seems possible via
infected mosquitoes, infected birds (passerine, waders,
farm birds like emus or pheasants) and also via infected
reptiles and amphibians. As already mentioned for
WEEV, no frequent migration of birds between the
Americas and Europe exists. Therefore an introduction
seems only possible as a result of human activities (e.g.
trade, scientific, conservation, touristic activities).
Although no studies on the vector competence of European mosquito species for EEEV are available, Aedes vexans and Culex pipens are among the most abundant
mosquito species in Europe. However, at least in North
America, Culiseta melanura seems to be the main vector
for EEEV. The genus Culiseta is a rather species poor
genus (five species worldwide), which has been claimed
to be the reason for higher levels of genetic identity in
viruses transmitted by Culiseta mosquitoes than in
viruses that mainly use Culex or Aedes vector species
[35]. In contrast to WEEV, where no clinical symptoms in
birds seem to occur, EEEV seems to cause neurologic disease and haemorrhagic disease with death in many species of non-American wild birds. Therefore, the
introduction and establishment of EEEV in the European
bird populations would probably cause high death rates
in birds and would likely be detected at an early timepoint after introduction (Table 1). As for WEEV, the basic
factors for the establishment of a natural cycle seem to be
available in Europe also for EEEV.
Venezuelan Equine Encephalomyelitis Virus

Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis is caused by a complex of viruses (Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis
virus, VEEV) which belongs to the genus Alphavirus in
the family Togaviridae. The complex includes seven different virus species and a number of subtypes and varieties [36]. VEEV occurs mainly in tropical and subtropical
regions of the Americas and circulate endemically
between mosquitoes of the genus Culex (Melanoconion)
and rodents (Oryzomys, Proechimys, Sigmodon, Peromyscus, Heteromys, Zygodontomys) [[37], Figure 1]. How-

Page 5 of 15

ever, some species of birds, mainly herons, also develop
high and prolonged viremias and thus can infect bloodsucking mosquitoes. Therefore these birds may serve as
maintenance and amplifying hosts on particular occasions [37]. Other wild or farm animals do not seem to
replicate VEEV in virus titres high enough to serve as
hosts for maintenance of transmission cycles. Also
humans infected with epidemic VEEV strains develop
high titres and may therefore play a role as maintenance
and amplifying hosts [38,39].
Major VEE epidemics occur sporadically or periodically when epidemic strains of the subtypes IAB and IC
spill over into competent mosquitoes of the genus Aedes
and Psorophora which have a peridomestic/peri-agricultural behaviour and may transmit VEEV to equines, donkeys and mules. Equids develop high virus titres and
therefore may serve as amplifying hosts for VEEV. An
equine-mosquito-cycle may induce an extensive virus circulation with a spill-over to humans and cause epidemic
VEE (Figure 1). Epidemic VEE in humans is a highly incapacitating dengue-like illness which in a small part of
infected people, mainly in children, may cause severe
encephalitis with fatality rates of 1 to 3% [40]. There is no
specific treatment available to cure the disease and no
human vaccine to prevent it. A vaccine for equids, however, can be purchased.
The epidemic occurrence of VEEV during the last two
decades shows that it is highly variable in nature and that
single amino acid changes in the viral genome may cause
major changes in vector competence of mosquitoes or in
the pathogenicity in equids [41-43]. Studies also show
that epidemic strains of VEEV adapt to one of the important epidemic bridge-vectors (Ochlerotatus taeniorhynchus formerly Aedes taeniorhynchus) and replicate to
higher titres in this mosquito species than in mosquitoes
involved in endemic transmission (Melanoconion) [44].
The introduction and establishment of VEEV into Europe
may be possible via infected mosquitoes, rodents, birds
(herons), horses and humans (Table 1). The establishment of enzootic viruses needs susceptible rodents and
transmitting competent mosquitoes. While in Central
and Southern America, mainly rodents of the subfamily
Sigmodontinae are involved as maintenance hosts, data
on the replication of different VEEV subtypes in European rodents of the subfamilies Murinae and Arvicolinae
are not available. Whether mosquitoes of the genera
Culex and Aedes in Europe are competent for VEEV has
not been studied so far. However, American strains of
Aedes albopictus were found to be capable of transmitting
VEEV [45,46]. Therefore, at least a limited peri-domestic
or urban (human-mosquito-human) transmission cycle
with epidemic VEEV strains seems possible (Table 1).
However, for larger epizootics and epidemics of VEEV,
larger populations of non-immune equids are a pre-req-

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

Page 6 of 15

uisite for the initiation of the epidemic transmission
cycles.
West Nile Virus
vertical
transmission

vertical
transmission

„blood
transfusion,
organ
transplanͲ
tation“

urban cycle

deadͲend hosts

rural cycle

West Nile virus (WNV) is a member of the Japanese
encephalitis group of the genus Flavivirus in the family
Flaviviridae. The evolutionary origin of WNV seems to
be in Central Africa, from where it spread over various
parts of the world and locally new genotypes emerged
[47]. Actually five genetic lineages are recognized, from
which only lineage 1a is distributed worldwide while the
other lineages and sub-lineages exhibit a more local geographic distribution [48]. WNV causes a febrile illness or
encephalitis in humans and horses [49]. In humans the
fatality rate of WNV CNS infections ranges from 5 to 10%
with higher rates in elderly people or those with additional underlying diseases [50]. The introduction of
WNV in the Americas caused a high fatality rate in different American species of birds (e.g. Corvidae), while fatalities by WNV infections in wild birds in the Old World
have not been reported so far [51]. However in Israel epizootics in geese were repeatedly reported during the last
decades.
Like other members of the Japanese encephalitis serogroup, WNV in nature is maintained in a bird-mosquito
cycle (Figure 2). WNV was isolated or detected in at least
43 species of old world mosquito species, mainly belonging to the genus Culex [52]. The importance of other
mosquito genera and species (Aedes, Anopheles,
Aedomyia, Mansonia, Coquilletidia) and of hard and soft
ticks (Hyalomma, Dermacentor, Rhipicephalus, Amblyomma, Argas, Ornithodoros) for the endemic and epidemic transmission cycles remains to be determined [53].
Various birds, mainly passerines serve as primary vertebrate hosts of WNV [54,55]. WNV infections were also
detected in rodents and other small mammals, however,
these animals do not seem to produce viremias high
enough for maintaining the transmission cycle. Moderate
viremias, however, were detected in horses and in lemurs
in Madagascar [55]. These animals may support the virus
transmission cycle under local ecological conditions. In
one study a frog (Rana ridibunda) was found to be viremic and was able to transmit the virus to blood-sucking
Culex pipiens [56]. Therefore, also a frog-mosquito-frogcycle seems to be possible under certain ecological conditions.
WNV is an often cited example of a dispersing arbovirus since it invaded into North America in 1999 [10].
From the original point of invasion (New York) the WNV
dispersed within a few years over the total continental
U.S.A. and Southern parts of Canada and also migrated
into Central America and parts of South America. The
main way of migration is thought to be via migration of
birds. Several bird species (house sparrow, blue jays,

mosquito movement

Culex tarsalis
(other Culex spp.)

Culex pipiens
(other Culex & Aedes spp.)

Bird movement/migration
Figure 2 Schematic drawing of the transmission cycles and possible modes of dispersal of West Nile virus.

American robins) may have played an important role in
the distribution of WNV in the Americas. Additionally,
there is evidence that different mosquito species were
important in different parts of Northern America for the
transmission of WNV, and that a more efficiently replicating strain evolved in 2003 entirely replacing the originally introduced WNV strain in North America [57].
The exact way of introduction of WNV into North
America is still unclear. Several additional factors are discussed which improved the establishment and transmission of WNV in this new environment (Table 1). Among
them are the introduction and geographic dispersion of
large and WNV non-immune populations of the house
sparrow, which served as a very efficient maintenance
host for WNV, the availability of a very competent vector
(Culex pipiens), climate warming, and perhaps also the
decline of infections with the closely related St. Louis
encephalitis virus, an indigenous virus of the Japanese
encephalitis serogroup in the Americas [9]. However in
Europe, instead of all discussions on the geographic dispersion and introduction into new regions, no clear
increase of the range of distribution of WNV can be
observed. Since the early 1970s, when the virus was
detected in Czechoslovakia, no extension of distribution
further northward was detected despite many efforts to
detect WNV in Central and Northern Europe after the

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

introduction in the Americas, although competent vectors as well as maintenance and amplifying hosts for
WNV seem to exist in Central Europe and repeated
introductions into Central Europe have occurred [58,59].
In a risk assessment of the introduction of WNV into the
Galapagos Islands, four modes of introduction are discussed: introduction via infected humans, via infected
migratory birds, via infected mosquitoes, and via humantransported host vertebrates [60]. The introduction via
infected humans could be excluded, as humans do not
develop viremias high enough for infecting mosquitoes.
The analysis showed that the highest risk of an introduction of WNV is infected mosquitoes un-intentionally
transported in airoplanes carrying tourists. Also the
introduction of WNV via infected eggs or larvae in tyres
seemed to be of importance. Instead, the introduction of
WNV via migratory birds or via infected chickens
seemed to be at least one magnitude lower than due to
airoplane-transported mosquitoes. In the case of optimized conditions the introduction of WNV may most
probably happen due to migratory birds or via carrying of
infected mosquitoes from endemic areas via human
transport activities. Therefore, the migratory bird routes
and the main transport routes from endemic southern
and South-eastern Europe may be most important for
continuous surveillance [48,61,62].
Japanese Encephalitis Virus

Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is a member of the similarly named serogroup in the genus Flavivirus of the
family Flaviviridae. JEV is transmitted in a natural transmission cycle involving mosquitoes of the genus Culex
and water birds (mainly egrets and herons) [63]. Actually
five lineages of JEV can be distinguished which is of
importance for epidemiological studies [9]. Currently,
JEV is the most important mosquito-transmitted arbovirus, causing encephalitis in the world. An estimated
30,000 to 50,000 human cases occur every year [64]. Up
to 30% of all ill humans die, and about half of the surviving patients show persisting, life-long neurologic sequelae [65]. JEV infects a number of different animals, among
them dogs, ducks, chicken, cattle, bats, snakes and frogs.
Humans and horses may develop a severe and fatal form
of encephalitis. However, the viremia titres in humans
and horses are not high enough to serve as transmission
hosts (Figure 3). In contrast, pigs develop high viremias
and they therefore serve as amplification hosts for bridge
vectors to initiate epizootics and epidemics [66].
The natural transmission cycle mainly involves mosquitoes of the genus Culex. The primary vector is Culex tritaeniorhynchus, which is associated with rice paddies and
irrigated crop fields in whole Southeast Asia. Culex tritaeniorhynchus feeds on water birds and on larger mammals, also on pigs and therefore transmits JEV to this

Page 7 of 15

Endemic / natural cycle

Culex tritaeniorhynchus
(other Culex spp.)

Amplification cycle

Culex tritaeniorhynchus
(other Culex & Aedes spp.)

„rice fields“

„farms“

deadͲend hosts
rural infections

rural & periͲurban infections

Figure 3 Schematic drawing of transmission cycles and rural as
well as peri-urban infections of animals and humans with Japanese encephalitis virus.

important amplifying host, and also to equids and to
humans. Other Culex species, like Culex pipens, Culex
vishnui and Culex bitaeniorhynchus may play a local role
for the transmission of JEV (Figure 3). The natural vertebrate hosts of JEV are ardeid birds, mainly the blackcrowned night heron (Nycticorax nycticorax) and the
Asian cattle egret (Bubulcus ibis coromandus) [67]. There
is evidence that JEV is also transmitted transovarially in
Culex tritaeniorhynchus. Therefore, an enzootic or an
epizootic cycle may be initiated from mosquitoes directly
after diapause. The invasion of JEV in new areas in Southeast Asia during the last decades has been mainly associated with the increase of human populations and,
consequently, in increasing areas of rice paddies and pig
farming [68]. JEV recently expanded also in higher altitudes in the Kathmandu valley of Nepal and into New
Guinea and to the Torres Straight and to Northern Australia [69,70].
Japanese encephalitis virus shows a clear tendency of
expansion. One mechanism of spread involves the air
transport of infected mosquitoes. This method of spread
was shown by the introduction of JEV into Pacific islands
like Guam or Saipan [71,72]. A recent study showed that
the potential risk of an introduction of JEV into the west
coast of the United States is possible. Competent vectors
and pigs as amplifying vertebrate hosts are available in
moderate numbers. However pigs in California do not
live in residential environments as in Asia, but in large pig
farms, which are dispersed throughout the state. Therefore, the risk of a spread of introduced JEV may be lower
as in the agricultural areas of Asian countries. However,
the feral pig production farms provide sufficient non-

immune populations for an amplification and potential
spread of JEV in California. As the viremia in pigs may be
prolonged, also the transport of pigs to new locations/
farms may provide a way of transport for the spread of
JEV for small and moderate distances. Also, a further
introduction into central Asia and even into eastern and
Central Europe seems possible (Table 1). Birds may also
play a critical role of transporting over long distances and
pigs may be responsible for the local distribution of the
virus. JEV is one of the arboviruses with a high potential
of expansion into virgin areas [73].

Page 8 of 15

endemic transͲ
mission cycle
at the „Dambo“

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

Heavy rainfall
(„flooding“)
leads to high
mosquito
abundance

epidemic transͲ
mission cycle (rare)

epizootic transͲ
mission cycle
at the „Dambo“

Rift Valley Fever Virus

Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a disease which was first
described as an entity during an epizootic outbreak in
1930 - 1931 in Kenya [74]. There, the etiologic agent, Rift
Valley fever virus (RVFV) causes severe disease, stillbirth
and often death of cattle, sheep and goats [75]. Only in
the 1950s, first cases of an undifferentiated fever in
humans were associated with infection of RVFV. Apart
from the original outbreak, the pathogenic potential of
RVFV for humans was described in detail during outbreaks in the 1950s [74]. In 1975, during a large outbreak
of RVF in South-Africa, the first fatal human cases were
described and the virus was reclassified as a hemorrhagic
fever virus [76]. Until 1977, RVFV outbreaks were limited
to Sub-Saharan Africa. In 1977 an epizootic RVF epidemic occurred in Egypt, for the first time north of the
Saharan desert. During this epidemic more than 200,000
human cases with 600 fatalities were registered. Besides
hemorrhagic manifestations the virus caused retinitis
with blindness, hepatitis and encephalitis [77,78]. During
the late 1980s a new extension of the geographic range of
RVFV into western Africa was detected. And again in
2000, RVFV caused an epizootic and epidemic in SaudiArabia and Yemen, the first time that RVF was detected
outside of Africa [79,80].
RVFV belongs to the genus Phlebovirus of the family
Bunyaviridae. It is transmitted in an enzootic cycle
among wildlife and mosquitoes [81]. RVF is a promiscuous virus, using a number of different mosquito species
belonging to different genera (Aedes, Ochlerotatus, Stegomyia, Anopheles, Culex, Neomelaniconion, Eretmapodites
and others) as vectors [[74], Figure 4]. The role of most of
these mosquito species for the maintenance of the enzootic cycle is unclear. Probably the most important way of
maintaining the enzootic cycle is the transovarial transmission in mosquitoes, mainly of the genus Aedes. Aedes
macintoshi seems to play a major role in Eastern Africa
[82]. Aedes macintoshi lays infected eggs into the ground
and these eggs need one or more severe flooding to hatch.
Therefore an inter-epidemic period (low mosquito population, low number of cases of RVF) and an epidemic
period (high populations of mosquitoes and high num-

various
mosquito
spp.

Figure 4 Schematic drawing of the development from an endemic transmission cycle through an epizootic transmission cycle to
epidemic transmission of Rift Valley fever virus.

bers of sick animals and of human cases) can be distinguished. The occurrence of epidemic periods is clearly
associated with heavy rains which are closely linked to
warming of the Indian Ocean during the El Nino Southern Oscillations (Figure 4). The impact of climate change
on Rift Valley fever virus infections is clearly relevant and
has been subject to a recent review [83]. Wild and domestic animals are infected and serve as amplification hosts
to create more infected mosquitoes. RVFV may be transmitted to other mosquito species which serve as bridging
vectors to other wild and domestic animals and to
humans which may cause further amplification of the
transmission cycle [[84], Figure 4].
These examples show that RVFV, without any doubt, is
one of the most aggressive migrating arbovirus. The
routes of dispersal detected so far seem to be in parallel
with the great migration routes of camels. Therefore,
there is some good evidence that viremic, but non-symptomatic infected camels transported the virus to Egypt

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

and possibly also to the Arabian Peninsula [85]. As also
humans may serve as amplifying hosts, the introduction
of RVFV by viremic humans seems possible and probable. In 2008, one case of RVF was diagnosed retrospectively in Germany in an ill woman, who had returned
from Africa [86]. However, few data exist on the vector
competence of European mosquito species for RVFV. Initial results on the dissemination rates in some infected
mosquito species tested, suggest that most of these may
serve as vectors [87]. Likewise, an introduction into the
United States may be possible, as was seen for West Nile
virus in 1999. Several ways of introduction were discussed, and the risk of importation into the US by
infected animals, by infected people, by mechanical
transport of infected insects, intercontinental windborne transport of RVFV- bearing insects, and also by
intentional introduction and release of RVFV were
assessed [88]. Studies on the vector competence of
Northern American mosquitoes showed that several
common species (Aedes vexans, Culex erraticus, Culex
nigripalpus, Culex quinquefasciatus, Culex salinarius)
can be infected and develop systemic infection. However,
only Aedes vexans and Culex erraticus developed virus
titres which were high enough to transmit the virus to
laboratory animals [89,90]. Therefore with the presence
of competent vectors and large populations of naive, nonimmune wild and domestic ruminants (and possibly
humans), the necessary factors exist in North America to
establish a transmission cycle (Table 1). Similar studies
for Europe are still missing. However, there is little doubt
that vectors and ruminants are present in Europe to allow
establishing of at least temporary enzootic transmission
cycles (Table 1).
Usutu virus

Usutu virus (USUV) belongs to the Japanese encephalitis
serogroup within the mosquito-borne cluster of the
genus Flavivirus in the family Flaviviridae [91]. It was
originally isolated from mosquitoes of the genus Culex in
South Africa in 1959. Since that time the virus was isolated several times from mosquitoes, rodents and birds
throughout Sub-Saharan Africa [92]. There has been
some limited information that USUV may be the etiologic agent of a mild human disease with fever and rash
[93]. In 2001, USUV suddenly emerged in the area of the
Austrian capital Vienna and caused widespread deaths
among the population of Eurasian blackbirds (Turdus
merula) and some other bird species. USUV could be
detected the following years and its area of distribution
extended into south-east (Hungary), south (Italy), west
(Switzerland), and north (Czech Republic, Poland) of the
original location of emergence where it also caused mortality in birds [55,94,95]. In 2009, USUV was shown to
exhibit human pathogenicity when it was for the first

Page 9 of 15

time detected to cause neuroinvasive infection in two
patients with immune deficiency (orthotopic liver transplantation, B cell lymphoma) in Italy [96,97]. USUV, most
probably was introduced into Austria via viremic birds
returning from their winter migration from Africa to
Europe. Another possible way of introduction could be
the transport of virus-infected mosquitoes from Africa to
Austria via airoplane, as the location of emergence in
Austria, Vienna, harbours the largest international airport in Austria.
USUV is thought to be maintained in nature in a mosquito-bird transmission cycle. In Africa ornithophilic
mosquitoes of the genera Culex, Coquillettidia and Mansonia are thought to be the main vectors. In Austria,
Culex spp. may play a major role, although USUV so far
has not been isolated from mosquitoes but has been
detected in overwintering Culex pipiens pools by real
time RT-PCR (our own unpublished results). There
seems to be a mode of adaptation of the virus to the new
bird species and/or to the new mosquito species in
Europe. After high mortality rates in blackbirds during
the first two years of emergence of USUV, in the following
years increasing rates of seropositive birds were detected
in Austria which gave evidence for a continuing circulation of USUV with a somewhat lower pathogenicity,
inducing an herd immunity in the bird populations [94].
USUV appears as an impressive example for the introduction and permanent establishment of a so-called
"tropical" arbovirus in moderate climates. In a recent
study, it was argued that USUV is mainly maintained in a
natural cycle in areas of Austria with a minimum of at
least ten hot days (> 30°C) [98]. In this simulation it is
predicted that USUV will become endemic in larger parts
of Central Europe until the end of the century. According
to the presented model, optimal environmental conditions for outbreaks of USUV will occur in about 10 years
from now on [98]. Whether USUV will develop in a similar way as WNV did in the Americas remains to be seen
in the future. And even more striking is the question
whether the closely related WNV would behave in a similar way.
Tick-borne encephalitis virus

So far, only the invasive potential of mosquito-borne
arboviruses has been discussed. The example of tickborne encephalitis virus (TBEV) shows that also ticktransmitted arboviruses may be able to invade new areas.
TBEV is a flavivirus of the tick-borne group of the genus
Flavivirus in the family Flaviviridae [99]. It is distributed
in the northern hemisphere of Europe and Asia. There, it
is transmitted in nature by hard ticks (Ixodidae, almost
exclusively Ixodes ricinus and Ixodes persulcatus). The
natural vertebrate hosts of TBE virus are small rodents of
the genera Myodes and Apodemus, although other

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

Page 10 of 15

Rodentia or Eulipotyphla (formerly: Insectivora) may
contribute to the natural transmission cycle [[99]; see Figure 5]. In contrast to mosquitoes, ticks do not depend on
a sufficient viremia of the infected host to take up an
arbovirus. While blood-feeding until repletion of a mosquito is a question of a few minutes, ticks are attached to
their host for up to a week. So-called saliva-assisted
transmission (SAT) is the indirect promotion of arbovirus
transmission via the actions of tick saliva molecules on
the vertebrate host [100]. The skin site where ticks feed is
highly modified by the pharmacologically active molecules secreted in the tick saliva. This phenomenon is crucial in maintaining a threshold level of infected tick
individuals in a tick population through a mechanism
known as co-feeding. Co-feeding is facilitated through
feeding of a number of ticks in close proximity on the
host skin and mediated via the tick saliva. During cofeeding, pathogens such as TBEV are transferred from
one tick to another [101]. Adults and immature ticks
(either larvae or nymphs) feed on the same reservoir host,
mostly rodents, thus transmitting and maintaining the
arbovirus between the different life stages of the vector.

Co-feeding and thus the TBEV prevalence in an enzootic
focus depends on the simultaneous presence of nymphs
and larvae (and adults) on the vertebrate host. As for
Ixodes ricinus in Europe, larvae become active above 10°C
while nymphs start searching for suitable hosts at 7°C.
This means, among many other factors, that a fast warming in spring will be beneficial for co-feeding and in turn
will result in higher numbers of TBEV-positive ticks
[102,103].
TBEV is the most important tick-transmitted arbovirus
of human pathogenicity in Europe and Asia [104,105]. An
estimated 10000 to 15000 human cases occur annually
with a fatality rate of 1% (Western subtype) to up to 20%
(Far Eastern subtype) [106,107]. The geographic origin of
the emergence of TBEV has been known due to comparative sequence studies for several years. These studies
show that TBEV originated somewhere in the Siberian or
Far Eastern area [108]. From there, the virus dispersed to
the south and to the west. During its movement new subtypes and viruses evolved: the western subtype of TBEV
and louping ill virus on the British islands, in Spain and in
Norway [109]. The movement into the eastern direction

transstadial
transmission

Ixodes ricinus
Ixodes spp.

transstadial
transmission

transovarial
transmission:
low importance

Figure 5 Schematic drawing of the transmission cycle of tick-borne encephalitis virus.

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

finally ended in the evolution of the Far Eastern subtype
(in China and Japan) and Powassan virus which is prevalent in Russia and in Northern America [109,110]. More
additional available viral sequences showed that TBEV
was introduced at least three different times to Japan
alone during the last several hundred years [110]. However, not much is known about the possible ways how
TBEV disperses over long distances. As humans and
domestic animals (cattle, goat, and sheep) and game animals (deer, boar, fox, and wolf ) do not develop high viremias they are unable to re-infect ticks during bloodsucking (dead-end hosts). Therefore, viremic humans and
animals seem not to play a role in transporting TBEV into
new areas. Mainly goats and, to a lesser extent, also cattle
and sheep may transmit the virus via milk to their offspring. In case of trading raw milk and cheese products,
the virus can be transported and can infect humans [111],
but the mode of dispersal cannot result in establishing a
new TBEV focus (Table 1). Scandinavian researchers
showed that the migration of birds could play a major role
for the migration of tick-borne viruses. They found ticks
(mainly larvae and nymphs of Ixodes ricinus) on every
30th bird which migrated in autumn from Northern
Europe towards the South. About one out of 2200 migrating birds carried a TBEV-infected tick [112]. These data
offer new insights into the potential migration of TBEV
over long distances. However, no phylogenetic relationship between TBEV strains from northern Europe and
from Central Europe could be detected. A new phylogenetic study of more than 160 TBE virus strains from the
Siberian region shows that TBEV in Russia moved along
the main transport routes in Russia [113]. At least two
introductions from Siberia into western direction are
detectable. These invasions of TBEV into western parts of
Russia and the Baltic countries can be associated with
major human activities, the construction of the first land
road into Siberia and the construction of the Trans-Siberian Way [113]. The anthropogenic factor, i.e. human
activity therefore seems to be the most important factor
for the distribution of TBEV into the western parts of
Europe. Potential ways of transport may be viremic
rodents which follow humans on the main routes or
virus-infected ticks which are carried by humans or
human-associated animals (Table 1).
Powassan virus

Powassan virus (POWV) is the sole member of the tickborne encephalitis serological complex of flaviviruses in
North America. It received its name after the town Powassan in Ontario, Canada, were it was isolated from the
brain of a child deceased after encephalitis in the late
1950th [114] and a couple of years earlier from ticks collected in Colorado, USA [115]. The latter was initially
name deer tick virus and listed as a distince virus species

Page 11 of 15

DTV, but recent molecular analyses placed DTV as a genotype of POWV [116-118]. More interesting is the ecology of POWV, since it seems to exist in three rather
discrete enzootic cycles: Ixodes cookie and woodchucks
and mustelids; Ixodes marxi and squirrels; Ixodes scapularis and white-footed mice [119]. POWV has also been
found in considerable numbers in Dermacentor ticks,
namely D. andersoni and D. variablis but the corresponding enzootic cycle has not ben explored in further detail.
Vertical transmission of POWV was observed in Ixodes
scapularis [120]. The current distribution of POWV with
parts of Canada and the USA, as well as Parts of Russia is
interesting because it suggests that the Bering Strait had
to be crossed at least once in history to explain the current geographical range of POWV. Phylogenetic studies
of the TBE serogroup viruses place an Eurasian progenitor as common ancestor for POWV in North America
[121]. One way of how POWV could have been introduced is by animals moving across the Bering land bridge
during a recent glacial period or by migrating birds (as
discussed above for TBEV). The tight clustering of Russian and Canadian strains suggests a rather recent introduction perhaps along with American mink that were
imported to support fur trade [122]. So this is likely
another example of the emergence of an arbovirus by animal trade.
It is interesting that for other tick-borne arboviruses,
similar results on the importance of human activities for
the spread into new, non-endemic areas are evolving.
Kyasanur Forest virus, a virus related to TBEV is limited
to some regions (Karnataka) in India [123]. However, a
few years ago a closely related tick-borne virus, Alkhurma
virus, was detected in cases of hemorrhagic fever in Saudi
Arabia [123]. Also for this virus, mainly human activities
are suspected for the recent dispersion by viremic animals or virus-infected ticks from India to the Arabian
Peninsula. For another tick-borne arbovirus, CrimeanCongo Hemorrhagic Fever virus, human activities and
changes in agricultural practices seem to be a major factor for emergence and distribution during the last years
[124]. Louping ill virus is a relative of TBEV. This virus
probably evolved on the British Isles from the introduced
TBEV strain(s) [125]. Louping ill virus was transported
with human activities to the Iberian Peninsula where a
new subtype of the virus has evolved since then (Spanish
sheep encephalitis virus). It was also transported to Norway where it is now dispersing, possibly due to climatic
changes, to the north [125].

Conclusions
Arboviruses are maintained in nature in complex transmission cycles between arthropods and vertebrates. They
have developed strategies of adaptation and evolution to
spread into new areas and eventually become established.

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

Several recent examples show, that tropical arboviruses
are capable to spread to countries with moderate climates. While bird-associated mosquito-borne viruses
seem to be transported mainly by migrating birds, human
activities (travel, trade) play a major role for arboviruses
where humans play a role as natural vertebrate hosts.
Also for tick-borne arboviruses, mainly human activities
seem to contribute to the spread over long distances and
the establishment in new ecosystems changed by human
activities. In most cases of newly emerging zoonotic
arboviruses, the ways of introduction remain obscure.
Future research should aim at exploring the circumstances of these events. A better understanding of how
arboviruses travel and why they become established in
other geographic areas will be of great benefit for human
and veterinary public health, because it may help to prevent devastating outbreaks of arboviral diseases in
humans and animals.

Page 12 of 15

9.
10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
Both authors contributed equally to this work.

17.
18.

Acknowledgements
The work of the authors is funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF) grant 01KI 0712 as part of the network "Emerging arthropodborne viral infections in Germany". Publication of the CVBD5 thematic series
has been sponsored by Bayer Animal Health GmbH.

19.

Author Details
1Institute of Animal Hygiene & Veterinary Public Health, University of Leipzig,
An den Tierkliniken 1, 04103 Leipzig, Germany and 2Bundeswehr Institute of
Microbiology, Neuherbergstrasse 11, 80937 Munich, Germany

21.

Received: 29 March 2010 Accepted: 8 April 2010
Published: 8 April 2010

20.

22.

© 2010 Pfeffer and Dobler; licensee BioMed Central terms of the Creative Commons
This is an & Vectors 2010, 3:35http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35 Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Parasites Open Access from: distributed under the Ltd.
article is available article

References
1. Jones KE, Patel NG, Levy MA, Storeygard A, Balk D, Gittleman JL, Daszak P:
Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature 2008,
451:990-993.
2. Bengis RG, Leighton FA, Fischer JR, Artois M, Mörner T, Tate CM: The role
of wildlife in emerging and re-emerging zoonoses. Rev Sci Tech Off Int
Epiz 2004, 23:497-511.
3. World Health Organization: Arthropod-borne and rodent-borne viral
diseases. Report of a WHO Scientific group. Wld Hlth Tech Rep Ser 1985,
719:1-114.
4. Carver S, Bestall A, Jardine A, Ostfeld RS: Influence of hosts on the
ecology of arboviral transmission: Potential mechanisms influencing
dengue, Murray Valley encephalitis, and Ross River virus in Australia.
Vector-Borne Zoonotic Dis 2009, 9:51-64.
5. Lambrechts L, Scott TW: Mode of transmission and the evolution of
arbovirus virulence in mosquito vectors. Proc Royal Soc B 2009,
276:1369-1378.
6. Pfeffer M, Dobler G: Was kommt nach Bluetongue - Europa im
Fadenkreuz exotischer Arboviren. Berl Münch Tierärztl Wochenschr 2009,
122:458-466. [in German]
7. Kuno G, Chang GJJ: Biological transmission of arboviruses:
Reexamination of and new insights into components, mechanisms,
and unique trias as well as their evolutionary trnds. Clin Micribiol Rev
2005, 18:608-637.
8. Sutherst RW: Global change and human vulnerability to vector-borne
diseases. Clin Microbiol Rev 2004, 17:136-173.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Weaver SC, Reisen WK: Present and future arboviral threats. Antiviral Res
2010, 85:328-345.
Lanciotti RS, Roehrig JT, Deubel v, Smith J, Parker M, Steele K, Crise B,
Volpe KE, Crabtree MB, Scherret JH, Hall RA, MacKenzie JS, Cropp CB,
Panigrahy B, Ostlund E, Schmitt B, Malkinson M, Banet C, Weissman J,
Komar N, Savage HM, Stone W, McNamara T, Gubler DJ: Origin of the
West Nile virus responsible for an outbreak of encephalitis in the
Northeastern United States. Science 1999, 286:2333-2337.
Marano N, Arguin PM, Pappaioanou M: Impact of globalization and
animal trade on infectious disease ecology. Emerg Infect Dis 2007,
13:1807-1809.
Schmidt O: Neue Tier- und Pflanzenarten - Bereicherung oder
Bedrohung unserer Wälder? LWF aktuell 2004, 45:1-3. [in German]
Anonymus: Update: multistate outbreak of monkeypox--Illinois,
Indiana, Kansas, Missouri, Ohio, and Wisconsin, 2003. Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep 2003, 52:642-6.
Pavlin BI, Schloegel LM, Daszak P: Risk of importing zoonotic diseases
through wildlife trade, United States. Emerg Infect Dis 2009,
15:1721-1726.
Jenkins PT, Genovese K, Ruffler H: Broken screens: the regulation of live
animla transportation i the United States. 2007 [http://
www.Defenders.org/resources/publications/programs_and_policy/
international_conservation/broken_screens/broken_screens_report.pdf].
Washington DC: Defenders of Wildlife
Ginsburg J: Dinner, pets and plagues by the bucketful. The Scientist
2004, 18:28 [http://www.the-scientist.com/2004/4/12/].
Essbauer S, Ahne W: Viruses of lower vertebrates. J Vet Med B Infect Dis
Vet Public Health 2001, 48:403-75.
Scholte EJ, Dijkstra E, Blok H, De Vries A, Takken W, Hofhuis A, Koopmans
M, De Boer A, Reusken CB: Accidental importation of the mosquito
Aedes albopictus into the Netherlands: a survey of mosquito
distribution and the presence of dengue virus. Med Vet Entomol 2008,
22:352-358.
Zacks MA, Paessler S: Encephalitic alphairuses. Vet Microbiol 2010,
140:281-286.
Karabatson N: The International Catalogue of Arboviruses. In San
Antonio, American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 3rd edition. The
subcommittee on Information Exchange of theAmerican Committee on
Arthropod-borne viruses; 1985.
Weaver SC, Kang W, Shirako Y, Rumenapf T, Strauss EG, Strauss JH:
Recombinational history and molecular evolution of western equine
encephalomyelitis complex alphaviruses. J Virol 1997, 71:613-623.
Reisen WK, Monath TP: Western equine encephalomyelits. In The
Arboviruses: Epidemiology and Ecology Volume V. Edited by: Monath T. Boca
Raton, CRC Press; 1989:89-138.
Fulhorst CF, Hardy JL, Eldrigde BF, Presser SB, Reeves WC: Natural vertical
transmission of western equine encephalomyelitis virus in
mosquitoes. Science 1994, 263:676-678.
Monath TP, Sabattini MS, Pauli R, Daffner JF, Mitchell CJ, Bowen GS, Cropp
CB: Arbovirus investigations in Argentina 1977-1980. IV. Serologic
surveys and sentinel equine program. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1985,
34:966-975.
Mitchell CJ, Monath TP, Sabattini MS, Daffner JF, Cropp CB, Calisher CH,
Darsie RF, Jacob WL: Arbovirus isolations from mosquitoes collected
during and after the 1982-1983 epizootic of western equine
encephalitis in Argentina. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1987, 36:107-113.
Calisher CH, Monath TP, Mitchell CJ, Sabattini MS, Cropp CB, Kerschner J,
Hunt AR, Lazuick JS: Arbovirus investigations in Argentina, 1977-1980.
III Identification and characterization of viruses isolated, including new
subspecies of western and Venezuelan equine encephalitis viruses and
four new bunyaviruses (Las Maloyas, Resistencia, Barranqueras and
Antequera). Am J Trop Med Hyg 1985, 34:956-965.
Kenney JL, Adams AP, Weaver SC: Transmission potential of two
chimeric western equine encephalitis vaccine candidates in Culex
tarsalis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010, 82:354-359.
Schmitt SM, Cooley TM, Fitzgerald SD, Bolin SR, Lim A, Schaefer SM, Kiupel
M, Maes RK, Hogle SA, O'Brien DJ: An outbreak of eastern equine
encephalitis virus in free-ranging white-tailed deer in Michigan. J Wildl
Dis 2007, 43:635-644.
Morris CD: Eastern equine encephalomyelitis. In The Arboviruses:
Epidemiology and Ecology Volume III. Edited by: Monath T. Boca Raton, CRC
Press; 1988:1-20.

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

30. Cohen SB, Lewoczko K, Huddleston DB, Moody E, Mukherjee S, Dunn JR,
Jones TF, Wilson R, Moncayo AC: Host feeding patterns of potential
vectors of eastern equine encephalitis virus at an epizootic focus in
Tennessee. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2009, 81:452-456.
31. Tengelsen LA, Bowen RA, Royals MA, Campbell GL, Komar N, Craven RB:
Response to and efficiacy of vaccination against eastern equine
encephalomyelitis virus in emus. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001,
218:1469-1473.
32. Hayes RO, Daniels JB, Maxfield HK, Wheeler RE: Field and laboratory
studies on eastern encephalitis in warm- and cold-blooded
vertebrates. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1964, 13:595-601.
33. Vaidyanathan R, Edman JD, Cooper LA, Scott TW: Vector competence of
mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) from Massachusetts for a sympatric
isolate of eastern equine encephalomyelitis virus. J Med Entomol 1997,
34:346-352.
34. Morris CD, Srihongse S: An evaluation of the hypothesis of transovarial
transmission of eastern equine encephalomyelitis virus by Culiseta
melanura. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1978, 27:1246-1250.
35. Lundström JO, Pfeffer M: Phylogeographic structure and evolutionary
history of Sindbis virus. Vector-Borne Zoon Dis 2010 in press.
36. Weaver SC, Ferro C, Barrera R, Boshell J, Navarro JC: Venezuelan equine
encephalitis. Annu Rev Entomol 2004, 49:141-174.
37. Walton TE, Grayson MA: Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis. In The
Arboviruses: Epidemiology and Ecology Volume IV. Edited by: Monath T.
Boca Raton, CRC Press; 1988:203-231.
38. Aguilar PV, Greene LP, Coffey LL, Medina G, Moncayo AC, Anishchenko M,
Ludwig GV, Turell MJ, O'Guinn ML, Lee J, Tesh RB, Watts DM, Russell KL,
Hice C, Yanoviak S, Morrison AC, Klein TA, Dohm DJ, Guzman H, Travassos
da Rosa AP, Guevara C, Kochel T, Olson J, Cabezas C, Weaver SC: Endemic
Venezuelan equine encephalitis in Northern Peru. Emerg Infect Dis
2000, 10:880-888.
39. Quiroz E, Aguilar PV, Cisneros J, Tesh RB, Weaver SC: Venezuelan equine
encephalitis in Panama:fatal endemic disease and genetic diversity of
etiologic viral strains. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2009, 2:e472.
40. Paessler S, Weaver SC: Vaccines for Venezuelan equine encephalitis.
Vaccine 2009, 27S4:D80-85.
41. Anishchenko M, Bowen RA, Paessler S, Austgen L, Greene LP, Weaver SC:
Venezuelan encephalitis emergence mediated by a phylogenetically
predicted viral mutation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:4994-4999.
42. Brault AC, Powers AM, Holmes EC, Woelk CH, Weaver SC: Positively
charged amino acid substitutions in the E2 envelope glycoprotein are
associated with the emergence of Venezuelan equine encephalitis
virus. J Virol 2002, 76:1718-1731.
43. Brault AC, Powers AM, Ortiz D, Estrada-Franco JG, Navarro-Lopez R,
Weaver SC: Venezuelan equine encephalitis emergence: enhanced
vector infection from a single amino acid substitution in the envelope
glycoprotein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:11344-11349.
44. Brault AC, Powers AM, Weaver SC: Vector infection determinants of
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus reside within the E2 envelope
glycoprotein. J Virol 2002, 76:6387-6392.
45. Beaman JR, Turell MJ: Transmission of Venezuelan equine
encephalomyelitis virus by strains of Aedes albopictus (Diptera:
Culicidae) collected in North and South America. J Med Entomol 1991,
28:161-164.
46. Fernandez F, Moncayo AC, Carrara AS, Forattini OP, Weaver SC: Vector
competence or rural and urban strains of Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus
(Diptera: Culicidae) from Sao Paulo State, Brazil for IC, ID, and IF
subtypes of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus. J Med Entomol 2003,
40:522-527.
47. Peterson LR: Global epidemiology of West Nile virus. In West Nile
encephalitis virus infection Edited by: Diamond MS. New York, Springer;
2009:1-24.
48. Vázquez A, Sánchez-seo MP, Ruiz S, Molero F, Hernández L, Moreno J,
Magallanes A, Gómez Tejedor C, Tenorio A: Putative new lineage of West
Nile virus, Spain. Emerg Infect Dis 2010, 16:549-552.
49. Venter M, Human S, Zaayman D, Gerdes GH, Williams J, Steyl J, Leman PA,
Paweska JT, Setzkorn H, Rous G, Murray S, Parker R, Donnellan C,
Swanepoel R: Lineage 2 West Nile Virus as Cause of Fatal Neurologic
Disease in Horses, South Africa. Emerg Infect Dis 2009, 15:877-884.
50. Beckham JD, Tyler KL: Clinical manifestation of neurological disease. In
West Nile encephalitis virus infection Edited by: Diamond MS. New York,
Springer; 2009:69-96.

Page 13 of 15

51. Komar N: West Nile virus: epidemiology and ecology in North America.
Adv Virus Res 2003, 61:185-234.
52. Hubalek Z, Halouska J: West Nile fever - a re-emerging mosquito-borne
viral disease in Europe. Emerg Infect Dis 1999, 5:643-650.
53. Weaver SC, Barrett AD: Transmission cycles, host range, evolution and
emergence of arboviral disease. Nat Rev Microbiol 2004, 2:789-801.
54. Taylor RM, Work TH, Hurlbut HS, Rizk F: A study of the ecology of West
Nile virus in Egypt. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1956, 5:579-620.
55. Hubalek Z: Mosquito-borne viruses in Europe. Parasitol Res 2008,
103S1:29-43.
56. Kostyukov MA, Alekseev AN, Bulychev VP, Gordeeva ZE: Experimental
infection of Culex pipiens mosquitoes with West Nile virus by feeding
on infected Rana ridibunda frogs and its subsequent transmission.
Med Parazitol (Mosk) 1986, 6:76-78.
57. Moudy RM, Meola MA, Morin LL, Ebel GD, Kramer LD: A newly emergent
genotype of West Nile virus is transmitted earlier and more efficiently
by Culex mosquitoes. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007, 77:365-370.
58. Bakonyi T, Ivanics E, Erdélyi K, Ursu K, Ferenczi E, Weissenböck H, Nowotny
N: Lineage 1 and 2 strains of encephalitic West Nile virus, central
Europe. Emerg Infect Dis 2006, 12:618-23.
59. Bakonyi T, Hubálek Z, Rudolf I, Nowotny N: Novel flavivirus or new
lineage of West Nile virus, central Europe. Emerg Infect Dis 2005,
11:225-31.
60. Kilpatrick AM, Dsazak P, Goodman SJ, Rogg H, Kramer LD, Cedeno V,
Cunningham AA: Predicting pathogen introduction: West Nile virus
spead to Galapagos. Conserv Biol 2006, 20:1224-1231.
61. Calistri P, Giovannini A, Savini G, Monaco F, Bonfanti L, Ceolin C, Terregino
C, Tamba M, Cordioli P, Lelli R: West Nile Virus Transmission in 2008 in
North-Eastern Italy. Zoonoses Public Health 2009 in press.
62. Pradier S, Leblond A, Durand B: Land cover, landscape structure, and
West Nile virus circulation in southern France. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis
2008, 8:253-63.
63. Weaver SC, Powers AM, Brault AC, Barrett ADT: Molecular
epidemiological studies of veterinary arboviral encephalitides. Vet J
1999, 157:123-138.
64. Erlanger TE, Weiss S, Keiser J, Utzinger J, Wiedenmayer K: Past, present
und future of Japanese encephalitis. Emerg Infect Dis 2009, 15:1-7.
65. Solomon T, Vaughn DW: Pathogenesis and clinical features of Japanese
encephalitis and West Nile virus infections. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
2002, 267:171-194.
66. Endy TP, Nisalak A: Japanese encephalitis virus: ecology and
epidemiology. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2002, 267:11-48.
67. Solomon T, Ni H, Beasley DW, Ekkelenkamp M, Cardosa MJ, Barrett AD:
Origin and evolution of Japanese encephalitis virus in southeast Asia. J
Virol 2003, 77:3091-3098.
68. Hurk AF van den, Ritchie SA, Mackenzie JS: Ecology and geographical
expansion of Japanese encephalitis. Ann Rev Entomol 2009, 54:17-35.
69. Partridge J, Ghimire P, Sedai P, Bista MB, Banerjee M: Endemic Japanese
encephalitis in the Kathmandu valley, Nepal. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007,
77:1146-1149.
70. Mackenzie JS, Johansen CA, Ritchie SA, Hurk AF van den, Hall RA:
Japanese encephalitis as an emerging virus: the emergence and
spread of Japanese encephalitis virus in Australasia. Curr Top Microbiol
Immunol 2002, 267:49-73.
71. Hammon WM, Tigertt WD, Sather GE, Berge TO, Meiklejohn C:
Epidemiologic studies on concurrent virgin epidemics of Japanese B
encephalitis and mumps in Guam, 1947-with subsequent observations
including dengue, through 1957. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1958, 7:441-467.
72. Mitchell CJ, Savage HM, Smith GC, Castro LT, Roppul M: Japanese
encephalitis on Saipan.: a survey of suspected mosquito vectors. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 1993, 48:585-590.
73. Nett RJ, Campbell GI, Reisen WK: Potential for the Remergence of
Japanese encephalitis virus in California. Vector-Borne Zoonotic Dis 2009,
9:511-518.
74. Meegan JM, Bailey CL: Rift valley fever. In The Arboviruses: Epidemiology
and Ecology Volume IV. Edited by: Monath T. Boca Raton, CRC Press;
1988:51-76.
75. Bird BH, Ksiazek TG, Nichol ST, MacLachlan NJ: Rift Valley fever virus. J Am
Vet Assoc 2009, 234:883-893.
76. Van Velden DJJ, Meyer JD, Olivier J, Gear JHS, McIntosh B: Rift Valley fever
affecting humans in South Africa: a clinicopathological study. S Afr Med
J 1977, 51:867-879.

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

77. Boctor WM: The clinical picture of Rift Valley fever in Egypt. J Egypt Publ
Health Assoc 1978, 53:177-180.
78. Siam AL, Meegan JM, Gharbawi KF: Rift Valley fever ocular manifestation:
observations during the 1977 epidemic in Egypt. Br J Ophthalmol 1980,
64:366-374.
79. Balkhy HH, Menish ZA: Rift Valley fever: an uninvited zoonosis in the
Arabian peninsula. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2003, 21:153-157.
80. Madani TA, Al-Mazrou YY, Al-Jeffri MH, Mishkhas AA, Al-Rabeah AM,
Turkistani AM, Al-Sayed MO, Abodahish AA, Khan AS, Ksiazek TG,
Shobokshi O: Rift Valley fever epidemic in Saudi Arabia:
epidemiological, clinica and laboratoy characterisitics. Clin Infect Dis
2003, 37:1084-1092.
81. Gerdes GH: Rift Valley fever. Rev Sci Tech Off Int Epiz 2004, 23:613-623.
82. Linthicum KJ, Davies FD, Kairo A, Bailey CL: Rift Valley fever virus (family
Bunyaviridae, genus Phlebovirus). Isolations from Diptera collected
during an inter-epidemic period in Kenya. J Hyg (Lond) 1985,
95:197-209.
83. Pfeffer M, Dobler G: Impact of climate change on Rift Valley fever virus
infections. Nova Acta Leopoldina 2010 in press.
84. Martin V, Chevalier V, Ceccato P, Anyamba A, De Simone L, Lubroth J, de la
Rocque S, Domenech J: The impact of climate change on the
epidemiology and control of rift Valley fever. Rev Sci Tech Off Int Epiz
2008, 27:413-426.
85. Hoogstral H, Meegan JM, Khalil GM, Adham FK: The Rift Valley fever
epizootic in Egypt 1977-1978. 2. Ecological and entomological studies.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1979, 73:624-629.
86. Oltmann A, Kämper S, Staeck O, Schmidt-Chanasit J, Günther S, Berg T,
Frank C, Krüger D, Hofmann J: Fatal outcome of hepatitis A virus (HAV)
infection in a traveler with incomplete HAV vaccination and evidence
of Rift Valley fever virus infection. J Clin Microbiol 2008, 46:3850-3853.
87. Moutailler S, Krida G, Schaffner F, Vazeille M, Failloux AB: Potential vectors
of Rift Valley Fever virus in the Mediterranean region. Vector Borne
Zoonotic Dis 2008, 8:779-753.
88. Kasari TR, Carr DA, Lynn TV, Weaver JT: Evaluation of pathways for release
of Rift Valley fever virus into domestic ruminant livestock, ruminant
wildlife, and human populations in the continental United States. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2008, 232:514-529.
89. Gargan TP, Clark GG, Dohm DJ, Turell MJ, Bailey CL: Vector potential of
selected North American mosquito species for Rift Valley Fever virus.
Am J Trop Med Hyg 1988, 38:440-449.
90. Turrell MJ, Mores CN, Terracina L, Wallette DL, Hribar LJ, Pecor JE, Blow JA:
Potential for North American mosquitoes to transmit Rift Valley fever
virus. J Am Mosq Control Assoc 2008, 24:502-507.
91. Calisher CH, Gould EA: Taxonomy of the virus family Flaviviridae. Adv
Virus Res 2003, 59:1-19.
92. Weissenböck H, Kolodziejek J, Url A, Lussy H, Rebel-Bauder B, Nowotny N:
Emergence of Usutu virus, an African mosquito-borne flavivirus of the
Japanese encephalitis virus group, Central Europe. Emerg Infect Dis
2002, 8:652-656.
93. Weissenböck H, Hubalek Z, Bakonyi T, Nowotny N: Zoonotic mosquitoborne flaviviruses: worldwide presence of agents with proven
pathogenicity and potential candidates of future emergin diseases.
Vet Microbiol 2010, 140:271-280.
94. Meister T, Lussy H, Bakonyi T, Sikutova S, Rudolf I, Vogl W, Winkler H, Frey H,
Hubalek Z, Nowotny N, Weissenböch H: Serological evidence of
continuing high Usutu virus (Flaviviridae) activity and establishment of
herdimmunity in wild birds in Austria. Vet Microbiol 2008, 127:237-248.
95. Manarolla G, Bakonyi T, Gallazzi D, Crosta L, Weissenböck H, Dorrestein
GM, Nowotny N: Usutu virus in wild birds in northern Italy. Vet Microbiol
2010, 141:159-63.
96. Pecorari M, Longo G, Gennari W, Grottola A, Sabbatini A, Tagliazucchi S,
Savini G, Monaco F, simone M, Lelli R, Rumpianesi F: First human case of
Usutu virus neuroinvasive infection, Italy, August-September 2009.
Euro Surveill 2009, 17:15-17.
97. Cavrini F, Gaibani P, Longo G, Rossini G, Bonilauri P, Gerundi GE, di
Benedetto F, Pasetto A, Girardis M, Dottori M, Landini MP, Sambri V: Usutu
virus infectrion in a patient who enderwent orthotopic liver
transplantation, Italy, August-September 2009. Euro Surveill 2009,
17:17-19.
98. Brugger K, Rubel F: Simulation of climate-change scenarios to explain
Usutu-virus dynamics in Austria. Prev Vet Med 2009, 88:24-31.

Page 14 of 15

99. Mansfield KL, Johnson N, Phipps LP, Stephenson JR, Fooks AR, Solomon T:
Tick-borne encephalitis virus - a review of an emerging zoonosis. J Gen
Virol 2009, 90:1781-1794.
100. Nuttall PM, Labuda M: Saliva-assisted transmission of tick-borne
pathogens. In Ticks: Biology, Disease and Control Edited by: Bowman AS,
Nuttall PA. Cambridge University Press; 2008:205-219.
101. Randolph SE, Gern L, Nuttall PA: Co-feeding ticks: Epidemiological
significance for tick-borne pathogen transmission. Parasitol Today
1996, 12:472-479.
102. Gray JS: Ixodes ricinus seasonal activity: Implications of global warming
indicated by revisiting tick and weather data. Internatl J Med Microbiol
2008, 298S1:19-24.
103. Gray JS: The development and questing activity of Ixodes ricinus L.
under field conditions in Ireland. Bull Entomol Res 1982, 72:263-270.
104. Süss J, Schrader C: Tick-borne human pathogenic microorganisms
found in Europe and those considered nonpathogenic. Part I: Ticks and
viruses. Bundesgesundheitsbl Gesundheitsf Gesundheitsschutz 2004,
47:392-404. [in German]
105. Donoso-Mantke O, Schädler R, Niedrig M: A survey on cases of tickborne encephalitis in European countries. EuroSurveill 2008, 13:. pii:
18848
106. Smorodintsev AA: Tick-borne spring-summer encephalitis. Prog Med
Virol 1958, 1:210-247.
107. Kunze U, ISW-TBE: Tick-borne encephalitis - a European health
challenge. Conference of the 8th meeting of the International Scientific
Working Group on tick-borne encephalitis (ISW TBE). Wien Med
Wochenschr 2006, 156:376-378.
108. Zanotto PM, Gao GF, Gritsun T, Marin MS, Jiang WR, Venugopal K, Reid
HW, Gould EA: An arbovirus cline across the northern hemisphere.
Virology 1995, 210:152-159.
109. Gould EA, de Lamballerie X, Zanotto PM, Holmes EC: Origins, evolution,
and vector/host coadaptations within the genus flavivirus. Adv Virus
Res 2003, 59:277-314.
110. Suzuki Y: Multiple transmissions of tick-borne encephalitis virus
between Japan und Russia. Genes Genet Syst 2007, 82:187-195.
111. Holzmann H, Aberle SW, Stiasny K, Werner P, Mischak A, Zainer B, Netzer
M, Koppi S, Bechter E, Heinz FX: Tick-borne encephalitis from eating
goat cheese in a mountain region of Austria. Emerg Infect Dis 2009,
15:1671-1673.
112. Wladenström J, Lundkvist A, Falk KI, Garpmo U, Bergström S, Lindegren G,
Sjöstedt A, Mejlon H, Fransson T, Haemig PD, Olsen B: Migrating birds
and tickborne encephalitis virus. Emerg Infect Dis 2007, 13:1215-1218.
113. Kovalev SY, Chernykh DN, Kokorev VS, Snitkovskaya TE, Romanenko W:
Origin and distribution of tick-borne encephalitis virus strains of the
Siberian subtype in the middle Urals, the north-west of Russia and the
Baltic countries. J Gen Virol 2009, 90:2884-2892.
114. McLean DM, Donahue W: Powassan virus: isolation of virus from fatal
case of encephalitis. Can Med Assoc J 1959, 80:708-711.
115. Thomas LA, Kennedy RC, Ecklund CM: Isolation of a virus closely related
to Powassan virus from Dermacentor andersonii collected along north
Cache la Poudre River, Colo. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1960, 104:355-359.
116. Kuno G, Artsob H, Karabatsos N, Tsuchiya KR, Chang GJ: Genomic
sequencing of deer tick virus and phylogeny of Powassan-related
viruses of North America. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2001, 65:671-676.
117. Beasley DW, Suderman MT, Holbrook MR, Barrett AD: Nucleotide
sequencing and serological evidence that the recently recognized
deer tick virus is a genotype of Powassan virus. Virus Res 2001, 79:81-89.
118. Ebel GD, Spielman A, Telford SR III: Phylogeny of North American
Powassan virus. J Gen Virol 2001, 82:1657-1665.
119. Ebel GD: Update on Powassan virus: Emergence of North American
tick-borne flavivirus. Annu Rev Entomol 2010, 55:95-110.
120. Costero A, Grayson MA: Experimental transmission of Powassan virus
(Flaviviridae) by Ixodes scapularis ticks (Acari: Ixodidae). Am J Trop Med
Hyg 1996, 55:536-546.
121. Gould EA, Moss SR, Turner SL: Evolution and dispersal of encephalitic
flaviviruses. Arch Virol 2004:65-84.
122. Leonova GN, Kondratov IG, Ternovoi VA, Romanova EV, Protopopova EV,
Chausov EV, Pavlenko EV, Ryabchikova EI, Belikov SI, Loktev VB:
Characterization of Powassan viruses from far eastern Russia. Arch Virol
2009, 154:811-820.

Pfeffer and Dobler Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/3/1/35

123. Mehla R, Kumar SRP, Yadav P, barde PV, Yergolkar PN, Erickson BR, Carroll
SA, Mishra AC, Nichol ST, Mourya DT: Recent ancestry of Kyasanur Forest
disease virus. Emerg Infect Dis 2009, 15:1431-1437.
124. Carroll SA, Bird BH, Rollin PE, Nichol ST: Ancient common ancestry of
Crimean -congo hemorrhagic fever virus. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2010 in
press.
125. McGuire K, Holmes EC, Gao GF, Reid HW, Gould EA: Tracing the origin of
louping ill virus by molecular phylogenetic analysis. J Gen Virol 1998,
79:981-988.
doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-3-35
Cite this article as: Pfeffer and Dobler, Emergence of zoonotic arboviruses
by animal trade and migration Parasites & Vectors 2010, 3:35

Page 15 of 15

</pre>
</body>
</html>
