<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Analysis of the unique structural and physicochemical properties of the DraD/AfaD invasin in the context of its belonging to the family of chaperone/usher type fimbrial subunits</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25. doi:10.1186/1472-6807-11-25"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Rafał J Piątek"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Analysis of the unique structural and
physicochemical properties of the DraD/AfaD
invasin in the context of its belonging to the
family of chaperone/usher type fimbrial subunits
Rafał J Piątek1*, Piotr Bruździak2, Beata M Zalewska-Piątek1, Marek A Wojciechowski3, Justyna M Namieśnik1 and
Józef W Kur1

Abstract
Background: DraD invasin encoded by the dra operon possesses a classical structure characteristic to fimbrial
subunits of the chaperone/usher type. The Ig-fold of the DraD possesses two major characteristics distinguishing it
from the family of fimbrial subunits: 1) a distortion of the b-barrel structure in the region of the acceptor cleft,
demonstrated by a disturbance of the main-chain hydrogen bonds network, and 2) an unusually located disulfide
bond connecting B and F strands - the localization exclusively observed in the subfamily of DraD/AfaD-type
subunits.
Results: To evaluate the influence of the DraD-sc specific structural features on its stability and mechanism of
thermal denaturation, a series of DSC and FT-IR denaturation experiments were performed giving following
conclusions. 1) The DraD-sc is characterized by a low stability (standard Gibbs free energy and enthalpy of
unfolding of 18.4 ±1.4 kJ mol-1 and 131 ±25 kJ mol-1, respectively) that contrasts strongly with almost infinite
stability of the described previously DraE-sc fimbrial protein. 2) The DraD-sc unfolds thermally according to the two
state equilibrium model, in contrast to the irreversible kinetically controlled transition of the DraE-sc. 3) The DraD
specific disulfide bond is crucial at the folding stage and has little stability effect in the mature protein.
Conclusions: Data published so far emphasize unique biological properties of the DraD invasin as fimbrial subunit:
a chaperone independent folding, an usher independent surface localization and the possibility to exist in two
forms: as unbound subunits and as loosely bound at fimbrial tip.
Presented calorimetric and FT-IR stability data combined with structural correlations has underlined that the DraD
invasin is also characterized by unique physicochemical and structural attributes in the context of its belonging to
the family of fimbrial subunits.

Background
Adhesive structures of the chaperone\usher type
encoded by Gram-negative bacteria are conserved at the
level of an operon organization, a mechanism of biogenesis, and a molecular structure. The key feature of these
organelles are their building blocs - protein subunits
characterized by the defective immunoglobulin-like
structure. In contrast to the classical Ig-fold, a closed b* Correspondence: rafpiate@pg.gda.pl
1
Department of Microbiology, Gdańsk University of Technology, ul.
Narutowicza 11/12, 80-233 Gdańsk, Poland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

barrel composed of 7 b-strands, these subunits are missing the seventh strand and expose the arising hydrophobic cleft to a solvent. In result, these fimbrial subunits
need to interact with a specific chaperone to fold properly. According to the donor strand complementation
reaction (DSC), a subunit forms with a chaperone the
binary complex in which the groove is completed by the
G1 donor strand of the chaperone [1-3]. In adhesive
organelles the acceptor cleft of a ‘n’ subunit is supplemented by the N-terminal donor strand Gd of a consecutive ‘n+1’ subunit [4,5]. Formation of a functional
linear adhesive structure occurs through the outer

© 2011 Piątek et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

membrane usher protein according to the donor strand
exchange reaction (DSE) [6,7]. This mechanism of biogenesis is very well investigated at the structural and
energetic level especially for type 1, P pili of E. coli and
the capsular F1 antigen of Yersinia pestis (for review
see: [8,9]).
Adhesive organelles of the chaperone/usher system
belong to the most stable protein structures ever
described [10,11]. The observed resistance to unfolding
is an outcome of the structural stability of protein subunit modules. The denaturation of a subunit results in a
destruction of the adhesive structure. Hence, the selfcomplemented subunits that possess a C-terminally
fused specific Gd donor strand (denoted by the -sc suffix) are minimal approximations of these adhesive organelles. The data published so far permit to distinguish
two general mechanisms of these subunits stabilization
that may cooperate in the proteins. The first is based on
a thermodynamic stability and is denoted by a high
Gibbs free energy of unfolding and an enthalpy of
unfolding. Most proteins possess the standard unfolding
free energy in the range of 20 - 60 kJ mol-1. This ‘energetic window’ is a natural consequence of the protein
metabolism in the living organism, and the occurrence
of proteins with higher values of ΔG is rare and unfavorable from physiological point. The self-complemented Caf1-sc subunit of the capsular F1 adhesin is
stabilized by the unfolding free energy ΔG37°C of 70-80
kJ mol-1. This corresponds to the equilibrium constant
Kunfold of magnitude 10-12 - 10-14 [5]. This value implies
an almost infinite stability to the F1 capsular antigen at
the physiological temperature, even in spite of the irreversibility of adhesive organelles unfolding. The Caf1
protein does not possess any special structural motif
responsible for its high thermodynamic stability. It is
rather an effect of a global optimization of the interactions that stabilize the Ig-barrel structure [4,5]. The second mechanism is based on a subunit kinetic stability
denoted by a high energy of activation of the unfolding
stage [12,13]. The self-complemented AfaE-sc subunit of
Afa-III adhesin (98% identity to DraE subunit of Dr fimbriae) is characterized by the moderate unfolding free
energy ΔG25°C of 45.1 ± 1.5 kJ mol-1 [14]. Although the
DraE-sc is effectively protected from the unfolding by
the activation barrier E a of 463.5 ± 20.8 kJ mol -1 and
corresponding rate constant 10-17s-1, which results in its
unfolding half-life time of 108 years at 25°C [15]. DraE
and many other fimbrial subunits are characterized by a
disulfide bond, which is uniquely localized compared to
other members of the Ig-type protein superfamily, as it
connects the A and B strands. Our previous work
showed that the DraE-sc protein with cysteine residues
changed to alanine lost its kinetic stability [13]. This
suggests that such a localization of the disulfide bond is

Page 2 of 13

important for generation of the kinetic stability of the
fimbrial proteins.
The dra and the afa-III operons encode FGL-type
polyadhesins: the Dr fimbriae composed of DraE proteins and the Afa-III afimbrial polymers composed of
AfaE-III subunits (98% identity to the DraE), respectively [16]. These adhesin proteins are responsible for
bacterial attachment to the host urinary epithelia via
interaction with: the Dra blood-group antigen presented
on the CD55/decay-accelerating factor (DAF) [17,18],
the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)-related cellular
adhesion molecules [19] and the 7S domain of the basement membrane protein type IV collagen [20,21]. The
dra and afa-III gene clusters encode also second minor
fimbrial subunits: the DraD and AfaD proteins (100%
identity), respectively. These proteins are denoted as
putative invasins particles crucial in the promotion of
effective bacterial internalization [16,22]. Although this
function and definition of specific receptor for DraD/
AfaD are under debate [23,24]. In the context of the
presented general conservation of chaperone\usher type
fimbrial subunits properties of the family of the DraD/
AfaD-like invasin subunits are very interesting [16]. The
crystallographic and NMR structures of the DraD/AfaD
invasin show that they possess the classic Ig-like fold
with a characteristic hydrophobic groove as a consequence of the missing seventh G strand [14,25]. A specific feature of these invasins is the lack of N-terminal
donor strand Gd crucial for the donor strand exchange
reaction (DSE) (Figure 1A). In consequence, the DraD/
AfaD subunit may only exist at the tip of the fimbrial
structure, although there are no direct evidences of
interactions between the DraD invasin and the DraE
adhesin. The structural comparison between DraD-CHis [25], AfaD-sc [14], AfaDE-sc [14] and AfaE-sc [26]
proteins reveals the unusual properties of the invasin
acceptor cleft. In the DraD-C-His structure of a homodimer the acceptor pocket of one subunit is complemented by a nonspecific C-terminal fusion peptide of
the second subunit. The peptide does not penetrate into
the hydrophobic groove and forms hydrogen bonds only
with the F strand and does not with the A strand.
Hence, the cleft of the DraD-C-His is opened to the solvent and the b-barrel is ‘unzipped’ [25]. In the AfaD-sc
and AfaDE-sc proteins the acceptor cleft of the invasin
is filled in by a specific G d donor strand of the AfaE
subunit introduced as a C-terminal fusion peptide, or as
an extension of AfaE-sc fused to the AfaD by the
DNKQ linker, respectively. Surprisingly, in these structures the acceptor cleft of the invasin is opened to the
solvent as in the DraD-C-His case (Figure 1B) [14]. On
the contrary, in the AfaE-sc adhesin structure the Gd
donor strand precisely interacts with the acceptor
pocket participating in a formation of the protein

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Structural differences between DraD/AfaD and DraE/AfaE fimbrial subunits. (A) Topology diagram of DraD-DraE tip complex. The
core forming strands are striped, the S-S denotes disulfide bond. (B) Comparison of DraD-sc and DraE-sc acceptor cleft area. In both proteins A
and F strands forming the groove as well as the donor Gd strand are shown as ribbons. Backbone hydrogen bonds participating in the b-barrel
formation are drawn as blue springs. (C) Tyrosine corner joining E and F strands. Residues of the canonical tyrosine corner motif are drawn as
thick sticks while side chains of residues comprising the hydrophobic core of the protein as thinner sticks. Arg16 moiety completely buried in
the core of DraE protein is drawn with thicker line. The figures were generated with VMD program (Theoretical and Computational Biophysics
Group, Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) [42].

hydrophobic core (Figure 1B). This phenomena may
explain the instability of the DraD-DraE protein complex and may result in a dissociation of the DraD from
the fimbrial tip [22,27].
Another structural element distinguishing DraD invasin from the other fimbrial subunits is localization of

disulfide bond. In contrast to the canonical Ig-fold, position of the disulfide bridge in many fimbrial subunits is
unusual since it joins two adjacent strands of the same
sheet of the b-sandwich, namely the beginning of A
strand with the end of B strand [13]. Beside the atypical
position in the sequence also the spatial location of the

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

bridge is unusual since it is placed at the top of the bbarrel unlike in the canonical Ig-structures, where the
disulfide bond joins the strands in the middle thus positioning itself in the hydrophobic core center of the protein. Figure 1A represents as an example the localization
of a disulfide bond in the DraE fimbrial subunit. In the
DraD protein the disulfide bond links two strands
belonging to the opposite sheets, namely the B and F
strands and hence resembles the canonical Ig-fold location (Figure 1A). Despite the different connectivity compared to DraE (and other subunits with disulfide bond),
the location of the disulfide near the top of the b-barrel
in the three-dimensional structure of DraD resembles
the localization in DraE. It does so by linking the end of
B strand with the end of F strand while the usual canonical Ig-fold location of the disulfide link is B3 F3. Interestingly, in the family of DraD/AfaD-like invasins the
potential disulfide bonds homologous to that identified
in the structure of DraD/AfaD occurs in proteins
encoded only by the afa and afa-like operons. The putative invasins SafD and SefD from Salmonella do not
possess two cysteines and thus do not have a disulfide
bond.
The Cota et al. [14] using equilibrium denaturation
experiments denoted low stability of the AfaD-sc protein
and determined its unfolding free energy of 17.9 ± 6.8 kJ
mol-1. In this paper we evaluated, by means of the DSC
calorimetry and FT-IR spectroscopy, the influence of the
unusual structural properties of the Ig-like fold of
DraD/AfaD invasin on its stability and the mechanism
of thermal unfolding. Two major structural elements
specific to the DraD in the context of its belonging to
the superfamily of fimbrial subunits are carefully correlated with experimental data. 1) The DraD protein possesses the disulfide bond connecting the B and F strands
that is unique to the family of fimbrial subunits. This
renders that the DraD invasin may be used in some
extent as an additional natural verification of previously
presented thesis that the disulfide bond connecting A
and B strands is responsible for the observed high
kinetic stability of the DraE-sc [13]. 2) The network of
the inter-strands main-chain hydrogen bonds stabilizing
the b-barrel structure of the DraD is defective in the
region of acceptor cleft. This contrasts with the general
view of precise docking of Gd donor strands in fimbrial
subunits observed so far. In our experiments we used a
recombinant DraD-sc protein with the histidine tag at
the N-terminus and self-complemented at the C-terminus by attaching donor strand sequence from DraE protein. This construct of DraD protein is a minimal model
of fimbrial tip complex DraD-DraE. This protein is identically constructed as the DraE-sc protein described previously [15] and analogically to the other fimbrial self-

Page 4 of 13

complemented subunits. This strategy permitted us to
perform a straight comparison between parameters
characterizing the Ig-like structure of DraD-sc with that
of the other fimbrial subunits.

Results
Stability of the DraD invasin fimbrial subunit
DraD-sc does not possess a DraE-sc-like kinetic stability

To verify the kinetic stability of the DraD-sc protein we
used a method that measures the resistance of a native
protein structure to the unfolding caused by SDS, under
condition of the SDS-PAGE electrophoresis [28]. Kinetically stable proteins, resistant to the SDS denaturation,
incubated at moderate temperatures in the Laemmli
buffer, demonstrate a gel retardation in comparison to
an overheated protein sample. The analyzed DraD-sc
protein samples were incubated at the temperature gradient from 25° to 100°C in the Laemmli buffer for 10
minutes and separated electrophoretically. In all analyzed samples the DraD-sc protein migrated at the same
level of a molecular weight ca. 16 kDa. No band retardation was observed in samples incubated at lower temperatures (data not shown). The identically constructed
recombinant DraE-sc protein tested in the same experiment showed the retardation observed up to 70°C [13].
The previously described DraE-sc-ΔSS protein (double
Cys to Ala mutant) totally lost resistance to the SDS
denaturation [13]. This experiment clearly shows that
the DraD-sc protein which contains the disulfide bond
connecting the B and F strands, does not possess high
kinetic stability, characteristic for the DraE-sc protein.
This experiment additionally supports thesis that the
presence of the disulfide bond connecting the A and B
strands may serve as an unique strategy for the high
kinetic stability generation of the Ig-like fold which
appeared exclusively in many fimbrial subunits of the
chaperone/usher type adhesive structures [13].
DraD-sc possesses low thermodynamic stability

To determine thermodynamic parameters and the
mechanism of the DraD-sc protein thermal unfolding
we used the most direct technique - differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). These experiments were performed using the same equipment and buffer conditions
as in the case of the described DraE-sc and DraE-scΔSS proteins [13,15]. This permitted us to conduct a
reliable comparison of thermodynamic parameters characterizing these proteins. The DraD-sc protein unfolded
reversibly with the temperature of transition T m of
52.25°C and the enthalpy of transition ΔHcal of 314 ± 10
kJ mol-1 (Figure 2B). Even if the sample was overheated
to 75°C the reversibility in the reheating scan was 91%.
The posttransitional baseline was stable and was not
affected by any detectable thermal effects of the

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

Page 5 of 13

unfolding enthalpy ΔH T at 25° and 37°C according to
the following equations:
GT =

HTm 1 −

HT =

HTm +

T
Tm

+

CpTm T − Tm − T ln

CpTm (T − Tm)

T
Tm

(1)
(2)

Where ΔHTm is the reference enthalpy of transition,
corresponding to the T m , the reference temperature,
ΔCpTm is the difference between heat capacities of denatured and native state of protein at the reference temperature. The obtained calorimetric ΔG25(37)°C of 18.4
(12.3) ± 1.4 kJ mol -1 correlates well with a published
value of 17.9 ± 6.8 kJ mol-1 at 25°C determined for the
AfaD-sc protein using guanidinium chloride equilibrium
denaturation experiments [14]. The presented standard
unfolding free energy means that the stability of the
DraD-sc invasin is rather low and it is close to the
lower stability limit of 20 kJ mol-1 typically observed for
proteins collected in the ProTherm thermodynamic
database [29]. The DraD-sc unfolding is also denoted by
rather low enthalpy change ΔH25(37)°C of 131 (214) ± 25
kJ mol-1 which is a consequence of structural distortion
mainly in the region of the acceptor cleft. The presented
data clearly showed that the low stability of the DraD-sc
invasin contrasted with the data published so far concerning the stability of adhesive organelles of the chaperone/usher type and protein subunits.
Formation of disulfide bond is necessary for
DraD-sc folding

Figure 2 Results of the DSC analysis of DraD-sc denaturation
process. (A) The raw calorimetric data representing the reversibility
of the protein denaturation. Numbers denote the heating scans
order. (B) The dependence of the excess heat capacity (Cpex) on
temperature at scanning rate 1 K min-1 before the baseline
subtraction. (C) Experimental (red straight) and fitted (black dashed)
DSC curves exhibiting high similarity.

aggregation phenomena (Figure 2A). Also, the calculated
cooperativity ratio ΔH vH /ΔH cal equaled to 1.03 confirmed a high transition reversibility and allowed us to
use the equilibrium two-state model (Figure 2C). The
curvature of the transition and the baseline stability permitted also for a direct determination of the molar heat
capacity change of the DraD-sc unfolding (ΔCp = 6.7 ±
0.5 kJ mol -1 K -1 ), which corresponded to a ΔC p per
mole of residues of 44.7 J mol-1 K-1. Using all experimentally determined values of T m , ΔC p and ΔHcal we
calculated the unfolding Gibbs free energy ΔGT and the

The DraD-sc protein possesses a disulfide bond connecting B and F strands that is uniquely localized compared to the other fimbrial subunits [13]. To examine
the role of a disulfide bond in the DraD-sc structure we
constructed an E. coli BL21(DE3)/pET30b(+)/DraD-scΔSS strain encoding a mutant DraD-sc protein in which
two cysteine residues were exchanged to alanine. This
construct is identical to the previously described DraEsc-ΔSS protein that was used to explore the influence of
disulfide bond on adhesin subunit stability [13]. The
DraD-sc-ΔSS invasin was not detected in the culture
samples with monoclonal anti-His and polyclonal antiDraD antibodies during the Western-blotting analysis.
To reduce a potential proteolysis of the mutant invasin
the bacterial cultures were cultivated at 30°C with IPTG
as an expression inductor with a concentration of 0.25
mM. As a positive control of expression the E. coli BL21
(DE3)/pET30b(+)/DraD-sc strain was used, which produced the disulfide containing DraD-sc. To examine the
influence of the disulfide bond on the DraD-sc protein
stability we planned a calorimetric experiment in which
we used the DraD-sc sample with reduced disulfide

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

bond as an effect of protein incubation in a buffer containing dithiothreitol (DTT). The efficiency of DraD-sc
reduction was confirmed with Ellman’s reaction that
detects specifically free sulfhydryl groups. All final dialyzed calorimetric samples of the reduced DraD-sc contained 0.5 or 1 mM DTT to inhibit potential oxidation
reactions. In the first heating DSC scan we observed a
single endothermic peak with transition temperature
of 51.8°C corresponding to the unfolding of reduced
DraD-sc (experiment with 1 mM DTT in a buffer)
(Figure 3A). After this transition there was a large visible exothermic effect connected with the protein aggregation phenomena. In the next four reheating scans the
observed thermograms were rather flat without any
endothermic peaks that might suggested that the DraDsc refolded to some degree during cooling steps. In next
five reheating scans (from 6 to 10) we observed an
endothermic peak exhibiting a maximum at ca. 53°C
(Figure 3A). The area of this peak increased in the following cooling/heating steps approaching in the fourth
scan ca. 35% of the initial denaturation peak. At the
same time, the heat capacity value of the sample
decreased in the pretransition region of these scans that
correspond to native protein. This effect could be connected with a slow regaining of the native structure in
the next few steps.
We also examined the influence of the DTT at concentration of 0.5 mM on the DraD-sc calorimetric denaturation (data not shown). In this experiment the
observed endothermic peak in the first heating scan was
identical to the previously described. In the next scans
peaks increasing in area with transition temperature of
53°C were observed at once, there was no thermograms
without endothermic peak characteristic for experiments
performed in buffer with 1 mM DTT. The peak with
transition temperature of 53°C corresponded to the
DraD-sc protein with a disulfide bond. This was confirmed with Ellman’s test that detects free sulfhydryl
groups by analysis of the soluble protein samples recovered from calorimeter cells after the end of experiment.
The observed phenomena of the oxidized invasin
appearance was connected with a well known thermal
oxidative instability of DTT during calorimetric experiments [30]. DTT in heating scans was heated up to 75°
C with scanning rate 1°C min-1, and after finishing each
heating cells of calorimeter were equilibrated for 10
minutes at 75°C before cooling. The platinum cells of
calorimeter may work as catalyst of the DTT oxidation.
According to these data the re-oxidation of the DraD-sc
began in calorimetric cell when the redox potential of a
buffer dropped to a level sufficient for a disulfide bond
formation. This explained observed differences in denaturation experiments performed in buffers with 0.5 and
1 mM of DTT. Additionally we performed analogical

Page 6 of 13

Figure 3 Results of DSC experiments concerning the DraD-sc
denaturation in reducing conditions. (A) The denaturation in
presence of 1 mM DTT in the protein sample. The first scan (black)
is denoted with melting temperature 51°C. Next scans are denoted
with melting temperature 53°C and increase in their intensity
(marked with an arrow pointing up). (B) The denaturation in
presence of 1 mM TCEP-HCl in the protein sample. The first scan is
marked with black line, the rest is shown in color. First three reheating scans exhibit different level and stabilize after the third rescan (dark blue).

calorimetric denaturation experiments of DraD-sc invasin in buffers that contained TCEP-HCl instead of DTT.
This disulfide reducing compound is resistant to oxygen
oxidation, hence its concentration and reduction potential in the following reheating scans is stable [31]. In the
first heating scan of the DraD-sc in a buffer containing
1 mM TCEP a huge endothermic peak was observed
(Figure 3B). This was an effect of a few processes occurring during analysis. TCEP-HCl is a highly hydrophilic
compound containing three carboxylic groups and, in
contrast to DTT, is not able to reduce disulfide bonds
that are buried in a hydrophobic protein core. So, the
observed distortion of the DSC peak was an effect of an
interaction of TCEP with the DraD-sc accompanied by
a protein unfolding and a subsequent reduction of the

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

Page 7 of 13

disulfide bond. Next scans did not possess any
endothermic peaks corresponding to the DraD-sc refolding (Figure 3B). The samples after experiments contained a fully reduced and aggregated DraD-sc protein.
The presented data clearly showed that the reduced
DraD-sc was stable and unfolded at temperature only
1.5°C lower than the oxidized DraD-sc. Although only
the melting temperature could be determined, and none
of the thermodynamic parameters could not, it was that
a disulfide bond only slightly stabilized the DraD-sc in
its final structure. The observation that the refolding of
the reduced DraD-sc during calorimetric experiments is
strictly dependent on its re-oxidadion suggested that the
formation of disulfide bond is crucial at some folding
stages. This observation might explain the lack of the
DraD-sc-ΔSS expression in which two cysteine residues
were exchanged to alanine. In contrast to the invasin
subunit, the mutation of cysteine residues to alanine in
DraE-sc protein resulted in a higher level of expression
than in the case of the protein containing a disulfide
bond. The thermal denaturation of tha DraE-sc-ΔSS was
almost totally reversible process in contrast to the
reduced DraD-sc protein. The stabilizing effect of the
disulfide bond on a final structure of the DraE-sc was
significant and was probably responsible for observed
high kinetic stability of that adhesin [13].
FT-IR analysis of the DraD-sc thermal unfolding

To correlate determined calorimetrically stability parameters and mechanism of DraD-sc thermal unfolding
with corresponding structural changes we analyzed this
transition using the FT-IR spectroscopy. This technique
permits to observe changes in protein secondary structure through monitoring C = O stretching vibration of
the polypeptide backbone. The second derivative of a
native secondary structure of the DraD-sc exhibits shape
characteristic to Ig-like fimbrial proteins, similar to the
previously observed [13,15]. A strong minimum at 1637
cm-1 indicates that b-sheets are the main component of
the folded structure. A small minimum at ca. 1660 cm-1
suggests that some small turns are present too. The
absence of other minima characteristic to other well
known secondary structures allows us to conclude that
the DraD-sc construct folds properly and its structure is
consistent with a known crystallographic structures of
the Dr fimbriae structural proteins.
Although the structure is quite similar to the structure
of previously characterized DraE-sc, the denaturation
mechanism seems to be different [15]. The behavior of
secondary structures observed in the infrared is not so
straightforward, as in the case of the DraE-sc. There are
no isosbestic points visible in the Figure 4A indicating
that the denaturation mechanism cannot be simply

Figure 4 The FT-IR results of the DraD-sc denaturiation
experiments. (A) Second derivatives of the DraD-sc at temperature
range of 29.8 - 73.8°C. Numbers 1 and 2 denote the first and the
second feature of two distinguishable transitions. Arrows indicate
changes in minima intensities with an increase of temperature. (B)
The result of chemometric analysis of denaturation data from the
figure A. Three individuals are present (indicated with different
colors and symbols), and two transitions are visible near 50°C and
60°C. (C) Second derivatives of the DraD-sc in the presence of 10
mM DTT at temperature range of 29.1 - 70.1°C. Description is the
same as in figure A.

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

described as two-state in conditions of the FT-IR experiment. Especially a region above 1680 cm-1 suggests that
at least two phenomena can be responsible for observed
changes. To check this hypothesis, we employed the
Factor Analysis [32]. The Principal factor analysis algorithm performed on the series concludes that three species are present during the presented temperature range
(Figure 4B). Using the automated window factor analysis
algorithm we can conclude that the first process occurs
at a temperature ca. 50°C. This transition may be connected with the proper denaturation of the DraD-sc and
may correspond to the transition denaturation peak visible in the DSC experiment (Figure 2). However, the second transition (above 60°C) is marked with strong
changes in the secondary structure, mainly an aggregation characterized by a relatively strong minimum at
1618 cm-1 and a small one at about 1684 cm -1. In the
case of this protein, the process of denaturation is
clearly separated from the aggregation process.
A series of second derivative spectra of the DraD-sc in
the presence of DTT is very similar to the series of the
DraD-sc itself (Figure 4C). The DTT does not affect the
secondary structure of DraD-sc at low temperatures and
it looks like it does not affect the first process attributed
to the denaturation of the DraD-sc. Still two processes
are distinguishable on the basis of the high wavenumbers region, however, they are almost simultaneous and
it is difficult to say what is the exact temperature of the
first process. The first process is accompanied by a second process of a massive aggregation, marked with a
very strong minimum at 1618 cm -1. The denaturation
temperature is not affected noticeably by the DTT presence, and the occurrence of isosbestic points, which
suggest that only one resultant transition takes place,
may indicate that it is similar as the previously described
(i.e. ca. 50°C).
In contrast to other proteins we work on in our
laboratory the process of DraD-sc denaturation (without
DTT) is in some extent reversible in conditions of the
FT-IR experiment. This may be stated on the basis of
the location of the amide I’ maximum (data not shown),
which returns to the initial position of 1637 cm-1. However, the protein recovery is not complete, probably due
to high concentration of the protein used in this type of
experiment (ca. 20 mg ml-1), and characteristic aggregation bands are still visible in the spectrum of the DraDsc. In the case of experiments concerning the usage of
DTT there is no proof of any renaturation in the cooling step right after the heating.
The results of the analysis of FT-IR denaturation series spectra are quite consistent with the DSC results.
The reversibility of denaturation and the significant
separation of denaturation and aggregation steps are
common features of the DraD-sc denaturation in

Page 8 of 13

conditions of both these experiments. Presented results
of FT-IR experiments suggest also that the DTT does
not affect the denaturation step of the DraD-sc. The
presence of DTT plays a crucial role at the aggregation
step, lowering its temperature from ca. 60°C to ca. 50°C.
These two processes, namely denaturation and aggregation of protein in the presence of DTT, are hardly possible to be separated both in FT-IR and DSC experiments.
Aggregation-characteristic features of DSC thermogram
and FT-IR spectrum appear immediately after denaturation step (Figures 3A and 4C), and in both cases prevent
from the direct analysis of the step. Although conditions
of these experiments were different, they shed some
light on the mechanism of the DraD-sc denaturation.
Differences between DraD/AfaD and DraE/AfaE proteins
core packing and donor strands adjustment

To describe quantitatively potential structural marks of
the experimentally determined stability of the DraD-sc
protein we calculated the shape correlation statistic (Sc)
[33] and the protein density parameter (PD) [34]. These
two indexes describe the geometry of strands adjustment and the quality of the protein core packing,
respectively. To better emphasize specific properties of
the DraD-sc structure we compared it with that of the
DraE/AfaE-sc. The most apparent difference between
DraD-sc and DraE-sc proteins (and fimbrial subunits
generally) visible in the structures can be noticed in the
area of the acceptor cleft formed between the A and F
strands [14,25]. Since these self-complemented structures are distorted in the area of the linker, the following shape correlation statistics and hydrogen bonds
analysis are performed only for the last ten residues of
the donor strands. In the AfaE-sc protein the donor Gd
strand is locked in the cleft by the total number of 10
backbone hydrogen bonds to both strands forming the
complete seven stranded b-barrel structure (Figure 1B).
The geometrical fit between the complementing donor
strand and the acceptor cleft in the AfaE-sc is demonstrated by the calculated Sc parameter of value 0.768.
For the DraD protein the acceptor groove is distorted in
such a way that the donor strand is able to form only 4
hydrogen bonds with the F strand only (Figure 1B). This
correlates with the value of Sc parameter for the acceptor cleft/donor strand interface of only 0.666. This comparison clearly showed that the adjustment of Gd donor
strand in the DraD-sc structure is very poor.
The difference in the protein density (PD) index
observed in DraD-sc and AfaE/DraE-sc proteins, gives
also some interesting information. Although the DraDsc b-barrel structure is defective, in effect of imperfect
interaction of Gd donor strand with the acceptor cleft,
the whole protein is characterized by a better core packing than in the AfaE-sc, the PD value of 0.741 and

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

0.709, respectively. The difference in protein packing
between the DraD-sc and AfaE/DraE-sc is well visible in
the region of so called tyrosine corner identified in both
proteins at the beginning of the F strand with the tyrosines 108 in DraD and 112 in the DraE occupying
equivalent positions (Figure 1C). The tyrosine corner is
a common feature usually stabilizing the Greek key bbarrel structures which can be found [35,36]. In this
motif the tyrosine side chain OH group makes a hydrogen bond to the backbone NH or CO moieties of residues Y-3, Y-4 or Y-5 with the middle case being the
most common. Amino acids preceding the Tyr108
group in the DraD (the corresponding sequence is IAPGEY) match the Tyr corner consensus sequence which
is LxPGxY. In the DraD subunit the tyrosine side chain’s
hydroxyl is positioned in the proximity of Ala104 CO
group forming the most “classic” Δ4 tyrosine corner.
The side chain of the Ile103 is buried in the strictly
hydrophobic protein interior participating in forming of
the tight hydrophobic core of the protein (Figure 1C).
As for the DraE protein the Tyr112 and preceding residues (the corresponding sequence is TPPGNY) can be
identified as the tyrosine corner motif. Interestingly,
although the conformation of the Tyr112 side chain is
very similar to that of Tyr108 in DraD, its OH group
does not create any hydrogen bonds neither to the backbone CO nor NH groups of the preceding residues.
That is the result of a slightly different conformation of
this part of the backbone including the partially exposed
Thr107 resembling the Ile103 in DraD and worse packing of the neighboring residues accommodating completely buried Arg16 residue (Figure 1C). Usually burial of
a polar residue has destabilizing effect on the protein
structure unless the buried residue maintains favorable
interactions in the protein interior. The guanidinium
moiety of Arg16 residue can form cation-pi interactions
with Tyr112 phenyl ring, hydrogen bonds with backbone
carbonyl of Lys14, side chain carbonyl of Asn106, and
with backbone carbonyl of Leu140. The later residue
belongs to the donor strand thus its interaction with
Arg16 additionally anchors the G strand in the acceptor
groove. On the other hand, when the donor strand is
missing, Arg16 residue lacks two hydrogen bonds and
thus its burial has additional destabilizing effect on the
DraE subunit structure.

Discussion
Fimbrial subunits form conserved protein family with
Ig-like topology characterized by a missing of the
seventh G strand which generates an opened hydrophobic groove in the structure. In the functional adhesin
organelle the acceptor cleft is completed by the specific
N-terminal donor strand Gd of the neighboring subunit.
Complementation of the groove by the donor strand

Page 9 of 13

results in formation of a very stable b-barrel with an
optimized hydrogen bond network between strands and
a well packed protein core. This general picture of fimbrial subunits contrasts with properties of the DraD/
AfaD invasin subunit. The G d strand of DraD-sc is
hydrogen bonded only with the F strand of the groove
that results in the ‘unzipped’ b-barrel structure. In the
region of the acceptor cleft there are six main-chain
donors and acceptors of hydrogen bonds that do not
participate in hydrogen bonds formation (Figure 1B).
The worse fitting of the DraD-sc donor strand inside
the cleft in relation to AfaE-sc protein is indicated by
the Sc value of 0.666 and 0.768, respectively. The published Sc value of 0.78 for packing of specific Gd donor
strand in acceptor cleft of the Caf1 subunit of Y. pestis
correlates well with that of the AfaE-sc. The S c parameter calculated for the interface between the Caf1
acceptor cleft and the G1 donor strand of the chaperone
Caf1M is slightly lower and values of 0.76 [4]. This
comparison emphasized the level of DraD structure distortion in the region of acceptor cleft. The structural
destabilization of the DraD-sc protein is reflected in the
standard Gibbs free energy of unfolding of only 18.4 ±
1.4 kJ mol-1 that strongly contrasts with values obtained
for the other self-complemented protein subunits of
adhesive organelles: Caf1-sc 70-80 kJ mol-1 (at 37°C) [5],
type 1 pili subunits 50-80 kJ mol -1 (at 25°C) [12] and
AfaE-sc 45 kJ mol-1 (at 25°C) [14]. This value is also
lower than the standard ΔG of unfolding of defective
structurally self-complemented subunits: DraE-sc-ΔSS
(DraE without disulfide bond) 30 ± 5.0 kJ mol -1 [13],
DSG-FimHP (subunit with the parallel Gd donor strand
orientation) 26.5 ± 2.0 kJ mol-1 and FimHP-DSC (subunit with the antiparallel G1 donor strand of the chaperone) 26.8 ± 2.0 kJ mol-1 [12]. It is worth to note that
native subunits missing the seventh b-strand are capable
to fold but are marginally stable (ΔG25°C of unfolding of
8-10 kJ mol -1 ) [5,12,37]. The lower stability of the
DraD-sc invasin is quite obvious when one compares its
transition temperature Tm with transition temperatures
of DraE-sc and Caf1 subunits. The DraD-sc invasin
denatures at 52.25°C, that is ca. 35°C lower then in the
case of DraE-sc and Caf1, and 10°C lower then in the
case of the DraE-sc-ΔSS [13,15]. The DraD-sc unfolding
is also denoted by rather low enthalpy change ΔH25(37)°C
of 131 (214) ± 25 kJ mol -1 . This value is significantly
lower than the one reported for the Caf1’’ subunit, i.e.
ΔH 37°C 395 kJ mol -1 , which is close to the maximum
observed for a globular proteins [5]. A direct comparison of the standard unfolding enthalpy of the DraD-sc
to that of the DraE-sc is impossible because of irreversibility of calorimetric transition of the latter and its
strictly kinetic character. However, the DraE-sc-ΔSS
mutant, which is undistinguishable from DraE-sc on the

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

basis of FT-IR spectra unfolds with the enthalpy ΔH37°C
of 333 ± 20 kJ mol -1 . In the case of the Caf1’’ the
observed melting enthalpy is a demonstration of almost
perfectly optimized interactions that stabilize this protein. The low melting enthalpy of the DraD-sc is to a
large extent a consequence of a structure distortion
caused by a disorder of the hydrophobic core and the
hydrogen bond network in a region of acceptor groove
of the b-barrel (Figure 1B).
The another special feature of the DraD invasin is a
localization of the disulfide bond that connects B and F
strands of opposite sheets forming the b-barrel. This
contrasts with a general position of the disulfide bridge
in fimbrial subunits of the chaperone/usher system that
joins neighboring A and B strands in the same sheet
(Figure 1A) [13]. The presented data show that the disulfide bond is necessary at the stage of the DraD-sc
folding as suggests the impossibility of obtaining an
expression of the double Cys to Ala DraD-sc protein
mutant. This disulfide dependent folding thesis is supported by calorimetric unfolding experiments of the
reduced DraD-sc protein in a buffer containing reducing
compound DTT and by FT-IR observation of the protein unfolding in the presence of this reducing agent.
The depicted unique structural features of the DraDsc Ig-like fold and presented data on its thermal denaturation mechanism and stability properties determined
by the DSC calorimetry and FT-IR spectroscopy differ
with the properties of the DraE adhesin and generally
fimbrial subunits of chaperone-usher type. The individuality of DraD/AfaD-like proteins is also reflected in
its phylogenetic relations to the other fimbrial subunits.
These invasins belong to a family of subunits assembling
adhesive structures of g3 clade [38]. This clade encompasses fimbrial structures encoded by the gene clusters
of the FGL chaperone subfamily. However, the invasins
form the individual subfamily within g3 subunits clade
characterized by a specific conserved domain PF05775
(Pfam, protein families database).

Conclusions
The biogenesis of the chaperone-usher type adhesive
structures is conserved process dependent on a common
properties of fimbrial proteins: the chaperone dependent
folding and the usher dependent surface cell localization
in the form of a polymeric structure. This general view
highly contrast with properties of DraD/AfaD invasin. 1)
The chaperone independent folding - the DraD production is stable and fold properly in the periplasm of bacterial strains that do not co-express the draB chaperone
gene [39]. 2) The usher independent surface localization
- the DraD is transported via the type II secretor [40].
3) The DraD may occur at the cell surface as an
unbound subunit with the open acceptor cleft or loosely

Page 10 of 13

attached at the tip of Dr fimbriae [22,27]. 4) Although it
is a potential tip subunit it is not required as an initial
subunit in the biogenesis of Dr fimbriae [39]. Despite
available structural data the molecular sources of these
unique properties are poorly determined. Presented in
this paper data permit to precise two speculative thesis.
1) The protein expression, DSC microcalorimetry and
FT-IR spectroscopy in vitro experiments showed that
the disulfide bond unique to the DraD is crucial to its
proper folding. This render a question: Is the formation
of the specific to the DraD/AfaD disulfide bond crucial
to the observed chaperone independent invasin folding?
2) The structural comparison of the DraD/AfaD invasin
with the DraE and other fimbrial subunits emphasize its
structural optimization outside the region of the acceptor cleft. This is denoted by the protein density parameter and some minor structural elements such as
tyrosine corner. This also render a question: Are the
disulfide bond and described minor structural elements
responsible for the observed stability of the DraD in the
form with the open acceptor cleft? Interestingly, the
DraD-like SafD and SefD invasins that are initiator subunits of the S. typhi and S. enteritidis pili biogenesis,
respectively are transported to the cell surface via the
classical chaperone/usher pathway do not possess any
disulfide bond in their structures. This additionally confirms the thesis that the unique disulfide bond of the
DraD enables its folding and the usher independent
transport to the cell surface.
The presented in this work calorimetric and FT-IR
spectroscopy data described the stability and mechanism
of thermal denaturation of the self-complemented form
of DraD - the minimal model of invasin protein in the
fimbrial tip complex. This protein construction strategy
was widely used in the studies of fimbrial subunits of
the chaperone-usher type. This permitted us to perform
a straight comparison between DraD-sc properties and
that of other subunits and enabled to conclude that
properties of DraD are unique in the context of its
belonging to the family of fimbrial subunits. Although
the above presented thesis concerning potential structural sources of unique biological properties of the
native (with open acceptor cleft) DraD should be verified in future experiments based on the native DraD
protein.

Methods
Protein expression and purification

DraD-sc (self-complemented) is a recombinant fusion
protein composed of the following segments in N to C
direction: the N-terminal signal peptide, the His6-Tag
peptide AELHHHHHH connected with DraD b-sandwich complemented at C-terminus by the specific Nterminal donor strand GFTPSGTTGTTKLTVT of the

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

DraE protein inserted using linker peptide DNKQ. The
native draD gene possesses the unique SacI site located
immediately after sequence encoding signal peptide,
similarly as in the case of the draE gene. This permits
to use in construction of expression plasmid pET30DraD-sc encoding DraD-sc an identical cloning strategy
as in the case of the pET30-DraE-sc plasmid [15]: forward primer 5’-tatgagctccaccaccaccaccaccacGCTGAACTGCACCTGGAGAGCCGGGGAGGTTC-3’
(SacI site is underlined, the sequence coding His-Tag is
lower case, the complementary sequence is upper case)
and reverse primer 5’-tataagctttcaggtaacggtcagtttggtggtaccggtggtgccagacggggtgaaaccctgtttgttgtcTTCCTGTGGCACCACACAGGCTCCGCCAACCG-3’ (the HindIII
restriction site and stop codon are underlined, the
sequence encoding linker peptide and donor strand is
lower case, the complementary sequence is upper case).
Expression plasmid pET30-DraD-sc-ΔSS encoding
DraD-sc, the disulfide bond lacking mutant, was created
on the basis of pET30-DraD-sc plasmid using PCR
borne Site Directed - Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, CA,
USA) to change codons encoding Cys to Ala. The
DraD-sc protein was produced in E. coli BL21(DE3)/
pET30-DraD-sc strain using the same procedure as in
case of the DraE-sc protein [15]. The E. coli BL21(DE3)/
pET30-DraD-sc-ΔSS culture was grown with an agitation at 30°C to OD600 = 0.3, induced by an adding IPTG
to a final concentration of 0.25 mM and grown for an
additional 2 h. The DraD-sc invasin was purified from
isolated periplasmic fractions by Ni2+ - affinity chromatography on IMAC Sepharose 6 Fast Flow resin (GE
Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden) and
exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 75 10/300 GL
column (Amersham Biosciences, Uppsala, Sweden)
using procedure as in case of the DraE-sc [15].
Microcalorimetry and other techniques

DSC experiments were performed on the CSC 6300
Nano-DSC III differential scanning microcalorimeter
(Calorimetry Sciences Corporation, Lindon, UT, USA)
with the capillary cell volume of 0.299 ml at the temperature range from 10 to 75°C. The experimental data
were recorded using DSCRun software (Calorimetry
Sciences Corporation, Lindon, UT, USA). The concentration of DraD-sc (molecular mass 16.34 kDa) were ca.
1.75 mg ml-1 in each experiment. The analysis was performed with the scanning rate of 1°C min -1 . Samples
preparation, measurements and data analyses were performed identical as described previously for DraE-sc and
DraE-sc-ΔSS proteins [13,15]. The DraD-sc protein (disulfide containing) was analyzed calorimetrically in a buffer: 20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl.
To prepare DraD-sc protein samples with the disulfide
bond chemically reduced by DTT (dithiothreitol) the

Page 11 of 13

following procedure was used. The DraD-sc protein was
dialyzed to a buffer: 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and
100 mM NaCl. To the dialyzed sample DTT was added
to the final concentration of 30 mM. Reduction of disulfide bonds was conducted 4 h at the room temperature
with gently agitation and than continued overnight at
the temperature of 4°C. After reduction reaction the
protein sample was dialyzed to a buffer: 20 mM sodium
phosphate, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl and 0.5 or 1 mM
DTT as an antioxidant. The reduction of DraD-sc protein with TCEP-HCl (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
HCl)) was performed as follows. The DraD-sc protein
was dialyzed to buffer: 50 mM sodium citrate, pH 5.0,
80 mM NaCl after this the TCEP-HCl was added to the
final concentration of 30 mM. The reduction process
was performed identically as in case of the DTT. After
reduction stage the sample was dialyzed to a buffer: 50
mM sodium citrate, pH 5.0, 80 mM NaCl and 1 mM
TCEP-HCl. The detection of sulfhydryl groups in the
DraD-sc protein samples were performed with Ellman’s
reagent (DTNB, 5,5’-Dithio-bis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid)).
Before analysis the protein samples were rapidly dialyzed
to a detection buffer: 100 mM sodium phosphate, pH
8.0, 1 mM EDTA, using Amicon Ultra concentrator
(Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). To the 250 μl of protein
samples the 50 μl of DTNB (4 mg/ml in the detection
buffer) was added. After 15 minutes of incubation at the
room temperature the sample absorbencies were measured at 412 nm. Calculations were performed using
molar extinction coefficient of TNB of 14.150 M-1cm-1.
The FT-IR spectroscopy and SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis assay were performed as described previously for DraE-sc and DraE-sc-ΔSS proteins [13,15].
The protein concentration in the FT-IR experiments
was ca. 20 mg ml-1. The Factor Analysis was performed
using the Matlab R2010a program (The MathWorks,
Natick, MA, USA).
Assessing the structural features

Packing density (PD) is a measure of the quality of
protein core packing. It is calculated as a fraction of the
protein’s solvent excluded volume occupied by its Van
der Waals volume. The value of this parameter varies
between 0 and 1 and for proteins with perfect core packing PD value approaches the later value. Although the
average packing of the protein interior depends on its
size with smaller molecules being better packed on average, for molecules of similar sizes packing density is a
good measure of their internal fit. For PD calculations we
used procedure as described [34]. To check the geometrical fit between the complementing donor strand and the
acceptor cleft shape correlation statistics (Sc) were calculated [33]. This parameter indicates how well two surfaces fit each other. Its value varies between 0 and 1 with

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

the former value indicating no geometrical fit and the
later one indicating the perfect fit of the two surfaces.
The number of hydrogen bonds was calculated for the
energy minimized structures of both subunits with the
GROMACS tool g_hbonds [41]. The calculations were
based on the AfaD/DraD (pdb code: 2fvn) and the AfaE
(1rxl) structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank.
Abbreviations
Cpex: the excess heat capacity; DraD the invasin subunit encoded by a dra
operon; DraD-sc: the self-complemented DraD subunit; DraD-sc-ΔSS: the
disulfide bond lacking mutant of DraD-sc; DraE: the adhesive subunit of Dr
fimbriae; DraE-sc: the self-complemented DraE subunit; DraE-sc-ΔSS: the
disulfide bond lacking mutant of DraE-sc; DSC: the differential scanning
calorimetry; ΔCp: the heat capacity change of protein unfolding; ΔG: the free
energy change of protein unfolding; ΔH: the enthalpy change of protein
unfolding; FT-IR: the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy; Tm: the protein
melting temperature.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education,
grants number: 2218/B/PO1/2008/34 and N N401 569438.
Author details
Department of Microbiology, Gdańsk University of Technology, ul.
Narutowicza 11/12, 80-233 Gdańsk, Poland. 2Department of Physical
Chemistry, Gdańsk University of Technology, ul. Narutowicza 11/12, 80-233
Gdańsk, Poland. 3Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and
Biochemistry, Gdańsk University of Technology, ul. Narutowicza 11/12, 80-233
Gdańsk, Poland.
1

Authors’ contributions
RP carried out the DSC microcalorimetry, the SDS-PAGE kinetic stability
experiments and drafted the manuscript. PB carried out the FT-IR
spectroscopy experiments, participated in analyzing DSC data, drafted the
manuscript. BZP constructed DNA plasmids and drafted the manuscript. MW
carried out structural and computational analyses, drafted the manuscript. JN
carried out protein purification and drafted the manuscript. JK drafted the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 26 January 2011 Accepted: 16 May 2011
Published: 16 May 2011
References
1. Sauer FG, Futterer K, Pinkner JS, Dodson KW, Hultgren SJ, Waksman G:
Structural basis of chaperone function and pilus biogenesis. Science 1999,
285:1058-1061.
2. Barnhart MM, Pinkner JS, Soto GE, Sauer FG, Langermann S, Waksman G,
Frieden C, Hultgren SJ: PapD-like chaperones provide the missing
information for folding of pilin proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000,
97:7709-7714.
3. Zavialov AV, Kersley J, Korpela T, Zav’yalov VP, MacIntyre S, Knight SD:
Donor strand complementation mechanism in the biogenesis of nonpilus systems. Mol Microbiol 2002, 45:983-995.
4. Zavialov AV, Berglund J, Pudney AF, Fooks LJ, Ibrahim TM, MacIntyre S,
Knight SD: Structure and biogenesis of the capsular F1 antigen from
Yersinia pestis: preserved folding energy drives fiber formation. Cell
2003, 113:587-596.
5. Zavialov AV, Tischenko VM, Fooks LJ, Brandsdal BO, Aqvist J, Zav’yalov VP,
Macintyre S, Knight SD: Resolving the energy paradox of chaperone/
usher-mediated fibre assembly. Biochem J 2005, 389:685-694.
6. Remaut H, Tang C, Henderson NS, Pinkner JS, Wang T, Hultgren SJ,
Thanassi DG, Waksman G, Li H: Fiber formation across the bacterial outer
membrane by the chaperone/usher pathway. Cell 2008, 133:640-652.
7. Vetsch M, Erilov D, Molière N, Nishiyama M, Ignatov O, Glockshuber R:
Mechanism of fibre assembly through the chaperone-usher pathway.
EMBO Rep 2006, 7:734-738.

Page 12 of 13

8.

9.

10.
11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Zav’yalov V, Zavialov A, Zav’yalova G, Korpela T: Adhesive organelles of
Gram-negative pathogens assembled with the classical chaperone/usher
machinery: structure and function from a clinical standpoint. FEMS
Microbiology Reviews 2010, 34:317-378.
Zavialov A, Zav’yalova G, Korpela T, Zav’yalov V: FGL chaperone-assembled
fimbrial polyadhesins: anti-immune armament of Gram-negative
bacterial pathogens. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2007, 31:478-514.
Eshdat Y, Silverblatt FJ, Sharon N: Dissociation and reassembly of
Escherichia coli type 1 pili. J Bacteriol 1981, 148:308-314.
Orndorff PE, Falkow S: Organization and expression of genes responsible
for type 1 piliation in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1984, 159:736-744.
Puorger C, Eidam O, Capitani G, Erilov D, Grütter MG, Glockshuber R:
Infinite kinetic stability against dissociation of supramolecular protein
complexes through donor strand complementation. Structure 2008,
16:631-642.
Piątek R, Bruździak P, Wojciechowski M, Zalewska-Piatek B, Kur J: The
noncanonical disulfide bond as the important stabilizing element of the
immunoglobulin fold of the Dr fimbrial DraE subunit. Biochemistry 2010,
49:1460-1468.
Cota E, Jones C, Simpson P, Altroff H, Anderson KL, du Merle L, Guignot J,
Servin A, Le Bouguénec C, Mardon H, et al: The solution structure of the
invasive tip complex from Afa/Dr fibrils. Mol Microbiol 2006, 62:356-366.
Piątek R, Bruździak P, Zalewska-Piątek B, Kur J, Stangret J: The preclusion of
irreversible destruction of Dr adhesin structures by a high activation
barrier for unfolding stage of the fimbrial DraE subunit. Biochemistry
2009, 48:11807-11816.
Servin AL: Pathogenesis of Afa/Dr diffusely adhering Escherichia coli. Int J
Med Microbiol 2005, 295:471-478.
Van Loy CP, Sokurenko EV, Samudrala R, Moseley SL: Identification of
amino acids in the Dr adhesin required for binding to decayaccelerating factor. Mol Microbiol 2002, 45:439-452.
Le Bouguénec C, Servin AL: Diffusely adherent Escherichia coli strains
expressing Afa/Dr adhesins (Afa/Dr DAEC): hitherto unrecognized
pathogens. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2006, 256:185-194.
Berger CN, Billker O, Meyer TF, Servin AL, Kansau I: Differential recognition
of members of the carcinoembryonic antigen family by Afa/Dr adhesins
of diffusely adhering Escherichia coli (Afa/Dr DAEC). Mol Microbiol 2004,
52:963-983.
Nowicki B, Moulds J, Hull R, Hull S: A hemagglutinin of uropathogenic
Escherichia coli recognizes the Dr blood group antigen. Infect Immun
1988, 56:1057-1060.
Westerlund B, Kuusela P, Risteli J, Risteli L, Vartio T, Rauvala H, Virkola R,
Korhonen TK: The O75X adhesin of uropathogenic Escherichia coli is a
type IV collagen-binding protein. Mol Microbiol 1989, 3:329-337.
Jouve M, Garcia MI, Courcoux P, Labigne A, Gounon P, Le Bouguénec C:
Adhesion to and invasion of HeLa cells by pathogenic Escherichia coli
carrying the afa-3 gene cluster are mediated by the AfaE and AfaD
proteins, respectively. Infect Immun 1997, 56:4082-4089.
Korotkova N, Yarova-Yarovaya Y, Tchesnokova V, Yazvenko N, Carl MA,
Stapleton AE, Moseley SL: Escherichia coli DraE adhesin-associated
bacterial internalization by epithelial cells is promoted independently by
decay-accelerating factor and carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell
adhesion molecule binding and does not require the DraD invasin. Infect
Immun 2008, 76:3869-3880.
Guignot J, Hudault S, Kansau I, Chau I, Servin AL: Human decayaccelerating factor and CEACAM receptor-mediated internalization and
intracellular lifestyle of Afa/Dr diffusely adhering Escherichia coli in
epithelial cells. Infect Immun 2009, 77:517-531.
Jedrzejczak R, Dauter Z, Dauter M, Piatek R, Zalewska B, Mróz M, Bury K,
Nowicki B, Kur J: Structure of DraD invasin from uropathogenic
Escherichia coli: a dimer with swapped beta-tails. Acta Crystallogr D Biol
Crystallogr 2006, 62:157-164.
Anderson KL, Billington J, Pettigrew D, Cota E, Simpson P, Roversi P,
Chen HA, Urvil P, du Merle L, Barlow PN, et al: An atomic resolution model
for assembly, architecture, and function of the Dr adhesins. Mol Cell
2004, 15:647-657.
Gounon P, Jouve M, Le Bouguenec C: Immunocytochemistry of the AfaE
adhesin and AfaD invasin produced by pathogenic Escherichia coli
strains during interaction of the bacteria with HeLa cells by high
resolution scanning electron microscopy. Microbes Infect 2000,
2:359-365.

Piątek et al. BMC Structural Biology 2011, 11:25
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6807/11/25

Page 13 of 13

28. Manning M, Colón W: Structural basis of protein kinetic stability:
resistance to sodium dodecyl sulfate suggests a central role for rigidity
and a bias toward beta-sheet structure. Biochemistry 2004,
43:11248-11254.
29. Kumar MD, Bava KA, Gromiha MM, Prabakaran P, Kitajima K, Uedaira H,
Sarai A: ProTherm and ProNIT: thermodynamic databases for proteins
and protein-nucleic acid interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:
D204-D206.
30. Johnson CM, Cooper A, Stockley PG: Differential scanning calorimetry of
thermal unfolding of the methionine repressor protein (MetJ) from
Escherichia coli. Biochemistry 1992, 31:9717-9724.
31. Getz EB, Xiao M, Chakrabarty T, Cooke R, Selvin PR: A comparison between
the sulfhydryl reductants tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and
dithiothreitol for use in protein biochemistry. Anal Biochem 1999,
273:73-80.
32. Malinowski ER: Factor Analysis in Chemistry. New York: Wiley;, 3 2002.
33. Lawrence MC, Colman PM: Shape complementarity at protein/protein
interfaces. J Mol Biol 1993, 234:946-950.
34. Rother K, Preissner R, Goede A, Froemmel C: Inhomogeneous molecular
density: reference packing densities and distribution of cavities within
proteins. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:2112-2121.
35. Hemmingsen JM, Gernert KM, Richardson JS, Richardson DC: The tyrosine
corner: a feature of most Greek key beta-barrel proteins. Protein Sci 1994,
3:1927-1937.
36. Hamill SJ, Cota E, Chothia C, Clarke J: Conservation of folding and stability
within a protein family: the tyrosine corner as an evolutionary cul-desac. J Mol Biol 2000, 295:642-649.
37. Vetsch M, Sebbel P, Glockshuber R: Chaperone-independent folding of
type 1 pilus domains. J Mol Biol 2002, 322:827-840.
38. Nuccio SP, Bäumler AJ: Evolution of the chaperone/usher assembly
pathway: fimbrial classification goes Greek. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2007,
71:551-575.
39. Zalewska B, Piątek R, Bury K, Samet A, Nowicki B, Nowicki S, Kur J: A
surface-exposed DraD protein of uropathogenic Escherichia coli bearing
Dr fimbriae may be expressed and secreted independently from DraC
usher and DraE adhesion. Microbiology 2005, 151:2477-2486.
40. Zalewska-Piatek B, Bury K, Piątek R, Bruzdziak P, Kur J: Type II secretory
pathway for surface secretion of DraD invasin from the uropathogenic
Escherichia coli Dr+ strain. J Bacteriol 2008, 190:5044-5056.
41. Hess B, Kutzner C, van der Spoel D, Lindahl E: GROMACS 4: Algorithms for
highly efficient, load-balanced, and scalable molecular simulation.
J Chem Theory Comput 2008, 4:435-447.
42. Humphrey W, Dalke A, Schulten K: VMD -Visual Molecular Dynamics.
J Molecular Graphics 1996, 14:33-38.
doi:10.1186/1472-6807-11-25
Cite this article as: Piątek et al.: Analysis of the unique structural and
physicochemical properties of the DraD/AfaD invasin in the context of
its belonging to the family of chaperone/usher type fimbrial subunits.
BMC Structural Biology 2011 11:25.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
