<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Transcriptional analysis of the HeT-A retrotransposon in mutant and wild type stocks reveals high sequence variability at Drosophila telomeres and other unusual features</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-573"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="David Piñeyro"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Transcriptional analysis of the HeT-A
retrotransposon in mutant and wild type stocks
reveals high sequence variability at Drosophila
telomeres and other unusual features
David Piñeyro, Elisenda López-Panadès, María Lucena-Pérez and Elena Casacuberta*

Abstract
Background: Telomere replication in Drosophila depends on the transposition of a domesticated retroelement, the
HeT-A retrotransposon. The sequence of the HeT-A retrotransposon changes rapidly resulting in differentiated
subfamilies. This pattern of sequence change contrasts with the essential function with which the HeT-A is
entrusted and brings about questions concerning the extent of sequence variability, the telomere contribution of
different subfamilies, and whether wild type and mutant Drosophila stocks show different HeT-A scenarios.
Results: A detailed study on the variability of HeT-A reveals that both the level of variability and the number of
subfamilies are higher than previously reported. Comparisons between GIII, a strain with longer telomeres, and its
parental strain Oregon-R indicate that both strains have the same set of HeT-A subfamilies. Finally, the presence of
a highly conserved splicing pattern only in its antisense transcripts indicates a putative regulatory, functional or
structural role for the HeT-A RNA. Interestingly, our results also suggest that most HeT-A copies are actively
expressed regardless of which telomere and where in the telomere they are located.
Conclusions: Our study demonstrates how the HeT-A sequence changes much faster than previously reported
resulting in at least nine different subfamilies most of which could actively contribute to telomere extension in
Drosophila. Interestingly, the only significant difference observed between Oregon-R and GIII resides in the nature
and proportion of the antisense transcripts, suggesting a possible mechanism that would in part explain the longer
telomeres of the GIII stock.

Background
Drosophila has a unique mechanism of telomere maintenance. Instead of using the telomerase holoenzyme as
most eukaryotes, Drosophila replenishes the telomeres by
specific transpositions onto the end of the chromosomes
of three retrotransposons, HeT-A, TART and TAHRE
[1,2]. The telomeric retrotransposons are completely
excluded from euchromatin and share unique characteristics, possibly linked to their telomeric role, that separate
them from their non-LTR counterparts. Orthologues of
HeT-A and TART have been cloned and studied from
species more than 60 MY distant (D.melanogaster - D.
* Correspondence: elena.casacuberta@ibe.upf-csic.es
Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF), Passeig Marítim de la
Barceloneta 37-49, 08003, Barcelona, Spain

virilis), demonstrating that the telomeric retrotransposons predate the separation of the extant species as well
as the robustness and reliability of this mechanism of telomere maintenance [3,4]. Surprisingly, HeT-A and TART
orthologues, although committed to the essential function of telomere replication, are far from being static, and
while maintaining their basic structures allow their
sequence to change rapidly, evolving faster than euchromatic genes and other retrotransposons [5]. This trend of
fast sequence change also results in differences within
the same Drosophila species and for the D. melanogaster
HeT-A element two previous studies have suggested the
presence of a small number of subfamilies coexisting in
the same stock [6,7].
Previous studies have attempted to classify the genomic copies of the HeT-A element in several subfamilies

© 2011 Piñeyro et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

according to their variability in the 3’UTR [6] and also
in the ORF [7]. These studies found four subfamilies
considering ORF variability and two considering 3’UTR
variability. Taking into account that those studies were
based in a limited number of genomic copies, our first
objective was to perform an exhaustive survey at genomic level in order to obtain a more accurate picture of
the real variability of the HeT-A element.
Other retroelements also form subfamilies in a given
genome, as for example Tnt1 in tobacco and L1 in
mammalian genomes [8,9]. In the case of Tnt1, the different subfamilies have acquired different sequences at
their regulatory regions that ensure the expression of a
particular subfamily in response to different external
factors, widening and diversifying in that way the number of opportunities for transposition [10]. In the case
of L1, although remnants of several subfamilies exist in
a given genome, only one subfamily seems to be active
at a time [11]. Whether the existence of different HeT-A
subfamilies has a putative role related to its own survival
as a retrotransposon or to its telomeric function is still
unknown. Studies comparing the number and dynamics
of the different subfamilies between wild type and telomeric mutant stocks are needed to answer this question.
With the completion of the heterochromatic genome
project [12] and the assembly of some telomeres for the
particular Drosophila strain used in the sequencing project (isogenic strain 2057 yellow (y 1 ); cinnabar (cn 1 )
brown (bw1) speck (sp1) [7,13]) it was possible to obtain
the first detailed view of the telomere structure in Drosophila melanogaster. Because the telomeric retrotransposons suffer from terminal erosion while being at the
end of the chromosome, 5’ truncated copies were
expected. These two studies actually revealed that more
HeT-A copies in the telomeric arrays have maintained
ORFs and other regions needed for function than had
originally been expected. The existence of functional
copies in proximal regions of these long telomere arrays
suggests that these interior sequences may be renewed
more frequently than previously thought. In this case,
the turnover in these arrays does not simply replace
terminal sequence lost in DNA replication but is also
necessary for rebuilding a large fraction of the telomere
when needed [14]. If this were the case, it would be
even more important to keep a fair number of HeT-A
copies capable of active transposition to replenish or
make up new telomeres whenever needed. Alternatively,
full length elements in the middle of the array could
also be explained by the simultaneous transposition of
more than one HeT-A element, or access of HeT-A
transposition intermediates to the end of the chromosome when terminal erosion has not yet taken place, for
example when the capping complex is disassembled.
Finding which HeT-A copies are actively being

Page 2 of 14

transcribed and whether transcriptional differences exist
in response to subfamily affiliation or specific position
in the telomeric array would help to better understand
telomere biology in Drosophila.
Besides specialized structures composed of repeated
sequences, telomeres are also composed of specific proteins and RNA [15]. Because Drosophila telomere elongation is dependent on elements located within the
telomere itself, the presence of RNA at telomeres is not
a surprise. Some years ago a non-coding antisense RNA
containing telomeric repeats was reported in different
mammals and named TERRA (Telomeric-Repeat containing RNA) [16]. TERRA RNA seems to be an important component of the telomeric heterochromatin with
different regulatory functions in chromatin as well as
direct regulation of the telomerase activity. Similarly to
TERRA RNA, the telomeric retrotransposons HeT-A
and TART are also transcribed from the antisense strand
[17,18] and a recent report strongly suggests that short
RNAs coming from the telomeres might have a role in
telomere function, protection and development in Drosophila [19]. Therefore, with the new discoveries of
non-coding RNAs being involved in different regulatory
functions, as mentioned above, further studies on the
potential role for the antisense RNAs of HeT-A and
TART at Drosophila telomeres become crucial.
The work presented here aims at better characterizing
the extent of HeT-A variability and determining if different HeT-A subfamilies could become more successful in
a given stock. For this, we have chosen two different
stocks, a wild type stock, Oregon-R, and a mutant stock
with longer telomeres, the GIII stock bearing an Oregon-R background where the third chromosome from
the Tel-1 mutant was introduced almost 10 years ago
[20]. Although the cytological position of the Tel-1
mutation has been determined (3L (69)), it is still
unknown the molecular cause responsible for the extremely long telomeres of the GIII stock (approximately
ten times longer than in any wild type stock). We have
amplified and sequenced from DNA and RNA sources
in these two stocks some of the most variable regions
inside the HeT-A sequence, and have been able to identify all previously defined HeT-A subfamilies. Moreover
we describe five previously unreported HeT-A families,
demonstrating that HeT-A variability is even greater
than expected. Our results show that most HeT-A subfamilies are actively transcribed and some of the found
variations allow us to draw the recent history for a
number of HeT-A copies. Finally, we have done a wide
study on HeT-A antisense transcription and found that
most antisense transcripts suffer different alternative
splicing with remarkable conservation. Interestingly, we
find that the GIII and Oregon-R stocks mainly differ in
which subfamilies contribute the most to antisense

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

Page 3 of 14

transcription. This leads us to suggest that due to the
importance of non-coding RNAs in gene and heterochromatin regulation, the reported differences could
explain in part the greater expression of HeT-A and ultimately the longer telomeres of the GIII stock.

Results
HeT-A sequence variability

Available information on telomere composition in Drosophila is partial (Additional files 1, 2); in order to
investigate the nature and the extent of sequence variability in HeT-A, we decided to carry out a genome wide
study analyzing two different regions along the retrotransposon, inside the HeT-A ORF (gag) and the 3’
Untranslated Region (UTR). For this, we designed primers that would anneal to highly conserved sequences

among copies, maximizing the number of different subfamilies that would be amplified, and in turn flanking
highly variable regions in order to maximize the
obtained information. Highly variable regions were
selected by performing alignments of the amplified fragment from all HeT-A sequences already present in the
databases in which the primers were contained (Figure 1
and Additional file 2). We first used the 3’UTR primers
to obtain by qPCR an approximate copy number of
HeT-A (Figure 2). We did obtain a ten-fold difference
between the Oregon-R and the GIII strain. We then
proceed to amplify both the gag and the 3’UTR fragment from genomic DNA. As expected from the alignment presented in Figure 1, the DNA fragments
amplified for the 3’UTR region show a considerable size
variation reflected in several amplified bands while

3’UTR amplified region

HeT A

AAAA

gag

gag amplified region

550 bp
Figure 1 HeT-A regions amplified in this study. Middle, schematic drawing of the HeT-A complete element. Upper and lower, nucleotide
alignment of the amplified fragments from the gag gene and the 3’UTR using all previously sequences of the HeT-A elements from Drosophila
melanogaster containing this region available in the data base. Sequences corresponding to the fragment inside the gag gene (from upper to
lower): 01D09, 4R6265, 4R6274, XL4800, 17B3, 4R6262, 4R6268, 23Zn-1, 4R6276 and 9D4. Sequences from the fragment inside the 3’UTR region
(from upper to lower): 1187X, 3Zn-1, RT394, 44PChrIII, 4R6276, 23Zn-3, RT473, 4R6270, 4R6278, 4R6269, XL4800, AJ549609, XL6255, XL5504, CS-TA1, CS-T-A2, HTChrIII, XL4795, 4R6262, XL6256, 4R6268, 4R6277, 4R6265 and 4R6274. For correspondence of sequence name with the accession
numbers see Additional file 2.

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

Page 4 of 14

Number of HeT-A copies per actin copy

Relative number of HeT-A genomic copies
400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

Oregon-R

GIII

Figure 2 HeT-A genomic copy number. Relative number of HeT-A
genomic copies in the analyzed Drosophila stocks, Oregon-R and
GIII. HeT-A copy number obtained by qPCR (using primers annealing
at the 3’UTR) and normalized per copy number of the actin gene.

A

amplified fragments for the ORF region display mainly
two discrete bands in the case of Oregon DNA (Figure
3B). We cloned and sequenced the amplified fragments
for the two regions, performed alignments and the
resulting trees are shown in Figures 4A and 5A (copies
from genomic DNA shown in green). The total number
of analyzed sequences for the gag and the 3’UTR fragment is shown in Table 1.
As a result of amplifying the gag gene and the 3’UTR separately we were not able to know whether they belonged to
the same copy; we thus used the complete HeT-A copies
available in the database, and included them in our analysis. As several complete HeT-A copies present in the database belong to different subfamilies, we can in this
manner observe if copies belonging to the same subfamily
group together for both, the gag and the 3’UTR fragment.
We chose a threshold of 10% difference to define the different subfamilies, as this was the minimum divergence
percentage that allowed correlating our results with

B
5’UTR

gag

3’UTR

gag

3’UTR

Size
marker
1000 bp
500 bp

100 bp

C

gag
Size
marker

Oregon
+
GC

3’UTR
GIII

+

GC

Oregon
GC
+

GIII
+

GC

Size
marker

1000 bp

1000 bp

500 bp

500 bp

100 bp

100 bp

Figure 3 Genomic and RNA amplification. A. Schematic representation of a HeT-A element containing the 5’UTR (dotted box), the gag gene
(black box) and the 3’UTR (lined box). Black bars at the bottom mark the amplified fragments. B. Genomic amplification of the indicated
fragments in both, Oregon-R and GIII. Note the size variability of the amplified products indicative of size polymorphism among different HeT-A
genomic copies. C. RNA amplification of the indicated fragment in both, Oregon-R and GIII stocks. +/- indicate specific amplification of sense
and antisense strand respectively. GC indicates control for genomic DNA amplification.

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

A

Page 5 of 14

B

gag

Oregon R genomic sequence

A

Oregon R RNA sequence
GIII genomic sequence
GIII RNA sequence
From databases

G3 gag 69

E
D

B

Relative abundance of sequences

C
60

50

40

30

20

10

0

A

B

C

D

E

Subfamilies
Figure 4 Phylogenetic analysis of the sequences amplified for the gag fragment. All amplified sequences from genomic DNA of Oregon-R
and GIII (names in green and orange, respectively) and from total RNA from 3rd instar larvae of Oregon-R and GIII (names in blue and red,
respectively) were used. Also included are the previously annotated HeT-A sequences containing the analyzed fragment (shown in black). A.
Phylogenetic tree constructed using all obtained sequences. The different subfamilies are indicated with boxes with the corresponding letter.
Additionally, the tree includes a Drosophila yakuba HeT-A sequence (AF043258, named yakuba in the tree), in order to illustrate the degree of
variability of HeT-A inside species and between species (D.yakuba and D.melanogaster are considered to be ~10 million years of genetic distance;
source: http://flybase.org). The position of sequence G3-gag-69 is indicated. B. Bar chart representing the relative abundance of each subfamily.

previous reports [6,7]. In the present study, we have found
representatives of all the previously described subfamilies,
for both the gag and the 3’UTR fragments (Figures 4A and
5A). Families A, B, C and D for the gag gene and families
A and G for the 3’UTR region had been described previously [7,6]. Furthermore, our analysis has revealed
greater variability in the HeT-A sequence identifying one
new subfamily for the gag fragment and seven new subfamilies for the 3’UTR fragment, with a total of five (A to E)
and nine (A to J minus E) subfamilies attending to gag
and 3’UTR respectively. In spite of being full length, some
of the previously classified HeT-A sequences, had only
been analyzed for the gag or the 3’UTR region. Interestingly, our study has now found that the phylogenetic relationship among subfamilies is maintained for both

fragments and therefore families A to D for the gag fragment correspond to families A to D for the 3’UTR fragment (Figures 4 and 5). With this result, our study
integrates all previously described HeT-A subfamilies.
Unfortunately, this comparison is limited by the low
amount of preexisting sequences containing both the
gag and the 3’UTR fragment. This is the case of subfamily E present in the gag analysis, which does not have a
corresponding subfamily E for the 3’UTR because no
previous full-length HeT-A sequence belonging to this
subfamily exists in the database. Finally, we should mention that the 10% of divergence does not take into
account the gaps present inside sequences; thereby the
high variability reported here is still a sub-estimation of
the real variability inside the HeT-A sequences.

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

A

Page 6 of 14

B

3’UTR sense
D
ORE 3Ub 30

ORE 3Ub 37

ORE 3Ub 41

Oregon R RNA sequence
GIII genomic sequence
GIII RNA sequence
From databases

G3 3Ub 127

F
J

B

4R6268

G3 3Ub 77

C
I

A
G3 3Ub 113

Relative abundance of sequences

G

Oregon R genomic sequence

H

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

A

B

C

D

F

G

H

I

J

Subfamilies
Figure 5 Phylogenetic analysis of the sense sequences amplified for the 3’UTR fragment. All amplified sequences from genomic DNA of
Oregon-R and GIII (names in green and orange, respectively) and from total RNA from 3rd instar larvae of Oregon-R and GIII (names in blue and
red, respectively) were used. Also included are the previously annotated HeT-A sequences containing the analyzed fragment (shown in black). A.
Phylogenetic tree constructed using all obtained sequences. The different subfamilies are indicated with boxes and corresponding letter. The
position of sequences ORE-3Ub-30, ORE-3UB-41, ORE-3Ub-37, G3-3Ub-77, G3-3Ub-127, G3-3Ub-113 and the previously known 4R6268 are
indicated. B. Bar chart representing the relative abundance of each subfamily.

HeT-A content and variability in the GIII strain versus
Oregon-R

HeT-A content determined by qPCR (Figure 2) is
approximately ten times higher in the GIII strain than
in the wild type strain, Oregon-R. We wondered if this
ten-fold difference in number of copies would result in
higher variability. In order to investigate this question
we analyzed three times more sequences of the gag and
the 3’UTR fragments from the GIII strain (Table 1) and
added them to the phylogenetic trees corresponding to

each fragment (Figure 4A and 5A). As Figures 4A and
5A show, all genomic sequences from GIII (yellow)
group together with the preexisting subfamilies from
Oregon-R (green). There are a few cases in both fragments where sequences from both Oregon-R and GIII
appear isolated between subfamilies. This is the case, for
example, for the GIII sequence G3-Gag-89 in the gag
tree (in yellow, Figure 4A), or sequences in the 3’UTR
tree (Figure 5A), ORE-3Ub-30, ORE-3Ub-41 and ORE3Ub-37 which are intermediates between the G and the

Table 1 Number of sequences obtained and analyzed in our study.
Genomic gag

Genomic 3’UTR

RNA gag sense

RNA 3’UTR sense

RNA 3’UTR antisense

Oregon-R

44

43

44

41

40

GIII

125

125

124

124

124

Taking into account the genomic copy number obtained for each strain (see Figure 1), the coverage is slightly higher than 1 for Oregon-R and slightly lower than
0.5 for GIII. Antisense strand amplification was performed only in the case of the 3’UTR due to its relative abundance.

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

D subfamilies, G3-3Ub-77 that has diverged from the G
subfamily, or G3-3Ub-127 and G3-3Ub-113 which have
respectively diverged from the F and A subfamilies.
Figures 4B and 5B reflect more graphically the relative
abundance of each subfamily in the pool of sequences
analyzed for each strain. With one exception, subfamily
J, the content of each subfamily in Oregon-R and GIII is
similar or proportional (attending to the fact that there
are ten times more copies of HeT-A in GIII). The
absence of subfamily J in GIII might be due to the
insufficient coverage of our approach, or a lower fitness
of this subfamily as suggested by its low presence also
in Oregon-R. Alternatively, the absence of the J family
in GIII suggests that the major increase in HeT-A copy
number in this stock may be the result of an increase of
only the telomeric copies of the parental stock OregonR. Previous studies have reported few HeT-A defective
copies outside the telomeres in the heterochromatic
region of the III and Y centromeres [21-23]. These
small HeT-A fragments mostly correspond to the 3’UTR
and have not been previously classified in subfamilies.
All the sequences, from subfamilies I and J collected in
this study show 99% or higher sequence identity with
the centromeric sequences previously reported, suggesting that sequences belonging to these subfamilies come
from non-telomeric regions.
Taking into account the total number of HeT-A copies
obtained in the Oregon-R and GIII stocks (Figure 2) and
the number of analyzed sequences (Table 1), the coverage presented here is slightly higher than 1 for the Oregon-R and slightly lower than 0.5 for the GIII stock.
Although this coverage is low for a detailed analysis of
each HeT-A copy present in these stocks, it allows a fair
glance to the HeT-A content and variability in these two
stocks. The results from Figures 4 and 5 indicate that in
major terms, the higher number of HeT-A copies in
GIII is consequence of the general and proportional
increase of the different HeT-A subfamilies already integrated in its parental strain Oregon-R.
Contribution of the different subfamilies to HeT-A
transcription

In order to investigate the specific contribution of each
HeT-A subfamily to the HeT-A transcriptome in both
Oregon-R and GIII strains, we proceeded with the same
analysis amplifying the gag and the 3’UTR fragments
from RNA sources where HeT-A is actively transcribed
(see Methods). RNA amplification was performed to distinguish sense and antisense strands, since antisense
expression of HeT-A has previously been reported in
germ line tissues [18]. Here, we find that antisense
expression especially for the 3’UTR fragment is abundant and shows considerable size variability in larvae tissues (Figure 3). For the total number of analyzed RNA

Page 7 of 14

sequences for each strain see Table 1. We added the
obtained sequences from both fragments to the existing
DNA phylogenetic trees in order to be able to correlate
expressed sequences with genomic copies (Figures 4 and
5) (blue Oregon-R and red GIII). Most expressed
sequences nicely group with their genomic counterpart.
This result is important because it demonstrates that
our approach, in spite of having partial coverage, is
good enough to study the HeT-A content and variability
on these two strains. If our coverage had been too low
to carry out these studies, we would expect to find a fair
number of expressed or genomic sequences with no
counterpart.
The first result from integrating the genomic and the
transcriptomic data for both fragments (Figures 4 and 5)
indicates that, with the exception of subfamily I, all
existing subfamilies of both strains are expressed. Figures 4B and 5B allow a graphical view of the relative
expression of the different subfamilies. Subfamilies A
and H stand out as the ones with higher expression rate
in both strains. Interestingly, subfamily A has a low
copy number in both GIII and Oregon-R, suggesting the
recent birth of this subfamily or its low transposition
efficiency. Subfamilies C (with the exception of the
3’UTR fragment in GIII) and G would be an example of
the opposite situation, the expression detected for these
subfamilies is lower than expected for the genomic
copies integrated in these genomes, nevertheless the differences in this case are subtle and could be explained
by level of coverage of this approach.
A few HeT-A defective copies have been found outside
the telomeres in the heterochromatic region of the III
and Y centromeres [21-23]. Although the centromeric
copies have not been previously classified in subfamilies,
they all show 99% or higher sequence identity with the
sequences from subfamilies I and J demonstrating that
the 3’UTR primers used in this study are able to amplify
sequences belonging to subfamilies I and J. Nevertheless, these copies are expressed at a very low level since
we have only detected one sequence out of 44 for the J
subfamily in Oregon-R and no sequence for the I subfamily. This result indicates that HeT-A expression coming from other genomic locations outside telomeres is
very limited demonstrating that the expression of the
HeT-A retrotransposon comes almost exclusively from
the telomeres. Again, most subfamilies are expressed
similarly in both stocks, supporting the evidence that
the major HeT-A content in GIII comes from a proportional increase of the HeT-A subfamilies already present
in the parental genetic background, Oregon-R.
Because we have also included in our analysis the
HeT-A sequences from the two assembled telomeres
(Additional file 1, and in black Figures 4A and 5A), and
because in all cases these sequences group together with

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

Page 8 of 14

the newly identified HeT-A copies from our study, we
can suggest that the HeT-A content in these two strains,
Oregon-R and GIII does not differ substantially from
the strain used in the genome sequencing project (isogenic strain 2057 yellow (y 1 ); cinnabar (cn 1 ) brown
(bw1) speck (sp1 )).
Finally, it is also important to mention that all the
analyzed RNA sequences from the gag fragment are free
of frame-shifts and other mutations resulting in stop
codons, suggesting that all expressed sequences containing a gag fragment could produce a putative functional
Gag protein. The phylogenetic relationships of the protein sequences corresponding to the DNA sequences for
the gag fragment were analyzed and resulted very similar
to the ones presented in Figure 4A (data not shown).

Antisense HeT-A expression

While sense amplification is similar for both regions,
antisense amplification for the 3’UTR fragment is highly
abundant and heterogeneous (Figure 3C). On the contrary, antisense transcription for the gag fragment is
nearly undetectable in Oregon-R and very poor in GIII
(Figure 3C). Therefore, antisense transcription was only
considered for the 3’UTR region and the number of
sequences analyzed in this study is shown in Table 1.
Figure 6 reflects the relative amount of the antisense
transcripts belonging to the different subfamilies. As
shown in Figure 6, subfamily C in the case of GIII
(60%) and subfamily H in the case of Oregon-R (40%)
are the main producers of 3’UTR antisense transcripts.
The comparison between the data from Figure 6 with

Relative abundance of sequences

3’UTR antisense
70

Oregon R genomic sequence
Oregon R RNA sequence
GIII genomic sequence
GIII RNA sequence

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
A

B

C

D

F

G

H

I

J

Subfamilies
Figure 6 Analysis of the antisense sequences amplified for the 3’UTR fragment. All amplified sequences from genomic DNA of Oregon-R
and GIII (bars in green and orange, respectively) and from total RNA from 3rd instar larvae of Oregon-R and GIII (bars in blue and red,
respectively) were used. The bar chart represents the relative abundance of each type of sequence for each subfamily. While the genomic
sequences are the same than in the previous figure and the subfamily number is maintained, the amplified antisense RNA sequences show a
different proportion for each subfamily. Note the case of subfamily C in GIII, which represents the ~60% of all the antisense HeT-A expressed
sequences in this strain.

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

Page 9 of 14

Figure 5B, shows that these subfamilies are also actively
transcribed in the sense strand in GIII and Oregon-R
respectively. Other subfamilies show a lower but also
similar transcriptional level from both strands like subfamilies B and D, and finally some subfamilies have
almost no antisense expression, subfamilies F and G,
that behave otherwise in the sense strand, or subfamilies
I and J which have very low expression from both
strands. As mentioned before, the sequences from subfamilies I and J belong to defective copies located outside
the telomeres and this study demonstrates that their
contribution to the total antisense pool of HeT-A transcripts, as it was also the case for sense transcription, is
very low (1 out of 124 of subfamily I in GIII, and 1 out
of 40 of subfamily I and 3 out of 40 of subfamily J in
Oregon-R).
Antisense transcripts for the 3’UTR are highly variable
in size (Figure 3C). After cloning and sequencing, we
demonstrate that the size variability is due to several

splicing processes to which most antisense transcripts
(91% in GIII and 74% in Oregon-R) are subjected. Surprisingly, no sense transcript was found to be spliced.
At least four different types of splicing in the 3’UTR
fragment exist, being splicing variant 1 and 3 similar to
those previously described [18] and splicing variants 2
and 4 here reported for the first time (Figure 7).
Although splicing variant 1 is the most common splicing
in both strains (70% in GIII and 44% in Oregon-R), the
relative contribution of different subfamilies to each variant is different in both stocks (Figure 8A and 8B). In
Oregon-R subfamily H is the most abundant, while in
GIII subfamily H does not even represent the 10% of
total antisense expression (Figure 6). All splice sites can
be predicted by automated software with high score
(Figure 8C) and they show higher conservation than the
surrounding sequences (Figure 7). Importantly, splice
donor 1 is present in all sequences, even if some are
occasionally not processed. In GIII exists even a

D2
A3

A2

A1

D1

Figure 7 Splice donor and acceptor analysis. Top: consensus sequence obtained from the alignment of all the 3’UTR genomic sequences
(total number: 168) indicating the identity level below each position (green: highest, red: lowest). The different donor (D) and acceptor (A)
positions are indicated. Bottom: schematic representation of the different splicing variants. Dash arrow represents the HeT-A 3’UTR. Black arrows
indicate the primers used for amplification. Underneath, bullets identify splicing donors (D) and squares identify acceptors (A).

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

Page 10 of 14

A
NO
SPLICING
26%

Oregon R
SV 1
44%

SV 4
3%

SV 3
8%

SV 4
2%
SV 3
1%

NO
SPLICING
9%

GIII

SV 2
18%
SV 1
70%

SV 2
19%

C

B
Splicing
Variant (SV)

Subfamilies with this
SV

SV 1

B, C, G, H, I and J

SV 2

D

SV 3

A and H

SV 4

A

Figure 8 Analysis of the different splicing variants from the antisense 3’UTR sequences. A. Proportion of each splicing variant (SV) found
in the analyzed strains. B. Table summarizing the splicing variant usage by each subfamily. C. Consensus sequence (reverse strand) for each
donor (D) and acceptor (A). Splice site is indicated by two bigger letters. The NNSPLICE 0.9 score for each splice site is also indicated.

stronger bias of antisense transcription of the different
subfamilies, being subfamily C accountable for more
than 60% of the total antisense transcripts in this strain.

Discussion
Intriguingly, the main component of Drosophila telomeres, the HeT-A retrotransposon, has the tendency to
change faster than expected for a gene with an essential
function and even for a retroelement [5]. Because telomere extension in Drosophila strongly depends on transpositionally capable HeT-A copies, it is important to
better characterize the extent and the nature of this
variability. We have attempted to classify this variability
in different subfamilies and integrate our findings with
previously reported results [6,7]. We show that the HeTA sequence is even more variable than previously
reported. As expected from this higher variability, we
have identified at least nine different HeT-A subfamilies,
five of which had not been reported previously. Our
results also point out to the existence of some constraints

to this rapid sequence change. Although the rate of
sequence change is remarkable, we find in the GIII strain,
with abnormally long telomeres and a ten fold difference
in HeT-A copy number, the same variability reflected in a
similar number and genetic distance among subfamilies.
Although there might have not been enough time for the
GIII and the Oregon-R stocks to show substantial variability, we believe that these similar patterns of distribution of the GIII and Oregon-R sequences into subfamilies
could suggest that certain constraints are acting to keep
the same scenario in both strains. Similarly, as shown in
Figure 4A, the sequence for the D.yakuba HeT-A gag
gene behaves as an outgroup verifying the existence of a
threshold that keeps the identity of the sequences within
HeT-A from D.melanogaster. Because of the function
with which HeT-A is entitled, this retroelement must
interact with different pathways and cell components at
different levels. The requirements for such interactions
may constitute the basis for some sequence change constraints. The resulting sequence dynamics could be

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

explained by a putative genetic conflict in which the
HeT-A retrotransposon would be locked together with
Drosophila telomeres. In this scenario, although HeT-A
would be constantly domesticated to fulfill the function
of telomere replication, it would try to keep its parasitic
nature by making the necessary changes to escape the
telomere targeting and regulation imposed by other cellular components. The balance of these forces would
result in the observed pattern of variability of the different HeT-A subfamilies. Alternatively, HeT-A might have
only few functional domains that are under negative
selection, and all changes in the rest of the sequence that
do not impede its ability to transpose at telomeres will
translate into the birth of a new subfamily.
Although the strain used to assemble the telomeres
(2057 see below) [7,13] is different from the ones used
in this study, and therefore to know the exact cytological position inside the telomeres it would be necessary
to map all the sequences from this study at the telomeres of the Oregon-R and the GIII stocks, we have
found high similarity among the sequences from the
three strains suggesting a common trend at the level of
transcription and genomic organization. Because cloning, sequencing and mapping the telomeres for any particular stock is highly problematic, and has not even
been successfully achieved to completion for the
sequenced stock (only two telomeres are assembled for
the isogenic strain 2057 yellow (y 1 ); cinnabar (cn 1 )
brown (bw1 ) speck (sp1 )), we were forced to compare
our results with the only mapped telomere sequences
(Additional file 1). Our studies have revealed the presence, at both genomic and transcriptomic level, of
sequences that perfectly match HeT-A full length and
truncated copies from the two unique assembled telomeres (Additional file 1 and sequences in black in Figures 4 and 5). The assembled data shows that these
particular copies of HeT-A are located both in different
telomeres and inside a telomere, at both distal and proximal regions. Understanding if the HeT-A copies capable
of transposition were located in a specific region of the
telomere was until now a puzzling question. Taking into
account that all subfamilies are transcribed, but not all
of them are likely to be present at the same telomeric
position or in full-length copies, we suggest that HeT-A
elements are expressed regardless of their position and
whether they are complete or not. However, it is possible that differences in RNA levels between subfamilies
could still depend on how many elements of a subfamily
are terminal vs. proximal and full-length vs. truncated.
The putative simultaneous presence of mRNAs from the
full length copies of HeT-A (transposition intermediates)
and mRNAs from truncated copies could be explained
by a complex regulatory mechanism in which full length
and small RNAs (sense and antisense) would interact

Page 11 of 14

and control HeT-A transposition and the telomeric
chromatin (see below). Work by Shpiz et al. [18]
demonstrated a direct relationship between the presence
of antisense transcripts of HeT-A in ovaries and the
rasiRNA pathway. Because the antisense HeT-A transcripts reported here do not come from germ line tissues, we suggest that the antisense transcription of HeTA in somatic tissues could also be involved in a mechanism of RNA interference working in somatic cells. It is
worth mentioning that we have detected expression of
sequences with high identity with truncated HeT-A
copies located in pericentromeric heterochromatin
[21-23], but the low level of expression of these copies
in comparison with the ones putatively located at the
telomeres rules out a major contribution of the pericentromeric copies in the regulation of HeT-A expression.
Thereby, we propose that the truncated copies of HeT-A
retrotransposon at the telomeres could act in a similar
way than truncated copies from master loci such as flamenco, acting to control transposition of other Drosophila retrotransposons (gypsy, Zam and Ideafix) [24,25].
Nevertheless, an important difference exists between
HeT-A and the majority of Drosophila retrotransposons,
the number of full length copies of HeT-A per genome
is much higher. The maintenance of a good reservoir of
full length copies is probably related to its involvement
in building the telomeres, and might require a slightly
different regulation than other retrotransposons with no
apparent function in the genome, which allows the integration of HeT-A copies whenever telomeres are
extended.
An alternative and not exclusive explanation for our
observations, is that the different small RNAs of the
HeT-A copies have additional functions besides the regulation of its own transcription. Recently the world of the
non-coding RNAs is being expanded with new functions
often involved in chromatin structure and regulation.
Examples like the Xist RNA involved in mammalian
dosage compensation or, of course, the TERRA RNA in
telomere regulation, and the capacity of other non-coding RNAs to recruit histone modifying enzymes like the
HOTAIR and the Ezh2 enzyme for regulation of the
human HOXC [16,26,27], allow us to suggest that some
of the HeT-A RNAs could have important additional
roles at Drosophila telomeres. In this direction, a recent
paper has demonstrated how some HeT-A small RNAs
coming from the telomeres are essential to recruit the
capping complex that protects Drosophila telomeres [19].
In order to transpose properly, a HeT-A copy has to be
entirely transcribed from the sense strand. Transcription
begins at the 3’UTR end of the immediately upstream
HeT-A element and extents along the complete downstream copy [28]. On top of the sense transcription, HeTA is also transcribed in the antisense strand in ovaries

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

[18] and in larvae tissues (this study). Interestingly, we
have found a large number of antisense transcripts of
HeT-A, most of which are spliced through a small number of very conserved splicing alternatives. The antisense
transcripts mainly come from the 3’UTR since only a few
transcripts seem to extent into the gag gene (Figure 3C).
Although the fewer gag antisense transcripts could be
explained by the major number of 3’UTR regions integrated in the genome than copies with the gag gene,
other factors like the presence of terminating signals may
explain better the different level of antisense expression.
The fact that, in spite of the high variability the antisense
transcripts strongly conserve the splice donors and
acceptors sites suggests that this processing is important
and points once more to a putative functional role.
Importantly, the major difference that we have found
between a strain with abnormally long telomeres, GIII,
and a wild type background, Oregon-R, concerns the
antisense transcription. In GIII, the antisense transcript
coming from the 4R6268 HeT-A copy (or subfamily C
relatives) represents more than 60% of the total pool of
antisense transcripts in this stock (Figure 6). This HeT-A
copy has not massively integrated in the past in any of
the two strains and is poorly transcribed from the sense
strand. Therefore, it is tempting to suggest that this transcript could have an effect on HeT-A regulation and we
could even speculate that a possible distortion in HeT-A
regulation caused by the higher presence of this particular spliced antisense transcript could in part explain the
longer telomere phenotype of the mutant background in
the GIII stock. Further studies should address the reasons
of the higher antisense expression of this particular copy
and the possible consequences for HeT-A regulation and
telomere biology in Drosophila.

Conclusions
The study presented here demonstrates that the sequence
variability of the HeT-A retrotransposon is much higher
than previously reported defining at least nine different
HeT-A subfamilies. Most of these subfamilies are actively
being transcribed and likely contribute to the telomere
extension in different Drosophila melanogaster strains.
HeT-A is one of the few non-LTR retrotransposons capable of maintaining different subfamilies simultaneously
transposing actively. Finally, the presence of a highly conserved splicing process only in the antisense transcripts
of the 3’UTR region points to a putative regulatory, functional or structural role for the HeT-A RNA.
Methods
Drosophila stocks

All Drosophila stocks were maintained at 25°C on a
standard yeasted corn meal-molasses medium. OregonR is a standard laboratory wild type strain. The Gaiano

Page 12 of 14

III (GIII) stock carries the third chromosome from the
Gaiano strain (with the Tel-1 mutation) in an Oregon-R
background [20].
Genomic DNA and total RNA extraction

5 female and 5 male adult flies were collected from each
strain and used to perform the genomic DNA extraction. The frozen flies were pounded with a pellet pestle
in lyses buffer containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl, 0.1 M EDTA
and 1% SDS; and left to incubation during 30 minutes.
The resulting supernatant after centrifugation was precipitated with 1 M potassium acetate and 0.5 volumes of
isopropanol and finally washed with ethanol and resuspended with milliQ H2O. The DNA concentration and
quality were checked using NanoDrop® ND-1000.
5 female and 5 male 3rd instar larvae were collected
from each strain and used to perform the total RNA
extraction (RNeasy ® Mini Kit, Qiagen ref.74104).
DNAse I treatment as follows: once with RNase-Free
DNase set (Qiagen ref.79254) on-column, as manufacturer instructions, and twice for 3 hours with the same
DNAse I in solution, as manufacturer instructions. The
RNA concentration and quality were checked using
NanoDrop® ND-1000.
Quantitative PCR (qPCR)

The primers used to quantify the genomic copy number
in both strains were: HeT-A Real Time F (5’ ACAGATGCCAAGGCTTCAGG 3’) and HeT-A Real Time
R (5’ GCCAGCGCATTTCATGC 3’) that bind to the
3’UTR of HeT-A. In order to normalize the data, we
also quantified the genomic copy number of actin in all
samples using the primers: Actin F (5’ GCGCCCTTACTCTTTCACCA 3’) and Actin R (5’ ATGTCACGGACGATTTCACG 3’). The qPCR was carried out using the
iQ SYBR Green super mix (Biorad) in iQ Real-Time
PCR thermal cycler (Biorad), following standard qPCR
protocols. The data was analyzed with the iQ software
(Biorad).
HeT-A genomic and RNA amplification, cloning and
sequencing

The primers used to amplify the gag fragment were:
GAG F (5’ GGCGCCAAAAGCAGCATC 3’) and GAG
R (5’ AACGTCCGGCTTGGGGTT 3’). The primers
used to amplify the 3’UTR fragment were: 3UTR F (5’
GCTCCAAGCTGCCAATCC 3’) and 3UTR R (5’
GCCAGAAGGACGGAAGCAC 3’). Genomic amplification was performed by standard PCR using Biotools
DNA Polymerase (Cat Nº 10047). RNA amplification
was performed by RT-PCR (Transcriptor One-Step RTPCR Kit (Roche ref. 04655877001)) as directed by the
manufacturer, specific for sense or antisense transcript
amplification. Amplified products were directly ligated

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

into pSTBlue-1 plasmid, using the AccepTor™ Vector
Kit (Novagene ref. 70595-3). Plasmid DNA was purified
by standard alkaline miniprep protocol. Insert presence
was checked by EcoRI (Fermentas, ref. #ER0271) restriction. The plasmid DNA was sequenced by the Value
Service of Macrogen Inc. (Korea) using the T7 promoter
primer.
Taq Polymerase error test

The error test of the Biotools DNA Polymerase (Cat Nº
10047) was performed amplifying, cloning and sequencing an already known clone. Eleven sequences comprising 459 nucleotides were analyzed and no error was
found.
Sequence analysis

The sequence alignments were carried out using
MAFFT 6.833b program [29]. The phylogenetic trees
were constructed using RAxML 7.2.8 program [30] performing 1000 bootstrap analysis for each tree. Clustering
of sequences into subfamilies was done so that any
sequence within a subfamily had no more than 10% of
nucleotide changes with respect to another, excluding
gaps. The search for splice sites in the obtained 3’UTR
antisense transcripts was performed using the
NNSPLICE 0.9 software [31]. The identity plot for the
sequence alignment in Figure 7 was obtained using Geneious 4.8.3 software [32].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Schematic representation of the assembled data
from Drosophila telomeres (source: http://flybase.org). XL, left
telomere chromosome X (aprox. 20 Kb). 4R, right telomere chromosome
4 (aprox. 70 Kb). Names of HeT-A copies are indicated. Domains of
complete HeT-A element, 5’UTR, gag gene and 3’UTR (dotted, smooth
and lined boxes, respectively) are indicated.
Additional file 2: HeT-A sequences previously available on
databases. Names and accession numbers are given. X indicates if HeT-A
elements are complete and if the sequence has been used in the gag
and/or 3’UTR fragment analysis.

List of abbreviations
MY: Millions of Years; ORF: Open Reading Frame; TERRA: Telomeric-Repeat
containing RNA; qPCR: quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction; UTR: UnTranslated Region; EDTA: Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; SDS: Sodium
Dodecyl Sulfate; bp: base pairs.
Acknowledgements
We thank Josep M. Casacuberta, Josefa González, Mary-Lou Pardue, Joan
Roig Amorós and members of the Casacuberta laboratory for critical reading
of the manuscript. This work was supported by a grant from the Spanish
Ministry of Science and Innovation BFU2009-08318/BMC to E.C.
Authors’ contributions
DP performed research and wrote the paper, EL-P and ML-P performed
research and EC conceived, directed the study and wrote the paper. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Page 13 of 14

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 28 April 2011 Accepted: 23 November 2011
Published: 23 November 2011
References
1. Pardue ML, DeBaryshe PG: Retrotransposons provide an evolutionarily
robust non-telomerase mechanism to maintain telomeres. Annu Rev
Genet 2003, 37:485-511.
2. Abad JP, De Pablos B, Osoegawa K, De Jong PJ, Martin-Gallardo A,
Villasante A: TAHRE, a novel telomeric retrotransposon from Drosophila
melanogaster, reveals the origin of Drosophila telomeres. Mol Biol Evol
2004, 21(9):1620-1624.
3. Casacuberta E, Pardue ML: HeT-A elements in Drosophila virilis:
retrotransposon telomeres are conserved across the Drosophila genus.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100(24):14091-14096.
4. Casacuberta E, Pardue ML: Transposon telomeres are widely distributed
in the Drosophila genus: TART elements in the virilis group. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2003, 100(6):3363-3368.
5. Casacuberta E, Pardue ML: HeT-A and TART, two Drosophila
retrotransposons with a bona fide role in chromosome structure for
more than 60 million years. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110(1-4):152-159.
6. Danilevskaya ON, Lowenhaupt K, Pardue ML: Conserved subfamilies of the
Drosophila HeT-A telomere-specific retrotransposon. Genetics 1998,
148(1):233-242.
7. Abad JP, De Pablos B, Osoegawa K, De Jong PJ, Martin-Gallardo A,
Villasante A: Genomic analysis of Drosophila melanogaster telomeres:
full-length copies of HeT-A and TART elements at telomeres. Mol Biol
Evol 2004, 21(9):1613-1619.
8. Casacuberta JM, Vernhettes S, Grandbastien MA: Sequence variability
within the tobacco retrotransposon Tnt1 population. EMBO J 1995,
14(11):2670-2678.
9. Craig NL: Mobile DNA II. Washington, D.C.: ASM Press; 2002.
10. Beguiristain T, Grandbastien MA, Puigdomenech P, Casacuberta JM: Three
Tnt1 subfamilies show different stress-associated patterns of expression
in tobacco. Consequences for retrotransposon control and evolution in
plants. Plant Physiol 2001, 127(1):212-221.
11. Boissinot S, Chevret P, Furano AV: L1 (LINE-1) retrotransposon evolution
and amplification in recent human history. Mol Biol Evol 2000,
17(6):915-928.
12. Hoskins RA, Smith CD, Carlson JW, Carvalho AB, Halpern A, Kaminker JS,
Kennedy C, Mungall CJ, Sullivan BA, Sutton GG, et al: Heterochromatic
sequences in a Drosophila whole-genome shotgun assembly. Genome
Biol 2002, 3(12):RESEARCH0085.
13. George JA, DeBaryshe PG, Traverse KL, Celniker SE, Pardue ML: Genomic
organization of the Drosophila telomere retrotransposable elements.
Genome Res 2006, 16(10):1231-1240.
14. DeBaryshe PG, Pardue ML: Differential maintenance of DNA sequences in
telomeric and centromeric heterochromatin. Genetics 2011, 187(1):51-60.
15. De Lange T, Lundblad V, Blackburn EH: Telomeres. Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.:
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press;, 2 2006.
16. Luke B, Lingner J: TERRA: telomeric repeat-containing RNA. EMBO J 2009,
28(17):2503-2510.
17. Danilevskaya ON, Traverse KL, Hogan NC, DeBaryshe PG, Pardue ML: The
two Drosophila telomeric transposable elements have very different
patterns of transcription. Mol Cell Biol 1999, 19(1):873-881.
18. Shpiz S, Kwon D, Rozovsky Y, Kalmykova A: rasiRNA pathway controls
antisense expression of Drosophila telomeric retrotransposons in the
nucleus. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37(1):268-278.
19. Khurana JS, Xu J, Weng Z, Theurkauf WE: Distinct functions for the
Drosophila piRNA pathway in genome maintenance and telomere
protection. PLoS Genet 2010, 6(12):e1001246.
20. Siriaco GM, Cenci G, Haoudi A, Champion LE, Zhou C, Gatti M, Mason JM:
Telomere elongation (Tel), a new mutation in Drosophila melanogaster
that produces long telomeres. Genetics 2002, 160(1):235-245.
21. Agudo M, Losada A, Abad JP, Pimpinelli S, Ripoll P, Villasante A:
Centromeres from telomeres? The centromeric region of the Y
chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster contains a tandem array of
telomeric HeT-A- and TART-related sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1999,
27(16):3318-3324.

Piñeyro et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:573
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/573

Page 14 of 14

22. Losada A, Agudo M, Abad JP, Villasante A: HeT-A telomere-specific
retrotransposons in the centric heterochromatin of Drosophila
melanogaster chromosome 3. Mol Gen Genet 1999, 262(4-5):618-622.
23. Mendez-Lago M, Wild J, Whitehead SL, Tracey A, de Pablos B, Rogers J,
Szybalski W, Villasante A: Novel sequencing strategy for repetitive DNA in
a Drosophila BAC clone reveals that the centromeric region of the Y
chromosome evolved from a telomere. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37(7):2264-2273.
24. Mevel-Ninio M, Pelisson A, Kinder J, Campos AR, Bucheton A: The flamenco
locus controls the gypsy and ZAM retroviruses and is required for
Drosophila oogenesis. Genetics 2007, 175(4):1615-1624.
25. Brennecke J, Aravin AA, Stark A, Dus M, Kellis M, Sachidanandam R,
Hannon GJ: Discrete small RNA-generating loci as master regulators of
transposon activity in Drosophila. Cell 2007, 128(6):1089-1103.
26. Leeb M, Steffen PA, Wutz A: X chromosome inactivation sparked by noncoding RNAs. RNA Biol 2009, 6(2):94-99.
27. Rinn JL, Kertesz M, Wang JK, Squazzo SL, Xu X, Brugmann SA,
Goodnough LH, Helms JA, Farnham PJ, Segal E, et al: Functional
demarcation of active and silent chromatin domains in human HOX loci
by noncoding RNAs. Cell 2007, 129(7):1311-1323.
28. Danilevskaya ON, Arkhipova IR, Traverse KL, Pardue ML: Promoting in
tandem: the promoter for telomere transposon HeT-A and implications
for the evolution of retroviral LTRs. Cell 1997, 88(5):647-655.
29. Katoh K, Asimenos G, Toh H: Multiple alignment of DNA sequences with
MAFFT. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 537:39-64.
30. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(21):2688-2690.
31. Reese MG, Eeckman FH, Kulp D, Haussler D: Improved splice site detection
in Genie. J Comput Biol 1997, 4(3):311-323.
32. Drummond AJ, Ashton B, Buxton S, Cheung M, Cooper A, Heled J,
Kearse M, Moir R, Stones-Havas S, Sturrock S, Thierer T, Wilson A: Geneious
v5.1. 2010 [http://www.geneious.com].
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-573
Cite this article as: Piñeyro et al.: Transcriptional analysis of the HeT-A
retrotransposon in mutant and wild type stocks reveals high sequence
variability at Drosophila telomeres and other unusual features. BMC
Genomics 2011 12:573.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
