<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Identifying essential genes in bacterial metabolic networks with machine learning methods</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-56"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kitiporn Plaimas, Roland Eils, Rainer K_nig"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

Open Access

METHODOLOGY ARTICLE

Identifying essential genes in bacterial metabolic
networks with machine learning methods
Methodology article

Kitiporn Plaimas1,2, Roland Eils*1,2 and Rainer König1,2

Abstract
Background: Identifying essential genes in bacteria supports to identify potential drug targets and an understanding
of minimal requirements for a synthetic cell. However, experimentally assaying the essentiality of their coding genes is
resource intensive and not feasible for all bacterial organisms, in particular if they are infective.
Results: We developed a machine learning technique to identify essential genes using the experimental data of
genome-wide knock-out screens from one bacterial organism to infer essential genes of another related bacterial
organism. We used a broad variety of topological features, sequence characteristics and co-expression properties
potentially associated with essentiality, such as flux deviations, centrality, codon frequencies of the sequences, coregulation and phyletic retention. An organism-wise cross-validation on bacterial species yielded reliable results with
good accuracies (area under the receiver-operator-curve of 75% - 81%). Finally, it was applied to drug target
predictions for Salmonella typhimurium. We compared our predictions to the viability of experimental knock-outs of S.
typhimurium and identified 35 enzymes, which are highly relevant to be considered as potential drug targets.
Specifically, we detected promising drug targets in the non-mevalonate pathway.
Conclusions: Using elaborated features characterizing network topology, sequence information and microarray data
enables to predict essential genes from a bacterial reference organism to a related query organism without any
knowledge about the essentiality of genes of the query organism. In general, such a method is beneficial for inferring
drug targets when experimental data about genome-wide knockout screens is not available for the investigated
organism.
Background
By definition, essential proteins of a cellular organism are
necessary to live and replicate, and are therefore attractive targets for antimicrobial treatments. However, experimentally assaying the essentiality of their coding genes is
error prone when done in high throughput. Additionally,
experimental screens are resource intensive and not feasible for all organisms, as typically, for each gene a knockout strain needs to be constructed. Besides this, pathogenic bacterial organisms are hazardous to cultivate and
therefore need higher laboratorial efforts. The metabolism of a cell is substantial for maintaining life and
growth, and hence metabolic enzymes have been success-

* Correspondence: r.eils@dkfz.de
1

Department of Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics, Institute of
Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology, Bioquant, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 267, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

fully targeted by antibiotics inhibiting essential processes
in bacterial genomes [1].
Several computational techniques have been developed
to identify essential genes in silico. Flux balance analyses
(FBA) is widely used to assess the essentiality of genes [2].
However, FBA approaches need clear definitions of nutrition availability and biomass production under specifically given environmental conditions [3]. Descriptors for
enzymes in the metabolic network were put up by graph
theoretical approaches and were used to identify drug
targets in micro-organisms. Concepts of choke-points
and load-points were successfully applied to estimate the
essentiality of an enzyme [4-6]. The term 'damage' was
used to assess enzymes that may serve as drug targets
when their inhibition influences a substantial number of
downstream reactions and products [7]. In a previous
study, we examined the ability of the network to obtain
the products of a knocked-out reaction from its educts
via alternative pathways and used this method to detect

© 2010 Plaimas et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

potential drug targets for P. falciparum [6]. Various
descriptors for centrality of a node in a network have
been successfully applied and supported detecting essential proteins in protein-protein interaction networks [812]. It was shown that proteins which have a more central
position evolve more slowly and are more likely to be
essential for survival [9]. Also sequence features like
codon usage, GC-content and localization signals were
used for predicting essential genes. They were successfully applied for inferring essential genes from S. cerevisiae to the less studied yeast strain S. mikatae [13].
Additionally, phyletic retention has been found to be a
valuable predictive feature for gene essentiality in E. coli
and S. cerevisiae [14,15]. Although protein-protein interaction networks may provide a global view of cellular signaling, we were rather interested in identifying drug
targets in pathogens inferred from properties of malfunctional metabolism after having knocked out an enzymatic function.
In a previous study, we developed and applied an integrative machine learning method that combined these
topology based methods to validate an experimental
knock-out screen of Escherichia coli [16]. We now used
the basic concepts of this strategy to enable predicting
essential genes in an organism for which no experimental
training data is available. For defining the essentiality of a
gene, we now integrated sequence characteristics such as
codon usages, length of the sequences and phyletic retention. Furthermore, we incorporated several centralitydescriptors for a node in a network. We used experimental datasets of comprehensive genome wide knock-out
screens of Escherichia coli [17,18] and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa [19,20] to train the machines with a large variety of attributes including topology characteristics as
mentioned above, own developments on evaluating possible flux deviations [6], and genomic and transcriptomic
information. To develop a classification system that is
readily applicable for predicting essential genes of a new
query organism, the system needs to make accurate predictions for an organism on which it was not trained.
Therefore, we performed a cross-validation across the
organisms of E. coli and P. aeruginosa, i.e. we trained with
E. coli and validated with P. aeruginosa (and vice versa) to
obtain the quality of the performance of this approach.
We then applied the trained and validated classifiers to
the pathogenic bacterium Salmonella typhimurium. We
compared our results with the literature and experimental data of a large knock-out study for S. typhimurium
[21]. Furthermore, we analyzed our predictions with gene
set enrichment tests for metabolic pathways and identified proteins of the entire non-mevalonate pathway to be
relevant for targeting with drugs. Its reactions showed
typically topological characteristics of essential reactions.
Using our prediction results and the experimental knock-

Page 2 of 16

out screen, we defined 35 enzymes as drug targets for S.
typhimurium, 23 out of which have been described previously as drug targets in other micro-organisms. We suggest these and the remaining twelve as potential new drug
targets for the organism we studied (S. typhimurium).

Results and discussion
Predicting essential genes with an organism-wise cross
validation

The general workflow is depicted in Figure 1. We reconstructed the metabolic networks for the investigated
organisms by a bipartite graph consisting of alternating
reactions and compounds. Two reactions were linked by
a compound if the compound was a product of one reaction and a substrate of the other. The machine learning
system was trained and validated with a large set of features. Local topology based features were used to qualitatively describe possible flux deviations. Choke and load
points were defined and damage was used to describe the
qualitative flux load and down stream effects of the
knocked down reaction. Centrality features were calculated to additionally estimate the load of the reactions.
We considered the existence of homologous genes for the
corresponding knocked out genes which may be expected
to take over the function. Co-regulated genes were considered to estimate the existence of possible analogous
genes. Phyletic retention was calculated for observing
phylogenetic conservation of the gene which was
knocked out. Codon usages were calculated for each gene
and used as features. All features are listed in Table 1 and
are described in detail in the methods. We started predicting essential genes for E. coli. For this, we trained
classifiers (machines) with the experimental data of two
genome-wide knock-out screens of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (datasets paeJ and paeL from experimental studies
of Jacobs and co-workers [19] and Liberati and co-workers [20], respectively). These datasets were taken as our
gold standard defining true positives and true negatives
of essential genes in the metabolism of the training
organism (P. aeruginosa). We trained several (100) classifiers with all essential genes and an equal amount of randomly selected non-essential genes (stratification of the
training data). The trained machines were then applied to
predict essential genes for the query organism (E. coli).
The output of all machines was summed up and used as a
voting score that represented the propensity of a gene to
be lethal for the cell. In turn, the same scheme was
applied to predict essential genes for P. aeruginosa with
classifiers which were now trained with two datasets
from E. coli (ecoB from Baba and co-workers' study [17]
and ecoG from Gerdes and co-workers' study [18],
respectively). This organism-wise cross-validation was
applied to estimate the performance of the classifiers. We
compared the datasets for each genome. 79 of the essen-

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

Page 3 of 16

Table 1: List of all features.
Short form

Explanation

Topology features
a) Deviation
RUP

Reachable/Unreachable Products (RUP): equals one if all products could be produced when blocking the reaction,
otherwise zero

PUP

Percentage of Unreachable Products (PUP): the percentage of products which cannot be produced when blocking the
reaction

ND

Number of Deviations (ND)

APL

Average Path Length (APL): the average path length of the deviations

LSP

Length of the Shortest Path (LSP): the length of the shortest path of the deviations

NS

Number of Substrates (NS)

b) Local topology
NP

Number of Products (NP)

NNR

Number of Neighboring Reactions (NNR)

NNNR

Number of Neighbors of Neighboring Reactions (NNNR)

CCV

Clustering Coefficient Value (CCV): clustering coefficient of a reaction

DIR

Directionality of a reaction (DIR)

CP

Choke Point (CP): a reaction is a choke point or not (Rahman et al, 2006)

LS

Load Score (LS): load score of a reaction (Rahman et al, 2006)

NDR

Number of Damaged Reactions (NDR) (Lemke et al, 2004)

c) Choke points and load scores

d) Damage
NDC

Number of Damaged Compounds (NDC) (Lemke et al, 2004)

NDRD

Number of Damaged Reactions having no Deviations (NDRD): the number of damaged reactions that have no other
alternative paths to be reached after blocking a reaction

NDCD

Number of Damaged Compounds having no Deviations (NDCD): the number of damaged compounds that have no other
alternative paths to be reached after blocking a reaction

NDCR

Number of Damaged Choke point Reactions (NDCR)

NDCC

Number of Damaged Choke point Compounds (NDCC)

NDCRD

Number of Damaged Choke point Reactions having no Deviations (NDCRD): the number of damaged choke point
reactions that have no other alternative paths to be reached after blocking a reaction

NDCCD

Number of Damaged Choke point Compounds having no Deviations (NDCCD): the number of damaged choke point
compounds that have no other alternative paths to be reached after blocking a reaction
e) Centrality

BW

Betweenness centrality

CN

Closeness centrality

EC

Eccentricity centrality

EV

Eigenvector centrality

Genomic and transcriptomic features
f) Homologs
NAR

Number of Associated Reactions (NAR): the number of reactions that base on the knocked-out gene

Hn

Homology at different expectation values: the number of homologous genes with e-value cutoff 10-30,10-20,10-10,10-7,105,10-3 (H30, H20, H10, H7, H5, H3)

NGSE

Number of Genes having Similar Expression (NGSE): the number of genes that have similar expression (correlation
coefficient >0.8)

MCC

Maximum of Correlation Coefficients (MCC): maximum value of the correlation coefficients for all neighboring genes

PR

Phyletic Retention (PR): the number of orthologs in the other prokaryotes

g) Gene expression

h) Phyletic retention

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

Page 4 of 16

Table 1: List of all features. (Continued)
i) Codon usage
Nc

Number of codons

N3s

Base composition at silent sites (T3s, C3s, A3s, G3s)

glt

The frequency of amino acids glutamine (exemplarily)

tial genes were common in ecoB and ecoG, 92 were common in paeL and paeJ. One hundred machines were
trained with different training-sets for each knock-out
screen. Votes from both training sets for an organism
were summed up and defined the stringency. A high
number of votes for essentiality led to high specificity,
while lower numbers led to higher sensitivity. The resulting receiver operator curves (ROC) of the classifiers are
shown in Figure 2A for predicting P. aeruginosa and Figure 2B for predicting E. coli. For predicting essential
genes for P. aeruginosa we yielded an area under the
curve (AUC) of 0.80 and 0.79 when compared to the
experimental datasets paeL and paeJ, respectively. In
turn, for E. coli we yielded an AUC of 0.81 and 0.75 when
compared to ecoB and ecoG, respectively. We wanted to
obtain a reliable list of potential drug targets. For this,
predictions for essential genes needed a low number of
false positives. Hence, we set a high stringency and calculated the precision (true predictions out of all predictions
for essentiality) with a high selection criterion (more than
195 out of 200 votes). We yielded a precision of 67%
(accuracy: 87%, sensitivity: 7%, validating with paeL) and
100% (accuracy: 80%, sensitivity: 3%, validating with paeJ)




 
 
  
 
  






 

when predicting essential genes for P. aeruginosa. In turn,
we yielded a precision of 61% (accuracy: 87%, sensitivity:
27%, validating with ecoB) and 65% (accuracy: 80%, sensitivity: 18%, validating with ecoG) for E. coli. We yielded
the best classifier results when using all features, in comparison to the classification performance when using
individual sets of features (see Additional file 1:
SupplementS1 for more details).
Examining the features

We wanted to obtain an estimate of the correlations of
our features to the essentiality of a gene. Therefore, we
calculated Pearson's correlation coefficients of the essentiality class of each gene (1 = essential, 0 = non-essential)
and the corresponding feature values. Figure 3 gives an
overview for all features (see Additional file 2:
SupplementS2 for correlation coefficients of all features).
In the following, we describe the major results of our correlation study.
Topology features

The efficiency of flux deviations was estimated by the features RUP and PUP which gave an estimate if all products




  


 
 

   
  


 

   


 

 











 



 




  


 
 



 
 
 

 
   
   

   
 




  
  










Figure 1 The workflow. Essentiality data for an organism was taken from an experimental genome wide knock-out screen. It was used to train the
machine learning system using features that based on the topology of the metabolic network and genomic and transcriptomic data. The trained classifier was then applied to another organism (query organism) for which the essentiality for each gene in the metabolism was predicted.




Page 5 of 16


  
   
  


Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56









  
   
  



   
       










   
       

Figure 2 ROC curves of the prediction performances. (A) 100 Support Vector Machines were trained with the datasets ecoB and ecoG, respectively,
and were then queried using the datasets from P. aeruginosa (union of the datasets paeL and paeJ). The number of machines predicting essentiality
was summed up (voting score). Results from varying thresholds of the voting score were compared to the experimental results of paeL and paeJ yielding the ROC curves (area under the curve: 0.80 and 0.79, respectively). (B) Similar to (A) only that the machines were trained with the datasets of P.
aeruginosa and queried with the datasets of E. coli resulting in ROC curves with AUC = 0.81 and 0.75 for the datasets ecoB and ecoG, respectively.

of the knocked-out reaction could be produced without
the reaction (RUP) and how large the percentage of nonproducible products (PUP) was. RUP was a Boolean feature to observe if the mutant could produce all products
of the knocked-out reaction. RUP = 1 was set if all downstream products could be produced by the mutant while
RUP was set to zero if at least one downstream product
could not be produced. The number of reachable products (RUP) was highly negative correlated and the percentage of unreachable products (PUP) highly positive
correlated to the essentiality of a gene (P = 1.2E-10 and P
= 2.4E-09, respectively) as shown in Figure 3A. If the (in
silico) mutant could not produce one or more downstream products, RUP was zero whereas the percentage
of unreachable products was increased in comparison to
the situation in which all products could be produced.
The higher the percentage of unreachable products of the
mutant, the less products of the knocked out enzyme

could be covered by alternative pathways. The number of
substrates and products of the reactions of the knocked
out gene (NS, NP) were positively correlated to gene
essentiality (P = 4.3E-06 and P = 0.0172, respectively)
showing that essential enzymes metabolize more different compounds. Interestingly, the number of neighboring
reactions (NNR) and the number of neighbors of neighboring reactions (NNNR) showed a weak negative correlation to essentiality (P = 0.14 and P = 0.091, respectively).
This is reasonable as a reaction with a high number of
neighboring reactions may have more metabolites as
products that can be produced by alternative enzymes.
The clustering coefficients (CCV) showed the same tendency (negatively correlated, P = 0.018) also pointing to
advantageous alternative pathways.
We estimated the feasibility of possible flux deviations
by a set of features describing alternative pathways. The
number of alternative pathways (ND), the average path

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

Page 6 of 16

  



    






 

  


 
 

 















!


















 




 









   
    
 

Figure 3 Correlation of the features to essentiality. The feature-values of each gene were correlated with the essentiality of the gene (1 = essential,
0 = non-essential). (A) shows the correlation coefficients for the topology features, (B) for the genomic and transcriptomic features. High values indicate that the feature was positively correlated to essentiality (see Additional file 2: SupplementS2 for all correlation coefficients). These values were
obtained for all gold standards (ecoB, ecoG for E. coli and paeJ, paeL for P. aeruginosa).

length of the deviations (APL) and the length of the
shortest alternative path (LSP) described the feasibility of

alternative pathways. As expected, all of them were negatively correlated to essentiality (P = 0.15, P = 3.4E-04 and

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

P = 0.0063, respectively), i.e. knocked out enzymes for
which alternative pathways existed were less likely to
cause a lethal phenotype if knocked out. Choke-points
(CP) are uniquely consumed or produced compounds in
the metabolism and showed a positive correlation with
essentiality (P = 2.8E-04) as choke-points are often difficult to be replaced by the rest of the metabolism. Loadscores (LS) give an estimate of how often a reaction is
involved in metabolic processes. They were also positively correlated to essentiality (P = 9.4E-04). Betweenness centrality (BW) and eccentricity (EC) were strongly
positive correlated to essentiality (P = 1.3E-14 and 7.6E08, respectively) showing that enzymes have a higher
influence on vitality if placed in the center of the network.
Closeness centrality (CN) also showed a positive correlation (P = 0.0020). Interestingly, the eigenvector centrality
(EV) showed a negative correlation (P = 0.0013).
Betweenness, closeness and eccentricity centrality are
global centrality measures considering the whole network
while the eigenvector centrality is a measure for local
centrality and is computed from its neighbors. Note that
typically a node with a high value of eigenvector centrality is a hub (node with high connectivity) with other hubs
connected to it. Hence, flux deviations may be more
likely for local hubs that have hubs in their vicinity making the node replaceable whereas global central nodes
seemed to be generally substantial for maintaining the
metabolic flow in the network. Therefore the eigenvector
centrality may describe the network topology more in the
sense as the clustering coefficient, specifically in respect
to the likelihood of alternative pathways.
Genomic and transcriptomic features

As expected, the number of homologous genes (H30,
H20, H10, H7, H5, H3) showed a negative correlation to
essentiality (P = 3.2E-04, 6.3E-04, 1.4E-06, 4.7E-09, 1.1E10, 1.5E-09, respectively). Interestingly, an E-value cut-off
of 10-5 (H5) worked best showing that also non-perfectly
matching sequences may take over functions of the
knocked out gene. The number of genes having similar
expression (NGSE) exhibited also a negative correlation
to essentiality (P = 1.7E-04) which may be due to coexpression of genes with analogous function. For the feature phyletic retention (PR), the number of prokaryotes
having orthologs of the knocked out gene showed a positive correlation to essentiality (P = 2.1E-16) supporting
the findings of a previous study that conserved genes in
evolution hint for their essentiality [14].
We analyzed the codon usage for each gene and related
these to the essentiality of the gene. We found that genes
with a high number of the nucleotide thymine at the third
position of the codons were more likely to be essential for
cell viability (feature T3s in Figure 3, see Additional file 3:
SupplementS3 for histograms). The third codon position

Page 7 of 16

is the most redundant position in the genetic code.
Matching of mRNA to tRNA codon nucleotides is less
robust at the third position, and translational errors are
therefore more likely to occur at that position. However,
essential genes need to be stable and to be protected in
the sequence. Thymine in the genetic code might cope for
this as it was shown that thymine protected DNA and
improved the efficiency of DNA replication [22]. Conserved genes are more likely to be essential [23] and a thymine at the 3rd codon position facilitates stable genetic
inheritance into off-springs and cellular replicates. Interestingly, we observed a larger difference of T3s in E. coli
when compared to P. aeruginosa. It was found that a large
average of G and C content at the third codon position is
common for all genes in P. aeruginosa [24]. These results
in a low T content at the third codon position which we
observed and may explain the larger difference of T3s for
essential and non-essential genes in E. coli compared to P.
aeruginosa (see also Additional file 3: SupplementS3 for
histograms).
Even though decision trees performed inferior compared to Support Vector Machines (data not shown), we
used decision trees for an alternative approach to determine the most discriminating features for gene essentiality. Decision trees were trained with the datasets ecoB,
ecoG, paeL and paeJ. It is known that the first decision of
a decision tree is performed with the best discriminating
feature [25]. Therefore, we counted the occurrence of our
features at the top position of each run. Out of 400 runs,
we got T3s (137×), BW (81×), Nc (38×), H3 (21×), H5
(15×), val (12×), H7 (11×), NGSE (11×), PUP (10×) as the
first decision (features with less than 10 counts are not
shown). This again showed that the feature for T3s substantially supported the classification.
Identifying drug targets for S. typhimurium

We applied our trained machines from all four datasets
(ecoB, ecoG, paeL, and paeJ) to predict essential genes for
S. typhimurium and obtained votes from four hundred
machines for each gene of S. typhimurium to be essential.
To obtain a reasonable threshold for the number of votes
predicting a gene to be essential, we compared the number of essentially predicted genes with the numbers of the
training sets for E. coli and P. aeruginosa. For E. coli 104
and 147 genes were essential corresponding to the datasets ecoB and ecoG, respectively, and for P. aeruginosa, 92
and 150 (corresponding to datasets paeL and paeJ,
respectively). Therefore, we set a threshold of 350 votes
(of 400 machines) to classify a gene as essential for S.
typhimurium and obtained a comparable amount of 128
predicted essential genes. The complete list of genes
being predicted as essential is given in the supplement
(see Additional file 4: SupplementS4). We then compared
our results to the experimental data from Knuth and co-

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

workers who performed a large knock-out study for S.
typhimurium [21]. They detected 6% of all open reading
frames as being essential including 53 essential genes
coding for enzymes in metabolism. For the remaining
open reading frames of the genome they didn't make any
prediction, including 711 genes for enzymes in metabolism. We compared the list of essential genes of Knuth
and co-workers with our predictions and found 27 of our
predicted genes in the list of Knuth and co-workers yielding a precision of 21%, an accuracy of 83% and sensitivity
of 51%. It is to note that the experimental screen of Knuth
and co-workers was not comprehensive; the authors
stated in their article that for the genes not to be predicted as essential, they couldn't conclude that these
genes are definitely non-essential. Therefore, our novel
predictions may suit as potential new targets for further
investigations. As a conservative and robust estimate of
essential genes for S. typhimurium, we defined the corresponding enzymes of genes which were experimentally
determined (by Knuth and co-workers) and were recognized by our classifiers. We then searched in the literature to find drug treatments of these enzymes for other
micro-organisms. The results are listed in the following.
Two asterisks (**) mark a gene for which enzyme we
found clear evidence to be a drug target for a microorganism. One asterisk (*) was set for a gene when we
found reasonable evidence for its enzyme to serve as a
drug target for a micro-organism. Hence, enzymes with
one asterisk may serve for finding new drug targets and
enzymes with two asterisks for transferring drug targets
from other bacterial diseases to the disease we studied (S.
typhimurium). Table 2 gives an overview of the results.
We compared the open reading frames of the predicted
genes with the human transcripts and did not detect significant homologs (using BLAST [26] and ENSEMBL
cDNA transcripts [27]). E-values of the best hits are given
in the supplement (see Additional file 5: SupplementS5).
Here is the brief summary of the literature evidences we
found:
** murE: UDP-N-acetylmuramoylalanyl-D-glutamate2,6-diaminopimelate ligase is an essential enzyme and a
well-known target against bacterial cell walls of Staphylococcus aureus [28].
* murG: N-acetylglucosaminyl transferase is a potential
antibiotic targeting the biosynthesis of bacterial peptidoglycans. However, it is difficult to design inhibitors for
this enzyme. Identifying inhibitors is under current
research [29,30].
** murC: UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-alanine ligase catalyzes an essential step in the pathway for synthesizing
peptidoglycan precursors. Recently, new inhibitors of the
MurC enzyme have been successfully tested for Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis and Klebsiella pneumoniae
[31].

Page 8 of 16

* pyrH: The gene for uridylate kinase is essential in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis [32].
** uppS: Undecaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase (UPPS)
is a novel antibacterial target of Streptococcus pneumoniae [33].
** accA: Acetyl-CoA carboxylase is a drug target for
anti-obesity and antibiotic drugs [34,35].
* hemH: Ferrochelatase is essential for multiplication
and intracellular survival of Brucella abortus [36].
* kdsB: Analogs of 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate
(KDO) were designed to inhibit CTP:CMP-KDO cytidylyltransferase (CMP-KDO synthetase) [37]. It is a potential target of Haemophilus influenzae [38] and E.coli [39].
* fabD: Acyl carrier protein S-malonyltransferase is a
potential target of Mycobacterium bovis BCG [38].
** fabG: 3-ketoacyl-(acyl-carrier-protein) reductase is a
well-known drug target of E. coli, B. subtilis, and S. aureus
[40].
* pssA: Phosphatidylserine synthetase is required for
motility and chemotaxis in E. coli [41]. Furthermore,
mutants of Escherichia coli K12 which were defective in
phosphatidylserine synthetase, were isolated as temperature-sensitive, conditional lethals [42].
* kdtA: 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic-acid transferase is the enzyme of kdtA. In E. coli, it is essential for
cell growth and accounts for conditional lethality associated with mutations in KDO biosynthesis [43].
** dfp: Pantothenate kinase is uptream of phosphopantothenoylcysteine decarboxylase in the biosynthesis of
pantothenate and CoA. It is a well-known target for antimicrobial drugs against E. coli and Mycobacterium tuberculosis [44].
* rep: ATP-dependent DNA helicase Rep. Its deletion
was found to be lethal in B. subtilis [45] and Stapphylococcus aureus [46].
* rpoB: DNA-directed RNA polymerase is a promising
target for the discovery of new antimicrobial agents
against E. coli [47].
The non-mevalonate pathway and fatty acid biosynthesis
are highly enriched with essential genes of S. typhimurium

We performed gene set enrichment tests (Fisher's exact
tests) with all pathways from KEGG [48] and found a significant enrichment of essential genes in the nonmevalonate pathway (P = 9.2E-06) and in the fatty acid
biosynthesis pathway (P = 3.8E-04). Most of the genes in
these pathways were essential (8 out of 9 genes in the
non-mevalonate pathway and 8 out of 12 genes in the
fatty acid biosynthesis pathway. The non-mevalonate
pathway (Figure 4) produces isopentenyl diphosphate
(IPP) and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP) that
serve as a basis for the production of sterols, dolichols,
and ubiquinone as well as components of macromolecules such as prenyl groups in proteins [49]. The pathway

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

Page 9 of 16

Table 2: Predicted essential genes and potential drug targets.
ORF

Gene Symbol

EC

Enzyme

Evidence

a) Intersection of our predictions with the experimental screen
STM0123

murE

6.3.2.13

UDP-N-acetylmuramoylalanyl-D-glutamate-2,6diaminopimelate ligase

**

STM0128

murG

2.4.1.227

N-acetylglucosaminyl transferase

*
**

STM0129

murC

6.3.2.8

UDP-N-acetylmuramate-L-alanine ligase

STM0154

lpdA

1.8.1.4

Dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase

STM0218

pyrH

2.7.4.22

Uridylate kinase

*

STM0221

uppS

2.5.1.31

Undecaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase

**

STM0222

cdsA

2.7.7.41

CDP-diglyceride synthase

STM0228

lpxA

2.3.1.129

UDP-N-acetylglucosamine acyltransferase

STM0232

accA

6.4.1.2

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase

**

STM0489

hemH

4.99.1.1

Ferrochelatase

*

STM0535

lpxH

STM0542

folD

1.5.1.5, 3.5.4.9

Bifunctional 5,10-methylene-tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase

STM0988

kdsB

2.7.7.38

CTP:CMP-KDO cytidylyltransferase

*

STM1194

fabD

2.3.1.39

Acyl carrier protein S-malonyltransferase

*
**

UDP-2,3-diacylglucosamine hydrolase

STM1195

fabG

1.1.1.100

3-ketoacyl-(acyl-carrier-protein) reductase

STM1200

tmk

2.7.4.9

Thymidylate kinase

STM1700

fabI

1.3.1.10

Enoyl-(acyl carrier protein) reductase

STM2483

dapE

3.5.1.18

Succinyl-diaminopimelate desuccinylase

STM2652

pssA

2.7.8.8

Phosphatidylserine synthase

STM3090

metK

2.5.1.6

STM3415

rpoA

2.7.7.6

STM3724

kdtA

*

DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit alpha
3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic-acid transferase

*

STM3730

dfp

4.1.1.36

Pantothenate kinase

**

STM3912

rep

3.6.1.-

ATP-dependent DNA helicase Rep

*

STM3978

yigC

STM4153

rpoB

2.7.7.6

DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit beta

STM4154

rpoC

2.7.7.6

DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit beta'

3-octaprenyl-4-hydroxybenzoate decarboxylase
*

b) Predictions for the non-mevalonate pathway
STM0049

ispH, lytB

1.17.1.2

4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-enyl diphosphate reductase

*

STM0220

dxr

1.1.1.267

1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase

*

STM0422

dxs

2.2.1.7

1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase

**

STM0423

ispA

2.5.1.10

geranyltranstransferase

*

STM1779

ispE, ipk

2.7.1.149

4-diphosphocytidyl-2-C-methyl-D-erythritol kinase

**

STM2523

ispG, gcpE

1.17.7.1

4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-en-1-yl diphosphate synthase

*

STM2929

ispF

4.6.1.12

2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate synthase

*

STM2930

ispD

2.7.7.60

2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase

*

** clear evidence to be a drug target
* reasonable evidence to serve as a good drug target

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

Page 10 of 16


  







  







   
 



     
 
   
 











  
    
 
     
 

 




   
 
    





  

 
!









 "

   
  

  






  

 

  



 


 

  
  

 
#


   
!     










 







  



 


  




 

Figure 4 The non-mevalonate pathway. The non-mevalonate pathway produces isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP). It is an alternative pathway in bacteria and does not exist in the human host which uses the mevalonate pathway to produce IPP. The non-melavonate pathway was highly enriched
with genes that were predicted to be essential. Reactions are given by their EC number and the gene symbol of the genes of the corresponding enzymes.

for non-mevalonate biosynthesis has been considered
previously for attractive targets of novel antibiotics
against bacteria [50,51] including S. typhimurium [52,53].
Figure 4 shows the non-mevalonate pathway and its
essential enzymes for S. typhimurium. Note that the
arrows in the figure do not represent information about

the irreversibility of these reactions but rather show the
direction of the overall flux. This rather linear pathway
starts at 1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate-synthase (EC
2.2.1.7) which corresponding gene dxs has been identified to be essential also by the experimental knock-out
study of Knuth and co-workers [21]. The next six

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

enzymes downstream were predicted to be essential by
our method. The last enzyme we found in this pathway
was geranyltranstransferase (EC 2.5.1.10). It catalyzes a
reaction to produce farnesyl-diphosphate. Recently, Cornish and co-workers performed an elaborated mutagenesis study of the non-melavonate pathway in S.
typhimurium and found five genes to be essential (ispD,
ispE, ispF, ispG, ispH) [52]. We propose that all eight
enzymes in this pathway are promising potential drug
targets for S. typhimurium. We searched in the literature
and indicated our findings by one and two asterisks as
described above. For two genes we found clear evidences
(two asterisks) and for six genes reasonable evidences
(one asterisks) to code for drug targets (see Additional file
5: SupplementS5).

Conclusions
We established a machine learning approach that predicts the essentiality of genes for an organism when no
experimental knock-out data is available. The classifiers
were trained with essentiality information for genes of
one organism (e.g. E. coli) and were employed to predict
essential genes of the other organism (e.g. P. aeruginosa).
These predictions did not depend on essentiality information of the query organism for which the predictions
were made, but solely on features that were calculated
from the metabolic network and genomic and transcriptomic information of the query organism. Such data is
abundantly available for many pathogenic bacteria. We
applied this method to predict essential genes of Salmonella typhimurium as the query organism of interest and
proposed 35 potential drug targets. 27 targets resulted
from the intersection between our predictions and an
experimental study [21] and 8 targets of the nonmevalonate pathway which we found by a statistical
enrichment analysis. The non-mevalonate pathway is
essential in algae, plants and several eubacteria including
pathogenic bacteria. Enzymes of this pathway have been
described to be potential targets for the development of
novel antibiotics and herbicidal agents [50,52]. For S.
typhimurium, we also inferred this by our machine learning approach. We discovered interesting correlations of
our features to the essentiality of a gene. Various features
describing the network topology served the machine to
select reactions that showed no possible pathways for flux
deviations, as e.g. in the linear non-mevalonate pathway.
An intelligent combination of these features may be seen
as an alternative approach to the established methods of
flux balance analyses (FBA) and elementary flux modes
(EFM) if detailed growth and nutrient information is
lacking (which is needed for FBA, see [3] and if an indepth refinement of the metabolic network is considered
to be too labor intensive (in EFM the enzymes need to be

Page 11 of 16

separated into internal nodes and external nodes to
reduce the computational complexity [54]).
Our method served well to estimate genes and their
corresponding enzymes in the bacterial organisms of E.
coli, P. aeruginosa and S. typhimurium. Inferring essentiality information for an organism from another organism
may be facilitated by investigating a closely related organism as we did with S. typhimurium being rather closely
related to E. coli. To apply this method to other microorganisms, the metabolism may need to be well
described, and the method may need adaptation for less
studied organisms or which show special metabolic capabilities. For applying this method to eukaryotic genomes,
the compartments in the cell at which a reaction occurs
may need to be considered. It will be very challenging to
apply our method for inferring multiple drug targets
using experimental double knock-out screens as e.g. of
the synthetic lethal project of eSGA [55]. For this, attributes that are related to single players (like e.g. sequence
features) might be of less relevance while specifically network features might be much more related to synergistic
knock-out effects. The challenge for the future remains to
integrate such topological descriptive approaches with
genetic information to systematically explore the network
effects of enzyme treatments and combinations thereof.

Methods
Network reconstruction

The metabolic networks of E. coli, P. aeruginosa, and S.
typhimurium were reconstructed using the database of
KEGG [48]. Unspecific compounds such as water, ATP,
etc. were discarded. Additionally, only the main compounds of the reactions as annotated in the KGML files of
KEGG were used. Except for the centrality features and
clustering coefficients, the topology features were calculated by a representation of the network as a bipartite
graph consisting of metabolites and reactions as alternating nodes. For calculating the centrality features and the
clustering coefficients, we represented the metabolic network as an undirected graph, also known as a reactionpair network. It consisted of reactions as nodes and
metabolites as edges connecting two reactions of the
graph. Two reactions were connected by a metabolite if
the metabolite was a product of one of the reactions and a
substrate of the other reaction. Edges were discarded
such that the network had no loops and no more than one
edge between any two different nodes. Reactions were
mapped to enzymes and enzymes mapped to their corresponding genes using the association tables from KEGG.
Genes that corresponded to death-end reactions in the
network were not included into the datasets for training
and validation. If a gene corresponded to more than one
reaction, the mean value of the reaction features was
taken. For the Boolean features (RUP, DIR, CP, see below)

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

we used the Boolean OR-operation, i.e. a gene feature was
set to one if at least one reaction feature equaled to one.
The gold standards

To train and validate our predictions, we used published
datasets from genome wide experimental knock-out
screens. All were performed in LB rich medium. Two
datasets were of E. coli and two of P. aeruginosa. Additionally we used data from a knock-out study of S. typhimurium which was also performed in LB rich medium.
All datasets were taken from the NMPDR database [56].
For E. coli, we used the KEIO collection of Baba and coworkers [17] which we denoted as 'ecoB'. It consisted of
104 essential and 641 non-essential genes for the metabolic network. The other dataset of E. coli was from
Gerdes and co-workers [18] which we denoted as 'ecoG'.
It consisted of 147 essential genes and 533 non-essential
genes for our network. For P. aeruginosa we used the data
of Liberati et al. [20] denoted as 'paeL'. It consisted of 92
essential genes and 615 non-essential genes for the network. The other dataset for P. aeruginosa was taken from
the study by of Jacobs et al. [19]. We denoted it as 'paeJ'. It
consisted of 150 essential genes and 579 non-essential
genes. The experimental dataset for S. typhimurium was
from Knuth and co-workers [21] and based on insertionduplication mutagenesis (IDM). Small, randomly generated genomic fragments were cloned into a conditionally
replicating vector, and the resulting library of single S.
typhimurium clones was grown under permissive conditions. Upon switching to non-permissive temperature,
discrimination between lethal and non-lethal insertions
following homologous recombination allowed the trapping of genes with essential functions. With this method,
genes were detected that were indispensable for growth.
However, non-essential genes could not be determined.
For the metabolism, 53 genes were found to be essential
and for the remaining 711 the essentiality could not be
determined by this method [21].
Defining the features

Features were obtained from network topology properties and genomic and transcriptomic information. Table 1
shows an overview of all features and their abbreviations.
Topology based features
a) Deviation features

For the following features, we used the metabolic network in the representation of a bipartite graph consisting
of two different alternating nodes, i.e. metabolites and
reactions. As reported recently [6,16], we implemented a
breadth first algorithm to investigate the network when a
single reaction was blocked. We defined a reaction as
essential for survival when basically the mutated network
could not yield the products of the reaction from
upstream substrates of the reaction. Hence, features were

Page 12 of 16

defined to describe if the knocked out reaction was substantial for producing its downstream metabolites or if
these products could still be produced by other pathways.
The investigation for each tested knocked out reaction
was performed by the following algorithm:
i. All metabolites acting as input nodes (substrates) and
output nodes (products) of the knocked out reaction
were selected. The set of substrates S defined the input
nodes and the set of products P defined the output nodes.
To get a broader list of available substrates we integrated
other substrates into S. We included the substrates of the
upstream reactions and the products of the downstream
reactions into the sets S and P, respectively. Substrates of
reactions that had at least one of the substrates S as a substrate were included into S. Further, substrates of reactions that had a metabolite out of P as a substrate were
also included into S.
ii. Reactions were selected which used only available
compounds as substrates.
iii. These selected reactions and their products were
incorporated into the list of discovered reactions and
products. The products were set as newly available
metabolites in the network.
iv. Steps ii and iii were repeated until no further reactions could be identified.
v. The output nodes that could be produced were
counted (reachable products P).
After finishing the process, we used the number of
defined output nodes that could be produced within the
mutated network for two features, i.e. a quality feature
defining if all products could be produced (RUP, reachable/unreachable products), and the percentage of products that could not be produced (PUP, percentage of
unreachable products). We again run a breadth first
search on the network to estimate possible deviations.
Starting from S, the breadth first search explored the network for finding the direct products of the knocked out
reaction. When the algorithm visited these products, it
stored the corresponding pathway and continued its
search to find further alternative paths until the network
was entirely explored or a maximal path length of 10
reactions was reached. The organism may have many
pathways to produce the products making the system
more robust. Thus, we counted the number of possible
alternative paths yielding feature ND (ND, number of
deviations). We took the average path length (APL, average path length) and the shortest path length (LSP, length
of shortest path) of the deviations as features for the classifier. The deviation features were used to find alternative
pathways to produce products of the knocked out reaction by its substrates S. In the metabolic network, these
substrates can also be consumed by other reactions yielding their products etc. Therefore, we kept track of alter-

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

native paths in the network for the potential of the
organism to survive when a reaction was blocked.

Page 13 of 16

reactions [10]. The betweenness centrality Cb(v) for a
reaction v is given by

b) Local topology

The number of substrates and products of the knocked
out reaction were counted (NS: number of substrates;
NP: number of products). We defined features for the
number of Neighboring reactions (NNR) and the number
of Neighbors of Neighboring reactions (NNNR). We calculated the clustering coefficient (CCV) as described in
[57,58] of the knocked out reaction to estimate the local
density of the network. The reaction direction (DIR,
directionality of reactions) was taken from KEGG and set
as reversible if no other information was available.
c) Choke-points and load-scores

A reaction that uniquely consumes or produces a certain
metabolite in the metabolic network is considered a
choke point. Such a reaction shows high potential for
essentiality [4,5]. We used this as a feature (CP, choke
points). According to the concept [4], load scores were
defined as hot spots in the network based on the ratio of
the number of k-shortest paths passing through a reaction, and the number of nearest neighbor links attached
to it. This ratio was compared to the average load value in
the network.
d) Damage

The damage was defined to determine potentially
effected metabolites and reactions downstream of the
knocked out reaction. We used the definition of damaged
compounds and reactions from Lemke and co-workers
[7] yielding the features NDR (NDR, number of damaged
reactions) and NDC (number of damaged compounds).
As half of our reactions were annotated as being reversible, some compounds and reactions might have been
inferred as damage but are actually just back-traced alternative pathways. Therefore, we calculated the number of
damaged compounds and reactions for a network in
which all alternative pathways were discarded yielding
NDRD (number of damaged reactions without deviations) and NDCD (number of damaged compounds without deviations). In addition, we calculated the number of
damaged choke points (NDCR, number of damaged
choke point reactions; NDCC, number of damaged choke
point compounds; NDCRD, number of damaged choke
point reactions without deviations; NDCCD, number of
damaged choke point compounds without deviations).
e) Centrality

For these features, we used the network-representation of
a reaction-pair network. We computed the centrality features by using the R package 'igraph' [59] consisting of
betweenness centrality (BC), closeness centrality (CN),
eccentricity (EC) [10], and eigenvector centrality (EV)
[60]. Let G(V, E) be a simple undirected graph with n vertices (reactions). Betweenness measures the frequency of
a reaction (node) to be in the shortest path of all pairs of

C b ( v) =

∑

i ≠ j ≠ v∈V

d ij (v)
d ij

,

(1)

in which dij is the number of shortest paths from reaction i to reaction j, and dij(v) is the number of shortest
paths from i to j that pass through reaction v. The sum is
composed of all pairs (i, j) of reactions of the network.
Closeness centrality approximates how many edges are
required to access every other reaction from a given reaction [10]. It is defined by the inverse of the average length
of the shortest paths to all the other reactions. The closeness centrality Cc(v) for a reaction v is given by
C c ( v) =

n −1
∑ d vi
i ≠ v ,i∈V

(2)

in which n is the number of reactions in the network.
Eccentricity is the longest distance from the given reaction to any other reaction [61]. The eccentricity Ce(v) for
a vertex v is given by
C e ( v) =

n −1
.
max (d vi )
i ≠ v ,i∈V

(3)

Eigenvector centrality is based on the assumption that
the utility of a reaction is determined by the utility of the
neighboring reactions [62]. It scores a reaction higher if it
is connected to high-scoring reactions. It is defined as the
principal eigenvector of the adjacency matrix of the network. Let xi denote the score of a reaction i. Let Aij be the
adjacency matrix of the network. Thus Aij = 1 if there is
an edge between reactions i and j, and Aij = 0 otherwise.
For reaction i, the centrality score is proportional to the
average of the centralities of i's network neighbors:

xi =

1
l

∑

j∈Neighbor (i)

xj

=

1
l

n

∑A x ,
ij j

(4)

j =1

in which Neighbor(i) is the set of neighboring reactions
of reaction i, n is the total number of reactions and λ is a
constant. This leads directly to the well-known eigenvector equation, Ax = λx. Normally, there are different eigenvalues λ for which an eigenvector solution exists.
According to the Perron-Frobenius theorem only the

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

eigenvector of the largest eigenvalue is the eigenvector
centrality [60].
Genomic and transcriptomic features
f) Homologs

We calculated the number of homologous genes that
might have taken over the function of the knocked out
gene. Homologous genes were searched using BLAST
[26] against all open reading frames of the respective
organism (E. coli, P. aeruginosa, S. typhimurium). We
used different E-value cutoffs, i.e. 10-3, 10-5, 10-7, 10-10, 1020, and 10-30 to obtain the features H3, H5, H7, H10, H20
and H30, respectively. Sequences of all open reading
frames were taken from the NCBI database (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, E. coli: [GenBank:NC_000913],
P. aeruginosa: [GenBank:NC_002516], and S. typhimurium: [GenBank:NC_003197]).
g) Gene expression

We collected gene expression data for all three investigated organisms from public resources. The datasets
were selected in respect to have a rather unspecific regulation, i.e. from treatments affecting not a small band but
a broad range of metabolic pathways. For E. coli, we used
gene expression data from a study in which the regulation
during oxygen deprivation was investigated [63], for P.
aeruginosa from a study observing the response to agmatine and putrescine treatment [64] and from a study of
quorum-sensing response to environmental conditions
[65]. For S. typhimurium we used data of cells treated
with nutrient limitation at different time points [66] and
data from a study that captured the regulatory response
in the environment of the host [67]. The data was normalized by variance stabilization normalization [68].
Genes with similar functionality in the same pathway
often show co-regulation [69]. Therefore, the maximum
correlation coefficient (MCC) of all neighboring reactions of the knocked out reaction was used as a feature.
Additionally, we calculated the number of reactions with
similar gene expression (NGSE, correlation coefficient >
0.8) and used it as features for an estimate of co-regulated
analogous genes.
h) Phyletic retention

We selected 177 prokaryotic organisms (except E. coli, P.
aeruginosa, and S. typhimurium) as described in
Gustafson et al. [14] out of which we counted the number
of organisms having an open reading frame that was
homologous the sequence of the knocked out gene. This
was performed with E. coli, P. aeruginosa, and S. typhimurium using bi-directional best BLAST hits (E-value cutoff
of 0.1).
i) Codon usage

Codons were counted for each investigated gene from its
coding region. We counted base compositions at silent
sites (third position of the codons) yielding the features

Page 14 of 16

T3s, C3s, A3s, G3s for thymine, cytosine, adenine and
guanine, respectively. Additionally, the number of codons
coding for all encoded amino acids (phe, ser, tyr, cys, leu,
trp, pro, his, arg, gln, ile, met, thr, asn, lys, val, ala, asp,
glu, gly) were counted. All codon counts were normalized
by division of the total number of codons (Nc). Nc was
also used as a feature.
The machine learning system

We used Support Vector Machines from the R package
'e1071' to classify essential and non-essential genes of
metabolism http://www.r-project.org. A radial basis
function was used as the kernel. Parameter optimization
was performed on the training data for the regularization
term and the kernel width. The regularization term
defined the costs for false classifications and was optimized using the values 2n with n = -4, -2, 0, 2, 4. The same
range was taken for the kernel width. This optimization
was realized by training with a grid search over all combinations of these parameters. The sizes of the two classes
differed considerably in our data sets (essential genes: 8 15%, non-essential genes: 85 - 92%). For a broad spectrum of different sensitivities and specificities, we applied
a voting scheme. We trained 100 Support Vector
Machines (SVMs) with all essential genes and an equal
amount of randomly selected non-essential genes. With
this, we stratified the training data. For the classification
of a query gene, the output of all machines was summed
up and used as a voting score for the gene to be essential
for the cell.
Defining the most discriminating features with decision
trees

The first decision in decision trees applies the best discriminating feature [25]. Therefore, we used decision
trees as an alternative approach for defining the most discriminating features. We applied the method of decision
trees using the R package 'rpart' http://www.r-project.org
to classify essential and non-essential genes of the metabolism. Gini impurity [70] was used for splitting the data.
The minimum number of observations that had to exist
in a node was 20 and the maximum depth was 30. We
stratified the training data in the same manner as for
training the Support Vector Machines. One hundred
decision trees were generated for each gold standard
(ecoB, ecoG, paeL and paeJ). To get the most discriminating features, for each run the first decision of each tree
was selected.
Performance measures and statistics

For assessing the performance of the classifier, the predictions were compared to the gold standard from the experimental screens. A prediction was either true positive (tp,
prediction: essential, gold standard: essential), false posi-

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

tive (fp, prediction: essential, gold standard: non-essential), true negative (tn, prediction: non-essential, gold
standard: non-essential) or false negative (fn, prediction:
non-essential, gold standard: essential). We calculated the
standard measures accuracy = (tp+tn)/(tp+tn+fp+fn),
sensitivity = tp/(tp+fn), and specificity = tn/(tn+fp). A
receiver operator characteristics (ROC-curve) was used
to measure the performance for a classifier system with
various thresholds. In the ROC-curve the sensitivity is
plotted against 1 - specificity and the area under the
curve (AUC) yields a performance estimate across the
entire range of thresholds. P-values for Pearson's correlation coefficients for the features were calculated as
described in [71].

Page 15 of 16

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.
11.
12.

Additional material
Additional file 1 ROC curves for the essential gene predictions with
subsets of features.
Additional file 2 Correlation coefficients of the features to gene
essentiality.
Additional file 3 Histograms for the frequency of T3s in essential
genes and non-essential genes.
Additional file 4 All examined metabolic genes of S. typhimurium
with our computational predictions and the experimental results of
Knuth et al. (2004).
Additional file 5 Predicted essential genes and potential drug targets
for S. typhimurium and their literature evidences.
Authors' contributions
KP and RK put up the general concept and design of the study. KP carried out
the data analysis. KP and RK drafted the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded within the BMBF-FORSYS consortium Viroquant
[#0313923]; the Nationales Genom-Forschungs-Netz (NGFN+) for the neuroblastoma project ENGINE, and the Commission on Higher Education (CHE) of
Thailand.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
Author Details
1Department of Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics, Institute of
Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology, Bioquant, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 267, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany and 2B080 Division of
Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

21.

22.
Received: 17 December 2009 Accepted: 3 May 2010
Published: 3 May 2010
© 2010 Plaimas et al; 2010, 4:56
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56
BMC article is Biology licensee distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Systems available article BioMed Central Ltd.

References
1. Hopkins AL, Groom CR: The druggable genome. Nat Rev Drug Discov
2002, 1:727-730.
2. Feist AM, Henry CS, Reed JL, Krummenacker M, Joyce AR, Karp PD,
Broadbelt LJ, Hatzimanikatis V, Palsson BO: A genome-scale metabolic
reconstruction for Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655 that accounts for 1260
ORFs and thermodynamic information. Mol Syst Biol 2007, 3:121.
3. Schuetz R, Kuepfer L, Sauer U: Systematic evaluation of objective
functions for predicting intracellular fluxes in Escherichia coli. Mol Syst
Biol 2007, 3:119.
4. Rahman SA, Schomburg D: Observing local and global properties of
metabolic pathways: 'load points' and 'choke points' in the metabolic
networks. Bioinformatics 2006, 22:1767-1774.

23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.

Yeh I, Hanekamp T, Tsoka S, Karp PD, Altman RB: Computational analysis
of Plasmodium falciparum metabolism: organizing genomic
information to facilitate drug discovery. Genome Res 2004, 14:917-924.
Fatumo S, Plaimas K, Mallm JP, Schramm G, Adebiyi E, Oswald M, Eils R,
Konig R: Estimating novel potential drug targets of Plasmodium
falciparum by analysing the metabolic network of knock-out strains in
silico. Infect Genet Evol 2009, 9:351-358.
Lemke N, Heredia F, Barcellos CK, Dos Reis AN, Mombach JC: Essentiality
and damage in metabolic networks. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:115-119.
Gursoy A, Keskin O, Nussinov R: Topological properties of protein
interaction networks from a structural perspective. Biochem Soc Trans
2008, 36:1398-1403.
Hahn MW, Kern AD: Comparative genomics of centrality and
essentiality in three eukaryotic protein-interaction networks. Mol Biol
Evol 2005, 22:803-806.
Estrada E: Virtual identification of essential proteins within the protein
interaction network of yeast. Proteomics 2006, 6:35-40.
Przulj N, Wigle DA, Jurisica I: Functional topology in a network of protein
interactions. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:340-348.
Acencio ML, Lemke N: Towards the prediction of essential genes by
integration of network topology, cellular localization and biological
process information. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:290.
Seringhaus M, Paccanaro A, Borneman A, Snyder M, Gerstein M:
Predicting essential genes in fungal genomes. Genome Res 2006,
16:1126-1135.
Gustafson AM, Snitkin ES, Parker SC, DeLisi C, Kasif S: Towards the
identification of essential genes using targeted genome sequencing
and comparative analysis. BMC Genomics 2006, 7:265.
Hwang YC, Lin CC, Chang JY, Mori H, Juan HF, Huang HC: Predicting
essential genes based on network and sequence analysis. Mol Biosyst
2009, 5:1672-8.
Plaimas K, Mallm JP, Oswald M, Svara F, Sourjik V, Eils R, Konig R: Machine
learning based analyses on metabolic networks supports highthroughput knockout screens. BMC Syst Biol 2008, 2:67.
Baba T, Ara T, Hasegawa M, Takai Y, Okumura Y, Baba M, Datsenko KA,
Tomita M, Wanner BL, Mori H: Construction of Escherichia coli K-12 inframe, single-gene knockout mutants: the Keio collection. Mol Syst Biol
2006, 2:2006 0008.
Gerdes SY, Scholle MD, Campbell JW, Balazsi G, Ravasz E, Daugherty MD,
Somera AL, Kyrpides NC, Anderson I, Gelfand MS, et al.: Experimental
determination and system level analysis of essential genes in
Escherichia coli MG1655. J Bacteriol 2003, 185:5673-5684.
Jacobs MA, Alwood A, Thaipisuttikul I, Spencer D, Haugen E, Ernst S, Will O,
Kaul R, Raymond C, Levy R, et al.: Comprehensive transposon mutant
library of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:14339-14344.
Liberati NT, Urbach JM, Miyata S, Lee DG, Drenkard E, Wu G, Villanueva J,
Wei T, Ausubel FM: An ordered, nonredundant library of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa strain PA14 transposon insertion mutants. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2006, 103:2833-2838.
Knuth K, Niesalla H, Hueck CJ, Fuchs TM: Large-scale identification of
essential Salmonella genes by trapping lethal insertions. Mol Microbiol
2004, 51:1729-1744.
Leon PE: Inhibition of ribozymes by deoxyribonucleotides and the
origin of DNA. J Mol Evol 1998, 47:122-126.
Giaever G, Chu AM, Ni L, Connelly C, Riles L, Veronneau S, Dow S, LucauDanila A, Anderson K, Andre B, et al.: Functional profiling of the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Nature 2002, 418:387-391.
Grocock RJ, Sharp PM: Synonymous codon usage in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PA01. Gene 2002, 289:131-139.
Witten IH, Frank E: Data Mining, Practical Machine Learning Tools and
Techniques San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann; 2005.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman
DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Beal K, Ballester B, Caccamo M, Chen Y, Clarke L,
Coates G, Cunningham F, Cutts T, et al.: Ensembl 2007. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, 35:D610-617.
Bratkovic T, Lunder M, Urleb U, Strukelj B: Peptide inhibitors of MurD and
MurE, essential enzymes of bacterial cell wall biosynthesis. J Basic
Microbiol 2008, 48:202-206.

Plaimas et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:56
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/56

29. Kotnik M, Anderluh PS, Prezelj A: Development of novel inhibitors
targeting intracellular steps of peptidoglycan biosynthesis. Curr Pharm
Des 2007, 13:2283-2309.
30. Helm JS, Hu Y, Chen L, Gross B, Walker S: Identification of active-site
inhibitors of MurG using a generalizable, high-throughput
glycosyltransferase screen. J Am Chem Soc 2003, 125:11168-11169.
31. Zawadzke LE, Norcia M, Desbonnet CR, Wang H, Freeman-Cook K,
Dougherty TJ: Identification of an inhibitor of the MurC enzyme, which
catalyzes an essential step in the peptidoglycan precursor synthesis
pathway. Assay Drug Dev Technol 2008, 6:95-103.
32. Robertson D, Carroll P, Parish T: Rapid recombination screening to test
gene essentiality demonstrates that pyrH is essential in
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Tuberculosis (Edinb) 2007, 87:450-458.
33. Peukert S, Sun Y, Zhang R, Hurley B, Sabio M, Shen X, Gray C, Dzink-Fox J,
Tao J, Cebula R, Wattanasin S: Design and structure-activity relationships
of potent and selective inhibitors of undecaprenyl pyrophosphate
synthase (UPPS): tetramic, tetronic acids and dihydropyridin-2-ones.
Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2008, 18:1840-1844.
34. Tong L, Harwood HJ Jr: Acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylases: versatile
targets for drug discovery. J Cell Biochem 2006, 99:1476-1488.
35. Tong L: Acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase: crucial metabolic enzyme and
attractive target for drug discovery. Cell Mol Life Sci 2005, 62:1784-1803.
36. Almiron M, Martinez M, Sanjuan N, Ugalde RA: Ferrochelatase is present
in Brucella abortus and is critical for its intracellular survival and
virulence. Infect Immun 2001, 69:6225-6230.
37. Capobianco JO, Darveau RP, Goldman RC, Lartey PA, Pernet AG: Inhibition
of exogenous 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate incorporation into lipid
A precursor of toluene-treated Salmonella typhimurium cells. J
Bacteriol 1987, 169:4030-4035.
38. Ku MJ, Yoon HJ, Ahn HJ, Kim HW, Baek SH, Suh SW: Crystallization and
preliminary X-ray crystallographic studies of 3-deoxy-mannooctulosonate cytidylyltransferase from Haemophilus influenzae. Acta
Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2003, 59:180-182.
39. Jelakovic S, Schulz GE: The structure of CMP:2-keto-3-deoxy-mannooctonic acid synthetase and of its complexes with substrates and
substrate analogs. J Mol Biol 2001, 312:143-155.
40. Sohn MJ, Zheng CJ, Kim WG: Macrolactin S, a New Antibacterial Agent
with FabG-inhibitory Activity from Bacillus sp. AT28. J Antibiot (Tokyo)
2008, 61:687-691.
41. Shi W, Bogdanov M, Dowhan W, Zusman DR: The pss and psd genes are
required for motility and chemotaxis in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol
1993, 175:7711-7714.
42. Raetz CR, Foulds J: Envelope composition and antibiotic
hypersensitivity of Escherichia coli mutants defective in
phosphatidylserine synthetase. J Biol Chem 1977, 252:5911-5915.
43. Belunis CJ, Clementz T, Carty SM, Raetz CR: Inhibition of
lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis and cell growth following inactivation
of the kdtA gene in Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 1995, 270:27646-27652.
44. Kumar P, Chhibber M, Surolia A: How pantothenol intervenes in
Coenzyme-A biosynthesis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2007, 361:903-909.
45. Kobayashi K, Ehrlich SD, Albertini A, Amati G, Andersen KK, Arnaud M, Asai
K, Ashikaga S, Aymerich S, Bessieres P, et al.: Essential Bacillus subtilis
genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:4678-4683.
46. Ji Y, Zhang B, Van SF, Horn , Warren P, Woodnutt G, Burnham MK,
Rosenberg M: Identification of critical staphylococcal genes using
conditional phenotypes generated by antisense RNA. Science 2001,
293:2266-2269.
47. Chopra I: Bacterial RNA polymerase: a promising target for the
discovery of new antimicrobial agents. Curr Opin Investig Drugs 2007,
8:600-607.
48. Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M: KEGG: Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:29-34.
49. Hunter WN: The non-mevalonate pathway of isoprenoid precursor
biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:21573-21577.
50. Illarionova V, Kaiser J, Ostrozhenkova E, Bacher A, Fischer M, Eisenreich W,
Rohdich F: Nonmevalonate terpene biosynthesis enzymes as
antiinfective drug targets: substrate synthesis and high-throughput
screening methods. J Org Chem 2006, 71:8824-8834.
51. Singh N, Cheve G, Avery MA, McCurdy CR: Targeting the methyl
erythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway for novel antimalarial,
antibacterial and herbicidal drug discovery: inhibition of 1-deoxy-D-

Page 16 of 16

52.
53.

54.

55.

56.

57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.

64.

65.

66.
67.

68.

69.

70.
71.

xylulose-5-phosphate reductoisomerase (DXR) enzyme. Curr Pharm
Des 2007, 13:1161-1177.
Cornish RM, Roth JR, Poulter CD: Lethal mutations in the isoprenoid
pathway of Salmonella enterica. J Bacteriol 2006, 188:1444-1450.
Testa CA, Cornish RM, Poulter CD: The sorbitol phosphotransferase
system is responsible for transport of 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol into
Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium. J Bacteriol 2004,
186:473-480.
Dandekar T, Moldenhauer F, Bulik S, Bertram H, Schuster S: A method for
classifying metabolites in topological pathway analyses based on
minimization of pathway number. Biosystems 2003, 70:255-270.
Butland G, Babu M, Diaz-Mejia JJ, Bohdana F, Phanse S, Gold B, Yang W, Li
J, Gagarinova AG, Pogoutse O, et al.: eSGA: E. coli synthetic genetic array
analysis. Nat Methods 2008, 5:789-795.
McNeil LK, Reich C, Aziz RK, Bartels D, Cohoon M, Disz T, Edwards RA,
Gerdes S, Hwang K, Kubal M, et al.: The National Microbial Pathogen
Database Resource (NMPDR): a genomics platform based on
subsystem annotation. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D347-353.
Barabasi AL, Oltvai ZN: Network biology: understanding the cell's
functional organization. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5:101-113.
Wagner A, Fell DA: The small world inside large metabolic networks.
Proc Biol Sci 2001, 268:1803-1810.
Csardi G, Nepusz T: The igraph software package for complex network
research. interJournal 2006, Complex Systems:1695.
Bonacich P: Power and Centrality: A Family of Measures. American
Journal of Sociology 1987, 92:1170-1182.
Koschützki D, Schreiber F: Comparison of Centralities for Biological
Networks. In Proc German Conf Bioinformatics (GCB 2004) Springer-Verlag;
2004:199-206.
Bonacich P: Factoring and weighting approaches to status scores and
clique identification. Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1972, 2:113-120.
Covert MW, Knight EM, Reed JL, Herrgard MJ, Palsson BO: Integrating
high-throughput and computational data elucidates bacterial
networks. Nature 2004, 429:92-96.
Chou HT, Kwon DH, Hegazy M, Lu CD: Transcriptome analysis of
agmatine and putrescine catabolism in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
PAO1. J Bacteriol 2008, 190:1966-1975.
Schuster M, Greenberg EP: Early activation of quorum sensing in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa reveals the architecture of a complex
regulon. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:287.
Kim CC, Falkow S: Significance analysis of lexical bias in microarray data.
BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:12.
Detweiler CS, Monack DM, Brodsky IE, Mathew H, Falkow S: virK, somA
and rcsC are important for systemic Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium infection and cationic peptide resistance. Mol Microbiol
2003, 48:385-400.
Huber W, von Heydebreck A, Sultmann H, Poustka A, Vingron M: Variance
stabilization applied to microarray data calibration and to the
quantification of differential expression. Bioinformatics 2002, 18(Suppl
1):S96-104.
Samal A, Singh S, Giri V, Krishna S, Raghuram N, Jain S: Low degree
metabolites explain essential reactions and enhance modularity in
biological networks. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:118.
Breiman L, Friedman JH, Olshen R, Stone CJ: Classification and Regression
Tree Monterey, CA: Wadsworth International Group; 1984.
Weiss NA: Introductory Statistics New York: Addison Wesley; 2007.

doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-56
Cite this article as: Plaimas et al., Identifying essential genes in bacterial
metabolic networks with machine learning methods BMC Systems Biology
2010, 4:56

</pre>
</body>
</html>
