<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The population genomics of begomoviruses: global scale population structure and gene flow</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2010 7:220. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-220"/>
<meta name="Author" content="HC Prasanna"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

RESEARCH

Open Access

The population genomics of begomoviruses:
global scale population structure and gene flow
HC Prasanna1,4*, D P Sinha1, Ajay Verma2, Major Singh1, Bijendra Singh1, Mathura Rai1, Darren P Martin3

Abstract
Background: The rapidly growing availability of diverse full genome sequences from across the world is increasing
the feasibility of studying the large-scale population processes that underly observable pattern of virus diversity. In
particular, characterizing the genetic structure of virus populations could potentially reveal much about how factors
such as geographical distributions, host ranges and gene flow between populations combine to produce the
discontinuous patterns of genetic diversity that we perceive as distinct virus species. Among the richest and most
diverse full genome datasets that are available is that for the dicotyledonous plant infecting genus, Begomovirus, in
the Family Geminiviridae. The begomoviruses all share the same whitefly vector, are highly recombinogenic and
are distributed throughout tropical and subtropical regions where they seriously threaten the food security of the
world’s poorest people.
Results: We focus here on using a model-based population genetic approach to identify the genetically distinct
sub-populations within the global begomovirus meta-population. We demonstrate the existence of at least seven
major sub-populations that can further be sub-divided into as many as thirty four significantly differentiated and
genetically cohesive minor sub-populations. Using the population structure framework revealed in the present
study, we further explored the extent of gene flow and recombination between genetic populations.
Conclusions: Although geographical barriers are apparently the most significant underlying cause of the seven
major population sub-divisions, within the framework of these sub-divisions, we explore patterns of gene flow to
reveal that both host range differences and genetic barriers to recombination have probably been major
contributors to the minor population sub-divisions that we have identified. We believe that the global Begomovirus
population structure revealed here could facilitate population genetics studies into how central parameters of
population genetics namely selection, recombination, mutation, gene flow, and genetic drift shape the global
begomovirus diversity.

Background
The study of genome-wide patterns of sequence variation within and between closely related virus species can
be used to efficiently infer the fine-scale genetic structures of virus populations. Information on population
structures - particularly that pertaining to stratification
and admixture (i.e. gene flow) - is valuable in a variety
of situations. These include the establishment of sensible
species/subspecies/strain classification criteria, the detection of geographical or biological barriers to gene flow,
and the identification of demographic, epidemiological
* Correspondence: prasanahc@yahoo.com
1
Indian Institute of Vegetable Research, P B No. 1, P O - Jakhini,
Shahanshapur, Varanasi, India
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

or evolutionary processes responsible for virus differentiation [1-3]. More specifically, a detailed knowledge of
virus population stratification can provide important
insights into how virus genetic diversity generated
through mutation and recombination is shaped into discernable taxonomic groupings: A process that involves
natural selection and genetic drift in the context of epidemiological fluctuations in virus population sizes and
the spatial movement of viruses across land-masses
[4,5]. The deeper understanding of virus epidemiology
and evolutionary history that can potentially be provided
by studies of virus population structure is also directly
applicable to the formulation of strategies for controlling
the dissemination of viral diseases [6,7].

© 2010 Prasanna et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

It is therefore surprising that there have been no studies specifically aimed at identifying global-scale population genetic structures within agriculturally significant
groups of plant pathogenic viruses such as the geminiviruses, potyviruses, tospoviruses, cucumoviruses and
sobemoviruses. For example, virtually nothing is known
about population stratification amongst the various
geminivirus species within the genus Begomovirus that
are responsible for economically devastating diseases of
many leguminaceous, solanaceous, curcurbitaceous and
malvaceous crop species throughout the tropical and
subtropical regions of the world [8-15]. Begomoviruses
are transmitted by the whitefly, Bemasia tabaci, and
have circular single stranded one (i.e. monopartite) or
two (i.e. bipartite) component genomes ranging in size
from ~2.7 Kb (for monopartite species) to ~5.4 Kb (for
bipartite species) [16].
Relationships amongst DNA-A and DNA-A-like
sequences are widely used in formalized begomovirus
species, strain and variant demarcation schemes [17-19].
Based on the phylogenies of currently sampled DNA-A
and DNA-A-like sequences, begomoviruses have been
classified worldwide into seven different groups.
Whereas begomoviruses originating from the Old World
have been divided into Africa-Mediterranean, Indian,
Asian, and legume-infecting viruses (legumoviruses),
those originating in the New World have been classified
into Latin American and Meso American groups. A
seventh group of Sweet potato-infecting viruses (swepoviruses) is found in both the Old and New Worlds [20].
This phylogenetic sub-division of the begomoviruses
broadly corresponds with their geographical distributions [20] except that the divergent legumovirus and
swepovirus [20,21] lineages occur alongside other distantly related begomovirus groups.
The current Begomovirus taxonomic classification system is based almost entirely on traditional phylogenetic
reconstruction and pairwise genetic distance estimators
(such as Hamming or p-distances) [17-20,22]. These
estimators have been commonly used because of both
their simplicity and their relatively unambiguous
approximation of relationships between sequences.
However, frequent inter-species genetic recombination
is a prominent feature of begomovirus evolution [22-27]
that can obscure estimated relationships amongst groups
of species [28-30] and can thus undermine the robustness of current classification schemes. In this regard it is
noteworthy that population genetic analysis based
approaches can in many cases explicitly account for
genetic recombination. In fact, enumerating the
exchange of genetic material between individuals is the
foundational basis of some population genetic methods
that seek to describe the degrees to which different

Page 2 of 12

partially isolated sub-populations within structured
meta-populations interact with one another.
Here we use such a population-genetics model-based
clustering approach both to verify the existence of
defined sub-populations within the global begomovirus
meta-population and to track the movement of genetic
material between these populations. Besides identifying
hitherto unappreciated genetically discreet begomovirus
sub-populations, our study provides interesting insights
into how constraints on genetic recombination imposed
by geographical distance and/or host range differences
may contribute to taxonomically relevant patterns of
begomovirus diversity.

Results
Assessment of linkage disequilibrium

The admixture model implemented in STRUCTURE
assigns individual genomes to populations under the
assumption that all polymorphic sites within the genomes are in linkage equilibrium. We therefore tested
the degree of linkage equilibrium that is evident
within begomovirus genomes using LIAN 3.4 to calculate a standardized index of association between genome sites (I S A ). Monte Carlo simulations indicated
that although pairs of sites within the begomovirus
genome did indeed display evidence of significant linkage disequilibrium (LD; P = 0.01), the corresponding
I S A was 0.0367 - a low value providing evidence that
many of the polymorphic loci considered are effectively in linkage equilibrium. I S A is expected to be
zero when there is no linkage among pairs of polymorphisms. The estimated I S A value for our global
begomovirus dataset was, for example considerably
lower than that approximated for Helicobacter pylori
(0.0607) [31] and slightly lower than that estimated
for hepatitis B virus (0.038) [32]. In both these cases
the methods implemented in the program STRUCTURE has been very successfully applied and we were
therefore encouraged to find that our dataset most
likely displayed sufficient evidence of linkage equilibrium to enable its use in evaluating begomovirus
population structure.
To investigate further the degrees of LD displayed by
pairs of polymorphic sites we plotted two standard measures of LD, |D’| and r2 , against the physical distance
separating pairs of sites (Fig. 1). There was no evidence
of a significant decrease of LD with physical distance as
indicated by the low correlation coefficients obtained for
both |D’| (-0.045) and r 2 regressions (-0.047) against
physical distance. This analysis indicated that there was
no systematic LD bias in our begomovirus dataset that
might seriously impact its use in the inference of gross
population structure.

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

Page 3 of 12

Figure 1 (a b). Patterns of LD illustrated as the relationships between the distance between loci (expressed in nucleotides) and |D’|
and r2, respectively. |D’| and r2 were calculated using DnaSP (67). The existence of only weak correlations between |D’| and r2 with physical
distance indicate that there is evidence of only weak LD in our begomovirus dataset.

Analysis of gross population structure

Our initial analysis of population structure within the
full begomovirus dataset aimed at discriminating
between two to twelve sub-populations (i.e. K = 2 to12)
failed to yield an estimate of the true optimal sub-population number in that the value of Ln P(D) increased
consistently with increasing K. However, the secondorder rate of change of the likelihood function (ΔK)
showed a clear peak at K = 8, reflecting the existence of
at least eight genetically cohesive begomovirus subpopulations each displaying distinctive nucleotide distribution patterns. Although according to ΔK, the optimal
number of sub-populations for the complete begomovirus dataset was eight, we chose the more conservative
K = 7 for further analysis because this number of subpopulations yielded reasonably consistent clustering in
repeated analysis runs. With K = 8, either the sweet
potato-infecting viruses within the larger swepovirusAsian legumovirus sub-population (S-AL in Fig 2) or
Japanese viruses within the larger China-Japan-Southeast
Asia sub-population (Ch-J-SEA in Fig 2) were inconsistently consigned to sub-populations in different analysis
runs.
For the sake of clarity, we named the seven sub-populations identified in the K = 7 analysis based on both
the geographical location and hosts of the viruses
assigned with the sub-populations. Schematic representations of the population structures revealed by our analysis are summarised in Fig 2. This figure indicates the
predominant sub-populations that are discernable with
sub-population numbers ranging from two to seven (i.e.
K = 2 to 7). Within this figure vertical columns that
contain multiple colors represent individual begomovirus sequences containing nucleotide polymorphisms

that are associated with multiple different sub-populations. At K = 7, most individual sequences (393/470)
were assigned to one sub-population with > 70% support for their assignment. For the remainder of this
paper these seven major sub-populations will be referred
to as the New World viruses, the Africa-Mediterranean
viruses (Af-Med), the Swepoviruses-Asian legumoviruses
(S-AL), the East African cassava mosaic virus group
(eAf-CAS), the New Delhi tomato-Asian Cucurbitinfecting viruses (NDT-ACU), the Indo-Pak cottonSouth Indian tomato viruses (IPC-SIT), and ChinaJapan-Southeast Asia viruses (Ch-J-SEA).
The sequential increase in population stratification
noted in the analysis series with K values ranging from
two through seven (Fig. 2) provides some useful insights
into the relative strengths of different signals of population subdivision that are evident within the global begomovirus population. Typically, STRUCTURE will divide
a dataset into its maximally divergent groups, although
sample sizes and degrees of within-group diversity will
also affect the exact divisions that are made [2]. In our
analysis with K = 2, individuals were mostly sorted into
well defined New World and Old World sub-populations. The only exceptions were the legumoviruses and
swepoviruses which were not consistently classified into
either group. While the New World sub-population
comprised viruses from North America, Latin America,
Mexico and the Caribbean, the Old World sub-population comprised Asian and Af-Med viruses. With K = 3
the Af-Med viruses were most identifiably distinct from
the Asian viruses. With K = 4, the legumoviruses of
Asia and the swepoviruses were together separated into
a distinct sub-population (S-AL in Fig. 2). With K = 5,
the eAf-CAS viruses were split from the Af-Med sub-

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

Page 4 of 12

Figure 2 Sequential clustering solutions obtained from K = 2 to K = 7 based on Bayesian cluster analysis of the global begomovirus
dataset. The number of clusters in a given plot is indicated by the value of K. Populations are labeled within their respective clusters. The figure
shown for a given K is based on the highest likelihood run at that K. Abbreviations for the populations: New Delhi tomato-Asian cucurbit
begomoviruses (NDT-ACU); Swepoviruses-Asian legumoviruses (S-AL); African-Mediterranean begomoviruses (Af-Med); East African Cassava Mosaic
Viruses (eAf-CAS); Indo-Pak cotton-South Indian tomato begomoviruses (IPC-SIT).

population, to form a separate sub-population. At K = 6,
tomato-infecting New Delhi viruses and Cucurbit-infecting begomoviruses together formed a new sub-population (NDT-ACU in the Fig 2). Finally, with K = 7, the
Indo-Pak cotton viruses together with South Indian
tomato begomoviruses (IPC-SIT in Fig 2) were separated from the China-Japan-Southeast Asian begomovirus sub-population.
Since inconsistent sub-population splits were obtained
with K > 7, we attempted to identify further population
structures within the seven consistently defined subpopulations obtained with K = 7. Each one of these subpopulations was treated as a main population and each
was analysed separately under the admixture model with
uncorrelated allele frequencies.
Characterization of further structure within seven major
sub-populations

A second layer of population structure analysis was performed on each of the seven major sub-populations in isolation (Fig 3). STRUCTURE analysis of four of these seven
(Af-Med viruses, S-AL, NDT-ACU, and IPC-SIT viruses)
yielded both consistent results in consecutive runs and
some indication that an optimal number of minor (or second-level) sub-populations had been identified.

The major IPC-SIT and Af-Med sub-populations
apparently each contained four genetically cohesive
minor sub-populations (ΔK was maximized at K = 4;
Figs 3A and 3B). Although STRUCTURE indicated that
the NDT-ACU sub-population probably consists of as
many as four genetically cohesive minor sub-populations
(ΔK peaked at K = 4), individuals were predominantly
assigned to two of these minor sub-populations with
less than 50% support. In Fig 3A we present the minor
sub-population structure for this group as inferred with
K = 2, because with this level of subdivision almost all
individuals (33/36) could be assigned to sub-populations
with > 75% support Tomato-infecting viruses from New
Delhi, Pakistan, and Bangladesh formed an independent
cluster from cucurbit-infecting begomoviruses from all
over Asia.
According to ΔK estimates, there are potentially four
minor sub-populations within the major New World
begomovirus population. We however chose K = 3 for
further analysis because this yielded more consistent
results between repeated runs. Even when the STRUCTURE analysis was performed using a linkage model we
observed no improvements in clustering. For each of the
three identified New World minor sub-populations, a
third tier of STRUCTURE analyses was performed to

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

Page 5 of 12

Figure 3 Classification of individual viruses from major sub-populations using STRUCTURE according to membership proportions. For
convenience the sub-populations have been displayed based on their region of origin (A: Asia; B: Africa; C: New World) and Swepoviruses-Asian
legumovirus group (S-AL). Different sub-populations are indicated by different colours. The hosts of the viruses are indicated within the clusters
and the geographical location of member viruses is indicated along the right side of the represented population. Admixed individuals are
indicated in italics. Multiple colours within individual bars are indicative of admixture. Colours that do not correspond to any minor subpopulation within the major sub-populations indicate instances of inter-major sub-population admixture that could not be properly depicted
within the minor sub-population plots. Correspondence of colours between different major sub-population groups is not meaningful.

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

Page 6 of 12

Table 1 Analysis of molecular variation (AMOVA) for seven major sub-populations and 34 minor sub-populations
identified within the global begomovirus meta-population
Source of variation

Fixation indices

P-value

Among major sub-populations

(FCT) 0.30

< 0.001

Among minor sub-populations within major sub-populations

(FSC) 0.40

< 0.001

Within minor sub-populations

(FST) 0.58

< 0.001

identify further population structures. This third clustering hierarchy revealed a total of ten minor sub-populations within the major New World sub-population (Fig
3C). At this stage of the analyses all ten of the minor
sub-populations showed consistent clustering and no
further population subdivision were supported by the
data.
Both of the major eAf-CAS and Ch-J-SEA sub-populations consisted of four minor sub-populations. Both of
these major sub-populations showed a clear ΔK peak at
K = 4 but clustering was inconsistent between runs. As
membership scores were low within the identified K = 2
minor sub-populations, we performed a third tier of
clustering analysis on each of these minor sub-populations separately and respectively identified four and five
consistently clustered minor sub-populations within the
eAf-CAS and Ch-J-SEA major sub-populations (Fig 3A
and Fig 3B). Within the swepovirus-Asian legumovirus
major sub-population there are apparently three minor
sub-populations (Fig 3D).
Verification of the population structure hypothesis

Collectively 34 minor sub-populations were identified
within the seven major sub-populations. We tested the
evidence favoring the existence of these genetically distinct minor sub-populations using AMOVA and found
that all 34 were supported by a highly significant F ST
statistic (F ST of 0.58; p = < 0.001). The hierarchical
AMOVA of the seven major sub-populations and the 34
minor sub-populations indicated that most of the observable genetic diversity is collectively attributable to fixed
genetic differences between the 34 minor sub-populations (40.96% of the diversity) and seven major subpopulations (30.65% of the diversity; Table 1).
To further test whether the 34 identified minor subpopulations would be considered genetically distinct
using alternative methodologies, two other statistical
tests of population differentiation (Z-test of genetic differentiation implemented in DnaSP and the FST permutation test implemented in ARLEQUIN) were applied to
the various population partitions. The null hypothesis of
no population structure was rejected with p-values <
0.001 by the Z-test [33]. Additionally, F ST statistics
(pairwise measures of population differentiation), were
calculated for each of the 34 minor sub-populations [see
additional file 1]. FST scores ranged from 0.09 to 0.92.

Whereas an F ST value of 0 between two populations
would indicates that they were completely undifferentiated, a score of 1 would indicate that every observable
genetic difference between individual members of the
two populations could be used to distinguish between
the populations. Overall, a very high degree of differentiation was noted between the Tomato chino La paz
virus group and the African cassava mosaic virus minor
sub-population. (FST = 0.92). The lowest degree of differentiation (FST = 0.09) was observed between the New
World Tomato rugose and chloratic mottle and Tomato
golden mottle virus groups. With the exceptions highlighted (the numbers in bold) in Table S1 [see additional
file 1], the various tests of genetic differentiation broadly
supported the partitioning of begomovirus populations
defined in our STRUCTURE analyses. Generally only
comparisons between minor sub-populations with low
sample sizes yielded non-significant FST values.
Patterns of gene flow between sub-populations

The admixture model that we used in our STRUCTURE
analyses assigned individuals to particular sub-populations based on their relative membership scores with
respect to each of these sub-populations. These relative
membership scores get encoded as colour bars in the
sub-population structure maps generated by STRUCTURE (Fig 3). This representation readily allows the
identification of individual sequences with polymorphic
nucleotide sites that may have been derived through
recombination between viruses in different subpopulations.
It is evident from the STRUCTURE plots presented in
Fig 2 and Fig 3 that many individual genomes contain
substantial numbers of nucleotide polymorphisms that
are apparently characteristic of multiple different subpopulations. These “admixed” individuals indicate that
there are probably substantial rates of gene flow
between different sub-populations. Very little evidence
of population admixture was observed amongst individuals assigned to the minor Asian legumovirus (red in
Figure 3D), African cassava mosaic virus (green in Fig
3B), New Delhi Tomato leaf curl virus (yellow in Fig
3A) and Alternanthera yellow vein virus (pink in Fig
3A) minor sub-populations. Similarly the Bean golden
yellow mosaic virus, Tomato chino La paz virus and Pepper golden mosaic virus minor sub-populations of the

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

New World were found to be homogeneous with low
degrees of gene flow from other sub-populations. This
suggests that there is little if any recombinational integration into these sub-populations of genetic polymorphisms that are characteristic of other subpopulations.
This does not imply, however, that the members of
these various minor sub-populations do not participate
in recombination. There is, for example, evidence that
African cassava mosaic viruses and legumoviruses have
potentially contributed substantial amounts of genetic
material to other minor sub-populations with which
they are co-circulating.
By contrast, within the major Af-Med virus sub-population, the minor sub-population comprising begomoviruses causing diseases in African Solanaceous crops,
South African cassava and Middle Eastern watermelon
(indicated in red in Fig 3B) is highly admixed. There is
also evidence of extensive admixture within the largest
and most diverse minor sub-population within the
major Ch-J-SEA sub-population (represented mostly by
dark green in Fig 3A). Among the New World virus
minor sub-populations there appears to have been a
large degree of genetic exchange amongst the Tomato
chlorotic mottle virus-Tomato rugose mosaic virus cluster
and the Sida mosaic virus clusters. Similarly, the Tomato
golden mottle virus-Tomato yellow vein streak virus cluster, has apparently acted as a frequent recipient of
genetic material from the Bean golden yellow mosaic
virus, Rhyncosia golden mosaic virus and Pepper hausteco yellow vein virus clusters.

Discussion
Here we have described for the first time the fine-scale
genetic structures of world-wide begomovirus DNA-A
and DNA-A-like populations. We have provided clear
evidence for the existence of numerous genetically cohesive begomovirus sub-populations, some of which have
thus far not been appreciated as distinctive taxonomic
entities. Overall, 34 largely discreet genetic entities were
identified using parametric population genetic modelbased clustering approaches implemented in the program STRUCTURE. The approach we have used has
been very successfully applied to the study of population
structure in humans [2,34,35] and many other sexually
reproducing species [3,36-39]. The approach has also
been prominently applied to predominantly asexual
microbial species such as Helicobacter pylori [31], Plasmodium falciparum [39] and Hepatitis B virus [32]. To
our knowledge, the work we have described here is the
first application of this analytical approach to the study
of population structure within a plant virus genus.
Consistent with current taxonomic classification of the
major begomovirus lineages, our hierarchical model-

Page 7 of 12

based analysis of population stratification revealed that
the begomoviruses can, unsurprisingly, be most broadly
split into New World and Old World groups. Beyond
this fundamental similarity, however, there were some
potentially informative differences between the major
sub-populations within these super-groups that we and
others have identified. Primary among these differences
is our assignment of the currently established New
World swepovirus and Old World legumovirus sub-genera [20,21] to the same major sub-population within our
Old World group. Second is our assignment of the currently established Meso-American and Latin American
New World virus groups to the same major New-World
virus sub-population, and splitting of both a major cassava infecting virus group from the established African
virus group, and a NDT-ACU virus group from the
established Indian group.
Despite conflicting with the current classification of
swepoviruses as a distinct lineage, it is perhaps unsurprising that our analysis has indicated that swepoviruses
and the legumoviruses are sister, probably Old-World,
virus lineages. The swepovirus and legumovirus coat
proteins are serologically closely related [40], swepoviruses have been found in both the New and Old
Worlds [41-45] but have a genome organization resembling that of Old World begomoviruses [43] and there is
very convincing direct evidence that swepoviruses have
been donors of divergent rep genes found in some Oldworld Africa-Mediterranean virus isolates [26]. Our analysis in fact implies that the swepoviruses are highly
admixed as they possess polymorphisms that are characteristic of multiple different begomovirus sub-populations (multiple colors within individual columns of the
S-AL sub-population as resolved at K = 7 in Fig 2), indicating that members of this group may also be the
recombinant recipients of genetic material from viruses
assigned to the major New World, Ch-J-SEA, Af-Med
and eAf-CAS sub-populations. Indeed, extensive recombination in swepoviruses sampled from nature has been
convincingly detected in a recent study [44].
The seven major sub-populations defined by our
exploration of population genetic structure within the
global begomovirus meta-population could objectively
be further subdivided into 34 minor sub-populations.
Importantly, our initial identification of these 34 minor
sub-populations was also independently well supported
by alternative non-parametric summary statistic based
approaches such as AMOVA, FST and Z-statistic based
analyses that are also aimed at detecting and characterizing population structure.
Although geographical barriers to intercontinental
movement are clearly the underlying cause of much of
the observable genetic differentiation between the three
main begomovirus sub-populations (K = 3 in Fig 2) it is

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

difficult to invoke the spatial separation of populations
as the only significant underlying cause of clearly structured sub-populations co-circulating in Africa (Af-Med
and eAf-CAS) and Asia (S-AL, NDT-ACU, IPC-SIT and
Ch-J-SEA sub-populations). Despite their close spatial
association and evidence of relatively frequent recombination between members of these major sub-populations
(evidenced by both the admixture observed here and
patterns of recombination observed in other studies)
[27,46], these Asian and African begomovirus sub-populations have still remained genetically quite distinct.
This suggests that there may be some other barriers to
full panmyxis (i.e. unconstrained gene flow) amongst cocirculating Asian and African begomoviruses. Amongst
the most obvious candidate constraints on gene-flow
amongst these sub-populations are host range and/or
genetic barriers to recombination.
Accordingly, when one considers the evidence we have
provided for the existence of additional population stratification within each of the seven major begomovirus
sub-populations, it is apparent that in many cases viral
host-ranges could be contributing to minor sub-population structure within the major sub-populations. Among
the 34 genetically differentiated minor sub-populations
detected, many showed strong clustering based on the
hosts from which their individual members have been
isolated. For example, one of the two minor sub-populations within the major NDT-ACU sub-population is
entirely made up of cucurbit infecting viruses that have
been sampled throughout south and Southeast Asia.
Similarly, amongst the four minor sub-populations
within the Ch-J-SEA major sub-population, the minor
Alternenthera-infecting virus sub-population contains
only viruses isolated from Alternenthera spp. Other evidence of minor sub-population stratification that may
be attributable to host range restrictions on gene flow
can be found in the African cotton infecting viruses,
Chinese Ageratum and Tomato infecting viruses, Southern Indian and Sri Lankan tomato and cassava infecting
viruses. Striking differences were also detected depending on the apparently favored host species of New
World virus sub-populations. For example, the cucurbitinfecting viruses, Bean golden yellow mosaic viruses and
Malvaceae-infecting viruses apparently form independent genetically isolated populations.
It must, however, be stressed firstly that very little is
known about the natural host ranges of any of these
virus groups and, secondly, that there exist blatant sampling biases in favor of begomovirus species/strains that
cause crop diseases. The fact remains however, that
whereas certain of the minor sub-populations (such as
those comprising Ageratum-infecting viruses in the ChJ-SEA major sub-population, Tobacco curly shoot
viruses and its recombinants in the IPK SIT sub-

Page 8 of 12

population, ToLCNDV and its recombinants in the
NDT-ACU sub-population or pepper-Mali viruses in the
Af-Med sub-population) consist of viruses that have collectively been sampled from six or more different host
species, others contain viruses that have only ever been
sampled from one species. Interestingly, the “broad host
range” minor sub-populations are also apparently more
admixed than the “narrow host range” minor sub-populations. Unfortunately we cannot tell from our analysis
either whether recombination has facilitated the
increased host-ranges that are apparent within these
sub-populations or whether increased host ranges drive
increased
inter-sub-population
recombination
frequencies.
Whereas our results are consistent with the notion
that host-range differences might underlie much of the
minor sub-population structure we have uncovered, it
must be pointed out that viruses from many “narrowhost range” sub-populations infect the same individual
plant species as viruses sampled from “broad host
range” sub-populations. There are therefore presumably
at least some opportunities for gene flow amongst these
populations in nature. This then suggests that genetic
barriers to genetic exchange, in addition to host range
barriers, may underlie some of the genetic cohesiveness
of many sub-populations. It is known that the viability
of recombinant viruses is influenced by the relatedness
of their parents and that strong purifying selection probably operates against the survival of recombinants with
defective intra-protein and inter-genome region interactions [46,47]. Thus purifying selection acting against
gene flow between sub-populations is likely to be at
least partially responsible for the absence of admixture
observed in some sub-populations. For example, despite
its members co-circulating with, and infecting the same
host species as other Af-Med and eAf-CAS minor subpopulations, the minor sub-population containing
ACMV contains almost no evidence of admixture with
any other Af-Med or eAf-CAS minor sub-populations.
This result is consistent with recombination analyses
which have found that whereas ACMV has occasionally
donated genetic material to circulating recombinant
viruses there are no known instances of predominantly
ACMV genomes acting as acceptors of foreign genetic
material [48]. It must, however, be stressed that while
our results are consistent with the existence of genetic
barriers to the flow of genetic material into sub-populations displaying low degrees of admixture, it remains to
be experimentally confirmed whether or not viruses
such as ACMV are particularly intolerant of inheriting
genetic material from viruses belonging to different subpopulations.
Finally, we hope that our study will be perceived as
complementing rather than contradicting established

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

thinking on begomovirus taxonomy and evolution. The
major and minor begomovirus sub-populations that we
have identified here should provide a launch point for
further population genetic studies into how population
size fluctuations, selection, genetic drift, migration and
gene flow have shaped currently observable patterns of
begomovirus diversity. As failure to account for population structure can confound statistical tests for natural
selection or population growth [49], focusing analyses
on these defined sub-populations should hopefully
increase the reliability and power of such tests. Whereas
dissecting the relative importance of virus-vector
[50,51], vector-host [52] and virus-host [12,25,53] specificities will certainly provide some valuable insights into
the underlying causes of the population structures that
our analysis has revealed, understanding the complex
selection pressures exerted by hosts and vectors [54-56]
will indicate how viruses have diversified to produce
such structures. It is our intention that knowledge of
these population structures should encourage more
detailed studies into: (1) experimental verification of the
host ranges of individuals in different sub-populations;
(2) the impact of virus host ranges on gene-flow; (3)
comparisons between signals of natural selection in different sub-populations and (4) dating the origins of
major and minor sub-populations to track both the
ancient and modern global migrations of begomoviruses.

Materials and methods
Sequence data

All available 690 full-length monopartite begomovirus
genomes and bipartite begomovirus DNA-A genome
component sequences were obtained from GeneBank
using TaxBrowser. Multiple sequence alignments were
constructed using ClustalW [57] and edited manually.
All but one sequence within groups of sequences sharing more than 98% nucleotide identity were discarded.
The resulting dataset comprised 470 complete DNA-A/
DNA-A-like sequences.
Linkage equilibrium analysis

Testing for the presence and degree of linkage disequilibrium (LD) evident in a group of sequences is a significant aspect of population genetics. Moreover, the
model-based approach we used to investigate the structure of begomovirus populations assumes that different
polymorphic sites along the genomes being investigated
display only limited degrees of LD. From the perspective
of global begomovirus diversity it is very probable that,
because of the extent of inter-species genetic exchange
amongst begomoviruses, many sites will be effectively in
linkage equilibrium. However it was essential that we
test the degree of linkage equilibrium evident within our
worldwide begomovirus population sample. A null

Page 9 of 12

hypothesis of linkage equilibrium was tested by Monte
Carlo simulations using the program LIAN (version 3.4)
[58]. LIAN performs a linkage equilibrium test and
yields a standardized index of association, ISA, which is
a measure of the degree of haplotype-wide linkage evident in a dataset [58]. This program essentially tested
the degree to which pairs of polymorphic sites within
begomovirus genomes have been independently inherited (i.e. separated by recombination) during the evolutionary history of the begomoviruses as a whole. The
observed variance (VD ) of pairwise distances between
groups of closely related sequences that apparently
share a recent common ancestry (these are called haplotypes), is computed and compared to the variance
expected when all loci are in linkage equilibrium (VE).
Only polymorphic sites were included for the analysis
and a 5% critical value was obtained as described [59].
In addition, traditional measures of LD namely |D’| [60]
and r2 [61], were estimated using DnaSP [62].
Population structure analysis

Global begomovirus population structure was investigated using the program STRUCTURE (Version 2.0) [1].
This program applies a Bayesian model-based approach
to analyse population structure and identifies both
groups of genetically similar individuals and divergent
populations of individuals on the basis of allele
frequencies.
In the beginning, ad hoc STRUCTURE runs were performed to determine the optimum number of iterations
for the initial burn-in and estimation phases of the analysis so as to ensure the reliability of posterior probability estimates. Burn-in and parameter estimation
iterations ranging from 20,000 to 40,000 did not yield
significantly different results. From these preliminary
analyses we determined that an initial burn-in of 40,000
iterations followed by 40,000 iterations for parameter
estimation was sufficient. To estimate the number of
populations (the K parameter), the begomovirus dataset
was analyzed allowing the value of K to vary from 1 to
12. Five independent runs were carried out for each K
value (equating to 60 runs in total). As advised in the
STRUCTURE user’s manual, we set most of the parameters to their default values [63]. Specifically, we chose
the admixture model with the option of correlated allele
frequencies between populations [31]. This model can
account both for some individuals having mixed ancestry and for allele frequencies in sub-populations being
similar due to admixture or shared ancestry. This model
is an appropriate choice in that there is ample evidence
available for both rampant begomovirus recombination
and substantial movement of begomoviruses across different regions of the world. Indeed, this model is also
considered best in cases where population structure is

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

subtle [31]. We co-estimated the degree of admixture
(the alpha parameter) from the data. When alpha is
close to zero, most individuals fall into clearly defined
sub-populations but when alpha > 1 most individuals
carry a range of alleles that make it difficult to unambiguously assign them to particular sub-populations
[31]. The lambda parameter describing the distribution
of allele frequencies was set to one. The optimum number of sub-populations (Kopt) was identified as previously
described [64].
For Kopt, each individual was then assigned to one of
the sub-populations, according to their respective estimated membership scores (ranging from 0 to 1 for each
individual sequence for each sub-population and summing to 1 for each individual across all sub-populations)
for each of the different sub-populations. Individuals that
could be assigned to two or more different sub-populations each with membership scores of 0.15 or higher
were considered to be admixed. It is important to note
that despite our expecting the admixture model to identify the correct number of sub-populations we also
expected it to generally overestimate the proportion of
admixed individuals by ignoring linkage between polymorphic nucleotide sites that were physically very close
to one another within the begomovirus genomes. We
also applied the linkage model for K opt in order to
account for potential physical linkage between loci when
refining the sub-population assignment of difficult to
assign individuals. For this model the burn-in and
MCMC run lengths were set at 20000 and 40000 respectively, with a 10000 iteration admixture burn-in length.
Sublevel clustering

We used the first hierarchical sub-population cluster
classification inferred by STRUCTURE to study finerscale clustering within major begomovirus sub-populations. Each of the seven established major begomovirus
sub-populations was considered as a major sub- population and analysed separately under the admixture model
with uncorrelated allele frequencies (and the value of l
inferred for each sub-population). We used ΔK, an ad
hoc parameter as described in [64] to determine the
optimum (or at least the most probable) number of subpopulations. The number of populations was fixed at a
lower K wherever firstly, the assignment of particular
sequences to sub-populations was inconsistent over different runs and, secondly, whenever no individual
sequences at the highest ΔK exhibited membership
probability scores > 70%.
Molecular variation, population differentiation and
Genetic divergence

The population stratifications inferred by STRUCTURE
were tested by analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA)

Page 10 of 12

as implemented in ARLEQUIN (ver. 3.0) [65]. AMOVA
measures the partitioning of variance at different levels
of population subdivision, and yields F-statistics known
as fixation indices (or FST statistics). The fixation indices
estimated from the begomovirus sequence analyses were
tested using a non-parametric permutation approach as
described in [66]. Furthermore the significance of FST
based estimates of population structure was also tested
in ARLEQUIN using a permutation test (with 1000 randomised iterations) as in [67]. Also, DnaSP (version 4.0)
[62] was used to estimate Z test statistics of genetic differentiation [33]. Permutation tests with 10 000 replicates were performed to test the significance of these
statistics.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1. Differentiation between the 34 minor
begomovirus sub-populations identified in this study. Data provided
represent pairwise measures of population differentiation (FST). Non
significant FST values based on permutation test are highlighted.

Acknowledgements
We are thankful to D. Falush for providing valuable suggestions during
different stages of this study and for sharing xmfa2struct source code before
its release. We also thank J. Pritchard for helpful suggestions. We gratefully
acknowledge all those begomovirus researchers who contributed to the rich
publically available complete genome sequence dataset.
Author details
Indian Institute of Vegetable Research, P B No. 1, P O - Jakhini,
Shahanshapur, Varanasi, India. 2Dorectorate of Wheat Research, P B NO. 158,
Aggrasain Marg, Karnal, India. 3Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular
Medicine, University of Cape Town, South Africa. 4Department of Plant
sciences, Mail Stop 3, One Shields Avenue, University of California, Davis,
95616, California, USA.

1

Authors’ contributions
HCP conceived, designed the study. HCP, DPS, AV, MS, BS and MR
performed sequence alignments and population structure analysis. HCP and
DPM interpreted data and wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 13 July 2010 Accepted: 10 September 2010
Published: 10 September 2010
References
1. Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotypic data. Genetics 2000, 155(2):945-959.
2. Rosenberg NA, Pritchard JK, Weber JL, Cann HM, Kidd KK, Zhivotovsky LA,
Feldman MW: Genetic structure of human populations. Science 2002,
298(5602):2381-2385.
3. Rosenberg NA, Bruke T, Elo K, Feldman MW, Freidlin PJ, Groenen MA,
Hillel J, Maki-Tanila A, Tixier-Bochard M, Vignal A, Wimmersh K, Weigend S:
Empirical evaluation of genetic clustering methods using multilocus
genotypes from 20 chicken breeds. Genetics 2001, 159(2):699-713.
4. Barton N, Clark A: Population structure and process in evolution. In
Population biology: ecological and evolutionary viewpoints. Edited by:
Wohrmann K, Jain SK. Springer-Verlag, Berlin; 1990:115-173.

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

14.

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.
31.

Slatkin M: Gene flow and population structure. In Ecological genetics.
Edited by: Real LA. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press; 1994:3-17.
Garcia-Arenal F, Fraile A, Malpica JM: Variability and genetic structure of
plant virus populations. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2001, 39:157-186.
Holmes EC: Viral evolution in the genomic age. PLoS Biol 2007, 5(10):e278.
Briddon RW, Markham PG: Cotton leaf curl disease. Virus Res 2000,
71:151-159.
Brown JK: The status of Bemisia tabaci (Genn.) as a pest and vector in
world agroecosystems. FAO Plant Prot Bull 1994, 42:3-32.
Brown JK, Bird J: Whitefly-transmitted geminiviruses and associated
disorders in the Americas and the Caribbean basin. Plant Dis 1992,
76:220-225.
Morales FJ, Anderson PK: The emergence and dissemination of white-fly
transmitted geminiviruses in Latin America. Arch Virol 2001, 146:415-441.
Moriones E, Navas-Castillo J: Tomato yellow leaf curl virus, an emerging
virus complex causing epidemics worldwide. Virus Res 2000, 71:123-134.
Polston JE, Anderson PK: The emergence of whitefly-transmitted
geminiviruses in tomato in the western hemisphere. Plant Dis 1997,
81:1358-1369.
Polston JE, Bois D, Serra CA, Concepcion S: First report of a tomato yellow
leaf curl-like geminivirus in the Western Hemisphere. Plant Dis 1994,
78:831.
Varma A, Malathi VG: Emerging geminivirus problems: A serious threat to
crop production. Ann Appl Biol 2003, 142:145-164.
Harrison BD: Advances in geminivirus research. Annu Rev Phytopathol
1985, 23:55-82.
Fauquet CM, Stanley J: Revising the way we conceive and name viruses
below the species level: a review of geminivirus taxonomy calls for new
standardized isolate descriptors. Arch Virol 2005, 150:2151-2179.
Fauquet CM, Bisaro DM, Briddon RW, Brown JK, Harrison BD, Rybicki EP,
Stenger DC, Stanley J: Revision of taxonomic criteria for species
demarcation in the family Geminiviridae, and an updated list of
begomovirus species. Arch Virol 2003, 148:405-421.
Fauquet CM, Briddon RW, Brown JK, Moriones E, Stanley J, Zerbini M,
Zhou X: Geminivirus strain demarcation and nomenclature. Arch Virol
2008, 153:783-821.
Fauquet CM, Stanley J: Geminivirus classification and nomenclature:
progress and problems. Ann Appl Biol 2003, 142:165-189.
Hameed S, Robinson DJ: Begomoviruses from mungbeans in Pakistan:
Epitope profiles, DNA A sequences and phylogenetic relationships. Arch
Virol 2004, 149:809-819.
Padidam M, Sawyer S, Fauquet CM: Possible emergence of new
geminivirus by frequent recombination. Virology 1999, 265:218-225.
Delatte H, Martin DP, Naze F, Goldbach R, Reynaud B, Peterschmitt M,
Lett JM: South West Indian Ocean islands tomato begomovirus
populations represent a new major monopartite begomovirus group. J
Gen Virol 2005, 86:1533-1542.
Garcia-Andres S, Monci F, Navas-Castillo J, Moriones E: Begomovirus
genetic diversity in the native plant reservoir Solanum nigrum: evidence
for the presence of a new virus species of recombinant nature. Virology
2006, 350:433-442.
Garcia-Andres S, Accotto GP, Navas-Castillo J, Moriones E: Founder effect,
plant host, and recombination shape emergent population of
begomoviruses that cause the tomato yellow leaf curl disease in the
Mediterranean basin. Virology 2007, 359:302-312.
Lefeuvre P, Martin DP, Hoareau M, Naze F, Delatte H, Thierry M, Varsani A,
Becker N, Reynaud B, Lett JM: Begomovirus ‘melting pot’ in the southwest Indian Ocean islands: molecular diversity and evolution through
recombination. J Gen Virol 2007, 88:3458-3468.
Prasanna HC, Rai M: Detection and frequency of recombination in
tomato-infecting begomoviruses of South and Southeast Asia. Virol J
2007, 4:111.
Awadalla P: The evolutionary genomics of pathogen recombination. Nat
Rev Genet 2003, 4:50-60.
Penny D, White WT, Hendy MD, Phillips MJ: A bias in ML estimates of
branch lengths in the presence of multiple signals. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
25:239-242.
Posada D, Crandall KA: The effect of recombination on the accuracy of
phylogeny estimation. J Mol Evol 2002, 54:396-402.
Falush D, Wirth T, Linz B, Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Kidd M, Blaser MJ,
Graham DY, Vacher S, Perez-Perez GI, Yamaoka Y, Megraud F, Oto K,

Page 11 of 12

32.
33.
34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

43.

44.

45.

46.
47.

48.

49.

50.

51.
52.

Reichard U, Katzowitsch E, Wang X, Actman M, Suerbaum S: Traces of
human migrations in Helicobacter pylori populations. Science 2003,
299:1582-1585.
Szmaragd C, Balloux F: The population genomics of hepatitis B virus. Mol
Ecol 2007, 16:4747-4758.
Hudson R, Boos DD, Kaplan NL: A statistical test for detecting population
subdivision. Mol Biol Evol 1992, 9:138-151.
Kim JJ, Verdu P, Pakstis AJ, Speed WC, Kidd JR, Kidd KK: Use of autosomal
loci for clustering individuals and populations of East Asian origin. Hum
Genet 2005, 117:511-519.
Li SL, Yamamoto T, Yoshimoto T, Uchihi R, Mizutani M, Kurimoto Y,
Tokunaga K, Jin F, Katsumata Y, Saitou N: Phylogenetic relationship of the
populations within and around Japan using 105 short tandem repeat
polymorphic loci. Hum Genet 2006, 118:695-707.
Garris AJ, Tai TH, Coburn J, Kresovich S, McCouch S: Genetic structure and
diversity in Oryza Sativa L. Genetics 2005, 169:1631-1638.
Kuroda Y, Kaga A, Tomooka N, Vaughan DA: Population genetic structure
of Japanese wild soybean (Glycine soja) based on microsatellite
variation. Mol Ecol 2006, I5(4):959-974.
Manel S, Bellemain E, Swenson JE, Francois O: Assumed and inferred
spatial structure of populations: the Scandinavian brown bears revisited.
Mol Ecol 2004, 13(5):1327-1331.
Duan J, Mu J, Thera MA, Joy D, Kosakovsky Pond SL, Diemert D, Long C,
Zhou H, Miura K, Ouattara A, Dolo A, Doumbo O, Su X, Miller L: Population
structure of the genes encoding Plasmodium falciparum apical
membrane antigen 1: Implications for vaccine design. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2008, 105(22):7857-7862.
Onuki M, Honda Y, Hanada K: Geminate particle morphology of sweet
potato leaf curl virus in partially purified preparation and its serological
relationship to two begomoviruses by western blotting. J Gen Plant
Pathol 2000, 66:182-184.
Briddon RW, Bull SE, Bedford ID: Occurrence of sweet potato leaf curl
virus in Sicily. Plant Pathology 2006, 55:286.
Cohen J, Milgram M, Antignus Y, Pearlsman M, Lachman O, Loebenstein G:
Ipomoea crinkle leaf curl caused by a whitefly-transmitted Gemini-like
virus. Ann Appl Biol 1997, 131:273-282.
Lotrakul P, Valverde RA: Cloning of a DNA A-like component of sweet
potato leaf curl virus: nucleotide sequence and phylogenetic
relationships. Mol Plant Path 1999 [http://www.bspp.org.uk/mppol/abstract/
0422lotr.htm"[http://www.bspp.org.uk/mppol/abstract/0422lotr.htm]].
Lozano G, Trenado HP, Valverde RA, Navas-Castillo J: Novel begomovirus
species of recombinant nature in sweet potato (Ipomea batatas) and
Ipomea indica: taxonomic and phylogenetic implications. J Gen Virol
2009, 90:2550-2562.
Luan YS, Zhang J, Liu DM, Li WL: Molecular characterisation of sweet
potato leaf curl virus isolate from China (SPLCV-CN) and its phylogenetic
relationship with other members of the Geminiviridae. Virus Genes 2007,
35:379-385.
Lefeuvre P, Lett JM, Reynaud B, Martin DP: Avoidance of protein fold
disruption in natural virus recombinants. PLoS Pathog 2007, 3:e181.
Martin DP, Vander Walt E, Posada D, Rybicki EP: The evolutionary value of
recombination in constrained by genome modularity. PLoS Genet 2005, 1:
e51.
Ndunguru J, Legg JP, Aveling TA, Thompson G, Fauquet CM: Molecular
biodiversity of cassava begomoviruses in Tanzania: evolution of cassava
geminiviruses in Africa and evidence for East Africa being a center of
diversity of cassava geminiviruses. Virol J 2005, 2:e21.
Ptak SE, Przeworski M: Evidence for population growth in humans is
confounded by fine-scale population structure. Trends Genet 2002,
18:559-563.
Maruthi MN, Colvin J, Seal SE, Gibson G, Cooper J: Co-adaptation between
cassava mosaic geminivirus and their local vector population. Virus Res
2002, 86:71-85.
Power AG: Insect transmission of plant viruses, a constraint on virus
variability. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2000, 3:360-340.
Gerling D, Horowitz AR, Baumgartner J: Autoecology of Bemisia tabaci.
Proceedings of a symposium on Bemisia tabaci ecology and control: XVII
International congress of Entomology, 19-23 August 1984; Hamburg. FRG.
Agric Ecosyst Environ 1986, 17:15-20.

Prasanna et al. Virology Journal 2010, 7:220
http://www.virologyj.com/content/7/1/220

Page 12 of 12

53. Sanchez-Campos S, Navas-Castillo J, Camero R, Soria C, Diaz JA, Moriones E:
Displacement of tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV)-Sr by TYLCV-Is in
tomato epidemics in Spain. Phytopathology 1999, 89:1038-1043.
54. Colvin J, Omongo CA, Maruthi MN, Otium-Nape GW, Thresh JM: Dual
begomovirus infections and high Bemisia tabaci populations: Two
factors driving the spread of a cassava mosaic disease pandemic. Plant
Pathol 2004, 53:577-584.
55. Garcia-Arenal F, Fraile A, Malpica JM: Variation and evolution of plant virus
populations. Intl Microbiol 2003, 6:225-232.
56. Seal SE, Vandenbosch F, Jeger MJ: Factors influencing begomovirus
evolution and their increasing global significance: implications for
sustainable control. Crit Rev Plant Sci 2006, 25:23-46.
57. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
58. Haubold B, Hudson RR: LIAN 3.0: detecting linkage disequilibrium in
multilocus data. Linkage analysis. Bioinformatics 2000, 16:847-848.
59. Souza V, Nguyen TT, Hudson RR, Pinero D, Lenski RE: Hierarchical analysis
of linkage disequilibrium in Rhizobium populations: evidence for sex?
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:8389-8393.
60. Lewontin RC: The interaction of selection and linkage. I. General
considerations: heterotic models. Genetics 1964, 49:49-67.
61. Hill WG, Robertson A: Linkage disequilibrium in finite populations. Theor
Appl Genet 1968, 38:226-231.
62. Rozas J, Sanchez-Delbarrio JC, Messegeuer X, Rozas R: DnaSP, DNA
polymorphism analyses by coalescent and other methods. Bioinformatics
2003, 19:2496-2497.
63. Pritchard JK, Wen W: Documentation for STRUCTURE software: Version 2 2004
[http://pritch.bsd.uchicago.edu/software.html].
64. Evanno G, Regnaut S, Goudet J: Detecting the number of clusters of
individuals using the software STRUCTURE: a simulation study. Mol Ecol
2005, 14:2611-2620.
65. Excoffier L, Laval G, Schneider S: ARLEQUIN Ver. 3.0: an integrated
software package for population genetics data analysis. Evol Bioinform
Online 2005, 1:47-50.
66. Excoffier L, Smouse P, Quattro J: Analysis of molecular variance inferred
from metric distances among DNA haplotypes: Application to human
mitochondrial DNA restriction data. Genetics 1992, 131:479-491.
67. Weir BS, Cockerham CC: Estimating F-statistics for the analysis of
population structure. Evolution 1984, 38:1358-1370.
doi:10.1186/1743-422X-7-220
Cite this article as: Prasanna et al.: The population genomics of
begomoviruses: global scale population structure and gene flow.
Virology Journal 2010 7:220.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
