<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Terebridae and teretoxins: Combining phylogeny and anatomy for concerted discovery of bioactive compounds</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Chemical Biology 2010 10:7. doi:10.1186/1472-6769-10-7"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Nicolas Puillandre"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

REVIEW

Open Access

The Terebridae and teretoxins: Combining
phylogeny and anatomy for concerted discovery
of bioactive compounds
Nicolas Puillandre1, Mandë Holford2*

Abstract
The Conoidea superfamily, comprised of cone snails, terebrids, and turrids, is an exceptionally promising group for
the discovery of natural peptide toxins. The potential of conoidean toxins has been realized with the distribution of
the first Conus (cone snail) drug, Prialt (ziconotide), an analgesic used to alleviate chronic pain in HIV and cancer
patients. Cone snail toxins (conotoxins) are highly variable, a consequence of a high mutation rate associated to
duplication events and positive selection. As Conus and terebrids diverged in the early Paleocene, the toxins from
terebrids (teretoxins) may demonstrate highly divergent and unique functionalities. Recent analyses of the Terebridae, a largely distributed family with more than 300 described species, indicate they have evolutionary and pharmacological potential. Based on a three gene (COI, 12S and 16S) molecular phylogeny, including ~50 species from
the West-Pacific, five main terebrid lineages were discriminated: two of these lineages independently lost their
venom apparatus, and one venomous lineage was previously unknown. Knowing the phylogenetic relationships
within the Terebridae aids in effectively targeting divergent lineages with novel peptide toxins. Preliminary results
indicate that teretoxins are similar in structure and composition to conotoxins, suggesting teretoxins are an attractive line of research to discover and develop new therapeutics that target ion channels and receptors. Using conotoxins as a guideline, and innovative natural products discovery strategies, such as the Concerted Discovery
Strategy, the potential of the Terebridae and their toxins are explored as a pioneering pharmacological resource.
Introduction
The conoideans (cone snails, terebrids, and turrids) are
a hyperdiverse group of marine gastropods that prey on
fish, worms, and other mollusks (Figure 1). Several conoidean lineages are characterized by specialized organs
referred to as a venom apparatus that is used to subdue
prey [1]. Analysis over the last three decades of venom
toxins produced by various species in the genus Conus
(cone snails), the most famous representative of this
group, reveal a complex system of molecular compounds (see e.g. [2,3]). Each Conus species is able to
produce 100-200 peptide toxins [4,5], making this
genus, and by extension the whole Conoidea superfamily, one of the most promising groups for the discovery
of natural peptide toxins together with snakes, spiders
and scorpions.
* Correspondence: mholford@york.cuny.edu
2
The City University of New York-York College and The Graduate Center, The
American Museum of Natural History NYC, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Within the conoideans, the auger snails, or the Terebridae, include approximately 300 to 350 described species [6,7]. The Terebridae, characterized by an elongated
shell, are mostly sand-dwellers that live in shallowwaters near the tropics. Contrary to cone snails, terebrids have not attracted significant scientific attention,
and comparatively little is known about their ecology
and toxinology. Most of the main lineages of conoideans, including terebrids and conids, diverged at least
in the early Paleocene [8]. Such an early separation
would indicate toxins from terebrids could be highly
divergent and unique, compare to toxins found in the
genus Conus.
Presented here is an overview of the emerging potential of terebrids and their peptide toxins. As terebrid
toxins are closely related to cone snail toxins (conotoxins), what is known about the structural and functional
diversity of conotoxins, and their application in pharmacology is first briefly reviewed. In addition, a comparison
will be made of the traditional biochemical approach to

© 2010 Puillandre and Holford; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

Page 2 of 12

Figure 1 Evolution of Conoidea classification. Cone snail, turrid, and terebrid shells that make up the Conoidean superfamily are depicted. A.
Conoidea classification based on shell and radula characters (e.g. [8,57]). B. Conoidea classification based mainly on anatomical characters ([1]).
ST = Strictispiridae; DR = Drilliidae; PS = Pseudomelatomidae. C. Conoidea classification with molecular characters. Two main clades are defined,
but a formal classification has not yet been proposed.

peptide toxin discovery, and a novel multidisciplinary
biodiversity first approach, termed the Concerted Discovery Strategy (CDS). CDS combines molecular and chemical techniques with phylogenetic analysis of species
and toxin evolution to enhance the discovery of peptidic
natural products. Recent results highlight the advantage
of CDS to quickly define independent lineages within
Conus [9,10] and the terebrids [11,12], thus facilitating
the identification of numerous and divergent species,
each producing unique peptide toxins. By analogy with
“conotoxin”, the term “teretoxin” is introduced to designate natural peptide toxins produced by terebrid snails.

1. Conotoxins and pharmacology
1.1. Brief history of the discovery of conotoxins

Cone snails were known as venomous predators [13] for
many years before the analysis of their venom started in
the 1970’s, with the isolation of active compounds from
the venom gland of C. californicus [14] and C. geographus [15]. In 1981, Gray et al.[16] first biochemically
described the structure and function of several conotoxins extracted from C. geographus. Soon after, the Olivera group identified numerous toxins from other
Conus species, such as C. magus, C. striatus, and C. textile [17,18]. In the following two decades, the regularity
of toxin discovery has been enhanced both by the number of laboratories working on conotoxins, and by the
use of new techniques that improved characterization
methods such as molecular biology, mass spectrometry,
and sequencing. Currently there are more than 3,000
different proteins extracted from Conus venom

described (Conoserver: http://research1t.imb.uq.edu.au/
conoserver/).
1. 2. Structure and function of conotoxins

The vast majority of conotoxins are characterized by a
three-domain structure consisting of: a highly conserved
signal sequence, a more variable pro-region and a hypervariable mature sequence (Figure 2A). The signal
sequence can be used as a diagnostic character to attribute each conotoxin to one of the ~15 superfamilies
described so far (Figure 2B). The mature toxin is a disulfide-rich peptide with a highly conserved cysteine pattern in each superfamily [5] (Figure 3). At least
25 different functions have been described for a small
fraction of the known conotoxins that have been characterized ([5]; conoserver). By the end of the 1990’s, given
the diversity of their molecular targets such as, sodium
(Na+), potassium (K+) or calcium (Ca2+) channels, noradrenaline transporter, and nicotinic acetylcholine
(nACh) receptors, it became apparent conotoxins possessed potentially numerous therapeutic applications.
1.3 The emergence of conotoxins for drug development

The first conotoxin to be approved for use as a drug is
ziconotide (Prialt), which is used to treat chronic pain in
HIV and Cancer patients [19]. Ziconotide was discovered and developed from the ω -MVIIA peptide
expressed by Conus magus (Figure 3). As other ω conopeptides of the O superfamily, MVIIA targets Ca 2+
channels and has high specificity for the N-type calcium
channel CaV2.2. The emergence of ziconotide has led to

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

Page 3 of 12

Figure 2 Molecular organization of Conoidean venom toxins. A. Schematic of the precursor sequence for conoidean toxins. Conoidean
toxins possess a signal sequence at the ntermini, an intervening pro-region, followed by the mature toxin in single copy. Each gene superfamily
is generally characterized by one highly conserved signal sequence, associated in most cases to one cysteine (Cys)-pattern in the mature
sequence, and corresponding to several toxin families (such as a, μ, ω, δ) and molecular targets (ion channels or receptors). B. Conotoxin
examples. Depicted are the mature toxin sequences, gene superfamily, and molecular targets of well characterized conotoxins.

the increased investigation of cone snail peptides in drug
development. This is in large part due to the large number of conotoxins discovered and their specificity for
particular ion channels and receptors. A recent review
[5], listed several conotoxin-derived peptides that
reached clinical development at various stages. These
include: Contulakin-G (neurotensin receptor), c -MrIA
(norepinephrine transporter), a-Vc1.1 (nicotinic

receptors), Conantokin-G (NMDA receptors), -PVIIA
(K+ channels), and μO-MrVIB (Na+ channels). Most of
the contoxins listed are potential therapeutics for pain,
but several are being evaluated for epilepsy or myocardial infraction. Twede et al. [20] also cited several other
conotoxins with neuroprotective/cardioprotective properties: namely, conantokins, ω, μ and -conotoxins that
respectively target NMDA receptors, Ca2+, Na+ and K+

Figure 3 Cysteine scaffold of conotoxins. Representative disulfide connectivity of three conotoxins belonging to three different gene
superfamilies are illustrated.

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

channels. It should be noted that although ziconotide is
a breakthrough, delivery of the drug by intrathecal injection is problematic and limits its utility.

2. Conus: the tree that hides the forest
2.1. Conoidean phylogeny

Conus and the Terebridae both belong to the superfamily Conoidea. This group has always been considered a
taxonomic nightmare, primarily because of its substantial diversity, 4,000 described species, with an estimate
of more than 10,000 living species [21], and secondarily
because of the difficulty to propose a stable system of
classification [22]. Very few classifications have been
proposed, however most of them are not congruent, and
are largely contradictory. Conoidean classification has
evolved in accordance with the character type used to
delimit groups. Initially, only shell and radula characters
were used. As they are beautifully ornamented and
easily distinguished, cone snails are the most famous
conoideans, a star among shell collectors, taxonomists,
and biochemists alike. Consequently, cone snails were
classified in a separate family, the Conidae. Similarly,
the Terebridae, with their thin, elongated shells, are
relatively easy to recognize, and were also classified as
an independent family. All the others conoideans were
placed in the Turridae s.l. (Figure 1A). More recently,
the analysis of anatomical characters revealed that cone
snails are not so different from other conoideans, and
some turrids (Clathurellinae, Raphitominae, Mangeliinae, Oenopotinae, Conorbinae) were placed in the Conidae together with Conus ([1]; Figure 1B). The use of
molecular characters to analyze conoidean classification
gave yet a different structure to the superfamily. Molecular characters confirmed that Turridae s.l. was a largely paraphyletic group, including Conus, but also
Terebridae [22]. It is clear that more interdisciplinary
research that combines molecular, anatomical and morphological characters is needed to establish a valid classification of the Conoidea.

Page 4 of 12

corresponds to one lineage among others. Even if cone
snails remain the most collected and studied group
within Conoideans, terebrids and turrids are a compelling research source as they may have evolved unique
and diverse venom toxins. Preliminary analyzes of turritoxins [24,25] and teretoxins [26,27] are promising
(Table 1).
Consider for a moment, if 3,000 conotoxins are
already described, how many peptide toxins can be
expected for the whole conoideans? How can such
diversity be embraced, and how can peptide toxin discovery be optimized? In the next two sections, an estimation of peptide toxin diversity is proposed to answer
the first question, and a new strategy, termed “Concerted Discovery Strategy (CDS),” is described to handle
the second.
2.3. A sizeable natural library of peptide toxins

It has been shown that each Conus species can express
between 100 and 200 different peptide toxins, most
being exclusive, i.e. not found in any other species. With
more than 600 described species, and others remaining
to be discovered, it can estimated that 60,000 to 120,000
different peptide toxins could be produced by cone
snails. These numbers are probably underestimated, as
unpublished results (F. Ducancel et al., A. Lluisma and
P. Bandyopadhyay) indicate that a single species may
include 200 different toxins, only for the A-superfamily.
Preliminary results obtained for terebrids and turrids
seem to indicate that similar levels of toxin diversity
occur in these two groups as well [24-29] (Figure 4).
Based on these conclusions, it is possible to estimate
that the whole Conoidean superfamily could contain
between 400,000 and 2,000,000 different toxins. Spiders
are the only other venomous group thought to include
similar levels of toxin diversity [30]. Conoideans are
thus producing a sizeable natural library of peptide toxins that have potential applications for biomedical applications and drug development.

2.2. The revolution of molecular phylogeny as it pertains
to Conoideans

2.4. A concerted discovery strategy for finding new
peptide toxins

The advent of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
sequencing has revolutionized taxonomic classification.
Together with anatomical and morphological characters,
molecular approaches help to define distinct biodiverse
groups. Molecular approaches identified at least 15 independent lineages within the conoideans, most of them
corresponding to previously recognized taxa [1,8,22,23].
Some taxa were traditionally recognized as families, i.e.
Conus as Conidae, while others were considered as subfamilies, i.e. Mangeliinae, and Crassispirinae. Molecular
results suggest that the genus Conus does not have a
central position in the superfamily, but rather it

As applied since the beginning of the 1980’s, the traditional process of toxin discovery is to fractionate the
crude venom from a target species, then characterize
the fractions using Edman sequencing or electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) (Figure 5A).
Most of the species that have been studied with this
method correspond to species that are easy to collect,
large enough to allow an easy extraction of the venom
in a sufficient quantity, and known to be highly venomous, especially for vertebrate preys. These features
were thought to indicate toxins viable for therapeutic
applications in humans. While overwhelmingly used by

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

Page 5 of 12

Table 1 Recently identified teretoxins
Teretoxin

Mature Toxin Sequence

Corresponding conotoxin Superfamily

Agx-s11a

DCEQHTDCSAASGPVYCCQDSDCCGGVDYICTNYGQCVRHF

I

K+ channels

Agx-s6a

SLDEELKSNDCPEYCPHGNECCEHHECRYDPWSRELKCLDSLDS

O

Na+, K+, Ca2+ Channels

Agx-s7a

ATNRHQCDTNDDCEEDECCVLVGGNVNNPGVQTRICLACS

O

Na+, K+, Ca2+ Channels

Hhe6.3

VLFTPPELLGCGNRCSDDCCKWGRCQPGCTD

O

Na+, K+, Ca2+ Channels

Hhe9.1

YEENCGTEYCTSKIGCPGRCVCKEYNYNGEITRRCRA

P

Unknown

Hhe9.2

DEEVGCFPNVCKNDGNCSIETSTGMTRCQCLEGYTGHVCENPL

P

Unknown

most researchers, the traditional strategy has several
drawbacks, such as it is extremely laborious and requires
large amounts of material to be successful. Several findings from the work of the Olivera group [31,32] in the
1990’s elucidated the molecular structure of conotoxins
(Figure 2). Namely, the conserved signaling region of
the peptide toxin gene superfamilies has enabled the use
of PCR and other molecular techniques to minimize the
identification of toxins using the traditional strategy.
However, in cases where a significant amount of sample
material is not available, use of the traditional strategy is
a challenge.
The Concerted Discovery Strategy (CDS), previously
referred to as the exogenomic strategy as proposed by
Olivera [5], differs from the traditional toxin discovery
strategy in the way species and venom compounds are
selected (Figure 5B). With CDS, species are not chosen

Potential Target

based on technical criteria, such as size and ease of collection, but using an evolutionary-based approach. The
central idea is to identify species that belong to highly
divergent lineages, thus potentially able to express
highly divergent toxins. This method enhances the
probability of characterizing different toxins. A larger
pool of different toxins increases the likelihood of identifying those with different molecular targets, indicating
different therapeutic applications. Compared to the traditional strategy, where most of the studied species
belonged to a limited number of clades within Conus,
suggesting a biased estimation of the peptide toxin
diversity within the genus, CDS is much more aligned
with identifying a diverse set of peptide toxins with
diverse functional applications. Furthermore, a biodiversity first concerted method will allow the identification
of the lineages that have lost the venom apparatus

Figure 4 Comparison of the known number of toxins (left) and species (right) in the main groups of the Conoidea. The number of
toxins in Conidae ("conotoxins”) corresponds to the published toxins in GenBank. No turritoxins or teretoxins are published in GenBank, but
several were recently described ([24-29]).

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

Page 6 of 12

Figure 5 Toxin discovery process. A. Traditional strategy. Analyzed species are chosen randomly, and may correspond to a single lineage.
Prospective toxin analysis starts first with characterization of venom components by HPLC (venom fractionation). B. Concerted Discovery Strategy
(CDS). Taxonomic tools are used first to identify independent lineages to maximize the species, and thus teretoxin diversity, and then to analyze
the numerous cDNA compounds isolated from each analyzed specimen. Application of CDS increases discovery of divergent teretoxins.

within the Conoideans, a not-so-rare feature in this
group (see Sect. 4.2.2, but also [1,33,34]; Fedosov and
Puillandre unpublished data). A priori knowledge about
the presence or absence of a venom apparatus eliminates the expense of time and resources pursuing specimens without venom ducts, hence not expressing
peptide toxins to hunt prey.

Another feature of CDS makes use of the advances of
molecular biology in the form of manufacturing cDNA
or EST libraries. Using cDNA libraries of venom duct
tissue, expressed gene products are analyzed, and potential peptide toxin are identified. At this stage, a phylogenetic approach can be used to analyze the toxin
diversity within a single species. Recent studies have

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

shown that divergent clades within a toxin-based phylogeny may produce toxins with different functions (e.g.
[2,9,10,35]). Instead of functionally analyzing randomlychosen toxins, as in the traditional method, CDS highlights promising toxins to be screened first. Using CDS,
phylogenetic methods are used to identify prospective
targets, first species within conoideans and then toxins
within the selected species.

3. The Terebridae family

Page 7 of 12

prominent (without gill filaments), rhynchodcal introvert, and anus situated very posteriorly in the pallial cavity. Bouchet and Rocroi [40] in the most recent
classification based on morphology of the Gastropoda
confirmed the presence of two subfamilies, Terebrinae
and Pervicaciinae, within the family Terebridae. The use
of anatomy, and shell characteristics were sufficient to
elucidate the monophyly of the Terebridae, but for definitive delimitations at genera and species level, an integrative approach using molecular biology is required.

3.1. Traditional taxonomy of the Terebridae

The Terebridae was first identified and classified by Bruguiere (1789), who created the genus Terebra. Since that
time the seminal works to classify the group have been
presented in recent papers highlighting the anatomy and
shell morphology [7,36-38]. Miller in his publications in
the 1970’s plucked the group from relative obscurity to
highlight the fascinating degree of anatomical variability
that accounts for the diverse feeding strategies within
the Terebridae. Based on analysis of foregut materials
Miller identified three different types of terebrid anatomy: (1) Type I has salivary glands, a shrunken buccal
tube, no radula sac, venom duct, or venom bulb. (2)
Type II has the venom apparatus similar to Conus, i.e. a
radular sac, venom duct and venom bulb, in addition to
salivary glands and a true proboscis. (3) Type III lacks
salivary glands and the components of the venom apparatus, but has an uncharacteristic accessory feeding
organ, the accessory proboscis structure. Using specimens from the genera Duplicaria, Taylor has revised
terebrid foregut anatomy based on radula characteristics
and identified an amendum to Miller’s Type I that has
salivary glands and a radula sac, but no venom gland
[37]. Based on shell morphology, Bratcher and Cernohorsky [7], and more recently Terryn [6] have identified
~300 different species within the Terebridae. Bratcher
and Cernohorsky placed the species into four genera: a
large genus termed Terebra, consisting of the majority
of species, a second genus termed Hastula, a third
genus termed Duplicaria, and a fourth termed Terenolla. Terryn in his classification made use of ~15 genera terms, including Myurella, and Cinguloterebra. The
first phylogeny of the group was done by Taylor et al.
[1]. Using seven species of Terebrinae and seven of Pervicaciinae, Taylor and colleagues outlined anatomical
terminology for the terebrid foregut and postulated a
phylogeny that identified the Terebridae as monophyletic and separate from the Conidae.
Simone in 2000 [39] updated the terebrid phylogeny
using specimens from the Western Atlantic. Simone
confirmed the monophyly of the group, identified the
Hastula genera as separate from the genus Terebra and
found the following apomorphies: reduction of the
cephalic tentacles, anterior end of the ctenidial vein

3.2. Molecular Phylogeny applied to the Terebridae

The revisionary process that resulted from the use of
molecular characters for the Conoideans classification
also happened for the Terebridae. Most of the genera
recognized by Terryn [6] do not correspond to clades,
as defined by molecular analyzes based on 16S, 12S, and
COI mitochondrial genes and ~50 different species
[11,12]. Molecular analysis identified five distinct clades
in the Terebridae: a sister group to all other terebrids
made up of T. jungi, since revised to the genus Pellifronia [41] (clade A), an Acus clade (clade B), a Terebra
clade (clade C), a Hastula clade (clade D), and a Myurella clade (clade E) (Figure 6). This result indicates that
most of the morphological characters used to define
genus-level groups of terebrids should be used with caution, and could correspond to convergent evolution or
ancestral polymorphism. The genus “Terebra“ is a good
illustration of the conflict between classical morphological characters and molecular data. Specimens morphologically attributed to this genus are found in three
different clades: Pellifronia, Terebra, and Myurella as
identified by Holford et al. [11,12].
In addition to the clarification of the phylogenetic
relationships within the Terebridae, the tree outlined in
Figure 6 provides a reliable framework to analyze the
evolution of different terebrid characters (see Sect. 4).
3.3. Alpha-taxonomy of the Terebridae

As stated above, the only available molecular work on
terebrids highlighted several complications at the generic level, and also revealed that the alpha-taxonomy
(species delimitation and description) may need to be
revised [12]. Based on shell characters only, the definition of species in the Terebridae certainly suffers from
the same pitfalls cited previously for the classification:
morphological convergence or ancestral polymorphism.
Furthermore, the molluscan shell is known to be highly
plastic, and morphological variation may only be the
results of environmental variability within a single species range [42]. The results presented in Holford et al.
[12] indicate that some species correspond to several
lineages (e.g. Strioterebrum plumbeum, Cinguloterebra
fenestrata), and that several molecularly defined lineages

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

Page 8 of 12

Figure 6 Molecular phylogeny of the Terebridae. Five clades are defined Pellifronia, Acus, Terebra, Hastula, and Myurella (Clades A to E). Two
clades have lost the venom apparatus: Acus (clade B) and Myurella (clade E), corresponding to two independent losses (red stars). Two lineages
are found in the Panamic Eastern Pacific, black arrows correspond to Acus strigata and Terebra arygosia, the others in the Western Pacific. The
tree was constructed using Bayesian and likelihood analyzes based on COI, 12S and 16S mitochondrial genes, see [11,12] for full details on the
molecular phylogeny. The molecular phylogeny of the Terebridae effectively highlights the terebrid lineages that have a venom apparatus
(Pellifronia, Terebra, Hastula), therefore using peptide toxins to subdue prey, and those that do not have a venom apparatus (Acus, Myurella), thus
not using toxins to hunt.

are not named at the species level (e.g. the “Terebra“
textilis complex). However, the sampling used in this
study does not allow a clear analysis of the species-level
variability within the terebrids. More specimens are
required to estimate both the intra and inter-specific
variability of each putative species, in order to propose
robust hypotheses of species delimitation.
Several recent expeditions carried out in the IndoWest Pacific by the Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle (Paris) uncovered a large number of specimens,
representing both already described species and several
unknown taxa. Recently, four different Terebridae species were collected during an expedition in the East
Pacific (Panama) [11]. Two of these four species were
represented by several specimens, and the results are
congruent with the morphological hypotheses: the molecular variability within species is weaker than the variability between species.
3.4 Terebrid ecology and behavior

Miller [43] provided the most detail known to date on
the feeding ecology of the terebrids. Miller described

three anatomical feeding varieties (Types I, II, and III)
only one of which (Type II) possessed the venom apparatus similar to that used by Conus. The terebrid clades
that have a venom apparatus correspond to three divergent lineages, implying the three clades with a venom
apparatus (Pellifronia, Terebra, and Hastula) may have
evolved different feeding strategy (Figure 6). Furthermore, the two other terebrid lineages that have lost the
venom duct, Types I and III, while not good candidates
to find new teretoxins, are good models to analyze the
ecological adaptation of venom-apparatus free conoideans. Questions to be investigated include, how do species that lack the venom duct and radula, which are the
main characteristics for capturing prey using venom toxins, feed? Are they still able to capture prey using toxins
produced by other glands (e.g. the salivary gland), or did
they develop new strategies not based on venom? If so,
did the two lineages without the venom ducts develop
similar or different strategies? Preliminary work in
Conus has demonstrated that peptide toxins are produced in the salivary glands [44], suggesting it may be
possible that the Type I species of terebrid, which lack a

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

venom apparatus, but have salivary glands, could also
use toxins to subdue its prey. The delivery of the toxins
is not clear as most Type I species do not have a radular
or a true proboscis to deliver the toxin to the prey. Type
III terebrids have developed an accessory feeding organ
that they use to engulf polychaetes and other worms.
There are many open questions pertaining to the ecology of the terebrids. These could be addressed in tandem with studies involving the evolutionary
development of the venom apparatus. Of the three
Miller types which is the ancestral one that led to the
development of the others? The radula is often hailed as
the component responsible for the radiation of species
diversity in Conus [45], could it also explain diversity in
Type II terebrids? Given the complications of breeding
terebrids and the complexity of the venom apparatus,
evolutionary development questions might be difficult to
approach using embryology and current evo-devo techniques, but highlight an interesting line of research that
would enhance current knowledge about the terebridae
and evolutionary/ecological development in general.
3.5 Evolution of venom apparatus as it pertains to
peptide toxins in the Terebridae

One striking result of the molecular phylogenetic analysis of the Terebridae is that the venom apparatus
appears to have been lost at least twice independently
during the evolution of the group (Figure 6). The corollary finding is that the venom duct was present in the
common ancestor of all the terebrids, and also in the
common ancestor of all the conoideans [1]. From this
common ancestor, three highly divergent lineages
evolved independently in the Terebridae: Pellifronia,
Terebra and Hastula. As these lineages correspond to
deep nodes in the tree, and given the extremely high
rate of evolution of the toxins in the genus Conus [2,3],
these terebrids may have evolved different toxins. The
conotoxins discovered so far belong to ~ 15 different
superfamilies, and evolved ~ 25 different functions;
however, the genetic distance between Pellifronia, Terebra and Hastula within the Terebridae is at least two
times greater than the distance between the different
species of Conus from which the known conotoxins
were extracted (unpublished results). The potential
divergence between teretoxins extracted from species
belonging to different clades suggests previously undescribed superfamilies and functions could be identified
from terebrid characterizations.
3.6 Preliminary characterization of teretoxins

While only a few teretoxins have been described in the
literature, results from preliminary characterizations
indicate their potential as biochemical tools for analyzing the mechanics and function of the neuronal circuit.

Page 9 of 12

Several teretoxins, previously referred to as augertoxins,
identified by Imperial and colleagues [26,27] from Terebra subulata and Hastula hectica have a cysteine framework similar to the O-superfamily of conotoxins (Table
1). This suggests that they may fold into the inhibitory
cysteine knot motif referred to as the ICK motif [46].
The ICK motif is common among peptide toxins from
various organisms including snakes and spiders, and is
known to block ion channels. While the T. subulata teretoxins identified have a similar O-superfamily cysteine
framework, the signal sequence of the precursor region
is not homologous with the conotoxin O-superfamily
signal sequence [26]. This suggests that although the
mature toxins are similar, the genes encoding the peptides are not. Likewise, the teretoxins identified from H.
hectica [27] have cysteine patterns similar to the O and
P conotoxin superfamilies, but their signal sequences are
highly divergent. These findings indicate the genetic
makeup of conus and terebrid toxins are not the same.
It thus follows that newly discovered teretoxins could
have diverse functional applications compared to their
conotoxin counterparts.

4. Taxonomy as a tool for discovery of bioactive
compounds
4.1. Congruence between anatomy and molecular
phylogeny

The strong congruence between anatomy and the molecular phylogeny based on Western Pacific species is
shown in Figure 6. All the species included in the Acus
and Myurella clades do not have a venom apparatus,
therefore, likely not using peptide toxins to hunt prey.
Conversely, all the species included in the three other
clades, Pellifronia, Terebra and Hastula all have the
venom apparatus, as confirmed by the anatomical dissection of most of the species included in the dataset
[12]. The correlation between anatomy and molecular
phylogeny was confirmed by the inclusion of several
species collected in the Eastern Pacific. The Panamic
species A. strigata, placed in the Acus clade, does not
have a venom apparatus, while three other Panamic species, T. argyosia, T. ornata, and T. formosa, which possess a venom apparatus, are placed in the Terebra clade
[11]. These results support the premise that the presence or absence of the venom duct can be inferred by
including a given species in the phylogenetic tree, without dissecting it. From a teretoxin discovery perspective,
the phylogenetic tree would then be an invaluable asset,
capable of readily identifying the lineages with a venom
apparatus and expressing peptide toxins for predation. A
priori identification of terebrids expressing peptide toxins enhances by several orders of magnitude the initial
step of characterizing novel teretoxins. In addition, the
phylogenetic tree could be used to identify divergent

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

lineages and enhance discovery of teretoxins with different functional applications. Analysis of at least one species from each clade with a venom apparatus would be
sufficient to provide a gross estimation of the toxin
diversity of terebrids.
4.2. The importance of a complete Terebridae phylogeny
for teretoxin discovery

The current molecular phylogeny of the Terebridae
[11,12] is not comprehensive. Several genera and biogeographic regions are not represented in the dataset. As
five lineages are present in the West Pacific, two of them
having lost the venom apparatus, it can be expect that
there are additional lineages in other regions that have
evolved distinct toxins and possible other independent
lineages that have lost the venom apparatus. A complete
terebrid phylogeny would greatly enhance the discovery
and characterization of novel teretoxins. Current studies
are under way to sample more of the Eastern Pacific and
other regions to encounter the missing taxa.
The Concerted Discovery Strategy (CDS) as initially
described [5] and expanded upon by Olivera and Teichert [9] using a-conotoxins as a model, demonstrates
the importance of understanding the phylogeny of the
Conoidea when targeting novel bioactive compounds.
Paramount to the strategy is the fact that the genes that
encode venom toxins are rapidly evolving, to reflect
changes in ecological niches. This ebb and flow between
genes and the surrounding environment results in a
diversification of toxins. One of the keys to understanding this diversifying selection process is to reliably
reconstruct the phylogeny of the group and use it as a
roadmap for the discovery of peptide toxins with therapeutic applications.

5. Conclusion
The Terebridae are a promising family within the Conoidea. Similar to cone snails terebrids possess venom
peptide toxins that appear rich in variety and functional
applications (Table 1). Preliminary results conducting
biochemical [26] and molecular [27] characterization of
teretoxins indicate they are very similar in structure to
cone snail toxins. Teretoxins thus far identified appear
to be larger than conotoxins (≥ 40 amino acids) and do
not have posttranslation modifications, a feature commonly found in conotoxins. The lack of posttranslation
modifications makes teretoxins an attractive target for
analysis using mass spectrometry. Recently Ueberheide
and colleagues [47] developed a mass spectrometry
approach for elucidating toxin sequences from cone
snails that utilizes the electron-transfer dissociation
(ETD) method for tandem mass spectrometry. ETD is
used to increase sequence coverage and improve mass
detection to limits well beyond those of Edman

Page 10 of 12

sequencing and previous mass spectrometry methods.
While limited by the current high cost of advanced
mass spectrometry hardware, this technique appears to
be a viable complement to the Concerted Discovery
Strategy (CDS), and can be used both to confirm the
expression and characterization of newly discovered teretoxins. While thus far applied only to cone snail toxins,
the ETD inspired method also holds promise for identifying the primary amino-acid sequences of peptide toxins from terebrids and other venomous organisms. In
addition, recombinant techniques such as the recently
described tethered-toxin approach [48-51] facilitate the
synthesis and folding of larger peptidic toxins.
Although not traditionally the molecular compound of
choice for drug discovery, peptides, and especially peptidic toxins, are becoming increasingly important in the
development of novel drug discovery pipelines. The Ntype calcium (Ca2+ ) channel analgesic ziconotide, the
first conotoxin drug, is striking for the molecular target
and function combination it identified [19]. Prior to
ziconotide’s discovery Ca2+ channels were not readily
recognized as targets for pain alleviation. Similar to
Ziconotide, an ω conotoxin, several other conotoxin
families including, μ-conotoxins, which target voltagegated Na+ channels, k- and kM-conotoxins, which target
K + channels, and conantokins, which target NMDA
receptors, are under various stages of pharmaceutical
development [5,20,52]. The potential applications of
these conotoxins vary from pain, to epilepsy, and cardioprotective agents. In addition to conotoxins, peptidic
toxins from scorpions, snakes and spiders, such as candoxin (Alzheimer’s disease) [53], and a-Bgtx (myasthenic autoimmune response) [54,55] are making an impact
in pharmacological developments. These peptides and
the organisms that produce them are instrumental in
identifying the next generation of therapeutics.
A discovery strategy such as CDS, which takes into
account the divergent characteristic of peptide toxins
from biodiverse organisms, paired together with current
advances in peptide/proteomics, genomic and bioinformatic technologies provides a paradigm for investigating
peptidic natural products that significantly enhances the
identification of pharmacologically useful bioactive compounds. Current integrative initiatives that utilize ecological, genomic, proteomic, and functional activity based
data of toxins, such as the cone snail genome project for
health, CONCO http://www.conco.eu, and Venomics
[56], will be useful in deciphering the potential and challenges ahead for terebrid toxin characterization.
Acknowledgements
MH acknowledges support from NIH (GM088096-01) and NSF (0940108). NP
acknowledges support from CNRS. The authors thank Emmanuel Chang for
thoughtful comments to the mansucript.

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

Author details
1
UMR 7138, Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Departement
Systematique et Evolution, CP26, 57 rue Cuvier, 75231 Paris Cedex 05,
France. 2The City University of New York-York College and The Graduate
Center, The American Museum of Natural History NYC, USA.

Page 11 of 12

23.

24.
Authors’ contributions
NP and MH read and approved the manuscript.
Received: 21 April 2010 Accepted: 17 September 2010
Published: 17 September 2010

25.

References
1. Taylor JD, Kantor YI, Sysoev AV: Foregut anatomy, feedings mechanisms
and classification of the Conoidea (= Toxoglossa)(Gastropoda). Bulletin of
the Natural History Museum of London (Zoology) 1993, 59(2):125-170.
2. Conticello SG, Gilad Y, Avidan N, Ben-Asher E, Levy Z, Fainzilber M:
Mechanisms for Evolving Hypervariability: The Case of Conopeptides.
Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18:120-131.
3. Duda TF, Remigio A: Variation and evolution of toxin gene expression
patterns of six closely related venomous marine snails. Mol Ecol 2008,
17:3018-3032.
4. Terlau H, Olivera BM: Conus venoms: a rich source of novel ion channeltargeted peptides. Physiological Review 2004, 84:41-68.
5. Olivera BM: Conus peptides: biodiversity-based discovery and
exogenomics. J Biol Chem 2006, 281:31173-31177.
6. Terryn Y: A collectors guide to recent Terebridae (Mollusca:
Neogastropoda). Hackenheim: ConchBooks 2007.
7. Bratcher T, Cernohorsky WO: Living terebras of the world. New York:
American Malacologists, Inc 1987.
8. Powell AWB: The molluscan families Speightiidae and Turridae. An
evaluation of the valid taxa, both recent and fossil, with lists of
characteristics species. Bulletin of the Auckland Institute and Museum 1966,
5:5-184.
9. Olivera BM, Teichert RW: Diversity of the neurotoxic Conus peptides: a
model for concerted pharmacological discovery. Molecular Interventions
2007, 7:251-260.
10. Holford M, Zhang MM, Gowd KH, Azam L, Green BR, Watkins M, Ownby JP,
Yoshikami D, Bulaj G, Olivera BM: Pruning nature: Biodiversity-derived
discovery of novel sodium channel blocking conotoxins from Conus
bullatus. Toxicon 2008, 53:90-98.
11. Holford M, Puillandre N, Modica MV, Watkins M, Collin R, Bermingham E,
Olivera BM: Correlating molecular phylogeny with venom apparatus
occurrence in Panamic Auger snails (Terebridae). PLoS One 2009, 4:e7667.
12. Holford M, Puillandre N, Terryn Y, Cruaud C, Olivera BM, Bouchet P:
Evolution of the Toxoglossa Venom Apparatus as Inferred by Molecular
Phylogeny of the Terebridae. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:15-25.
13. Kohn AJ, Saunders PR, Wiener S: Preliminary studies on the venom of the
marine snail Conus. Annals of the The New York Academy of Sciences 1960,
90:706-725.
14. Whysner JA, Saunders PR: Purification of the lethal fraction of the venom
of the marine snail Conus californicus. Toxicon 1966, 4:177-178.
15. Cruz LJ, Gray WR, Olivera BM: Purification and properties of a myotoxin
from Conus geographus venom. Arch Biochem Biophys 1978, 190:539-548.
16. Gray WR, Luque A, Olivera BM, Barrett J, Cruz LJ: Peptide toxins from
Conus geographus Venom. J Biol Chem 1981, 256:4734-4740.
17. Olivera BM, Gray WE, Zeikus RD, McIntosh JM, Varga J, Rivier J, de Santos V,
Cruz LJ: Peptide neurotoxins from fish-hunting cone snails. Science 1985,
230:1338-1343.
18. Hillyard DR, Olivera BM, Woodward SR, Corpuz GP, Gray WE, Ramilo CA,
Cruz LJ: A molluskivorous Conus toxin: conserved frameworks in
conotoxins. Biochemistry (Mosc) 1989, 28:358-361.
19. Miljanich GP: Ziconotide: neu- ronal calcium channel blocker for treating
severe chronic pain. Curr Med Chem 2004, 11:3029-3040.
20. Twede VD, Miljanich GP, Olivera BM, Bulaj G: Neuroprotective and
cardioprotective conopeptides: an emerging class of drug leads. Current
Opinion in Drug Discovery & Development 2009, 12:231-239.
21. Bouchet P: Turrid genera and mode of development: the use and abuse
of protoconch morphology. Malacologia 1990, 32(1):69-77.
22. Puillandre N, Samadi S, Boisselier MC, Sysoev AV, Kantor YI, Cruaud C,
Couloux A, Bouchet P: Starting to unravel the toxoglossan knot:

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.

34.

35.
36.
37.
38.

39.

40.
41.

42.

43.
44.
45.
46.

molecular phylogeny of the “turrids” (Neogastropoda: Conoidea). Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2008, 47:1122-1134.
McLean JH: A revised classification of the family Turridae, with the
proposal of new subfamilies, genera and subgenera from the Eastern
pacific. The Veliger 1971, 14(1):114-130.
Lopez-Vera E, Heimer de la Cotera EP, Maillo M, Riesgo-Escovar JR,
Olivera BM, Aguilar MB: A novel structure class of toxins: the methioninerich peptides from the venoms of turrid marine snails (Mollusca,
Conoidea). Toxicon 2004, 43:365-374.
Watkins M, Hillyard DR, Olivera BM: Genes expressed in a Turrid venom
duct: divergence and similarity to conotoxins. J Mol Evol 2006,
62:247-256.
Imperial JS, Watkins M, Chen P, Hillyard DR, Cruz LJ, Olivera BM: The
augertoxins: biochemical characterization of venom components from
the toxoglossate gastropod Terebra subulata. Toxicon 2003, 42:391-398.
Imperial JS, Kantor Y, Watkins M, Heralde FM, Stevenson B, Chen P,
Hansson K, Stenflo J, Ownby J-P, Bouchet P, et al: Venomous Auger Snail
Hastula (Impages) hectica (Linnaeus, 1758): Molecular Phylogeny, Foregut
Anatomy and Comparative Toxinology. J Exp Zool 2007, 308B:744-756.
Rojas A, Feregrino A, Ibarra-Alvarado C, Aguilar MB, Falcon A, Heimer de la
Cotera EP: Pharmacological characterization of venoms obtained from
Mexican Toxoglossate Gastropods on isolated Guinea Pig Ileum. Journal
of Venomous Animals and Toxins including Tropical Diseases 2008,
14:497-513.
Heralde FM, Imperial J, Bandyopadhyay P, Olivera BM, Concepcion GP,
Santos AD: A rapidly diverging superfamily of peptide toxins in
venomous Gemmula species. Toxicon 2008, 51:890-897.
King GF, Gentz MC, Escoubas P, Nicholson GM: A rational nomenclature
for naming peptide toxins from spiders and other venomous animals.
Toxicon 2008, 52:264-276.
Woodward SR, Cruz LJ, Olivera BM, Hillyard DR: Constant and
hypervariable regions in conotoxin propeptides. EMBO 1990, 9:1015-1020.
Olivera BM: Conus venom peptides, receptor and ion channel 385
targets, and drug design: 50 million years of neuropharmocology. Mol
Biol Cell 1997, 8:2101-2109.
Fedosov AE: Anatomy of accessory rhynchodeal organs of Veprecula
vepratica and Tritonoturris subrissoides: new types of foregut morphology
in Raphitominae (Conoidea). Ruthenica 2007, 17:33-41.
Fedosov AE, Kantor Y: Toxoglossan gastropods of the subfamily
Crassispirinae (Turridae) lacking a radula, and a discussion of the status
of the subfamily Zemaciinae. Journal of Molluscan Studies 2008, 74:27-35.
Puillandre N, Olivera BM: Evolution of Conus peptide genes: duplication
and positive selection. Journal of Molecular Evolution 2010, 70:190-202.
Miller BA: Feeding mechanisms of the family Terebridae. Annual Reports
of the American Malacological Union 1971, 1970:72-74.
Taylor JD: The anatomy of the foregut and relationships in the
Terebridae. Malacologia 1990, 32:19-34.
Taylor JD, Miller JA: A new type of gastropod proboscis: the foregut of
Hastula bacillus (Gastropoda: Terebridae). Journal of Zoology, London
1990, 220:603-617.
Simone LR: A phylogentic study of the Terebrinae (Mollusca,
Caenogastropoda, Terebridae) based on species from the Western
Atlantic. J Comput Biol 2000, 3:137-150.
Bouchet P, Rocroi J-P: Classification and nomenclator of Gastropods
families. Malacologia 2005, 47(1-2):..
Terryn Y, Holford M: The Terebridae of the Vanuatu Archipelago with a
Revision of the Genus Granuliterebra Oyama 1961. Visaya 2008,
Supplement 3, ISSN 1656-1654.1650. ISBN 1978-1653-929767-929720929766.
Puillandre N, Baylac M, Boisselier MC, Cruaud C, Samadi S: An integrative
approach of species delimitation in the genus Benthomangelia
(Mollusca: Conoidea). Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 2009,
96:696-708.
Miller BA: Studies on the biology of Indo-Pacific Terebra. Durham:
University of New Hampshire 1970.
Biggs JS, Olivera BM, Kantor Y: Alpha-conopeptides specifically expressed
in the salivary gland of Conus pulicarius. Toxicon 2008, 52:101-105.
Shimek RL, Kohn AJ: Functional morphology and evolution of the
toxoglossan radula. Malacologia 1981, 20(2):423-438.
Norton RS, Pallaghy PK: The cysteine knot structure of ion channel toxins
and related polypeptides. Toxicon 1998, 36:1573-1583.

Puillandre and Holford BMC Chemical Biology 2010, 10:7
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6769/10/7

Page 12 of 12

47. Ueberheide BM, Fenyo D, Alewood PF, Chait BT: Rapid sensitive analysis of
cysteine rich peptide venom components. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 2009, 106:6910-6915.
48. Holford M, Auer S, Laqua M, Ibañez-Tallon I: Manipulating neuronal circuits
with endogenous and recombinant cell-surface tethered modulators.
Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience 2009, 2:21.
49. Hruska M, Ibañez-Tallon I, Nishi R: Cell-autonomous inhibition of alpha 7containing nico- tinic acetylcholine receptors prevents death of
parasympathetic neurons during development. J Neurosci 2007,
27:11501-11509.
50. Ibañez-Tallon I, Wen H, Miwa JM, Xing J, Tekinay AB, Ono F, Brehm P,
Heintz N: Tethering naturally occurring peptide toxins for cellautonomous modulation of ion channels and receptors in vivo. Neuron
2004, 43:305-311.
51. Fortin J, Zhu Y, Choi C, Beinborn M, Nitabach MN, Kopin AS: Membranetethered ligands are effective probes for exploring class B1 G proteincoupled receptor function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
2009, 106:8049-8054.
52. Fox JW, Serrano SM: Approaching the golden age of natural product
pharmaceuticals from venom libraries: an overview of toxins and toxin
derivatives currently involved in therapeutic or diagnostic applications.
Curr Pharm Des 2007, 13:2927-2934.
53. Nirthanan S, Charpantier E, Gopalakrishnakone P, Gwee MCE, Khoo H,
Cheah L, Bertrand D, Kini RM: Candoxin, a novel toxin from Bungarus
candidus, is a reversible antagonist of muscle (alphabetagammadelta)
but a poorly reversible antagonist of neuronal alpha 7 nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:17811-17820.
54. Drachman DB: The biology of myasthenia gravis. Annu Rev Neurosci 1981,
4:195-225.
55. Mebs D: Snake venoms: toolbox of the neurobiologist. Endeavour 1989,
13:157-161.
56. Menez A, Stocklin R, Mebs D: Venomics’ or: the venomous systems
genome project. Toxicon 2006, 47:255-259.
57. Powell AWB: The New-Zealand recent and fossil Mollusca of the family
Turridae. With general notes on turrid nomenclature and systematics.
Bulletin of the Auckland Institute and Museum 1942, 2:1-192.
doi:10.1186/1472-6769-10-7
Cite this article as: Puillandre and Holford: The Terebridae and
teretoxins: Combining phylogeny and anatomy for concerted discovery
of bioactive compounds. BMC Chemical Biology 2010 10:7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
