<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Construction and analysis of proteinprotein interaction networks</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Automated Experimentation 2010 2:2. doi:10.1186/1759-4499-2-2"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Karthik Raman"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

REVIEW

Open Access

Construction and analysis of protein–protein
interaction networks
Karthik Raman1,2*

Abstract
Protein–protein interactions form the basis for a vast majority of cellular events, including signal transduction and
transcriptional regulation. It is now understood that the study of interactions between cellular macromolecules is
fundamental to the understanding of biological systems. Interactions between proteins have been studied through
a number of high-throughput experiments and have also been predicted through an array of computational methods that leverage the vast amount of sequence data generated in the last decade. In this review, I discuss some of
the important computational methods for the prediction of functional linkages between proteins. I then give a
brief overview of some of the databases and tools that are useful for a study of protein–protein interactions. I also
present an introduction to network theory, followed by a discussion of the parameters commonly used in analysing networks, important network topologies, as well as methods to identify important network components, based
on perturbations.
Introduction
Proteins are the main catalysts, structural elements, signalling messengers and molecular machines of biological
tissues [1]. Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) are extremely important in orchestrating the events in a cell.
They form the basis for several signal transduction pathways in a cell, as well as various transcriptional regulatory networks. The availability of complete and
annotated genome sequences of several organisms has
led to a paradigm shift from the study of individual proteins in an organism to large-scale proteome-wide studies of proteins, which interact in a beautifully
concerted network of metabolic, signalling and regulatory pathways in a cell. In general, the behaviour of a
system is quite different from merely the sum of the
interactions of its various parts. As Anderson put it as
early as 1972, in his classic paper by the same title,
“More is different“ [2] — it is not possible to reliably
predict the behaviour of a complex system, despite a
good knowledge of the fundamental laws governing the
individual components. Comparative genomics at a primary sequence level has also indicated that species differences are due more to the difference in the
interactions between the component proteins, rather
* Correspondence: k.raman@bioc.unizh.ch
1
Department of Biochemistry, University of Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
8057 Zürich, Switzerland

than the individual genes themselves [3]. Consequently,
several efforts have been made to identify these interactions, in an attempt to understand biological systems
better [4-12]. The need to understand protein structure
and function has been a critical driving force for biological research in the recent decades. With the advent of
high-throughput experiments to identify PPIs, more
knowledge on protein function has been obtained,
together with the development of several methods to
predict and study the interactions between proteins.
A wide variety of methods have been used to identify
protein–protein associations; these associations may
range from direct physical interactions inferred from
experimental methods to functional linkages predicted
on the basis of computational analyses. In the past,
experimental methods based on microarrays and yeast
two-hybrid, as well as computational methods based on
protein sequences and structures have been developed
and widely used. Given the difficulties in experimentally
identifying PPIs, a wide range of computational methods
have been used to identify protein–protein functional
linkages and interactions. These methods range from
identifying a single pair of interacting proteins at one
end, to the identification and analysis of a large network
of thousands of proteins, the latter as large as that of an
entire proteome of a given cell.

© 2010 Raman; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

Computational methods for prediction of
protein–protein functional linkages and
interactions
Methods based on genomic context
Domain fusion

The domain fusion or Rosetta Stone method was proposed by Eisenberg and co-workers [13]. The method is
based on the hypothesis that if domains A and B exist
fused in a single polypeptide AB in another organism,
then A and B are functionally linked. Fig. 1A shows an
example to illustrate this point. The premise is that
since the affinity between proteins A and B is greatly
enhanced when A is fused to B, some interacting pairs
of proteins may have evolved from proteins that
included the interacting domains A and B on the same
polypeptide. Veitia [14] has proposed a kinetic background to the idea of gene fusion, suggesting the inclusion of eukaryotic sequences to increase the robustness
of Rosetta Stone predictions. The argument basically
involves the fact that eukaryotes, with a larger volume,
cannot afford to accommodate separate proteins A and
B, as the required concentrations of A and B would be
prohibitively high, to achieve the same equilibrium concentration of AB. One limitation of this method is its
low coverage; it has the least coverage among the methods based on genomic context [15].
Conserved neighbourhood

If the genes that encode two proteins are neighbours on
the chromosome in several genomes, the corresponding
proteins are likely to be functionally linked [16]. This
method is particularly useful in case of prokaryotes,
where operons commonly exist, or in organisms where
operon-like clusters are observed. Fig. 1B shows an
example to illustrate this method. This method has been
reported to identify high-quality functional relationships
[17]. However, the method suffers from low coverage,
due to the dual requirement of identifying orthologues
in another genome and then finding those orthologues
that are adjacent on the chromosome [17]. Nevertheless,
this coverage is still higher than that of the Rosetta
Stone method [15]. Bork and co-workers have proposed
another approach that exploits the conservation of
divergently (bi-directionally) transcribed gene pairs [18].
The method is complementary to the existing gene
neighbourhood method, which focuses on operons,
where the genes are transcribed in a common orientation (co-directionally). They report the application of
this method, to successfully associate self-regulatory
transcription factors to their respective operons, enhancing functional annotations [18].
Phylogenetic profiles

Identification of functional linkages between proteins
using phylogenetic profiles is based on the idea that

Page 2 of 11

functionally linked proteins would co-occur in genomes.
The phylogenetic profile of a protein can be represented
as a ‘bit string’, encoding the presence or absence of the
protein in each of the genomes considered (see Fig. 1C).
Proteins having matching or similar phylogenetic profiles tend to be strongly functionally linked [19]. In a
study reported in 1999 [19], when only 17 fully
sequenced genomes were considered for analysis, the
function of a number of proteins in Escherichia coli
could be assigned correctly, by examining the similarity
of their phylogenetic profiles. Fig. 1C illustrates an
example, showing how two proteins A and B are likely
to be functionally linked, owing to the similarity of their
phylogenetic profiles across five genomes. This method
is in a sense the computational equivalent of the experimental genetic approach of mapping a mutant gene’s
phenotype to the gene. Genes with similar phylogenetic
profiles essentially produce similar phenotypes, much
similar to a standard genetic mapping [17]. Bork and
co-workers [20] have used anti-correlated occurrences
of genes (complementary phylogenetic patterns, as
against co-occurrence) across genomes to identify several analogous enzyme displacements (functionally
equivalent genes) in thiamine biosynthesis.
The online service Protein Link EXplorer (PLEX; http://
bioinformatics.icmb.utexas.edu/plex/) [21] allows for the
construction of phylogenetic profiles for any given
sequence, which can be compared to profiles of all other
proteins from 89 fully sequenced genomes that are stored
in the PLEX database. PLEX can also accept sophisticated
phylogenetic profile inputs and comparison parameters,
including individual organism or group-based profiles.
Gene neighbours and Rosetta stone links of all proteins
that match the query profile can also be investigated.
Methods based on co-evolution

Co-evolution can be defined as the joint evolution of
ecologically interacting species [22] and it implies the
evolution of a species in response to selection imposed
by another. Co-evolution thus requires the existence of
mutual selective pressure on two or more species [23].
Computational methods to predict PPIs through the
characteristics of co-evolution have been developed by
extrapolating concepts developed for the study of species co-evolution to the molecular level [23,24]. An in
silico Two-hybrid (i2h) method has been proposed,
based on the study of correlated mutations in multiple
sequence alignments [25,26]. The premise is that coadaptation of interacting proteins can be detected by the
presence of a distinctive number of compensatory mutations in corresponding proteins of different species. An
interaction index, defined based on the distribution of
correlation values is calculated. Correlated mutations

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

Page 3 of 11

Figure 1 Prediction of functional linkages between proteins, based on different methods. (A) Method of domain fusion. The figure
shows proteins predicted to interact by the Rosetta stone method (domain fusion). Each protein is shown schematically with boxes representing
domains. Proteins P2 and P3 in Genomes 2 and 3 are predicted to interact because their homologues are fused in the first genome. (B) Gene
neighbourhood. The figure shows four hypothetical genomes, containing one or more of the genes A, B and C. Since the genes A and B are
co-localised in multiple genomes (1–4), they are likely to be functionally linked with one another. (C) Phylogenetic profiles. The figure shows
five hypothetical genomes, each containing one or more of the proteins A, B, C and D. The presence or absence of each protein is indicated by
1 or 0, respectively, in the phylogenetic profiles given on the right. Identical profiles are highlighted — proteins A and B are functionally linked
(dotted line), whereas proteins C and D, which have different phylogenetic profiles (shown in grey) are not likely to be functionally linked. (D)
Correlated mutations. The alignments of two protein families are shown; conserved residues in either alignment are shown in the same colour
(blue and green). Correlated mutations in either alignment (coloured red) are indicated by arrow marks. Common sub-trees of the phylogenetic
trees are highlighted in yellow. The presence of correlated mutations in each family suggests that the corresponding sites may be involved in
mediating interactions between the proteins from each family.

can also been used to identify specific residues involved
at the interaction sites [26]. Fig. 1D illustrates how correlated mutations can be used to identify functional linkages between proteins.
Protein interactions have also been predicted on the
basis of the comparison of evolutionary histories, or
phylogenetic trees, under the premise that interacting
proteins are subject to similar evolutionary pressures
resulting in similar topologies for the corresponding
trees [27-29]. A more recent method [30] uses the complete network of phylogenetic tree similarities between
all protein pairs in the genome to reassess pairwise similarity between the phylogenetic trees of any two proteins, thereby accounting for the co-evolutionary
context of the proteins more effectively.
Other methods

Although homology-based methods are often quite useful for inferring PPIs, there are occasions where homology-based methods may not be effective. For example,
Mika and Rost have illustrated earlier that homologybased inference of physical PPIs are accurate only at

high levels of sequence identity [31]. Further, homologybased inference of PPIs work better within species than
across species, for low and high levels of sequence similarity [31].
Functional linkages may also be derived by the analysis of correlated mRNA expression levels, or protein
co-expression. These techniques do not require any
homology information [17], as they rely on the measurement of additional expression data. These techniques can, therefore, find unique relationships among
proteins. The premise of all expression clustering
methods is that proteins do not work in isolation and
are often co-expressed with functionally related proteins. By altering the conditions for performing the
experiments, enough variation in gene expression can
be observed to identify co-expressing genes. Protein
co-expression analysis is preferable since mRNA levels
and protein levels have often been found to be poorly
correlated.
Gene expression data has also been shown to be useful in understanding the dynamics of PPI networks
[32-34]. Lu and collaborators [33] integrated gene

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

expression profiles (from a mice model of asthma) into
a network of mouse PPIs derived from the BIND database. They found that highly connected proteins, or hub
proteins in the network have less variable gene expression profiles compared to proteins at the network periphery. Mande and collaborators have described the
construction of ‘conditional networks’ by integrating
gene expression data under different conditions into
protein functional linkage networks [34]. These networks present a picture of the dynamics of the functional linkages between proteins; a comparative analysis
of four different conditional networks illustrates important responses in wild-type and mutant Escherichia coli
cells treated with ultra-violet rays.
Efforts to mine experimental protein–protein association information from literature have also been made.
For example, Hogue and co-workers have described an
support vector machine (SVM)-based approach to mine
the biomedical literature for PPIs [35]. Databases such
as the STRING include such computationally mined
interactions [36]. Eisenberg and co-workers have
described an approach to identify abstracts that discuss
PPIs from literature, which may then be manually
scanned to identify PPIs [37]. This approach forms the
basis for the rapid expansion of the database of interacting proteins (DIP) [37]. Zaki and collaborators have
described a method based on pairwise similarity of protein sub-sequences, to predict PPIs [38].
Experimental methods

Although this review primarily deals with computational
methods for predicting PPIs, I here briefly outline some
experimental methods for assessing PPIs, for the sake of
completeness. There are a number of experimental techniques such as yeast-two hybrid [39], affinity purification/mass spectrometry [4,5,9,11,40] and protein
microarrays [41-43], which are reviewed in detail elsewhere [44,45]. These form the basis of several largescale datasets on PPIs.
In the yeast-two hybrid assay, two fusion proteins are
created: the ‘bait’ (a protein of interest with a DNAbinding domain attached to its N-terminus) and the
‘prey’ (its potential interaction partner, fused to an activation domain). If the ‘bait’ and the ‘prey’ interact, their
binding forms a functional transcriptional activator,
which in turn activates reporter genes or selectable markers [39]. This assay has been adapted for high-throughput analyses of PPIs [46,47].
Gavin and collaborators have described the purification of complexes of 1739 proteins from S. cerevisiae
(including the complete set of 1143 human orthologues)
using tandem affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry, illustrating the complexity of connectivity
between protein complexes [4]. Mass spectrometry has

Page 4 of 11

also been used to construct a large-scale map of human
protein interactions [11].
Protein microarrays aid in the detection of in vitro
binary interactions of various types — protein–protein,
protein–lipid or antigen–antibody interactions. Proteins
covalently attached to a solid support are screened with
fluorescently labelled probes (proteins or lipids), to identify interactions [41]. A high density yeast protein
microarray comprising 5800 yeast proteins was developed and used to identify novel calmodulin and phospholipid binding proteins [41].
Although many of these assays can identify PPIs with
high confidence, they still have their share of false positives and can suffer from a limited reproducibility.
Nevertheless, high-throughput experimental analyses of
PPIs are quite important in obtaining the protein interaction map of a cell. Further, combining results from
multiple experiments as well as computational methods
for predicting functional linkages (as is done in databases such as the STRING) is likely to further improve
our understanding of the complex web of interactions
within a cell.

Databases and tools for analysis of PPIs
In this section, I review some of the important databases
that house data on PPIs, as well as some useful tools for
the visualisation and analysis of PPIs. Protein interaction
databases have also been reviewed in [44]. Some of the
important databases containing data about PPIs are discussed below. Some more examples of databases useful
for researching PPIs are given in Table 1.
STRING

STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting
Genes/Proteins; http://string.embl.de/) [36,48] is a precomputed database for the exploration and analysis of
protein–protein associations. The associations are
derived from high-throughput experimental data, mining
of databases and literature, analyses of co-expressed
genes and also from computational predictions, including those based on genomic context analysis. STRING
employs a unique scoring framework based on benchmarks of the different types of associations against a
common reference set, to produce a single confidence
score per prediction. The graphical user interface is
appealing and user-friendly, backed by an excellent
visualisation engine. Medusa http://coot.embl.de/
medusa/, a general graph visualisation tool, is a front
end (interface) to the STRING protein interaction database [49].
HPRD

Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD; http://www.
hprd.org/) [50] integrates information relevant to the

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

Page 5 of 11

Table 1 Databases and resources useful for researching PPIs.
Database

URL

Resources

Refs.

BIND

Peer-reviewed bio-molecular interaction database containing published interactions
and complexes

http://bind.ca/

[79]

BioGRID
COGs

Protein and genetic interactions from major model organism species
Orthology data and phylogenetic profiles

http://www.thebiogrid.org/
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/

[80]
[81,82]

DIP

Experimentally determined interactions between proteins

http://dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/

[51]

HPRD

Human protein functions, PPIs, post-translational modifications, enzyme–substrate
relationships and disease associations

http://www.hprd.org/

[50,83]

IntAct

Interaction data abstracted from literature or from direct data depositions by expert
curators

http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/

[84]

iPFAM

Physical interactions between those Pfam domains that have a representative
structure in the Protein DataBank (PDB)

http://ipfam.sanger.ac.uk/

[85]

MINT

Experimentally verified PPI mined from the scientific literature by expert curators

http://mint.bio.uniroma2.it/mint/

[86]

Predictome Experimentally derived and computationally predicted functional linkages

http://visant.bu.edu/

[52]

ProLinks

Protein functional linkages

http://mysql5.mbi.ucla.edu/cgi-bin/
functionator/pronav

[87]

SCOPPI

Domain–domain interactions and their interfaces derived from PDB structure files and http://www.scoppi.org/
SCOP domain definitions

[88]

STRING

Protein functional linkages from experimental data and computational predicttions

[36,48]

function of human proteins in health and disease. The
database is almost completely manually curated by biologists who have read and interpreted over 300,000 published articles during the annotation process. Data
pertaining to thousands of PPIs, post-translational modifications, enzyme/substrate relationships, disease associations, tissue expression and sub-cellular localisation
have been extracted from literature into the database.
DIP

The DIP (Database of Interacting Proteins; http://dip.
doe-mbi.ucla.edu/) database [51] catalogues experimentally derived PPIs. Due to the variety of experiments and
their corresponding reliabilities, DIP applies some quality assessment methods to pick out subsets of most reliable interactions. The DIP is generally considered as a
valuable benchmark or verify the performance of any
new method for prediction of PPIs.
Predictome

The Predictome [52] database houses links between the
proteins of 44 genomes based on the implementation of
gene context functional linkage methods, viz. chromosomal proximity, phylogenetic profiling and domain
fusion. It also contains information on large-scale
experimental screenings of PPI data, from experiments
such as yeast two-hybrid, immuno-co-precipitation and
correlated expression. The Predictome database is presently accessible through the visual front-end provided
by VisANT [53], which is a versatile tool for visualisation and analysis of interaction data. Website http://
visant.bu.edu/.

http://string.embl.de/

Tools for network analysis and visualisation

In this section, I briefly discuss some of the useful software tools available for the analysis and visualisation of
biological networks. A comprehensive review of the
tools useful for the visualisation of networks has been
published elsewhere [54]. Some more examples of tools
useful for network visualisation and analysis are given in
Table 2.
Cytoscape Cytoscape http://www.cytoscape.org/[55] is a
software platform for visualising molecular interaction
networks and integrating these interactions with gene
expression profiles. The tool is best used in conjunction
with large databases of gene expression data, protein–
protein, protein–DNA, and genetic interactions that are
increasingly available for humans and model organisms.
Cytoscape supports several algorithms for the layout of
networks. Several useful plug-ins are available for Cytoscape, to extend its capabilities. A notable example is the
NetworkAnalyzer plug-in [56], which can be used to
compute various network parameters.
Pajek Pajek http://pajek.imfm.si/ is a program (only for
Windows-based operating systems) for the analysis and
visualisation of very large networks; it can even handle
networks with > 105 nodes. Pajek also includes a variety
of network layout algorithms, including force-directed
layout algorithms such as Fruchterman–Reingold [57].
Pajek is highly versatile and can also be used to study
network dynamics.

Analyses of network structure
The field of network theory has witnessed a number of
advances in the past [58-60], many of which are

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

Page 6 of 11

Table 2 Examples of tools useful for the visualisation of networks and PPIs.
Tool

URL

Features

Refs.

BioLayout Express
3D

http://www.biolayout.org/

Facilitates microarray data analysis

[89]

Cytoscape
Large Graph
Layout (LGL)
Osprey

http://www.cytoscape.org/
http://sourceforge.net/projects/lgl

Versatile; implements many visualisation algorithms; many plug-ins available
Especially useful for dynamic visualisation of large graphs (105 nodes, 106 edges);
force-directed layout algorithm
Provides network filters, connectivity filters, many layouts and facilitates dataset
superimposing
Especially useful for the analysis of very large networks

[55]
[90]

Especially facilitates analysis of gene ontologies

[53]

General purpose graph editor

-

Pajek
Visant
Yed

http://biodata.mshri.on.ca/osprey/
servlet/Index
http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/
networks/pajek/
http://visant.bu.edu/
http://www.yworks.com/products/
yed/

impacting the analyses of biological networks such as
PPI networks. In this section, I discuss some of the
important network parameters useful in the analysis of
networks and understanding their characteristics,
important network topologies, as well as some of
the measures that can be used to analyse perturbations
to networks. Detailed reviews of the application
of network theory to biology have been published
elsewhere [61,62].
Network parameters

Network theory provides a quantifiable description of
networks; there are several network measures that
enable the comparison and characterisation of complex
networks:
Connectivity (or) Degree

The most elementary characteristic of a node is its
degree, k, which represents the number of links the
node has, to other nodes in the network.
Degree distribution

The degree distribution, P(k), gives the probability that a
selected node has exactly k links. P(k) is obtained by
counting the number of nodes N(k) with k = 1, 2, ...
links and dividing by the number of nodes N. The
degree distribution allows to distinguish between various
network topologies [61].
Clustering Coefficient

The clustering coefficient was first defined by Watts
and Strogatz [58]. The clustering coefficient, C, for a
node is a notion of how connected the neighbours of a
given node are (cliquishness). The average clustering
coefficient for all nodes in a network is taken to be the
network clustering coefficient. In an undirected graph,
if a vertex vi has ki neighbours, ki(ki - 1)/2 edges could
exist among the vertices within the neighbourhood
(Ni). The clustering coefficient for an undirected graph
G(V, E) (where V represents the set of vertices in the
graph G and E represents the set of edges) can then be
defined as

Ci 

2|{e jk}|
; v j , v k  N i , e jk  E.
k i (k i 1)

[91]
[92]

(1)

The average clustering coefficient characterises the
overall tendency of nodes to form clusters or groups. C
(k) is defined as the average clustering coefficient for all
nodes with k links.
Characteristic Path Length

The characteristic path length, L, is defined as the number of edges in the shortest path between two vertices,
averaged over all pairs of vertices. It measures the typical separation between two vertices in the network [58].
Intuitively, it represents the network’s overall navigability [61].
Network Diameter

The network diameter d is the greatest distance (shortest path, or geodesic path) between any two nodes in a
network [63]. It can also be viewed as the length of the
‘longest’ shortest path in the network.
d  max d G (u, v)
u ,vG

(2)

where dG(u, v) is the shortest path between u and v in
G. A few authors have also used this term to denote the
average geodesic distance in a network (which translates
to the characteristic path length), although strictly the
two measures are distinct.
Betweenness

Betweenness is a centrality measure of a vertex within a
graph [64]. For a graph G(V, E), with n vertices, the
betweenness CB(v) of a vertex v is defined as
C B ( v) 



s  v  t V

 st (v)
 st

(3)

where sst is the number of shortest paths from s to t,
and sst (v) is the number of shortest paths from s to t
that pass through a vertex v. A similar definition for

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

‘edge betweenness’ was given by Girvan and Newman
[65]. Nodes with a higher betweenness lie on a larger
number of shortest paths in a network.
Network topologies

The understanding of the topology or the architectural
principles of a biological network can directly give an
insight into various network characteristics. There are
several known topologies of networks, characterised by
their distinctive network parameters. The following are
some network models that are relevant to the understanding of biological networks.
Random networks

The Erdös–Rényi model of a random network starts
with N nodes and connects each pair of nodes with a
probability p, which creates a graph with approximately
pN(N - 1)/2 randomly placed links. The node degrees
follow a Poisson distribution indicating that most nodes
have approximately the same number of links. The characteristic path length is proportional to the logarithm of
the network size L ~ log N. C(k) is independent of k
[61].
Small-world networks

Small-world networks are characterised by two properties: (i) individual nodes have few neighbours, but (ii)
most nodes can be reached from one another through
few steps, often referred to as ‘six degrees of separation’
[66]. Small-world networks have been generated by rewiring regular ring-lattice-like networks [58]. A regular
ring-lattice resembles a (circular) string of beads, where
each node (bead) is linked to one node on either side,
and is also additionally connected to the immediate
neighbour of those nodes. Thus, each node is linked to
four nodes nearest to it on the ‘string’. The ring-lattice
is rewired as follows: the original links in the lattice are
replaced by random ones with a probability 0 ≤ j ≤ 1,
introducing varying amounts of disorder, which takes
the network from complete regularity to complete disorder (randomness). The re-wiring process allows the
small-world model to interpolate between a regular lattice and a (more or less) random graph. When j = 0,
there is no re-wiring and the regular lattice remains
unchanged. The clustering coefficient for this lattice
tends to 0.75 for large k. The regular lattice, however,
does not show the small-world effect. Mean geodesic
distances between vertices tend to L/4k for large L.
When j = 1, every edge is re-wired to a new random
location and the graph is almost a random graph, with
typical geodesic distances on the order of log L/ log k,
but very low C ≃ 2k/L [67]. As Watts and Strogatz
showed by numerical simulation, however, there exists a
sizeable region in between these two extremes of j, for
which the model generates a network that has both low
path lengths and high clustering. Small-world networks

Page 7 of 11

have a characteristic path length of the same order as
random networks (L ≳ log N), but have a clustering
coefficient much higher than that of random networks
(C ≫ C random ). The small-world topology has been
observed in networks such as film actor networks,
power grids and the neural network of the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans [58].
Scale-free Networks

Scale-free networks are characterised by a power-law
degree distribution; the probability that a node has k
links is given by P(k) ~ k-g, where g is the degree exponent [59]. The value of g determines many properties of
the system. For smaller values of g, the role of the
‘hubs’, or highly connected nodes, in the network
becomes more important. For g > 3, hubs are not relevant, while for 2 <g < 3, there is a hierarchy of hubs,
with the most connected hub being in contact with a
small fraction of all nodes. Scale-free networks have a
high degree of robustness against random node failures,
although they are sensitive to the failure of hubs. The
probability that a node is highly connected is statistically
more significant than in a random graph. The properties
of a scale-free network are often determined by a relatively small number of highly connected hubs. The Barabási–Albert scale-free network model [59] involves the
construction of a network through an iterative procedure. Beginning with a network having m 0 nodes, in
each subsequent iteration, a single node is added to the
network, with m ≤ m0 links to existing nodes. The probability with which this node connects to the existing
nodes of the network is directly proportional to the connectivity of the existing nodes (’rich get richer’ phenomenon). The probability p i with which the new node
connects to an existing node i, is given as
pi 

ki
 jG k j

where ki is the degree of node i and the denominator
represents the sum of the degrees of all nodes in the
network (G). After n iterations, the model leads to a
network with m0 + n nodes and mn edges. The network
generated by this model has a power-law degree distribution characterised by g = 3. Scale-free networks with
2 <g < 3, a range commonly observed in many biological
networks, are ultra-small, with a characteristic path
length L ~ log log N, significantly smaller than that of
random networks (log N) [61].
Analysis of network perturbations

Networks can be perturbed through the removal of nodes
and edges. A typical analysis would be to probe the effect
of disrupting a node and its corresponding edges. Networks of different topologies vary in their resilience to

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

various types of perturbations. A number of studies have
been carried out to analyse the response of networks to
the deletion of their nodes and edges. A review of how
nodes in a network can be prioritised based on network
analysis has been presented elsewhere [68].
Barabási and co-workers have analysed the response of
scale-free and random networks to various types of
‘attacks’ [69]. In particular, they have analysed the networks representing the topologies of the Internet and
the World-Wide Web. The common observation is that
scale-free networks are quite insensitive to random node
removals; they are highly robust in the face of random
node failures and the characteristic path length was
found to be almost unaffected. This is intuitively reasonable, since most of the vertices in these networks have
low degree and therefore lie on few paths between
others; thus their removal rarely affects communications
substantially. On the other hand, directed attacks targeting the highly connected hubs led to a rapid disruption
of the communication through the network. The characteristic path length was found to increase very sharply
with the fraction of hubs removed and typically only a
small fraction of the hubs needed to be ‘knocked out’
before essentially all communication through the network was destroyed [67,69].
Jeong and co-workers have analysed the effect of node
deletions on S. cerevisiae PPI network [70]. They report
that although proteins with five or fewer links constituted about 93% of the total number of proteins, only
about 21% of them were essential. On the other hand,
only 0.7% of the proteins had more than 15 links, but
single deletion of 62% of these proved lethal. This
implies that highly connected proteins with a central
role in the architecture of the network are three times
more likely to be essential than proteins with only a
small number of links to other proteins.
Another comprehensive analysis of vulnerability of
complex networks to various types of attacks has been
discussed in [71]. In addition to node deletions studied
earlier [69], they have also studied the effects of edge
removals. Further, for each case of attacks on vertices
and edges, four different attacking strategies were
employed: removals by the descending order of the
degree and the betweenness centrality, calculated for
either the initial network or the modified network during the iterative removal procedure. They report that
the removals based on the re-calculated degrees and
betweenness centralities are often more harmful than
the attack strategies based on the initial network’s parameters, underlining the importance of the changes in
network structure following the removal of important
edges or nodes.
Wingender and co-workers have proposed a measure,
known as pairwise disconnectivity index [72], which

Page 8 of 11

quantifies how crucial a node or an edge (or a group of
nodes/edges) is, for sustaining the communication
between connected pairs of vertices in a directed network. This is one metric that explicitly considers paths
between the various nodes in a network; it is thus quite
useful in analysing how node deletions in a network can
disrupt the flow of information.
We have earlier reported an analysis of the number of
disrupted shortest paths in the network, to identify
nodes that may be critical to a network [73]. Network
analysis has also been used for identifying pathways to
drug resistance [74]. Ge and collaborators have developed an ‘information flow analysis’, to identify proteins
central for information transmission in interactome networks of S. cerevisiae and C. elegans [75]; the proteins
so identified were also likely to be essential for survival.
The method employs confidence scores for PPIs and
also considers multiple paths in a network while evaluating the importance of each protein [75]. The analysis
of node deletions from PPI networks has been used for
the identification of potential drug targets [73,76].

Conclusions
PPI networks provide a simplified overview of the web
of interactions that take place inside a cell. The vast
amounts of sequence data that have been generated
have been leveraged to make better predictions of interactions and functional associations between proteins, as
well as individual protein functions. By integrating
experimental methods for determining PPIs and computational methods for prediction, a lot of useful data on
PPIs have been generated, including a number of highquality databases.
Although the analyses of PPI networks has produced
several useful results, often improving our understanding of the underlying biology, they are not without
flaws. One of the key flaws of the existing methods to
delineate such large-scale protein interaction networks
is the limited reproducibility of such experiments;
further, it is suspected that what is examined is only a
small fraction of the entire proteome [77]. However,
most databases do combine multiple methods for predicting interactions, as well as results from multiple
high-throughput experiments, mitigating this problem to
a certain extent. Further, these networks often paint a
static picture of the overwhelmingly complex dynamic
interactions that take place in a cell. An improved
model of these interactions must consider both the
dynamics (temporal changes in the interactions) as well
as the strengths of each of the interactions. The global
overview presented by such interaction maps is no
doubt useful, but the finer details of the interactions
may be significantly important for our ability to make
testable predictions about biological systems [78].

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

Nevertheless, protein interaction maps have many
practical applications and hold the key to understanding
complex biological systems. With a large amount of
high-throughput data being generated at various levels,
computational analyses of these data, to identify associations and interactions between various proteins, form a
fundamental step in our quest to understand the organisation of complex biological systems. As Dennis Bray
put it rather eloquently [78], “We have a new continent
to explore and will need maps at every scale to find our
way“.

Page 9 of 11

8.

9.
Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to Nagasuma Chandra and Andreas Wagner for their
mentorship. Financial support through the YeastX project of SystemsX.ch is
gratefully acknowledged.
Author details
1
Department of Biochemistry, University of Zürich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
8057 Zürich, Switzerland. 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Quartier Sorge,
Batiment Genopode, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

10.

Authors’ contributions
KR wrote, read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.

11.

Received: 25 November 2009
Accepted: 15 February 2010 Published: 15 February 2010
References
1. Eisenberg D, Marcotte EM, Xenarios I, Yeates TO: Protein function in the
post-genomic era. Nature 2000, 405(6788):823-826.
2. Anderson PW: More Is Different. Science 1972, 177(4047):393-396.
3. Valencia A, Pazos F: Computational methods for the prediction of protein
interactions. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2002, 12:368-373.
4. Gavin AC, Bsche M, Krause R, Grandi P, Marzioch M, Bauer A, Schultz J,
Rick JM, Michon AM, Cruciat CM, Remor M, Hfert C, Schelder M,
Brajenovic M, Ruffner H, Merino A, Klein K, Hudak M, Dickson D, Rudi T,
Gnau V, Bauch A, Bastuck S, Huhse B, Leutwein C, Heurtier MA, Copley RR,
Edelmann A, Querfurth E, Rybin V, Drewes G, Raida M, Bouwmeester T,
Bork P, Seraphin B, Kuster B, Neubauer G, Superti-Furga G: Functional
organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein
complexes. Nature 2002, 415(6868):141-147.
5. Ho Y, Gruhler A, Heilbut A, Bader GD, Moore L, Adams SL, Millar A, Taylor P,
Bennett K, Boutilier K, Yang L, Wolting C, Donaldson I, Schandorff S,
Shewnarane J, Vo M, Taggart J, Goudreault M, Muskat B, Alfarano C,
Dewar D, Lin Z, Michalickova K, Willems AR, Sassi H, Nielsen PA,
Rasmussen KJ, Andersen JR, Johansen LE, Hansen LH, Jespersen H,
Podtelejnikov A, Nielsen E, Crawford J, Poulsen V, Srensen BD, Matthiesen J,
Hendrickson RC, Gleeson F, Pawson T, Moran MF, Durocher D, Mann M,
Hogue CWV, Figeys D, Tyers M: Systematic identification of protein
complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by mass spectrometry. Nature
2002, 415(6868):180-183.
6. Giot L, Bader JS, Brouwer C, Chaudhuri A, Kuang B, Li Y, Hao YL, Ooi CE,
Godwin B, Vitols E, Vijayadamodar G, Pochart P, Machineni H, Welsh M,
Kong Y, Zerhusen B, Malcolm R, Varrone Z, Collis A, Minto M, Burgess S,
McDaniel L, Stimpson E, Spriggs F, Williams J, Neurath K, Ioime N, Agee M,
Voss E, Furtak K, Renzulli R, Aanensen N, Carrolla S, Bickelhaupt E,
Lazovatsky Y, DaSilva A, Zhong J, Stanyon CA, Finley RL, White KP,
Braverman M, Jarvie T, Gold S, Leach M, Knight J, Shimkets RA,
McKenna MP, Chant J, Rothberg JM: A protein interaction map of
Drosophila melanogaster. Science 2003, 302(5651):1727-1736.
7. Li S, Armstrong CM, Bertin N, Ge H, Milstein S, Boxem M, Vidalain PO,
Han JDJ, Chesneau A, Hao T, Goldberg DS, Li N, Martinez M, Rual JF,

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

Lamesch P, Xu L, Tewari M, Wong SL, Zhang LV, Berriz GF, Jacotot L,
Vaglio P, Reboul J, Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Li Q, Gabel HW, Elewa A,
Baumgartner B, Rose DJ, Yu H, Bosak S, Sequerra R, Fraser A, Mango SE,
Saxton WM, Strome S, Heuvel SVD, Piano F, Vandenhaute J, Sardet C,
Gerstein M, Doucette-Stamm L, Gunsalus KC, Harper JW, Cusick ME,
Roth FP, Hill DE, Vidal M: A map of the interactome network of the
metazoan C. elegans. Science 2004, 303(5657):540-543.
Rual JF, Venkatesan K, Hao T, Hirozane-Kishikawa T, Dricot A, Li N, Berriz GF,
Gibbons FD, Dreze M, Ayivi-Guedehoussou N, Klitgord N, Simon C,
Boxem M, Milstein S, Rosenberg J, Goldberg DS, Zhang LV, Wong SL,
Franklin G, Li S, Albala JS, Lim J, Fraughton C, Llamosas E, Cevik S, Bex C,
Lamesch P, Sikorski RS, Vandenhaute J, Zoghbi HY, Smolyar A, Bosak S,
Sequerra R, Doucette-Stamm L, Cusick ME, Hill DE, Roth FP, Vidal M:
Towards a proteome-scale map of the human protein-protein
interaction network. Nature 2005, 437(7062):1173-1178.
Krogan NJ, Cagney G, Yu H, Zhong G, Guo X, Ignatchenko A, Li J, Pu S,
Datta N, Tikuisis AP, Punna T, Peregrn-Alvarez JM, Shales M, Zhang X,
Davey M, Robinson MD, Paccanaro A, Bray JE, Sheung A, Beattie B,
Richards DP, Canadien V, Lalev A, Mena F, Wong P, Starostine A,
Canete MM, Vlasblom J, Wu S, Orsi C, Collins SR, Chandran S, Haw R,
Rilstone JJ, Gandi K, Thompson NJ, Musso G, Onge PS, Ghanny S, Lam MHY,
Butland G, Altaf-Ul AM, Kanaya S, Shilatifard A, O’Shea E, Weissman JS,
Ingles CJ, Hughes TR, Parkinson J, Gerstein M, Wodak SJ, Emili A,
Greenblatt JF: Global landscape of protein complexes in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2006, 440(7084):637-643.
Arifuzzaman M, Maeda M, Itoh A, Nishikata K, Takita C, Saito R, Ara T,
Nakahigashi K, Huang HC, Hirai A, Tsuzuki K, Nakamura S, Altaf-Ul-Amin M,
Oshima T, Baba T, Yamamoto N, Kawamura T, Ioka-Nakamichi T,
Kitagawa M, Tomita M, Kanaya S, Wada C, Mori H: Large-scale
identification of protein-protein interaction of Escherichia coli K-12.
Genome Res 2006, 16(5):686-691.
Ewing RM, Chu P, Elisma F, Li H, Taylor P, Climie S, McBroom-Cerajewski L,
Robinson MD, O’Connor L, Li M, Taylor R, Dharsee M, Ho Y, Heilbut A,
Moore L, Zhang S, Ornatsky O, Bukhman YV, Ethier M, Sheng Y, Vasilescu J,
Abu-Farha M, Lambert JP, Duewel HS, Stewart II, Kuehl B, Hogue K,
Colwill K, Gladwish K, Muskat B, Kinach R, Adams SL, Moran MF, Morin GB,
Topaloglou T, Figeys D: Large-scale mapping of human protein-protein
interactions by mass spectrometry. Mol Syst Biol 2007, 3:89.
Yu H, Braun P, Yildirim MA, Lemmens I, Venkatesan K, Sahalie J, HirozaneKishikawa T, Gebreab F, Li N, Simonis N, Hao T, Rual JF, Dricot A, Vazquez A,
Murray RR, Simon C, Tardivo L, Tam S, Svrzikapa N, Fan C, de Smet AS,
Motyl A, Hudson ME, Park J, Xin X, Cusick ME, Moore T, Boone C, Snyder M,
Roth FP, Barabsi AL, Tavernier J, Hill DE, Vidal M: High-quality binary
protein interaction map of the yeast interactome network. Science 2008,
322(5898):104-110.
Marcotte EM, Pellegrini M, Ng HL, Rice DW, Yeates TO, Eisenberg D:
Detecting Protein Function and Protein-Protein Interactions from
Genome Sequences. Science 1999, 285(5428):751-753.
Veitia RA: Rosetta Stone proteins: “chance and necessity"?. Genome Biol
2002, 3(2):interactions1001.1-1001.3.
Huynen M, Snel B, Lathe W, Bork P: Predicting protein function by
genomic context: quantitative evaluation and qualitative inferences.
Genome Res 2000, 10(8):1204-1210.
Dandekar T, Snel B, Huynen MA, Bork P: Conservation of gene order: a
fingerprint of proteins that physically interact. Trends Biochemical Sci
1998, 23(9):324-328.
Marcotte EM: Computational genetics: finding protein function by
nonhomology methods. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2000, 10:359-365.
Korbel JO, Jensen LJ, von Mering C, Bork P: Analysis of genomic context:
prediction of functional associations from conserved bidirectionally
transcribed gene pairs. Nat Biotechnol 2004, 7:911-917.
Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: Protein
phylogenetic profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96(8):4285-4288.
Morett E, Korbel JO, Rajan E, Saab-Rincon G, Olvera L, Olvera M, Schmidt S,
Snel B, Bork P: Systematic discovery of analogous enzymes in thiamin
biosynthesis. Nat Biotechnol 2003, 21:790-795.
Date SV, Marcotte EM: Protein function prediction using the Protein Link
Explorer (PLEX). Bioinformatics 2005, 21(10):2558-2559.
Thompson J: The Coevolutionary Process Chicago: University of Chicago
Press 1994.

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

23. Pazos F, Valencia A: Protein co-evolution, co-adaptation and interactions.
EMBO J 2008, 27(20):2648-2655.
24. Barker D, Pagel M: Predicting functional gene links from phylogeneticstatistical analyses of whole genomes. PLoS Comput Biol 2005, 1:e3.
25. Pazos F, Helmer-Citterich M, Ausiello G, Valencia A: Correlated mutations
contain information about protein-protein interaction. J Mol Biol 1997,
271(4):511-523.
26. Pazos F, Valencia A: In silico Two-Hybrid System for the Selection of
Physically Interacting Protein Pairs. Proteins 2002, 47:219-227.
27. Goh CS, Cohen FE: Co-evolutionary analysis reveals insights into proteinprotein interactions. J Mol Biol 2002, 324:177-192.
28. Ramani AK, Marcotte EM: Exploiting the co-evolution of interacting
proteins to discover interaction specificity. J Mol Biol 2003, 327:273-284.
29. Pazos F, Ranea JAG, Juan D, Sternberg MJE: Assessing protein co-evolution
in the context of the tree of life assists in the prediction of the
interactome. J Mol Biol 2005, 352(4):1002-1015.
30. Juan D, Pazos F, Valencia A: High-confidence prediction of global
interactomes based on genome-wide coevolutionary networks. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(3):934-939.
31. Mika S, Rost B: Protein-protein interactions more conserved within
species than across species. PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2(7):e79.
32. Komurov K, White M: Revealing static and dynamic modular architecture
of the eukaryotic protein interaction network. Mol Syst Biol 2007, 3:110.
33. Lu X, Jain VV, Finn PW, Perkins DL: Hubs in biological interaction networks
exhibit low changes in expression in experimental asthma. Mol Syst Biol
2007, 3:98.
34. Hegde SR, Manimaran P, Mande SC: Dynamic changes in protein
functional linkage networks revealed by integration with gene
expression data. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4(11):e1000237.
35. Donaldson I, Martin J, de Bruijn B, Wolting C, Lay V, Tuekam B, Zhang S,
Baskin B, Bader GD, Michalickova K, Pawson T, Hogue CWV: PreBIND and
Textomy - mining the biomedical literature for protein-protein
interactions using a support vector machine. BMC Bioinformatics 2003,
4:11.
36. von Mering C, Jensen LJ, Snel B, Hooper SD, Krupp M, Foglierini M,
Jouffre N, Huynen MA, Bork P: STRING: known and predicted proteinprotein associations, integrated and transferred across organisms. Nucleic
Acids Res 2005, 33(Suppl 1):D433-437.
37. Marcotte EM, Xenarios I, Eisenberg D: Mining literature for protein-protein
interactions. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(4):359-363.
38. Zaki N, Lazarova-Molnar S, El-Hajj W, Campbell P: Protein-protein
interaction based on pairwise similarity. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:150.
39. Fields S, Song O: A novel genetic system to detect protein-protein
interactions. Nature 1989, 340(6230):245-246.
40. Gingras AC, Gstaiger M, Raught B, Aebersold R: Analysis of protein
complexes using mass spectrometry. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007,
8(8):645-654.
41. Zhu H, Bilgin M, Bangham R, Hall D, Casamayor A, Bertone P, Lan N,
Jansen R, Bidlingmaier S, Houfek T, Mitchell T, Miller P, Dean RA, Gerstein M,
Snyder M: Global analysis of protein activities using proteome chips.
Science 2001, 293(5537):2101-2105.
42. Michaud GA, Salcius M, Zhou F, Bangham R, Bonin J, Guo H, Snyder M,
Predki PF, Schweitzer BI: Analyzing antibody specificity with whole
proteome microarrays. Nat Biotechnol 2003, 21(12):1509-1512.
43. Mattoon DR, Schweitzer B: Profiling protein interaction networks with
functional protein microarrays. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 563:63-74.
44. Shoemaker BA, Panchenko AR: Deciphering protein-protein interactions.
Part I. Experimental techniques and databases. PLoS Comput Biol 2007,
3(3):e42.
45. Uetz P: Experimental methods for protein interaction identification and
characterization. Protein-protein interactions and networks
Springer2008:1-32.
46. Uetz P, Giot L, Cagney G, Mansfield TA, Judson RS, Knight JR, Lockshon D,
Narayan V, Srinivasan M, Pochart P, Qureshi-Emili A, Li Y, Godwin B,
Conover D, Kalbfleisch T, Vijayadamodar G, Yang M, Johnston M, Fields S,
Rothberg JM: A comprehensive analysis of protein-protein interactions in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2000, 403(6770):623-627.
47. Ito T, Chiba T, Ozawa R, Yoshida M, Hattori M, Sakaki Y: A comprehensive
two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein interactome. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2001, 98(8):4569-4574.

Page 10 of 11

48. Jensen LJ, Kuhn M, Stark M, Chaffron S, Creevey C, Muller J, Doerks T,
Julien P, Roth A, Simonovic M, Bork P, von Mering C: STRING 8-a global
view on proteins and their functional interactions in 630 organisms.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37 Database: D412-D416.
49. Hooper SD, Bork P: Medusa: a simple tool for interaction graph analysis.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21(24):4432-4433.
50. Peri S, Navarro JD, Amanchy R, Kristiansen TZ, Jonnalagadda CK,
Surendranath V, Niranjan V, Muthusamy B, Gandhi TKB, Gronborg M,
Ibarrola N, Deshpande N, Shanker K, Shivashankar HN, Rashmi BP,
Ramya MA, Zhao Z, Chandrika KN, Padma N, Harsha HC, Yatish AJ,
Kavitha MP, Menezes M, Choudhury DR, Suresh S, Ghosh N, Saravana R,
Chandran S, Krishna S, Joy M, Anand SK, Madavan V, Joseph A, Wong GW,
Schiemann WP, Constantinescu SN, Huang L, Khosravi-Far R, Steen H,
Tewari M, Ghaffari S, Blobe GC, Dang CV, Garcia JGN, Pevsner J, Jensen ON,
Roepstorff P, Deshpande KS, Chinnaiyan AM, Hamosh A, Chakravarti A,
Pandey A: Development of human protein reference database as an
initial platform for approaching systems biology in humans. Genome Res
2003, 13(10):2363-2371.
51. Xenarios I, Fernandez E, Salwinski L, Duan XJ, Thompson MJ, Marcotte EM,
Eisenberg D: DIP: The Database of Interacting Proteins: 2001 update.
Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:239-241.
52. Mellor JC, Yanai I, Clodfelter KH, Mintseris J, DeLisi C: Predictome: a
database of putative functional links between proteins. Nucleic Acids Res
2002, 30:306-309.
53. Hu Z, Snitkin ES, DeLisi C: VisANT: an integrative framework for networks
in systems biology. Brief Bioinform 2008, 9(4):317-325.
54. Pavlopoulos G, Wegener AL, Schneider R: A survey of visualization tools
for biological network analysis. BioData Min 2008, 1:12.
55. Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res
2003, 13(11):2498-2504.
56. Assenov Y, Ramírez F, Schelhorn SE, Lengauer T, Albrecht M: Computing
topological parameters of biological networks. Bioinformatics 2008,
24(2):282-284.
57. Fruchterman TMJ, Reingold EM: Graph drawing by force-directed
placement. Softw Pract Exper 1991, 21(11):1129-1164.
58. Watts DJ, Strogatz SH: Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks.
Nature 1998, 393(6684):440-442.
59. Barabási AL, Albert R: Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks. Science
1999, 286(5439):509-512.
60. Albert R, Jeong H, Barabási AL: Diameter of the World-Wide Web. Nature
1999, 401:130-131.
61. Barabási AL, Oltvai ZN: Network biology: understanding the cell’s
functional organization. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5(2):101-113.
62. Mason O, Verwoerd M: Graph theory and networks in Biology. IET Syst Biol
2007, 1(2):89-119.
63. Diestel R: Graph Theory. Graduate Texts in Mathematics Springer-Verlag
2000, 173.
64. Freeman LC: A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness.
Sociometry 1977, 40:35-41.
65. Girvan M, Newman MEJ: Community structure in social and biological
networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(12):7821-7826.
66. Watts D: Six Degrees London: W. W. Norton & Company 2003.
67. Newman MEJ: The Structure and Function of Complex Networks. SIAM
Review 2003, 45(2):167-256.
68. Chang AN: Prioritizing genes for pathway impact using network analysis.
Methods Mol Biol 2009, 563:141-156.
69. Albert R, Jeong H, Barabási AL: Error and attack tolerance of complex
networks. Nature 2000, 406(6794):378-382.
70. Jeong H, Mason SP, Barabási AL, Oltvai ZN: Lethality and centrality in
protein networks. Nature 2001, 411(6833):41-42.
71. Holme P, Kim BJ, Yoon CN, Han SK: Attack vulnerability of complex
networks. Phys Rev E 2002, 65(5):056109.
72. Potapov AP, Goemann B, Wingender E: The pairwise disconnectivity index
as a new metric for the topological analysis of regulatory networks. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:227.
73. Raman K, Kalidas Y, Chandra N: targetTB: A target identification pipeline
for Mycobacterium tuberculosis through an interactome, reactome and
genome-scale structural analysis. BMC Syst Biol 2008, 2:109.

Raman Automated Experimentation 2010, 2:2
http://www.aejournal.net/content/2/1/2

74. Raman K, Chandra N: Mycobacterium tuberculosis interactome analysis
unravels potential pathways to drug resistance. BMC Microbiol 2008,
8:234.
75. Missiuro PV, Liu K, Zou L, Ross BC, Zhao G, Liu JS, Ge H: Information flow
analysis of interactome networks. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5(4):e1000350.
76. Raman K, Vashisht R, Chandra N: Strategies for efficient disruption of
metabolism in Mycobacterium tuberculosis from network analysis. Mol
Biosyst 2009, 5:1740-1751.
77. von Mering C, Krause R, Snel B, Cornell M, Oliver SG, Fields S, Bork P:
Comparative assessment of large-scale data sets of protein-protein
interactions. Nature 2002, 417(6887):399-403.
78. Bray D: Molecular networks: the top-down view. Science 2003,
301(5641):1864-1865.
79. Bader GD, Betel D, Hogue CWV: BIND: the Biomolecular Interaction
Network Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:248-250.
80. Stark C, Breitkreutz BJ, Reguly T, Boucher L, Breitkreutz A, Tyers M: BioGRID:
a general repository for interaction datasets. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34
Database: D535-D539.
81. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 1997, 278(5338):631-637.
82. Tatusov RL, Fedorova ND, Jackson JD, Jacobs AR, Kiryutin B, Koonin EV,
Krylov DM, Mazumder R, Mekhedov SL, Nikolskaya AN, Rao BS, Smirnov S,
Sverdlov AV, Vasudevan S, Wolf YI, Yin JJ, Natale DA: The COG database:
an updated version includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:41.
83. Prasad TSK, Goel R, Kandasamy K, Keerthikumar S, Kumar S, Mathivanan S,
Telikicherla D, Raju R, Shafreen B, Venugopal A, Balakrishnan L,
Marimuthu A, Banerjee S, Somanathan DS, Sebastian A, Rani S, Ray S,
Kishore CJH, Kanth S, Ahmed M, Kashyap MK, Mohmood R,
Ramachandra YL, Krishna V, Rahiman BA, Mohan S, Ranganathan P,
Ramabadran S, Chaerkady R, Pandey A: Human Protein Reference
Database-2009 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37 Database: D767-D772.
84. Aranda B, Achuthan P, Alam-Faruque Y, Armean I, Bridge A, Derow C,
Feuermann M, Ghanbarian AT, Kerrien S, Khadake J, Kerssemakers J, Leroy C,
Menden M, Michaut M, Montecchi-Palazzi L, Neuhauser SN, Orchard S,
Perreau V, Roechert B, van Eijk K, Hermjakob H: The IntAct molecular
interaction database in 2010. Nucleic Acids Res 2009.
85. Finn RD, Marshall M, Bateman A: iPfam: visualization of protein-protein
interactions in PDB at domain and amino acid resolutions. Bioinformatics
2005, 21(3):410-412.
86. Chatr-aryamontri A, Ceol A, Palazzi LM, Nardelli G, Schneider MV,
Castagnoli L, Cesareni G: MINT: the Molecular INTeraction database.
Nucleic Acids Res 2007, , 35 Database: D572-D574.
87. Bowers PM, Pellegrini M, Thompson MJ, Fierro J, Yeates TO, Eisenberg D:
Prolinks: a database of protein functional linkages derived from
coevolution. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R35.
88. Winter C, Henschel A, Kim WK, Schroeder M: SCOPPI: a structural
classification of protein-protein interfaces. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34
Database: D310-D314.
89. Freeman TC, Goldovsky L, Brosch M, van Dongen S, Mazire P, Grocock RJ,
Freilich S, Thornton J, Enright AJ: Construction, visualisation, and
clustering of transcription networks from microarray expression data.
PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3(10):2032-2042.
90. Adai AT, Date SV, Wieland S, Marcotte EM: LGL: creating a map of protein
function with an algorithm for visualizing very large biological networks.
J Mol Biol 2004, 340:179-190.
91. Breitkreutz BJ, Stark C, Tyers M: Osprey: a network visualization system.
Genome Biol 2003, 4(3):R22.
92. Batagelj V, Mrvar A: Pajek - Program for Large Network Analysis.
Connections 1998, 21:47-57http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?
doi=.
doi:10.1186/1759-4499-2-2
Cite this article as: Raman: Construction and analysis of protein–protein
interaction networks. Automated Experimentation 2010 2:2.

Page 11 of 11

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
