<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-6-S4-S22.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="petere"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Research article

NemaFootPrinter: a web based software for the identification of
conserved non-coding genome sequence regions between C. elegans
and C. briggsae
Davide Rambaldi, Alessandro Guffanti, Paolo Morandi and
Giuseppe Cassata*
Address: IFOM-FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology Foundation, Milan, Italy
Email: Davide Rambaldi - davide.rambaldi@ifom-ieo-campus.it; Alessandro Guffanti - alessandro.guffanti@ifom-ieo-campus.it;
Paolo Morandi - paolo.morandi@ifom-ieo-campus.it; Giuseppe Cassata* - giuseppe.cassata@ifom-ieo-campus.it
* Corresponding author

from Italian Society of Bioinformatics (BITS): Annual Meeting 2005
Milan, Italy, 17–19 March 2005
Published: 1 December 2005
</supplement>
<supplement> <title> <p>Italian Society of Bioinformatics (BITS): Annual Meeting 2005</p> </title> <editor>Rita Casadio, Alessandro Guffanti, Manuela Helmer-Citterich, Giancarlo Mauri, Luciano Milanesi, Graziano Pesole, Cecilia Saccone and Giorgio Valle</editor> <note>Research articles</note>

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6(Suppl 4):S22

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-6-S4-S22

Abstract
Background: NemaFootPrinter (Nematode Transcription Factor Scan Through Philogenetic
Footprinting) is a web-based software for interactive identification of conserved, non-exonic DNA
segments in the genomes of C. elegans and C. briggsae. It has been implemented according to the
following project specifications:
a) Automated identification of orthologous gene pairs.
b) Interactive selection of the boundaries of the genes to be compared.
c) Pairwise sequence comparison with a range of different methods.
d) Identification of putative transcription factor binding sites on conserved, non-exonic DNA
segments.
Results: Starting from a C. elegans or C. briggsae gene name or identifier, the software identifies
the putative ortholog (if any), based on information derived from public nematode genome
annotation databases. The investigator can then retrieve the genome DNA sequences of the two
orthologous genes; visualize graphically the genes' intron/exon structure and the surrounding DNA
regions; select, through an interactive graphical user interface, subsequences of the two gene
regions. Using a bioinformatics toolbox (Blast2seq, Dotmatcher, Ssearch and connection to the
rVista database) the investigator is able at the end of the procedure to identify and analyze
significant sequences similarities, detecting the presence of transcription factor binding sites
corresponding to the conserved segments. The software automatically masks exons.
Discussion: This software is intended as a practical and intuitive tool for the researchers
interested in the identification of non-exonic conserved sequence segments between C. elegans and
C. briggsae. These sequences may contain regulatory transcriptional elements since they are
conserved between two related, but rapidly evolving genomes. This software also highlights the
power of genome annotation databases when they are conceived as an open resource and the
possibilities offered by seamless integration of different web services via the http protocol.
Availability: the program is freely available at http://bio.ifom-firc.it/NTFootPrinter

Page 1 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S22

Figure 1
Web Interface Scheme
Web Interface Scheme. NemaFootPrinter scheme: starting from gene name submission ('Start analysis' on the top-left
of the scheme), gene name and organism are submitted to the GENEFINDER script (red-border box) that verifies if the given
gene has an ortholog and displays the clone name. GENEFINDER also allows not-interactive selection of n base pairs upstream
and downstream of the given genes. After gene-name retrieval the user can choose a display mode (green-border boxes):
TEXT-MODE allows non-interactive selection of subsequences; the SLIDER-MODE uses an Applet Java to select interactively sub-sequences; the FRAME-MODE combines the slider and the result page on two horizontal frames. On the
RESULTS page (blue-border boxes) users can find images of genes structure and boundaries generated on the fly, links to the
sequences (FASTA format) and links to a series of bioinformatics tools (yellow-border boxes): BLAST 2 sequences is used
for a first screening of the two sequences for similarities; Dotmatcher generates a dot plot and associate an image for direct
graphical visualization of regions of similarity. By clicking on a point into the Dotmatcher image and extending the selection for
n base pairs, it is possible to align small regions with the Smith and Waterman algorithm. One can then send Fasta files and Blastz
alignments to the rVista server (the two subsequences and the relative Blastz alignment generated on the local server).
Through this public database it is possible to identify the transcriptional regulatory elements, if any, associated with conserved
subsequences.

Page 2 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S22

Background
Comparative genomics is a powerful bioinformatics
methodology for the identification of conserved genomic
DNA segments between two related organisms [1]. Alignment of DNA sequences from different species provides
an effective tool to decode genomic information, based
on the assumption that functional sequences tend to
diverge at a slower rate than non-functional sequences. By
comparing the genomic sequences of species at different
evolutionary distances, it is possible, besides identifying
coding sequences, to recognize conserved non-coding
sequences with a potential regulatory function, and determine which sequences are unique for a given species. This
procedure is called Phylogenetic Footprinting [2,3]. Alignment algorithms optimize these comparisons so that the
regions, that diverge slowly, can be anchored together and
highlighted against a background of more rapidly evolving DNA, that is devoid of any functional constraints [4].
On a broader view, the identification of non-exonic Conserved Sequence Elements tags associated with human
disease-related genes may open new venues for the interpretation of experimental data [5].
Although C. elegans and C. briggsae are almost identical in
morphology and development [6], their genomes have
diverged. Several estimates suggest that separation of the
two species occurred 23–40 million years ago [7]. Conservation of DNA sequences is confined largely to proteincoding regions and short flanking sequences; functional
conservation between these two species has also been
demonstrated by rescue experiments of mutant phenotypes via DNA-mediated transformation [8].
We developed an interactive web-based and user friendly
software to help the researchers in the identification of
conserved non-coding sequence regions between the
genomes of the two nematodes C. elegans and C. briggsae,
starting from a bio-computational project focused on
identification of conserved segments in a single pair of
orthologous genes.

Implementation
The program developed here is a research tool; hence the
design has been sometimes bound to the functionality, in
order to optimize the speed and easiness of interaction
between all the components. A careful planning of all the
required modules has been achieved, however we have
used system analysis and design techniques for the most
complex parts of this development project.
Documentation has been targeted both at the user with a
web
page
http://bio.ifom-firc.it/NTFootPrinter/
howto.html, and to the programmer/maintainer of the
software, with internal documentation on the scripts. We
always relied on feedback from the interested scientist in

designing the user interface and ameliorating the software
functionality. From the programming language point of
view, we adopted standard solutions that were fit to the
problem (bioinformatics development).
The following components have been used to develop the
web application:
1) A local mirror of Wormbase [9] database under
mySQL. The genome annotation information in Wormbase is maintained in General Feature Format (GFF). GFF
is a text-based format for the transfer of genome information, allowing genome researchers to develop tools and
have them tested without having to maintain a complete
feature-finding system. Documentation on this format is
available at http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/formats/
GFF/GFF_Spec.shtml
2) An EnsMart table to search orthologs. EnsMart [10] is a
data retrieval tool that generates lists of biological objects
(e.g. genes, SNPs) from data held in the Ensembl database. EnsMart uses the BioMart system http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/biomart/.
3) A Perl web interface used to retrieve gene and
sequences, mask exons, launch analysis tools, and generate gene images (GD libraries). Other web based technologies are implemented inside the Perl code: cursor
coordinates capture and client-side image maps are implemented in html and JavaScript.
4) A graphical user interface implemented in Java (Swing
Applet) for interactive selection of sub-sequences. Using
HTTP POST and GET method, the Applet is able to communicate with other elements of the system.
5) A collection of locally compiled C++ software: dotmatcher and extractseq (EMBOSS package), blast two
sequences (NCBI), ssearch (part of the FASTA program
suite written by William Pearson), blastz.
6) An User Agent LWP connection (Perl library) to send
subsequences and blastz alignment to a transcription factor database web server (rVista)

Results and Discussion
The main functional flow of the software can be summarized as follows (Figure 1): Starting from a C. elegans or C.
briggsae gene name or identifier, the software identifies the
putative ortholog (if any), based on information derived
from one of the EnsMart datamart tables [10]. In this first
step, the user has the opportunity to start from either an
identifier ('gene model') or from a 'common gene name',
following the CGC (Caenorhabditis Genetics Center) genetic
nomenclature [11].

Page 3 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S22

The user can select a display mode:
1. TEXTMODE: html output only
2. SLIDER MODE: graphical visualization with a Java
Applet (Figure 2)
3. FRAME MODE: both results and slider on the same web
page using frames
The software retrieves the sequences of the two orthologous genes from the local database. At this step, exons of
the two orthologous genes are masked, since similarities
between conserved coding regions are not interesting for
our purpose. After sequence retrieval, the software generates 'On-the fly' an image of the gene structures with associated intron / exon structures.
A Java applet (Figure 2) displays gene structures and
neighbourhoods, the user can select subsequences. The
same operation can be performed in text mode. After this
step, the user can start sequence analysis from the results
page.
On the results page the investigator can identify and analyze sequence similarities with a number of tools:

• Pairwise Blast12[12]: While the standard BLAST program is widely used to search for homologous sequences
in nucleotide and protein databases, it is necessary to
compare only two sequences to ascertain their similarity
or common features. In such cases, searching the entire
database would be unnecessarily time-consuming. 'BLAST
2 Sequences' utilizes the BLAST algorithm for pairwise
DNA-DNA or protein-protein sequence comparison.
• Dotmatcher13[13]: Dotplot is a graphical representation of the regions of similarity between two sequences.
The two sequences are placed along the axes of a rectangular matrix and (subject to threshold conditions) wherever
there is equality between the sequences a dot is placed on
the image. Where the two sequences have substantial
regions of similarity, many dots align to form diagonal
lines. It is therefore possible to glance at local regions of
similarity, as these will show diagonal lines (Figure 3). In
this version of Dotplot the user can control window size,
threshold and which strand to align: a small subroutine
in the web page named 'strand-helper' helps in choosing
the best configuration (align plus strand against plus,
minus strand against minus, plus against minus, etc.).
Even if the software selects a default strand configuration,
the user can manually choose another strand mode. On
the web page, text boxes give the exact position (relative to
the effective sequence length) of the cursor on the X and

Figure 2
Select subsequences
Select subsequences. CBrothersSlider.java is a small application written in Java to interactively display gene structures with
intron/exon structure and to select subsequences. The interface display clone identifiers (A) and gene images generated "Onthe fly" (B). Shifting the sliders (C) or submitting directly chromosome coordinates (D), the user is able to select a subsequence. A small control panel (E) can be used to select only the region on the left of the gene (left checkbox) or on the right of
the gene (right checkbox); if both the checkboxes are selected, the application selects only the gene sequence. After sequence
manipulation, using the Submit button (F), user can post the selected subsequence coordinates to the main script that generates new FASTA files and display the Results page.

Page 4 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S22

Y-axis; this helps the user in choosing the sequence stretch
of
interest.
• Ssearch 14[14]: Ssearch uses Pearson's implementation
of the method of Smith and Waterman [15] to search for
similarities between one sequence (the query) and any
group of sequences of the same type (nucleic acid or protein). After the Smith-Waterman score for a pairwise alignment is determined, Ssearch uses a simple linear
regression against the natural log of the search set
sequence length to calculate a normalized z-score for the
sequence pair [16]. The distribution of the z-scores tends
to closely approximate an extreme-value distribution;
using this distribution, the program can estimate the
number of sequences that would be expected to produce
a z-score greater than or equal to the z-score obtained in
the search. This is reported as the E() score. When all of
the search set sequences have been compared to the query,
the list of best scores is printed. In our implementation
Ssearch is used for aligning two subsections isolated from
the Dotplot output.
• BlastZ17[17]and rVista 18[18]: BlastZ computes local
alignments for sequences of any length based on the
assumption that the input sequences are related and share
blocks of high conservation that are separated by regions
that lack similarity and vary in length. Regions of homology are displayed collinear only to the reference
sequence, while the order and orientation of the conserved elements is not necessarily the same in the second
sequence.
Identifying transcriptional regulatory elements represents
a significant challenge in annotating genomes. Our bioinformatics procedure has been transparently connected
trough the http protocol to a computational tool, rVista.
rVista is aimed at high-throughput discovery of cis-regulatory elements, combining clustering of predicted transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) and maximizing the
identification of functional sites.
A continuous exchange of ideas and information about
this software and its interface occurred between the software developers and the nematode researchers. This user
feedback has hence been fundamental in tailoring the
graphical interface in functions of his needs.
A PAIRWISE alignment performed with blast2seq (blast
two sequences), a heuristic algorithm (BLAST), is used for
fast comparison of two sequences.
Dotmatcher uses a simple but slow algorithm; for this
reason we have chosen this as a tool to verify the alignments identified in the first step. When two regions of
similarity have been found, this similarity can be quanti-

fied with the Smith and Waterman algorithm (best local
alignment). This is the most sensitive method available
for pairwise sequence comparison, but it works slowly,
therefore it is more appropriate for in depth analyses than
primary searches.
The last component of the toolbox is a transparent connection through the http layer to a database search tool
(rVista) focused on the identification of transcription factor binding sites related to conserved sequence elements.
Continuous update of the transcription factors for vertebrates and, in particular, for nematodes is thus guaranteed. Local execution of blastz algorithm permits a fast
genome sequence alignment, while the remote server
(rVista) performs transcription factor binding site analysis.
Finally, in order to test the quality of the software, we performed the following experiment: Natarajan and colleagues [19] have recently determined enhancer elements
in the C. elegans gene encoding for a beta catenin homologue: bar-1. By classical promoter analysis (creating transgenic lines bearing deletion constructs of the promoter
region) they were able to identify two different Cis acting
elements [19]. In a second step, by alignment, they show
that these enhancers/elements are conserved in C.
briggsae. By simply using our software we were able to confirm all the elements described in this work without any
molecular biology experimentation needed (data not
shown). With the help of NemaFootPrinter, from now on,
researchers will "first" use our software and "then" test the
results by creating just a few transgenic strains in order to
just "test" the results and not to "identify" the regions by
tedious in vivo experiments.
Other tools for performing comparative genomics
CisHorto, another tool for transcription-factor identification [20], uses Position Weight Matrices and a user-provided ungapped multiple alignment to predict new
transcription factors binding sites. Our software adopts a
simpler strategy for the identification of putative transcription factor sites, based on sequence similarity and
exon masking to highlight similarities between non-coding regions.

CSTminer [21] is an user-friendly tool for generic identification of coding and noncoding conserved sequence tags
through cross-species genome comparison, that uses an
original algorithm to identify statistically significant conserved blocks and assess their coding or noncoding nature
through the measure of a "coding potential score". We
focused our development specifically on nematode genetics, leaving to the final user a high degree of interactivity
and exploration for the identification of conserved
sequence regions.

Page 5 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S22

http protocol. As a result, a new resource, aimed at solving
a specific biological problem is now freely available at
We
http://bio.ifom-firc.it/NTFootPrinter/howto.html.
have also demonstrated that usability and functionality in
bioinformatics development can be achieved only
through a strong and continued feedback from the scientist/user.

Availability and requirements
Project name: NemaFootPrinter
Project home page:
Printer/index.html

http://bio.ifom-firc.it/NTFoot-

server side: UNIX type platforms
client side: Any operating system
Programming language: SQL, Perl, Java
Other requirements:

Figure 3
dotmatcher
dotmatcher. A Dotplot image: C. elegans and C. briggsae
sequences are placed on the axes. The gene structure generated on the fly help the Investigator to orient itself in the rectangular image. The top of the image shows parameters given
by the investigator (windowsize and threshold). This web
images are clickable by the user, the single click is extended
in both directions for n base pairs. Both segments (one for C.
elegans and one for C. briggsae) are sent to the Ssearch control page, in order to align segments with the Smith and
Waterman algorithm.

Conclusion
Genome annotation databases such as Wormbase [22] or
EnsEMBL [23] have a fundamental role in modern biological research and they also offer a platform to bioinformatics development. We have presented a simple webbased software aimed to identify conserved functional
segments outside exons (putative new gene expression
control elements) through comparative genomics
between the nematodes C. elegans and C. briggsae [24].
With this project we have highlighted that a specific bioinformatics project can be realized by a sound integration
of genome database mirrors, local development and
transparent integration with remote resources [25]. Where
speed and robustness were needed, we relied on local mirroring of databases and development of software modules, but when other resources already solved the task we
integrated seamlessly calls to remote services through the

The web-based application was tested and is compatible
with the more common Internet browser. For the Slider
Applet the user must have a Java Virtual Machine installed
and configured on the client. User without Java can use
the TEXT MODE to analyze genes. Even the older text-only
browsers like 'lynx' are compatibles with the software
(obviously text-only browser must use the TEXT MODE
display). For more compatibility information check the
help
page:
http://bio.ifom-firc.it/NTFootPrinter/
slider_help.html

Authors' contributions
All authors contributed to the development of NemaFootPrinter.
DR wrote most parts of the NemaFootPrinter core, the
CGI scripts, the Java applet and the database handlers. AG
was responsible of the main bioinformatics programming
strategy.
PM was respnsible of biological applied aspect.
GC made the scientific supervision and interface design.
All authors drafted the manuscript and approved the final
version.

Page 6 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6:S22

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank all the teams behind the public resources used
for this development work: Wormbase, EnsEMBL, EnsMart and rVista. DR
is supported by an AIRC (Italian Association for Cancer Research) fellowship in the framework of the AIRC Bioinformatic Center Grant (BICG). AG
is supported by FIRC (Italian Foundation for Cancer Research). NemaFootPrinter is a project developed with Perl, MySQL and others open-source
software, for these reasons we wish also thank all the Open Source community for their support to the Bioinformatics research. We also acknowledge the members of the Cassata lab for comments on the manuscript.

21.

22.
23.
24.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

Nardone J, Lee DU, Ansel KM, Rao A: Bioinformatics for the
'bench biologist': how to find regulatory regions in genomic
DNA. Nat Immunol 2004, 5:768-774.
Blanchette M, Schwikowski B, Tompa M: Algorithms for phylogenetic footprinting. J Comput Biol 2002, 9:211-223.
Zhang Z, Gerstein M: Of mice and men: phylogenetic footprinting aids the discovery of regulatory elements. J Biol 2003, 2:11.
Pollard DA, Bergman CM, Stoye J, Celniker SE, Eisen MB: Benchmarking tools for the alignment of functional noncoding
DNA. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:6.
Boccia A, Petrillo M, di Bernardo D, Guffanti A, Mignone F, Confalonieri S, Luzi L, Pesole G, Paolella G, Ballabio A, Banfi S: DG-CST
(Disease Gene Conserved Sequence Tags), a database of
human-mouse conserved elements associated to disease
genes. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:D505-510.
Nigon V, Dougherty EC: Reproductive patterns and attempts at
reciprocal crossing of Rhabditis elegans Maupas, 1900, and
Rhabditis briggsae Dougherty and Nigon, 1949 (Nematoda:
Rhabditidae). J Exp Zool 1949, 112:485-503.
Emmons SW, Klass MR, Hirsh D: Analysis of the constancy of
DNA sequences during development and evolution of the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1979,
76:1333-1337.
Maduro M, Pilgrim D: Conservation of function and expression
of unc-119 from two Caenorhabditis species despite divergence of non-coding DNA. Gene 1996, 183:77-85.
Chen N, Harris TW, Antoshechkin I, Bastiani C, Bieri T, Blasiar D,
Bradnam K, Canaran P, Chan J, Chen CK, et al.: WormBase: a comprehensive data resource for Caenorhabditis biology and
genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(Database):D383-389.
Kasprzyk A, Keefe D, Smedley D, London D, Spooner W, Melsopp C,
Hammond M, Rocca-Serra P, Cox T, Birney E: EnsMart: a generic
system for fast and flexible access to biological data. Genome
Res 2004, 14:160-169.
Horvitz HR, Brenner S, Hodgkin J, Herman RK: A uniform genetic
nomenclature for the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
Mol Gen Genet 1979, 175:129-133.
Tatusova TA, Madden TL: BLAST 2 Sequences, a new tool for
comparing protein and nucleotide sequences. FEMS Microbiol
Lett 1999, 174:247-250.
Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: the European Molecular
Biology Open Software Suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16:276-277.
Pearson WR, Lipman DJ: Improved tools for biological sequence
comparison. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988, 85:2444-2448.
Smith TF, Waterman MS: Identification of common molecular
subsequences. J Mol Biol 1981, 147:195-197.
Pearson WR: Comparison of methods for searching protein
sequence databases. Protein Sci 1995, 4:1145-1160.
Schwartz S, Kent WJ, Smit A, Zhang Z, Baertsch R, Hardison RC,
Haussler D, Miller W: Human-mouse alignments with
BLASTZ. Genome Res 2003, 13:103-107.
Loots GG, Ovcharenko I: rVISTA 2.0: evolutionary analysis of
transcription factor binding sites. Nucleic Acids Res 2004,
32:W217-221.
Natarajan L, Jackson BM, Szyleyko E, Eisenmann DM: Identification
of evolutionarily conserved promoter elements and amino
acids required for function of the C. elegans beta-catenin
homolog BAR-1. Dev Biol 2004, 272:536-557.
Bigelow HR, Wenick AS, Wong A, Hobert O: CisOrtho: a program pipeline for genome-wide identification of transcrip-

25.

tion factor target genes using phylogenetic footprinting.
BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:27.
Castrignano T, Canali A, Grillo G, Liuni S, Mignone F, Pesole G: CSTminer: a web tool for the identification of coding and noncoding conserved sequence tags through cross-species
genome comparison. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:W624-627.
Stein L, Sternberg P, Durbin R, Thierry-Mieg J, Spieth J: WormBase:
network access to the genome and biology of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:82-86.
Hubbard T, Andrews D, Caccamo M, Cameron G, Chen Y, Clamp M,
Clarke L, Coates G, Cox T, Cunningham F, et al.: Ensembl 2005.
Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(Database):D447-453.
Stein LD, Bao Z, Blasiar D, Blumenthal T, Brent MR, Chen N, Chinwalla A, Clarke L, Clee C, Coghlan A, et al.: The genome sequence
of Caenorhabditis briggsae: a platform for comparative
genomics. PLoS Biol 2003, 1:E45.
Geraghty DE, Fortelny S, Guthrie B, Irving M, Pham H, Wang R, Daza
R, Nelson B, Stonehocker J, Williams L, Vu Q: Data acquisition,
data storage, and data presentation in a modern genetics
laboratory. Rev Immunogenet 2000, 2:532-540.

Page 7 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
