<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Challenges of the next decade for the Asia Pacific region: 2010 International Conference in Bioinformatics (InCoB 2010)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:S1. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S4-S1"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Shoba Ranganathan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ranganathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S1

INTRODUCTION

Open Access

Challenges of the next decade for the Asia
Pacific region: 2010 International Conference in
Bioinformatics (InCoB 2010)
Shoba Ranganathan1,2*, Christian Schönbach3, Kenta Nakai4, Tin Wee Tan2*
From Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010)
Tokyo, Japan. 26-28 September 2010

Abstract
The 2010 annual conference of the Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet), Asia’s oldest bioinformatics
organisation formed in 1998, was organized as the 9th International Conference on Bioinformatics (InCoB), Sept.
26-28, 2010 in Tokyo, Japan. Initially, APBioNet created InCoB as forum to foster bioinformatics in the Asia Pacific
region. Given the growing importance of interdisciplinary research, InCoB2010 included topics targeting scientists
in the fields of genomic medicine, immunology and chemoinformatics, supporting translational research. Peerreviewed manuscripts that were accepted for publication in this supplement, represent key areas of research interests that have emerged in our region. We also highlight some of the current challenges bioinformatics is facing in
the Asia Pacific region and conclude our report with the announcement of APBioNet’s 100 BioDatabases
(BioDB100) initiative. BioDB100 will comply with the database criteria set out earlier in our proposal for Minimum
Information about a Bioinformatics and Investigation (MIABi), setting the standards for biocuration and bioinformatics research, on which we will report at the next InCoB, Nov. 27 – Dec. 2, 2011 at Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Background
Since 1998, the Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network
(APBioNet) [1] has strived to bring together scientists
from diverse disciplines working together to advance the
frontiers of bioinformatics in the region. In 2002, the
bioinformatics research effort was sufficiently well established to encourage scientists from Thailand and the
APBioNet to launch InCoB2002 (the International Conference on Bioinformatics, 2002) in Bangkok and adopt
this meeting as their annual conference. Subsequent
InCoB meetings were hosted in strategic venues in the
region, particularly to stimulate greater awareness and
urgency amongst local biologists for the need to
* Correspondence: shoba.ranganathan@mq.edu.au; tinwee@bic.nus.edu.sg
1
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences and ARC Centre of
Excellence in Bioinformatics, Macquarie University, Sydney NSW 2109,
Australia
2
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

transform their research capability by including tools
and techniques in bioinformatics and computational
biology.
Promoting bioinformatics development through
conferences

Over the past eight years of InCoB conferences (Bangkok,
Thailand (2002); Penang, Malaysia (2003); Auckland,
New Zealand (2004); Busan, South Korea (2005); New
Delhi, India (2006) [2]; Hong Kong (2007) [3]; Taipei,
Taiwan (2008) [4] and Singapore (2009) [5,6]) and associated satellite workshops and meetings, we have seen a
healthy growth in the development and advancement of
bioinformatics, commensurate with an increase in the
number of scientists who moved into bioinformatics
from other fields and the number of students who have
taken an interest in bioinformatics. Consequently, there
has been a significant growth in the number of publications in bioinformatics, as well in “wetlab” biology, containing computational techniques. Last but not least, the

© 2010 Ranganathan et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ranganathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S1

quality of publications and the standard of research
reported in papers originating from China, India and the
Southeast Asian region have rapidly improved [personal
communication from Elsevier and others].
Many Asian-trained students have moved on farther
afield and have found research laboratories in North
America or Europe to advance their careers during
post-doctoral research, or seek positions as principal
investigators and academic faculty. Due to a robust
groundswell of interest, there is no brain-drain. On the
contrary a “brain-overflow” appears to emerge, and
looking ahead, there is no doubt that the region’s top
universities and research institutions will continue to be
an active trainer of bioinformatics researchers for the
rest of the world and a breeding ground for promising
bioinformatics students. Many new conferences, meetings and journals in bioinformatics and computational
biology which have emerged and sustained themselves
in the region are one result of the growing strength of
bioinformatics and demand in research dissemination.
Promoting widespread awareness of bioinformatics need

Factors driving this rapid growth include a strong
awareness that the curriculum of a typical undergraduate life science course has to include a significant level
of training in computer science and computational biology, supported by the ingress of high quality researchers
from computer science and ICT. Where skillsets are
lacking, many universities in our region have also incorporated conversion courses for biologists wishing to
acquire computational skills through post-graduate education, such as the popular Bioinformatics Masters by
coursework degree programs, particularly in India. In
this regard, over the past decade, APBioNet has held
numerous training activities in partnership with organisations such as the S* Life Science Informatics Alliance,
the Federation of Asian-Oceanic Biochemists and Molecular Biologists (FAOBMB), Asia-Pacific International
Society for Molecular Biologists (A-IMBN), the Institute
Pasteur, the EUAsiaGrid initiative, inter-governmental
agencies such as ASEAN and APEC, and others. These
efforts have built a base of bioinformatics competency
and stimulated other initiatives in training and education such as the Thai hypercourse in bioinformatics, the
ASEAN Virtual Institute of Science and Technology
(AVIST) and the Japan-based Asian Bioinformatics
Research and Education Network (ABREN, [7]). Overall,
these efforts have contributed to the growth of skilled
bioinformaticians over the past decade.
To maintain the interconnectedness of our regional
bioinformaticians with the rest of the world, APBioNet
was invited to be a regional affiliate of the International
Society for Computational Biology (ISCB) [8] by P.E.
Bourne, the ISCB President in 2002. The presence and

Page 2 of 6

support of succeeding Presidents, Board Directors and
senior ISCB members, notably M. Gribskov (InCoB
2006), M. Waterman (InCoB 2006), B. Rost (InCoB
2007), T. Gaasterland (InCoB 2008), and C. Sander
(InCoB 2009), had significant impact on the growth and
prestige of the field in the Asia Pacific region.
Supporting a culture of inclusivity

During the past ten years, national Bioinformatics societies have also formed in our region, as well as discipline
specific groups led by thought leaders in Asia Pacific. In
this regard, the APBioNet has through InCoB conference and other workshops, maintained strong ties of
collaboration continually and lent support for national
initiatives wherever possible. For instance, in the current
InCoB2010 conference, partnership with the Japanese
Society for Bioinformatics (JSBi) [9], the Chem-Bio
Informatics Society of Japan (CBI) [10] and the International Immunomics Society (IIMMS) [11] lent it a
strong cross fertilization of ideas from the chemoinformatic and the immunoinformatic communities and has
helped to sustain the strong inter-disciplinary and inclusive approach of APBioNet.
Encouraging bioinformatics research output

To increase the submission of research papers with
potential high impact and citation rates, APBioNet
started in 2006 to publish the best submitted InCoB
papers in a dedicated BMC Bioinformatics supplement
[2]. By 2009, manuscripts from APBioNet members
diversified and increased in quality and sophistication
with computational biology articles published in BMC
Genomics [5] as well as BMC Bioinformatics [6], while
this year, due to overwhelming support, we have three
journal supplements, continuing with BMC Genomics,
BMC Bioinformatics [12] and adding on Immunome
Research [13]. This supplement represents the majority
of accepted papers, spanning sequence, genome and
transcriptome analyses; networks, pathways and systems
biology; disease informatics; data and text mining; and
structural bioinformatics.
Rigour in review policy

The manuscripts submitted to InCoB2010 proceedings
were, in the main, subject to two rounds of peer-review
by at least three reviewers, from the APBioNet/InCoB
program committee members and external experts as
required (Additional file 1). InCoB2010 provided multitrack submissions, with the inclusion of late breaking
abstracts from recent publications and for showcasing
technology developments. The aim of the editors was to
select the best papers from Asia Pacific countries, with a
few from European and North American countries.
From the 108 full paper submissions, 50 were shortlisted

Ranganathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S1

for oral presentation. This supplement features 25
papers, with another 15 papers in BMC Bioinformatics
and six in Immunome Research, reflecting an overall
acceptance rate of 42.6%. To encourage early career
researchers, a few short articles will appear in the online
journals, Bioinformation [14] and IPSJ Transactions on
Bioinformatics [15]. A brief review of the various themes
in this supplement, as follows, serves to illustrate the
breadth and depth of research that is taking place in our
region.
Sequence, genome and transcriptome analysis

Huang et al. [16] present a sequence-based predictor to
identify the functional residues in a RNA-binding
protein while Le et al. [17] have uncovered sequencedependent histone variant positioning signatures, providing additional insights into epigenetic regulatory
mechanisms of many important cellular processes. Lin
et al. [18] have improved secondary structure prediction
using short subsequences with local structural similarity.
NGSQC, a next generation sequence analysis pipeline
is presented by Dai et al. [19], while Li et al. [20] have
used next generation sequence data to discover and
characterize medaka miRNA genes.
Chen et al. [21] present UPS 2.0, an updated version
of their software for selecting unique probes for oligonucleotide microarrays for pangenomic and genomic
studies, while Ogura et al. [22] have applied probe
design to the development of an in vitro homology
search array.
Rather than cluster homologous sequences alone, Jia
et al. [23] have clustered orthologous sequences at the
transcript level while the analysis of Meng et al. [24]
present a first global view of RNA editing in plant
nuclear transcripts.
Networks, pathways and systems biology

Unravelling gene regulatory networks is a topic of
intense research. Chen et al. [25] have explored dynamic
gene regulatory interactions from gene expression data,
while Summer and Perkins [26] have formulated a functional data analysis approach to identify nonlinear models of gene regulatory networks. Ayukawa et al. [27]
present a standardized method to integrate operator
sequences to the regulatory region of a plasmid.
Protein interactions are compounded by the problem
of a protein being simultaneously present in different
subcellular compartments. PathLocdb is a comprehensive database for subcellular localization of metabolic
pathway with application for multiple localization analysis [28]. To uncover the modular structure of protein
interaction networks, Liu et al. [29] propose a new
density-based algorithm (ADHOC).
Disease informatics

Yang [30] et al. have compiled dbDEMC: a database of
differentially expressed miRNAs in human cancers, to

Page 3 of 6

improve the classification, diagnosis and treatment of
human cancers, while Shimokawa et al. [31] present
iCOD: an integrated clinical omics database based on
the systems-pathology view of disease. With the health
of aging populations providing a major challenge to the
medical profession, Kwon et al. [32] present Gerontome:
a web-based database and analysis server for agingrelated genes.
To assist the development of peptide-based diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines, Wee et al. [33] have
developed a novel predictor for B cell epitopes, while
Yoo et al. [34] address the issue of predicting AIDS disease progression using HIV structural gp120 profiles. At
a much wider level, Nagaraj et al. [35] present the
human hereditary diseasome, to explore relationships
among gene attributes and thereby characterise evolutionary trends associated with disease genes.
Data and text mining

Laurila et al. [36] introduce the first rule-based
approach for the extraction of mutation impact on protein properties, using text mining and semantic web
technologies. To mine the mutational content of 12
Drosophila genomes in a phylogenetically relevant manner, Yampolsky and Bouznier [37] present a tool for the
genome-wide analysis of frequencies and patterns of
amino acid substitutions.
Structural bioinformatics

Finding novel drugs has been assisted by the availability
of protein structures. Grover et al. have investigated the
anti-cancerous potency of the potential herbal drug,
Withaferin, using mammalian 20S proteasomes [38] and
propose a novel mechanism of potential action associated with Nuclear Factor kappa B suppression [39].
Clinchiu et al. [40] propose TSCC: a Two-Stage Combinative Clustering for virtual screening using proteinligand interactions and physical-chemical features, to
assist drug design.
Identifying new key challenges and tackling new issues

These research areas show that in the past decade, we in
the Asia Pacific have achieved much in bioinformatics
research, development and education, either through the
APBioNet or in collaboration with others. We have also
stimulated others to create their own independent
efforts to promote bioinformatics. The early phase of
growth, focusing on awareness, education and meetings
has been set in motion with good sustainable progress.
The publications in this journal supplement and those
from previous conferences testify to the spectrum of
activities and the quality achieved in a cross section of
our research community.
Going forward, several new initiatives led by APBioNet will shape the future of bioinformatics and computational biology in the region. To promote increasing

Ranganathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S1

quality of research publications and to sustain this
growth in bioinformatics, we have identified several key
challenges and problems, not necessarily peculiar to our
region, but nonetheless of critical importance to its
future growth, which APBioNet can address at the organizational level:
1. The need for a standards-based approach towards
more robust software development and software
interoperability.
2. The lack of persistence of such databases and the
interoperability of data content.
3. The potential lack of in silico research reproducibility and the promotion of high quality peer-review
process.
4. The growing problem of author ambiguity associated with the nature of transliterated Asian names and
the issues of non-repudiability, duplicative “me-too”
research and plagiarism.
5. E-science infrastructure of our region not keeping
pace with the burgeoning numbers of researchers, both
in bioinformatics and in bioinformatics-driven biology,
demanding better computing and network performance
in other regions, particularly in North America and
Europe.
These issues are potential threats to the sustainable
growth of bioinformatics in our region, and APBioNet,
through InCoB and other meetings, has started to
address them through concrete initiatives, novel efforts
and synergistic partnership with other organizations.
APBioNet initiatives to seek collaborators and partners

In InCoB2009, APBioNet launched the MIABi initiative,
the Minimum Information about a Bioinformatics Investigation. In the MIABi framework, work is in progress to
crystallize basic key points of agreement on what constitutes a set of minimum information criteria. All authors
of this issue of the InCoB2010 conference supplement
have agreed to MIABi compliance.
Discussions have been initiated with colleagues in the
International Society for Biocuration (ISB) [41] on their
initiative for minimum standards in biological database
curation to ensure harmonization of standards. The procedural issues for implementing such as system include
the following aspects which will be addressed in the
paper included in this supplement [42]:
a. Minimum Information about a bioinformatics investigation (MIABi)
b. Data and software persistence and perpetuity
c. Reinstantiability and reproducibility
d. Author and Contributor Identity Disambiguation
e. Standardized Terminology
f. Infrastructural and informational interoperability
such as use of international computational grids and
cloud computing

Page 4 of 6

BioDB100, the 100 BioDatabases initiative

To prove that the whole suite of procedures and protocols mentioned above will work on real world live systems, we propose to implement from this year, a
BioDB100 challenge: the challenge to build 100 sustainable BioDatabases and datasets to test them against the
MIABi standards compliance process and the protocols
for re-instantiability, reproducibility, version control and
author disambiguation. To incentivise our stakeholders
to contribute and participate, we have to offer some
solutions for persistence and some workable ideas for
interoperability. In this regard, we are currently in discussions with EUAsiaGrid and various Asia Pacific partners to provision for data storage space on a grid or
cloud platform or both. Such high performance computational platforms can also lend itself to workflow integration and automation of database maintenance. We
plan to request the developers and curators of secondary
databases who rely on key public databases to design
their database management system to automate the
update of their boutique secondary databases based on
new entry updates regularly. We hope that they will
continue to build their databases in compliance with
standards and checklists that emerge from international
community initiatives such as those from MIABi [42],
the Biocuration conference series [41] and the MIBBI
project (Minimum Information for Biological and Biomedical Investigations) [43].

Conclusion
Considering the scope and depth of topics covered in
this issue, Asia Pacific bioinformatics research continues
to increase its level of achievement. This area is now a
core research discipline in our educational and research
institutions, encompassing not only the “-omics”
sciences and systems biology, but also in translational
research and personalized medicine. Moreover, we are
taking steps in the direction of thought leadership and
scientific policy which we hope will set the example for
a new generation of scientists who fully embrace the
new biology of today that is increasingly information
and technology-driven, with knowledge generation
dependent on applications of physical and computer
sciences.
Additional File 1: APBioNet InCoB2010 Program Committee members
and reviewers
Additional File 2: InCoB2010 sponsors

Acknowledgements
InCoB2010 received generous support by six corporate and five institutional
sponsors. Platinum sponsors include the Protein Databank Japan (PDBj) and
the Computational Biology Research Center (CBRC) of the National Institute

Ranganathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S1

of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). A detailed list of
sponsors is available from Additional File 2. Sponsors were provided the
opportunity to publicize and promote selected research results and/or
software tools at InCoB2010. Gold Sponsor RIKEN BASE (Bioinformatics And
Systems Engineering Division) introduced a rational genome design contest
(GenoCon) on a new informational semantic-web platform that links
business and educational communities in the field of synthetic biology. We
are also deeply indebted to JSBi, CBI and IIMMS for their support.
We thank Asif M. Khan for proof-reading this manuscript.
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 11
Supplement 4, 2010: Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010): Computational Biology. The full contents of the supplement are
available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11?issue=S4.
Author details
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences and ARC Centre of
Excellence in Bioinformatics, Macquarie University, Sydney NSW 2109,
Australia. 2Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597.
3
Department of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Kyushu Institute of
Technology, Fukuoka 820-8502, Japan. 4Laboratory of Functional Analysis in
silico, Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science , The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
1

Competing interests
None declared.
Published: 2 December 2010
References
1. The Asia-Pacific Bioinformatics Network. [http://www.apbionet.org].
2. Ranganathan S, Tammi M, Gribskov M, Tan TW: Proceedings of APBioNet Fifth International Conference on Bioinformatics (InCoB2006), New Delhi,
India, 18-20 December 2006. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7(Suppl 5):S1.
3. Ranganathan S, Gribskov M, Tan TW: Bioinformatics research in the Asia
Pacific: a 2007 update. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9(Suppl 1):S1.
4. Ranganathan S, Hsu WL, Yang UC, Tan TW: Emerging strengths in Asia
Pacific bioinformatics. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9(Suppl 12):S1.
5. Ranganathan S, Eisenhaber F, Tong JC, Tan TW: Extending Asia Pacific
bioinformatics into new realms in the “-omics” era. BMC Genomics 2009,
10(Suppl 3):S1.
6. Ranganathan S: Towards a career in bioinformatics. BMC Bioinformatics
2009, 10(Suppl 15):S1.
7. Asian Bioinformatics Research and Education Network. [http://gibk21.bio.
kyutech.ac.jp/ABREN/].
8. The International Society for Computational Biology. [http://www.iscb.
org].
9. The Japanese Society for Bioinformatics. [http://www.jsbi.org/en/].
10. The Chem-Bioinformatics Society of Japan. [http://www.cbi.or.jp/cbi/
englishindex.html].
11. The International Immunomics Society. [http://www.iimms.org].
12. Schönbach C, Nakai K, Tan TW, Ranganathan S: InCoB2010 - 9th
International Conference on Bioinformatics at Tokyo, Japan, September
26-28, 2010. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S1.
13. Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics (InCoB2010):
Immunome Research. [http://www.immunome-research.com/supplements/
6/S1].
14. Bioinformation. [http://www.bioinformation.net/].
15. IPSJ Transactions on Bioinformatics (TBIO). [http://www.ipsj.or.jp/
katsudou/sig/sighp/bio/IPSJTBIO_e.html].
16. Huang YF, Chiu LY, Huang CC, Huang CK: Predicting RNA-binding residues
from evolutionary information and sequence conservation. BMC
Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S2.
17. Le NT, Ho TB, Ho BH: Sequence-dependent histone variant positioning
signatures. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S3.
18. Lin HN, Sung TY, Ho SY, Hsu WL: Improving protein secondary structure
prediction based on short subsequences with local structure similarity.
BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S4.
19. Dai M, Thompson RC, Maher C, Contreras-Galindo R, Kaplan MH,
Markovitz DM, Omenn G, Meng F: NGSQC: Cross-Platform Quality Analysis
Pipeline for Deep Sequencing Data. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S7.

Page 5 of 6

20. Li SC, Chan WC, Ho MR, Tsai KW, Hu LY, Lai CH, Hsu CN, Hwang PP, Lin WC:
Discovery and characterization of medaka miRNA genes by next
generation sequencing platform. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S8.
21. Chen SH, Lo CZ, Su SY, Kuo BH, Hsiung CA, Lin CY: UPS 2.0: Unique Probe
Selector for Probe Design and Oligonucleotide Microarrays at the
Pangenomic/ Genomic Level. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S6.
22. Ogura A, Yoshida MA, Fukuzaki M, Sese J: In vitro homology search array
comprehensively reveals highly conserved genes and their functional
characteristics in non-sequenced species. BMC Genomics 2010,
11(Suppl 4):S9.
23. Jia Y, Wong TKF, Song YQ, Yiu SM, Smith DK: Refining orthologue groups
at the transcript level. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S11.
24. Meng Y, Chen D, Jin Y, Mao C, Wu P, Chen M: RNA editing of nuclear
transcripts in Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S12.
25. Chen Y, Park B, Han K: Qualitative reasoning of dynamic gene regulatory
interactions from gene expression data. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):
S14.
26. Summer G, Perkins TJ: Functional data analysis for identifying nonlinear
models of gene regulatory networks. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):
S18.
27. Ayukawa S, Kobayashi A, Nakashima Y, Takagi H, Hamada S, Uchiyama M,
Yugi K, Murata S, Sakakibara Y, Hagiya M, Yamamura M, Kiga D:
Construction of a genetic AND gate under a new standard for assembly
of genetic parts. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S16.
28. Zhao M, Qu H: PathLocdb: a comprehensive database for subcellular
localization of metabolic pathway and its application for multiple
localization analysis. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S13.
29. Liu C, Li J, Zhao Y: Exploring hierarchical and overlapping modular
structure in the yeast protein interaction network. BMC Genomics 2010,
11(Suppl 4):S17.
30. Yang Z, Ren F, Liu C, He S, Sun G, Gao Q, Yao L, Zhang Y, Miao R, Cao Y,
Zhao Y, Zhong Y, Zhao H: dbDEMC: a database of differentially expressed
miRNAs in human cancers. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S5.
31. Shimokawa K, Mogushi K, Shoji S, Hiraishi A, Mizushima H, Tanaka H: iCOD:
an integrated clinical omics database based on the systems-pathology
view of disease. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S19.
32. Kwon J, Lee B, Chung H: Gerontome: a web-based database server for
aging-related genes and analysis pipelines. BMC Genomics 2010,
11(Suppl 4):S20.
33. Wee LJK, Simarmata D, Kam YW, Ng LFP, Tong JC: SVM-based prediction
of linear B-cell epitopes using Bayes Feature Extraction. BMC Genomics
2010, 11(Suppl 4):S21.
34. Yoo PD, Ho YS, Ng J, Charleston M, Saksena NK, Yang P, Zomaya AY:
Hierarchical Kernel Mixture Models for the Prediction of AIDS Disease
Progression Using HIV Structural gp120 Profiles. BMC Genomics 2010,
11(Suppl 4):S22.
35. Nagaraj SH, Ingham A, Reverter A: The interplay between evolution,
regulation and tissue specificity in the human hereditary diseasome.
BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S23.
36. Laurila JB, Naderi N, Witte R, Riazanov A, Kouznetsov A, Baker CJO:
Algorithms and semantic infrastructure for mutation impact extraction
and grounding. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S24.
37. Yampolsky LY, Bouzinier MA: Evolutionary patterns of amino acid
substitutions in 12 Drosophila genomes. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):
S10.
38. Grover A, Shandilya A, Bisaria VS, Sundar D: Probing the anticancer
mechanism of prospective herbal drug Withaferin A on mammals: a
case study on human and bovine proteasomes. BMC Genomics 2010,
11(Suppl 4):S15.
39. Grover A, Shandilya A, Punetha A, Bisaria VS, Sundar D: Inhibition of the
NEMO/IKKβ association complex formation, a novel mechanism
associated with the NF-κB activation suppression by Withania
somnifera’s key metabolite withaferin A. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):
S25.
40. Clinciu DL, Chen YF, Ko CN, Lo CC, Yang JM: TSCC: Two-Stage
Combinatorial Clustering for virtual screening using protein-ligand
interactions and physicochemical features. BMC Genomics 2010,
11(Suppl 4):S26.
41. International Society for Biocuration (ISB). [http://biocurator.org], and their
International Biocuration Conference series.

Ranganathan et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S1

Page 6 of 6

42. Tan TW, Tong JC, De Silva M, Lim KS, Ranganathan S: Advancing Standards
for Bioinformatics Activities: Persistence, Reproducibility, Disambiguation
and Minimum Information about a Bioinformatics Investigation (MIABi).
BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S27.
43. Taylor CF, Field D, Sansone S-A, Aerts J, et al: Promoting coherent
minimum reporting guidelines for biological and biomedical
investigations: the MIBBI project. Nature Biotechnol 2008, 26(8):889-896.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S4-S1
Cite this article as: Ranganathan et al.: Challenges of the next decade
for the Asia Pacific region: 2010 International Conference in
Bioinformatics (InCoB 2010). BMC Genomics 2010 11(Suppl 4):S1.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
