<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Quail Genomics: a knowledgebase for Northern bobwhite</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:S13. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-S6-S13"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Arun Rawat"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Rawat et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S13

PROCEEDINGS

Open Access

Quail Genomics: a knowledgebase for Northern
bobwhite
Arun Rawat1, Kurt A Gust2, Mohamed O Elasri1, Edward J Perkins2*
From Seventh Annual MCBIOS Conference. Bioinformatics: Systems, Biology, Informatics and Computation
Jonesboro, AR, USA. 19-20 February 2010

Abstract
Background: The Quail Genomics knowledgebase (http://www.quailgenomics.info) has been initiated to share and
develop functional genomic data for Northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus). This web-based platform has been
designed to allow researchers to perform analysis and curate genomic information for this non-model species that
has little supporting information in GenBank.
Description: A multi-tissue, normalized cDNA library generated for Northern bobwhite was sequenced using 454
Life Sciences next generation sequencing. The Quail Genomics knowledgebase represents the 478,142 raw ESTs
generated from the sequencing effort in addition to assembled nucleotide and protein sequences including 21,980
unigenes annotated with meta-data. A normalized MySQL relational database was established to provide
comprehensive search parameters where meta-data can be retrieved using functional and structural information
annotation such as gene name, pathways and protein domain. Additionally, blast hit cutoff levels and microarray
expression data are available for batch searches. A Gene Ontology (GO) browser from Amigo is locally hosted
providing 8,825 unigenes that are putative orthologs to chicken genes. In an effort to address over abundance of
Northern bobwhite unigenes (71,384) caused by non-overlapping contigs and singletons, we have built a pipeline
that generates scaffolds/supercontigs by aligning partial sequence fragments against the indexed protein database
of chicken to build longer sequences that can be visualized in a web browser.
Conclusion: Our effort provides a central repository for storage and a platform for functional interrogation of the
Northern bobwhite sequences providing comprehensive GO annotations, meta-data and a scaffold building
pipeline. The Quail Genomics knowledgebase will be integrated with Japanese quail (Coturnix coturnix) data in
future builds and incorporate a broader platform for these avian species.

Background
Northern bobwhite represents an avian wildlife species
that is critical to the maintenance of ecosystem function.
The munitions compound (MC) 2,6-dinitrotoluene (2,6DNT) contaminates soil and water on military training
facilities posing a hazard to Northern bobwhite, a
ground foraging bird. Advancing our knowledge in the
potential hazards of 2,6-DNT to avian species is important to insure the protection of these wild populations.
The utility of Northern bobwhite in various ecological
* Correspondence: Edward.J.Perkins@usace.army.mil
2
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Environmental Laboratory, EP-P, Vicksburg,
MS, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

[1], experimental [2] and regulatory [3] scenarios has
gained recognition for the species as an excellent experimental avian wildlife model.
Genomic information for Northern bobwhite lags
behind other avian model species with 1717 ESTs
derived from a brain-tissue cDNA library [4]. This low
coverage of the Northern bobwhite genome limits application of toxicogenomic approaches for assessing the
systemic impacts of chemical stressors. In comparison,
avian species such as chicken and zebra finch have been
robustly described and microarrays have been developed
to allow in-depth investigations [5,6]. For example, various public repositories [7-9] host protein, gene ontology
and pathway information for chicken in addition to

© 2010 Perkins et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Rawat et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S13

specialized chicken databases which are also freely
accessible [10-12].
We recognized the need to greatly expand and integrate the information-base for Northern bobwhite to
develop the species as a robust avian-wildlife genomic
model. The Quail knowledgebase contains 478,142 raw
ESTs, assembled nucleotide and protein sequences, and
21,980 unigenes annotated with meta-data. Data entities
such as protein information and gene ontology annotation are integrated in a common platform with a web
interface for comprehensive parameter searching. The
linkage among these data entities is provided by unigene
ID that connects the entities internally allowing the user
to perform flexible query searches. The result of our
effort is a web-accessible knowledgebase for Northern
bobwhite which includes user friendly navigation tools
and provides EST assembling information, sequence and
structural properties and complex search utilities,
bundled with an alternative method to generate
sequence scaffolds to “stitch” transcripts against a reference organism. The data represented in the Quail Genomics knowledgebase have provided novel insights into
the systemic perturbations of 2,6-DNT in Northern bobwhite [13]. Similarly, the knowledgebase can provide
researchers the ability to perform analysis and curate
genomic information to further their own research
pursuits.

Construction and content

Page 2 of 8

performed based on this interaction among the data
entities and is stored in the relational database. The protein database represents Refseq sequences for chicken
downloaded from Entrez in fasta format (http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/gquery). The assembled sequences
and corresponding chicken protein sequences are
indexed for fast querying and stored as flat files.
Nucleotide assembly and annotation

The preparation of nucleotide assembly data resulted in
71,384 unique sequences [13]. All sequences were annotated against non-redundant protein database with
BLASTX and also against model organism and chicken
database using Parallel Blast [16] with HPC[17]. Prediction of protein-coding regions was established using
ESTScan which uses a hidden Markov model to identify
coding regions that uses Gallus gallus as training data
[18]. The predicted protein-coding regions were scanned
for protein signatures using Interproscan for high
throughput annotation [19,20]. The output is stored in
the database and can be retrieved via querying for visual
inspection of protein domains in HTML format. Hyperlinks are provided on the display results for retrieval of
additional information. Microarray-based gene expression data is also included in the Quail Genomics knowledgebase where p-value and fold changes are stored as
persistent data for each experiment. A full description
of microarray experiments and analyses is provided in
Rawat et al [13].

Platform architecture

The Quail Genomics knowledgebase is a web-based tool
implemented with PERL 5.10.0, CGI, PHP 5.3, and BioPERL 1.6 script programs developed in-house interfacing with MySQL 5.4.3 database [14] through PERL-DBI
and integrate with class packages and modules of GoDev project [8] (Figure 1). The user interface is supported in HTML that is hosted on Apache 2.2.13 webserver [15] (UNIX version). The Quail Genomics
knowledgebase currently runs on a duo 2.26GHz Quad
core Intel Xeon (Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA)
that uses the 64 bit Snow Leopard v1.6 (Apple Computer Inc. Cupertino, CA) operating system. The
assembled sequences and chicken protein sequences are
indexed and the annotation information is stored in the
database. Users can access various features and data by
PHP, PERL/CGI-BIN scripts hosted in Apache and
retrieve information from database and/or indexed text
files to display results. Hyperlinks are provided on the
display results for retrieval of additional information.
Database schema and implementation

The conceptual data representation of annotation and
association of data entities is summarized in Figure 2.
The database schema design and development was

Gene Ontology browser

We performed reciprocal blast hit (RBH) to assess ortholog detection among Northern bobwhite and chicken
(Gallus gallus, an intra-order phylogenetic relative of
Northern bobwhite) across both the putative homologs
(BLASTX, E ≤ 10-5) and predicted ORFs (ESTScan) that
might lead to orthologous genes (Figure 2). We observed
that putative homolog-ORF pairs (where matching protein identifiers were sorted on minimum E value for blast
hits) were complementary in 85% of comparisons to the
RBH pairs. To maximize the ortholog count for the
Northern bobwhite, we conjoined ortholog sets derived
from each method resulting in non-redundant orthologous unique transcripts that represent 8,825 unique gene
products (Figure 2). To functionally annotate the
8,825 Northern bobwhite orthologs, we investigated
and inferred putative GO [21] annotations finding
matching annotations for 4,786 (54.2%) genes. We implemented the GO-Dev project from Amigo locally to provide Tree Browser to represent the Northern bobwhite
orthologs.
GO-Dev is an open-source platform that consists of
CGI/perl modules, database structure and web interface
[22]. GO-Dev and dependencies including GraphViz

Rawat et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S13

Page 3 of 8

Figure 1 The overview of Quail Genomics web architecture. Various in-house Perl, CGI, Bioperl and HTML scripts are stored in webserver and
retrieve information from database to visualize results in web browser. The Amigo infrastructure is locally installed and interacts with local
database and webserver.

Figure 2 The data-flow diagram and interaction among the data entities stored in database. DEG, differentially expressed gene; RBH,
reciprocal BLAST hit.

Rawat et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S13

Page 4 of 8

[23] which are required to successfully run the Amigo
infrastructure locally were downloaded and installed.
The Amigo infrastructure runs on the Quail Genomics
webserver and interacts with our local MySQL database
where database dumps are imported into the GO table
structures. We exported our GO data for Northern bobwhite orthologs to the local Amigo database and the
data can be viewed via tree browser from Quail
Genomics.
Genomic scaffolds

The 71,384 unigenes identified for Northern bobwhite
are an over representation of the total protein-coding
genes that are expected to make up the Northern bobwhite genome. Frequently, due to missing EST
sequences, the ESTs from a single gene may not overlap
to assemble to a contiguous sequence resulting in nonoverlapping contigs and singletons or splits in genes.
Also, stringent parameters during assembly of ESTs into
contigs might lead to unassembled sequences especially
when the sequences have low genome coverage [24].
These issues of missing sequences or fragmentation
might lead to partial representation of a protein-coding
sequence. Many of the sequence fragments might actually represent the same protein leading to redundancy in
the assembled sequences.
For model organisms, methods such as Blat [25] and
Bowtie [26] can be utilized to annotate against a reference genome; however inadequate representation of a
reference sequence for a non-model organism makes
annotation difficult. Other methods like Ensemble genebuild pipeline [24] are also available however these do
not allow user to select ‘gene of interest’ and allow visualization. Finally, methods such as Genescript [27] do provide visualization features, however integration of these
with our web interface and database is not practical due
to workflow and operating system incompatibility.
Therefore, we have built a pipeline that generates scaffolds by aligning unigenes that might represent partial
sequence fragments against specific coding regions of
gene to generate scaffolds consisting of multipleunigenes. The user can select from the list of all the
Northern bobwhite genes stored in the database that
have more than six unigenes/fragments (arbitrarily set)
that represent same protein-coding region. The scaffolds
can be built by clicking ‘gene of interest’ which fetches
these similar unigene fragments from the database.
These are aligned against the protein database of
chicken and visualized in a web browser (Figure 3). As
described above, the protein database consists of Refseq
sequences for chicken and stored in our local server.
The output of BLAST includes information including:
start position, end position, frame direction and

Figure 3 The flow chart representing the building of genomic
scaffolds. The user selects gene of interest and the query retrieves
the Northern bobwhite unigenes stored in the database, maps to
the reference organism and visualize in web browser.

sequence homology against the reference sequence for
each unigene which is parsed and extracted with BioPerl
script. This information is used to align each unigene
that might represent a partial fragment against the
chicken protein sequence.
It may be of interest to further study these scaffolds to
understand redundancy or potential alternate spliced
elements. In conjunction with Parallel Blast output
stored as persistent data and the sequence information
stored in relational database management system
(RDBMS), our pipeline allows users to interact and
visualize results ‘on the fly’. The temporary file handler
added in the script allows multi-user access and deletes
files created during scaffold building, to maintain housekeeping on the server.

Utility and discussion
Quail Genomics knowledgebase hosts the genomic data
for Northern bobwhite which includes nucleotide and
protein sequences, meta-data properties and microarray
expression data as summarized in Table 1. The knowledgebase provides a central repository for storage, data
management and access through a web interface.
Annotation search

Users can access sequence information (Figure 4)
through single query searches (i.e. unigene ID) and
batch search (i.e. by blast hit cutoff or microarray
experiment). We cross referenced the various entities of
data with internal ID that allow comprehensive annotation search with gene name, protein and regular expression search (i.e. cytochrome p450) that might be of
interest to specific users. While browsing through any
search (i.e. differentially expressed gene for an experiment), the user can click hyperlinked unigene ID to see
the detailed report. The output is provided in tabular

Rawat et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S13

Table 1 Composition of data available in Quail Genomics
knowledgebase
Data Content in Quail
Genomics
Sequencing

478,142 EST

Post assembly

71,384 Unigenes (35,904 contigs, 35,480
singlets)

Putative homologs

21,912 hits

Predicted protein regions

39,400 potential ORFs

Protein domains
Ortholog detection

15,057 Interproscan hits
8,825 putative orthologs

Gene Ontology

4,786 GO terms

form with assembling, sequence, structural properties
and metadata (Figure 5).

Page 5 of 8

on experiment and dose and output can be viewed for
microarray probes sorted on p-value. The microarray
probes which had a statistically significant increase or
decrease in expression (p-value<.05) are highlighted in
red or green, respectively.
GO browser

The Northern bobwhite orthologs are functionally annotated under the Inferred from the electronic annotation
(IEA) evidence level. The GO categories of these orthologs
can be browsed for biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions through the GO Tree
Browser implemented from Amigo [28]. With guidelines
as defined by GO consortium [29], these orthologs are
candidates that might be considered for update to Inferred
from Sequence Orthology (ISO) evidence level.

Additional searches

Beside annotation search, we have integrated additional
searches in our platform. Users can search ESTs that
assemble as contigs and visualize the overlap and direction against the assembly. Users can also input their
sequence and perform blast search (BLASTN,
TBLASTX) against the indexed nucleotide sequences of
Northern bobwhite. The expression data is stored based

Genomic scaffolds

The user can select parameter BLASTP for predicted
proteins from ESTScan and BLASTX for nucleotide
sequences and e-value cutoff to visualize scaffolds for
the Northern bobwhite unigenes. All the unigenes that
comprise more than six fragments are listed in the
web page with annotation. Clicking on the gene of

Figure 4 Web browser results of query search options for the Quail Genomics.

Rawat et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S13

Page 6 of 8

Figure 5 Results of the output in the browser executed after performing a parameter search.

interest will show frame direction along with sequence
alignment against the indexed Gallusgallus Refseq protein sequence data (downloaded February 2008).
Northern bobwhite unigenes alignment against the
chicken protein sequence for gene F5 is shown for raw
nucleotide and predicted protein (Figure 6). This
example explains the redundancy in the assembled
sequences, stemming from the fragmentation of unigenes due to non-overlapping contigs and singletons.
The unigenes representing the same protein-coding
sequence of chicken fragmented due to either absence
of overlapping sequences or insufficient assembling

parameter threshold. We also believe that this information can also be utilized not only to quality control
sequencing coverage for an individual gene coding
region but also to study alternate splicing mechanism.
Also, more meaningful full-length protein-coding
sequence can be built either by tuning e-value cutoff
or cross matching alignment of raw nucleotide with
the predicted protein output. One other advantage of
using the scaffold visualized in web browser is that it
allows multiple users to access a central system without separate installation of dependencies and software
(s) and local databases.

Rawat et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S13

Page 7 of 8

Figure 6 The figure depicts the non overlapping sequences lead to split among the unigenes representing same gene. The upper
panel shows Northern bobwhite unigenes alignment against the chicken protein sequence for gene F5. The lower panel is alignment against
same gene with the Northern bobwhite predicted protein. The labels in both panels represent same unigenes for raw nucleotide and predicted
protein and roughly expanse the same region of protein-coding chicken sequence. * The magnification of the two panels is different

Past applications and results

The data represented in Quail Genomics knowledgebase
have provided insights into the metabolic perturbations
underlying several observed toxicological phenotypes in
a 2,6-DNT-exposure case study investigating Northern
bobwhite [13]. The comprehensive metadata attributes
helped us to identify RT-qPCR validated impacts.
Future developments

Japanese quail, a reproductive avian model species [30],
has only 136 ESTs available in GenBank (May’2010).
The Quail Genomics knowledgebase will soon incorporate 559,819 ESTs generated for Japanese quail by next
generation sequencing using GS-FLX technology (454
Life Sciences/Roche, Branford, CT) developed to further
ecotoxicological research in Japanese quail (unpublished). Subsequent updates will be performed every 3
months or as required. We will continue to work on the
scaffold module allowing users to interact with output
and download in GFF format.

Conclusions
The Quail Genomics knowledgebase provides a webbased utility for genomic investigations in an emerging
wildlife model, the Northern bobwhite. As of March

2010, this knowledgebase contains raw sequence,
assembled sequence, annotations and gene expression
data for the Northern bobwhite. The Quail Genomics
knowledgebase will be integrated with Japanese quail
genomics and incorporated into a broader platform for
investigations of avian species.

Availability and requirements
Quail Genomics knowledgebase is publicly available
[31]. The web interface is HTML 4.01 and has been
tested with Firefox 3 and Internet Explorer 7. PERL,
PHP, GO-DEV, MYSQL, BioPERL 1.6 are supported by
dependencies and run on Quad core, 16GB RAM, MAC
OSX 1.6. Raw data and microarray data have been
deposited in public repositories and can be downloaded
from the links provided.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Mississippi Functional
Genomics Network (NIH/NCRR P20 RR016476) and grant #W912HZ-08-C0032 from the U. S. Army Environmental Quality/Installations Research
Program. We thank Glover George for assisting in establishing MPI-Blast and
use of http://cluster.vislab.usm.edu. Permission was granted from the Chief
of Engineers to publish this information.
This article has been published as part of BMC Bioinformatics Volume 11
Supplement 6, 2010: Proceedings of the Seventh Annual MCBIOS
Conference. Bioinformatics: Systems, Biology, Informatics and Computation.

Rawat et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 6):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/S6/S13

Page 8 of 8

The full contents of the supplement are available online at
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11?issue=S6.

19. Zdobnov EM, Apweiler R: InterProScan - an integration platform for the
signature-recognition methods in InterPro. Bioinformatics 2001,
17:847-848.
20. Nagaraj SH, Deshpande N, Gasser RB, Ranganathan S: ESTExplorer: an
expressed sequence tag (EST) assembly and annotation platform. Nucleic
Acids Research 2007, 35:W143-W147.
21. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al: Gene Ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. Nature Genetics 2000, 25:25-29.
22. GO-Dev.. 2010 [http://wiki.geneontology.org/index.php/AmiGO_Manual:
_Installation].
23. GraphViz.. 2010 [http://www.graphviz.org/].
24. Potter SC, Clarke L, Curwen V, Keenan S, Mongin E, Searle SMJ, Stabenau A,
Storey R, Clamp M: The ensembl analysis pipeline. Genome Research 2004,
14:934-941.
25. Kent WJ: BLAT - The BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome Research 2002,
12:656-664.
26. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL: Ultrafast and memoryefficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome.
Genome Biol 2009, 10:R25.
27. Hudek AK, Cheung J, Boright AP, Scherer SW: Genescript: DNA sequence
annotation pipeline. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1177-1178.
28. Harris MA, Clark JI, Ireland A, Lomax J, Ashburner M, Collins R, Eilbeck K,
Lewis S, Mungall C, Richter J, et al: The Gene Ontology (GO) project in
2006. Nucleic Acids Research 2006, 34:D322-D326.
29. Guide to GO Evidence Codes.. 2010 [http://www.geneontology.org/GO.
evidence.shtml].
30. Balthazart J, Tlemcani O, Ball GF: Do sex differences in the brain explain
sex differences in the hormonal induction of reproductive behavior?
What 25 years of research on the Japanese quail tells us. Hormon Behav
1996, 30:627-661.
31. Quail Genomics.. 2009 [http://quailgenomics.info].

Author details
1
University of Southern Mississippi, Dept. of Biological Sciences, Hattiesburg,
MS, USA. 2U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Environmental Laboratory, EP-P,
Vicksburg, MS, USA.
Authors’ contributions
AR designed and developed the database. AR performed programming in
PERL, PHP, HTML, BIOPERL and integration of GO-DEV libraries and web
interface development, Webserver administration and drafted the
manuscript.
KAG developed the normalized cDNA library for Northern bobwhite,
facilitated the sequencing effort, was involved in coordination of
bioinformatics effort and assisted in manuscript development.
MOE involved in coordination of bioinformatics effort.
EJP participated in its design, coordination and manuscript writing.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that there are no competing interests.
Published: 7 October 2010
References
1. Quinn MJ, Bazar MA, McFarland CA, Perkins EJ, Gust KA, Gogal RM,
Johnson MS: Effects of subchronic exposure to 2,6-dinitrotoluene in the
northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus). Environ Toxicol Chem 2007,
26:2202-2207.
2. Johnson MS, Michie MW, Bazar MA, Gogal RM: Influence of oral 2,4dinitrotoluene exposure to the Northern Bobwhite (Colinus virginianus).
International Journal of Toxicology 2005, 24:265-274.
3. Sauer JR, Link WA, Nichols JD, Royle JA: Using the North American
Breeding Bird Survey as a tool for conservation: A critique of BART et al.
(2004). Journal of Wildlife Management 2005, 69:1321-1326.
4. Gust KA, Pirooznia M, Quinn MJ Jr., Johnson MS, Escalon L, Indest KJ,
Guan X, Clarke J, Deng Y, Gong P, et al: Neurotoxicogenomic
Investigations to Assess Mechanisms of Action of the Munitions
Constituents RDX and 2,6-DNT in Northern Bobwhite (Colinus
virginianus). Toxicological Sciences 2009, 110:168-180.
5. Crowley TM, Haring VR, Burggraaf S, Moore RJ: Application of chicken
microarrays for gene expression analysis in other avian species. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10.
6. Carre W, Wang x, Porter TE, Nys Y, Tang JBE, Morgan R, Burnside J,
Aggrey SE, Simon J, Cogburn LA: Chicken functional genomics resource:
sequencing and annotation of 35,407 ESTs from single and multiple
tissue cDNA libraries and CAP3 assembly of a chicken gene index.
Physiological Genomics 2006, 25:514-524.
7. UniProt.. 2010 [http://www.uniprot.org].
8. GO Database.. 2010 [http://www.geneontology.org/].
9. KEGG.. 2010 [http://www.genome.jp/kegg].
10. Geisha.. 2010 [http://geisha.arizona.edu].
11. ChickEST Database.. 2010 [http://www.chick.manchester.ac.uk].
12. Gallus Gallus SBS.. 2010 [http://mpss.udel.edu/gga].
13. Rawat Arun, Kurt AGust , Youping Deng, Natàlia Garcia-Reyero,
Michael JQuinn Jr., Mark SJohnson , Karl Indest, Mohamed OElasri ,
Edward JPerkins : From raw materials to validated system: The
construction of a genomic library and microarray to interpret systemic
perturbations in Northern bobwhite. Physiological Genomics 2010.
14. MySQL.. 2010 [http://www.mysql.com].
15. Apache.. 2010 [http://www.apache.org/].
16. Darling A, Carey L, Feng W: The Design, Implementation, and Evaluation
of mpiBLAST. 4th International Conference on Linux Clusters: The HPC
Revolution 2003 in conjunction with ClusterWorld Conference & Expo, June
2003.
17. Vislab High Performance Computing.. 2010 [http://cluster.vislab.usm.edu].
18. Iseli C, Jongeneel CV, Bucher P: ESTScan: A program for detecting,
evaluating, and reconstructing potential coding regions in EST
sequence. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 1999, 138-147.

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-S6-S13
Cite this article as: Rawat et al.: Quail Genomics: a knowledgebase for
Northern bobwhite. BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11(Suppl 6):S13.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
