<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Embryonic and post-embryonic development of the polyclad flatworm Maritigrella crozieri; implications for the evolution of spiralian life history traits</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12. doi: 10.1186/1742-9994-7-12"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kate A Rawlinson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Open Access

RESEARCH

Embryonic and post-embryonic development of
the polyclad flatworm Maritigrella crozieri;
implications for the evolution of spiralian life
history traits
Research

Kate A Rawlinson1,2

Abstract
Background: Planktonic life history stages of spiralians share some muscular, nervous and ciliary system characters in
common. The distribution of these characters is patchy and can be interpreted either as the result of convergent
evolution, or as the retention of primitive spiralian larval features. To understand the evolution of these characters
adequate taxon sampling across the Spiralia is necessary. Polyclad flatworms are the only free-living Platyhelminthes
that exhibit a continuum of developmental modes, with direct development at one extreme, and indirect
development via a trochophore-like larval stage at the other. Here I present embryological and larval anatomical data
from the indirect developing polyclad Maritrigrella crozieri, and consider these data within a comparative spiralian
context.
Results: After 196 h hours of embryonic development, M. crozieri hatches as a swimming, planktotrophic larva. Larval
myoanatomy consists of an orthogonal grid of circular and longitudinal body wall muscles plus parenchymal muscles.
Diagonal body wall muscles develop over the planktonic period. Larval neuroanatomy consists of an apical plate,
neuropile, paired nerve cords, a peri-oral nerve ring, a medial nerve, a ciliary band nerve net and putative ciliary
photoreceptors. Apical neural elements develop first followed by posterior perikarya and later pharyngeal neural
elements. The ciliated larva is encircled by a continuous, pre-oral band of longer cilia, which follows the distal margins
of the lobes; it also possesses distinct apical and caudal cilia.
Conclusions: Within polyclads heterochronic shifts in the development of diagonal bodywall and pharyngeal muscles
are correlated with life history strategies and feeding requirements. In contrast to many spiralians, M. crozieri hatch with
well developed nervous and muscular systems. Comparisons of the ciliary bands and apical organs amongst spiralian
planktonic life-stages reveal differences; M. crozieri lack a distinct ciliary band muscle and flask-shaped epidermal
serotonergic cells of the apical organ. Based on current phylogenies, the distribution of ciliary bands and apical organs
between polyclads and other spiralians is not congruent with a hypothesis of homology. However, some similarities
exist, and this study sets an anatomical framework from which to investigate cellular and molecular mechanisms that
will help to distinguish between parallelism, convergence and homology of these features.
Background
Flatworms (phylum Platyhelminthes) have long been
viewed as the sister group to all other bilaterian metazoans, due in large part to their blind gut and relatively simple, acoelomate body plan [1]. However, recent molecular
phylogenetic studies have forced a re-evaluation of classi* Correspondence: k.rawlinson@ucl.ac.uk
1

Smithsonian Marine Station, 701 Seaway Drive, Fort Pierce, Florida, 34949 USA

cal hypotheses of metazoan intrarelationships. The Platyhelminthes (including catenulids and rhabditophorans,
but excluding the acoels and nemertodermatids [2]) now
nest within the Spiralia, the protostomian sister clade to
Ecdysozoa [[3] based on [4]]. Resolution of intrarelationships within the Spiralia is increasing, and the Platyhelminths are thought to belong to a clade that includes the
Bryozoa, Entoprocta, Cycliophora [5], and possibly Gas-

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Rawlinson; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

trotricha and Gnathostomulida [6]. This clade, in turn, is
the sister group to a clade that includes annelids, mollusks, nemerteans and brachiopods [4,6]. This new phylogenic hypothesis has a number of profound implications
for scenarios of metazoan morphological and life history
evolution. This is largely due to the patchy distribution of
ciliated planktonic ("larval") stages across spiralians and
deuterostomes.
A cursory examination of the phylogenetic distribution
of larval stages within the mollusk/annelid/nemertean/
branchiopod clade suggests that a ciliated "trochophore"
larva could have been a primitive feature of this group.
However, within its sister clade (Platyhelminthes, Gastrotricha, Gnathostomulida, Bryozoa, Entoprocta,
Cycliophora) the distribution of larval forms is scarcer,
and absent in the gastrotrichs and gnathostomulids. This
distribution of larval characters within the Spiralia could
be interpreted in two ways: either as the result of
repeated convergent evolution of intermediate planktonic
life stages [7], or, perhaps more controversially, as the
retention of a primitive spiralian larval form in certain
groups, with multiple instances of independent loss in
other lineages [8]. To distinguish between these alternative hypotheses of character evolution, detailed morphological and developmental data are needed from a wide
diversity of taxa within the Spiralia - and in particular,
from the relatively understudied indirect developing
members of the Platyhelminthes, Bryozoa, Entoprocta,
Cycliophora. Polyclad flatworms are unique among the
free-living marine platyhelminths in having a gradient of
developmental modes. These modes of development can
be roughly categorized as direct development (embryos
hatching as a benthic juvenile), intermediate development (larva with lobes and ciliary band retained within
an egg case, and hatching as a benthic juvenile), and indirect development (with a planktonic form with lobes and
ciliary band) [9]. Polyclad planktonic larval forms are,
themselves, morphologically diverse, and include the
four-lobed Götte's larva, the eight-lobed Müller's larva, as
well as additional six- and ten-lobed forms [[10,11], pers
obs]. To date, Müller's larvae have been described in both
suborders of polyclads - the Cotylea and Acotylea - while
Götte's larva, intracapsular larva and direct development
are all found exclusively with the Acotylea [12]. However,
a dearth of data on the intrarelationships of polyclads and
insufficient taxonomic sampling of their life history strategies precludes inference of the primitive mode of development for this clade.
The ciliated larvae of polyclads have been thought to
superficially resemble the pilidium of nemertines [10],
and it has been suggested - based on morphological and
topological similarities between their ciliary bands and
cephalic ganglia - that polyclad larvae are homologous
with the trochophore larva of other spiralians [13]. How-

Page 2 of 25

ever, current hypotheses of platyhelminth phylogeny support direct development as the primitive condition for
the clade [2,14,15], and the appearance of ciliated larval
forms within a single order of free-living platyhelminths
may, instead, point to the convergent evolution of a
planktonic life stage in polyclads. Nevertheless, due to the
variable position of the Platyhelminthes within the Spiralia [e.g. [5] and [6]] and of the Polycladida within the
Platyhelminthes [see [16]] the question of polyclad-trochophore larval homology or convergence remains open,
and comparative analyses of the development of putatively homologous larval structures are needed to distinguish between these alternative scenarios.
Larval characters that are widespread amongst spiralian larvae include an apical tuft, paired ventral nerve
cords, paired lateral nerve cords, cerebral ganglia, circumoral nerve loops, perikarya associated with the pedal
nerve cord and the establishment of an apical muscle grid
during myogenesis [17,18]. To date, descriptive studies on
indirect developing polyclads using modern microscopy
and fluorescent labeling techniques have characterized
two anatomical similarities shared between spiralian and
polyclad larvae - the early establishment of an apical muscle grid in the acotylean Hoploplana inquilina [19] and
cotylean Maritigrella crozieri [20], and paired ventral and
lateral nerve cords in the acotylean Imogine mcgrathi
[21]. Ultrastructural studies of polyclad larvae have
greatly increased our understanding of the peripheral and
central nervous system (including the brain and ciliary
band - [21-24]). However, many aspects of polyclad
embryonic and post-embryonic development remain
unknown. For instance, the fate of the primary longitudinal muscles and development of pharyngeal muscles is
undescribed, and data on the development and distribution of embryonic and larval neurons, their spatial relationship to the embryonic and larval musculature, and
the development of the ciliary band and apical organs are
lacking.
Here, I provide a detailed account of embryonic and
larval development in the cotylean polyclad Maritigrella
crozieri. Using a nuclear stain, phalloidin staining for Factin, and immunohistochemical staining of the nervous
system, I show in detail: early cleavage, gastrulation and
development of the ciliary band; myogenesis and neurogenesis. I discuss how different temporal patterns of
bodywall muscle development relate to different life history strategies within polyclads. This first analysis of neurotransmittor distribution shows a well-developed
nervous system in the hatchling of M. crozieri. Myogenic
and neurogenic elements of the ciliary band and apical
plate in M. crozieri are compared to those in other spiralian pelagic life history stages. Evidence for and against
homology of these organs is given, however, these data
are not sufficient to make the non-arbitrary distinction

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

between homology, parallelism and convergence. Efforts
needed to decipher between these three scenarios are discussed and this study provides a morphogenetic and
embryological foundation in polyclads for future comparative studies of spiralian developmental gene expression
and function.

Results
Overview of Maritigrella crozieri embryogenesis

In a quiescent state mature Maritigrella crozieri measure
31.3 (± 2.7) mm in length and 18.1 (± 1.9) mm in width
(mean ± SD; n = 20). Individuals lay multiple egg batches,
each containing anywhere from 50 to over 1000 individually encapsulated eggs. The eggs are nearly spherical and
measure 220 (± 15.6) μm (mean ± SD, n = 20) in diameter.
At 22°C embryonic development took 196 (± 16) h (mean
+ SD, n = 200) to hatching. Embryonic stages are
described as hours post oviposition (hpo) and, in order to
make them comparable between taxa, as a percentage of
embryonic development time (% d.t.). There was no difference in development time between encapsulated
embryos and those reared outside of the egg capsule.
Cleavage in Maritigrella crozieri is quartet, spiral and
equal. The first cleavage takes place 8 hpo (4% d.t., Fig.
1A), followed by the second cleavage at 11 hpo (6% d.t.,
Fig. 1B). The four blastomeres are the same size making
quadrant identification difficult. Following the cleavage
nomenclature of Surface [25], the first quartet micromeres develop at 14 hpo (7% d.t., Fig. 1C), the second quartet micromeres at 18 hpo (9% d.t., Fig. 1D), the very small
third quartet micromeres at 21 hpo (11% d.t.), and the
large fourth quartet micromeres (~90 μm) and very small
macromeres (10 μm) at 23 hpo (12% d.t., Fig. 1E). The
number of micromeres from the first three quartets
increases to more than 83 in the next 10 hours, these
form an irregular double layer at the animal pole and
form a cap over the 4th quartet micromeres (Fig. 1F). At
the onset of gastrulation a 4th quartet micromere divides
(33 hpo, 17% d.t., Fig. 1G) - this, according to Surface
[25], is 4d. Gastrulation proceeds by epiboly - the
micromeres at the animal pole divide and migrate vegetally as a sheet, enveloping the 4th quartet micromeres
and macromeres (Fig. 1H, I, J). It appears as though the
micromeres 4a-c do not divide, but coalesce into the yolk
filled interior of the embryo. The four small fourth quartet macromeres are visible and remain undivided until
the ectoderm is established as a layer and just before it
begins to invaginate at the lower pole to form the pharynx. By 95 hpo (48% d.t.) epiboly is almost complete and
the animal-vegetal axis turns into the antero-posterior
axis.
Following gastrulation, development may be considered in three main stages; i) development of the epidermis and organ primordia, ii) organ differentiation, iii)

Page 3 of 25

development of larval lobes. Development of the epidermis and organ primordia takes place between 69 and 125
hpo (35% and 63% d.t.). During this time the embryo is
round in shape and a small outpocketing develops at the
posterior end, in the centre of which lies the stomodaeum. Smooth epithelial ectodermal cells are differentiated from more rounded deep cells. At 69 hpo (35% d.t.),
epidermal cilia stain positive for acetylated tubulin, and
rotation of the embryos starts at 75 hpo (38% d.t.). At 109
hpo (56% d.t.) a pre-oral ciliary band forms a circle subequatorially around the posterior end of the embryo and
a ring of longer cilia forms around the developing stomodaeum (Fig. 2A). Sixteen hours later, the ciliary band has
four offshoots which branch upwards towards the anterior of the embryo (Fig. 2C). The epidermal eyespot
forms at 115 hpo (58% d.t.), in an anterio-dorsal position.
From 126 hpo (64% d.t.) to 169 hpo (86% d.t.) organ differentiation takes place and the embryo becomes obovate
by elongating slightly along the antero-posterior axis.
During this period two acetylated tubulin (acTub)
expressing structures are visible, these are the two developing protonephridial canal cells (129 hpo, Fig. 2D). They
extend from either side of the stomodeum, across the epithelium and basement membrane and proceed anteriorly.
The two putative terminal cells of the protonephridia are
visible in acTub stained wholemounts later (160 hpo) as
two bilaterally symmetric, unbranched, elongated and
heavy ciliated vesicles, located in the upper third of the
embryo either side of the oral hood (Fig. 2F). The left
cerebral eye develops first (139 hpo [70% d.t.]), followed
shortly by the right cerebral eye, they are 20 μm from
each other and are positioned more ventrally relative to
the epidermal eye. The stomodaeum migrates from a
posterior position to a mid-ventral position at 150 hpo
(Fig. 2E), the pharynx invaginates later at 160 hpo (Fig.
2F), while the ciliary band migrates equatorially and
demarcates the position where the eight larval lobes will
develop (Fig. 2E). The F-actin containing microtubular
sheaths of rhabdite cells are visible at the anterior and
posterior tip of the embryo and become more numerous.
From 170 hpo (87% d.t.) to 196 hpo (100% d.t.) the
embryo's shape changes from obovate to a complex morphology with eight protruding lobes. Lobe formation
starts with the protrusion of the oral hood (170 hpo [87%
d.t.]) followed by the dorsal lobe. The paired lobes follow
sequentially with the ventro-lateral lobes (175 hpo, 89%
d.t.), followed by the lateral lobes and shortly after, the
dorso-lateral lobes (which elongate further after hatching). The lateral lobes protrude higher up the embryo
than the ventolateral and dorsolateral lobes. The pharynx
and gut lumen meet at 175 hpo (89% d.t.). The gut is
blind, ciliated throughout, un-branched (Fig. 2G) and
reaches almost to the latitude of the brain in the developed larva. Hatching occurs on day 8 after 196 hours of

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Page 4 of 25

Figure 1 Confocal laser scanning micrographs (CLSM) of the blastula and gastrula stages of Maritigrella crozieri. (F-actin labeled with phalloidin 564 [red], nucleic acids stained with Sytox Green [green]). (A-D) - animal views of cleavage cycles 1-4; showing the first quartet micromeres (arrowheads in C) and second quartet micromeres (arrowheads in D). (E) Animal view showing the third quartet micromeres (arrowheads), vegetal view
showing large fourth quartet micromeres (4a-d, double arrowheads) and mini-macromeres (mm)(4A-D). (F) Lateral view shows irregular double layer
of dividing 1st to 3rd quartet micromeres at the animal pole over the 4a-d quartet. (G) Animal view of micromere cap and vegetal view of 4d division.
(H-J) Animal, lateral and vegetal views respectively of gastrulation by epiboly; micromere cap migrates vegetally enveloping the fourth quartet micromeres and macromeres, which remain visible until the ectoderm invaginates at the lower pole to form the stomodeum. Scale bars 100 μm, hpo =
hours post oviposition, dt = development time.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Page 5 of 25

Figure 2 Ciliary band migration in Maritigrella crozieri embryos. CLSM micrographs of post-gastrulation acetylated tubulin stained wholemounts.
(A) Posterior view showing ciliary ring around stomodeum (st) at posterior pole and the early ciliary band (cb). (B-C) Lateral view - anterior up - (B)
ciliated epidermis and sub-equatorial ciliary band, (C) four branches of ciliary band migrate anteriorly, (D) Ventral view at focal plane of developing
protonephridial canal cells (pnp). (E) Ventral view - stomodeum migrates ventrally, (F) Ventral and left lateral view - ciliary band demarcates position
where the eight larval lobes will form (oral hood, oh, ventro-lateral lobe, vll, lateral lobe, ll, dorsal lobe, dl), cilia in the protonephridia lumen (pnp) and
pharynx (ph) are visible. (G) Left lateral view-pre-hatchling showing continual band of longer cilia round the lobes and fused intestine (in) and pharynx.
Scale bars 100 μm

embryonic development. The larva is positively phototactic and swims in a right-handed helix - led by epidermal
eye (ie anterio-dorsal side leading). It is planktotrophic
[26] and was observed to feed on cultures of unicellular
algae introduced into the seawater (pers obs). Rhabdites,
and pigmentation do not extend onto the lobes. The protonephridia extend anteriorly from below the mouth
through the basement membrane, branching mid-larvae
at the level of the lateral lobes, and re-enter the epidermis
ventro-anteriorly just above the oral hood at the same latitude as the brain. They run interior to, but in close proximity with, the lateral nerve connectives. The average size
of a hatchling is 250 (± 12, n = 10) μm in length and 200
(± 8, n = 10) μm wide. The gross anatomy is illustrated at
two-day post hatching (Fig. 3).

These muscles serve as attachment sites for most of the
longitudinal muscles. Approximately 6 longitudinal muscles met in the centre of the complex at the anterior pole.
Below, an orthogonal grid of 12-22 outer circular and 1216 inner longitudinal muscles constitutes the framework

Larval muscle anatomy

The body wall musculature at two-days post-hatching (n
= 30)(Fig. 4) is composed of an apical complex on top of
circular and longitudinal fibers organized in a lattice-like
arrangement. Parenchymal muscles include dorso-ventral muscles and those associated with the mouth and
pharynx.
The apical complex (Fig 4A), at the anterior pole of the
larva, was made up of 5 spirally arranged coils or closed
circular muscles. The apical coil had a diameter of 15 μm.

Figure 3 Gross anatomy of Maritigrella crozieri two-day posthatching pelagic stage. A) ventral view, B) left lateral view. (ac) apical
cilium, (ee) epidermal eye, (ce) cerebral eye, (in) intestine, (oh) oral
hood, (pnp) protonephridia, (ll) lateral lobe, (vll) ventro-lateral lobe, (ph)
pharynx, (m) mouth, (sop) sub-oral plate, (cci) caudal cilium.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Page 6 of 25

Figure 4 Confocal projections of the phalloidin-labelled musculature of Maritigrella crozieri two-day post-hatching pelagic stage. Apical
views (ventral up) of A) Apical complex (ac) of circular and coiled muscles above the orthogonal grid of body wall muscles, and B) optical sections
below the apical complex showing mouth retractor muscle (mrm) and a pair of anterior-posterior parenchymal muscles (asterisk) extending from the
apical complex to the mouth (m in C). A pair of dorso-ventral parenchymal muscles (arrow heads in B) extends from the dorsal lobe (dl) to the oral
hood (oh). C) Ventral, D) lateral and E) dorsal view of orthogonal grid of body wall muscles, mouth retractor muscle (mrm) and oral hood muscles;
longitudinal (arrowheads in C), oblique (double arrowhead in C) and circular (arrowheads in D). Prominent circular muscles include the anterior primary circular muscle (apcm), the posterior primary circular muscle (ppcm), and the lateral lobe circular muscle (llcm). Two thick muscle bands extend
between the oral hood and dorsal lobe (double arrowheads in D & E), the endings branch obliquely across the lobes (double arrowhead in C) and
interdigitate with endings from the opposing fiber. Primary longitudinal muscles (arrow heads in E), epidermal eye (ee). Roots of the apical and caudal
cilia are visible in the epidermis (asterisks in C, D & E). (F) Dorsal view, optical sections inside of body wall musculature at focal plane of dorsoventral
parenchymal muscles (arrowheads), three pairs in bilateral organisation lateral to the intestine (in). (G) Ventral view, single optical section showing
many parenchymal muscles radiating from the posterior primary circular muscle (ppcm) laterally (arrow heads) and anteriorly (asterisk), concentric
rings of mouth muscles (double arrow heads). (H) More ventral still, an optical section behind the ventral lobes shows the mouth retractor muscle
(mrm) extending from the apical complex and a ring of muscle (double arrowheads) around the pharynx (ph). Scale bars 50 μm.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

of the body wall musculature. Of these, two circular and
two longitudinal muscles are considered primary muscle
fibres, as they were the earliest distinguishable landmarks
during myogenesis (see below). These muscles were more
deeply set than the rest of the body wall muscle grid. The
primary circular muscles (Fig. 4D) consist of an anterior
primary circular muscle and the posterior primary circular muscle. The former follows the lower contour of the
oral and dorsal lobes. The posterior primary circular
muscle forms the lower muscle band of the ventro-lateral
and dorso-lateral lobes, but is not connected to the lateral
lobe, which protrudes higher up the larvae. However, it
runs close to the lateral lobe circular muscle ventrally
above the mouth. On the dorsal side two primary longitudinal muscles (Fig. 4E) run parallel to each other down
from the apical complex to the caudal pole, under the
sub-oral plate to join the mouth muscles on the ventral
surface.
Bilateral symmetry of the longitudinal muscles is
apparent from the apical view (Fig. 4A). 2-3 major longitudinal muscle fibres extend posteriorly from the apical
complex into each lateral lobe. At the end of the lobes
these muscles digitate into fine muscle fibres. Of these
longitudinal muscles, the two that form the lateral ridge
of the lateral lobes are particularly thick and prominent.
Four longitudinal muscles on the dorsal side, including
the two primary longitudinal muscles, pass under the
sub-oral plate and are joined by many fine muscles leading to the mouth. The lateral lobe circular muscle (Fig.
4D) runs around the larvae at the level of the two lateral
lobes and over the anterior opening of the mouth. Many
of the prominent circular and longitudinal muscles
appear to be double stranded. Many fine circular muscles
converge at the mouth. A first diagonal body wall muscle
(Fig. 4D, E) runs from a posterior medial position on the
dorsal side around to the right lateral side, arcing up
behind the lateral lobe and curves down towards the ventro-lateral lobe. This is named the dorsal diagonal arc in
Hoploplana inquilina [19], and in M. crozieri it becomes
more pronounced, extending from the left caudal side to
the right side of the larvae as it develops. By 10 days posthatching other diagonal fibres are visible including two
short diagonal muscles that cross each other above the
dorsal lobe (see additional file 1 figure S1a).
The musculature of the concave oral hood consists of 57 circular muscles (Fig. 4D) and 3-8 oblique muscle fibres
(Fig. 4C) radiating from paired thick bands of muscle on
either side of the hood (Fig. 4D). These paired muscles
bands run from the upper surface of the dorsal lobe to the
oral hood. A second pair extends (Fig. 4D) along the
lower margin of the dorsal and oral lobes, and they converge ventrally with the anterior primary circular muscle
and a lower circular muscle to form the thick, prominent
muscle at the front of the lobe. There are 9 fine longitudi-

Page 7 of 25

nal muscles (Fig. 4C) in the oral hood that are positioned
inside of the circular and oblique muscles. These muscles
connect to the upper margin of the mouth muscles. The
dorsal lobe is made up of four circular muscles (including
the anterior primary circular muscle) and the two pairs of
thick muscle bands that wrap around the larva from the
oral hood to the dorsal lobe. The endings branch and
interdigitate on the dorsal lobe protrusion (Fig 4E). The
three pairs of lateral lobes that protrude from the body
wall each have 2-3 longitudinal muscles and several circular muscles. Numerous fine circular and diagonal muscles are found along the length of the lobes and at the tips.
There are five pairs of bilaterally symmetrical parenchymal dorsoventral muscles; three run lateral to the
intestine, between the mouth and anterior primary circular muscle (Fig. 4F). The fourth pair lies inside of the
anterior primary circular muscle and joins the dorsal lobe
to the oral hood (Fig. 4F). The fifth pair is more anterior
and is at the same latitude as the 8th circular muscle from
the apex (Fig. 4B). Several more dorsoventral parenchymal muscles are found in the sub-oral plate. Six - twelve
diagonal parenchymal muscle fibres run anteriorly from
the posterior primary circular muscle just above the
mouth margin, two connect below the apical complex,
several run to the frontal muscle of the oral hood and the
others connect to circular muscles laterally below the latitude of the cerebral eyes (Fig. 4G). These diagonal muscles probably act as mouth dilator muscles. The mouth
retractor muscle (Fig 4B, C, H) bifurcates at the anterior
pole of the larva, each branch attaches to either side of
the apical complex. Just below the cerebral eyes it forks
into several branches, which divide into many fingers.
Some of these fingers reach down to the mouth circular
muscles, while others attach to the lower muscles of the
oral hood. Three ring-shaped fibres form a sphincter at
the mouth (Fig. 4G and 4H). F-actin in the cilial band was
stained with phalloidin and two rows of cilia were
observed on the oral and ventro-lateral lobes, while only
one is observed on the lateral, dorso-lateral and dorsal
lobes (additional file 1 figure S1 b).
Larval neuroanatomy

The ground pattern of nerves at two-days post-hatching
(n = 50) is described based on acetylated tubulin (acTub)
stained wholemounts (Fig. 5A &5B). Acetylated tubulin
marks stabilized microtubules that form in, for example,
axon fibers and gland cell necks. In order to begin to distinguish neural from non-neural elements, the distribution of the neurotransmittors serotonin (5HT) and
FMRF-amide was mapped onto the ground pattern. Neurons that showed immunoreactivity to the neurotransmittors were located in the apical plate, the neuropile,
paired dorso-lateral and ventro-lateral nerve cords, a
pharyngeal nerve ring, a medial nerve, a ciliary band

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Figure 5 The neural groundplan of the Maritigrella crozieri twoday post-hatching pelagic stage. (A & B) based on acetylated tubulin wholemounts, left lateral and ventral view respectively (bright
green = neurons that show serotonin and/or FMRFamide immunoreactivity, dark green = structures not immunoreactive to serotonin and
FMRF-amide antibodies). (C) Serotonin expression - ventral view. (D)
FMRF-amide expression - ventral view. (aa) apical plate, (apl) apical
plexus, (cbnr) ciliary band ring, (cc) cerebral commissure, (ccb) commissural cell bodies (ccip) caudal cilium perikarya, (cp) caudal perikarya,
(dlc) dorso-lateral connective, (een) epidermal eye nerve, (gcn) gland
cell necks, (iec) intra-epidermal cells, (ien) intra-epidermal nerves, (ienp)
intra-epidermal nerve plexi, (mc) medial cluster, (mn) medial nerve,
(on) oellar nerve, (phnr) pharyngeal nerve ring, (rc) ring connectives,
(sor) supra-oral ring, (vlc) ventro-lateral connective, (vp) ventral perikarya.

nerve ring, and two intra-epidermal nerve plexi (Fig. 5C
&5D). Many acTub labeled structures did not show 5HT
or FMRFamide immunoreactivity, indicating that other
neurotransmittors might be active or that they are nonneural structures (see below, Fig. 5).
The apical plate is located above the apical spiral complex of the body wall muscles (Fig. 6A) and consists of: 1)
a single apical cilium (Fig. 6A, 7A), 2) a ring of longer cilia
surrounding the apical cilium (Fig. 6A) and 3) a ring of
5HT (Fig. 6E) and FMRFamide expression beneath the
ring of long cilia. Whether the ring of long cilia are from
cells that are 5HT and FMRFamide positive or whether
these epidermal ciliated cells are non-neuronal but are in
contact with dendrites of 5HT and FMRFamide positive
cells is not discernable from this data and requires further

Page 8 of 25

investigation. Indeed how the apical plate is connected to
the neuropile is not evident from these data. The acTub
structures leading from the apical plate to the cerebral
commissure are not 5HT or FMRFamide-positive and it
is possible that they could be the microtubules in the
gland cell necks (Fig 7A).
Intraepithelial neurons surrounding the apical plate
extend posteriorly between the body wall muscles to a
cluster of axons - the apical plexus, which is situated in
the midline, anterior to, but in contact with, the cerebral
commissure and forms part of the neuropile (see
below)(Fig. 7A, D, E, F). The brain of the larvae consists
of a bilaterally symmetric central neuropile made up of
two distinct regions; the apical plexus and the cerebral
commissure. The apical plexus consists of a rectangular
shaped network of FMRF-amide expressing cell processes
(Fig. 7B) and the spherical median cluster expressing
5HT and FMRFamide - this may be a synaptic glomeruli
where the sensory afferents innervating the apical plate,
intra-epidermal cells and other intra-epidermal neurites
converge (Fig. 7C). Nerves expressing both neurotransmittors proceed from the apical plexus to the epidermal
eye (Fig. 7F) (5HT data not shown). The cerebral commissure consists of an orderly array of neurons, with subsets showing immunoreactivity to FMRF-amide and 5HT
(Fig. 7A, B). Two very distinct 5HT-expressing cell bodies
sit either side of the cerebral commisure (Fig. 6A, C, E, F
and 7A, C). Neurons from the commissure can be traced
into all four main body nerve cords; the paired ventro-lateral and dorso-lateral nerves (Fig. 6A, B, D, E F &7A, B,
C). The two cerebral eyes sit either side of the apical
plexus and acTub visible fibres lead from the cerebral
commissure to the eyes (possible ocellar nerves) (Fig. 7E).
The dorso-lateral and ventro-lateral nerves (5HT, FMRFamide IR) diverge at the junction of the prominent 5HTexpressing commissural cell bodies. The ventro-lateral
nerves extend ventrally, and branch at the level of the
anterior primary circular muscle. One branch aligns with
this muscle around the oral hood, while the second
branch follows the inner margin of the ventro-lateral
lobes (Fig. 6D). The dorso-lateral nerve cord extends posterio-laterally (Fig. 6A, E, 7A, B) until it reaches the body
wall muscles where it aligns with the prominent lateral
longitudinal muscle. Projections branch off the dorso-lateral nerve cord dorsally with many following the contours
of circular muscle bands. Below the lateral lobe the main
branch of the dorso-lateral nerve sits external to the
bodywall musculature and meets its pair at the caudal cilium (Fig. 6B). The caudal cilium is slightly dorsal to the
posterior pole, and is located beneath the two primary
longitudinal muscles (Fig. 6D). One neuronal cell body
(5HT and FMRFamide IR) innervates the caudal cilium,
and two more perikarya are located on both sides of the
caudal tuft on the dorso-lateral nerve cord (Fig. 6D).

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Page 9 of 25

Figure 6 CLSM micrographs of the nervous system in two-day post-hatching Maritigrella crozieri. (phalloidin-white, acTub-green, 5HT-magenta, FMRFamide-blue [except in C where 5HT and FMRFamide-magenta]). (A) Mid optical sections of triple labeled larva (ventral view), showing neural
components; commissural cell bodies [ccb], dorso-lateral connective [dlc], pharyngeal nerve ring [phnr], intra-epidermal cells [iec], epidermal nerve
plexi [enp], apical plate [ap] and apical cilium [ac], in relation to the apical complex muscles (ac) and posterior primary circular muscle (ppcm). (B) FMRFamide expression in the apical plexus (apl), dorso-lateral coonective, pharyngeal nerve ring and supra-oral nerve ring (arrowhead) Ventral view.
Rhabdites (rb). (C) Dorso-lateral view showing the neural activity in the apical plexus, the cerebral commissure (cc) and commissural cell bodies, and
the spatial relationships between the intra-epidermal cells, epidermal nerve plexi, pharyngeal nerve ring, protonephridia (pnp), and intestine (in). (D
& E) Ventral and lateral views of the nerve and muscle orthogons showing the ventro-lateral (vlc) and dorso-lateral connectives, the innervation of the
sub-oral plate (caudal perikarya (cp) and caudal cilia perikaryon (ccip) on the dorso-lateral connective and ventral perikarya (vp) on the medial nerve),
and the intra-epidermal 5HT expression at the apical plate and the ciliary band (cb). (F) Dorsal view showing the spatial relations of the protonephridia
(pnp) and dorso-lateral connectives, the pharyngeal nerve ring and the pharynx (ph) and intestine, and the intra-epidermal cells and the neuropile and
commissural cell bodies. (G) Right lateral view of head, 5HT expression in epidermal nerve plexus external to the apical complex of body wall muscles
and acTub IR in intra-epidermal cells. (H) Neuromusculature of left lateral lobe (lll) showing nerves external to body wall muscles. (I) Ventral view of
FMRFamide expression in the pharyngeal nervous system shows connections between the pharyngeal nerve ring and the dorso-lateral connectives
(arrowheads) and cerebral commisure (double arrowheads). Scale bars 50 μm.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Page 10 of 25

Figure 7 The larval brain of Maritigrella crozieri - CSLM micrographs of neural components. (A-E) Ventral views of the anterior end of the larvae.
(A) AcTub (green) and 5HT (magenta) expression showing the posterio-lateral extension of the dorso-lateral nerve cords (dlc) and anterior and anterior-lateral extension of intra-epithelial neurites (ien) to the apical plate (ap) and surface from the cerebral commissures (cc). 5HT expression is pronounced in the commissural cell bodies (ccb) and median cluster (mc). The protonephridia (pnp), intra-epidermal cells (iec) and cilia in the intestine
(in) show acTub IR and rhabdites (rb) are visible in the epidermis. Inset shows neural connection (arrow heads) between the intra-epidermal cells and
the cerebral commisure. (B) FMRFamide (blue) and acTub (green) expression, note lack of FMRFamide expression in commissural cell bodies but immunoreactivity in the apical plexus (apl) above the cerebral commissure and in two nerves connecting the brain to the pharynx (double arrowheads).
Inset shows FMRFamide and acTub expression in cerebral commissure. (C, D, E) Dual labeling of acTub (green) and FMRFamide and 5HT simultaneously (magenta) showing; (C) ventral section of brain with commissural cell bodies, cerebral commissure, apical plexus and intraepithelial neurites,
(D) dorsal section of brain consisting of median cluster and intraepithelial neurites in close proximity to intra-epidermal cells (iec) and apical cilia (ac).
(E) Optical section at the focus plane of the cerebral eyes (ce) either side of median cluster, acTub expressing optic nerves (on) visible. (F) Left lateral
view of anterior end of larva showing FMRFamide (blue) expression in the median cluster dorsal to the apical plexus. FMRFamide and acTub IR is seen
in epidermal eye nerve (een) extending dorsally to the epidermal eye (asterisk) Inset shows neuron (arrowhead) from intra-epidermal cell passing
through the basement membrane. Scale bars 50 μm, inset in B 25 μm.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

From the caudal cilium, two medial FMRFamide and
5HT expressing nerves extend to a ventral perikarya
before diverging and connecting to the pharyngeal nerve
ring (Fig. 6B, D). Several 5HT and FMRFamide expressing nerves (Fig. 6B, C, F, I) form a net around the concentric rings of the pharyngeal musculature (Fig. 6A, D).
Numerous (2-5) bilaterally symmetric perikarya are visible on this nerve ring (Fig. 6A, C, F). Many nerves (2-4)
radiate laterally from each side of the pharyngeal ring to
join the dorso-lateral nerves and two nerves join the cerebral commissure at the commissural cell bodies (FMRFamide IR only) (Fig. 4I). No nerves or plexi were observed
around the intestine. Anterior to the pharyngeal nerve
ring sits a ring of FMRF-amide expressing cells (Fig. 6B).
This is located intra-epidermally between the ventro-lateral lobes.
A grid of nerves that express FMRFamide and 5HT
innervate the musculature of the larval lobes. The nerves
are external to the musculature and circular (ring or
transverse) nerves form commissures connecting the four
main nerve cords (Fig. 6D and 6H). 5HT and FMRFamide
expression reveal two putative intra-epidermal nerve
plexi; the first beneath the cilia and the second external to
the body wall musculature (Fig. 6A, E, G and 7F), though
where this second plexus sits in relation to the basement
membrane needs verification at the ultrastructural level.
5HT and FMRFamide expression is particulary dense
below the ciliary band with many transmittor release sites
between the lobe muscles and ciliated cells of the ciliary
band (Fig. 6E, additional file 1 figure S1c. FMRFamide
data not shown).
A comparison of the aminergic (5HT) and peptidergic
(FMRFamide) components of M. crozieri larval nervous
system reveals there is significant overlap in immunoreactivity in the neuropil, dorso-lateral and ventro-lateral
connectives, pharyngeal nerve ring and peripheral nerve
plexus (especially under the ciliary band), though colocalisation was not tested. However only FMRFamide immunoreactivity was detected in the supra-oral ring and in
portions of the pharyngeal nervous system, such as
nerves leading to the dorso-lateral connectives and brain
(Fig. 5D). Only 5HT immunoreactivity was detected in
the two cell bodies at each side of the cerebral commissures (Fig. 5C).
Many acTub labeled structures did not show 5HT or
FMRFamide immunoreactivity; the fibres leading to the
cerebral eyes and structures leading from the neuropile to
the apical plate (these have been discussed above). A
prominent third feature identified by acTub staining was
two clusters of 2 - 8 intra-epidermal cells at the anterior
pole of the larvae (Fig. 6G). These clusters are located
dorso-laterally to each cerebral eye, and a thin process
extends from each cell through the basement membrane
to the brain (Fig. 7A &7F). These cells are similar in their

Page 11 of 25

acTub expression to the 'apical gland cells' described in
Imogine mcgrathi [21] and may correspond to the intraepithelial multiciliated cells described in Pseudoceros
canadensis [24]. They are hypothesized to be ciliary photoreceptors (see discussion).
The ontogeny of the nervous and muscle systems
1) 0-125 hpo (0-63% d.t.)

During the first 54% of development time, F-actin was
only visible in zonulae adhaerentes of epidermal cells.
Approximately 12 hours after gastrulation, between 107 119 hpo (55- 60% d.t.), the first muscles developed; 2-3
spiral coiled muscles at the anterior pole, plus a ring of
interweaved circular muscles at the posterior pole surrounding the stomodeum (Fig. 8A). The first immunoreactive elements of the nervous system were a 5HT
expressing ectodermal cell at the site of the developing
epidermal eye, and a single neuron that connected this
cell to further 5HT immunoreactive cells in the apical
epidermis (Fig. 8A &10A). The two primary longitudinal
muscles formed subsequently (121 hpo, 62% d.t.), 40 μm
apart from each other and running parallel from the posterior pole to the apical circular muscles. They ran close
to the epidermal eye indicating a dorsal position (Fig. 8B).
Oblique muscles branching off from the longitudinal
muscles developed into circular muscles, including the
anterior primary circular muscle (Fig. 8B). Further circular muscles developed at the posterior pole and equatorially (Fig. 8C). Myogenesis appears to proceed by
branching or fission of the pioneer myofibrils of the apical complex and primary circular and longitudinal muscles, many of which had forked ends (Fig. 8C). The two
5HT-expressing cell bodies of the cerebral commissure
appear at 62% d.t. in close proximity to the epidermal eye,
and 5HT expression is detected in a caudal perikaryon
(Fig. 8C).
2) 126-169 hpo (64-86% d.t.)

The first cerebral commissure labeled with acTub was
observed at 126 hpo (64% d.t.) and from this extended
one intra-epithelial neuron to the apical plate (not
shown). At this stage 5HT expression was also visible in
1-2 caudal perikarya in the epidermis (Fig. 8C, D). By 139
hpo (70% d.t.) the cerebral eyes in the epidermis showed
5HT immunoreactivity. A ring-shaped cluster of 5HT
expressing cells (12-14) formed in the apical epidermis
between the cerebral eyes above the apical spiral complex
of muscles (Fig. 8E). This signaled the start of brain condensation as further development of the commissural cell
bodies and axons ensued below the body wall muscles.
Migrations of the dorso-lateral and ventro-lateral connectives from the commissural cell bodies commenced.
The former was thicker and more prominent than the
later, and they grew out from the brain before the main
period of longitudinal muscle growth. Early traces of dor-

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Page 12 of 25

Figure 8 Early development of the nervous and muscle systems in Maritigrella crozieri. CLSM micrographs of fluorescently labeled wholemounts from 55-70% development time (phalloidin - white, 5HT - magenta). (A) Left - anterior view, right - posterior view. Early development of apical
circular myofibrils (acm) and posterior circular muscles (pcm) around the stomodeum (st). 5HT immunoreactivity in the developing epidermal eye (ee)
and it's associated nerve (een). (B) Dorsal view showing the primary longitudinal muscles (plm) and their position relative to the epidermal eye, apical
circular muscles and anterior primary circular muscle (apcm). Rudiments of the commissural cell bodies (ccb) are developing. (C) Left lateral view showing further development of circular muscles (cm) and 5HT expression in caudal perikarya (cp). (D) Anterior and left lateral view show neuropil condensation. An apical ring (ar) of 5HT expressing cells in the epidermis sits between the cerebral eyes (asterisks) and above the apical circular muscles, the
commissural cell bodies and nerves are below the body wall muscles. The dorso-lateral (dlc) and ventro-lateral (vlc) connectives migrate posteriorly
and the ring commisures extend dorsally (double arrowheads). Several longitudinal muscles (arrowheads) form and early mouth retractor muscles
(mrm) grow from the apical complex posterior-ventrally to the mouth. (E) Ventral view shows predominance of circular muscles and the first signs of
5HT expression under the ciliary band (cb). (F) Anterio-lateral view shows the establishment of the orthogonal body wall musculature with the development of up to 12 longitudinal muscles. The mouth retractor muscles (mrm) are visible on the ventral side and increasing numbers of rhabdites (rb)
develop in the epidermis Scale bars 100 μm.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Page 13 of 25

Figure 9 Late embryonic development of the nervous and muscle systems in Maritigrella crozieri. CLSM micrographs of fluorescently labeled
wholemounts from 71-100% development time (phalloidin - white, 5HT - magenta, acTub - green, FMRFamide - blue). (A) Ventro-left lateral view
showing acTub and FMRFamide immunoreactivity in the cerebral commissure (cc), intraepithelial nerves (ien) and dorso-lateral connective (dlc). AcTub expression is also in the protonephridia (pnp) and in cilia in the pharynx (ph). (B) Ventral view showing circular muscle formation around the
mouth (double arrowhead) and 5HT expression in the pharyngeal nerve ring (phnr) with its bilaterally symmetric perikarya (php). Two nerves extend
posteriorly from the pharyngeal nerve ring and converge at a ventral perikarya (vp) before joining the dorso-lateral connective with it's caudal perikaya
(cp). Myofibrils diverge from the orthogonal muscle grid as lobe formation commences, a circular muscle loops over the oral hood (arrowhead). (C)
Left lateral view 10 hours before hatching showing areas of double muscle fibers (arrowhead), flattened circular muscles (double arrowheads) and
circular nerves of the dorsal plexus (asterisks) following the anterior primary circular muscles (apcm). Scale bars 100 μm.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Page 14 of 25

Figure 10 Embryonic development of the serotonergic nervous system in Maritigrella crozieri. (A) 111 hours post-oviposition (hpo) - ventral
view, (B) 125 hpo - ventral view, (C) 139 hpo - i) ventral view, ii) left lateral view, (D) 175 hpo - ventral view. (ar) apical ring, (cb) ciliary band, (cc) cerebral
commissure, (ccb) commissural cell bodies, (ce) cerebral eye, (cp) caudal perikaryon, (dlc) dorso-lateral connective, (ee) epidermal eye, (mn) medial
nerve, (phnr) pharyngeal nerve ring, (rc) ring commissures, (st) stomodaeum, (vlc) ventro-lateral connective, (vp) ventral perikarya.

sal and ventral circular commissures were visible. Faint
5HT immunoreactivity under the cilial band was
detected (Fig. 8D). By 74% development time a third caudal perikarya had formed along the dorso-lateral connective in the suboral plate and 5HT expression was strong
in the epidermis under the developing ciliary band (Fig.
8E). The first acTub labeled intra-epidermal cell formed
at 160 hpo (81% d.t.).
Further circular muscles developed during this period
between the anterior primary circular muscle and the
apical spiral complex. These single fibres appear to form
the lower coils of the apical spiral complex closing to
completely encircle the embryo. During this period the
number of longitudinal myofibrils also grew within the
body wall. The first parenchymal muscles, early mouth
retractor muscles, were visible at 139 hpo (71% d.t.) and
grew from the apical complex posterior-ventrally to the
forming mouth (Fig. 8D). By 160 hpo (81% d.t.) up to 14
circular muscles and 12 longitudinal muscles formed
around the embryo establishing an orthogonal muscle
grid (Fig. 8F). A dense band of circular muscles developed
at the latitude of the developing dorsal lobe and oral
hood. One prominent equatorial circular muscle was evident.
3) 170 hpo (87% d.t.) - hatching

From 170 hpo (87%), muscles began to deviate from the
orthogonal grid. On the ventral side circular muscles
arched from one developing ventrolateral lobe up over
the oral hood and down to the opposite ventrolateral lobe
(Fig. 9B). A series of concentric muscle rings formed
around the pharynx (Fig. 9B), and parenchymal mouth
dilator muscles developed connecting the anterior margin of the mouth to the apical complex and circular body
wall muscles. From 176 hpo (90%) onwards the roots of
the apical tuft cilium was visible above the apical complex

(not shown). Serotonin expression was detected in the
pharyngeal nerve ring (Fig. 10D), which forms in close
association with the pharyngeal circular muscles. Bilaterally symmetric pharyngeal perikarya (up to 4 in number)
develop at this stage. From the two lower perikarya on
the nerve ring two axons extend caudally and converge at
a ventro-caudal perikaryon, these nerves then run adjacent to the primary longitudinal muscles and join the
dorso-lateral connective at the caudal cilium.
Between 180-196 hpo (92-100% d.t.) many of the spiral
muscle fibres of the apical complex are transformed into a
more or less circular muscle system. Secondary longitudinal and circular muscles were observed to line up with
the primary muscle fibres of the orthogonal muscle grid
to give areas of double fibers (Fig. 9C). Many circular
muscles formed thin flattened laminar sheets from two
fibers (Fig. 9C). The number of acTub expressing intraepidermal cells increased and the commissural cell bodies
migrated further from the epidermis and closer together.
The dorso-lateral connectives ran adjacent to the prominent double-stranded lateral longitudinal muscles that
form part of the lateral lobes and weave either side of the
circular body wall muscles (Fig. 9C). Below the lateral
lobe this nerve crosses the body wall muscles and proceeds in the epidermis to the caudal tuft. A nerve plexus
extends dorsally from the dorso-lateral nerve cord with
two circular nerves running external to the circular muscles of the oral hood and dorsal lobe (Fig. 9C).

Discussion
In this study, confocal laser scanning microscopy combined with fluorescent staining and immunohistochemistry has enabled the detailed description of polyclad
cleavage, gastrulation, ciliation, myo- and neurogenesis,
and larval myo- and neuroanatomy. This is the first study

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

to detail the development and topology of the larval nervous system using antibodies against neurotransmittors,
and to demonstrate the position of neural elements relative to musculature. It is now possible to compare the
results found in Maritigrella crozieri amongst other polyclads and platyhelminths. The anatomy and development
of other spiralian larvae have received considerable attention using these techniques (see [27] and references
therein). The addition of embryological and larval data
from a polyclad widens the taxon sampling within the
Spiralia, giving a more comprehensive comparative
framework within which to discuss the evolution of larval
anatomies.
Polyclads are the only free-living platyhelminths where
embryos can be reared in vitro outside of their impermeable egg capsule. As such they are an important taxon
with which to address platyhelminth development and
investigate the spiral pattern of early cleavage. In Maritigrella crozieri cleavage is of equal quartet spiral type and
identification of the D quadrant occurs late, at the onset
of epiboly. There appears to be no difference in blastomere size at the two or four-cell stage. In polyclads the macromeres are much larger than the first to third quartet
micromeres. However, the sixth cleavage cycle gives rise
to significantly larger micromeres than macromeres at
the 4th quartet stage. This may be a derived feature of
polyclads, although verification in other archoophoran
Rhabditophora such as macrostomids has not been possible as cleavage patterns beyond the third division are
obscured by yolk [28]. However, an observation of a similar pattern has been recorded in the neoophoran Lecithoepitheliates [29].
Anti-tubulin immunohistochemistry on Maritigrella
crozieri embryos showed that the ciliary band is the first
ciliary feature to appear, well before the apical and caudal
cilia. The ciliary band forms post-gastrulation as a complete continuous band around the stomodaeum, which
then migrates to the position of the developing larval
lobes. Ruppert [22] describes the distribution of prototrochal cells in another Muller's larva as a circular pre-oral
band interrupted by the eight arm-like outgrowths of the
body wall. However, there is variation in cilial band morphology in 4 and 6-lobed polyclad larva. In Imogine
mcgrathi one ciliary band forms a complete circle around
the larva at the latitiude of the oral hood, while a second
ciliary band encircles the two lateral, peri-oral lobes [21].
In Pseudoceros canadensis, the ciliary band consists of
discontinuous ventral and dorsal loops and ciliated features on the suboral plate [23]. This variation could be
related to feeding strategies. The larvae of M. crozieri are
actively planktotrophic [26] and the mechanism for
planktivory is assumed to be the use of the ciliary band
for down-stream feeding. I. mcgrathi larvae have been

Page 15 of 25

reported to feed passively on microplankton [21]. There
is no evidence on whether P. canadensis is planktotrophic, however, given the accessory ciliary features
that it possesses [23] it is highly likely that these are
involved in feeding. Tubulin staining also highlights the
apical and caudal cilia, the cilia in the developing pharynx, gut lumen, and paired protonephridia. It has also
been used to visualize axon fiber development [21] (discussed below). A collar of cilia at the junction of the stomodaeum and larval gut is present in M. crozieri as in
other polyclad larvae investigated by Ruppert [22].
Myogenesis and larval myoanatomy

Adult musculature of Platyhelminthes consists of body
wall muscles made up of circular, longitudinal and diagonal myofibrils, and parenchymal muscles [30]. Compared
to other Platyhelminthes, there is a paucity of data on the
musculature of adult polyclads, with data for only three
species: Planocera gilchristi [31], Notoplana acticola
[32,33] and Discocelides langi [34]. However, there are
ontogenetic data on muscle development for three species: Melloplana ferruginea [20], Hoploplana inquilina
[19] and Maritigrella crozieri [[20], this study]. The later
two are indirect developers.
Comparisons between Maritigrella crozieri and Hoploplana inquilina highlight the similarities in muscle development and topology between six and eight-lobed larvae
from two different species in different sub-orders (Cotylea and Acotylea respectively). Similarities in myogenesis
include: 1) the early formation of a primary muscle grid,
composed of two longitudinal muscles, an anterior and a
posterior circular muscle. 2) An initial period of circular
muscle development followed by longitudinal muscle
growth. 3) Similarities in mouth retractor muscle position and number, and rings of concentric circular muscles
around the mouth. The radial pharynx muscles described
in H. inquilina probably equate to the parenchymal
mouth dilator muscles described in M. crozieri. 4) Similar
chronology and timing of larval lobe development, with
the oral hood and ventro-lateral lobe anlages visible at
92% development time in H. inquilina and by 89% in M.
crozieri.
However, there are several notable differences in muscles development and topology between M. crozieri and
H. inquilina. The first primary longitudinal muscles of H.
inquilina were located in lateral positions compared to
dorsal positions in M. crozieri. Two transverse muscles
extend over the apex of H. inquilina embryos at 92%
development time and these were not observed in M. crozieri embryos. Pharyngeal longitudinal muscles described
in H. inquilina were not observed in M. crozieri. A prominent diagonal muscle runs around the dorsal side of the
embryo in H. inquilina. This is not in M. crozieri
embryos, though one diagonal muscle was counted in

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

two-day old larvae. This muscle becomes thicker over the
following 8 days, by which time further diagonal muscles
have formed. This suggests that in indirect developing
polyclads diagonal muscles are added to the body wall
musculature during the planktonic period. The observed
acceleration of diagonal muscle development in H.
inquilina relative to M. crozieri correlates with length of
time in the plankton. H. inquilina larvae have been
observed to settle at 16 days post-hatching [11] while M.
crozieri larvae settle after approximately 3.5 weeks [35].
At hatching, the direct developing Melloplana ferruginea have approximately 10 pairs of diagonal body wall
muscles on the dorsal side and 5 on the ventral side, many
parenchymal dorso-ventral muscles, and a more elaborate musculature of the pharynx [20] compared to Maritigrella crozieri larvae. M. crozieri larvae develop diagonal
muscles throughout the pelagic period and it is predicted
that dorso-ventral muscles develop in later larval stages,
thereby giving M. crozieri pelagic forms a similar body
wall musculature to that of direct developing hatchlings
at time of settlement. As such a comparable sequence of
body wall musculature differentiation is seen between the
different developmental modes; with the initial establishment of the orthogonal grid of circular and longitudinal
muscles, followed by the formation of diagonal and
dorso-ventral muscles. Comparisons between M. crozieri,
H. inquilina and M. ferruginea reveal heterochrony in the
development of two muscle types that may correlate with
the different life history strategies. Both diagonal body
wall muscles and complex pharyngeal muscles develop
earlier in species that spend no (Melloplana ferruginea)
to little (Hoploplana inquilina) time in the water column
compared to species that spend longer periods feeding in
the plankton (Maritigrella crozieri).
Features of the larval anatomy may be retained in the
adult body plan as metamorphosis consists of a series of
gradual changes involving the dorso-ventral flattening of
the body and the reabsorption of the larval lobes [22,36].
This is quite unlike the catastrophic movements that
effect metamorphosis in some spiralian larvae (e.g. nemerteans [37] and bryozoans [38]). Data from late stage
polyclad larvae of many different species collected from
the plankton show that growth of diagonal body wall
muscles and dorsoventral parenchymal muscles dorsoventrally flatten the larva whilst it is still actively swimming in the water column (Rawlinson, unpubl data). It is
highly likely that the body wall musculature that develops
in the Maritigrella crozieri larva persists through to
adulthood and this is likely to be a common feature of
polyclad larval development. Development of the musculature associated with a ventral sucker has been observed
in late-stage larvae of unidentified species (presumably
belonging to the sub-order Cotylea) (additional file 1 fig-

Page 16 of 25

ure S1d), though whether this occurs in M. crozieri is
unknown. Post-settlement myogenesis must continue in
order to develop the high density of circular, longitudinal
and diagonal body wall muscles and the complex muscle
systems associated with the powerful tubular pharynx,
the tentacles and reproductive structures of the adult
worm.
"Intermediate-type" is the term used by Wanninger [27]
to differentiate the mode of development of circular muscles in indirect developing polyclads from that in other
worm-like spiralians. Based on myogenetic descriptions
from Hoploplana inquilina [19] and Pseudoceros
canadensis (Semmler and Wanninger, unpubl as cited in
[27]), he summarises early myogenesis as the formation
of pairs of secondary circular muscles in between the
original two primary circular founder muscles, which
develop synchronously at opposite ends of the embryo.
Fission or duplication of existing muscle fibres is considered as the driving force in ring muscle growth in P.
canadensis (Semmler and Wanninger, unpubl data as
cited in [27]). This pattern of circular muscle distribution
is also found in Maritigrella crozieri. However, the mechanisms that lead to the regular distribution of these circular muscles are not clear. Early myogenesis in M. crozieri
shows myofibrils developing from the apical complex and
primary circular muscles by means of fission (as seen in
fibres with forked ends), and duplication (as seen in fibres
lying in very close proximity to each other). Furthermore,
circular muscles were observed to branch off from the
primary longitudinal muscles.
While fission and duplication of pioneer muscle fibers
appear to be the mode of myogenesis in Maritigrella crozieri, it has been suggested that nerve cords play a central
guiding function during the development of circular
muscles in the closely related rhabditophoran Macrostomum hystricinum marinum [39]. In M. hystricinum marinum migration and differentiation of pre-myocytes of
circular muscles appear to be spatially restricted to the
nerve cord. The cell bodies of these muscle fibers stay
close to the main longitudinal nerve cords sending out
the contractile part of their cells in a dorsal and ventral
direction. In F-actin and serotonin labelled M. crozieri
embryos, circular muscles form before the dorso-ventral
and dorso-lateral connectives are visible (Fig. 8B and 8C)
and early myofibrils are not spatially restricted to the
developing dorso-lateral connective but are evenly distributed around the circumference of the embryo. Communication between these cell types is highly probable, as
later in development the prominent lateral longitudinal
muscles in M. crozieri do form in alignment with the
already developed dorso-lateral connectives (Fig. 9C).
Furthermore, there is close association between the cell
types, particularly around the mouth and pharynx.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Neurogenesis and larval neuroanatomy

Polyclad larval neuroanatomy has been described at the
ultrastructural level in unknown species of Göttes and
Müllers larvae [22] and in detail in Pseudoceros canadensis [23,24,40]. A cursory examination of the serotonergic
nervous system has been carried out in Stylostomum sanjuana [41]. Development of the larval nervous system in
Imogine mcgrathi was demonstrated at the ultrastructural
level and using an antibody against acetylated tubulin
[21].
An apical or frontal organ has been identified by ultrastructural studies in polyclad larvae [22-24] and a glandulo-sensory function has been suggested [22].
According to these studies, the apical organ consists of a
cluster of monociliated sensory cells surrounded by a circle of gland cell necks supported peripherally by microtubules. The gland cell necks pass through the basement
membrane extending posteriorly, dorsal and ventral to
the neuropile to secretory cell bodies above, below and
behind the brain [22,24]. The bases of the monociliated
sensory cells were located on top of the brain (called apical cells, Lacalli [24]), but no direct connection to the
brain was observed, Lacalli [24] therefore determined
that these apical cells were probably not nerve cells.
Immunohistochemical studies [[21], this study] show
immunoreactivity in the form of an apical plate. 5HT and
FMRFamide are expressed in a ring around the apical
cilia and these expression patterns may be located in the
monociliated sensory cells described by Lacalli [23,24]. If
the apical organ described in Pseudoceros canadensis is in
the same position in Maritigrella crozieri then there
appears to be little 5HT or FMRFamide immunoreactivity in the organ. It is possible that some of the acetylated
tubulin staining visible intraepidermally under the apical
plate is associated with the microtubules that give peripheral support to the gland cell necks (Fig. 7A). Furthermore the lack of immunoreactivity in the apical cells
described by Lacalli [24], may confirm his suspicions that
these cells lying on top of the brain (that give rise to
numerous microvilli and to one cilium) are not nerve
cells, although this requires further analysis, as many
additional neuropeptides and neurotransmittors are
found in larval nervous systems [42,43]. These findings
may suggest that the frontal/apical organ (sensu Ruppert
and Lacalli) may be more glandular than sensory, but that
it is surrounded by neural activity in the neuropile and
apical plate. Hay-Schmidt [41] described two serotonergic cells in the 'apical ganglion' of Stylostomum sanjuana
larvae. These serotonin-expressing cells are equivalent to
the commissural cell bodies described here in M. crozieri
and the lateral cell masses described in P. canadensis [23].
They are not homologous to the serotonergic epidermal
cells found in the apical organ of some other spiralian larvae (see below). Comparative studies on direct develop-

Page 17 of 25

ing polyclad species would determine whether these
species have a similar apical sensory plate or whether it is
a unique character of the pelagic life history stage. Cilia at
apical and caudal ends, with a presumed sensory function, have been identified in direct developing hatchlings
[44].
Acetylated tubulin-expressing intra-epidermal cells at
the anterior end of larvae have been recognized in Imogine mcgrathi ('apical gland cells' in [21]) and Maritigrella
crozieri (this study). In Imogine mcgrathi 14-17 of these
cells were found in later stage embryos, similarly in Maritigrella crozieri larvae, 2-8 acetylated tubulin-expressing
cells formed bilaterally symmetric clusters in the dorsal
epidermis at the latitude of the cerebral eyes. It is possible
that these acTub expressing cells are homologous to the
intra-epithelial multiciliated cells buried entirely within
the epithelium described in Pseudoceros canadensis by
Lacalli [24]. He concludes that due to their multiciliated
organization that there should be some involvement with
sensory reception and the nervous system. Findings in M.
crozieri corroborate this hypothesis as fine connections
were observed leading from these cells to the neuropile
(Fig. 5A, F). Furthermore their strong acTub immunoreactivity could be consistent with dense ciliation. There
are two differences observed between the acTub reactive
intra-epidermal cells in Imogine mcgrathi and Maritigrella crozieri. Firstly, the processes leading from these
cells are fine (much thinner than intra-epithelial nerves)
in M. crozieri but thick and swollen in I. mcgrathi. Secondly, the processes from these cells extend to the brain
in M. crozieri, whereas in I. mcgrathi they end at the apical plate. These differences may be due to inter-specific
variation, or differences between larval types (Müller's vs
Götte's). It is possible that the intra-epidermal acTub
reactive cells observed in M. crozieri and I. mcgrathi and
the intra-epithelial multiciliated cells in P. canadensis are
ciliary photoreceptors and that these may persist through
ontogeny to the adult body plan. In adult macrostomid
species and other rhabditophorans putative light-perceiving organs are common, and these consist of pericerebral
aggregations of cells with an internal cavity into which
axonemata of modified cilia project [45]. Ciliated cells
and 'sensory cups' (showing acTub immunoreactivity)
associated with apical sensory organs have been
described in the larvae of the polychaete Platynereis
dumerilii [46] and the gastropod Nerita melanotragus
[47]. In P. dumerilii these cells have been shown to
express opsins [46], suggesting that they are ciliary photoreceptors and might function in non-directional photoresponse such as the control of photoperiodic behaviour.
Indeed extraocular photoreceptors are found in many
marine larvae [48]. To determine whether these intra-epidermal cells in M. crozieri are ciliary photoreceptors, the
expression of opsins could be investigated and ablation

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

experiments used to demonstrate their role, plus future
developmental studies on later stage larvae and juveniles
are needed to determine whether these cells persist in the
adult body plan.
The anatomy of the larval neuropile is generally consistent between Pseudoceros canadensis, Imogine mcgrathi
and Maritigrella crozieri. It consists of a spherical tangle
of cell processes called the apical plexus (or median cluster in I. mcgrathi [21]), which lies anterio-dorsal to the
orderly array of neurites that form the cerebral commissure. The neurites associated with the receptor cells of
the cerebral eyes are distinctive for their large diameter in
P. canadensis and rather than entering the brain directly,
these pass down the side of the brain on either side to the
ends of the commissure. The same pattern is seen in the
ocellar nerves of M. crozieri. The lateral cell masses
described in P. canadensis [23] probably correspond to
the commissural cell bodies in M. crozieri.
Lacalli's [23,24] work on the neuroanatomy of the
Muller's larva of Pseudoceros canadensis revealed the
organization of the central and peripheral nervous systems. He described the central nervous system as comprising of a brain, apical organ and four nerve cords, all of
which lie beneath the basement membrane. The peripheral nervous system is intra-epithelial and lies entirely
outside the basement membrane consisting of nerves in
association with the ciliary band. The only direct contact
between the central and peripheral systems occurs at the
ends of the dorsolateral cords, where a few neurites cross
the basement membrane to the adjacent ciliary nerves
[23]. A similar topology of nerves is seen in the larva of
Maritigrella crozieri using immunohistochemical techniques, although some differences are recorded. In M.
crozieri the distinction between a central and peripheral
nervous system is not as distinct, as nerves appear to
cross the basement membrane in at least two places.
First, contrary to the findings in P. canadensis where the
dorso-lateral connectives terminate at the ciliary band
[24], the dorso-lateral connectives in M. crozieri extend
to the lateral lobes, where they become external to the
body wall musculature and continue in the sub-oral plate
to the caudal tuft where they meet their co-lateral pair.
Secondly, nerves associated with the pharyngeal nervous
system may cross the basement membrane, especially
FMRFamide expressing nerves. These nerves connect to
the intra-epidermal caudal tuft perikaryon via the medial
nerve and to the supra-oral nerve ring, while also connecting, sub-epidermally, to the dorso-lateral nerves and
brain. Several other notable differences are observed in
neuroanatomy of Pseudoceros canadensis and Maritigrella crozieri larvae; 1) the ventro-lateral cords terminate
at the sides of the oral hood in P. canadensis, whereas in
M. crozieri the two ventral connectives bifurcate, with
one branch meeting it's co-lateral pair at the distal por-

Page 18 of 25

tion of the oral hood and the second branch extending
posteriorly. 2) In P. canadensis suboral plate innervation
consists of three nerve cells below the rejectory cell (a ciliated cell that functions as a food rejection system)[41].
However, in M. crozieri there is considerable sub-oral
plate innervation as intra-epidermal innervation surrounding the caudal tuft and leading to the pharyngeal
nerve ring.
In Pseudoceros canadensis Lacalli [23] found that most
neural elements outside of the basement membrane
belong to a separate intraepithelial system of nerves associated with the ciliary band. These ciliary nerves ran
beneath the band along most of its length, the largest
being those in the ventrolateral lobes where the sensory
cells are the most numerous. A large nerve passed above
the mouth to connect the ciliary nerves of the ventrolateral lobes. In Maritigrella crozieri 5HT and FMRFamide
immunoreactive cells beneath the epidermal cilia indicate
a sub-cilial nerve plexus, these increase in density
beneath the ciliary band, forming a prominent network
following its entire length. No distinct nerve tracts were
identified with the three neural markers used. There
appeared to be a second nerve plexus beneath the sub-cilial plexus but above the body wall musculature, which
was situated between and in contact with both the ciliary
nerve band and the body wall musculature. The differences in neural anatomy described between M. crozieri
and P. canadensis may be variation between species, artifacts of different types of analysis (immunohistochemistry vs electron microscopy) or ontogenetic differences
whereby the smaller (150 μm anterior-posterior axis), less
elaborate (6 lobes) hatchling of P. canadensis is slightly
less developed.
A supra-oral ring of FMRFamide expressing cells was
found in Maritigrella crozieri larvae (Fig. 4B). This has
not been described from other Müller's larvae but Ruppert [22] observed an anastomosis of intraepithelial neurons between the two ventral clusters of neurons just
anterior to the mouth in a Götte's larva. Perhaps this zone
of neural activity is associated with a food groove as
found in other spiralian larvae, where heavily innervated
cilia convey particles towards the mouth or control
mucous secretion.
A comparison of the larval serotonergic nervous system
is possible between the 8-lobed larvae of two closely
related euryleptids; Stylostomum sanjuana [41] and Maritigrella crozieri (this study). Hay-Schmidt [41] describes
an apical ganglion housing a pair of serotonergic cell bodies from which an axon extends laterally towards the posterior end where they join a ring of serotonergic
processes coming from six serotonergic cell bodies (one
for each lateral lobe). Projections from the serotonergic
neurons enter the ciliary band and the serotonergic larval
nervous system initially stops at the prototroch. However,

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

the serotonergic nervous system in S. sanjuana looks
remarkably similar to that of M. crozieri and on close
examination of the images I would disagree with HaySchmidt's interpretation that the six serotonergic cell
bodies represent one for each lateral lobe and that the
nervous system does not extend caudally beyond the ciliary band. The six serotonergic cell bodies he has indicated (his Fig 1A) look equivalent to those of the dorsolateral connective in M. crozieri, which are found in the
sub-oral plate.
From this study it is evident that early neurogenesis in
M. crozieri starts with neurotransmittor (5HT and FMRFamide) immunoreactivity in the epidermis with the
establishment of brain and apical plate primordia, and
expression in caudal perikarya. The 5HT and FMRFamide expressing dorso-lateral and ventro-lateral connectives migrate posteriorly. The dorso-lateral
connective connects the cerebral commisure to the caudal perikarya and the thinner, less prominent ventro-lateral connective bifurcates with one extension following
the oral hood and the second following the inner margin
of the future ventro-lateral lobes. Neurogenesis has only
been studied in one other polyclad, Imogine mcgrathi,
this was carried out using immunohistochemistry against
acTub [21]. I. mcgrathi shows asymmetric development of
brain - with the neuropile being thicker and extending
further on the right side, with the right cerebral eye
developing first. At the two eye stage in I. mcgrathi (their
stage 7) a small dorso-medial cluster of neurons forms in
the brain that sends branched processes toward the apical
tuft. This is interpreted as a forerunner of the apical
plexus. Antibody staining of I. mcgrathi was not achieved
after this stage, however, this was possible in Maritigrella
crozieri and it can be confirmed that this medial cluster is
most likely the anlage of the apical plexus ('tangle') of the
larval neuropile.
Lacalli [24] considered that the adult and larval
orthogons cannot be considered equivalent or directly
comparable without further information on how the former develops from the later. It is unlikely that the adult
nervous system develops entirely separately from the larval nervous system due to the gradual nature of polyclad
metamorphosis [22,36]. The neural anatomy of the benthic stage Maritigrella crozieri is unknown. However,
from the acotylean, Notoplana acticola, Koopowitz [49]
described the adult nervous system consisting of two
nerve networks that radiate outwards from an anterior
brain: 1) a ventral network of coarse nerves with a meshwork of finer fibres between the large nerves, 2) a dorsal
network of fine fibres. It is hypothesised that the transition in M. crozieri from pelagic multi-lobed larvae to
dorso-ventrally flattened benthic adult may include the
following rearrangement to the nervous system topology:
the prominent dorso-lateral connectives become the

Page 19 of 25

main ventral nerve cords in the flattened adult; the dorsal
ring nerves become commissural nerves connecting the
lateral nerves dorsally and forming part of the dorsal network; the 5HT expressing ventral perikaryon on the
nerve cords that extend between the caudal tuft and pharyngeal nerve ring become associated with the ventral
sucker.
If indeed the rearrangement of muscles and nerves
involved with settlement to the benthos is gradual and
slight, then perhaps the polyclad gastrula embarks on
development towards a juvenile, but the early stages of
this process co-exist with transient larval structures (e.g.
lobes and ciliary band) to allow a temporary pelagic life
and the ability to capture food. A further study on late
stage larval development and settlement of Maritigrella
crozieri would allow the morphogenetic change involved
in settlement to be assessed. Furthermore, a working phylogeny of polyclads is needed to determine the polarity of
change for life-history evolution within this clade. If an
indirect life history was plesiomorphic then one might
ask the role of the larval muscles and nerves in the development of the juvenile/adult body plan. If, however, the
intercalation of pelagic stages occurred many times independently then one might consider how elements of the
juvenile/adult musculature and nervous system have
been co-opted or embellished to serve in mechanic and
sensory roles in planktonic larvae.
Spiralian larval ciliary bands and apical sensory organs

Neither spiral cleavage nor planktonic life stages are
found universally amongst the Platyhelminthes or the
Spiralia. Yet, it has been proposed that the trochophore
larva represents the ancestral feeding larva of the Spiralia
and possibly of the protostomes [50-53]. The name trochophore has been used in a fairly wide sense and has
been redefined by Rouse [54] to include larval forms that
have a prototroch originating from trochoblasts, an apical
plate (and usually an apical tuft) and a pair of protonephridia. According to Rouse [54] the taxa that have a
trochophore are the Annelida, Echiura, Entoprocta, Mollusca, and Sipuncula. Nielsen [13] added the Nemerteans
and Platyhelminthes to this list. In accordance with
Rouse's [54] definition, the polyclad larva could come
under the term trochophore, and there is a long history
defending a phylogenetic link between polyclad and trochophore larvae [10,13,22,53,55-58]. However, Elher's
[59] platyhelminth phylogeny and recent molecular studies [[4-6], see [16]] have established a new framework for
interpreting the distribution of larval forms within Platyhelminthes and the broader Spiralia. As polyclads are the
only free-living Platyhelminth lineage to have planktonic
larval forms, the likelihood of planktonic larvae being a
primitive feature of this clade is low. Indeed, the primitive
life history condition for polyclads remains unclear, due

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

to the patchy distribution of larval characters within the
group. Furthermore, the platyhelminths, themselves, are
nested within a clade whose members do not universally
exhibit planktonic larval stages. As such, it seems unparsimonious to suggest that the ciliary band and apical plate
of polyclad larvae are homologous with those of other
spiralian larvae. Nevertheless arguments of homology of
larval traits have arisen due to morphological similarities
in larval features, and from assumptions that the convergent evolution of these features is highly unlikely. The
developmental data presented here from Martigrella crozieri enables a more detailed comparison of the ciliation,
myo- and neurogenesis associated with the ciliary band
and apical organ amongst spiralian larvae.
The prototroch is defined as a ring of (usually compound) cilia on multiciliate cells that is derived from trochoblasts, which exhibit a constant cell lineage and
pattern of organisation [54,56,60,61]. In trochophore larvae, the prototroch is a pre-oral band of ciliary cells that
function as the principal locomotory cilial band and as a
motor generating a feeding current towards the mouth.
In Maritigrella crozieri larvae the pre-oral ciliary band
serves the same functions and homology of the polyclad
ciliary band with the prototroch of other spiralian larvae
has been proposed based on shared spiral cleavage [10],
positional similarities [22], and the position of the cilial
band cells along the borderline of first and second quartet
micromere derivatives [[13] based on the interpretation
of cell lineage data of [62]]. However, convergent evolution is suggested by Ax [1] and Jenner [63] based on the
phylogenetic distribution of larval forms and characters.
Rouse [54] suggests that a prototroch is absent in Platyhelminthes, based on the statement by van den Biggelaar
et al. [64,65] that polyclad larvae are uniformly ciliated
and do not posses a discrete ciliary band.
Data from Maritigrella crozieri reveal a number of similarities and differences between these ciliary bands and
the associated muscles and nerves. Contrary to the findings of van den Biggelaar et al. [64,65] a single pre-oral
band of cells with long cilia is present in M. crozieri (and
in all other polyclad larvae examined by the author,
unpub data). It develops following gastrulation and ciliation of the epidermis, and prior to the development of the
apical or caudal cilia. The prototroch is also the first ciliary feature to appear in the trochophore larvae of some
polychaetes [66,67] and mollusks [60]. There are two
rows of cilia on the peri-oral lobes in M. crozieri ie. the
oral hood and both ventro-lateral lobes. Two rows of cilia
are also present in the prototroch of the trochophore of
the polychaete Pomatoceros lamarckii [66].
Differences between the musculature and innervation
of the ciliary band of M. crozieri larvae and the prototrochs of various spiralian larvae are noted. M. crozieri

Page 20 of 25

lacks a distinct prototroch muscle directly beneath the
ciliated prototrochal cells. Prototroch muscle rings of this
nature are found in some mollusk and annelid larvae but
are lost at metamorphosis [17,66,68]. These muscle rings
are lacking in some taxa with a very short larval phase
such as the Scaphopod, Antalis entalis (metamorphic
competence reached 94 hours postfertilisation)[69] and
the Sipuncula, Phascolion strombus (metamorphic competence 72 hpf )[70]. In M. crozieri the ciliary band cells
form a convoluted continuous band around the eight larval lobes, multiple longitudinal and circular body wall
muscles are involved in the movement and orientation of
the band during the comparatively long planktonic phase.
As these muscles are part of the orthogonal grid of body
wall musculature, it seems unlikely that they are truly larval muscles and probably become part of the juvenile
musculature.
The serotonin immunoreactivity, in the form of a dense
nerve net between the ciliated cells of the ciliary band
and the muscles of the lobes of M. crozieri, bares more
resemblance to the extensive nerve net in polyplacophoran [71] and ectoproct larvae [72] than to the distinct
serotonin-labelled axons of the prototroch nerve rings of
the larvae of some polychaetes [66], bivalves [73] and gastropod mollusks [74]. In early Platynereis dumerilii trochophores, ciliary band beating and phototactic
movement is under the control of larval photoreceptors
that are in direct contact with the prototroch; the two larval photoreceptors work as sensory-motor neurons [43].
In M. crozieri larvae there is no direct coupling of light
sensing and ciliary motor control as the eyespots are not
located near the ciliary band. Instead neurons from the
eyes are centralized through the brain and integrated
neuronal processes probably coordinate ciliary band
beating and the activity of longitudinal, circular and diagonal muscles to steer the larvae. Sensory and motor
nerves may already have differentiated before hatching in
M. crozieri. Future investigations at the molecular level
will help determine whether there are similar developmental mechanisms involved in ciliary band morphogenesis between larvae of different taxa, and the early
appearance of the ciliary band in polyclad embryos may
serve as a reference for embryonic gene expression patterns.
Many marine protostome larvae have an apical cluster
of neurons positioned below an apical cilium or patch of
cilia. Neurons within this apical ganglion are among the
first cells to express a neuronal phenotype during
embryogenesis [75-78], and it has been suggested that
these cells induce the development of the cerebral system
[79,80]. During the pelagic stage of the life-history it is
generally considered that this apical ganglion functions in
a sensorimotor capacity to transduce environmental

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

stimuli into motor signals that modulate muscular and
ciliary activities of the larva [74], eventually triggering
larval settlement and metamorphosis [81,82].
It is becoming evident that many neurotransmittors are
expressed in these apical neurons [43,83]. However, due
to the commonly available antibody to serotonin and its
conservation across the Metazoa [41], this neurotransmittor and its spatial and temporal distribution in embryonic and larval nerves has received most attention to
date. Apical clusters of serotonin expressing larval neurons have been called a variety of names including 'apical
sensory organ', 'cephalic sensory organ', apical disc', 'apical organ' and 'apical ganglion' and they have been
described from species in the following spiralian clades:
Mollusca [42,71,74-76,80,84,85], Annelida [66,86,87]
Sipuncula [88], Phoronida [89,90], Bryozoa [91], Brachiopoda [83], Entoprocta [72].
There is great diversity in shape, number and immunoreactivity of the apical ganglion neurons amongst spiralian larvae, even within phyla, with apical ganglia missing
all together in Echiura [92,93], the coronate larvae of a
bryozoan [[38], although see [91]] and the choroid larva
of Cycliophora [94]. Some of these serotonergic epithelial
cells have neck-like apical projections giving them a flaskshape, as seen in many mollusk taxa [71,73,74,80,84], an
entoproct [72]), and a polychaete [87]. However, other
polychaetes [66,86], bryozoans [91] and phoronids [90]
do not show such cell morphology. Wanninger [18,27]
considers the plesiomorphic condition for spiralians to be
a simple apical organ with about four serotonergic flaskshaped cells.
Phylogenetic homologies of the apical ganglion are difficult and need to be based on comparable developmental
stages. Results on the ontogeny of the serotonergic nervous system in a M. crozieri show that, at hatching, a simple apical plate consists of a small ring of serotoninpositive epidermal cells under the ciliary ring surrounding the apical cilium (Fig. 4E). Therefore the intra-epidermal, flask-shaped serotonergic cells of the larval apical
organ, considered plesiomorphic for the spiralians
[18,27], are not found in the hatchling stage of M. crozieri.
However, in order to ascertain that these apical organ
cells are not found at different developmental stages a
couple of further investigations are necessary. Firstly, in
M. crozieri the embryonic transient ring of epidermal,
serotonin-expressing cells between the cerebral eyes (Fig.
8D & 10C) shows similar positioning to the ring of flaskshaped cells of the larvae of a polyplacophoran [71] and
an entoproct [72]. The close proximity of this ring of cells
to the developing cerebral commissures and associated
neuronal cell bodies would suggest a role in larval brain
development, as has been proposed for Molluscs [80]. If
this is the case, it could be hypothesized that the polyclad
equivalent of the apical organ flask-shaped serotonergic

Page 21 of 25

cells is an embryonic feature and that the cerebral system
is already established before the larval phase. Secondly, it
is necessary to determine whether serotonergic flaskshaped cells develop in M. crozieri near time of settlement, as these cells are thought to function in chemosensory detection of metamorphic cues in the veliger of
the gastropod Phestilla sibogae [95].
In the early Maritigrella crozieri larva the serotonin
expressing cells in the apical plate and their connection to
the neuropil are simple compared to the elaborate apical
organs of many other spiralians, which may include apically derived structures as well as lateral ganglionic components. Whether the morphologically simple apical
plate of polyclads is a primitive condition and complex
apical organs have convergently evolved multiple times in
separate lineages remains to be tested.
While this study has highlighted several gross morphological similarities and differences between the ciliary
bands and apical organ across taxa, the current data does
not allow the non-arbitrary distinction between parallelism, convergence and homology. A more robust phylogenetic analysis would allow better distinction between
homology and parallelism, while more developmental
data would help distinguish between convergence and
parallelism [96]. Considering the patchy distribution of
the ciliary band/prototroch and apical organ across the
Spiralia, three scenarios of organ-level evolution can be
considered.
1) Morphological homology - with the ciliary band
and an apical organ being present in the pelagic stage
of last common ancestor, with repetitive loss in multiple lineages explaining the unparsimonious distribution on the tree.
2) Morphological similarity because of parallelism.
The developmental mechanisms to make the ciliary
band and apical organ in the last common ancestor of
Spiralia were recruited convergently in taxa with
these features.
3) Complete convergence of ciliary bands and apical
organs as similar adaptations to external conditions.
Independently evolved features with different developmental mechanisms.
Scenario 1 is accepted by some [13,27] although, based
on current spiralian and platyhelminthe phylogenies, the
distribution of ciliary bands (and possibly apical organs)
is not congruent with a hypothesis of homology. In order
to differentiate between scenarios 2 and 3 developmental
similarities can be investigated by searching for common
gene expressions and by examining the regulation of
these genes to assess whether the regulatory linkages are
convergent or developmentally similar. This study has
provided the anatomical framework upon which to test
these scenarios.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

Conclusion
Compared to many spiralian taxa with biphasic lifecycles
polyclad species with pelagic stages hatch with welldeveloped muscle and nervous systems. This study gives
a further example of myogenesis and the myoanatomy of
an indirect developing polyclad species and shows that
the patterns of muscle development are similar between
species with different modes of development and that differences in the timing of development of diagonal bodywall muscles and pharyngeal muscles correlate with
length of pelagic stage and feeding strategies. The data
also suggest that in Maritigrella crozieri, and other species with biphasic life cycles, that significant myogenesis
continues over the pelagic stage, that these and muscles
developed during embryogenesis are likely to persist in
the adult bodyplan and that settlement to the benthos
probably does not involve major rearrangement of bodywall muscles. These observations have bearings on the
evolution of the biphasic life cycle and suggest that the
intercalation of a pelagic stage may only require the
development of a ciliary band and the lobes on which it
sits.
Data on the development of the nervous system in
Maritigrella crozieri show that at hatching the larva has
developed sensory apparatus in the form of an apical cilium and apical plate, three pigmented photoreceptors,
many putative ciliary photoreceptors (intra-epidermal
cells) and a caudal cilium. These are integrated into a centralized nervous system through a simple neuropile and
the paired nerve cords, which connect to the body wall
musculature and ciliary band. This first study detailing
the distribution of the neurotransmittors serotonin and
FMRFamide, and demonstrating the position of neural
elements relative to the musculature, provides the basis
on which to examine the diversification of polyclad and
spiralian larval body plans.
Comparisons of the ontogeny, musculature and neural
system of the ciliary band in Maritigrella crozieri with the
prototroch in other spiralian taxa reveal morphological
similarities and differences, providing evidence for and
against the homology of these structures. The many
underlying morphological differences and the current
distribution of ciliary bands/prototrochs across the platyhelminthe and spiralian phylogenies assumes that the
covergent evolution of the polyclad ciliary band is most
parsimonious.
Methods
Animal collection and culture

Maritigrella crozieri adults were collected from Zane
Grey Creek on Long Key and from No Name Key in the
Florida Keys, U.S.A. from August 2008 to February 2009.
They were kept in seawater tanks and fed the ascidian

Page 22 of 25

Ecteinascidia turbinata (Herdman 1880). In order to
carry out phalloidin staining, immunohistochemistry and
nuclear staining on the developing embryos it was necessary to obtain eggs lacking the impermeable egg-shell
membrane. This was achieved using the technique of
Boyer [97], whereby the uteri of gravid adults were
pierced with a sharpened tungsten needle to release
mature, fertilized eggs. Naked embryos were raised in
penicillin-streptomycin (100 μg/ml penicillin; 200 μg/ml
streptomycin) Millipore filtered seawater in gelatin
coated Petri dishes at room temperature (22°C), with
daily water changes.
Sampling and fixation

Embryos were collected at approximately 5 hours intervals. Embryos were fixed for 1 hour at room temperature
in 4% formaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffered saline
(PBS), pH = 7.6. Embryos were rinsed in PBS for 1 h at
room temperature. Embryos for phalloidin and nuclear
staining were stored in PBS and 0.1% sodium azide at 4°C.
Embryos for immunohistochemistry were dehydrated
and stored in Methanol at -20°C.
Phalloidin staining and immunohistochemistry

To visualize filamentous actin, embryos were washed 3 ×
15 min with 0.1 M PBS, permeabilised for 1 h in PBS and
0.1% Triton x-100 (PBST), and incubated in Alexa 488 or
543 phalloidin 1:500 (Molecular Probes) for 1 h at room
temperature. Embryos were washed in PBST for 1 h. Blastula and gastrula stage embryos were then counterstained with the nuclear stain Sytox Green (Invitrogen)(0.1 uM Sytox Green for 30 min in the dark, rinsed
for 1 h in PBST).
To visualize neurogenesis and development of cilia,
three primary antibodies were used; anti-serotonin
(immunostar) and anti-FMRFamide (immunostar), which
label the cytoplasm of a subset of central nervous system
neurons (cell body and axonal processes), and anti-acetylated tubulin (Sigma), which labels the stabilized microtubules of neurons and ciliated cells. From methanol,
embryos were rinsed three times in PBS followed by 4 ×
20 min washes in PBST and then placed in Image-iT™ FX
Signal Enhancer (Molecular Probes) for 1 h to minimize
non-specific staining. Specimens were rinsed in PBST for
1 h and incubated in primary antibodies (anti-rabbit
FMRFamide diluted 1:500, anti-rabbit Serotonin diluted
1:500, or anti-mouse Acetylated Tubulin diluted 1:500)
for 18 h at 4°C. All antibodies were diluted with PBST.
Specimens were then rinsed 4 × 30 min in PBST and
transferred to goat anti-rabbit Alexa-Fluor 488 or goat
anti-mouse Alexa-Fluor 488 (Molecular Probes), as
appropriate (diluted 1:200 in PBT). Specimens were incubated in secondary antibody for 18 h at 4°C and then
rinsed in PBST for 12 h. Negative controls were obtained

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

at each developmental stage by omitting the primary
antibody and no fluorescence signal was detected.

Page 23 of 25

4.

Microscopy and image processing

Immunostained embryos were dehydrated (30%, 50%,
70%, 95% and 100% isopropanol), cleared with Murray's
reagent (2:1 benzyl benzoate: benzyl alcohol) and
mounted in Permount (Fisher). Phalloidin stained
embryos/larvae were mounted in Vectashield antifade
mounting medium (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame,
CA). 10 or more embryos per development stage were
imaged using a Zeiss LSM 510 confocal laser scanning
microscope. Digital images were assembled in Adobe
Photoshop CS.

Additional material

5.

6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Additional file 1 Figure S1 - CLSM micrographs showing musculature
and serotonergic nervous system of polyclad pelagic stages. (phalloidin - white, 5HT - magenta). (A) 10 day post hatching Maritigrella crozieri
larva, dorsal view, showing development of diagonal body wall muscles
above the dorsal lobe and the dorsal diagonal arc (arrow heads). (B) 2 day
post hatching M. crozieri larvae showing two rows of cilia on the ciliary band
of the peri-oral lobes (arrowheads) and one row on the lateral and dorsolateral lobes (double arrowhead). (C) Right lateral view of 2 day post hatching M. crozieri larvae showing extensive synaptic serotonin expression
between receptors of the ciliary band cells, axons and musculature of lobes
(cb - ciliary band, ap - apical plate). (D) Unidentified 8-lobed polyclad larvae
showing later-stage larval muscle development including development of
ventral sucker (vs) muscles and further development of mouth (m) and
pharyngeal (ph) muscles. Scale bars: A-C 50 μm, D 100 μm.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Competing interests
The author declares that they have no competing interests.

17.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Smithsonian Marine Science Network Postdoctoral Fellowship and was carried out at the Smithsonian Marine Station in Fort
Pierce, Florida.
I wish to thank Mary Rice, Val Paul, Julie Piraino and all staff at SMS for their help
and encouragement, and the friends of SMS for contributing to the new Zeiss
LSM 510 confocal microscope. I wish to thank Andrew Gillis for help with animal collection and Max Telford for interesting discussion. Finally, I wish to thank
two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. Smithsonian Marine Station
at Fort Pierce Contribution number 815.

18.

Author Details
1Smithsonian Marine Station, 701 Seaway Drive, Fort Pierce, Florida, 34949 USA
and 2Current address: Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK

21.

Received: 14 December 2009 Accepted: 28 April 2010
Published: 28 April 2010

19.

20.

22.

23.

© 2010 Rawlinson; licensee http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12
This is anin is available from:BioMed Central Ltd. the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Frontiers Open Access article distributed under
article Zoology 2010, 7:12

References
1. Ax P: The position of the Gnathostomulida and Platyhelminthes in the
phylogenetic system of the Bilateria. In The origins and relationships of
lower invertebrates Edited by: Conway Morris S, George JD, Gibson R, Platt
HM. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1985:168-180.
2. Larsson K, Jondelius U: Phylogeny of Catenulida and support for
Platyhelminthes. Orgs Divers Evol 2008, 8:378-387.
3. Giribet G, Dunn CW, Edgecombe GD, Hejnol A, Martindale MQ, Rouse GW:
Assembling the spiralian tree of life. In Animal Evolution: genomes, fossils
and trees Edited by: Telford MJ, Littlewood DTJ. Oxford University Press;
2009:52-64.

24.
25.
26.

27.

Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, Sorensen MV, Haddock SHD,
Schmidt-Rhaesa A, Okusu A, Mobjerg Kristensen R, Wheeler WC,
Martindale MQ, Giribet G: Broad phylogenomic sampling improves
resolution of the animal tree of life. Nature 2008, 452:745-749.
Paps J, Baguna J, Riutort M: Lophotrochozoa internal phylogeny: new
insights from an up-to-date analysis of nuclear ribosomal genes. Proc R
Soc Lond Ser B-Biol Sci 2009, 276:1245-1254.
Hejnol A, Obst M, Stamatakis A, Ott M, Rouse GW, Edgecombe GD,
Martinez P, Baguñà J, Bailly X, Jondelius U, Wiens M, Werner E, Müller G,
Seaver E, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G, Dunn CW: Assessing the
root of bilaterian animals with scalable phylogenomic methods. Proc R
Soc Lond Ser B-Biol Sci 2009. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2009
Sly BJ, Snoke MS, Raff RA: Who came first - larvae or adults? Origins of
bilaterian metazoan larvae. Int J Dev Biol 2003, 47:623-632.
Arendt D, Technau U, Wittbrodt J: Evolution of the bilaterian larval
foregut. Nature 2001, 409:81-85.
Kato K: On the development of some Japanese polyclads. Jpn J Zool
1940, 8:537-573.
Jägersten G: Evolution of the metazoan life cycle. A comprehensive theory
London: Academic Press; 1972.
Rooney LM, Boyer BC: New aspects of development of the polyclad,
Hoploplana inquilina. Biol Bull 1984, 167:519-520.
Smith NF, Johnson KB, Young C: Phylum Platyhelminthes. In Atlas of
marine invertebrate larvae Edited by: Young CM, Sewell MA, Rice ME. San
Diego: Academic Press; 2002:123-148.
Nielsen C: Trochophora larvae: cell lineages, ciliary bands and body
regions.2. Other groups and general discussion. J Exp Zool Part B 2005,
304B:401-47.
Littlewood DTJ, Rohde K, Clough KA: The inter-relationships of all major
groups of Platyhelminthes: phylogenetic evidence from morphology
and molecules. Biol J Linn Soc 1999, 66:75-114.
Lockyer AE, Olson PD, Littlewood DTJ: Utility of complete large and small
subunit rRNA genes in resolving the phylogeny of the Neodermata
(Platyhelminthes): implications and a review of the cercomer theory.
Biol J Linn Soc 2003, 78:155-171.
Baguñà J, Riutort M: Molecular phylogeny of the Platyhelminthes. Can J
Zool 2004, 82:168-193.
Wanninger A, Haszprunar G: Chiton myogenesis: Perspectives for the
development and evolution of larval and adult muscle systems in
mollusks. J Morphol 2002, 251:103-113.
Wanninger A: Comparative lophotrochozoan neurogenesis and larval
neuroanatomy: recent advances from previously neglected taxa. Acta
Biol Hung 2008, 59:127-136.
Rieter D, Boyer BC, Ladurner P, Mair G, Salvenmoser W, Rieger R:
Differentiation of the body wall musculature in Macrostomum
hystricinum and Hoploplana inquilina (Platyhelminthes), as models for
muscle development in lower Spiralia. Roux's Arch Dev Biol 1996,
205:410-423.
Bolaños DM, Litvatis M: Embryonic muscle development in direct and
indirect developing marine flatworms (Platyhelminthes, Polycladida).
Evol Dev 2009, 11:290-301.
Younossi-Hartenstein A, Hartenstein V: The embryonic development of
the polyclad flatworm Imogine mcgrathi. Dev Genes Evol 2000,
210:383-398.
Ruppert EE: A review of metamorphosis of turbellarian larvae. In
Settlement and metamorphosis of marine invertebrate larvae Edited by: Chia
F-S, Rice ME. New York: Elsevier; 1978:65-81.
Lacalli TC: The nervous system and ciliary band of Müller's larva. Proc R
Soc Lond Ser B-Biol Sci 1982, 217:37-58.
Lacalli TC: The brain and central nervous system of Müller's larva. Can J
Zool 1983, 61:39-51.
Surface FM: The early development of a polyclad, Planocera inquilina
Wh. Proc Acad Natl Sci Phil 1907, 59:514-559.
Scarpa J, Weis B, Ruppert E, Frick J, Ford A, Wright A: Direct evidence of
planktotrophy in Muller's larva of the tiger flatworm Pseudoceros
crozieri [abstract]. Am Zool 1996, 36(5):107.
Wanninger A: Shaping the things to come: Ontogeny of
Lophotrochozoan Neuromuscular Systems and the Tetraneuralia
concept. Biol Bull 2009, 216:293-306.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

28. Morris J, Nallur R, Ladurner P, Egger B, Rieger R, Hartenstein V: The
embryonic development of the flatworm Macrostomum sp. Dev Genes
Evol 2004, 214(5):220-239.
29. Reisinger E, Cichocki I, Erlach R, Szyskowitz T: Ontogenetische Studien an
Turbellarien: ein Beitrag zur Evolution der Dotterverarbeitung im
ektolecitalen. Ei. Zeitschrtft fur zoologisches Systematik und Evolutionsforschung 1974, 12:161-195. 241-278
30. Tyler S, Hooge M: Comparative morphology of the body wall of
flatworms (Platyhelminthes). Can J Zool 2004, 82:194-210.
31. Gruber SA, Ewer DW: Observations on the myo-neural physiology of the
polyclad, Planocera gilchristi. J Exp Biol 1962, 39:459-477.
32. MacRae EK: The fine structure of muscle in a marine turbellarian. Cell
and Tissue Research 1965, 68:348-362.
33. Chien P, Koopowitz H: The ultrastructure of neuromuscular systems in
Notoplana acticola, a free-living polyclad flatworm. Cell and Tissue
Research 1972, 133:277-288.
34. Pedersen KJ: The organization of the connective tissue of Discocelides
langi, (Turbellaria, polycladida). Cell and Tissue Research 1966, 71:94-117.
35. Johnson KB, Forward RB: Larval photoresponses of the polyclad
flatworm Maritigrella crozieri (Platyhelminthes, Polycladida) (Hyman). J
Exp Mar Biol Ecol 2003, 282:103-112.
36. Lang A: Die Polycladen (Seeplanarien) des Golfes von Neapel. Fauna
Flora Golfes Neapel 1884, 11:1-688. Pls. 1-39
37. Norenburg JL, Stricker SA: Phylum Nemertea. In Atlas of marine
invertebrate larvae Edited by: Young CM, Sewell MA, Rice ME. San Diego:
Academic Press; 2002:163-177.
38. Wanninger A, Koop D, Degnan BM: Immunocytochemistry and
metamorphic fae of the larval nervous system of Triphyllozoon
mucronatum (Ectoprocta: Gymnolaemata: Cheilostomata).
Zoomorphology 2005, 124:161-170.
39. Rieger RM, Salvenmoser W, Legniti A, Tyler S: Phalloidin-rhodamine
preparations of Macrostomum hystricinum marinum (Plathelminthes):
morphology and postembryonic development of the musculature.
Zoomorphology 1994, 114:133-147.
40. Lacalli TC: The suboral complex in the Müller's larva of Pseudoceros
canadensis (Platyhelminthes, Polycladida). Can J Zool 1988,
66:1893-1895.
41. Hay-Schmidt A: The Evolution of the Serotonergic Nervous System.
Proc R Soc Lond Ser B-Biol Sci 2000, 267:1071-1079.
42. Croll RP: Development of embryonic and larval cells containing
serotonin, catecholamines, and FMRFamide-related peptides in the
gastropod mollusc Phestilla sibogae. Biol Bull 2006, 211:232-247.
43. Jékely G, Colombelli J, Hausen H, Guy K, Stelzer E, Nédélec F, Arendt D:
Mechanism of phototaxis in marine zooplankton. Nature 2008,
456:395-400.
44. Rawlinson KA, Bolaños DM, Liana MK, Litvaitis MK: Reproduction,
Development and Parental Care of two direct developing flatworms
(Platyhelminthes: Polycladida: Acotylea). J Nat Hist 2008, 42:173-2192.
45. Sopott-Ehlers Sopott-Ehlers B, Salvenmoser Willi, Reiter Dietmar, Rieger
Reinhard, Ehlers Ulrich: Photoreceptors in species of the Macrostomida
(Plathelminthes): ultrastructural findings and phylogenetic
implications. Zoomorphology 2001, 121(1):1-12.
46. Arendt D, Tessmar-Raible K, Snyman H, Dorresteijn AW, Wittbrodt J: Ciliary
photoreceptors with a vertebrate-type opsin in an invertebrate brain.
Science 2004, 306(5697):869-871.
47. Page L, Kempf SC: Larval apical sensory organ in a neritimorph
gastropod, an ancient gastropod lineage with feeding larvae.
Zoomorphology 2009, 128:327-338.
48. Cronin TW: Photoreception in Marine Invertebrates. Am Zool 1986,
26:403-415.
49. Koopowitz H: On the evolution of central nervous systems: Implications
from polyclad turbellarian neurobiology. Hydrobiologia 1986,
132:79-87.
50. Nielsen C, Nørrevang A: The trochaea theory: an example of life cycle
evolution. In The origins and relationships of lower invertebrates Edited by:
Conway Morris S, George JD, Gibson R, Platt HM. Oxford: Clarendon Press;
1985:28-41.
51. Nielsen C: Origin and evolution of animal life cycles. Biol Rev 1998,
73:125-155.
52. Nielsen C: The phylogenetic position of Entoprocta and Ectoprocta.
Proceedings of the 11th International Bryozoology Association Conference:
2002; Balboa: Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute 2000:66-73.

Page 24 of 25

53. Nielsen C: Animal evolution. Interrelationships of the living phyla Oxford
University Press; 2001.
54. Rouse GW: Trochophore concepts: ciliary bands and the evolution of
larvae in spiralian Metazoa. Biol J Linn Soc 1999, 66:411-464.
55. Lacalli TC: Structure and organization of the nervous system in the
trochophore larva of Spirobranchus. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 1984,
306:79-135.
56. Nielsen C: Animal evolution. Interrelationships of the living phyla Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 1995.
57. Peterson KJ, Cameron RA, Davidson EH: Bilaterian origins: significance of
new experimental observations. Dev Biol 2000, 219:1-17.
58. Telford MJ: Embryology and developmental genes as clues to
platyhelminth relationships. In Interrelationships of the Platyhelminthes
Volume Ch 24. Edited by: Littlewood DTJ, Bray RA. Taylor and Francis
London; 2001.
59. Ehlers U: Das phylogenetische System der Plathelminthes Stuttgart: Verlag;
1985.
60. Damen P, Dictus WJAG: Cell lineage of the prototroch of Patella vulgata
(Gastropoda, Mollusca). Dev Biol 1994, 162:364-383.
61. Mead AD: The cell origin of the prototroch. Biological Lectures, Marine
Biological Laboratoy, Woods Hole 1899, 1898:113-138.
62. Boyer BC, Henry JQ, Martindale MQ: Dual Origins of Mesoderm in a Basal
Spiralian: Cell Lineage Analyses in the Polyclad Turbellarian Hoploplana
inquilina. Dev Biol 1996, 179:329-338.
63. Jenner R: Towards a phylogeny of the Metazoa: evaluating alternative
phylogenetic positions of Platyhelminthes, Nemertea, and
Gnathostomulida, with a critical reappraisal of cladistic characters.
Contributions in Zoology 2004, 73:3-163.
64. Biggelaar JAM van den, van Loon AE, Damen WGM: Mesentoblast and
trochoblast specification in species with spiral cleavage predict their
phyletic relations. Nether J Zool 1996, 46:8-21.
65. Biggelaar JAM van den, Dictus WJAG, van Loon AE: Cleavage patterns,
cell-lineages and cell specification are clues to phyletic lineages in
Spiralia. Semin Cell & Devel Biol 1997, 8:367-378.
66. McDougall C, Chen WC, Shimeld S, Ferrier DEK: The development of the
larval nervous system, musculature and ciliary band of Pomatoceros
lamarckii (Annelida): heterochrony in polychaetes. Front in Zool 2006,
3:16.
67. Arenas-Mena C, Wong KS-Y, Arandi N: Ciliary band gene expression
patterns in the embryo and trochophore larva of an indirectly
developing polychaete. Mechanisms of Development: Gene Expression
Patterns 2007, 7:544-549.
68. Wanninger A, Ruthensteiner B, Lobenwein S, Salvenmoser W, Dictus
WJAG, Haszprunar G: Development of the musculature in the limpet
Patella (Mollusca, Patellogastropoda). Dev Genes Evol 1999, 209:226-238.
69. Wanninger A, Haszprunar G: Muscle development in Antalis entalis
(Mollusca, Scaphopoda) and its significance for scaphopod
relationships. J Morphol 2002, 254:53-64.
70. Wanninger A, Koop D, Bromham L, Noonan E, Degnan BM: Nervous and
muscle system development in Phascolion strombus (Sipuncula). Dev
Genes Evol 2005, 215:509-518.
71. Friedrich S, Wanninger A, Brückner M, Haszprunar G: Neurogenesis in the
Mossy Chiton, Mopalia muscosa (Gould)(Polyplacophora): evidence
against molluscan metamerism. J Morphol 2002, 253:109-117.
72. Wanninger A, Fuchs J, Haszprunar G: The anatomy of the serotonergic
nervous system of an entoproct creeping-type larva and its
phylogenetic implications. Invertebr Biol 2007, 126:268-278.
73. Croll RP, Jackson DL, Voronezhskaya EE: Catecholamine-containing cells
in larval and post-larval bivalve molluscs. Biol Bull 1997, 193:116-124.
74. Page LR, Paries SC: Comparative study of the apical ganglion in
planktotrophic caenogastropod larvae: ultrastructure and
immunoreactivity to serotonin. J Comp Neurol 2000, 418:383-401.
75. Kempf SC, Page LR, Pires A: Development of serotonin-like
immunoreactivity in the embryos and larvae of nudibranch mollusks
with emphasis on the structure and possible function of the apical
sensory organ. J Comp Neurol 1997, 386:507-528.
76. Marois R, Carew TJ: Ontogeny of serotonergic neurons in Aplysia
californica. J Comp Neurol 1997, 386:477-490.
77. Dickinson AJG, Nason J, Croll RP: Histochemical localization of
FMRFamide, serotonin and catecholamine in embryonic Crepidula
fornicata (Prosobranchia: Gastropoda). Zoomorphology 1999, 119:49-62.

Rawlinson Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/12

78. Dickinson AJG, Croll RP: Development of the larval nervous system of
the gastropod Ilyanassa obsoleta. J Comp Neurol 2003, 466:187-218.
79. Salvini-Plawen LV: What is convergent/homoplastic in Pogonophora? J
Zool Syst Evol Res 2000, 38:133-147.
80. Wanninger A, Haszprunar G: The development of the serotonergic and
FMRF-amidergic nervous system in Antalis entalis (Mollusca,
Scaphopoda). Zoomorphology 2003, 122:77-85.
81. Hadfield MG, Meleshkevitch EA, Boudko DY: The apical sensory organ of
a gastropod veliger is a receptor for settlement cues. Biol Bull 2000,
198:67-76.
82. Leise EM, Thavaradhara K, Durham NR, Turner BE: Serotonin and nitric
oxide regulate metamorphosis in the marine snail Ilyanassa obsoleta.
Am Zool 2001, 41:258-267.
83. Hay-Schmidt A: Ultrastructure and immunocytochemistry of the
nervous system of the larvae of Lingula anatina and Glottidia sp.
(Brachiopoda). Zoomorphology 1992, 112:189-205.
84. Voronezhskaya EE, Tyurin SA, Nezlin LP: Neuronal development in larval
chiton Ischnochiton hakodadensis (Mollusca: Polyplacophora). J Comp
Neurol 2002, 444:25-38.
85. Voronezhskaya EE, Nezlin LP, Odintsova NA, Plummer JT, Croll RP:
Neuronal development in larval mussel Mytilus trossulus (Mollusca:
Bivalvia). Zoomorphology 2008, 127:97-110.
86. Brinkmann N, Wanninger A: Larval neurogenesis in Sabellaria alveolata
reveals plasticity in polychaete neural patterning. Evol Dev 2008,
10:606-618.
87. Voronezhskaya EE, Tsitrin EB, Nezlin LP: Neuronal development in larval
polychaete Phyllodoce maculata (Phyllodicidae). J Comp Neurol 2003,
455:299-309.
88. Kristof A, Wollesen T, Wanninger A: Segmental mode of neural
patterning in Sipuncula. Curr Biol 2008, 18:1129-1132.
89. Santagata S: Structure and metamorphic remodeling of the larval
nervous system and musculature of Phoronis pallida (Phoronida). Evo
Dev 2002, 4:28-42.
90. Santagata S, Zimmer RL: Comparison of the neuromuscular systems
among actinotroch larvae: systematic and evolutionary implications.
Evol Dev 2002, 4:43-45.
91. Santagata S: Evolutionary and structural diversification of the larval
nervous system among marine bryozoans. Biol Bull 2008, 215:3-23.
92. Hessling R, Westheide W: Are Echiura derived from a segmented
ancestor? Immunocytochemical analysis of the nervous system in
developmental stages of Bonellia viridis. J Morphol 2002, 252:100-113.
93. Hessling R: Novel aspects of the nervous system of Bonellia viridis
(Echiura) revealed by the combination of immunohistochemistry,
confocal laser-scanning microscopy and three-dimensional
reconstruction. Hydrobiologia 2003, 496:225-239.
94. Wanninger A: Immunohistochemistry of the nervous system and the
musculature of the choroids larva of Symbion Pandora (Cycliophora). J
Morphol 2005, 265:237-243.
95. Hadfield MG, Meleshkvitch EA, Boudko DY: The apical sensory organ of a
gastropod is a receptor for settlement cues. Biol Bull 2000, 198:67-76.
96. Hall BK: Descent with modification: the unity underlying homology and
homoplasy as seen through an analysis of development and evolution.
Biol Rev 2003, 78:409-433.
97. Boyer B: Development of in vitro fertilized embryos of the polyclad
flatworm, Hoploplana inquilina, following blastomere separation and
deletion. Dev Genes Evol 1987, 196:158-164.
doi: 10.1186/1742-9994-7-12
Cite this article as: Rawlinson, Embryonic and post-embryonic development of the polyclad flatworm Maritigrella crozieri; implications for the evolution of spiralian life history traits Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:12

Page 25 of 25

</pre>
</body>
</html>
