<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Ancestral and derived attributes of the dlx gene repertoire, cluster structure and expression patterns in an African cichlid fish</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2011, 2:1. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-1"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Adina J Renz"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

RESEARCH

Open Access

Ancestral and derived attributes of the dlx gene
repertoire, cluster structure and expression
patterns in an African cichlid fish
Adina J Renz1, Helen M Gunter1,2, Jan MF Fischer1, Huan Qiu1,3, Axel Meyer1, Shigehiro Kuraku1*

Abstract
Background: Cichlid fishes have undergone rapid, expansive evolutionary radiations that are manifested in the
diversification of their trophic morphologies, tooth patterning and coloration. Understanding the molecular
mechanisms that underlie the cichlids’ unique patterns of evolution requires a thorough examination of genes that
pattern the neural crest, from which these diverse phenotypes are derived. Among those genes, the homeoboxcontaining Dlx gene family is of particular interest since it is involved in the patterning of the brain, jaws and teeth.
Results: In this study, we characterized the dlx genes of an African cichlid fish, Astatotilapia burtoni, to provide a
baseline to later allow cross-species comparison within Cichlidae. We identified seven dlx paralogs (dlx1a, -2a, -4a,
-3b, -4b, -5a and -6a), whose orthologies were validated with molecular phylogenetic trees. The intergenic regions
of three dlx gene clusters (dlx1a-2a, dlx3b-4b, and dlx5a-6a) were amplified with long PCR. Intensive cross-species
comparison revealed a number of conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) that are shared with other percomorph
fishes. This analysis highlighted additional lineage-specific gains/losses of CNEs in different teleost fish lineages and
a novel CNE that had previously not been identified. Our gene expression analyses revealed overlapping but
distinct expression of dlx orthologs in the developing brain and pharyngeal arches. Notably, four of the seven
A. burtoni dlx genes, dlx2a, dlx3b, dlx4a and dlx5a, were expressed in the developing pharyngeal teeth.
Conclusion: This comparative study of the dlx genes of A. burtoni has deepened our knowledge of the diversity of
the Dlx gene family, in terms of gene repertoire, expression patterns and non-coding elements. We have identified
possible cichlid lineage-specific changes, including losses of a subset of dlx expression domains in the pharyngeal
teeth, which will be the targets of future functional studies.

Introduction
Cichlid fishes are amongst the premier models of evolution, as they have undergone rapid adaptive radiation to
fill a multitude of ecological niches. This has been made
possible, in part, by their striking diversity of jaw and
tooth morphologies [1-5]. It has been hypothesized that
one of the central factors that has permitted the cichlids’
dramatic trophic radiation is their unique pharyngeal
jaw apparatus, or ‘throat jaws’ [6,7]. These modified gill
arches have taken on the role of food processing, freeing
up the oral jaws for more specialized forms of food
acquisition such as algal scraping [5]. An understanding
* Correspondence: shigehiro.kuraku@uni-konstanz.de
1
Chair in Zoology and Evolutionary Biology, Department of Biology,
University of Konstanz, Universitätsstrasse 10, 78457 Konstanz, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

of the genetic basis of cichlid craniofacial diversity first
requires thorough dissections of the genes responsible
for neural crest patterning. This knowledge can then be
used to compare neural crest patterning between cichlid
species, as this forms the basis for their highly variable
oral and pharyngeal jaws [8-10].
Cichlid craniofacial specification and morphogenesis
are beginning to be characterized at the molecular level.
In the Nile tilapia, Hox paralog group 2 gene is
expressed in the neural crest that populates the pharyngeal arches in a similar pattern to that of striped bass
and zebrafish [11,12]. Later in development, numerous
haplochromine cichlids express Hox genes in the dental
mesenchyme directly surrounding the tooth germs in
the lower pharyngeal jaw [13]. Albertson et al. identified
bmp4 as a putative candidate for craniofacial diversity in

© 2011 Renz et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

a QTL study that compared cichlids with different jaw
shapes [8]. Lastly, Kobayashi et al. identified myofibrilassociated glycoprotein 4 gene (magp4) as a potentially
important gene for cichlid craniofacial diversification as
it is differentially expressed in the jaws of Haplochromis
chilotes and Haplochromis sp."rockkribensis” [14].
The Dlx genes have a significant role in patterning the
brain, jaw and teeth among amniotes [15], and represent
excellent candidates to further characterize cichlid cranial morphogenesis. The Dlx genes are the vertebrate
homologs of the distal-less (dll) gene first identified in
Drosophila, which is known to be required for distal
limb development [16]. Dlx and dll both belong to the
homeobox-containing superfamily of transcription factors (reviewed in [15]). Six Dlx genes have been identified in mammals - they are likely to be derived from a
tandem gene duplication event followed by chromosomal duplications [17]. This scheme also seems to hold
in the leopard shark [18]. In contrast, in lampreys,
although six Dlx genes have also been documented,
their orthology relationships to the six dlx genes of
gnathostomes (jawed vertebrates) are not fully resolved
[19,20]. Previous studies have reported conserved noncoding elements in the Dlx clusters, suggesting that
these intergenic elements contribute to the maintenance
of syntenic relationships for sequential pairs of dlx
genes within clusters [21-23].
Combinatorial expression patterns of mouse Dlx genes
in the mandibular and hyoid arches were reported to be
indispensable for establishing dorsoventral polarity
between upper and lower jaw elements (’Dlx code’)
[24,25]. In the chicken, although Dlx gene expression
fundamentally resembles that of mouse, Dlx4 was found
to be pseudogenized [26]. In addition, the Dlx1-Dlx2
cluster has not been identified in its genome assembly
even though the expression patterns of these individual
genes have been reported [26,27]. In the zebrafish, it
was shown that dorsoventral patterning of pharyngeal
arches is achieved by regulatory genes including dlx
genes [28-30]. This indicates that the Dlx-dependent
patterning is derived from the common ancestor of at
least all extant bony vertebrates. An analysis of a distantly-related teleost fish will provide clues that will
help to reconstruct the ancestral state and infer secondary changes.
Among the teleost fishes, dlx gene functions have
been well studied so far in zebrafish [28-31] and medaka
[32]. Because of the teleost-specific genome duplication
(TSGD), they possess more genes than tetrapods
[33,34]. In cichlid fishes, only dlx2 (more precisely
dlx2a) has been characterized so far [8,13]. In light of
the nested expression patterns seen in the Dlx code
[24,33], it is crucial to analyze the entire dlx gene repertoire of a single species. This is a challenge in species

Page 2 of 14

such as cichlid fishes where craniofacial morphology
shows such unique features.
In this study, as a baseline to later explore the intraCichlidae variation, we provide comparative analysis of
molecular phylogeny, genomic linkage and expression
patterns of dlx genes between a selected cichlid species
and non-cichlids. We identified seven dlx genes in an
African cichlid fish, Astatotilapia burtoni, and analyzed
their molecular phylogenies and their embryonic expression patterns. Intergenic regions of the three dlx gene
clusters were also sequenced and subjected to searches
for conserved non-coding elements (CNEs). Our intensive cross-species comparison revealed a relatively high
level of conservation of CNEs among ray-finned fishes
(Acanthopterygii) and additional lineage-specific gains/
losses of CNEs amongst the teleost fishes as well as conservation of previously unidentified CNEs outside the
dlx gene clusters. We detected differential expression of
dlx genes particularly in the first and second pharyngeal
arches, as previously characterized in zebrafish. In the
developing pharyngeal teeth, we show that four of the
seven identified dlx genes are expressed. Comparisons
with other teleost fishes revealed possible losses of a
subset of dlx expression in the pharyngeal teeth which
to the best of our knowledge could be a unique feature
of cichlid fishes.

Results
Identification of A. burtoni dlx genes

Through RT-PCR, we obtained sequences for seven dlx
transcripts from Astatotilapia burtoni, each of which
contained full-length protein-coding regions (see Materials and Methods). In the multiple alignment of the
deduced amino acid sequences, all genes showed strong
similarity to members of the Dlx subfamily of homeobox-containing genes, as they contain the characteristic
amino acid residues of the dlx homeobox, TQTQV
KIWFQN (Additional file 1). Based on sequence similarity to, and subsequent phylogenetic analyses with homologs from other teleost fishes, these seven cDNA
sequences were inferred to be derived from orthologs of
dlx1a, -2a, -3b, -4a, -4b, -5a, and -6a, and were designated accordingly. Although we performed in silico surveys of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and partial
genomic sequences from cichlid fishes currently available in NCBI dbEST http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/dbEST/, no additional Dlx paralogs were found.
Molecular phylogenetic analyses

To confirm the identities of the newly discovered
A. burtoni dlx genes to orthologs of other vertebrates,
we conducted phylogenetic analyses. It was previously
shown that the splits between Dlx1-6 occurred before
the divergence between the chondrichthyan and

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

osteichthyan lineages [17,19]. Therefore, we constructed
phylogenetic trees for individual jawed vertebrate paralogs (Dlx1-6) using cartilaginous fish orthologs (namely
leopard shark Triakis semifasciata Dlx1-6; [18]) as outgroup (Figure 1). Our survey of available genomic contigs of elephant shark (Callorhinchus milii; [35])
detected at least one exon for each of the six paralogs
(Dlx1-6), but none of the identified contigs were long
enough to cover the entire region employed in our phylogenetic analysis. In the currently available elephant
shark genome sequences, we could not detect any additional Dlx genes that might be unique to the cartilaginous fish lineage.
In our molecular phylogenetic trees, all Dlx genes
except Dlx4, (for which mammalian members show
extremely long branches [36]), exhibited a dichotomy
between teleost fishes and tetrapods, supported strongly
by both the neighbor-joining (NJ) and maximum-likelihood (ML) methods (Figure 1D). The newly identified
A. burtoni genes always grouped with homologs of other
acanthomorpha species (Figure 1), consistent with previous studies on the phylogenetic relationships of teleost
fishes [37-40]. Overall, our phylogenetic trees supported
their orthologies and accordingly these A. burtoni dlx
genes were named dlx1a, dlx2a, dlx3b, dlx4a, dlx4b,
dlx5a, and dlx6a.
We observed relatively long branches at the base of
teleost fishes for dlx1a, -5a and -6a (Figure 1A, E, F),
suggesting an elevation of evolutionary rates for these
genes. Moreover, dlx2b and -3a exhibited markedly
longer branch lengths compared with their paralogs
generated in the TSGD [33] (Figure 1B, C). This phylogenetic analysis also highlighted possible lineage-specific
losses of dlx genes. Second teleost duplicates, generated
by the TSGD, which we tentatively call dlx1b, dlx5b and
dlx6b in the hypothetical common ancestor, are absent
from all teleost fish genome sequences currently available. The absence of these putative duplicates implies
that they were lost following their duplication in the
stem lineage leading to teleosts. We also noted that the
absence of dlx3a appears to be unique to Cypriniformes
including the zebrafish, and that the absence of dlx2b
appears to be unique to the percomorphs including pufferfishes, stickleback, medaka and cichlids (Figure 1B,
C). These lineage-specific gene losses were also proposed by a previous report [32]. In our extended study,
the absence of an A. burtoni dlx3a ortholog as well as a
medaka dlx4a ortholog suggests additional gene losses.
In addition to the A. burtoni genes, we identified EST
sequences in NCBI, encoding dlx genes of diverse teleost fishes, covering, for example, Salmoniformes, Siluriformes and Characiformes, including representatives of
teleosts without sequenced genomes. After assembly of
these previously unidentified dlx-encoding ESTs, we

Page 3 of 14

constructed molecular phylogenetic trees including
them (Additional file 2; see also Materials and methods).
According to the data available so far, none of these
lineages have retained the dlx paralogs that should have
existed just after the TSGD (namely dlx1b, -5b and -6b).
All previously identified teleost-specific paralogs (dlx1a,
-2a, -3a, -3b, -4a, -4b, -5a, and -6a) were retained by
representative species from Salmoniformes, while only
four of these (dlx2a, -2b, -3a, and -5a), including information in GenBank (dlx2a and -2b of Synodontis multipunctatus), were found in species from Siluriformes
(Additional file 2B, C, E). Taken together, even though
taxon and sequence sampling is obviously not complete,
the loss of dlx3a (as seen in the zebrafish) at most dates
back to the split of Cypriniformes from other otocephalan lineages (for example, Characiformes and Siluriformes) (Additional file 2C). On the other hand, since
the presence of dlx2b is confined to the otocephalan
representatives (Cypriniformes, Siluriformes and Characiformes) (Additional file 2B), this suggests that its
ortholog was lost only in the basal lineage of Percomorpha (including stickleback, pufferfishes and medaka) at
the latest. This gene loss might date back to the origin
of Euteleostei before the split of Salmoniformes from
others.
dlx clusters: detection of putative cis-regulatory elements

In order to investigate patterns of conservation of
potential cis-regulatory elements in intergenic portions
of dlx-containing genomic regions, we conducted long
PCR for A. burtoni between pairs of dlx genes whose
orthologs in other teleost fishes form bi-gene clusters
(see Materials and methods). With gene specific primers designed in the last exons of paired genes, genomic sequences for A. burtoni dlx1a-2a, dlx3b-4b, and
dlx5a-6a clusters were successfully amplified. These
sequences did not contain any non-dlx protein-coding
region with strong similarity to sequences in public
databases (also those without any strong similarity to
sequences in other species; see Methods) and repetitive
elements registered in the RepBase library other than
simple repeats and low complexity sequences (see
Materials and methods for details of gene prediction
and repeat detection). Absence of any transcribed elements (for example, non-coding RNA) in the intergenic regions was also supported by Blastn searches
using the entire intergenic sequences as queries against
all available EST sequences, where we found no significant matches. The A. burtoni intergenic sequences
were globally aligned and compared with their orthologous cluster sequences available for other vertebrates
(Figure 2). In the intergenic regions of the dlx1a-2a,
dlx3b-4b, and dlx5a-6a clusters, by applying the criterion of 70% identity within a 100-bp stretch, we

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 4 of 14

Figure 1 Molecular phylogenetic trees including Astatotilapia burtoni dlx genes. (A) dlx1. (B) dlx2. (C) dlx3. (D) dlx4. (E) dlx5. (F) dlx6. The
trees were reconstructed with the maximum likelihood (ML) method (see Materials and methods). Bootstrap values were calculated with 100
resamplings. Support values at nodes indicate in order bootstrap probabilities in the ML and the NJ analyses. ‘-’ indicates that the phylogenetic
relationship supported by the ML was not reconstructed by the NJ method. In C, we do not show bootstrap probabilities for some nodes due
to space limitations: 35 (ML) and 42 (NJ) for the node combining zebrafish dlx3b with its T. rubripes and medaka orthologs; 43 (ML) and ‘-’ (NJ
method did not support this relationship) for the node combining A. burtoni dlx3b with its orthologs of the zebrafish, T. rubripes, and medaka.
For each of A-F, the orthologs of the leopard shark (Triakis semifasciata) and tetrapods were used as outgroups. The number of amino acid sites
used for tree inference was as follows: (A) 239 amino acid sites (aa) (shape parameter for gamma distribution a = 0.50); (B) 174 aa (a = 0.37);
(C) 137 aa (a = 0.34); (D) 128 aa (a = 0.44); (E) 216 aa (a = 0.29) and (F) 184 aa (a = 0.26). Accession numbers for the entries in GenBank and
Ensembl are indicated in parentheses.

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 5 of 14

Figure 2 Comparison of the intergenic regions of three dlx clusters among osteichthyans. (A) dlx1a-dlx2a (Dlx1-Dlx2) cluster. (B) dlx3bdlx4b (Dlx3-Dlx4) cluster. (C) dlx5a-dlx6a (Dlx5-Dlx6) cluster. Sequence similarity was visualized by mVista (see Materials and methods) using
stickleback as a reference. Third exons of dlx genes are shown in grey and conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) in intergenic regions are
shown in purple shading. Designation of detected CNEs, namely I12.1 to I12.9, I34.1 to I34.6 and I56.1 to I56.6, are shown at the top (see
Materials and methods for our criterion for CNE annotation). See Additional file 3, for comparisons including the flanking regions of the dlx
clusters.

identified nine, six, and seven conserved non-coding
elements (CNEs), respectively, designated I12.1 to
I12.9, I34.1 to I34.6 and I56.1 to I56.7 (Figure 2; also
see Materials and methods for this naming). Even
though our A. burtoni genomic sequences are limited
to intergenic regions, we also compared 5-kb flanking
regions on both ends for dlx1a-2a, dlx3b-4b, and
dlx5a-6a clusters without A. burtoni, and detected 10,
5, and 13 CNEs that met the aforementioned similarity
criterion (Additional file 3A, B, C).

Throughout the three A. burtoni dlx clusters, we did not
detect the loss of any CNEs shared by other species,
with one exception: a CNE tentatively named I12.3b
(see Materials and methods for this naming). Notably,
we identified CNEs shared by only a subset of teleost
fishes. Most of them (for example, I12.7, I34.1, I34.2,
I34.4, I34.5, I34.6, I56.6a and I56.7) were shared only
between A. burtoni, medaka, stickleback and pufferfishes, excluding zebrafish, consistent with their phylogenetic relationships [37] (Figure 2). This type of

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 6 of 14

conservation pattern was also frequently observed for
flanking regions (Additional file 3A, B, C). One lineagespecific CNE I12.3ab was conserved only in medaka, A.
burtoni and stickleback (Figure 2). Our comparison also
revealed conservation of the previously characterized
CNEs, I12.4, I12.5, I56.3, and I56.4 (I12b, I12a, I56ii and
I56i, respectively; [21]) in a wider range of species,
including A. burtoni, medaka, Tetraodon nigroviridis and
anole lizard Anolis carolinensis (Figure 2). We also
detected losses of CNEs in the zebrafish lineage (for
example, I56.5) (Figure 2). In the flanking region of the
dlx5a-dlx6a cluster, we detected an uncharacterized
CNE, F56.9, which is conserved among all analyzed species, except the anole lizard where the corresponding
region is not completely sequenced (Additional file 3).
We performed Blastn searches, using the identified
CNE sequences of A. burtoni (for those in the intergenic
regions) and stickleback (for those in the flanking
regions) as queries, in currently available sea lamprey
Petromyzon marinus and elephant shark Callorhinchus
milii genome assemblies. In an elephant shark genome
sequence (AAVX01041446 in GenBank), we identified a
match for only the CNE I12.5, which is conserved in all
osteichthyans surveyed in the present study (Additional
file 4;also see [41]). In P. marinus, we could not find
any homologous sequences to CNEs that we identified
in this study. This should be reexamined with the

anticipated whole genome sequences of this species and
other cyclostomes.
dlx gene expression analysis

We performed in situ hybridization for both whole
embryos and sections for all seven A. burtoni dlx genes
at 5, 7, 8, 10, 13 and 18 days post fertilization (dpf)
(Table 1). Later stages were not included in our study as
the calcification of bones and teeth in these stages was
not compatible with the paraffin-based sectioning protocol we employed. Additionally, examination of the oral
teeth in embryos 18 dpf was not always possible using
this sectioning technique, and thus we have chosen to
focus only on expression in the pharyngeal teeth.
Brain

Two pairs of clustered genes, namely dlx1a and -2a,
(arrowheads in Figure 3A, B), and dlx5a and -6a, (arrowheads in Figure 3E, F), showed similar expression patterns in the diencephalon of the brain at 7 dpf. dlx3b and
dlx4b were expressed more anteriorly on the ventral side,
where the olfactory placodes are located (arrows in
Figure 3C, D). For dlx4a, no clear signal was detected in
comparable sites at the stages we investigated (Figure
3G). At 10 dpf, expression signals of dlx1a, -2a, -5a and
-6a genes were still detected in the median of the diencephalon (data not shown). No expression signals of dlx3b,

Table 1 Embryonic expression domains of A. burtoni dlx genes.
Gene

Brain

Pharyngeal arches

Fin folda

Teeth

Othera

5 dpf

7, 8 and 10 dpf

5 dpf

7 dpf

10 dpf

Oral

Pharyngeal

dlx1a

++

++ (di)

++ (I and II)
- (III and IV)
+ (V and VI)

++

++

-

- (7 dpf)
- (10 dpf)
- (13 dpf)

-

dlx2a

++

++ (di)

++ (I and II)
+ (III and IV)
++ (V and VI)

+

++

N.I.

+ (7 dpf)
+ (8 dpf)
- (10 dpf)

-

dlx4a

-

-

++ (I-VI)

++

++

+ (18 dpf)

++ (7 dpf)
+ (8 dpf)
++ (10 dpf)
++ (13 dpf)

-

dlx3b

-

++ (olf)

++ (I-VI)

++

++

+ (18 dpf)

++ (7 dpf)
++ (8 dpf)
++ (10 dpf)
++ (13 dpf)

+ (cf)
+ (df)
+ (af)

++ (csm)
+ (ov)

dlx4b

-

++ (olf)

+ (I-VI)

++

++

-

- (7 dpf)
- (10 dpf)
- (13 dpf)

+ (cf)

+ (csm)

dlx5a

++

++ (di)

++ (I-VI)

++

++

+ (18 dpf)

++ (7 dpf)
++ (8 dpf)
++ (10 dpf)

+ (cf)
+ (df)
+ (af)
+ (pf)

+ (ov)

dlx6a

+

++ (di)

+ (I-VI)

-

+

N.I.

- (7 dpf)
- (10 dpf)

-

+ (ov)

Expression domains with a high expression level were shown as ‘++’, while ‘+’ denotes a low expression signal. ‘-’ indicates no expression signal detected and ‘N.
I.’ indicates a case in which the expression pattern was not investigated. Additional spatial and temporal details of gene expression are shown in brackets.
Abbreviations: di = diencephalon; cf = caudal fin; df = dorsal fin; af = anal fin; pf = pectoral fin; csm = circular smooth muscles of pharynx; olf = olfactory
placode; ov = otic vesicle. aSome of these expression domains are shown in Additional file 5 and Additional file 6, respectively.

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 7 of 14

Figure 3 A. burtoni dlx expression patterns in the brain. In situ
hybridization on transverse sections at 7 dpf (A to G). (H)
Hematoxylin-eosin staining. dlx1a (A), dlx2a (B), dlx5a (E) and dlx6a
(F) show similar expression patterns in the diencephalon of the
forebrain (arrowheads). dlx3b (C) and dlx4b (D) also share expression
signals in the region where the olfactory placodes are developing
(arrows). No expression is seen for dlx4a (G). Scale bar in A: 100 μm.
Anteroposterior levels of these photos are indicated in Additional
file 9. Note that pigmentation persists in the eye.

-4a and -4b were detected at this stage. Expression signals in the brain for dlx1a, -2a, -5a and -6a were also
observed in five dpf embryos (Figure 4C, D, G, H).
Pharyngeal arches

At 5 dpf, intense expression was detected in the ventrolateral region of the ectomesenchyme in the developing
pharyngeal arches (PAs) for all seven A. burtoni dlx
genes (Figure 4). In parallel, we performed whole-mount
in situ hybridization of hoxa2a gene, which is known to
be expressed in the second and more posterior arches
[12,42,43]. In PA1, which is marked by the absence of

Figure 4 A. burtoni dlx expression patterns in the pharyngeal
arches. Whole-mount in situ hybridization at 5 dpf. Gene names are
shown on the left. (A, C, E, G, I, K, M, O) Ventral view. The
boundary between the PA1 and PA2, delineated by the anterior
end of hoxa2a expression (A), is indicated with dotted lines. (B, D,
F, H, J, L, N, P) Lateral view of the anterior pharyngeal arches.
Anterior is to the right. The outline of the eye is indicated by a
dotted line. In the PA1, along the DV axis, dlx2a expression
extended more broadly than the other dlx genes (F), while dlx3b
expression was more restricted (J). dlx5a and dlx6a expression
extends more towards the ventral midline (M, O), while dlx4a is
downregulated in ventral parts of the anterior PAs (G). Relatively
weak expression of dlx1a and dlx2a was detected in PA3 and PA4
(C, E). Abbreviations: e = eye; PA1 = first pharyngeal arch; PA2 =
second pharyngeal arch. Scale bar: 100 μm.

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 8 of 14

hoxa2a expression (Figure 4A, B), we detected expression of all analyzed dlx genes (Figure 4C-P). Of these,
along the dorsoventral (DV) axis, dlx2a expression is
distributed more broadly within PA1 (Figure 4F), while
expression of at least dlx3b was more restricted (Figure
4J). In addition, the ventral-most areas of the anterior
pharyngeal arches are devoid of dlx4a expression (Figure
4G). In contrast, expression of dlx5a and -6a extended
further towards the ventral midline than the other dlx
genes (Figure 4M, O). In the anterior part of the PA1
immediately behind the eye, no expression of dlx4a, -3b
and -5a was observed (Figure 4H, J, N). We observed
weaker expression of dlx1a and dlx2a in PA3 and PA4
than in other PAs (Figure 4C, E). Expression signals of
dlx1a, -3b, -4a, -4b and -5a persisted until 10 dpf (data
not shown). At 7 and 10 dpf, we observed only weak
expression signals for dlx2a, while no clear signal of
dlx6a expression was detected (data not shown).
Pharyngeal teeth

Expression signals of dlx2a, dlx3b, dlx4a and dlx5a in
the dentigerous area of the upper and lower pharyngeal jaws were first detected at 7 dpf, and persisted
until 10 dpf (dlx5a) and 13 dpf (dlx3b and -4a),
according to the stages we analyzed (Table 1). Of
those, dlx3b expression in the teeth was the most
intense throughout all developmental stages. At 8 dpf,
dlx3b expression was observed in the dental mesenchyme and oral epithelium during morphogenesis (Figure
5D). The expression signal in dental mesenchyme persisted until early differentiation (asterisks in Figure 5E,
F). In a later stage, the expression became more
restricted towards the tip of developing teeth (arrowheads in Figure 5E, F). dlx4a expression was detected
at 8 dpf at the base of the differentiating teeth in the
dental mesenchyme and epithelium (Figure 5G). dlx5a
showed a more dynamic pattern. At 8 dpf, this gene
was expressed more intensively in the dental epithelium than in the mesenchyme at the base of the differentiating teeth (arrowheads in Figure 5H). Teeth in a
later phase of differentiation showed intense mesenchymal expression signals compared with epithelial
expression restricted to the base of the inner dental
epithelium (arrow in Figure 5I). dlx2a expression in
the dental mesenchyme was observed at 8 dpf in a
short period of early tooth development including
morphogenesis stage (Figure 5B, C). This signal was
detected only in teeth positioned in the lateral extremities of the pharyngeal jaws. We did not detect expression of dlx2a in teeth at later stages of development.
Throughout our analysis, we did not detect expression
of dlx1a, dlx4b and dlx6a in developing teeth, even
though these genes are expressed in other tissues in
distinct, tissue-specific patterns (Figures 3 and 4).

Figure 5 A. burtoni dlx expression patterns in pharyngeal tooth
development. Transverse sections were produced after performing
whole mount in situ hybridization on 8 dpf A. burtoni embryos.
Dorsal is to the top. (A) Schematic illustration of a transverse view.
Red boxes indicate the regions of tooth development on the upper
pharyngeal jaw magnified in B-I. Outlines of developing teeth were
delineated with dotted lines based on hematoxilin-eosin staining
performed after photographing these sections. (B, C) dlx2a
expression. The signal in the dental mesenchyme was observed in a
short period of early tooth development including morphogenesis
stage (B, C). (D-F) dlx3b expression in the developing teeth. The
signal was observed in the dental mesenchyme and oral epithelium
during morphogenesis (D). The signal in the dental mesenchyme
persisted until early differentiation (asterisks in E and F). In a later
stage, the expression became more restricted towards the tip of the
developing teeth (arrowheads in E and F). (G) dlx4a expression. The
expression signal was observed at the base of the differentiating
teeth in the dental mesenchyme and epithelium. (H, I) dlx5a
expression. This gene was expressed more intensively in the dental
epithelium than in the mesenchyme at the base of the
differentiating teeth (arrowheads in H). Teeth in a later phase of
differentiation showed intense mesenchymal expression signals
compared with epithelial expression, which was restricted to the
base of the inner dental epithelium (arrow in I). Developmental
staging of teeth was based on Figure 4 of [32] for basic description
in medaka and Figure 1 of [62] for that in a cichlid fish.
Abbreviations: ov = otic vesicle; nc = notochord; b = brain; oc = oral
cavity. Anteroposterior levels of these photos are indicated in
Additional file 9. Scale bar: 20 μm.

Other expression domains

We also detected A. burtoni dlx expression in other tissues. This includes expression of dlx2a, -3b, and -5a in
the otic vesicle (Table 1). Intense signals of dlx3b, dlx4b
and dlx5a were detected in the caudal fin rays at 7 dpf,
9 dpf and 10 dpf (Table 1). In the pectoral fin, we
detected expression signals of dlx5a at 10 dpf (Additional file 5). Expression signals of dlx3b and -4b were

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

also detected in the circular smooth muscles (csm) of
the esophagus, posterior to the pharyngeal jaw, at 13
dpf (Additional file 6).

Discussion
The evolution of dlx gene repertoires in teleosts

The canonical genomic organization of the vertebrate
dlx repertoire comprises three conserved bi-gene clusters [17]. One example violating this dogma is the
pseudogenization of Dlx4 in chicken [26]. Based on
our analysis, the anole lizard Anolis carolinensis retains
an only partially annotated, but intact Dlx4 gene
(Ensembl ID: ENSACAG00000005126), which is confirmed by the presence of its transcript in the NCBI
EST Database (Accession ID: FG754683). We propose
that the pseudogenization of the chicken Dlx4 might
be a bird- or archosaurian lineage-specific event, and
we can regard the ‘3 × 2 state’ as the plesiomorphic
condition of Dlx cluster architecture at least for jawed
vertebrates. As observed previously for other genes
[44], the identification of dlx genes in zebrafish [31]
suggested an altered scheme for teleost fishes due to
the additional whole genome duplication (TSGD,
[33,34]). A more recent study on medaka dlx genes
also produced a similar conclusion supporting the
duplicated gene repertoires as well as its subsequent
differentiation between teleost fish lineages [32].
Our identification of seven A. burtoni dlx genes provides evidence of further lineage-specific changes in
dlx gene repertoires. The currently available medaka
genome sequence does not contain the dlx4a gene,
and our exhaustive search of its cDNA through RTPCR with degenerate primers specifically designed for
dlx4a failed as well. In contrast, the A. burtoni dlx4a
gene was isolated with RT-PCR. However, dlx3a,
which is present in the medaka genome and expressed
during embryogenesis, was not detected by us in the
A. burtoni transcriptome through RT-PCR with degenerate primers designed to specifically amplify dlx3a.
Thus, neither medaka nor A. burtoni have been shown
to possess an intact dlx3a-dlx4a cluster (Figure 6).
Even though shown for other genes involved in vertebrate development [45,46], changes of developmental
gene repertoires within Osteichthyes have not been
intensively investigated so far. Our finding of possible
differences in dlx gene repertoires within teleost fishes
and even within Percomorpha suggests that more
dynamic changes have occurred even in developmentally important regulatory genes between closely
related taxa than was previously recognized. This
observation on post-TSGD lineage-specific changes is
paralleled by the situation of their Hox gene cluster
complements that were also found to be different
between different teleost fish lineages [44,47].

Page 9 of 14

Stepwise establishment of putative cis-regulatory
elements

Our comparison of the intergenic regions of dlx clusters,
including tetrapods, provided an overall picture of their
putative cis-regulatory elements. Many gains of non-coding elements are deduced from the phylogenetic tracing
even during the relatively recent evolution of teleost
fishes (Figure 6). Additionally, we found a match of I12.5
in the elephant shark C. milii. This element has also been
found in a BAC clone sequence containing Dlx2 [41],
thus providing the first evidence of a putative cis-regulatory element in Dlx clusters outside Osteichthyes (Additional file 4). Our comparison also identified already
functionally characterized CNEs in a wider range of vertebrates (see Results). At the same time, an element
I12.3b, which has not been functionally characterized to
date, was found to have been lost specifically in the
cichlid lineage (Figure 6). In contrast, identification of
cichlid-specific gains of CNE by means of phylogenetic
footprinting [48] requires the addition of at least one
more species that is sufficiently distant from A. burtoni.
The gains of the elements I12.3ab, I56.2 and F56.10
would support a closer phylogenetic relationship of stickleback to medaka/cichlid than to pufferfishes (Figure 6).
The phylogenetic relationship among these percomorph
fishes has not yet reached a consensus based on available
molecular data [37,38,40,47]. These so-called ‘rare genomic changes’ [49] might serve as genomic synapomorphies for a stickleback-medaka-cichlid grouping.
Dlx code in teleost fishes

A. burtoni dlx expression patterns in the brain closely
resemble that of the mouse (Figure 3; [15]). Therefore, our
riboprobes are regarded as specific enough to discern spatiotemporal regulation of dlx genes throughout embryogenesis. In light of the differential expression patterns of
this group of genes observed in mouse and zebrafish
([24,28-30]; see also Introduction), we assessed dorsoventral (or proximodistal) distribution of A. burtoni dlx transcripts particularly in the PA1 and PA2. Our examination
revealed the expression of all analyzed A. burtoni dlx
genes in the PA1, the Hox-negative region, and in the
hoxa2a-positive PA2 (Figure 4). At least dlx2a transcripts
showed slightly wider distribution along the DV axis in
the PA1 and PA2 than those of other dlx genes (Figure
4F). The broadest expression of Dlx2 homolog resembles
the situation in zebrafish [28-30] and mouse [24], suggesting the conservation since the osteichthyan ancestor.
Although not as distinct as the dlx2a expression, relatively
broad expression of dlx5a along the DV axis is also
described in zebrafish [28,30,31]. Our analysis on A. burtoni dlx5a, however, did not yield a similar pattern (Figure
4N). Including dlx5a, all the analyzed dlx genes except for
dlx2a seemed to be expressed in a similar manner to each

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

Page 10 of 14

Figure 6 A hypothesized scenario for dlx gene evolution. Evolution of gene repertoires, gene cluster structure and conserved non-coding
elements (CNEs) are shown (see Materials and Methods, for our criteria in assigning CNEs). Timing of gains and losses of CNEs is based on the
most parsimonious interpretation. Dlx7 and Dlx8 are hypothetical genes that are thought to have existed immediately after two rounds of whole
genome duplication. Alphabets in the names of CNEs: I = intergenic CNE; F = flanking CNE; M = mammal specific CNE; P = pufferfish specific
CNE; A = amniote specific CNE; T = tetrapod specific CNE; 1R/2R = two rounds of whole genome duplications; TSGD (3R) = teleost-specific
genome duplication.

other in the PA1 and PA2 (Figure 4D, H, J, L, N and 4P),
except that expression particularly of dlx3/4 genes did not
protrude ventrally towards the midline (Figure 4G, I and
4K), as seen in zebrafish [31]. In summary, our analysis on
A. burtoni supported the common ancestry of differential
dlx expression patterns in the PA1/2 among teleost fishes,
and also among osteichthyans. Equivalence of functional
properties of Dlx code in cichlid fish could be tested by
loss-of-function experiments as demonstrated in mouse
and zebrafish [24,29].
Possible roles for dlx genes in dentition: novelty in
cichlids?

We performed an intensive analysis of A. burtoni dlx
expression in pharyngeal teeth (Figure 5). Previously, dlx

expression in teeth was described for zebrafish and
medaka [31,32]. For cichlids, expression of dlx2a (designated ‘Dlx2’ there) has been described in the teeth (oral,
pharyngeal or both) for Lake Malawi species (Tramitichromis intermedius, Labeotropheus fuelleborni, Dimidiochromis compressiceps and Metriaclima zebra [8,13]). In
A. burtoni, the dlx2a expression in the pharyngeal teeth
was detected in a highly restricted manner both spatially
and temporally (Figure 5B, C; see also Results). This
restricted dlx2a expression was also documented in
medaka and zebrafish [31,32]. dlx5a expression also
exhibited striking dynamism in that its intense expression
at the tooth base shifted from the dental epithelium to
the mesenchyme in the course of tooth development
(Figure 5H and 5I). As similar expression patterns are

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

described in medaka and zebrafish [31,32], these dynamic
expressions of dlx2a and dlx5a, as well as the most
intense expression of dlx3b (see Results; [31,32]), are
recognized as conserved features shared among the
major lineages of Teleostei. dlx3a, which we could not
identify in A. burtoni, has not been observed in the pharyngeal teeth in medaka [32]. dlx4a, the other gene on the
same ancient bi-gene cluster as dlx3a, has not been identified in medaka [32]. Interestingly, in A. burtoni, we
identified a dlx4a ortholog, and detected its relatively
weak expression in pharyngeal teeth (Figure 5G), as well
as in zebrafish [31]. We did not detect dlx1a, dlx4b, and
dlx6a expressions in the pharyngeal teeth in the developmental stages we analyzed, while we detected expression
signals of these genes in other tissues (Table 1). Of these,
the absence of dlx1a expression in the pharyngeal teeth
is documented also in medaka, while they express dlx4b
and dlx6a [32]. Thus, it is possible that, in the lineage
leading to cichlids after the split of the medaka lineage,
pharyngeal tooth expression of dlx4b and dlx6a was secondarily lost. Further study would be required to determine whether the absence of those gene expressions is
the result of our incomplete selection of stages or if they
represent a genuine diversification of dlx functions after
the split of the cichlid lineage from others. To confirm
the cichlid lineage-specific changes, careful analyses of
their expression in intermediate fish lineages (Pomacentridae and Embiotocidae; [10]) may also be necessary.

Conclusion
Overall, inclusion of teleost fishes in the framework of
vertebrate Dlx study and inclusion of a cichlid fish in
that of teleost dlx study allowed us to highlight stepwise
gains and losses of putative cis-regulatory elements as
well as dlx family members at a higher resolution. Especially, in the lineage leading to an African cichlid A. burtoni, we discovered 1) a possible loss of dlx3a and 2)
loss of the CNE I12.3b in the intergenic region of the
dlx1-dlx2 cluster. We also detected possible loss of
dlx4b and dlx6a expression in the developing pharyngeal teeth.
Materials and methods
Embryos

An inbred Astatotilapia burtoni line, originally provided
by Hans Hoffmann (University of Texas, Austin, TX,
USA), was kept at 24°C. Broods of up to 80 eggs were
fertilized naturally and kept in the mothers’ mouth until
elicitation. For in situ hybridization, embryos were either
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), dehydrated and stored in 100%
methanol, or fixed in Serra’s fixative (60% ethanol, 30%
formaldehyde, 10% acetic acid) and kept in 100%

Page 11 of 14

ethanol at -20°C. The chorion and yolk were removed
for embryos up to 6 dpf.
Isolation and sequencing of cDNAs

Total RNA was extracted from whole embryos at 13 dpf
using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA),
and reverse transcribed into cDNA using a 3’RACE
System (Invitrogen). The cDNA was used as a template
in the following PCR amplification with the FastStart
High Fidelity PCR System (Roche, Basel, Switzerland).
Degenerate primers were designed based on the multiple
alignment of major vertebrate dlx genes: 5’-GCG CAR
ACN CAR GTN AAR ATH TGG TT-3’ and 5’- GCG
CAR GTN AAR ATH TGG TTY CAR AA-3’ for the
conserved amino acid stretches TQTQVKIWF and
TQVKIWFQN, respectively. Nested 3’RACE PCRs were
performed using the two degenerate primers, with universal primers that were designed to the 3’ end of the
oligo(dT) used for making cDNA. We amplified 3’ cDNA
fragments of dlx3b, dlx5a, dlx4a and dlx4b from this
PCR. To isolate dlx1a, dlx2a and dlx6a, we designed forward gene specific primers based on partial exonic
sequences of their putative orthologs in Malawi Lake
cichlid fishes identified from genome shotgun reads available at Joint Genome Institute [50] (Additional file 7).
These were used with the universal primers in 3’RACE
reactions. 5’ upstream sequences of the isolated cDNA
fragments were amplified and sequenced with a 5’RACE
System (Invitrogen). Details of PCR conditions and following procedures for cloning and sequencing were
described previously [10]. cDNA sequences for A. burtoni
dlx genes were deposited under accession numbers
(EMBL: FN667596 to FN667602). The cDNA template
for hoxa2a riboprobe was amplified using gene specific
primers designed based on the A. burtoni hoxa2a genome sequence in GenBank (EF594313).
Genomic DNA sequencing

Genomic DNA was extracted from a whole embryo of
A. burtoni using the traditional phenol-chloroform protocol [51]. For long PCR against this genomic DNA, we
designed primers specific to the 3’ UTR of each isolated
dlx gene. PCRs were performed using either a Long
Range PCR System (Roche) or Long PCR Enzyme
(Fermentas, St. Leon-Rot, Germany). Amplified DNA
fragments were purified with the MinElute PCR Purification kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), and cloned with
the TOPO-XL Cloning kit (Invitrogen). Sequencing was
performed through primer walking or random sequencing with EZ-Tn Kit (Epicentre, Madison, WI, USA).
Genomic DNA sequences for A. burtoni dlx intergenic
regions were deposited under accession numbers
(EMBL: FN668537 to FN668539).

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

Comparison of intergenic sequences

By using Genscan [52] and Augustus [53], we confirmed
that there is no additional protein-coding sequence in
the intergenic regions of the A. burtoni dlx clusters.
Cross-specific comparison of intergenic sequences was
performed using mVISTA [54] with the newly determined A. burtoni sequences as well as dlx clusters of
model teleost fishes available in the Ensembl Genome
Browser ([55]; version 54). Searches of the partial sea
lamprey (version PMAR3) and elephant shark genome
assemblies were performed using Blastn to detect local
similarities, because no intact Dlx bi-gene cluster was
contained in the genome assemblies. To detect CNEs,
we were based on a criterion of 70% similarity in a 100
bp sequence stretch. See Additional file 8 for the naming of CNEs with ‘a’ and ‘b’ (for example, I12.3b). It
should be noted that there could be functional cis-regulatory elements that are less similar or shorter than our
criterion. A potential complication of pairwise comparisons arises when non-overlapping regions (tentatively
named CNE a and CNE b in the present study) of a single CNE (CNE ab) are conserved between the query and
each of the aligned sequences (Additional file 8).
Molecular phylogenetic analyses

By using deduced amino acid sequences of the newly
isolated sequences as queries, Blastp searches were performed to collect available homologous peptide
sequences from Ensembl [55], and Genpept [56]. A multiple alignment was constructed using the alignment
editor Xced where the alignment algorithm MAFFT is
implemented [57]. Preliminary neighbor-joining trees
were inferred on the Xced. Final trees were inferred
using PhyML [58], assuming the JTT + I + Γ4 model.
Bayesian posterior probabilities were calculated using
MrBayes [59]. To confirm presence and absence of particular dlx genes in diverse teleost fish lineages, we ran
an original Perl script to automatically detect orthologous sequences in assembled expressed sequence tags
(ESTs) downloaded from NCBI dbEST [60]. Sequences
found by this procedure were also included in molecular
phylogenetic trees in Additional file 2.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization

Digoxigenin (DIG)-labeled antisense and sense riboprobes were synthesized according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Invitrogen) using SP6, T7 or T3 polymerase, according to the orientation of inserted template
cDNA in the plasmid. After rehydration of fixed
embryos and washing in PBTw (PBS containing 0.1%
Tween 20), the embryos were post-fixed in 4% PFA/PBS
for 20 minutes. Digestion with proteinase K (5 μg/ml,
Roche) was adapted for cichlid embryos: 5 minutes at
room temperature for embryos 5 dpf, 8 minutes for

Page 12 of 14

embryos 7, 8, 10 and 13 dpf and 10 minutes for
embryos 18 dpf. After another post-fixation step,
embryos were washed with DEPC-PBT, immersed in
50% formamide and prehybridized in hybridization buffer (50% formamide, 5× SSC, 1 mg/ml total yeast RNA,
50 μg/ml heparin, 0.1% Tween 20, in DEPC) for 3 h at
68°C. The specimens were then incubated in hybridization buffer with DIG-labeled RNA probes overnight at
68°C. After hybridization, the specimens were washed
with 100% formamide solution (containing 50% formamide, 5× SSC, 0.1% Tween20 and 9 mM Citric acid in
DEPC-water), 75%, 50% and 25% of this solution in 2%
SSCTw (saline sodium citrate buffer containing 0.1%
Tween 20) and in 2× SSCTw and 0.2× SSCTw at 68°C,
each for 15 minutes. Then embryos were washed for
each 10 minutes in 75%, 50% and 25% SSCTw in PBTw
and finally in pure PBTw at room temperature. The specimens were soaked in 0.5% Blocking reagent (Roche) in
PBTw for 30 minutes and subsequently the reagent was
replaced by a 1:2000 dilution of anti-DIG-AP antibody
in 0.5% Blocking solution and gently agitated at 4°C o/n.
After incubation, the embryos were washed extensively
in PBTw at room temperature, and hybridization was
detected by incubation with NBT and BCIP (Roche).
For histological observation in Figure 5, the stained
embryos were dehydrated with a series of methanol, and
embedded and sectioned as described below. Prepared
sections were aligned on glass slides and deparaffinized
for microscopic observation.
Section in situ hybridization

Embryos were embedded in Paraplast (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) and transverse sectioned with a microtome at a thickness of 8 μm. Detailed procedures were
reported previously [61].
Hematoxilin-eosin staining

Sectioned specimens were deparaffinized with three fiveminute washes in xylene and were stepped into 70% ethanol. Staining in Mayer’s Hematoxylin (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) was conducted for 20 minutes, and the slides
were washed with running tap water for 5 to 10 minutes.
Slides were incubated in 80% ethanol and stained with
0.25% EosinY (Fluka) in 80% ethanol for three to five
minutes. They were quickly washed twice with 100%
ethanol and twice in xylene. Sections were mounted with
Eukitt (Fluka) for microscopic observation.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Alignment of dlx genes and other homeodomaincontaining genes. Alignment shows dlx1-6 containing the
homeodomain and flanking regions, in comparison to non-dlx relatives
(yellow) of the Antennapedia (ANTP) class [63]. Teleost genes duplicated

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

in the TSGD are shown in green (a paralog) and orange (b paralog). ‘#’
represents amino acid residues conserved in the dlx gene family, while ‘*’
represents amino acid residues conserved in all compared homeobox
protein sequences.
Additional file 2: Molecular phylogenetic trees of Dlx1-6 including
EST-derived teleost sequences. (A) Dlx1 (207 amino acid sites (aa)
employed in the analysis in total; shape parameter for gamma
distribution a = 0.61). (B) Dlx2 (200 aa; a = 0.50). (C) Dlx3 (97 aa; a =
0.44). (D) Dlx4 (92 aa; a = 0.48). (E) Dlx5 (248 aa; a = 0.40). (F) Dlx6 (187
aa; a = 0.26). EST-derived sequences shown in bold are available upon
request. Retention of dlx1a in Pimephales promelas and of dlx4a in
Oncorhynchus mykiss was supported by analyses based on shorter
alignments, but data are not shown here because of low confidence
(data not shown). Salmo salar (Atlantic salmon), Oncorhynchus mykiss
(rainbow trout), and Osmerus mordax (rainbow smelt) are categorized in
the order Salmoniformes. Ictalurus punctatus (channel catfish) is
categorized in Siluriformes. Pimephales promelas (fathead minnow) is
categorized in Cypriniformes.
Additional file 3: Comparison of flanking genomic regions of dlx
clusters. (A) dlx1a-dlx2a cluster. (B) dlx3b-dlx4b cluster. (C) dlx5a-dlx6a
cluster. Levels of sequence similarity were visualized by mVista (see
Materials and methods) using stickleback as a reference. Exons are
shown in gray shading. Conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) in
intergenic regions and flanking regions are shown in purple and green
shading, respectively. Designations of the detected CNEs, namely F12.1
to F12.10, F34.1 to F34.5 and F56.1 to F56.13, are shown at the top (see
Materials and methods for our criterion CNE annotation). Note that A.
burtoni sequences are not available for intronic and flanking regions.
Note that the flanking region of the anole lizard Dlx6 gene contains a lot
of ‘N’s, and this is mainly why many of the CNEs conserved between
other species are absent.
Additional file 4: Nucleotide sequence alignments of two selected
conserved non-coding elements (CNEs). (A) I12.5. (B) F56.9.
Alignments were constructed by mVISTA. Sites with no substitutions are
indicated with ‘+’.
Additional file 5: dlx expressions in A. burtoni fins. Whole-mount in
situ hybridization of A. burtoni embryos showing expression in the fin
rays of the caudal fin for dlx3b (A to C) and dlx5a (D to F) at 7 dpf (A,
D), 9 dpf (B, E) and 10 dpf (C, F), as well as in the pectoral fin for dlx5a at
10 dpf (G).
Additional file 6: Expression of dlx genes in the esophagus. Section
in situ hybridization in A. burtoni 13 dpf (B, C), as well as HematoxylinEosin staining (A). Strong signal of dlx3b transcripts (B) and lower signal
of dlx4b transcripts (C) were detected in the circular smooth muscles
(csm) surrounding the pharyngeal cavity posterior to the pharyngeal jaw.
pc, pharyngeal cavity; ce, columnar epithelium. Arrows indicate
expression. Scale bar: 100 μm. Anteroposterior planes of sectioning are
indicated by shaded bars in a schematized A. burtoni embryo in
Additional file 9.
Additional file 7: Oligonucleotide primers used to amplify A. burtoni
dlx cDNAs.
Additional file 8: Supporting illustration for CNE naming. Naming
scheme for CNEs with ‘a’, ‘b’ or ‘ab’. Bars indicate putative cis-regulatory
elements based on cross-species comparisons. In the pairwise
comparisons between species 1 and 2 and species 1 and 3, we can
detect similarities more than 70%, whereas the level of similarity for the
pair of species 2 and 3 does not satisfy our criterion (100 bp and 70%).
Accordingly we designate these similar regions (that overlap between
species 1 and 2, and species 1 and 3) ‘a’ and ‘b’.
Additional file 9: Anteroposterior levels of sections in a schematic
A. burtoni embryo. Anteroposterior planes of sectioning are indicated
by shaded bars for the corresponding figures.

Abbreviations
CNEs: conserved non-coding element; PA: pharyngeal arch; TSGD: teleostspecific genome duplication.

Page 13 of 14

Acknowledgements
This study was supported by grants of the German Research Foundation
(DFG) to AM. We thank Nils Offen, Nicola Blum, Silke Pittlik, Elke Hespeler,
Philippe Reuter, Konrad Bergen, Wei-Jen Chen, Dave Gerrard, Nathalie Feiner
and Ursula Topel for technical support in cDNA cloning, sequencing and in
situ hybridization, and Sven Boekhoff for bioinformatic assistance. We are
also grateful to two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments.
The sea lamprey genomic data were produced by the Genome Center at
Washington University School of Medicine in St Louis and they can be
obtained from ftp://genome.wustl.edu/pub/organism/Other_Vertebrates/
Petromyzon_marinus/.
Author details
1
Chair in Zoology and Evolutionary Biology, Department of Biology,
University of Konstanz, Universitätsstrasse 10, 78457 Konstanz, Germany.
2
Zukunftskolleg, University of Konstanz, Universitätsstrasse 10, 78457
Konstanz, Germany. 3Department of Pharmacology, Universitätsmedizin,
Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 67, 55101
Mainz, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
SK and AM conceived the study. AJR conducted cDNA cloning, and JMFF
sequenced intergenic genomic DNA. AJR and HQ performed molecular
phylogenetic analyses. AJR and HMG collected embryos and analyzed gene
expression patterns. SK wrote the first draft of the manuscript, and all
authors contributed to the final version of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 18 June 2010 Accepted: 4 January 2011
Published: 4 January 2011
References
1. Kocher TD: Adaptive evolution and explosive speciation: the cichlid fish
model. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5:288-298.
2. Meyer A: Phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary processes in East
African cichlids. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 1993, 8:279-284.
3. Salzburger W, Meyer A: The species flocks of East African cichlid fishes:
recent advances in molecular phylogenetics and population genetics.
Naturwissenschaften 2004, 91:277-290.
4. Stiassny MLJ, Meyer A: Cichlids of the Rift Lakes. Scientific American 1999,
280:64-69.
5. Fryer G, D IT: The Cichlid Fishes of the Great Lakes of Africa: Their Biology and
Evolution Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd; 1972.
6. Liem KF: Evolutionary strategies and morphological innovations: cichlid
pharyngeal jaws. Systematic Zoology 1973, 22:425-441.
7. Stiassny MLJ, Jensen JS: Labroid intrarelationships revisited:
morphological complexity, key innovations, and the study of
comparative diversity. Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology 1987,
151:269-319.
8. Albertson RC, Kocher TD: Genetic and developmental basis of cichlid
trophic diversity. Heredity 2006, 97:211-221.
9. Baker CV: The evolution and elaboration of vertebrate neural crest cells.
Curr Opin Genet Dev 2008, 18:536-543.
10. Kuraku S, Meyer A: Genomic analysis of cichlid fish ‘natural mutants’. Curr
Opin Genet Dev 2008, 18:551-558.
11. Le Pabic P, Stellwag EJ, Brothers SN, Scemama JL: Comparative analysis
of Hox paralog group 2 gene expression during Nile tilapia
(Oreochromis niloticus) embryonic development. Dev Genes Evol 2007,
217:749-758.
12. Le abic PP, Scemama JL, Stellwag EJ: Role of Hox PG2 genes in Nile tilapia
pharyngeal arch specification: implications for gnathostome pharyngeal
arch evolution. Evol Dev 2010, 12:45-60.
13. Fraser GJ, Hulsey CD, Bloomquist RF, Uyesugi K, Manley NR, Streelman JT:
An ancient gene network is co-opted for teeth on old and new jaws.
PLoS Biol 2009, 7:e31.
14. Kobayashi N, Watanabe M, Kijimoto T, Fujimura K, Nakazawa M, Ikeo K,
Kohara Y, Gojobori T, Okada N: magp4 gene may contribute to the
diversification of cichlid morphs and their speciation. Gene 2006,
373:126-133.

Renz et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:1
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/1

15. Panganiban G, Rubenstein JL: Developmental functions of the Distal-less/
Dlx homeobox genes. Development 2002, 129:4371-4386.
16. Cohen SM, Bronner G, Kuttner F, Jurgens G, Jackle H: Distal-less encodes a
homoeodomain protein required for limb development in Drosophila.
Nature 1989, 338:432-434.
17. Stock DW, Ellies DL, Zhao Z, Ekker M, Ruddle FH, Weiss KM: The evolution
of the vertebrate Dlx gene family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93:10858-10863.
18. Stock DW: The Dlx gene complement of the leopard shark, Triakis
semifasciata, resembles that of mammals: implications for genomic and
morphological evolution of jawed vertebrates. Genetics 2005, 169:807-817.
19. Kuraku S, Meyer A, Kuratani S: Timing of genome duplications relative to
the origin of the vertebrates: Did cyclostomes diverge before or after?
Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:47-59.
20. Kuraku S, Takio Y, Sugahara F, Takechi M, Kuratani S: Evolution of
oropharyngeal patterning mechanisms involving Dlx and endothelins in
vertebrates. Dev Biol 2010, 341:315-323.
21. Ghanem N, Jarinova O, Amores A, Long Q, Hatch G, Park BK, Rubenstein JL,
Ekker M: Regulatory roles of conserved intergenic domains in vertebrate
Dlx bigene clusters. Genome Res 2003, 13:533-543.
22. Sumiyama K, Irvine SQ, Ruddle FH: The role of gene duplication in the
evolution and function of the vertebrate Dlx/distal-less bigene clusters.
J Struct Funct Genomics 2003, 3:151-159.
23. Sumiyama K, Irvine SQ, Stock DW, Weiss KM, Kawasaki K, Shimizu N,
Shashikant CS, Miller W, Ruddle FH: Genomic structure and functional
control of the Dlx3-7 bigene cluster. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99:780-785.
24. Depew MJ, Lufkin T, Rubenstein JL: Specification of jaw subdivisions by
Dlx genes. Science 2002, 298:381-385.
25. Graham A: Jaw development: chinless wonders. Curr Biol 2002, 12:
R810-812.
26. Brown ST, Wang J, Groves AK: Dlx gene expression during chick inner ear
development. J Comp Neurol 2005, 483:48-65.
27. Rouzankina I, Abate-Shen C, Niswander L: Dlx genes integrate positive and
negative signals during feather bud development. Dev Biol 2004,
265:219-233.
28. Walker MB, Miller CT, Coffin Talbot J, Stock DW, Kimmel CB: Zebrafish furin
mutants reveal intricacies in regulating Endothelin1 signaling in
craniofacial patterning. Dev Biol 2006, 295:194-205.
29. Talbot JC, Johnson SL, Kimmel CB: hand2 and Dlx genes specify dorsal,
intermediate and ventral domains within zebrafish pharyngeal arches.
Development 2010, 137:2507-2517.
30. Miller CT, Swartz ME, Khuu PA, Walker MB, Eberhart JK, Kimmel CB: mef2ca
is required in cranial neural crest to effect Endothelin1 signaling in
zebrafish. Dev Biol 2007, 308:144-157.
31. Borday-Birraux V, Van der Heyden C, Debiais-Thibaud M, Verreijdt L,
Stock DW, Huysseune A, Sire JY: Expression of Dlx genes during the
development of the zebrafish pharyngeal dentition: evolutionary
implications. Evol Dev 2006, 8:130-141.
32. Debiais-Thibaud M, Germon I, Laurenti P, Casane D, Borday-Birraux V: Low
divergence in Dlx gene expression between dentitions of the medaka
(Oryzias latipes) versus high level of expression shuffling in osteichtyans.
Evol Dev 2008, 10:464-476.
33. Kuraku S, Meyer A: The evolution and maintenance of Hox gene clusters
in vertebrates and the teleost-specific genome duplication. Int J Dev Biol
2009, 53:765-773.
34. Meyer A, Van de Peer Y: From 2R to 3R: evidence for a fish-specific
genome duplication (FSGD). Bioessays 2005, 27:937-945.
35. Venkatesh B, Kirkness EF, Loh YH, Halpern AL, Lee AP, Johnson J,
Dandona N, Viswanathan LD, Tay A, Venter JC, Strausberg RL, Brenner S:
Survey sequencing and comparative analysis of the elephant shark
(Callorhinchus milii) genome. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e101.
36. Coubrough ML, Bendall AJ: Impaired nuclear import of mammalian Dlx4
proteins as a consequence of rapid sequence divergence. Exp Cell Res
2006, 312:3880-3891.
37. Azuma Y, Kumazawa Y, Miya M, Mabuchi K, Nishida M: Mitogenomic
evaluation of the historical biogeography of cichlids toward reliable
dating of teleostean divergences. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:215.
38. Chen WJ, Orti G, Meyer A: Novel evolutionary relationship among four
fish model systems. Trends in Genetics 2004, 20:424-431.

Page 14 of 14

39. Li C, Orti G, Zhang G, Lu G: A practical approach to phylogenomics: the
phylogeny of ray-finned fish (Actinopterygii) as a case study. BMC Evol
Biol 2007, 7:44.
40. Steinke D, Salzburger W, Meyer A: Novel relationships among ten fish
model species revealed based on a phylogenomic analysis using ESTs. J
Mol Evol 2006, 62:772-784.
41. Macdonald RB, Debiais-Thibaud M, Martin K, Poitras L, Tay BH, Venkatesh B,
Ekker M: Functional conservation of a forebrain enhancer from the
elephant shark (Callorhinchus milii) in zebrafish and mice. BMC Evol Biol
2010, 10:157.
42. Davis A, Scemama JL, Stellwag EJ: Japanese medaka Hox paralog group 2:
insights into the evolution of Hox PG2 gene composition and
expression in the Osteichthyes. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2008,
310:623-641.
43. Scemama JL, Vernon JL, Stellwag EJ: Differential expression of hoxa2a and
hoxa2b genes during striped bass embryonic development. Gene Expr
Patterns 2006, 6:843-848.
44. Hoegg S, Meyer A: Hox clusters as models for vertebrate genome
evolution. Trends Genet 2005, 21:421-424.
45. Feiner N, Begemann G, Renz AJ, Meyer A, Kuraku S: The origin of bmp16, a
novel Bmp2/4 relative, retained in teleost fish genomes. BMC Evol Biol
2009, 9:277.
46. Kuraku S, Takio Y, Tamura K, Aono H, Meyer A, Kuratani S: Noncanonical
role of Hox14 revealed by its expression patterns in lamprey and shark.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:6679-6683.
47. Hoegg S, Boore JL, Kuehl JV, Meyer A: Comparative phylogenomic
analyses of teleost fish Hox gene clusters: lessons from the cichlid fish
Astatotilapia burtoni. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:317.
48. Tagle DA, Koop BF, Goodman M, Slightom JL, Hess DL, Jones RT:
Embryonic epsilon and gamma globin genes of a prosimian primate
(Galago crassicaudatus). Nucleotide and amino acid sequences,
developmental regulation and phylogenetic footprints. J Mol Biol 1988,
203:439-455.
49. Rokas A, Holland PW: Rare genomic changes as a tool for phylogenetics.
Trends Ecol Evol 2000, 15:454-459.
50. Joint Genome Institute (JGI). [ftp://ftp.jgi-psf.org/pub/JGI_data/Cichlid/].
51. Sambrook J, Russell DW: Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. 3 edition.
Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2001.
52. Burge C, Karlin S: Prediction of complete gene structures in human
genomic DNA. J Mol Biol 1997, 268:78-94.
53. Stanke M, Keller O, Gunduz I, Hayes A, Waack S, Morgenstern B:
AUGUSTUS: ab initio prediction of alternative transcripts. Nucleic Acids
Res 2006, 34:W435-439.
54. VISTA Genome Browser. [http://genome.lbl.gov/vista/].
55. Ensembl. [http://www.ensembl.org/;], version 54.
56. Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Sayers EW: GenBank.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D46-D51.
57. Katoh K, Kuma K, Toh H, Miyata T: MAFFT version 5: improvement in
accuracy of multiple sequence alignment. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:511-518.
58. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
59. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
60. Expressed Sequence Tags database of NCBI. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/dbEST/].
61. Kuraku S, Usuda R, Kuratani S: Comprehensive survey of carapacial ridgespecific genes in turtle implies co-option of some regulatory genes in
carapace evolution. Evol Dev 2005, 7:3-17.
62. Huysseune A, Sire JY: Structure and development of first-generation
teeth in the cichlid Hemichromis bimaculatus (Teleostei, Cichlidae). Tissue
Cell 1997, 29:679-697.
63. Zhong YF, Butts T, Holland PW: HomeoDB: a database of homeobox gene
diversity. Evol Dev 2008, 10:516-518.
doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-1
Cite this article as: Renz et al.: Ancestral and derived attributes of the
dlx gene repertoire, cluster structure and expression patterns in an
African cichlid fish. EvoDevo 2011 2:1.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
