<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Corticosteroids: way upstream</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Molecular Brain 2010 3:2. doi:10.1186/1756-6606-3-2"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Therese Riedemann"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

REVIEW

Open Access

Corticosteroids: way upstream
Therese Riedemann1,2, Alexandre V Patchev1, Kwangwook Cho2, Osborne FX Almeida1*

Abstract
Studies into the mechanisms of corticosteroid action continue to be a rich bed of research, spanning the fields of
neuroscience and endocrinology through to immunology and metabolism. However, the vast literature generated,
in particular with respect to corticosteroid actions in the brain, tends to be contentious, with some aspects suffering from loose definitions, poorly-defined models, and appropriate dissection kits. Here, rather than presenting a
comprehensive review of the subject, we aim to present a critique of key concepts that have emerged over the
years so as to stimulate new thoughts in the field by identifying apparent shortcomings. This article will draw on
experience and knowledge derived from studies of the neural actions of other steroid hormones, in particular
estrogens, not only because there are many parallels but also because ‘learning from differences’ can be a fruitful
approach. The core purpose of this review is to consider the mechanisms through which corticosteroids might act
rapidly to alter neural signaling.
The protagonists and their roles
Corticosteroids are the main humoral mediators of
stress and their increased secretion in response to
adverse stimuli normally results in a cascade of physiological and behavioral homeostatic mechanisms that
allow survival and the activation of defense mechanisms
against future insults. They facilitate arousal and the
appropriate channeling of physiological resources; primarily, corticosteroids act to conserve essential salts, stimulate gluconeogenesis and lipid metabolism,
cardiovascular and pulmonary function and erythropoeisis and bone turnover, while inhibiting, among others,
reproductive and ingestive behaviors as well as immune
responses [1]. Thus, corticosteroids are well suited to
serve the fight-or-flight response (first described by
Walter B. Cannon in 1915).
Corticosteroids (CS) are primarily produced by the
adrenal glands although recent studies suggest that they
may also be synthesized in the brain [2,3]. The term
‘corticosteroids’ embraces two prototypic steroids with
distinct biological functions: glucocorticoids (cortisol in
most large mammals, corticosterone in rodents and
other taxa), named because of their gluconeogenic properties, and mineralocorticoids (primarily aldosterone),
named for their role in the regulation of the salt-water
balance. Like other steroid hormones, corticosteroids
* Correspondence: osa@mpipsykl.mpg.de
1
Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelin Str. 2-10, 80804 Munich,
Germany

are small, lipophilic molecules (ca. 300 Da) that are
derived from cholesterol. Their physical properties facilitate their passage across the blood brain barrier where
they act to maintain brain structure (they are implicated
in the regulation of neuronal cell birth, differentiation
and apoptosis, as well as dendritic arborization and
synaptic function), and integrate a variety of behavioral
and physiological processes, including their own secretion. In this respect, they serve as messengers between
the periphery and brain, but also between the external
and internal environments and the brain.
The hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis embraces the
feedforward and feedback neuroendocrine mechanisms
that regulate CS production and synthesis (Figure 1).
Neural inputs trigger the release of adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary which, in turn, stimulates adrenocortical synthesis and secretion of CS.
Although CS are not stored in a readily-releasable pool,
it is estimated that adequate amounts of CS can be
released into the bloodstream within minutes of appropriate neural stimuli. Noxious (stressful) stimuli are the
primary triggers of neural firing that result in increased
CS release. On the other hand, CS are secreted according to strictly-regulated circadian rhythms that are dictated by the central nervous system. More recently, CS
have been found to have ultradian rhythmic patterns of
release. Such patterns are most likely maintained
through dynamic cross-talk between the peripherallyproduced CS and centrally-driven regulatory

© 2010 Riedemann et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

Page 2 of 20

Figure 1 Schematic representation of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and its neuronal inputs. Corticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH)- and arginine vasopressin (AVP)-expressing parvocellular neurons in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) project to pituitary (via the
median eminence) where they stimulate adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) synthesis and secretion, subsequently triggering corticosteroid
synthesis and release from the adrenal cortex. Besides acting in the brain to regulate various behaviours, corticosteroids fine-tune the
subsequent pattern (amplitude and duration) of corticosteroid secretion; they activate their cognate receptors in the pituitary, hypothalamus and
hippocampus and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST, a relay between the hippocampus/amygdala and the PVN) to restrain, and in the
amygdala to enhance, adrenocortical secretion. Monoaminergic transmitters, namely, norepinephrine, serotonin and dopamine released from
midbrain nuclei (the locus coeruleus [LC], raphé and ventral tegmental area [VTA] and substantia nigra [SN], respectively) exert modulatory
effects on all brain regions involved in the control of the HPA axis. ‘Plus’ signs (green) indicate positive drive on the HPA axis; ‘minus’ signs (red)
represent sites of corticosteroid negative feedback; ‘clock’ signs denote neuronal populations known to respond rapidly to corticosteroids.
Corticosteroids are secreted rhythmically, displaying ultradian and circadian patterns. The circadian peak coincides with the onset of the daily
activity cycle (dark phase in rodents, light phase in humans). While the physiological and behavioural significance of the ultradian rhythms of
corticosteroid secretion is still unclear, it is plausible that they serve to dynamically fine-tune the regulation of the HPA axis and thus, to facilitate
adaptive processes. LD, light-dark cycle.

mechanisms; they are also likely important integrators of
normo-physiological functions [4].
Since corticosteroids come on stage within 3-7 minutes of first perception of a stressor [5], they may be
considered to be secondary or auxiliary players in comparison to monoamines (in particular, epinephrine and
norepinephrine) whose actions are initiated within milliseconds to seconds [6] i.e. corticosteroids are secreted
during the first stage of the ‘general adaptation syndrome’, a concept introduced by Hans Selye in 1946.
However, since corticosteroids act against the background of increased monoamine secretion, it is thought
that they act to fine-tune the organism’s response to
stress [7] and to facilitate signal-to-noise discrimination.
Moreover, unlike the transient monoamine response,
corticosteroids exert sustained actions on cellular activity and behavior, and therefore are essential for ensuring
the orchestration of a coordinated adaptive response as

well as ‘preparedness’ of the organism to cope with
future challenges.
Although corticosteroids are often thought of in negative terms because of their causative role in diseases
such as diabetes, hypertension, osteoporosis and
immune suppression, they are essential for adaptation to
stress and for maintaining physiological processes. With
respect to brain structure and function, corticosteroids
play an important role in maintaining hippocampal cell
numbers under basal conditions; this is illustrated by
robust observations that removal of corticosteroids by
extirpation of the adrenal glands results in massive
apoptosis, with parallel increases in neurogenesis, within
the granule cell population of the hippocampus [8]. On
the other hand, stress and elevated levels of glucocorticoids inhibit the generation of new granule neurons [9].
Another aspect that suggests an important role of corticosteroids in normo-physiology is the well-pronounced

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

circadian pattern of corticosteroid secretion. These
rhythms are robust and bi-directionally tightly coupled
to the individual’s sleep-activity and feeding cycles,
while being entrained and maintained by the daily lightdark cycle.
The magnitude and duration of the humoral response
to stress is tightly coupled to the nature (quality, intensity and duration) of the stressor, as well as the context
in which it occurs. Depending on context (e.g. the prevailing physiological or psychological state, as well as
history of the individual), stressors may trigger excessive
corticosteroid secretion over an extended duration; in
such cases, the response switches from being an adaptive one into a maladaptive one, marked by transient or
chronic pathology. Major depression and cognitive
impairment are two conditions that represent the socalled stress-induced disorders of the brain. The first of
these seems to reflect a sub-optimal stress-coping strategy and may largely originate from impairments of the
mechanisms contributing to the homeostatic negative
feedback processes that act to protect the organism
against excessive exposure to corticosteroids; frequently,
depressed mood is accompanied by impaired cognition
and hyperemotionality, indicating that stress impacts on
multiple, inter-related neural circuits. A number of
human and animal studies have demonstrated the disruptive effects of excessive corticosteroid secretion on
cognition [10-12]. There is now strong evidence that the
latter involve structural changes, including severe reductions in the dendritic arborization of hippocampal and
prefronto-cortical neurons [13-15]. and synaptic loss
[16-18]. In addition, recent studies indicate that stress
may initiate neurodegenerative processes that increase
the risk for severe cognitive deficits such as those seen
in dementia of the Alzheimer type [19]. Lastly, chronically elevated levels of corticosteroids interfere with central and pituitary integrators and regulators of the
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, resulting in
impaired corticosteroid negative feedback and sustained
corticosteroid secretion [20].

The soliloquy we’ve come to know and love
Glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids fulfill their characteristic biological functions through the mediation of
glucocorticoid receptors (GR) and mineralocorticoid
receptors (MR), respectively. Both of these receptors are
present in the brain; while GR are expressed ubiquitously (most strongly in the hippocampus), MR are
more discretely distributed (strongly expressed in certain
hippocampal subfields and the septum, and moderately
expressed in the amygdala and hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus) [21]. The MR has a 7-10-fold greater affinity for corticosterone as compared to the GR [22]. It is
thus estimated that the MR is some 80% occupied

Page 3 of 20

under basal conditions, and that the GR only becomes
activated when corticosterone levels rise during the daily
circadian peak of corticosterone secretion or after stress.
Although aldosterone may be synthesized in the brain
[2,3], it should be noted that brain MR do not normally
‘see’ their prototypic endogenous ligand; aldosterone is
produced in the periphery at concentrations that are too
low to have a direct impact on the brain and in any
case, the hormone does not easily cross the blood-brain
barrier. On the other hand, it should be mentioned that
ligand availability is subject to local regulation through
activation/deactivation of cortisol/corticosterone through
the actions of 11b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase [23].
The MR and GR belong to the phylogenetically
ancient superfamily of nuclear receptors, all of which
are transcriptional factors. For the sake of clarity, we
will herein refer to nuclear MR and GR as nMR and
nGR, respectively. Whereas the unliganded nMR is primarily localized in the nucleus, the unoccupied nGR
resides in the cytoplasm and only translocates to the
nucleus upon ligand activation. This process depends on
the dissociation of a host of chaperone and co-chaperone molecules, including heat shock protein 90 (hsp90)
as well as on the inclusion of a nuclear translocation
signal in the receptor protein [24]. Like other nuclear
receptors, nMR and nGR are organized according to
canonical modules, including a ligand binding domain
(LBD), a DNA binding domain (DBD), and two activation functions (AF-1 and AF-2) at their N- and C-terminals, respectively. The various domains share
considerable homologies (homology between nMR and
nGR: ~57% in LBD; ~94% in DBD). Interactions of the
DBD with hormone response elements (HRE) in the
promoters of specific genes result in the induction or
repression of gene transcription and subsequently,
changes in the expression of proteins that influence cellular functions. Homologies also exist within the HRE
sequence of various nuclear receptors, and receptor
recruitment and interactions with specific co-regulator
proteins (co-activators/-repressors) may endow these
structurally similar receptors with differing specificities
and potencies.

Stage props
Transcriptional and translational effects of corticosteroid
receptor activation have been demonstrated using drugs
such as actinomycin D and cycloheximide, respectively.
On the other hand, demonstration that nGR mediate
corticosteroid effects have relied on the use of the
antagonist mifepristone (RU 38486, also a potent
antagonist of progesterone receptors), while spironolactone or oxoprenoate (RU28318) have been used to
demonstrate mediation through nMR. Other potentially
useful additions to the pharmacological toolbox for

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

studying events mediated by nGR and nMR include
established chaperone inhibitors of hsp90 (e.g. cisplatin
and geldanamycin; [25]) and of the FK506-binding proteins (e.g. GPI1046; [26]).

Drop sceneb
The mode of action of corticosteroids summarized
above, i.e. involving gene transcription and translation,
may be generalized to all steroid hormone receptors,
including those for estrogens. Since nuclear receptors
become transcriptionally active upon ligand activation,
their actions are, by definition, slow in onset and potentially long-lasting (hours to days, or even months); at
best, gene transcription and translation require a minimum of 20-30 minutes (translation takes longer than
transcription) [27]. However, steroids have been implicated in the elicitation of a number of ‘rapid’ or ‘fast’
physiological and behavioral responses to external stimuli; some examples of fast steroid-mediated responses
and the mechanisms thought to underlie their actions
are presented in Additional File 1. Historically, the idea
that steroids can rapidly alter neuronal excitability and
conduction stemmed from work on the actions of sex
steroids by Kawakami and Sawyer in 1959 [28] and
Woolley and Timiras in 1962 [29].
As a rule, fast responses are considered to be those
that occur within the first 20 minutes of increased steroid secretion, i.e. in a much shorter timeframe than that
required for effects on gene transcription and protein
synthesis. Somewhat erroneously, these fast actions are
referred to as ‘non-genomic’; in fact, rapidly triggered
signaling cascades may ultimately converge in the
nucleus to regulate gene transcription and protein
synthesis. Distinction between the ‘fast’ and ‘slow’
actions of steroid hormones is more of mechanistic than
of behavioral or physiological importance, since the latter are the integrated manifestations of sequential
events. Viewed from this perspective, the rapid actions
of steroids may be considered as ‘primers’ of the substrates responsible for the manifestation of transcriptional events triggered by nuclear receptors; kinase
cascades activated during early phases of steroid action
and which lead to the phosphorylation of regulatory
sites of nuclear receptors [30-32] are a good example of
such priming functions.
Many of the changes in behavior and brain physiology
that are listed in Additional File 1 reflect rapid
responses of the hippocampus to steroid hormones. For
example, corticosteroids have been consistently shown
to influence cognition and their effects are thought to
result from their ability to directly or indirectly alter the
excitability of hippocampal neurons. The hippocampus
has been extensively studied for a number of pragmatic
reasons. The input-output connections of the different

Page 4 of 20

hippocampal subfields are well defined, making their
electrophysiological study convenient. Of all brain areas,
the hippocampus has been best studied in the context
of long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), the electrophysiological correlates of learning and memory, functions in which the hippocampus is
strongly implicated [[33-35]; see Figure 2 and Additional
File 2]. The hippocampus also serves as an important
homeostatic regulator of the HPA axis upon which it
exerts a strong negative drive [36,37] through the mediation of nMR and nGR [38].
Although the attention paid to the hippocampus is justifiable because of its role in the regulation of many behavioral and physiological processes, it should be
remembered that it constitutes only part of a complex
neuronal network that underpins physiology and behavior in normal and pathological states. For example,
although the hippocampus plays an important role in
the regulation of the HPA axis, it should be noted that
other brain areas such as the prefrontal cortex [39],
amygdala and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, under
the modulatory influence of monoamines from the hindbrain [40], contribute to the control of corticosteroid
secretion; all these areas have reciprocal connections
with the hippocampus and express nGR.
Several studies have begun to define how corticosteroids and other steroids act on different brain structures
to produce integrated and adaptive behavioral and physiological responses, e.g. the prefrontal and orbito-frontal cortices (executive functions, including attention,
behavioral flexibility, declarative memory, decision making [41,13,14,42]), thalamus (processing and gating of
sensory input [43], amygdala (evaluation of emotional
load of sensory input and regulation of fear [44], ventral
striatum (motivation and reward [45] and decision-making [42]), and the cerebellum (learning of motor tasks
[46]. Of these, the amygdala, involved in the control of
fear, aggression and cognition (see Additional File 1),
has been the most intensively studied. Interesting work
by Roozendaal and colleagues has demonstrated a crosstalk between rapid GC and noradrenergic signaling in
contextual memory consolidation [44,47] and suggests
that endocannabinoids are key mediators of this crosstalk [48].

Putative membrane receptors - pirates with legs
to stand on?
The message that emerges from the previous section is
that nuclear receptors, acting as transcriptional factors,
are unlikely to mediate rapid actions of the sort listed in
Additional File 1. Nevertheless, the identity of the molecular entity that allows rapid transduction of steroid signals remains elusive. Interestingly, some of the fast
responses to corticosteroids are reportedly attenuated in

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

Page 5 of 20

Figure 2 Schematic representation of induction and recording of long-term potentation and long term depression in the
hippocampus. Long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) can be induced by applying an electrical stimulus by placing an
electrode placed in the Schaffer collateral-commissural (SCC) pathway and recording from the CA1 subfield. Upper panel shows a coronal section
through the dorsal hippocampus, with schematic representation of intra-hippocampal connectivity. The CA1 pyramidal cell layer receives input
from the entorhinal cortex through the dentate gyrus [DG] and the CA3 pyramidal layers and the SCC; the subiculum carries hippocampal
efferents. Lower left-hand panel illustrates measurements of LTP as excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSP, peak amplitude or slope of the latter).
Initially, low-frequency stimulation (LFS, usually less than 0.1 Hz) is applied to the Schaffer collaterals to establish a stable baseline (usually for 2030 min), after which LTP is induced by high-frequency stimulation (HFS; usually 100 Hz), followed by LFS. Successful induction of LTP can be
assumed when the post-HFS EPSP peak amplitude (or slope) exceeds that seen before HFS and is maintained for at least 60 min. ① depicts a
single evoked EPSP; ② represents a potentiated EPSP after HFS. Lower right-hand panel shows that EPSP recordings also serve to detect LTD.
After initial baseline recording, low-frequency stimulation (LFS, usually 1 or 5 Hz) is applied to the SCC; successfully induced LTD can be assumed
when the post-LFS EPSP peak amplitude (or slope) is smaller than that observed before LFS. ① shows a single baseline EPSP; ② depicts a
example of a depressed EPSP after LFS.

the presence of pharmacological antagonists of nGR (RU
38486 [49] or nMR (spironolactone [50,51]). These findings suggest certain homologies between the classical
nuclear receptors and the putative receptors mediating
the rapid actions of these steroids. Nevertheless, the
existence of another class of receptors, with distinct chemistries and cellular localizations, and that are not sensitive to the above-named antagonists, cannot be
dismissed.
Several mechanisms that may account for membranemediated transduction of the rapid actions of estradiol
have been proposed (see Figure 3). Substantial evidence

supports the view that classical nuclear estrogen receptors (nER of which there are two isoforms, ERa and ERb)
are integrated into, or in close proximity of, the cell
membrane. One hypothesis is that palmitoylation facilitates the interaction of these receptors with caveolins, a
family of proteins that associate with cholesterol and
sphingolipids to form caveolae within the plasma membrane and which are implicated in signal transduction.
While some authors describe protein-protein interactions
of such membrane-associated nER with other membrane
proteins as a mechanism to explain rapid estrogen signaling [52-54], others propose mediation by a membrane-

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

Page 6 of 20

Figure 3 Schematic representation of corticosteroid-triggered multiple tentative rapidly influencing neuronal function. Corticosteroids
are represented by red triangles. Nuclear GR (nGR) interact with caveolins [cf. [81]]; the interaction probably depends on posttranslational
modifications of nGR to yield so-called membrane corticosteroid receptors (mCR). Alternatively, CS-initiated intracellular signaling cascades may
result from corticosteroid binding to proteins embedded in the plasma membrane, e.g. G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) [75] which, upon
activation, activate protein kinase A (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC) in turn. Other evidence points to membrane-bound corticosteroid binding
proteins that interact with members of the src family of kinases (SFK) to activate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and/or
modulate the activity of other membrane-associated proteins, e.g. NMDA receptors and other ion channels with potential steroid binding sites
[76,85,86,222]. Under basal conditions, nGR are tethered in the cytoplasm in the form of a protein complex that includes the chaperone heat
shock protein 90 (hsp90) which itself may directly interact with Src kinases and the MAPK kinase, MEK [cf. [83]]. Additionally, direct interactions
between the nGR and Ras which may be functionally relevant have been described [84]. Finally, MAPK-mediated phsophorylation of nGR may
influence the transcriptional activity of nGR [32]. Thus, corticosteroid actions at the plasma membrane can converge and prime or potentiate
hormonal actions on gene transcription.

bound ER (mER) that is coupled to a Gaq protein. Evidence for the latter includes the observation that estradiol induces activation of the phospholipase C- protein
kinase A (PLC-PKC-PKA) pathway in nER knockdown
mice [55]. The same investigators demonstrated rapid
electrophysiological effects of STX, a diphenylacrylamide-based selective estrogen receptor modulator, in
nER knockout animals; STX, which does not bind to
either isoform of the nER, proved to be more potent than
estradiol in their in vitro and in vivo test systems [55,56].

While no mER has been cloned and characterized to
date, GPR 30, an orphan G protein-coupled receptor
(GPCR), has been identified as a potential transducer of
estrogen signals that originate at the cell membrane
[57,58]. GPR 30 was shown to display similar structural
characteristics to other membrane receptors [57], but
was nevertheless viewed with a certain amount of skepticism. For example, the nER antagonist ICI 182,780 exerts
agonistic effects on this receptor [59] and neurons from
GPR 30 knockout mice still display rapid responses to

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

estradiol [60], the latter finding suggesting that GPR 30
may co-exist alongside (an)other mER with unique pharmacological properties. Notably, in an extension of their
earlier work, Revankar et al. [61] exploited chemical biology to explore the subcellular localization of GPR 30 and
its signaling potential; on the basis of observations in 4
cancer cell lines, they discarded the notion that sufficient
GPR 30 is localized at the plasma membrane and rather
suggested that GPR 30 localized in the endoplasmic reticulum serves as an intracellular transmembrane receptor
for estrogen.
Interestingly, Toran-Allerand and colleagues [62,63]
described a high affinity (K D for estradiol: 1.6 nM)
caveolin-associated protein in the plasma membranes of
neonatal (but not adult) neocortical and uterine tissues.
This so-called ER-X seems to come closer to meeting
the expectations of a distinct mER insofar that it cannot
be blocked by ICI 182,780 [62]; moreover, these authors
found that experimentally-induced ischemic stroke in
adult animals is accompanied by an upregulation of ERX in the brain, suggesting that the ER-X mediates the
neuroprotective actions ascribed to estrogens.
It is tempting to hypothesize, that the mediators of
rapid corticosteroid effects may share similar basic properties and mechanisms with the proposed membraneassociated estrogen receptors. The existence of a membrane-bound receptor for corticosteroids (herein
referred to as mCR) was postulated by Willmer in 1961
[64]. Willmer’s suggestion that steroid hormones interdigitate with, and alter the permeability of, lipids in the
plasma membrane, lost currency as evidence that steroids bind to intracellular proteins (nuclear receptors)
and stimulate protein synthesis began to accumulate
from 1961 onwards [65,66]. However, in 1974 Satre and
Vignais described corticosterone binding to mitochondrial preparations from the adrenal and kidney [67], a
finding that eventually extended to other cell types [68].
A series of authors provided evidence for membranebound steroid recognition sites in the brain [69-71];
among these, Towle and Sze demonstrated specific corticosterone binding to plasma membrane preparations
from rat brain synapses [72]. These membrane binding
sites had a relatively high affinity for corticosterone (KD
10-7 M vs. 10-9 M in the case of cytosolic binding sites)
and treatment with phospholipase A2 or phospholipase
C led to complete dissociation of membrane-bound corticosterone. Similarly, Orchinik et al. described the presence of mCR in brain synaptosomal fractions obtained
from the amphibian Taricha granulosa (rough-skinned
newt) [69]. These receptors showed pharmacological
specificity for corticosterone and cortisol (KD 10-9 M),
and lesser affinities for aldosterone and other natural
and synthetic steroids (such as dexamethasone and RU
38486). Importantly, Orchinik et al. reported a linear

Page 7 of 20

relationship between the potencies of various compounds (corticosterone being the most potent) in inhibiting male reproductive behavior (inhibition by
corticosterone within 8 minutes of application) and
their ability to bind the putative mCR [69]. In subsequent studies, these authors described similar neuronal
mCR in mammalian [73] and bird [74] brains and suggested a role for guanine nucleotide-binding proteins in
the formation of a ternary complex of corticosterone
and the putative neuronal mCR, i.e. the mCR appears to
be coupled to G proteins [75]. Additional evidence for
the existence of a mCR was eventually provided by
Orchinik’s colleagues who solubilized and partially purified membrane-bound corticosterone binding sites from
the amphibian brain [76]; the assumed mCR had a
molecular weight of about 63 kDa, as compared to 97
kDa and 110 kDa in the case of the nGR and nMR,
respectively. More recently, studies by Johnson et al.
[77] provided anatomical evidence for the existence of
nGR within the postsynaptic density of neurons in the
rodent amygdala. At present it is unclear as to whether
there are any homologies between the mCR and either
the nGR or nMR.
Ultrastructural studies with an antibody against purified rat nGR revealed immunoreactivity associated with
the plasma membrane of rat hippocampal and hypothalamic neurons [78]. Notably, membrane-associated
immunoreactive nGR sites were observed in or near
membranes covering the dendrites and somata of pyramidal neurons; nGR immunoreactivity was also seen in
the vicinity of the Golgi complex. With regard to the
plasma membrane, Liposits and Bohn [78] noted that
nGR immunoreactivity was associated with coated vesicles which, together with their localization along the
membrane, suggested that nGR might either be transported and inserted into the plasma membrane, or
coupled to mediators of transduced signals. In this
respect, parallels may be drawn with what was reported
above with respect to the membrane-bound mediators
of estrogen actions. Palmitoylation of the nER has been
suggested as a mechanism that facilitates integration of
the nuclear receptor into (or the proximity of) the cell
membrane, thus providing access to BSA-conjugated
steroids and interactions of the receptor with membrane-associated signaling proteins [79]. While it
remains to be shown that classical corticosteroid receptors can be palmitoylated and trafficked to the plasma
membrane, recent studies have identified a highly conserved 9-amino acid motif in the ligand binding domain
of estrogen, progesterone, androgen and glucocorticoid
receptors that could serve as a substrate for palmitoylation [80]; these observations suggest that palmitoylation
may be a general mechanism that allows nuclear receptors to double up as bona fide membrane receptors.

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

Supporting the plausibility of this view, Matthews et al.
have shown that nGR interacts with caveolin [81].
Many unliganded nuclear receptors (e.g. nGR), are
tethered in the cytoplasm through their association with
chaperone proteins such as heat shock protein 90
(hsp90); this complex is dissociated upon arrival of the
ligand [24]. Interestingly, hsp90 is known to interact
with src kinase [82], a membrane-proximal kinase
thought to mediate the rapid activation of the MAPK
pathway by corticosteroids. In addition, hsp90 interactions with MEK2, another kinase upstream of MAPK,
has been shown to mediate MAPK pathway activation
by estradiol [83]. In fact, nGR itself reportedly interacts
with Raf-1, a downstream effector of Ras, and upstream
regulator of the MAPK pathway [84].
Receptors for several neurotransmitters (some of
which are ion channels) have been shown to bind CS
[76,85,86]. Although it remains unclear as to whether
these interactions serve as a conduit of the rapid actions
of CS, the latter seems plausible given the evidence that
neurosteroids can modulate chloride flux and thereby,
neuronal excitability, by binding to an allosteric site on
the GABAA receptor [87].
In summary, there is growing support for the view
that CS can initiate signaling at the plasma membrane
through one or more of the following mediatory
mechanisms: (i) G protein-coupled membrane-bound
CS receptors, (ii) steroid modulatory sites on plasmabound neurotransmitter receptors, (iii) interactions
between cytoplasmic CS receptors and kinase familyinteracting chaperone molecules, and/or (iv) palmitoylation. Elucidation of the mechanisms underlying the
rapid actions of CS will require a stepwise analysis of
the contributions of each member of this ‘interactome’ a major challenge.

From the sightlines - peeping on a rapidly
changing stage
This section will focus on the cellular endpoints that
can be used to support the view that corticosteroids
rapidly influence neuronal activity, focusing on alterations in membrane excitability and signaling cascades
that originate at or close to the plasma membrane.
However, attempts to summarize the existing literature
are confronted with the fact that the results derive from
disparate protocols and experimental models in different
laboratories. For example, a wide range of corticosteroid
doses and exposure times have been applied to studying
synaptic transmission in either rat or mouse dissociated
hippocampal neurons or hippocampal slices. We will,
however, first consider early studies on hypothalamic
neurons by Kasai and colleagues and Saphier and Feldman, using in vitro ionotophoresis. Kasai and colleagues
showed that cortisol excited tuberoinfundibular neurons

Page 8 of 20

in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) which project to
the median eminence from where their neurosecretory
products reach the anterior pituitary; however, these
authors also reported inhibitory effects of cortisol in the
PVN, suggesting this to result from inhibition of noradrenergic inputs [88-90]. Saphier and Feldman, observed
a significant reduction in the spontaneous firing rates of
similar hypothalamic neurons after the application of
corticosterone [91,92]; these changes had a rapid onset
and were maintained even after iontophoresis of the
hormone was stopped. Further, they reported on a subset of neurons whose activity was not altered by corticosterone; glutamate-induced excitation of these
neurons was however suppressed in the presence of
corticosterone.
Together, the studies described above represent a
hypothalamic electrophysiological correlate of the negative feedback control of adrenocortical secretion, and
illustrate that corticosteroids can elicit different
responses from different brain areas or neuronal populations within an anatomical region or specific neuronal
phenotypes within a given subfield; moreover, the
responses depend on neural inputs to the particular set
of neurons under investigation [91,93]. Given the suggested importance of the hippocampus in mediating glucocorticoid negative feedback (see above), it is surprising
that Barak [94] failed to observe any changes in the
activity of hippocampal neurons upon applying corticosterone. As will become evident below, despite a large
number of studies that focussed on the CA1 subfield of
the hippocampus, it is difficult to compile a consensus
view of how corticosteroids impact on the activity of
this region.
Examining spike accommodation in hippocampal neurons, Vidal et al. reported that corticosterone (1 μM)
decreases spike numbers [95], whereas Joëls and de
Kloet [96] and Beck et al. [97], using 1 nM, observed
the steroid to increase spike numbers and decrease the
after-hyperpolarisation (AHP) amplitude; these effects
were abolished in the presence of spironolactone (nMR
antagonist). Importantly, 30 nM of corticosterone, which
activates nGR (as well as nMR), decreased spike numbers and increased AHP amplitude, leading the authors
to conclude that the bifurcating actions of low and high
doses of corticosterone reflect the activation of nMR
and nGR, respectively [96]. Further, given the gradual
rise in corticosterone levels upon arrival of a stimulus
(e.g. stress), they proposed a concentration-dependent
biphasic cellular response to corticosterone, i.e. an initial
increase in neuronal excitability, followed by suppression
of neuronal excitability. Similar findings were reported
earlier by Rey et al. (effects observed between 0.2 and
10 nM corticosterone; peak increase in spike amplitude
at 2 nM corticosterone) [98].

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

Given that the amplitude of the AHP is determined by
Ca2+ and Ca 2+ -dependent K + transients [99,100], it is
interesting that Landfield and colleagues reported that
high doses of the synthetic GR agonist RU28362 (7 μM)
enhance the amplitudes of voltage-dependent calcium
channel (VDCC)- mediated Ca 2+ spikes in a protein
synthesis-dependent manner [101]. In contrast, Tian et
al. suggested that the increase in the slow after-hyperpolarization amplitude seen after exposure to high doses of
corticosterone may involve cAMP-dependent phosphorylation and Ca 2+ -activated K + channels [102]: dexamethasone (1 μM), a synthetic glucocorticoid with high
selectivity for the nGR, blocked PKA-mediated inhibition of Ca2+-activated K+ channels without influencing
VDCC-mediated Ca2+ currents in a mouse pituitary cell
line (AtT20). It should be noted that Tian et al. treated
their cells with dexamethasone for 2 h and that these
effects required de novo protein synthesis for their manifestation [102,103]. Because activation of NMDA receptors results in an influx of Ca 2+ and, as mentioned
above, Ca2+ determines the AHP amplitude [99], corticosteroid-NMDA receptor interactions have been analyzed in a number of studies using electrophysiological
recordings as the endpoint. For example, Wiegert et al.
showed that exposure of mouse hippocampal slices to
corticosterone (100 nM) for 20 min resulted in NMDA
receptor-mediated suppression of primed-burst potentiation and synaptic potentiation [104] (induced by stimulation at 10 Hz, in contrast to the more commonly-used
100 Hz LTP regimen). In contrast, theta-burst potentiation (see Additional File 2 for information on different
stimulation protocols), which requires activation of both
NMDA receptors and voltage-dependent Ca2+-channels
was not affected by corticosterone treatment. The same
authors also described a role for L-type Ca2+ channels
in the synaptic actions of corticosterone [105]. In the
context of the question of whether corticosterone can
rapidly alter synaptic function, it is important to note,
however, that Wiegert et al. [104] and Chameau et al.
[105] made their electrophysiological recordings
between 1 and 6 h after initial exposure to the steroid.
On the other hand, Chameau et al. [105] found by
quantitative PCR that corticosterone did not change the
mRNA expression of the pore-forming Cav1 subunit of
the L-type Ca2+ channel, and ruled out transcriptional
mechanisms in the effects they observed.
Wiegert et al. [104] showed that RU 38486 blocks corticosterone-induced impairments of synaptic plasticity,
implying mediation of the effects by nGR. A similar
conclusion was drawn from their previous work on
GRdim/dim mice, a strain carrying a point mutation of
the DNA binding domain of the nGR which precludes
transcriptional effects; briefly corticosterone did not
influence VDCC-mediated Ca2+ currents in hippocampal

Page 9 of 20

slices from GRdim/dim mice [106]. To address the question of how glucocorticoids enhance Ca2+ currents on
the one hand, and reduce synaptic efficacy on the other,
Joëls’ laboratory examined synaptic efficacy 1-4 h after a
brief exposure to corticosterone (1 μM CORT for 20
min) [107]. Their investigations revealed that synaptic
transmission was potentiated when VDCCs were activated, and impaired only when NMDA receptors were
activated; moreover, they found that these effects were
RU 38486-sensitive, indicating their mediation by nGR.
Together, these observations point to the importance of
considering all of the individual components that contribute to the overall response in field recordings. In this
respect, it is worth recalling that the magnitude of LTP
and LTD is a function of the number of AMPA receptors that are present at the synaptic surface (see Additional File 2). Miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents
(mEPSCs, which represent the spontaneous release of
neurotransmitter quanta from presynaptic terminals) are
mediated by AMPA receptors and changes in the
mEPSC amplitude represent postsynaptic changes in
AMPA receptor properties and/or numbers. Indeed,
Martin et al. observed that corticosterone increases the
amplitude (but not frequency) of miniature excitatory
postsynaptic currents and demonstrated that corticosterone increases trafficking of the GluR1 and GluR2 subunits of the AMPA receptor to the synaptic surface,
apparently through an nGR-dependent mechanism
[108]. This last study is in good agreement with that by
Karst and Joëls, who also reported nGR-mediated
increases in mEPSC amplitude [109].
Despite the overwhelming amount of data implying a
role for nGR and/or nMR in mediating the effects of
corticosterone on synaptic transmission, other evidence
indicates that the rapid actions of corticosterone are
mediated by mCR. For example, corticosterone was
shown to dose-dependently (0.1, 1, 10, 100 μM) inhibit
inward NMDA receptor-mediated currents, within seconds, in primary hippocampal cultures [110]. This effect
faded upon wash-out of the hormone and was not
reversible with RU 38486; assuming that RU 38486
binds specifically to nGR, the latter finding precludes
mediation through nGR. The latter interpretation is supported by the finding that the effects of corticosterone
were reproducible with membrane-impermeable BSAconjugated corticosterone. Results from Takahashi et al.
also dismissed a mediatory role for nGR or nMR in the
mediation of corticosterone effects; however, they
reported that the steroid prolongs the elevation of
NMDAR-mediated Ca2+ influx in dissociated hippocampal neurons independently of VDCC and mobilization
of intracellular Ca 2+ stores [111]. In contrast, other
authors reported that corticosterone and BSA-corticosterone (30 min) inhibit the peak amplitude of NMDA

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

receptor-mediated Ca2+ currents in the CA1 subfield of
the mouse hippocampus [93], that bath application of
corticosterone to hippocampal slices inhibits VDCCmediated Ca2+ currents within minutes [112], and that
corticosterone increases synaptosomal uptake of Ca 2+
upon K+-induced depolarization [113].
At this stage, it is important to note that some of the
discrepant reports on corticosterone-induced changes in
NMDAR-mediated Ca2+ currents may reflect the different durations of exposure to the steroid used by different groups. In fact, Wiegert et al. defined a narrow time
window (10 min before high frequency stimulation) during which corticosterone facilitates synaptic potentiation;
longer bath applications of the hormone were found to
impair synaptic potentiation [114].
Most of the evidence reviewed above presumes postsynaptic sites of corticosterone action. New studies of
CA1 neurons also report changes in the frequency of
mEPSCs, thus implying presynaptic sites of action.
Thus, Karst et al. [50] and Olijslagers et al. [51] showed
that corticosterone increases the frequency of AMPA
receptor-mediated mEPSCs. Both studies show that
application of BSA-conjugated corticosterone produced
similar effects to those obtained with corticosterone,
and interestingly, that de novo protein synthesis was not
essential for their manifestation. Together, these results
hint at the involvement of receptors other than nGR
and nMR; nevertheless, nMR antagonism by spironolactone resulted in a blockade of the corticosteroneinduced increases in mEPSC frequency. [50,51] [but see
[114]]. On the other hand, since RU 28362, a synthetic
nGR agonist, did not reproduce the effects of corticosterone, and because the effects were not antagonizable
with RU 38486, Karst et al. [50] and Olijslagers et al.
[51] proposed that the putative mCR might share identity with the nMR. The latter suggestion is supported by
experiments in mice with targeted mutations of nGR
and nMR [50,106] and work by Groc et al. [115]. Using
dissociated hippocampal cells to visualize AMPA receptor trafficking, the latter authors observed increased
synaptic surface expression of GluR2 subunits of the
AMPA receptor within minutes of exposure to corticosterone, BSA-conjugated corticosterone or aldosterone
(the prototypic nMR agonist).
Related to the electrophysiological measures summarized in the last few paragraphs, Olijslagers et al. demonstrated that activation of the MAP kinase ERK1/2 is
crucial for the corticosterone-induced increase in
mEPSC frequency [51]. Interestingly, their experiments
showed non-dependence on postsynaptic G protein
activity on mEPSC frequency. Rather, by using the HRas G12V strain of mouse which displays strong presynaptic activation of ERK1/2 due to constitutively high
expression of the H-Ras transgene, they suggested that

Page 10 of 20

the actions of corticosterone are initiated at presynaptic
sites, increasing the probability of presynaptic neurotransmitter release [50,51]. Moreover, in agreement with
other studies [111], Olijslagers et al., reported that intracellular Ca2+ stores do not influence mEPSC frequency
upon exposure to corticosterone [51]. Lastly, it should
be noted that although the involvement of G proteins in
corticosterone-induced changes in mEPSC frequency
were excluded [51], direct infusion of GDPbS into the
postsynaptic cell prevented the decrease of the peak
amplitude of IAcurrents (postsynaptic K+ conductance)
by corticosterone [51]; this finding points to mediation
through a postsynaptic mCR-dependent mechanism.
A number of studies suggest a role of G proteins in
the mediation of the rapid actions of corticosterone. For
example, ffrench-Mullen showed that the inhibition of
Ca 2+ currents by cortisol in guinea pig CA1 neurons
depends on pertussis toxin-sensitive G-proteins [112].
The same author also showed that the effects of cortisol
are significantly diminished in the presence of PKC inhibitors (BIS and PKCI 19-31), and ruled out a role for
PKA in the mediation of the actions of cortisol [112].
Similarly, Chen and Qiu showed that corticosterone
rapidly inhibits VDCC-mediated Ca 2+ currents in a
phaeochromocytoma cell line of neural origin (PC12
cells), and that inhibition of G proteins by application of
either pertussis toxin or GDPbS significantly attenuates
the ability of either corticosterone or BSA-corticosterone
to stimulate the influx of Ca2+ [116]. They also demonstrated that activation of PKC with phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate results in an inhibition of Ca2+ entry though
VDCC after depolarization with K+, and that the application of corticosterone activates PKC within 5-15 minutes. Lastly, like Qi et al. [117] who obtained similar
results in primary hippocampal neurons, Chen and Qiu
[116] showed that both, corticosterone and BSA-conjugated corticosterone trigger the activation of PKC and a
series of MAP kinases (ERK1/2, p38MAPK and c-Jun)
in PC-12 cells; maximum kinase activation occurred
within 15 min of application of the hormone and the
effects could not be attenuated by RU 38486.

Reality
Blood (and brain) corticosteroid levels rise and fall in a
pulsatile manner under basal (unstimulated) conditions,
and the circadian and stress-induced rises in corticosterone secretion occur gradually, taking minutes or even
hours to reach peak levels. This raises the question of
whether corticosteroid levels above a certain threshold
have an impact on physiology and behavior and provokes curiosity about the mechanisms that could underpin the rapid biological actions of corticosteroids.
Original interest in the fast actions of corticosteroids
was awakened by attempts to understand the ‘fast’ and

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

‘slow’ negative feedback actions of corticosteroids at the
level of the pituitary and the brain. Pioneering research
by Mary Dallman used ingenious experimental designs
which eventually provided evidence for the rapid actions
of corticosteroids in reducing their own secretion [118]
and, as already mentioned, the search for electrophysiological correlates was pursued in the hypothalamus in
parallel. Today, predominantly based on work from the
laboratories of Stafford Lightman and colleagues [4], it
would appear that the ultradian rhythmic secretion of
relatively high-amplitude corticosterone may serve to
ensure low levels of adrenocortical activity during the
organism’s resting phases; these brief pulses presumably
act rapidly to suppress brain-pituitary drive of adrenal
secretion.
At the behavioral level, Orchinik et al. [69] elegantly
demonstrated the potency of corticosterone in inhibiting
male reproductive behaviour in newts, within 8 min of
application. In mammals, Jozsef Haller and colleagues
have shown that corticosterone injections elicit aggressive and anxiety-related behavior (latency of 7 min) in
rats whose endogenous adrenocortical activity is suppressed by inhibition of 11b-hydroxylase activity with
metyrapone [119-121]. Several authors have also
described the ability of corticosterone to rapidly alter
locomotor behavior in rodents; for example, acute systemic injections of corticosterone to rats (placed in a
novel environment) were shown to stimulate locomotion
within 7.5 minutes of administration [122].
Rhythms in the secretion of corticosteroids and other
neuromodulatory molecules can influence experimental
outcomes, even in in vitro settings. For instance, Ca2+
currents into hippocampal CA3 neurons in in vitro preparations are highest during the subjective night, when
corticosterone levels are highest [123]. Similarly, Brunel
and de Montigny [124] reported that the firing rate and
pharmacological responsiveness of CA3 neurons is highest during the nocturnal peak in corticosterone secretion
in vivo. Importantly, using hippocampal slice cultures,
Chaudhury et al. demonstrated that the amplitude of
LTP is greatest during the subjective night [125]. Additionally, Eckel-Mahan and colleagues reported circadian
dependency in the efficiency of consolidation of long
term memory [126].
Many studies support the idea that stress, a large part
of whose actions are mediated by corticosteroids, influences learning and memory. Besides the quality and
intensity of the stressor, the context in which the stressful stimulus is perceived, is an important determinant of
the behavioral outcome. The latter is more easily
explained in terms of ‘intrinsic’ and ‘extrinsic stress
[127]; ‘intrinsic stress’ refers to situations in which stress
is either elicited by, or directly associated with, the cognitive experience (e.g. spatial learning), whereas

Page 11 of 20

‘extrinsic stress’ describes situations in which the stress
occurs outside the context of the momentary stress
situation (e.g. foot shock stress before spatial learning).
According to a model developed by Sandi and PineloNava [127], learning and memory will be facilitated by
stressors that activate the same (or similar) neural circuitries that are required for interpreting and responding to a particular cognitive challenge. Supporting this
view, Cahill and McGaugh [128] and Sandi [129]
reported that emotionally arousing experiences are better remembered than neutral ones. In fear conditioning
experiments, Cordero et al. noted that post-training corticosterone levels correlate with the strength of stimulus
required to encode memories [130,131]. Moreover, the
importance of corticosterone in information acquisition
and consolidation of memory is well known, even if still
poorly understood [132-135]. The relative importance of
nMR and nGR in these processes are elegantly discussed
by Schwabe et al. [136], and Revest et al. [134] have
demonstrated a mediatory role of the MAPK pathway in
the facilitation of hippocampus-dependent contextual
fear conditioning by corticosteroids. In the previouslycited work on long-term contextual fear memory by
Eckel-Mahan and colleagues [126], rhythms of MAPK
(ERK1/2) activation were shown to coincide temporally
with the degree of persistence of memory. Given that
corticosterone acutely increases ERK1/2 phosphorylation
[51,116,117,134], the results presented by Eckel-Mahan
and colleagues [126] should be considered in the context of the hypothesis proposed by Sandi and PineloNava [127] and the pioneering work by Oitzl and de
Kloet [137]; in addition, since the amygdala plays a
major part in the regulation of fear and has reciprocal
interactions with the hippocampus and other cognitionregulating brain areas, future interpretations of the work
by Eckel-Mahan and colleagues [126] should embrace
the idea that corticosteroids can exert actions on a network of interconnected brain structures, whose individual responses will determine the ultimate behavioral
output.
Besides the acute behavioral and physiological actions
of corticosteroids, much research has been focused on
understanding the influence of chronically elevated corticosteroid secretion. Notwithstanding the above-mentioned fact that corticosteroids may exert acute effects
during the rising phase of the endocrine response to
stress, it is important to note that the latter is, generally,
a protracted one. Thus, while the acute rises in corticosteroid secretion may shape the overall long-term
response, the longer duration of corticosteroid exposure
after stress allows recruitment of an array of intracellular responses (including nuclear receptor-mediated
events) and cellular, physiological and behavioral adaptations. It is important to note that, although the

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

adrenocortical response to stress primarily serves an
adaptive purpose, in certain circumstances, it may
switch to being maladaptive, marked by transient or
chronic pathology, as discussed earlier in this article.
The physiological and behavioral responses to stress
depend on myriad molecules and processes, with an
important contribution by corticosteroids; effects of the
latter are often studied in isolation at the cost of other
contributory factors and the neural networks which regulate, or may be regulated by, corticosteroids. This can
be exemplified by considering our earlier discussion of
corticosteroid interactions with glutamatergic transmission and reports that the direction and/or magnitude of
LTP and LTD are influenced by the intensity and emotional value of a given stressor; for example, LTP is only
reduced in animals exposed to uncontrollable stress
[138], but not in animals that can escape from the stressor [139]. Using the paradigm of foot-shock stress,
Wang et al. reported that stress induces a shift in synaptic plasticity; thus, whereas stress facilitates LTD induction, it impairs LTP induction [140]. Besides showing
that these effects of stress can be blocked by RU 38486,
these last authors showed that blockade of the NMDA
receptor restores LTP inducibility in stressed animals;
further they demonstrated that stress-induced changes
in synaptic efficacy can be abolished by prior administration of Ro25-6981, a specific antagonist of the NR2B
subunit of the NMDA receptor. A role for the NR2B
subunit in the synaptic plasticity thought to be essential
for the orchestration of the behavioral response to stress
was also suggested by Wong et al. who showed that
Ro25-6981 reverses elevated platform stress-induced
deficits in spatial learning and memory, as tested in the
Morris water maze (MWM) [141].
The NR2B subunit is predominantly associated with
extrasynaptic NMDA receptors whose activation
depends on glutamate “spill-over”, a phenomenon that
can be mimicked with threo-b-benzyloxyaspartate
(TBOA), a blocker of glutamate re-uptake. Wong et al.
[141] found that TBOA application to animals 5 min
before low frequency stimulation resulted in the successful induction of LTD, indicating that stress leads to
glutamate “spill-over”. Linking LTD with stress-induced
memory impairment, the authors showed that preventing LTD induction by infusion of a GluR2 peptide analogue that cannot be internalized abolished the ability of
stress to cause memory deficits in the MWM test; these
findings add to the evidence that acute stress results in
the internalization of AMPA receptors, followed by
synaptic depression and learning and memory deficits.
We previously discussed how the MAPK signaling
pathways may be linked with LTP and LTD (and learning and memory). In this respect, it is interesting to
note that this pathway is concomitantly activated by

Page 12 of 20

stress, presumably due to activation of nGR [142,143],
believed to be essential for the phosphorylation of
ERK1/2 [134]. Moreover, the observation that tail shock
and restraint stress robustly activate ERK1/2 and impair
synaptic potentiation in the CA1 subfield suggests a
major role for the MAPK pathway in mediating the
actions of stress [144]. In addition to inducing the phosphorylation of ERK1/2, stress activates other kinases (e.
g. p38 MAPK, CaMKII) and pCREB within 2 min of
swim stress [145]. Surprisingly, however, the latter
responses are accompanied by a reinforcement (rather
than impairment) of LTP in the dentate gyrus of the
hippocampus. This finding indicates that different stressors may elicit quite different electrophysiological
responses and/or, that the synaptic effects of stress differ
from one hippocampal subfield to another. Since the
effects of stress on biochemical and electrophysiological
signalling in the dentate gyrus were found to be subject
to modulation by serotonin [145], it is plausible that differential monoaminergic innervation of the different
hippocampal subfields defines the ultimate cellular
response.
We summarize some potential mechanisms that may
account for the rapid and slower effects of corticosteroids on neuronal physiology, with a focus on synaptic
events, in Figure 4. An attempt is made to show how
signals originating at the neuronal surface are integrated
both at the synaptic and transcriptional levels.

Critique
From the preceding, it appears safe to assume that,
irrespective of the behavioural or physiological outcomes, acute and chronic elevations of corticosteroid
secretion initiate common mechanisms and biochemical processes; convergence of these events will depend
on parameters such as exposure dosage and time, as
well as the context in which they occur. Given the
potential for convergence (as well as potentiation),
improved knowledge of the initial stages of corticosteroid signalling, whether membrane- or nuclear receptor-mediated, is clearly desirable. Studies on the rapid
neural actions of corticosteroids are likely to gain
further interest, especially as newer analytical tools
become available and knowledge about the fast actions
of other steroid hormones grows. It therefore seems
appropriate to list some critical issues and needs, the
consideration of which may foster progress through
cautious reflection:
• definition of the terms “rapid” or “fast” actions
of corticosteroids in terms of the timeframe within
which a clearly defined (electro)physiological, biochemical and/or behavioural response is elicited in
animals or neuronal cell and brain slice preparations;

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

Page 13 of 20

Figure 4 Working model of sequential corticosteroid influences on synaptic physiology. Corticosterone-mediated changes in synaptic
transmission occur at different levels and in different sequential steps. ① depicts synaptic transmission under basal conditions. Neuronal
excitation results in glutamate secretion from synaptic vesicles at presynaptic sites into the synaptic cleft. Glutamate binds to postsynaptic
glutamate-gated ion channels (in particular, AMPA receptors), which open to permit ion fluxes (Na+ influx, K+ efflux) across the AMPA receptor,
resulting in a depolarization of the postsynaptic cell. Due to a voltage-dependent Mg2+ block in its membrane domain, the NMDA receptor
remains inactive under basal conditions, and is activated when a certain transmission threshold is reached. ② Exposure to corticosteroids (e.g.
during stress) may lead to activation of ERK1/2 in the presynaptic terminal (possibly through membrane corticosteroid receptors [51]); increased
glutamatergic stimulation of postsynaptic AMPA receptors results in an increase in the frequency of AMPA receptor-mediated miniature
postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs). ③ Enhanced activation of AMPA receptors in the previous step further depolarizes the postsynaptic membrane
and activates NMDA receptors. Activated NMDA receptors (Na+ and Ca2+ influx, K+ efflux) lead to further depolarization of the postsynaptic cell,
resulting in the opening of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels (VDCC) and high postsynaptic concentrations of Ca2+. Corticosteroids may
stimulate glutamate secretion so strongly, causing glutamate “spill-over” which activates not only synaptic, but also extrasynaptic, glutamate
receptors [141]; the latter are mainly NMDA receptors of the NR2B subtype. The increased intracellular levels of Ca2+ trigger a cascade of Ca2
+
-dependent signaling pathways in the postsynaptic cell, which may, in turn, induce the phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation of
postsynaptic glutamatergic receptors and of nuclear corticosteroid receptors (nMR and nGR). Activation of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors is
thought to trigger NR2B-dependent kinases, which might initiate trafficking of extrasynaptic NR2B receptors into the postsynaptic surface.
Furthermore, Ca2+-dependent signaling pathways in the postsynaptic cell participate in the regulation of AMPA receptor trafficking to and from
the synaptic surface, as indicated in ④. Phosphorylation of nuclear corticosteroid receptors, influences their translocation to the nucleus and
therefore, their transcriptional activity [32], as indicated in ⑤.

• standardized test protocols (steroid dose, animal
or cellular models, and sexcof animals); in in vitro
studies, drug diffusion times and active concentrations achieved at target cells should be controlled;
similarly, in in vivo research, pharmacokinetic factors, including solvent and route of administration,

should be considered; age of animals, but also of
material used for in vitro testing, is important
because of dynamic age-related changes in the
expression of key partners such as glutamate receptor subunits [146]; since corticosteroids are secreted
according to a strict circadian rhythm, both the

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

availability of endogenous corticosteroids as well as
of primary and secondary downstream effectors will
vary over the day - this demands testing at a given
circadian time to ensure comparable measurements
[123-125].
• while surgical adrenalectomy is a useful approach
to ensure that only the actions of exogenously-administered steroids are being recorded, the operation
requires anaesthesia and may involve potentially
confounding post-operative pain; chemical adrenalectomy is a good alternative (e.g. blockade of corticosteroid synthesis with metyrapone), but it may
have (indirect) non-selective effects on the production of other steroids; adrenalectomy, in general,
induces massive apoptosis and stimulates neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus within just a few hours,
changes that probably result in reorganized neuronal circuits and measurable outputs [147].
• attention to the fact that acute and chronic corticosteroid exposures differ significantly, and that
administration of corticosteroids only mimics an
intermediate phase of the organism’s response to
stress;
• clear exclusion of transcriptional and translational events initiated by activation of cognate
nuclear receptors;

The show must (will) go on
While the nuclear receptor-mediated actions of corticosteroids are well established, those that appear to be
mediated through non-classical, possibly membranebound receptors, have perhaps not received sufficient
appreciation. The lack of consistent results (see need for
standardization in previous section), compounded by the
relatively fruitless hunt for putative membrane receptors,
accounts for the scepticism that haunts this area of
research. Increased respectability might be gained by
initially seeking answers to some of the following questions:
• How can the neural actions ascribed to peripherally-produced corticosteroids be distinguished from
those that result from those elicited by corticosteroids thought to be produced in neural tissue?
• Can the rapid actions of corticosteroids observed
predominantly in the CA1 subfield of the hippocampus be generalized to other hippocampal subfields,
or indeed other brain regions?
• Do the endpoints assessed after application of corticosteroids reflect actions exclusively at the hippocampus? In vitro, do we get only a partial (or
perhaps, false) picture? In vivo, are we monitoring
responses from a network of corticosteroid-sensitive

Page 14 of 20

brain regions? How are the outputs modulated by
other neurochemical states and inputs?
• Do corticosteroids directly interact with membrane
proteins? What is the chemical identity of these
molecules? Are they distinct from the known nuclear
receptors and if not,
◦ Do they represent post-translational modifications (e.g. palmitoylated versions of the nuclear
receptors, as suggested for the mER)?
◦ Is there biochemical evidence for interactions
with other known membrane receptors (e.g. glutamate receptors); do these receptors have allosteric binding sites for corticosteroids as well as
for pharmacological antagonists of nMR and
nGR? (cf. estrogens, progestins)
• How do events that are triggered by corticosteroids
at the membrane funnel into long-term cellular and
organismic adaptations (e.g. by positive or negative
priming of the gene machinery regulated by nMR
and nGR)?
• How do the rapid actions of corticosteroids contribute to their longer-lasting actions (e.g. ‘priming’ of
nuclear receptor-mediated events?)
• Is it possible to define corticosteroid actions - fast
and slow - in terms of spatio-temporal maps, keeping in mind that damage induced in a relatively
short time in one area may take longer to spread to
other interconnected areas [cf. [13]]?
• Is it feasible to generate genetic or pharmacological
tools that will facilitate acceptance and further study
of mCR?

Appendix
a) Corticosteroids: way upstream - the title of this
article is adapted from Alan Ayckbourne’s stage play
Way Upstream in which two couples on a boating
holiday run into some strange happenings.
b) A painted cloth in front of which a short scene is
played while the main stage set is changed.
c) Research on the rapid actions of corticosteroids
has mainly exploited male rodents or tissues derived
from them. Corticosteroid secretion is strongly influenced by sex, as are physiology and behaviour. Many
of the physiological and behavioural readouts monitored in such studies reflect the prevailing sex steroid milieu; in females, sex steroids are secreted in a
cyclical fashion.
Additional file 1: Summary of rapid effects of corticosteroids and
estrogens on the central nervous system [148-181].
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1756-6606-3-2S1.PDF ]

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

Additional file 2: Synaptic plasticity and learning and memory [182221].
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1756-6606-3-2S2.PDF ]

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Silei Yang and members of the Munich and Bristol
laboratories for their critique and encouragement. The article was written
within the framework of the European Union’s CRESCENDO Consortium (FP6
Contract LSHM-CT-2005-018652). TR was supported by LINE and a fellowship
from the Max Planck Society.
Author details
1
Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelin Str. 2-10, 80804 Munich,
Germany. 2Henry Wellcome Laboratories for Integrative Neuroscience and
Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Bristol, Bristol,
UK.
Authors’ contributions
TR, AP and OFX wrote the manuscript; KC critically reviewed the manuscript
and suggested improvements. All authors read and approved the final form
of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 18 September 2009
Accepted: 11 January 2010 Published: 11 January 2010
References
1. Chrousos GP, Gold PW: The concepts of stress and stress system
disorders. Overview of physical and behavioral homeostasis. JAMA 1992,
267:1244-1252.
2. Ye P, Kenyon CJ, Mackenzie SM, Nichol K, Seckl JR, Fraser R, Connell JM,
Davies E: Effects of ACTH, dexamethasone, and adrenalectomy on
11beta-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) and aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2)
gene expression in the rat central nervous system. J Endocrinol 2008,
196:305-311.
3. Gomez-Sanchez EP, Ahmad N, Romero DG, Gomez-Sanchez CE: Is
aldosterone synthesized within the rat brain?. Am J Physiol Endocrinol
Metab 2005, 288:E342-346.
4. Lightman SL, Wiles CC, Atkinson HC, Henley DE, Russell GM, Leendertz JA,
McKenna MA, Spiga F, Wood SA, Conway-Campbell BL: The significance of
glucocorticoid pulsatility. Eur J Pharmacol 2008, 583:255-262.
5. Bassett JR, Cairncross KD: Time course for plasma 11-hydroxycorticosteroid elevation in rats during stress. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1975,
3:139-142.
6. Morilak DA, Barrera G, Echevarria DJ, Garcia AS, Hernandez A, Ma S,
Petre CO: Role of brain norepinephrine in the behavioral response to
stress. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2005, 29:1214-1224.
7. Radley JJ, Williams B, Sawchenko PE: Noradrenergic innervation of the
dorsal medial prefrontal cortex modulates hypothalamo-pituitaryadrenal responses to acute emotional stress. J Neurosci 2008,
28:5806-5816.
8. Yu S, Holsboer F, Almeida OF: Neuronal actions of glucocorticoids: focus
on depression. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2008, 108:300-309.
9. Fuchs E, Gould E: Mini-review: in vivo neurogenesis in the adult brain:
regulation and functional implications. Eur J Neurosci 2000, 12:2211-2214.
10. Starkman MN, Giordani B, Gebarski SS, Schteingart DE: Improvement in
learning associated with increase in hippocampal formation volume. Biol
Psychiatry 2003, 53:233-238.
11. Lupien SJ, McEwen BS, Gunnar MR, Heim C: Effects of stress throughout
thelifespan on the brain, behaviour and cognition. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009,
10:434-445.
12. Gilpin H, Whitcomb D, Cho K: Atypical evening cortisol profile induces
visual recognition memory deficit in healthy human subjects. Mol Brain
2008, 1:4.

Page 15 of 20

13. Cerqueira JJ, Mailliet F, Almeida OF, Jay TM, Sousa N: The prefrontal cortex
as a key target of the maladaptive response to stress. J Neurosci 2007,
27:2781-2787.
14. Holmes A, Wellman CL: Stress-induced prefrontal reorganization and
executive dysfunction in rodents. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2009, 33:773-783.
15. Radley JJ, Rocher AB, Rodriguez A, Ehlenberger DB, Dammann M,
McEwen BS, Morrison JH, Wearne SL, Hof PR: Repeated stress alters
dendritic spine morphology in the rat medial prefrontal cortex. J Comp
Neurol 2008, 507:1141-1150.
16. Sousa N, Almeida OFX: Corticosteroids: sculptors of the hippocampal
formation. Rev Neurosci 2002, 13:59-84.
17. Grillo CA, Piroli GG, Wood GE, Reznikov LR, McEwen BS, Reagan LP:
Immunocytochemical analysis of synaptic proteins provides new insights
into diabetes-mediated plasticity in the rat hippocampus. Neuroscience
2005, 136:477-486.
18. Bessa JM, Ferreira D, Melo I, Marques F, Cerqueira JJ, Palha JA, Almeida OFX,
Sousa N: Hippocampal neurogenesis induced by antidepressant drugs:
an epiphenomenon in their mood-improving actions. Mol Psychiatry
2009, 14:739.
19. Sotiropoulos I, Catania C, Riedemann T, Fry JP, Breen KC, Michaelidis TM,
Almeida OFX: Glucocorticoids trigger Alzheimer disease-like pathobiochemistry in rat neuronal cells expressing human tau. J Neurochem 2008,
107:385-397.
20. de Kloet ER, Joëls M, Holsboer F: Stress and the brain: from adaptation to
disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 2005, 6:463-475.
21. Reul JM, de Kloet ER: Anatomical resolution of two types of
corticosterone receptor sites in rat brain with in vitro autoradiography
and computer-ized image analysis. J Steroid Biochem 1986, 24:269-272.
22. Reul JM, Gesing A, Droste S, Stec IS, Weber A, Bachmann C, Bilang-Bleuel A,
Holsboer F, Linthorst AC: The brain mineralocorticoid receptor: greedy for
ligand, mysterious in function. Eur J Pharmacol 2000, 405:235-249.
23. Seckl JR, Holmes MC: Mechanisms of disease: glucocorticoids, their
placental metabolism and fetal ‘programming’ of adult pathophysiology.
Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab 2007, 3:479-488.
24. Gronemeyer H, Gustafsson JA, Laudet V: Principles for modulation of the
nuclear receptor superfamily. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2004, 3:950-964.
25. Rosenhagen MC, Sōti C, Schmidt U, Wochnik GM, Hartl FU, Holsboer F,
Young JC, Rein T: The heat shock protein 90-targeting drug cisplatin
selectively inhibits steroid receptor activation. Mol Endocrinol 2003,
17:1991-2001.
26. Edlich F, Weiwad M, Wildemann D, Jarczowski F, Kilka S, Moutty MC,
Jahreis G, Lücke C, Schmidt W, Striggow F, Fischer G: The specific FKBP38
inhibitor N-(N’, N’dimethylcarboxamidomethyl) cycloheximide has
potent neuroprotective and neurotrophic properties in brain ischemia. J
Biol Chem 2006, 281:14961-14970.
27. Tata JR: Hormonal regulation of growth and protein synthesis. Nature
1968, 219:331-337.
28. Kawakami M, Sawyer CH: Neuroendocrine correlates of changes in brain
activity thresholds by sex steroids and pituitary hormones. Endocrinology
1959, 65:652-668.
29. Woolley DE, Timiras PS: The gonad-brain relationship: effects of female
sex hormones on electroshock convulsions in the rat. Endocrinology 1962,
70:196-209.
30. Chen D, Washbrook E, Sarwar N, Bates GJ, Pace PE, Thirunuvakkarasu V,
Taylor J, Epstein RJ, Fuller-Pace FV, Egly JM, Coombes RC, Ali S:
Phosphorylation of human estrogen receptor alpha at serine 118 by two
distinct signal transduction pathways revealed by phosphorylationspecific antisera. Oncogene 2002, 21:4921-4931.
31. Bruck N, Vitoux D, Ferry C, Duong V, Bauer A, de Thé H, Rochette-Egly C: A
coordinated phosphorylation cascade initiated by p38MAPK/MSK1
directs RARalpha to target promoters. EMBO J 2009, 28:34-47.
32. Kino T, Ichijo T, Amin ND, Kesavapany S, Wang Y, Kim N, Rao S, Player A,
Zheng YL, Garabedian MJ, Kawasaki E, Pant HC, Chrousos GP: Cyclindependent kinase 5 differentially regulates the transcriptional activity of
the glucocorticoid receptor through phosphorylation: clinical
implications for the nervous system response to glucocorticoids and
stress. Mol Endocrinol 2007, 21:1552-1568.
33. Bliss TV, Lomo T: Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in
the dentate area of the anaesthetized rabbit following stimulation of
the perforant path. J Physiol 1973, 232:331-356.

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

34. Bliss TV, Collingridge GL: A synaptic model of memory: long-term
potentiation in the hippocampus. Nature 1993, 361:31-39.
35. Stanton PK, Sejnowski TJ: Associative long-term depression in the
hippocampus induced by hebbian covariance. Nature 1989, 339:215-218.
36. Wilson M, Critchlow V: Effect of fornix transection or hippocampectomy
on rhythmic pituitary-adrenal function in the rat. Neuroendocrinology
1974, 13:1973-29.
37. Sapolsky RM, Plotsky PM: Hypercortisolism and its possible neural bases.
Biol Psychiatry 1990, 27:937-952.
38. Wintermantel TM, Berger S, Greiner EF, Schütz G: Evaluation of steroid
receptor function by gene targeting in mice. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
2005, 93:107-112.
39. Mizoguchi K, Ishige A, Takeda S, Aburada M, Tabira T: Endogenous
glucocorticoids are essential for maintaining prefrontal cortical cognitive
function. J Neurosci 2004, 24:5492-5499.
40. Ulrich-Lai YM, Herman JP: Neural regulation of endocrine and autonomic
stress responses. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009, 10:397-409.
41. Radley JJ, Gosselink KL, Sawchenko PE: A discrete GABAergic relay
mediates medial prefrontal cortical inhibition of the neuroendocrine
stress response. J Neurosci 2009, 29:7330-7340.
42. Dias-Ferreira E, Sousa JC, Melo I, Morgado P, Mesquita AR, Cerqueira JJ,
Costa RM, Sousa N: Chronic stress causes frontostriatal reorganization
and affects decision-making. Science 2009, 325:621-625.
43. Jaferi A, Bhatnagar S: Corticosterone can act at the posterior paraventricular thalamus to inhibit hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal activity in
animals that habituate to repeated stress. Endocrinology 2006,
147:4917-4930.
44. Roozendaal B, McEwen BS, Chattarji S: Stress, memory and the amygdala.
Nat Rev Neurosci 2009, 10:423-433.
45. Piazza PV, Le Moal ML: Pathophysiological basis of vulnerability to drug
abuse: role of an interaction between stress, glucocorticoids, and dopaminergic neurons. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1996, 36:359-378.
46. Katz DB, Steinmetz JE: Psychological functions of the cerebellum. Behav
Cogn Neurosci Rev 2002, 1:229-241.
47. Roozendaal B, Quirarte GL, McGaugh JL: Glucocorticoids interact with the
basolateral amygdala beta-adrenoceptor–cAMP/cAMP/PKA system in
influencing memory consolidation. Eur J Neurosci 2002, 15:553-560.
48. Campolongo P, Roozendaal B, Trezza V, Hauer D, Schelling G, McGaugh JL,
Cuomo V: Endocannabinoids in the rat basolateral amygdala enhance
memory consolidation and enable glucocorticoid modulation of
memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:4888-4893.
49. Cho K, Little HJ: Effects of corticosterone on excitatory amino acid
responses in dopamine-sensitive neurons in the ventral tegmental area.
Neuroscience 1999, 88:837-845.
50. Karst H, Berger S, Turiault M, Tronche F, Schütz G, Joëls M: Mineralocorticoid receptors are indispensable for nongenomic modulation of hippocampal glutamate transmission by corticosterone. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2005, 102:19204-19207.
51. Olijslagers JE, de Kloet ER, Elgersma Y, van Woerden GM, Joëls M, Karst H:
Rapid changes in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cell function via pre- as
well as postsynaptic membrane mineralocorticoid receptors. Eur J
Neurosci 2008, 27:2542-2550.
52. Hart SA, Snyder MA, Smejkalova T, Woolley CS: Estrogen mobilizes a
subset of estrogen receptor-alpha-immunoreactive vesicles in inhibitory
presynaptic boutons in hippocampal CA1. J Neurosci 2007, 27:2102-2111.
53. Kalita K, Szymczak S, Kaczmarek L: Non-nuclear estrogen receptor beta
and alpha in the hippocampus of male and female rats. Hippocampus
2005, 15:404-412.
54. Milner TA, Ayoola K, Drake CT, Herrick SP, Tabori NE, McEwen BS, Warrier S,
Alves SE: Ultrastructural localization of estrogen receptor beta
immunoreactivity in the rat hippocampal formation. J Comp Neurol 2005,
491:81-95.
55. Qiu J, Bosch MA, Tobias SC, Krust A, Graham SM, Murphy SJ, Korach KS,
Chambon P, Scanlan TS, Rønnekleiv OK, Kelly MJ: A G-protein-coupled
estrogen receptor is involved in hypothalamic control of energy homeostasis. J Neurosci 2006, 26:5649-5655.
56. Qiu J, Bosch MA, Tobias SC, Grandy DK, Scanlan TS, Ronnekleiv OK, Kelly MJ:
Rapid signaling of estrogen in hypothalamic neurons involves a novel
G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor that activates protein kinase C. J
Neurosci 2003, 23:9529-9540.

Page 16 of 20

57. Revankar CM, Cimino DF, Sklar LA, Arterburn JB, Prossnitz ER: A transmembrane intracellular estrogen receptor mediates rapid cell signaling.
Science 2005, 307:1625-1630.
58. Thomas P, Pang Y, Filardo EJ, Dong J: Identity of an estrogen membrane
receptor coupled to a G protein in human breast cancer cells.
Endocrinology 2005, 146:624-632.
59. Filardo EJ, Quinn JA, Frackelton AR Jr, Bland KI: Estrogen action via the G
protein-coupled receptor, GPR30: stimulation of adenylyl cyclase and
cAMP-mediated attenuation of the epidermal growth factor receptor-toMAPK signaling axis. Mol Endocrinol 2002, 16:70-84.
60. Qiu J, Rønnekleiv OK, Kelly MJ: Modulation of hypothalamic neuronal
activity through a novel G-protein-coupled estrogen membrane
receptor. Steroids 2008, 73:985-991.
61. Revankar CM, Mitchell HD, Field AS, Burai R, Corona C, Ramesh C, Sklar LA,
Arterburn JB, Prossnitz ER: Synthetic estrogen derivatives demo-nstrate
the functionality of intracellular GPR30. ACS Chem Biol 2007, 2:536-544.
62. Toran-Allerand CD, Guan X, MacLusky NJ, Horvath TL, Diano S, Singh M,
Connolly ES Jr, Nethrapalli IS, Tinnikov AA: ER-X: a novel, plasma
membrane-associated, putative estrogen receptor that is regulated
during development and after ischemic brain injury. J Neurosci 2002,
22:8391-8401.
63. Singh M, Sétáló G Jr, Guan X, Frail DE, Toran-Allerand CD: Estrogeninduced activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in
the cerebral cortex of estrogen receptor-alpha knock-out mice. J
Neurosci 2000, 20:1694-1700.
64. Willmer EN: Steroids and cell surfaces. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc 1961,
36:368-398.
65. Jensen EV: From chemical warfare to breast cancer management. Nat
Med 2004, 10:1018-1021.
66. Tata JR: Signalling through nuclear receptors. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2002,
3:702-710.
67. Satre M, Vignais PV: Steroid 11beta-hydroxylation in beef adrenal cortex
mitochondria. Binding affinity and capacity of specific (14C)steroids and
for (3H)metyrapol, an inhibitor of the 11beta-hydroxylation reaction.
Biochemistry 1974, 13:2201-2209.
68. Gametchu B: Glucocorticoid receptor-like antigen in lymphoma cell
membranes: correlation to cell lysis. Science 1987, 236:456-461.
69. Orchinik M, Murray TF, Moore FL: A corticosteroid receptor in neuronal
membranes. Science 1991, 252:1848-1851.
70. Ke FC, Ramirez VD: Binding of progesterone to nerve cell membranes of
rat brain using progesterone conjugated to 125I-bovine serum albumin
as a ligand. J Neurochem 1990, 54:467-472.
71. Kelly MJ, Moss RL, Dudley CA: The effect of ovariectomy on the responsiveness of preoptic-septal neurons to microelectrophoresed estrogen.
Neuroendocrinology 1978, 25:204-211.
72. Towle AC, Sze PY: Steroid binding to synaptic plasma membrane: differential binding of glucocorticoids and gonadal steroids. J Steroid Biochem
1983, 18:135-143.
73. Orchinik M, Hastings N, Witt D, McEwen BS: High-affinity binding of
corticosterone to mammalian neuronal membranes: possible role of
corticosteroid binding globulin. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1997,
60:229-236.
74. Breuner CW, Orchinik M: Pharmacological characterization of intracellular, membrane, and plasma binding sites for corticosterone in
house sparrows. Gen Comp Endocrinol 2009, 163:214-224.
75. Orchinik M, Murray TF, Franklin PH, Moore FL: Guanyl nucleotides modulate binding to steroid receptors in neuronal membranes. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1992, 89:3830-3834.
76. Evans SJ, Murray TF, Moore FL: Partial purification and biochemical
characterization of a membrane glucocorticoid receptor from an
amphibian brain. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2000, 72:209-221.
77. Johnson LR, Farb C, Morrison JH, McEwen BS, LeDoux JE: Localization of
glucocorticoid receptors at postsynaptic membranes in the lateral
amygdala. Neuroscience 2005, 136:189-299.
78. Liposits Z, Bohn MC: Association of glucocorticoid receptor immunoreactivity with cell membrane and transport vesicles in hippocampal
and hypothalamic neurons of the rat. J Neurosci Res 1993, 35:14-19.
79. Razandi M, Alton G, Pedram A, Ghonshani S, Webb P, Levin ER: Identification of a structural determinant necessary for the localization and
function of estrogen receptor alpha at the plasma membrane. Mol Cell
Biol 2003, 23:1633-1646.

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

80. Pedram A, Razandi M, Sainson RC, Kim JK, Hughes CC, Levin ER: A
conserved mechanism for steroid receptor translocation to the plasma
membrane. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:22278-22288.
81. Matthews L, Berry A, Ohanian V, Ohanian J, Garside H, Ray D: Caveolin
mediates rapid glucocorticoid effects and couples glucocorticoid action
to the atiproliferative program. Mol Endocrinol 2008, 22:1320-1330.
82. Pratt WB: The role of the hsp90-based chaperone system in signal transduction by nuclear receptors and receptors signaling via MAP kinase.
Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1997, 37:297-326.
83. Sétáló G Jr, Singh M, Guan X, Toran-Allerand CD: Estradiol-induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in explants of the mouse cerebral cortex: the
roles of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and MEK2. J Neurobiol 2002,
50:1-12.
84. Widén C, Zilliacus J, Gustafsson JA, Wikström AC: Glucocorticoid receptor
interaction with 14-3-3 and Raf-1, a proposed mechanism for cross-talk
of two signal transduction pathways. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:39296-39301.
85. Bouzat C, Barrantes FJ: Modulation of muscle nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors by the glucocorticoid hydrocortisone. Possible allosteric
mechanism of channel blockade. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:25835-25841.
86. Sedlácek M, Korínek M, Petrovic M, Cais O, Adamusová E, Chodounská H,
Vyklický L Jr: Neurosteroid modulation of ionotropic glutamate receptors
and excitatory synaptic transmission. Physiol Res 2008, 57:S49-57.
87. Hosie AM, Wilkins ME, Smart TG: Neurosteroid binding sites on GABA(A)
receptors. Pharmacol Ther 2007, 116:7-19.
88. Kasai M, Kannan H, Ueta Y, Osaka T, Inenaga K, Yamashita H: Effects of
iontophoretically applied cortisol on tuberoinfundibular neurons in
hypo-thalamic paraventricular nucleus of anesthetized rats. Neurosci Lett
1988, 87:35-40.
89. Kasai M, Yamashita H: Inhibition by cortisol of neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus in adrenalectomized rats; an in vitro
study. Neurosci Lett 1988, 91:59-64.
90. Kasai M, Yamashita H: Cortisol suppresses noradrenaline-induced excitatory responses of neurons in the paraventricular nucleus; an in vitro
study. Neurosci Lett 1988, 91:65-70.
91. Saphier D, Feldman S: Iontophoretic application of glucocorticoids
inhibits identified neurones in the rat paraventricular nucleus. Brain Res
1988, 453:183-190.
92. Mor G, Saphier D, Feldman S: Inhibition by corticosterone of paraventricular nucleus multiple-unit activity responses to sensory stimuli in
freely moving rats. Exp Neurol 1986, 94:391-399.
93. Sato S, Osanai H, Monma T, Harada T, Hirano A, Saito M, Kawato S: Acute
effect of corticosterone on N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated Ca2
+ elevation in mouse hippocampal slices. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2004, 321:510-513.
94. Barak YB, Gutnick MJ, Feldman S: Iontophoretically applied corticosteroids
do not affect the firing of hippocampal neurons. Neuroendocrinology
1977, 23:248-256.
95. Vidal C, Jordan W, Zieglgänsberger W: Corticosterone reduces the excitability of hippocampal pyramidal cells in vitro. Brain Res 1986, 383:54-59.
96. Joëls M, de Kloet ER: Mineralocorticoid receptor-mediated changes in
membrane properties of rat CA1 pyramidal neurons in vitro. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1990, 87:4495-4498.
97. Beck SG, List TJ, Choi KC: Long- and short-term administration of corticosterone alters CA1 hippocampal neuronal properties.
Neuroendocrinology 1994, 60:261-272.
98. Rey M, Carlier E, Soumireu-Mourat B: Effects of corticosterone on hippocampal slice electrophysiology in normal and adrenalectomized BALB/c
mice. Neuroendocrinology 1987, 46:424-429.
99. Shah MM, Haylett DG: K+ currents generated by NMDA receptor activateion in rat hippocampal pyramidal neurons. J Neurophysiol 2002,
87:2983-2989.
100. Hotson JR, Prince DA: A calcium-activated hyperpolarization follows
repetitive firing in hippocampal neurons. J Neurophysiol 1980, 43:409-419.
101. Kerr DS, Campbell LW, Thibault O, Landfield PW: Hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor activation enhances voltage-dependent Ca2+
conduct-ances: relevance to brain aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992,
89:8527-8531.
102. Tian L, Knaus HG, Shipston MJ: Glucocorticoid regulation of calciumactivated potassium channels mediated by serine/threonine protein
phosphatase. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:13531-13536.

Page 17 of 20

103. Shipston MJ, Kelly JS, Antoni FA: Glucocorticoids block protein kinase A
inhibition of calcium-activated potassium channels. J Biol Chem 1996,
271:9197-9200.
104. Wiegert O, Pu Z, Shor S, Joëls M, Krugers H: Glucocorticoid receptor activation selectively hampers N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor dependent
hippocampal synaptic plasticity in vitro. Neuroscience 2005, 135:403-411.
105. Chameau P, Qin Y, Spijker S, Smit G, Joëls M: Glucocorticoids specific-ally
enhance L-type calcium current amplitude and affect calcium chan-nel
subunit expression in the mouse hippocampus. J Neurophysiol 2007,
97:5-14.
106. Karst H, Karten YJ, Reichardt HM, de Kloet ER, Schütz G, Joëls M: Corticosteroid actions in hippocampus require DNA binding of
glucocorticoid receptor homodimers. Nat Neurosci 2000, 3:977-978.
107. Krugers HJ, Alfarez DN, Karst H, Parashkouhi K, van Gemert N, Joëls M:
Corticosterone shifts different forms of synaptic potentiation in opposite
directions. Hippocampus 2005, 15:697-703.
108. Martin S, Henley JM, Holman D, Zhou M, Wiegert O, van Spronsen M,
Joëls M, Hoogenraad CC, Krugers HJ: Corticosterone alters AMPAR
mobility and facilitates bidirectional synaptic plasticity. PLoS One 2009, 4:
e4714.
109. Karst H, Joëls M: Corticosterone slowly enhances miniature excitatory
ostsynaptic current amplitude in mice CA1 hippocampal cells. J
Neurophysiol 2005, 94:3479-3486.
110. Liu L, Wang C, Ni X, Sun J: A rapid inhibition of NMDA receptor current
by corticosterone in cultured hippocampal neurons. Neurosci Lett 2007,
420:245-250.
111. Takahashi T, Kimoto T, Tanabe N, Hattori TA, Yasumatsu N, Kawato S:
Corticosterone acutely prolonged N-methyl-d-aspartate receptormediated Ca2+ elevation in cultured rat hippocampal neurons. J
Neurochem 2002, 83:1441-1451.
112. ffrench-Mullen JM: Cortisol inhibition of calcium currents in guinea pig
hippocampal CA1 neurons via G-protein-coupled activation of protein
kinase C. J Neurosci 1995, 15:903-911.
113. Sze PY, Iqbal Z: Glucocorticoid action on depolarization-dependent
calcium influx in brain synaptosomes. Neuroendocrinology 1994,
59:457-465.
114. Wiegert O, Joëls M, Krugers H: Timing is essential for rapid effects of
corticosterone on synaptic potentiation in the mouse hippocampus.
Learn Mem 2006, 13:110-113.
115. Groc L, Choquet D, Chaouloff F: The stress hormone corticosterone
conditions AMPAR surface trafficking and synaptic potentiation. Nat
Neurosci 2008, 11:868-870.
116. Chen YZ, Qiu J: Possible genomic consequence of nongenomic action of
glucocorticoids in neural cells. News in Physiological Sciences 2001,
16:292-296.
117. Qi AQ, Qiu J, Xiao L, Chen YZ: Rapid activation of JNK and p38 by
glucocorticoids in primary cultured hippocampal cells. J Neurosci Res
2005, 80:510-517.
118. Dallman MF: Fast glucocorticoid actions on brain: back to the future.
Front Neuroendocrinol 2005, 26:103-108.
119. Mikics E, Kruk MR, Haller J: Genomic and non-genomic effects of glucocorticoids on aggressive behavior in male rats. Psychoneuroendocrinology
2004, 29:618-635.
120. Mikics E, Barsy B, Haller J: The effect glucocorticoids on aggressiveness in
established colonies of rats. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2007, 32:160-170.
121. Mikics E, Barsy B, Barsvári B, Haller J: Behavioral specificity of non-genomic
glucocorticoid effects in rats: effects on risk assessment in the elevated
plus-maze and the open-field. Horm Behav 2005, 48:152-162.
122. Sandi C, Venero C, Guaza C: Novelty-related rapid locomotor effects of
corticosterone in rats. Eur J Neurosci 1996, 8:794-800.
123. Kole MH, Koolhaas JM, Luiten PG, Fuchs E: High-voltage-activated Ca2+
currents and the excitability of pyramidal neurons in the hippocampal
CA3 subfield in rats depend on corticosterone and time of day. Neurosci
Lett 2001, 307:53-56.
124. Brunel S, de Montigny C: Diurnal rhythms in the responsiveness of
hippocampal pyramidal neurons to serotonin, norepinephrine, gammaaminobutyric acid and acetylcholine. Brain Res Bull 1987, 18:205-212.
125. Chaudhury D, Wang LM, Colwell CS: Circadian regulation of hippo-campal
long-term potentiation. J Biol Rhythms 2005, 20:225-236.

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

126. Eckel-Mahan KL, Phan T, Han S, Wang H, Chan GC, Scheiner ZS, Storm DR:
Circadian oscillation of hippocampal MAPK activity and cAMP:
implications for memory persistence. Nat Neurosci 2008, 11:1074-1082.
127. Sandi C, Pinelo-Nava MT: Stress and memory: behavioral effects and
neurobiological mechanisms. Neural Plast 2007, 2007:78970.
128. Cahill L, McGaugh JL: Mechanisms of emotional arousal and lasting
declarative memory. Trends Neurosci 1998, 21:294-299.
129. Sandi C: The role and mechanisms of action of glucocorticoid involvement in memory storage. Neural Plast 1998, 6:41-52.
130. Cordero MI, Merino JJ, Sandi C: Correlational relationship between shock
intensity and corticosterone secretion on the establishment and
subsequent expression of contextual fear conditioning. Behav Neurosci
1998, 112:885-891.
131. Cordero MI, Kruyt ND, Merino JJ, Sandi C: Glucocorticoid involvement in
memory formation in a rat model for traumatic memory. Stress 2002,
5:73-79.
132. Cordero MI, Sandi C: A role for brain glucocorticoid receptors in contextual fear conditioning: dependence upon training intensity. Brain Res
1998, 786:11-17.
133. Roozendaal B, McGaugh JL: Glucocorticoid receptor agonist and antagonist administration into the basolateral but not central amygdala
modulates memory storage. Neurobiol Learn Mem 1997, 67:176-179.
134. Revest JM, Di Blasi F, Kitchener P, Rougé-Pont F, Desmedt A, Turiault M,
Tronche F, Piazza PV: The MAPK pathway and Egr-1 mediate stressrelated behavioral effects of glucocorticoids. Nat Neurosci 2005, 8:664-672.
135. de Kloet ER, Oitzl MS, Joëls M: Stress and cognition: are corticosteroids
good or bad guys?. Trends Neurosci 1999, 22:422-426.
136. Schwabe L, Schächinger H, de Kloet ER, Oitzl MS: Corticosteroids operate
as switch between memory systems. J Cogn Neurosci 2009.
137. Oitzl MS, de Kloet ER: Selective corticosteroid antagonists modulate
specific aspects of spatial orientation learning. Behav Neurosci 1992,
106:62-71.
138. Foy MR, Stanton ME, Levine S, Thompson RF: Behavioral stress impairs
long-term potentiation in rodent hippocampus. Behav Neural Biol 1987,
48:138-149.
139. Shors TJ, Seib TB, Levine S, Thompson RF: Inescapable versus escapable
shock modulates long-term potentiation in the rat hippocampus. Science
1989, 244:224-226.
140. Wang M, Yang Y, Dong Z, Cao J, Xu L: NR2B-containing N-methyl-Daspartate subtype glutamate receptors regulate the acute stress effect
on hippocampal long-term potentiation/long-term depression in vivo.
Neuroreport 2006, 17:1343-1346.
141. Wong TP, Howland JG, Robillard JM, Ge Y, Yu W, Titterness AK, Brebner K,
Liu L, Weinberg J, Christie BR, Phillips AG, Wang YT: Hippocampal longterm depression mediates acute stress-induced spatial memory retrieval
impairment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:11471-11476.
142. Meller E, Shen C, Nikolao TA, Jensen C, Tsimberg Y, Chen J, Gruen RJ:
Region-specific effects of acute and repeated restraint stress on the
phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Brain Res 2003,
979:57-64.
143. Sananbenesi F, Fischer A, Schrick C, Spiess J, Radulovic J: Mitogen-activated
protein kinase signaling in the hippocampus and its modulation by
corticotropin releasing factor receptor 2: a possible link between stress
and fear memory. J Neurosci 2003, 23:11436-11443.
144. Yang CH, Huang CC, Hsu KS: Behavioral stress modifies hippocampal
synaptic plasticity through corticosterone-induced sustained
extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation. J Neurosci 2004, 24:11029-11034.
145. Ahmed T, Frey JU, Korz V: Long-term effects of brief acute stress on
cellular signaling and hippocampal LTP. J Neurosci 2006, 26:3951-3958.
146. Monyer H, Burnashev N, Laurie DJ, Sakmann B, Seeburg PH: Developmental and regional expression in the rat brain and functional
properties of four NMDA receptors. Neuron 1994, 12:529-540.
147. Crick C, Miranker W: Apoptosis, neurogenesis, and information content in
Hebbian networks. Biol Cybern 2006, 94:9-19.
148. Sandi C, Venero C, Guaza C: Nitric oxide synthesis inhibitors prevent rapid
behavioral effects of corticosterone in rats. Neuroendocrinology 1996,
63:446-453.
149. Kruk MR, Halász J, Meelis W, Haller J: Fast positive feedback between the
adrenocortical stress response and a brain mechanism involved in
aggressive behavior. Behav Neurosci 2004, 118:1062-1070.

Page 18 of 20

150. de Quervain DJ, Roozendaal B, Nitsch RM, McGaugh JL, Hock C: Acute
cortisone administration impairs retrieval of long-term declarative
memory in humans. Nat Neurosci 2000, 3:313-314.
151. de Quervain DJ, Roozendaal B, McGaugh JL: Stress and glucocorticoids
impair retrieval of long-term spatial memory. Nature 1998, 394:787-790.
152. Sajadi AA, Samaei SA, Rashidy-Pour A: Intra-hippocampal micro-injections
of anisomycin did not block glucocorticoid-induced impairment of
memory retrieval in rats: an evidence for non-genomic effects of glucocorticoids. Behav Brain Res 2006, 173:158-162.
153. Roozendaal B, de Quervain DJ, Schelling G, McGaugh JL: A systemically
administered beta-adrenoceptor antagonist blocks corticosteroneinduced impairment of contextual memory retrieval in rats. Neurobiol
Learn Mem 2004, 81:150-154.
154. Kent WD, Cross-Mellor SK, Kavaliers M, Ossenkopp KP: Acute effects of
corticosterone on LiCl-induced rapid gustatory conditioning in rats: a
taste reactivity analysis. Neuroreport 2000, 11:3903-3908.
155. Kent WD, Cross-Mellor SK, Kavaliers M, Ossenkopp KP: Acute effects of
corticosterone on LiCl-induced rapid gustatory conditioning in rats: a
microstructural analysis of licking patterns. Behav Brain Res 2002,
136:143-150.
156. Piazza PV, Rougé-Pont F, Deroche V, Maccari S, Simon H, Le Moal M:
Glucocorticoids have state-dependent stimulant effects on the
mesenceph-alic dopaminergic transmission. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996,
93:8716-8720.
157. Avanzino GL, Ermirio R, Cogo CE, Ruggeri P, Molinari C: Effects of
corticosterone on neurones of the locus coeruleus, in the rat. Neurosci
Lett 1987, 80:85-88.
158. Gründemann D, Schechinger B, Rappold GA, Schömig E: Molecular
identification of the corticosterone-sensitive extraneuronal
catecholamine transporter. Nat Neurosci 1998, 1:349-351.
159. Qiu J, Wang P, Jing Q, Zhang W, Li X, Zhong Y, Sun G, Pei G, Chen Y: Rapid
activation of ERK1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase by cortico-sterone
in PC12 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2001, 287:1017-1024.
160. Li X, Qiu J, Wang J, Zhong Y, Zhu J, Chen Y: Corticosterone-induced rapid
phosphorylation of p38 and JNK mitogen-activated protein kinases in
PC12 cells. FEBS Lett 2001, 492:210-214.
161. Dallman MF, Yates FE: Dynamic asymmetries in the corticosteroid feedback path and distribution-metabolism-binding elements of the adrenocortical system. Ann NY Acad Sci 1969, 156:696-721.
162. Chen YZ, Hua SY, Wang CA, Wu LG, Gu Q, Xing BR: An electrophysiological study on the membrane receptor-mediated action of glucocorticoids in mammalian neurons. Neuroendocrinology 1991, 53:25-30.
163. Di S, Malcher-Lopes R, Halmos KC, Tasker JG: Nongenomic glucocort-icoid
inhibition via endocannabinoid release in the hypothalamus: a fast
feedback mechanism. J Neurosci 2003, 23:4850-4857.
164. Tasker JG, Di S, Malcher-Lopes R: Minireview: rapid glucocorticoid
signaling via membrane-associated receptors. Endocrinology 2006,
147:5549-5556.
165. Kelly MJ, Rønnekleiv OK: Control of CNS neuronal excitability by estrogens via membrane-initiated signaling. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2009,
308:17-25.
166. Teyler TJ, Vardaris RM, Lewis D, Rawitch AB: Gonadal steroids: effects on
excitability of hippocampal pyramidal cells. Science 1980, 209:1017-1018.
167. Foy MR, Xu J, Xie X, Brinton RD, Thompson RF, Berger TW: 17beta-estradiol
enhances NMDA receptor-mediated EPSPs and long-term potentiation. J
Neurophysiol 1999, 81:925-929.
168. Vouimba RM, Foy MR, Foy JG, Thompson RF: 17beta-estradiol suppresses
expression of long-term depression in aged rats. Brain Res Bull 2000,
53:783-787.
169. Roepke TA, Xue C, Bosch MA, Scanlan TS, Kelly MJ, Rønnekleiv OK: Genes
associated with membrane-initiated signaling of estrogen and energy
homeostasis. Endocrinology 2008, 149:6113-6124.
170. Gu G, Rojo AA, Zee MC, Yu J, Simerly RB: Hormonal regulation of CREB
phosphorylation in the anteroventral periventricular nucleus. J Neurosci
1996, 16:3035-3044.
171. Wagner EJ, Rønnekleiv OK, Kelly MJ: The noradrenergic inhibition of an
apamin-sensitive, small-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel in
hypothalamic gamma-aminobutyric acid neurons: pharmacology, estrogen sensitivity, and relevance to the control of the reproductive axis. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther 2001, 299:21-30.

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

172. Kelly MJ, Ronnekleiv OK, Eskay RL: Identification of estrogen-respons-ive
LHRH neurons in the guinea pig hypothalamus. Brain Res Bull 1984,
12:399-407.
173. Navarro CE, Saeed SA, Murdock C, Martinez-Fuentes AJ, Arora KK,
Krsmanovic LZ, Catt KJ: Regulation of cyclic adenosine 3’,5’-monophosphate signaling and pulsatile neurosecretion by Gi-coupled plasma
mem-brane estrogen receptors in immortalized gonadotrophin-releasing
hormone neurons. Mol Endocrinol 2003, 17:1792-1804.
174. Abe H, Terasawa E: Firing pattern and rapid modulation of activity by
estrogen in primate luteinizing hormone releasing hormone-1 neurons.
Endocrinology 2005, 146:4312-4320.
175. Abe H, Keen KL, Terasawa E: Rapid action of estrogens on intracellular
calcium oscillations in primate luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone-1
neurons. Endocrinology 2008, 149:1155-1162.
176. Morales A, Gonzalez M, Marin R, Diaz M, Alonso R: Estrogen inhibition of
norepinephrine responsiveness is initiated at the plasma membrane of
GnRH-producing GT1-7 cells. J Endocrinol 2007, 194:193-200.
177. Kow LM, Pfaff DW: The membrane actions of estrogens can potentiate
their lordosis behavior-facilitating genomic actions. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2004, 101:12354-12357.
178. Micevych P, Dominguez R: Membrane estradiol signaling in the brain.
Front Neuroendocrinol 2009, 30:315-327.
179. Peng HY, Chen GD, Tung KC, Chien YW, Lai CY, Hsieh MC, Chiu CH, Lai CH,
Lee SD, Lin TB: Estrogen-dependent facilitation on spinal reflex
potentiation involves the Cdk5/ERK1/2/NR2B cascade in anesthetized
rats. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2009, 297:E416-426.
180. Wong JK, Le HH, Zsarnovszky A, Belcher SM: Estrogens and ICI182,780
(Faslodex) modulate mitosis and cell death in immature cerebellar neurons via rapid activation of p44/p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase. J
Neurosci 2003, 23:4984-4995.
181. Alyea RA, Watson CS: Nongenomic mechanisms of physiological
estrogen-mediated dopamine efflux. BMC Neurosci 2009, 10:59.
182. Lømo T: The discovery of long-term potentiation. Philos Trans R Soc Lond
B Biol Sci 2003, 358:617-620.
183. Otto T, Eichenbaum H, Wiener SI, Wible CG: Learning-related patterns of
CA1 spike trains parallel stimulation parameters optimal for inducing
hippocampal long-term potentiation. Hippocampus 1991, 1:181-192.
184. Abraham WC, Logan B, Greenwood JM, Dragunow M: Induction and
experience-dependent consolidation of stable long-term potentiation
lasting months in the hippocampus. J Neurosci 2002, 22:9626-9634.
185. Blitzer RD, Iyengar R, Landau EM: Postsynaptic signaling networks: cellular cogwheels underlying long-term plasticity. Biol Psychiatry 2005,
57:113-119.
186. Blake JF, Brown MW, Collingridge GL: CNQX blocks acidic amino acid
induced depolarizations and synaptic components mediated by nonNMDA receptors in rathippocampal slices. Neurosci Lett 1988, 89:182-186.
187. Andreasen M, Lambert JD, Jensen MS: Effects of new non-N-methyl-Daspartate antagonists on synaptic transmission in the in vitro rat
hippocampus. J Physiol 1989, 414:317-336.
188. Davies SN, Collingridge GL: Role of excitatory amino acid receptors in
synaptic transmission in area CA1 of rat hippocampus. Proc R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci 1989, 236:373-384.
189. Lynch GS, Dunwiddie T, Gribkoff V: Heterosynaptic depression: a postsynaptic correlate of long-term potentiation. Nature 1977, 266:737-739.
190. Dudek SM, Bear MF: Homosynaptic long-term depression in area CA1 of
hippocampus and effects of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor blockade.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:4363-4367.
191. Mulkey RM, Malenka RC: Mechanisms underlying induction of homosynaptic long-term depression in area CA1 of the hippocampus. Neuron
1992, 9:967-975.
192. Kemp N, McQueen J, Faulkes S, Bashir ZI: Different forms of LTD in the
CA1 regoin of the hippocampus: role of age and stimulus protocol. Eur J
Neurosci 2000, 12:360-366.
193. Staubli UV, Ji ZX: The induction of homo- vs. heterosynaptic LTD in area
CA1 of hippocampal slices from adult rats. Brain Res 1996, 714:169-176.
194. Kemp N, Bashir ZI: NMDA receptor-dependent and -independent longterm depression in the CA1 region of the adult rat hippocampus in
vitro. Neuropharmacology 1997, 36:397-399.
195. Berretta N, Cherubini E: A novel form of long-term depression in the CA1
area of the adult rat hippocampus independent of glutamate receptors
activation. Eur J Neurosci 1998, 10:2957-2963.

Page 19 of 20

196. Cho K, Kemp N, Noel J, Aggleton JP, Brown MW, Bashir ZI: A new form of
long-term depression in the perirhinal cortex. Nat Neurosci 2000,
3:150-156.
197. Lynch G, Kessler M, Halpain S, Baudry M: Biochemical effects of highfrequency synaptic activity studied with in vitro slices. Fed Proc 1983,
42:2886-289.
198. Lisman JA: Mechanism for the Hebb and the anti-Hebb processes
underlying learning and memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989,
86:9574-9578.
199. Bortolotto ZA, Collingridge GL: A role for protein kinase C in a form of
metaplasticity that regulates the induction of long-term potentiation at
CA1 synapses of the adult rat hippocampus. Eur J Neurosci 2000,
2:4055-4062.
200. Colledge M, Dean RA, Scott GK, Langeberg LK, Huganir RL, Scott JD:
Targeting of PKA to glutamate receptors through a MAGUK-AKAP
complex. Neuron 2000, 27:107-119.
201. Esteban JA, Shi SH, Wilson C, Nuriya M, Huganir RL, Malinow R: PKA
phosphorylation of AMPA receptor subunits controls synaptic trafficking
underlying plasticity. Nat Neurosci 2003, 6:136-143.
202. McDonald BJ, Chung HJ, Huganir RL: Identification of protein kinase C
phosphorylation sites within the AMPA receptor GluR2 subunit.
Neuropharmacology 2001, 41:672-679.
203. Dickinson BA, Jo J, Seok H, Son GH, Whitcomb DJ, Davies CH, Sheng M,
Collingridge GL, Cho K: A novel mechanism of hippocampal LTD
involving muscarinic receptor-triggered interactions between AMPARs,
GRIP and liprin-alpha. Mol Brain 2009, 2:18.
204. Kim JJ, Foy MR, Thompson RF: Behavioral stress modifies hippocampal
plasticity through N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor activation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:4750-4753.
205. Rowan MJ, Anwyl R, Xu L: Stress and long-term synaptic depression. Mol
Psychiatry 1998, 3:472-474.
206. Avital A, Segal M, Richter-Levin G: Contrasting roles of corticosteroid
receptors in hippocampal plasticity. J Neurosci 2006, 26:9130-9134.
207. Pérez-Otaño I, Ehlers MD: Learning from NMDA receptor trafficking: clues
to the development and maturation of glutamatergic synapses.
Neurosignals 2004, 13:175-189.
208. Flint AC, Maisch US, Weishaupt JH, Kriegstein AR, Monyer H: NR2A subunit
expression shortens NMDA receptor synaptic currents in developing
neocortex. J Neurosci 1997, 17:2469-2476.
209. Cull-Candy S, Brickley S, Farrant M: NMDA receptor subunits: diversity,
development and disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2001, 11:327-335.
210. Zhuo M: Plasticity of NMDA receptor NR2B subunit in memory and
chronic pain. Mol Brain 2009, 2:4.
211. Wenzel A, Fritschy JM, Mohler H, Benke D: NMDA receptor heterogen-eity
during postnatal development of the rat brain: differential expression of
the NR2A, NR2B, and NR2C subunit proteins. J Neurochem 1997,
68:469-478.
212. Wenzel A, Villa M, Mohler H, Benke D: Developmental and regional
expression of NMDA receptor subtypes containing the NR2D subunit in
rat brain. J Neurochem 1996, 66:1240-1248.
213. Barria A, Malinow R: NMDA receptor subunit composition controls
synaptic plasticity by regulating binding to CaMKII. Neuron 2005,
48:289-301.
214. Zhao J, Peng Y, Xu Z, Chen RQ, Gu QH, Chen Z, Lu W: Synaptic metaplasticity through NMDA receptor lateral diffusion. J Neurosci 2008,
28:3060-3070.
215. Greger IH, Esteban JA: AMPA receptor biogenesis and trafficking. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 2007, 17:289-297.
216. Pellegrini-Giampietro DE, Bennett MV, Zukin RS: Are Ca(2+)-permeable
kainate/AMPA receptors more abundant in immature brain?. Neurosci
Lett 1992, 144:65-69.
217. Arai Y, Mizuguchi M, Takashima S: Developmental changes of glutamate
receptors in the rat cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Anat Embryol (Berl)
1997, 195:65-70.
218. Greger IH, Khatri L, Kong X, Ziff EB: AMPA receptor tetramerization
ismediated by Q/R editing. Neuron 2003, 40:763-774.
219. Shi S, Hayashi Y, Esteban JA, Malinow R: Subunit-specific rules govern-ing
AMPA receptor trafficking to synapses in hippocampal pyramidal
neurons. Cell 2001, 105:331-343.
220. Esteban JA: AMPA receptor trafficking: a road map for synaptic plasticity.
Mol Interv 2003, 3:375-385.

Riedemann et al. Molecular Brain 2010, 3:2
http://www.molecularbrain.com/content/3/1/2

Page 20 of 20

221. Schlager MA, Hoogenraad CC: Basic mechanisms for recognition and
transport of synaptic cargos. Mol Brain 2009, 2:25.
222. Jang MK, Mierke DF, Russek SJ, Farb DH: A steroid-modulatory domain on
NR2B controls N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor proton sensitivity. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:8198-8203.
doi:10.1186/1756-6606-3-2
Cite this article as: Riedemann et al.: Corticosteroids: way upstream.
Molecular Brain 2010 3:2.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
