<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Comparative phylogenies and host specialization in the alder ectomycorrhizal fungi Alnicola, Alpova and Lactarius (Basidiomycota) in Europe</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-40"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Juliette Rochet"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Comparative phylogenies and host specialization
in the alder ectomycorrhizal fungi Alnicola,
Alpova and Lactarius (Basidiomycota) in Europe
Juliette Rochet1,2, Pierre-Arthur Moreau3, Sophie Manzi1,2, Monique Gardes1,2*

Abstract
Background: Mycorrhizal fungi form intimate associations with their host plants that constitute their carbon
resource and habitat. Alnus spp. (Betulaceae) are known to host an exceptional species-poor and specialized
ectomycorrhizal (ECM) fungal community compared to other tree species, but the host-specificity pattern and its
significance in terms of fungal diversification and speciation remain poorly documented. The degree of parallel
speciation, host switching, and patterns of biogeography were explored in the historical associations between
alders and three ECM taxa of Basidiomycetes: Alnicola (Agaricales), Alpova (Boletales), and Lactarius (Russulales). The
aim was to develop an evolutionary framework on host specificity and diversification of Basidiomycetes in this
highly specialized plant-fungus symbiosis.
Results: Sporocarps of Alnicola (220), Lactarius (61) and Alpova (29) were collected from stands of the four
European alder species (A. alnobetula including the endemic subsp. suaveolens in Corsica, A. cordata, A. glutinosa,
A. incana) in Western Europe (mainly in France and Austria), from 1995 to 2009. Specimens were morphologically
identified to the species level. From these, 402 sequences of four DNA regions (ITS, rpb2, gpd, and the V9 domain
of the mit-SSU rDNA) were successfully obtained and analyzed in addition with 89 sequences available in GenBank
and UNITE databases. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted on all sequence data sets (individual and combined)
using maximum likelihood reconstruction and Bayesian inference. Fungal phylogenies are compared and discussed
in relation to the host, with a focus on species boundaries by associating taxonomic, systematic and molecular
information.
Conclusions: Patterns of host specificity and phylogenies of Alnicola and Lactarius suggest coevolution as a basal
factor of speciation in relation with the subgeneric diversification of Alnus, possibly due to the very selective
pressure of the host. A second element of the historical associations between Alnus and its fungal symbionts is a
host-dependent speciation (radiation without host change), here observed in Alnicola and Alpova in relation with
Alnus subgen. Alnus. Finally host shifts from Alnus subgen. Alnus to A. alnobetula are found in most lineages of
Alnicola (at least four times), Alpova (twice) and Lactarius (once), but they do not represent such a common event
as could be expected by geographic proximity of trees from the two subgenera. However, active or very recent
host extensions clearly occurred in Corsica, where some fungi usually associated with Alnus glutinosa on mainland
Europe locally extend there to A. alnobetula subsp. suaveolens without significant genetic or morphological
deviation.

* Correspondence: monique.gardes@univ-tlse3.fr
1
Université de Toulouse, UPS, UMR 5174 EDB (Laboratoire Evolution et
Diversité Biologique), 118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex 4,
France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Rochet et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

Background
In the ectomycorrhizal (ECM) symbiosis, the root system of an individual tree is typically colonized by several
members of different ECM fungal species, and individual
fungi can normally associate with several plants [1].
Ectomycorrhizal fungi display a great range of host specificity [2,3]. This varies from extremes such as Suilloideae that are almost exclusively associated with
Pinaceae [4] with the example of the very host-specific
Suillus pungens colonizing one or few related pine species [5], to species as Laccaria amethystina that demonstrate a true multihost ability [3]. The tight affinity
between many ECM fungal species and their hosts has
led to host-based taxonomic treatments in certain genera, e.g. Leccinum [6], and implicitly suggests that the
phylogeny of the fungi follows that of their host plants,
a process commonly known as coevolution [7]. Two
main categories of events can be proposed to explain
highly specialized associations between a plant and a
fungal symbiont: (i) cospeciation/codivergence events
where a symbiont speciates in response to the speciation
of its host (association by descent), the phylogenetic
outcome is congruent phylogenies of interacting taxa,
and (ii) speciation through host shifts where the symbiont switches from the ancestral host to a new, unrelated host species (association by colonization); the
phylogeny of the symbiont is influenced by the host evolution, but it is not reciprocal. Both processes suggest
that host diversity, if not necessarily the sole cause of
reproductive isolation and speciation, may force diversification and speciation of their symbionts. Host specificity is generally expressed as a symbiont’s adaptation to
a particular host species or higher taxa. The model
investigated in the present study is the ectomycorrhizal
symbiosis between the alder genus Alnus Mill. (Betulaceae) and three genera of Basidiomycota.
Based on fossil pollen evidence, the plant genus Alnus
would have originated from tropical Eastern Asia
around the Late Cretaceous [8], and it is likely that it
reached Europe during early Oligocene. It was diversified in central Europe tropical forests by the end of Oligocene - early Miocene [9], and adapted to temperate
and subarctic environments at the Miocene period [8].
Species of Alnus are now distributed in temperate and
arctic regions of the Northern Hemisphere, except
A. acuminata Kunth (sensu lato, including A. jorullensis
Kunth) that extends as far South as South America.
There are 29-35 species of Alnus is the current flora,
with 4-5 species in Europe, 9 in the New World, and
18-23 in Asia [8,10,11]. Alnus consists of three clades
[11,12] including one subgenus not represented in Europe (subgen. Clethropsis), and two widely distributed
subgenera Alnobetula and Alnus. The subgenus Alnobetula (also described as genus Duschekia Opiz) is sister

Page 2 of 14

to subgenera Clethropsis and Alnus, and likely the most
primitive one [11-13]. It is represented, according to
authors, either by a single thicket-forming circumpolar
species: Alnus alnobetula (Ehrh.) K.Koch [also known as
A. viridis (Chaix) DC.] divided into geographical subspecies [8,10], or by several allopatric or parapatric species
[11,12]); A. alnobetula was already present in France at
the late Miocene, about 5.34 My ago [14]. The second
main lineage (subgenus Alnus) is represented by numerous species in Eastern and Central Asia, with radiations
towards North and South America, Europe, the Mediterranean basin and Eastern Asia, differentiated during
Pleistocene. In subgen. Alnus, A. glutinosa (L.) Gaertn is
a European and North African endemic species, present
from W Europe and N Maghreb to Fennoscandia; pollen
records and molecular data have revealed distinct major
southern refuges in the last ice age, including W France,
Corsica, S Italy, N Africa, Carpathians, and Turkey
[15,16]. Alnus incana (L.) Moench is distributed across
the cooler parts of Europe, mainly in Northern Europe
and high elevation mountains in the Alps, the Carpathians and the Caucasus. Alnus cordata (Loisel) Duby
is a Tyrrhenian endemic species that was isolated during
the Pleistocene in Corsica and in a few other Mediterranean ice-free areas (Southern Italy, Albany) [17,18]
where it remained confined since its massive introduction for forestry all over Europe during the late 20 th
century.
After the Quaternary glaciations the circumpolar
species Alnus alnobetula and A. incana expanded in
continental Europe (throughout Alps and Carpathians
for A. alnobetula, up to Eastern France and Scandinavia
for A. incana) from several refugia located in Central
and Eastern Europe [10,19], while A. alnobetula subsp.
suaveolens (Req.) Lambinon & Kerguélen likely evolved
isolated as an endemic subspecies in Corsica since the
Pleistocene [20,21].
From analysis of mycorrhizae [22-27] alder trees have
revealed an exceptional species-poor assemblage of
ECM fungi compared to the other tree species, with less
than 50 fungal species (including unidentified taxa)
reported worldwide in the literature on A. acuminata,
A. alnobetula s. lat., A. glutinosa, A. incana s. lat., and
A. rubra. The fungal communities are dominated by six
Basidiomycete genera, whatever the species of Alnus
considered: Tomentella (12-15 spp.), Alnicola (15-20
spp.), Lactarius (5-8 spp.), Cortinarius (6-10 spp.),
Alpova/Melanogaster [28] (6 spp.), and Russula (2-4
spp.). The fruiting community is also composed of two
locally abundant taxa, Paxillus (1-2 spp.) and Gyrodon
(1 sp.), rarely found from mycorrhizae analysis (Rochet
et al., unpublished results). Other occasionally reported
genera are Amanita (A. friabilis), Hebeloma, Inocybe,
Pachyphloeus, Pseudotomentella, and unidentified

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

Helotiales (possibly root endophytes). The Alnus-ECM
fungi association is considered the most specialized
ECM symbiosis. Except Tomentella spp. (for which precise taxonomic information is lacking) and several species of Ascomycota [26], all species are known, or
strongly suspected, to be exclusive to the genus Alnus
since they have never been found on any other trees
than alders at present. There are reports of species-poor
and specialized ECM fungal community for the ectomycorrhizal larch tree Larix spp. and five-needle pines (e.g.
Pinus cembra, P. strobus) [29-31]. High specificity patterns are also observed for many orchids and monotrope
plants associated with ectomycorrhizal fungi [1].
For the mycorrhizal symbiosis, it is still an open question how associations between plants and fungi arise
and how specificity occurs. One way would be geographical isolation of populations leading to a narrowing of
host range and allopatric speciation. However, we
hypothesize than in highly specialized associations such
as the alder-ECM symbiosis, plants exert considerable
selective pressure on their fungal symbionts and are
major drivers of diversification. This hypothesis was
evaluated here by documenting the history of AlnusECM fungi association and specificity through molecular
phylogenetic reconstructions.
Strong host-specificity patterns in mutualistic as well
as parasitic relationships suggest intuitively a narrow
coevolutionary history between symbionts [7]. The
degree of parallel speciation and host switching between
alders and three ECM taxa of basidiomycetes are

Page 3 of 14

explored as well as patterns of biogeography, with aims
to develop more specific hypotheses on the processes
that contribute to the diversification of the fungal
lineages. Our predictions were that (i) the association
with subgenus Alnus, more “modern” than subgenus.
Alnobetula, is a derived character (the speciation of the
fungi is linked to the speciation of the host), or (ii) evolution of a fungal symbiont would lead to increased specialization (there is an ongoing process of speciation by
adaptation to new hosts).
The fungal lineages, Alnicola sect. Alnicola [32],
Alpova, and Lactarius, were selected on the following criteria: 1) are present with all species of Alnus (excluding
Paxillus and Gyrodon for this reason, never reported with
subgen. Alnobetula); 2) have well-defined species concept
(excluding Cortinarius, Tomentella and Alnicola sect.
Submelinoides [32] for this reason); 3) contain enough
species to obtain an informative phylogenetic tree
(excluding Russula and Amanita for this reason).
Sequences from one to four DNA regions were analyzed,
including the nuclear rDNA ITS, parts of the nuclear
genes rpb2 and gpd, and the V9 domain of the mitochondrial SSU-rDNA. Phylogenetic relationships among the
European alders (five species and subspecies) were investigated using the ITS and chloroplast MatK sequences.

Results
Host phylogeny and datation

The phylogeny based on the combined data sets from
ITS and MatK (Figure 1; see also Additional file 1: list

Figure 1 Bayesian cladogram inferred from nuclear rDNA ITS and chloroplastic region MatK sequences of Alnus spp. Numbers above
branches are posterior probability scores. Numbers circled at the internodes are age in million years (My) estimated with Bayesian analysis
implemented in BEAST software. The divergence between Alnus and Betula was assigned with an age of 95 to 105 My.

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

of tree sequences used in this study) shows that European native species of Alnus are separated into two
major clades that correspond to the subgenera Alnobetula and Alnus. Within the subgenus Alnobetula,
A. alnobetula subsp. alnobetula and A. alnobetula
subsp. suaveolens formed a monophyletic group. The
subgenus Alnus clade comprises A. glutinosa and
A. incana. Alnus cordata clusters outside this group.
The multigene phylogeny confirms the relationship
between the two Alnus clades with subgenus Alnobetula
in a basal position. The molecular dating method gave
the divergence between the two main subgenera of
Alnus at the Eocene (around 48,6 My ago), and the original split between A. cordata and the A. glutinosaincana complex at the Oligocene (around 22,9 My ago;
Figure 1). Results also suggest recent lineage diversification at the Pleistocene for both subgenera (around 1,1
and 7,9 My ago for subgenus Alnobetula and the A. glutinosa-incana complex, respectively; Figure 1).
Alnicola phylogeny and reconstruction of the history of
associations

The ITS sequences for most Alnicola [abbreviated Alc.
below] collections were complete (see Additional file 2:

Page 4 of 14

list of fungal sequences used in this study). However,
the numbers of variable and informative characters of
the ITS molecular dataset were very low (27 on ITS1
and 21 on ITS2 for the whole section, i.e. 14 species).
Most species were separated from each other by 2 to 6
nucleotides at best. Only Alnicola pseudosalabertii collections group together in a strongly supported clade
that is well separated from the other lineages [32]. However, fourteen infrageneric groups (clusters or phylogroups, interpreted here as phylogenetic species) are
identified, that are congruent with existing morphological taxonomy (morphospecies) at least for well-documented taxa [33,34]. Six of them could not be identified
to valid taxa and are here cited under provisional names
(Alnicola badiofusca, Alc. citrinella, Alc. longicystis, Alc.
pallidifolia, Alc. pseudosalabertii, Alc. xanthophylla).
Because the datasets of the four genes were highly
congruent, a combined analysis was conducted on a
2743 bases long alignment, obtained by concatenation of
all genes for each sampled morphospecies, with a Bayesian approach (Figure 2, 3, 4). Alnicola geraniolens
Courtec., which belongs to Alnicola sect. Amarescens
[33] (not associated with Alnus) was taken as an outgroup [32]. Alnicola cholea Kühner, in sect. Cholea P.A.

Figure 2 Phylogenetic reconstruction of the Alnicola sect. Alnicola lineage (Hymenogastraceae) by concatenate analysis (ITS, GPD,
RPB2, V9), showing putative evolutional events in relation with host specificity. Red: species associated with Alnus sect. Alnus. Green:
species associated with Alnus sect. Alnobetula. Green star shows putative basal association with Alnus alnobetula (possible co-speciation). Arrows
show events of speciation associated with host specificity; red arrow: host-dependent radiation with Alnus subgen. Alnus; green arrow: host shifts
from Alnus subgen. Alnus to A. alnobetula.

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

Page 5 of 14

Figure 3 Phylogenetic reconstruction of the Alpova lineage (Paxillaceae) based on ITS, showing putative evolutional events in relation
with host specificity. Red: species associated with Alnus sect. Alnus. Green: species associated with Alnus sect. Alnobetula. Brown: species
associated with alders of both sections. Red star shows putative basal association with Alnus sect. Alnus. Arrows show events of speciation
associated with host specificity; red arrow: host-dependent radiation with Alnus subgen. Alnus; green arrow: host shifts from Alnus subgen. Alnus
to A. alnobetula.

Moreau [35], a more distant species not associated with
Alnus, was also tested as outgroup but gave a weaker
resolution on some branches (not shown). Although
species relationships are still not completely resolved
even when data from additional genes are included, the
same fourteen species are clearly identified in all the
analyses (each gene separately or the concatenated dataset), likely representing independently evolved lineages
(Figure 2). The low sequence divergence and lack of
phylogenetic resolution including with the combined
gene dataset, suggests a fast radiation of these species in
a short geological time.
The/pseudosalabertii clade is coming out as basal lineage amongst sect. Alnicola, with strong support in the
concatenated analysis (Posterior Probability = 1, Figure
2). It is only represented by a rare species, only known
from a few sites under Alnus alnobetula in mineral-rich
subalpine situations. It has distinctive morphological
characters such as spore features and pileal microstructure (unpublished data) that are also present in the nonalnicolous species of Alnicola sect. Amarescens, but not
in other species of sect. Alnicola. These ancestral characters are congruent with its basal position in the phylogeny of Alnicola section Alnicola. Alc. pseudosalabertii,

a species strictly associated to subgenus Alnobetula,
appears clearly as an ancestral lineage.
The/luteolofibrillosa lineage appears as a collective
species (or as a species complex), represented in Europe
by at least two genetically distinct lineages. The former,
Alnicola luteolofibrillosa s. str., is strictly associated with
Alnus alnobetula in the Alps. The later, here named
Alc. luteolofibrillosa “2”, is collected under Alnus sect.
Alnus in Europe and North America. Suprisingly, Alc.
luteolofibrillosa “2” is found also with Alnus alnobetula
subsp. suaveolens in Corsica, where Alc. luteolofibrillosa
s. str would be expected according to host specificity.
Alnicola silvae-novae (D.A. Reid) Courtec., a rare species
encountered with Alnus glutinosa, comes out in the
same cluster as Alc. luteolofibrillosa (Figure 2).
The ancestral state in the/luteolofibrillosa lineage is
subgenus Alnus, while the host switches to Alnobetula
probably occurred via a generalist species and niche
contraction or host-dependent speciation (duplication).
In the/badia lineage, three species, Alnicola badia
Kühner with Alnus alnobetula, Alc. longicystis ad int.
and Alc. xanthophylla ad int. with Alnus glutinosa and
A. incana, group together with very little nucleotide variation (7-8 characteristic positions on ITS1-2). All three

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

Page 6 of 14

Figure 4 Phylogenetic reconstructions of the Lactarius lineage (Russulaceae) based on ITS, showing putative evolutional events in
relation with host specificity. A: concatenate analysis of alnicolous species (ITS + RPB2 + V9). B: concatenate analysis (ITS + RPB2) of Lactarius
subgen. Russulares showing positions of each clades of alnicolous species within the genus. Red: species associated with Alnus sect. Alnus.; Green:
species associated with Alnus sect. Alnobetula. Green and red stars show putative basal association with Alnus sect. Alnobetula (with possible cospeciation) and sect. Alnus respectively. Arrows show events of speciation associated with host specificity; red arrow: host-dependent radiation
with Alnus subgen. Alnus; green arrow: host shifts from Alnus subgen. Alnus to A. alnobetula.

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

are apparently restricted to specific soil conditions, e.g.
sands and alluvial substrates.
The/umbrina lineage contains Alnicola subconspersa
(P.D. Orton) Bon, Alc. umbrina (Maire) Kühner, and
Alc. badiofusca ad int., that are three abundant fruiting
species in alder stands. Both Alc. subconspersa and Alc.
umbrina are associated with Alnus glutinosa and occasionally with A. cordata and A. incana, while Alc. badiofusca is found under Alnus alnobetula. In the present
study, Alnicola dubis P.-A. Moreau & Vidonne is assimilated to Alc. subconspersa. Both Alc. striatula (P.D.
Orton) Romagn. and Alc. scolecina (Fr.) Romagn. s.
auct. [36] are assimilated to Alc. umbrina. Despite a
recognition of Alc. dubis, Alc. striatula and Alc. scolecina in traditional taxonomy [34], these three species
are temporarily grouped with the previous ones because
of weak morphological support and only 1-2 nucleotide
differences in the ITS sequences. These provisional
taxonomic choices do not influence the results of our
analysis since these taxa share the same host (Alnus glutinosa). However, taxonomy in this lineage obviously
remains to be precised.
Finally four distinct species that comprise Alnicola
citrinella (Alc. escharioides (Fr.: Fr.) Romagn. s. auct. pl.)
with Alnus glutinosa and A. incana, Alc. pallidifolia
with A. alnobetula, Alc. salabertii P.-A. Moreau & Guy
Garcia with A. cordata [37], and Alc. sphagneti (P.D.
Orton) Romagn., are also difficult to position in the
phylogeny. However, they are characterized by distinctive morphological and ecological characters as well as
nucleotide differences in the ITS and the other gene
regions. Alc. sphagneti is associated with Alnus glutinosa, and apparently restricted to North Atlantic acidic
localities; in the phylogenetic analyses, it comes out at
the basis of the/umbrina lineage (Figure 2).
Alpova phylogeny

The monophyletism of both genera Alpova [abbreviated
Alp. below] and Melanogaster [28] is strongly supported
by both ITS (PP = 1) and multigene phylogenies (Figure
3), and these results are consistent with previous studies
[38,39]. Melanogaster is here taken as outgroup [40] to
root the Alpova phylogeny. The relationships among the
Alpova species were also well resolved with both phylogenies (not shown). Because Alpova appears as a genus
with a reduced diversity in Europe (three species,
Figure 3) the analysis was extended to extra-European
species of Alpova, and phylogenetic reconstructions performed using ITS sequences.
Phylogenetic analysis of the ITS dataset clearly splits
Alpova into two strongly supported clades, both including North American and European species (Figure 3).
The first clade (PP = 0,83) contains an unidentified
American taxon, Alpova “diplophloeus 1”, in a basal

Page 7 of 14

position, while Alp. alpestris, a European species often
encountered under Alnus alnobetula in the Alps, Carpathians and Corsica, is placed in a derived position. No
significant molecular difference was found among continental collections of Alp. alpestris (represented by 9
sporocarps from 4 localities, all located in the French
Alps). The two Corsican collections (3 sporocarps from
2 localities) are separated from the mainland collections
by 9 nucleotide positions: two in the ITS1, one in RPB2
and 6 in GPD. The second clade (PP = 1) is rooted by
another unidentified American taxon (Alp. “diplophloeus
2”) and the South American Alp. austroalnicola associated with Alnus acuminata s.lat. (subgenus Alnus). It
comprises three derived taxa that are the Corsican endemic Alp. corsicus (non host-specific but mainly with
subgenus Alnus), Alp. “diplophloeus 3” (DQ989497)
under Alnus incana, and a European collection (Alp. cf.
cinnamomeus) that has been found so far under
A. alnobetula.
The case of Alpova corsicus deserves a particular
attention as this species, represented here by 8 sporocarp collections from 6 sites in Corsica (see Additional
file 2: list of fungal sequences used in this study) and
one sequence from mycorrhiza (not shown), appears
restricted to the island of Corsica. When found, it fruits
abundantly under Alnus glutinosa in riparian and peaty
forests, but also under A. cordata at supramediterranean
level, and more occasionally under A. alnobetula subsp.
suaveolens (one single collection with longer spores)
[28]. Remarkably, our numerous prospects under A. glutinosa or A. incana in continental France never showed
us any basidiome of Alpova. In addition to the information provided by sporocarp surveys, molecular studies of
ECM communities have not revealed so far the presence
of Alpova species in alder stands of A. glutinosa or
A. incana elsewhere in continental Europe. The few
reports of Alpova sporocarps from Alnus incana and A.
glutinosa in central Europe are referred to Melanogaster
luteus [28,41].
Lactarius phylogeny

Collections of Alnus-associated Lactarius are grouped
in four independent lineages, based on the combined
molecular phylogeny of ITS and rpb2 sequences
(Figure 4A, 4B) as well as on separated gene phylogenies (not shown). The internal systematics of Lactarius is still insufficiently documented and the
nomenclature of subgenera and sections follows the
most recent phylogenetic assessment of the whole
genus [42,43]; Alnus-associated species belong to subgen. Piperites and subgen. Russulares which form
together a monophyletic lineage. Subgenus Plinthogali
is taken as outgroup for rooting the Piperites-Russulares phylogeny [42].

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

The/lepidotus lineage contains two species that are Lactarius lepidotus Hesler & A.H. Sm. strictly associated with
Alnus alnobetula, and L. lilacinus (Lasch: Fr.) Fr. associated with A. glutinosa and A. incana. The two species
are closely related despite strong morphological differences. Both are usually classified by taxonomists in subsection Coloratini (including species such as L. helvus,
L. glyciosmus, and L. alpinus) due to the presence of typical dry squamulose pileus [44], but here surprisingly, they
show genetic affinities with several groups with gelatinized
pileus (ixocutis) of subgen. Piperites, represented in the
phylogeny by sect. Deliciosi (L. quieticolor) (Figure 4B).
All collections of L. alpinus Peck, from the Alps and
Corsica, group together with other species of Lactarius
from subgen. Piperites, sect. Glutinosi, surprinsingly
without close relationship with L. lepidotus despite morphological affinities (Figure 4B).
L. alpinus is associated to Alnus alnobetula and has
been reported worldwide in the distribution range of its
host, e.g. in N.E. USA, Alaska, Greenland, Carpathian
Mountains [44,45]. L. alpinus var. mitis Hesler & A.H.
Sm. is known from alder trees (subgen. Alnus) in
Western U.S.A. [45], and might represent a possible
host-shifted vicariant of L. alpinus; unfortunately no
DNA sequence or reliable dry material could be obtained.
The two remaining lineages (/omphaliformis and/
obscuratus) are more modern than the previous ones,
coming out from a species-rich group of small Lactarius
(subgen. Russularia) mostly common in temperatesubarctic areas, such as L. tabidus (Fr.: Fr.) Fr., L. subsericatus Bon, or L. aurantiacus Fr., and strongly hostspecific such as L. subdulcis (Fr.: Fr.) Fr. (restricted to
Fagus) and L. hepaticus Plowr. (restricted to Pinus).
L. omphaliformis Romagn. forms a single clade that is
genetically very stable, and surprisingly comprises a
sequence obtained from Alnus acuminata in Argentina
(GenBank DQ195543). In Europe, L. omphaliformis has
been reported from the West under A. glutinosa in typically acidic situations, but it might be a cosmopolitan
species associated with more species of Alnus sect.
Alnus worldwide. The lack of reports under A. incana
could be due to narrow biogeographical and edaphic
preferences, not compatible with the natural distribution
of the host in Europe. It is also one of the very few symbiotic species of Alnus sect. Alnus for which no relative
species is known on A. alnobetula.
The/obscuratus lineage is composed of morphologically highly variable and taxonomically confused taxa
(Figure 4A). Six distinct species or varieties are recognized by mycologists [44,46,47] and many names are
usually cited in literature (e.g. L. obscuratus Lasch: Fr.,
L. cyathuliformis Bon, L. clethrophilus Romagn., L. brunneohepaticus M.M. Moser, L. obscuratus var. radiatus
(J.E. Lange) Romagn., L. obscuratus var. subalpinus

Page 8 of 14

Basso, L. radiatus var. alnobetulae Bon). In the present
study, three well-separated phylogroups are identified
with a clear host specificity (Figure 4A) Both L. obscuratus s. str. (including L. clethrophilus) and L. cyathuliformis are found in association with A. glutinosa, A. incana
and A. cordata, while L. brunneohepaticus (including
L. obscuratus var. subalpinus) is associated with A. alnobetula in the Alps and Corsica.

Discussion
Looking for early speciation events

The ancestral position of subgenus Alnobetula inferred
from worldwide molecular phylogenies of alders [11,12]
is confirmed by our results. Our molecular clock estimates are consistent with the fossil records that suggest
an extant ancestor of A. cordata-glutinosa-incana at the
Oligocene (around 22,9 Mya) and recent radiation
events at the Pleistocene in the subgenus Alnobetula
and the glutinosa-incana complex (Figure 1). A low
sequence divergence was also cited [11] in the ITS
region within the subgenus Alnobetula and the
A. incana species complex (including A. glutinosa), indicating recent diversification in the circumpolar areas.
Alnicola is the most informative genus thanks to its
species richness. Since no supraspecific classification in
sect. Alnicola has been proposed so far in taxonomic literature, the present phylogeny will contribute to a better
systematic and taxonomic treatment of the genus
(unpublished results). Alnicola pseudosalabertii, a species with ancestral morphological characters, is likely
the oldest known Alnus-associated species in the Hymenogastraceae family. Its basal position in the Alnicola
phylogeny suggests a common origin of the Alnusassociated fungal lineage and the most ancestral Alnus
lineage, and therefore a synchrony in the occurrence of
both lineages. However, the absence of fossils or standardized molecular clock in fungi did not allow us to
test the time concordance between the plant and the
fungal lineages.
In Lactarius, the two oldest Alnus-associated lineages
root at the basal origin of temperate Lactarii
(Figure 4B) and are likely to find their origin at the
same early period of emergence of temperate-subarctic
Alnus species of subgen. Alnobetula [48]. This is congruent with the fact that Lactarius lepidotus (/lepidotus)
and L. alpinus (/alpinus), two widespread species with
ancestral morphological characters in the genus (dry trichodermial pileus structure) are strictly associated with
Alnus alnobetula worldwide. L. lilacinus, here appearing
as a sister clade of L. lepidotus (Figure 4A), would be an
example of phylogenetic speciation with Alnus sect.
Alnus if it could be shown to derive from L. lepidotus.
In Alpova, the two species currently known to be
associated with Alnus alnobetula (Alp. alpestris and Alp.

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

aff. cinnamomeus) are in derived position in the phylogeny (Figure 3), and therefore do not illustrate any
co-evolutive pattern (but information is lacking about
host identity of North American species). Hypothesis of
a recent emergence of the Alpova lineage with Alnus
sect. Alnus cannot be excluded. The alternative hypothesis is an older origin of Alpova with Alnus alnobetula
with host-shift and later radiation with Alnus sect.
Alnus. If so, then ancestral species that would be analogous to Alnicola pseudosalabertii in the Alnicola phylogeny, should be found under Alnus alnobetula in and
outside Europe.
Recent host-dependent evolution processes

If the hypothesis of co-speciation could explain the basal
topology of the oldest Alnus-associated lineages such as/
pseudosalabertii (Alnicola),/lepidotus (Lactarius) and/
alpinus (Lactarius), the prediction of a specific diversity
only driven by co-evolution processes in which ancestral
species would be associated to Alnus alnobetula, and
recent lineages to Alnus glutinosa-A. incana, is clearly
not congruent with the current species diversity
observed in Alnus-associated communities. Except Lactarius species (L. alpinus and L. lepidotus) which are
still dominant in Alnus alnobetula ecosystems,
most ECM fungal species currently dominating the
community (such as Alpova alpestris, Lactarius brunneohepaticus, Alnicola badia, Alc. badiofusca, Alc. luteolofibrillosa) are derived from fungal lineages evolved
with Alnus sect. Alnus (Figure 1). In Alnicola, the main
current diversity likely appears during a fast radiation
period. It is tempting to compare this diversification
event to the fast radiation period of Alnus during the
Pleistocene [11,12], which suggests that recent lineages
of fungi show the same evolutionary patterns that Alnus
sect. Alnus. Similarly to Betula-associated Leccinum species (Boletales) [6], the most plausible mechanism for
this diversification event is allopatric speciation with isolation of fungal populations in glacial refuges of their
host at the Pleistocene.
Host shifts but not host extension?

The two hypotheses previously suggested - early
co-evolution with Alnus sect. Alnobetula, and later hostdependent speciation with Alnus sect. Alnus, explain
correctly most of the topology of the three fungal genera, but the presence in derived branches of species
associated with Alnus alnobetula - not explained by any
co-evolution scheme - suggests another factor of hostdependent speciation. Most species associated with
Alnus alnobetula derived from lineages associated to
Alnus sect. Alnus (e.g. Alnicola badia in the/badia lineage, and Alc. badiofusca in the/umbrina lineage; Lactarius brunneohepaticus in the/obscuratus lineage; and

Page 9 of 14

Alpova alpestris derived from Alnus sect. Alnus associated species). The only explanation for so many examples of recent Alnobetula-associated species of ECM
fungi is recent host-shifts that have occurred independently in most fungal lineages, from modern species of
Alnus subgen. Alnus to A. alnobetula, followed by a fast
host-dependent speciation. Interestingly enough, no
example has been found of host shift from Alnus alnobetula to A. glutinosa/A. incana hosts. This unilateral
phenomenon suggests that environmental pressure or
promiscuity of different species of Alnus cannot explain
completely such host-shift phenomena, which certainly
implies important genetic mechanisms of host recognition so far unidentified.
What Corsica tells us about host shifts

The geographic co-expansion of Alnus alnobetula and
A. incana throughout their distribution area since the
Pleistocene [11] and their frequent co-occurrence in the
same geographical areas (e.g. in the Alps where A. alnobetula and A. incana co-exist and grow locally intermixed) create environmental contexts that should
facilitate host-shifts. If colonization of new hosts is more
a matter of geographic proximity than relatedness of the
hosts, then numerous derived species and unsolved species complexes would be expected. The results show
that recent jumps to distantly related hosts (from different subgenera) are relatively infrequent and limited to
one “shifted” new species per lineage (see above). Fungal
species with broad host range are not observed in
derived positions of the three fungal phylogenies. All
studied species are well resolved at specific level and
highly host-specific at the level of plant subgenus (even
when collected in sites where alders from the two subgenera grow adjacent to each other, as shown by molecular analysis of mycorrhizae, Rochet et al. unpublished
data). This pattern of host-symbiont association is also
observed in ‘Alnicola’ sect. Submelinoides [32 and
unpublished data], Russula (J. Borovička, unpublished
data), Cortinarius [30], and several other genera [49]. By
contrast, colonization of close relatives within each subgenus of Alnus is occurring frequently, possibly
explained by host tracking through hybrids. Thus, the
same species of ECM fungi are commonly found under
A. glutinosa and A. incana, two alder species for which
natural hybridization has been reported in the boundaries of their distribution areas [50]. Such a scenario of
host-tracking coevolution (that could eventually lead to
speciation) have been nicely shown between Puccinia
rust fungi and their crucifer (Brassicaceae) hosts [51].
Corsica is a remarkable exception to this general pattern of host-symbiont association. Thus, host jumping
to distantly related hosts appears to be facilitated in
Corsica because there are at least three species of fungi

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

that are commonly found under A. glutinosa (A. incana
never existed in Corsica) and A. alnobetula subsp. suaveolens, despite the geographical distance between collections from the two hosts (at least 10 km apart from
each other). The generalist species are Alnicola luteolofibrillosa “2” (with an already perceptible genetic divergence of 2 nucleotide positions on ITS1 between
A. glutinosa- and A. alnobetula subsp. suaveolensassociated populations), Alpova corsicus [28], and “Alnicola” inculta (Peck) Singer (sect. Submelinoides, not
treated in this study) present in Corsica under A. alnobetula but never found or reported from the Alps under
this tree so far.
It is likely that the speciation process by host shift
which led to the differentiation of most Alnus alnobetula-associated fungi from Alnus incana-glutinosa -associated lineages, is still active, or at last much more
recent or less advanced, in Corsica where the three
examples cited above seem to illustrate a case of “host
extension” preceding speciation. In contrast to the “Leccinum model” [6], “host extension” here does not extend
to unrelated new hosts but to another species of Alnus,
and is probably favoured by tree promiscuity as well as
by insularity and genetic isolation from the continent.
More examples would have to be looked for in other
areas of Quaternarian glacial refugia where A. glutinosa/
A. incana and A. alnobetula still co-exist, e.g. in Eastern
Europe or Caucasus. As real islands provide an opportunity to examine the factors causing evolution in ECM
fungi [52], fine-scale genetic structure of the fungal species present on the mainland, Corsica, and other host
Mediterranean islands (e.g. Sardinia) should also be pursued in future studies.
The Alnus-ECM fungal symbiosis: a powerful model for
the study of speciation of ECM fungi

The factors driving ECM diversity in terms of speciation
processes remain poorly documented, and only a few
examples have been satisfactorily investigated. The interactions between alders and ectomycorrhizal fungi appear
highly specialized, and as a consequence when hosts
undergo certain selection regimes, their symbionts
might also take evolutionary steps to maximize their fitness. The evolutionary framework developed in this
study gives an alternative to the cyclic-biphasic model
developed on Leccinum (ECM Boletales) [6], which
implies more or less soft periods of host contractions
and extensions driven by environmental changes, in
which coevolution does not act significantly.
Because coevolutionary events become masked
through time via host switching, extinction and duplication, finding empirical evidence for co-speciation (or codivergence) patterns has proven difficult in many groups
of organisms, including classical examples of animal

Page 10 of 14

parasites. However, possibly due to the very selective
pressure of the host, ECM coevolution appears in Alnicola and in Lactarius as a basal factor of speciation in
these genera in relation with the subgeneric diversification of Alnus. More investigations on extra-European
Alnus-associated communities are necessary to fill the
phylogenetic puzzle in all these genera and confirm the
reality of this early speciation process. Evidence for
ongoing local coevolutionary selection could also be
obtained by experimental pairings between plant and
fungal populations [53].
The second element of the historical associations
between plants and fungal symbionts is a host-dependent speciation (radiation without host change), suggested marginally [6] for explaining the radiation of a
Betula-associated group of Leccinum, here observed
clearly in Alnicola and Alpova in relation with Alnus
sect. Alnus; allopatry is a possible cause of genetic isolation of populations evolving quickly as genetically distinct species (detectable by unsolved rake-like clades).
This phenomenon of Pleistocene origin might have driven active speciation processes in relation with Alnus
sect. Alnus. A fine-scale genetic study of common fungal
species associated e.g. with Alnus glutinosa [15] in its
glaciation refugia such as Spain, North Africa, Corsica,
Balkans and Turkey, would help quantifying local hostdependent diversification processes in fungi, migration
and interbreeding processes at a continental scale, and
extrapolate them to more ancient speciation events.
Host shifts from Alnus alnobetula to subgen. Alnus are
observed in most lineages of Alnicola (at least four times),
Alpova (twice) and Lactarius (once) (Figure 2, 3, 4), but
they do not represent such a common event as could be
expected by current geographic proximity of trees from
the two subgenera, or by their assumed promiscuity in
Pleistocene refuges. Other, probably rare factors are necessarily involved to explain this phenomenon. Host shift is
likely a consequence of past host extension; in our study
we have identified active or very recent host extensions in
Corsica, of fungi usually associated with Alnus glutinosa
locally extending to A. alnobetula subsp. suaveolens without significant genetic or morphological deviation. In Corsica the current coexistence of these trees at short
distance, and even their close promiscuity during glaciations events, are reinforced by insularity and confinement
in narrow valleys. In the Alps this phenomenon might be
older than in Corsica, since sister species associated with
A. alnobetula are genetically and morphologically well differentiated from those associated to the A. glutinosa-A.
incana complex.

Conclusions
Although extreme specialization may represent an evolutionary-dead-end, host-dependent speciation seems to

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

have played a more important role than host shift across
large phylogenetic distances in the evolution of the studied fungi, as especially illustrated by Alnicola, the most
species-rich studied group. The Alnus-EcM fungi communities are a unique model for reconstituting the
events of speciation amongst symbiotic fungi. Fungal
assemblages associated with alders comprise other genera such as Tomentella (Thelephorales), Cortinarius
(Agaricales), Paxillus (Boletales), Russula (Russulales),
which will complete the present study.
Inferences about the evolutionary events of symbionts
in the light of phylogenies are sensitive to the information at hand. By adding missing or newly discovered fungal species to the trees, especially from the numerous
non-investigated alder species outside Europe, our picture about the details of coevolution or host switching
may change. Advancing the work presented here would
benefit from additional sampling of the fungi (sporocarps
and mycorrhizae), particularly in areas that would introduce new host associations not represented here.
Although estimation of the time of divergence of the
clades will always be difficult in fungi due to the lack of
fossils, what is also required is a comprehensive and well
calibrated tree based on numerous molecular divergence
rate estimates. Most such data are not available today. A
concerted effort is thus necessary for understanding the
evolution of Alnus-associated fungi, what in turn would
greatly benefit to the understanding of the effects of evolutionary and historical events in the late Tertiary and
Quaternary on the geographic distribution of ECM fungi
in general [54], with transferability of this information to
biodiversity studies and conservation programs.
The present study focused on historical events and coevolutionary relationships in explaining current patterns
of host specificity in the Alnus ECM symbiosis. Further
research is needed to shed light on the role of ecological
parameters such as soil nitrogen conditions in shaping
the distinct nature of Alnus ectomycorrhizal assemblages and the current distribution of the fungal species.

Methods
Taxonomic sampling
PLANTS

The four European native species of alders (= five species and subspecies) are listed in Additional file 1, along
with the gene regions analyzed for each of them and
GenBank accession numbers.
BASIDIOMYCOTA

Most fungal sequences used in this study are derived
from extensive sporocarps sampling of Alnicola, Alpova
and Lactarius conducted by PAM over several years.
Sporocarps of 220 Alnicola, 61 Lactarius and 29 Alpova

Page 11 of 14

Figure 5 Mapping of sampled sites for sporocarps in Western
and Central Europe (for details see Additional file 2). Colour of
circles indicates tree species; green: Alnus alnobetula; black: A.
cordata; red = A. glutinosa; blue: A. incana. Large circles: at least
three species sampled (sites visited for this study); small circles: one
or two species sampled (occasional visits on sites or collections sent
by correspondents).

were collected from multiple stands of the four European alder species, at various locations in France and
other European countries (especially Austria and Switzerland; Figure 5). In most cases, host could be designated unambiguously in the field, one species of alder
trees being locally the only ECM host plants, but in a
few cases the closest ECM host tree was design as the
host plant. Molecular typing of ectomycorrhizae was
also performed to confirm the identity of the host and
the fungal symbiont (the results will be presented elsewhere). Tissue samples (gills or part of the fruitbody
flesh) were stored in a CTAB 2X Buffer (100 mM TrisHCl (pH 8), 1.4 M NaCl, 20 mM Na2 EDTA, 2%
CTAB) until DNA extraction. Taxonomy and nomenclature follow [28] for Alpova, [42] for Lactarius, [34] and
partly unpublished results for Alnicola. Voucher specimens are deposited at the Herbarium of the Faculté des
Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Lille (LIP),
France. The dataset also included sequences from earlier
studies [32,55-57,42,58] and some unpublished
sequences with reference material downloaded from
public databases (GenBank, UNITE). Information
regarding the sampling (species, host plant, geographic
location, DNA and herbarium collection numbers, genes
analyzed, GenBank accession numbers, references) is
provided for all materials in Additional file 2: list of fungal sequences used in this study as supplementary data.
DNA extraction, PCR amplification and sequencing

Total DNA was extracted from Alnus leaves, CTAB
samples and herbarium specimens of ECM fungi using

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

Page 12 of 14

the kit Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Promega)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

[66] and Bayesian inference as implemented in MrBayes
3.1.2 [67].

PLANTS

MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD

Two DNA regions were selected for the present Alnus
phylogeny: the nuclear rDNA ITS and the chloroplastic
region MatK. The PCR reaction mix included 0.2 μl of
GoTaq 5 U/μl (Promega), 10 μl of 5X buffer, 1 μl
of 20 μM for each primer, 1 μl of dNTP 10 mM, 1 μl of
DNA template and nuclease free water for a final volume
of 50 μl. Standard cycling parameters were an initial
denaturation step at 94°C for 1 minute, 40 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30 s, annealing for 40 s at different
temperatures depending on the primer set (57°C for ITS,
46°C for matK) and elongation at 72°C for 40 s, followed
by a final elongation step at 72°C for 5 min.

In PhyML, trees were constructed for each DNA
region using the most general time-reversible model of
nucleotide evolution with Gamma distributed errors on
mutation rates (GTR+G) and node support was estimated by using the approximate likelihood-ratio test
(alrt), a much faster method for estimating branch support than either the bootstrap or Bayesian posterior
probabilities [51].

BASIDIOMYCOTA

One to four regions were amplified and sequenced
depending on the genus and sample. The DNA regions
and primers used for PCR are the nuclear rDNA ITS
using the primer set ITS-1F/ITS-4B [59], the rpb2 gene
using bRPB2-5F/bRPB2-7.1R [60], the gpd gene using
GPD-F/GPD-RA [61,62], and the hyper variable domain
V9 of the mitochondrial SSU-rDNA using the V9U/V9R
[63,64].
Amplifications were carried out in 25 μl reaction containing 0,2 μl of GoTaq polymerase of 5 U/μl (Promega), 5 μl of Buffer 5X (Promega), 0.25 μl of 5 μM for
each primer, 5 μl of dNTPs 5 mM, 2 μl of template
DNA and 15.8 μl of nuclease free water. Standard
cycling parameters were an initial denaturation step at
94°C for 3 min, 35 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for
45 s, annealing for 45 s at different temperatures
depending on the primer set (50° for rpb2, 53° for V9,
and 55°C for ITS and gpd), and elongation at 72°C for 1
min, followed by a final elongation step at 72°C for 10
min. Post-cycling, samples were held at 4°C.
PCR products were loaded onto a 1.25% standard
agarose gel for electrophoresis (20 min at 100 W). Gels
were stained with ethidium bromide and photographed
under ultraviolet light. Unsuccessfully amplified samples
were subjected to multiple amplifications at various
DNA concentrations. Sequencing was done by MilleGen
(Labège, France).
Alignment and phylogenetic analyses

Sequences were manually edited using Sequencher 4.8.
Gene Codes (Ann Arbor, MI). They were aligned using
MAFFT version6 using the LINS-i method with standard settings [65] and subsequently carefully refined by
eye. Phylogenetic analyses were conducted on sequence
datasets from individual and combined DNA regions
using maximum likelihood reconstruction with PhyML

BAYESIAN INFERENCE

Modeltest 3.7 [68] was run for all data sets (individual
and combined) to select a model of sequence evolution.
Appropriate DNA substitution models and its parameters were determined based on the comparisons of
negative log likelihood values in Modeltest 3.7 [69]
implemented in PAUP*4.0b10 [70]. Likelihood and prior
settings were changed to meet with the settings corresponding to the models found for each marker. Gaps
were coded as missing data. The analyses were initiated
with random starting trees and one cold and three
incrementally heated Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) chains were run for 10,000,000 generations.
Trees were sampled every 1000 generations. The previously determined model of sequence evolution to each
data set was applied in the partitioned Bayesian analyses
for all combined data sets. For each data set, MCMC
runs were repeated twice. Stationarity of the Markov
chain was ascertained by plotting likelihood values
against number of generations for apparent stationarity.
The first 1000 to 2000 trees were discarded as burn-in,
and the remaining trees were used to calculate a 50%
majority rule tree and to determine the posterior probabilities for the individual branches.
Estimation of time divergence in Alnus phylogeny

To estimate divergence times between lineages, the combined data set of ITS and MatK sequences was employed.
Rate constancy was tested with a likelihood ratio test [71].
Because the molecular data departed from clock-like evolution, a Bayesian analysis implemented with BEAST ver.
1.4.7 [72] was used under a log-normal relaxed molecular
clock [73] and a Yule pure birth model of speciation to
estimate the times of divergence and their credibility intervals in the genus Alnus. Posterior distributions of parameters were approximated using two independent MCMC
analyses of 10,000,000 generations with 10% burn-in. Samples from the two runs which yielded similar results were
combined and convergence of the chains was checked
using the program Tracer 1.3 [74]. Based on a recent Betulaceae phylogeny [75] the divergence between Alnus and

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

Page 13 of 14

Betula was assigned with an age of 95 to 105 million year
(My).

2.

Additional material

3.

Additional file 1: List of tree sequences used in this study.
Sequences of Alnus and Betula species are either generated by the
authors or downloaded from GenBank. Vouchers (leaves) are preserved at
the Laboratoire Evolution et Diversité Biologique, Toulouse (F).
Additional file 2: List of fungal sequences used in this study.
Sequences are either generated by the authors (402 sequences) or
downloaded from GenBank or UNITE databases (89 sequences). (1): not a
genuine Alpova but a Melanogaster [28]. Abbreviations of host names:
Aacum: Alnus acuminata; Aalnobet: Alnus alnobetula; Acord: Alnus
cordata; Afrut: Alnus fruticulosa; Aglut: Alnus glutinosa; Ainc: Alnus incana;
Arub: Alnus rubra; Arub?: likely Alnus rubra (M. Berbee, personal
communication); Asuav: Alnus alnobetula subsp. suaveolens; Asp.:
unidentified species of Alnus. Abbreviations of countries: A: Austria; ARG:
Argentina; CAN: Canada; CH: Switzerland; CZ: Czech republic; F: France;
GB: Great Britain; HU: Hungary; I: Italy; MTN: Montenegro; RUS: Russia; N:
Norway; SW: Sweden; USA: United States of America.

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

Abbreviations
ad int.: ad interim (provisional names for unpublished taxa); Alc.: Alnicola; Alp.:
Alpova; ECM: ectomycorrhizal (fungi forming ectomycorrhizae with
Tracheophytes).; My: 106 years; s.lat.: sensu lato; s.str.: sensu strict; sect.: section
(taxonomic rank); subgen.: subgenus (taxonomic rank)
Acknowledgements
We thank P. Jargeat and H. Gryta for their comments on earlier versions of
the manuscript, F. Chassagne for help with the molecular work, and B.
Mouhamadou for the V9 sequences annotation. J. Borovička and M. Berbee
are thanked for unpublished information about Russula species and Alpova
collections, respectively, J. Alesandri, M. Coulom, L. Hugot and C. Lavoise for
field assistance in Corsica, J. Ammirati, G. Corriol, Y. Deneyer, L. Deparis, M.
Durand, H. Gamper, J. Guinberteau, P.B. Matheny, B. Perič, U. Peintner, F.
Richard, J.-P. Vidonne and J.-J. Wuilbaut for providing important fungal
collections for our study, R. Courtecuisse, B. de Foucault and P.A. Schmidt for
bibliographic contributions. D. Huges is thanked for correcting English
language in our text. This research was financially supported by the région
Midi-Pyrénées (grant 2008-2011 to MG) and by the Office de
l’Environnement de la Corse (OEC, Ajaccio, F) to PAM.
Author details
Université de Toulouse, UPS, UMR 5174 EDB (Laboratoire Evolution et
Diversité Biologique), 118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex 4,
France. 2CNRS, UMR 5174 EDB, 31062 Toulouse Cedex 4, France. 3Laboratoire
de Botanique, Faculté des Sciences pharmaceutiques et biologiques, Univ
Lille Nord de France, 59006 Lille Cedex, France.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

1

Authors’ contributions
JR carried out the molecular phylogenies, and participated in writing of the
manuscript as a part of her PhD project. PAM carried out most of the
sporocarp samplings and taxonomic identifications, and was deeply involved
in the writing of the manuscript along with MG. SM did most of the DNA
extractions from sporocarps, the PCRs and the editing of the sequences.
MG’s contributions are the conception and the coordination of the study,
the acquisition and the analysis of the data, and the writing of the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

20.

21.
22.
23.

24.

Received: 10 November 2010 Accepted: 9 February 2011
Published: 9 February 2011

25.

References
1. Smith SE, Read DJ: Mycorrhizal Symbiosis. 3 edition. London: Academic
Press; 2008.

26.

Molina R, Massicotte H, Trappe JM: Specificity phenomena in mycorrhizal
symbioses: community-ecological consequences and practical
implications. In Mycorrhizal symbiosis, an integrative plant-fungal process.
Edited by: Allen MF. New York: Chapman and Hall; 1992:357-423.
Roy M, Dubois MP, Proffit M, Vincenot L, Desmaris E, Selosse MA: Evidence
from population genetics that the ectomycorrhizal basidiomycete
Laccaria amethystina is an actual multihost symbiont. Mol Ecol 2008,
17:2825-2838.
Kretzer A, Li Y, Szaro T, Bruns TD: Internal transcribed spacer sequences
from 38 recognized species of Suillus sensu lato: phylogenetic and
taxonomic implications. Mycologia 1996, 88:776-785.
Bruns TD, Bidartondo M, Taylor DL: Host specificity in ectomycorrhizal
communities: what do exceptions tell us? Integ Comp Biol 2002, 42:352-359.
Den Bakker HC, Zuccarello GC, Kuyper TW, Noordeloos ME: Evolution and
host specificity in the ectomycorrhizal genus Leccinum. New Phytol 2004,
163:201-215.
Thompson JN: The geographic mosaic of coevolution Chicago: University of
Chicago Press; 2005.
Furlow JJ: The systematics of the American species of Alnus (Betulaceae).
Rhodora 1979, 81:1-121.
Kvaček Z, Teodoridis V: Tertiary macrofloras of the Bohemian Massif: a
review with correlations within Boreal and Central Europe. Bull Geosci
2007, 82:383-408.
Schmidt PA: Zur Systematik und Variabilität der mitteleuropäischen Erlen
(Gattung Alnus Mill.). Mitt Deutsch Dendrol Ges 1996, 82:15-42.
Chen Z, Li J: Phylogenetics and biogeography of Alnus (Betulaceae)
inferred from sequences of nuclear ribosomal DNA ITS region. Int J Pl Sci
2004, 165:325-335.
Navarro E, Bousquet J, Moiroud A, Munive A, Piou D, Normand P: Molecular
phylogeny of Alnus (Betulaceae), inferred from ribosomal DNA ITS
sequences. Pl Soil 2003, 254:207-217.
Murai S: Phytotaxonomical and geobotanical studies on genus Alnus in
Japan (III). Taxonomy of whole world species and distribution of each
section. Bull Gov Forest Exp Sta Meguro 1964, 171:1-107.
Kovar-Eder J, Kvaček Z, Martinetto E, Roiron P: Late Miocene to Early Pliocene
vegetation of southern Europe (7-4Ma) as reflected in the megafossil plant
record. Palaeogeogr Palaeoclimatol Palaeoecol 2006, 238:321-339.
King RA, Ferris C: Chloroplast DNA phylogeography of Alnus glutinosa (L.)
Gaertn. Mol Ecol 1998, 7:1151-1161.
Hewitt GM: Post-glacial re-colonization of European biota. Biol J Linn Soc
1999, 68:87-112.
Briquet J: Prodrome de la flore corse, comprenant les résultats botaniques de
six voyages exécutés en Corse sous les auspices de M. Émile Burnat Tome I.
Geneva, Basel: Georg & Cie; 1910.
Ball PW: Alnus Miller. In Flora Europaea Psilotaceae to Platanaceae. Volume I..
2 edition. Edited by: Tutin TG, Heywood VH, Burges NA, Valentine DH,
Moore DM. Cambridge University Press; 1993:69-70.
Kamruzzahan S: Is Alnus viridis a glacial relict in the Black Forest ? Master
thesis Albert-Ludwigs Univ. Freiburg; 2003 [http://www.freidok.uni-freiburg.
de/volltexte/1189/pdf/Is_Alnus_viri.pdf].
Contandriopoulos J: La flore orophile de la Corse: origines, rapports avec
celle des Alpes et des montagnes de l’Europe méridionale. Actes du
colloque sur la flore et la végétation des chaînes alpine et jurassienne. Annales
littéraires de l’université de Besançon Besançon: Presses Universitaires de
Franche-Comté; 1971, 205-222.
Schönswetter P, Tribsch A: Vicariance and dispersal in the alpine
perennial Bupleurum stellatum L. (Apiaceae). Taxon 2005, 54:725-732.
Molina R: Ectomycorrhizal specificity in the genus Alnus. Can J Bot 1981,
59:325-334.
Brunner I, Brunner F, Laursen GA: Characterization and comparison of
macrofungal communities in an Alnus tenuifolia and an Alnus crispa
forest in Alaska. Can J Bot 1992, 70:1247-1258.
Miller SL, Koo CD, Molina R: Characterization of red alder mycorrhizae:
a preface to monitoring belowground ecological responses. Can J Bot
1991, 69:516-531.
Becerra A, Zak MR, Horton TR, Micolini J: Ectomycorrhizal and arbuscular
mycorrhizal colonization of Alnus acuminata from Calilegua National
Park (Argentina). Mycologia 2005, 15:525-531.
Tedersoo L, Suvi T, Jairus T, Ostonen I, Põlme S: Revisiting ectomycorrhizal
fungi of the genus Alnus: differential host specificity, diversity and
determinants of the fungal community. New Phytol 2009, 182:727-735.

Rochet et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/40

27. Kennedy PG, Hill LT: A molecular and phylogenetic analysis of the
structure and specificity of Alnus rubra ectomycorrhizal assemblages.
Fungal Ecol 2010, 3:195-204.
28. Moreau PA, Rochet J, Richard F, Manzi S, Chassagne F, Gardes M: Alnusassociated species of Alpova and Melanogaster (Boletales, Paxillaceae) in
Europe. Cryptog Mycol 2011.
29. Trappe J: Fungus associates of ectotrophic mycorrhizae. Bot Rev 1962,
28:538-606.
30. Moser M: Some aspects of Cortinarius associated with Alnus. J JEC 2004,
3:47-101.
31. Mohatt KR, Cripps CL, Lavin M: Ectomycorrhizal fungi of whitebark pine
(a tree in peril) revealed by sporocarps and molecular analysis of
mycorrhizae from treeline forests in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem.
Botany 2008, 86:14-25.
32. Moreau PA, Peintner U, Gardes M: Phylogeny of the ectomycorrhizal
mushroom genus Alnicola (Basidiomycota, Cortinariaceae) based on
rDNA sequences with special emphasis on host specificity and
morphological characters. Mol Phylogen Evol 2006, 38:794-807.
33. Moreau PA: A nomenclatural revision of the genus Alnicola. Fungal Div
2005, 20:121-155.
34. Horak E: Röhrlinge und Blätterpilze in Europa - unter der Mitarbeit von
Anton Hausknecht (Bolbitiaceae) und P.A. Moreau (Alnicola). Heidelberg:
Elsevier Spektrum Akademischer; 2005.
35. Moreau PA, Mleczko P, Ronikier M, Ronikier A: Rediscovery of Alnicola
cholea (Cortinariaceae): taxonomic revision and description of its
mycorrhiza with Polygonum viviparum. Mycologia 2006, 98:468-478.
36. Romagnesi H: Description de quelques espèces d’Agarics ochrosporés.
Bull Trimestriel Soc Mycol France 1942, 58:121-169.
37. Moreau PA, Garcia G: Alnicola salabertii, sp. nov., mycorhizique d’Alnus
cordata, et deux autres Alnicola à petites spores. Bull Trimestriel Soc Mycol
France 2005, 120:273-292.
38. Grubisha LC, Bergemann SE, Bruns TD: Host islands within the California
Northern Channel Islands create fine-scale genetic structure in two
sympatric species of the symbiotic ectomycorrhizal fungus Rhizopogon.
Mol Ecol 2007, 16:1811-1822.
39. Binder M, Hibbett DS: Molecular systematics and biological diversification
of Boletales. Mycologia 2006, 98:971-981.
40. Halász K: Különböző stressztűrőképességű nagygombanemzetségek
Kárpát-medencei leletanyagának molekuláris azonosítása és
rendszerezése. PhD Thesis University of Budapest; 2008 [http://teo.elte.hu/
minosites/ertekezes2009/halasz_k.pdf].
41. Perič B, Moreau PA: Melanogaster luteus, un hypogé rare retrouvé au
Monténégro. Mycol Montenegrina 2010, 12:77-83.
42. Buyck B, Hofstetter V, Eberhardt U, Verbeken A, Kauff F: Walking the thin
line between Russula and Lactarius: the dilemma of Russula subsect.
Ochricompactae. Fungal Div 28:15-40.
43. Heilmann-Clausen J, Verbeken A, Vesterholt J: The genus Lactarius. Fungi of
Northern Europe 2 Copenhagen: The Danish Mycological Society; 1998.
44. Basso MT: Lactarius Pers. Fungi Europaei 7. Alassio: Mykoflora; 1999.
45. Hesler LR, Smith AH: North American species of Lactarius Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press; 1979.
46. Romagnesi H: Étude sur les lactaires de la sous-section des Striatini. Bull
Trimestriel Soc Mycol France 1974, 90:139-146.
47. Bon M: Clé monographique du genre Lactarius. Doc Mycol 1980, 10:1-85.
48. Nuytinck J, Verbeken A: Worlwide phylogeny of Lactarius section Deliciosi
inferred from ITS and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene
sequences. Mycologia 2007, 99:820-832.
49. Brunner I, Horak E: Mycological analysis of Alnus associated macrofungi in
the region of the Swiss National Park as recorded by J. Favre (1960).
Mycol Helv 1990, 4:111-139.
50. Banaev EV, Bazant V: Study of natural hybridization between Alnus incana
(L.) Moench, and Alnus glutinosa (L.) Gaertn. J Forest Sci 2007, 53:66-73.
51. Roy BA: Patterns of association between crucifers and their flower-mimic
pathogens: host jumps are more common than coevolution or
cospeciation. Evolution 2007, 55:41-53.
52. Grubisha LC, Trappe JM, Molina R, Spatafora JW: Biology of the
ectomycorrhizal genus Rhizopogon. V. Phylogenetic relationships in the
Boletales inferred from LSU rDNA sequences. Mycologia 2001, 93:82-89.
53. Hoeksema JD, Thompson JN: Geographic structure in a widespread plantmycorrhizal interaction: pines and false-truffles. J Evol Biol 2007,
20:1148-1163.

Page 14 of 14

54. Geml J, Tulloss RE, Laursen GA, Sazanova NA, Taylor DL: Evidence for
strong inter- and intracontinal phylogeographic structure in Amanita
muscaria, a wind-dispersed ectomycorrhizal basidiomycete. Mol Phylogen
Evol 2008, 48:694-701.
55. Peintner U, Bougher N, Castellano MA, Moncalvo JM, Moser MM, Trappe JM,
Vilgalys R: Multiple origins of sequestrate fungi related to Cortinarius
(Cortinariaceae). Amer J Bot 2001, 88:2168-2179.
56. Boyle H, Zimdars B, Renker C, Buscot F: A molecular phylogeny of
Hebeloma species from Europe. Mycol Res 2006, 110:369-380.
57. Grubisha LC, Trappe JM, Molina R, Spatafora JW: Biology of the
ectomycorrhizal genus Rhizopogon VI. Re-examination of infrageneric
relationships inferred from phylogenetic analyses of internal transcribed
spacer sequences. Mycologia 2002, 94:607-619.
58. Hedh J, Samson P, Erland S, Tunlid A: Multiple gene genealogies and
species recognition in the ectomycorrhizal fungus Paxillus involutus.
Mycol Res 112:965-975.
59. Gardes M, Bruns T: ITS primers with enhanced specificity for
basidiomycetes - application to the identification of mycorrhizae and
rusts. Mol Ecol 1993, 2:113-118.
60. Matheny PB: Improving phylogenetic inference of mushrooms with RPB1
and RPB2 nucleotide sequences (Inocybe; Agaricales). Mol Phylogen Evol
2005, 35:1-20.
61. Johannesson HS, Johannesson KHP, Stenlid J: Development of primer sets
to amplify fragments of conserved genes for use in population studies
of the fungus Daldinia loculata. Mol Ecol 2000, 9:375-378.
62. Jargeat P, Martos F, Carriconde F, Moreau PA, Gryta H, Gardes M:
Phylogenetic species delimitation in ectomycorrhizal fungi and
implications for barcoding: the case of the Tricholoma scalpturatum
complex (Basidiomycota). Mol Ecol 2010, 19:5216-5320.
63. Gonzales P, Labarère J: Sequence and secondary structure of the
mitochondrial small-subunit rRNA V4, V6, and V9 domains reveal highly
species-specific variations within the genus Agrocybe. Appl Environm
Microbiol 1998, 64:4149-4160.
64. Mouhamadou B, Carriconde F, Gryta H, Jargeat P, Manzi S, Gardes M:
Molecular evolution of mitochondrial ribosomal DNA in the fungal
genus Tricholoma: barcoding implications. Fungal Genet Biol 2008,
45:1219-1226.
65. Katoh K, Kuma K, Toh H, Miyata T: MAFFT version 5: improvement in
accuracy of multiple sequence alignment. Nucleic Acid Res 2005,
33:511-518.
66. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
67. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist FR: MrBayes: Bayesian inference of phylogeny.
Biometrics 2001, 17:754-755.
68. Posada D, Crandall KA: Modeltest: testing the model of DNA substitution.
Bioinformatics 1998, 14:817-818.
69. Posada D, Crandall KA: Selecting the Best-Fit Model of Nucleotide
Substitution. Syst Biol 2001, 50:580-601.
70. Swofford D: PAUP*. Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony (*and Other
Methods). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts; 2003, Version
4d10.
71. Felsenstein J: Phylogenies from molecular sequences: inference and
reliability. Annual Rev Genet 1988, 22:521-565.
72. Drummond AJ, Rambaut A: BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary analysis by
sampling trees. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:214.
73. Drummond AJ, Ho SYW, Phillips MJ, Rambaut A: Relaxed phylogenetics
and dating with confidence. PLoS Biol 2006, 4:699-710.
74. Rambaut A, Drummond AJ: Tracer v1.4. 2007 [http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk/
Tracer].
75. Forest F, Savolainen V, Chase MW, Lupia R, Bruneau A, Crane PR: Teasing
apart molecular- versus fossil-based error estimates when dating
phylogenetic trees: a case study in the birch family (Betulaceae). Syst Bot
2005, 30:118-133.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-40
Cite this article as: Rochet et al.: Comparative phylogenies and host
specialization in the alder ectomycorrhizal fungi Alnicola, Alpova and
Lactarius (Basidiomycota) in Europe. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:40.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
