<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary variation of papillomavirus E2 protein and E2 binding sites</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2011, 8:379. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-379"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Adam Rogers"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

RESEARCH

Open Access

Evolutionary variation of papillomavirus
E2 protein and E2 binding sites
Adam Rogers, Mackenzie Waltke and Peter C Angeletti*

Abstract
Background: In an effort to identify the evolutionary changes relevant to E2 function, within and between
papillomavirus genera, we evaluated the E2 binding sites (E2BS)s inside the long-control-region (LCR), and
throughout the genomes. We identified E2BSs in the six largest genera of papillomaviruses: Alpha, Beta, Gamma,
Delta, Lambda, and Xi-papillomaviruses (128 genomes), by comparing the sequences with a model consensus we
created from known functional E2BSs (HPV16, HPV18, BPV1). We analyzed the sequence conservation and
nucleotide content of the 4-nucleotide spacer within E2BSs. We determined that there is a statistically significant
difference in GC content of the four-nucleotide E2BS spacer, between Alpha and Delta-papillomaviruses, as
compared to each of the other groups. Additionally, we performed multiple alignments of E2 protein sequences
using members of each genus in order to identify evolutionary changes within the E2 protein.
Results: When a phylogenetic tree was generated from E2 amino acid sequences, it was discovered that the
alpha-papillomavirus genera segregates into two distinct subgroups (a1 and a2). When these subgroups were
individually analyzed, it was determined that the subgroup a1 consensus E2BS favored a spacer of AAAA, whereas
subgroup a2 favored the opposite orientation of the same spacer; TTTT. This observation suggests that these
conserved inverted linkers could have functional importance.
Keywords: extrachromosomal DNA, persistent infection, Human papillomavirus, E2 Protein, DNA binding Domain

Background
Papillomaviruses (PV) are small (55 nm diameter) nonenveloped viruses of icosahedral capsid symmetry that
house a single molecule of circular double-stranded
DNA [1]. This family of viruses infects surface tissues
such as the skin or mucosa which include the mouth,
airways, and anogenital tissues of vertebrate animals [2].
Members of the mucosal HPVs are the causative agents
of cervical cancer as well as some vaginal, anal, and
penile cancers [3-5]. Additionally, emerging research is
implicating HPVs in some head and neck cancers [6].
The family of papillomaviridae has 16 assigned genera
(alpha-papillomavirus through pi-papillomavirus) and
one unassigned genus [7]. There are over 120 strains of
HPV identified at present [8] as well as numerous species that infect mammals, birds, and reptiles. Papillomaviruses are classified by differences in the major capsid
protein open-reading-frame (ORF), L1. An HPV
* Correspondence: Pangeletti2@unl.edu
Nebraska Center for Virology, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, 68583-0900, USA

genotype is defined by a difference of at least 10% in the
L1 gene, as compared to the closest known HPV type.
A difference of between 2-10% constitutes a subtype,
and less than a 2% difference defines a variant [1,9].
Alpha-papillomaviruses are classified into high and low
risk categories by their potential to lead to cervical cancer [4,5,10].
The HPV genome that consists of a long control
region (LCR), an early gene region, and a late gene set.
The LCR (~850 bp) contains the origin of replication
(ori) and multiple transcription binding sites, thus controlling the expression of viral genes [1,8]. The compact
size of the HPV genome necessitates the use of alternative-splicing for expression of early and late. The early
genes are expressed in undifferentiated or newly differentiated keratinocytes, whereas late genes are expressed
in keratinocytes undergoing terminal differentiation
[1,11]. The early genes (E1, E2, E6 and E7) are primarily
responsible for replication, genome maintenance, and
the promotion of cell growth. The E2 protein serves as
a transcription and replication regulator and a

© 2011 Rogers et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

maintenance factor. Full-length E2 protein contains
three domains: an N-terminal transactivation domain,
an internal “hinge” domain, and a DNA binding domain
(DBD) located at the C-terminus. Both the C-terminal
and N-terminal domains are relatively well conserved
within the PVs [12].
E2 binds as a dimer at DNA-binding sites through the
C-terminal DBD [11]. The E2 DBD forms a dimeric®barrel and each strand contributes a half-barrel. The
dimer interface has a hydrophobic core and uses extensive hydrogen bonding between subunits to maintain
tight binding. This ® -barrel core contains elaborately
packed side chains that contribute to the stability of the
dimer, whereas ® -strands 2 and 3 are connected by a
poorly conserved 6-10 residue loop. The tertiary structure of characterized E2 DBDs is similar, but there
appear to be variation in the orientations of the two
subunits [8]. Some evidence suggests that the activation
domain mediates linking activity between E2 molecules
bound at distant E2-binding sites, thus forming DNA
loops [8,13].
E2 recognizes the consensus sequence, 5’ACCgNNNNcGGT-3’, with nucleotide positions 4 and 9
allowing some variability. A number of studies have
examined the binding of E2 protein to its cognate binding site [8,14-20]. The sequence of the 4-nucleotide
spacer varies by HPV type, and is thought to be critical
for determining E2 binding affinity, and potentially in
playing a role in gene regulation, despite having no predicted nucleotide-amino acid contacts from the crystal
structure [8,16-18,21]. The E2 homodimer binds the
DNA by the alpha helices of each monomer by contact
with two successive major grooves of the target site
[8,17].
Four E2 binding sites are conserved in the LCR of
most papillomaviruses and have been assigned numbers
according to their distance from the early promoter
[11]. Each site is differentially regulated by variable
binding affinity for the E2 protein, resulting in varying
replication and transcriptional effects during the viral
life cycle [22,23] presumably as a result of differences in
E2 binding affinity [8] due to sequence variation as well
as methylation of the E2 binding site [14,20]. These
binding sites are typically well conserved across all
papillomaviruses. However, in some cases variation in
the number and location of some E2 binding sites does
occur, including a predicted fifth binding site within the
LCR of beta-papillomaviruses [24] and some alphapapillomaviruses [20] as well as observation of up to 17
sequences with ability to bind E2 with the bovine papillomavirus 1 genome [19].
In this study, we examined the evolutionary divergence in E2BS recognition by the E2 transcriptional regulatory protein. Several studies have found that PVs

Page 2 of 12

have different numbers of E2BSs with different affinities
and different effects on replication [20,25-27]. We
hypothesize that PV E2 proteins have evolved different
affinities and different preferences for E2BSs, including
spacer nucleotides, which control E2BS pre-bend. Currently, the majority of the work performed on the E2
protein function has been performed on domains from a
relatively small number of papillomavirus types. A complete understanding of papillomaviruses and the function of their E2 proteins should include all known types.
To work towards this objective, we performed a bioinformatic analysis to generate a list of putative E2BS
sequences matching the consensus in all papillomaviruses currently classified by ICTV. We then analyzed
them for variations in binding site number, location,
and differences in the 4-nucleotide spacer region
between the largest of the HPV genera, the Alpha, Beta,
Gamma, Delta, Lambda, and Xi-papillomaviruses. We
performed multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis of E2 proteins of these viruses to observe
evolutionary patterns from an E2-centric perspective.
Finally, we performed sequence alignment of the viral
E2 protein C-terminal DBDs of each genus and
observed that a greater degree of variation is present in
the Alpha-papillomaviruses compared to Beta. One of
the characteristics associated with the classification of
papillomaviruses into their respective genera includes
the ability to infect mucosal and cutaneous epithelia as
well as fibroblast tissue. Our studies suggest that evolution of the E2 protein and its cognate binding site correlates with adaptive radiation papillomaviruses.

Methods
Putative E2 Binding Site Identification and Analysis

Initially, we obtained sequences for the E2 binding sites
of three representative, well-characterized papillomavirus species, HPV16, HPV18, and BPV1 [8,28], to create a broad, complete representative training data set.
We then utilized Multiple EM Motif Elicitation (MEME)
software to use statistic modeling techniques to create a
consensus motif sequence for E2 binding sites within
the genomes of papillomaviruses [29]. This motif was
then used to search through all complete papillomavirus
sequences (obtained from the Papillomavirus Episteme
(http://pave.niaid.nih.gov/#home, (PaVE)) database containing information from Refseq and Genbank [30-32]
for all papillomavirus genera containing 5 of more
members (HPV 2-40, 42-45, 47-62, 65-78, 80-96, 99,
100, 102, 104-107, 110, 111, FA75/KI88-03, RTRX7,
BPV1-9, COPV, DPV, FdPV1, FdPV2, LrPV1, PlpPV1,
PcPV1, UuPV1, and MfPV1-10, utilizing the Motif
Alignment and Search Tool (MAST) [33]. For later phylogenetic analyses of alpha-papillomavirus subgroups, we
divided our data set to into high and low risk groups

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

Page 3 of 12

and alpha-PVs capable of infecting cutaneous keratinocytes. The high risk group included HPV 16, 18, 26, 31,
33, 35, 39, 45, 52, 56, 58, 59, 67, 73, and 82. The cutaneous subgroup included HPV2, 3, 10, 27, 28, 29, 57,
78, and 94.

for all papillomaviruses E2 ORFs and these were subjected to multiple alignment using COBALT software
[35]. The multiple alignment was then used to draw
phylogenetic trees using Neighbor Joining and Kimura
protocols.

E2BS Sequence Analysis

Results

After retrieving the list of putative E2BSs from the
ICTVdb papillomavirus sequences, the data was sorted
based on multiple criteria. Recovered sequences were
manually analyzed from the resultant MAST output to
observe the genome location of the identified binding
sites as well as the GC content of the four base spacer
sequences. Binding sites were classified as either inside
or outside the LCR, according to the criteria of being
located between the end of the L1 opening reading
frame and the beginning of the E7 open reading frame.
Binding sites were similarly separated into their respective papillomavirus genera and the identified E2BSs
were analyzed using MEME to generate a Sequence
Logo to observe the differences in E2BS consensus
sequences for each papillomavirus genus. Similar MEME
analysis was performed to compare the E2BSs of low
and high-risk alpha-papillomaviruses. Alpha papillomavirus E2BSs were sorted into two subgroups (a1 and
a2) based on phylogenetic analyses of E2 proteins (section below). Each of four conserved E2BSs within alphaHPVs were sorted as to their position within the LCR,
for example position 1 E2BSs were compared separately
from position 2 E2BSs etc. Analyzed E2BSs were displayed with sequence logo to indicate the extent of conservation at each nucleotide position.

E2BS Identification

Protein Sequence Alignment

Amino acid sequences for all known E2 proteins within
the papillomaviridae family were acquired from NCBI
and sorted into the respective papillomavirus genera
analyzed in the previous sections. To refine the significance of our results, analysis was limited to the alpha
and beta-papillomavirus genera, as the other genera possess less than ten members each. All E2 sequences were
then aligned using Muscle [34]. Some sequences (HPV
77, 3, and 29) were removed due to long stretches of
non-homologous repetitive DNA in the linker region.
Alignments were then repeated, focusing specifically on
aligning the amino acids located within the C-terminal
DBD of E2. Weblogo was then used to generate a quantitative graphical representation of the sequence
alignments.
Phylogenetic Analysis

We performed phylogenetic analysis to examine evolution of papillomavirus E2 amino acid sequences. Complete amino acid sequences were obtained from NCBI

To examine the evolution of E2 DNA binding site
sequences, we utilized the sequence motif analysis software MEME to generate a consensus DNA binding site.
To generate the initial motif, we generated a training set
based on the confirmed E2 binding sites from HPV16
and 18 as well as BPV1, as these are well characterized
and representative of the papillomavirus family. The
resulting binding site motif is shown in Figure 1a,
Sequence Logo, demonstrating the typical high conservation of bases from positions 1-3 and 10-12 along with
the lack of sequence conservation in the four base
spacer region. Genome sequences were collected from
ICTVdb [32] and sorted into the various papillomavirus
genera. Papillomavirus genera were eliminated from the
rest of the analysis if they contained fewer than five
members, in order to improve the statistical significance
of results. In total, 68 alpha, 35 beta, 6 delta, 7 gamma,
7 lambda, and 5 xi-papillomaviruses were analyzed,
totaling 128 papillomaviruses, representing 111 Human
and 17 animal sequences. These were then used to identify the location of E2 binding sites, utilizing MAST
software, to identify DNA sequences with high sequence
identity to the MEME-generated binding site motif
(Figure 1).
As predicted, the four conserved binding sites located
within the LCR were identified in the majority of papillomavirus species examined (data not shown). However,
a number of potential E2BSs were identified both inside
and outside the LCR. The number of E2 binding sites
identified averaged between four and six per genome for
the alpha, beta, gamma, lambda, and xi-papillomaviruses, whereas the delta-papillomaviruses averaged
eight binding sites per genome, (Figure 1b) due in large
part to the 14 E2BSs identified in BPV1. The majority of
these sequences were found to be located within the
LCR as expected, averaging approximately 3 for the
alpha, beta, gamma, lambda, and xi, and 7 for delta.
E2BS Sequence Analysis

The identified E2BSs were then collected and examined
to identify the GC content of nucleotides located within
their four base spacer regions. G and C nucleotides
from the observed E2BSs were counted and tabulated to
obtain the average GC content of the four-nucleotide
spacer. Most cutaneous papillomavirus genera contained
approximately 25 to 30% GC content within the spacer

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

Page 4 of 12

Figure 1 Consensus Sequence Analysis of E2BSs Throughout Papillomavirus Genera. Well characterized E2BSs from HPV16, 18, and BPV1
were analyzed using MEME software to generate a consensus E2BS motif (a). This motif was then utilized by MAST software to search through
the full-length genomes of 128 papillomaviruses obtained from NCBI to identify sequences with high-identity to the consensus. The average
number of E2BSs identified per genome was sorted into the six largest papillomavirus genera and were further analyzed to determine if the
binding sites were located inside or outside the LCR of the genomes (b). Identified E2BSs were then manually analyzed to determine the GC
content of their four base spacer regions. Results were again calculated in terms of average GC content of E2BSs for each of the individual
papillomavirus genera both inside and outside the LCR as well as in total (c). Finally, the identified binding sites were used for MEME analysis to
identify the consensus E2BS motif for each of the six papillomavirus genera analyzed in this study (d).

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

region (Figure 1c). Alpha-papillomaviruses, in general,
tended to have very low GC content (15%) and deltapapillomaviruses tended to be very high (approximately
50%, indicating no statistical preference for GC versus
AT bases).
When E2BSs were sorted into those “inside the LCR”
and “outside the LCR” groups, specific trends became
apparent. First, alpha-papillomaviruses and to a lesser
extent xi-papillomaviruses displayed a unique requirement for AT nucleotide rich spacers within the LCR,
and a much higher GC content in E2BSs located outside. Gamma and lambda-papillomaviruses seemed to
possess the opposite trend, with a 15-18% GC content
outside the LCR and significantly higher found inside
the LCR. Delta-papillomaviruses tended to still have a
much higher GC content within the spacer than any of
the other papillomavirus genera, while the beta-papillomaviruses remained consistently at approximately 30%
GC content.
To further this analysis, we took the identified E2BSs
for each papillomavirus genera and performed MEME
analysis to identify sequence variation within binding
sites by genera (Figure 1d). As predicted, nucleotides 13 and 10-12 were well conserved across papillomavirus
genera. Some variation was observed in the preference
for C and G nucleotides at positions 4 and 9 respectively, particularly in the gamma and delta genera at
position 9. The four-nucleotide spacer is highly variable
between papillomavirus genera, however some trends
are apparent. Alpha-papillomaviruses seemed to have
the most consistent sequence conservation, particularly
at positions 5-7, in which A nucleotides were very
highly conserved. A and T bases were overrepresented
in the spacer in all papillomavirus genera, except deltapapillomaviruses, which demonstrated no clear trend for
any base at any position. Overall, despite little evidence
of evolution of contact nucleotides, we observed that
each of the papillomavirus genera seem to have significant variation in preferences for E2BS spacer sequences.
E2 Protein Phylogenetic Analysis

To examine evolution of the E2 protein, we acquired
amino acid sequences for all the E2 proteins from papillomaviruses used for the E2BS MEME/MAST procedures. The E2 sequences were then analyzed using
COBALT software under Neighbor Joining and Kimura
protocols. The resultant phylogenetic tree is shown in
Figure 2a. As shown, when analyzed simply from E2
amino acid sequences, papillomaviruses sort into specific
clades matching with the genera classifications which, as
stated previously, were based on L1 amino acid
sequences [7].
Three specific clade groups become apparent based on
this analysis: one containing the delta-papillomaviruses,

Page 5 of 12

one containing the alpha-papillomaviruses, and a third
encompassing the other genera analyzed in this study.
The delta clade possessed the largest degree of evolutionary diversity compared to the other clades, implying
a significant evolutionary divergence of the delta E2 proteins from the other papillomaviruses. One papillomavirus, FDPV2, did not sort out with the other members
of the lambda-papillomavirus genus and, did not associate with any of the other clades identified by this
analysis.
The alpha clade further subdivides into two subgroups
we labeled as 〈1 and 〈2. When analyzed independently,
specific trends become apparent for these two subgroups. The individual members of the subgroups possess specific infectious characteristics (Figure 2b). The
majority of the Human papillomaviruses from subgroup
〈1 are associated with the high-risk group of HPVs. One
subgroup contains both HPV16 and HPV31, two papillomaviruses most associated with cervical cancer. Interestingly, subgroup 〈1 also contains a cluster of viruses
infecting longtailed and rhesus macaques, which seems
to have diverged less than the other members of the
subgroup in terms of their genetic distance (Figure 2a).
Subgroup 〈2 contains two clusters of alpha-papillomaviruses capable of infecting cutaneous keratinocyte cells,
as well as three clusters associated with large genital
warts (condylomas).
MEME Analysis of Alpha Subgroup E2BSs

Given the results of the phylogenic analysis for the
alpha-papillomavirus genera, we performed MEME analysis on the identified E2BSs for each of the alpha-papillomavirus subgroups, as well as those classified as high
and low-risk papillomaviruses and the two clusters containing the alpha-papillomaviruses capable of infecting
cutaneous keratinocytes. Given that subgroup a1 consists primarily of high-risk viruses, the consensus motif
for subgroup a1 and high-risk alpha-papillomaviruses
are essentially identical (Figure 2c). No significant difference was apparent between the high-risk and low-risk
viruses outside of a slight under-representation of the
guanine nucleotide at position 4, which could suggest a
reduced susceptibility at this site for methylation (see
discussion). Cutaneous papillomaviruses appear to possess a significantly reduced preference for A/T nucleotides within the four-base-spacer. Interestingly, the
subgroup a2 E2BS1, positioned closest to p97, has a
consensus motif that has a preference for thymine
rather than adenine bases within the four-base spacer
(Figure 2d). This would imply that the linker sequence
of subgroup a2 is an inversion of the linker from subgroup a1. These differences could be important in the
orientation of pre-bending of the E2BS1 DNA in relation to the other E2BSs.

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

Page 6 of 12

Figure 2 Phylogenetic Analysis of Papillomavirus E2 Protein and E2BSs. E2 protein amino acid sequences for each of the papillomaviruses
were obtained from NCBI and used for COBALT analysis. The resulting multiple alignment was then used to generate a phylogenetic tree to
analyze papillomavirus evolution in terms of the E2 protein (a). Clades were identified corresponding to the classical PV genera and indicated on
the tree, as well as two subgroups of the alpha-papillomavirus genera (a1 and a2). These were then expanded and examined individually, and
the locations of various types of alpha-papillomaviruses (specifically those capable of infecting cutaneous keratinocytes and those possessing a
high-risk of progression to cervical cancer) were indicated (b). HPV E2BSs from part one were then reanalyzed using MEME software to identify a
consensus E2BS for each of the subgroups identified in 2b, i.e., subgroup a1 and a2, (high and low-risk alpha-papillomaviruses), as well as those
capable of infecting cutaneous keratinocytes tissue (c). Alpha E2BSs of were analyzed for changes in the 4-base pair sequence spacer (d). Each
of the four E2 binding sites, numbered 1-4 starting from the closest to the p97 promoter, were analyzed for position-specific differences in the
4-base-pair spacer sequence between alpha subgroups (a1 and a2).

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

E2 Amino Acid Sequence Conservation

Since one of the primary differences between the alphapapillomaviruses as compared to the other genera is the
ability to infect mucosal, as opposed to cutaneous keratinocytes, we wanted to determine if a similar level of
divergence could be observed in the amino acid
sequence of the E2 proteins themselves. In order to
demonstrate evolutionary divergence of human papillomavirus E2 proteins, complete amino acid sequences for
the alpha-papillomaviruses and representative genera of
cutaneous papillomaviruses, and the Beta-papillomaviruses were compiled. Certain papillomavirus genera
were excluded, since these groups averaged less than ten
members each, and thus would make alignments less
informative. We initially performed sequence alignments
on the full-length E2 protein. However, it was determined that the linker region of Alpha-papillomavirus
sequences, which is not well conserved amongst varying
HPV types, was skewing the results of the alignments
(data not shown). We therefore adjusted our sequences
to contain only the C-terminal 80 amino acids of the E2
protein, roughly corresponding to the DNA binding
domains (DBD) (Figures 3a, b). It was apparent that
alpha-papillomaviruses have a great degree of sequence
diversity, as compared to beta-papillomaviruses. A series
of representative alignments obtained an average
sequence identity of 41% for Alpha-papillomaviruses as
compared to 65.25% identity for beta. The differences
are also apparent when the logo representative alignment program is used to generate a consensus sequence
(Figures 4a, b) even within the, well-conserved region of
amino acid sequence, which makes direct contact with
the nucleotides of the E2BS.

Discussion
The vast majority of papillomaviruses analyzed using
MEME and MAST during the course of this study conform to the expected number and location of the four
conserved E2BSs within the LCRs of their genomes,
with some minor variation. The averages across all the
genera were between 4-6 E2BSs, besides delta-papillomavirus genus, which seems to be significantly different
from the other papillomaviruses. The majority of the
sites identified from the study were located within the
LCR, though in some cases, sequences that were predicted to bind E2 protein were identified within the
papillomavirus ORFs. Whether these putative downstream E2BSs are actually occupied during active infection is an open question, but they could provide a
mechanism for regulation of gene expression.
Papillomaviruses are classified by their tissue tropism,
genome organization, and sequence divergence within a
conserved region of the L1 open reading frame [9].
However, recent phylogenetic analysis has demonstrated

Page 7 of 12

that alignment based on the E1 and E2 protein
sequences results in a phylogeny which better clusters
papillomavirus species in terms of their epidemiology
and oncogenicity [28]. The E2 protein is one of four
genes which are present in all known papillomaviruses,
but has the highest DN/DS ratio of the four, or ratio
between non-synonymous versus synonymous substitutions [36]. A DN/DS ratio greater than 1, indicates a
high-degree of evolutionary pressure. This is not surprising, since E2 plays numerous functional roles in the
cell between regulating transcription, facilitating DNA
replication, and viral genome maintenance [11].
E2 proteins bind the consensus palindromic sequence,
ACCgNNNNcGGT, through a dynamic, water-mediated
interface [8,15]. The NNNN central region or “spacer” is
absolutely conserved in length, but the sequence varies
by species and individual binding site positions. Hierarchical occupation of the E2BSs by E2 may have important functional and regulatory consequences for both
transcription and replication during infection. Previous
studies have shown that AT-rich spacers have an
increased binding affinity in certain papillomavirus species [8,11]. Specifically, while some alpha-papillomaviruses like HPV16 are acutely sensitive to AT
concentration in the spacer region, others like BPV1 are
essentially insensitive. Hegde et. al. proposed that the
reason for this is due to a reduced ability possessed by
the E2 protein of some alpha-papillomaviruses, specifically HPV16, to bend DNA into a conformation which
fits within the E2 DNA binding pocket [8]. Essentially,
AT-rich stretches of nucleotides are more intrinsically
rigid and “pre-bent” into a shape that conforms to the
E2 protein DNA binding domain, presumably as a result
of binding site-protein co-evolution, thus requiring less
energy to deform the target sequence to allow protein
binding. The results of this study support this assertion,
with alpha-papillomavirus E2BSs possessing approximately 95% A/T nucleotides within the spacer region, as
compared to roughly 75% in the cutaneous papillomavirus genera, and 50% in delta-papillomaviruses. With
the current limited understanding of nucleotide
sequence recognition, specifically for indirect readout
which occurs in regions like the E2BS spacer (where no
direct nucleotide-amino acid contacts are made), predictions of binding affinity are limited to sophisticated
bioinformatic modeling software and empirical data
identified using methods like quantitative EMSA. However, regions of increased positive charge tend to correlate favorably with DNA deformation ability, presumably
through non-symmetrical charge neutralization by interactions between positively charged amino acid residues
and the negatively charged phosphate backbone [37] or
by actively attracting the negatively charged DNA to
positive residues [38]. Observation of alignments of the

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

Page 8 of 12

Figure 3 E2 DNA Binding Domain Protein Alignment. Amino acid sequences for all known E2 proteins were acquired from NCBI and aligned
using Muscle. (a) This figure shows the sequence alignment of the Alpha-papillomavirus C-terminal 80 amino acids of the E2 DNA binding
domain. The colors represent homologous amino acids and the bar-graphs below represent a quantitative measure of conservation at each
position. (b) This figure shows the sequence alignment of the Beta-papillomavirus C-terminal 80 amino acids of the E2 DNA binding domain.

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

Page 9 of 12

Figure 4 E2 DNA Binding Domain WebLogo. Weblogo was used to generate a graphical representation of the sequence analysis of the Cterminal DNA binding domain of E2. The black box represents the conserved region where alpha-papillomavirus E2 proteins contact DNA (a).
Similarly, the beta-papillomavirus C-terminal DNA binding domain of E2 alignment is shown. The black box represents the conserved region
where alpha-papillomavirus E2 proteins contact DNA (b).

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

Alpha and Beta HPV E2 DNA binding domains
(Figure 3, 4) would seem to support this assertion, as a
greater number of conserved positively-charged amino
acid residues, both within the nucleotide contact region
as well as outside, is clearly present in the beta-papillomaviruses. This observation correlates with the
increased presence of GC residues in the spacers of
Beta-papillomavirus E2BSs. BPV E2 studies have shown
that a cluster of positively charged residues located Cterminal of the DBD has been implicated in controlling
the sensitivity to the spacer GC content [8]. Interestingly, we observed that the consensus E2BS diverged,
even within papillomavirus genera. Specifically, the two
alpha subgroups consensus binding site possessed an
inverted four base spacer. Typically, when the four conserved binding sites are observed individually, the spacer
of binding sites 5’ of the viral origin of replication tend
to be oriented such that the consensus binding site possesses A nucleotides whereas those 3’ of the ori contain
the inverse, or T nucleotides [20]. As a result, given that
the E2BS sequence is a psuedopalindrome, this would
likely result in the E2 protein binding in opposite orientation with respect to the double-helix. The functional
consequences of this have yet to be fully explored, but
could have interesting implications for E2 function in
the two alpha subgroups.
E2BS locations have also diverged along with tissue
type, which could have numerous additional effects on
viral transcriptional regulation. The number and location of E2BSs varies throughout the PVs. There are 4
primary conserved binding sites near the viral origin of
replication termed BS1, BS2, BS3 and BS4. E2 binding
to the first site (BS1) interferes with TATA box recognition by the TATA binding protein, binding to the second (BS2) and third (BS3) sites causes promoter
repression by competition with cellular transcription
factors, and binding to the fourth site (BS4) up regulates
viral early gene expression [8]. In addition, binding to
BS3 is required for DNA replication. When E2 protein
concentration is low, the promoter for the E6 and E7
oncogenes is activated and BS4 is occupied. When E2
protein concentration is high, the E6 promoter is
repressed and BS1 and BS2 are occupied by E2 [8]. Differential affinities for the spacers of these E2BSs have
been predicted to play a regulatory role in E2 mediated
viral gene transcription [8]. The vast differences in number and location of E2BSs identified in this study, however, may suggest that there are significant differences
in regulation from one virus species to another. Additionally, the E2 proteins of individual papillomaviruses
have demonstrated variable ability to tolerate GC content of the four base spacer [8] and binding site methylation [20] may further individualize the specific
regulation strategy utilized.

Page 10 of 12

All four of the E2BSs in the LCR are almost exclusively AT-rich in the spacer. However, predicted E2BSs
outside the LCR generally contain higher levels of GC
content in the spacer. This suggests that these binding
sites would tend to have much lower binding affinity for
E2. Considering that external binding sites were not
conserved between various HPV types and the fact that
E2 has numerous functions that are up or down-regulated during the course of the viral life cycle, it is difficult to speculate what roles these additional binding
sites might play, including remodeling the chromosome
structure, or potentially blocking the progress of RNA
polymerase complexes during transcription. Further
complicating the issue is the fact that, in BPV1, 17 total
E2 binding sites have been previously identified by gel
shift assays, many of which had significantly divergent
sequences from the consensus [39]. However, those studies also determined that binding sites more closely
related to the consensus generally had the highest binding affinity for E2, thus it is likely that the binding sites
identified from this study are preferentially filled at multiple stages of the viral life cycle. This presents a possible regulatory mechanism to control occupation of
E2BSs, and thus their transcriptional and/or replicational effects.
One explanation for the greater degree of variability in
mucosal HPVs could stem from the wide tissue types
infected by Alpha-papillomaviruses. Much of the evolutionary differences observed in the study correlate with
differences in preferred infection site. Mucosal epithelia
infected by Alpha-papillomaviruses ranges from oral to
anogenital, all of which could provide a slightly different
micro-environment for HPV replication. Additionally,
while cutaneous tissue is considered an immune-privileged site, the mucosal epithelia is much more actively
surveyed by the immune system and exposed to IgA.
This could also potentially serve as a driving force for
divergence of E2 protein function. Previous work has
established that differences in tissue type can have significant effect on LCR transcription enhancer activity
[40,41]. E2-host co-evolution could then be a potential
explanation for the extreme level of tissue specificity
exhibited by most members of the papillomaviridae
family.
GC content overall tends to be typically low in papillomaviruses, presumably as a means of eliminating targets for methylation by the host gene regulation
machinery [20]. Sanchez et. al. determined that there
was an evolutionary selection for CpG methylation sites
within the E2BSs of papillomaviruses at positions 4-5
and 9-10 [20]. Our analysis demonstrated a varying prevalence of G and C nucleotides, respectively, at these
sites between the papillomaviruses. Beta and xi-papillomaviruses, both possessing a much higher prevalence

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

for the CpG methylation site at one or more of the
potential sites than the average for the other genera.
Delta-papillomaviruses seemed to favor the presence of
a methylation site at the 4-5 position, but selected
against one at the 9-10 position. For other papillomaviruses, the patterns are somewhat more ambiguous.
This is not unexpected, since results by Sanchez et. al.
showed that within the alpha-papillomaviruses, the pattern of CpG prevalence varies within the four conserved
E2BSs, suggesting that methylation is a key function in
determining binding hierarchy for E2 [14,20]. As such, if
the same holds true for other papillomavirus genera, it
is not surprising that, this pattern would be somewhat
skewed. A similar effort to examine the individual conserved E2BSs for papillomaviruses beyond the alpha
genus would possibly determine if similar methylation
patterns exist, but is beyond the scope of this study.
One important observation from our studies is the
large degree of variability between both the proteins and
their counterpart DNA binding sites between papillomavirus genera. Delta-papillomaviruses averaged a larger
number of E2BSs within the LCR (perhaps, biased
somewhat by the 17 E2BSs in BPV1), than any of the
other genera examined in this study, and demonstrated
a large degree of insensitivity to GC content in the 4base spacer region. To the other extreme, the alphapapillomaviruses, showed an intense preference to A/T
nucleotides within the four highly-conserved E2BSs in
the LCR, almost to the point of exclusion at some base
positions. The other genera ranged somewhere in
between. It’s tempting to infer that, as these three
groups primarily infect different tissue types (mucosal
epithelia for alpha; cutaneous for beta, gamma, lambda,
and xi; and fibroblasts for delta) that this in some way
represents an element of the adaptive radiation the virus
underwent to adopt these infectious substrates. Aside
from potential explanations for this observation, it
should remind researchers to be cautious when drawing
generalizations between papillomavirus genera E2 proteins, since a particular feature of BPV1 E2 protein may
function differently or even be absent for other PVs, as
has been shown for HPV16 and BPV1’s respective utilization of Brd4 for viral genome maintenance versus regulation of gene expression [42].
Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Angeletti lab for their critical evaluation of this
manuscript. This work was supported by NIH Grant: K01CA100736 to P.C.A.
and by a COBRE grant (5P20RR015635) through the Nebraska Center for
Virology.
Authors’ contributions
AR performed sequence alignments and analyses and wrote the manuscript.
MW did additional data and literature research and helped write the
manuscript. PCA conceived of the study and coordinated the work and
edited the manuscript.

Page 11 of 12

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 26 April 2011 Accepted: 1 August 2011
Published: 1 August 2011
References
1. Zheng ZM, Baker CC: Papillomavirus genome structure, expression, and
post-transcriptional regulation. Front Biosci 2006, 11:2286-2302.
2. Day PM, Lowy DR, Schiller JT: Papillomaviruses infect cells via a clathrindependent pathway. Virology 2003, 307:1-11.
3. Bosch FX, Sanjose S, Castellsague X, Moreno V, Munoz N: Papillomavirus
Research: From Natural History to Vaccines and Beyond.Edited by:
Saveria Campo M. Wymondham: Caisreir Academic Press; 2006:19-40.
4. Clifford GM, Smith JS, Plummer M, Munoz N, Franceschi S: Human
papillomavirus types in invasive cervical cancer worldwide: a metaanalysis. Br J Cancer 2003, 88:63-73.
5. Munoz N, Bosch FX, de Sanjose S, Herrero R, Castellsague X, Shah KV,
Snijders PJ, Meijer CJ: Epidemiologic classification of human
papillomavirus types associated with cervical cancer. N Engl J Med 2003,
348:518-527.
6. D’Souza G, Kreimer AR, Viscidi R, Pawlita M, Fakhry C, Koch WM, Westra WH,
Gillison ML: Case-Control Study of Human Papillomavirus and
Oropharyngeal Cancer. N Engl J Med 2007, 356:1944-1956.
7. de Villiers E-M, Fauquet C, Broker TR, Bernard H-U, zur Hausen H:
Classification of papillomaviruses. Virology 2004, 324:17-27.
8. Hegde RS: The papillomavirus E2 proteins: structure, function, and
biology. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 2002, 31:343-360.
9. de Villiers EM, Fauquet C, Broker TR, Bernard HU, zur Hausen H:
Classification of papillomaviruses. Virology 2004, 324:17-27.
10. Wentzensen N, Vinokurova S, von Knebel Doeberitz M: Systematic review
of genomic integration sites of human papillomavirus genomes in
epithelial dysplasia and invasive cancer of the female lower genital
tract. Cancer Res 2004, 64:3878-3884.
11. McBride AA, Romanczuk H, Howley PM: The papillomavirus E2 regulatory
proteins. J Biol Chem 1991, 266:18411-18414.
12. Sakai H, Yasugi T, Benson JD, Dowhanick JJ, Howley PM: Targeted
mutagenesis of the human papillomavirus type 16 E2 transactivation
domain reveals separable transcriptional activation and DNA replication
functions. J Virol 1996, 70:1602-1611.
13. Antson AA, Burns JE, Moroz OV, Scott DJ, Sanders CM, Bronstein IB,
Dodson GG, Wilson KS, Maitland NJ: Structure of the intact transactivation
domain of the human papillomavirus E2 protein. Nature 2000,
403:805-809.
14. Thain A, Jenkins O, Clarke A, Gaston K: CpG methylation directly inhibits
binding of the human papillomavirus type 16 E2 protein to specific
DNA sequences. J Virol 1996, 70:7233-7235.
15. Ferriero DU, Delarole M, Nadra AD, De Prat Gay G: Free Energy
Contributions to Direct Readout of a DNA Sequence. J Biol Chem 2005,
32480-32484.
16. Blakaj DM, Kattamuri C, Khrapunov S, Hegde RS, Brenowitz M: Indirect
Readout of DNA Sequence by Papillomavirus E2 Proteins Depends Upon
Net Cation Uptake. J Mol Biol 2006, 358:224-240.
17. Dell G, Wilkinson KW, Tranter R, Parish J, Leo Brady R, Gaston K:
Comparison of the Structure and DNA-binding Properties of the E2
Proteins from an Oncogenic and a Non-oncogenic Human
Papillomavirus. J Mol Biol 2003, 334:979-991.
18. Hines CS, Meghoo C, Shetty S, Biburger M, Brenowitz M, Hegde RS: DNA
structure and flexibility in the sequence-specific binding of
papillomavirus E2 proteins. J Mol Biol 1998, 276:809-818.
19. Li R, Knight J, Bream G, Stenlund A, Botchan M: Specific recognition
nucleotides and their DNA context determine the affinity of E2 protein
for 17 binding sites in the BPV-1 genome. Genes & Development 1989,
510-526.
20. Sanchez IE, Dellarole M, Gaston K, de Prat Gay G: Comprehensive
comparison of the interaction of the E2 master regulator with its
cognate target DNA sites in 73 human papillomavirus types by
sequence statistics. Nucl Acids Res 2008, 36:756-769.
21. Yongli Zhang, Zhiqun Xi, Rashmi S Hegde, Zippora Shakked, Crothers aDM:
Predicting indirect readout effects in protein-DNA interactions. PNAS
2004, 101:8337-8341.

Rogers et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:379
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/379

22. M Remm RB, Jenkins JR: The E2 binding sites determine the efficiency of
replication for the origin of human papillomavirus type 18. Nucleic Acids
Res 1992, 20:6015-6021.
23. Corbach GSaS: Dose-dependent regulation of the early promoter of
human papillomavirus type 18 by the viral E2 protein. J Virol 1997,
71:50-58.
24. Ensser A, Pfister H: Epidermodysplasia verruciformis associated human
papilomaviruses present a subgenus-specific organization of the
regulatory genome region. Nucl Acids Res 1990, 18:3919-3922.
25. Piirsoo M, Ustav E, Mandel T, Stenlund A, Ustav M: Cis and trans
requirements for stable episomal maintenance of the BPV-1 replicator.
Embo J 1996, 15:1-11.
26. Stubenrauch F, Lim HB, Laimins LA: Differential requirements for
conserved E2 binding sites in the life cycle of oncogenic human
papillomavirus type 31. J Virol 1998, 72:1071-1077.
27. Sverdrup F, Khan SA: Two E2 binding sites alone are sufficient to
function as the minimal origin of replication of human papillomavirus
type 18 DNA. J Virol 1995, 69:1319-1323.
28. Li R, Knight J, Bream G, Stenlund A, Botchan M: Specific recognition
nucleotides and their DNA context determine the affinity of E2 protein
for 17 binding sites in the BPV-1 genome. Genes & Development 1989,
3:510-526.
29. Bailey TL, Elkan C: Fitting a mixture model by expectation maximization
to discover motifs in biopolymers. Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology Menlo Park, California:
AAAI Press; 1994, 28-36.
30. Chapter 17, The Reference Sequence (RefSeq) Project. The NCBI
handbook Bethesda: National Library of Medicine (US), National Center for
Biotechnology Information; 2002.
31. Olson M HL, Cantor C, Botstein D: A common language for physical
mapping of the human genome. Science 1989, 245:1434-1435.
32. Pruitt KDT, T Maglott DR: NCBI Reference Sequence (RefSeq): a curated
non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and
proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35(Database):D61-35.
33. Bailey TL, Gribskov M: Combining evidence using p-values: application to
sequence homology searches. Bioinformatics 1998, 14:48-54.
34. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
35. Papadopoulos JS, Agarwala R: COBALT: constraint-based alignment tool
for multiple protein sequences. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:1073-1079.
36. Narechania A, Terai M, Burk RD: Overlapping reading frames in closely
related human papillomaviruses result in modular rates of selection
within E2. J Gen Virol 2005, 86:1307-1313.
37. Strauss JK, Maher LJ: DNA bending by asymmetric phosphate
neutralization. Science 1994, 266:1829-1834.
38. Kerppola TK, Curran T: The transcription activation domains of Fos and
Jun induce DNA bending through electrostatic interactions. Embo J 1997,
16:2907-2916.
39. Li R, Knight J, Bream G, Stenlund A, Botchan M: Specific recognition
nucleotides and their DNA context determine the affinity of E2 protein
for 17 binding sites in the BPV-1 genome. Genes Dev 1989, 3:510-526.
40. Mistry N, Simonsson M, Evander M: Transcriptional activation of the
human papillomavirus type 5 and 16 long control region in cells from
cutaneous and mucosal origin. Virol J 2007, 4:27.
41. Sailaja G, Watts RM, Bernard HU: Many different papillomaviruses have
low transcriptional activity in spite of strong epithelial specific
enhancers. J Gen Virol 1999, 80(Pt 7):1715-1724.
42. McPhillips MG, Oliveira JG, Spindler JE, Mitra R, McBride AA: Brd4 Is
Required for E2-Mediated Transcriptional Activation but Not Genome
Partitioning of All Papillomaviruses. J Virol 2006, 80:9530-9543.
doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-379
Cite this article as: Rogers et al.: Evolutionary variation of papillomavirus
E2 protein and E2 binding sites. Virology Journal 2011 8:379.

Page 12 of 12

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
