<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Carbon-dependent control of electron transfer and central carbon pathway genes for methane biosynthesis in the Archaean, Methanosarcina acetivorans strain C2A</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Microbiology 2010 10:62. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-10-62"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Lars Rohlin"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Carbon-dependent control of electron transfer
and central carbon pathway genes for methane
biosynthesis in the Archaean, Methanosarcina
acetivorans strain C2A
Lars Rohlin1, Robert P Gunsalus1,2*

Abstract
Background: The archaeon, Methanosarcina acetivorans strain C2A forms methane, a potent greenhouse gas, from
a variety of one-carbon substrates and acetate. Whereas the biochemical pathways leading to methane formation
are well understood, little is known about the expression of the many of the genes that encode proteins needed
for carbon flow, electron transfer and/or energy conservation. Quantitative transcript analysis was performed on
twenty gene clusters encompassing over one hundred genes in M. acetivorans that encode enzymes/proteins with
known or potential roles in substrate conversion to methane.
Results: The expression of many seemingly “redundant” genes/gene clusters establish substrate dependent control
of approximately seventy genes for methane production by the pathways for methanol and acetate utilization.
These include genes for soluble-type and membrane-type heterodisulfide reductases (hdr), hydrogenases including
genes for a vht-type F420 non-reducing hydrogenase, molybdenum-type (fmd) as well as tungsten-type (fwd)
formylmethanofuran dehydrogenases, genes for rnf and mrp-type electron transfer complexes, for acetate uptake,
plus multiple genes for aha- and atp-type ATP synthesis complexes. Analysis of promoters for seven gene clusters
reveal UTR leaders of 51-137 nucleotides in length, raising the possibility of both transcriptional and translational
levels of control.
Conclusions: The above findings establish the differential and coordinated expression of two major gene families
in M. acetivorans in response to carbon/energy supply. Furthermore, the quantitative mRNA measurements
demonstrate the dynamic range for modulating transcript abundance. Since many of these gene clusters in
M. acetivorans are also present in other Methanosarcina species including M. mazei, and in M. barkeri, these
findings provide a basis for predicting related control in these environmentally significant methanogens.

Background
Methanosarcina acetivorans strain C2A is a mesophilic
anaerobic archaean isolated from a kelp-degrading
enrichment of marine origin [1]. It is one of the more
metabolically versatile methanogens in that it can use
acetate as well as one-carbon substrates including
mono-methylamine, di-methylamine, tri-methyl amine,
methanol, or carbon monoxide as a sole source of carbon and energy. As a result, it contributes to the
* Correspondence: robg@microbio.ucla.edu
1
Department of Microbiology Immunology and Molecular Genetics,
University of California, Los Angeles, 405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA

formation of two green house gases, methane and carbon dioxide during the natural recycling of organic carbon in anaerobic environments. The biochemical
pathways for carbon flow from the alternative substrates
to methane are reasonably well established [2-4]. However, little is yet known about the expression of the
genes encoding the described pathway enzymes or
accessory proteins needed for electron and carbon flow.
Additionally, the genome contains seemingly redundant
copies of many other genes with implied roles in carbon
or energy metabolism [5]. For example, M. acetivorans
possesses four gene clusters annotated for formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase, three gene sets annotated for

© 2010 Rohlin and Gunsalus; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

Page 2 of 15

hydrogenase, five distinct clusters of genes encoding
membrane-bound and/or soluble-type heterodisulfide
reductase enzymes, and two gene clusters encoding distinct membrane bound ATP sythase complexes. Orthologs of many of these genes are present in other
described Methanosarcinaceae species including
M. acetivorans, M. mazei, and M. barkeri (Table 1,
described below), plus in other methanogenic species.
The expression and/or physiological roles of many of
these genes are either poorly understood or unknown.
Initial genomic and proteomic studies with M. acetivorans and M. mazei have initially addressed this but did
not clearly resolve these questions due in part to DNA/
protein sequence similarities and/or detection limits of
the methods used [6]. Additionally, these approaches
did not quantitatively address how mRNA abundance
levels vary during the alternative cell growth conditions.
In the present study we address the above questions
using M. acetivorans as a model system to examine
gene expression in response to substrate availability.
Using quantitative PCR and supporting molecular methods, the resulting data establish expression levels of
Table 1 Comparison of genesa and corresponding
enzyme complexes in sequenced Methanosarcina
genomes.
Name

M. acetivorans

M. mazei

M. barkeri

atpDCIXHBEFAG
ahaHIKECFABD

Y
Y

N
Y

Y
Y

fpoPABCDHIJJKLMNO operon

Y

Y

Y

vhtG1A1C1D1

Y

Y

Y

vhtG2A2C2

Y

Y

Y

frhADGB

Y

Y

Y

vhoGAC

N

Y

N

echABCDEF

N

Y

Y

rnfXCDGEABY
mrpABCDEFG

Y
Y

N
N

N
N

hdrED1

Y

Y

Y

hdrD2

Y

Y

Y

hdrA1-pfd

Y

Y

Y

hdrC1B1

Y

Y

Y

hdrA2B2C2

Y

Y

Y

fmdE1F1A1C1D1B1

Y

Y

Y

fmdF2A2C2D2B2
fmdB3

Y
Y

N
N

N
Y

fwdD1B1A1C1

Y

Y

N

fwdG2B2D2

Y

Y

Y

fwdG1

Y

Y

N

fwdE1

Y

Y

Y

aceP

Y

Y

Y

pta ack

Y

Y

Y

a

The presence/absence of the corresponding genes/enzymes in the three
genomes are indicated by Y (yes) or N (no). For a complete inventory of all
M. acetivorans genes and designations listed see Figures 1-6.

genes for over twenty enzymes/enzyme complexes for
carbon flow and/or energy conservation. The resulting
findings define two major substrate-specific gene
families for acetate and methanol utilization for this
model organism. These studies also lay a foundation to
purse the molecular basis of central catabolic pathway
gene regulation in this major class of methanogenic
archaea.

Results
Gene redundancy in the M. acetivorans genome

The M. acetivorans genome contains many seemingly
redundant copies of genes annotated with roles in
methanogenesis [5]. These include two sets of genes
annotated for a molybdate-type formylmethanofuran
dehydrogenase (fmd), and two gene sets for a tunstentype formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase (fwd), five heterodisulfide reductase-like hdrED and hdrABC gene
clusters for reduction of Coenzyme M-Coenzyme B heterodisulfide, two sets of vht genes for F420 non-reducing hydrogenase, and two sets of genes for ATP
synthesizing complexes [5]. Additional genes include frh
hydrogenase-like genes, plus additional genes for rnfand mrp-type membrane associated bacterial electron
transfer complexes, plus genes needed for acetate metabolism (discussed below). Homologous and seemingly
“redundant” genes/gene sets are also found in the genomes of M. mazei, and M. barkeri (Table 1). The reason
for these genome makeups is currently unknown. M.
acetivorans was used as a model microorganism to evaluate expression of over twenty sets of genes using gene
specific primer pairs designed to eliminate cross-hybridization when DNA sequence similarity exists (Methods).
RT-PCR, pPCR, and 5’ analysis was then performed
using RNA isolated from M. acetivorans cells grown
with either acetate or methanol as the sole source of
carbon and energy. In this study, a number of new M.
acetivorans gene designations were established to distinguish among homologous orfs (Table 1, and described
below).
Formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase (fmd, fwd)
gene expression

Two of the four previously annotated sets of genes for
formylmethanofuran dehydrogenasethese were designated as molybdenum-type enzymes and are named
here as fmdE1F1A1C1D1B1 and fmdF2A2C2D2B2
(Figure 1A). Two additional gene sets were annotated as
tungsten-type formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase, and
are designated here as fwdD1B1A1C1 and fwdG2B2D2
(Figure 1B). Using qPCR analysis methods (Methods),
the molybdenum-type operon reporter genes fmdE1 and
fmdA1 (Figure 1A) were shown to be expressed at
14-fold higher levels during methanol growth conditions

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Differential expression of genes annotated for fmd and fwd in M. acetivorans. Panel A) the six and five gene fmdE1F1A1C1D1B1
and fmdF2A2C2D2B2 clusters encoding the two putative molybdenum-type formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase enzyme complexes. Panel B)
the four and three gene fwdD1B1A1C1 and fwdG2B2D2 clusters encoding the two putative tungsten-type formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase
enzyme complexes. The Genebank identification number (MA number) is shown below each gene while the individual gene designation is
shown above. Panel C) RT-PCR data for the indicated fmd and fwd genes. Values are expressed as copy number (Methods).

relative to acetate growth (Figure 1C). The second set of
reporter genes (fmdF2, fmdA2, and fmdB2) were
expressed about 2-fold higher during these conditions,
but the maximal level of expression was less than 5% of
that seen for the fmdE1 and fmdA1genes. Noteworthy,
the fmdE1 and fmdA1 gene expression values were
within the same range observed for the fpoN and fpoL
genes that encode subunits of the F420 H2 dehydrogenase needed for central pathway electron transfer functions (described below). The high transcript abundance
of the fmdE1F1A1C1D1B1 gene cluster implies a major
role of this gene set during methanogenesis in contrast
to that for the fmd2 gene set.
The annotated tungsten containing formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase gene cluster fwdD1B1A1C1 reporter genes designated fwdB1 and fwdA1 (Figure 1B) were
also expressed 15-fold higher levels during methanol
growth relative to acetate (Figure 1C). Interestingly, this
was within the magnitude observed for the fmdE1F1A1C1D1B1 gene cluster. However, the second

tungsten-type gene cluster (as reported by the fwdB2
gene), was constitutively expressed and at a level about
one-half of that observed for either fwdA1 or fwdB1.
These fmd/fwd transcript abundance measurements
clearly demonstrate that two of the four fmd
and fwd gene clusters (i.e., fmdE1F1A1C1D1B1 and
fwdD1B1A1C1) are highly transcribed in response to
substrate availability, and furthermore this suggests that
two distinct formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase activities are concurrently utilized during methanol growth
conditions (discussed below).
Heterodisulfide reductase gene expression

M. acetivorans genome analysis revealed five genes/gene
clusters annotated as heterodisulfide reductase, an
enzyme essential for electron transfer from methanogenic electron donors to methyl-CoM reductase
(Table 1, Figure 2A). These include genes for a membrane-type protein designated here as hdrE1, hdrD1 and
hdrD2 similar to those needed for methane formation in

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

Page 4 of 15

acetivorans metabolism is currently unknown but must
now be considered. An orf following the hdrA1 gene is
annotated as a polyferredoxin (pfd), and this suggests a
role for this protein in electron transfer to couple the
soluble-type Hdr complex with an appropriate electron
donor complex. In contrast, hdrA2 and hdrB2 transcript
abundance was about two to twenty-fold lower under
the corresponding conditions. This suggests a minor
role for the second set of HdrABC-type genes (i.e.,
hdrA2B2C2) in methanogenesis.
The hdrA1pfd and hdrC1B1genes for the soluble-type
enzyme subunits are located at different chromosomal
loci, and are coordinately expressed since their mRNA
abundance levels are alike (Figure 2C). Additionally, the
PCR-based gene experiments also demonstrate that the
hdrA1pfd and the hdrED1 genes are each expressed as
operons (data not shown). Taken together, these data
are consistent with a need for both a membrane-type
and a soluble type Hdr enzyme for electron transfer/
energy conservation under acetate and methanol cell
growth conditions. This suggests that distinct electron
transfer pathways are operating to service the alternative
Hdr enzymes.
Figure 2 Differential expression of genes in M. acetivorans
annotated for hdr (hetero-disulfide reductase). Panel A) Genes
encoding the putative membrane-type hetero-disulfide reductase
subunits, hdrED1 and hdrD2. Panel B) Genes encoding the putative
soluble-type hetero-disulfide reductase subunits, hdrA1 pfd, hdrC1B1,
and hdrA2C2B2. The Genebank identification number (MA number)
is shown below each gene while the individual gene designation is
shown above. Panel C) RT-PCR data for the indicated hdr genes.

M. barkeri [7]. An additional six genes encoding soluble-type heterodisulfide reductase proteins are also present in the genome. They include the hdrA1 gene
associated with a poly-ferredoxin-like gene (pfd), an
unlinked set of hdrCB genes called hdrC1and hdrB1,
and a third hdr gene cluster designated hdrA2 hdrC2
hdrB2 (Figure 2B).
Quantitative gene expression experiments (Figure 2C)
revealed that the membrane-type hdrD1 gene was most
highly expressed during acetate cell growth conditions,
and where methanol conditions gave slightly lower transcript abundance (ca. 0.7-fold). In contrast, hdrD2 gene
expression was very low (i.e., at level of about one twentieth that seen for the hdrD1gene Figure 2C), suggesting
a minor or no direct function in methanogenesis. Interestingly, the abundance of the soluble-type hdrA1pfd
and hdrC1B1 gene transcripts were also nearly as high
as for the membrane type hdrED1 genes (Figure 2C).
Here, acetate growth gave three-fold higher hdrA1 transcript levels versus methanol growth conditions. The
participation of a soluble-type hdrABC enzyme in M.

The vht and frh gene clusters

The M. acetivorans genome lacks an echABCDEF gene
cluster encoding an Ech-type hydrogenase with
described roles in hydrogen uptake and ion translocation in M. mazei [3,5]. Since M. acetivorans cells do not
exhibit significant hydrogenase activity [8,9], some other
mechanism must provide a means for electron transfer
from cellular donor(s) to Hdr. Interestingly, the M. acetivorans genome contains two sets of genes (designated
vhtG1A1C1D1, and vhtG2A2C2) for F420-nonreducing
hydrogenase-types (Figure 3A, 3B, Table 1). It also contains a set of frhADGB genes for a coenzyme F420-type
hydrogenase (Figure 3A). Quantitative RT-PCR assays
(Figure 3C) established that the vhtG1 and vhtC1genes
were each expressed at four- to six-fold higher levels
during methanol growth conditions, and this is within
the range seen for the fpoL and fpoN genes needed for
methyl group oxidation for methanol and acetate metabolism. In contrast, expression of the vhtG2 and vhtC2
genes was low under all conditions examined (Ca. about
17-20-fold lower than vhtG1 and vhtC1). Finally, the
frhA and frhB gene expression levels were low relative
to vhtG1 or fpoL (Figure 3C), and this suggests a minor
role for the frhADGB and vhtG2A2C2 gene clusters in
either methanol or acetate-dependent cell growth. Since
vhtG1 transcript abundance was elevated and about half
of that observed for the fpoL and fpoN genes that
encode subunits of the F420 H 2 dehydrogenase
(Figure 3C), this implies a significant physiological role
for the vhtG1A1C1D1 gene products during methanol

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

Page 5 of 15

Figure 3 Differential expression of genes annotated for vht (F420 non-reducing hydrogenase) and frhADGB (F420 reducing
hydrogenase) in M. acetivorans. Panel A) The genes encoding the frhADGB F420 reducing hydrogenase subunits. Panel B) The genes
encoding the vhtG1A1C1D1 and the vhtG2A2C2 F420 non-reducing hydrogenases. The Genebank identification number (MA number) is shown
below each gene while the individual gene designation is shown above. Panel C) RT-PCR data for the indicated genes.

growth. The biochemical and physiological roles for the
vhtG1 and vhtC1 hydrogenase-type genes in M. acetivorans are presently unknown.
The rnfXCDGEABY gene cluster is abundantly expressed

M. acetivorans contains a set of six genes (MA06590664) annotated as nqr123456 [5] that are absent in the
M. mazei, and M. barkeri genomes (Table 1). These
genes were subsequently re-designated rnfCDGEAB
based on sequence comparisons to the rnf and nqr-type
genes in other microorganisms, [10]. This gene cluster
also contains two additional genes of unknown function
that we designate here as rnfX and rnfY (Figure 4A)
whereby the first (MA0658) precedes rnfC and the second (MA0665) follows rnfB. We propose that these
genes may encode unique input/output modules for
membrane associated electron transfer since they are
absent in other microbial genomes. During acetate cell
growth relative to methanol growth conditions, the rnfX,
rnfG, and rnfA reporter genes exhibited elevated transcript abundance (ca. 2.5 to 3.5-fold; Figure 4D). Each
gene was also more highly expressed than many reference genes involved in central methanogenesis (e.g.,
fpoN, and fpoL that encode subunits of the F420 H2

dehydrogenase). Therefore, the rnfXCDGEABY gene
expression data support the proposal that the products
participate in electron transfer during acetate metabolism as proposed via methanophenazine [10]. In addition, they must also function during methanol culture
conditions based on transcript abundance (Figure 4D).
Other roles can be envisioned including participation in
electron transfer to a soluble-type heterodisulfide reductase via a poly-ferredoxin (e.g., encoded by the hdrA1
pfd and hdrC1B1 gene complex, described below).
The mrpABCDEFG gene cluster is acetate induced

The M. acetivorans genome contains a set of seven
genes called mrpABCDEFG (Figure 4B) with similarity
to the gene clusters found in a variety of bacterial species but absent in either M. barkeri or M. mazei
(Table 1) [5,11-13]. The mrp-encoded protein complex
in Bacillus subtilis was shown to confer a role in multiple drug resistance and/or pH regulation [13,14]. As
revealed by the M. acetivorans transcript analysis studies
(Figure 4D), the mrpA and mrpF reporter genes were
expressed more highly during acetate cell growth conditions (Ca. 11 to 12-fold) relative to methanol growth.
These levels were above the expression levels observed

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

Page 6 of 15

Figure 4 Differential expression of genes related to electron transport in M. acetivorans. The orientation and relative length of each gene
is indicated by the open arrows. The Genebank identification number (MA number) is shown below each gene. Panels: A) The eight gene rnf
cluster; B) the seven gene mrp cluster; C) the fourteen gene fpo cluster; and D), RT-PCR data for the indicated rnf, mrp, and fpo genes.

for the ack, pta, and hdr genes needed for acetate utilization, and within the range seen for the rnf gene cluster. These findings imply a major role for the six mrp
gene products in acetate metabolism versus methanol
metabolism.
Expression of the atp and aha genes encoding ATP
synthase complexes

M. acetivorans contains genes for a bacterial-type F0F1
synthase encoded by the MA2441 to MA2433 genes
designated here as atpDCIHBEFAG, plus an archaealtype A 0 A1 ATP synthase encoded by the ahaHIKECFABD genes (MA4152 to MA4160) (Figure 5). Although
prior DNA microarray experiments [6] demonstrated that
six of the nine genes in the archaeal-type A0 A 1 ATP
synthase (ahaECFABD) encoding the ATP-hydrolysing/
synthesizing domain (A1) were expressed two-fold higher
in acetate grown cells relative to methanol, the other
genes were not [6]. It is still unknown how their expression varies quantitatively relative to atpDCIHBEFAG gene
cluster expression. Corresponding DNA microarray

studies with the atpDCIHBEFAG genes that encode a
bacterial-like F0F1 complex revealed that only two of the
nine genes (atpD and atpC) were expressed significantly
higher in acetate by 3.2 and 1.8 fold, respectively: the
remaining genes were either not detected or did not exhibit changes. Lastly, relative to central pathway genes for
acetate and methanol utilization, it was unresolved how
the aha and atp gene sets are expressed since the microarray data did not address this.
From the RT-PCT transcript abundance studies, three
representative aha genes representing the archaeal-type
A0A1 ATP synthase genes were highly expressed relative
to the atp reporter genes (Figure 5C). Acetate cell
growth conditions resulted in two-fold higher aha transcript levels relative to methanol cell growth. These
genes were the most highly expressed in the cell regardless of the growth condition. In contrast, the bacterialtype F0F1 atpD, atpA and atpG genes were expressed at
less than 2% of the level seen for the ahaI, ahaC and
ahaB genes: this suggests a minor role for the atp genes
in methanogenesis in contrast to the aha gene cluster.

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

Page 7 of 15

Figure 5 Expression of the atpDCIHBEFAG and the ahaHIKECFABD gene clusters encoding the bacterial-type and the archaea-type ATP
synthase complexes of M. acetivorans, respectively. The Genebank identification number (MA number), and individual gene designation are
shown above or below each gene. Panel C shows RT-PCR data for the indicated atp and aha gene clusters.

Acetate-induced genes

One M. acetivorans gene of unknown function
(MA4008) was revealed by our prior DNA microarray
studies to be more highly expressed during acetate
growth conditions relative to methanol cell growth (Lars
Rohlin, personal communication). Inspection of the
amino acid sequence revealed six trans-membrane spanning regions reminiscent of a membrane solute uptake
system (Additional file 1, Figure S1 and discussed
below). To extend these MA4008 gene expression findings, quantitative PCR experiments were performed
(Methods, Figure 6A). MA4008 was expressed at a 125fold higher level during acetate versus methanol cell
growth conditions. Interestingly, when methanol was
also present in the culture medium in addition to acetate, MA4008 expression was suppressed to a level seen
when only methanol was present (ca. by 215 fold). This
indicates that the MA4008 gene is expressed only when
the energetically superior carbon substrate is absent,
consistent with a proposed role in acetate uptake. The
M. acetivorans MA4008 orf is designated aceP for its
role in an acetate-dependent membrane function. Two
other genes required for acetate utilization are ack
(MA3606) and pta (MA3607) that encode acetate kinase
and phosphoacetyl transferase, respectively ([15]
Table 1). Quantitative PCR experiments (Figure 6A)
established that both genes were highly expressed and at
levels similar to aceP when acetate was the sole substrate. The 11-18-fold differential pta and ack gene

Figure 6 Differential expression of genes induced in presence
of acetate. Panel A) The indicated genes include ack (acetate
kinase), pta (phosphoacetyl transferase), and a gene designated aceP
encoding a putative acetate uptake system. The RT-PCR data were
determined as described in Materials. Panel B) Transcript abundance
for aceP from cells grown in the presence or absence of the
methanogenic substrate, methanol with the indicated amounts of
acetate present.

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

expression findings are similar to previous reports in
M. acetivorans and M. thermophila [6,16].
Location of the fpoP, hdrE, hdrA1, mrpA, pta, aceP, and
ahaA promoters

The mRNA 5’ ends of the fpoPABCDHIJJKLMNO,
hdrED1, hdrA1-pfd, mrpABCDEFG, pta ack, aceP and
ahaHIKECFABD genes/clusters were determined to
locate their corresponding promoter elements. Using
primer extension methods (Figure 7A), all but one of
the promoter elements were demonstrated to have long
un-translated regions (UTR’s) that range from 51 to 137
nucleotides in length. For example, the aceP 5’ mRNA
end is located 104 nucleotides upstream of the translational start site. Similar findings were seen for the

Page 8 of 15

mrpA, fpoP, ahaH, hdrE, and hdrA genes. Only the pta
gene had a relatively short UTR (i.e., 27 nt). We did not
detect mRNA 5’ ends for either rnfX or hdrC1. Alignment of all the upstream regions of these promoter elements (Figure 7A) revealed the highly conserved
sequence present in other archaeal promoters, the
TATA box (Figure 7B) located approximately 20-30 nt
upstream of the +1 mRNA start site (discussed below).
This site is bound by the TBP protein that aids RNA
polymerase binding [17]. In contrast, the BRE box elements were not well conserved. When the UTR elements and the upstream regions were further examined
using a suite of bioinformatics tools (Materials), no
clearly discernable DNA sequence elements with either
dyad symmetry or direct repeats were found. Similarly,

Figure 7 Location of the mRNA 5’ends for the hdrE1, hdrA1, mrpA, fpoP, pta, aceP, and ahaA genes. Top panel; Sequence gels for the
mrpA, fpoP, ahaA and aceP genes along with the corresponding DNA ladders. RNA prepared from methanol or from acetate-grown cells is
indicated by Me and Ac, respectively. Bottom panel: the alignment of the upstream DNA sequences relative to the start of transcription (+1
position). The position of the initiation codon is boxed where the numbering is relative to the start of transcription. The putative TATA-box
sequences are double underlined and the BRE-regions are indicated by a solid underline. The mRNA 5’ end positions for the pta, hdrA1, and
hdrE1 genes were determined with a ubiquitous ladder (data not shown).

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

no conserved regions within the RNA UTR’s were seen
for the coordinately expressed hdrA1pfd and hdrC1B1
genes sets.

Discussion
Prior microarray and proteomic experiments reported
transcript/protein ratios for a subset of the M. acetivorans genes addressed in this study [6,18]. However, by
the limitations of the methods used, these studies did
not provide expression ratios for many other key methanogenic pathway genes nor did they report information
for other genes with potential roles in cell energy generation. Therefore quantitative PCR gene expression studies were undertaken here using M. acetivorans as a
model to organism to examine which of the seemingly
redundant gene copies in Methanosarcina species are
utilized during growth on the alternative methanogenic
substrates, acetate and methanol. As a result, we may
interpret the resulting data as a readout of cell commitment to make RNA. From these experiments six points
are readily apparent.
First, this study establishes the simultaneously
high levels of gene expression for both a molybdenumtype (fmdE1F1A1C1D1B1) and a tungsten-type (fwdD1B1A1C1) formyl methanofuran dehydrogenase enzyme in
M. acetivorans (Figure 1). In contrast, the fmd2 and fwd2
gene clusters were not. The co-expression of the fmd1 and
fwd2 gene clusters during routine cell culture suggest that
both tungsten and molybdate oxyanions are limiting during cell growth. Alternatively, the cell may somehow
require the two gene sets to catalyze different reactions in
methanogenic metabolism. Studies of the Methanobacterium wolfei and Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum
enzymes indicate that a tungsten-containing isoenzyme
was constitutively expressed and that a molydate-containing isoenzyme was induced by molybdate ions [19].
Studies are in progress to establish if one or both of
these oxyanion-metals modulate expression of the
M. acetivorans fwd1 and/or fmd1 gene clusters. The
M. acetivorans expression findings predict that the homologous fmd1 and the fwd1-type gene clusters in M. barkeri
and in M. mazei are used to make the major formyl
methanofuran dehydrogenase enzymes (Table 1). Interestingly, the M. barkeri genome lacks the annotated fwd1
tungsten-type enzyme.
Second, all sequenced Methanosarcina genomes contain multiple hdr genes encoding a membrane-type as
well as a soluble-type heterodisulfide reductase (Table 1,
Figure 2). Based on the transcript abundance studies in
M. acetivorans, the membrane-type Hdr complex
encoded by the hdrED1 genes was the most abundantly
expressed gene cluster (Figure 2). This is consistent with
the biochemical role for the membrane bound enzyme
in M. barkeri [7]. However, given the high transcript

Page 9 of 15

levels for the hdrA1 and hdrB1 genes in cells grown
with either acetate or methanol, a physiological role is
hereby predicted for a soluble-type HdrABC heterodisulfide reductase in M. acetivorans metabolism, and by
inference, in M. mazei and M barkeri. The presence of a
poly-ferredoxin-like gene immediately downstream of
the hdrA1 gene (Figure 2B) provides one candidate for
electron transfer from primary electron donors (i.e.,
from methanol via either formyl methanofuran dehydrogenase, or from acetate via carbon monoxide dehydrogenase) to this Hdr soluble-type enzyme (discussed
below). Transcript abundance for both the hdrED1 and
hdrA1B1 genes were within the same magnitude
observed for the fpoN and fpoL genes (Figure 3C) that
encode subunits of the F420 H2 dehydrogenase needed
for central carbon flow to carbon dioxide. Since genes
for both a membrane-type and a soluble-type Hdr
enzyme are co-expressed, this suggests that multiple
pathways exist for electron transfer and/or energy conservation in M. acetivorans. By inference, the homologous hdrA pfd and hdrC1B1gene sets in M. barkeri and
M. mazei are also highly expressed and operative. The
energetic implication for having distinct Hdr-type
enzymes is unknown. Possibilities include adaptation to
different substrate levels and/or alternative modes of
energy conservation [20].
Third, regarding the M. acetivorans sets of frh, vhtG1,
and vhtG2 genes (Figure 3), plus the two electron transfer complexes encoded by rnfXCDGEABY and mrpABCDEFG genes (Figure 4), only the vhtG1, rnf and
mrp gene sets were abundantly expressed. The
vhtG1A1C1D1gene cluster encoding a methanophenazine-linked type hydrogenase was expressed at four- to
six-fold higher levels during methanol growth conditions, and within the range seen for the fpoL and fpoN
genes needed for methyl group oxidation for methanol
and acetate metabolism. This is also in the range seen
for methanol-dependent fmdA1, and fwdA1 expression
(Figure 1). In contrast, no vht gene expression was
detected in M. acetivorans when a vht-uidA promoter
assay system was used [21]. Whether the high vhtG1
and vhtC1 mRNA levels detected here (Figure 3) versus
the low values by the vht-uidA promoter assay is due to
strain differences, cell growth, and/or in the analytical
methods used is unknown. The vhtG1A1C1 like-hydrogenase genes are conserved among the three Methanosarcina strains (Table 1) where a more complex gene
expression pattern is evident across these species [8,22].
Interestingly, the M. acetivorans vht mRNA expression
pattern was similar to that seen in M. mazei [22], and a
physiological role is implied for the M. acetivorans vht
genes.
The rnf and mrp gene clusters are unique to the metabolism of M. acetivorans since related gene clusters are

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

absent in either of the M. mazei and M. barkeri genomes (Table 1, [5,23]). As noted by Li, the
rnfXCDGEABY gene products are logical candidates to
fulfill the role of the Ech-type hydrogenases present in
M. mazei and M. barkeri [10]. By this scheme, the Rnf
complex would accept electrons derived from the carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH) complex via an
associated ferredoxin encoded by the complex. The
membrane associated Rnf-type complex is then proposed to transfer electrons on to the membrane associated methanophenazine cofactor (MPH) that in turn is
reoxidized by a membrane-type heterodisulfide reductase (e.g. HdrED). From the hdr transcript studies (Figure 2), this enzyme would be encoded by the hdrED1
gene set since hdrD2 expression was low. By an alternative model, one might envision a role for the Rnf
complex in transferring electrons to the soluble heterodisulfide reductase complex encoded by the hdrA1 pfd
and hdrC1B1 genes via protein-protein interactions. The
poly-ferredoxin encoded by pfd (MA2867) from the
soluble-type heterodisulfide gene cluster is one candidate to interact with one of the unique Rnf complex
proteins such as RnfX or RnfY. Either model is compatible with the essentiality for Rnf based on the effect of an
rnf deletion strain that is unable to grow with acetate as
a sole carbon supply. Little biochemical data exist to
distinguish among these possibilities.
Based on the role of the Mrp complex in cytoplasmic
pH homeostasis in Bacillus halodurans, a similar function was proposed for the M. acetivorans Mrp-like complex [10]. Both belong to the Group I class of proteins
and exhibit similar gene compositions and gene order
[24]. Interestingly, several alternative roles have been
suggested for the bacterial Mrp genes and include
exchange of another type of mono-valent ion, in detoxification, and in interactions with another cellular
enzyme to form a membrane complex somehow associated with cellular ion partitioning [24]. A role for the
M. acetivorans gene products in cytoplasmic pH homeostasis or the other above roles would make it distinct
from other Methanosarcina species since related mrp
genes are absent in the other sequenced genomes
(Table 1). In this regard, phenotypic analysis of M. acetivorans mrp mutants will be of special interest. The high
similarity of the M. acetivorans mrp genes relative to
those in the bacteria, suggest an origin in the methanogen by lateral gene transfer event from a Group I organism. Do the M. acetivorans mrp and rnf transcript
abundance data provide additional clues about the roles
of either Mrp or Rnf? The genes for both are among the
most highly expressed in the cell (Figure 4), where the
mrp gene expression pattern is similar to levels for the
ack and pta genes needed for acetate utilization (Figure 6). The 8-fold higher mrp expression level relative

Page 10 of 15

to methanol growth approximates the 8-12 fold seen for
the ack and pta genes (Figure 8) in support of a primary
role in acetate-dependent metabolism, rather than in
detoxification and/or ion homeostasis. In contrast, a second pattern of gene expression is seen for the central
pathway genes involved in one carbon oxidations (mer,
mtd, mch, fpo, and ftr) that are all more highly
expressed by 5 to 11 fold when methanol is the sole
substrate (Figure 8). A third set of genes required for
both acetate and methanol metabolism are differentially
expressed at an intermediate level (e.g., mtr genes, 2.3fold; hdrDE, 1.2-fold, and hdrABC, 3-fold). The rnf gene
expression pattern (i.e., 2.4 fold higher level with acetate) falls in this group. It is interesting to speculate that
some of these genes may be controlled in response to
electron flow rather than the carbon supply (e.g., acetate
versus methanol availability).
Forth, the quantitative ATPase gene expression studies
demonstrate that the archaeal-type A0A1 ATP synthase
encoded by the ahaHIKECFABD genes are among the
most highly expressed genes in the cell (Figure 5). In
contrast, transcript abundance for the bacteria type
atpDCIHBEFAG genes was about 175-fold lower than
these aha cluster genes during either acetate or methanol growth. Although it is conceivable that the atp-type
genes may be significantly expressed under unknown
growth conditions, an alternative possibility is that they
constitute a “dead-ended” lateral gene transfer event
[23]. Interestingly, the deletion of the atp gene region of
M. acetivorans conferred no phenotype [25]. The atpX
gene present in the M. acetivorans and M. barkeri genomes is conserved in some, but not all bacterial-like
ATP synthase operons. It is present in the Rhodoferax
ferrireducens DSM 15236, Desulfuromonas acetoxidans
DSM 684 and Shewanella frigidimarina NCIMB genomes (gene alignments not shown). Since the synteny of
atpX in the above operons is conserved, atpX is not due
to an isolated insertion event in the M. acetivorans
genome.
Biochemical studies have identified essential amino
acids involved in translocation of sodium ions by the
proteolipid c subunit of the Ilyobacter tartaricus ATPase
[26]. To address whether Na + or H + ions are transported by the M. acetivorans archaeal-type A0A1 ATP
synthase, the ahaK gene encoding proteolipid c subunit
was aligned with the corresponding subunits of I. tartaricus plus other well studied microorganisms (Additional
file 2, Figure S2). Four amino acid residues at positions
32, 63, 65, and 66 in the I. tartaricus protein to specify
Na+ ion movement [26]. These four residues are conserved in M. acetivorans, in contrast to E. coli that is a
proton translocating enzyme. This suggests the
archaeal-type A 0 A 1 ATP synthase also transfers Na +
ions rather than protons to form ATP, in keeping with

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

Page 11 of 15

Figure 8 Overview of differential gene expression in M. acetivorans in response to methanol versus acetate utilization. A boxed
number indicates the fold-increase in mRNA levels seen for the indicated gene(s) during acetate versus methanol growth conditions. A circled
number indicates the fold-increase in mRNA levels during methanol versus acetate growth conditions. All data are from this study except for the
mcr, mtr, mer, mtd, mch, and ftr gene ratio data derived from a prior microarray study [6]. The genes/enzymes are: ack, acetate kinase; pta,
phosphotransacetylase; cdh, carbon monoxide dehydrogenase; MT1, mtaB2 methyl transferase 1; MT2, mtaA, methyltransferase 2; mcr,
methylcoenzyme M reductase; mtr, methyl -H4 MPT:HSCoM methyltransferase; mer, methylene -H4 MPT reductase; hmd, methylene -H4 MPT
dehydrogenase; mch, methenyl -H4 MPT cyclohydrolyase; ftr, formyl MFR:H4MPT formyl transferase; fmd, formyl methanofuran dehydrogenase
Mo-type; fwd, formyl methanofuran dehydrogenase W-type; fpo, F420 H2 dehydrogenase; hdr, heterodisulfide reductase; rnf, Rnf-type complex;
mrp, Mrp-type complex. The control gene was MA3998. Methanophenazine is represented by MPH. The proposed acetate transporter protein is
indicated by AceP while the unknown transporter(s) for one carbon compounds is indicated by a question mark.

the example of Pyrococcus furiosus [27]. Furthermore,
the archaeal type ahaK subunit in the three Methanosarcina strains form a distinct protein subclass given the
presence of an additional three amino acids relative to
position 14 of the I. tartaricus subunit, and a three
amino acid deletion corresponding to position 47-49 of
I. tartaricus. Amino acid alignments of the A0A1 ATP
synthases subunits from the M. mazei and M. barkeri
proteolipids suggest the same conclusion for these
highly related archaeal complexes (Additional file 2,
Figure S2). Interestingly, the alignment of the c proteolipid subunit (atpE) of the M. acetivorans bacterial-type
F 0 F 1 synthase also suggests specificity for Na + ions.
A neighbor-joining tree of the archaeal and bacterial
c-type polypeptides (Figure 9) reveals a relatively

conserved origin of the archaeal-type A 0 A 1 ATP
synthase in the Methanosarcina species. Strikingly, the
bacterial-type F0F1 synthase genes present in M. acetivorans and M. barkeri are more distantly related to
either the archaeal or bacterial type enzymes. This
branch of ATP metabolism genes/proteins remains
poorly understood and awaits further study.
Fifth, a candidate gene encoding a potential acetate
uptake system for M. acetivorans was identified (Figure 6).
This gene exhibits the same expression patterns as the
ack and pta genes needed for activation of the methanogenic substrate following its entry into the cell. Expression of aceP was suppressed by the energetically
favorable substrate, methanol (Figure 6B). The AceP protein is predicted to have six transmembrane-spanning

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

Page 12 of 15

to begin exploring regulatory controls in this organism at
the level of regulated mRNA synthesis and turnover. Little is known about the relative contributions of archaea
transcription factors, translation factors, and/or small
RNA’s in gene regulation in the Methanosarcina species
to provide the distinct patterns of gene expression
observed here. M. acetivorans clearly maintains a cellular
commitment to dynamically control transcript levels in
response to methanogenic substrate type where two
major gene families are further defined by this study.

Figure 9 Phylogenic tree of the atp and aha ATP synthase
proteolipid subunit c for the methanogens M. acetivorans, M.
mazei, and M. barkeri, and for the bacterial homologs indicated
in reference [26]. The predicted or experimentally determined ion
transferred is indicated from data provided in Additional file 2,
Figure S2.

alpha-helical regions (Additional file 1, Figure S1). Noteworthy, aceP homologs are present in other methanogens
including M. mazei, M. barkeri, M. maripaludis, and M.
hungatei, and they constitute a distinct class of archaea
transporters. Related genes are also present in many bacterial species (Additional file 3, Figure S3), suggesting the
possibility of a lateral gene transfer event from a bacterium into the Methanosarcina sp. as was proposed as one
explanation for their large genome sizes [23]. Experiments are in progress to characterize the membrane
function of the M. acetivorans protein since no archaeal
or bacterial homologs shown in Additional file 3,
Figure S3 have been examined to date.
Carbon control in the Archaea

Considerable information is available concerning carbon
control of gene expression in bacterial and eukaryal systems, but little is yet known about related carbon control
in the Archaea. Few studies have been reported for any
archaeal species but include microarray studies in Pyrococcus furiosus [28], M. mazei [29,30], and M. acetivorans
[6]. The present experiments extend these studies to
address a larger set of genes needed for carbon flow and
electron transfer leading to methane formation from two
key methanogenic substrates (Figure 8). It provides a
foundation of RNA transcript abundance and 5’ end data

Conclusion
Of the twenty M. acetivorans gene clusters examined in
this study, all but four were differentially expressed by 2
to 200-fold during acetate versus methanol cell growth
(Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). The majority of these queried
genes are present all sequenced Methanosarcina genomes
that include M. acetivorans, M. mazei and M. barkeri
(Table 1) and include the genes for multiple heterodisulfide reductase and hydrogenase-like enzymes. Exceptions
are the echABCDEF, vhoGAC, rnfXCDGEABY, and
mrpABCDEFG genes that encode known or predicted
electron transfer complexes for ion movement and/or
electron transfer. A number of the above orfs are
assigned new gene designations to aid in their description. The M. acetivorans gene expression data (Figures 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8) provides a foundation to understand
how energy-yielding pathways are regulated in this model
organism and in related methanogens. It is unknown if
this control occurs by the actions of classical transcription factors like those found in bacteria and eukaryotes,
and/or by RNA control mechanisms involving attenuation, regulated termination and/or small RNAs.
Methods
Cell culture

Methanosarcina acetivorans C2A [1] was cultivated in a
mineral medium that contained (in grams per liter):
NaCl, 11.69 g; MgSO 4 7H 2 O, 12.32 g; KCl, 0.76 g;
CaCl 2 ·2H 2O, 0.14 g; NH4 Cl, 0.5 g; Resazurin solution
(10,000 × stock solution), 0.1 ml; trace metal solution
(100×) 10 ml [29]; vitamin solution (100×) 10 ml [29];
HCl (12.1 N) 0.5 ml; Na2HPO4 7H2O, 1.12 g; cysteineHCl H2O, 0.25 g; Na2CO3, 3.0 g. An atmosphere (80:20)
of nitrogen to carbon dioxide was used in the vessel
headspace. Following sterilization, the medium was supplemented with filter-sterilized 0.1 ml 50% methanol or
0.2 ml 5 M acetate per 10 ml medium as previously
described [30].
RNA purification

For RNA isolation, cultures of M. acetivorans C2A cells
were grown on acetate or methanol with serial transfer
of three times to mid-exponential phase before cell

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

harvest. Total RNA was purified from 10 ml of cell samples using the RNAwiz (Ambion Austin, TX) following
the manufacturer’s instructions. The purified RNA was
treated with DNase I as described [31,32].
Quantitative RT-PCR

The real time reverse transcription (RT-PCR) reactions
were performed using Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturers recommended protocol using random primers
and 1 μg of total RNA. A mock reaction without Superscript was run to evaluate for the presence of genomic
DNA contamination. To remove complementary RNA,
1 μl RNase H was added to mixture and incubated for
20 min at 37°C. The RNase was then heat inactivated at
70°C for 15 min. The cDNA from the RT reaction was
diluted 10 fold, and 1 μl of the diluted cDNA was subsequently used in a 30 μl iQ SYBR green supermix
according to the manufactures recommendations following addition of 1.5 μl DMSO. The real time PCR reactions were conducted on a Biorad iCycler (Biorad,
Hercules, CA) or an Eppendorf Realtime2 (Eppendorf,
Westbury, NY) using a four-step program consisting of,
denaturing, annealing, extension, and acquisition steps.
The RT-PCR primers were created by a modified version of MyPROBES [32]. The PCR product lengths were
in a range of 100-200 bp, the melting temperature was
in the range of 55-66°C, the GC content was 55-65%,
and the primer length was 17-22 bases (Additional file
4, Table S1). The primers were tested against serial dilution of genomic DNA (106 to 102 copies) to generate a
standard curve for each gene tested. The products were
also visualized on agarose gels to establish the generation of a unique product of the correct size for each
gene probe. Each gene expression value was then determined in triplicate for each of the three biological samples in conjunction with a genomic DNA serial dilution
standard. Melting curves were analyzed to establish that
non-specific amplification had not occurred (i.e., biphasic vs mono-phasic for a single product). The reported
copy number was calculated from a total of nine data
points. Each gene was also tested against the mock
reaction. The gene expression data for each gene was
compared to a reference gene (MA3998) that showed
no significant up or down regulation in microarray
experiments of Li, et al. [6]. In an independent
approach, all qPCR signals were also normalized to the
total amount of RNA used in the experiment, and in a
separate analysis, to the RNA for the mcr genes
(MA4546-4550) that encode methyl coenzyme M reductase. The results from the latter two approaches were in
excellent agreement to the MA3998 normalization procedure. Values are reported in transcript copy number
per 5 μg total RNA.

Page 13 of 15

Primer extension analysis

To determine mRNA 5’ ends, primer extension reactions
were performed as described previously [33] using gene
specific primers which were located approximately 60
bases downstream of the ATG start codons of the mrpA,
hdrE, hdrA, aceP, ahaH, pta, and fpoP genes (see Additional file 4, Table S1 listing each primer). Total RNA
was isolated described above. A total of 30 μg of RNA
was used in each primer extension reaction: the primer
and RNA was heated to 85°C for 10 min, and then slowly
cooled to 45°C: 33P-labeled dATP and unlabeled dCTP,
dGTP, and dTTP were added to the mixture, and reverse
transcription was then performed at 50°C using Superscript III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen Carlsbad, CA)
according to manufactures recommendations. The reaction was stopped by sequentially adding 5 μl 3 M sodium
acetate (pH 5.2) and 150 μl 100% ice-cold ethanol followed by overnight incubation at -20°C. The cDNA’s was
precipitated at 13,000 rpm at 4°C for 35 min. For generation of fragments of the indicated regulatory region was
cloned into TOPO-PCR4 vector (Invitrogen Carlsbad,
CA). The Sequtherm Excel II Kit (Epicentre Madison,
WI) was used to perform sequencing reactions of the
DNA regions cloned into TOPO-PCR4 using the above
primers to confirm the intended sequences. The extension and sequencing products were resolved on a 6.0%
sequencing gel and exposed to a phosphorimager screen
as previously described [32].
Informatics analysis and data visualization

Protein similarities were determined using BLAST [34],
the alignment and the phylogentic tree of proteins were
done with clustalw [35] and the visualization of the
trees were done with splitTree4 [36]. Upstream DNA
regions were searched for palindromic and repeated
motifs using simple Perl script software written in
house. Similar searches were also performed for conserved elements in the UTR regions.
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Amino acid alignment of the acetate
induced membrane protein from M. acetivorans and several other
organisms. Bacillus Anthracis str. Ames, Burkholderia xenovorans,
Haemophilus somnus, Pasteurella multocida, MeOHP Methanococcoides
burtonii, UnkP Methanosarcina mazei, UnkP Methanosarcina acetivorans,
MeOHP Methanosarcina acetivorans, MeOHP Methanosarcina barkeri,
MeOHP Methanosarcina mazei, Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus,
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans, Chromobacterium violaceum, Shewanella
oneidensis MR-1, Dehalococcoides sp. CBDB1, Erwinia carotovora,
Photorhabdus luminescens, Yersinia pestis KIM, Salmonella typhimurium,
Escherichia coli, Geobacter metallireducens, Pelobacter carbinolicus, AceP
Methanosarcina acetivorans, AceP Methanosarcina barkeri, AceP
Methanosarcina mazei, Methanospirillum hungateii, Anaeromyxobacter
dehalogenans, AceP Methanococcoides burtonii, Methanococcus
maripaludis, Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, Sulfolobus solfataricus P2, Picrophilus
torridu, Thermoplasma acidophilum, Thermoplasma volcanium GSS1.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2180-1062-S1.PDF ]

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

Additional file 2: Figure S2. Amino acid alignment of the
proteolipid c subunits of the ATP synthases from M. acetivorans
and several other organisms. The bacterial-type (MA2436, MA2) and
the archaeal-type gene cluster/protein (MA4154, MA1) from M.
acetivorans are shown with the corresponding sequences for Ilyobacter
tartaricus (IT), Acetobacterium woodii (AW), Propionigenium modestum
(PM), M. barkeri (MB), E. coli (EC), M. tuberculosis (MT), Spinachia oleracea
(SO), and Synechococcus elongatus (SE). Numbering is relative to the start
of translation of Ilyobacter tartaricus [26]. Amino acids are indicated by
color: orange (GPST), red (HKR), blue (FWY, green (ILMV).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2180-1062-S2.PDF ]
Additional file 3: Figure S3. Phylogenic tree of the pudative aceP
membrane protein from M. acetivorans. Bacillus Anthracis str. Ames,
Burkholderia xenovorans, Haemophilus somnus, Pasteurella multocida,
MeOHP Methanococcoides burtonii, UnkP Methanosarcina mazei, UnkP
Methanosarcina acetivorans, MeOHP Methanosarcina acetivorans, MeOHP
Methanosarcina barkeri, MeOHP Methanosarcina mazei,
Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus, Desulfovibrio desulfuricans,
Chromobacterium violaceum, Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, Dehalococcoides
sp. CBDB1, Erwinia carotovora, Photorhabdus luminescens, Yersinia pestis
KIM, Salmonella typhimurium, Escherichia coli, Geobacter metallireducens,
Pelobacter carbinolicus, AceP Methanosarcina acetivorans, AceP
Methanosarcina barkeri, AceP Methanosarcina mazei, Methanospirillum
hungateii, Anaeromyxobacter dehalogenans, AceP Methanococcoides
burtonii, Methanococcus maripaludis, Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, Sulfolobus
solfataricus P2, Picrophilus torridu, Thermoplasma acidophilum,
Thermoplasma volcanium GSS1.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2180-1062-S3.PDF ]
Additional file 4: Table S1. Oligonucleotides used in this study.
Description: This table provides the nucleotide sequence of all
oligonucleotides used for PCR-based experiments.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2180-1062-S4.PDF ]

Page 14 of 15

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation grant
award NSF-0110762, Department of Energy Biosciences Division grant award
DE-FG03-86ER13498, and the UCLA-DOE Institute of Genomics and
Proteomics.
Author details
Department of Microbiology Immunology and Molecular Genetics,
University of California, Los Angeles, 405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA. 2Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles,
405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

16.

17.

1

Authors’ contributions
LR performed the gene expression and informatics analysis of the genomes,
and contributed to the concepts and strategy for performing the study. RG
provided critical comments to improve the experimental design, and
manuscript layout. All authors were involved in analyzing all the data, read
and approved the final manuscript.

18.

19.

20.

Received: 20 August 2009
Accepted: 23 February 2010 Published: 23 February 2010

21.

References
1. Sowers KR, Baron SF, Ferry JG: Methanosarcina acetivorans sp. nov., an
Acetotrophic Methane-Producing Bacterium Isolated from Marine
Sediments. Appl Environ Microbiol 1984, 47(5):971-978.
2. Ferry JG, (ed): Methanogenesis; Ecology, Physiology, Biochemistry and
Genetics. New York: Chapman and Hall 1993.

22.

23.

Deppenmeier U: The unique biochemistry of methanogenesis. Prog
Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol 2002, 71:223-283.
Thauer RK: Biochemistry of methanogenesis: a tribute to Marjory
Stephenson. Microbiology 1998, 144(9):2377-2406.
Galagan JE, Nusbaum C, Roy A, Endrizzi MG, Macdonald P, FitzHugh W,
Calvo S, Engels R, Smirnov S, Atnoor D, et al: The genome of
Methanosarcina acetivorans reveals extensive metabolic and
physiological diversity. Genome Res 2002, 12(4):532-542.
Li L, Li Q, Rohlin L, Kim U, Salmon K, Rejtar T, Gunsalus RP, Karger BL,
Ferry JG: Quantitative proteomic and microarray analysis of the archaeon
Methanosarcina acetivorans grown with acetate versus methanol. J
Proteome Res 2007, 6(2):759-771.
Kunkel A, Vaupel M, Heim S, Thauer RK, Hedderich R: Heterodisulfide
reductase from methanol-grown cells of Methanosarcina barkeri is not a
flavoenzyme. Eur J Biochem 1997, 244(1):226-234.
Guss AM, Mukhopadhyay B, Zhang JK, Metcalf WW: Genetic analysis of
mch mutants in two Methanosarcina species demonstrates multiple
roles for the methanopterin-dependent C-1 oxidation/reduction
pathway and differences in H(2) metabolism between closely related
species. Mol Microbiol 2005, 55(6):1671-1680.
Nelson MJ, Ferry JG: Carbon monoxide-dependent methyl coenzyme M
methylreductase in acetotrophic Methosarcina spp. J Bacteriol 1984,
160(2):526-532.
Li Q, Li L, Rejtar T, Lessner DJ, Karger BL, Ferry JG: Electron transport in the
pathway of acetate conversion to methane in the marine archaeon
Methanosarcina acetivorans. J Bacteriol 2006, 188(2):702-710.
Blanco-Rivero A, Leganes F, Fernandez-Valiente E, Calle P, FernandezPinas F: mrpA, a gene with roles in resistance to Na+ and adaptation to
alkaline pH in the cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC7120. Microbiology
2005, 151(Pt 5):1671-1682.
Sun H, Shi W: Genetic studies of mrp, a locus essential for cellular
aggregation and sporulation of Myxococcus xanthus. J Bacteriol 2001,
183(16):4786-4795.
Ito M, Guffanti AA, Oudega B, Krulwich TA: mrp, a multigene,
multifunctional locus in Bacillus subtilis with roles in resistance to
cholate and to Na+ and in pH homeostasis. J Bacteriol 1999,
181(8):2394-2402.
Dzioba-Winogrodzki J, Winogrodzki O, Krulwich TA, Boin MA, Hase CC,
Dibrov P: The Vibrio cholerae Mrp system: cation/proton antiport
properties and enhancement of bile salt resistance in a heterologous
host. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2009, 16(3-4):176-186.
Latimer MT, Ferry JG: Cloning, sequence analysis, and hyperexpression of
the genes encoding phosphotransacetylase and acetate kinase from
Methanosarcina thermophila. J Bacteriol 1993, 175(21):6822-6829.
Singh-Wissmann K, Ferry JG: Transcriptional regulation of the
phosphotransacetylase-encoding and acetate kinase-encoding genes
(pta and ack) from Methanosarcina thermophila. J Bacteriol 1995,
177(7):1699-1702.
Bell SD, Kosa PL, Sigler PB, Jackson SP: Orientation of the transcription
preinitiation complex in archaea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999,
96(24):13662-13667.
Li Q, Li L, Rejtar T, Karger BL, Ferry JG: Proteome of Methanosarcina
acetivorans Part I: an expanded view of the biology of the cell. J
Proteome Res 2005, 4(1):112-128.
Hochheimer A, Hedderich R, Thauer RK: The formylmethanofuran
dehydrogenase isoenzymes in Methanobacterium wolfei and
Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum: induction of the molybdenum
isoenzyme by molybdate and constitutive synthesis of the tungsten
isoenzyme. Arch Microbiol 1998, 170(5):389-393.
Thauer RK, Kaster AK, Seedorf H, Buckel W, Hedderich R: Methanogenic
archaea: ecologically relevant differences in energy conservation. Nat
Rev Microbiol 2008, 6(8):579-591.
Guss AM, Kulkarni G, Metcalf WW: Differences in hydrogenase gene
expression between Methanosarcina acetivorans and Methanosarcina
barkeri. J Bacteriol 2009, 191(8):2826-2833.
Deppenmeier U, Blaut M, Lentes S, Herzberg C, Gottschalk G: Analysis of
the vhoGAC and vhtGAC operons from Methanosarcina mazei strain
Go1, both encoding a membrane-bound hydrogenase and a
cytochrome b. Eur J Biochem 1995, 227(1-2):261-269.
Deppenmeier U, Johann A, Hartsch T, Merkl R, Schmitz RA, Martinez-Arias R,
Henne A, Wiezer A, Bäumer S, Jacobi C, Brüggemann H, Lienard T,

Rohlin and Gunsalus BMC Microbiology 2010, 10:62
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/10/62

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

Page 15 of 15

Christmann A, Bömeke M, Steckel S, Bhattacharyya A, Lykidis A, Overbeek R,
Klenk HP, Gunsalus RP, Fritz HJ, Gottschalk G: The genome of
Methanosarcina mazei: evidence for lateral gene transfer between
bacteria and archaea. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2002, 4(4):453-461.
Swartz TH, Ikewada S, Ishikawa O, Ito M, Krulwich TA: The Mrp system: a
giant among monovalent cation/proton antiporters?. Extremophiles 2005,
9(5):345-354.
Saum R, Schlegel K, Meyer B, Muller V: The F1FO ATP synthase genes in
Methanosarcina acetivorans are dispensable for growth and ATP
synthesis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2009, 300(2):230-236.
Meier T, Polzer P, Diederichs K, Welte W, Dimroth P: Structure of the rotor
ring of F-Type Na+-ATPase from Ilyobacter tartaricus. Science 2005,
308(5722):659-662.
Pisa KY, Huber H, Thomm M, Muller V: A sodium ion-dependent A1AO
ATP synthase from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus.
FEBS J 2007, 274(15):3928-3938.
Schut GJ, Brehm SD, Datta S, Adams MW: Whole-genome DNA microarray
analysis of a hyperthermophile and an archaeon: Pyrococcus furiosus
grown on carbohydrates or peptides. J Bacteriol 2003, 185(13):3935-3947.
Wolfe RS, Higgins IJ: Microbial biochemistry of methane; a study in
contrasts. Microbial Biochemistry Baltimore: University Park PressQuayle JR
1979, 267-300.
Sowers KR, Robertson DE, Noll D, Gunsalus RP, Roberts MF: Ne-acetyl-blysine: an osmolyte synthesized by methanogenic Archaebacteria. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1990, 87(23):9083-9087.
Oh MK, Rohlin L, Kao KC, Liao JC: Global expression profiling of acetategrown Escherichia coli. J Biol Chem 2002, 277(15):13175-13183.
Rohlin L, Trent JD, Salmon K, Kim U, Gunsalus RP, Liao JC: Heat shock
response of Archaeoglobus fulgidus. J Bacteriol 2005, 187(17):6046-6057.
Sowers KR, Thai TT, Gunsalus RP: Transcriptional regulation of the carbon
monoxide dehydrogenase gene (cdhA) in Methanosarcina thermophila. J
Biol Chem 1993, 268(31):23172-23178.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, et al: Clustal W and
Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(21):2947-2948.
Huson DH, Bryant D: Application of phylogenetic networks in
evolutionary studies. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(2):254-267.

doi:10.1186/1471-2180-10-62
Cite this article as: Rohlin and Gunsalus: Carbon-dependent control of
electron transfer and central carbon pathway genes for methane
biosynthesis in the Archaean, Methanosarcina acetivorans strain C2A.
BMC Microbiology 2010 10:62.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
