<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The gene transformer-2 of Anastrepha fruit flies (Diptera, Tephritidae) and its evolution in insects</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-140"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Francesca Sarno, Mar_a F Ruiz, Jos_ M Eir_n-L_pez, Andr_ LP Perondini, Denise Selivon, Lucas S_nchez"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

The gene transformer-2 of Anastrepha fruit flies
(Diptera, Tephritidae) and its evolution in insects
Research article

Francesca Sarno1, María F Ruiz1, José M Eirín-López2, André LP Perondini3, Denise Selivon†3 and Lucas Sánchez*†1

Abstract
Background: In the tephritids Ceratitis, Bactrocera and Anastrepha, the gene transformer provides the memory device
for sex determination via its auto-regulation; only in females is functional Tra protein produced. To date, the isolation
and characterisation of the gene transformer-2 in the tephritids has only been undertaken in Ceratitis, and it has been
shown that its function is required for the female-specific splicing of doublesex and transformer pre-mRNA. It therefore
participates in transformer auto-regulatory function. In this work, the characterisation of this gene in eleven tephritid
species belonging to the less extensively analysed genus Anastrepha was undertaken in order to throw light on the
evolution of transformer-2.
Results: The gene transformer-2 produces a protein of 249 amino acids in both sexes, which shows the features of the
SR protein family. No significant partially spliced mRNA isoform specific to the male germ line was detected, unlike in
Drosophila. It is transcribed in both sexes during development and in adult life, in both the soma and germ line. The
injection of Anastrepha transformer-2 dsRNA into Anastrepha embryos caused a change in the splicing pattern of the
endogenous transformer and doublesex pre-mRNA of XX females from the female to the male mode. Consequently,
these XX females were transformed into pseudomales. The comparison of the eleven Anastrepha Transformer-2
proteins among themselves, and with the Transformer-2 proteins of other insects, suggests the existence of negative
selection acting at the protein level to maintain Transformer-2 structural features.
Conclusions: These results indicate that transformer-2 is required for sex determination in Anastrepha through its
participation in the female-specific splicing of transformer and doublesex pre-mRNAs. It is therefore needed for the
auto-regulation of the gene transformer. Thus, the transformer/transfomer-2 > doublesex elements at the bottom of the
cascade, and their relationships, probably represent the ancestral state (which still exists in the Tephritidae,
Calliphoridae and Muscidae lineages) of the extant cascade found in the Drosophilidae lineage (in which tra is just
another component of the sex determination gene cascade regulated by Sex-lethal). In the phylogenetic lineage that
gave rise to the drosophilids, evolution co-opted for Sex-lethal, modified it, and converted it into the key gene
controlling sex determination.
Background
Sex determination refers to the developmental programme that commits the embryo to following either the
male or the female pathway. The past few years have seen
a great amount of interest in the evolution of developmental mechanisms at the genetic and molecular levels,
and in determining the evolutionary processes by which
these mechanisms came into existence. In this respect,
* Correspondence: lsanchez@cib.csic.es
1

Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (C.S.I.C.), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040
Madrid, Spain
† Contributed equally

sex determination is a process that seems to be exceptionally suitable for comparative study, given the great
variety of mechanisms that exist. Indeed, sex determination has long been of major interest not only as a developmental process but also because of the evolutionary
problem it poses - a problem that can only be solved by
identifying and comparing the genetic structures of sex
determination pathways. Molecular genetic technologies
now allow such comparisons to be made. In addition, sex
determination in the reference system of insects - that of
Drosophila melanogaster - is known in fine detail, making
truly informative comparisons possible.

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Sarno et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

The characterisation of the sex determination genes in
D. melanogaster has shown that their control during
development is governed by the sex-specific splicing of
their products (reviewed in [1]). The product of a gene
controls the sex-specific splicing of the pre-mRNA from
the downstream gene in the genetic cascade. Sex-lethal
(Sxl) is at the top of this cascade and acts as the memory
device for female sexual development via its auto-regulatory function: its product controls the splicing of its own
pre-mRNA [2,3]. In addition, Sxl controls the splicing of
the pre-mRNA from the downstream gene transformer
(tra) [4-6]. The Tra product and the product of the constitutive gene transformer-2 (tra-2) control the sex-specific splicing of pre-mRNA from the gene doublesex (dsx)
[7-10], which is transcribed in both sexes but gives rise to
two different proteins, DsxF and DsxM [11,12]. These are
transcription factors that impose female and male sexual
development respectively via the sex-specific regulation
of the so-called sexual cytodifferentiation genes.
Genes homologous to the sex determination genes of
D. melanogaster have been sought in other insects
(reviewed in [13]). In the tephritid fruit flies, the gene Sxl
has been characterised in Ceratitis capitata [14] and in
Bactrocera oleae [15], tra has been characterised in C.
capitata [16], B. oleae [17] and in twelve Anastrepha species [18], and dsx has been characterised in C. capitata
[19], B. oleae [15] and in eleven Anastrepha species
[20,21].
The tephritid Sxl gene is not regulated in a sex-specific
fashion, and therefore the same Sxl transcript encoding
the functional Sxl protein is found in both males and
females [14,15]. Thus, in the tephritids, Sxl does not
appear to play the key discriminating role (memory
device) in sex determination that it plays in Drosophila.
As in the drosophilids, the tephritid tra gene is constitutively expressed in both sexes and its primary transcript
shows sex-specific alternative splicing. However, whereas
in the drosophilids Sxl regulates tra, in the tephritids this
gene appears to have an auto-regulatory function that
produces functional Tra protein specifically in females.
The gene tra in the tephritids has male-specific exons
that contain translation stop codons. The incorporation
of these exons into the mature tra mRNA in males determines that, in this sex, a truncated, non-functional Tra
protein is produced. In females, the male-specific exons
are spliced out because of the presence of Tra protein [1618]. The presence of putative Tra-Tra2 binding sites in
the male-specific exons and in the surrounding introns
may suggest that the Tra2 protein participates in the tra
auto-regulatory function. The introduction of Ceratitis
[16] or Bactrocera [17]tra-dsRNA into Ceratitis or Bactrocera embryos, respectively, results in the destruction
of endogenous tra function in both species and the subsequent complete transformation of females into
pseudomales. Together, these results support the pro-

Page 2 of 14

posal of Pane et al. [16] that the key regulatory role played
by tra is to act as the memory device for sex determination via its auto-regulatory function.
The tephritid gene dsx codes for male- and female-specific RNAs, which encode the male-specific and femalespecific Dsx proteins [15,19-21]. Putative Tra-Tra2 binding sites have been found in the female-specific exon,
suggesting that, as in Drosophila, male-specific splicing
represents the default mode and that female-specific
splicing requires Tra protein, which would only be present in females.
So far, the isolation and characterisation of the gene
transformer-2 (tra-2) in the tephritids has been only performed in C. capitata [22,23]. This gene is transcribed in
both sexes. The injection of Ceratitis tra-2 dsRNA into
Ceratitis embryos results in the transformation of genotypically female embryos into adult pseudomales, highlighting the role of tra-2 in Ceratitis sex determination
[23]. Its function is required for the female-specific splicing of dsx and tra pre-mRNA; it therefore participates in
tra auto-regulatory function [23].
The study of the evolution of the sex determination
gene cascade (i.e., the genes and their interactions)
requires its characterisation in different species. To better
analyse the evolution of the gene tra-2, and more specifically its pivotal role in tra auto-regulation in the tephritids, its characterisation was undertaken in eleven
tephritid species belonging to the less extensively analysed genus Anastrepha. The present analysis therefore
included Anastrepha obliqua, A. amita and A. sororcula,
plus the four closely related species of the so-called Anastrepha fraterculus complex - A. sp.1 aff. fraterculus, A.
sp.2 aff. fraterculus, A. sp.3 aff. fraterculus and A. sp.4 aff.
fraterculus [24,25], all of which belong to the fraterculus
group [26] - along with A. serpentina (serpentina group),
A. striata and A. bistrigata (striata group) and A. grandis
(grandis group) [26].
Firstly, the gene tra-2 in the reference species A. obliqua was isolated and its molecular organisation, expression pattern and encoded product studied. Secondly, the
tra-2 ORFs in the other Anastrepha species were identified, and a comparative analysis of all the known insect
Tra2 proteins undertaken. Thirdly, its function in sex
determination was studied by following the sexual development (at the morphological, chromosome and molecular levels) of Anastrepha embryos in which endogenous
tra-2 function was destroyed by the injection of tra-2
dsRNA. Finally, the phylogeny of tra-2 in these species
and in other insects was investigated.

Results
The molecular organisation of tra-2 in Anastrepha obliqua,
and its expression

The first step in the isolation of the A. obliqua tra-2 gene
(Aotra2) was to perform RT-PCR on total RNA from

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

female adults. Reverse transcription was performed using
the primer oligo-dT, while two nested PCR reactions
were performed with three degenerated primers: the
nested forward Mar17 and Mar26 primers, and the
reverse Tra2-B primer, the latter located in the very well
conserved RRM domain of the Tra2 protein (see Materials and Methods and Figure 1A). The first PCR reaction
was performed using the pair of primers Mar17 plus
Tra2B, the second using Mar26 plus Tra2B. An amplicon
of 92 bp was amplified, cloned and sequenced. The conceptual amino acid sequence of this amplicon showed a
high degree of similarity with the 3' region of the RRM
domain of D. melanogaster Tra2 protein, indicating that a
fragment of the putative AoTra2 protein had been isolated.
To determine the molecular organisation of Aotra2 the
following strategy was followed. Firstly, 3'- and 5'-RACE
analyses were performed. To this end, specific primers
from the amplified sequenced were synthesised (see
Materials and Methods). These primers were used in
nested PCR reactions involving total RNA from male and
female adults. The amplicons, which were the same in
both sexes, were then cloned and sequenced.
A GenomeWalker library of A. obliqua was synthesised
(see Materials and Methods) and used to perform PCR
genome-walking on the genomic DNA of A. obliqua from
the initial amplicon towards the 5' and 3' directions (see
Materials and Methods for the primers used). The
genomic amplicons were cloned and sequenced. The
sequences of the genomic fragments thus generated were
compared with the A. obliqua male and female cDNA
sequences previously determined. In this way, the exon/
intron junctions were unambiguously identified.
Figure 1A shows the molecular organisation of Aotra2
and its comparison with that of C. capitata tra-2 (Figure
1B) and D. melanogaster tra-2 (Figure 1C). The transcription unit of Aotra2 was made up of 3635 bp and composed of eight exons and seven introns. The putative
translation start site was the last three nucleotides of
exon1, and the stop codon was located at 15 nucleotides
of the beginning of exon 8. The size of the exons and
introns of tra-2 from Anastrepha, Ceratitis and Drosophila is given as additional File 1. The sizes of the mRNAs
encoding the Tra2 proteins shown in Figure 1 are given in
the legend to this Figure.
The molecular organisation of gene tra-2 in Anastrepha, Ceratitis and Drosophila was very similar. The
conceptual translation of the Aotra2 mRNA encoded a
protein with an RNA-recognition motif (RRM) flanked
by two arginine-serine rich regions (RS) as in Ceratitis
and Drosophila. The RS1 domain was encoded in exons 2,
3 and 4, the RRM domain in exons 5 and 6, and the RS2
domain in exons 7 and 8 in Anastrepha and 6b and 7 in
Ceratitis and Drosophila. The putative Aotra2 protein

Page 3 of 14

should have some additional amino acids at the aminoterminal end preceding the RS1 domain.
In D. melanogaster, tra-2 gives rise to three mRNAs
(tra2-226, tra2-264 and tra2-179) by alternative splicing
pathways and alternative promoters, which encode three
distinct isoforms of the Tra2 protein [27,28]. As in the
case of other dipterans C. capitata [23], Musca domestica
[29] and Lucilia cuprina [30], only a single tra2 mRNA
was detected in A. obliqua. This was confirmed by overlapping PCR on total RNA of males and females using the
primers shown in Figure 1A.
The expression of Aotra2 was studied by performing
RT-PCR on total RNA from a mixture of male plus female
embryos, from a mixture of male plus female larvae at
different developmental stages, from the heads plus thoraces of male and female adults (separately), and from
adult ovaries. The primers used were GW1 from exon 1
and P4 from exon 8 (see Figure 1A). In all cases, a fragment of 368 bp was amplified (Figure 1D). This was
cloned and sequenced confirming that it corresponded to
the expected Aotra2 fragment. Negative controls in all
these PCR reactions produced no amplicons (see Materials and Methods). These results indicate that the gene
Aotra2 is expressed at all developmental stages and during adult life in both sexes, including the ovaries of adult
females, what suggests that tra-2 has a maternal expression.
In the male germ line of D. melanogaster, the Tra2 protein acts negatively on the splicing of its primary transcript promoting the inclusion of intron M1 in the mRNA
(see Figure 1C), which encodes a truncated, non-functional Tra2 protein [31]. This aberrant mRNA comprises
about 50% of the total tra2 mRNA in the male germ line
[32]. This retention of the M1 intron is the mechanism by
which the functional Tra2 protein limits its own synthesis
since the final amount of this protein is crucial for male
fertility [33]. This negative regulation of the Tra2 protein
is exerted by its binding to specific ISS-sequences located
in intron M1 [34]. The existence of putative Tra2-binding
ISS sequences in intron 3 of Aotra2 gene (data not shown)
prompted us to investigate whether the mRNA isoform
carrying this intron is also significantly produced in the
testis of A. obliqua, as a sign that tra-2 negative auto-regulation might exist in the A. obliqua male germ line. To
this end, RT-PCR was performed on total RNA from
adult testis using the pair of primers P1 from exon 1 and
P2 from exon 4. Only a single fragment of 300 bp was
amplified that corresponded to the mature mRNA lacking introns 1, 2 and 3 (Figure 1E, lane 2). Notwithstanding, when primers PM1 at the beginning of intron 3 and
primer P2 from exon 4 were used for PCR, two bands of
about 200 and 900 bp, respectively, were amplified (Figure 1E, lane 1). Negative controls for all these PCR reactions produced no amplicons (see Materials and

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

Page 4 of 14

Anastrepha obliqua

A

7$$

$7*

P1

PM1

PM2
P2

P5

P3

Mar26
Tra2B
Mar17

$$$$

P4

GW1
GW2
550

56

7UD

56

Ceratitis capitata

B
$7*

7$$
D

E
$$$$

56

C

56

550

7UD

Drosophila melanogaster
$7

$7*

*

7$$

$7*

0
$$$$
550

56

56

550

56

56

550

E
2

(

/

06

7UD

56

D
0:

7UD

0:

7UD

F

)6
ES

ES

ES

Figure 1 Comparison of the molecular organisation of the tra-2 of A. obliqua (A), C. capitata (B) and D. melanogaster (C) and their proteins.
Exons (boxes) and introns (dashed lines) are not drawn to scale. The numbers inside the boxes indicate the number of the exon. The beginning and
the end of the ORF are indicated by ATG and TAA respectively. AAA stands for poly-A(+). (D) Expression of gene tra-2 of A. obliqua. RT-PCR analyses of
total RNA from ovaries (O), embryos (E), from male and female larvae (L), male soma (head plus thorax, MS) and female soma (head plus thorax, FS).
(E) Expression of gene tra-2 of A. obliqua. RT-PCR analysis of total RNA from A. obliqua testis. Lane 1 corresponds to PCR with primers PM1 and P2; lane
2 corresponds to PCR with primers P1 and P2 (see location of primers in Figure 1A). (F) Southern-blot corresponding to the gel shown in (E) and hybridisation with a probe specific for intron 3 of A. obliqua. The arrow marks the hybridisation to the higher band in lane 1 of Figure 1E. The size of the
mRNAs encoding the proteins shown in this figure are: 1923 bp for A. obliqua mRNA, 1113 bp for C. capitata mRNA, and 960, 1583 and 1391 bp for D.
melanogaster mRNAs tra2-179, tra2-226 and tra2-264, respectively.

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

Methods). The 900 bp fragment might correspond to an
mRNA isoform retaining intron 3. To confirm this expectation, a Southern-blot with the RT-PCR products of the
two PCR reactions shown in Figure 1E was carried out
using a probe corresponding to intron 3 (see Materials
and Methods). Only the 900 bp band - not the small 200
bp band - in lane 1 showed positive hybridisation. The
300 bp band in lane 2 did not hybridise as expected since
this corresponds to an mRNA lacking intron 3 (Figure
1F). Collectively, these results indicate that the mRNA
isoform retaining intron 3 in the male germ line of A.
obliqua is very poorly represented, in contrast to that
seen in Drosophila and in agreement with which occurs
in C. capitata [23] and Musca domestica [29].
The Tra2 protein of A. obliqua and other Anastrepha
species

The conceptual translation of the female Aotra2 mRNA
showed it to encode a polypeptide of 249 amino acids. It
shared the main structural features that characterise the
SR protein family, i.e., the RNA-binding motif (RRM) and
two RS-domains, which are rich in serine-arginine dipeptides and confer upon these proteins the capacity to interact with others.
To characterise the Tra2 protein of other Anastrepha
species, it was assumed that the tra-2 gene of the Anastrepha species studied here had a molecular organisation
similar to that of A. obliqua. Under this assumption, RTPCR analyses of total RNA from female adults were performed. Reverse transcription was performed with the P4
primer located in the 3'UTR region of Aotra2. PCR
amplification of the cDNA was undertaken using the pair
of primers P5 (from the 5'UTR of Aotra2) plus P4 (see
Figure 1A). In this way the whole ORF of the tra-2 gene of
all Anastrepha species studied here was amplified, cloned
and sequenced. The Tra2 protein of all these Anastrepha
species was composed of 249 amino acids. Their degree
of similarity (i.e., identical plus conserved amino acids)
was extremely high, ranging from 97.2 to 100% (see additional File 2).
The putative Tra2 protein from A. obliqua (used as the
reference species), those from the dipterans C. capitata,
B. oleae, M. domestica, L. cuprina, D. melanogaster, D.
virilis and D. pesudoobscura, that from the lepidopteran
Bombyx mori (the silkworm) and from the hymenopteran
Apis mellifera (the honeybee), and the Tra2-like protein
from
the
jewel
wasp
Nasonnia
vitripennis
(Hymenoptera), were then compared (see additional File
3). The number of amino acids composing these Tra2
proteins varied: the C. capitata and B. oleae had 251
amino acids, M. domestica 232, L. cuprina 271, D. melanogaster, D. virilis and D. pseudoobscura 264, 315 and 248
respectively, B. mori 284, A. mellifera 269, and the N. vitripennis Tra2-like protein 307. These differences are due

Page 5 of 14

to changes throughout the Tra2 protein except in the
RRM domain, which has the same number of amino acids
in all these species.
Similarity was higher among the dipteran Tra2 proteins
than between these and the lepipdopteran and
hymenopteran Tra2 proteins. The greatest degree of similarity was seen between the tephritid Anastrepha, Ceratitis and Bactrocera Tra2 proteins (83.9 - 86.3%), and
between these and those of the Lucilia (57.4 - 58.9%),
Musca (48.3 - 57.7%), Drosophila (36.7% - 49.6%) Apis
(58.7%) and Bombyx (48.2%) representatives.
The gene tra-2 is required for sex determination in
Anastrepha

Outside Drosophila, the function of tra-2 in sex determination has been unambiguously demonstrated in M.
domestica [29] and in C. capitata [23] using RNAi procedures. The injection of the Musca and Ceratitis tra-2
dsRNA into their respective embryos, transformed XX
flies into pseudomales. This methodology was used to
test the requirement of tra-2 for sex determination in
Anastrepha. An imperative of this technique is to have
markers that allow one to determine whether male survivors really do correspond to XX females that have been
transformed into pseudomales by destruction of the
endogenous tra-2 gene function, or normal XY males. No
Y chromosome molecular markers have yet been identified for Anastrepha flies. Therefore, to ascertain the chromosome constitution of the XX pseudomales,
chromosome squashes from the testis of the adults were
prepared. The X and the Y chromosome of A. obliqua are
not easily distinguished [35], whereas those of A. sp.1 aff.
fraterculus can be clearly separated one from another [25]
as shown in Figure 2A-C. Hence, embryos of this latter
species were used as hosts for the injection of Aotra2
dsRNA since the tra-2 gene of A. obliqua and that of A.
sp.1 aff. fraterculus have a very high degree of similarity
(see additional Files 3 and 4) (for details of the injection
procedure and the analysis of chromosomes see Materials
and Methods).
Of the 1450 A. sp.1 embryos experimentally injected
with Aotra2 dsRNA, 86 reached the adult stage, and of
these 76 were males and 10 were females. However,

Figure 2 Chromosomes of A. sp.1 aff. fraterculus. (A) Normal karyotype in a male that developed from an egg injected with buffer; (B)
karyotype of a pseudomale that developed from an egg injected with
tra-2 dsRNA; and (C) karyotype of a normal female.

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

among the 1000 control injected embryos, 44 survived to
adulthood, 21 being males and 23 females. The sex ratio
bias associated with the experimental injection cannot be
explained by a higher sensitivity of the female embryos to
the injection procedure causing their death. Rather, it
suggests a transformation of XX female embryos into XX
pseudomales caused by a destruction of the endogenous
tra-2 function. Testis squashes were prepared for the 76
experimental male survivors; 58 showed cell divisions
and the chromosomes were unambiguously identified,
showing there to be 47 XY males and 11 XX
pseudomales. All these pseudomales showed normal
male external terminalia (data not shown). However, after
dissection, some of them showed male and female internal genital structures (Figure 3A-C). Others pseudomales
had aberrant gonads such as underdeveloped testes, or a
well-developed testis plus a poorly developed testis (Figure 3E, F). It was expected that these XX pseudomales
would show a change in the splicing pattern of both
endogenous tra and dsx pre-mRNAs. This was confirmed
by RT-PCR assays on total RNA from the XX
pseudomales, from which the gonads were removed.
The gene tra of the Anastrepha species is transcribed in
both sexes during development and in adult life, but its
primary transcript follows alternative splicing routes: the
male-exons, which are incorporated into mature mRNA

Page 6 of 14

in males are spliced out in females. It encodes three
female mRNAs that differ in the length of the 3'-UTR
depending on the poly-A(+) signal used, and five different
isoforms of male mRNA depending on the male-specific
exons included [18]. To analyse the splicing pattern of the
endogenous tra pre-mRNA, the pair of primers TraAo41
and TraAo44 were used; these are located in common
exons 1 and 2, respectively, which flank the male-specific
exons (Figure 4A). Figure 4A shows that in the
pseudomales the amplicons corresponding to the male
tra mRNA isoform were generated (traces of the female
tra mRNA were present in pseudomale #4). Negative
controls in all these PCR reactions produced no amplicons (see Materials and Methods). These results indicate
that the destruction of the endogenous tra-2 function
causes a change in the splicing pattern of the endogenous
tra pre-mRNA from the female mode into the male one.
Consequently, the Tra2 protein is required for sex determination in Anastrepha through its participation in the
female-specific splicing of tra pre-mRNA.
The gene dsx of Anastrepha codes for male-and femalespecific RNAs, which encode the male-specific DsxM
and female-specific DsxF proteins [20,21]. The presence
of putative Tra-Tra2 binding sites in the female-specific
exon of dsx suggests suggest that, as in Drosophila, malespecific splicing represents the default mode and that

A
$7*

7$$
PV

PV

PV

7UD$R

7UD$R

3VHXGRPDOHV
0:

)

0

#

#

#

#
ES
ES

WUD0

ES WUD)

B
$7*

7*$

7$$

$$$
GV[$R

GV[$R

)

$$$
GV[$R

0

3VHXGRPDOHV

Figure 3 Internal terminalia of Anastrepha flies. Parts of the reproductive tract of an intersexual mosaic developed from an injected egg
with Aotra2 dsRNA (A-C), and of a normal female (D). In (A) arrows
point to two vesicles, one of which is yellow (similar to normal testes).
(B) Arrow points to the accessory gland. (C) Arrows point to the spermathecae. (D) Parts of a normal female reproductive tract showing an
ovary (ov) and the three regular spermathecae (arrows). Bar = 200 μm.
(E, F) Parts of the reproductive tract of A. sp.1 aff. fraterculus males. (E)
Testes of a normal male (larger arrows). Small arrow points to the male
terminalia; rec, rectum. (F) Asymmetric testes of a male that developed
from an egg injected with Aotra2 dsRNA. The right testis is spherical
and the other shows the normal elliptical form; the small arrow points
to the accessory gland. Bar = 300 μm.

0:

)

0

#

#

#

#
ES GV[0
ES GV[)

Figure 4 Analyses of the splicing pattern of tra (A) and dsx (B) premRNAs of A. sp.1 aff. fraterculus in XX pseudomales developed
from eggs injected with Aotra2 dsRNA. F and M indicates normal female and male respectively. The sequences of the TraAo41 and
TraAo44 primers used, the locations of which are shown with arrows in
Figure 4A, are described in Ruiz et al. [18]; the sequences of the dsxA26,
dsxAo32F and dsxAo35M primers used, the locations of which is shown
with arrows in Figure 4B, are described in Ruiz et al. [21].

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

female-specific splicing requires the Tra-Tra2 complex.
To analyse the splicing pattern of the endogenous dsx
pre-mRNA in the XX pseudomales, the pair of primers
dsxAo26 in the common exon 2 and dsxAo32F in the
female-specific exon were used to detect the female dsxF
mRNA, whereas the pair of primers dsxAo26 in the common exon 2 and dsxAo35M in the male-specific exon
were used to detect the male dsxM mRNA (Figure 4B).
The four analysed XX pseudomales had the dsxM mRNA
(Figure 4B), but three of then (#1, 2 and 3) showed also
the dsxF mRNA although in different abundance. While
in pseudomale #1 the transcript was barely visible, in
pseudomales #2 and 3, the amount was almost similar
relatively to the corresponding dsxM RNA. Negative controls in all these PCR reactions produced no amplicons
(see Materials and Methods). These results indicate that
the Tra2 protein is needed for the female-specific splicing
of dsx pre-mRNA in Anastrepha.
Phylogeny and molecular evolution of gene tra-2

The Tra2 protein sequences determined for different
Anastrepha species were aligned with homologous
sequences from other tephritids and representative
insects in order to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships of this protein in Diptera (see additional File 4),
using the Tra2 sequences from B. mori (Lepidoptera), A.
mellifera and N. vitripennis (Hymenoptera) as outgroups.
The topology obtained for the Tra2 protein phylogeny
shown in Figure 5A shows high confidence levels in the
groups defined. In the phylogenetic tree, the Tra2 proteins of the Nasonia, Apis and Bombix representatives
clustered in a basal clade and the dipteran species in
another. Within the latter, Drosophila species were found
in one branch and the other dipterans in another. Musca
and Lucilia clustered in a subgroup and the species of
Tephritidae in another. Among the tephritids, Bactrocera
and Ceratitis clustered into one subgroup on the same
branch, while the Anastrepha species clustered into a different subgroup of that same branch.
The Tra2 protein from the Anastrepha species appears
to be closely related to Tra2 from other tephritids, such as
Ceratitis and Bactrocera, as well as to Musca and Lucilia,
showing a monophyletic origin. The Tra2 proteins of the
Drosophila representatives, however, show substantial
divergence.
The variation presented both at the nucleotide and
amino acid levels of the tra-2 gene in Diptera was studied
in the present work by discriminating between the different functional domains of Tra2 protein: the RRM, RS Nterminal (RS1) and RS C-terminal (RS2) domains and the
linker region. The overall amino acid and nucleotide variation were 0.236 ± 0.011 and 0.359 ± 0.021 substitutions
per site, respectively, are given in additional File 5. The
nature of this nucleotide variation was essentially synony-

Page 7 of 14

mous, being significantly greater than the non-synonymous variation in all cases except for the N-terminal RS1
domain of the protein. The overall variation obtained in
Diptera was substantially higher than that seen for the
tephritids, which showed a high degree of protein conservation among themselves (0.048 ± 0.007 amino acid substitutions per site and 0.081 ± 0.006 nucleotide
substitutions per site). In the tephritids - as for the dipterans - the level of synonymous variation was significantly
greater than that of non-synonymous variation. Comparisons between the extent of synonymous and non-synonymous variation revealed significant differences in all
cases (Z-test, P < 0.001; see additional File 5) with the
exception of the N-terminal RS1 domain of Tra2, pointing towards the presence of negative selection acting at
the protein level in order to maintain Tra2 structural features, especially with respect to the RRM domain.
A higher degree of protein and nucleotide sequence
conservation in the Tra2 protein was evident in the
region corresponding to the RRM motif as well as in the
linker region (adjacent to RRM), in contrast to the high
degree of variation presented by the RS1 and RS2
domains. The nucleotide variation across the tra-2 gene
is detailed in the graph shown in Figure 5B. A valley in
the region corresponding to the RRM and linker regions
were observed concomitantly with a reduction in nonsynonymous substitutions, emphasizing the critical role
played by this RRM domain in Tra2 function.

Discussion
In this work, Aotra2 was characterised and found to produce a single mRNA in both sexes that encoded a 249
amino acid-long protein with the features of the SR protein family. In contrast to that seen in Drosophila, no significant partially spliced mRNA isoform specific to the
male germ line was detected. The observed mRNA is
transcribed in both sexes during development and in
adult life in both the soma and germ line. The injection of
Aotra-2 dsRNA into Anastrepha embryos caused a
change in the splicing pattern of the endogenous tra and
dsx pre-mRNAs of XX females from the female to the
male mode. Consequently, these XX females showed
transformation into pseudomales.
The recover of XX pseudomales composed of a mixture
of male and female structures in the internal genitalia
indicates that the transformation of females induced by
the Aotra-2 dsRNA was partial. This result is in line to
observations of partial transformation induced by RNAi
of the gene tra of C. capitata [16], of B. oleae [17], of L.
cuprina [30] and of M. domestica [36], and the partial
transformation induced by RNAi of the gene tra-2 of M.
domestica [29] and of C. capitata [23], in which some
pseudomales had, e.g. male external genitalia but female
structures in the anterior regions of the body. Unfortu-

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

Page 8 of 14

A

B

Figure 5 Molecular evolution of Tra2 proteins. (A) Amino acid phylogeny encompassing Tra2 proteins from Diptera. Taxonomic relationships are
indicated in the right margin of the tree. Numbers for interior nodes represent bootstrap and confidence probabilities based on 1000 replicates, followed by the BP corresponding to the maximum parsimony tree topology (shown only when greater than 50%). The topology was rooted with the
Tra2 protein from the lepidopteran B. mori and the hymenopterans A. mellifera and N. vitripennis. (B) Proportion of nucleotide sites at which two sequences being compared were different (p, nucleotide substitutions per site) and ratio between the numbers of non-synonymous (pN) and synonymous (pS) substitutions per site across the coding regions of tra-2 in the analysed species. The different functional regions defined for the Tra2 proteins
are indicated below the graph.

nately, in Anastrepha species, including the A. sp.1 here
studied, the degree of sexual mosaicism at the morphological level cannot be inferred since there are no sexually
dimorphic structures in the adult body other than the
genitalia (external and internal) and the external analia
[37]. Based on the results found in C. capitata, B. oleae, L.
cuprina and M. domestica above mentioned, it is

expected that in A. sp.1 the extent of the sexual transformation was also variable among the pseudomales; i.e.
although these were identified as males by inspection of
the external terminalia, other structures of the fly could
remain female if the injected dsRNA did not reach their
cellular precursors. This would explain the fact that the
analysed A. sp.1 XX pseudomales showed traF and dsxF

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

transcripts besides the expected traM and dsxM mRNAs.
The variable amount of the female transcripts found in
the pseudomales would be related to the different proportions of female structures in their non-sexually dimorphic regions. These results indicate that the Tra2 protein
is needed for sex determination in Anastrepha.
Finally, the Tra2 proteins of ten other Anastrepha species were characterised and compared among themselves
and with the Tra2 protein of other insects in which it has
been characterised. The Tra2 protein from the Anastrepha species was closely related to the Tra2 from other
tephritids, such as Ceratitis and Bactrocera, as well as to
other dipterans such as Musca and Lucilia, showing a
monophyletic origin. However, the Tra2 protein of Drosophila showed substantial divergence. The nature of the
nucleotide variation in tra-2 was essentially synonymous
(significantly more common than non-synonymous variation). This suggests the existence of negative selection
acting at the protein level in order to maintain Tra2 structural features, especially with respect to the RRM
domain.
Function of tra-2 in Anastrepha sex determination

In the tephritids C. capitata [16] and B. oleae [17], and in
twelve Anastrepha species [18], the gene tra acts as the
memory device for sex determination via its auto-regulatory function, i.e., through the contribution of the Tra
protein to the female-specific splicing of its own premRNA [16,17]. Further, the tra-2 of C. capitata is needed
for the female-specific splicing of tra and dsx pre-mRNAs
[23]. This requires the formation of a complex with the
Tra protein, which then interacts with the Tra-Tra2 binding sites present in both pre-mRNAs [16,19]. This role for
tra-2 in sex determination also exists in Anastrepha species (present work).
The maternal expression of tra [16-18] and tra-2 ([23];
present work) in tephritids supplies the embryo with
maternal Tra-Tra2 complex. This is essential for imposing female-specific splicing of the initial zygotic tra premRNA so that the first zygotic functional Tra protein is
produced and tra auto-regulation can be established. In
this scenario the XX embryos follow female development.
In XY embryos, however, the yet non-characterised M
factor present in the Y chromosome would prevent the
tra auto-regulation system being set up. Consequently,
these embryos would not produce functional Tra protein
and develop as males [16] (see Figure 6). The existence of
an M factor in the Y chromosome has been demonstrated
only in C. capitata [38]. However, the analysis of tra in
Bactrocera [17] and tra [18] and tra-2 (present work) in
Anastrepha species suggests their Y chromosome have a
similar function.
Both the tephritid Tra and Tra2 protein show a dual
splicing role in sex determination. On one hand both

Page 9 of 14

Drosophilidae
family
XX; AA

X(Y); AA

Tephritidae, Muscidae and Calliphoridae
families
XY, M factor

XX

Tramat

SxlF

SxlM

Tramat

TraF Tra2

TraM Tra2

TraF

DsxF

DsxM

DsxF

DsxM

female

male

female

male

Tra2mat

a
Tra2

Tra2mat

TraF

Tra2

Figure 6 Comparison of the sex determination gene cascades between Drosophilidae (Drosophila), and Tephritidae (Ceratitis Anastrepha and Bactrocera), Muscidae (Musca) and Calliphoridae
(Lucilia) families of Diptera. Tramat and Tra2mat indicate maternal Tra
and Tra2 product. DsxF and DsxM stands for female and male Dsx protein, respectively. Though the maternal expression of gene tra-2 in Lucilia and the characterisation of this gene in Bactrocera have not been
reported, both species are included in the scheme of this Figure because the analysis of tra in Bactrocera [17] and the analysis of tra and
tra-2 in Lucilia [30] suggests their tra-2 genes have a similar function as
in Ceratitis, Anastrepha and Musca. Scheme based on references 16, 17,
18, 23, 29, 30 and 36.

behave as a splicing activator of dsx pre-mRNA: the binding of Tra-Tra2 to the female-specific exon promotes the
inclusion of this exon into the mature mRNA. On the
other hand, Tra and Tra2 act as splicing inhibitors of tra
pre-mRNA: the binding of Tra-Tra2 to the male-specific
exons prevents the inclusion of these exons into the
mature mRNA. It has been proposed that the Tra2-ISS
binding sites, which have been found in the splicing regulatory region of the tra pre-mRNA of the tephritids, but
not in dsx pre-mRNA, provide the distinguishing marker
for the dual splicing function of the Tra-Tra2 complex in
tephritids [18].
This role of genes tra and tra-2 in sex determination is
not exclusive to tephritid insects (Diptera, Tephritidae)
since the homologous genes in L. cuprina (Diptera, Calliphoridae) seem to play the same role [30]. A similar situation is found in the housefly M. domestica (Diptera,
Muscidae), where the gene F plays the key role for female
sex determination. The maternal product is needed to
activate the zygotic function of F, which appears to show
auto-regulation [39]. Recently, the molecular characterisation of F revealed it to be the orthologue of tra in the
housefly [36]. tra-2 is also required for this auto-regulation in this species [29]. The existence of an M factor in
the Y chromosome has been also demonstrated in Lucilia
[40] and in Musca [41-43], though in this latter species,
some strains carry the M factor in an autosome [44]. In

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

XY zygotes, the presence of the masculinising factor M in
the Y chromosome would prevent the establishment of
tra auto-regulation and cause male development [30,36]
(see Figure 6).
Together, these results support the model of Wilkins
[45], who proposed that the evolution of sex-determining
cascades was bottom up (for a theoretical analysis of this
model see Pomiankowski et al., [46]). It has been suggested [18] that the tra/tra2 > dsx elements at the bottom
of the cascade, and their relationships, likely represent
the ancestral state (which still exists in the Tephritidae,
Calliphoridae and Muscidae lineages) of the extant cascade found in the Drosophilidae lineage (in which tra is
just another component of the sex determination gene
cascade regulated by Sxl). Thus, in the phylogenetic lineage that gave rise to the drosophilids, evolution co-opted
for the Sxl gene, modified it, and converted it into the key
gene controlling sex determination.
In Drosophila, the gene tra-2 also shows a dual splicing
role. It behaves as a splicing activator of dsx pre-mRNA in
the soma of Drosophila females, but also acts as a splicing
inhibitor of the M1 intron in tra-2 pre-mRNA in the
germ line of Drosophila males (see Figure 1C). The presence of M1 in the mature tra-2 mRNA prevents the formation of full, functional Tra2 protein [32]. It has been
found that Drosophila somatic cells are also able to prevent splicing of the M1 intron whenever levels of Tra2
protein are above normal [47]. The tra-2 promoter of the
male-germ line is more active than the tra-2 promoter of
the somatic tissues of Drosophila [27,28,47]. Regulated
levels of Tra2 protein are therefore required since an
excess of the Tra2 protein causes male sterility [33] and
reduces the viability of Drosophila males and females
[47].
The gene tra-2 produces a single mRNA in both sexes
and no significant partially spliced mRNA isoform specific to the male germ line has been detected in Ceratitis
[23], Musca [29], Lucilia [30] or Anastrepha (present
work). Hence, it is here postulated that the promoter of
this gene in the male germ line of these dipteran insects
behaves in a fashion similar to that seen in the somatic
tissues. The splicing inhibitor function of tra-2 observed
in the Drosophila male germ line was probably acquired
during the evolutionary lineage that gave rise to the drosophilids and may constitute an evolutionary solution for
its high expression in this tissue and the return to normal
levels of Tra2 protein. This protein belongs to the SR protein family, the members of which are involved in splicing
regulation, mRNA transport and mRNA translation [48].
Its level in the cell must therefore be regulated if these
processes are not to be impaired.
The molecular evolution of Tra2

The analysis of Tra2 relationships among the studied species resulted in a statistically well supported phylogenetic

Page 10 of 14

tree. In this tree, the Tephritidae species, which belong to
the subgroup Acalyptratae of the suborder Brachycera,
were more closely related to Musca and Lucilia, which
belong to the Calyptratae subgroup of the suborder
Brachycera, than to Drosophila species, which also
belong to the subgroup Acalyptratae. These findings are
in line with previous analyses of genes involved in sex
determination, e.g., Sxl [49], tra [30] and tra-2 [22,30].
However, the analysis of dsx indicates a distinct relationship, i.e., Dsx proteins from the Tephritidae are more
closely related to Drosophila than to Musca [21]. This discrepancy might be explained by the position of the genes
dsx, tra and tra-2 in the sex determination cascade. The
gene dsx is the more basal gene in this cascade, whereas
the other genes would have been co-opted for sex determination over evolutionary time; thus, a higher degree of
conservation can be expected for dsx than for tra or tra-2
[45]. The gene dsx encodes for transcription factors that
control the sexual cytodifferentiation genes; dsx is therefore subject to strong purifying selection to maintain this
control. The Tra and Tra2 proteins belong to the SR family of proteins involved in splicing, which are characterised by having repetitions of the serine-arginine
dipeptide. Variation in the content of RS dipeptides
seems to be a feature of the SR proteins whenever they
have maintained enough such dipeptides to preserve
their function [50].
The overall amino acid variation of Tra2 (present work)
is significantly smaller than that previously reported for
Tra [18]. The low rates of evolution shown by Tra2 in
tephritids are also in agreement with the low rates of evolution reported for Tra in this group, and in stark contrast
with the high rates of neutral evolution reported in some
Drosophila species [50,51].
The extent of synonymous and non-synonymous nucleotide variation in the Tra2 proteins suggests the presence
of extensive silent divergence. This, together with the
strict conservation of the distribution of the RS-rich and
RRM domains, suggests that tra-2 is subject to strong
purifying selection to preserve the mechanism of action
of Tra2 proteins. A higher degree of conservation was
evident in the RRM and linker regions, in contrast to the
diversity shown by the RS-rich regions. In fact, the RRMlinker junction region is considered a signature motif of
Tra2 proteins [52].
The Tra protein seems to lack an RNA binding domain;
thus, its influence in splicing regulation is exerted at the
level of its interaction (through the RS domains) with
other proteins carrying RNA-binding domains, such as
Tra2 (reviewed in [53]). The variation in the number of
RS dipeptides in the RS1 and RS2 regions of the Tra2 proteins parallels the situation found in the Tra proteins,
which appear to undergo high rates of neutral evolution
[50,51]. The high degree of conservation in the RRM
domain of the Tra2 proteins studied here agrees with its

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

fundamental role in the function of the Tra-Tra2 complex; this domain confers upon the complex its capacity
to specifically interact with the tra and dsx pre-mRNAs
and thus regulate its sex-specific splicing.
The high degree of divergence between the Anastrepha
and the Drosophila Tra2 proteins is of particular interest.
This divergence was mainly observed in the RS domains,
which are involved in protein-protein interactions. This
observation agrees with the experimental observation
that the Anastrepha Tra-Drosophila Tra2 complex
appears to be less efficient than the Drosophila Tra-Tra2
complex at inducing female-specific splicing of the Drosophila dsx pre-mRNA [54]. Hence, the interaction
between the Anastrepha Tra protein and the Drosophila
Tra2 protein might be impeded as a consequence of
changes accumulated in these proteins after the Anastrepha and Drosophila phylogenetic lineages separated.
These results suggest that Tra and Tra2 proteins coevolved to exert their function in sex determination.

Conclusions
The gene transformer-2 is required for sex determination
in Anastrepha through its participation in the femalespecific splicing of transformer and doublesex premRNAs. It is therefore needed for the auto-regulation of
the gene transformer. Thus, the transformer/transfomer-2
> doublesex elements at the bottom of the cascade, and
their relationships, probably represent the ancestral state
(which still exists in the Tephritidae, Calliphoridae and
Muscidae lineages) of the extant cascade found in the
Drosophilidae lineage (in which tra is just another component of the sex determination gene cascade regulated
by Sex-lethal). The extent of synonymous and non-synonymous nucleotide variation in the Tra2 proteins suggests the presence of extensive silent divergence. This,
together with the strict conservation of the distribution
of the RS-rich and RRM domains, suggests that tra-2 is
subject to strong purifying selection to preserve the
mechanism of action of Tra2 proteins.
Methods
Species

The species of Anastrepha studied, their host fruits, and
the sites where they were collected are described in Ruiz
et al. [21]. Rearing conditions were 23 ± 2°C, relative
humidity 60-80%, light intensity 4000-5000 lux, photoperiod 12:12 h (L:D).
Molecular analyses

Genomic DNA was extracted from frozen specimens as
described in Maniatis et al. [55]. Total RNA from adult
female ovaries, adult male testis, embryos, larvae, and
adult male and female somatic cells was prepared using
the Ultraspec-II RNA isolation kit (Biotecx) following the

Page 11 of 14

manufacturer's instructions. Five micrograms of total
RNA from each sample were reversed transcribed with
Superscript (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer's
instructions. Reverse transcription reactions were performed with an oligo-dT. Two percent of the synthesised
cDNA was amplified by PCR. All amplicons were analysed by electrophoresis in agarose gels, cloned using the
TOPO TA-cloning kit (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer's instructions and sequenced. In all cases, PCR
reactions with RNA samples were performed to guarantee that they were not contaminated with genomic DNA
(negative controls of PCR reactions).
The GenomeWalker genomic library of A. obliqua was
synthesised using the BD GenomeWalker Universal kit
(BD Biosciences), following the manufacturer's instructions.
Southern-blotting (see Figure 1F) was performed by
transferring the RT-PCR products shown in Figure 1E
onto a nylon membrane (Zeta-Probe Blotting Membranes BIO RAD). The probe used corresponds to a fragment of 630 nucleotides of the A. obliqua tra-2 gene,
obtained by PCR involving genomic DNA and using the
pair of primers PM1 and PM2 located at the 5' and 3' ends
of intron 3 respectively (see Figure 1A). The probe was
labelled with digoxigenin using the PCR DIG Labeling
Mix kit (Roche) and hybridisation was detected with the
DIG luminescent Detection Kit for Nucleic Acids (Roche)
following the manufacturer's instructions.
DNA sequencing and sequence analysis

Sequencing was performed using an automated 377 DNA
sequencer (Applied Biosystems). The analysis of
sequences was performed by using the BLASTX programme.
Injection of Aotra2 dsRNA into Anastrepha embryos

The tra2 dsRNA was prepared as described for Drosophila [56]. The complete ORF of Aotra2 cloned in the
pUAST plasmid was used as a template in a PCR reaction
with the primer pair P1T7 and P3T3 (corresponding to
primers P1 and P3) (see Figure 1A), flanked by a T7 promoter sequences at their 5' ends. The amplicon of this
PCR was used as template to produce the tra2 dsRNA in
an in vitro transcription reaction with T7 RNA polymerase using the Megascript kit (Ambion). This dsRNA
was precipitated with ethanol and resuspended in the
injection buffer [57].
Hemispheres made of 3% agar stained with red commercial food dye (aniline) and wrapped in parafilm® where
furnished for oviposition [25], and eggs for injection
recovered after 2 h. These were injected into the adjacent
anterior region of the posterior pole with either 8 μM
Aotra2 dsRNA (experimental embryos) or injection buffer (control embryos), following the described procedures

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

[56] with minor modifications. The injected embryos
were then transplanted into host fruit where they developed until reaching the pupal stage. The pupae were collected and transferred to population cages until the
emergence of the adults. Newborn males (2-4 days old)
were examined to record their external terminalia (external genitalia plus analia), which is the only external sexual
dimorphic structure found in Anastrepha species [37],
and then dissected for analysis of the internal genital
structures and the removal of the testes for the determination of their chromosomal constitution.
Preparation of chromosome squashes

Chromosome squashes of testes from the Anastrepha
males were prepared as previously described [58,59].
Sequences of the primers used in this work

Mar17: 5' GTRTGIGSIVGYTKNGTDATNGA 3';
Mar26: 5' MGIAGYCGNGGNTTYTGYTTY 3';
Tra2B: 5' NCKRTCRTCDATYTCCATNCC 3';
P1: 5' AGAGTTGGAATGAGTCCACG 3';
P2: 5' CACGTCGCTTATCGTATGGA 3';
P3: 5' CATATTTTTAATAGCGCGTACG 3';
P4: 5' ATTACCAAGGTGTGGGCTTC 3';
P5: 5' AGTGAAATCCAGTTGATACGC 3';
GW1: 5' TATCAGGATATAGCCGATGCTAAGGC 3';
GW2: 5' CAAGCGTCTTTAGCTGCCTTAGCATC 3';
PM1: 5' TACGAACGCAGCTTACTTCC 3';
PM2: 5' CTTGCGGTTCTGAGACTGAC 3'.
P1T7:
5'
TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGACTAGAGTTGGAATGAGTCCACG 3'
P3T3: 5' TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGACTCATAT
TTTTAATAGCGCGTACG 3'
The Mar17 primer is described in Burghardt et al. [29].
The sequence of the Mar26 and Tra2B primers was generously provided by K. Komitopoulou.
Phylogenetic and Molecular Evolutionary Analyses

The present analysis included 21 tra-2 sequences belonging to different insects with the following accession numbers: DIPTERA: Anastrepha amita [EMBL: FN658617],
A. bistrigata [EMBL: FN658616], A. fraterculus sp.1
[EMBL: FN658608], A. fraterculus sp.2 [EMBL:
FN658609], A. fraterculus sp.3 [EMBL: FN658610], A.
fraterculus sp.4 [EMBL:FN658611], A. grandis
[EMBL:FN658612], A. obliqua [EMB:FN658607], A. serpentina [EMBL: FN658613], A. sororcula [EMBL:
FN658614], A. striata [EMBL: FN658615], Ceratitis capiBactrocera
oleae
tata
[EMBL:EU999754],
[EMBL:AJ547623], Musca domestica [EMBL:AY847518],
Lucilia cuprinia [EMBL:FJ461620], Drosophila melanoD.
virilis
gaster
[EMBL:M23633],
D.
pseudoobscura
[EMBL:XM_002049663],
[EMBL:XM_001360568]; LEPIDOPTERA: Bombyx mori
[EMBL:NM_001126233]; HYMENOPTERA: Apis mellif-

Page 12 of 14

era [EMBL:XM_001121070] and Nasonia vitripennis
[EMBL:XP_001601106)]. Multiple sequence alignments
were conducted on the basis of the translated amino acid
sequences and edited for potential errors over 1089
nucleotide sites corresponding to 363 amino acid positions using BIOEDIT [60] and CLUSTAL W [61] software. The different domains in the Tra2 protein were
defined according to Salvemini et al. [23] as: the RS-rich
N-terminal region (19-459), the RNA recognition motifRRM (502-717), the linker region (718-774), and the RSrich C-terminal region (775-1077).
Molecular evolutionary analyses were performed using
MEGA v.4 software [62]. The extent of nucleotide
sequence divergence was estimated by means of the
Kimura 2-parameter method [63] and the amino acid
sequence divergence estimated by means of the uncorrected differences (p-distances). This approach is known
to give good results, especially for distantly related taxa
[64]. The number of synonymous (pS) and non-synonymous (pN) nucleotide differences per site were calculated
using the modified method of Nei-Gojobori [65], providing the transition/transversion ratio (R) for each case.
Evolutionary distances were calculated using the compete
deletion option. Standard errors of the estimates were
calculated using the bootstrap method (1000 replicates).
Phylogenetic trees were reconstructed using the neighbour-joining tree-building method [66]. However, maximum parsimony trees were also inferred to ensure that
the obtained results were not dependent on this choice.
The reliability of the resulting topologies was tested by
the bootstrap method [67] and by the interior-branch test
[68], producing the bootstrap probability (BP) and confidence probability (CP) values for each interior branch in
the tree respectively. Given that the bootstrap method is
known to be conservative, a BP > 80% was interpreted as
high statistical support for groups, whereas a CP ≥ 95%
was considered statistically significant [69]. Phylogenies
were rooted using the tra-2 gene of Lepidoptera and
Hymenoptera.
The analysis of the nucleotide variation across coding
regions was performed using the sliding-window
approach afforded by DnaSP v.5 software [70], estimating
the proportion (p) of nucleotide sites at which two
sequences being compared were different, and the ratio
between the numbers of non-synonymous (pN) and synonymous (pS) substitutions per site, employing a window
length of 25 nucleotides and a step size of 5 nucleotides.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Number of nucleotides that compose the exons and
introns of gene tra-2 of A. obliqua, C. capitata and D. melanogaster.
Exons (boxes) and introns (lines) are not drawn to scale.

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

Additional file 2 Percentage similarity among the Anastrepha Tra2
proteins. Comparison of the Tra2 proteins of Anastrepha species.
Additional file 3 Percentage similarity among the insect Tra2 proteins. Comparison of the Tra2 proteins of the insects so far characterised. A.
obliqua was used as the reference species for the Anastrepha species.
Additional file 4 Amino acid alignment of the Tra2 protein in the
analysed species. The different protein domains are indicated as follows:
RS-rich regions in grey background, RNA recognition motif (RRM) in green
background, and linker region in yellow background. The RNP-1 and RNP-2
elements are indicated in open black boxes.
Additional file 5 Evolutionary parameters of the Tra2 proteins from
insects. Average numbers of amino acid (pAA), total nucleotide (pNT), synonymous (pS) and non-synonymous (pN) nucleotide differences per site,
codon bias (Effective Number of Codons, ENC) and Z-test of selection in
complete tra-2 genes and independent tra-2 domains from insects. SE,
standard error; R, average transition/transversion ratio; n/a, not applicable. a
H0: pN = pS; H1: pN <pS.
Authors' contributions
FS performed the experiments. MFR helped with the molecular biology experiments. JMEL performed the phylogenetic analyses. ALPP performed the analysis of chromosomes. DS performed the analysis of chromosomes and
supervised the dsRNA injection experiments. LS conceived and supervised the
study, and wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to the final version of
the manuscript.

Page 13 of 14

9.
10.
11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
Acknowledgements
This work was financed by grants BFU2005-03000 and BFU2008-00474
awarded to L. Sánchez by the D.G.I.C.Y.T. FS was the recipient of an EMBO ShortTerm fellowship for the performance of the RNAi injection experiments at the
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. JME-L was supported by a contract within the
Ramón y Cajal Subprogramme (MICINN).
Author Details
1Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (C.S.I.C.), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040
Madrid, Spain, 2CHROMEVOL-XENOMAR Group, Departamento de Biología
Celular y Molecular, Universidade da Coruña, 15071 A Coruña, Spain and
3Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências,
Universidade de São Paulo, 05508-0900 Sao Paulo, Brazil
Received: 18 February 2010 Accepted: 13 May 2010
Published: 13 May 2010

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

© 2010 Sarnoavailable articlehttp://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140
This is an Open Access from:BioMed Central Ltd.the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC article is et al; licensee distributed under
Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140

References
1. Sánchez L, Gorfinkiel N, Guerrero I: Sex determination and the
development of the genital disc. In Comprehensive Molecular Insect
Science Volume 1. Edited by: Gilbert LI, Iatrou K, Gill SS. Oxford: Elsevier
Pergamon; 2005:1-38.
2. Bell LR, Maine EM, Schedl P, Cline TW: Sex-lethal, a Drosophila sex
determination switch gene, exhibits sex-specific RNA splicing and
sequence similar to RNA binding proteins. Cell 1988, 55:1037-1046.
3. Bell LR, Horabin JI, Schedl P, Cline TW: Positive autoregulation of Sexlethal by alternative splicing maintains the female determined state in
Drosophila. Cell 1991, 65:229-239.
4. Boggs RT, Gregor P, Idriss S, Belote JM, McKeown M: Regulation of sexual
differentiation in Drosophila melanogaster via alternative splicing of
RNA from the transformer gene. Cell 1987, 50:739-747.
5. Belote JM, McKeown M, Boggs RT, Ohkawa R, Sosnowski BA: The
molecular genetics of transformer, a genetic switch-controlling sexual
differentiation in Drosophila. Devel Genet 1989, 10:143-154.
6. Valcárcel J, Singh R, Zamore PD, Green MR: The protein Sex-lethal
antagonizes the splicing factor U2AF to regulate alternative splicing of
transformer pre-mRNA. Nature 1993, 362:171-175.
7. Hedley M, Maniatis T: Sex-specific splicing and polyadenylation of dsx
pre-mRNA requires a sequence that binds specifically to tra-2 protein
in vitro. Cell 1991, 65:579-586.
8. Hertel KJ, Lynch KW, Hsiao EC, Liu EHT, Maniatis T: Structural and
functional conserevation of the Drosophila doublesex splicing
enhancer repeat elements. RNA 1996, 2:969-981.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Ryner LC, Baker BS: Regulation of doublesex pre-mRNA processing
occurs by 3'-splice site activation. Genes Dev 1991, 5:2071-2085.
Tian M, Maniatis T: A splicing enhancer complex controls alternative
splicing of doublesex pre-mRNA. Cell 1993, 74:105-114.
Burtis KC, Baker BS: Drosophila doublesex gene controls somatic sexual
differentiation by producing alternatively spliced mRNAs encoding
related sex-specific polypeptides. Cell 1989, 56:997-1010.
Hoshijima K, Inoue K, Higuchi I, Sakamoto H, Shimura Y: Control of
doublesex alternative splicing by transformer and transformer-2 in
Drosophila. Science 1991, 252:833-836.
Sánchez L: Sex-determining mechanisms in insects. Int J Dev Biol 2008,
52:1059-1075.
Saccone G, Peluso I, Artiaco D, Giordano E, Bopp D, Polito LC: The Ceratitis
capitata homologue of the Drosophila sex-determining gene Sex-lethal
is structurally conserved, but not sex-specifically regulated.
Development 1998, 125:1495-1500.
Lagos D, Ruiz MF, Sánchez L, Komitopoulou K: Isolation and
characterization of the Bactrocera oleae genes orthologous to the sex
determining Sex-lethal and doublesex genes of Drosophila
melanogaster. Gene 2005, 384:111-121.
Pane A, Salvemini M, Bovi PD, Polito C, Saccone G: The transformer gene
in Ceratitis capitata provides a genetic basis for selecting and
remembering the sexual fate. Development 2002, 129:3715-3725.
Lagos D, Koukidou M, Savakis C, Komitopoulou K: The transformer gene
in Bactrocera oleae: the genetic switch that determines its sex fate.
Insect Mol Biol 2007, 16:221-230.
Ruiz MF, Milano A, Salvemini M, Eirín-López JM, Perondini ALP, Selivon D,
Polito C, Saccone G, Sánchez L: The gene transformer of Anastrepha fruit
flies (Diptera, Tephritidae) and its evolution in insects. PLoS ONE 2007,
2(11):e1239.
Saccone G, Salvemini M, Pane A, Polito C: Masculinization of XX
Drosophila transgenic flies expressing the Ceratitis capitata DoublsexM
isoform. Int J Dev Biol 2008, 52:1043-1050.
Ruiz MF, Stefani RN, Mascarenhas RO, Perondini ALP, Selivon D, Sánchez L:
The gene doublesex of the fruit fly Anastrepha obliqua (Diptera,
Tephritidae). Genetics 2005, 171:849-854.
Ruiz MF, Eirín-López JM, Stefani RN, Perondini ALP, Selivon D, Sánchez L:
The gene doublesex of Anastrepha fruit flies (Diptera, tephritidae) and
its evolution in insects. Dev Genes Evol 2007, 217:725-731.
Gomulski LM, Dimopoulos G, Xi Z, Soares MB, Bonaldo MF, Malacrida AR,
Gasperi G: Gene discovery in an invasive tephritid model pest species,
the Mediterranean fruit fly, Ceratitis capitata. BMC Genetics 2008, 9:243.
Salvemini M, Robertson M, Aronson B, Atkinson P, Polito C, Saccone G:
Ceratitis capitata transformer-2 gene is required to establish and
maintain the autoregulation of Cctra, the master gene for female sex
determination. Int J Dev Biol 2009, 53:109-120.
Selivon D, Vretos C, Fontes L, Perondini ALP: New variant forms in the
Anastrepha fraterculus complex (Diptera, Tephritidae). In Proc. VIth
Intern. Symp. Fruit Flies Economic Importance: 2004; Irene, South Africa Edited
by: Barnes BN. Isteg Scientific Pub; 2004:253-258.
Selivon D, Perondini ALP, Morgante JS: A genetic-morphological
characterization of two cryptic species of Anastrepha fraterculus
complex (Dipetra, Tephritidae). Ann Entomol Soc Amer 2005, 98:365-381.
Norrbom AL, Zucchi RA, Hernández-Ortiz V: Phylogeny of the genera
Anastrepha and Toxotrypana (Trypetinae: Toxotrypanini) based on
morphology. In Fruit Flies (Tephritidae): phylogeny and evolution of
behaviour Edited by: Aluja M, Norrbom AL. Boca Ratón: CRC Press;
1999:299-342.
Amrein H, Maniatis T, Nöthiger R: Alternatively spliced transcripts of the
sex determining gene tra-2 of Drosophila encode functional proteins of
different size. EMBO J 1990, 9:3619-3629.
Mattox W, Palmer MJ, Baker BS: Alternative splicing of the sex
determination gene transformer-2 is sex-specific in the germ line but
not in the soma. Genes Dev 1990, 4:789-805.
Burghardt G, Hediger M, Siegenthaler C, Moser M, Dübendorfer A, Bopp D:
The transformer2 gene in Musca domestica is required for selecting and
maintaining the female pathway of development. Dev Genes Evol 2005,
215:165-176.
Concha C, Scott MJ: Sexual development in Lucilia cuprina (Diptera,
Calliphoridae) is controlled by the transformer gene. Genetics 2009,
182:785-789.

Sarno et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/140

31. Mattox W, Baker BS: Autoregulation of the splicing of transcripts from
the transformer-2 gene of Drosophila. Genes Dev 1991, 5:786-796.
32. Mattox W, Palmer MJ, Baker BS: Alternative splicing of the sex
determination gene transformer-2 is sex-specific in the germ line but
not in the soma. Genes Dev 1990, 4:789-805.
33. McGuffin ME, Chandler D, Somaiya D, Dauwalder B, Mattox W:
Autoregulation of transformer-2 alternative splicing is necessary for
normal male fertility in Drosophila. Genetics 1998, 149:1477-1486.
34. Qi J, Su S, Mattox W: The doublesex splicing enhancer components Tra
and RBP1 also repress splicing through an intronic silencer. Mol Cell Biol
2007, 27:699-708.
35. Selivon D, Perondini ALP, Rocha LS: The mitotic chromosomes of eight
species of Anastrepha (Diptera, Tephritidae). Neotrop Entomol 2005,
34:273-279.
36. Hediger M, Henggeler C, Meier N, Pérez R, Saccone G, Bopp D: Molecular
characterization of the key switch F provides a basis for understanding
the rapid divergence of the sex-determining pathway in the housefly.
Genetics 2010, 184:155-170.
37. White IM, Elson-Harris MM: Fruit flies of economic significance: their
identification and bionomics. CAB International 1992, Wallingford:601.
38. Willhoeft U, Franz G: Identification of the sex-determining region of the
Ceratitis capitata Y chromosome by deletion mapping. Genetics 1996,
144:737-745.
39. Dübendorfer A, Hediger M: The female-determining gene F of the
housefly, Musca domestica, acts maternally to regulate its own zygotic
activity. Genetics 1998, 150:221-226.
40. Bedo DG, Foster GG: Cytogenetic mapping of the male-determining
region of Lucilia cuprina (Diptera: Calliphoridae). Chromosoma 1985,
92:344-350.
41. Hiroyoshi T: Sex-limited inheritance and abnormal sex ratio does not
contribute to the X:A ratio in strains of the housefly. Genetics 1964,
50:373-385.
42. Rubini PG, Palenzona D: Response to selection for high number of
heterochromosomes in Musca domestica L. L. Genet Agr 1967,
21:101-110.
43. Hediger M, Minet AD, Niessen M, Schmidt R, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Sükran C,
Nöthiger R, Dübendorfer A: The male-determining activity on the Y
chromosome of the housefly (Musca domestica L.) consists of separable
elements. Genetics 1998, 150:651-661.
44. Dübendorfer A, Hediger M, Burghardt G, Bopp D: Musca domestica, a
window on the evolution of sex-determining mechanisms in insects.
Int J Dev Biol 2002, 46:75-79.
45. Wilkins A: Moving up the hierarchy: a hypothesis on the evolution of a
genetic sex determination pathway. BioEssays 1995, 17:71-77.
46. Pomiankowski A, Nöthiger R, Wilkins A: The evolution of the Drosophila
sex determination pathway. Genetics 2004, 166:1761-1773.
47. Qi J, Su S, McGuffin ME, Mattox W: Concentration dependent selection
of targets by an SR splicing regulator results in tissue-specific RNA
processing. Nucl Acids Res 2006, 34:6256-6263.
48. Shepard PJ, Hertel KJ: The SR protein family. Genome Biology 2009,
10:242.
49. Serna E, Gorab E, Ruiz MF, Goday C, Eirín-López JM, Sánchez L: The gene
Sex-lethal of the Sciaridae family (Order Diptera, Suborder
Nematocera) and its phylogeny in dipteran insects. Genetics 2004,
168:907-921.
50. McAllister BF, McVean GAT: Neutral evolution of the sex-determining
gene transformer in Drosophila. Genetics 2000, 154:1711-1720.
51. Kulathinal RJ, Skwarek L, Morton RA, Singh RS: Rapid evolution of the sexdetermining gene, transformer: Structural diversity and rate
heterogeneity among sibling species of Drosophila. Mol Biol Evol 2003,
20:441-452.
52. Dauwalder B, Amaya-Manzanares F, Mattox W: A human homologue of
the Drosophila sex determination factor transformer-2 has conserved
splicing regulatory functions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:9004-9009.
53. Black DL: Mechanisms of alternative pre-messenger RNA splicing.
Annu Rev Biochem 2003, 72:291-336.
54. Ruiz MF, Sánchez L: Effect of the gene transformer of Anastrepha on the
somatic sexual development of Drosophila. Int J Dev Biol 2010,
54:627-633.
55. Maniatis T, Fritsch F, Sambrook J: Molecular cloning. New York: Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory; 1982.

Page 14 of 14

56. Kennerdell JR, Carthew RW: Use of dsRNA-mediated genetic
interference to demonstrate that frizzled and frizzled 2 act in the
wingless pathway. Cell 1998, 95:1017-1026.
57. Rubin GM, Spradling AC: Genetic transformation of Drosophila with
transposable element vectors. Science 1982, 218:348-353.
58. Selivon D, Perondini ALP: Evaluation of techniques for C and ASG
banding of the mitotic chromosomes of Anastrepha fraterculus
complex (Diptera, Tephritidae). Brazil J Genet 1997, 20:651-654.
59. Goday C, Selivon D, Perondini ALP, Greciano PG, Ruiz MF: Cytological
characterization of sex chromosomes and ribosomal DNA location in
Anastrepha species (Diptera, Tephritidae). Cytogenet Genome Res 2006,
114:70-76.
60. Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor
and analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucl Acids Symp Ser 1999,
41:95-98.
61. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignments through
sequence weighting, position specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucl Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
62. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
63. Kimura M: A simple method for estimating evolutionary rate of base
substitutions through comparative studies of nucleotide sequences. J
Mol Evol 1980, 16:111-120.
64. Nei M, Kumar S: Molecular Evolution and Phylogenetics. New York:
Oxford University Press; 2000.
65. Zhang J, Rosenberg HF, Nei M: Positive Darwinian selection after gene
duplication in primate ribonuclease genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:3708-3713.
66. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406-425.
67. Felsestein J: Confidence limits on phylogenies: an approach using the
bootstrap. Evolution 1985, 39:783-791.
68. Sitnikova T: Bootstrap method of interior-branch test for phylogenetic
trees. Mol Biol Evol 1996, 13:605-611.
69. Sitnikova T, Rzhetsky A, Nei M: Interior-branch and bootstrap tests of
phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1995, 12:319-333.
70. Librado P, Rozas J: DnaSP v5: a software for comprehensive analysis of
DNA polymorphism data. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1451-1452.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-140
Cite this article as: Sarno et al., The gene transformer-2 of Anastrepha fruit
flies (Diptera, Tephritidae) and its evolution in insects BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:140

</pre>
</body>
</html>
