<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A phage-targeting strategy for the design of spatiotemporal drug delivery from grafted matrices</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7. doi:10.1186/1755-1536-4-7"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ritsuko Sawada"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

RESEARCH

Open Access

A phage-targeting strategy for the design of
spatiotemporal drug delivery from grafted matrices
Ritsuko Sawada1,2, Carrie Y Peterson1, Ana Maria Gonzalez3, Bruce M Potenza1, Barbara Mueller4, Raul Coimbra1,
Brian P Eliceiri1, Andrew Baird1,3*

Abstract
Background: The natural response to injury is dynamic and normally consists of complex temporal and spatial
cellular changes in gene expression, which, when acting in synchrony, result in patent tissue repair and, in some
instances, regeneration. However, current therapeutic regiments are static and most rely on matrices, gels and
engineered skin tissue. Accordingly, there is a need to design next-generation grafting materials to enable
biotherapeutic spatiotemporal targeting from clinically approved matrices. To this end, rather then focus on
developing completely new grafting materials, we investigated whether phage display could be deployed onto
clinically approved synthetic grafts to identify peptide motifs capable of linking pharmaceutical drugs with
differential affinities and eventually, control drug delivery from matrices over both space and time.
Methods: To test this hypothesis, we biopanned combinatorial peptide libraries onto different formulations of a
wound-healing matrix (Integra®) and eluted the bound peptides with 1) high salt, 2) collagen and
glycosaminoglycan or 3) low pH. After three to six rounds of biopanning, phage recovery and phage amplification
of the bound particles, any phage that had acquired a capacity to bind the matrix was sequenced.
Results: In this first report, we identify distinct classes of matrix-binding peptides which elute differently from the
screened matrix and demonstrate that they can be applied in a spatially relevant manner.
Conclusions: We suggest that further applications of these combinatorial techniques to wound-healing matrices
may offer a new way to improve the performance of clinically approved matrices so as to introduce temporal and
spatial control over drug delivery.

Background
Synthetic grafts for full-thickness acute and chronic
wounds have emerged as an important tool in the surgical management of cutaneous injuries [1-5]. Recognizing
that significant improvements are still needed, several
investigators have proposed that a combination of
matrices with biotherapeutics would be an important
direction in the development of next generation grafts
[6-11]. Although it may be possible to create new
matrices de novo, one promising approach has involved
adding biotherapeutics and gene-based medicines to
commonly used and clinically approved matrices before
their deployment [1,2,6,7,10-16]. Athough this approach
* Correspondence: anbaird@ucsd.edu
1
Department of Surgery, Division of Trauma, Surgical Critical Care and Burns,
University of California San Diego School of Medicine, 200 W. Arbor Dr., San
Diego, CA 92103-8236 USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

builds on a significant amount of clinical experience, the
results have unfortunately been variable, and furthermore, the approach is not amenable to treatment after
graft placement. For example, gene-activated matrices
(GAM) [17-21] require preformulation of genes within
collagen matrices and, although we have used woundhealing matrices (Integra®; Integra LifeSciences, Plainsboro, NJ, USA) in animal models of wound healing to
evaluate exogenous gene delivery at the site of injury
after deployment [21,22], the response with different
strategies has been variable, presumably because of
changes in DNA/DNA vector-fixation capacity in
already deployed matrices.
A crucial factor in the inclusion of candidate biotherapeutics into the wound bed is the assumption that factors, in particular growth factors, will have the necessary
bioavailability to elicit a biologic response at the right
place and at the right time [6,9,12]. Accordingly, the

© 2011 Sawada et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

disappointing performance of recombinant growth factors and gene medicines in various clinical paradigms
[23-30] may simply reflect the pharmacokinetics of
these factors in the wound bed, their stability in a protease-rich environment, and their spatial distribution on
matrices. Although the use of synthetic and semisynthetic grafts may have achieved widespread clinical use,
there remains an important challenge to transform these
first-generation matrices into dynamic, spatiotemporally
sensitive, next-generation drug-deployment vehicles.
One way to monitor the changes in spatiotemporal
responsiveness to therapeutics has involved analyzing
the wound-bed genome [31-34], transcriptome [35-38]
and proteome [35,39] for clues as to what genes are
active, and when and where. Another approach involves
evaluating changes in endogenous gene expression noninvasively and in real time [40-42]. To this end, we have
shown that it is possible to monitor non-invasively any
changes in vascularization and permeability after grafting [22], and that both endogenous and exogenous gene
expression can be monitored noninvasively after placement of tissue grafts [21]. Because the identification of
when and where drug targets are expressed defines the
parameters of spatiotemporal delivery, we sought to
describe two endpoints, angiogenesis and inflammation,
to guide our drug-delivery efforts.
In the present study, we tested whether combinatorial
tools such as phage display [43] could be used to help
design next-generation matrices capable of drug delivery.
If so, we reasoned that a genetic selection of active peptides might help identify unique classes of peptides with
different affinities and specificities, whose activities are
dependent, a priori, on the specific protocol used for
their selection. We first focused on characterizing the
dynamic nature of the endogenous gene expression in
the wound bed in an attempt to characterize aspects of
the temporal and spatial kinetics of tissue responsiveness.
We then focused on identifying specific peptide motifs
that could be deployed to target the graft with specific,
and presumably differential, affinities. In designing the
targeting strategy for these proof-of-concept experiments, we selected a clinically approved graft that is 1) in
wide use for both full-thickness burns and chronic
wounds, 2) a biosynthetic formulation that is stable at
room temperature, 3) suitable for combinatorial screening and 4) amenable to biopanning using phage display.
We show how an Integra®-based matrix that is a composite of modified type I bovine collagen and chondroitin
sulfate glycosaminoglycan (CS-GAG), can be used to
select for peptide targeting. Moreover, having previously
used this matrix to define the kinetics of vascular permeability and neovascularization in a full-thickness wound,
we show that there are temporal and spatial changes in
gene expression that accompany tissue repair, which

Page 2 of 16

specifically need targeting at different times and different
locations. These data provide the first systematic evaluation of phage display to identify peptide motifs for
biotherapeutic targeting to the wound bed. We also
describe the screening protocols used to detect, identify
and validate these peptides. The possibility that these
findings could serve as a foundation to evolve static synthetic matrices into dynamic grafts that provide temporal
and spatial control over drug delivery is discussed.

Results
We evaluated and subsequently deployed several strategies to identify peptides capable of interacting with the
Integra® matrices. These included the use of 1) two different peptide libraries as starting materials including the
PHD-C7C and PHD12 libraries; 2) different formulations
of the target including intact, solubilized or cryostatsectioned matrices for biopanning; 3) different elution
buffers including chondroitin sulfate, low pH and high
salt; and lastly 4) different blocking buffers including
bovine serum albumin (BSA), phosphate-buffered saline
containing 0.1% Tween (PBS-T), and non-fat milk (NFM)
to limit non-specific binding of phage These variations
would allow us to select particles that display different
classes of peptides with different affinities for the target
matrix. The approaches used are detailed in Table 1 and
summarized schematically in Figure 1.
Temporal and spatial assessment of vascular remodeling
and inflammation in vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor-luciferase and Smad 2/3 binding elementluciferae transgenic mice

To assess spatiotemporal control of angiogenesis, we
examined the activation of the vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor (VEGFR)2 gene (vegfr2) in a transgenic
mouse that expresses firefly luciferase under the regulation
of the VEGFR2 promoter. Whereas Zhang et al. [44] used
this model to assess contact sensitivity, we sought to
define the kinetics of VEGF-dependent responsiveness in a
full-thickness wound grafted with Integra® to determine
its correlation with the vascular remodeling seen in our
injury model [21,22]. Representative images of grafted
wounds in each of these mice localized VEGFR2-controlled luciferase gene expression to the rim of the wound,
with a peak of gene expression at 7 days (Figure 2A). As
expected from our previous immunohistochemical studies
[21,22], the localization of the vegfr2 gene expression in
the angiogenic rim corresponded to the region of most
active angiogenesis in these grafts. Over the 14-day period
in which these full-thickness wounds consolidated, contracted and healed, peak VEGFR2 promoter activation was
recorded on day 7 (Figure 2A). These observations suggest
that the VEGFR2 promoter activation of luciferase in
intact transgenic mice can be used as a model to both

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

Page 3 of 16

Table 1 Summarized biopanning strategies useda for the identification of Integra® (IT) matrix targeting peptides from
New England Biolabs libraries
Protocol

IT1BA

IT6BA

Target

Matrix

Sonicated Sonicated Sonicated Sonicated Sonicated Sections

IT6BAS

IT6BGC

IT7BA

IT7BCG

IT8BA

IT8BAS

IT8PA

IT8PAS

IT9MA

IT9PA

Sections Sections

Sections Sonicated Sonicated

Library

C7C

C7C

C7C

C7C

PHD12

PHD12

C7C

C7C

C7C

C7C

PHD12

PHD12

Block
Elution

BSA
Acid

BSA
Acid

BSA
Acid/salt

BSA
GAG

BSA
Acid

BSA
GAG

BSA
Acid

PO4
Acid

PO4
Acid

3 to 5

3

3

3

3

3

4

4

PO4
Acid/
salt
3

NFM
Acid

Selection
rounds
Colonies
analyzed

BSA
Acid/
salt
3

3

3

50

15

15

15

15

15

30

30

30

30

30

30

Peptide ID

Table
2

Table 2

Table 2

Table 2

Table 2

Table 2

Table 3

Table 3

Table 3

Table 3

Table 3

Table 3

Phylogeny

Figure
3

Figure 4A Figure 4A Figure 5A Figure 4B Figure 5B Figure
6A,C

Figure
6A

Figure 6B, Figure
D
6B

Figure 7

Figure 7

a
Four distinct strategies were evaluated (IT1, IT7, IT8 and IT9), which involved changing the blocking buffer (phosphate-buffered saline with Tween, bovine serum
albumin (BSA) and non-fat milk (NFM)), the elution conditions (acid, acid/salt and glaycosaminoglycan), the target (matrix, sonicated samples and thin sections)
and the number of rounds (three or four) of biopanning.

localize the distribution of vascular remodeling events and
quantify the kinetics of expression.
Signaling through the transforming growth factor
(TFF)-b and Smad 2/3 pathway, in contrast, has been
associated in various in vitro and in vivo models with
inflammation and scarring [45,46]. The binding element
for the Smad 2 and 3 transcription factors can be used to
monitor smad2/3 gene activation. Therefore, to determine the kinetics of activation of this pathway, we examined the activation of this Smad Binding Element (SBE)
promoter in a luciferase transgenic mouse after a fullthickness wound and graft. Results showed luciferase
activity at 3 days distributed across the wound bed,
which resolved by day 7 (Figure 2B). Quantification of

Figure 1 Summary of phage screening strategy. Libraries of
targeted phage were added to either intact matrix (IT1), sonicated
immobilized matrix (IT6, IT7 and IT9) or thin sections of matrix (IT8).
The blocking strategies with phosphate buffer (P04), bovine serum
albumin (BSA) or non fat milk (NFM) were deployed as indicated,
and eluates from samples treated with chondroitin sulfate, high salt
or high acid, which were processed over three to four rounds (R3,
R3/4) of selection before sequence analyses, were used.

the luciferase activity showed a peak as early as postoperative day 3 (the earliest day examined), which
declined through the 14-day time course. Whereas TGFb-Smad2/3 pathway signaling is generally associated with
scar formation, the determinants for which are thought
to be a late response of the wound bed, these data suggest that SBE signaling may be an early response.
Screening strategy for identification of matrix targeting
peptides

In light of the spatial and temporal changes seen in the
expression of endogenous genes after injury, we sought
to design a drug-immobilization strategy that would
enable biotherapeutic absorption at specific sites within
target matrices. It is our long-term goal to modulate
biotherapeutic affinities to matrices so as to introduce
intrinsic temporal and spatial control of biotherapeutic
release. With this end in mind, we designed and deployed
a multifaceted phage display screening strategy to identify
peptide motifs capable of differential binding to Integra®
matrices. By comparing the results obtained from PHDC7C and PHD12 phage libraries, we hoped to generate
different classes of linker candidates for biotherapeutic
delivery. By evaluating specific blocking and elution strategies, we reasoned that we could preferentially select
peptides with differential affinities and hence increase the
heterogeneity of the genetic selection of IT targeting peptide candidates. This overall strategy is described in Figure 1 and summarized in Table 1, and the identity of
peptides recovered is presented in Table 2 and Table 3.
Identification of matrix binding peptides eluted under
different conditions

The first series of experiments involved screening the
PHD-C7C library on intact Integra ® bilayer matrix

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Spatiotemporal localization of the host response to grafted injuries in transgenic reporter mice. Transgenic mice expressing
the firefly luciferase reporter under the regulation of either (A) the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 promoter or (B) the Smad
binding element promote were analyzed for the kinetics of the vascular remodeling and scarring response, respectively, 3, 7 and 14 days after
placement of a full-thickness Integra® graft. Transgenic expression of luciferase was imaged and bioluminescence quantified by selecting a
circular region of interest (ROI) at the grafting site and comparing it to an ROI at a site remote form the injury.

Table 2 Identification of Integra® (IT) matrix targeting peptides from libraries eluted by acid, acid salt and chondroitin
sulfatea
IT1b

R3 (pH 2)

IT6c
e

R3 (pH 2)

IT6

R (GAGd)

IT7c

R3 (pH 2)

IT7

R3 (GAG)

IT6-BA (Figure 4A)

BSA

IT6-CG (Figure 4B)

BSA

IT7-BA (Figure 5A)

BSA

IT7-CG (Figure 5B)

BSA

IT1 (Figure 3)

BSA

3.2

CTESAPYFC

A-1

CNPLHRQHC

CG-1

CLSTSSKSC

BA-1

HWHDWMWSWRRD

CG-1

AYYPQNHKSNAE

3.4

CPDANNGNC

A-2

CFKHSSHQC

CG-2

CLSTSSKSC

BA-2

SMWPWYYSQWAR

CG-2

APQYQHNQATHT

3.7

CNMAQTNMC

A-3

CPPTPLSLC

CG-3

CLSTSSKSC

BA-3

TLGDRYSTKHPI

CG-3

SITWTHHPGALQ

3.8

CPNANLGTC

A-4

CINASKPLC

CG-4

CQTSANTQC

BA-4

SFSTMNTAPGGS

CG-4

AGLHPRSLESLP

4.2
4.3

CINSFYAQC
CKSAISSSC

A-5
A-6

CNRMVQPMC
CNLALTQAC

CG-5
CG-6

CGVPAGSTC
CLSTSSKSC

BA-5
BA-7

WYMPWWSAGQAA
QKKIRKRPHVKR

CG-5
CG-6

HPGNRSLDPLNH
LLADTTHHRPWT

4.4

CVPQYSSQC

A-7

CFKHSSHQC

CG-7

CLSTSSKSC

BA-8

GAFHKHHHARLI

CG-7

ATGKPTRLESHV

4.5

CQPKAVNHC

A-8

CQEPRSNAC

CG-8

CLATKLHNC

BA-9

WYMPWWSAGQAA

CG-8

NPSNLYRQPAMT

4.7

CPVSPSGAC

A-9

CPSHHLESC

CG-9

CLSTSSKSC

BA-10

WNRSPLPDYGAA

CG-9

SKAHDISQRQPP

4.8

CSNASRPFC

A-10

CNPLHRQHC

CG-10

CDGVSTKHC

BA-11

SLWQRWFPVLDH

CG-10

VNRIPGENLSSP

4.10

CNPALSTHC

A-11

CSKTFPVRC

CG-11

CLSTSSKSC

BA-12

HWHDWMWSWRRD

CG-11

AYYPQNHKSNAE

4.13

CGKAGLPLC

A-12

CFKHSSHQC

CG-12

CLSTSSKSC

BA-13

DLALRNPTPSDP

CG-12

SNQPAPALFHQL

4.14
4.15

CPTHPPFQC
CESSAIRYC

AS-1

CFKHSSHQC

CG-13
CG-14

CIKNPTKYC
CLSTSSKSC

BA-14
BA-15

SHALPLTWSTAA
WHYNSWYRWPVM

CG-13
CG-14

YSPASKSPVPSL
SVSVGMKPSPRP

4.18

CNNGTSRLC

AS-2

CFKHSSHQC

CG-15

CMPSPSLK

-

-

CG-15

SVSVGMKPSPRP

4.19

CPSQTHPTC

AS-3

CTYPFHASC

-

-

-

-

-

-

4.20

CTNQQRHTC

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

a

The sequences of peptides isolated using the biopanning strategies IT1, IT6 and IT7 are presented along with their code numbers for reference.
IT1 was screened against intact matrix and only acid eluates were evaluated.
c
IT6 and IT7 used both acid and GAG elutions.
d
GAG = glycosaminoglycan.
e
BSA = bovine serum albumin.
b

IT8b

R3 (pH 2)

IT8

R3 (NaCl)

IT8

R3 (pH 2)

IT8

R3 (NaCl)

IT8

R4 (pH 2)

IT8

R4 (pH 2)

IT9c

R4 (pH 2)

BSA

IT8-BA

BSA

IT8-BAS

PO4

IT8-PA

PO4

IT8-PAS-

BSA

IT8-BA

PO4

IT8-PA-

NFM

IT9-MA

BAS1

CHMSPRHQS

Figure 6B
PA1
CVQSSTQHC

PAS4

CHVTAQRAC

Figure 6C
R4BA1

CKGPVSRHC

Figure 6D
R4PA1
CGKHDDTYC

Figure 7
MA1
HETFPSPRANSV

Figure 6A
BA1
CVPSSARIC
BA2

CRPHDSKAC

BAS2

CLPNKQWSC

PA2

CSGHHSLRC

PAS5

CATPEWPPC

R4BA2

CTTSSEHVC

R4PA2

CPTKDLRYC

MA2

BA3

CHPEPRSQC

BAS3

CKQPLNNTC

PA3

CPTSQQKVC

PAS6

CPNLMNTRC

R4BA3

CSTTMKTSC

R4PA3

CTSSGNRYC

MA3

HETFPSPRANSV
HETFPSPRANSV

BA4

CVEKRPRQC

BAS4

CTVTPRHLC

PA4

CNSTHPRAC

PAS8

CTKSSPPRC

R4BA4

CDNKRSPAC

R4PA4

CTIKTNLQC

MA4

HETFPSPRANSV

BA5

CFMDYRNLC

BAS5

CDNTSKTQC

PA5

CNRLESHLC

PAS9

CTQTTVASC

R4BA5

CKLNYPNAC

R4PA5

CHSTAKSAC

MA5

SQIDYATGPRQA

BA6

CSHSVQPFC

BAS6

CASTTAACC

PA6

CTNPHRSQC

PAS10

CDQSKTIAC

R4BA7

CQFSKSQSC

R4PA6

CPASKGDFC

MA6

WDTEKASPLSPL

BA7

CQTHNPRQC

BAS7

CLHMDKKRC

PA7

CTKTPWPGC

PAS11

CSRGSMGIC

R4BA8

CTLDTRRDC

R4PA8

CSHRVPHDC

MA7

HETFPSPRANSV

BA8
BA10

CDGAPAPLC
CKTDLQKQC

BAS8
BAS10

CMKTPMRSC
CYKHVGQRC

PA8
PA9

CNRLQGEHC
CPTPTGRYC

PAS12
PAS13

CSPIRGSMC
CSHTGHHQC

R4BA10
R4BA11

CPFSSSPSC
CPSMSHHQC

R4AP9
R4PA10

CHATPYPKC
CDSSRHTHC

MA8
MA10

HETFPSPRANSV
DHTGKSPGLFHN

BA11

CGPFPQPHC

BAS11

CHLSPFKSC

PA10

CVPTAMSNC

PAS14

CHEPTTMAC

R4BA12

CSASTQSFC

R4PA11

CSRLSQEYC

-

-

BA12

CSFHGPGPC

BAS12

CTTSKYRDC

PA11

CSLARPNEC

PAS15

CSRADLTTC

R4BA13

CPLKGLATC

R4PA12

CTGKQYPQC

-

-

BA13

CSTNQTPTC

BAS13

CTATGLSNC

PA12

CVRTPFSMC

-

-

R4BA14

CTGKPLKTC

R4PA13

CGMNAFRAC

A1

AHKHKHPGHITA

BA14

CSTSPONSC

BAS14

CPSSMPSRC

PA13

CNNTTPPSC

-

-

R4BA17

CIHMTGYHC

R4PA14

CGMNAFRAC

-

-

BA15

CKLIHNNSC

BAS15

CPATSHTHC

PA15

CTSQQKANC

-

-

R4BA21

CEMTETKHC

R4PA16

CTTKYSTTC

-

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

Table 3 Identification of Integra® (IT) matrix targeting peptides from peptide libraries after bovine serum albumin (BSA), phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
and non-fat milk (NFM) blockinga

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

R4BA26

CKENWPLIC

R4PA18

CSSDKALVC

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

R4BA30
-

CSNSPTTMC
-

R4PA24
R4PA25

CSPRSHLSC
CPPSPMPYC

-

-

a

The sequences of peptides pulled from the biopanning strategies IT8 and IT9 are presented along with their code numbers for reference.
IT8 was screened against matrix sonicated samples blocked with BSA or PBS-T, and the peptide sequences were generated from both acid and GAG elutions.
c
IT9 was biopanned from thin sections of matrix blocked with NFM or PBS-T, and only the acid/high salt eluates evaluated.
b

Page 5 of 16

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

wound dressings. As expected, the recovery of binding
particles during the four rounds of biopanning initially
decreased, but then subsequently increased 40-fold. We
identified two distinct motifs of peptides with this selection strategy: XAXSX and XTHPX (Table 2). The former (XXAXSXX) was detected in sequences recovered
from the third round of screening, and the latter
(XXTHPXX) was detected in the fourth round.
We performed a phylogenic analysis of these Integra®-targeting (IT) peptides, which identified one major
subfamily represented by peptides IT1-4.8 with two distal sequences (IT1, peptide 4.5 and IT1, peptide 4.20)
(Figure 3). Further selection in a fifth round failed to
enrich and found increased non-specific adsorption to
BSA blocking agents and further screening was discontinued (data not shown).
In IT6 and IT7 screens (Table 2), phages were eluted
with either low pH or by displacement with exogenous
chondroitin sulfate to obtain particles with different
binding capacities. The target for the biopanning was a
homogenized and sonicated Integra ® matrix that was
absorbed to ELISA plates (see Methods). This approach
was designed to minimize non-specific sequestration of
particles in the highly fenestrated matrix during the biopanning procedure. In one biopanning strategy (IT6),
we evaluated peptides recovered from a screen of the
PHD-C7C library described above. In a second biopanning set, we analyzed the PHD12 library of linear peptides 12 amino acids long (IT7). In both instances, we

Page 6 of 16

were able to recover peptides with distinct motifs, which
upon analyses collapsed into separate families (Figure
4A). For example, sequence collapse within the IT6 acid
eluate identified one main family of related peptides
represented by the sequence of IT6-A2 and a putative
consensus sequence of XKHSXH, whereas there were
two outlying peptides represented by IT6-A5 and IT6A11. Peptides eluted with acid/high salt fell into the
prime family of the ITA2 peptides recovered, suggesting
that the salt wash did not provide any selective advantage. Mining the PHD12 library under these same conditions showed more heterogeneity (Figure 4B) but the
sequences nevertheless collapsed to a prime sequence of
WMWS represented by the IT7-A1.
The collapse of selected peptides from the library is
perhaps best illustrated by the sequences obtained from
the chondroitin sulfate elutions in IT6. Of 15 sequences,
nine were identical and closely related (0.429) to others
(IT6-CG8) (Table 2; Figure 5A). The formatted alignments show the importance of Ser/Thr in the selection
of these peptides. This was less obvious in the collapse
of the PHD12 library in the third round of selection by
chondroitin sulfate elution (Figure 5B). Whereas there
was one main family of related peptides represented by
IT7-3CG, the motif seemed to revolve around the positive charge of histidine (XTHHX) rather then the presence of a hydroxyl group of serine or threonine, yet
there are similar alignments in XXLESXX, such as
IT7-CG6.

Figure 3 Phylogenic tree of peptide targeting candidates biopanned from IT1 (PHD-C7C) library screening on intact matrices. Peptide
sequences were obtained after the third and fourth rounds of screening, and analyzed for structural relatedness, using MacVector sequence
analysis software. Recovery of particles increased 40-fold over four rounds.

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

Page 7 of 16

Figure 4 Phylogenic tree of peptide targeting candidates using acid elution of partially solubilized matrix sonicated samples. Peptide
sequences were obtained after the third round of screening using (A) the IT6 protocol, which biopanned using the PHD-C7C library or (B) the
IT7 protocol, which used the PHD12 library as starting material. In both instances, the phage were recovered from the acid eluates of washed
sonicated samples. Sequences were analyzed for structural relatedness using MacVector sequence analysis software. Library collapse was
reflected by an increased recovery of 300-fold in IT7 over the three rounds of biopanning.

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

Page 8 of 16

Figure 5 Phylogenic tree of peptide targeting candidates using chondroitin sulfate elution from matrix sonicated samples. Peptide
sequences were obtained after the third round of screening using (A) the IT6 protocol, which biopanned using the C7C library or (B) the IT7
protocol, which used the PHD12 library as starting material. In both instances the phage were recovered from the chondroitin sulfate (CS)glycosaminoglycan (GAG) eluates of washed sonicated matrix samples, which contained CG to remove bound peptides. Sequences were
analyzed for structural relatedness using MacVector sequence analysis software. Library collapse was indicated by an increased recovery of
400-fold in IT7 over the three rounds of biopanning.

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

Identification of matrix-targeting peptides under different
blocking conditions

There was concern that if the IT6 and IT7 protocols
above were adapted to evaluate the yields from PHDC7C and PHD12 libraries, respectively, on sonicated
matrix homogenates, selection bias in the combinatorial
screens could be generated by the blocking buffer and
not just by virtue of sequestration within the matrix, as
suspected with IT1 peptides. To address this possibility,
we evaluated the identity of binding peptides selected
onto thin (10 μm) sections of matrix. Reasoning that
thin sections would minimize sequestration within the
matrix fenestrations, crysostat = processed matrices
were used for biopanning. The results from the four
approaches are presented in Table 3. Both the acid and
acid/salt eluates of PHD-C7C biopanning in the presence of bovine serum albumin (BSA) identified 14 peptides, which by phylogenic analyses were related, except
for two sequences (Figure 6A). Within this family of
sequences there were two subfamilies with the consensus sequences XSTSXQX and SXSXH, represented by
peptides IT8-3A4 and IT8-3A2, respectively. There was
less homology when the biopanning was performed in
the absence of BSA (Table 3) and there were three
families identified, of which one further segregated into
acid and acid/salt motifs (Figure 6B). With a fourth
round of screening, the peptides eluting with acid from
BSA-blocked sections (Table 3) collapsed further to
reveal the XXSXSXSX motif found in peptide IT84A10,

Page 9 of 16

whereas the non-blocking fourth-round sequences collapsed towards a similar SSXXTY sequence illustrated
by IT8-4B3 (Figure 6C).
To further address possible biopanning bias that might
be introduced by BSA blocking, we compared the
screening selection with and without NFM when biopanning against the PHD12 library. After three rounds
of processing in IT9, libraries collapsed to the extent
that seven of 10 of sequences corresponded to one peptide (HETFPSPRANSV) in the NFM-blocked samples,
which also had the XSXXXSX consensus (Figure 7A,B).
All 20 sequences obtained from the non-blocked screen
corresponded to a sequence not found in previous
screens (AHKHKHPGHITA) (Table 3). Phylogenic analyses of the peptides showed that the linkages between
the peptides identified could be divided into three
classes that, as in other cases, were represented by a
central core group of related peptides and two distally
related sequences. Their distal sequences corresponded
to outliers of the NFM-blocking and non-blocking
screens, respectively.
Evaluation of candidate peptides for binding capacity

The strategy to confer temporal and spatial control to
drug release on the matrices involves the use of peptides
with differential affinities to components of the deployed
graft. To this end, we evaluated peptide binding to the
matrix relative to controls by direct incubation onto the
target. Representative results for different targeting

Figure 6 Phylogenic tree of peptide targeting candidates eluted after bsa or no blocking of matrix sections. Peptide sequences were
obtained after (A,B) the third and (C,D) fourth (rounds of screening using the IT8 (PHD-C7C Library) biopanning protocol that used a low pH
elution (pH2.2) of 10 μm matrix sections that were either (A,C) blocked or (B,D) not with bovine serum albumin. Phage were isolated from single
colonies, and the sequences of the peptide inserts (Table 3) were analyzed for structural relatedness using MacVector sequence analysis software.

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

Figure 7 Phylogenic tree of peptide targeting candidates
eluted after non-fat milk (NFM) or no blocking of matrix
sonicated samples. Peptide sequences were obtained after the
third round of screening using the IT9 (PHD 12) protocol, with NFM
used to block the non-specific binding to sonicated matrix. All 30
clones analyzed in the NFM-free assay corresponded to a single
peptide of 12 amino acids: AHKHKPGHITA. Structural relatedness
using MacVector sequence analysis software. Recovery of increased
800-fold in IT9 biopanning.

peptides are presented in Figure 8. The initial screen
involved direct binding analyses of the targeted particles
as illustrated for the IT8 peptides recovered in the presence or absence of blocking BSA (Figure 8A). Under
the ELISA conditions used (see Methods), background
binding was low and there was an approximately 105
increase in binding. Although all of the peptides selected
as candidates showed specific binding, some (for example, IT8-R4PA21) seemed to have greater capacity. This
affinity is evaluated in dose response curves which,
showed a dose -dependent increase in binding that
reflects the affinity the peptides confer to the particles
(Figure 8B). In this specific example, binding of peptides
selected by chondroitin sulfate displacement was evaluated in an ELISA using the glycosaminoglycan to capture targeted phage. Although there was a 10 5 -fold
increase in saturable binding, the affinities were narrow
and detectable over a two- to three-fold change in concentrations. In-depth analysis of specificity, capacity,
affinity and avidity of all the peptide candidates is
underway on matrix, sonicated samples and GAGcoated plates to select targeting leads for evaluation in
preclinical studies.
Validation of peptides on intact matrix

Although changes in affinity might meet the long-term
goal to confer temporal control over delivery, we also
wanted to establish whether the targeting peptides could
be compatible with spatial control. To this end, we sought
to decorate matrices so that they could be designed for
drug delivery in a spatially relevant manner, for example
in the angiogenic ring described in Figure 2A. Targeted
phage can be placed onto sections so as to absorb to

Page 10 of 16

specific loci (Figure 8C). In the case of targeting VEGFR2,
particles were placed in the periphery of the matrix. In
one example (Figure 8C, number 2) the peptide IT6-A7,
derived form the PHD-C7C library and with the sequence
CFKHSSHQC displayed on the phage, was placed as parallel lines on sections, and the lines were clearly visualized
by immunohistochemistry. In another example (Figure 8C,
number3), we demonstrated focal immobilization and
hence, potential for targeting specific loci with the IT6-A7
particle, identified from the PHD12 library, with the targeting sequence SQIDYATGPRQA displayed on the
phage. When placed as points on sections, the position
(lower left corner) of the IT6-A7 particle was clearly visualized by immunohistochemistry. This spatial immobilization, coupled with the temporal differences in binding
conferred by differential affinities, provides the first step
towards the design of spatially and temporally controlled
drug delivery from matrices.

Discussion
In this paper, we provide data supporting the use of phage
display to identify targeting peptides for Integra®, a surgical dressing used for the treatment of full-thickness burns
and wounds and approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration. We evaluated several conditions for phage
targeting of the grafting material including 1) different
starting peptide libraries, 2) different elution strategies,
3) different blocking strategies and 3) different formulations of the matrix material to facilitate selection of peptides with different binding characteristics. Although our
study focused on the use of Integra® as a matrix product,
any matrix formulation could be subjected to similar evaluation and explored for possible targeting peptides. In
fact, it is possible that alternative proteins to CS-GAG
may have peptide sequences with widely different affinities. To this end, it is important to note that the peptides
identified here represent first-generation sequences that
can be optimized and converted to leads by further
exploration of their affinities, specificities and relative elution characteristics.
We demonstrate an application of phage display
towards mining the range of various binding sites presumably present in a collagen-glycosaminoglycan matrix
such as Integra ® . Further investigation is needed to
determine whether these binding motifs can be used for
the design of modified biotherapeutics to complement
the biologic activity of cutaneous wound healing and tissue repair. Thus, although the biologic significance of
these binding sites remains to be determined in vivo,
the identification of these candidate motifs is a necessary first step towards the design of spatiotemporal
matrix-deployed biotherapeutics.
Integra® is an engineered bilayer matrix that consists
primarily of GAG with denatured bovine collagen. This

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

Page 11 of 16

Figure 8 Peptide screening, dose-response analyses and spatial immobilization of targeted particles onto intact matrices. Using the
methods described in the text, individual phage were tested for either their ability to bind to immobilized components (for example,
chondroitin sulfate, collagen 4, bovine serum albumin or to sonicated matrix samples, as illustrated by (A) binding of IT8 peptides to
immobilized chondroitin sulfate or (B) dose-response analyses to specific peptides binding to sonicated matrix samples immobilized in ELISA
wells. Spatial binding to matrix sections was established by placing targeted particles as (C) continuous lines along two sides (sample 2) or as a
dot (sample 3). Phosphate-buffered saline alone was negative (sample 1). In all instances, binding of particles was assessed by
chemiluminescence.

acellular synthetic dressing has clinical applications in
full-thickness burn injury and wounds, and more limited
uses in tissue regeneration. The capacity to combine the
use of such a wound dressing with a molecular technique such as phage display presents the possibility of
designing strategies that can exploit the different pharmacokinetic properties of the peptides identified. For
example, we anticipate that a slow and stable release of
growth factors, cytokines and other remodeling factors
could be used to modulate the natural course of tissue
repair. The matrix would act to stabilize the delivery of
the pharmaceutical at the site of the wound bed in the
precise location at which its activity can most influence
wound healing (that is, angiogenic factors on the periphery
and superficial surfaces of the matrix, and scar-limiting

factors throughout). When key events in wound repair
occur, such as granulation tissue growth and protease
release into the matrix, local conditions would allow the
release of the pharmaceutical drug into the wound to facilitate healing. Additionally, pharmaceuticals could be
designed that would be released when exposed to wound
exudates, leading to the protease-mediated degradation of
substances that impede wound healing. Alternatively, the
targeting peptides could be used to target nanoparticles,
liposomes and viruses to matrices for gene delivery to the
wound bed.
Phage display is a widely used combinatorial technique
that has been used extensively since its discovery
25 years ago by Smith [47]. Numerous groups have used
it to identify interacting peptides and their binding

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

partners in simple, complex and even in vivo environments [29,43,48-59], but to our knowledge, it has never
been deployed for graft targeting per se, although a
number of integrin targeting peptides have been identified and exploited [51,54,60,61]. Phage display has also
been used to identify binding peptides for stem cells,
immune cells, bacteria and recombinant proteins [43],
and of particular interest to the studies described here,
clotted plasma [57]. In this latter study, clotted plasma,
an essential element of wound closure, was subjected to
phage-library screening to identify peptide motifs that
localized to the injured tissue and fibrin/fibronectincontaining tumors. Although our studies focused more
on the experimental conditions for peptide identification
than the specific binding motifs for a biosynthetic
matrix, it is clear that the integrity of these motifs
within a wound bed are changing and undergoing active
remodeling, and may be altered. Accordingly, phage display may also be used to identify changes in binding
sites as they change in the wound bed, by combining
the approach described here with protocols involving in
vivo biopanning paradigms, used by other laboratories
[48,58,59]. This work is currently underway in our
laboratories.
Although we began with the goal of using the discovered peptides for drug delivery to the wound bed from
matrices, retargeted bacteriophages themselves may have
intrinsic utility. There is a growing interest in the use of
phage in the wound bed to control infection and biofilm
development [62,63]. Indeed, Markoishvili et al [15]
developed a novel sustained-release matrix using biodegradable polyester amides that are impregnated with
bacteriophage and antibiotics to show efficacy in the
management of infected venous stasis ulcers and other
poorly healing wounds. Whether the peptides identified
by phage display could enhance these sustained-release
pharmacokinetics remains to be established. If so, they
would require minimal reformulation. There are also
significant advantages to the concept of using phage display peptides in the same structural context in which
they were originally identified (that is, on the particle).
It is for these very reasons that phage-based vectors for
gene delivery have been put forth for development
[64-66].
As emphasized by the changes we describe in the temporal and spatial distribution of VEGFR2 and SBE promoter activity after grafting (Figure 2), it is particularly
apparent that one of the major hurdles faced by the field
of tissue repair and regeneration is pharmacokinetic: different agents need to be delivered to different places at
different times, depending on the state of repair [6,9,12].
This is a formidable challenge to regenerative sciences,
because different agents also have different functions,
depending on the context in which they are recognized

Page 12 of 16

by the cell. It is in view of this intrinsic complexity that
deployment of a combinatorial method such as phage
display to a combinatorial problem such as wound healing presents a novel approach to the clinical problem of
tissue repair. It is interesting to speculate that emerging
technologies such as in vivo biopanning may help exploit
the intrinsic complexity of the wound-healing response
for drug deployment. The studies presented here present
a combinatorial approach towards targeting that uses traditional biopanning and peptide-selection techniques of
phage display. Whether or not these techniques or other
combinatorial methods (for example, using directed evolution) might enable the design and creation of the nextgeneration matrices remains to be determined. In the
meantime, it will be important to evaluate the potential
of matrix-targeting peptide candidates such as those
described here for their utility in spatiotemporal drug
delivery to the wound bed.

Conclusions
We demonstrate how phage-display technologies can be
used to identify peptide sequences that interact with
Integra® grafting matrices. We show that when multiple
strategies are deployed in different classes of screening
assays, they identify different classes of targeting
peptides, which may each have differential value in the
temporal-spatial targeting of drugs, biotherapeutics and
nanoparticles to the wound bed.
Methods
Characterization of gene expression after full-thickness
injury
Mouse graft model

All procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee at University of California, San
Diego. Mice were anesthetized with isoflourane, then the
dorsum of the animal was shaved to clear the field of fur
and the surgical site prepared using aseptic techniques.
A full-thickness circular wound measuring 15 mm in diameter was marked to the right of midline using a standard
template, and the skin, subcutaneous tissue and fascia
were excised. Integra® grafts of 15 mm in diameter were
cut from aseptic sheets and secured in place with approximately seven 3-0 silk sutures. Immediately after surgery,
animals received 1.4 ml normal saline resuscitation and
0.05 mg/kg buprenorphine subcutaneously. Animals were
allowed to recover under observation, returned to the
vivarium, checked daily and maintained in a 12-hour light/
dark cycle with free access to food and water.
Transgenic mouse models of gene expression

Male transgenic mice expressing firefly luciferase under
the regulation of SBE (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor,
ME, USA) and transgenic mice expressing firefly luciferase under the regulation of the VEGFR2 promoter (kind

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

gift of Dr. J. Molkentin; PMID 14656927) were used.
The mice ranged in age from eight to 16 weeks old, and
were handled as described previously [21].
Non-invasive in vivo imaging of gene expression during
wound healing

Mice were anesthetized with isofluorane and given intraperitoneal injection with 1.5 mg of the substrate D-luciferin
(Caliper Life Sciences, Hopkinton, MA, USA) in 150 μl saline. After a 5-minute incubation to obtain steady-state
kinetics of substrate distribution, the still-anesthetized mice
were imaged (Lumina CCD Imaging System’ Caliper Life
Sciences) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Exposure-matched images were acquired (Living
Image software, version 3.0; Caliper Life Sciences). All animal images shown in this study were exposure-matched
(that is, matching color bar upper and lower limits in each
panel). Regions of interest (ROI) showing bioluminescence
in the wound area and matched sizes in the flank were
used for image acquisition [21]. Each image was quantified
in units of photons/sec/cm2 /steradian to obtain a fold
change as defined by wound divided by control ROI signal.
Images were collected on days 3, 7 and 14 after grafting.
Phage display libraries

As specifically indicated in Table 1, one of two commercial peptide libraries (New England Biolabs, Ipswich,
MD, USA) were used. These libraries consisted of either
1) a disulfide-constrained heptapeptide (PHD-C7C) or
2) a dodecapeptide (PHD12) library. The randomized
peptide segment of the PHD-C7C library is flanked by a
pair of cysteine residues, which results in the display
having peptide loops rather than linear sequences. All of
the libraries have reported complexities in excess of 2 ×
109 independent clones, and are displayed at the N-terminus of the minor coat protein pIII on M13 phage, at
a valency of five peptides per virion. Unlike the PHD12
libraries, the first randomized position in the PHD-C7C
library is preceded by Ala-Cys, and all of the libraries
contain a short linker sequence (Gly-Gly-Gly-Ser)
between the displayed peptide and pIII.
Biopanning strategies for matrix binding peptide
identification
Screening protocol 1: Intact matrix biopanning using
different elution strategies

The first protocols (IT1) (Table 1; Figure 1) involved
screening the PHD-C7C library on intact Integra® bilayer
matrix wound dressings (catalog number BMW4101, lot
number 465012B; Integra®) that were first cut to fit into
24-well cell culture plates. Non-specific binding to these
membranes was blocked by an overnight incubation with
5 mg/ml of BSA in PBS-T at 4°C. The following day, the
blocking buffer was aspirated and washed in PBS-T. As
indicated, the matrices were then incubated for 1 hour at

Page 13 of 16

room temperature with 2 × 1012 wild type M13 phage
[66,67] in 1% BSA to further block non-specific phage
particle binding and enhance biopanning for displayed
peptides. After washing these blocked matrices three
times with PBS-T, 2 × 1011 particles from the PHD-C7C
library were added for 1 hour at room temperature in 1%
BSA. Matrices were then processed with four washes of
1) PBS-T, 2) salt (0.5 mol/l NaCl) or 3) 0.2 mol/l glycinePBS (pH 2.2) in 1% BSA. Particles remaining in the
matrix were homogenized, and the recovered phage from
each eluate was amplified, titered and further processed
for the next round of screening. This process was
repeated four times, after which the peptides were
sequenced. Recoveries increased 40-fold over four rounds
of biopanning.
Screening protocol 2: dissociated matrix biopanning

IT6 and IT7 were adapted from the protocol described
above but used the PHD-C7C and PHD12 libraries,
respectively, on sonicated matrix homogenates instead of
intact matrix. This biopanning was specifically designed
to address the high non-specific background seen with
protocol 1, presumably a result of sequestration in the
fenestrations of the intact matrix. First, 24-well plates
were coated with 100 ul of dissociated Integra®, which
was prepared by homogenizing a 30 × 40 mm matrix in
50 ml PBS at 4°C, and adding 100 μl of a 1:5 diluent to
coat wells overnight at °C. The following day, the wells
were washed with PBS-T and blocked by the addition of
0.1% BSA in PBS-T for 1 hour at room temperature.
After washing four times with PBS-T, phage was added
for 1 hour at room temperature. Unbound particles were
removed with further washes, and binding assessed with
and without 0.2 mol/l glycine (pH 2.2) acid wash to evaluate binding affinity. Phage that acquired binding capacity were collected at the first round using 1) chondroitin
sulfate 100 μg/mL in PBS, 2) 0.2 mol/l glycine in 1% BSA
or 3) 0.2 mol/l glycine/0.5 mol/l NaCl washes, or from
the particles bound to matrix after all washes. Each collection was then cycled through three or four more
rounds of selection using the appropriate elution strategy
(Table 1), and peptide sequences obtained to monitor
library collapse to binding sequences.
Screening protocol 3: cryostat section biopanning

The third protocol deployed (IT8) was developed to
identify binding peptides capable of binding directly to
matrices, avoiding bias for the selection of peptide
sequestration while retaining in situ biopanning on
matrix sections. To this end, matrices were frozen in
optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound, and
10 μm sections were prepared using a cryostat and then
placed onto frozen slides. These sections were thawed,
washed and incubated with the PHD-C7C library as
described in protocol 1, and the bound phage eluted
from sections with 1) chondroitin sulfate, 2) high salt

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

(0.5 mol/l NaCl) or (3) 0.2 mol/l glycine (pH 2.2) in 1%
BSA. The particles obtained in rounds 3 and 4 were
used for sequencing.
Protocol 4: biopanning with and without NFM blocking

To address the possibility that selection bias was introduced by the nature of the blocking buffer, NFM was
evaluated as a blocking agent in the IT9 screen to minimize non-specific binding. The profile of the targeting
peptide candidates recovered was then compared with
the use of PBS-T blocking buffer alone. In these experiments, the sonicated samples were processed into assay
plates as above, but were either blocked during the preincubation with 1% non-fat milk in PBS-T, or with PBST alone. After 1 hour incubation with the PHD-C7C
libraries, unbound peptides were removed with four
PBS-T, washes and bound phage were eluted with either
0.2 mol/l glycine (pH 2.2) in 1% BSA or 0.2 mol/l glycine/0.5 mol/l NaCl to distinguish different classes of
binding peptides that would have different affinities and
different kinetics of release from intact grafts.
DNA sequencing, peptide sequence deduction, homology
and phylogeny analyses

DNA sequencing to deduce the peptide inserts encoded
between the Kpn1/Acc65 1 and Eag 1 restriction sites was
performed as described by the manufacturer (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA). Single-strand phage was
prepared with a commercial kit (Spin M13 Kit; Qiagen,
Valencia, CA, USA). After quantification of yields on agarose gels, DNA sequencing was performed using primers
supplied by the manufacturer (CAACAAATCGTTTTAG
GGTATGT) and (GCAATGCGATTGATACTCCCG).
Data was analyzed using MacVector (Eastman Chemical
Co., New Haven, CT, USA) and Vector NTI sequence
analysis programs (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).
ELISA and IT peptide validation

To characterize the binding specificity of candidate IT
peptides, we developed modified ELISAs using both 96well and 24-well microtiter plate formats. Plates were
coated with 100 μl of dissociated Integra® (prepared by
homogenizing a 30 × 40 mm matrix in 50 ml PBS at 4°C
and adding 100 μL of PBS-T diluent (1:5)) to coat wells
overnight at 4°C. The following day, the wells were
washed with PBS-T, and non-specific binding blocked by
the addition of 0.1% BSA, non-fat milk or no protein in
PBS-T for 1 hour at room temperature. After washing
the wells four times with PBS-T, candidate phage were
added for 1 hour at room temperature. Unbound particles were removed with further washes with PBS-T.
Bound phage were detected by incubation for 2 hours
with a horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated antiM13 antibody (1:5000; MoBiTek, Gottingen, Germany),
four washes with PBS-T and development of the HRP

Page 14 of 16

signal with chemiluminescence (Chemiglo; Alpha Innotech, San Leandro CA, USA).
To demonstrate spatially controlled binding of targeted particles, matrices were evaluated by imaging sections prepared in OCT. Negative controls (PBS) or
targeted particles were deposited onto matrices in 5 μl
PBS (1013 particles/ml) as either a dot or a continuous
line, and allowed to bind for 90 minutes at room temperature. After rinsing and blocking with 0.1%milk in
PBS-T for 1 hour, the sections were incubated with
anti-M13 HRP-conjugated antibody (1:5000) for 1 hour
at room temperature. Signal was detected using chemiluminescence and visualized (IVIS Lumina Xenogen
Imaging system; Caliper Biosciences).
Statistical analysis

The change of bioluminescence after luciferin injection
in wounds was analyzed in at least four animals in each
group at each time point to obtain statistical significance. Student’s t-test was used to analyze the data, and
P < 0.05 was considered significant.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Emelie Amburn, Alexandra Borboa, Jasmine Chukwueke,
Niti Randhawa and Shuman Sun for excellent technical assistance. We thank
Mr John Fitzgerald for preparation of the figures and Drs Michael
Pierschbacher (San Diego, Ca) and Marc Gottlieb (Phoenix, Az) for their
insight and helpful suggestions. This research was supported by the National
Institutes of Health grants P20-GM078421(AB), EY018479 (AB) and HL73396
(BE) and the CDMRP BC073891(AB)
Author details
1
Department of Surgery, Division of Trauma, Surgical Critical Care and Burns,
University of California San Diego School of Medicine, 200 W. Arbor Dr., San
Diego, CA 92103-8236 USA. 2MabVax Therapeutics, Inc., 11588 Sorrento
Valley Rd, Suite 20, San Diego, CA 92121 USA. 3College of Medical and
Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT,
UK. 4Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies, 3550 General Atomics Court,
San Diego, CA 92121-1122 USA.
Authors’ contributions
RS performed the phage biopanning, screening and sequencing
experiments, and contributed to the manuscript. CYP performed the
validation experiments and contributed to the manuscript. AMG assisted in
design selection, protocols for analyses and interpretation of data. BMM
contributed to the conception, design and coordination of the study. BP
coordinated sample acquisition and assisted with experimental design. RC
contributed to the coordination and design of the study, and the editing of
the manuscript. BE contributed to the conception, design and coordination
of the study, and performed the in vivo experiments. AB conceived of the
study, and contributed to the conception, design and coordination of the
work, and the writing and revising of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Declaration of competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 17 June 2010 Accepted: 17 February 2011
Published: 17 February 2011
References
1. Chan ES, Lam PK, Liew CT, Lau HC, Yen RS, King WW: A new technique to
resurface wounds with composite biocompatible epidermal graft and
artificial skin. J Trauma 2001, 50:358-362.

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

Clayman MA, Clayman SM, Mozingo DW: The use of collagenglycosaminoglycan copolymer (Integra®) for the repair of hypertrophic
scars and keloids. J Burn Care Res 2006, 27:404-409.
Gravvanis AI, Tsoutsos DA, Iconomou T, Gremoutis G: The use of integra®
artificial dermis to minimize donor-site morbidity after suprafascial
dissection of the radial forearm flap. Microsurgery 2007, 27:583-587.
Mis B, Rolland E, Ronfard V: Combined use of a collagen-based dermal
substitute and a fibrin-based cultured epithelium: a step toward a total
skin replacement for acute wounds. Burns 2004, 30:713-719.
Schneider J, Biedermann T, Widmer D, Montano I, Meuli M, Reichmann E,
Schiestl C: Matriderm versus Integra®: a comparative experimental study.
Burns 2009, 35:51-57.
Chen RR, Silva EA, Yuen WW, Brock AA, Fischbach C, Lin AS, Guldberg RE,
Mooney DJ: Integrated approach to designing growth factor delivery
systems. FASEB J 2007, 21:3896-3903.
Hall H: Modified fibrin hydrogel matrices: both, 3D-scaffolds and local
and controlled release systems to stimulate angiogenesis. Curr Pharm
Des 2007, 13:3597-3607.
Huang S, Fu X: Naturally derived materials-based cell and drug delivery
systems in skin regeneration. J Control Release 2009.
Silva EA, Mooney DJ: Spatiotemporal control of vascular endothelial
growth factor delivery from injectable hydrogels enhances angiogenesis.
J Thromb Haemost 2007, 5:590-598.
Wilcke I, Lohmeyer JA, Liu S, Condurache A, Kruger S, Mailander P,
Machens HG: VEGF(165) and bFGF protein-based therapy in a slow
release system to improve angiogenesis in a bioartificial dermal
substitute in vitro and in vivo. Langenbecks Arch Surg 2007,
392:305-314.
Zisch AH, Zeisberger SM, Ehrbar M, Djonov V, Weber CC, Ziemiecki A,
Pasquale EB, Hubbell JA: Engineered fibrin matrices for functional display
of cell membrane-bound growth factor-like activities: study of
angiogenic signaling by ephrin-B2. Biomaterials 2004, 25:3245-3257.
Cao L, Mooney DJ: Spatiotemporal control over growth factor signaling
for therapeutic neovascularization. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2007, 59:1340-1350.
Halstenberg S, Panitch A, Rizzi S, Hall H, Hubbell JA: Biologically
engineered protein-graft-poly(ethylene glycol) hydrogels: a cell adhesive
and plasmin-degradable biosynthetic material for tissue repair.
Biomacromolecules 2002, 3:710-723.
Marino P, Norreel JC, Schachner M, Rougon G, Amoureux MC: A polysialic
acid mimetic peptide promotes functional recovery in a mouse model
of spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol 2009, 219:163-174.
Markoishvili K, Tsitlanadze G, Katsarava R, Morris JG Jr, Sulakvelidze A: A
novel sustained-release matrix based on biodegradable poly(ester
amide)s and impregnated with bacteriophages and an antibiotic shows
promise in management of infected venous stasis ulcers and other
poorly healing wounds. Int J Dermatol 2002, 41:453-458.
Milleret V, Simonet M, Bittermann AG, Neuenschwander P, Hall H: Cytoand hemocompatibility of a biodegradable 3D-scaffold material
designed for medical applications. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater
2009, 91:109-121.
Berry M, Gonzalez AM, Clarke W, Greenlees L, Barrett L, Tsang W,
Seymour L, Bonadio J, Logan A, Baird A: Sustained effects of geneactivated matrices after CNS injury. Mol Cell Neurosci 2001, 17:706-716.
Gonzalez AM, Berlanga O, Leadbeater WE, Cooper-Charles L, Sims K,
Logan A, Eliceiri B, Berry M, Baird A: The deployment of adenoviruscontaining gene activated matrices onto severed axons after central
nervous system injury leads to transgene expression in target neuronal
cell bodies. J Gene Med 2009, 11:679-688.
Gonzalez AM, Berry M, Greenlees L, Logan A, Baird A: Matrix-mediated
gene transfer to brain cortex and dorsal root ganglion neurones by
retrograde axonal transport after dorsal column lesion. J Gene Med 2006,
8:901-909.
Gu DL, Nguyen T, Gonzalez AM, Printz MA, Pierce GF, Sosnowski BA,
Phillips ML, Chandler LA: Adenovirus encoding human platelet-derived
growth factor-B delivered in collagen exhibits safety, biodistribution,
and immunogenicity profiles favorable for clinical use. Mol Ther 2004,
9:699-711.
Peterson CY, Shaterian A, Borboa AK, Gonzalez AM, Potenza BM, Coimbra R,
Eliceiri BP, Baird A: The noninvasive, quantitative, in vivo assessment of
adenoviral-mediated gene delivery in skin wound biomaterials.
Biomaterials 2009, 30:6788-6793.

Page 15 of 16

22. Shaterian A, Borboa A, Sawada R, Costantini T, Potenza B, Coimbra R,
Baird A, Eliceiri BP: Real-time analysis of the kinetics of angiogenesis and
vascular permeability in an animal model of wound healing. Burns 2009,
35:811-817.
23. Calcutt NA, Jolivalt CG, Fernyhough P: Growth factors as therapeutics for
diabetic neuropathy. Curr Drug Targets 2008, 9:47-59.
24. Undas A, Celinska-Lowenhoff M, Stepien E, Nizankowski R, Tracz W,
Szczeklik A: Effects of simvastatin on angiogenic growth factors released
at the site of microvascular injury. Thromb Haemost 2006, 95:1045-1047.
25. Smith TJ, Khatcheressian J, Lyman GH, Ozer H, Armitage JO, Balducci L,
Bennett CL, Cantor SB, Crawford J, Cross SJ, et al: 2006 update of
recommendations for the use of white blood cell growth factors: an
evidence-based clinical practice guideline. J Clin Oncol 2006,
24:3187-3205.
26. Riedel K, Riedel F, Goessler UR, Holle G, Germann G, Sauerbier M: Current
status of genetic modulation of growth factors in wound repair. Int J
Mol Med 2006, 17:183-193.
27. Becker JC, Beckbauer M, Domschke W, Herbst H, Pohle T: Fibrin glue,
healing of gastric mucosal injury, and expression of growth factors:
results from a human in vivo study. Gastrointest Endosc 2005, 61:560-567.
28. Goldman R: Growth factors and chronic wound healing: past, present,
and future. Adv Skin Wound Care 2004, 17:24-35.
29. Smith PD, Polo M, Soler PM, McClintock JS, Maggi SP, Kim YJ, Ko F, Robson CM:
Efficacy of growth factors in the accelerated closure of interstices in
explanted meshed human skin grafts. J Burn Care Rehabil 2000, 21:5-9.
30. Anitua E: Plasma rich in growth factors: preliminary results of use in the
preparation of future sites for implants. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 1999,
14:529-535.
31. Cobb JP, Brownstein BH, Watson MA, Shannon WD, Laramie JM, Qiu Y,
Stormo GD, Morrissey JJ, Buchman TG, Karl IE, Hotchkiss RS: Injury in the
era of genomics. Shock 2001, 15:165-170.
32. Ganesan AK, Ho H, Bodemann B, Petersen S, Aruri J, Koshy S, Richardson Z,
Le LQ, Krasieva T, Roth MG, et al: Genome-wide siRNA-based functional
genomics of pigmentation identifies novel genes and pathways that
impact melanogenesis in human cells. PLoS Genet 2008, 4:e1000298.
33. Roy S, Khanna S, Yeh PE, Rink C, Malarkey WB, Kiecolt-Glaser J, Laskowski B,
Glaser R, Sen CK: Wound site neutrophil transcriptome in response to
psychological stress in young men. Gene Expr 2005, 12:273-287.
34. Tarran SL, Craft GE, Valova V, Robinson PJ, Thomas G, Markham R,
Langlois NE, Vanezis P: The use of proteomics to study wound healing: a
preliminary study for forensic estimation of wound age. Med Sci Law
2007, 47:134-140.
35. Jansen BJ, Schalkwijk J: Transcriptomics and proteomics of human skin.
Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic 2003, 1:326-341.
36. Roy S, Khanna S, Rink C, Biswas S, Sen CK: Characterization of the acute
temporal changes in excisional murine cutaneous wound inflammation
by screening of the wound-edge transcriptome. Physiol Genomics 2008,
34:162-184.
37. Roy S, Patel D, Khanna S, Gordillo GM, Biswas S, Friedman A, Sen CK:
Transcriptome-wide analysis of blood vessels laser captured from
human skin and chronic wound-edge tissue. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:14472-14477.
38. van Ruissen F, Jansen BJ, de Jongh GJ, Zeeuwen PL, Schalkwijk J: A partial
transcriptome of human epidermis. Genomics 2002, 79:671-678.
39. Kueh J, Richards M, Ng SW, Chan WK, Bongso A: The search for factors in
human feeders that support the derivation and propagation of human
embryonic stem cells: preliminary studies using transcriptome profiling
by serial analysis of gene expression. Fertil Steril 2006, 85:1843-1846.
40. Edinger M, Hoffmann P, Contag CH, Negrin RS: Evaluation of effector cell
fate and function by in vivo bioluminescence imaging. Methods 2003,
31:172-179.
41. Henriquez NV, van Overveld PG, Que I, Buijs JT, Bachelier R, Kaijzel EL,
Lowik CW, Clezardin P, van der Pluijm G: Advances in optical imaging and
novel model systems for cancer metastasis research. Clin Exp Metastasis
2007, 24:699-705.
42. Shah K, Weissleder R: Molecular optical imaging: applications leading to
the development of present day therapeutics. NeuroRx 2005, 2:215-225.
43. Smith GP, Petrenko VA: Phage Display. Chem Rev 1997, 97:391-410.
44. Zhang N, Fang Z, Contag PR, Purchio AF, West DB: Tracking angiogenesis
induced by skin wounding and contact hypersensitivity using a Vegfr2luciferase transgenic mouse. Blood 2004, 103:617-626.

Sawada et al. Fibrogenesis & Tissue Repair 2011, 4:7
http://www.fibrogenesis.com/content/4/1/7

45. Nakao A, Miike S, Hatano M, Okumura K, Tokuhisa T, Ra C, Iwamoto I:
Blockade of transforming growth factor beta/Smad signaling in T cells
by overexpression of Smad7 enhances antigen-induced airway
inflammation and airway reactivity. J Exp Med 2000, 192:151-158.
46. Hanada T, Yoshimura A: Regulation of cytokine signaling and
inflammation. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2002, 13:413-421.
47. Smith GP: Filamentous fusion phage: novel expression vectors that
display cloned antigens on the virion surface. Science 1985,
228:1315-1317.
48. Arap W, Kolonin MG, Trepel M, Lahdenranta J, Cardo-Vila M, Giordano RJ,
Mintz PJ, Ardelt PU, Yao VJ, Vidal CI, et al: Steps toward mapping the
human vasculature by phage display. Nat Med 2002, 8:121-127.
49. Brack SS, Silacci M, Birchler M, Neri D: Tumor-targeting properties of novel
antibodies specific to the large isoform of tenascin-C. Clin Cancer Res
2006, 12:3200-3208.
50. Koivunen E, Arap W, Rajotte D, Lahdenranta J, Pasqualini R: Identification of
receptor ligands with phage display peptide libraries. J Nucl Med 1999,
40:883-888.
51. Koivunen E, Gay DA, Ruoslahti E: Selection of peptides binding to the
alpha 5 beta 1 integrin from phage display library. J Biol Chem 1993,
268:20205-20210.
52. Lee SM, Lee EJ, Hong HY, Kwon MK, Kwon TH, Choi JY, Park RW, Kwon TG,
Yoo ES, Yoon GS, et al: Targeting bladder tumor cells in vivo and in the
urine with a peptide identified by phage display. Mol Cancer Res 2007,
5:11-19.
53. Muller OJ, Kaul F, Weitzman MD, Pasqualini R, Arap W, Kleinschmidt JA,
Trepel M: Random peptide libraries displayed on adeno-associated virus
to select for targeted gene therapy vectors. Nat Biotechnol 2003,
21:1040-1046.
54. Pasqualini R, Koivunen E, Ruoslahti E: A peptide isolated from phage
display libraries is a structural and functional mimic of an RGD-binding
site on integrins. J Cell Biol 1995, 130:1189-1196.
55. Pasqualini R, Ruoslahti E: Organ targeting in vivo using phage display
peptide libraries. Nature 1996, 380:364-366.
56. Petrenko VA, Smith GP, Mazooji MM, Quinn T: Alpha-helically constrained
phage display library. Protein Eng 2002, 15:943-950.
57. Pilch J, Brown DM, Komatsu M, Jarvinen TA, Yang M, Peters D, Hoffman RM,
Ruoslahti E: Peptides selected for binding to clotted plasma accumulate
in tumor stroma and wounds. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:2800-2804.
58. Rajotte D, Arap W, Hagedorn M, Koivunen E, Pasqualini R, Ruoslahti E:
Molecular heterogeneity of the vascular endothelium revealed by in
vivo phage display. J Clin Invest 1998, 102:430-437.
59. Trepel M, Arap W, Pasqualini R: In vivo phage display and vascular
heterogeneity: implications for targeted medicine. Curr Opin Chem Biol
2002, 6:399-404.
60. Koivunen E, Wang B, Ruoslahti E: Isolation of a highly specific ligand for
the alpha 5 beta 1 integrin from a phage display library. J Cell Biol 1994,
124:373-380.
61. Kraft S, Diefenbach B, Mehta R, Jonczyk A, Luckenbach GA, Goodman SL:
Definition of an unexpected ligand recognition motif for alphav beta6
integrin. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:1979-1985.
62. Cislo M, Dabrowski M, Weber-Dabrowska B, Woyton A: Bacteriophage
treatment of suppurative skin infections. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz)
1987, 35:175-183.
63. Rhoads DD, Wolcott RD, Kuskowski MA, Wolcott BM, Ward LS,
Sulakvelidze A: Bacteriophage therapy of venous leg ulcers in humans:
results of a phase I safety trial. J Wound Care 2009, 18:237-238, 240-233.
64. Burg MA, Jensen-Pergakes K, Gonzalez AM, Ravey P, Baird A, Larocca D:
Enhanced phagemid particle gene transfer in camptothecin-treated
carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 2002, 62:977-981.
65. Larocca D, Jensen-Pergakes K, Burg MA, Baird A: Receptor-targeted gene
delivery using multivalent phagemid particles. Mol Ther 2001, 3:476-484.
66. Larocca D, Kassner PD, Witte A, Ladner RC, Pierce GF, Baird A: Gene
transfer to mammalian cells using genetically targeted filamentous
bacteriophage. FASEB J 1999, 13:727-734.
67. Kassner PD, Burg MA, Baird A, Larocca D: Genetic selection of phage
engineered for receptor-mediated gene transfer to mammalian cells.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999, 264:921-928.

Page 16 of 16

doi:10.1186/1755-1536-4-7
Cite this article as: Sawada et al.: A phage-targeting strategy for the
design of spatiotemporal drug delivery from grafted matrices. Fibrogenesis
& Tissue Repair 2011 4:7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
