<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>FusionSeq: a modular framework for finding gene fusions by analyzing paired-end RNA-sequencing data</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-10-r104"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Andrea Sboner"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

METHOD

Open Access

FusionSeq: a modular framework for finding gene
fusions by analyzing paired-end RNA-sequencing
data
Andrea Sboner1,2†, Lukas Habegger1†, Dorothee Pflueger3, Stephane Terry3, David Z Chen1, Joel S Rozowsky2,
Ashutosh K Tewari4, Naoki Kitabayashi3, Benjamin J Moss3, Mark S Chee5, Francesca Demichelis3,6, Mark A Rubin3*†,
Mark B Gerstein1,2,7*†

Abstract
We have developed FusionSeq to identify fusion transcripts from paired-end RNA-sequencing. FusionSeq includes
filters to remove spurious candidate fusions with artifacts, such as misalignment or random pairing of transcript
fragments, and it ranks candidates according to several statistics. It also has a module to identify exact sequences
at breakpoint junctions. FusionSeq detected known and novel fusions in a specially sequenced calibration data set,
including eight cancers with and without known rearrangements.
Background
Deep sequencing approaches applied to transcriptome
profiling (RNA-Seq) are dramatically impacting our
understanding of the extent and complexity of eukaryotic transcription [1-4]. RNA-Seq provides a more accurate measurement of expression levels of genes and
more information about alternative splicing of their isoforms compared to other chip-based methods [1,4-10].
Large international consortia, such as the ENCODE
project [11] and the modENCODE project [12], are
exploiting this technology to obtain a better picture of
the transcriptome. More recently, RNA-Seq was applied
to the identification of fusion transcripts, where mRNAs
from two different genes are joined together [13-17].
Although the role of these chimeric transcripts is not
fully understood, some studies have shown that they
might be implicated in cancer [18,19]. Also, a fusion
transcript may indicate an underlying genomic rearrangement between the two genes. Such gene fusions are
thought to drive molecular events, such as in chronic
myelogenous leukemia, which is defined by the
* Correspondence: rubinma@med.cornell.edu; asbmg@gersteinlab.org
† Contributed equally
1
Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, 300
George Street, New Haven, CT 06511, USA
3
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

reciprocal translocation between chromosome 9 and 22
leading to a chimeric fusion oncogene (BCR-ABL1)
encoding a tyrosine kinase that is constitutively active.
Most gene fusions reported in the past have been
attributed to hematological cancers [20-22]. Recently,
recurrent fusions between the transmembrane protease
serine 2 (TMPRSS2) gene and members of the ETS
family of transcription factors (mainly the v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog (avian), ERG, and
the ets variant 1, ETV1) were reported in prostate cancer [23]. Other epithelial tumors, such as lung and
breast cancer, also harbor translocations [24-26].
Compared to DNA sequencing, RNA-Seq seems to
have less requirements in terms of overall coverage,
since it aims at sequencing only the regions of the genome that are transcribed and spliced into mature
mRNA, which current estimates set at about 2 to 6%.
However, this apparent advantage of RNA-Seq in practice is not so straightforward. Indeed, determining the
depth of sequencing needed to completely assess the
extent of transcription in complex organisms is complicated by the high dynamic range of gene expression, the
presence of alternatively spliced transcripts, and the biological condition of the transcriptome, that is, cell types
or environmental conditions [2].

© 2010 Sboner et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

State-of-the-art

RNA-Seq can be used effectively to detect fusion transcripts. Maher et al. [13] discovered novel fusion transcripts using single-end reads of various lengths. This
approach nominated multiple candidates such as
SLC45A3-ELK4, which was independently confirmed as
a common ‘read-through’ transcript identified in prostate cancer (that is, fusion transcripts resulting from two
nearby genes without any genomic rearrangement [19]).
This and other non-genomic events of adjacent or
neighboring genes appear to be common. Maher et al.
showed in principle how to use RNA-Seq to discover
fusion transcripts. They used two single-end sequencing
platforms, which is rather infeasible in terms of both
cost and labor efforts [13]. Since then, paired-end (PE)
RNA-Seq has been introduced and has received broader
attention for transcriptome profiling, bringing with it
great potential to accelerate fusion discoveries [14,15].
The concept of sequencing both ends of a fragment,
either cDNA or genomic DNA, was introduced in the
context of the identification of structural variants
[27-31]. Such events are among the basic mechanisms
generating fusion transcripts. The main advantage of PE
reads is that the connectivity information between the
sequenced ends is available. PE sequencing is thus the
obvious method to employ for identifying fusion transcripts. In a path-breaking study, Maher et al. [15] analyzed PE RNA-Seq data and demonstrated the feasibility
of this technology to confirm known gene fusions and
identify novel fusion transcripts. Their study also confirmed the need for a systematic analysis accounting for
computational complexity and statistical significance.
The method proposed, however, relies on the distance
between the two ends of a transcript fragment (insert
size). This idea, inspired by structural variant analysis,
cannot be directly translated to the transcriptome analysis in order to obtain an accurate description of all the
occurring events. The main reason is the complexity of
the transcription, and in particular the splicing of
introns, that can lead to read pairs spanning several
exons, as we describe in detail later.
Two more recent studies focus on the identification of
novel splice junctions from RNA-Seq data [32,33]. This
problem is related to the discovery of fusion transcripts
because, in principle, a ‘splice junction’ can indeed join
two different genes and thus suggest a fusion event.
Although these methods can, in principle, be applied to
the discovery of fusion transcripts, they mainly focus on
the mapping of the reads. They do not analyze the
impact of artifacts independent from the mapping procedure on the detection of fusion transcripts, such as
the random pairing of transcript fragments during sample preparation (see Materials and methods). These
tools also do not provide a means to summarize the

Page 2 of 19

results of the detection of potential fusion transcripts.
Finally, the experimenter would not have the flexibility
of using other mapping tools that may provide complementary information. Specifically, SplitSeek is currently
available only for AB/SOLiD [33].
To address these issues, we developed FusionSeq, a
novel computational suite whose aim is to detect candidate fusion transcripts by analyzing PE RNA-Seq data
[34]. FusionSeq is mapping-independent as much as
possible, such that it is not bound to a single platform
or mapping approach. It accounts for several sources of
errors in order to provide a high-confidence list of
fusion candidates, which are also scored by using several
statistics to prioritize experimental validation. FusionSeq
also includes tools to summarize and present its results
integrated into a web browser. Furthermore, we
sequenced an appropriate data set to calibrate this
approach, comprising mostly human prostate cancer tissues with and without known fusion events.

Results and discussion
Mapping the reads

The first step when dealing with next-generation
sequencing is the alignment of the reads against known
reference sequences. Here the main challenge is how to
map millions of reads in a computationally efficient way.
Several alignment tools have been developed and, since
this research field is quite active, it is likely that
improved or new tools will be introduced. In addition, a
variety of mapping strategies can be employed. As an
example, a splice junction library may be employed
along with the reference genome to identify reads bridging exons. Our goal is to develop a method that is
independent as much as possible from mapping strategies and alignment tools. As a test, we tried a variety of
alignment tools and approaches, all yielding consistent
results, thus demonstrating the robustness of FusionSeq
(Additional file 1). For simplicity, we here report the
results obtained by mapping the reads to the genome
with ELAND, the standard program supplied with the
Illumina platform (see Materials and methods). Table 1
reports the results of the mapping (details in Additional
file 1).
Overall modular framework

The overall schematic of our approach is depicted in
Figure 1. It consists of three modules.
Module 1: fusion transcript detection

This module only assumes that the PE reads have been
aligned and their location is known. It identifies the set
of candidate fusions from the mapped sequence reads.
Conceptually, it consists of three steps (Figure 1a): step
1, poor quality reads are removed; step 2, PE reads that
map to the same gene are considered part of the normal

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

Page 3 of 19

Table 1 Results of the alignment
Sample
ID

Type

Known fusion
type

Read size
(nt)

Total number of PE
reads

Mapped PE
reads

Percentage of mapped PE
reads

106_T

PCa

TMPRSS2-ERG

1700_D
580_B

PCa
PCa

TMPRSS2-ERG
TMPRSS2-ERG

51

7,239,733

4,723,941

65.25%

51
36

12,435,299
18,134,550

7,629,273
7,690,673

61.35%
42.41%

99_T

PCa

NDRG1-ERG

36

2,844,879

1,515,444

53.27%

2621_D

PCa

SLC45A3-ERG

54

22,079,700

11,899,984

53.90%

1043_D

PCa

No known fusions

51

3,003,305

1,898,332

63.21%

NCI-H660

PCa cell line

TMPRSS2-ERG

51

6,512,688

4,120,365

63.27%

GM12878

Lymphoblastoid cell
line

No known fusions

54

44,829,991

20,676,159

46.12%

Total number of PE reads, number of mapped PE reads and the percentage mapped are reported, Note that the number of single-end reads is double the
number of PE reads. PCa, prostate cancer.

transcriptome; step 3, PE reads that map to different
genes are selected as potential candidate fusion transcripts; also, reads that do not align anywhere are stored
for the computational validation of the candidates and
for determining the sequence of the junctions. Note that
the mapping of the reads can occur anywhere within a
gene: exons, introns or splice junctions.
We employ a reference annotation set (University of
California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Known Genes [35]) and
classify each single-end of a PE read into different categories depending on what parts of the gene it is mapped
to: exon, intron, splice junction or boundary. The latter
case corresponds to reads that might be mapped to the
genomic boundary of an exon - for example, in the case
of a retained intron or when pre-mRNA is sequenced.
Module 2: filtration cascade

Several types of noise can introduce artifacts at any
stage of the sequencing and analysis process. Hence, we
developed a number of different filters to reduce the
problem of artificial chimeric transcripts (Figure 1b).
Additional filters, more specific to the reference annotation set employed, are described in Additional file 1.
Three misalignment filters The reads can be mapped
to a different location on the genome compared to
where they were generated, mainly because of the
sequence similarity of regions in the genome (paralogs,
pseudogenes, repetitive elements). Indeed, it is possible
that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), RNA editing, or errors in the base caller can lead to misalignment
of one of the ends resulting in artificial chimeric transcripts. This issue is particularly relevant in the intermediate range of sequencing depth (1 million to 100
million reads), which FusionSeq has been designed for.
We devised three filters to deal with this issue of
sequence similarity, briefly described hereafter (see
Materials and methods for detail).
Large scale sequence similarity filter If the two genes
of a candidate fusion transcript are paralogous, they are
discarded because of this homology potentially causing a

misalignment. We use TreeFam to identify these candidates and remove them from the list [36,37].
Small scale sequence similarity filter The above filter
seeks broad similarities between two transcripts. However, it may be possible that there is high similarity
between small regions within the two genes where the
reads actually map. To identify these cases, for each of
the candidate chimeric transcripts, the reads aligned to
one gene are searched for sequence similarity against
the corresponding partner. If high similarity is found,
the pair is removed (Materials and methods).
Repetitive regions filter Some reads may be aligned to
repetitive regions in the genome due to the low
sequence complexity of those regions and may result in
artificial fusion candidates. We thus remove reads
mapped to those regions (Materials and methods).
Random pairing of transcript fragments: abnormal insert
size filter

The filters described so far deal with computationally
generated artifacts. However, some artifacts can be
intrinsic to the experimental protocol. Library preparation typically requires the fragmentation of the cDNA.
This may result in the generation of random chimeric
transcripts when inefficient A-tailing may lead to the
ligation of random cDNA molecules [38]. This issue
affects more highly expressed genes. The abnormal
insert size filter addresses this problem by exploiting the
fact that the transcript fragments have approximately
the same size because a size-selection step is typically
part of the experimental protocol. We could filter the
set of candidate fusion transcripts by selecting those
paired reads having an insert size - that is, the distance
between the two mapped reads - comparable to the
fragment size and by excluding those with a much
higher insert size, somewhat resembling the approach
for determining DNA structural variants [27,39-41].
However, this approach is based on the fact that the
alignment of genomic PE reads to the genome reflects
its linearity, where any deviation from this ‘nominal’

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

Page 4 of 19

Figure 1 Schematic of FusionSeq. (a) The PE reads are processed to identify potential fusion candidates. Poor quality reads are discarded at
first, and the remaining PE reads are aligned to the reference human genome (hg18). The reads are compared to the annotation set (UCSC
Known Genes) in order to classify them as belonging to the same gene or to different genes. Those aligned to two different genes are then
selected as potential fusion candidates. All good quality single-end reads are also stored for the identification of the sequence of the junction.
(b) The filtration cascade module analyzes the candidates and removes those that have high sequence homology between the two genes or a
higher insert size compared to the transcriptome norm. Additional filters are employed to remove candidates due to random pairing and
misalignment as well as PCR artifacts and annotation inconsistencies. The high-confidence list of candidates is then scored and processed to find
the sequence of the junction. (c). The junction-sequence identifier detects the actual sequence at the breakpoints by constructing a fusion
junction library. It first covers the regions of the potential breakpoint of each gene with ‘tiles’ 1 nt apart, and then creates all possible
combinations, considering both orientation of the fusion, namely gene A upstream of gene B and vice versa. All single-end reads are then
aligned to the fusion junction library and the junction with the highest support is identified as the sequence of the fusion transcript junction.
DASPER, difference between the observed and analytically calculated expected SPER; RESPER, ratio of empirically computed SPERs; SPER,
supportive PE reads.

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

insert size will be considered abnormal (Figure S1a in
Additional file 1). These approaches cannot be directly
translated to RNA-Seq analysis because of at least three
additional layers of complexity: the splicing mechanism
of the transcription; the genome of the individual, which
contains some differences from the reference genome;
and the cancer genome of the same individual, which
can include additional somatic variations (Figure S1b in
Additional file 1).
We devised a method to address some of these issues
and still make use of this concept to identify true chimeric transcripts. We first introduce the concept of the
‘composite model’ of a gene - that is, the union of all
exons from all known isoforms of a gene - and then we
define the ‘minimal fusion transcript fragment’ (Figure
2). This is generated by using all PE reads bridging the
two different genes. It is important to note that in the
case of a real fusion transcript, we can only identify the
region around the fusion junction. Reads generated by a
fusion transcript that are distant from the junction will
be assigned to one gene or the other. For a real chimeric
transcript, the minimal fusion transcript fragment will
thus capture the region around the breakpoint and the

Page 5 of 19

insert-size distribution computed on it will be similar to
the insert size distribution of normal transcripts. Conversely, for an artifactual chimeric transcript, paired
reads would randomly join the two genes from all different parts (Figure 2b, right-hand side). The minimal
fusion transcript fragment would be bigger than the
expected fragment. Hence, the insert-size distribution
computed on this minimal fusion transcript fragment
will be higher than that of normal transcripts, that is,
abnormal. The normal insert-size distribution can be
estimated from the data by using the composite models
of all genes (see Materials and methods).
Two filters for the combination of misalignments and
random pairing
An additional complication is the possibility that random pairing and misalignment occur together. Highly
expressed genes may generate transcript fragments that
randomly join with another gene. In addition, misalignment can affect the correct identification of the genes
involved in this random pairing. This is particularly
challenging because only a fraction of the reads from
random pairing will be misaligned; specifically, those
with high similarity to another region of the genome.

Figure 2 Abnormal insert-size principle applied to transcriptome data. The composite model of a gene is created via the union of the
exonic nucleotides from all its isoforms. By using the composite model, we can exploit the abnormal insert-size principle. A minimal fusion
transcript fragment is created by connecting the regions of the two genes joined by PE reads. Subsequently, the insert-size of these chimeric PE
reads is computed and compared to the insert-size distribution of PE reads in the normal transcriptome. The higher insert-size compared to the
transcriptome norm would suggest an artifact since it may be due to the random joining of fragments during library generation.

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

This would result in PE reads bridging relatively small
regions that can escape the abnormal insert size filter.
Hence, we devised two additional filters: one comparing
the candidates to the typically highly expressed ribosomal genes, and the other assessing the consistency of
the expression levels of the individual genes of a chimeric transcript (see Materials and methods).
PCR filter
Most library preparations also require a PCR amplification step. This may lead to potentially artifactual fusion
candidates when the same read is over-represented,
yielding to a ‘spike-in-like’ signal, that is, a narrow signal
with a high peak. To reduce this effect, we filter candidates that have chimeric reads piling up in a small
region (see Materials and methods).
Module 3: junction sequence identifier After the identification of high-quality candidate fusion transcripts, we
can seek the overall support of those candidates taking
advantage of the pool of all single-end reads. This process also allows the identification of the exact sequence
of the fusion transcript junction. The knowledge of the
actual junction sequence has many uses. First, it can
help to identify the actual regions that are connected in
the fusion transcript. Second, it helps in subsequent
experimental validation, such as by RT-PCR. Finally, it
can provide additional evidence for the fusion transcript
or can be used to rule out artifacts.
In order to identify the junction sequence, we build a
‘fusion junction library’ and align all single-end reads to
this library (Figure 1c). To be computationally efficient,
we first identify the regions where the potential breakpoints are using the information from the PE reads bridging the two genes. The exact size of the regions bears
greatly on the resulting complexity of the potential
fusion transcript and the computational power (see
Materials and methods). Then, we cover these regions
with ‘tiles’ that are spaced 1 nt apart and, finally, we
generate the fusion junction library by creating all pairwise connections between these tiles. The rationale is
that the correct junction sequence will correspond to
one of these connected tiles and that there will be fulllength single-end reads that will align to that sequence
(see Materials and methods).
Scoring the candidates

Although FusionSeq filters out many spurious fusion
candidates, some may still be present, especially random
chimeric transcripts generated during sample preparation. Hence, candidates are scored based on their likelihood to be real, allowing prioritization of validation
experiments. The first obvious measure is simply the
number of inter-transcript PE reads (mi) normalized by
the total number of mapped PE reads (Nmapped), similarly to RPKM (reads per kilobase of exon model per
million mapped reads) for measuring gene expression

Page 6 of 19

[3]. This is expressed per million mapped reads and
called SPER for ‘supportive PE reads’. For the i-th candidate:
SPERi =

mi
⋅ 10 6
N mapped

This measure gives an indication of the abundance of
the fusion transcript. However, to assess whether a
given SPER is ‘high’ enough, we compare it with two
‘expected’ values: one is calculated analytically and the
other empirically. The first quantity is DASPER (the difference between the observed and analytically calculated
expected SPER), indicating how many (normalized)
inter-transcript PE reads we observe more than expectation. The analytically calculated expected SPER (<SPER
>) is based on the observation that if two ends were randomly joined, the probability that this occurs for gene A
and gene B is proportional to the product of the probability that the two single-ends of the pair are mapped
to gene A and gene B (see Materials and methods). This
scoring method takes into account fusion transcripts
that might have been generated during sample preparation from highly expressed genes. Obviously, the higher
DASPER is, the more likely the fusion candidate is real.
The second measure is RESPER (the ratio of empirically computed SPERs). The rationale for this measure
is the comparison of the observed SPER with the SPERs
of the other candidates. We expect a real fusion transcript to be supported by a higher number of reads
compared to the artifactual chimeric transcripts (see
Materials and methods). This quantity, contrary to DASPER, is independent of the fragment size, thus more suitable for comparisons across samples. While RESPER is
useful, it suffers in comparison to DASPER if a sample
has several real fusions.
In summary, by computing these quantities, we can
‘demote’ fusion candidates that may result from random
joining of highly expressed genes (DASPER), and select
those candidates that ‘stand out’ compared to the others
(RESPER), thus providing a high-confidence ranked list
of candidates.
Classifying the candidates

FusionSeq provides a list of potential fusion candidates
that are automatically classified into different categories
depending on the genes that are involved [13]: (1) interchromosomal - two genes on different chromosomes;
(2) intra-chromosomal - two genes on the same chromosomes. The latter can be further subclassified as: (2a)
read-through candidates if the two genes are close
neighbors on the genomes, that is, if no other gene is
present between them; (2b) cis candidates - similar to
read-through events, but the two genes are on different
strands.

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

Several read-through events have been reported in the
literature, although their role remains unclear [42]. This
may also be an effect of the pervasive transcription of
the genome. Indeed, when considering primary transcripts, more than 90% of the nucleotides of the human
genome are transcribed [11]. Although the RNA-Seq
protocol requires a poly-A selection step, it may occur
that pre-mRNA fragments with stretches of adenosines
are still selected and sequenced.
FusionSeq applied to prostate cancer samples

In order to develop and calibrate FusionSeq, we selected
a set of prostate cancer tissues harboring the common
TMPRSS2-ERG fusion, others with less common fusions
(SLC45A3-ERG, NDRG1-ERG) and prostate cancers with
no evidence of known ETS fusions. We also sequenced a
prostate cancer cell line with the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion
(NCI-H660) and a lymphoblastoid cell line (GM12878)
that was selected for the HapMap project and employed
by the ENCODE project as controls. This normal cell
line is not expected to have gene fusions (Table 1). Overall, FusionSeq takes about 2 hours to analyze 20 million
mapped reads. More details about the computational
complexity are discussed in Materials and methods.
Fusion candidates The application of FusionSeq to the
above samples resulted in the identification of 12 fusion
candidates, on average, per sample with SPER greater
than 1 (range 0 to 25). Considering the top candidate
for each sample, the average SPER is 13.99 for those
with known ERG rearrangements and 3.09 for those
without known fusions (Table 2; Table S1 in Additional
file 1). The vast majority of candidate fusions are intrachromosomal - they occur between genes that are on
the same chromosome - with the majority being readthrough events (Table S1 in Additional file 1).
The most common fusion, TMPRSS2-ERG, is ranked
at the top of the list. The other known fusions between
ERG and other 5’ partners, namely SLC45A3 and
NDRG1, are also included in the top candidates. The
remaining candidates appear to be read-through events,
including ZNF649-ZNF577 (Table 2).
Although the candidates are ranked by RESPER, it is
worth noting that the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion has high
values for both SPER and DASPER, as expected. These statistics are almost equivalent for the top candidates; however, they substantially differ in the case of artifacts given
by highly expressed genes (Tables S1, S3 and S5 in Additional file 1), suggesting the effectiveness of DASPER in
identifying those cases. Indicatively, DASPER and RESPER
values greater than 1 seem to conservatively select for true
chimeric events, with 16 out of 19 candidates (84%) being
either experimentally confirmed or with EST evidence.
We find a second candidate fusion transcript involving
ERG and GMPR in sample 1700_D in addition to
TMPRSS2-ERG. By analyzing the regions that are

Page 7 of 19

Table 2 SPER, DASPER, and RESPER for the top candidates
with DASPER > 0 and RESPER > 1 across all prostate
cancer tissue samples
Type

ID

Fusion candidate

SPER DASPER RESPER

Intra

580_B

TMPRSS2-ERG

36.54

36.53

14.31

Intra

1700_D TMPRSS2-ERG

19.66

19.63

8.79

Intra

106_T

TMPRSS2-ERG

10.16

10.11

3.97

Inter

2621_D SLC45A3-ERG

4.29

4.15

3.56

4.59
4.33

4.59
4.33

2.05
1.93

Inter
1700_D ERG-GMPR
Read-through 1700_D SLC16A8-BAIAP2L2
Read-through

106_T

AK094188-AK311452

4.87

4.87

1.9

Read-through

1700_D

ZNF473-FLJ26850

3.54

3.54

1.58

Read-through

580_B

ZNF577-FLJ26850

4.03

4.03

1.58

Read-through

1043_D

ZNF577-ZNF649

5.79

5.79

1.55

Read-through

1700_D

CAMTA2-INCA1

3.01

3.01

1.35

Inter

1700_D

EEF1D-HDAC5

2.88

2.84

1.29

Read-through
Read-through

1043_D
1700_D

FLJ00248-LRCH4
VMAC-CAPS

4.74
2.62

4.74
2.62

1.27
1.17

Read-through

106_T

FLJ00248-LRCH4

2.96

2.96

1.16

Cis

1043_D

AX747861-FLI1

4.21

4.21

1.13

Read-through

106_T

TAGLN-AK126420

2.75

2.75

1.07

Inter

580_B

PIGU-ALG5

2.73

2.73

1.07

Inter

99_T

NDRG1-ERG

7.26

7.15

1.02

Cell lines are reported in Table S1 in Additional file 1. Entries in bold are
known gene fusions, and those in italics read-through events confirmed either
experimentally or via additional evidence, such as ESTs or mRNAs from
GenBank.

connected, it seems that the exons not involved in the
TMPRSS2-ERG fusion are linked to GMPR, suggesting
that ERG undergoes a balanced translocation. This
novel finding was experimentally validated (Figure S2 in
Additional file 1). Another novel finding is the fusion
transcript involving PIGU and ALG5 that was also
experimentally confirmed [43]. Finally, there is one cis
candidate including AX747861 and FLI1, which may
suggest some complex rearrangement (Materials and
methods). However, from EST data there is evidence
that this may correspond to a single FLI1 transcript,
thus suggesting an artifact caused by the annotation set
(Figure S3 in Additional file 1). Although FusionSeq can
properly handle such cases with the annotation filters
(Additional file 1), we report it here as an example of
how the framework can be employed to refine the
search of candidate fusion transcripts and help the
experimenter screen this list.
Effects of the filters The application of the filters
reduced the number of candidates identified by the
fusion detection module. Out of a total of 7,342 candidates, only 133 candidates passed all the filters, a reduction of 98% (average number of identified candidates
per sample = 917.75, range [451 to 1,618]; average number of candidates per sample after filtering = 16.63,
range [4 to 41]). In Figure 3a, we summarize the effect

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

Page 8 of 19

Figure 3 Filtration cascade module. (a) The average percentage of candidates identified by the fusion detection module that are removed by
each filter is reported. The labels also depict the order the filters have been applied in this case (counter-clockwise starting from the
RepeatMasker filter), but it is worth noting that the order of the application of the filters does not affect the final list of candidates. (b) RESPER
(ratio of empirically computed SPERs) versus depth of sequencing. The plot shows the RESPER values for SLC45A3-ERG, a real fusion transcript,
and P4HB-KLK3, an artifact likely created by the random pairing due to the high expression of KLK3 at different sequencing depths.

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

of the filters. Each filter reduces the number of potential
candidates to some extent, indicating that they address
these issues. We experimentally verified that some of
the candidates filtered out or with negative DASPER are
artifactual (Table S6 in Additional file 1).
Sequencing depth and detection of fusion candidates
We investigated the effect of the number of mapped
reads on the detection of fusion transcripts. We randomly sampled fractions of mapped reads from sample
2621_D, and applied FusionSeq to the reduced data sets
(see Materials and methods). The top candidate is
always SLC45A3-ERG with an increasing RESPER, as
expected (Figure 3b). That RESPER increases with
increasing sequencing depth is an indicator that the real
fusion transcript stands out compared to the background. Although the number of fusion candidates
increases as well, the DASPER for the majority of other
candidates is negative, suggesting that they are artifacts
(Table S1 in Additional file 1).
TMPRSS2-ERG fusion-positive prostate cancer tissues
For all the TMPRSS2-ERG-positive prostate cancer tissues,
FusionSeq always detects this fusion transcript at the top
of the list (Table S1 in Additional file 1). Figure 4a shows
the PE reads bridging the two genes for the three tissue
samples and the cell line harboring the fusion for the
entire region between TMPRSS2 and ERG. It is worth noting that the regions connected by the PE reads are different across the samples, suggesting the presence of
different TMPRSS2-ERG isoforms.
Exon expression The expression of a fusion transcript
should also be reflected in the intensity of the signal at
the exon level. Specifically, if a fusion transcript does
not include some exons of the ‘wild-type’ gene, the
expression of those excluded exons should be lower
compared to that of exons that are part of the fusion
transcript. This observation was originally reported by
Tomlins et al. [23] using a standard exon walking
experiment and has been confirmed using exon arrays
[44].
For illustration purposes, Figure 5 shows the expression values (RPKM) for the exons of ERG and
TMPRSS2. It is common that the expression of ERG is
driven by its fusion with a 5’ partner. Hence, we can
expect that the major expression signal is due to the
fusion transcript. Indeed, the expression signal of the
exons involved in the fusion transcript is higher than
that of the region excluded. A similar conclusion is
obtained when looking at TMPRSS2.
Junction-sequence identification analysis Figure 4c
shows the results of the junction-sequence identifier
module for the four samples with TMPRSS2-ERG fusion.
The main breakpoints are detected for both TMPRSS2
and ERG. This allows the determination of the correct
fusion isoform, which was experimentally validated with

Page 9 of 19

RT-PCR (Figure 4d). By taking a closer look at the junction-sequence identification results, a second potential
breakpoint for sample 1700_D can be detected, albeit
with much fewer number of reads (5 compared to 320
for the main breakpoint; Figure S4a in Additional file 1).
The reads supporting it are uniformly distributed across
the junction, suggesting that it is a real breakpoint and
that multiple fusion variants are present. This finding
has been validated with RT-PCR using a primer specific
to this junction (Figure S4b in Additional file 1).
ERG-rearranged cases with different 5’ partners We
analyzed two other ERG-rearranged cases where the 5’
partner of ERG is different from TMPRSS2. We previously reported the discovery of a novel rearrangement
between ERG and NDRG1 for sample 99_T, resulting
from the focused analysis of PE RNA-Seq restricted to
the specific region of ERG [14]. With the current
method that performs a genome-wide analysis, we confirmed the NDRG1-ERG fusion transcript as the top
candidate (Table 2). Furthermore, we applied FusionSeq
to another ERG-rearranged sample, 2621_D, identifying
SLC45A3-ERG as top candidate (Table 2, Figure 4b).
ERG rearranged-negative case and normal cell line
When applied to the sample without known fusion transcripts (1043_D), FusionSeq detected only a few candidates, the top being the read-through event between
ZNF577 and ZNF649, which is common in all prostate
tissues analyzed here and has been already documented
[13]. For the GM12878 cell line, it is noteworthy that,
despite having more than 20 million mapped PE reads,
none of the few candidates (n = 4) have a SPER higher
than 0.3, as expected being a normal cell line (Table S1
in Additional file 1). The read-through event with positive DASPER appears to be a mis-annotation of the
untranslated regions (UTRs; BC110369-BC080605),
whereas the inter-chromosomal candidates have a negative DASPER, suggesting that they may be due to random chimeric pairing. Indeed, one of the genes involved
is a highly expressed gene, ACTG1, with an RPKM
>232,000 [3]. Furthermore, the junction-sequence identifier analysis does not yield any result.
Simulation results

In addition to experimental evidence, we also performed
a simulation study to assess FusionSeq performance. We
employed the GM12878 cell line as an estimate of the
background because it is not expected to harbor any
fusion transcripts. We randomly generated inter-transcript reads, thus simulating the presence of fusion transcripts, and added these PE reads to the pool of the
actual PE reads of the GM12878 cell line data (see
Additional file 1 for details). The results showed that a
DASPER score greater than 1 achieves high sensitivity
(0.80) even if the fusion transcript is expressed at half
the rate of the ‘wild-type’ allele (F = 0.5) with an area

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

Page 10 of 19

Figure 4 Results of FusionSeq. (a) A subset of the PE reads connecting TMPRSS2 and ERG are shown for four samples (106_T, NCI-H660,
1700_D, 580_B). (b) PE reads connecting ERG and SLC45A3 for sample 2621_D. The outer circle reports all chromosomes, whereas the inset
shows only the region of ERG and SLC45A3. The gray lines depict the intra-transcript PE reads, whereas the red ones represent the intertranscript PE reads. Note that for illustration purposes, only the inter-transcript reads are shown for SLC45A3. The inset also depicts the composite
model (blue line) and its exons (green boxes). (c) Results of the junction-sequence identifier. The location of the breakpoints for the four
samples with the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion are reported as bars (not to scale). Moreover, the sequence of the junctions as well as a subset of the
aligned reads for two samples is reported (106_T, 580_B). (d) The locations of the PCR primers used for the validation are depicted as red
arrows. The isoforms consist of TMPRSS2 and ERG exons fused to form different exon combinations as depicted schematically. For both samples
NCI-H660 and 1700_D, isoform III is detected, whereas, for samples 106_T and 580_B, isoforms I and VI are determined, respectively (Table S7 in
Additional file 1) [46,56]. The transcript isoforms were validated by a PCR assay for each sample separately (gel images). A 50-nt length standard
(lane 1) is shown here for the determination of the approximate fragment size. The identity of the PCR products was validated by Sanger
sequencing.

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

Page 11 of 19

Figure 5 Expression values of the exons of TMPRSS2 and ERG. The RPKM values computed on each exon of ERG (isoform NM_004449.4) and
TMPRSS2 (isoform NM_005656.3) are shown as stacked bars for the four samples with TMPRSS2-ERG fusion. For illustration purposes, the exons
included in the most common fusion isoforms are labeled as ‘FUSED’.

under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
(AUC) higher than 0.95 (Figure S5 in Additional file 1).
Conclusions

Gene fusions have been considered the key molecular
event in leukemias, lymphomas, and some soft tissue
tumors (that is, sarcomas). With the 2005 discovery of
common recurrent gene fusions in prostate cancer,
there exists a strong likelihood that recurrent gene
fusions are present in common epithelial cancers [23].
Numerous studies have now confirmed that approximately 50% of prostate cancers harbor a recurrent
fusion between TMPRSS2 and ERG or ETV1 [45]. In an
attempt to identify these fusion events, we employed PE
RNA-Seq technology exploiting the connectivity information of the two ends of transcript fragments. As is
the case for other applications of deep sequencing, considerations of computational complexity and statistical
significance are mandatory.
FusionSeq: a modular framework

In the current study, we describe FusionSeq, a novel
computational and statistical framework to identify
fusion transcripts by analyzing PE RNA-Seq data. This
framework consists of three modules: a fusion transcript
detection module; a filtration cascade module, which is
composed of a set of filters that remove different types
of artifacts and rank the candidates by different scores;
and a junction-sequence identifier module, which
detects the actual sequence of the fusion junction.
Among the advantages of our method is the decoupling
of the alignment approach from the identification of

candidate fusion transcripts. Indeed, we developed
FusionSeq to be independent from the alignment tool
and the mapping strategy as much as possible. Other
methods proposed that could potentially identify fusion
transcripts require a particular choice of the mapping
tool or platform and do not provide any considerations
about artifactual fusion transcripts generated by the
sequencing protocol [32,33]. To this end, we have developed a set of filters to remove artifactual candidates generated by several sources of errors (see Materials and
methods), which are particularly relevant in the intermediate range of sequencing depth (1 million to 100 million reads). It is likely that with higher coverage those
issues will impact the analysis less since one can use the
statistics of the higher coverage to overcome errors.
Of further interest is also the ability of this method to
identify the sequence of the junction of the fusion transcript using the full read length. This valuable information allowed us to detect and then experimentally
confirm the simultaneous presence of multiple fusion
isoforms within a single cancer tissue. Moreover, it
enables the experimentalist to narrow the genomic
region to look at for the subsequent validation of the
fusion candidate. All validated fusions in this data set
have breakpoints lying at the exon boundary. This
might indicate that, in case of genomic rearrangement,
the splicing machinery is still active and removes the
intronic regions harboring the actual genomic breakpoints. Hence, we speculate that insertions or deletions
that typically occur at genomic breakpoints might not
affect the junction of the fusion transcript.

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

Scoring the candidates

One of the novel features introduced by FusionSeq is
the computation of scores to assign a ‘confidence value’
to the fusion candidates. We propose a classification
and scoring approach to prioritize the selection of candidates for experimental validation (see Materials and
methods).
We envision that researchers seeking gene fusions can
use this tool to focus their efforts on the candidates
with the top scores. Validation typically includes seeking
confirmation of the putative fusion sequence using standard PCR assays and traditional sequencing as well as
exploring for a corresponding genomic rearrangement at
the DNA level using such approaches as fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH).
Sample set

One important aspect of this study is that we tested
FusionSeq on data generated from cancer samples
derived from human tumors and not only cell lines.
Clearly these types of samples are more challenging
given their heterogeneity as they may include tumor,
stromal, and endothelial cells. We have used a set of
prostate cancer samples with and without the
TMPRSS2-ERG fusion transcript to calibrate FusionSeq.
This well-characterized gene fusion was not only
detected where present, but the junction sequence identifier also detected the correct junctions, thus enabling
the determination of the specific isoform variants. Moreover, we observed that one sample had multiple variants.
Understanding the complexity of isoform splicing in
cancer may not only add insight into biology, but may
also provide useful prognostic information as it has
been suggested that some TMPRSS2-ERG isoforms play
a distinct role in prostate cancer development [46,47].
Furthermore, FusionSeq identified two novel events
(ERG-GMPR and PIGU-ALG5), demonstrating that our
procedure is able to find new fusions in addition to
well-characterized ones.
Reporting the results

FusionSeq also includes tools to access and display the
results of the analysis through a web-browser by seamlessly integrating the UCSC Genome Browser. Moreover, to display inter-chromosomal events, which is
currently not possible in the UCSC Genome Browser,
we developed SeqViz, a visualization tool based on Circos [48], an open source software particularly suited for
this purpose (see Materials and methods). These webbased interface tools enable the user to quickly access
the information provided by FusionSeq, an aspect that
greatly increases its applicability in comparison to other
related tools [32,33].
Future directions

Although we demonstrated the feasibility of this
approach using several cancer tumor samples, there are

Page 12 of 19

some limitations to the current approach. The fusion
transcript detection module is based on a gene annotation set that provides the information of the genes and
their isoforms. Although the framework is flexible and
the choice of which annotation to use is left to the user,
the identification of the candidate fusion is of course
limited to this set. We employed the UCSC Known
Genes set, which contains 66,803 isoforms. We believe
that this is a reasonable choice and that the use of a different annotation set would not dramatically change our
results.
Although FusionSeq is independent from the mapping
strategy adopted, it is likely that different mapping
approaches would make use of the filtration cascade differently. As an example, if the alignment procedure
explicitly excludes repetitive regions, the filter using
RepeatMasker will impact on the final list of candidates
to a lesser extent. This is why the modularity of FusionSeq allows the users to adapt the framework to their
specific goals (Figure S9 in Additional file 1).
We anticipate that FusionSeq will benefit from the
availability of longer sequence reads and deeper sequencing, with an increased ability to identify and score
novel fusion events from RNA-Seq data.
Materials and methods
Prostate cancer selection and RNA extraction

All the prostate cancer samples were collected under an
IRB (Institutional Review Board) approved protocol.
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) slides were prepared
from frozen tissue blocks and evaluated for cancer
extent and tumor grade by the study pathologist (MAR).
To ensure high purity of cancer cells and minimize
benign tissue, tumor isolation was performed by first
selecting for high-density cancer foci (< 10% stromal or
other non-tumor tissue contamination) and then taking
1.5 mm biopsy cores from the frozen tissue block for
RNA extraction using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The RNA extract was then subjected to
DNase treatment using a DNA-free™ Kit (Applied Biosystems/Ambion, Austin, TX, USA). The quality of RNA
was assessed using the RNA 6000 Nano Kit on a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA,
USA). Up to 10 μg of RNA with RIN (RNA integrity
number) ≥7 was determined suitable for sample
preparation.
Sample preparation

The samples were prepared in accordance with the Illumina RNA sample preparation protocol (Part # 1004898
Rev. A September 2008). Briefly, mRNAs were fragmented at elevated temperature using divalent cations and
transcribed into cDNA, thereby generating a library of
cDNA fragments. RNA-Seq adapters were then ligated
to the blunt ends of the cDNA fragments. The library of

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

cDNA fragments subsequently underwent a size-selection step in which cDNAs were first electrophoresed
through a 2.5% agarose gel in TAE buffer. Then, the
desired fragment size products (200 or 300 nt) were
retrieved from the gel and subjected to PCR amplification using universal primer sites present at the end of
the ligated adapters. The library was then subjected to
quality control steps such as verification of fragment
size and concentration measurements using the DNA
1000 Kit (Agilent Technologies) on an Agilent 2100
Bioanalyzer.
All samples were sequenced using one lane of an Illumina Genome Analyzer II (GAII) flowcell, except for
GM12878 and 99_T, which were sequenced using two
lanes. Since the experiments were performed over several months as Illumina introduced advances to the
GAII platform, the total number of reads and the read
length vary (Table 1). However, all samples were prepared following the same protocol.
Validation of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion isoforms with PCR

Aliquots from the same RNA stock were used for both
RNA-Seq and PCR validation by conventional reversetranscription PCR. RNA was reverse transcribed using a
High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The TMPRSS2-ERG
PCR was performed using Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase (Invitrogen) with 1 mM MgCl2, 0.1 μM of each primer (forward, TMPRSS2 exon 1 - TAGGCGC
GAGCTAAGCAGGAG; reverse, ERG exon 5 GTAGGCACACTCAAACAACGACTGG; as published
by Tomlins et al. [23]) and 50 ng cDNA at an annealing
temperature (Ta) of 63°C for 35 cycles and the PCR
products were separated on a 2.5% agarose gel. For
TMPRSS2-ERG isoform IV, the PCR was performed,
using a reverse primer specifically designed for the
detection of isoform IV (TGCATTCATCAGGAGAGTTCCTGC), under the same conditions but with
Ta 55°C and 40 cycles. The obtained products were isolated from the gel using the MinElute™ Gel Extraction
Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) and subsequently sent
for Sanger sequencing at the Core facility of Cornell
University (Ithaca, NY, USA).
Mapping

We employed ELAND to map the PE reads against the
Human Reference Genome (March 2006 Assembly hg18). We allowed for up to two mismatches of the
alignment and selected reads that passed the quality filter from ELAND. In case of pairs mapped to the same
chromosome, we selected reads aligned to opposite
strands. We also employed bowtie to map the reads to
the human genome sequence [49]. Since bowtie does
not allow PE reads to be mapped on different chromosomes, we adopted the following strategy: the two ends

Page 13 of 19

were mapped separately to the genome and the best
alignment was selected among the top ten candidates in
the case of mapping to multiple locations. Two mismatches were allowed for bowtie too. Then, the two
ends were paired together, if both ends were aligned.
Moreover, for comparison purposes, we mapped the
reads to a splice junction and a ribosomal library in
addition to the genome (see Additional file 1 for details).
Filtration cascade

Large scale sequence similarity filter Two paralogous
genes resulting as fusion candidates are discarded
because their homology can potentially cause a misalignment. We use TreeFam to identify and remove these
candidates [36,37]. TreeFam is a database of phylogenetic trees of animal genes with the aim of providing a
curated list of orthologs and paralogs.
Small scale sequence similarity filter The small scale
sequence similarity filter seeks broad similarities
between two transcripts. However, it may be possible
that there is high similarity between small regions
within the two genes where the reads actually map.
Hence, to search for similar sequences within the two
candidate genes, we employ a two-step strategy. We
first perform a fast search of the reads aligned to one
gene against the full transcriptome, represented by all
composite models, using bowtie [49]. If more than a
user-defined threshold (default of 1%) of the reads map
to one gene ‘hit’, the partner gene, the candidate is discarded. This approach removes candidates where the
reads have high similarity, since bowtie allows up to
three mismatches only. For those candidates not filtered
out by this approach, a second, more refined comparison is performed. We align the reads mapped to one
gene to its partner’s sequence by using BLAT [50]. If
the fraction of reads that have similarities to the corresponding partner is higher than a user-defined threshold
(default of 1%), then the pair is discarded. In order to
call a hit - that is, similarity to the partner gene - we
require that at least 75% of the read has similarity to the
corresponding gene.
Repetitive regions filter Some reads may be aligned to
repetitive regions in the genome due to the low
sequence complexity of those regions, which may result
in artificial fusion candidates. We thus remove reads
mapped to repetitive regions using RepeatMasker to
identify these regions [51,52].
Abnormal insert size filter The PE RNA-Seq experimental protocol requires sequencing of the ends of
cDNA molecules of a determined length: the fragment
size. If we mapped those sequenced reads to the transcriptome (which we do not know exactly), we would
obtain an insert-size distribution - the distance between
the two reads - similar to the fragment size. However,

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

since the reads are aligned to the reference genome, the
insert-size distribution can be rather skewed (Figure S1b
in Additional file 1). Using a splice junction library does
not help in this context. Besides having potential biases
given by the incomplete knowledge of the junctions, it
cannot determine to which isoform the two ends belong.
The composite model allows use of the concept of the
insert-size also for RNA-Seq data (Figure 2a). The composite model is the union of all the exons from all
known transcripts of a gene. This ensures that all exonic
nucleotides are considered. The insert-size distribution
computed using the composite model as reference
should thus be comparable to the nominal fragment size
selected during sample preparation (if there is more
than one isoform, the insert size distribution computed
with the composite model will be slightly shifted
towards higher values because of the inclusion of all
possible exonic regions in the composite model).
We then extend this concept to distinguish potentially
real chimeric transcripts from artifactual ones. We generate a minimal fusion transcript fragment by using all
the PE reads bridging two different genes (Figure 2b).
The rationale is that the insert size distribution computed on this minimal fusion transcript fragment of a
real chimeric transcript is similar to the insert size distribution of normal transcripts. This is because we
expect inter-transcript PE reads to connect the regions
around the junction only. Conversely, a fusion transcript
generated by random chimeric pairing would have a
rather long minimal fusion transcript because paired
reads would randomly join different regions of the two
genes. This, in turn, would yield a much higher insertsize distribution compared to that of the real case; that
is, it would be abnormal.
Specifically, for each of the candidate chimeras, the
insert-size distribution is computed using all paired
reads mapping to the composite model of that gene:
that is, the intra-transcript insert-size distribution. For
this purpose, only reads that are fully contained within
exons are considered. If a candidate has only intronic
reads, this filter is not applied. Similarly, the ‘anomalous’
reads - reads that bridge two different genes - are first
used to create a minimal fusion transcript (Figure 2b).
Note that from the PE data we cannot determine the
full fusion transcript, but only the region nearby the
actual junction of the two genes, that is, the minimal
fusion transcript fragment. Then, the insert-size distribution of the minimal fusion transcript is computed
(inter-transcript insert-size distribution) and compared
with the intra-transcript insert-size distribution. If the
median of the inter-transcript insert-size distribution is
much higher than the median of the intra-transcript
insert-size distribution, it is likely due to misalignments.
A P-value is computed by randomly sampling the intra-

Page 14 of 19

transcript insert-size distribution. Candidate fusion transcripts having a P-value lower than a user-defined cutoff
are discarded as artifacts. Note that the candidates that
are ‘outliers’ with respect to the intra-transcript insertsize distribution are discarded as artifacts, whereas, in
the DNA context, they are kept as potential insertions
or deletions (Figure S1a in Additional file 1).
For this analysis, we used a P-value cutoff of 0.01 (corresponding to approximately 2.5 standard deviations
from the transcriptome norm) for all samples, except
for 2621_D, for which we used a cutoff of 0.0001
because of the much tighter intra-transcript insert-size
distribution given by the smaller fragment size compared to the other samples.
Ribosomal filter The vast majority of transcripts in the
cell are ribosomal RNA. Although the experimental protocol typically requires either selecting for non-ribosomal mRNA with polyA+ selection or depleting of
ribosomal RNAs, this process is imperfect. This translates into a high abundance of ribosomal transcripts
with a higher chance of generating random chimeras. If
misalignment occurs too, this would result in artifactual
candidates that appear to not involve ribosomal genes.
Hence, this filter compares the reads of the candidates
to the ribosomal genes sequence database using a more
sensitive alignment tool such as BLAT [50]. If the reads
align to ribosomal genes, the candidate is removed.
Specifically, in order to identify reads that bear similarity to ribosomal genes but were mapped to another
region, we require a read to have more than 75% similarity to a ribosomal gene to count it as a hit. If more
than 10% of reads map to the ribosomal library, the candidate is discarded (Additional file 1). Note that this
issue, although related, is independent of the mapping
strategy. Indeed, even if we employ a ribosomal library
during the alignment phase, there still may be reads
that, due to misalignment, will map best to other
regions of the genome.
Expression consistency filter Highly expressed genes
give rise to the same issue that occurs with ribosomal
genes. This filter compares the expression signal (that is,
number of reads) generated by the chimeric reads to the
signal of the individual genes. The rationale is that, in
the case of a real fusion transcript, the two genes would
be expressed at the same or higher levels than the ‘chimeric’ signal, whereas, in the case of an artifactual candidate, the signal would be generated only from the
chimeric reads and the signal of the two individual
genes would be much lower.
In more detail, the expression signal of the fusion candidate is computed by counting the number or intertranscript, that is, chimeric, reads mapped and normalizing by the length of the region covered by those reads.
The expression of the individual genes is computed as

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

the number of reads normalized by the length of the
transcripts. If the chimeric reads have a higher signal
than that of the individual genes, the candidate is
discarded.
PCR filter To avoid artifacts resulting from the PCR
amplification step, we require the reads supporting a
candidate fusion transcript to independently cover at
least p nucleotides (default p = 5) in addition to the
read size on both ends, otherwise the candidate is discarded. This ensures that several instances of the transcripts were expressed in the cells. In the case of
sufficient coverage, it is also possible to compute the
entropy to identify these cases and remove them.
Junction-sequence identifier module

The PE reads can identify the genes involved in a fusion
transcript, but cannot directly determine the junction
sequence because, typically, short read alignment tools
do not allow gapped alignment for the single read.
Hence, we developed this module to take advantage of
the fast short read alignment tools and identify the
sequence of the junction in an efficient way.
Let us assume we have some PE reads joining gene A
with gene B, thus suggesting a fusion event between
them. Those reads would connect regions around the
junction. For each gene, we thus select the region that
can include the junction sequence by first considering
all exons that can be potentially involved in the junction
as well as the intronic regions that are supported by chimeric PE reads. Those regions are extended considering
the flanking 150 nucleotides. We then cover them with
a set of ‘tiles’ that are spaced 1 nt apart and construct a
fusion junction library by creating all pairwise junctions
between these tiles. Since we do not know a priori what
the specific form of the fusion transcript is, we create
two libraries, one assuming gene A is upstream of gene
B and the other assuming gene B is upstream of gene A
(Figure 1c). This fusion junction library plays the same
role as a canonical splice junction library: it enables the
alignment of short reads, thus overcoming the need for
a computationally expensive gapped alignment for reads
bridging two exons or, as in this case, regions of different genes.
All the reads, including the non-mapped ones, are
then mapped against this library. In this case we consider the two ends independently. The rationale is that
the actual junction sequence will be described by a certain pair of tiles, and reads not previously mapped anywhere in the genome now can be aligned to this fusion
junction. Moreover, reads that previously mapped with
one or two mismatches to the reference genome may
now map perfectly to the fusion junction and thus
increase the evidence supporting the junction. The size
of these tiles depends on the read size as well as the
amount of overlap across the two joined tiles required

Page 15 of 19

by the user. For example, for reads that are 36 nt long
and a required overlap of at least 10 nucleotides, each
fusion junction element is 52 nt long, that is, each tile is
26 nt long. This ensures that every 36-nt read, if
mapped to this junction element, will have at least 10
nucleotides mapped to the tile of each gene.
To select the true junction sequence, we determine
which fusion junction obtains the highest support, that
is, the junction with the highest number of reads aligned
to. In addition, we also require the set of single-end
reads to be uniformly distributed across the junction to
provide further evidence. Provided there is enough coverage overall, we employ a Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistical test, otherwise we apply a simple heuristic by
requiring that at least n reads align to the junction with
at least m different starting positions on the junction
sequence. The latter parameter ensures that no PCR
artifacts affect the junction identification. Also, we
search for similarity of the identified junction elsewhere
in the genome using BLAT [50], in order to eliminate
potential spurious junctions.
From a computational viewpoint, let us assume that
we have about 1,000 virtual tiles for each gene. By creating all pair-wise combinations of these virtual tiles for
the two genes and considering both directions - gene A
upstream of gene B and vice versa - will result in 1,000
× 1,000 × 2 = 2 × 10 6 putative junctions. If we have
approximately 30 candidate fusion transcripts, the putative fusion junction library will thus contain approximately 6 × 10 7 = 60 million elements. Using fast
alignment tools, this analysis is feasible, although it
requires large-scale computational resources. Indeed, we
use bowtie to first create an index of the fusion library
and then map the reads against it [49]. To fully exploit
the parallelization of a multi-node computing cluster,
each fusion candidate is analyzed independently on different nodes. Moreover, the fusion junction library itself
is also split across multiple nodes in order to optimize
the generation of the indexes.
Sequencing depth and detection of fusion candidates

To assess the impact of sequencing depth on the detection of the fusion candidates, we randomly selected a
fraction of mapped reads from sample 2621_D. Specifically, we extracted 10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 90% of all
PE mapped reads (1.1 million, 3 million, 6 million, 9
million, and 10.8 million PE reads, respectively). The
number of fusion candidates with more than five PE
reads clearly correlates with sample size: 0, 1, 3, 4, and
7, respectively. The SLC45A3-ERG fusion was detected
as the top candidate, starting with 3 million mapped PE
reads, with a SPER of 4.7. The relatively low SPER for
this candidate is related to the smaller fragment size
that has been adopted for this sample (200 nucleotides
compared to 300 to 330 nucleotides for the others). The

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

smaller fragment size limits the number of PE reads that
could span the junction. From this analysis, it appears
that 3 million reads are sufficient for detecting this
fusion in this context. However, this result is difficult to
generalize. It might be true only for fusion transcripts
that are expressed at a similar level to SLC45A3-ERG.
We cannot exclude the presence of less abundant fusion
transcripts that would have been uncovered by deeper
sequencing.
Scoring the candidates

We may take into account different types of information
to score the candidates. Potentially we could use the
number of PE reads bridging the two genes, the number
of reads supporting the main junction, and the ‘shape’
of the coverage as indicators of the reliability of the candidate. Practically, since it may be possible that the true
junction is not detected because of lack of coverage, the
more general quantities are based on the number of PE
reads supporting the fusion candidate. Hence, every
fusion transcript candidate is first scored using SPER,
the normalized number of supportive PE reads, the
most intuitive quantitative measure (see Results - Scoring the candidates). One may argue that a ‘local’ score a score that takes into account the expression of the
genes involved in the fusion - might be a reasonable
choice. We defined LSPER (local SPER) as the number
of inter-transcript PE reads supporting the fusion
divided by the average gene expression value computed
as RPKM [3]. However, in many cases, only one allele
contributes to the fusion transcript. Hence, the expression of the fusion transcript (estimated by the number
of inter-transcript reads because the structure of the
whole fusion is unknown) may not correlate with the
expression of the genes generating it and thus this may
impair the correct ranking of the candidates (text and
Figure S6 in Additional file 1). After computing SPER
for each candidate, we need to assign a ‘confidence’ to
this number. We compare it with two expectations. The
first one, DASPER (the difference between the observed
and analytically calculated expected SPER), is based on
the observation that if two ends were randomly joined,
the probability that this occurs for gene A and gene B is
proportional to the product of the probability that the
two single-ends of the pair are mapped to gene A and
gene B:
P ( A ∩ B ) = P ( A )∗ P ( B )

where P(A) and P(B) are the probabilities that a single-end is mapped to gene A and B, respectively. Note
that this is a very conservative estimate because it does
not take into account that single ends should also be
within a certain distance, based on the fragment size, to
be joined in a pair. Nevertheless, as a first

Page 16 of 19

approximation, the expected SPER can be estimated as
the ratio of the number of single-end reads mapped to
gene A and gene B and the total number of mapped single-end reads. For the i-th candidate, involving gene A
and B, we have:
SPERi =

m AB
N mapped

⋅ 10 6 =

m A ⋅ mB
1
⋅ N mapped ⋅ P ( A ) ⋅ P ( B ) ⋅ 10 6 = 2
⋅ 10 6
N mapped
N mapped

{

}

where <mAB> is the expected number of inter-transcript PE reads under the null hypothesis, and mA and
mB are the number of single end reads mapped to gene
A and B, respectively. By subtracting this number from
the observed SPER, we can rank the fusion candidates
according to DASPER score:
DASPERi = SPERi − SPERi

We chose to compute the difference between these
two quantities compared to a more traditional ratio or
log-ratio because it is more robust in cases of low coverage (that is, low number of reads) than computing a
ratio. More accurate estimations of the expected SPER
can certainly be devised for cases with low coverage,
although they would likely require the specific characteristics of the sequencing platform and the mapping
approach adopted to be taken into account, thus reducing the broader applicability of this method. Although
DASPER can reliably rank the candidates within a sample, it may be possible that when comparing candidates
from multiple samples DASPER may not properly
account for different fragment sizes. Indeed, smaller
fragment sizes decrease the likelihood of sequencing PE
reads bridging two genes, resulting in lower SPER, and
consequently, lower DASPER, affecting the comparison
among samples. To address this issue, for each fusion
transcript candidate i, we compute the ratio of its SPERi
to the average SPER of all candidates of a sample, that
is, RESPER:
RESPERi =

1
⋅
M

SPERi

∑ SPER

j

j=1..M

where M is the total number of fusion transcript candidates for a sample. Since this quantity is independent of
the fragment size, it is more suitable for comparisons
across samples. Also, as long as the sequencing depth
increases, RESPER is expected to increase for a real fusion
transcript compared to an artifactual one (Figure 3b).
In the case of sufficient coverage, we can also integrate the information related to the junction-sequence
identifier analysis, such as the number of single-end
reads supporting a junction as well as how evenly the
single-end reads cover it. Ideally, the entire fusion

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

junction should be uniformly covered by the reads. If
this does not occur, the chimeric transcript might have
been generated during sample preparation and the PCR
amplification step resulted in an over-representation of
that transcript. However, definitive determination of
uniform coverage requires great sequencing depth.
Computational complexity

One of the main issues to address is the computational
complexity of processing RNA-Seq data. Computationally, the three modules have different requirements. The
fusion transcript detection module depends on the total
number of mapped reads. Once the alignment is performed, it takes about 15 minutes to run this module
on 20 million mapped PE reads using one core of a dual
2 Intel® Xeon® CPU E5410 at 2.33 GHz (four cores each,
for a total of eight cores), with 6 MB cache, 32 GB
RAM, and a 156 GB local disk. The filtration cascade
module takes about 15 to 30 minutes to run on the
same architecture. The difference depends on the number of candidates initially identified. A more intensive
effort is required for the junction-sequence identifier
analysis, the main bottleneck being the indexing of all
the virtual tiles. The time complexity also depends on
the size of the region being tiled. The alignment of the
reads after the indexing is much less computationally
demanding. In fact, the time to complete a junctionsequence identifier analysis for a single candidate in
both directions, AB and BA, ranges from about 90 to
180 minutes if run on a single machine. However, by
splitting the fusion junction library in different files, it is
possible to run the indexing step in parallel, thus substantially decreasing the time complexity. Indeed, by
splitting the fusion junction library in files with 2 million elements, it is possible to complete the indexing
and the mapping in about 15 minutes for both
orientations.

Page 17 of 19

coordinates are also reported (Figure S7b in Additional
file 1). By clicking on the genomic coordinates the corresponding UCSC Genome Browser page is displayed.
Also, each candidate has a detailed page reporting
detailed information, including the junction-sequence
identifier analysis results (Figure S7c in Additional file
1).
Although we extensively rely on the data format of the
UCSC Genome Browser, it is not possible to show the
results for inter-chromosomal fusions (that is, those
between genes on different chromosomes) since it can
display only one chromosome at a time. In order to
address this issue, we developed SeqViz (Figure S8 in
Additional file 1), an application that is based on Circos,
an open source software that is particularly suited to the
display of genomic information by representing the full
genomes as a circle [54]. An example of a Circos image
can be found in Figure 4b. Among the main features of
Circos is the high flexibility in adding and showing
many types of information: connection between the two
ends of a PE read, gene annotation sets, expression
values, and so on.
Software and data availability

FusionSeq is available for download at [34]. Data sets
used in this study are available via dbGaP [55] (study
accession [phs000311.v1.p1]).
Abbreviations

DASPER: difference between the observed and analytically calculated expected SPER; EST: expressed sequence
tag; GAII: Illumina Genome Analyzer II; nt: nucleotide;
PE: paired-end; RESPER: ratio of empirically computed
SPERs; RNA-Seq: mRNA sequencing; RPKM: reads per
kilobase of exon model per million mapped reads; SPER:
supportive PE reads; UCSC: University of California
Santa Cruz.

Report of the analysis results

We also developed a set of tools to report the analysis
results through a web interface and the UCSC Genome
Browser (text and Figure S7 in Additional file 1) [53].
All programs of FusionSeq take as input one of the
standard formats we defined (Additional file 1), and
additional tools convert them into files that can be
interpreted by the UCSC Genome Browser, such as
WIGGLE, BED or GFF. This integration is facilitated by
the use of a web interface to interrogate the samples.
The user selects the sample and the list of potential candidates is shown with the candidates sorted according to
DASPER (Figure S7a in Additional file 1). Information
regarding the genes involved, such as gene symbols
(including aliases), gene description and genomic

Authors’ contributions

ASB conceived, developed and implemented FusionSeq,
analyzed the data and drafted the manuscript; LH
devised, developed and implemented modules of FusionSeq; DP and ST prepared the samples for sequencing,
provided feedback for the development of FusionSeq,
and experimentally validated the results; DZC developed
SeqViz; JSR conceived the use of the abnormal insertsize concept; AKT collected and provided high-quality
prostate cancer samples; NK and BJM prepared and
sequenced the samples at Rubin lab; MSC sequenced
samples at Prognosys Biosciences and provided useful
feedback for the development of FusionSeq; FD analyzed
the data and drafted the manuscript; MAR coordinated

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

the collection of the samples, provided insights during
the development of FusionSeq and the experimental
validations, and drafted the manuscript; MBG coordinated the development of FusionSeq, devised some of
the filters, helped analyze the data and drafted the
manuscript.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary material, tables and figures. The
results of different mapping tools and approaches, the description of
additional filters that are annotation specific, more details about data
formats, and the visualization tools.

Page 18 of 19

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the support of the ‘Yale University
Biomedical High Performance Computing Center’ and NIH grant no.
RR19895, which funded the computer cluster instrumentation where the
analysis has been performed, National Cancer Institute grant R01CA125612
to MAR and FD, National Human Genome Research Institute grant
5R44HG004237 to MC, the Prostate Cancer Foundation, and the Breslin
Foundation.
Author details
1
Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, 300
George Street, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. 2Molecular Biophysics and
Biochemistry Department, Yale University, 260 Whitney Avenue, New Haven,
CT 06520, USA. 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.
4
Department of Urology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 525 East 68th Street,
New York, NY 10065, USA. 5Prognosys Biosciences, Inc., 505 Coast Blvd
South, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. 6Institute for Computational Biomedicine,
Weill Cornell Medical College, 1305 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.
7
Department of Computer Science, Yale University, 51 Prospect Street, New
Haven, CT 06511, USA.
Received: 14 April 2010 Revised: 12 August 2010
Accepted: 21 October 2010 Published: 21 October 2010

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.

20.
21.

References
1. Nagalakshmi U, Wang Z, Waern K, Shou C, Raha D, Gerstein M, Snyder M:
The Transcriptional landscape of the yeast genome defined by RNA
sequencing. Science 2008, 320:1344-1349.
2. Wang Z, Gerstein M, Snyder M: RNA-Seq: a revolutionary tool for
transcriptomics. Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10:57-63.
3. Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L, Wold B: Mapping and
quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nat Methods 2008,
5:621-628.
4. Hillier LW, Reinke V, Green P, Hirst M, Marra MA, Waterston RH: Massively
parallel sequencing of the polyadenylated transcriptome of C. elegans.
Genome Res 2009, 19:657-666.
5. Sultan M, Schulz MH, Richard H, Magen A, Klingenhoff A, Scherf M,
Seifert M, Borodina T, Soldatov A, Parkhomchuk D, Schmidt D, O’Keeffe S,
Haas S, Vingron M, Lehrach H, Yaspo M: A global view of gene activity
and alternative splicing by deep sequencing of the human
transcriptome. Science 2008, 321:956-960.
6. Venables JP, Klinck R, Bramard A, Inkel L, Dufresne-Martin G, Koh C, GervaisBird J, Lapointe E, Froehlich U, Durand M, Gendron D, Brosseau J,
Thibault P, Lucier J, Tremblay K, Prinos P, Wellinger RJ, Chabot B,
Rancourt C, Elela SA: Identification of alternative splicing markers for
breast cancer. Cancer Res 2008, 68:9525-9531.
7. Pan Q, Shai O, Lee LJ, Frey BJ, Blencowe BJ: Deep surveying of alternative
splicing complexity in the human transcriptome by high-throughput
sequencing. Nat Genet 2008, 40:1413-1415.

22.
23.

24.

25.
26.

27.

Wang ET, Sandberg R, Luo S, Khrebtukova I, Zhang L, Mayr C, Kingsmore SF,
Schroth GP, Burge CB: Alternative isoform regulation in human tissue
transcriptomes. Nature 2008, 456:470-476.
Ramsköld D, Wang ET, Burge CB, Sandberg R: An abundance of
ubiquitously expressed genes revealed by tissue transcriptome
sequence data. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000598.
Agarwal A, Koppstein D, Rozowsky J, Sboner A, Habegger L, Hillier L,
Sasidharan R, Reinke V, Waterston R, Gerstein M: Comparison and
calibration of transcriptome data from RNA-Seq and tiling arrays. BMC
Genomics 2010, 11:383.
The ENCODE Project Consortium: Identification and analysis of functional
elements in 1% of the human genome by the ENCODE pilot project.
Nature 2007, 447:799-816.
Celniker SE, Dillon LAL, Gerstein MB, Gunsalus KC, Henikoff S, Karpen GH,
Kellis M, Lai EC, Lieb JD, MacAlpine DM, Micklem G, Piano F, Snyder M,
Stein L, White KP, Waterston RH: Unlocking the secrets of the genome.
Nature 2009, 459:927-930.
Maher CA, Kumar-Sinha C, Cao X, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Han B, Jing X,
Sam L, Barrette T, Palanisamy N, Chinnaiyan AM: Transcriptome
sequencing to detect gene fusions in cancer. Nature 2009, 458:97-101.
Pflueger D, Rickman DS, Sboner A, Perner S, LaFargue CJ, Svensson MA,
Moss BJ, Kitabayashi N, Pan Y, de la Taille A, Kuefer R, Tewari AK,
Demichelis F, Chee MS, Gerstein MB, Rubin MA: N-myc downstream
regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) is fused to ERG in prostate cancer. Neoplasia
2009, 11:804-811.
Maher CA, Palanisamy N, Brenner JC, Cao X, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Luo S,
Khrebtukova I, Barrette TR, Grasso C, Yu J, Lonigro RJ, Schroth G, KumarSinha C, Chinnaiyan AM: Chimeric transcript discovery by paired-end
transcriptome sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:12353-12358.
Gingeras TR: Implications of chimaeric non-co-linear transcripts. Nature
2009, 461:206-211.
Zhao Q, Caballero OL, Levy S, Stevenson BJ, Iseli C, de Souza SJ, Galante PA,
Busam D, Leversha MA, Chadalavada K, Rogers Y, Venter JC, Simpson AJG,
Strausberg RL: Transcriptome-guided characterization of genomic
rearrangements in a breast cancer cell line. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:1886-1891.
Li H, Wang J, Mor G, Sklar J: A neoplastic gene fusion mimics transsplicing of RNAs in normal human cells. Science 2008, 321:1357-1361.
Rickman DS, Pflueger D, Moss B, VanDoren VE, Chen CX, de la Taille A,
Kuefer R, Tewari AK, Setlur SR, Demichelis F, Rubin MA: SLC45A3-ELK4 is a
novel and frequent erythroblast transformation-specific fusion transcript
in prostate cancer. Cancer Res 2009, 69:2734-2738.
Mitelman F: Recurrent chromosome aberrations in cancer. Mutat Res
2000, 462:247-253.
Mitelman F, Johansson B, Mertens F: Fusion genes and rearranged genes
as a linear function of chromosome aberrations in cancer. Nat Genet
2004, 36:331-334.
Mitelman F, Johansson B, Mertens F: The impact of translocations and
gene fusions on cancer causation. Nat Rev Cancer 2007, 7:233-245.
Tomlins SA, Rhodes DR, Perner S, Dhanasekaran SM, Mehra R, Sun X,
Varambally S, Cao X, Tchinda J, Kuefer R, Lee C, Montie JE, Shah RB,
Pienta KJ, Rubin MA, Chinnaiyan AM: Recurrent fusion of TMPRSS2 and
ETS transcription factor genes in prostate cancer. Science 2005,
310:644-648.
Soda M, Choi YL, Enomoto M, Takada S, Yamashita Y, Ishikawa S, Fujiwara S,
Watanabe H, Kurashina K, Hatanaka H, Bando M, Ohno S, Ishikawa Y,
Aburatani H, Niki T, Sohara Y, Sugiyama Y, Mano H: Identification of the
transforming EML4-ALK fusion gene in non-small-cell lung cancer. Nature
2007, 448:561-566.
Kumar-Sinha C, Tomlins SA, Chinnaiyan AM: Recurrent gene fusions in
prostate cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2008, 8:497-511.
Guffanti A, Iacono M, Pelucchi P, Kim N, Solda G, Croft L, Taft R, Rizzi E,
Askarian-Amiri M, Bonnal R, Callari M, Mignone F, Pesole G, Bertalot G,
Bernardi L, Albertini A, Lee C, Mattick J, Zucchi I, De Bellis G: A
transcriptional sketch of a primary human breast cancer by 454 deep
sequencing. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:163.
Korbel JO, Urban AE, Affourtit JP, Godwin B, Grubert F, Simons JF, Kim PM,
Palejev D, Carriero NJ, Du L, Taillon BE, Chen Z, Tanzer A, Saunders ACE,
Chi J, Yang F, Carter NP, Hurles ME, Weissman SM, Harkins TT, Gerstein MB,

Sboner et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R104
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/10/R104

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.
36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

Egholm M, Snyder M: Paired-end mapping reveals extensive structural
variation in the human genome. Science 2007, 318:420-426.
The Human Genome Structural Variation Working Group: Completing the
map of human genetic variation. Nature 2007, 447:161-165.
Campbell PJ, Stephens PJ, Pleasance ED, O’Meara S, Li H, Santarius T,
Stebbings LA, Leroy C, Edkins S, Hardy C, Teague JW, Menzies A,
Goodhead I, Turner DJ, Clee CM, Quail MA, Cox A, Brown C, Durbin R,
Hurles ME, Edwards PAW, Bignell GR, Stratton MR, Futreal PA: Identification
of somatically acquired rearrangements in cancer using genome-wide
massively parallel paired-end sequencing. Nat Genet 2008, 40:722-729.
Bentley DR, Balasubramanian S, Swerdlow HP, Smith GP, Milton J,
Brown CG, Hall KP, Evers DJ, Barnes CL, Bignell HR, Boutell JM, Bryant J,
Carter RJ, Keira Cheetham R, Cox AJ, Ellis DJ, Flatbush MR, Gormley NA,
Humphray SJ, Irving LJ, Karbelashvili MS, Kirk SM, Li H, Liu X, Maisinger KS,
Murray LJ, Obradovic B, Ost T, Parkinson ML, Pratt MR, et al: Accurate
whole human genome sequencing using reversible terminator
chemistry. Nature 2008, 456:53-59.
Bashir A, Volik S, Collins C, Bafna V, Raphael BJ: Evaluation of paired-end
sequencing strategies for detection of genome rearrangements in
cancer. PLoS Comput Biol 2008, 4:e1000051.
Wu TD, Nacu S: Fast and SNP-tolerant detection of complex variants and
splicing in short reads. Bioinformatics 2010, 26:873-881.
Ameur A, Wetterbom A, Feuk L, Gyllensten U: Global and unbiased
detection of splice junctions from RNA-seq data. Genome Biol 2010, 11:
R34.
FusionSeq: a modular framework for finding gene fusions by analyzing
paired-end RNA-sequencing data. [http://rnaseq.gersteinlab.org/fusionseq/
].
Hsu F, Kent WJ, Clawson H, Kuhn RM, Diekhans M, Haussler D: The UCSC
Known Genes. Bioinformatics 2006, 22:1036-1046.
Li H, Coghlan A, Ruan J, Coin LJ, Hériché J, Osmotherly L, Li R, Liu T,
Zhang Z, Bolund L, Wong GK, Zheng W, Dehal P, Wang J, Durbin R:
TreeFam: a curated database of phylogenetic trees of animal gene
families. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:D572-580.
Ruan J, Li H, Chen Z, Coghlan A, Coin LJM, Guo Y, Heriche J, Hu Y,
Kristiansen K, Li R, Liu T, Moses A, Qin J, Vang S, Vilella AJ, Ureta-Vidal A,
Bolund L, Wang J, Durbin R: TreeFam: 2008 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:D735-740.
Quail MA, Kozarewa I, Smith F, Scally A, Stephens PJ, Durbin R, Swerdlow H,
Turner DJ: A large genome center’s improvements to the Illumina
sequencing system. Nat Methods 2008, 5:1005-1010.
Volik S, Zhao S, Chin K, Brebner JH, Herndon DR, Tao Q, Kowbel D,
Huang G, Lapuk A, Kuo W, Magrane G, De Jong P, Gray JW, Collins C: Endsequence profiling: sequence-based analysis of aberrant genomes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:7696-7701.
Tuzun E, Sharp AJ, Bailey JA, Kaul R, Morrison VA, Pertz LM, Haugen E,
Hayden H, Albertson D, Pinkel D, Olson MV, Eichler EE: Fine-scale structural
variation of the human genome. Nat Genet 2005, 37:727-732.
Korbel J, Abyzov A, Mu X, Carriero N, Cayting P, Zhang Z, Snyder M,
Gerstein M: PEMer: a computational framework with simulation-based
error models for inferring genomic structural variants from massive
paired-end sequencing data. Genome Biol 2009, 10:R23.
Taylor TD, Noguchi H, Totoki Y, Toyoda A, Kuroki Y, Dewar K, Lloyd C,
Itoh T, Takeda T, Kim D, She X, Barlow KF, Bloom T, Bruford E, Chang JL,
Cuomo CA, Eichler E, FitzGerald MG, Jaffe DB, LaButti K, Nicol R, Park H,
Seaman C, Sougnez C, Yang X, Zimmer AR, Zody MC, Birren BW,
Nusbaum C, Fujiyama A, et al: Human chromosome 11 DNA sequence
and analysis including novel gene identification. Nature 2006,
440:497-500.
Pflueger D, Terry S, Sboner A, Habegger L, Esgueva R, Lin P, Svensson MA,
Kitabayashi N, Moss BM, MacDonald TY, Tewari AK, Chee MS, Rickman DS,
Demichelis F, Gerstein MB, Rubin MA: Discovery of non-ETS gene fusions
in human prostate cancer using next generation RNA sequencing.
Genome Res 2010.
Jhavar S, Reid A, Clark J, Kote-Jarai Z, Christmas T, Thompson A,
Woodhouse C, Ogden C, Fisher C, Corbishley C, De-Bono J, Eeles R,
Brewer D, Cooper C: Detection of TMPRSS2-ERG translocations in human
prostate cancer by expression profiling using GeneChip human exon 1.0
ST arrays. J Mol Diagn 2008, 10:50-57.

Page 19 of 19

45. Tomlins SA, Bjartell A, Chinnaiyan AM, Jenster G, Nam RK, Rubin MA,
Schalken JA: ETS gene fusions in prostate cancer: from discovery to daily
clinical practice. Eur Urol 2009, 56:275-286.
46. Wang J, Cai Y, Ren C, Ittmann M: Expression of variant TMPRSS2/ERG
fusion messenger RNAs is associated with aggressive prostate cancer.
Cancer Res 2006, 66:8347-8351.
47. Wang J, Cai Y, Yu W, Ren C, Spencer DM, Ittmann M: Pleiotropic biological
activities of alternatively spliced TMPRSS2/ERG fusion gene transcripts.
Cancer Res 2008, 68:8516-8524.
48. Krzywinski M, Schein J, Birol I, Connors J, Gascoyne R, Horsman D, Jones SJ,
Marra MA: Circos: an information aesthetic for comparative genomics.
Genome Res 2009, 19:1639-1645.
49. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg S: Ultrafast and memory-efficient
alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol
2009, 10:R25.
50. Kent WJ: BLAT - the BLAST-Like Alignment Tool. Genome Res 2002,
12:656-664.
51. RepeatMasker Home Page. [http://www.repeatmasker.org/].
52. Jurka J: Repbase update: a database and an electronic journal of
repetitive elements. Trends Genet 2000, 16:418-420.
53. Kent WJ, Sugnet CW, Furey TS, Roskin KM, Pringle TH, Zahler AM,
Haussler AD: The Human Genome Browser at UCSC. Genome Res 2002,
12:996-1006.
54. Krzywinski MI, Schein JE, Birol I, Connors J, Gascoyne R, Horsman D,
Jones SJ, Marra MA: Circos: An information aesthetic for comparative
genomics. Genome Res 2009, 19:1639-1645.
55. dbGaP. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap].
56. Clark J, Merson S, Jhavar S, Flohr P, Edwards S, Foster CS, Eeles R, Martin FL,
Phillips DH, Crundwell M, Christmas T, Thompson A, Fisher C, Kovacs G,
Cooper CS: Diversity of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion transcripts in the human
prostate. Oncogene 2006, 26:2667-2673.
57. Hubbard T, Barker D, Birney E, Cameron G, Chen Y, Clark L, Cox T, Cuff J,
Curwen V, Down T, Durbin R, Eyras E, Gilbert J, Hammond M, Huminiecki L,
Kasprzyk A, Lehvaslaiho H, Lijnzaad P, Melsopp C, Mongin E, Pettett R,
Pocock M, Potter S, Rust A, Schmidt E, Searle S, Slater G, Smith J,
Spooner W, Stabenau A, et al: The Ensembl genome database project.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:38-41.
58. RSEQtools. [http://archive.gersteinlab.org/proj/rnaseq/rseqtools/].
59. Habegger L, Sboner A, Gianoulis TA, Rozowsky JS, Agarwal A, Snyder M,
Gerstein MB: RSEQtools: a modular framework to analyze RNA-Seq data
using compact, anonymized data summaries. Bioinformatics .
60. Liu W, Ewing CM, Chang B, Li T, Sun J, Turner AR, Dimitrov L, Zhu Y, Sun J,
Kim JW, Zheng SL, Isaacs WB, Xu J: Multiple genomic alterations on
21q22 predict various TMPRSS2/ERG fusion transcripts in human
prostate cancers. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2007, 46:972-980.
doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-10-r104
Cite this article as: Sboner et al.: FusionSeq: a modular framework for
finding gene fusions by analyzing paired-end RNA-sequencing data.
Genome Biology 2010 11:R104.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
