<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution of the axial system in craniates: morphology and function of the perivertebral musculature</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-4"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Nadja Schilling"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

REVIEW

Open Access

Evolution of the axial system in craniates:
morphology and function of the perivertebral
musculature
Nadja Schilling

Abstract
The axial musculoskeletal system represents the plesiomorphic locomotor engine of the vertebrate body, playing a
central role in locomotion. In craniates, the evolution of the postcranial skeleton is characterized by two major
transformations. First, the axial skeleton became increasingly functionally and morphologically regionalized. Second,
the axial-based locomotion plesiomorphic for craniates became progressively appendage-based with the evolution
of extremities in tetrapods. These changes, together with the transition to land, caused increased complexity in the
planes in which axial movements occur and moments act on the body and were accompanied by profound
changes in axial muscle function. To increase our understanding of the evolutionary transformations of the
structure and function of the perivertebral musculature, this review integrates recent anatomical and physiological
data (e.g., muscle fiber types, activation patterns) with gross-anatomical and kinematic findings for pivotal craniate
taxa. This information is mapped onto a phylogenetic hypothesis to infer the putative character set of the last
common ancestor of the respective taxa and to conjecture patterns of locomotor and muscular evolution. The
increasing anatomical and functional complexity in the muscular arrangement during craniate evolution is
associated with changes in fiber angulation and fiber-type distribution, i.e., increasing obliqueness in fiber
orientation and segregation of fatigue-resistant fibers in deeper muscle regions. The loss of superficial fatigueresistant fibers may be related to the profound gross anatomical reorganization of the axial musculature during the
tetrapod evolution. The plesiomorphic function of the axial musculature -mobilization- is retained in all craniates.
Along with the evolution of limbs and the subsequent transition to land, axial muscles additionally function to
globally stabilize the trunk against inertial and extrinsic limb muscle forces as well as gravitational forces.
Associated with the evolution of sagittal mobility and a parasagittal limb posture, axial muscles in mammals also
stabilize the trunk against sagittal components of extrinsic limb muscle action as well as the inertia of the body’s
center of mass. Thus, the axial system is central to the static and dynamic control of the body posture in all
craniates and, in gnathostomes, additionally provides the foundation for the mechanical work of the appendicular
system.
Introduction
The axial musculoskeletal system represents the plesiomorphic propulsive engine of the vertebrate body and
maintains a central role in locomotion in all craniates.
Considering its evolutionary antecedence to the appendicular system and its importance for locomotion, our
understanding of the axial system is surprisingly limited
compared to our understanding of the limbs.
Correspondence: nadja.schilling@uni-jena.de
Institute of Systematic Zoology and Evolutionary Biology, Friedrich-SchillerUniversity Jena, Germany

The evolution of the axial system is marked by profound changes in its morphology and function. The
increasing differentiation of its muscular, neural, and
skeletal elements is certainly partly responsible for the
diversity of locomotor mechanics among craniates. The
arrangements of the axial musculature among vertebrates show at least as much diversity as any other muscle system. Understanding the adaptive value of the
various muscular arrangements is an undertaking to
which this review attempts to contribute. To develop a
plausible scenario of the evolutionary transitions in the
structure and function of the perivertebral musculature,

© 2011 Schilling; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

the functional, anatomical, and physiological characters
of representatives of pivotal taxa were mapped onto a
phylogenetic hypothesis. Such an approach allows inference of the most likely character set of the last common
ancestor of the respective taxa as well as informed speculations concerning the patterns of locomotor and muscular evolution. The function of a muscle can be deduced
from morphological and physiological variables such as
its topography, fiber architecture, fiber-type composition,
in-vivo muscle strain and ex-vivo work loops. The integration of these data with other physiological data such
as the muscle’s activity as well as with biomechanical
data such as the associated locomotor kinematics allows
one to test functional hypotheses and to infer a muscle’s
possible functions. Because only some of these variables
have been studied in axial muscles of a number of craniates, inference of the muscle function will be based on a
subset of this ideally available information (i.e., muscle
topography, fiber architecture, fiber-type composition,
activation patterns, kinematics).
Parts of the proposed scenario cannot be tested directly
because some kinds of information, such as data about
soft tissues, are either inadequately preserved in the fossil
record or are missing altogether. An indirect method, the
‘extant phylogenetic bracket’ often allows reconstruction
of soft tissue characters of fossils [1]. Hypotheses are
thereby formulated by evaluating osteological character
states causally related with the tested characters in at
least the first two extant outgroups of the fossil taxon of
interest [outgroup rule, [2]]. Regarding the axial system,
simple inference from extant sister taxa fails in some
cases because of the fundamental anatomical differences
among the groups and the absence of the critical osteological traits in the respective sister taxa. Additionally, the
data available on soft tissue characters such as fiber composition are currently too incomplete for many extant
craniates to allow a strict phylogenetic reconstruction of
the evolution of their axial system. Assuming that the
same biomechanical laws operate now as have in the
past, the inferred intramuscular transformations that
accompanied gross-anatomical and functional changes
during craniate evolution were inferred from studying
species that resemble the hypothetical last common
ancestor of the particular taxon of interest. For that reason, this review focuses on specific craniate taxa only.
Groups highly derived in their postcranial anatomy and
locomotor style such as snakes, birds, or monotremes
were not included in the proposed scenario; although, of
course, they would be potentially interesting and relevant
to some of the major themes discussed below.
Axial muscles may serve a number of different locomotor functions. They may produce movements of the axial
skeleton that generate positive or negative external work
(referred to as mobilization). They also may counteract,

Page 2 of 19

control, or restrict movements that are either passively
induced by gravitational or inertial forces, actively produced by antagonists, or transmitted to the trunk by
extrinsic limb muscles, i.e. they stabilize the trunk. Such
stabilizing role may involve long periods of activation, for
example to ensure such as the structural linking of the
skeletal elements (called tonic, local stabilization), but also
faster, briefer muscle action for quick responses for example required to stabilize the trunk against rapid loading
(dynamic, global stabilization). Accordingly, local stabilizers can be expected to contain high proportions of fatigue-resistant fibers and are likely in close proximity to the
joint they stabilize, while global stabilizers should contain
primarily fast contracting fibers and be well effectively
positioned relative to the axis of motion. Mobilization, for
example to produce body propulsion, may involve slow or
fast fibers depending on locomotor speed. As is the case
for global stabilizers, mobilizers are expected to be well
situated for the production of locomotor work. This classification, first proposed as human-specific trait based on
their back muscle topography and activity [3,4], was
adopted and further developed by research on other mammalian species [e.g., [5,6]], and revealed as generally
applicable to the trunk musculature of tetrapods [e.g., [7]].
Although too strict categorization risks oversimplification,
because muscles likely fulfill different functions during different behaviors or even the course of one behavior, such
classification of the perivertebral muscles into local and
global stabilizers as well as global mobilizers has heuristic
value and provides a framework for the formulation of testable hypotheses [8]. Because the evolution of the axial
muscle function and morphology is tightly linked to the
evolution of the postcranial skeleton, a few relevant
aspects of the evolutionary transformations in the postcranial skeleton will first be summarized before the evolution
of the perivertebral musculature is discussed.

Evolution of the postcranial skeleton
The evolution in the postcranial system in craniates
from the agnathan fish ancestors to mammals is characterized by two major transformations. First, the axial
skeleton became more and more regionalized. Second,
the ancestrally axial-based locomotion became increasingly appendage-based with the evolution of extremities
and their reorganization within tetrapods. Both events
were associated with fundamental changes in the body
planes in which movements occur and moments act on
the body. Furthermore, the moments acting on the
trunk changed substantially during tetrapod evolution
with the transition to land.
In petromyzontids, the axial skeleton consists of more
or less similar, arch shaped elements situated dorsally to
the notochord (arcualia) (Figure 1). In gnathostome
fishes, the vertebral column is regionalized into trunk

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

Page 3 of 19

Figure 1 Hypothesized evolutionary transformations of the morphology and function of the axial system in craniates. Data were
compiled from various sources (see text) and mapped onto a simplified phylogenetic hypothesis based on [71]. Character states plesiomorphic
for craniates are indicated by arrows. – Axial skeleton (rectangles): Notochordates (i.e., Cephalochordata + Craniata) ancestrally possess a
notochord, eponymous for the group. In early vertebrates, cranio-caudally uniform vertebral elements evolved (VE). In gnathostomes, the axial
skeleton is regionalized. A trunk (= dorsal, D) and tail region (caudal, CD) are distinguished in gnathostome fishes, while a cervical (C), truncal,
sacral (S), and caudal region are present in early tetrapods. In mammals, the truncal region is further subdivided into a thoracic (T) and a lumbar
(L) region. – Axial musculature (circles): Gross anatomy and fiber orientation: Transformations in the arrangement of the perivertebral
musculature are illustrated by schematic cross-sections showing the gross-anatomical changes (left) and cartoons of a few body segments in

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

Page 4 of 19

lateral perspective illustrating the changes in muscle and/or fiber arrangement (right). Dorsal and ventral parts of the myomeres are innervated
by separate rami of the ventral root in agnathan fishes (light and dark brown). In each segment, muscle fibers span longitudinally between
adjacent myosepta. In gnathostomes, the dorsal and ventral myomere parts are morphologically separated by the horizontal septum (pink)
resulting in epaxial (ep) and hypaxial (hy) muscles. Likely associated with the evolutionarily new requirements to stabilize the body against longaxis torsion, deeper muscle fibers are obliquely oriented. In non-amniote tetrapods, the epaxial musculature retained its segmental organization
in contrast to the hypaxial musculature, which comprises the polysegmental subvertebral (sv) and the abdominal wall muscles (the latter are not
shown here). The majority of the epaxial fibers connects adjacent myosepta longitudinally, while deeper fibers run at different angles. In
amniotes, the epaxial musculature is reorganized into three longitudinal and polysegmental muscle tracts (tr: transversospinal, lo: longissimus, ilc:
iliocostalis). In mammals, the transversospinal muscle is subdivided into several entities forming the transversospinal system (trs). The mammalian
ventrovertebral musculature is strengthened by the psoas major (ps). – Axial muscle function (diamonds): The plesiomorphic function of the
axial musculature is to mobilize the body in the horizontal plane. The horizontal and torsional moments that result from the evolution of fins
and a heterocercal tail, which tend to laterally bend the trunk and cause long-axis torsion, respectively, have to be counteracted by the axial
muscles in gnathostome fishes. In tetrapods, as a consequence of the evolution of supporting limbs and transition to land, the axial muscles
additionally function to globally stabilize the trunk against inertial and extrinsic limb muscle forces as well as against gravitational forces. Note
that the evolution of limbs preceded the transition to land. In tetrapods with a sprawled limb posture, extrinsic limb muscle forces in the
horizontal plane are relatively large. The greater agility and maneuverability as well as an increased importance of limb action for body
propulsion, likely requires the axial muscles to dynamically stabilize the trunk to a greater extent in amniotes than in non-amniote tetrapods.
Associated with the evolution of sagittal mobility and a parasagittal limb posture in mammals, the axial muscles additionally function to globally
stabilize the trunk against sagittal components of extrinsic limb muscle action as well as against inertia. Furthermore, the axial musculature
mobilizes the trunk in the sagittal plane during asymmetrical gaits.

and tail by the presence of ribs and large neural and
hemal spines, whereas cervical, truncal, sacral, and tail
regions are distinguished in tetrapods. In mammals, the
truncal series was further subdivided into a thoracic and
a lumbar region, resulting in altogether five morphologically and functionally different divisions of the vertebral
column (Figure 1).
Subdivisions of the axial skeleton allow particular body
regions to be morphologically and physiologically specialized for certain functions such as body propulsion.
For example, the primary function of the tail in gnathostome fishes is propelling the body by lateral undulations
[e.g., carangiform swimming, [9]] and therefore it must
allow lateral flexion but resist longitudinal compression.
In adaptation to this locomotor function, the tail region
has no ribs and large hemal arches to provide attachment sites and leverage for the axial muscles. This cranio-caudal regionalization of the body is augmented by
soft tissue traits such as differences in fiber population
[10,11], fiber contractile properties [12,13] or the
arrangement of the connective tissue [14-16]. The
reduction of the role of trunk bending in locomotion in
carangiform swimmers compared to anguilliform locomotion, as for example in agnathans, may reduce pressure peaks in the body cavity, and thereby interference
with inner organ function, but first and foremost it
reduces the internal work of locomotion because only
part of the body undergoes bending. Similarly, the formation of functional regions of the mammalian trunk
facilitated specialization of the vertebral series. The
thoracic region allows movements in the horizontal and
transverse planes, reflected by more or less horizontally
oriented zygapophyses, and the presence of ribs forming
the rib cage provides rigidity for the thorax to ensure

lung function [17-20]. In contrast, intense motions in
the sagittal plane are facilitated in the rib-free lumbar
region due to vertical zygapophyses [19-21].
In contrast to the primarily axial-based locomotion of
aquatic craniates, body propulsion results from integrated action of trunk and limbs in tetrapods. Therefore,
in addition to the plesiomorphic function of contributing to the work of locomotion, the body axis provides
the foundation for the production of mechanical work
by the limbs, and thus is central to the static and
dynamic control of body posture and the integration of
coordinated actions of the limbs in all tetrapods. In the
lineage leading from the hypothesized ancestor of tetrapods to therian mammals, body propulsion became
increasingly dependent on limb action. In salamanders
and lizards, the fore- and hindlimbs are composed of
three serially homologous elements that function
roughly in the same manner regarding their range of
excursion and positioning during locomotion [22]. The
evolutionary transformation from the ancestral (tetrapod) sprawled limb posture to the derived parasagittal
position in therian mammals entailed a dissociation of
serial and functional homologues [23,24]. With the
reduction of the coracoid, the scapula lost its rigid connection to the trunk in therian mammals and gained
mobility unique among tetrapods. In the hindlimb, the
proximal part of the autopodium was elongated to form
a new functional segment. As a result, the typical therian limb consists of three functionally equivalent elements plus a contact segment [i.e., scapula-femur,
humerus-shank, lower arm-metatarsus, hand-toes
[23,25]]. Associated with the evolution of a parasagittal
limb posture was a fundamental change in the moments
that act on the trunk. While extrinsic pro- and retractor

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

Page 5 of 19

muscle activity can be expected to act primarily in the
horizontal plane and thus cause lateral bending in a
sprawled limb posture, swinging the legs back and forth
in a parasagittal plane results in the limb pro- and
retractors acting on the trunk in the sagittal plane and
thus causing sagittal bending [26]. Furthermore, the lateral components of the propulsive forces, that tend to
laterally bend the trunk and exert rotational torque on
the girdles, are larger in an animal with a sprawled limb
posture compared to one with parasagittal limb motion
[27]vs. [28].

slow frequency swimming, as has been shown for various gnathostome fishes (see below), but unfortunately,
no separate recordings from the parietal vs. the central
fibers exist.
Given the great similarities in myotome organization
between lancelets and agnathan craniates [29,38,46,47],
the morphology and the function of the axial musculature of agnathan craniates to 1) produce lateral bending,
and thus to mobilize the trunk, and 2) to modulate the
body’s stiffness are most likely plesiomorphic for craniates (Figure 1).

Evolution of axial muscle function and
morphology

Gnathostome fishes

Agnathans

The organization of the axial musculature into serial
units (i.e., myomeres) by a complex myoseptal system is
plesiomorphic for craniates (Figures. 1, 2). Each myomere is composed of a superficial layer of tonic fibers
and a central stack of twitch fibers, all fibers spanning
longitudinally between adjacent myosepta [29-35]. The
dorsal part of the myomere is innervated by a dorsal
branch of the ventral root, while the ventral portion is
innervated by a ventral branch [36]. These two myomere
portions are innervated by different motoneurons [37],
intermingled in the ventral portion of the gray matter of
the spinal chord [38]. Each motoneuron innervates muscle fibers in two or three myomeres, resulting in contractions that extend beyond a given segment [36].
Observations on swimming lampreys show a rhythmic,
alternating, and posteriorly propagating activation of the
axial musculature suitable for producing a traveling
wave of lateral bending [39,40]. In both, hagfish and
lampreys, the whole body is involved in the undulatory
movements with little longitudinal variation in either
the burst duration as a percentage of cycle duration or
in the lateral displacement [40,41] (i.e., anguilliform
swimming), which likely accounts for the anterior-posteriorly undifferentiated musculoskeletal system; the
body segments are a repetition of virtually identical subunits. The generated force is primarily transmitted to
the notochord by the myoseptal system. The notochord
occupies a position near the neutral axis of lateral bending and has been shown to 1) dominate the viscoelastic
properties of the body, 2) provide dynamic passive stability, and 3) act as a power amplifier in hagfish [42,43]. It
has been suggested that the muscular system actively
tunes the body’s stiffness in order to match its resonant
frequency to undulatory frequency during locomotion
[42-44]. Particularly the superficial, tonic fibers are well
suited to modulate the stiffness of the body over long
periods; possibly directly via the myoseptal system and
indirectly via the skin, onto which the myosepta attach
[45]. The parietal, tonic fibers could also be involved in

In contrast to agnathan fishes and lancelets, a transverse
septum (Septum horizontale) separates the myomeres
into epaxial and hypaxial parts in gnathostomes, which
are innervated by separate rami of the ventral root of
the spinal nerve. This general separation into epaxial
and hypaxial muscles is retained in all gnathostomes,
regardless of how profoundly the axial musculature was
reorganized in the different taxa. The traditional view of
epaxial and hypaxial muscles with their respective innervation is challenged however by the fact that dorsal and
ventral parts of the myomeres are also innervated by
separate rami in the hagfish [Peters, 1963, cited in [38]]
and the lamprey [37]. Therefore, the horizontal septum
morphologically separates two previously neurologically
distinct units in gnathostomes [48]. Further, in actinopterygian and lungfishes three rami emerging from the
ventral root innervate the dorsal, medial, and ventral
parts of a myomere, respectively [48-50]. Most likely
associated with that, the extreme dorsal and ventral portions show distinct activation patterns that are not
necessarily correlated with the activity of the central
fibers near the horizontal septum [51]. Nevertheless, the
horizontal septum represents the major transmitter of
muscle force to the axial skeleton [52], and therefore
represents an important locomotor adaptation apomorphic for gnathostome fishes (Figure 1).
Gnathostome fishes have complexly folded, W-shaped
myomeres [45,48,53], which are primarily composed of
twitch fibers. Tonic fibers are segregated superficially
and laterally in a wedge-shaped area close to the horizontal septum (Figure 2), providing good leverage for
the production of lateral bending [e.g., chondrichthyans:
[54,55]; actinopterygians: [47,56]; lungfish: [10]]. Considerable variation in the amount of tonic fibers and the
relative proportion of tonic to twitch fibers may occur
along the body or interspecifically and depending on
lifestyle [e.g., [10,57-59]], but the general arrangement is
very similar among gnathostome fishes. In chondrichthyan fishes, one spinal nerve innervates muscle fibers in
two adjacent myomeres [38]. Similar to agnathans, the
axial muscles of gnathostome fishes are activated

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

Page 6 of 19

Figure 2 Histological cross-sections of the perivertebral musculature showing the distribution of the muscle fiber types (left) and
schematic illustration of the segregations of fatigue-resistant fibers (right). Data were assembled from: hagfish, Myxine glutinosa: Sudan
black B staining [from [30], reproduced with permission of author and Springer Verlag]; velvet belly lantern shark, Etmopterus spinax: cross-section
from behind the anus, Sudan black B staining (Photos by P.R. Flood, Copyright by Bathybiologica AS); tiger salamander, Ambystoma tigrinum, 4th
external trunk segment, enzyme-histochemical reaction for mATPase (acid preincubation) [7]; desert iguana, Dipsosaurus dorsalis, 14th trunk
vertebra, combined enzyme-histochemical reaction for mATPase (alkaline preincubation) and NADH-TR (S. Moritz, unpubl. data); common vole,
Microtus arvalis, intervertebral level between 6th and 7th lumbar vertebrae, enzyme-histochemical reaction for mATPase (alkaline preincubation)
and NADH-TR [8]. Cross-sections were selected to illustrate of the muscular characters discussed in the text. Note that cranio-caudal changes in
the proportion of the respective fiber types may occur (see text for details).

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

alternating and sequentially consistent with the production of a traveling wave of trunk bending [e.g., chondrichthyan: [60]; actinopterygians: [59,61-63]; lungfish:
[64]]. Red, tonic fibers are active during low-tailbeat-frequency, sustained swimming, while white, twitch fibers
are additionally recruited during fast bursts and hightailbeat-frequency swimming [e.g., [65-70]].
The evolution of paired extremities increased the
maneuverability in gnathostomes [71]. The associated
extrinsic muscles apply forces to the body that induce
torsional and bending moments on the trunk. Because
many gnathostome fishes are neutrally buoyant, primarily the horizontal (fore/aft) and the lateral components
of the propulsive forces produced by the fins play a role
in locomotion. The horizontal components cause rotational torque on the girdles and thus lateral bending,
requiring preferably longitudinal fiber orientation for
stabilization, while the lateral components induce longaxis torsion and require an oblique fiber orientation
[26,72]. Because early representatives of gnathostomes
such as placoderms typically had a heterocercal tail fin,
additional torque about the long-axis of the body likely
resulted from tail beating. Compared to agnathan fishes,
in which the muscle fibers are oriented longitudinally
[29], the evolutionarily new requirements to stabilize the
body against long-axis torsion are reflected by the apomorphic oblique fiber orientation found in most
gnathostome fishes. For example, the fibers are parallel
to the long axis of the body in the superficial portion of
the epaxial myomeres, while deeper fibers run at angles
between 10° and 35° relative to the body axis [73]. In
the lateral hypaxial musculature, muscle fibers of the
two oblique layers have opposing radial orientations
[45], well suited to stabilize the body against long-axis
torsion (Figure 1). In addition, oblique fiber orientation
provides an advantage for shortening velocity due to the
greater architectural gear ratio, that is, a greater shortening distance resulting from fiber rotation as a consequence of the constant volume of the segment [74].
Hence, the axial musculature of non-tetrapod gnathostomes retained its plesiomorphic function of mobilizing
the body and producing locomotor work. Associated
with the evolution of fins and a heterocercal tail, the
axial musculature also stabilizes the body against the
locomotor forces produced by the extrinsic fin muscles
and torsional moments resulting from tail beating
(Figure 1). These new functions are reflected by an
oblique fiber orientation hypothesized to be apomorphic
for gnathostomes.
Tetrapods

The plesiomorphic segmental organization of the axial
musculature underwent stepwise reorganization during
the evolution of tetrapods. In salamanders, the only

Page 7 of 19

available postural model for early representatives of the
tetrapods, the epaxial musculature retained its plesiomorphic segmental arrangement in contrast to the
hypaxial muscles. The hypaxial musculature consists of
the abdominal wall muscles and a subvertebral muscle
mass, which is associated with the ventral aspect of the
vertebrae and ribs. Additional to the rectus system,
the abdominal wall generally comprises three layers: the
external and the internal oblique muscles as well as
the transversus muscle. The latter is an apomorphic feature of tetrapods [53] and involved in ventilation [75].
In most urodeles, the lateral hypaxial musculature is
secondarily segmentally organized by tendinous inscriptions [76,77] and displays different fiber angles depending on the layer [78,79]. Associated with the evolution
of polysegmental hypaxial muscles was likely a change
in muscle fiber type distribution from a superficial position of fatigue-resistant fibers in fishes to a deep localization in tetrapods such as salamanders [7]. As in
gnathostome fishes and thus plesiomorphic for tetrapods, the majority of the fibers connect adjacent myosepta longitudinally; only deeper fibers associated with
the vertebrae run at different angles within the epaxial
myomeres [80-82]. The segregation of the muscle fiber
types in the epaxial musculature of urodeles resembles
the pattern plesiomorphic for craniates [47,83]. That is,
tonic and slow-twitch fibers are co-localized superficially, while fast-twitch fibers form the bulk of the deep
muscle [7,84] (Figure 2). In the only two salamander
species for which data exist so far, this pattern is more
or less unchanged along the trunk [7].
Similar to fishes, when salamanders swim, their main
epaxial and all hypaxial muscles are active synchronously and alternating. Activation propagates along the
body, consistent in timing with the production of a traveling wave of lateral undulation [85-90]. Thus, in salamanders, most axial muscles mobilize the body during
swimming, i.e. their plesiomorphic function is retained.
In accordance with its poor mechanical advantage for
trunk bending and high percentage of tonic red and
twitch intermediate muscle fibers [7], the biphasic activity of the interspinalis muscle suggests that this muscle
functions in vertebral stabilization rather than lateral
bending [90]. Active modulation of the body’s stiffness
was suggested as one of the adaptations to swimming in
salamanders [85], and the superficial segregation of fatigue-resistant fibers in the dorsalis trunci muscle could
modulate the body stiffness via the myoseptal system
and the skin [7]. Unfortunately, no study has investigated the recruitment patterns of the different fiber
populations in this muscle, but the striking resemblance
of myomere organization to non-tetrapod craniates
invites such speculation. Nevertheless, when salamanders swim, most of their axial muscles produce lateral

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

bending, some likely also modulate the body’s stiffness,
and others provide local stabilization.
The evolution of limbs predated the transition to land
as has been argued based on the analysis of early representatives of tetrapods such as Acanthostega [91] and
members of the sister-group of tetrapods such as Tiktaalik [92]. Because aquatic stepping was likely the primitive locomotor function of the tetrapod limb [93],
trunk stabilization against locomotor forces produced by
extrinsic limb muscles is evolutionarily older than stabilization against gravitational forces. Thus, the evolutionary transition to land, basically a transition from high to
low viscosity and density and from low to high gravitational loads, was primarily associated with decreased
inertia and drag during the limb’s swing phase and
increased gravitational loading of the body resulting in
increased postural work for limb and trunk muscles
[94]. Furthermore, the vertical components of the forces
produced by the limbs, that are partially compensated
by buoyancy during aquatic stepping, induce long-axis
torsion of the body during terrestrial stepping [26].
A comparison of axial muscle activity during aquatic
and terrestrial stepping showed that muscle recruitment
(i.e., intensity) increased in all trunk muscles, despite
similar temporal patterns of muscle activation [90]. This
suggests that the trunk is stiffened during terrestrial locomotion, whereas the basic functions of the muscles are
conserved across environments. Consistent with this, the
perivertebral musculature contains an overall higher proportion of red tonic and intermediate twitch fibers in salamanders when compared to other sarcopterygians such
as lungfish. Comparisons of the fiber type composition in
various ecotypes, for example of predominantly terrestrial
vs. aquatic species would allow testing this hypothesis. In
addition, fatigue-resistant fibers are segregated in a central region of the lateral part and in ventral proximity to
the vertebral column in the medial part of the subvertebral muscle, allowing them to provide stability against torsion and sagging, respectively [7].
During both aquatic and terrestrial stepping, body propulsion is achieved by concerted trunk and limb muscle
action in salamanders. Lateral bending was suggested to
be actively produced by the trunk muscles to facilitate
the placement of the feet, which serve as anchors and
contribute to stride length [95,96]. But lateral bending
may also result passively from extrinsic limb muscle
action acting on the trunk via the limb girdles [97,98].
Consistent with the production of a standing wave of lateral bending, uniphasic and cranio-caudally synchronized
activity of the majority of the trunk muscles has been
observed [85-90] (Figure 3). Additional bursts close to
limb girdles indicate that the dorsalis trunci muscle also
stabilizes the trunk against limb muscle action [88]. This
additional activity likely serves to dynamically stabilize

Page 8 of 19

the trunk in the horizontal plane. Accordingly, the muscle primarily contains white twitch fibers [7,99], which
are arranged parallel to the long-axis of the body
[80,81,100] and the fore/aft and lateral components of
extrinsic limb muscle action can be expected to be
greater than the vertical ones given the sprawled limb
posture. Consistent with their oblique fiber orientation
[77,80], activity of the lateral hypaxial muscles resists
long-axis torsion [86,89,90]. The biphasic activity of the
fatigue-resistant interspinalis muscle suggests that it
functions as a local stabilizer during stepping, similar to
its function during swimming [90].
In summary, the axial musculature of basal tetrapods
such as salamanders mobilizes the trunk by producing
lateral bending, modulates body stiffness (both putative
plesiomorphic) and provides local stability to ensure the
integrity of the axial skeleton during swimming (putative
apomorphic for tetrapods). During aquatic stepping, it
additionally resists extrinsic limb muscle forces causing
lateral bending and long-axis torsion of the trunk; functions likely plesiomorphic for the group. During terrestrial locomotion, the axial musculature also stabilizes
the body against gravitational forces (Figure 1); an apomorphic function for terrestrial tetrapods.
Amniotes

A notable difference between anamniote and amniote
tetrapods is the greater terrestrial agility in amniotes.
Early amniotes were gracile, small animals with a snoutvent length of up to 24 cm [e.g., Paleothyris or Hylonomus, [101]], and thus comparable to extant small lizards
such as desert iguanas. Analyses of the axial skeleton
and reconstructions of the associated musculature in
various fossils indicate great similarity between these
early amniotes and generalized extant lizards and therefore imply similar trunk motions [102,103]. Their diet
and associated with that their lifestyle was presumably
also similar to extant small lizards, i.e. mainly preying
on arthropods, mixed with some plant material
[104,105]. Therefore, both burst and slow locomotion
must have constituted the locomotor repertoire of early
amniotes. Associated with a higher aerobic capacity
[106] and relatively higher body temperatures during
activity [107], amniotes such as lizards are characterized
by greater swiftness and maneuverability compared to
anamniote tetrapods such as salamanders. Swifter movements and increased performance are connected with
faster accelerations and decelerations of the limbs and
the center of mass of the body (CoM), and thus higher
peak loading of the limbs and trunk. Consequently,
amniotes have an increased need for dynamic stabilization of the body compared to anamniote tetrapods.
Similar to lissamphibians, amniotes such as lizards
exhibit a sprawling limb posture in which the feet are

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

Page 9 of 19

Figure 3 Activity patterns and hypothesized functions of the epaxial muscles in tetrapods during locomotion [modified from [118]].
Data for the epaxial muscle activity were assembled from: spotted salamander, Ambystoma maculatum, m. dorsalis trunci, 8th external trunk
segment, mean and standard error [90]; desert iguana, Dipsosaurus dorsalis, m. longissimus dorsi, 14th trunk vertebra, mean and standard
deviation (S. Moritz, unpubl. data); dog, Canis familiaris, m. longissimus thoracis et lumborum, 6th lumbar vertebra, median and upper and lower
quartiles [118]. The x-axis represents the stride cycle beginning with the touch down of the ipsilateral hindlimb. The footfall patterns of the both
hindlimbs are illustrated on the bottom of each graph (walk, trot: black: ipsilateral limb (iHL), gray: contralateral limb (cHL); gallop: black: trailing
limb (tHL), gray: leading limb (lHL). Note that for the galloping dog, the EMG trace associated with the trailing hindlimb is black, the one
associated with the leading hindlimb is gray. Bending traces above the electromyograms indicate the unimodal lateral flexion and extension on
the body side ipsilateral to the recorded muscle activity (salamander, lizard) and the bimodal flexion and extension in the sagittal plane
(mammal). Body planes in which moments and/or movements are suggested to occur are illustrated in the right top corner of each graph (for
details see Figure 1). Note that the unilateral and monophasic epaxial activity in the walking salamander and lizard associated with the ipsilateral
stance phase corresponds to the main activity observed in mammals. In mammals, the increased need for sagittal stability is met by bilateral
activity resulting from a second burst during ipsilateral swing phase.

positioned far laterally from the body axis. Compared to
a parasagittal limb posture, a sprawling posture is associated with greater lateral components of the propulsive
forces see [[27]vs. [28]] and greater horizontal components of extrinsic limb muscle forces due to pro- and

retraction of the stylopods in the horizontal plane
[22,26,108,109]. Both aspects result in moments that laterally bend the trunk. Compared to salamanders, limb
action can be expected to play a greater role in the production of locomotor work of lizards because of their

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

relatively stronger limbs and greater limb excursions.
Therefore, lateral bending in lizards may be a consequence of limb posture and limb muscle action, in addition to being actively produced for example to
contribute to the production of locomotor work [72]
and to facilitate limb positioning [109,110]. It is
hypothesized that during the evolution of amniotes a
shift in trunk muscle function occurred from primarily
producing lateral bending (anamniote tetrapod mode) to
increasingly controlling and counteracting moments
caused by limb action and greater peak loading.
In amniotes, the epaxial muscle mass was reorganized
into longitudinal and polysegmental tracts, forming the
transversospinal, the longissimus, and the iliocostalis
groups (Figure 2). The complexity and the arrangement
of these tracts vary greatly among amniotes due to differentiation into smaller muscle units and/or variations
in their relative sizes [20,100]. The hypaxial musculature
shows a wide range of variation in ectothermic amniotes
such as lizards primarily due to splitting and delamination of the main layers [111,112]. This anatomically
more complex arrangement compared to other tetrapods such as salamanders is likely partially related to
their enhanced locomotor performance but likely also
because axial muscles fulfill other functions such as ventilation in addition to their plesiomorphic role in locomotion [113]. As in salamanders, the muscle fibers in
the various layers of the lateral hypaxial musculature are
oriented obliquely at different angles [72,111]. In the
epaxial musculature, the most medial tract shows an
oblique fiber orientation in lizards, while the fibers in
the two lateral tracts are more or less parallel to the
long-axis of the body [100,114,115]. In contrast to anamniotes, in which the motoneuron pools of the epaxial
and hypaxial muscles overlap in the medial column,
motoneurons are spatially segregated in amniotes [116].
Motoneurons innervating epaxial muscles are located in
the ventromedial portion of the ventral horn, while the
hypaxial motoneurons reside dorsolaterally. Therefore,
discrete pools serve individual muscles, resulting in a
topographic map of motor pool organization that likely
facilitates proper control of the anatomically and, more
importantly, functionally diverse muscles originating
from the same myotome [38].
It remains controversial whether or not epaxial and
hypaxial muscles are involved in the production or the
counteraction of lateral bending in lizards as they are in
salamanders [117,118]. A functional division between
epaxial and lateral hypaxial muscles was proposed as a
basal feature of amniotes [117]; the former serving to
stabilize the trunk against torsional forces [119], while
the latter function to laterally bend the trunk and provide stabilization against long-axis torsion [72]. For the
epaxial muscles, Ritter concluded that they are not

Page 10 of 19

involved in bending based on the timing of the activity
as well as denervation experiments [117]. Several observations question this hypothesis: 1) Recent recordings
from walking lizards do suggest that the timing of the
activity of the epaxial muscles is consistent with the
production of lateral bending [120] (Figure 3) and
thereby confirm previous recordings [110]. These recent
data imply speed dependency in the epaxial muscle
function, and thus may reconcile the controversy observations [120]. 2) The denervation experiment, which
provided the main evidence against lateral stabilization,
was carried out around the mid-trunk, where the impact
of the extrinsic limb muscles is likely to be small. Also,
possible compensatory actions of other muscles such as
the hypaxial muscles were not tested. Furthermore, the
timing of epaxial muscle activity in lizards is similar to
that in salamanders and mammals, for which a stabilizing function against lateral bending was shown, at least
near the limb girdles, by simultaneous recordings of
extrinsic limb and back muscles [88,121]. 3) The importance of lateral trunk bending, its production or counteraction, is reflected in the anatomy of the epaxial
muscles. The two lateral tracts, well positioned to act
laterally on the vertebral column, are relatively large in
lizards [122], and their muscle fibers are oriented longitudinally, a fiber orientation well suited to laterally
mobilize and stabilize the trunk [100,114,115]. Thus, a
mobilizing and/or stabilizing role in lateral bending cannot be ruled out for the epaxial muscles in lizards and
further experiments, for example manipulating the locomotor forces, are necessary to clarify the function of the
epaxial muscles in lizards.
In addition to the plesiomorphic side-to-side movements, rotations about the long-axis of the body are an
important component of amniote locomotion and particularly the transversospinalis muscle was thought to
provide torsional stabilization based on its activity
[117,119] and the morphology of the neural spines
[103]. Its oblique fiber orientation [100,114] is consistent
with a stabilizing function against long-axis torsion and
distinguishes amniote from anamniote tetrapods. As
pointed out above, compared to salamanders, extrinsic
limb muscle and inertial forces can be expected to be
greater in lizards with their greater agility and locomotor speed. Therefore, torsional stabilization is additionally provided by the epaxial musculature of lizards [117],
but solely accomplished by the lateral hypaxial muscles
in salamanders [86,89].
The evolutionary disintegration of the plesiomorphic
segmental organization of the epaxial musculature of
tetrapods resulted in longitudinal, polysegmental muscle
tracts in amniotes and, likely more importantly, in an
overlapping muscle arrangement. Although this segmental disintegration may be connected with a slightly

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

increased number of sarcomeres in series and thereby a
small increase in contraction speed, one advantage of a
polysegmental over a segmental arrangement may be
that it allows for stabilization or mobilization of a whole
region of the trunk by activating a single motor unit. In
contrast, simultaneous activation of several adjacent segments is required in a myomeric organization to affect a
larger body region (e.g., to produce a standing wave).
Simultaneous action on a body region may be advantageous if the primary mode of trunk bending during
locomotion is a standing wave, rather than a traveling
wave, during which adjacent segments undergo lateral
excursion sequentially. On the other hand, an overlapping arrangement with attachment sites on each vertebra also allows the production of a traveling wave, as for
example in snakes [123,124]. But, more importantly, the
possession of muscle fibers of different lengths organized in an overlapping arrangement may increase the
animal’s maneuverability because it allows for activation
and control of specific and varying body regions and
thus for greater versatility. Associated with the reduction
of the myoseptal system, the muscle fibers also act
directly on the vertebrae in amniotes rather than indirectly via the myosepta. Direct muscle action on the vertebral column was associated with a greater degree of
vertebral structuring, i.e., relatively longer processes and
larger protuberances, which provide increased lever
arms and attachment sites for the muscles [103,112]. In
summary, possibly greater contraction speed and distance, more precise and selective activation and control
of a specific body region due to an overlapping muscle
arrangement, and improved muscle lever arms may have
facilitated more rapid mobilization and stabilization of
the body and are likely connected with the greater agility and versatility of amniotes.
Preliminary results on the perivertebral musculature of
lizards indicate, when compared with results on mammals [8], similarities in the overall fiber type distribution
among these amniotes [125]. Fatigue-resistant fibers are
segregated in deeper muscle areas, close to tendons and
bones, while the majority of the muscles comprises primarily fast twitch fibers (Figure 2). Consistent with the
superficial and polysegmental muscles functioning in
mobilization and global stabilization in lizards, they contain primarily fast-twitch glycolytic muscle fibers [125].
To allow these polysegmental muscles to act on a given
division of the vertebral column without causing vertebral dislocation, monosegmental muscle fibers are
hypothesized to ensure spinal integrity. The demands
for local stabilization can be expected to be greater in
lizards compared to salamanders due to their greater
trunk loading and their polysegmental structure of both
epaxial and hypaxial muscles. Given their topography
and fatigue-resistant properties [125], local stabilization

Page 11 of 19

is probably accomplished by the deeper fibers of the
transversospinalis muscle (Figure 2). Unfortunately, no
EMG recordings exist of this muscle region to test this
hypothesis. In contrast to anamniote tetrapods, in which
tonic and slow-twitch fibers are segregated superficially,
likely to modulate the body stiffness via the myoseptal
system and the skin, the fatigue-resistant fibers of
amniotes are regionalized in the depth of the muscles
close to the bones and intramuscular tendons in
amniotes [8] (Figure 2). This intramuscular reorganization has been suggested to be related to the complete
independence from water [35]. Independence from
water required changes in skin anatomy to reduce evaporation and may have simultaneously decreased the
skin’s ability to participate in force transmission.
Furthermore, the intimate connection between the myoseptal system and the skin was dissolved with the evolution of longitudinal muscle tracts. Thus, axial muscle
forces are directly transmitted to the vertebrae in
amniotes [112] and the body does not function as a
hydrostatic system in body support as in anamniotes.
Thus, the loss of the superficial fatigue-resistant fibers
may be associated with the substantial reorganization of
the epaxial musculature and the high degree of amniote
terrestriality.
In summary, the axial musculature of lizards appears
to fulfill similar functions as to those in salamanders,
allowing tentative inference that these functions are plesiomorphic for amniotes. But, compared to salamanders,
the need for local and especially global stabilization of
the trunk is increased in lizards due to their greater agility and locomotor speed, and this need is reflected in
the detailed muscle morphology.
Mammals

One of the most striking apomorphic characteristics of
mammalian locomotion is sagittal bending [126-128].
The ability to dorsoventrally flex and extend the body
axis enabled the evolution of asymmetrical gaits in
mammals such as gallop or half-bound [19] [note the
convergent evolution of galloping in crocodilians
[129-131]]. Several vertebral characteristics have been
proposed to be prerequisite for sagittal bending and,
thus, to have predictive value for the trunk region
involved: 1) reduction of ribs in the posterior trunk and
thus the formation of a lumbar region; 2) orientation
and width of the spinous processes and thus the position of the anticlinal vertebra in the vertebral series; 3)
orientation of the zygapophyseal facets and thus the
location of the diaphragmatic vertebra(e) along the vertebral column [18-21,132]. A comparative analysis of
intervertebral movements in small therians during fast
locomotion showed however that these skeletal characters were not simply related to the trunk region involved

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

in bending during locomotion, questioning their predictive value for the trunk region involved in sagittal bending [133,134]. It has been suggested, therefore, that
behaviors other than those directly related to locomotion may have driven the evolution of sagittal mobility,
which was subsequently incorporated into the locomotor repertoire [133,135].
During the evolution of mammals, extensive fusion
and reorganization of the epaxial tracts was associated
with the reduction of the posterior ribs and the evolution of a rib-free lumbar region. In many mammals, the
two lateral tracts are inseparable in the lumbar region
and therefore referred to as the sacrospinalis muscle
[100]. Associated with the evolution of asymmetrical
gaits and the corresponding intense dorsoventral flexion
of the posterior trunk were major reorganizations in the
muscular system. For example, in mammals the size of
the two medial epaxial tracts is increased compared to
lizards [20]. Accordingly, both the multifidus and the
longissimus muscles exhibit recruitment patterns consistent with the mobilization of the axial skeleton in galloping mammals [118,136,137]. Additionally, compared
to non-mammalian amniotes, the subvertebral musculature was strengthened in mammals and assists the
abdominal wall muscles as an antagonist of the epaxial
musculature. Parts of the hindlimb musculature shifted
onto the trunk (i.e., puboischiofemoralis as iliopsoas
muscle) and an axial slip of the subvertebralis muscle
became independent as the psoas minor muscle
[112,138,139]. Both act as hindlimb protractors and flexors of the vertebral column in mammals [140-143].
These muscular changes in the epaxial and the hypaxial
musculature augmented the fast, glycolytic muscle mass
around the vertebral column and therefore were likely
associated with the evolution of vigorous sagittal spine
movements, i.e. the evolution of asymmetrical gaits [8].
Consistent with the caudally increasing importance of
sagittal bending in body propulsion [133], the proportion of glycolytic muscle mass relative to the total anatomical cross-sectional area of the axial musculature
increases caudally [5,6,8].
The increased mobility in the posterior trunk and its
vigorous mobilization during fast locomotor activities
was hypothesized to be associated with an increased
need for local stabilization [8]. The evolutionary subdivision of the transversospinalis muscle into several muscular entities in mammals (i.e., the transversospinal
system) is probably related to this greater demand for
intervertebral stabilization because it was accompanied
by the functional specialization of its subunits [8]. Several deep, mono- and polysegmental muscles evolved (e.
g., rotatores, intermammillares, mammilloaccessorii
muscles) and are predominantly composed of fatigueresistant, slow fibers and thus well suited to provide

Page 12 of 19

sustained intervertebral stability [5,6,144]. In contrast,
the superficial, multisegmental division of the transversospinal complex (i.e., the multifidus muscle) contains a
high proportion of fast fibers [e.g., [8,145,146]; Figure 2]
that can mobilize as well as dynamically stabilize the
trunk [118,121,137,136].
Another consequence of the greater mobility in all
body planes, particularly in the posterior trunk, is an
increased need for postural feedback. Mammals differ
from other amniotes in that they possess a central, slow
region in the in the lateral longissimus muscle, which
extends between the iliac blades and the 4th to 2nd presacral vertebrae [8]. This region contains a large number
of muscles spindles [147,148] and is activated tonically
and independently from the rest of the muscle belly
[149,150]. Its responsiveness is modulated by the vertebral position [151]. It was suggested to function as a proprioceptive system monitoring the position of the pelvis
relative to the vertebral column [147,149]. Because no
such region has been found in lizards (S. Moritz, pers.
commun.) and salamanders [7], it is hypothesized to
represent an apomorphic character of mammals and to
be correlated with the evolution of a mobile lumbar
region [8].
During the evolution of mammals, truncal motions in
the sagittal plane were added to the plesiomorphic
movements in the horizontal and transverse planes.
Both, lateral bending and long-axis torsion occur during
symmetrical gaits [e.g., [134,152-155]]. They are, however, less pronounced in mammals than in other tetrapods. The functional roles of the axial muscles during
symmetrical gaits have been investigated in more detail
in mammals than in any other tetrapod group, but still
seem poorly understood compared to the understanding
of the limb musculature. Whereas the functional roles
of the lateral hypaxial muscles were clarified in a series
of experiments [156-158], the function of the epaxial
muscles have become more clear only recently. Because
their activity was not directly correlated with the production of lateral bending or tilting, the epaxials were
suggested to stabilize the trunk [137,159-163]; thereby,
only two studies tested the specific locomotor forces
and moments that may require stabilization [’sagittal
rebound’, [164,165]]. Their primary function, at least
near the hindlimb girdle, is to provide global stabilization against the vertical components of retractor muscles and the horizontal components of pro- and
retractor muscles [121]. Furthermore, epaxial muscles
probably assist in the production of lateral bending during symmetrical gaits because the observed cranio-caudal activation patterns during walking and trotting
accord in timing with both the traveling and the standing wave of trunk bending observed in these gaits,
respectively [118]. Consistent with a function as

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

dynamic stabilizers as well as mobilizers, the largest
epaxial muscles (i.e., the multifidus and the sacrospinalis
muscles) consist predominantly of fast, glycolytic fibers
[see [8] and references therein] (Figure 2).
Compared to the sprawled limb posture of lower tetrapods, the parasagittal limb posture of mammals can
be expected to result in relatively smaller lateral but
greater sagittal components of the propulsive forces produced by the limbs [97]. Furthermore, although the vertical moments acting on the trunk due to inertia are
similar in lizards and mammals with the same size and
locomotor speed, they are most likely largely passively
stabilized in lizards by their horizontally oriented zygapophyseal facets, but would bend and extend the trunk
sagittally in mammals due to their more vertical facets.
Both, the locomotor forces produced by the limbs and
the inertia of the body, result in an increased need for
dynamic muscular stabilization in the sagittal plane.
This increased need is reflected by changes in muscle
morphology and function in mammals compared to
lizards. For example, the two medial epaxials, best suited
to provide sagittal stability and mobility due to their
more dorsal position relative to the neutral axis of the
vertebral column, are increased in size in mammals [20].
Furthermore, all epaxial muscles have a distinct oblique
fascicle orientation [100], which allows for mobilization
and stabilization in all planes of the body simultaneously
and thus better meets the complex needs for trunk
mobility and stability in mammals. This oblique fiber
orientation likely provides an advantage in the shortening velocity of the entire muscle [74]. Furthermore, all
mammals investigated so far display a biphasic and
bilateral activity in their epaxial muscles during symmetrical gaits [137,159-166]. Of these two bursts during
each locomotor cycle, only the main burst occurring
during ipsilateral hindlimb stance corresponds to the
epaxial activity observed in other tetrapods (Figure 3),
while the second burst, associated with the hindlimb
swing phase, distinguishes mammals from other tetrapods [118] and thus appears to be an apomorphic feature of mammals. Based on recruitment symmetry (i.e.,
bilateral activity) or asymmetry (i.e., unilateral activity)
between both body sides a net extensor or net lateral
bending/torsional moment can be inferred [167]. A net
extensor moment is expected if sagittal forces dominate
(e.g., due to the vertical oscillations of the CoM or vertical components of the extrinsic limb muscles), and the
main function of the muscle is to stabilize the trunk in
the sagittal plane. The fact that mammals consistently
show biphasic, bilateral activity in their epaxial muscles
corroborates the interpretation that there is an increased
need for sagittal stability [118].
Among amniotes, only birds and mammals are able to
locomote and ventilate their lungs at the same time

Page 13 of 19

[113], except secondarily derived solutions for example
in varanid lizards [168]. In mammals, the evolution of a
diaphragm freed most axial muscles from a ventilatory
function during locomotion [158,169]. Because the diaphragm attaches to the posterior ribs, action of the diaphragm results in anterior tilting of the ribs. To provide
a firm base for the action of the diaphragm, the ribs
need to be stabilized (e.g., pulled caudally). The abdominal wall muscles, namely the oblique muscles, are well
positioned to retract the ribs and counteract rib protraction. However, both the internal and the external obliques are locomotor muscles [158], stabilizing the trunk
against sagittal shear during locomotion [157], and
therefore cannot provide costal stabilization. Especially
during asymmetrical gaits, inhalation is coupled with
trunk extension [133,170], thus the oblique abdominal
wall muscles would have to stabilize the ribs during
sagittal extension. Such activity of the oblique hypaxial
muscles would cause sagittal flexion and thus interfere
with the extension of the trunk. Rather, the oblique
abdominal wall muscles are in a good position to assist
the rectus abdominis muscle, which is the most important spinal flexor and active at the appropriate time
[137]. EMG recordings of the external oblique muscle in
galloping dogs are consistent with such locomotor function [Deban, Schilling, Carrier, unpubl. data]. However,
neither during symmetrical nor during asymmetrical
gaits can rib stabilization be provided by the abdominal
wall muscles.
Rib stabilization and possibly widening of the pleural
cavity during inhalation may be provided by the quadratus lumborum muscle based on its activation pattern as
has been shown in rabbits [171]. The homology of this
muscle has been subject of controversy [i.e., partially
subvertebralis, [172], intercostalis system: intertransversarii muscles, [112], levatores costarum muscles, [173]].
Its innervation either from the dorsal or the ventral
rami [174] and the location of its motoneurons in the
ventromedial and the lateromedial motor pools [175]
implies a mixed origin. However, its anatomical position
on the ventral aspects of the centra and insertion onto
the most posterior ribs allows the quadratus lumborum
muscle to provide costal stabilization without interfering
with locomotor events. Its proximity to the vertebral
column gives it poor leverage for sagittal flexion and
therefore its contribution to sagittal bending can be
expected to be low. Consistent with its function in rib
stabilization, the quadratus lumborum muscle showed a
striking central accumulation of slow fatigue-resistant
fibers, particularly in its anterior part in various therians
[5,6,8,176]. This central region was hypothesized to act
independently from the rest of the muscle belly [8],
similar to deep slow regions in anti-gravity muscles
[177,178]. In accordance with a function in ventilation,

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

its muscle fiber type composition did not show the physiological adaptations found in other perivertebral muscles with changes in body shape [e.g., in ferrets [179]] or
body size [176].
In summary, the evolution of sagittal mobility in
mammals added a new body plane, in which movements
can be produced but also have to be controlled and
counteracted. Thus, the axial muscles in mammals
mobilize the trunk in the sagittal plane (apomorphic for
mammals), in addition to their plesiomorphic role in
bending and twisting (Figure 1). In the epaxial musculature, the increased need for dynamic sagittal stabilization due to the parasagittal limb posture and the vertical
zygapophyses was met 1) locally by the evolution of
numerous deep, short, fatigue-resistant muscles and 2)
globally by a biphasic activity of superficial, polysegmental, fast muscles.

Concluding remarks
Intramuscular (re)organization in craniates

Muscular properties such as the distribution of muscle
fiber types are primarily determined by a muscle’s function and less by phylogeny. During the evolution of
craniates, the composition and distribution of fiber types
changed profoundly with a general tendency to segregate fatigue-resistant fibers in deeper muscle regions.
Various factors have been discussed to account for a
certain, ‘preferred’ location of a given fiber type within a
muscle or a muscle group such as heat loss or thermal
balance [reviewed in [180]]. Briefly, it is argued that
because red muscle tissue has better circulation at rest
than white one, a superficial position of red fibers would
cause greater heat loss [181], assuming that the environment is cooler than the animal. The thermal balance
argument is based on the observation that muscle fibers
increase their shortening speed and power as they
become warmer, which would be advantageous for deeply located, more insulated fibers. The temperature
dependence of these characteristics is essentially similar
between red and white fibers [e.g., [182-186]], and therefore would support either fiber type distribution. The
comparison of the intramuscular organization among
craniates illustrates that red or white fibers may be closer to the core of the body indicating that other factors
in addition to heat conservation are relevant to intramuscular organization.
Muscle fibers of different types are either segregated
from each other within a muscle or a muscle group or
they are intermingled (’salt-and-pepper pattern’). Gathering one fiber type may be advantageous because it
unites similar metabolic needs, neural control, and biomechanical properties. For example, red and white fibers
differ in their blood supply, in both the course and the
branching pattern of the capillary network [e.g.,

Page 14 of 19

[187-189]] as well as in their capillary to fiber ratio [e.g.,
[190-195]]. Whether the higher capillary content, and
thus a relative higher collagen proportion per muscle
area due to the vessel walls accounts for the different
biomechanical properties reported for red and white
muscle tissue [e.g., [189,196]] or differences in the connective tissue itself, for example in the structure of the
endomysial collagen [197-200], is controversial, but a
greater potential for elastic energy storage and a higher
stiffness was found in red compared to white muscle tissue [199,201]. Thus, congregating fibers of similar metabolic needs may reduce the costs of the formation and
maintenance of the supply network and concentrating
fibers with similar mechanical properties may reduce
intramuscular shear [188,202]. Furthermore, segregation
of a specific fiber type allows a muscle region to specialize for a specific function, because the properties of the
various fiber types are optimized for different motor
tasks [203]. Thus, an accumulation of a specific fiber
type indicates that this muscle or muscle region fulfills
first and foremost the same function in the same manner. In contrast, a mixed composition of a muscle or
muscle region places fibers with different contractile
properties in the biomechanically advantageous position.
Such arrangement allows the muscle to fulfill the same
function in different ways, i.e. by using different fiber
types and thus different motor units, for example to
accomplish the function with various force, speed, or
frequency [204,205].
In addition, the reorganization of the myoseptal system into polysegmental muscle tracts resulted in an
architectural problem in amniotes. The evolution of
polysegmental muscle tracts likely increased the importance of local stabilization of the intervertebral joints to
allow the polysegmental muscles to act on larger but
variable units of the vertebral column without causing
intervertebral instabilities. To provide local stabilization
and prevent vertebral dislocation, short muscle bundles
containing fatigue-resistant fibers and interlinking the
vertebrae (i.e., monosegmental muscles) must be positioned close to the vertebral column, while the polysegmental muscles are necessarily layered above. Thus,
simple architectural constraints additionally influence
muscle-fiber-type distribution. Further research is necessary to increase our understanding of why muscle fibers
of a given type are localized in particular muscle areas
and how the observed patterns of muscular organization
evolved.
Methodological caveats

Muscle is one of the most plastic tissues, which allows
the study of adaptations to changing functional demands
on the one hand, but requires a thorough selection of
the individuals and species studied on the other hand,

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

because interindividual or interspecific variability may
mask the investigated traits. Hence, observed differences
may represent phylogenetic divergence, functional divergence, and/or effects of environmental factors that differed among the individuals studied (phenotypic
plasticity). The species discussed herein were selected
based on their resemblance (particularly body size and
proportions as well as locomotor mode) to early representatives of higher taxa pivotal for the reconstruction
of the evolution of the craniate axial system. The muscular differences observed among them are assumed to
correlate with evolutionary changes in function and
morphology and that these differences are greater than
inter-individual variation.
This approach bears several caveats limiting inference
of character states. 1) Depending on the fossil record
and the availability of extant species resembling early
representatives of a given group in the critical traits, the
conclusions are better supported in some groups than
others. For example, extant small mammals such as
mice, rats, or tree-shrews highly resemble Mesozoic
mammals such as Morganucodon in their postcranial
anatomy [reviewed in [8]] and therefore are well-suited
to infer soft tissue characters for early mammals. In
contrast, salamanders differ in several essential postcranial characters from early representatives of tetrapods
such as Acanthostega or Ichthyostega [91,206] such as
the reduction of ribs and the relatively small body size.
However, salamanders are the only available postural
model for early tetrapods among extant taxa [207,208]
and were therefore considered herein despite these postcranial differences. 2) All species represent a mosaic of
plesiomorphic and apomorphic features [groundplan;
[2]]. For example, extant agnathans resemble early craniates such as the conodonts in their myomeric organization of their axial muscles or the possession of a
notochord as the main axial skeleton [69]. However,
they are highly specialized relicts of a multifaceted
group of jawless craniates that possessed for example
dermal armor to a varying extent [i.e., ostracoderms,
[69]]. Therefore, inference of plesiomorphic axial muscle
characteristics for craniates is potentially confounded by
derived character states in extant hagfish and lampreys.
3) The depth to which we know intra-taxon variation
and the confidence with which we can infer the set of
character states in the common ancestor of the respective groups varies greatly. Groups such as actinopterygians or mammals have been investigated intensively.
Therefore, their interspecific variability and the adaptive
value of the various muscular arrangements are fairly
well-understood. In such groups, we can start sorting
out character states that represent phylogenetic history
from those that are more likely the immediate result of
adaptation. Only very few species have been studied so

Page 15 of 19

far in other groups such as salamanders or lizards and
the ground-plan set of character states may not be
unequivocal yet. Some caution is required when species
from such groups are used to infer character states in
ancestors as the full extend of within-group muscular
variation has not been established yet. However, this
considered, inclusion of the currently known evidence
in hypotheses as stated herein provides a clear framework for future hypothesis driven research with options
for falsification.
Acknowledgements
I am very grateful to M.S. Fischer for fostering my interest in vertebrate
functional morphology and thank him for numerous stimulating discussions,
insightful criticism, and providing a productive environment. I am indebted
to D.R. Carrier, S.M. Deban, C. Anders, F. Goller, and M. Schmidt for valuable
discussions that were instrumental in developing many of the presented
ideas. Much of this work has benefited from discussions with students and
reflects their effort and enthusiasm for the axial system. Particularly, I thank
S. Moritz, B. Hesse, and H. Stark for fruitful discussions. The technical support
of I. Weiß, M. Krüger, R. Petersohn, K. Felbel, E. Gretscher, and M. Roser is
greatly appreciated. Thanks to P.R. Flood and S. Moritz for providing images
and data for Figures 2 and 3. Three reviewers provided constructive criticism
and helpful suggestions, which greatly improved the manuscript.
The many years of financial support by the Center of Interdisciplinary
Prevention of Diseases related to Professional Activities (KIP) founded and
funded by the Friedrich-Schiller-University, Jena and the
Berufsgenossenschaft Nahrungsmittel und Gastgewerbe, Erfurt made this
research possible. Specifically, I thank R. Grieshaber, H.-C. Scholle, and I. Bradl.
Financial support was furthermore provided by the German Research
Council (DFG), the Erwin-Riesch-Foundation, the German Exchange Program
(DAAD), and the Thuringian Ministry of Science, Research, and Art (all to NS).
Authors’ contributions and information
Part of this manuscript is based on the author’s Habilitation-Thesis. Thanks to
the organizers of the 103. Annual Meeting of the German Zoological Society
as well as to M. Nickel and C.S. Wirkner for their invitation to the symposium
and the opportunity to publish this review.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 13 September 2010 Accepted: 10 February 2011
Published: 10 February 2011
References
1. Witmer LM: The Extant Phylogenetic Bracket and the importance of
reconstructing soft tissues in fossils. In Functional morphology in vertebrate
paleontology. Edited by: Thomason, JJ. Cambridge University Press, New
York; 1995:19-33.
2. Hennig W: Phylogenetic systematics. University of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL,
USA; 1966, 1-280.
3. Bergmark A: Stability of the lumbar spine. Acta Ortho Scand 1989,
230:1-54.
4. Mottram SL, Comerford MJ: Stability dysfunction and low back pain.
J Orthop Med 1998, 20:13-18.
5. Schilling N: Characteristics of paravertebral muscles - fibre type
distribution pattern in Ochotona rufescens (Mammalia: Lagomorpha).
J Zool Syst Evol Res 2005, 43:38-48.
6. Schilling N, Arnold D, Wagner H, Fischer MS: Evolutionary aspects and
muscular properties of the trunk - Implications for human low back
pain. Pathophysiology 2005, 12:233-242.
7. Schilling N, Deban SM: Fiber-type distribution of the perivertebral
musculature in Ambystoma. J Morph 2010, 271:200-214.
8. Schilling N: Metabolic profile of the perivertebral muscles of small
therian mammals: Implications for the evolution of the mammalian
trunk musculature. Zoology 2009, 112:279-304.

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

9. Breder CM: The locomotion of fishes. Zoologica 1926, 4:159-257.
10. Dunn EA, Davison W, Maloiy GMO, Hochachka PW, Guppy M: An
ultrastructural and histochemical study of the axial musculature in the
African lungfish. Cell Tissue Res 1981, 220:599-609.
11. Gill HS, Weatherley AH, Lee R, Legere D: Histochemical characterization of
myotomal muscle of five teleost species. J Fish Biol 1989, 34:375-386.
12. Altringham JD, Wardle CS, Smith CI: Myotomal muscle function at
different locations in the body of a swimming fish. J Exp Biol 1993,
182:191-206.
13. Davies MF, Johnston IA, van de Wal JW: Muscle fibers in rostral and
caudal myotomes of the Atlantic Cod (Gadus morhua L.) have different
mechanical properties. Physiol Zool 1995, 68:673-697.
14. Willemse JJ: Functional anatomy of the myosepta in fishes. Proc Kon Ned
Akad Wet (C) 1966, 69:58-63.
15. Long JH, Nipper KS: The importance of body stiffness in undulatory
propulsion. Amer Zool 1996, 36:678-694.
16. Gemballa S: Myoseptenarchitektur und Rumpfmuskulatur der
Actinopterygii - Ein vergleichend-anatomischer Ansatz zum Verständnis
der undulatorischen Lokomotion. Verh Ges Ichthyol 1998, 1:29-58.
17. Virchow H: Die Wirbelsäule des Löwen nach der Form zusammengestellt.
SB Ges naturf Freunde Berlin 1907, 1907:1-43.
18. Fick R: Handbuch der Anatomie und Mechanik der Gelenke unter
Berücksichtigung der bewegenden Muskeln. 3. Teil. Spezielle Gelenkund Muskelmechanik. Gustav Fischer Verlag, Jena 1911, 1-688.
19. Rockwell H, Evans FG, Pheasant HC: The comparative morphology of the
vertebrate spinal column. Its form as related to function. J Morph 1938,
63:87-117.
20. Slijper EJ: Comparative biological-anatomical investigations on the
vertebral column and spinal musculature of mammals. Verh Kon Akad
Wetenschappen Amsterdam 1946, 45:1-128.
21. Washburn SL, Buettner-Janusch J: The definition of thoracic and lumbar
vertebrae. Am J Phys Anthrop 1952, 10:251-252.
22. Rewcastle SC: Stance and gait in tetrapods: an evolutionary scenario.
Symp Zool Soc Lond 1981, 48:239-267.
23. Fischer MS: Crouched posture and high fulcrum, a principle in the
locomotion of small mammals: The example of the rock hyrax (Procavia
capensis) (Mammalia: Hyracoidea). J Hum Evol 1994, 26:501-524.
24. Schmidt M, Fischer MS: Morphological integration in mammalian limb
proportions: Dissociation between function and development. Evolution
2009, 63:749-766.
25. Fischer MS, Schilling N, Schmidt M, Haarhaus D, Witte HF: Basic limb
kinematics of small therian mammals. J Exp Biol 2002, 205:1315-1338.
26. Gray J: Animal locomotion. Norton, New York; 1968, 1-479.
27. Farley CT, Ko TC: Mechanics of locomotion in lizards. J Exp Biol 1997,
200:2177-2188.
28. Budsberg SC, Verstraete MC, Soutas-Little RW: Force plate analysis of the
walking gait in healthy dogs. Am J Vet Res 1987, 48:915-918.
29. Maurer F: Die Elemente der Rumpfmuskulatur bei Cyclostomen und
höheren Wirbeltieren. Morphol Jahrb 1894, 21:473.
30. Flood PR, Storm Mathisen J: A third type of muscle fibre in the parietal
muscle of the Atlantic hagfish Myxine glutinosa. Z Zellforsch 1962,
58:638-640.
31. Mellgren SI, Storm Mathisen J: Oxidative enzymes, glycogen, and lipid in
striated muscle. A histochemical study in the Atlantic hagfish (Myxine
glutinosa L.). Z Zellforsch 1966, 71:169-188.
32. Teräväinen H: Anatomical and physiological studies on muscles of
lamprey. J Neurophysiol 1971, 34:954-973.
33. Teräväinen H, Rovainen CM: Fast and slow motoneurons to body muscle
of the sea lamprey. J Neurophysiol 1971, 34:990-998.
34. Dahl HA, Nicolaysen KR: Actomyosin ATPase activity in Atlantic hagfish
muscles. Histochemie 1971, 28:205-210.
35. Lie HR: A quantitative identification of three muscle fiber types in the
body muscles of Lampetra fluviatilis and their relation to blood
capillaries. Cell Tissue Res 1974, 154:109-119.
36. Peters S, Mackay B: The structure and innervation of the myotomes of
the lamprey. J Anat 1961, 95:575-585.
37. Wallén P, Grillner S, Feldman JC, Bergelt S: Dorsal and ventral myotome
motoneurons and their input during fictive locomotion in the lamprey.
J Neurosci 1985, 5:654-661.
38. Fetcho JR: A review of the organization and evolution of motoneurons
innervating the axial musculature of vertebrates. Brain Res 1987, 434:243-280.

Page 16 of 19

39. Grillner S, Wallen P, Dale N, Brodin L, Buchanan J, Hill R: Transmitters,
membrane properties and network circuity in the control of locomotion
in lamprey. TINS 1987, 10.
40. Williams TL, Grillner S, Smoljaninov VV, Wallen P, Kashin S, Rossignol S:
Locomotion in lamprey and trout: the relative timing of activation and
movement. J Exp Biol 1989, 143:559-566.
41. Grillner S, Wallen P, Brodin L: Neuronal network generating locomotor
behavior in lamprey: circuity, transmitters, membrane properties, and
simulation. Annual Review in Neurosciences 1991, 14:169-199.
42. Long JH, Koob-Emunds M, Sinwell B, Koob TJ: The notochord of hagfish
Myxine glutinosa: visco-elastic properties and mechanical functions
during steady swimming. J Exp Biol 2002, 205:3819-3831.
43. Koob TJ, Long JH: The vertebrate body axis: Evolution and mechanical
function. Amer Zool 2000, 40:1-18.
44. Blight AR: The muscular control of vertebrate swimming movements. Biol
Rev 1977, 52:181-218.
45. Maurer F: Die ventrale Rumpfmuskulatur der Fische (Selachier, Ganoiden,
Teleostier, Crossopterygier, Dipnoer). Jen Zeitschr 1913, 49:1-118.
46. Flood PR: Structure of the segmental trunk muscle in Amphioxus. Z
Zellforsch 1968, 84:389-416.
47. Bone Q: Evolutionary patterns of axial muscle systems in some
invertebrates and fish. Amer Zool 1989, 29:5-18.
48. Wikström DA: Ueber die Innervation und den Bau der Myomeren der
Rumpfmuskulatur einiger Fische. Anat Anz 1897, 13:401-408.
49. Marcus H: Über Myotome, Horizontalseptum und Rippen bei
Hypogeophis und Urodelen. Z Anat Entw Gesch 1937, 107:531-552.
50. Fetcho JR: The organization of the motoneurons innervating the axial
musculature of vertebrates. I. Goldfish (Carassius aurats) and
mudpuppies (Necturus maculosus). J Comp Neur 1986, 249:521-550.
51. Jayne BC, Lauder GV: Are muscle fibers within fish myotomes activated
synchronously ? Patterns of recruitment within deep myomeric
musculature during swimming in the Largemouth bass. J Exp Biol 1995,
198:805-815.
52. Westneat MW, Hoese WH, Pell CA, Wainwright SA: The horizontal septum:
mechanisms of force transfer in locomotion in scombrid fishes
(Scombidae, Pericformes). J Morph 1993, 217:183-201.
53. Nishi S: Muskeln des Rumpfes.Edited by: Bolk L. Handbuch der
vergleichenenden Anatomie der Wirbeltiere Urban 1938:5:351-446.
54. Kryvi H: Ultrastructure of the different fibre types in axial muscles of the
sharks Etmopterus spinax and Galeus melastomus. Cell Tissue Res 1977,
184:287-300.
55. Kryvi H, Totland GK: Fibre types in locomotory muscles of the
cartilaginous fish Chimaera monstrosa. J Fish Biol 1978, 12:257-265.
56. Johnston IA, Ward PS, Goldspink G: Studies on the swimming musculature
of the rainbow trout. I. Fibre types. J Fish Biol 1975, 7:451-458.
57. Boddeke R, Slijper EJ, van der Stelt A: Histological characteristics of the
body musculature of fishes in connection with their mode of life. Proc K
Ned Akad Wet Ser C Biol Med Sci 1959, 62:576-588.
58. Johnston IA, Patterson S, Ward P, Goldspink G: The histochemical
demonstration of myofibrillar adenosine triphosphatase activity in fish
muscle. Can J Zool 1974, 52:871-877.
59. Coughlin DJ, Rome LC: Muscle activity in steady swimming scup,
Stenotomus chrysops, varies with fiber type and body position. Biol Bull
1999, 196:145-152.
60. Donley JM, Shadwick RE: Steady swimming muscle dynamics in the
leopard shark Triakis semifasciata. J Exp Biol 2003, 206:1117-1126.
61. Jayne B, Lauder G: Red muscle motor patterns during steady swimming
in largemouth bass: effects of speed and correlations with axial
kinematics. J Exp Biol 1995, 198:1575-1587.
62. Gillis GB: Neuromuscular control of anguilliform locomotion: patterns of
red and white muscle activity during swimming in the american eel
Anguilla rostrata. J Exp Biol 1998, 201:3245-3256.
63. Altringham J, Ellerby D: Fish swimming: patterns in muscle function. J Exp
Biol 1999, 202:3397-3403.
64. Horner AM, Jayne BC: The effects of viscosity on the axial motor pattern
and kinematics of the African lungfish (Protopterus annectens) during
lateral undulatory swimming. J Exp Biol 2008, 211:1612-1622.
65. Bone Q: On the function of the two types of myotomal muscle fibre in
elasmobranch fish. J marine biol Ass 1966, 46:321-349.
66. Rayner MD, Keenan MJ: Role of red and white muscles in the swimming
of the skipjack tuna. Nature 1967, 214:392-393.

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

67. Johnston IA, Davison W, Goldspink G: Energy metabolism of carp
swimming muscles. J Comp Physiol B 1977, 114:203-216.
68. Hudson RCL: On the function of the white muscles in teleosts at
intermediate swimming speeds. J Exp Biol 1973, 58:509-522.
69. Ellerby DJ, Altringham JD, Williams T, Block BA: Slow muscle function of
Pacific bonito (Sarda chiliensis) during steady swimming. J Exp Biol 2000,
203:2001-2013.
70. Coughlin DJ: Aerobic muscle function during steady swimming in fish.
Fish Fish 2002, 3:63-78.
71. Westheide W, Rieger R: Spezielle Zoologie. II. Wirbel- oder Schädeltiere.
Spektrum Akademischer Verlag Heidelberg, Berlin 2009, 1-712.
72. Carrier DR: Activity of the hypaxial muscles during walking in the lizard
Iguana iguana. J Exp Biol 1990, 152:453-470.
73. Alexander RM: The orientation of muscle fibers in the myomeres of
fishes. J Mar Biol Ass UK 1969, 49:263-290.
74. Brainerd EL, Azizi E: Muscle fiber angle, segment bulging and architectural
gear ratio in segmented musculature. J Exp Biol 2005, 208:3249-3261.
75. Brainerd EL, Owerkowicz T: Functional morphology and evolution of
aspiration breathing in tetrapods. Respir Phys Neurobiol 2006, 154:73-88.
76. Maurer F: Der Aufbau und die Entwicklung der ventralen
Rumpfmuskulatur bei den urodelen Amphibien und deren Beziehungen
zu den gleichen Muskeln der Selachier und Teleostier. Morphol Jahrb
1892, 18:76-179.
77. Maurer F: Die ventrale Rumpfmuskulatur von Menobranchus, Menopoma
und Amphiuma, verglichen mit den gleichen Muskeln anderer Urodelen.
Jen Zeitschr 1911, 47:1-40.
78. Simons RS, Brainerd EL: Morphological variation of hypaxial musculature
in salamanders (Lissamphibia: Caudata). J Morph 1999, 241:153-164.
79. Brainerd EL, Simons RS: Morphology and function of lateral hypaxial
musculature in salamanders. Amer Zool 2000, 40:77-86.
80. Francis ETB: The anatomy of the salamander. Oxford University Press,
London; 1934, 1-381.
81. Auffenberg W: The epaxial musculature of Siren, Amphiuma, and Necturus
(Amphibia). Bull Florida State Mus 1959, 4:251-265.
82. Willemse JJ: Arrangements of connective tissue fibres and muscle fibres
in the tail musculature of adult newts (Triturus cristatus, T. alpestris and
T. vulgaris) (Amphibia, Urodela). Zoomorphology 1974, 77:255-269.
83. Flood PR, Kryvi H, Totland GK: Onto-phylogenetic aspects of muscle fiber
types in the segmental trunk muscles of lower chordates. Folia Morphol
1977, 25:64-67.
84. Totland GK: Three muscle fibre types in the axial muscle of axolotl
(Ambystoma mexicanum Shaw): a quantitative light- and electron
microscopic study. Cell Tissue Res 1976, 168:65-78.
85. Frolich L, Biewener AA: Kinematic and electromyographic analysis of the
functional role of the body axis during terrestrial and aquatic
locomotion in the salamander Ambystoma trigrinum. J Exp Biol 1992,
162:107-130.
86. Carrier DR: Action of the hypaxial muscles during walking and swimming
in the salamander Dicamptodon ensatus. J Exp Biol 1993, 180:75-83.
87. D’Aout KD, Aerts P, De Vree F: The timing of muscle strain and activation
during steady swimming in a salamander, Ambystoma mexicanum. Neth
J Zool 1996, 46:263-271.
88. Delvolve I, Bem T, Cabelguen JM: Epaxial and limb muscle activity during
swimming and terrestrial stepping in the adult newt, Pleurodeles waltl.
J Neurophysiol 1997, 78:638-650.
89. Bennett WO, Simons RS, Brainerd EL: Twisting and Bending: The
functional role of salamander lateral hypaxial musculature during
locomotion. J Exp Biol 2001, 204:1979-1989.
90. Deban SM, Schilling N: Activity of trunk muscles during aquatic and
terrestrial locomotion in Ambystoma maculatum. J Exp Biol 2009,
212:2949-2959.
91. Coates MI: The Devonian tetrapod Acanthostega gunnari Jarvik:
postcranial anatomy, basal tetrapod interrelationships and patterns of
skeletal evolution. Trans R Soc Edinb Earth Sci 1996, 87:363-421.
92. Shubin NH, Daeschler EB, Jenkins FAJ: The pectoral fin of Tiktaalik roseae
and the origin of the tetrapod limb. Nature 2006, 440:764-771.
93. Clack JA: Gaining ground: the origin and evolution of tetrapods. Indiana
University Press 2002, 1-400.
94. Gillis GB, Biewener AA: Hindlimb muscle function in relation to speed
and gait: in vivo patterns of strain and activation in a hip and knee
extensor of the rat (Rattus norvegicus). J Exp Biol 2001, 204:2717-2731.

Page 17 of 19

95. Evans FG: The anatomy and function of the foreleg in salamander
locomotion. Anat Rec 1946, 95:257-281.
96. Roos PJ: Lateral bending in newt locomotion. Proc Kon Ned Akad Wet (C)
1964, 67:223-232.
97. Gray J: Studies on the mechanics of the tetrapod skeleton. J Exp Biol
1944, 20:88-116.
98. Barclay OR: The mechanics of amphibian locomotion. J Exp Biol 1946,
23:177-203.
99. Totland GK: Histological and histochemical studies of segmental muscle
in axolotl Ambystoma mexicanum. Norw J Zool 1976, 24:73-84.
100. Nishi S: Zur vergleichenden Anatomie der eigentlichen (genuinen)
Rückenmuskeln. Gegenbaurs Morphol Jb 1916, 50:167-318.
101. Laurin M: The evolution of body size, Cope’s rule and the origin of
amniotes. Syst Biol 2004, 53:594-622.
102. Olson EC: The dorsal axial musculature of certain primitive Permian
tetrapods. J Morph 1936, 59:265-311.
103. Sumida SS, Modesto S: A phylogenetic perspective on locomotory
strategies in early amniotes. Amer Zool 2001, 41:586-597.
104. Carroll RL: The ancestry of reptiles. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond 1970,
257:267-306.
105. Sues HD, Reisz RR: Origin and early evolution of herbivory in terrestrial
tetrapods. TREE 1998, 18:141-145.
106. Janis CM, Keller JC: Modes of ventilation in early tetrapods: Costal
aspiration as a key feature of amniotes. Acta Palaeontol Pol 2001,
42:137-170.
107. Schmidt-Nielsen K: Animal physiology. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge; 1979, 1-560.
108. Brinkman D: The hind limb step cycle of Iguana and primitive reptiles.
J Zool (Lond) 1981, 181:91-103.
109. Jenkins FAJ, Goslow GE: The functional anatomy of the shoulder of the
Savannah monitor lizard (Varanus exanthematicus). J Morph 1983,
175:195-216.
110. Reilly SM: Quantitative electromyography and muscle function of the
hindlimb during quadrupedal running in the lizard Sceloporus clarkii.
Zoology 1995, 98:263-277.
111. Maurer F: Die ventrale Rumpfmuskulatur einiger Reptilien. Festschrift zum
siebzigsten Geburtstage Carl Gegenbauers 1896, 1-252.
112. Starck D: Vergleichende Anatomie der Wirbeltiere auf
evolutionsbiologischer Grundlage. Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New
York 1978, 1-3.
113. Carrier DR: Conflict in the hypaxial musculo-skeletal system:
documenting an evolutionary constraint. Amer Zool 1991, 31:644-654.
114. Tsuihiji T: Homologies of the transversospinalis muscles in the anterior
presacral region of Sauria (crown Diapsida). J Morph 2005, 263:151-178.
115. Tsuihiji T: Homologies of the Longissimus, Iliocostalis, and hypaxial
muscles in the anterior presacral region of extant Diapsida. J Morph
2007, 268:986-1020.
116. Fetcho JR, Reich NT: Axial motor organization in postmetamorphic tiger
salamanders (Ambystoma tigrinum): a segregation of epaxial and
hypaxial motor pools is not necessarily associated with terrestrial
locomotion. Brain Behav Evol 1992, 39:219-228.
117. Ritter D: Epaxial muscle function during locomotion in a lizard (Varanus
salvator) and the proposal of a key innovation in the vertebrate axial
musculoskeletal system. J Exp Biol 1995, 198:2477-2490.
118. Schilling N, Carrier DR: Function of the epaxial muscles in walking,
trotting, and galloping dogs: Implications for the evolution of epaxial
muscle funtion in tetrapods. J Exp Biol 2010, 213:1490-1502.
119. Ritter D: Axial muscle function during lizard locomotion. J Exp Biol 1996,
199:2499-2510.
120. Moritz S, Fischer MS, Schilling N: Aktivierung der epaxialen
Rumpfmuskulatur beim Wüstenleguan. In Kongressband 15 Erfurter Tage
“Prävention von arbeitsbedingten Gesundheitsgefahren und Erkrankungen”
(Verlag Bussert & Stadeler) Edited by: Grieshaber R, Stadler M, Scholle H-Ch
2009, 493-497.
121. Schilling N, Carrier DR: Function of the epaxial muscles during trotting.
J Exp Biol 2009, 212:1053-1063.
122. Vallois HV: Les transformations de la musculature de l’épisome chez les
vertébrés. Arch Morph Gén Exp 1922, 13:1-538.
123. Gans C: Terrestrial locomotion without limbs. Amer Zool 1962, 2:167-182.
124. Gasc JP: Axial musculature.Edited by: Gans, C. Biology of the Reptilia New
York, Academic Press; 1981:11:355-435.

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

125. Moritz S, Fischer MS, Schilling N: Gemeinsamkeiten und Unterschiede in
der Fasertypenverteilung bei Echsen und Säugetieren. In Kongressband
16 Erfurter Tage “Prävention von arbeitsbedingten Gesundheitsgefahren und
Erkrankungen” (Verlag Bussert & Stadeler) Edited by: Grieshaber R, Stadler M,
Scholle H-Ch 2010, 431-434.
126. Howell AB: Speed in animals. Univ Chicago Press, Chicago 1944, 1-270.
127. Hildebrand M: Motions of the running cheetah and horse. J Mamm 1959,
40:481-495.
128. Gambaryan PP: How mammals run. John Wiley and Sons, New York 1974,
1-367.
129. Cott HB: Scientific results of an inquiry into the ecology and economic
status of the Nile crocodile. Trans Zool Soc Lond 1961, 29:211-356.
130. Zug GR: Crocodilian galloping: a unique gait for reptiles. Copeia 1974,
1974:550-552.
131. Webb GJW, Gans C: Galloping in Crocodylus johnstoni - a reflection of
terrestrial activity ? Rec Aust Mus 1982, 34:607-618.
132. Virchow H: Die Wirbelsäule des Löwen nach der Form zusammengestellt.
SB Ges naturf Freunde Berlin 1907, 1907:43.
133. Schilling N, Hackert R: Sagittal spine movements of small therian
mammals during asymmetrical gaits. J Exp Biol 2006, 209:3925-3939.
134. Schilling N, Fischer MS: Kinematic analysis of treadmill locomotion of tree
shrews, Tupaia glis (Scandentia: Tupaiidae). Mamm Biol 1999, 64:129-153.
135. Fischer MS: Die Lokomotion von Procavia capensis (Mammalia:
Hyracoidea): Zur Evolution des Bewegungssystems bei Säugetieren. Abh
Naturwiss Verein 1998, 33:1-188.
136. Tokuriki M: Electromyographic and joint-mechanical studies in
quadrupedal locomotion III. Gallop. Jap J vet Sci 1974, 36:121-132.
137. English AW: The functions of the lumbar spine during stepping in the
cat. J Morph 1980, 165:55-66.
138. Howell AB: Morphogenesis of the architecture of hip and thigh. J Morph
1938, 62:177-218.
139. Jones CL: The morphogenesis of the thigh of the mouse Mus musculus
with special reference to tetrapod muscle homologies. J Morph 1979,
162:275-310.
140. Engberg I, Lundberg A: An electromyographic analysis of muscular
activity in the hindlimb of the cat during unrestrained locomotion. Acta
Physiol Scand 1969, 75:614-630.
141. Rasmussen SA, Chan AK, Goslow GEJ: The cat step cycle:
electromyographic patterns for hindlimb muscles during posture and
unrestrained locomotion. J Morph 1978, 155:253-270.
142. Carlson-Kuhta P, Trank TV, Smith JL: Forms of forward quadrupedal
locomotion. II. A comparison of posture, hindlimb kinematics, and motor
patterns for upslope and level walking. J Neurophysiol 1998, 79:1687-1701.
143. Smith JL, Carlson-Kuhta P, Trank TV: Forms of forward quadrupedal
locomotion. III. A comparison of posture, hindlimb kinematics, and
motor patterns for upslope and level walking. J Neurophysiol 1998,
79:1702-1716.
144. Kojima R, Okada M: Distribution of muscle fibre types in thoracic and
lumbar epaxial muscles of Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata). Folia
Primatol 1996, 66:38-43.
145. Yokoyama I: Analyses of the fibre composition of the lumbar back
muscles in mammals. Nippon Seikeigeka Gakkai Zasshi 1982, 56:579-594.
146. McFadden KD, Bagnall KM, Mahon M, Ford DM: Histochemical fiber
composition of lumbar back muscles in the rabbit. Acta Anat 1984,
120:146-150.
147. Carlson H: Histochemical fiber composition of lumbar back muscles in
the cat. Acta Physiol Scand 1978, 103:198-209.
148. Schwartz-Giblin S, Rosello L, Pfaff DW: A histochemical study of lateral
longissimus muscle in rat. Exp Neurol 1983, 79:497-518.
149. Carlson H: Morphology and contraction properties of cat lumbar back
muscles. Acta Physiol Scand 1978, 103:180-197.
150. Carlson H: Observations on stretch reflexes in lumbar back muscles of
the cat. Acta Physiol Scand 1978, 103:427-445.
151. Ge W, Long CR, Pickar JG: Vertebral position alters paraspinal muscle
spindle responsiveness in the feline spine: effect of positioning duration.
J Physiol 2005, 569:655-665.
152. Jenkins FAJ, Camazine SM: Hip structure and locomotion in ambulatory
and cursorial carnivores. J Zool (Lond) 1977, 181:351-370.
153. Graaff vdKM, Harper J, Goslow GEJ: Analysis of posture and gait selection
during locomotion in the striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis). J Mamm
1982, 63:582-590.

Page 18 of 19

154. Pridmore PA: Trunk movements during locomotion in the marsupial
Monodelphis domestica (Didelphidae). J Morph 1992, 211:137-146.
155. Haussler KK, Bertram JE, Gellman K, Hermanson JW: Segmental in vivo
vertebral kinematics at the walk, trot and canter: a preliminary study.
Equine Vet J Suppl 2001, 33:160-164.
156. Carrier DR: Ventilatory action of the hypaxial muscles of Iguana iguana: a
function of slow muscle. J Exp Biol 1989, 143:435-457.
157. Fife MM, Bailey CL, Lee DV, Carrier DR: Function of the oblique hypaxial
muscles in trotting dogs. J Exp Biol 2001, 204:2371-2381.
158. Deban SM, Carrier DR: Hypaxial muscle activity during running and
breathing in dogs. J Exp Biol 2002, 205:1953-1967.
159. Carlson H, Halbertsma J, Zomlefer M: Control of the trunk during walking
in the cat. Acta Physiol Scand 1979, 105:251-253.
160. Shapiro LJ, Jungers WL: Electromyography of back muscles during
quadrupedal and bipedal walking in primates. Am J Phys Anthrop 1994,
93:491-504.
161. Licka TF, Peham C, Frey A: Electromyographic activity of the longissimus
dorsi muscles in horses during trotting on treadmill. Am J Vet Res 2004,
65:155-158.
162. Wada N, Akatani J, Miyajima N, Shimojo K, Kanda K: The role of vertebral
column muscles in level versus upslope treadmill walking - An
electromyographic and kinematic study. Brain Res 2006, 1090:99-109.
163. Wada N, Miyajima N, Akatani J, Shimojo K, Kanda K: Electromyographic
activity of m. longissimus and the kinematics of the vertebral column
during level and downslope treadmill walking in cats. Brain Res 2006,
1103:140-144.
164. Ritter DA, Nassar PN, Fife MM, Carrier DR: Epaxial muscle function in
trotting dogs. J Exp Biol 2001, 204:3053-3064.
165. Robert C, Valette JP, Denoix JM: The effects of treadmill inclination and
speed on the activity of three trunk muscles in the trotting horse. Equine
Vet J 2001, 33:466-472.
166. Zomlefer M, Provencher J, Blanchette G, Rossignol S: Electromyographic
study of lumbar back muscles during locomotion in acute high
decerebrate and low spinal cats. Brain Res 1984, 290:249-260.
167. Wakeling JM, Ritruechai P, Dalton S, Nankervis K: Segmental variation in
the activity and function of the equine longissimus dorsi muscle during
walk and trot. Equine Comp Exerc Phys 2007, 4:95-103.
168. Owerkowicz T, Farmer CG, Hicks JW, Brainerd EL: Contribution of gular
pumping to lung ventilation in monitor lizards. Science 1999,
284:1661-1663.
169. Carrier DR: Function of the intercostal muscles in trotting dogs:
Ventilation or locomotion? J Exp Biol 1996, 199:1455-1465.
170. Bramble DM, Carrier DR: Running and breathing in mammals. Science
1983, 219:251-256.
171. Boyd W, Blincoe H, Hayner JC: Sequence of action of the diaphragm and
quadratus lumborum during quite breathing. Anat Rec 1965, 151:579-582.
172. Kardong KV: Vertebrates: Comparative anatomy, function, evolution.
McGraw-Hill Company, Boston;, 2 1998, 1-747.
173. Langenberg W, Jüschke S: Morphologie und Innervation der Mm.
levatores costarum und ihre Beziehung zu den Mm. intertransversarii
laterales lumborum an Mensch und Känguruh. Z Anat Entw Gesch 1970,
130:255-264.
174. Bogduk N: Clinical anatomy of the lumbar spine and sacrum. Churchill
Livingstone, New York; 1997, 1-261.
175. Takahashi Y, Ohtori S, Takahashi K: Somatotopic organization of lumbar
muscle-innervating neurons in the ventral horn of the rat spinal cord.
J Anat 2010, 216:489-495.
176. Hesse B, Fischer MS, Schilling N: Distribution pattern of muscle fibre types
in the perivertebral musculature of two different sized species of mice.
Anat Rec 2010, 293:446-463.
177. Chanaud CM, Pratt CA, Loeb GE: Functionally complex muscles of the cat
hindlimb V. The roles of histochemical fiber-type regionalization and
mechanical heterogeneity in differential muscle activation. Exp Brain Res
1991, 85:300-313.
178. Scholle HC, Schumann NP, Biedermann FHW, Stegeman DF, Grassme R,
Roeleveld K, Schilling N, Fischer MS: Spatiotemporal surface EMG
characteristics from rat triceps brachii muscle during treadmill
locomotion indicate selective recruitment of functionally distinct muscle
regions. Exp Brain Res 2001, 138:26-36.
179. Moritz S, Fischer MS, Schilling N: 3D-Fibre type distribution in the
paravertebral muscles of the domestic ferret (Mustela putorius f. furo)

Schilling Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:4
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/4

180.
181.
182.
183.
184.

185.

186.
187.
188.

189.
190.

191.
192.

193.

194.

195.
196.
197.

198.

199.

200.

201.
202.

203.

204.
205.
206.
207.

related to trunk movements during locomotion. Zoology 2007,
110:197-211.
Kernell D: Muscle regionalization. Can J Appl Physiol 1998, 23:1-22.
Loeb GE: Hard lessons in motor control from the mammalian spinal
cord. TINS 1987, 10:108-113.
Hajdu S: Behaviour of frog and rat muscle at higher temperatures.
Enzymologia 1950, 14:187-193.
Ranatunga KW, Wylie SR: Temperature dependent transitions in isometric
contractions of rat muscle. J Physiol Lond 1983, 339:87-95.
Ranatunga KW: Temperature-dependence of shortening velocity and rate
of isometric tension development in rat skeletal muscles. J Physiol 1982,
329:465-483.
Ranatunga KW: The force-velocity relation of rat fast- and slow-twitch
muscles examined at different temperatures. J Physiol Lond 1984,
351:517-529.
Ranatunga KW: Endothermic force generation in fast and slow
mammalian (rabbit) muscle fibers. Biophys J 1996, 71:1905-1913.
Lee JC: Vascular patterns in the red and white muscles of the rabbit.
Anat Rec 1958, 132:597-611.
Asmussen G, Kiessling A: Charakterisierung von besonderen
Muskelfasergruppen in der Skelettmuskulatur des Frosches durch ihre
Innervation und ihre Gefäßversorgung. Acta Anat 1974, 90:226-242.
Andersen P, Kroese AJ: Capillary supply in soleus and gastrocnemius
muscles of man. Pflügers Arch 1978, 375:245-249.
Lie HR: A quantitative identification of three muscle fiber types in the
body muscles of Lampetra fluviatilis and their relation to blood
capillaries. Cell Tissue Res 1974, 154:109-119.
Plyley MJ, Groom AC: Geometrical distribution of capillaries in
mammalian striated muscle. Am J Physiol 1975, 228:1376-1383.
Walesby NJ, Johnston IA: Fibre types in the locomotory muscles of an
antarctic teleost, Notothenia rossii - A histochemical ultrastructural and
biochemical study. Cell Tissue Res 1980, 208:143-164.
Hoppeler H, Mathieu O, Weibel ER, Krauer R, Lindtstedt SL, Taylor CR:
Design of the mammalian respiratory system VIII. Capillaries in skeletal
muscles. Respir Physiol 1981, 44:129-150.
Gleeson TT, Nicol CJM, Johnston IA: Capillarization, mitochondrial
densities, oxygen diffusion distances and innervation of red and white
muscle of the lizard Dipsosaurus dorsalis. Cell Tissue Res 1984, 237:253-258.
Totland GK: Capillary distribution in the lateral muscle of axolotl
Ambystoma mexicanum. Acta Zoologica 1984, 65:221-226.
Hudlicka O: Growth of capillaries in skeletal and cardiac muscle. Circ Res
1982, 50:451-461.
Kovanen V, Suominen H, Heikkinen E: Connective tissue of “fast” and
“slow” skeletal muscle in rats - effects of endurance training. Acta Physiol
Scand 1980, 108:173-180.
Kovanen V, Suominen H, Heikkinen E: Collagen of slow twitch and fast
twitch muscle fibres in different types of rat skeletal muscle. Eur J Appl
Physiol 1984, 52:235-242.
Kovanen V, Suominen H, Heikkinen E: Mechanical properties of fast and
slow skeletal muscle with special reference to collagen and endurance
training. J Biomech 1984, 17:725-735.
Laurent GH, Sparrow MP, Bates PC, Millward DJ: Turnover of muscle
protein in the fowl. Collagen content and turnover in cardiac and
skeletal muscles of the adult fowl and the changes during stretchinduced growth. Biochem J 1978, 176:419-427.
Wells JB: Comparison of mechanical properties between slow and fast
mammalian muscles. J Physiol 1965, 178:252-269.
Gorb SN, Fischer MS: Three-dimensional analysis of the arrangement and
length distribution of fascicles in the triceps muscle of Galea musteloides
(Rodentia, Caviomorpha). Zoomorphology 2000, 120:91-97.
Rome LC, Funke RP, Alexander RM, Lutz GJ, Aldridge H, Scott F,
Freadman M: Why animals have different muscle fibre types. Nature 1988,
335:824-827.
Henneman E, Olson CB: Relations between structure and function in the
design of skeletal muscles. J Neurophysiol 1965, 28:581-598.
Desmedt JE, Godaux E: Fast motor units are not preferentially activated
in rapid voluntary contractions in man. Nature 1977, 267:717-719.
Ahlberg PE, Clack JA, Blom H: The axial skeleton of the Devonian
tetrapod Ichthyostega. Nature 2005, 437:137-140.
Edwards JL: Two perspectives on the evolution of the tetrapod limb.
Amer Zool 1989, 29:235-254.

Page 19 of 19

208. Carroll RL, Irwin J, Green DM: Thermal physiology and the origin of
terrestriality in vertebrates. Zool J Linn Soc 2005, 143:345-358.
doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-4
Cite this article as: Schilling: Evolution of the axial system in craniates:
morphology and function of the perivertebral musculature. Frontiers in
Zoology 2011 8:4.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
