<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The Ca2+ activated SK3 channel is expressed in microglia in the rat striatum and contributes to microglia-mediated neurotoxicity in vitro</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010 7:4. doi:10.1186/1742-2094-7-4"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Lyanne C Schlichter"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

RESEARCH

JOURNAL OF
NEUROINFLAMMATION

Open Access

The Ca2+ activated SK3 channel is expressed in
microglia in the rat striatum and contributes to
microglia-mediated neurotoxicity in vitro
Lyanne C Schlichter1,2,5*, Vikas Kaushal1,2,3, Iska Moxon-Emre1,2, Vishanthan Sivagnanam1,2,4, Catherine Vincent1,2

Abstract
Background: Small-conductance Ca2+ activated K+ channels are expressed in the CNS, where KCNN2/SK2/KCa2.2
and KCNN3/SK3/KCa2.3 help shape the electrical activity of some neurons. The SK3 channel is considered a
potential therapeutic target for diseases and disorders involving neuron hyper-excitability but little is known about
its expression and roles in non-neuronal cells in either the healthy or damaged CNS. The purpose of this study was
to examine expression of KCNN3/SK3 in CNS microglia in vivo and in vitro, and to use an established in vitro model
to determine if this channel contributes to the neurotoxic capacity of activated microglia.
Methods: KCNN3 mRNA (real-time RT-PCR) and SK3 immunoreactivity were examined in rat microglia.
Lipopolysaccharide was then used to activate microglia (monitored by iNOS, nitric oxide, activation of NF-B and
p38 MAPK) and transform them to a neurotoxic state. Microglia-mediated neuron damage (TUNEL, activated
caspase 3) and nitrotyrosine levels were quantified using a two-chamber system that allowed microglia to be
treated with channel blockers, washed and then added to neuron/astrocyte cultures. Contributions of SK3 to these
processes were discriminated using a subtractive pharmacological approach with apamin and tamapin. ANOVA and
post-hoc tests were used to assess the statistical significance of differences between treatment groups. SK3
immunoreactivity was then compared in the normal and damaged adult rat striatum, by injecting collagenase (a
hemorrhagic stroke) or endothelin-1 (a transient ischemic stroke).
Results: KCNN3 mRNA was prevalent in cultured microglia and increased after lipopolysaccharide-induced activation;
SK3 channel blockade inhibited microglial activation and reduced their ability to kill neurons. SK3 immunoreactivity
was prevalent in cultured microglia and throughout the adult rat striatum (except white matter tracts). After strokes,
SK3 was highly expressed in activated microglia/macrophages within the lesions, but reduced in other cells.
Conclusions: SK3 is expressed in microglia in both the healthy and damaged adult striatum, and mechanistic in vitro
studies show it contributes to transformation of microglia to an activated neurotoxic phenotype. Thus, SK3 might be a
therapeutic target for reducing inflammation-mediated acute CNS damage. Moreover, its roles in microglia must be
considered when targeting this channel for CNS diseases, disorders and reducing neuron hyper-excitability.

Background
After acute CNS injuries such as stroke or trauma, there
is a prolonged inflammatory response involving microglial activation and infiltration of macrophages and neutrophils, which has the potential to cause secondary
injury [1-4]. Contributions of activated microglia are
complex because they can produce cytotoxic molecules,
* Correspondence: schlicht@uhnres.utoronto.ca
1
Genes and Development Division, Toronto Western Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, M5T 2S8, Canada

as well as growth and repair factors [5-9]. There is a
need to identify drug targets for reducing detrimental
outcomes of inflammation without interfering with beneficial microglial functions, such as phagocytosis, which
removes cellular debris, aids in repair and facilitates
reorganization of neuronal circuits [10,11]. Microglia
respond to CNS damage by up-regulating functions that
involve Ca2+ signaling; e.g., proliferation, migration, phagocytosis, and production of nitric oxide, interleukins,
cytokines and chemokines [12-17]. An anticipated
immediate response to a rise in intracellular Ca 2+ is

© 2010 Schlichter et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

activation of small- and intermediate-conductance Ca2
-activated K+ channels, which are very sensitive to Ca2+
increases and do not require changes in membrane
potential to activate [18-20]. Intermediate-conductance
Ca2+-activated K + channels (variously called KCNN4/
KCa3.1/SK4/IK) have been described in microglia
[21-23], but very little is known about other SK channels or their roles in these cells.
There are three mammalian SK channels (KCNN1/
SK1, KCNN2/SK2, KCNN3/SK3), which are predominantly expressed in the nervous system. By contributing
to the medium duration after-hyperpolarization, SK
channels regulate neuronal excitability, phasic firing patterns and action potential propagation [24-26]. The SK3
channel is under increasing scrutiny because of its
expression patterns in neurons in the caudate putamen,
hippocampus and dorsal motor nucleus, its role in
action potential firing in dopaminergic neurons, and the
possible links between several CNS disorders and SK3
mutations or changes in expression (see Discussion).
The resulting impetus to develop SK3 inhibitors, activators and modulators as therapeutic tools makes it essential to understand the roles of this channel in other
cells, both within the CNS and in peripheral tissues.
Very little is known about the expression, and particularly, the roles of SK channels in non-neuronal CNS
cells; this study addresses the contribution of these
channels to activation and potentially cytotoxic functions of microglia.
First, we compared transcript expression of KCNN1,
KCNN2 and KCNN3 in microglia isolated from rat brain.
KCNN3 predominated in unstimulated microglia, and they
had substantial SK3 immunoreactivity. KCNN3 was selectively increased in microglia that were activated by lipopolysaccharide, which increases intracellular Ca2+ [27,28]
and up-regulates pro-inflammatory molecules. Activated
microglia killed neurons in vitro; and the use of potent
peptide channel blockers demonstrated a specific role for
SK3 in microglial activation through p38 MAP kinase, and
in nitric oxide production and neurotoxicity. Importantly,
NFB activation and phagocytosis were not inhibited.
These results provide the first evidence that blocking SK3
channels in microglia can reduce their cytotoxicity, but
does not globally inhibit their functions. To demonstrate
that these findings are relevant to the adult CNS, we
showed SK3 immunoreactivity in microglia in the healthy
rat striatum, with substantial expression in activated
microglia and macrophages after both ischemic and
hemorrhagic strokes.
+

Methods
All procedures on animals were approved by the University Health Network animal care committee, in
accordance with guidelines established by the Canadian

Page 2 of 15

Council on Animal Care. All rats were obtained from
Charles River, St.-Constant, PQ. Prior to inducing a
stroke, adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (250-280 g; 3-4
months old) were housed in pairs, maintained under a
12 h light/dark cycle, and given food and water ad libitum. For preparing microglia cultures, 1-2 day-old rat
pups were killed by cervical dislocation.
Cell cultures

Microglia (≥99% pure) cultures were prepared using our
standard protocols [22,29,30]. After removing the
meninges from 1-2 day old rats, the brain was dissected,
minced in cold Minimal Essential Medium (MEM; Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA), centrifuged (300 g, 10 min) and
re-suspended in MEM supplemented with 5% horse
serum and 5% fetal bovine serum (Wisent, St-Bruno,
PQ), and 0.05 mg/ml gentamycin (Invitrogen). Two days
later, cellular debris, non-adherent cells and supernatant
were removed, fresh medium was added to the flask and
the mixed cultures were allowed to grow for another 810 days. Microglia suspensions were harvested by shaking the flasks on an orbital shaker (65 rpm, 4-6 h, 37°C),
and then seeded in MEM with 2% fetal bovine serum.
Neuron cultures were prepared from E18 rat embryos,
as before [22,29]. After removing the meninges and
brain stem, the tissue was isolated, incubated in 2 mg/
ml papain (Worthington Biochemical, NJ) for 30 min at
37°C, and triturated in Neurobasal A/B27 medium. The
neuron layer was re-suspended in antioxidant-free Neurobasal A medium with 2% B27 supplement, 0.05 mg/
ml gentamycin and 0.5 mM L-glutamine (all from Invitrogen). Neurons were seeded on poly-L-ornithine-treated German coverslips (Bellco Glass Inc., Vineland, NJ)
at 3 × 104 cells/well and grown for 7-10 days to increase
the proportion of mature neurons [22]. Every 4 days,
50% of the medium was replaced with fresh antioxidantfree Neurobasal A/B27. For studies of microgliamediated neurotoxicity, microglia were seeded in the
same medium used for neurons. When used to validate
the SK3 immunostaining, non-transfected and stably
transfected (with rSK3) CHO cells were grown in
Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco’s Medium with 10% fetal
bovine serum, HT supplement, antibiotic-antimycotic,
and 0.4 μg/ml geneticin (G418) (all from Gibco).
Induction of a hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke

An intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) was induced in the
striatum of adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (300-350 g),
as before [31-35]. In brief, rats were anesthetised with
isofluorane (3% induction, 1.5% maintenance) and
placed in a stereotaxic frame. A 1 mm diameter burr
hole was drilled in the skull (0.2 mm anterior and 3 mm
lateral to bregma), through which a 30-gauge needle
was lowered into the right caudate putamen. A micropump (Micro4, World Precision Instruments, Sarasota,
FL) delivered 0.125 U of bacterial type IV collagenase

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

(Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON) in 0.5 μl saline, at 250 nl/
min. This resulted in a hemorrhagic lesion that was limited to the striatum. To induce an ischemic stroke in
the striatum, the same surgical procedures were used,
but the vasoconstrictor peptide, endothelin-1 (Calbiochem, EMD Biosciences; San Diego, CA) was injected
(400 pmol in 1.0 μl of saline). This widely used model
produces a transient focal ischemic stroke [36], which
we found was of reproducible size and restricted to the
striatum [37]. After each injection, the needle was left in
place for 5 min to prevent solution reflux. The animal’s
core body temperature was maintained at 37.0 ± 0.5°C
using an electric heating pad throughout surgery and
recovery, and rats regained consciousness within 10 min.
Immunohistochemical analysis

All antibodies were diluted in 2.5% donkey serum and
centrifuged before use at 9400 g for 10 min to remove
any aggregated antibody. The concentrations used for
primary and secondary antibodies are indicated in the
figure legends. Cultured microglia were plated on glass
coverslips and grown for 3 days in MEM with 2% fetal
bovine serum and 0.05 mg/ml gentamycin. After washing with PBS (3×, 5 min each), they were fixed for 30
min in 4% paraformaldehyde, washed (3×, 5 min each),
permeabilized for 5 min with 0.2% Triton X-100, and
washed again (3×, 5 min each). SK3 immunoreactivity
was detected with an anti-SK3 antibody (rabbit polyclonal, Alomone Labs, Jerusalem, Israel) that we previously validated by Western blots on microglia and
rSK3-transfected CHO cells [21]. Non-specific antigens
were blocked with 4% donkey serum for 1.5 h and
microglia were incubated with the anti-SK3 antibody
overnight at 4°C. After washing, cells were incubated
with a donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Jackson
ImmunoResearch Laboratories) and microglia were colabeled (50 min, room temperature) with tomato lectin
(FITC-conjugated TL, Sigma-Aldrich), which binds to
microglial cell surface N-acetyl-glucosamine residues
and to N-acetyl-lactosamine on lysosomes of activated
cells. After further washing (PBS, 3×, 10 min each),
cell nuclei were labeled for 5 min with DAPI (4’-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) (1:3000; Sigma-Aldrich). The
coverslips were washed (PBS, 3×, 5 min each) and
mounted on glass slides with VectaShield mounting
medium (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA). Microglia and
CHO cells were imaged with an Axioplan 2 deconvolution microscope, 60× quartz objective, Axiocam HRm
digital camera, and analyzed with Axiovision 4.6 software (all from Zeiss).
After a stroke or ICH, rats were killed by an overdose
of isofluorane, and then perfused through the heart with
100 ml phosphate buffered saline (PBS), followed by 60
ml of fixative (4% paraformaldehyde, 2% sucrose in PBS;
pH 7.5). Dissected brains were stored in the same

Page 3 of 15

fixative at 4°C overnight, followed by 10% sucrose for 24
h and 30% sucrose for 48 h. Fixed brains were cut coronally through the needle entry site, and at 4 mm anterior and 4 mm posterior to that plane. Frozen brain
sections (16 μm thick) were made using a Model
CM350S cryostat (Leica, Richmond Hill, ON) and stored
at -40°C until used. Several antibodies were used to
illustrate the salient features of the striatum, ischemic
and hemorrhagic lesions, microglia and macrophages, as
we recently used [32-35]. White matter tracts were
labeled with an antibody against myelin basic protein
(MBP) (mouse monoclonal, Sigma-Aldrich), one of the
most abundant proteins in the myelin sheath. Three different labels were used for microglia and macrophages:
an antibody against rat CD11b/c, which is also called
complement receptor 3 (OX-42; mouse monoclonal,
AbD Serotec, Oxford, UK), an antibody against ‘ionized
calcium-binding adapter-1’ (Iba-1; rabbit polyclonal,
Wako, Osaka, Japan), or tomato lectin (as above). The
choice of label was based on staining clarity, which
depended on the tissue and cell activation state, and on
compatibility; i.e., polyclonal rabbit Iba-1 and SK3 antibodies could not be combined. The cryosections were
incubated (24 h, 4°C) with a primary antibody in PBS
containing 3% donkey serum and 0.3% Triton X-100,
and then washed in PBS (3×, 5 min each). Fluorophoreconjugated secondary antibodies were donkey anti-rabbit
or anti-mouse, as appropriate (see figure legends),
applied for 2 h at room temperature in PBS containing
3% donkey serum and 0.3% Triton X-100. After the sections were washed (PBS, 2×, 10 min each), they were
cover-slipped using an aqueous mounting medium (1:1
glycerol:PBS). Negative controls were treated in the
same manner, without the primary antibody. Sections
were examined using an LSM 510 META confocal
microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) and the final
images were prepared using ImageJ software (version
1.33k, NIH).
Quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR)

qRT-PCR [38] was used to monitor transcript expression of SK channels in cultured microglia, as we have
previously done for other ion channels [22,30]. Genespecific primers were designed with the ‘Primer3Output’
program http://frodo.wi.mit.edu/primer3/input.htm, as
follows. KCNN1 (SK1) (GenBank #AF000973): forward
5’-TGG ACA CAC AGC TCA CCA A-3’; reverse 5’ATG GAT GGC CTG AAG GAA C-3’. KCNN2 (SK2)
(GenBank #NM_019314): forward 5’-ACT TCC TTG
GAG CAA TGT GG-3’; reverse 5’-TGC ACA TGC
TTT TCT GCT TT-3’. KCNN3 (SK3) (GenBank
#U69884) forward 5’-CCA ACC CCT CCA GCT CTT3’; reverse 5’-GTT GGC TTT GGG GAA GGT-3’. TBP
(TATA box binding protein) (GenBank #XM_217785):

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

forward 5’-GGA CCA GAA CAA CAG CCT TC-3’;
reverse 5’-CCG TAA GGC ATC ATT GGA CT-3’.
RNeasy mini kits (Qiagen, Mississauga, ON) were used
to isolate RNA after degrading any contaminating DNA
with DNaseI (0.1 U/ml, 15 min, 37°C; Amersham Biosciences, Baie d’Urfe, PQ). A two-step reaction was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Invitrogen); i.e., total RNA (2 μg) was reverse transcribed in 20 μl volume using 200 U of SuperScriptII
RNase H-reverse transcriptase, with 0.5 mM dNTPs
(Invitrogen) and 0.5 μM oligo dT (Sigma-Aldrich).
Amplification was performed on an ABI PRISM 7900
Sequence Detection System (PE Biosystems, Foster City,
CA) at 95°C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95°C
for 15 s, 55°C for 15 s and 72°C for 30 s. ‘No-template’
and ‘no-amplification’ controls were included for each
gene, and melt curves showed a single peak, confirming
specific amplification. Relative input RNA amounts were
determined from a relative standard curve for each gene
of interest and the housekeeping gene, TBP.
Microglia stimulation, with and without SK blockers

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a cell wall component of
gram-negative bacteria that binds to Toll-like receptor 4
and is commonly used to activate microglia in vitro
[39,40]. We compared control microglia and those treated
with LPS from the commonly used E. coli strain, 0055:B5
(Sigma-Aldrich), with or without a channel blocker. (Figure legends indicate concentrations of LPS and blockers
for each experiment.) A pharmacological approach was
used to investigate the roles of SK channels because
microglia, like other innate immune cells (macrophages,
neutrophils), are extremely resistant to transfection, infection or siRNA-mediated knockdown. Because no specific
SK3 inhibitors are available, we designed a subtractive protocol to unequivocally discriminate roles of SK3 channels,
based on affinities of apamin and tamapin for cloned SK
channels [26]. IC50’s of apamin are 27-140 pM for SK2,
0.6-4.0 nM for SK3, and 0.7-12 nM for recombinant
human SK1; thus, we first tested a relatively high concentration of apamin. If 100 nM apamin (Alomone) blocked a
microglial function, then we compared a high and low
concentration of the scorpion toxin, tamapin. If apamin
affected the function of interest, then 5 nM tamapin (Alomone) was used, which fully blocks SK2 (Kd = 24 pM) and
significantly blocks SK3 (Kd = 1.7 nM) [41]. Finally, if 5
nM tamapin was effective, then 250 pM tamapin was used
to preferentially block SK2 channels, if present. Thus, a
role for SK3 channels was deduced if a cellular function
was inhibited by apamin and 5 nM tamapin, but not by
250 pM tamapin.
Microglia-mediated neuron damage

To assess whether SK3 channels contribute to microglia-mediated damage to neurons, we used a Transwell™
system (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ), as before

Page 4 of 15

[22]. Microglia in the porous upper inserts (106 cells/
insert) were incubated overnight (95% O2, 5% CO2, 37°
C), and then activated with LPS for 24 h, with or without apamin or tamapin. Neuron/astrocyte cultures
(~70:30%) were grown on a coverslip in the bottom well
of the chamber. The microglia-bearing inserts were then
washed thoroughly with Neurobasal A medium (Invitrogen), so that the target neurons were never exposed to
drugs, and then placed above healthy neuron/astrocyte
cultures and incubated for 24 or 48 h, depending on the
assay. The 3-μm diameter pores in the upper insert
allow the microglial cells to chemically communicate,
without cell-cell contact.
For analysis, the neuron-bearing coverslips were
removed from the chamber, washed with PBS, fixed for
30 min in 4% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized (2
min on ice) with 0.01% Triton X-100 in PBS containing
1% sodium citrate. DNA damage in the neuron-bearing
coverslips was determined by TUNEL, according to the
manufacturer’s protocol (Roche Applied Science, Laval,
PQ), with fluorescence detected using FITC-conjugated
streptavidin (1:500; Invitrogen). The cell nuclei were
labeled with DAPI (as above), and the coverslips were
washed and mounted on glass slides with 1:1 glycerol:
PBS. Cells were imaged with a 20× quartz objective on
the Axioplan 2 microscope and analyzed, as above. For
each cell culture (from n separate animals) and each
experimental condition, TUNEL-positive, DAPI-labeled
cells were counted in 5 microscope fields (150-200 cells/
field) on 2 coverslips and averaged.
To further determine whether neurons died by apoptosis, caspase 3 activation was monitored in neuron cultures that had been exposed for 24 h to microglia,
treated as above (± LPS treatment; ± an SK channel
blocker). The neuron cultures in the lower Transwell™
chamber were scraped and harvested, solubilized and
mixed with the fluorescent synthetic substrate, AcDEVD-AMC, according to the manufacturer’s protocol
(Calbiochem). After the supernatant was transferred to
24-well black-walled plates (PerkinElmer Life & Analytical Sciences, Woodbridge, ON), the fluorescence signal
in each well was determined, and compared with the
negative control (fluorogenic substrate alone). Finally, to
quantify tyrosine nitration levels in the neuron-bearing
coverslips, the cells were fixed (2% glutaraldehyde, 2%
paraformaldehyde), transferred to 24-well black-walled
plates, labeled for 18 h at 4°C with a rabbit polyclonal
anti-nitrotyrosine antibody (1:200; Cell Signaling Technology, Beverley, MA), and then washed and labeled for
2 h at room temperature with a Cy3-conjugated secondary antibody (1:500; Jackson Labs).
Standardization of plate-reader assays

A similar standardization procedure was used for
TUNEL, caspase 3 activation and tyrosine nitration in

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

Page 5 of 15

neurons, and for microglial p38 MAPK activation, NFB
activation, iNOS expression and nitric oxide production.
The fluorescence signal from each experimental well
was measured with a plate reader (SPECTRAmax
Gemini EM; Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA), and
then standardized as relative fluorescence units (RFU)
per milligram of protein, where protein content was
measured in each well with a plate reader (model
EL311SX, Bio-Tek Instruments, Winooski, VT) using a
colorimetric protein assay and BSA standards (Bio-Rad
Laboratories, Hercules, CA). For each experiment, the
negative control signal was subtracted as the average
from 3 control wells lacking cells. Each experimental (n)
value was obtained by averaging the RFU/mg protein
from 3 coverslips of cells cultured from one animal;
multiple n’s reflect cultures from different animals.

For phagocytosis, we used a fluorometric assay [43] in
which 100 μl of a suspension of heat-killed fluoresceinconjugated E. coli K-12 bacteria (Invitrogen) was added
to each well of a 96-well plate containing 50,000 microglia, and incubated with or without 100 nM apamin.
Following incubation (1 h, 37°C, 5% CO2), 50 μl of Trypan blue was added to quench the fluorescence of any
E. coli adhering to the outside of the microglia. The
fluorescence signal in each well was measured at 480
nm excitation and 520 nm emission wavelengths, and is
proportional to the number of FITC-conjugated E. coli
phagocytosed by the microglia. As a negative control,
we blocked phagocytosis with 10 μM of the actin polymerization inhibitor, cytochalasin D, and compared the
signal with solvent alone (0.2% DMSO).

Monitoring microglial activation

Where appropriate, data are presented as the mean of
each treatment group ± the standard error of the mean
(SEM). Statistical analyses were performed using Origin
7.0 software (Microcal, CT). Unless otherwise specified,
ANOVA followed by the Bonferroni post-hoc test was
used to assess the statistical significance of differences
between groups.

p38 MAPK activation was determined from the amount
of phosphorylated p38 MAPK and NFB activation was
monitored by degradation of IB-a using the plate
reader, as before [22,42]. Microglia were seeded on coverslips in 24-well plates (200,000 cells/well) and stimulated for 30 min with 100 ng/ml LPS. The cells were
washed with PBS (3×, 5 min each), fixed for 30 min in
4% paraformaldehyde, washed again (3×, 5 min each)
and permeabilized for 2 min on ice with 0.01% Triton
X-100. Microglia were labeled (18 h, 4°C) with a rabbit
polyclonal antibody against p38 MAPK (1:750) or phospho-p38 MAPK (1:50; both from Cell Signaling) or IBa (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotech., Santa Cruz, CA). After
further washing (PBS, 3×, 5 min each), immunoreactivity
was detected using a secondary antibody (2 h, room
temperature) conjugated either to Cy3 or FITC (1:500;
Jackson Labs).
To monitor iNOS and nitric oxide, microglia were
plated at 50,000 cells/well in a 96-well plate, cultured
overnight (37°C; 5% CO2), and then stimulated for 24 h
with LPS in the presence or absence of an SK blocker.
iNOS induction was monitored with a mouse monoclonal antibody (1:200; Cell Signaling) and a Cy3-conjugated secondary antibody (1:500; Jackson Labs). The
fluorescence intensity in each well was standardized to
protein concentration (as above), with background subtraction using control wells lacking the primary antibody. Nitric oxide in supernatants harvested 24 h after
LPS stimulation was measured using the colorimetric
Griess assay (Invitrogen). Ten microliters of 0.1% N-(1naphthyl) ethylenediamine and 10 μl of sulfanilic acid
were added to 100 μl of cell supernatant from each well.
The red product from the reaction with nitrite was
monitored with a spectrophotometric plate reader
(EL311SX, Bio-Tek Instruments, VT) as the absorbance
at 570 nm and the nitric oxide concentration was calculated by interpolation on a standard curve.

Statistical analyses

Results
Expression of KCNN/SK channels in microglia

[For all quantitative data, statistical analyses and levels
of significance are shown on the bar graphs.] Figure 1A
shows transcript expression of three KCNN channels in
cultured microglia. The cultures were ≥99% pure, as
shown here by labeling with tomato lectin, and as previously shown with real-time RT-PCR and staining with
OX-42 or anti-Iba1 antibodies [22,29,30]. All three
genes were expressed in microglia, but after stimulation
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), KCNN3 expression
increased ~1.7 fold and was significantly higher than
KCNN1 and KCNN2. There was punctate SK3 immunoreactivity inside and at the microglial cell surface (Figure 1B). We had previously validated this antibody by
Western blots on microglia and rSK3-transfected CHO
cells [21]; Figure 1C shows specific immunolabeling of
microglia and rSK3-transfected CHO cells, but no labeling of non-transfected cells. This verification was important for the in vivo analysis presented below. Microglial
morphology is highly variable in culture; we could not
quantify changes in SK3 labeling after LPS-induced activation because the processes retracted and cell bodies
enlarged.
Blocking microglial SK3 channels reduces their neurotoxic
capacity

Effects of blocking SK channels specifically in microglia
could only be studied in vitro because SK channels are
also expressed in neurons and astrocytes (see Discussion). Roles of microglial SK channels were determined

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

Figure 1 KCNN/SK expression in cultured microglia. A. Relative
mRNA expression of KCNN1-KCNN3 was determined by quantitative
real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), and normalized to the housekeeping
gene, TATA box-binding protein (TBP). Bars represent mean ± SEM
for 3 cultures from separate rat litters. After microglia were activated
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 100 ng/ml, 24 h), KCNN3 expression
increased (†p < 0.5) and was higher than KCNN1 and KCNN2
expression (**p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001). The inset shows a typical,
essentially pure microglial culture labeled with FITC-conjugated
tomato lectin. B. SK3 immunostaining in unstimulated microglia.
Cultured microglia were labeled with anti-SK3 (rabbit polyclonal,
1:200), a Cy3-conjugated secondary (donkey anti-rabbit, 1:400; red),
the microglia/macrophage stain, FITC-conjugated tomato lectin
(1:500; green) and the nuclear marker, DAPI (1:3000; blue). Scale
bars, 10 μm. C. Specificity of the SK3 staining. Upper panels: Lack of
non-specific staining (no SK3 primary antibody) in microglia, which
were labeled with DAPI (blue), tomato lectin (green) and the Cy3conjugated secondary antibody (left). The color-separated image at
the right shows the absence of non-specific staining in the Cy3
(red) channel. Scale bar, 10 μm. Lower panels: Phase-contrast
images show SK3 staining in transfected (left), but not in nontransfected CHO cells (anti-SK3 and Cy3-conjugated secondary
antibodies, as in panel B). Scale bars, 30 μm.

using a two-chamber Transwell™ system in which only
the microglia were exposed to channel blockers. Effects
of apamin on microglia are most likely due to SK3
channel block because KCNN2 was nearly undetectable
in LPS-activated microglia, and rodent KCNN1 apparently does not form functional channels [44,45]. Nevertheless, we used a subtractive pharmacological approach
to definitively implicate SK3. Each experiment followed

Page 6 of 15

the same format: if 100 nM apamin (blocks SK1, SK2,
SK3) had an effect, then 5 nM tamapin (blocks SK2,
SK3) was tested; if effective, then 250 pM tamapin
(blocks only SK2) was tested. A specific role for SK3
was deduced if a function was inhibited by apamin and
5 nM tamapin only. Conversely, inhibition by 250 pM
tamapin would implicate SK2 channels.
The ability of microglia to kill neurons was determined using cultures that were ~70% neurons (based on
MAP-2, a marker of mature neurons) and 30% astrocytes (stained with glial fibrillary acidic protein). The
cultures were derived from whole rat brains, and thus
were a mixed neuronal population. After exposure to
microglia in the Transwell™ chambers, DNA damage in
the target neuron/astrocyte cultures was quantified by
counting TUNEL-positive cells as a percentage of DAPIlabeled cells in each well. The damaged cells were neurons, as they were GFAP-negative, and this is consistent
with our earlier finding that LPS-activated microglia do
not kill astrocytes during the 48 h treatment period
[22]. After exposure to activated microglia, 26 ± 2% of
the target neurons became TUNEL-positive (Figure 2A),
which was significantly higher than in wells exposed to
unstimulated microglia (13 ± 1%). Less than 1% of neurons died in control wells lacking microglia. Treating
activated microglia with 100 nM apamin reduced the
number of TUNEL-positive neurons to 16 ± 1%, while 5
nM tamapin reduced it to 19 ± 1%. There was no effect
of 250 pM tamapin. Very similar results (no figure)
were obtained when TUNEL fluorescence was measured
with the plate reader; i.e., activated microglia nearly
doubled neuron TUNEL, and this was reduced ~64% by
100 nM apamin and ~85% by 5 nM tamapin, but was
unaffected by 250 pM tamapin. To further assess
whether neuron death was apoptotic, caspase 3 activity
was monitored in the target neuron/astrocyte cultures.
Entirely consistent results were obtained (Figure 2B);
activated microglia increased caspase 3 activity in neuron/astrocyte cultures by ~70%. This was reduced ~58%
by 100 nM apamin and ~52% by 5 nM tamapin, but
250 pM tamapin had no effect. Together, these results
show that blocking SK3 channels in activated microglia
reduces their ability to kill neurons by apoptosis.
SK3 channels contribute to a subset of microglial
functions

In Figures 3, 4 and 5, plate-reader results are expressed
as relative fluorescence units per milligram of protein (i.
e., RFU/mg) in each well (mean±SEM; # of microglial
cultures indicated on bars). Statistical analyses were performed on the raw data but for presentation, fluorescence values were normalized to untreated controls,
which were set to 1.0.
In activated microglia, iNOS increased more than 5
fold; this induction was inhibited ~58% by 100 nM

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

Figure 2 Blocking SK3 channels in microglia reduces their
neurotoxic behavior. Microglia on Transwell™ inserts were
incubated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 100 ng/ml, 24 h), with or
without 100 nM apamin, 5 nM tamapin or 250 pM tamapin. The
inserts were then washed to remove the drugs; thus, target neurons
were never exposed to LPS or channel blockers. Each microgliabearing insert was placed in a Transwell™ chamber above healthy
neurons, incubated for 24 h (for caspase 3 activation) or 48 h (for
TUNEL), and then the target neuron cultures were removed and
assessed. Results are presented as mean±SEM for the number of
separate cultures indicated on the bars. A. TUNEL-positive neuronal
nuclei were counted and expressed as a percentage of all DAPIstained nuclei. LPS-stimulated microglia killed more neurons than
untreated microglia (††p < 0.01), and killing was significantly
reduced by treating the microglia with 100 nM apamin (*p < 0.05)
or 5 nM tamapin (*p < 0.05), but not with 250 pM tamapin. B.
Average caspase 3 activity in each neuron-containing well was
measured with a fluorogenic substrate (Ac-DEVD-AMC) and the
fluorescence plate reader. Treating microglia with either 100 nM
apamin or 5 nM tamapin reduced caspase-3 activation in the target
neurons (*p < 0.05); whereas, 250 pM tamapin treatment had no
effect.

Page 7 of 15

apamin and ~83% by 5 nM tamapin, but was not
affected by 250 pM tamapin (Figure 3A). Once induced,
iNOS is enzymatically active and produces nitric oxide
(NO). NO production was increased ~3 fold; i.e., from
19 ± 5 nmoles/mg protein in control cells to 59 ± 11
nmoles/mg after LPS stimulation. This increase was prevented by 100 nM apamin, reduced ~85% by 5 nM
tamapin, but unaffected by 250 pM (Figure 3B). Using a
similar model of LPS-activated microglia, we previously
showed that either an iNOS inhibitor (S-methylisothiourea) or a peroxynitrite scavenger (FeTmPyP)
greatly reduced neuron apoptosis [22,42]. Because one
potential outcome of peroxynitrite formation is nitration
of cell proteins, we asked whether blocking the SK3
channel in microglia reduces tyrosine nitration in the
target neuron cultures. Activated microglia evoked a
160% increase in tyrosine nitration, and this was
reduced 50% by 100 nM apamin, 33% by 5 nM tamapin,
but was unaffected by 250 pM tamapin (Figure 3C).
Taken together, our results show a role for SK3 channels in iNOS induction and NO production by microglia, and in tyrosine nitration of neuronal proteins. They
do not, however, prove that peroxynitrite caused the tyrosine nitration and neuron death.
Microglia stimulation by LPS rapidly activates p38
mitogen activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) and
nuclear factor-B (NF-B), which we routinely detect
after 30 min by Western blot and spectrofluorimetric
analyses [22,42]. Microglial activation induced a ~230%
increase in microglial p38 MAPK activation, detected as
an increase in its phosphorylated form after 30 min
(Figure 4A). p38 MAPK activation was essentially abolished by 100 nM apamin, was reduced ~80% by 5 nM
tamapin, but was not affected by 250 pM tamapin. NFB activation was quantified as degradation of the ‘inhibitory factor B’ (IB-a), as before [22]. NF-B was
activated by LPS, as seen by the ~57% reduction in IBa protein after 30 min (Figure 4B). SK channels were
not involved in NF-B activation because neither apamin nor tamapin affected IB-a degradation. These
results implicate SK3 channels in a specific microglial
activation pathway: p38 MAPK activation.
An important question is whether SK3 blockade
impairs beneficial functions. We found that rat microglia
phagocytosed fluorescent-labeled heat-killed E. coli, but
this crucial function was not affected by 100 nM apamin
(Figure 5), which demonstrates that functional SK1-SK3
channels are not necessary. In control experiments, the
fluorescence signal was nearly abolished by inhibiting
phagocytosis with the actin polymerization inhibitor,
cytochalasin D; indicating a lack of stray fluorescence
from adherent E. coli. Together with the lack of NFB
inhibition, this result also demonstrates that apamin was
neither toxic nor a generalized microglial suppressant.

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

Figure 3 Blocking SK3 channels reduces microglial iNOS and
NO, and tyrosine nitration of target neurons. Microglia were
grown on Transwell™ inserts, and treated with LPS (100 ng/ml, 24
h), with or without 100 nM apamin, 5 nM tamapin or 250 pM
tamapin. Results are expressed as RFU/mg protein in each well
(mean±SEM; # of cell cultures indicated on bars), normalized to the
signal from untreated microglia. A. iNOS protein was monitored
with a mouse monoclonal anti-iNOS antibody (1:200) and a Cy3conjugated secondary antibody (1:500). LPS stimulation increased
iNOS expression (†p < 0.05), which was reduced by 100 nM apamin
(*p < 0.05) or 5 nM tamapin (**p < 0.01), but not by 250 pM
tamapin. B. Nitric oxide production was measured as nitrite
accumulation, using the Griess assay. LPS increased NO production
(†p < 0.05), which was abrogated by 100 nM apamin (**p < 0.01) or
5 nM tamapin (**p < 0.01), but unaffected by 250 pM tamapin. C.
Tyrosine nitrated proteins in the target neurons were monitored
with a rabbit polyclonal antibody against nitrotyrosine residues
(1:200) and Cy3-conjugated secondary antibody. LPS-stimulated
microglia induced tyrosine nitration in neurons (†p < 0.05), and this
was abrogated by treating the microglia with 100 nM apamin (***p
< 0.001) or 5 nM tamapin (**p < 0.01), but not by 250 pM tamapin.

Page 8 of 15

Figure 4 Blocking microglial SK3 channels inhibits p38 MAPK
(but not NFB) activation. Microglia cultures were treated with
LPS (100 ng/ml), with or without 100 nM apamin, 5 nM tamapin or
250 pM tamapin. p38 MAPK activation was monitored with a rabbit
polyclonal antibody against phosphorylated (active) p38 MAPK
(1:50). NF-B activation was monitored as degradation of IB-a,
using a rabbit polyclonal antibody against IB-a (1:100).
Immunoreactivity was detected using a Cy3-conjugated secondary
antibody (1:500). A. The phospho-p38 MAPK fluorescence signal was
increased in microglia after 30 min lipopolysaccharide treatment (†p
< 0.05). This activation was prevented by 100 nM apamin (*p <
0.05) or 5 nM tamapin (*p < 0.05), but not by 250 pM tamapin. C.
NF-B was activated in microglia after 30 min lipopolysaccharide
treatment, as judged by the decrease in IB-a fluorescence (†p <
0.05). NF-B activation was not affected by apamin or tamapin.

SK3 immunoreactivity in vivo before and after a
hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke

Having found that SK3 channels contribute to microglial
activation in vitro, it was important to demonstrate SK3
expression in microglia in vivo, particularly in the
damaged CNS. We examined SK3 immunoreactivity both
in the healthy adult rat striatum and during the pronounced inflammatory phase after either an intracerebral
hemorrhage (ICH) or ischemic stroke. For orientation, Figure 6A shows the structure of the striatum, with myelin

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

Figure 5 The SK blocker, apamin, does not affect microglial
phagocytosis. Phagocytosis of fluorescein-labeled E. coli bacteria
was quantified using a fluorescence plate reader (see Methods),
expressed as mean±SEM of the number of cell cultures indicated
on each bar. To generate a phagocytosis index, data were
normalized to the mean fluorescence signal from untreated
microglia that had phagocytosed E. coli. Phagocytosis was not
affected by a high concentration of apamin (100 nM) that blocks
cloned SK1, SK2 and SK3 channels. In control experiments,
phagocytosis was prevented by the actin-polymerization inhibitor,
10 μM cytochalasin D (***p < 0.001) compared with its solvent, 0.2%
DMSO. The signal from DMSO treated microglia did not differ from
untreated cells (p = 0.50).

basic protein-labeled axon bundles seen in cross section.
SK3 immunoreactivity (Figure 6B) was diffuse and widespread between the unstained white matter tracts. When
examining SK3 immunoreactivity, microglia were labeled
with tomato lectin, which produced the clearest cell staining when combined with the polyclonal SK3 antibody.
This was especially useful at higher magnifications, where
cell size and morphology allows clear discrimination
between these immune cells and microvessels (brain
endothelial cells also stain with tomato lectin). A highmagnification image from the healthy striatum (Figure 6C)
shows pronounced SK3 labeling in the processes of a resting microglial cell, and punctate staining elsewhere, which
is consistent with the diffuse SK3 staining seen at low
magnification in panel B.
Figure 7 illustrates the changes in microglia morphology and SK3 staining after an intracerebral hemorrhage
(ICH) was induced by injecting collagenase into the
striatum. OX-42 antibody clearly labels resting and activated microglia, as well as macrophages that have infiltrated from the blood. When microglia become highly
activated in vivo, they round up and cannot be distinguished from macrophages; thus, we use the term
‘microglia/macrophages’. At 7 days after the ICH, the
lesion is surrounded by a ring of activated microglia/

Page 9 of 15

macrophages (Figure 7A), as we previously showed with
several labels (OX-42, Iba-1, tomato lectin, ED-1)
[31-35]. For comparison, microglia in the undamaged
contralateral striatum have the typical highly ramified
‘resting’ morphology (Figure 7B). The edge of the
hemorrhagic lesion (Figure 7C) shows the transition
from ‘ameboid’ microglia with short protrusions (highmagnification inset at right) to large round cells (≥20
μm in diameter; left inset). Intense SK3 immunoreactivity and considerable surface labeling was seen in activated microglia/macrophages, as shown in a highmagnification color-separated image (Figure 7D) from
the dense cellular band at the edge of the lesion.
Similar changes in microglia/macrophages and SK3
immunoreactivity were seen after an ischemic stroke
was induced by injecting endothelin-1 into the striatum.
A low-magnification image (Figure 8A) illustrates the
ischemic lesion using an antibody against ‘ionized calcium-binding adapter-1’ protein (Iba-1). Increased Iba-1
labeling of immunoreactivity microglia and macrophages
is a hallmark of stroke-induced inflammation, while
labeling is less intense in the surrounding striatum [37].
The high magnification inset shows images of activated
microglia/macrophages from within the lesion. An
image from the edge of the infarct (Figure 8B) illustrates
the pronounced changes in SK3 immunoreactivity. In
the relatively undamaged surrounding striatum at the
lower left, the distribution of SK3 is the same as in the
undamaged striatum (compare with Figure 6B), including diffuse SK3 staining between white matter tracts. In
contrast, within the lesion, discrete cellular SK3 staining
is seen in activated microglia/macrophages. At the center of the infarct (Figure 8C), SK3 staining is largely
restricted to activated microglia/macrophages, which is
especially clear in the high magnification inset. Note the
loss of diffuse punctate staining outside these cells after
both forms of stroke.

Discussion
Previous studies of SK channels in the CNS have
emphasized their expression and roles in neurons. Transcripts for KCNN1, KCNN2 and KCNN3 have been
detected in the CNS by Northern analysis, in situ hybridization and RT-PCR, and immunoreactivity has been
shown in some neurons [24,26,46]. Because the
KCNN3/SK3 channel is being considered as a therapeutic target, it is crucial to understand its expression and
roles in both neuronal and non-neuronal CNS cells. SK3
is preferentially expressed in phylogenetically older brain
regions (thalamus, basal ganglia, cerebellum, brainstem)
[47-50]; for instance, KCNN3 mRNA [47] is relatively
high in the caudate putamen and in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra, and SK3 immunoreactivity
[49] is present in the caudate putamen. Reports of SK3

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

Page 10 of 15

Figure 6 SK3 immunoreactivity in the healthy adult rat striatum. Confocal micrographs of coronal sections show salient features of the
adult rat striatum, microglia/macrophages, and SK3 staining. A. A low-magnification image of the entire hemisphere (scale bar, 1 mm); the
striatum is indicated by a dashed curve; V, ventricle; CC, corpus callosum. White matter is labeled with an antibody against myelin basic protein
(MBP) (mouse monoclonal, 1:100) and a Cy3-conjugated secondary antibody (donkey anti-mouse, 1:400); note the dark ‘holes’ between the
brightly stained axon bundles seen in cross-section. B. Diffuse SK3 staining is seen between the unstained white matter tracts (asterisks) in the
normal striatum: co-labeled with FITC-conjugated tomato lectin (TL, 1:400), and anti-SK3 (rabbit polyclonal, 1:500) with a Cy3-conjugated
secondary antibody (donkey anti-rabbit, 1:400); scale bar, 100 μm. Lack of non-specific staining is shown by the negative control (inset) with Cy3conjugated 2° antibody alone. C. A high-magnification image (scale bar, 5 μm) shows intense SK3 staining in microglial processes (marked with
arrows) and punctate staining elsewhere (labeled as above; and with the nuclear stain, DAPI).

Figure 7 Changes in SK3 immunoreactivity and microglia/macrophages after an intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). Confocal images in A-C
were labeled with OX-42 antibody (mouse monoclonal; 1:200) and a Cy3-conjugated secondary (donkey anti-mouse, 1:400). A. A ring of
activated microglia/macrophages surrounds the hematoma at 7 days after an ICH: c, centre; e, edge; s, surrounding striatum (scale bar, 500 μm).
B. In the normal striatum, there is widespread OX-42 labeling of ‘resting’ microglia (scale bar, 100 μm). The inset shows a typical ramified
microglial cell with long processes and a small cell body (scale bar, 20 μm). C. At the edge of the hematoma 7 days after an ICH, microglia/
macrophages transition to amoeboid cells with partially retracted processes further from the lesion (and inset at upper right) to round cells near
the hematoma (and left inset). Scale bars: 100 μm for the main image and 20 μm for the insets. D. At the edge of the hematoma, SK3 labeling
in microglia/macrophages (as in Figure 6) is shown in high-magnification color-separated images (scale bars, 10 μm). The negative control (inset
in D’) shows lack of staining with Cy3-conjugated 2° antibody alone. The merged image (D’’) shows extensive surface SK3 staining in activated
microglia/macrophages (examples marked with arrows).

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

Page 11 of 15

Figure 8 SK3 immunoreactivity in the striatum 3 days after an ischemic stroke. A. The ischemic lesion (scale bar, 500 μm) shows increased
staining with the microglia/macrophage marker, ‘ionized calcium-binding adapter-1’ (Iba-1; rabbit polyclonal, 1:1000; Cy3-conjugated donkey antirabbit secondary, 1:400). The high-magnification image from the core (inset; scale bar, 20 μm) shows examples of activated microglia/
macrophages, co-labeled with the nuclear stain, DAPI. B, C. Sections from the edge and centre of the lesion were co-labeled with tomato lectin
and anti-SK3 (as in Figure 6). Scale bars: 100 μm for the main images; 20 μm for the inset. In panel B, note the unlabeled white matter tracts at
the edge of the lesion (asterisks) surrounded by areas of diffuse SK3 staining. In panel C, almost every activated microglia/macrophage (examples
marked with arrows) is co-labeled with SK3 and tomato lectin. Note the intense surface SK3 labeling of activated microglia/macrophages (inset).

expression in non-neuronal cells are very limited; it is
expressed in astrocytes in the supraoptic nucleus and in
olfactory ensheathing glial cells [51,52], and it contributes to vasodilation in response to endothelium-derived
hyperpolarizing factor (EDHF) [53]. Here, we observed
widely distributed and punctate SK3 immunostaining in
the healthy adult rat striatum (except in white matter
tracts), and for the first time, have shown SK3 immunoreactivity in microglia in vivo and in vitro. The isolated microglia were from neonatal rats and the in vivo
studies were from adults; thus, SK3 is apparently
expressed in microglia throughout post-natal development. The punctate nature of SK3 staining in the brain
has not been addressed previously. It can be partly
accounted for by the staining pattern in microglia,
which was punctate both in vivo and in vitro. SK3 was
co-localized with markers of presynaptic terminals in an
in vitro analysis of cultured hippocampal neurons [54],
and if this occurs in vivo and in striatal neurons, it
would also appear punctate.
Changes in SK3 expression have not been examined in
the damaged CNS. We observed pronounced changes in
staining patterns of activated microglia/macrophages
after either a hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke. Microglia
undergo complex ‘activation’ processes in response to
CNS damage or disease, which correspond with pronounced changes in morphology (illustrated in Figure
7). Activated microglia/macrophages formed a dense
band of cells at the edge of the hemorrhagic lesion
(other cells die inside the hematoma) [31-35], creating a
zone where cellular SK3 labeling was easily distinguished. When viewed at high magnification, essentially

every microglia/macrophage in this zone showed strong
SK3 immunoreactivity, including substantial staining at
the cell surface. After an ischemic stroke, similar ringlike SK3 staining was seen in activated microglia/macrophages within the infarct (see Figure 8). Another striking
change was the loss of neuronal SK3 staining in the
ischemic infarct. Neuron cell bodies and axons are still
present at this time after the stroke [37]; hence, this
provides novel evidence that neuronal SK3 expression
changes after acute CNS damage.
For microglia, which are considered non-excitable
cells (but see [55]), SK channels are well designed to
contribute to cellular functions because channel gating
is voltage independent and only a small elevation in free
Ca2+ (Kd ~300 nM) is required to activate them [18,26].
Such Ca2+ increases in microglia are readily achievable
through any of several receptor-ligand interactions, ion
channels and transporters, including purinergic receptors, store-operated Ca2+ entry [17,27], CRAC channels
[30] and reversed Na+/Ca2+ exchange [56]. Importantly
for this study, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) increases Ca2+ in
microglia and activates p38 MAPK and NF-B, up-regulates pro-inflammatory molecules [17,27,28,57] and
increases their capacity to kill neurons through a peroxynitrite-mediated mechanism [22,42,58]. By using potent
peptidyl blockers of SK channels we demonstrated
important new links between SK3 channels (but not
SK1 or SK2) and microglial activation through p38
MAPK, without a role in NF-B activation. Of note, p38
MAPK contributes to iNOS and NO production
[59-63], and p38 MAPK inhibitors are being tested for
stroke [61,63]. Very little is known about the

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

involvement of ion channels in microglial phagocytosis,
except for our recent report that swelling-sensitive Clchannels play a role [43]. Here, our observation that
apamin-sensitive SK channels are not required for bacterial phagocytosis might reflect a lack of channel activation because phagocytosis can be Ca2+ independent [64].
This insensitivity to SK channel block is important
because phagocytosis is an essential microglial function
that clears necrotic and apoptotic cells, which otherwise
could increase inflammation, provide a source of antigens and evoke autoimmune responses [10,11].
Intriguingly, simultaneous involvement of apamin-sensitive SK channels and KCNN4/KCa3.1 has been seen in
some cellular functions; e.g., in blood vessels [65,66],
and in microglia, where we also find that the TRAM-34sensitive KCa3.1 channel [22] contributes to microglial
activation and neurotoxicity. This convergence is not a
failure of blocker specificity, as SK1-SK3 channels are
the only known targets for apamin, and TRAM-34 is
specific for KCNN4/KCa3.1 [26,67]. No explanations
have been offered in the literature for the need for two
types of Ca2+-activated K+ channels in any cell in which
they co-exist. While recognizing that these ideas are
speculative, we present some possibilities for future
investigation. (i) There is one report that SK3 and
KCa3.1 form homotetramers in rat brain [49], but
because they can interact in expression systems [68],
their native tetrameric composition should be further
examined. (ii) In neurons, different KCa channels can
couple to different sources of intracellular Ca 2+ [69],
possibly in microdomains comprised of different macromolecular signaling complexes [25,70]. Microglia also
have multiple Ca2+ stores and entry pathways [17], and
because nothing is known about their coupling to SK3
and KCa3.1 channels, this should be examined. (iii) Our
finding that both SK3 and KCa3.1 regulate p38 MAPK
activation and nitric oxide production might reflect a
convergence of signaling. Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates p38 MAPK activation [71] and iNOS induction
[72], and LPS activates the p38a isoform of MAPK
[71,73], which interacts with ‘nuclear activator protein-1’
to induce iNOS transcription [74]. (iv) Both SK3 and
KCa3.1 channels respond to similar rises in Ca 2+, but
they could become activated at different times if their
subcellular locations differ or they are modulated by different second messengers. Trafficking of both channels
is similarly regulated by the calmodulin binding domain
[75,76] and other post-translational regulators of trafficking are now being addressed [77]. Nothing is known
about the relative numbers of active channels in cells in
which both channels are expressed.
Broader implications

Previously, interest in SK channels in the CNS was centered on their roles in neuron excitability and their

Page 12 of 15

potential as therapeutic targets. High SK3 levels in
dopaminergic midbrain neurons [reviewed in [26,47,78]],
and its role in producing a medium-duration afterhyperpolarization (mAHP) that regulates rhythmic firing
in the normal caudate putamen/striatum [79] have
made it an attractive target for Parkinson’s and schizophrenia. Although controversial, several studies have
correlated trinucleotide polymorphisms in SK3 with
schizophrenia and migraine [80,81], and changes in SK3
expression with sleep apnoea, sudden infant death syndrome, mood disorders, epilepsy and schizophrenia
[24,26,46,82]. SK3 channels also regulate neuron firing
in the dorsal motor nucleus and superior cervical ganglion neurons [26] and, in the hippocampus, the SK3 current increases with age and correlates with agedependent deficits in synaptic plasticity and learning
[24]. Clearly, the presence and roles of SK3 in normal
microglia, as well as changes in other CNS cell types
after damage must be considered. Although this study
examined SK3 in the striatum with or without ischemic
or hemorrhagic strokes, we have also observed strong
SK3 immunoreactivity in activated microglia/macrophages in the injured cortex, retina and spinal cord
(unpublished results). Thus, contributions of SK3 to
microglia functions are likely to extend to other CNS
areas, including regions where SK3 is lacking in neurons. The observation that SK3 contributes to p38
MAPK activation in microglia might extend to other
cell types in the CNS and elsewhere. To progress further
with in vivo functional studies, blockers and modulators
must be developed that can enter the CNS and discriminate between SK2 and SK3 channels. With increased
understanding of the expression and roles of SK3 in
non-neuronal CNS cells, the possibility of non-neuronal
effects must be thoroughly evaluated.

Conclusions
There are several salient findings in this study. (i) Transcripts for all three cloned SK channels (KCNN1,
KCNN2, KCNN3) are expressed in microglia, but
KCNN3 predominates and is the only channel up-regulated in LPS-activated microglia. KCNN2 expression in
activated microglia was especially low; near the limits of
detection. (ii) There was considerable SK3 immunoreactivity throughout the healthy adult striatum in vivo
(except in the white matter tracts), and in microglia in
vitro. (iii) During the inflammatory phase after either an
ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke, SK3 was especially prevalent in activated microglia/macrophages. Neuronal
staining was markedly decreased in the ischemic infarct.
(Neuronal changes after hemorrhage were not assessed.)
(iv) SK3 channels (but not SK1 or SK2) contributed to
microglial activation, which up-regulated iNOS and NO
production, and involved a functional link to signaling

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

through p38 MAP kinase. (v) Blocking SK3 channels in
microglia reduced their ability to induce apoptosis, caspase 3 activation and tyrosine nitration in neurons. (vi)
Blocking microglial SK channels with a high concentration of apamin did not globally inhibit the cells; NFB
activation and phagocytosis were not inhibited. By providing evidence that targeting SK3 channels can reduce
microglia-mediated neurotoxicity, this study identifies a
new potential molecular target for reducing inflammation-mediated damage in acute and chronic CNS
disorders.

Page 13 of 15

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.
11.

12.
Abbreviations
DAPI: 4’-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; iNOS/NOS2: inducible nitric oxide
synthase; Iba-1: ionized calcium-binding adapter-1 protein; ICH: intracerebral
hemorrhage; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; mAHP: medium-duration afterhyperpolarization; MEM: minimal essential medium; MBP: myelin basic
protein; PBS: phosphate buffered saline; qRT-PCR: quantitative real-time RTPCR; SK channel: small-conductance Ca2+ activated K+ channel; TLR4: Toll-like
receptor 4
Acknowledgements
We thank Xiaoping Zhu for conducting the real-time RT-PCR analysis in
Figure 1A. This work was supported by an operating grant to LCS from the
Canadian Institutes for Health Research (MT-13657). This work was presented
at the annual meeting of the American Society for Cell Biology (2009).
Author details
Genes and Development Division, Toronto Western Research Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, M5T 2S8, Canada. 2Department
of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A8, Canada.
3
Current address: 735 1re (Premiere) Avenue, Unit 205, Lachine, Quebec, H8S
2S6, Canada. 4Current address: Technology Development and
Commercialization, University Health Network, 101 College Street, Suite 150,
Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1L7, Canada. 5Corresponding address: MC9-417;
Toronto Western Hospital, 399 Bathurst Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5T 2S8,
Canada.
1

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.
21.

Authors’ contributions
LCS conceived of and supervised all aspects of the study and wrote the
manuscript. VK carried out the microglial activation and neuron killing
studies and accompanying statistical analysis (Figures 2, 3 and 4) and helped
draft the paper. IM-E carried out the in vivo studies (Figures 6, 7, 8). VS
carried out the phagocytosis studies (Figure 5). CV carried out the in vitro
immunohistochemistry (Figure 1B &1C). All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.

23.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

25.

22.

24.

26.
Received: 3 November 2009
Accepted: 14 January 2010 Published: 14 January 2010
References
1. Barone FC, Feuerstein GZ: Inflammatory mediators and stroke: new
opportunities for novel therapeutics. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1999,
19:819-834.
2. Han HS, Yenari MA: Cellular targets of brain inflammation in stroke. Curr
Opin Investig Drugs 2003, 4:522-529.
3. Simi A, Tsakiri N, Wang P, Rothwell NJ: Interleukin-1 and inflammatory
neurodegeneration. Biochem Soc Trans 2007, 35:1122-1126.
4. Wang Q, Tang XN, Yenari MA: The inflammatory response in stroke. J
Neuroimmunol 2007, 184:53-68.
5. Brown GC: Mechanisms of inflammatory neurodegeneration: iNOS and
NADPH oxidase. Biochem Soc Trans 2007, 35:1119-1121.

27.
28.

29.
30.

31.

Dheen ST, Kaur C, Ling EA: Microglial activation and its implications in
the brain diseases. Curr Med Chem 2007, 14:1189-1197.
Hanisch UK, Kettenmann H: Microglia: active sensor and versatile effector
cells in the normal and pathologic brain. Nat Neurosci 2007, 10:1387-1394.
Hailer NP: Immunosuppression after traumatic or ischemic CNS damage:
it is neuroprotective and illuminates the role of microglial cells. Prog
Neurobiol 2008, 84:211-233.
O’Brien K, Fitzgerald DC, Naiken K, Alugupalli KR, Rostami AM, Gran B: Role
of the innate immune system in autoimmune inflammatory
demyelination. Curr Med Chem 2008, 15:1105-1115.
Mallat M, Marin-Teva JL, Cheret C: Phagocytosis in the developing CNS:
more than clearing the corpses. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2005, 15:101-107.
Neumann J, Sauerzweig S, Ronicke R, Gunzer F, Dinkel K, Ullrich O,
Gunzer M, Reymann KG: Microglia cells protect neurons by direct
engulfment of invading neutrophil granulocytes: a new mechanism of
CNS immune privilege. J Neurosci 2008, 28:5965-5975.
Inoue K, Nakajima K, Morimoto T, Kikuchi Y, Koizumi S, Illes P, Kohsaka S:
ATP stimulation of Ca2+-dependent plasminogen release from cultured
microglia. Br J Pharmacol 1998, 123:1304-1310.
Moller T, Kann O, Verkhratsky A, Kettenmann H: Activation of mouse
microglial cells affects P2 receptor signaling. Brain Res 2000, 853:49-59.
Morigiwa K, Quan M, Murakami M, Yamashita M, Fukuda Y: P2
Purinoceptor expression and functional changes of hypoxia-activated
cultured rat retinal microglia. Neurosci Lett 2000, 282:153-156.
Moller T, Contos JJ, Musante DB, Chun J, Ransom BR: Expression and
function of lysophosphatidic acid receptors in cultured rodent microglial
cells. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:25946-25952.
D’Aversa TG, Yu KO, Berman JW: Expression of chemokines by human
fetal microglia after treatment with the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 protein Tat. J Neurovirol 2004, 10:86-97.
Farber K, Kettenmann H: Functional role of calcium signals for microglial
function. Glia 2006, 54:656-665.
Kohler M, Hirschberg B, Bond CT, Kinzie JM, Marrion NV, Maylie J,
Adelman JP: Small-conductance, calcium-activated potassium channels
from mammalian brain. Science 1996, 273:1709-1714.
Xia XM, Fakler B, Rivard A, Wayman G, Johnson-Pais T, Keen JE, Ishii T,
Hirschberg B, Bond CT, Lutsenko S, et al: Mechanism of calcium gating in
small-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels. Nature 1998,
395:503-507.
Stocker M: Ca2+-activated K+ channels: molecular determinants and
function of the SK family. Nat Rev Neurosci 2004, 5:758-770.
Khanna R, Roy L, Zhu X, Schlichter LC: K+ channels and the microglial
respiratory burst. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2001, 280:C796-806.
Kaushal V, Koeberle PD, Wang Y, Schlichter LC: The Ca2+-activated K+
channel KCNN4/KCa3.1 contributes to microglia activation and nitric
oxide-dependent neurodegeneration. J Neurosci 2007, 27:234-244.
Eder C, Klee R, Heinemann U: Pharmacological properties of Ca2
+
-activated K+ currents of ramified murine brain macrophages. Naunyn
Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1997, 356:233-239.
Blank T, Nijholt I, Kye MJ, Spiess J: Small conductance Ca2+-activated K+
channels as targets of CNS drug development. Curr Drug Targets CNS
Neurol Disord 2004, 3:161-167.
Bond CT, Maylie J, Adelman JP: SK channels in excitability, pacemaking
and synaptic integration. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2005, 15:305-311.
Pedarzani P, Stocker M: Molecular and cellular basis of small- and
intermediate-conductance, calcium-activated potassium channel
function in the brain. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008, 65:3196-3217.
Moller T: Calcium signaling in microglial cells. Glia 2002, 40:184-194.
Hoffmann A, Kann O, Ohlemeyer C, Hanisch UK, Kettenmann H: Elevation
of basal intracellular calcium as a central element in the activation of
brain macrophages (microglia): suppression of receptor-evoked calcium
signaling and control of release function. J Neurosci 2003, 23:4410-4419.
Kaushal V, Schlichter LC: Mechanisms of microglia-mediated neurotoxicity
in a new model of the stroke penumbra. J Neurosci 2008, 28:2221-2230.
Ohana L, Newell EW, Stanley EF, Schlichter LC: The Ca2+ release-activated
Ca2+ current (ICRAC) mediates store-operated Ca2+ entry in rat microglia.
Channels (Austin) 2009, 3:129-139.
Wasserman JK, Schlichter LC: Neuron death and inflammation in a rat
model of intracerebral hemorrhage: Effects of delayed minocycline
treatment. Brain Res 2007, 1136:208-218.

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

32. Wasserman JK, Schlichter LC: Minocycline protects the blood-brain barrier
and reduces edema following intracerebral hemorrhage in the rat. Exp
Neurol 2007, 207:227-237.
33. Wasserman JK, Yang H, Schlichter LC: Glial responses, neuron death and
lesion resolution after intracerebral hemorrhage in young vs. aged rats.
Eur J Neurosci 2008, 28:1316-1328.
34. Wasserman JK, Zhu X, Schlichter LC: Evolution of the inflammatory
response in the brain following intracerebral hemorrhage and effects of
delayed minocycline treatment. Brain Res 2007, 1180:140-154.
35. Wasserman JK, Schlichter LC: White matter injury in young and aged rats
after intracerebral hemorrhage. Exp Neurol 2008, 214:266-275.
36. Biernaskie J, Corbett D, Peeling J, Wells J, Lei H: A serial MR study of
cerebral blood flow changes and lesion development following
endothelin-1-induced ischemia in rats. Magn Reson Med 2001, 46:827-830.
37. Moxon-Emre I, Schlichter LC: Evolution of inflammation and white matter
injury in a model of transient focal ischemia. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 69:1-15.
38. Bustin SA, Nolan T: Pitfalls of quantitative real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction. J Biomol Tech 2004, 15:155-166.
39. Zielasek J, Hartung HP: Molecular mechanisms of microglial activation.
Adv Neuroimmunol 1996, 6:191-122.
40. Olson JK, Miller SD: Microglia initiate central nervous system innate and
adaptive immune responses through multiple TLRs. J Immunol 2004,
173:3916-3924.
41. Pedarzani P, D’Hoedt D, Doorty KB, Wadsworth JD, Joseph JS, Jeyaseelan K,
Kini RM, Gadre SV, Sapatnekar SM, Stocker M, Strong PN: Tamapin, a
venom peptide from the Indian red scorpion (Mesobuthus tamulus) that
targets small conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels and
afterhyperpolarization currents in central neurons. J Biol Chem 2002,
277:46101-46109.
42. Fordyce CB, Jagasia R, Zhu X, Schlichter LC: Microglia Kv1.3 channels
contribute to their ability to kill neurons. J Neurosci 2005, 25:7139-7149.
43. Ducharme G, Newell EW, Pinto C, Schlichter LC: Small-conductance Clchannels contribute to volume regulation and phagocytosis in microglia.
Eur J Neurosci 2007, 26:2119-2130.
44. Benton DC, Monaghan AS, Hosseini R, Bahia PK, Haylett DG, Moss GW:
Small conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels formed by the
expression of rat SK1 and SK2 genes in HEK 293 cells. J Physiol 2003,
553:13-19.
45. D’Hoedt D, Hirzel K, Pedarzani P, Stocker M: Domain analysis of the
calcium-activated potassium channel SK1 from rat brain. Functional
expression and toxin sensitivity. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:12088-12092.
46. Liegeois JF, Mercier F, Graulich A, Graulich-Lorge F, Scuvee-Moreau J,
Seutin V: Modulation of small conductance calcium-activated potassium
(SK) channels: a new challenge in medicinal chemistry. Curr Med Chem
2003, 10:625-647.
47. Stocker M, Pedarzani P: Differential distribution of three Ca2+-activated K+
channel subunits, SK1, SK2, and SK3, in the adult rat central nervous
system. Mol Cell Neurosci 2000, 15:476-493.
48. Wolfart J, Neuhoff H, Franz O, Roeper J: Differential expression of the
small-conductance, calcium-activated potassium channel SK3 is critical
for pacemaker control in dopaminergic midbrain neurons. J Neurosci
2001, 21:3443-3456.
49. Sailer CA, Hu H, Kaufmann WA, Trieb M, Schwarzer C, Storm JF, Knaus HG:
Regional differences in distribution and functional expression of smallconductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels in rat brain. J Neurosci 2002,
22:9698-9707.
50. Waroux O, Massotte L, Alleva L, Graulich A, Thomas E, Liegeois JF, ScuveeMoreau J, Seutin V: SK channels control the firing pattern of midbrain
dopaminergic neurons in vivo. Eur J Neurosci 2005, 22:3111-3121.
51. Fujita A, Takeuchi T, Hanai J, Hata F: Expression of the small conductance
Ca2+-activated K+ channel, SK3, in the olfactory ensheathing glial cells of
rat brain. Cell Tissue Res 2003, 313:187-193.
52. Armstrong WE, Rubrum A, Teruyama R, Bond CT, Adelman JP:
Immunocytochemical localization of small-conductance, calciumdependent potassium channels in astrocytes of the rat supraoptic
nucleus. J Comp Neurol 2005, 491:175-185.
53. Feletou M, Vanhoutte PM: Endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor:
where are we now?. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2006, 26:1215-1225.
54. Obermair GJ, Kaufmann WA, Knaus HG, Flucher BE: The small conductance
Ca2+-activated K+ channel SK3 is localized in nerve terminals of

Page 14 of 15

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

excitatory synapses of cultured mouse hippocampal neurons. Eur J
Neurosci 2003, 17:721-731.
Newell EW, Schlichter LC: Integration of K+ and Cl- currents regulate
steady-state and dynamic membrane potentials in cultured rat
microglia. JPhysiol 2005, 567:869-890.
Newell EW, Stanley EF, Schlichter LC: Reversed Na+/Ca2+ exchange
contributes to Ca2+ influx and respiratory burst in microglia. Channels
(Austin) 2007, 1:366-376.
Netea MG, Graaf van der C, Meer Van der JW, Kullberg BJ: Toll-like
receptors and the host defense against microbial pathogens: bringing
specificity to the innate-immune system. J Leukoc Biol 2004, 75:749-755.
Xie Z, Wei M, Morgan TE, Fabrizio P, Han D, Finch CE, Longo VD:
Peroxynitrite mediates neurotoxicity of amyloid b-peptide1-42- and
lipopolysaccharide-activated microglia. J Neurosci 2002, 22:3484-3492.
Ajizian SJ, English BK, Meals EA: Specific inhibitors of p38 and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways
block inducible nitric oxide synthase and tumor necrosis factor
accumulation in murine macrophages stimulated with
lipopolysaccharide and interferon-g. J Infect Dis 1999, 179:939-944.
Chen CC, Wang JK: p38 but not p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase
is required for nitric oxide synthase induction mediated by
lipopolysaccharide in RAW 264.7 macrophages. Mol Pharmacol 1999,
55:481-488.
Barone FC, Irving EA, Ray AM, Lee JC, Kassis S, Kumar S, Badger AM,
Legos JJ, Erhardt JA, Ohlstein EH, et al: Inhibition of p38 mitogenactivated protein kinase provides neuroprotection in cerebral focal
ischemia. Med Res Rev 2001, 21:129-145.
Han IO, Kim KW, Ryu JH, Kim WK: p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
mediates lipopolysaccharide, not interferon-g, -induced inducible nitric
oxide synthase expression in mouse BV2 microglial cells. Neurosci Lett
2002, 325:9-12.
Zhang W, Stanimirovic D: Current and future therapeutic strategies to
target inflammation in stroke. Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy 2002,
1:151-166.
McNeil PL, Swanson JA, Wright SD, Silverstein SC, Taylor DL: Fc-receptormediated phagocytosis occurs in macrophages without an increase in
average [Ca++]i. J Cell Biol 1986, 102:1586-1592.
Busse R, Edwards G, Feletou M, Fleming I, Vanhoutte PM, Weston AH:
EDHF: bringing the concepts together. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2002, 23:374380.
Ledoux J, Werner ME, Brayden JE, Nelson MT: Calcium-activated potassium
channels and the regulation of vascular tone. Physiology (Bethesda) 2006,
21:69-78.
Wulff H, Kolski-Andreaco A, Sankaranarayanan A, Sabatier JM, Shakkottai V:
Modulators of small- and intermediate-conductance calcium-activated
potassium channels and their therapeutic indications. Curr Med Chem
2007, 14:1437-1457.
Monaghan AS, Benton DC, Bahia PK, Hosseini R, Shah YA, Haylett DG,
Moss GW: The SK3 subunit of small conductance Ca2+-activated K+
channels interacts with both SK1 and SK2 subunits in a heterologous
expression system. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:1003-1009.
Marrion NV, Tavalin SJ: Selective activation of Ca2+-activated K+ channels
by co-localized Ca2+ channels in hippocampal neurons. Nature 1998,
395:900-905.
Allen D, Fakler B, Maylie J, Adelman JP: Organization and regulation of
small conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel multiprotein complexes. J
Neurosci 2007, 27:2369-2376.
Zhou X, Yang W, Li J: Ca2+- and protein kinase C-dependent signaling
pathway for nuclear factor-B activation, inducible nitric-oxide synthase
expression, and tumor necrosis factor-a production in
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated rat peritoneal macrophages. J Biol Chem
2006, 281:31337-31347.
Kann O, Hoffmann A, Schumann RR, Weber JR, Kettenmann H, Hanisch UK:
The tyrosine kinase inhibitor AG126 restores receptor signaling and
blocks release functions in activated microglia (brain macrophages) by
preventing a chronic rise in the intracellular calcium level. J Neurochem
2004, 90:513-525.
Hale KK, Trollinger D, Rihanek M, Manthey CL: Differential expression and
activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase a, b, g and δ in
inflammatory cell lineages. J Immunol 1999, 162:4246-4252.

Schlichter et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010, 7:4
http://www.jneuroinflammation.com/content/7/1/4

Page 15 of 15

74. Koistinaho M, Koistinaho J: Role of p38 and p44/42 mitogen-activated
protein kinases in microglia. Glia 2002, 40:175-183.
75. Joiner WJ, Khanna R, Schlichter LC, Kaczmarek LK: Calmodulin regulates
assembly and trafficking of SK4/IK1 Ca2+-activated K+ channels. J Biol
Chem 2001, 276:37980-37985.
76. Roncarati R, Decimo I, Fumagalli G: Assembly and trafficking of human
small conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel SK3 are governed by
different molecular domains. Mol Cell Neurosci 2005, 28:314-325.
77. Gao Y, Chotoo CK, Balut CM, Sun F, Bailey MA, Devor DC: Role of S3 and
S4 transmembrane domain charged amino acids in channel biogenesis
and gating of KCa2.3 and KCa3.1. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:9049-9059.
78. Hosseini R, Benton DC, Dunn PM, Jenkinson DH, Moss GW: SK3 is an
important component of K+ channels mediating the
afterhyperpolarization in cultured rat SCG neurones. J Physiol 2001,
535:323-334.
79. Jacobsen JP, Weikop P, Hansen HH, Mikkelsen JD, Redrobe JP, Holst D,
Bond CT, Adelman JP, Christophersen P, Mirza NR: SK3 K+ channeldeficient mice have enhanced dopamine and serotonin release and
altered emotional behaviors. Genes Brain Behav 2008, 7:836-848.
80. Vincent JB, Yuan QP, Schalling M, Adolfsson R, Azevedo MH, Macedo A,
Bauer A, DallaTorre C, Medeiros HM, Pato MT, et al: Long repeat tracts at
SCA8 in major psychosis. Am J Med Genet 2000, 96:873-876.
81. Mossner R, Weichselbaum A, Marziniak M, Freitag CM, Lesch KP, Sommer C,
Meyer J: A highly polymorphic poly-glutamine stretch in the potassium
channel KCNN3 in migraine. Headache 2005, 45:132-136.
82. Gargus JJ: Ion channel functional candidate genes in multigenic
neuropsychiatric disease. Biol Psychiatry 2006, 60:177-185.
doi:10.1186/1742-2094-7-4
Cite this article as: Schlichter et al.: The Ca2+ activated SK3 channel is
expressed in microglia in the rat striatum and contributes to microgliamediated neurotoxicity in vitro. Journal of Neuroinflammation 2010 7:4.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

BioMedcentral

</pre>
</body>
</html>
