<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.3)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Schmidt BMC Biology 2010, 8:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/83

CO M M E N TA R Y 	

Open Access

The hidden diversity of ribosomal peptide natural
products
Eric W Schmidt*
See research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/70

Abstract
A recent report in BMC Biology on the discovery and
analysis of biosynthetic genes for ribosomal peptide
natural products confirms that these pathways are
much more common and diverse than previously
suspected, contributing substantially to the chemical
arsenal employed by bacteria.

Bacterial natural products such as nonribosomally syn­
the­ ized peptides and polyketides are widely appreciated
s
as biologically active agents, in part because they include
many pharmaceuticals. Because their synthesis is en­
coded by large, highly conserved genes, their presence,
distribution and abundance is easily assessed. By
contrast, although the study of biologically active
ribosomally synthesized peptides - ribosomal peptide
natural products - has a long and rich history, the true
structural diversity of these compounds is just beginning
to be appreciated. In a recent paper in BMC Biology,
Haft, Basu and Mitchell [1] report on informatics
methods to uncover cryptic diversity in ribosomal
peptide natural products, and in the process discover two
widely occurring new families. Within these families,
there are numerous precursor peptides with hyper­
variable sequences. These precursors can likely act as
substrates for the processing pathways, and so each
pathway leads to numerous different peptides. This work
and other recent studies suggest that the ribosomal
peptide natural products represent a largely hidden arsenal
of active small molecules that are important in micro­
biology, the environment, medicine and technology.

Synthesis of ribosomal peptide natural products
Ribosomal peptide natural products are derived from
short precursor peptides, most commonly around 100
*Correspondence: ews1@utah.edu
Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Department of Biology, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA

amino acids long, that are posttranslationally modified by
various enzymes that catalyze the formation of a large
number of different chemical motifs (Figure 1) [2,3].
Commonly, the precursor peptide contains a relatively
conserved leader sequence that is at least partly respon­
sible for recognition by the modifying enzymes and/or by
export machinery such as ABC transporters. The
carboxyl terminus of the precursor peptide encodes the
sequence that is enzyme-modified (the ‘core sequence’).
Usually, the leader is cleaved from the mature carboxyl
terminus following modification, resulting in a short
peptide product. Mutations in the carboxy-terminal core
sequence are often tolerated by modifying enzymes,
leading to natural libraries of peptide products [4]. These
biosynthetic trends are nearly universal for the bacterial
ribosomal peptide natural products and are also
commonly found in the biosynthesis of similar peptides
from other organisms such as cone snails and fungi.
Despite these biosynthetic relationships, enzymes and
precursor peptides are often not clearly homologous. In
addition, the bacterial ribosomal peptide literature is
frag­ ented. These natural products were originally
m
described as ‘bacteriocins’, peptides that inhibited the
growth of bacteria closely related to the producing strain.
Low-molecular-weight bacteriocins include the lanti­
biotics and the microcins, which are highly post­
translationally modified peptides that in some ways
resemble their nonribosomally synthesized cousins ([2]
and references therein). A major problem with this
nomenclature, however, is that many bacteriocins are
proteins unrelated to the small-molecule bacteriocins. In
addition, many of the ribosomal peptides exhibit
strikingly different activities from those conventionally
ascribed to bacteriocins, including roles in the induction
of genetic competence, quorum sensing and enzyme
catalysis (as small-molecule redox cofactors). Some
peptides show in vitro activity against mammalian cells
but not against bacteria or fungi, and the biological
function of many others is unknown. The enormous
number of structural classes and of molecules within

© 2010 Schmidt; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Schmidt BMC Biology 2010, 8:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/83

(a)

Page 2 of 4

Leader peptide-core sequence
Xn -Ser/Thr-Xn -Cys-Xn
N

(b)

C

Cyclodehydration
heterocycles

Lanthionine
synthesis

R
O
(X) n

(c)

S
N

(X) n

N

(X) n

O
(X) n

R
N
H

S
O
(X) n

N
H

Diverse other
(X) n modiﬁcations

Diverse tailoring reactions
Bioactive small molecules

Figure 1. Diversity in ribosomal peptide natural products is
produced by variety in enzymatic modification and precursor
peptide hypervariability. (a) Although precursor peptides consist
of many different apparently unrelated sequence groups, in general
they contain a relatively conserved leader sequence directing
enzyme modification (grey) and a hypervariable core sequence
that encodes the final natural product (red). (b) In this study [1]
cyclodehydrating and lanthionine-bond forming enzymes were
analyzed, but other modifying enzymes exist, leading to numerous
posttranslational modifications. (c) Further derivatization by multiple
types of enzymes, including proteases that cleave the peptide
product from the leader peptide, add to the chemical diversity of
ribosomal peptide natural products.

each class suggests that these small peptides have many
different biological roles that have yet to be investigated.
The report by Haft et al. [1] directly demonstrates the
complexity and interrelatedness of the lantibiotic and
microcin groups and will help in the push to consolidate
the literature and to understand the biological roles of
these ubiquitous compounds.

Making connections among the heterocyclic
natural products
The genes for ribosomal peptide natural products are
hard to find, especially in the absence of any chemical or
bioactivity information. The precursor peptides are small
and often only distantly related to other precursor
peptides, and so are often not called as coding sequences
in automatic genome annotation [5]. Similarly, new
families of modifying enzymes are often not closely
enough related to characterized relatives to be identified
by BLAST searching [6,7]. A particularly revealing story
involves cyclodehydratase-mediated posttranslational
modi­ ­ ation of cysteine, serine and threonine residues to
fic
form heterocyclic thiazole and oxazole moieties. For the
antibacterial ribosomal peptide microcin B17 from
Escherichia coli, Walsh and colleagues [8] showed that a
three-protein enzyme complex, including cyclode­
hydratase, was required to modify the precursor peptide.
A study by our group [6] on the patellamides, small hetero­
cyclic ribosomal peptides from cyanobacterial symbionts
of marine animals, showed that the biosynthetic pathway

did not contain a cyclodehydratase or a precursor peptide
with significant sequence identity to microcin B17,
despite identical heterocyclization biochemistry. Instead,
a single-subunit cyclodehydratase was identified. Homo­
lo­ ous enzymes have been recognized in the genomes of
g
the cyanobacterium Trichodesmium erythraeum (leading
to the discovery of a new peptide product [5,6]) and
Streptococcus iniae (leading to the recognition of
streptolysin S as a thiazole-containing product) [6,7].
Using an informatics approach, Dixon and colleagues
[7] showed that the cyclodehydratases that modify
microcin B17, patellamides and other classes of peptides
are extremely abundant in bacteria and are linked to
diverse other posttranslational modifications. Despite
extreme sequence dissimilarity among individual
members, informatics studies revealed previously cryptic
homology in the cyclodehydratases. Recently, the impor­
tance of cyclodehydratases in the production of thera­
peutics has been emphasized by the independent
discovery by several groups that the thiostrepton family
of antibiotics is also ribosomally synthesized [9].
The study by Haft et al. [1] significantly extends this
work. The authors searched for gene clusters involved in
the biosynthesis of what they refer to as thiazole/oxazolemodified microcins (TOMMs) in more than 1,000
available bacterial genome sequences, specifically search­
ing for cyclodehydratase protein sequences. Two new
precursor peptide classes were discovered, both of which
are related to larger proteins. One is related to a noncatalytic fragment of nitrile hydrolase (NHase) and the
other to the Nif11 proteins involved in nitrogen fixation.
Strikingly, in some genomes the NHase-like precursor
peptide gene clustered with the cyclodehydratase gene,
whereas in other genomes it was located far away or the
two genes were even separated on a plasmid/chromo­
some pair. Further careful analysis using recently
developed informatics tools has enabled identification of
a transport protein linked to this system [1]. The NHaselike group of precursor peptides was found in
phylogenetically diverse bacteria, indicating a potentially
broadly important new class of secondary metabolites.
The Nif11-related precursor peptides are particularly
interesting because of the potential relationship to
nitrogen fixation. While some Nif11-like precursor genes
were linked to cyclodehydratase genes, others were
linked to genes encoding the export machinery. In a
striking twist, some of the Nif11-like precursor genes
were linked to genes for enzymes that carry out a
completely different posttranslational modification that
leads to a lantibiotic. This result clearly shows that
microcins and lantibiotics, while superficially seeming
structurally and biochemically dissimilar, are actually
closely linked in their precursors and biosynthesis. Haft
et al. [1] suggest that further studies of this type will help

Schmidt BMC Biology 2010, 8:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/83

to uncover numerous TOMM (and other natural
product) orphan genes. The new informatics methods
and ideas developed by the authors will greatly help to
further define the evolutionary routes and interrelation­
ships in the ribosomal peptide group.
The functionality of the TOMM genes was demon­
strated recently by van der Donk and colleagues [10],
who found Nif11-like precursor peptides and their
lantibiotic-pathway processing machinery in strains of
the ubiquitous planktonic marine cyanobacterium Pro­
chloro­ occus. The Prochlorococcus genus is responsible
c
for a large percentage of global carbon fixation and is
found in tropical and subtropical oceans around the
world. Previously, no natural products had been isolated
from members of this genus and their genomes are quite
small and would traditionally be considered unlikely to
encode many new compounds. However, about 0.5 to 5%
of strains of Prochlorococcus and the related genus
Synechococcus in environmental databases are estimated
to encode lantibiotic synthesis [10]. A single strain,
Prochlorococcus MIT9313, contained 29 precursor
peptides that could be modified by a single lantibioticprocessing enzyme, leading to a natural library of diverse
natural products in these strains. The paralogous expan­
sion of precursor peptides in Prochlorococcus and other
species was also recognized by Haft et al. [1]. Altogether,
these studies indicate that the widespread TOMM group
identified by Haft et al. does indeed lead to predicted
new natural products in important bacterial strains. The
biological role of such peptides remains speculative.

Precursor peptides and natural product diversity
By necessity, an enzyme that is capable of modifying 29
diverse precursor peptides must exhibit broad substrate
tolerance. Indeed, work by numerous groups has
established that ribosomal-peptide-modifying enzymes
often accept numerous substitutions in the core
sequences of precursor peptides, as long as the leader
sequences are somewhat conserved. This feature has
allowed both in vivo and in vitro synthesis of diverse
ribosomal peptide derivatives.
The biological impact of this broad substrate specificity
has been studied in our lab using the patellamide pathway
[4]. We examined symbiotic cyanobacteria in 46 different
marine animals from across the tropical Pacific and
showed that the DNA encoding modifying enzymes and
leader sequences were identical, within PCR error, in
these closely related symbiotic strains. However, the core
sequences were hypervariable, encoding a small library of
29 different precursor peptides. This population of so-far
uncultured symbiotic cyanobacteria, which are present in
numerous marine animals, synthesizes an enormous
diversity of natural products using identical enzymes
encoded by identical genes.

Page 3 of 4

The Prochlorococcus paper [10] and the work of Haft et
al. [1], along with other recent advances cited therein,
reveal that hypervariability in core sequences is a general
phenomenon with a widespread impact. To the best of
my knowledge, the presence of identical (at the DNA
sequence level) enzymes and leader sequences with
hypervariable core sequences in different strains has not
yet been described beyond the symbiotic Prochloron
studied in our lab. Nonetheless, strikingly similar stories
are clearly apparent in the sequence alignments obtained
by Haft et al. [1] and previous reports. Numerous varia­
tions in modifying enzymes have been discovered pre­
viously and the numbers of known enzymes are expand­
ing. As many of these enzymes apparently synthesize
diverse products using hypervariable precursor peptides,
it is clear that the true structural diversity and biological
impact of the ribosomal peptide natural products is just
beginning to be appreciated. The informatics approach
reported by Haft et al. will be very useful in the quest for
new ribosomal peptides.

Remaining fundamental questions
The ‘bacteriocins’ have been studied for nearly 90 years,
yet key questions of broad importance to their biology
have yet to be addressed. The evolutionary relationships
between diverse peptide families have yet to be estab­
lished. More fundamentally, the evolution of hyper­
variable core sequences within very highly conserved
DNA sequence backgrounds has not been examined.
How do bacteria produce extreme variation in small
cassettes of around 9 to 60 nucleotides while the remain­
der of the DNA remains constant? This could be related
to known phenomena such as pilin variation, but this has
yet to be established. As such core variation is clearly a
general phenomenon in bacteria, it would be useful to
determine its mechanism. Finally, although the roles of
some groups of bacteriocins have been extensively studied
and mathematically modeled, we do not yet understand
the biological roles of most of them. In developing
methods to find and analyze precursor and enzyme
relationships, the work of Haft and co-workers will greatly
aid studies to answer these fundamental questions.
Acknowledgements
Our work in ribosomal peptide biosynthesis is supported by NIH (GM071425).
Published: 17 June 2010
References
1.	 Haft DH, Basu MK, Mitchell DA: Expansion of ribosomally produced natural
products: a nitrile hydratase- and Nif11-related precursor family. BMC Biol
2010, 8:70.
2.	 McIntosh JA, Donia MS, Schmidt EW: Ribosomal peptide natural products:
bridging the ribosomal and nonribosomal worlds. Nat Prod Rep 2009,
26:537-559.
3.	 Oman TJ, van der Donk WA: Follow the leader: the use of leader peptides to
guide natural product biosynthesis. Nat Chem Biol 2010, 6:9-18.

Schmidt BMC Biology 2010, 8:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/83

4.	
5.	

6.	

7.	

Donia MS, Hathaway BJ, Sudek S, Haygood MG, Rosovitz MJ, Ravel J, Schmidt
EW: Natural combinatorial peptide libraries in cyanobacterial symbionts of
marine ascidians. Nat Chem Biol 2006, 2:729-735.
Sudek S, Haygood MG, Youssef DTA, Schmidt EW: Structure of trichamide, a
cyclic peptide from the bloom-forming cyanobacterium Trichodesmium
erythraeum, predicted from the genome sequence. Appl Environ Microbiol
2006, 72:4382-4387.
Schmidt EW, Nelson JT, Rasko DA, Sudek S, Eisen JA, Haygood MG, Ravel J:
Patellamide A and C biosynthesis by a microcin-like pathway in Prochloron
didemni, the cyanobacterial symbiont of Lissoclinum patella. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2005, 102:7315-7320.
Lee SW, Mitchell DA, Markley AL, Hensler ME, Gonzalez D, Wohlrab A,
Dorrestein PC, Nizet V, Dixon JE: Discovery of a widely distributed toxin
biosynthetic gene cluster. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:5879-5884.

Page 4 of 4

8.	

Li Y-M, Milne JC, Madison LL, Kolter R, Walsh CT: From peptide precursors to
oxazole and thiazole-containing peptide antibiotics: microcin B17
synthase. Science 1996, 274:1188-1193.
9.	 Li C, Kelly WL: Recent advances in thiopeptide antibiotic biosynthesis. Nat
Prod Rep 2010, 27:153-164.
10.	 Li B, Sher D, Kelly L, Shi Y, Huang K, Knerr PJ, Joewono I, Rusch D, Chisholm
SW, van der Donk WA: Catalytic promiscuity in the biosynthesis of cyclic
peptide secondary metabolites in planktonic marine cyanobacteria. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:10430-10435.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-83
Cite this article as: Schmidt EW: The hidden diversity of ribosomal peptide
natural products. BMC Biology 2010, 8:83.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
