<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>One-shot genitalia are not an evolutionary dead end - Regained male polygamy in a sperm limited spider species</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-197"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jutta M Schneider"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
One-shot genitalia are not an evolutionary dead
end - Regained male polygamy in a sperm
limited spider species
Schneider and Michalik
Schneider and Michalik BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/197 (8 July 2011)

Schneider and Michalik BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/197

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

One-shot genitalia are not an evolutionary dead
end - Regained male polygamy in a sperm
limited spider species
Jutta M Schneider1* and Peter Michalik2

Abstract
Background: Monogynous mating systems with extremely low male mating rates have several independent
evolutionary origins and are associated with drastic adaptations involving self-sacrifice, one-shot genitalia, genital
damage, and termination of spermatogenesis immediately after maturation. The combination of such extreme
traits likely restricts evolutionary potential perhaps up to the point of making low male mating rates irreversible
and hence may constitute an evolutionary dead end. Here, we explore the case of a reversion to multiple mating
from monogynous ancestry in golden orb-web spiders, Nephila senegalensis.
Results: Male multiple mating is regained by the loss of genital damage and sexual cannibalism but
spermatogenesis is terminated with maturation, restricting males to a single loading of their secondary mating
organs and a fixed supply of sperm. However, males re-use their mating organs and by experimentally mating males
to many females, we show that the sperm supply is divided between copulations without reloading the pedipalps.
Conclusion: By portioning their precious sperm supply, males achieve an average mating rate of four females
which effectively doubles the maximal mating rate of their ancestors. A heritage of one-shot genitalia does not
completely restrict the potential to increase mating rates in Nephila although an upper limit is defined by the
available sperm load. Future studies should now investigate how males use this potential in the field and identify
selection pressures responsible for a reversal from monogynous to polygynous mating strategies.

Background
In the absence of paternal care, the male sex is generally
considered to show a larger variation in mating rates
than the female sex [1,2]. Due to the small size of the
male gametes, they can be produced at relatively low cost
and in large numbers, and replenished after use. Classical
sex roles do not apply in mating systems without paternal
care in which males are nevertheless monogynous while
females mate multiply [3]. In such cases, males are
adapted to focus their entire mating effort on fertilising a
single female. A monogynous mating strategy can invade
if several conditions are fulfilled: firstly, a male biased sex
ratio is required that reduces the average male paternity
success to a value below one female. Secondly, an effective mechanism of paternity protection, associated with
* Correspondence: js@gilgamesh.de
1
Biozentrum Grindel, Zoological Institute and Museum, University of
Hamburg, Martin-Luther-King Platz 3, D-20146 Hamburg, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

the monogynous strategy is essential to elevate the paternity success of a monogynist above the average [4].
Under certain conditions, monogyny can co-occur with
bigyny, a strategy in which males mate with a maximum
of two females [5].
Monogynous mating systems have several evolutionary
origins across a wide range of taxonomic groups and
seem to have evolved several times independently in spiders [3,6]. Several extreme adaptations including permanent attachment to the female in angler fish, damage to
the genitals, e.g. in honey bees and spiders, as well as
post-insemination sexual cannibalism co-evolved with
monogyny [6]. Monogynous males have no residual
reproductive value after they have mated with a single
female and can invest maximally in any adaptation that
increases their paternity. Associated phenomena, namely
self-sacrifice and genital damage to the male, are best
studied in spiders which are ideal model organisms for
mating system research [7].

© 2011 Schneider and Michalik; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Schneider and Michalik BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/197

Male genitalia in spiders are paired secondary structures,
the pedipalps, which the males charge with sperm after
maturation [8]. The male releases sperm from the ventral
genital pore onto a special silken structure, the sperm
web. The pedipalps are dipped into the sperm-containing
liquid and charged with the ejaculate. This process of
sperm induction can be repeated between copulations
when sperm contents in the pedipalps are depleted [8].
Based on the present state of knowledge most spider species re-charge their pedipalps - an ability which has been
reduced in monogynous species of some families. Indeed,
several species of the families Araneidae, Theriididae and
Nephilidae have been found to terminate spermatogenesis
before maturation resulting in a single sperm load per
pedipalp without the option to recharge depleted pedipalps [9-11] - the trait was termed permanent sperm
depletion (PSD) [11]. The pedipalps are charged only
once, usually soon after maturation, and each pedipalp is
generally used only once (one-shot genitalia). Since males
of at least two of these species are strictly monogynous,
terminal investment strategies evolved that enhance male
fertilisation success with a single female. Accordingly,
males of the monogynous species risk or even sacrifice
their life to prolong copulation duration and they damage
their pedipalps to protect their paternity against future rivals. In the theridiid species Tidarren argo the males even
ectomise one of their two pedipalps during maturation
and always die while attached to the female with the
remaining pedipalp [12]. Hence, with the evolution of
one-shot genitalia, the production of sperm after induction
is no longer required and the costs of sperm production
can be saved in favour of other body functions and
demands [10]. In addition to self-sacrifice and genital
damage, the termination of spermatogenesis at maturation
may be another trait of monogamous spider males that
limits their mating rates to one or two females [11]. The
accumulation of extreme adaptations to monogyny may
severely constrain the evolutionary potential to change
back to higher mating rates and may thereby constitute an
evolutionary dead end. To date reversals to a polygynous
mating system have not been reported. However, there is
at least anecdotal evidence of a differentiation in male
mating rates within the spider genus Nephila.
In the family Nephilidae, genital damage and one-shot
genitalia seem to have evolved relatively early and are a
common pattern in the genera Herennia and Nephilengys [13]. In both genera males not only damage their
sperm transferring structure, the embolic conductor, but
they ectomise the entire pedipalp after copulation, an
adaptation termed “eunuch phenomenon” [14,15].
Recent molecular and combined phylogenetic analyses
suggest Nephila to be the sistergroup of Nephilengys +
Herennia and thus the “eunuch phenomenon” might be

Page 2 of 8

a synapomorphy for this clade [16,17] The genus
Nephila contains 15 species and their relationships were
addressed in recent phylogenetic studies which revealed
that either N. fenestrata [18] or a clade with N. pilipes
and N. constricta [17] is sister to all remaining Nephila.
In any case, all three species show male genital damage
[19]. Remaining Nephila species vary in whether male
genitalia are damaged or not during copulation [18]. For
example, the Australian species, N. plumipes is known
for frequent genital damage while this does not occur in
the sympatric N. edulis [20-22]. Likewise, the African N.
fenestrata frequently breaks off the tip of the embolic
conductor [23] while this has not been observed in the
sympatric N. senegalensis (unpublished observations).
The function of genital damage varies between species:
while it serves as a mating plug in N. fenestrata [24] it
does not prevent copulations and paternity of rival
males in N. plumipes [21]. In at least two species, N.
inaurata and N. pilipes, genital fragments of several
males can be found in single genital openings of females
[13,25]. The frequency of sexual cannibalism also varies
between species and in several species males evolved
tactics to survive female attacks. One such strategy is to
mate opportunistically while the females are moulting or
feeding. Opportunistic mating may be facultative as in
N. fenestrata [26] and N. clavipes [27] but is obligate in
N. plumipes and N. inaurata [21,25]. Furthermore, in
several species that do not or rarely show genital
damage, e.g. N. clavipes, N. edulis, N. inaurata and N.
senegalensis, repeated use of pedipalps can be observed
[27-29]. However, in N. clavipes males usually empty
their entire sperm load in a single copulatory bout at
least when copulating with virgin females and subsequent copulations occur but without sperm transfer
[30]. Repeated use of the same pedipalp with the same
female increases paternity share under sperm competition in N. edulis and in N. senegalensis (unpublished)
but it is unknown whether this is achieved through the
transfer of additional sperm or through other mechanisms that influence the paternity share such as the transfer of manipulative substances or copulatory courtship
(Eberhard 1996).
Here we study the phenomenon of multiple insertions
in male N. senegalensis from three angles. First, we
investigate the morphology of the testes before and after
maturation in order to test whether males of this species
are indeed terminating spermatogenesis and thus are
sperm limited or whether they may have regained the
possibility to produce sperm as adults. Second, we ask
whether males can fertilise eggs of several virgin females
through the repeated use of their palps. Third, we assess
whether females are polyandrous and whether receptivity is influenced by mating.

Schneider and Michalik BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/197

Results
(a) Male genital system

As revealed by dissections and histological analyses, spermatogenesis is terminated before adulthood (Figure 1).
Testis size decreased dramatically in adulthood and no
generative tissue could be observed after final moult (as
found in N. clavipes, [11]). Testes size keeps decreasing
with days elapsed since the final moult and a regain of
spermatogenesis was not observed (Figure 1). Spermatids,
which develop in cysts surrounded by extensions of the
somatic cells, are of the same developmental stage indicating a synchronous spermatogenesis (Figure 1).
(b) Male polygamy

Eight males were mated to a total of 55 females (minimum
5, maximum 9 females per male) and allowed to use one
pedipalp once with every female. Reloading of pedipalps
(sperm induction) was never observed between copulations. Females produced between 1 and 7 egg-sacs (most
females produced 3 egg-sacs) before they died a natural
death. Following a single copulation with a male, females
produced on average 1.76 (SE = 0.16) fertilised egg-sacs.
Fertilisation success decreased drastically after the 4th trial
of a male; while the first four mating partners of a male
had similar fertilisation success, the egg-sacs of subsequent
mating partners were less often fertilised (Figure 2). Individual males inseminated at least 3 and at most 5 females
(mean = 4.6 ± 0.5) and fertilised between 8 and 16 eggsacs (mean = 12.25 ± 1.0).
Copulation durations were not affected by the order of
the mating trial (restricted to the first 6 trials due to
sample sizes; male ID used as a random effect; ANOVA,
F 5,39 = 0.47, p = 0.79; Figure 3). This suggests that
males show normal courtship and mating behaviour
even if they are depleted of sperm.
Copulations were observed and the use of the two
pedipalps was documented. Seven of 8 males used their
left pedipalp first and 4 of these males re-used their left
pedipalp with their 2nd female. All males used both of
their pedipalps; right pedipalps were used more than
once by 7 of the 8 males, and left pedipalps were repeatedly used by 6 of 8 males. Right pedipalps were used
3.75 (SE = 0.67) times and left pedipalps 2.86 (SE =
0.52) times on average. The difference was not significant (Wilcoxon, Z = 0.96, p = 0.34).
The re-use of a pedipalp correlated significantly with
the number of females that the males inseminated with
this pedipalp (r2 = 0.59, F1,14 = 20.49, p = 0.0005). With
their right pedipalps males inseminated 2.38 females (SE
= 0.50, range 1-5) and with their left pedipalp they inseminated two females (SE = 0.38, range 1-6). The difference was not significant (Wilcoxon, Z = 0.44, p = 0.66).
In all cases in which a pedipalp was used more than

Page 3 of 8

once, the first two females inseminated with this palp
produced fertilised clutches.
For each of the 8 males we compared the copulation of
the pedipalp used during the first copulation. The duration
of the first copulation varied around a mean of 277.1s
(SE = 84.8) and was negatively although not significantly
related to the frequency of re-use of the same pedipalp
(r 2 = 0.38, F 1,6 = 3.75, p = 0.1) and accordingly to the
number of females fertilised with this pedipalp (r2 = 0.44,
F1,6 = 4.7, p = 0.07).
In a second experiment, we increased sperm limitation
by amputating one pedipalp of 18 males. We investigated the re-use and the fertilisation potential of single
pedipalps and exposed males to up to 4 females. From
the results of the previous experiment we expected that
male fertilise two females with a single pedipalp. Males
generally used their pedipalp repeatedly although one
male was cannibalised by his 2 nd female and another
male could not be motivated to copulate with more
than two females. The mean durations of copulations
did not significantly differ between the four trials
(ANOVA on trials 1 to 4, male ID as random effect:
F3,59 = 2.47, p = 0.074).
For unknown reasons a large proportion of females in
the 2 nd experiment suffered from complete or partial
reproductive failure; several females died before oviposition and others produced egg-sacs that were empty or
contained dried eggs. In the previous experiment, all
males fertilised the eggs of the first female they mated
with. In order to avoid errors by wrongly accounting
reproductive failures to decisions of the males, we
restricted our analysis of male fertilisation success to
those males that inseminated at least the first female
they copulated with. This reduced the sample size to 7
males and 28 copulations. The average number of
females with fertilised egg-sacs per pedipalp was two
(one male fertilised only 1 and 1 male 3 females) and no
male succeeded to inseminate all 4 females. The use and
fertilisation pattern of one-palped males matched the
results of the previous experiment in which males were
able to freely choose the pedipalps they used. The
increased sperm limitation did not induce the males to
change the patterns of sperm allocation. Both experiments suggest that most males split the sperm load in a
single pedipalp into two portions.
If both experiments are combined, the repeated use of
the single or firstly used pedipalp on fertilisation success
can be analysed with a larger sample size. The duration
of the first copulation significantly predicted whether 1,
2, 3 or 4 females were fertilised with the same pedipalp
(multiple logistic model: c22 = 6.59, p = 0.037; copulation
duration c2 = 5.91, p = 0.015; amputated yes/no: c 2 =
0.11, p = 0.74). Males that inseminated a single female

Schneider and Michalik BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/197

Page 4 of 8

Figure 1 Male genital system of Nephila senegalensis in subadult (30d after penultimate moult) and adult stage (1d and 128d after
final moult). View of the whole genital system and stained cross-sections of the testis. As evident in the section of the testis of the subadult
male the spermatids developing in cysts and the lumen is filled with dense secretion. In the adult testis only somatic tissue is present whereas
generative tissue is completely absent. Scale bar: 50 μm.

Schneider and Michalik BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/197

Page 5 of 8

individuals in our laboratory stock. An ANCOVA with
female ID as random factor revealed that 37% of the
variation in copulation duration was explained by the
mean tibia-patella length of the males in that small
males mated longer than large males (F1,52 = 5.78, p =
0.021) while neither the trial number (1-6) (F5,57 = 0.31,
p = 0.9) nor the pedipalp used (F1,52 = 0.03, p = 0.86)
were relevant. This suggests that female mating status
(regardless of which of her paired spermathecae is considered) and the degree of polyandry do not prevent her
from accepting copulations of normal length.

Figure 2 Individual males were mated to 6 females in
succession. The number of fertilised egg-sacs that females
produced after a single copulation is similar for the first 4 females
and then declines. Box-Plots depict medians and interquartiles of 8
females per mating sequence.

mated for a median of 442s (N = 3). Males that inseminated more than 2 females had a relatively shorter 1st
copulation (Median = 213s, N = 3) although not much
different from cases in which sperm was divided between
two females (median = 232s, N = 9).
(c) Female polygamy

Several males were successively introduced to each
female (range 6 - 13 males per female). All males were
generally accepted as mating partners and there was no
obvious decline in female receptivity. The number of
males per female was only limited by the available

Figure 3 Individual males were mated to 6 females in
succession. The duration of copulations varied (medians and
interquartiles are shown, N = 8) but did not significantly differ
between trials even though no or very little sperm was transferred
to the 5th and 6th female of a male.

Discussion
Nephila senegalensis males do not continue spermatogenesis in the adult stage and are unable to recharge
their pedipalps between copulations (PSD [11]). This
appears to be a heritage from their evolutionary history;
the congener N. clavipes shows the same trait and so do
species from the closely related genus Nephilengys [11].
The latter are strictly monogynous and possess one-shot
genitalia [9]. These patterns suggest that PSD initially
co-evolved with other adaptations to monogyny such as
genital damage and one-shot genitalia [11].
In contrast to their ancestors who likely possessed
one-shot genitalia [13,31,32], N. senegalensis males no
longer damage their genitalia and are able to use their
pedipalps repeatedly. Here we show that the repeated
use of pedipalps indeed involves a portioning of the
sperm supply within a single pedipalp. This is an important finding as this study also shows that males with
empty pedipalps exhibit normal mating behaviour so
that the occurrence of copulation cannot be equalised
with sperm transfer. Through portioning of sperm,
N. senegalensis more than doubled their maximal mating
rates in comparison to their monogynous or bigynous
relatives. Based on the current phylogenetic hypotheses
[14,16-18], they have regained the potential for polygamy. It remains to be studied in nature whether males
use this potential of multiple mating and move between
females or whether they use repeated copulations to
maximise their paternity success under sperm competition [29]. In the Australian N. edulis the dominant male
will increase the frequency of copulation in a competitive situation [29]. A paternity study on N. edulis
revealed that repeated copulations positively affected
paternity success under sperm competition [22]. However, the paternity share was not directly related to the
repeated use of a pedipalp but to the total copulation
duration, irrespective in how many copulatory bouts
took place [22]. Interestingly, repeated copulations were
used by large males while small males copulated for
longer [33]. However, if two males of similar size competed, the frequency of copulation was highest [33]. The
size and competition dependent alternative tactics are

Schneider and Michalik BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/197

proposed to maintain the size variation in male Nephila
[33-35]. Context dependent mating strategies are also
likely in N. senegalensis and may influence sperm allocation as well.
In most cases, males allocated the sperm load of one
palp into two portions although more or less portions are
possible. A congener, N. clavipes, also known to reuse
pedipalps despite sperm limitation [11,27], deplete their
sperm supply with virgin females [30] while this occurred
very rarely in N. senegalensis. Indeed, the length of the
first copulation determined how many portions are left
for future copulations with the same pedipalp. Here we
suggest that N. senegalensis show a prudent use of their
sperm supply during their first copulation and always
retain a quantity of their limited sperm supply for future
copulations.
Males readily mated with several females but not every
copulation resulted in fertilisation success. Especially
twice mated males appeared to copulate for a normal
length without transferring any sperm. Likewise, females
copulated with sperm depleted males even though they
did not benefit at all. In our laboratory setting, females
were highly polyandrous and accepted numerous males
for copulations. One possible benefit of polyandry may
be that females secure a sufficient sperm supply. Multiple mating will be adaptive if males are mobile and multiply mate in nature and if females have no mechanism
to detect whether males transfer any sperm or not. It is
unknown how relevant this is under natural conditions
and extensive field studies are required to answer this.
In nature, males accumulate on the large webs of
Nephila females and compete for copulations. This is a
general pattern in the genus and is considered one of the
most important requirements for the evolution of monogyny [4,6]. However, a monogynous strategy can only
invade and be stable, if it is associated with a potent
mechanism of paternity protection [4]. A common trait
in this respect that evolved independently in several spider families is the application of a mating plug through
damaging the genitalia [19].
N. fenestrata is the only species in which males still use
genitalia fragments to close the female genital opening.
In no other Nephila species studied to date genital
damage leads to the application of a mating plug that is
effective in excluding sperm competition. Provided the
high incidence of competition, species with one-shot genitalia but without the plug function are expected to
evolve alternative measures of paternity protection. Mate
guarding or the transfer of accessory substances that
manipulate female receptivity are such strategies as
shown for several insect species [36,37]. Species without
genital damage have the additional option to inseminate
several females but if a male depletes the sperm in a pedipalp during a single copulation this will restrict males to

Page 6 of 8

the maximum of two different mates, one with each pedipalp. N. senegalensis overcomes this limitation at least to
some degree by portioning the sperm in each pedipalp.
To date it is unknown which selection pressures are
responsible for the loss of genital damage and the recovery of a potential for polygamy. A reduction in the effectiveness of genital fragments as mating plugs is explained
by sexual conflict. Female and male genital morphology
co-evolved in that female genital openings could no
longer be plugged because male embolic conductors
became thinner and bypass each other while female genital openings became wider [14].

Conclusion
The case of the Nephilidae remains to be among the
most promising systems to explore the role of antagonistic co-evolution in concert with extreme male mating
strategies. Current knowledge suggests that despite an
evolutionary heritage of behavioural, morphological and
physiological adaptations to monogyny, males can
reverse to polygamy by overcoming sexual cannibalism
and genital damage and while they did not revert to
adult sperm production, they developed the potential to
an economical use of their limited sperm supply.
Methods
Spiders were F 1 and F 2 offspring derived from wildcaught individuals collected in 2008 near Craddock, Eastern Cape Province, South Africa. Juvenile spiders were
kept in individual plastic cups (250 ml) and while males
remained in cups, subadult and adult females were
housed in separate Perspex frames (60 cm × 60 cm ×
12 cm), where they built typical orb-webs. Females were
sprayed with water on 5 days per week, fed 5-8 Calliphora sp. flies 2-3 times per week, and weighed on the
day after their final moult. After mating, females were
transferred to individual plastic cups (400 ml), where
they laid eggs. After death of a female, we used callipers
to take the tibia-patella length of a foreleg as a measure
of its fixed body size. Males were maintained in individual cups (250 ml) on a diet of Drosophila. Males were
fed ad libitum twice per week and sprayed with water on
5 days per week. On the day after the final moult, each
male was weighed and after the male had died the tibiapatella length of both forelegs was measured under a dissecting microscope using the measuring tool of Leica
IM500. Measurements were taken of all males involved
in the below experiments. Egg-sacs were removed from
cups and incubated in individual containers at room temperature for 5 weeks and then placed in 70% ethanol.
Egg-sacs were carefully opened and inspected for the presence of hatchlings. Hatchlings will stay in the egg-sac
for a few days after they hatched from the eggs. Eggs that
have not developed by that time will not hatch. If

Schneider and Michalik BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/197

hatchlings were found in an estimated proportion above
50%, the egg-sac was considered to be fertilised (most
egg-sacs had above 80% hatching rate).
(a) Morphology of the male genital system

Subadult (5, 30 days after penultimate moult) and virgin
adult (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 28, 128, 147 days after final moult)
male specimens were dissected in phosphate buffer (0.1
M, pH 7.2) with 1.8% sucrose added (PB). The isolated
genital systems were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde (Merck
Chemicals Ltd., Nottingham, UK) in PB and documented
using Leica EZ 4D stereomicroscope or Olympus ZX 7
stereomicroscope with an Olympus DP 10 digital camera.
Afterwards, the samples were post-fixed in PB buffered
2% OsO 4 (SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg,
Germany), washed in PB, dehydrated in graded ethanol
and embedded in Spurr’s resin [38]. Semi-thin sections
(700 nm) were made with a Diatome HistoJumbo diamond knife at a Leica ultramicrotome UCT and stained
according to Richardson et al. [39]. Sections were documented using a Zeiss Mcr digital camera mounted on an
Olympus BX60 compound microscope. For more details
see [11]. Vouchers are deposited in the Zoological Institute and Museum Greifswald, Germany (ZIMG).
(b) Male polygamy

Virgin males were assigned to mate with several virgin
females in succession. Females always received a fly
before the male was carefully introduced in one of the
upper corners of the web. Thereby the risk of losing
males due to sexual cannibalism is minimized [26].
Courtship and copulation were closely observed and a
single copulation was permitted per female. We noted
which pedipalp the male used and measured the duration of the copulation with a stop watch. Copulation
ended by the male walking off the female or by the
female brushing the male off. After the end of the first
copulation, the male was carefully removed from the
web with a paint-brush and returned to his plastic cup.
Sometimes on the same day but otherwise on the following days, the male was placed onto the web of
another virgin female. The procedure was repeated until
the male died a natural death (one male fell victim to
sexual cannibalism), until the male did not show any
courtship for a series of at least two trials, or until we
ran out of virgin females.
In a first experiment, we used virgin males and
mated them to a minimum of 5 and a maximum of 9
females. In this treatment, males were free in the choice
of which of their two pedipalps they used. Copulations
were observed and the used pedipalp was documented.
In a second experiment, we tested how many females
males fertilize if they only have a single pedipalp, hence
have an even stronger limitation of sperm. After a preset

Page 7 of 8

schedule, we amputated either the left or the right pedipalp of a virgin male. Amputation was induced by
squeezing the male pedipalp with forceps until the male
ectomised the appendage. In this way, haemolymph
leakage is minimized or even absent. The method is
well established in our laboratory and is not known to
influence behaviour and survival of males. The amputated males (half eunuchs) were mated with 5 females in
succession.
(c) Female polygamy

Nine females were mated with several males in succession (6 to 13) and each males was allowed a single
copulation with one pedipalp. Courtship and copulation
duration were documented as well as the pedipalp each
male used. Males and females were otherwise treated in
the same way as described above.
(d) Statistical Analysis

Data were analyzed with JMP 7. Sample sizes can vary
due to missing data or exclusions of data. Some analyses
that involve comparisons of repeated trials are restricted
to the first 6 repeats because only few individuals were
mated more than 6 times. Exclusions are generally made
explicit with the results. In one-way tests, trial number
was defined as an ordinal variable. Data on the duration
of copulation were log-transformed to achieve a normal
distribution. All continuous data sets used for parametric statistics are normally distributed and have
homogeneous variances.
Acknowledgements
We thank Tomma Dierks and Angelika Taebel-Hellwig for conducting the
mating experiments and maintaining the animals and Marion Sandhop for
her support with the histological analysis. We are grateful to Gabriele Uhl for
her invaluable support and helpful discussions. Gabriele Uhl, Lutz Fromhage
and Rainer Neumann kindly provided comments to the manuscript.
Author details
1
Biozentrum Grindel, Zoological Institute and Museum, University of
Hamburg, Martin-Luther-King Platz 3, D-20146 Hamburg, Germany.
2
Department of General and Systematic Zoology, Zoological Institute and
Museum, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University, J.-S.-Bach-Str. 11/12, D-17489
Greifswald, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
JMS conceived the experiments, analyed the data and wrote the paper. PM
conducted the histology and contributed to writing the text. All authors
have read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 21 April 2011 Accepted: 8 July 2011 Published: 8 July 2011
References
1. Bateman AJ: Intra-sexual selection in Drosophila. Heredity 1948, 2:349-368.
2. Trivers RL: Parental investment and sexual selection. In Sexual selection
and the descent of man. Edited by: Campbell B. London: Heinemann;
1972:136-179.

Schneider and Michalik BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:197
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/197

3.

4.
5.

6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.
26.

Schneider JM, Fromhage L: Monogynous mating strategies in spiders. In
Behaviour: Evolution and Mechanisms. Edited by: Kappeler PI. Heidelberg:
Springer; 2010:.
Fromhage L, Elgar MA, Schneider JM: Faithful without care: the evolution
of monogyny. Evolution 2005, 59:1400-1405.
Fromhage L, McNamara JM, Houston AI: A model for the evolutionary
maintenance of monogyny in spiders. Journal of Theoretical Biology 2008,
250:524-531.
Miller JA: Repeated evolution of male sacrifice behavior in spiders
correlated with genital mutilation. Evolution 2007, 61:1301-1315.
Schneider JM, Andrade MCB: Mating behaviour and sexual selection. Book
Mating behaviour and sexual selection City: Cambridge University Press;
2011, 215-274.
Foelix RF: Biology of spiders. Oxford: Oxford University Press;, 2 1996.
Herberstein ME, Gaskett AC, Schneider JM, Vella NGF, Elgar MA: Limits to
male copulation frequency: Sexual cannibalism and sterility in St
Andrew’s cross spiders (Araneae, Araneidae). Ethology 2005,
111:1050-1061.
Michalik P, Knoflach B, Thaler K, Alberti G: Live for the momentAdaptations in the male genital system of a sexually cannibalistic spider
(Theridiidae, Araneae). Tissue Cell 2010, 42:32-36.
Michalik P, Rittschof CC: A Comparative Analysis of the Morphology and
Evolution of Permanent Sperm Depletion in Spiders. PLoS ONE 2011, 6(1):
e16014.
Knoflach B, Van Harten A: The one-palped spider genera Tidarren and
Echinotheridion in the Old World (Araneae, Theridiidae), with
comparative remarks on Tidarren from America. Journal of Natural History
2006, 40:1483-1616.
Kuntner M, Kralj-Fiser S, Schneider JM, Li D: Mate plugging via genital
mutilation in nephilid spiders: an evolutionary hypothesis. Journal of
Zoology 2009, 277:257-266.
Kuntner M, Coddington JA, Schneider JM: Intersexual arms race? Genital
coevolution in Nephilid spiders (Araneae, Nephilidae). Evolution 2009,
63:1451-1463.
Kralj-Fiser S, Gregoric M, Zhang S, Li D, Kuntner M: Eunuchs are better
fighters. Animal Behaviour 2011, 81:933-939.
Dimitrov D, Benjamin SP, Hormiga G: A Revised Phylogenetic Analysis for
the Spider Genus Clitaetra Simon, 1889 (Araneae, Araneoidea,
Nephilidae) with the First Description of the Male of the Sri Lankan
Species Clitaetra thisbe. Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology
2009, 159:301-323.
Su YC, Chang YH, Smith D, Zhu MS, Kuntner M, Tso IM: Biogeography and
Speciation Patterns of the Golden Orb Spider Genus Nephila (Araneae:
Nephilidae) in Asia. Zoological Science 2011, 28:47-55.
Kuntner M, Coddington JA, Hormiga G: Phylogeny of extant nephilid orbweaving spiders (Araneae, Nephilidae): testing morphological and
ethological homologies. Cladistics 2008, 24:147-217.
Uhl G, Nessler S, Schneider J: Securing paternity in spiders? A review on
occurrence and effects of mating plugs and male genital mutilation.
Genetica 2009, 138:75-104.
Schneider JM, Elgar MA: Sexual cannibalism and sperm competition in
the golden orb-web spider Nephila plumipes (Araneoidea): female and
male perspectives. Behavioral Ecology 2001, 12:547-552.
Schneider JM, Thomas ML, Elgar MA: Ectomised conductors in the golden
orb-web spider, Nephila plumipes (Araneoidea): a male adaptation to
sexual conflict? Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 2001, 49:410-415.
Schneider JM, Herberstein ME, De Crespigny FC, Ramamurthy S, Elgar MA:
Sperm competition and small size advantage for males of the golden
orb-web spider Nephila edulis. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 2000,
13:939-946.
Fromhage L, Schneider JM: Emasculation to plug up females: the
significance of pedipalp damage in Nephila fenestrata. Behavioral Ecology
2006, 17:353-357.
Fromhage L, Schneider JM: Emasculation to plug up females: the
significance of pedipalp damage in Nephila fenestrata. Behavioral Ecology
2006.
Schneider JM, Fromhage L, Uhl G: Copulation patterns in the golden orbweb spider Nephila madagascariensis. Journal of Ethology 2005, 23:51-55.
Fromhage L, Schneider JM: Safer sex with feeding females: sexual conflict
in a cannibalistic spider. Behavioral Ecology 2005, 16:377-382.

Page 8 of 8

27. Christenson TE, Brown SG, Wenzl PA, Hill EM, Goist KC: Mating Behavior of
the Golden-Orb-Weaving Spider, Nephila clavipes: I. Female Receptivity
and Male Courtship. Journal of comparative psychology 1985, 99:160-166.
28. Gerhardt U: Neue Untersuchungen zur Sexualbiologie der Spinnen,
insbesondere an Arten der Mittelmeerländer und der Tropen. Z Morph
Ökol Tiere 1933, 27:1-75.
29. Elgar MA, De Crespigny FEC, Ramamurthy S: Male copulation behaviour
and the risk of sperm competition. Animal Behaviour 2003, 66:211-216.
30. Linn CD, Molina Y, Difatta J, Christenson TE: The adaptive advantage of
prolonged mating: a test of alternative hypotheses. Animal Behaviour
2007, 74:481-485.
31. Kuntner M: A revision of Herennia (Araneae : Nephilidae : Nephilinae),
the Australasian ‘coin spiders’. Invertebrate Systematics 2005, 19:391-436.
32. Kuntner M: A monograph of Nephilengys, the pantropical ‘hermit
spiders’ (Araneae, Nephilidae, Nephilinae). Systematic Entomology 2007,
32:95-135.
33. Schneider JM, Elgar MA: The combined effects of pre- and postinsemination sexual selection on extreme variation in male body size.
Evolutionary Ecology 2005, 19:419-433.
34. Rittschof CC: Male density affects large-male advantage in the golden
silk spider, Nephila clavipes. Behavioral Ecology 2010, 21:979-985.
35. Elgar MA, Jones TM: Size-dependent mating strategies and the risk of
cannibalism. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 2008, 94:355-363.
36. Wolfner MF: Tokens of love: Functions and regulation of Drosophila male
accessory gland products. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 1997, 27:179-192.
37. Simmons LW: Sperm competition and its evolutionary consequences in
the insects. Princeton: Princeton University Press; 2001.
38. Spurr AR: A low-viscosity epoxy resin embedding medium for electron
microscopy. Journal of Ultrastructure Research 1969, 26:31-43.
39. Richardson KC, Jarett L, Finke EH: Embedding in epoxy resins for ultrathin
sectioning in electron microscopy. Stain Technology 1960, 35:313-325.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-197
Cite this article as: Schneider and Michalik: One-shot genitalia are not
an evolutionary dead end - Regained male polygamy in a sperm
limited spider species. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:197.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
