<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>InCoB celebrates its tenth anniversary as first joint conference with ISCB-Asia</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:S1. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-S3-S1"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Christian Schönbach"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Schönbach et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S1

INTRODUCTION

Open Access

InCoB celebrates its tenth anniversary as first
joint conference with ISCB-Asia
Christian Schönbach1*, Tin Wee Tan2, Janet Kelso3, Burkhard Rost4, Sheila Nathan5,6, Shoba Ranganathan7,2
From Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics – First
ISCB Asia Joint Conference 2011 (InCoB/ISCB-Asia 2011)
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 30 November - 2 December 2011

Abstract
In 2009 the International Society for Computational Biology (ISCB) started to roll out regional bioinformatics
conferences in Africa, Latin America and Asia. The open and competitive bid for the first meeting in Asia (ISCBAsia) was awarded to Asia-Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) which has been running the International
Conference on Bioinformatics (InCoB) in the Asia-Pacific region since 2002. InCoB/ISCB-Asia 2011 is held from
November 30 to December 2, 2011 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Of 104 manuscripts submitted to BMC Genomics
and BMC Bioinformatics conference supplements, 49 (47.1%) were accepted. The strong showing of Asia among
submissions (82.7%) and acceptances (81.6%) signals the success of this tenth InCoB anniversary meeting, and
bodes well for the future of ISCB-Asia.
Introduction
The tenth InCoB (International Conference on Bioinformatics), an official conference of the Asia-Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) [1], was held in Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia as a joint conference with the ISCBAsia meeting of the International Society for Computational Biology (ISCB) [2]. InCoB/ISCB-Asia 2011 is the
result of ISCB’s mission to host meetings in locations
that are not well served by the world’s largest bioinformatics conference ISMB (International Conference on
Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology). Owing to the
success of previous InCoB conferences [3,4], and as
ISCB’s first regional affiliate, APBioNet was selected to
co-organize the first ISCB-Asia conference.
Manuscript submission and review
We offered authors three tracks to submit manuscripts
for potential publication in the supplement issues of
BMC Bioinformatics or BMC Genomics (BMC track)
and Immunome Research (IR) [5]. Of 110 submitted
* Correspondence: schoen@bio.kyutech.ac.jp
1
Department of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Graduate School of Computer
Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Fukuoka
820-8502, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

manuscripts from 19 countries 104 were designated for
the BMC track. Immunome Research received three
submissions. Shorter manuscripts representing research
in progress were also sought for Bioinformation (BI),
which received three submissions. Most manuscripts
received three reviews from the 76 member strong Program Committee, supported by 39 additional reviewers
(Additional File 1). The first round of reviews resulted
in the provisional acceptance of 32 (30.8%) manuscripts,
with minor revisions. The authors of 28 manuscripts,
including three that were transferred by the Program
Committee Co-chairs to BI and IR tracks, had to
address major concerns raised by the reviewers. After a
second round of review, 26 (25%) manuscripts were provisionally accepted pending minor revisions. A statistics
of submissions and final acceptances by countries is
shown in Additional File 2. The manuscript revision and
re-review policy of InCoB/ISCB-Asia 2011 resulted in a
more than twofold greater acceptance rate compared to
ISMB/ECCB 2011 [6] which considers only manuscripts
requiring minor revisions.
The 25 articles selected for this issue represent a
cross-section of scientific and technological innovations
accelerating bioinformatics in the areas of databases,
software tools, RNomics, next-generation sequencing,

© 2011 Schönbach et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Schönbach et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S1

sequence analysis, evolution, proteome analysis and
disease informatics. The remaining 24 accepted BMC
articles are published as a BMC Bioinformatics supplement [7].

Biological databases and software tools
Papers presenting a wide variety of databases and software tools were accepted [8-12]. Particular focus areas
include the development of software for the alignment
of apicomplexan sequences [8] which have an unusual
sequence composition, software for the identification of
gene regulatory modules from microarray data [9], and
software for the identification of taxonomic identity
from metagenomic samples [10]. Liverome [11] and
Detoxiprot [12] represent databases for collecting and
sharing of network modules enriched in liver cancerpathways as well as enzymes, substrates, inducers and
inhibitors of detoxification.
RNomics and next-generation sequencing
Four papers make use of next-generation sequencing
(NGS) [13-16] to address a range of challenges from the
identification of the taxonomic origin of organism
sequences in metagenomic studies [13] to the identification of unique and novel genes in metatranscriptomic
data [14,15].
Fast-growing trees from plantations are used in pulp
and fiber production. Lignin, an essential component of
the tree structure, is undesired in this process. Ong and
Wickneswari [16] applied NGS to profile the expression
of Acacia mangium small RNAs in secondary xylem
samples of varying lignin content. The obtained small
RNA profiles, which include 82 novel miRNAs may
open venues to silence monolignol biosynthesis-associated genes without compromising the fitness of the
tree.
Secretory proteins are important players in hostpathogen interactions. Existing prediction tools do not
support the identification of secretory protein candidates
from NGS data, thus hampering the identification of
non-classical secreted protein candidates. Garg and Ranganathan [17] developed an assembly protocol for NGSderived sequence data to cluster, translate and homology
search an in-house dataset of experimentally determined
parasitic helminth excretory/secretory proteins. Another
aspect of the cellular secretome is exosomes or vesicles
used in intracellular communication and transport of
cellular components such as RNA. Since exosomes
could be used as vectors for therapeutic drug delivery, it
is of interest to identify motifs involved in targeting
RNA for secretion. Bagatov and colleagues [18] determined ab initio various short linear motifs that are specific for certain exosome-enriched RNAs.

Page 2 of 4

Evolution and sequence analysis
The growing number of complete genome drafts and
protein sequence data allows to re-visit questions on the
origin of vertebrate promoters, evolutionary conservation
of enzymes, as well as the generation of functional diversity through gene duplication and alternative splicing.
Profiling of ascidian promoters revealed a primordial vertebrate promoter type that appears to be partially methylated with a high but limited extent of CpG scores and G
+C content [19]. Phylogenetic profiles of rate-limiting
enzymes with inhibiting relations showed higher conservation across human, rat, mouse, budding yeast and E.
coli than common enzymes [20]. Chen et al. [21] analysed the relationship between the two mechanisms using
protein sequence and paralog information of seven
organisms ranging from human to C. elegans. The results
indicate a duplication age-dependent relationship of
alternative splicing and an evolutionary constraint among
duplicates. Alternative splicing was more frequently
observed among ancient than recent duplicates.
The increasing scale and speed of whole-genome
sequencing requires faster and high-accuracy genome
mapping methods. A new method that utilizes perfect
Hamming Code with a hash table significantly reduces
the number of hash keys required for searching genome
positions [22]. The Universal Automatic SNP Identification System (UASIS) [23], cross-references SNP identifiers of various databases to bridge potential SNP
nomenclature ambiguities and to promote compliance
with Human Genome Variation Society guidelines.
Proteome analysis
Knowledge of protein-protein interaction (PPI) data
quality and their limitations is critical for interpreting
results and essential for using them as a reference set.
Zhou and Wong [24] found that M. tuberculosis H37Rv
bacterial two-hybrid (B2H) data seemed to contain
numerous false positives and false negatives, while the
H37Rv STRING predicted PPIs included many nonedirect interactions. Yet, stringently predicted H37Rv
STRING PPI data appeared to be suitable as a reference
for analysing functional associations rather than physical
interactions. To understand the behaviour of proteins in
PPI networks, PPIs are often correlated with gene
expression parameters. The correlation of high-confidence human PPIs derived from the HitPredict database
with gene expression stability improved the classification
of transient obligatory hubs and revealed functionally
distinct, previously unknown type of hubs [25].
All protein domains common to mouse-infecting
viruses and mice were analyzed and published as MusVirus database and tool [26]. Biochemical and functional
interpretations of the shared domains indicated that the

Schönbach et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S1

analysed viruses prefer to acquire genes of the innate
immune response pathways. Granzymes are serine proteases that are implicated in the pathogenesis of several
chronic inflammatory and cardiovascular disorders. Wee
et al. [27] implemented a webserver to predict the
potential granzyme B degradome using support vector
machine classifiers derived from experimentally verified
substrate cleavage sites.
Beta-D-mannosidase mutations cause lysosomal storage disease. A comparative structural bioinformatics
analysis of inherited mutations in b-D-mannosidase
across multiple species revealed a geno-phenotpye correlation [28]. The identification of five mutational hotspots indicated that the closeness of mutations to the
active site correlates with the severity of phenotypes and
thus allowing phenotype severity predictions.

Disease informatics
Papers on the discovery and analysis of biomarkers and
disease gene candidates focussed on copy number variations (CNVs) [29], cut-circularize-linearize-and-paste
(CCLP) models [30] of chromosomal rearrangements
and an extreme class-discrimination (ECD) [31] of lung
adenocarcinoma gene expression data. Shia et al. [29]
examined CNVs in Taiwanese hyperlipidemia and myocardial infarction patient cohorts. A multistage analysis
revealed seven CNV regions that were associated with
both disorders and deserve further exploration as potential biomarkers for early-stage diagnosis. To study the
human immune response to tumours and phylogenetic
tree reconstructions, Huang et al [30] developed an
algorithm that minimizes the number of CCLP operations to sort permutations of a number of genes in a
given chromosome.
Lack of clinically applied biomarkers for the early
diagnosis and aggressiveness of lung adenocarcinoma
inspired the development ECD to select features in
paired gene expression samples, and to identify genes
that are essential for reprogramming lung tissue cells
[31]. Compared to commonly used methods, ECD produced highly discriminative variables when the number
of samples was small. Nevertheless, prioritizing and
experimentally verifying new candidates can be timeconsuming and expensive. Hsu et al. [32] proposed a
parameter-free interconnectedness method to rank disease candidates by evaluating their distance to known
disease genes in a network.
Conclusion
In recent years numerous Asian bioscience conferences
have added bioinformatics sessions to their program.
Yet, higher-profile annual conferences dedicated to
bioinformatics remained largely in North America and
Europe. The high number of manuscript and poster

Page 3 of 4

submissions to InCoB/ISCB-Asia 2011 suggests that the
joint conference model ISCB-Asia may indeed invigorate
regional bioinformatics-themed meetings in Asia, which
are necessary to advance bioinformatics research, particularly in South and Southeast Asia. The strengthening
of these regional conferences should lead to a gradual
and healthy consolidation of smaller meetings that will
benefit participants. Towards this end, we expect to see
you again at the 11th InCoB in Bangkok or at the 2 nd
ISCB-Asia conference.

Additional material
Additional File 1: List of Program Committee Members and
Additional Reviewers in Alphabetical Order
Additional File 2: A. Submission and Acceptance Statistics by
Regions and Countries B. Acceptance Rate for Submissions to BMC
track

Acknowledgements
We thank all members of the Program Committee, Local Organizing
Committee and additional reviewers for their efforts and time. Special thanks
go to Rofina Yasmin Othman (Under Secretary, MOSTI), Amir Feisal Merican
bin Aljunid Merican (MOSTI), Mohd Basyaruddin Bin Abdul Rahman (MOSTI),
Suhaimi Napis (iDEC), M. Shahir Shamsir Omar (UTM) and M. Firdaus-Raih
(UKM) for supporting the conference organization, BJ Morrison McKay
(Executive Officer, ISCB) for advising us and promoting the conference, and
Kalaivani Nadarajah for running the conference secretariat. We are grateful
to ISCB Board Members Reinhard Schneider, Scott Markel and Paul Horton
for their commitment and insightful comments during the planning phase.
We also thank BioMed Central for the continued publication and material
support. CS and SR acknowledge the support of Kyushu Institute of
Technology and Macquarie University, respectively.
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 12
Supplement 3, 2011: Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics – First
ISCB Asia Joint Conference 2011 (InCoB/ISCB-Asia 2011): Computational
Biology. The full contents of the supplement are available online at http://
www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12?issue=S3.
Author details
Department of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Graduate School of Computer
Science and Systems Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Fukuoka
820-8502, Japan. 2Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, , Singapore 117597. 3Department
of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
04103 Leipzig, Germany. 4Department for Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, Faculty for Informatics, Technical University Munich, 85748 Garching,
Germany. 5School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and
Technology, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi Selangor D.E.,
Malaysia. 6Malaysia Genome Institute, Jalan Bangi, 43000 Kajang Selangor D.
E., Malaysia. 7Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences and ARC
Centre of Excellence in Bioinformatics, Macquarie University, Sydney NSW
2109, Australia.
1

Authors’ contributions
CS and SR (Program Committee Co-chairs) wrote the introduction and
managed the review and editorial processes. CS, SR, JK (Chair, ISCB
Conferences Committee), BR, TWT and SN (Conference Chair) jointly
contributed to the scientific program development and its implementation.
TWT supported the post-acceptance manuscript processing.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 30 November 2011

Schönbach et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S1
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S1

References
1. The Asia-Pacific Bioinformatics Network. [http://www.apbionet.org].
2. The International Society for Computational Biology. [http://www.iscb.
org].
3. Ranganathan S, Schönbach C, Nakai K, Tan TW: Asia Pacific bioinformatics:
a 2010 update. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S1.
4. Schönbach C, Nakai K, Tan TW, Ranganathan S: InCoB2010 – 9th
International Conference on Bioinformatics at Tokyo, Japan, September
26-28, 2010. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 7):S1.
5. Immunome Research. [http://immunome-research.net/].
6. Gaasterland T, Vingron M: Editorial. Bioinformatics 2011, 27(13):i1.
7. Ranganathan S, Schönbach C, Kelso J, Rost B, Nathan S, Tan TW: Towards
big data science in the decade ahead from ten years of InCoB and the
1st ISCB-Asia. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 13):S1.
8. Ali J, Paila U, Ranjan A: ApicoAlign: An alignment and sequence search
tool for apicomplexan proteins. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S6.
9. Kim M, Shin H, Chung TS, Joung JG, Kim JH: Extracting regulatory
modules from gene expression data by sequential pattern mining. BMC
Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S5.
10. Mohammed MH, Ghosh TS, Reddy RM, Reddy CVSK, Singh NK, Mande SS:
INDUS - A composition based approach for rapid and accurate
taxonomic classification of metagenomic sequences. BMC Genomics 2011,
12(Suppl 3):S4.
11. Lee L, Wang K, Li G, Xie Z, Wang Y, Xu J, Sun S, Pocalyko D, Bhak J, Kim C,
Lee KH, Jang YJ, Yeom YI, Yoo HS, Hwang S: Liverome: a curated database
of liver cancer-related gene signatures with self-contained context
information. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S3.
12. Yang Z, Yu Y, Yao L, Li G, Wang L, Hu Y, Wei H, Wang L, Hammami R,
Razavi R, Zhong Y, Liang X: DetoxiProt: an integrated database for
detoxification proteins. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S2.
13. Mohammed MH, Ghosh TS, Chadaram S, Mande SS: i-rDNA: Alignmentfree algorithm for rapid in silico detection of ribosomal gene fragments
from metagenomic sequence data sets. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):
S12.
14. Mitra S, Stärk M, Huson DH: Analysis of 16S rRNA environmental
sequences using MEGAN. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S17.
15. Ogura A, Lin M, Shigenobu Y, Fujiwara A, Ikeo K, Nagai S: Effective gene
collection from the metatranscriptome of marine microorganisms. BMC
Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S15.
16. Ong SS, Wickneswari R: Expression profile of small RNAs in Acacia
mangium secondary xylem tissue with contrasting lignin content - a
potential regulatory sequence in monolignol biosynthetic pathway. BMC
Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S13.
17. Garg G, Ranganathan S: In silico secretome analysis approach for next
generation sequencing transcriptomic data. BMC Genomics 2011,
12(Suppl 3):S14.
18. Batagov AO, Kuznetsov VA, Kurochkin IV: Identification of nucleotide
patterns enriched in secreted RNAs as putative cis-acting elements
targeting them to exosome nano-vesicles. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl
3):S18.
19. Okamura K, Yamashita R, Takimoto N, Nishitsuji K, Suzuki Y, Kusakabe TG,
Nakai K: Profiling ascidian promoters as the primordial type of vertebrate
promoter. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S7.
20. Zhao M, Qu H: High similarity of phylogenetic profiles of rate-limiting
enzymes with inhibitory relation in human, mouse, rat, budding yeast
and E. coli. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S10.
21. Chen TW, Wu TH, Wailap V, Ng WV, Lin WC: Interrogation of alternative
splicing events in duplicated genes during evolution. BMC Genomics
2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16.
22. Takenaka T, Seno S, Matsuda H: Perfect Hamming code with a hash table
for faster genome mapping. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S8.
23. Poo DCC, Cai S, Mah JTL: UASIS: universal automatic SNP identification
system. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S9.
24. Zhou H, Wong L: Comparative analysis and assessment of M. tuberculosis
H37Rv protein-protein interaction datasets. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl
3):S20.
25. Patil A, Nakai K, Kinoshita K: Assessing the utility of gene co-expression
stability in combination with correlation in the analysis of proteinprotein interaction networks. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S19.

Page 4 of 4

26. Kinjo AR, Kumaga Y, Dinh H, Takeuchi O, Standley DM: Functional
characterization of protein domains common to animal viruses and
mouse. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S21.
27. Wee LJK, Er EPS, Ng LFP, Tong JC: In silico prediction of the granzyme B
degradome. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S11.
28. Hyunh T, Khan JM, Ranganathan S: A comparative structural
bioinformatics analysis of inherited mutations in β-D-mannosidase
across multiple species reveals a genotype-phenotype correlation. BMC
Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S22.
29. Shia WC, Ku TH, Tsao YM, Hsia CH, Chang YM, Huang CH, Chung YC,
Hsu SL, Liang KW, Hsu FR: Genetic copy number variants in myocardial
infarction patients with hyperlipidemia. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):
S23.
30. Huang KH, Chen KT, Lu CL: Sorting permutations by cut-circularizelinearize-and-paste operations. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S26.
31. Toh SH, Prathipati P, Motakis E, Yanamandra PS, Kwoh CK, Kuznetsov V: A
robust tool for discriminative analysis and feature selection in paired
samples impacts the identification of the genes essential for
reprogramming lung tissue to adenocarcinoma. BMC Genomics 2011,
12(Suppl 3):S24.
32. Hsu CL, Huang YH, Hsu CT, Yang UC: Prioritizing disease candidate genes
by a gene interconnectedness-based approach. BMC Genomics 2011,
12(Suppl 3):S25.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-S3-S1
Cite this article as: Schönbach et al.: InCoB celebrates its tenth
anniversary as first joint conference with ISCB-Asia. BMC Genomics 2011
12(Suppl 3):S1.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
