<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Myoanatomy and serotonergic nervous system of the ctenostome Hislopia malayensis: evolutionary trends in bodyplan patterning of ectoprocta</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-11"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Thomas Schwaha"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

RESEARCH

Open Access

Myoanatomy and serotonergic nervous system of
the ctenostome Hislopia malayensis: evolutionary
trends in bodyplan patterning of ectoprocta
Thomas Schwaha1*, Timothy S Wood2 and Andreas Wanninger1

Abstract
Background: Ectoprocta is a large lophotrochozoan clade of colonial suspension feeders comprising over 5.000
extant species. Their phylogenetic position within the Lophotrochzoa remains controversially discussed, but also
the internal relationships of the major ectoproct subclades -Phylactolaemata, Stenolaemata, and Gymnolaemata remains elusive. To gain more insight into the basic configuration of ectoproct muscle systems for phylogenetic
considerations, we analysed the adult myoanatomy and the serotonergic nervous system as well as myogenesis in
budding stages of the ctenostome Hislopia malayensis.
Results: In adults, the serotonergic nervous system is restricted to the lophophoral base with a high concentration
in the cerebral ganglion and serotonergic perikarya between each pair of tentacles. Prominent smooth apertural
muscles extend from the basal cystid wall to each lateral side of the vestibular wall. The musculature of the
tentacle sheath consists of regular strands of smooth longitudinal muscles. Each tentacle is supplied with two
bands of longitudinal muscles that show irregular striation. At the lophophoral base several muscles are present: (i)
Short muscle fibres that proximally diverge from a single point from where they split distally into two separate
strands. (ii) Proximally of the first group are smooth, longitudinal fibres that extend to the proximal-most side of
the lophophoral base. (iii) Smooth muscle fibres, the buccal dilatators, traverse obliquely towards the pharynx, and
(iv) a circular ring of smooth muscle fibres situated distally of the buccal dilatators. Retractor muscles are mainly
smooth with short distal striated parts. The foregut consists mainly of striated ring musculature with only few
longitudinal muscle fibres in the esophagus, while the remaining parts of the digestive tract solely exhibit smooth
musculature. During budding, apertural and retractor muscles are first to appear, while the parietal muscles appear
at a later stage.
Conclusions: The apertural muscles show high similarity within Ectoprocta and always consist of two sets of
muscles. Gymnolaemates and Phylactolaemates show clear differences within their digestive tract musculature, the
former showing smooth and longitudinal muscles to a much greater extent than the latter. The complex
musculature at the lophophoral base appears promising for inferring phylogenetic relationships, but sufficient
comparative data are currently lacking.

Introduction
The lophotrochozoan phylum Ectoprocta consists of
benthic, colonial filter feeders that live on various substrates. It currently contains over 5.000 extant and
approximately 20.000 described extinct species. They
are currently assigned to three taxa, whereby the
* Correspondence: thomas.schwaha@univie.ac.at
1
University of Vienna, Department of Morphology, Althanstraße 14, 1090
Vienna, Austria
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Phylactolaemata represent a small group of solely freshwater-inhabiting ectoprocts, while the Stenolaemata
(with the only remaining extant taxon Cyclostomata)
and the Gymnolaemata mainly constitute marine animals. Within the Gymnolaemata two distinct groups,
the Ctenostomata and Cheilostomata, are recognized
[1]. The relationships between these higher taxa are currently not well understood: The Phylactolaemata are
considered monophyletic, while the Cheilostomata and
Stenolaemata have been considered both monophyletic

© 2011 Schwaha et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

[2] or polyphyletic [3,4]. Due to their calcified protective
skeletons, the latter two taxa show a long fossil record
yielding more insight into their evolution. In contrast,
the fossil record of the non-mineralized Ctenostomata is
poor [5] and only represented by casts of borings (e.g.
[6]) and bioimmurations (i.e., overgrowth by encrusting,
mineralized organisms, cf. [7]).
There is a broad consensus that “Ctenostomata” is
paraphyletic and that ctenostome-like ancestors have led
independently to the origin of the calcified exoskeletons
of Cheilostomata and Stenolaemata [4,5,8,9]. Accordingly, the ctenostomes are of particular interest for studies dealing with ectoproct evolution. Due to the
scarcity of their fossil record, the study of extant ctenostome ectoprocts appears particularly promising for
further insights into ectoproct origins and phylogenetic
relationships. To date, ctenostome phylogenies are
mostly based on features of the cystid and colony morphology [5,10], while details on the anatomy of the soft
body (polypide) remain less investigated and are thus
widely neglected in phylogenetic analyses.
Myoanatomical features and neurotransmitter distribution, for example serotonin or FMRF-amide, have
recently been used for phylogenetic inferences among
lophotrochozoans [11-13]. Thereby, several immunocytochemical investigations have dealt with the neuromuscular system of different ectoproct larval types [14-21],
whereas no such study is as of yet available for adult
ectoprocts. Data on the development of the zooids and
the ontogenetic appearance of certain muscle systems
have been used to elucidate ectoproct internal relationships [3,22-25]. Myoanatomical details of the digestive
tract have also been proposed to be useful to discriminate certain subtaxa [26,27]. By contrast, characters of
the nervous system have never been considered on a
broad, comparative scale for systematic or phylogenetic
deductions.
Hislopiid ctenostomes comprise only seven freshwater
species and are the sole family within the superfamily
Hislopioidea. The latter belongs to the paraphyletic ‘carnosans’, which are regarded as primitive within the
Euctenostomata (sensu [25]), and which have retained a
simple colonial morphology similar to the proposed
cheilostome-like ancestor (see e.g. [5,9,22,25,28]). Their
supposedly relatively basal position within Euctenostomata (Figure 1; [5,10,22,25]) renders the Hislopiidae an
important model taxon for inferring ectoproct phylogeny and evolution. To gain more insight into the basic
configuration of ectoproct muscle systems and to evaluate their potential use for phylogenetic studies, we analyzed the adult myoanatomy and serotonergic nervous
system as well as myogenesis during budding in Hislopia
malayensis Annandale, 1916.

Page 2 of 16

Materials and methods
Animals

Colonies of Hislopia malayensis Annandale, 1916 were
collected from the pond of the Faculty of Fisheries of
the Kasetsart University in Bangkok (see [29]). Specimens were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.01 M
phosphate buffer (PBS) containing 0.01% NaN 3 for
1 hour at room temperature. Subsequently, they were
rinsed three times for 20 min and stored in the same
solution.
Immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy

Some colonies were dissected prior to staining to
increase tissue permeability. For F-actin staining, specimens were permeabilized in PBS containing 4% TritonX (PBT) for 1 hour, followed by overnight incubation in
a 1:40 dilution of AlexaFluor 488 phalloidin (Molecular
Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) in PBT at 4°C. Then, the specimens were rinsed three times in PBS. For staining of
the serotonergic nervous system, pieces of H. malayensis
colonies were transferred to 6% normal goat serum
(NGS; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in PBT
(block-PBT) overnight at 4°C. Subsequently, a polyclonal
rabbit anti-serotonin antibody (Zymed, San Francisco,
CA, USA) was applied at a concentration of 1:400 in
block-PBT for 24 hours at 4°C. Then, the specimens
were rinsed several times in block-PBT for 6 hours at 4°
C prior to application of a secondary fluorochrome-conjugated antibody (goat anti-rabbit AlexaFluor 594, Molecular Probes) in block-PBT at a concentration of 1:200
for 24 hours at 4°C. Specimens were then washed three
to four times in PBS for about 6 hours. Negative controls were performed by omitting the primary antibody
and yielded no signal. Nuclei were stained by adding a
few drops of DAPI (Invotrogen, 3 μg/ml) for 15-20 minutes, followed by three short washes in PBS. Specimens
were mounted in Fluoromount G (Southern Biotech,
Birmingham, AL, USA) on standard microscope slides.
Analysis and image acquisition was performed on a
Leica DM IRBE microscope equipped with a Leica TCS
SP2 confocal unit (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Confocal image stacks were recorded with
0.5-1μm step size along the Z-axis. Images stacks were
captured as maximum intensity projections or further
processed as volume renderings with Amira 4.1 software
(Mercury Computer Systems, Chelmsford, MA, USA).

Results
Myoanatomy of adult Hislopia malayensis

Colonies of Hislopia malayensis form simple encrusting
sheets on a variety of artificial or natural substrates [30].
Its individual zooids are flat and oval-shaped and are
interconnected by rosette-shaped communication pores.

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Phylogenetic system of the Ctenostomata, modified after (a) Jebram (1986) and (b) Todd (2000). (a) The phylogenetic
reconstruction of Jebram is mainly based on cystid and muscle differentiation. (b) The work of Todd (b) has in particular included characters of
fossil ctenostomes.

Each zooid consists of a more or less rigid, chitinous to
hyaline protective cystid and a flexible polypide that
contains all major organs of the zooid (Figure 2). On
each side of the zooid a series of four to five parietal
muscle bundles are associated with the cystid wall. They
originate from the basal attachment site and traverse the
coelomic cavity to the frontal cystid wall, where the orifice is situated (Figure 3a, b). The inner plug of each
communication pore shows a high number of actin-

filaments, which is highest in its periphery and decreases
towards the center (Figure 4h).
In retracted zooids the polypide is attached to the
cystid by an almost rectangularly invaginated vestibulum
that extends from the orifice on the frontal cystid wall
to the diaphragm at the distalmost end of the invaginated tentacle sheath (Figure 2). Prominent apertural
muscles extend from the basal cystid wall to each lateral
side of the vestibular wall. They consist of smooth

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Schematic overview of a retracted Hislopia malayensis zooid showing the main components of the polypide. The orifice at the
distal end of the zooid reaches into the vesitbulum, which is separated from the proximally situated tentacle sheath by the diaphragm. Within
the tentacle sheath the tentacle crown (i.e. the lophophore) is situated. The mouth opening is situated at the lophoral base and leads into the
broad pharynx which is followed by an elongated, tube-like esophagus. The latter continues into the prominent proventriculus from where the
digestive tract leads into the voluminous caecum. From the caecum the intestine leads into the anus, which terminates in the tentacle sheath.
Abbreviations: a - anus, at - atrium, cae - caecum, cw - cystid wall, d - diaphragm, es - esophagus, int - intestine, lb - lophophore base, o orifice, pv - proventriculus, t - tentacle, ts - tentacle sheath, v - vestibulum, vw - vestibular wall.

muscle fibres and extend along the entire length of the
vestibular wall (Figure 3a, b; 4b). On the frontal and lateral side, the vestibular wall shows a regular net of
smooth ring and longitudinal musculature, whereas
diagonal and longitudinal muscles are present on the
basal side (Figure 4b). A sphincter at the diaphragm

(diaphragmatic or atrial sphincter) separates the vestibulum from the space enclosed by the tentacle sheath, the
atrium (Figure 2;3a;4f). The tentacle sheath stretches
from the diaphragm to the lophophoral base. Its musculature consists of regular strands of smooth longitudinal
muscles that run from its distalmost end approximately

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

Page 5 of 16

Figure 3 Maximum-intensity projections of confocal laserscanning image stacks providing an overview of the muscle system of a
single zooid of Hislopia malayensis. (a) F-actin staining. Solely the parietal muscles are associated with the cystid. Most muscles of the zooid
are present at the distally situated aperture, which continues proximally into the polypide. Prominent retractor muscles run from the distal end
of the zooid to the lophophoral base. From the lophophoral base the digestive tract starts with the pharynx, followed by the esophagus, which
both possess mostly striated ring musculature. The adjoining proventriculus is the most prominent region of the digestive tract and possesses
only smooth ring musculature. The caecum carries several distinct ring muscles and two longitudinal muscles at its proximal tip. The intestine
possesses only smooth, longitudinal musculature. (b) Different zooid of H. malayensis similar as in (a) but also with cell nuclei stained with DAPI
to provide a clearer picture of the cystid wall and its outlines. Also note the early bud on the right side. Abbreviations: am - apertural muscles,
cae - caecum, clm - caecal longitudinal muscle, cp - communication pore, cw - cystid wall, ds - diaphragmatic sphincter, es - esophagus (cardia),
int - intestine, lb - lophophore base, o - orifice, pm - parietal muscles, pv - proventriculus, rm - retractor muscles, ts - tentacle sheath,
v - vestibulum, vwm - vestibular wall musculature, yb - young bud.

to the region of the anal area (Figure 4f). At its proximal
end, the tentacle sheath continues into the lophophore.
Each tentacle is supplied with two bands of longitudinal
muscles that show irregular striation (Figure 4b, c, e). A
distinct concentration of actin is present at the distal tip
of each tentacle (Figure 4c). Proximally, the longitudinal
tentacle musculature extends to the lophophoral base.
At the lophophoral base four groups of muscles are present: Below the musculature of each tentacle, short muscle fibres are found that proximally diverge from a
single point from where they split distally into two separate strands. These muscle elements are approximately
V-shaped with some fibres traversing medially (Figure
4a, e). A second set of muscles is situated proximally to
the first group and consists of smooth, longitudinal
fibres that extend to the proximal-most side of the
lophophoral base (Figure 4a, e). From that point smooth
muscle fibres, the buccal dilatators, traverse obliquely
towards the pharynx (Figure 4a, e). At the site of the
cerebral ganglion, two pairs of buccal dilatators are present. The first pair inserts more proximally on the pharynx, whereas the second pair attaches more distally to

the pharynx (Figure 4e). A circular ring of smooth muscle fibres is situated in the region of the mouth, medially
to the proximal-most part of the lophophoral base, and
slightly above the pharynx (Figure 4e). The retractor
muscles of the polypide originate from the proximal
cystid wall and insert at the entire lophophoral base
except for the ganglion area (Figure 3a; Figure 4a, e).
The fibres of the retractor muscles appear smooth for
most of their length. In some cases, however, the distalmost part of the fibres appears cross-striated (Figure
4g). The pharynx below the mouth opening is provided
with several narrow bands of circular musculature
which shows distinct cross-striation (Figure 3a;4e). The
pharynx continues into the esophagus, which is an elongated tube. Similar to the pharynx, its musculature is
mainly composed of obliquely striated ring musculature
(Figure 2;3a;4a, e), but few delicate longitudinal muscle
fibres could be observed as well (Figure 4d). The following cardia or proventriculus is bulbous and possesses
densely packed smooth ring musculature (Figure 3a;4a, i).
The digestive tract continues into the voluminous caecum which for the most part carries bands of smooth

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

Page 6 of 16

Figure 4 Myoanatomical details of the polypide of Hislopia malayensis. All but (a) are maximum-intensity projections of confocal
laserscanning image stacks. (a) Volume rendering of the confocal stack of the myoanatomy of a dissected polypide showing most of the
musculature of the digestive tract. (b) Oblique view on the vestibular wall showing apertural muscles and vestibular wall muscles. Diagonal
vestibular wall muscles can be distinguished on the basal side. (c) Detail of the tentacle musculature and muscular concentration at the tentacles
tips (open arrowheads). (d) Musculature of the esophagus showing thin longitudinal muscle fibres. (e) Lophophoral base musculature and parts
of the digestive tract. Asterisk marks a second pair of buccal dilatators. (f) Detail of the tentacle sheath musculature and apertural muscles. (g)
Magnified view of the distal portion of the retractor muscles displayed in (e). (h) Muscular elements of a rosette plate between individual zooids.
(i) Musculature of the proventriculus and adjacent parts of the digestive tract. Double arrowheads marks fine longitudinal muscle fibres in the
caecum. Abbreviations: a - anal area, am - apertural muscles, bd - buccal dilatators, brm - ring muscle at the lophophore base, cae - caecum, clm
- caecal longitudinal muscle, ds - diaphragmatic sphincter, dvm - diagonal vestibular wall musculature, es - esophagus, int - intestine, lb lophophore base, les - longitudinal musculature of the esophagus, llb - longitdunal muscles at the lophophore base, pm - parietal muscles, pv proventriculus, rm - retractor muscles, tm - longitudinal tentacle muscles, ts - tentacle sheath, vlb - v-shaped muscles at the lophophore base,
vwm - vestibular wall musculature, yb - young bud.

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

ring musculature (Figure 3a, b;4a, e, i). From the proximal end of the caecum two prominent longitudinal muscles extend distally. Halfway of the stomach they split
into two bundles (Figure 3a, b;4e). A few sparse longitudinal muscle fibres are also present between the circular
muscle bands (Figure 4i). The intestine, which adjoins
the stomach, carries smooth longitudinal muscles over
its entire length and terminates in the tentacle sheath
(Figure 3a;4a, f, i).
Myogenesis in budding zooids

Buds start as distal or lateral outgrowths of the cystid of
a zooid that soon become constricted off from the
mother zooid (Figure 3b). Further development leads to
a tube-like elongation of the cystid, slightly broadened
at its distal tip. In the middle of the bud the polypide
anlage develops. The retractor and apertural muscles are
first to appear in the bud. The anlagen of the retractor
muscles are V-shaped: Proximally, they originate from
the cystid wall from a single site, whereas distally the
bundles split and insert at the developing polypide. The
apertural muscles form as two small bands on each side
of the prospective aperture (Figure 5a).
In a later budding stage with distinct tentacle anlagen,
the cystid has broadened distally. The retractor and
apertural muscles have only slightly changed, but possess more muscle fibres (Figure 5b). Additional muscles
have not formed at this stage of budding. Further in
development, the cystid widens even more on its lateral
sides. Compared to the previous stage, the widening has
also progressed towards the proximal pole of the zooid.
Three to four distinct parietal muscle bands appear laterally to the developing polypide. Besides the much
enlarged retractor and apertural muscles, musculature of
the digestive tract has started to form (Figure 5c). In the
oldest stage analysed, the cystid exhibits the oval shape,
characteristic of adults. The developing polypide already
shows most of the adult musculature. In addition, differentiation and regionalization of the digestive tract has
commenced and its corresponding musculature has
started to form. The lophophoral base and the tentacles
already show all muscular elements that occur in the
adults. The apertural muscles are prominent and ring
musculature of the duplicature as well as the diaphragmatic sphincter is present. Only the tentacle sheath is
still devoid of muscles (Figure 5d).
Serotonergic nervous system

The serotonergic nervous system in adult zooids is
restricted to the lophophoral base of each polypide (Figure 6a, b). The highest concentration is found in the
cerebral ganglion, from where neurites extend circumpharyngeally. On the oral side there are three serotonergic perikarya at the base of each pair of tentacles, which

Page 7 of 16

are connected to the circumpharyngeal neurites to form
a nerve ring. At the remaining tentacles, neuronal perikarya are present as well. These are, however, more
apart than the three oral ones and are directly connected to the ganglion via delicate neurites. From each
perikaryon short neurites extend into each of the two
tentacles.

Discussion
Homology of apertural muscles and their phylogenetic
significance

Apertural muscles are present in all three ectoproct subtaxa, the Phylactolaemata, the Stenolaemata (with the
sole extant taxon Cyclostomata) and the Gymnolaemata,
which include the Ctenostomata and Cheilostomata. A
review of the existing literature shows that their terminology is utterly confusing and inconsistent. Common
terms found for apertural muscles are for example “parieto-vaginal muscles” [26], “parieto-diaphragmatic muscles” [31], “parieto-atrial muscles” [32], “parietovestibular muscles” [33], “pyramidal muscles” [34] or
“longitudinal parietal muscles” [35]. The latter term has
been established according to the notion that apertural
muscles are derived parietal muscles [28,33] and is also
frequently used in more recent compendia on ectoprocts
[35-37]. A comparison of these muscles is most easily
performed among retracted zooids (Figure 7). In all
ectoproct subtaxa, retracted zooids show a distalmost
invaginated portion of the cystid wall, termed the vestibular wall, which is separated from the proximally adjoining tentacle sheath by a diaphragm. At the diaphragm a
strong sphincter is present in all three subtaxa (Figure
7).
The Phylactolaemata, the suggested sistergroup of the
remaining ectoprocts [38,39], have two different apertural muscle systems: the duplicature bands and the vestibular dilatators (Figure 7a, b). The duplicature bands
are peritoneal bands containing longitudinal muscles
fibres that emerge from the lateral bodywall and insert
either directly at the diaphragm (as in the lophopodids:
Figure 7b; Lophopus: [34,40]; Lophopodella: [41]) or at
the tentacle sheath below the diaphragm in the remaining taxa (Figure 7a; Cristatella: pers. obs., Fredericella:
[34], Pectinatella: [33,34,42]; Plumatella: [34,43]; Stolella: [44]). Vestibular dilatators consist of separate muscle fibres that traverse the coelom distally of the
duplicature bands. In all phylactolaemates they are
loosely arranged and run from the lateral bodywall
towards the vestibular wall. They attach to the entire
area of the vestibular wall, starting at the area of the
diaphragm and projecting up to the distal parts of the
vestibular wall.
Cyclostome ectoprocts show a peculiar coelomic condition. In contrast to all other ectoprocts, the peritoneal

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

Page 8 of 16

Figure 5 Myogenesis during the budding process of Hislopia malayensis. Maximum-intensity projections of confocal laserscanning image
stacks. (a) Early budding stage showing the polypide anlage and the first anlagen of the developing apertural and retractor muscles at its distal
and proximal side, respectively. (b) More advanced budding stage with distinct tentacle anlagen (asterisk), in which the cystid of the bud has
widened distally and the apertural and retractor muscle anlagen have grown and are more pronounced. (c) Advanced budding stage where first
anlagen of the digestive tract musculature have formed and the parietal muscles are present laterally of the polypide anlage. Both, the apertural
and the retractor muscle anlagen are most prominent. The former consists of loosely smooth muscle fibres, whereas the prospective retractor
muscles have differentiated into two elongated muscle fibre bundles. (d) Almost completely developed zooid where most parts of the digestive
tract, especially the most prominent proventriculus, are formed similar to the adult. Compare to Figures 3 and 4 for details on the musculature
of adult specimens. Abbreviations: am - apertural muscles, ama - apertural muscle anlage, cae - caecum, ds - diaphragmatic sphincter, dt - distal
tip of the cystid of the bud, dtm - developing digestive tract musculature, ep - epizooic organism, int - intestine, lb - lophophore base, pa polypide anlage, pma - parietal muscle anlage, pm - parietal muscles, pv - proventriculus, rm - retractor muscles, rma - retractor muscle anlage,
vwm - vestibular wall musculature.

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

Page 9 of 16

Figure 6 The adult serotonergic nervous system of Hislopia malayensis. Maximum-intensity projections of confocal laserscanning image
stacks. (a) Lateral view of the lophophoral base showing the cerebral ganglion at the proximal side and parts of the circumpharyngeal neurite
bundles emanating to serotonergic perikarya at the lophophoral base. From the latter, two neurites are distinguishable at the base of each
adjacent tentacle. (b) Oral view of the serotonergic nervous system at the lophophoral base. The highest concentration of serotonin is found in
the cerebral ganglion on the left side. At the oral side, three serotonergic perikarya are present associated with the circumpharyngeal neurite
bundle. Further neurites extend towards the serotonergic perikarya from the ganglion and the circumpharyngeal ring. Abbreviations: cg cerebral ganglion, cpn - circumpharyngeal neurites, bp - perikarya at the lophophore base, obp - perikarya on the oral side of the lophophoral
base, nt - neurites extending into the tentacles.

layer of the endocyst is detached from the epidermis to
form a coelomic sac, the membranous sac, around the
polypide (Figure 7c; [33,45]). However, topographically
similar to the duplicature bands of phylactolaemates,
cyclostomes possess an attachment organ. It consists of
ligaments that attach the polypide and membranous sac
to the skeletal walls of the zooid (Figure 7c; [45,46]).
Supposedly homologous structures of the phylactolaemate vestibular dilatators are present as few muscle
fibres ("musculi extensores vestibuli” sensu [47], “longitudinal ectodermal muscle” sensu [45]), that run from
the distalmost bodywall (i.e., terminal membrane in
cyclostomes) to the diaphgram (Figure 7c).
In principle, the Gymnolaemata (Cteno- and Cheilostomata) also possess two muscular systems. First, homologs
of the duplicature bands, which are most commonly
termed “parieto-vaginal bands”, second, vestibular
muscles that are always prominent in cteno- and
cheilostomes.
Protoctenostome, i.e. benedeniporoidean [25], polypide
morphology is only insufficiently known. ‘Parieto-vaginal
muscles’ were mentioned for Benedenipora catenata
[48], but their description and illustration are too
incomplete for drawing any comparisons. The vestibular
muscles in ctenostomes usually form two portions, a
small proximal portion of muscular bundles that insert
at the diaphragm, the parieto-diaphragmatic muscles,
and a large distal portion that attaches to the vestibular
wall. The latter muscles are often referred to as parieto-

vaginal muscles. To avoid confusion with the parietovaginal muscle bands, we refer to them as “distal vestibular muscles”. By comparison with the potential outgroups, the Phylactolaemata and Cyclostomata, the
presence of these two sets of muscles can be regarded
as the plesiomorphic condition. An erect and simple,
uniserial colony morphology is regarded as ancestral
among ctenostomes [5,22], a condition that among “carnosan” ctenostomes is most closely exhibited by the
paludicelloideans. They possess parieto-vaginal bands
and their vestibular muscles are present as parieto-diaphragmatic muscles that consist of few fibres closely
adjoining the distal vestibular muscles (Figure 7d; Paludicella: [49-52]).
The ‘carnosan’ superfamilies Alcyonidioidea and
Hislopioidea are both considered early offshoots within
ctenostomes (Figure 1). Alcyonidioideans possess parieto-vaginal bands (Alcyonidium: [53-55]; Elzerina:
depicted, but not labelled by [1]) and their vestibular
muscles show a distinct separation into parieto-diaphragmatic and distal vestibular muscles (Figure 7g; e.g.,
Alcyonidium: [53]). Within the Hislopioidea the current
study on Hislopia malayensis shows that parieto-vaginal
bands are absent and only vestibular muscles are present, as reported by Annandale [52]. A similar arrangement of muscles is present in H. corderoi [56,57]. Only
for H. lacustris a set of muscles resembling parieto-vaginal bands has been illustrated [58]. However, the investigated specimens were not well preserved and differences

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

Page 10 of 16

Figure 7 Schematic representation of apertural areas of retracted ectoproct zooids with associated muscles. The distal zooidal part
points upwards. Epidermal layers are drawn in continuous lines and coelomic epithelia dashed. Tentacles are displayed in dark grey and the
diaphragm in orange. (a + b) Apertural muscles in phylactolaemates consist of sparse vestibular dilatators and duplicature bands that either
insert at the diaphragm (b) or at the tentacle sheath (a). (c) Cyclostomes possess bundles of vestibular dilatators that extend from the distal
bodywall to the diaphragm. Comparable to the duplicature bands, cyclostomes possess an attachment organ built by peritoneal strands. (d - h)
Ctenostomes. (d) Paludicelloidean ctenostomes as Paludicella show homologs of phylactolaemate duplicature bands, parieto-vaginal bands, and
prominent vestibular dilatators, which are subdivided into the proximal parieto-diaphragmatic muscles and the distal parieto-vestibular muscles.
(e + f) Ctenostomes forming elongated peristomes/stolons usually lack parieto-vaginal bands and show a strong separation of parietodiaphragmatic and distal parieto-vestibular musculature. Alcyonidioideans (g) possess parieto-vaginal bands, whereas hislopioideans (h) lack
them. The vestibular dilatators consist of a single portion in hislopioideans. In Alcyonidioideans they are separated into parieto-diaphragmatic
and distal vestibular musculature. (i) Cheilostomes possess parieto-vaginal bands and parieto-diaphragmatic musculature as found in
ctenostomes. The aperture in cheilostomes is closed by the opercular occlusors - most likely modified distal vestibular muscles. Abbreviations:
a - atrium, ao - attachment organ, db - duplicature bands, dvm - distal vestibular muscles, ms - membranous sac, oocl - operculum occlusors,
op - operculum, pdm - parieto-diaphragmatic muscles, pvb - parieto-vaginal bands, sph - sphincter, v - vestibulum, vd - vestibular dilatators.

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

in the muscular system were stated to be absent among
different species of Hislopia [52]. Accordingly, it is
appropriate to assume general absence of parieto-vaginal
bands for hislopiid ectoprocts. In contrast to the Alcyonidioidea, vestibular muscles of Hislopia show no
separation into parieto-diaphragmatic and distal vestibular muscles, but instead extend over the entire length of
the vestibular wall (Figure 7h).
Arachnidioidean ctenostomes display a wide range
regarding the length of the peristome and are mainly
characterized by cystid appendages which often anastomose among individual zooids of a colony. Details on
their polypide morphology are mostly restricted to the
genus Nolella [59,60], which always has an elongated
peristome. So far, no parieto-vaginal bands have been
recorded for this genus (Figure 7e).
The Victorelloidea, Walkerioidea, and Vesicularioidea
are characterized by peristome-elongation/trophon or
stolon formation [22,25] with often reduced parietovaginal bands. In the latter two clades, the distal parieto-vaginal muscles are spatially more displaced from
the parieto-diaphragmatic muscles (Figure 7f; e.g.,
Bowerbankia: [26]) than in the victorelloideans (Victorella: [26]) or the arachnidioideans (e.g., Nolella: [59]).
Within the Walkerioidea only Hypophorella expansa, a
species considered to be basal within this clade [25],
possesses distinct parieto-vaginal bands [53,61]. Indications for the latter are also present in Farrella repens
[62], while all other walkerioideans have reduced them
(Aeverillia: [63]; Harmeriella: [64]; Walkeria: [65,66]).
Similarly, a single species among victorelloideans, Sundanella sibogae, possesses parieto-vaginal bands [67],
while other genera have reduced them (Pottsiella:
[68,69]; Victorella: [26,70]). From our current knowledge, all Vesicularioidea lack parieto-vaginal bands
(Bowerbankia: [26,52,59,71,72]; Buskia: [73]; Spathipora:
[74]; Terebripora: [75]; Vesicularia: [76]).
Parieto-vaginal bands are present in malacostegan ectoprocts (Table 1), which are commonly regarded as a
paraphyletic to all remaining Cheilostomata [77]. Consequently, parieto-vaginal bands are probably part of the
ancestral cheilostome bauplan and may have been present in the last common cheilostome ancestor (Figure 7i).
Since they have also been recorded in species from
almost all “higher” groupings of cheilostomes (Table 1
and references therein [31,59,78-92]), it seems reasonable
to assume that they are present in most cheilostomes.
Cheilostomes have retained the parieto-diaphragmatic
muscles. Distally to these muscles, opercular occlusors
are situated (Figure 7i). Based on their similar topology
and insertion points, we consider the occlusors as a modification of the distal vestibular muscles. As a consequence, we reject the notion that apertural muscles,
including the opercular occlusors, are phylogenetically

Page 11 of 16

derived from parietal muscles [28,33]. As shown above,
apertural muscles are present in all three ectoproct subclades including the Phylactolaemata and Stenolaemata,
which both lack parietal muscles.
Several authors have regarded the cheilostome ancestors to be Arachnidium-like [1,28], but as previously
mentioned, soft body morphology is almost unknown
for the genus. The most precise data are available for
the genus Nolella, which forms elongated peristomes.
Similar to Nolella, species with long peristomial tubes
that belong to other superfamilies commonly lack the
parieto-vaginal bands. Since parieto-vaginal bands were
probably present in the ctenostome-like ancestor of
cheilostomes, it would be of particular interest to study
arachnidioidean species with short peristomes, such as
Arachnidium fibrosum.
Lophophoral and digestive tract musculature

The tentacle musculature consists of two longitudinal
muscle bands in most ectoprocts investigated to date
[33]. Within Phylactolaemata, Fredericella is an exception in having only one longitudinal muscle band [93].
In general, the tentacle musculature is smooth in phylactolaemates and cheilostomates, whereas striated
myofibrils have been reported for ctenostomes and
cyclostomes. However, only for phylactolaemates several
species were analysed in detail by electron microscopy
[33,93]. Accounts on cyclostome tentacle muscles rely
on the classical study of Borg [47], whereas only a single
species of both cteno- [94] and cheilostomes [95] were
analysed on the ultrastructural level. We observed striation of the longitudinal tentacle musculature of Hislopia
malayensis, which supports the previous notion that ctenostomes possess striated tentacle musculature.
As the center of the nervous system and source of
feeding and sensory structures, the lophophoral base
represents the most complex part of the polypide [33].
However, most of our current knowledge resides in its
description of the cheilostome Cryptosula pallasiana
[95]. Buccal dilatators are present in this species, but
were also described for the cheilostome Bugula simplex
[59], the ctenostome Bowerbankia pustulosa [96], Crisia
eburnea, and other cyclostomes [47,97]. They are
smooth in H. malayensis, C. pallasiana, and B. simplex,
while they were reported striated for B. pustulosa. A
second pair of dilatators inserting above the ganglion as
in H. malayensis has not been reported for any other
species. In C. pallasiana, so-called “basal transverse tentacle muscles” are present at the base of each pair of
tentacles that probably act as antagonist to the tentacle
musculature [95]. These muscles are absent in H.
malayensis, but possibly the circular ring muscle at the
lophophoral base of this species may be a homologous
structure. The two muscle groups at the lophophoral

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

Page 12 of 16

Table 1 List of cheilostome genera where parieto-vaginal bands have been found
Cheilostomata
Suborder

Superfamily

Malacostegina

Membraniporoidea

Family

Genus

Reference

“Anasca”

Flustroidea

Membranipora

[30,77,78]

Electra

[58,79,80]

Flustridae

Flustra

[81,82]

Carbasea

Flustrina

Membraniporidae
Electridae

[81,83-85]

Calloporoidea

Tendridae

Tendra

[86]

Buguloidea
Microporoidea

Bugulidae
Microporidae

Bugula
Andreella

[58]
[87]

Steginoporellidae

Steginoporella

[84]

Ascophoran
Hippothoomorpha

Hippothooidea

Hippothoidae

Antarctothoa

[88]

Umbonulomorpha

Lepralielloidea

Umbonulidae

Umbonula

[83]

Lepraliomorpha

Schizoporelloidea

Cryptosulidae

Cryptosula

[58,89]

Eminooeciidae

Eminooecia

[90]

Smittinidae

Parasmittina

[91]

Smittinoidea

base below each longitudinal tentacle muscle have to
our knowledge not been reported for any other ectoproct so far. Functionally, they remain difficult to interpret, but they could act in lophophore movement and
rotation. To clarify their function, more detailed observations on living specimens, e.g., by video microscopy,
are required.
In several ctenostomes the vacuolated cells of the
pharyngeal epithelium possess distinct striated muscle
fibres on their lateral walls. For Zoobotryon verticillatum
[98] and Alcyonidium polyoum [99] ultrastructural analysis revealed that the pharyngeal cells along with these
fibres represent a prominent myoepithelium. Light
microscopical observations on such fibres were also conducted for the ctenostomes Alcyonidium hirsutum [100],
Victorella pavida [101], and Bowerbankia pustulosa
[96]. This specialized pharynx acts as a strong sucking
pump for particle capture and has also been observed in
the cheilostomes Bugula flabellata [100], B. neritina
[102], and Cryptosula pallasiana [103]. In the current
study we found no muscular elements in the pharyngeal
cells of Hislopia malayensis. The only musculature associated with the pharynx consists of striated ring muscles
surrounding the pharyngeal epithelium. Pharyngeal ring
musculature has been described by the above mentioned
authors for the respective species and is, when mentioned, striated. This musculature is also present in Flustrellidra hispida [104] and Zoobotryon verticillatum
[105]. Longitudinal muscles in the pharynx were only
found in B. pustulosa [96]. Most phylactolaemate
bryozoans possess striated ring musculature in the pharynx as well [40,106]; only in Asajirella gelatinosa longitudinal muscles have been observed [33]. Cyclostome
pharyngeal musculature consists of striated ring

musculature and few longitudinal muscle fibres [47]. In
conclusion, striated ring musculature appears to be a
common trait of the ectoproct pharynx, whereas longitudinal fibres only occur in a few of the species studied
so far. However, drawing the border between the pharynx and adjoining esophagus is often difficult in many
ectoprocts and mostly only discernable by the ciliation
pattern [107]. Accordingly, some of the observed longitudinal pharyngeal musculature could actually belong to
the esophagus, which possesses few longitudinal fibres
in H. malayensis (this study), F. hispida [104], and
B. pustulosa [96].
The differentiation of the cardiac portion of the stomach or proventriculus into a gizzard occurs in some
cheilostomes and cyclostomes, but is more frequently
found in ctenostomes [33,108]. In the latter, the gizzard
was previously considered to have evolved only once
[25], while other authors argue for its multiple independent origin [108]. Internally, it is lined by cuticular
plates or teeth used for crushing ingested food particles.
In hislopiids the proventriculus carries a smooth cuticular lining in all species except for Echinella placoides,
where it contains several spirally arranged cuticular
ridges [109]. Functionally, it was either interpreted to
act as a mere storage organ or as crushing organ for
ingested food particles [110]. In H. malayensis the inner
walls of the proventriculus never form contact and food
particles are very small that do not require grinding. In
the proventriculus, there is a very active exchange of
undigested whole particles: the distal sphincter closes;
then a slow wave of tight constriction starts from the
proximal end which then moves distally. It squeezes the
contents and forces them to spurt back through the narrow constriction, between cuticular ridges, towards the

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

proximal end. In addition, particles are pushed back and
forth between the lower proventriculus and the upper
caecum. This is achieved mostly by cilia in these two
regions but also by spasmodic contractions of the caecum (Wood, personal observation). The purpose of all
this movement is unclear. The effect may be to break
apart any particles that cling together and not to grind
any particles.
In H. malayensis the remaining stomach or caecum
possesses mainly smooth circular muscle bands with
two prominent longitudinal muscles at the proximal
side and few longitudinal fibres between the circular
muscles. A similar muscular system of the caecum has
been described for F. hispida [104], Z. verticillatum
[105], B. pustulosa [96], and the cheilostome C. pallasiana [103]. The circular muscle bands in these species
are not adjoining, but keep a distance to each other. On
the contrary, phylactolaemates solely possess a dense
layer of circular, striated muscle fibres in the caecum
[33]. The remaining digestive tract, i.e. the intestine and
rectum, possess only smooth longitudinal musculature
in H. malayensis (this study), Z. verticillatum [105], and
B. pustulosa [96], while additional ring musculature was
described for F. hispida [104]. In contrast, most phylactolaemates possess mainly densely packed smooth ring
musculature in the intestine [40]. Among phylactolaemates, only A. gelatinosa shows few additional longitudinal muscle fibres in the intestine [33].
Retractor muscles and the striation problem

The partitioning of the zooid into the cystid and a
retractable polypide is a characteristic feature of all ectoprocts. Accordingly, polypide retractors are present in
all clades, and usually constitute the most prominent
somatic muscles. Their traverse within the coelom is
usually simple and unidirectional from the proximal or
lateral cystid wall to the lophophore base [111]. This
condition is also present in H. malayensis and other
species of Hislopia [52,56,57].
Retractor muscle fibres have been controversially
described as either striated (e.g. [54,112]) or smooth (see
[113]). Thereby, all ultrastructural studies found the
fibres to be smooth [33]. In the current study on Hislopia malayensis we found the retractor muscle fibres to
be mainly smooth, while the distal-most parts appeared
‘striated’. A similar appearance of the retractor muscle
fibres was recently observed in Pottsiella erecta [69].
Such striations were attributed as ‘pseudostriations’,
resulting from contraction folds or helically coiled fibrils
[73,96,113]. However, other ctenostomes also show
striations in expanded zooids with relaxed retractors
(Schwaha: unpublished observations). Consequently, it
remains difficult to fully interpret these striation patterns, which inevitably requires ultrastructural analysis.

Page 13 of 16

Myogenesis during the budding process

The temporal appearance of the retractor, apertural and
parietal muscles, as well as the polypide anlage during
budding has previously been analysed in several ctenostomes and has been used for phylogenetic inferences.
The earliest analyses tried to reconstruct the suborders
‘Carnosa’ and ‘Stolonifera’ as monophyletic taxa [23,24],
which was later rejected [22,25]. The latter author, Jebram [22], analysed myogenesis during the budding process of a hislopioid, Hislopia corderoi. Accordingly,
parietal muscles are the first to appear during budding
in H. corderoi, whereas the polypide anlage is second,
followed by the retractor muscles and the apertural
muscles, respectively - a succession also found in specimens of the closely related superfamilies Alyconidiodea
and Arachnidioidea [22]. The results of this study on H.
malayensis show that the parietal muscles are last to
appear during budding, which is not in accordance with
the observations on H. corderoi. However, it has to be
considered that the observations by Jebram [22] were
conducted on old preserved material and that the specimens were mainly analysed as whole mounts. With
these methods, the delicate first anlagen of the retractor
and apertural muscles are rather difficult to distinguish.
Considerable variation in the asexual muscle succession
occurs among numerous other ctenostome species [22]
and might also be present among species of Hislopia. As
promising these muscle successions might be for ctenostome phylogeny, their value should perhaps not be overestimated until analysed with modern methods.
The serotonergic nervous system

The serotonergic nervous system in Ectoprocta was previously analysed in different kinds of planktotrophic and
lecitotrophic larvae [14-16,114]. During ectoproct metamorphosis, larval organ systems undergo histolysis and
adult organs, including the nervous system, are formed
anew ("catastrophic metamorphosis”) [16,115]. Due to
the significant morphological differences, the individual
components of the larval nervous systems are most
likely lost during metamorphosis and are thus not considered ontogenetically homologous sensu Haszprunar
[116]. So far, the adult serotonergic nervous system has
only been investigated in the lepraliomorph cheilostome
Triphyllozoon mucronatum [16]. The latter shows a
similar condition to Hislopia malayensis. The highest
concentration of serotonin in both species is located in
the circumpharyngeal nerve ring or “cerebral ganglion”.
Additional serotonergic perikarya are present at the
lophophoral base and are connected to the ganglion by
fine neurites. Hislopia malayensis possesses additional
serotonergic neurites, which run from these perikarya
into the tentacles. Such serotonergic neurites have not
been found in T. mucronatum. These results currently

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

support a common serotonergic nervous system in gymnolaemates, i.e. cteno- and cheilostomes, but for estimating its value for phylogenetic considerations more
species need to be analysed.

Conclusions and Outlook
This study presents the first data on the myoanatomy
and serotonergic nervous system of an adult ctenostome
ectoproct, Hislopia malayensis. Comparative analysis
revealed that the Phylactolaemata show several morphological differences to the remaining ectoprocts by, e.g.,
being the only ectoproct taxon with a distinct bodywall
musculature. Only few synapomorphies for all ectoproct
taxa are identifiable (cf. [93]). As an example, our study
demonstrates that the apertural muscles are highly similar among the major ectoproct subclades and consist of
two principal sets of muscles, the parieto-vaginal bands
and the vestibular muscles. These have been modified
among the different ectoproct taxa according to the different morphology of the aperture. Their phylogenetic
derivation from parietal muscles seems unlikely. Concerning the apertural muscles in ctenostomes, two main
evolutionary trends are apparent: 1. Formation of dense
encrusting colonies with almost box-shaped zooids and
the aperture and its associated musculature shifted
towards the frontal side (Figure 7g, h). 2. Peristome
elongation or even stolon formation, usually accompanied by loss of parieto-vaginal bands and with distal parieto-vaginal musculature being more distantly situated
from the parieto-diaphragmatic musculature (Figure 7e,
f). Parieto-vaginal bands were most likely present in the
cheilostome ancestor and appear to be present in most
extant Cheilostomata.
Concerning the musculature of the digestive tract,
there are clear differences between the Phylactolaemata
and the Gymnolaemata. Most species of the former
possess tightly packed, mostly cross-striated ring musculature, whereas the digestive tract musculature of
the Gymnolaemata contains longitudinal muscles that
are more loosely arranged. Among the phylactolaemates, only Asajirella gelatinosa possesses few longitudinal muscles in the wall of the digestive tract. This
species belongs to the family Lophopodidae, which is
currently regarded as the most basal family within
Phylactolaemata [117,118]. Accordingly, we assume
longitudinal and ring musculature in the wall of the
digestive tract a basal ectoproct feature. Similarly, two
longitudinal muscle bands in the tentacles of the
lophophore seem to constitute a basal ectoproct feature. The lophophoral base connecting the tentacles
shows a complex set of several muscle groups, but due
to the lack of comparative data, conclusions on the
plesiomorphic state for Ectoprocta are currently not
possible.

Page 14 of 16

Cyclostome ectoprocts possess annular ring muscles in
their membranous sac that might have evolved from the
ring musculature of the phylactolaemate bodywall [45].
However, additional investigations using state-of-the-art
technology are needed to further address this issue, since
most available data rely on the classical work by Borg [47].
Acknowledgements
TS and TW would like to thank the staff of the Department of Environmental
Sciences, Kasetsart University, Bangkok and especially Jukkrit
Mahujchariyawong, Patana Anurakpongsatorn, Ratcha Chaichana, Sarantorn
Yimsri, and Sayan Jirjaratrong for their support. Special thanks to Jonathan
Todd (Natural History Museum) for valuable comments on the manuscript.
TS’s trip to Thailand was supported by the KWA-scholarship of the University
of Vienna. Special thanks to Claus Nielsen for providing access to relevant
literature. TS is currently supported by FWF project P 22696-B17 granted to
Andrey Ostrovsky (University of Vienna).
Author details
1
University of Vienna, Department of Morphology, Althanstraße 14, 1090
Vienna, Austria. 2Wright State University, Department of Biological Sciences,
3640 Colonel Glenn Highway Dayton, OH 45435 USA.
Authors’ contributions
TS conducted all practical work and drafted the manuscript. TW coordinated
research in Thailand, collected and identified the animals and contributed to
the manuscript. AW provided immunocytochemistry and confocal
microscopy facilities and contributed significantly to the writing of the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 3 November 2010 Accepted: 16 May 2011
Published: 16 May 2011
References
1. Cheetham AH, Cook PL: General features of the class Gymnolaemata. In
Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology Part G: Bryozoa Edited by: Robinson RA
1983, 138-207.
2. Taylor PD, Larwood GP: Major evolutionary radiations in the Bryozoa. In
Major evolutionary radiations Edited by: Taylor PD, Larwood GP 1990,
209-233.
3. Jebram D: The polyphyletic origin of the Cheilostomata (Bryozoa). Z zool
Syst Evol 1992, 30:46-52.
4. Ernst A, Schäfer P: Palaeozoic vs. post-Palaeozoic Stenolaemata:
Phylogenetic relationship or morphological convergence? Cour Forsch
inst Senck 2006, 257:49-64.
5. Todd JA: The central role of ctenostomes in bryozoan phylogeny. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Bryozoology Association Conference.
Edited by: Herrera Cubilla A, Jackson JBC. Balboa: Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute; 2000:104-135.
6. Pohowsky RA: The boring Ctenostomate Bryozoa: taxonomy and
paleobiology based on cavities in calcareous substrata. Bull Amer Paleont
1978, 73:1-192.
7. Taylor PD: Preservation of soft-bodied and other organisms by
bioimmuration - a review. Palaeontology 1990, 33:1-17.
8. Larwood GP, Taylor PD: Early structural and ecological diversification in
the Bryozoa. In Origin of major invertebrate groups. Edited by: House MR.
London: Academic Press; 1979:203-234.
9. Taylor PD: Bioimmured ctenostomes from the Jurassic and the origins of
the cheilostome Bryozoa. Palaeontology 1990, 33:19-34.
10. D’Hondt JL: Etat de connaissances sur las position phylogenetique et
l’evolution des bryozoaires. Boll Zool 1986, 53:247-269.
11. Wanninger A, Fuchs J, Haszprunar G: Anatomy of the serotonergic
nervous system of an entoproct creeping-type larva and its
phylogenetic implications. Invert Biol 2007, 126:268-278.

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

12. Wanninger A: Myo-anatomy of juvenile and adult loxosomatid
Entoprocta and the use of muscular body plans for phylogenetic
inferences. J Morph 2004, 261:249-257.
13. Wanninger A: Shaping the Things to Come: Ontogeny of
Lophotrochozoan Neuromuscular Systems and the Tetraneuralia
Concept. Biol Bull 2009, 216:293-306.
14. Gruhl A: Serotonergic and FMRFamidergic nervous systems in
gymnolaemate bryozoan larvae. Zoomorph 2009, 128:135-156.
15. Santagata S: Evolutionary and structural diversification of the larval
nervous system among marine bryozoans. Biol Bull 2008, 215:3-23.
16. Wanninger A, Koop D, Degnan BM: Immunocytochemistry and
metamorphic fate of the larval nervous system of Triphyllozoon
mucronatum (Ectoprocta: Gymnolaemata: Cheilostomata). Zoomorph
2005, 124:161-170.
17. Pires A, Woollacott RM: Serotonin and dopamine have opposite effects
on phototaxis in Larvae of the bryozoan Bugula neritina. Biol Bull 1997,
192:399-409.
18. Shimizu K, Hunter E, Fusetani N: Localisation of biogenic amines in larvae
of Bugula neritina (Bryozoa: Cheilostomatida) and their effects on
settlement. Mar Biol 2000, 136:1-9.
19. Santagata S: The morphology and evolutionary significance of the ciliary
fields and musculature among marine bryozoan larvae. J Morph 2008,
269:349-364.
20. Gruhl A: Muscular systems in gymnolaemate bryozoan larvae (Bryozoa:
Gymnolaemata). Zoomorph 2008, 127:143-159.
21. Gruhl A: Neuromuscular system of the larva of Fredericella sultana
(Bryozoa: Phylactolaemata). Zool Anz 2010, 249:139-149.
22. Jebram D: The ontogenetical and supposed phylogenetical fate of the
parietal muscles in the Ctenostomata (Bryozoa). Z zool Syst Evol 1986,
24:58-82.
23. Soule JD: Post-larval development in Carnosa (Bryozoa Ctenostomata).
Bull S Calif Acad Aci 1953, 52:88-92.
24. Soule JD: Post-larval development in relation to the classification of the
Bryozoa Ctenostomata. Bull S Calif Acad Aci 1954, 53:13-34.
25. Jebram D: Stolonen-Entwicklung und Systematik bei den Bryozoa
Ctenostomata. Z zool Syst Evol 1973, 11:1-48.
26. Braem F: Über Victorella und einige ihrer nächsten Verwandten, sowie
über die Bryozoenfauna des Ryck bei Greifswald. Zoologica 1951, 102:1-59.
27. Jebram D, Everitt B: New Victorellids (Bryozoa, Ctenostomata) from North
America: The use of parallel cultures in bryozoan taxonomy. Biol Bull
1982, 163:172-187.
28. Banta WC: Origin and early evolution of cheilostome Bryozoa. In Bryozoa
1974. Edited by: Pouyet S. Lyon: Université Claude Bernard; 1975:565-582.
29. Wood TS: Development and metamorphosis of cyphonautes larvae in
the freshwater ctenostome bryozoan, Hislopia malayensis Annandale,
1916. In Proceedings of the 14th International Bryozoology Association
Conference, Boone, North Carolina, July 1-8, 2007, Virg Mus Nat Hist Spec Publ
No 15. Edited by: Hageman SJ, Key MMJ, Winston JE. Martinsville, Virginia:
Virginia Museum of Natural History; 2008:329-338.
30. Wood TS, Anurakpongsatorn P, Mahujchariyawong J: Freshwater bryozoans
of Thailand (Ectoprocta and Entoprocta). Nat Hist J Chulanlongkorn Univ
2006, 6:83-119.
31. Lutaud G: Autozooid morphogenesis in anascan cheilostomates. In
Treatise on invertebrates Palaeontology Part G: Bryozoa (revised). Volume 1.
Edited by: Robinson RA. Boulder: Geol. Soc. Am.; 1983:208-237.
32. Hayward PJ, Ryland JS: British Ascophoran Bryozoans. In Synopsis of the
British Fauna (New Series) No14. Edited by: Kermack DM. Barnes RSK: London
etc.: Academic Press; 1979:312.
33. Mukai H, Terakado K, Reed CG: Bryozoa. In Microscopic anatomy of
invertebrates. Volume 13. Edited by: Harrison FW, Woollacott RM. New York,
Chichester: Wiley-Liss; 1997:45-206.
34. Kraepelin K: Die deutschen Süßwasser-bryozoen. 1. Anatomischsystematischer Teil. Abh Gebiet Naturw hrsg naturw Ver Hamburg 1887,
10:168, 167pl.
35. Hayward PJ: Ctenostome Bryozoans. In Synopsis of the British Fauna (New
Series) No33. Edited by: Kermack DM. Barnes RSK: London etc.: E.J.Brill/Dr.W.
Backhuys for The Linnean Society of London 1985:169.
36. Ryland JS: Bryozoans London: Hutchinson University Library; 1970.
37. Hayward PJ, Ryland JS: Cheilostomatous Bryozoa. Part 1. Aeteoidea Cribrilinoidea. In Synopses of the British Fauna (new series), No 10. Edited by:
Barnes RSK, Crothers JH. Shrewsbury: Field Studies Council.; 1998:.

Page 15 of 16

38. Wood TS: General features of the class Phylactolaemata. In Treatise on
Invertebrate Palaeontology Part G: Bryozoa (Revised). Edited by: Robinson RA.
Boulder and Lawrence: Geological Society of America and University of
Kansas; 1983:287-303.
39. Fuchs J, Obst M, Sundberg P: The first comprehensive molecular
phylogeny of Bryozoa (Ectoprocta) based on combined analyses of
nuclear and mitochondrial genes. Mol Phyl Evol 2009, 52:225-233.
40. Marcus E: Über Lophopus crystallinus (PALL.). Zool Jb Anat 1934,
58:501-606.
41. Rogick MD: Studies on fresh-water Bryozoa VI. The finer anatomy of
Lophopodella carteri. Trans Am Microsc Soc 1937, 56:367-396.
42. Mukai H, Oda S: Histological and histochemical studies on the epidermal
system of higher phylactolaemate bryozoans. Annot Zool Jap 1980,
53:1-17.
43. Braem F: Untersuchungen über die Bryozoen des süßen Wassers.
Zoologica 1890, 6:1-134.
44. Marcus E: Sobre Bryozoa do Brasil. II. Bolm Fac fil ciénc let Univ Sao Paolo,
Zool 1942, 6:57-105.
45. Nielsen C, Pedersen KJ: Cystid structure and protrusion of the polypide in
Crisia (Bryozoa, Cyclostomata). Acta Zool 1979, 60:65-88.
46. Schäfer P: Significance of soft part morphology in the classification of
recent tubuliporoid cyclostomes. In Bryozoa: Ordovician to Recent. Edited
by: nielsen C, Larwood GP. Fredensborg: Olsen 1985:273-284.
47. Borg F: Studies on recent cyclostomatous Bryozoa. Zool Bidr Uppsala
1926, 10:181-507.
48. Pergens E: Deux nouveaux types de Bryozoaires Cténostomes. Ann Soc
Roy Malacol Belg Mem 1889, 23:340-343.
49. Dumortier B-C, van Beneden PJ: Histoire naturelle des Polypes composes
d’eau douce ou des Bryozoaires fluviatiles. Bruxelles 1850.
50. Hancock A: On the anatomy of the fresh-water Bryozoa, with
descriptions of new species. Ann Mag Nat Hist ser 2 1850, 5:173-204.
51. Allman GJ: A monograph of the Fresh-water Polyzoa. Ray Soc Lond 1856, 119.
52. Annandale N: Zoological results of a tour in the Far East. Polyzoa,
Entoprocta, and Ctenostomata. Mem Asiat Soc Bengal 1916, 6:13-37.
53. Prouho H: Contribution à l’histoire des Bryozaires. Arch Zool Exp Gen (2nd
series) 1892, 10:557-656.
54. Silbermann S: Untersuchungen über den feineren Bau von Alcyonidium
mytili. Arch f Naturg 1906, 72:1-78.
55. Bobin G, Prenant M: Histogenèse et histolyse de la région péristomiale et
de la collerette chez Alcyonidium gelatinosum L. (Bryozoaire
Cténostome). Ann Sci Nat Zool Ser 1957, 11:23-48.
56. Wiebach F: Süsswasser-Bryozoen aus Brasilien und Zentral Afrika. Rev zool
bot afric 1970, 81:62-81.
57. Du Bois-Reymond Marcus E: Notes on some Brazilian Bryozoa Ectoprocta.
Bolm Zool Univ S Paolo 1984, 8:137-143.
58. Carter HJ: Description of a lacustrine Bryozoon allied to Flustra. Ann Mag
Nat Hist ser 3 1858, 1:169-171.
59. Calvet L: Contribution à l’histoire naturelle des Bryozaires Ectoproctes
marins. Trav instit zool Univ Montpellier stat zool Cette NS 1900, 8:1-488.
60. Rogick MD: Studies on marine Bryozoa. IV. Nolella blakei n. sp. Biol Bull
1949, 97:158-168.
61. Ehlers E: Hypophorella expansa, ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der minierenden
Bryozoen. Abhand Koenigl Gesellsch Wiss Goett 1876, 21:1-156.
62. van Beneden PJ: Recherches sur l’organisation des Laguncula, et l’histoire
naturelle des différents Polypes Bryozoaires qui habitent la côte
d’Ostende. Nouv Mém Acad Roy Sci Belles-Lett Brux 1845, 18:3-29.
63. Rogick MD: Studies on marine Bryozoa. 1. Aeverrillia setigera (Hincks)
1887. Biol Bull 1945, 89:201-214.
64. Borg F: On the genus Tubiporella and a new boring Bryozoan. Zool Bidr
Uppsala 1940, 18:415-437.
65. Hassall AH: Supplement to a catalogue of Irish Zoophytes. Ann Mag Nat
Hist ser 1 1841, 7:276-287, 363-373.
66. Claparede E: Beiträge zur Anatomie und Entwicklungsgeschichte der
Seebryozoen. Z wiss Zool 1870, 21:137-174.
67. Marcus E: Sobre Bryozoa do Brasil. I. Bolm Fac fil ciénc letr Univ Sao Paolo,
Zool 1941, 5:3-208.
68. Braem F: Über Pottsiella erecta (Potts). Arch Hydrobiol 1940, 36:306-318.
69. Smith DG, Werle SF, Klekowski E: The anatomy and brooding biology of
Pottsiella erecta (Potts, 1884) (Ectoprocta: Gymnolaemata: Ctenostomata),
with an expanded diagnosis of the Pottsiellidae. Hydrobiol 2003,
490:135-145.

Schwaha et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:11
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/11

70. Annandale N: Freshwater sponges, hydroids and polyzoa London: Taylor &
Francis; 1911.
71. Farre A: Observations on the minute structure of some of the higher
forms of Polypi, with views of a more natural arrangement of the Class.
Phil Trans R Soc Lond 1837, 127:387-426.
72. Bobin G, Prenant M: Les Bowerbankia (Bryozoaires Cténostomes) des
côtes françaises. Arch Zool exp Gén 1954, 91:73-88.
73. Marcus E: Bryozoarios marinhos brasileiros. III. Bolm Fac fil ciênc letr Univ
Sao Paolo, Zool 1939, 3:111-353.
74. Soule JD, Soule DF: Spathipora, its anatomy and phylogenetic affinities. In
Bryozoa 1974. Volume 3. Pouyet S: Doc. Lab. Geol. Fac. Sci. Lyon H.S.;
1975:247-253.
75. Soule JD, Soule DF: Systematics and biogeography of burrowing
bryozoans. Amer Zool 1969, 9:791-802.
76. Osburn RC: Bryozoa of the Pacific coast of America, part 3, Cyclostomata,
Ctenostomata, Entoprocta and Addenda. Rep Allan Hancock Pac Exped
1953, 14:613-841.
77. Taylor PD: Skeletal morphology of malacostegan grade cheilostome
Bryozoa. In Bryozoa: present and past. Edited by: Ross JRP. Bellingham:
Western Washington University; 1987:269-276.
78. Nitsche H: Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Bryozoen 3. Über die Anatomie und
Entwicklungsgeschichte von Flustra membranacea 4. Über die
Morphologie der Bryozoen. Z wiss Zool 1871, 21:416-498, pl.425-427.
79. Vigelius WJ: Morphologische Untersuchungen über Flustra membranaceotruncata Smith. Biol Zentralbl 1884, 3:705-721.
80. Freese W: Anatomisch-histologische Untersuchung von Membranipora
pilosa L. Arch Naturgesch 1888, 54:1-42, pl. 41-42.
81. Schulz K: Untersuchungen über den Bau der Bryozoen mit besonderer
Berücksichtigung der Exkretionsorgane. Arch Naturgesch 1901, 67:115-144.
82. Okada Y: Notes on some Japanese chilostomatous Bryozoa. Annot zool
jap 1921, 10:19-32.
83. Silen L: Zur Kenntnis des Polymorphismus der Bryozoen. Die Avicularien
der Cheilostomata Anasca. Zool Bidr Uppsala 1938, 17:149-366.
84. Harmer SF: On the morphology of the Cheilostomata. Quart Journ micr Sc
1902, 46:263-350.
85. Harmer SF: The Polyzoa of the Siboga Expedition. Part 2. Cheilostomata
Anasca. Siboga Exped, Monogr 1926, 28b:183-501.
86. Stach LW: Observations on Carbasea indivisa Busk (Bryozoa). Proc Zool
Soc London Ser B 1938, 108:389-399.
87. Repiachoff W: Zur Entwickelungsgeschichte der Tendra zostericola. Z wiss
Zool 1875, 25:129-142.
88. Jullien J: Bryozoaires. Miss Scient Cap Horn 1882-1883 1888, 6:1-92.
89. Rogick MD: Studies on marine Bryozoa, VII. Hippothoa. Ohio J Sci 1956,
56:183-191.
90. Ostroumoff AA: Contribution a l’etude zoologique et morphologique des
Bryozoaires du Golfe de Sebastopol. II. Donnees anatomiques. III.
Donnees sur l’histoire du developpement. Arch slav biol 1886, 2:8-25, 184190, 329-355.
91. Rogick MD: Studies on marine Bryozoa. X. Hippadenella carsonae, n. sp.
Biol Bull 1957, 112:120-131.
92. Humphries EM: Larval behavior and post-larval development in
Parasmittina nitida morphotype B (Bryozoa: Cheilostomata). Amer Zool
1977, 17:5-20.
93. Gruhl A, Wegener I, Bartolomaeus T: Ultrastructure of the body cavities in
Phylactolaemata (Bryozoa). J Morph 2009, 270:306-318.
94. Smith LW: Ultrastructure of the tentacles of Flustrellidra hispida
(Fabricius). In Living and Fossil Bryozoa. Edited by: Larwood GP. London:
Academic Press; 1973:335-342.
95. Gordon DP: Microarchitecture and function of the lophophore in the
bryozoan Cryptosula pallasiana. Mar Biol 1974, 27:147-163.
96. Brien P: Classe des Bryozoaires. In Traité de Zoologie. Volume 5. Edited by:
Grassé PP. Paris: Masson; 1960:1053-1335.
97. Nielsen C: On metamorphosis and ancestrula formation in
cyclostomatous bryozoans. Ophelia 1970, 7:217-256.
98. Bullivant JS, Bils RF: The pharyngeal cells of Zoobotryon verticillatum (delle
Chiaje), a gymnolaemate bryozoan. NZ J Mar Freshw Res 1968, 2:438-446.
99. Matricon I: Quelques données ultrastructurales sur un myoépithélium: le
pharynx d’un Bryozoaire. Z Zellf mikr Anat 1973, 136:569-578.
100. Henneguy MF: Sur un épithelium à fibres musculaires striées. CR Acad Sci
(Paris) 1909, 148:134-138.

Page 16 of 16

101. Braem F: Über die Querstreifung im Pharynx der gymnolämen Bryozoen
und über den Bau des Munddarms. Z Morph Ökol Tiere 1940, 36:688-676.
102. Renieri T: Submicroscopical features of alimentary canal in Bryzoa.
J Submicr Cytol 1970, 2:181-188.
103. Gordon DP: Ultrastructure and function of the gut of a marine bryozoan.
Cah Biol Mar 1975, 16:367-382.
104. Graupner H: Zur Kenntnis der feineren Anatomie der Bryozoen. Z wiss
Zool 1930, 136:38-77.
105. Gewerzhagen A: Untersuchungen an Bryozoen. Sitzungs Heidelb Akad Wiss
Math Nat Kl Abt B 1913, 9:1-16.
106. Becker G: Untersuchungen über den Darm und die Verdauung von
Kamptozoen, Bryozoen und Phoroniden. Z Morph Ökol Tiere 1937,
33:72-127.
107. Silen L: On the division and movements of the alimentary canal of the
Bryozoa. Ark Zool 1944, 35A:1-41.
108. Markham JB, Ryland JS: Function of the gizzard in Bryozoa. J ExpMar Biol
Ecol 1987, 107:21-37.
109. Wiebach F: Ein Bryozoon mit Kaumagen aus dem Baikalsee (Echinella
placoides Korotnev, Bryozoa Ctenostomata). Zool Anz 1966, 176:132-142.
110. Wiebach F: Amazonische Moostiere (Bryozoa). Amazoniana 1967,
1:173-188.
111. Hyman LH: The invertebrates. In smaller coelomate groups. Volume V. New
York: McGraw-Hill; 1959.
112. Bronstein G: Sur la présence de muscles striés chez les Bryozoaires. Bull
soc zool France 1938, 63:257-259.
113. Marcus E: Beobachtungen und Versuche an lebenden
Süßwasserbryozoen. Zool Jb Syst 1926, 52:279-350, pl.276.
114. Hay-Schmidt A: The evolution of the serotonergic nervous system. Proc
Roy Soc (Series B) 2000, 267:1071-1079.
115. Reed CG: Bryozoa. In Reproduction of marine Invertebrates VI Echinoderms
and Lophophorates. Edited by: Giese AC, Pearse JS, Pearse VB. Pacific Grove,
California: The Boxwood Press; 1991:85-245.
116. Haszprunar G: The types of homology and their significance for
evolutionary biology and phylogenetics. J Evol Biol 1992, 5:13-24.
117. Okuyama M, Wada H, Ishii T: Phylogenetic relationships of freshwater
bryozoans (Ectoprocta, Phylactolaemata) inferred from mitochondrial
ribosomal DNA sequences. Zool Scripta 2006, 35:243-249.
118. Hirose M, Dick MH, Mawatari SF: Molecular phylogenetic analysis of
phylactolaemate bryozoans based on mitochondrial gene sequences. In
Proceedings of the 14th International Bryozoology Association Conference,
Boone, North Carolina, July 1-8, 2007, Virg Mus Nat Hist Spec Publ No 15.
Edited by: Hageman SJ, Key MMJ, Winston JE. Martinsville, Virginia: Virginia
Museum of Natural History; 2008:65-74.
doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-11
Cite this article as: Schwaha et al.: Myoanatomy and serotonergic
nervous system of the ctenostome Hislopia malayensis: evolutionary
trends in bodyplan patterning of ectoprocta. Frontiers in Zoology 2011
8:11.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
