<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Medicago truncatula contains a second gene encoding a plastid located glutamine synthetase exclusively expressed in developing seeds</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010 10:183. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-183"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ana R Seabra"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Medicago truncatula contains a second gene
encoding a plastid located glutamine synthetase
exclusively expressed in developing seeds
Ana R Seabra1, Cristina P Vieira1, Julie V Cullimore2, Helena G Carvalho1*

Abstract
Background: Nitrogen is a crucial nutrient that is both essential and rate limiting for plant growth and seed
production. Glutamine synthetase (GS), occupies a central position in nitrogen assimilation and recycling, justifying
the extensive number of studies that have been dedicated to this enzyme from several plant sources. All plants
species studied to date have been reported as containing a single, nuclear gene encoding a plastid located GS
isoenzyme per haploid genome. This study reports the existence of a second nuclear gene encoding a plastid
located GS in Medicago truncatula.
Results: This study characterizes a new, second gene encoding a plastid located glutamine synthetase (GS2) in
M. truncatula. The gene encodes a functional GS isoenzyme with unique kinetic properties, which is exclusively
expressed in developing seeds. Based on molecular data and the assumption of a molecular clock, it is estimated
that the gene arose from a duplication event that occurred about 10 My ago, after legume speciation and that
duplicated sequences are also present in closely related species of the Vicioide subclade. Expression analysis by
RT-PCR and western blot indicate that the gene is exclusively expressed in developing seeds and its expression is
related to seed filling, suggesting a specific function of the enzyme associated to legume seed metabolism.
Interestingly, the gene was found to be subjected to alternative splicing over the first intron, leading to the
formation of two transcripts with similar open reading frames but varying 5′ UTR lengths, due to retention of the
first intron. To our knowledge, this is the first report of alternative splicing on a plant GS gene.
Conclusions: This study shows that Medicago truncatula contains an additional GS gene encoding a plastid
located isoenzyme, which is functional and exclusively expressed during seed development. Legumes produce
protein-rich seeds requiring high amounts of nitrogen, we postulate that this gene duplication represents a
functional innovation of plastid located GS related to storage protein accumulation exclusive to legume seed
metabolism.

Background
Nitrogen is a crucial nutrient that is both essential and
rate limiting for plant growth and seed production.
Nitrogen is assimilated in plants through the action of
Glutamine Synthetase (GS, EC 6.3.1.2) forming glutamine, which serves as a building block for all nitrogen
containing compounds in the plant. GS is a complex
and highly regulated enzyme, which in addition to the
primary ammonium assimilation, is involved in the
* Correspondence: mhcarval@ibmc.up.pt
1
Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular da Universidade do Porto, Rua do
Campo Alegre, 823, 4150-180 Porto, Portugal
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

reassimilation of ammonium released by a number of
biochemical processes such as photorespiration, protein
catabolism, deamination of amino acids and some specific biosynthetic reactions such as those involving
methionine, isoleucine, phenylpropanoid and lignin [1].
Being the first enzyme in the main pathway of ammonium assimilation in higher plants, GS potentially represents a key component of plant nitrogen use efficiency
(NUE) and yield and therefore, an extensive number of
studies have been dedicated to understand how GS is
regulated and how it is involved in the regulation of
nitrogen metabolism in plants [1].

© 2010 Seabra et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

Legumes can obtain a significant part of their nitrogen
from the atmosphere through a symbiotic interaction
with nitrogen fixing bacteria. Perhaps due to this special
source of nitrogen, legumes produce protein-rich seeds
with a high nutritive value, representing a major source
of nutrients for humans and animal livestock. Because
of the ecological, nutritional and economic importance
of legume seeds, the biochemical and molecular processes underlying their development have been the focus
of much research in recent years. With the development
of genomic resources for Medicago truncatula, recently
this model legume has been chosen for an integrative
approach toward understanding seed physiology and
great advances have been made in understanding the
metabolic control of seed filling and the regulatory network underlying reserve accumulation [2-5]. An original
finding raised by these studies is that the genes involved
in amino acid metabolism are among the most highly
regulated in the seeds of M. truncatula [3]. The accumulation of storage proteins in seeds, involves N-remobilization from vegetative organs, a process in which GS
is likely a key regulator, but although the enzyme has
been thoroughly investigated in several organs of different plant species, and especially in legumes, it has been
poorly investigated in seeds.
A number of GS isoenzymes has been identified in
plants and classified according to the sub cellular localization as cytosolic (GS1) and plastidic (GS2), which
are assumed to play non-overlapping roles. GS1 isoenzymes are involved in nitrogen assimilation and recycling derived from several different physiological
processes (reviewed in [6]), whereas GS2 has been
mainly implicated in the reassimilation of the ammonia
released during photorespiration [7,8]. Genetic studies
revealed that GS2 is encoded by a single gene per haploid genome, whereas several genes encode cytosolic
polypeptides [9-16]. Functional GS2 allelic genes have
been reported in the amphidiploid tobacco [17], the
tetraploid alfalfa [18] and the hexaploid wheat [19].
There is no evidence for the existence of multiple GS2
genes in any plant species and clearly, Arabidopsis
thaliana and rice, two plants whose genomes have
been fully sequenced, contain a single gene encoding
GS2.
M. truncatula provides an excellent model system for
the study of GS, as it contains a very small GS gene
family. Only three expressed GS genes have been
reported: MtGS1a and MtGS1b encoding cytosolic polypeptides and MtGS2 encoding a plastid located enzyme
[12,20,21]. However the genome of M. truncatula has
been reported to contain two additional genes related to
GS, the pseudogene MtGS1c which was found not to be
expressed [21] and a prokaryotic type GSI-like gene,
whose function is unknown [22]. This study reports the

Page 2 of 16

existence of a new gene encoding a second plastid
located isoenzyme in Medicago truncatula. The gene
was identified following the development of the genomic
resources for M. truncatula [23] and is characterized in
this article. Evidence is presented that the gene arose
from a duplication event which occurred after legume
speciation and that it produces a functional enzyme,
exclusively expressed in developing seeds and particularly during seed filling.

Results
Identification and characterization of a new gene
encoding a plastid-located glutamine synthetase in
Medicago truncatula

Following the advances in M. truncatula genome
sequencing, a new gene encoding a plastid located GS
was identified using the available genomic sequence
data from the large-scale genome assembly for this
model plant [23]. This newly identified gene is located
on chromosome 2 approximately 8 kbp downstream of
the previously characterized MtGS2 gene (GenBank
accession number: AY225150.1) and both genes are
comprised within M. truncatula BAC mth2-53e20
(AC148968) (Figure 1A). The existence of a second
plastid-located GS (GS2) gene in the plant genome was
confirmed by southern blot analysis of M. truncatula
genomic DNA, under stringent hybridization conditions, using a 260 bp MtGS2a fragment corresponding
to the beginning of the coding region, as a probe (Figure 1B). Restriction digestions of BAC mth2-53e20,
containing the two MtGS2 genes were run in parallel
for comparison. The expected hybridization fragments
(6227 bp and 8906 bp for EcoRV digestion, 4846 bp
and 7785 bp for BglII, 3536 bp and > 1.2 kbp for NcoI)
were detected in both the BAC and the genomic DNA
(Figure 1B). Two additional hybridizing fragments, corresponding to partial digestion of the gDNA, of
approximately 7000 bp and 6500 bp were detected
after digestion with EcoRV and NcoI, respectively
(Figure 1B).
Comparison of the genomic sequences of the two
genes revealed a high degree of homology both at the
level of intron/exon organization and sequence conservation (Figure 2). The two genes are composed of 14
exons (with varying lengths from 40 to 382 bp), interrupted by 13 introns (from 81 to 1201 bp). The start
codon is located in the second exon and the stop codon
in the last exon (Figure 2). The two genes are highly
homologous. For the coding region the level of synonymous divergence per synonymous site (Ks ) is 0.1541
and the level of non-synonymous divergence per nonsynonymous site (K a ) is 0.0274. For the introns K s is
0.2646. The newly found gene contains the information
to encode a functional GS2 protein with a calculated

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Southern blot analysis of GS2 genes in Medicago truncatula. A. Schematic representation of BAC mth2-53e90 indicating the
position of MtGS2a (AC148968-43) and MtGS2b (AC 1448968-42) and the restriction sites relevant for the southern analysis. The position of the
probe used for the Southern analysis is also indicated. B. Southern hybridization of M. truncatula J5 genomic DNA and BAC mth2-53e90 DNA. 20
μg of genomic DNA and 5 μg of BAC DNA were digested with BgLII (1), NcoI (2) and EcoRV (3) and probed with a 260 bp DNA fragment
corresponding to part of the 5’UTR and coding sequence of GS2a cDNA.

molecular weight (MW) of 47212 Da, and theoretical
isoelectric point (pI) of 6.68 (ProtParam-Expasy tools
[24]). The deduced protein contains a target peptide and
is predicted to be driven to the plastid (score 0.911, TargetP [25]). A comparison of the deduced amino acid
sequences of the two M. truncatula GS2 polypeptides,
reveals a high degree of homology (94% amino acid
identity). The existence of a second GS2 gene in the
genome of Medicago truncatula compels a redenomination of the previously identified MtGS2 gene (GenBank
accession number: AY225150.1), which will be referred
from now on as MtGS2a, and designate the second gene
as MtGS2b. The genes MtGS2a and MtGS2b are annotated in the genome as Medtr2g026390.1 and
Medtr2g026360.1, respectively.

Estimation of the time of the M. truncatula GS2
duplication event

The existence of a second GS2 gene in the genome of
M. truncatula, located in the same chromosome and
not too distant from the first gene suggests a recent
duplication event. Therefore the age of separation of different species of the vicioide subclade was estimated and
these estimates used for dating the duplication event,
assuming a molecular clock. Furthermore, a search for
the existence of a second GS2 gene in species where the
duplication is expected to exist was performed.
Estimates for the age of separation of different species
can be obtained, assuming a molecular clock [26], using
the levels of synonymous divergence per synonymous
site (K s ) for published chloroplast genes, and as

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

Page 4 of 16

Figure 2 Exon/intron organization of the two Medicago truncatula GS2 genes. Exons are numbered and represented by dark gray vertical
boxes. The two MtGS2b alternatively spliced transcripts are shown, highlighting the retention of the first intron in the MtGS2b-a transcript. The
start (ATG) and the stop codon (TAA) are indicated.

calibration point the 34 My estimate for the split
between Pisum and Albizia species [27]. In Table 1, the
estimated ages (in My) for the separation of four species
(representing different vicioide lineages; described in
Table 1 Average silent site divergence (Ks) and estimated
age of split (bold) between M. truncatula and related
species from the vicioide subclade, using three
chloroplast gene regions: rbcL, matK and trnL
Melilotus
Medicago
truncatula

Trifolium

Pisum

Vicia

(0.1194)
18.5 My
P.
sativum

(0.1556)
24.1 My
V. cracca

(0.1149)
15.2 My
P.
sativum

(0.1103)
14.6 My
V. hirsuta

rbcL
(0.0590)
9.1 My
M. albus

(0.0882)
13.6 My
T. pratense

(0.0511)
6.7 My
M. albus

(0.0661)
8.7 My
T.
albopurpureum

matK

trnL
(0.0126)
6.6 My
M. albus
Average Age
of split

(0.0254)
13.2 My
T.
praetermissum

(0.0211)
11.0 My
P.
sativum

(0.0297)
15.5 My
V.
nipponica

7.5 My

11.8 My

14.9 My

18.1 My

As a calibration point we used the 34 million years estimate for the split
between Pisum and Albizia species [27] and the levels of synonymous
divergence per synonymous site (Ks) for the published chloroplast genes rbcL,
matK and trnL of Pisum sativum and three Albizia species, namely the Ks
values of 0.2199 for P. sativum/A. julibrissin; 0.2575 for P. sativum/A. versicolor
and 0.0653 for P. sativum/A. julibrissin, respectively.

figure five in [28]) from M. truncatula is presented.
M. truncatula and P. sativum are species diverging
about 14.9 My. Using the silent site divergence at the
coding region of MtGS2a between these two species
(Ks = 0.2475), and the estimated age of 14.9 My as calibration point, it is inferred that the Medicago GS2 gene
duplication (K s = 0.1668) occurred about 10 My ago.
Therefore, taking into consideration the estimated ages
for the separation of the different species from M. truncatula (Table 1), the two genes are expected to be present in Melilotus but not in more distantly related
species. It is thus not surprising that a Blastp of the
L. japonicus (a species of the Robinioids clade) genome
at [29], using M. truncatula MtGS2a sequence
(AY225150) as a query, allows the detection of three GS
genes (chr6.CM0014.300, chr2.LjT01H08.60, and
LjT32D02.120). When these sequences together with
M. truncatula GS1 and GS2 gene sequences are used to
construct a phylogeny, the two first entries cluster with
M. truncatula GS1 genes and the latter sequence clusters with M. truncatula GS2 gene (data not shown).
Using the same methodology, L. japonicus is estimated
to have diverged from M. truncatula about 29 My ago
(data not shown). It should be noted that, if a different
calibration point is used, different ages will be obtained
for the gene duplication and species divergence. Nevertheless, our conclusion that this gene duplication is of a
recent origin and should only be present in M. truncatula closely related species is valid.
To test the presence of the GS2b gene in Melilotus
species, primers have been designed for conserved

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

regions in the coding sequences of GS2 genes from L.
japonicas, P. sativum, Phaseolus vulgaris, Glycine max
and the two M. truncatula GS2 genes (see Material and
Methods). The ~ 960 bp amplification product obtained
using these primers and genomic DNA of Melilotus
albus was cloned. Two restriction patterns, which were
called M. albus 1 and M. albus 2, were revealed from
the analysis of 36 colonies using two restriction
enzymes. Sequencing results revealed that M. albus 2
represent two types of sequences, called M. albus 2-1
and M. albus 2-2. Using blastn the three sequences
revealed more than 95% similarity with M. truncatula
MtGS2a coding region (AY225150) and less than 75%
similarity with the MtGS1 genes. Therefore, the putative
coding region of these sequences was annotated according to the Medicago sequence. In these sequences there
are five putative introns in the region analysed, with
intron sizes similar to those observed in Medicago
(AC202342). Although the specific function of the Melilotus albus GS2b genes can not be inferred from these
studies, the region analysed suggests that they may be
functional.
The phylogenetic relationship of the Melilotus albus
sequences and M. truncatula GS2 genes, using the coding region is presented in Figure 3. It should be noted
that M. albus 2-1 and M. albus 2-2 sequences cluster
with M. truncatula MtGS2b, with a strong bootstrap
support. Diversity levels between M. albus 2-1 and M.
albus 2-2 at the coding region are Ks = 0.0142 and Ka =
0.0042. Therefore, these sequences may represent two
different GS2b genes in Melilotus albus, from a very
recent (about 1 MY old) duplication. M. albus 1
sequence does not cluster with strong support with both
MtGS2a and MtGS2b gene sequences. To address if this
sequence may represent the orthologue of M. truncatula
MtGS2a gene the Bayesian tree presented in Figure 3
was constrained on having M. albus 2-1 and M. albus 22 and M truncatula MtGS2b sequences as one group,
plus all other sequences as another group. When the
difference of Bayes factors between this tree and the
unconstrained tree is calculated, a value of 4.85 is
obtained. It has been suggested that the constrained tree
should be considered as significantly worse, only if twice
this difference gives a number higher than 10 [30].
Thus, the constrained tree is not significantly worse
than the unconstrained one, and M. albus 1 sequence
may represent the orthologue of M. truncatula MtGS2a
gene.
Isolation and characterization of two MtGS2b transcripts

To investigate whether MtGS2b is a functional gene, a
thorough search for MtGS2b transcripts was performed
in several organs of M. truncatula by RT-PCR. The high
homology between the coding sequences of MtGS2b

Page 5 of 16

and the previously characterized MtGS2a, prevented the
design of MtGS2b specific primers or probes. As an
alternative approach, a set of primers that amplify both
transcripts was used and the two transcripts were subsequently differentiated by restriction digestion of the PCR
product by an enzyme that differentially cuts MtGS2b.
This first approach pointed to a specific expression of
MtGS2b in developing seeds (Data not shown). This tissue was thus used to isolate and sequence the 5′and 3′
ends of MtGS2b mRNAs by RACE. Gene specific primers were designed for the poorly conserved 5′ UTR
allowing subsequent cloning of MtGS2b cDNAs. Interestingly, two different MtGS2b transcripts of 1774 bp
and 1624 bp were isolated and designated as MtGS2b-a
and MtGS2b-b, respectively. The two transcripts were
sequenced and found to be identical in their coding
sequence and 3′UTR, but different in the length and
sequence of the 5′UTR (245 bp for MtGS2b-a and 95
bp for MtGS2b-b). Sequence alignment of the two
cDNAs with the genomic DNA indicates that the two
transcripts arise from alternative splicing over the first
intron. MtGS2b-a results from the retention of the first
intron (Figure 2). As the position of the start codon is
not altered, the two transcripts are predicted to encode
a similar protein. The two MtGS2b mRNA sequences
have been posted in GenBank, accession numbers
HM775420 and HM775421 for MtGS2b-a and MtGS2bb, respectively.
Expression analysis of MtGS2b transcripts and proteins

The expression of MtGS2a and MtGS2b was evaluated
by semi-quantitative RT-PCR using specific primers. To
be able to distinguish MtGS2a and the two MtGS2b
alternatively spliced transcripts, forward primers were
designed to hybridize specifically in the non-conserved
5′UTRs. These primers were used to amplify total RNA
isolated from several organs of the plant. The results are
displayed as gel images and graphical representation of
the amount of RNA relative to the housekeeping gene
elf1-a (TC106485) (Figures 4 and 5).
MtGS2a transcripts were detected in almost all
organs of the plant, being generally more highly
expressed in green tissues (leaves, stems and cotyledons from light-grown seedlings) and poorly expressed
in non-green tissues. Interestingly and despite the
nearly ubiquitous pattern of expression in green tissues, MtGS2a mRNAs could not be detect in developing, green seeds (Figure 4, lane 10), contrasting with
the expression of both MtGS2b transcripts exclusively
in these tissues. The MtGS2b expression signal
detected in pods (Figure 4, lane 9) is attributed to the
green seeds contained inside the pod, as asserted by
independent RT-PCR analyses of pod walls separated
from green seeds (data not shown).

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

Page 6 of 16

Figure 3 Phylogenetic relationships of GS2 genes in relevant legume species. Bayesian unconstrained tree. In brackets are GenBank
accession numbers. Numbers represent posterior probability values.

The seed-specific nature of MtGS2b expression
demanded an evaluation of its expression during seed
development and in dissected seed tissues (Figure 5).
Semi-quantitative RT-PCR was performed on total RNA
extracted from seeds collected at seven key developmental stages previously characterized at the physiological
level [3]: 3 days after pollination (DAP) (end of seed
coat differentiation), 6 DAP (globular stage embryo), 10
DAP (early torpedo embryo), 14 DAP (early stages of
seed filling), 20 DAP (peak of accumulation of storage
compounds) 24 DAP (late stages of seed filling) and 36
DAP (stage of physiological maturity and desiccation)
and from embryos, seed coat and endosperm dissected
from 20 DAP seeds. MtGS2a transcript levels remain
roughly unaltered from 3 DAP to 14 DAP (Figure 5,
lanes 1 to 4) however, at 20 DAP and thereafter, it
seems to be absent (Figure 5, lanes 5 to 7) from developing seeds. In contrast, the two MtGS2b transcripts
were detected in all developmental stages. The overall
pattern of expression appears to be similar for the two
MtGS2b alternatively spliced transcripts, with MtGS2b-a
always being expressed at higher levels. Although both
transcripts seem to reach a maximum of accumulation
at 10 DAP (Figure 5, lane 3), there was not a clear tendency to either decline or increase which may indicate

that the levels are somehow constant during seed development. The tissue distribution of MtGS2b transcripts
was also evaluated using dissected tissues from seeds
collected at 20 DAP: seed coat, endosperm and embryo
(Figure 5, lanes 11 to 13). Both MtGS2b transcripts
were found to be present in the three major seed tissues
with higher expression levels in the embryo. Thus, from
the two M. truncatula GS2 encoding genes, MtGS2b
seems to be the most significant GS2 gene expressed in
developing seeds, and the only GS2 gene expressed by
the end of seed-filling and late maturation stages
To evaluate whether MtGS2b expression could be
related to seed germination, the characterization of GS2
gene expression was extended to after-ripened seeds and
to seeds after imbibition. Both GS2 transcripts were
detected only at basal levels in mature dry seeds and in
seeds 1.5 hours following imbibition (Figure 5, lanes 89). However 24 hours after seed imbibition, when the
radicle was already visible, MtGS2b expression was
undetectable. At this stage, a substantial increase in
MtGS2a expression was observed (Figure 5, lane 10) as
previously reported to occur in M. truncatula during
post-germinative growth [31].
To correlate GS2 transcript levels with GS2 polypeptide content in developing seeds, protein extracts from

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

Page 7 of 16

Figure 4 Semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis of GS2 trancripts in different organs of the plant. Total RNA was extracted from roots of
plants growing on ammonium nitrate (1), roots of plants growing in symbiosis with S. meliloti (2), 14 day old nodules (3), leaves (4), stems (5),
cotyledons from light grown seedlings (6), cotyledons from dark grown seedlings (7), flowers (8), pods (9) and developing seeds collected at 20
DAP (10). 50 ng of cDNA was used in each assay. Transcript levels for MtGS2a, MtGS2b-a, MtGS2b-b and the elongation factor 1-a (elf1-a), as
internal reference gene are shown. Values correspond to quantified band intensities of GS2 relative to the housekeeping gene elf1-a.

five of the key developmental stages (10 DAP to 36
DAP) and the three major dissected seed tissues (seed
coat, endosperm and embryo), were subjected to SDSPAGE followed by western blotting using a specific GS2
antibody. The small size of 3 DAP and 6 DAP seeds disallowed the collection of sufficient material to include in
this analysis. GS2 polypeptide levels seem to increase
during the course of seed development until the end of

the seed-filling stage (24 DAP) with a significant
decrease in abundance at 36 DAP (Figure 6). Although
the anti-GS2 antibody cannot differentiate between the
products of MtGS2a and MtGS2b, the polypeptides
detected at 20 DAP and afterwards are likely to result
from MtGS2b expression, since MtGS2a transcripts are
undetectable at these stages of development. GS2 was
mostly abundant in the seed coat, however the embryo

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

Page 8 of 16

Figure 5 Semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis of GS2 transcripts during seed development, seed imbibition and in major seed tissues.
Total RNA was extracted from 3 DAP seeds (1), 6 DAP (2), 10 DAP (3), 14 DAP (4), 20 DAP (5), 24 DAP (6) and 36 DAP (7), dry seeds (afterripenning) (8), dry seeds 1,5 h after imbibition (9) and dry seeds 24 h after imbibition (10), seed coat (11), endosperm (12) and whole embryo
(13). 50 ng of cDNA was used in each assay. Transcript levels for MtGS2a, MtGS2b-a, MtGS2b-b and the elongation factor 1-a (elf1-a), as internal
reference gene are shown. Values correspond to quantified band intensities of each GS2 transcript relative to the housekeeping gene elf1-a.

and the endosperm also contribute to the GS2 polypeptide content in 20 DAP seeds (Figure 6). These results
do not entirely reflect the transcription profile of the
genes, indicating the existence of regulatory controls
operating at a post-transcriptional level.
Evaluation of the functionality of MtGS2b isoenzymes

MtGS2b contains the information to encode a functional
protein quite similar to GS2a. A comparison of the

deduced amino acid sequences of the two M. truncatula
GS2 polypeptides, reveals a high degree of homology
(94% amino acid identity), with only 26 amino acid substitutions in a total of 428 residues (Figure 7). Five of
the amino acid substitutions are located in the N-terminal transit peptide and thus the mature protein is predicted to contain only 21 amino acid substitutions.
GS2a and GS2b mature proteins are expected to have
similar molecular masses, but different pIs, of 5.25 and

Figure 6 Western blot analysis of GS2 polypeptides during seed development and in major seed tissues. Proteins were extracted from
seeds collected at different times following pollination (as indicated) and in seed tissues dissected from 20 DAP seeds: seed coat (SC),
endosperm (ES) and embryo (E). Protein extracts (10 μg per lane) were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by western-blot analysis using a specific
anti-GS2 antibody.

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

Page 9 of 16

Figure 7 Clustal X alignment of GS2a and GS2b deduced amino acid sequences. Residues fully conserved (*), highly conserved (:), poorly
conserved (.) and not conserved (). The transit peptide is represented in gray and was predicted by analogy with the GS2 from pea [9]. Black
boxes outline potential modified residues affecting GS2b activity. The black dots indicate two cysteine residues which are conserved in all plastid
located isoenzymes [69]. I-IV-identifies the conserved segments between GS proteins defined by Eisenberg et al. [49].

5.43, respectively. Based on structural analysis [32,33],
five amino acid substitutions are predicted to be in positions that could affect GS activity.
To ensure that the protein encoded by the newly identified MtGS2b gene is catalytically functional, heterologous complementation assays were performed. The
plant MtGS2b cDNA was cloned, without the target
peptide, into the E. coli expression vector pTrc99A, and
introduced into the the E. coli glnA mutant strain
ET8894. The previously described GS2a recombinant
protein [12] was used as positive control and the empty
plasmid as a negative control. Complementation,
enabling growth on minimal media containing ammonium as the nitrogen source, was clearly observed for
the two GS2 constructs whereas the bacteria transformed with the vector alone, could only grow in the
presence of a glutamine supplement (Figure 8A), indicating that GS2b is catalytically and physiologically
active.
Western blot analysis of total soluble protein extracts
from the two different bacterial cultures (Figure 8B)

showed that the polypeptides are expressed in the bacterial host with the expected molecular mass of approximately 42 kDa. To compare the activity of the two
proteins, GS activity assays were performed on total
proteins extracted from the glnA- strain grown in liquid
M9 minimal medium plus IPTG. GS activity determined
by the transferase reaction was 70 times lower for GS2b
relative to GS2a, while the synthetase activity was 1.3
fold enhanced (Figure 8C). This reflects striking differences in the kinetic properties of GS2b. Several attempts
were performed to express the protein GS2b with a
6×His tag in E. coli in order to purify the enzyme and
determine kinetic parameters. All attempts were unsuccessful, despite the fact that the highly homologous
GS2a can be easily expressed [34], preventing further
kinetic characterization of the enzyme.

Discussion
M. truncatula is the first plant species in which a second GS2 gene has been detected. The gene is located
on the same chromosome (chromosome 2) as the

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

Page 10 of 16

Figure 8 Analysis of the catalytic functionality of GS2b. A. Complementation analysis of an E. coli glnA mutant expressing either GS2b or
GS2a plant cDNAs. The plant cDNA corresponding to the coding sequences, without the predicted transit peptide were introduced into
pTrc99A. Controls were transformed with the empty plasmid. Bacteria were grown on Minimal Medium (M9) agar plates with (+GLN) and
without (-GLN) a glutamine supplement (0.25 mg mL-1). B. Western blot analysis of E. coli glnA extracts expressing recombinant GS2a or GS2b
mature proteins probed with anti-GS antibody. C. GS activity assays of E.coli glnA- extracts expressing either GS2a or GS2b mature proteins.
Results represent the mean of three independent experiments.

previously characterized MtGS2a gene, only 8 Kb apart,
indicating a recent duplication event. Gene duplicates
provide an opportunity for functional innovation. Mutations or genomic rearrangements altering when and
where the duplicates are expressed, or the structure/
function of the products encoded by the genes, can provide a selective advantage to the organism and be subsequently retained [35]. The newly identified MtGS2b
gene, shows a seed specific expression and may represent a functional innovation of plastid located GS
related to legume seed metabolism. This idea is reinforced by the presence of a second GS2 gene in a closely
related species of the Vicioide subclade (Melilotus
albus). Phylogenetic analysis estimated the age of the
duplication event to have occurred 10 My ago, after
legume speciation.
GS genes have been the subject of many molecular evolution studies, the gene is considered one of the oldest
functioning genes [36], and a good molecular clock
[37-39]. Phylogenetic studies have shown that chloroplastic and cytosolic GS genes have evolved through gene
duplication. Kumada et al. [36] estimated the common
ancestor of the two classes of genes to have duplicated
about 300 My ago, before the monocot/dicot divergence.
Doyle [38] proposed that members of the cytosolic GS

gene family in plants have also evolved by duplication of
a single, ancestral cytosolic GS gene and the evolution of
separate gene copies to fulfil different metabolic cell
requirements. A similar evolutionary process is conceivable for the plastid GS genes, the newly identified MtGS2b
gene could have evolved to fulfil a specific metabolic role
related to legume seed metabolism. To our knowledge,
this is the first report of a duplication of a plastid located
gene, and interestingly, the duplication seems to be quite
recent in view of the estimation of the age of divergence
of the cytosolic GS genes. Studies in Pinus sylvestris, estimate that the duplication of an ancestral cytosolic GS
occurred long before the divergence of gymnosperms/
angiosperms [40].
An exceptional example of gene conversion has been
proposed for the origin of the P. sativum cytosolic
GS3A and GS3b twin genes [41]. The coding regions of
plant GS genes are generally well conserved whereas the
noncoding sequences are often very divergent, but the
non-coding regions (5′ and 3′ UTR and introns) of
P. sativum cytosolic GS3A and GS3B twin genes are
highly conserved. These two genes are located on separate loci in different chromosomes and gene conversion
has been invoked as a possible mechanism for maintaining the high level of nucleotide similarity between the

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

twin genes [41]. Although the Medicago truncatula
MtGS2a and MtGS2b genes show a high degree of
sequence conservation in both the coding and non-coding regions (see Results), the two genes are located in
the same chromosome only 8 kb apart, compatible with
an adjacent duplication event.
A surprising feature of MtGS2b expression is the fact
that it is subjected to alternative splicing. Alignment of
the mRNA sequences with the genomic sequence indicates that the alternative splicing occurs over the first
intron, resulting in a longer 5′ UTR of alternatively
spliced form a by retention of the first intron. Intron
retention is considered the prevalent mode of alternative
splicing in plants [42,43]. In the case of MtGS2b, intron
retention occurs on the 5′ UTR and does not affect the
protein identity, but seems to be related to mRNA stability and/or translation efficiency. Leader introns have
been reported to increase transcription and/or translation efficiencies of some plant genes. Curi et al. [44]
demonstrated that the leader intron of a gene encoding
cytochrome c oxidase in Arabidopsis is responsible for
increasing translation efficiency, besides being also
responsible for the tissue-specific expression of the
gene. Another example is the 5′UTR intron of rice polyubiquitin, which was found to be responsible for transcriptional, post-transcriptional enhancement and
moderate increase in translation [45]. The two alternatively spliced MtGS2b transcripts show essentially the
same pattern of expression during seed development
(Figure 5), with the MtGS2b-a transcripts always being
more abundant than those of MtGS2b-b. This suggests
that either the excision of the first intron is inefficient,
or that mechanisms exist so that MtGS2b-a mRNA
levels are maintained.
On the other hand, the steady state levels of the two
MtGS2b mRNAs do not always correlate with protein
abundance. Similarly, a recent study which compared
the proteome and transcriptome of M.truncatula seeds
revealed several proteins displaying a profile differing
from that of the corresponding transcripts during seed
development and in different seed tissues [3]. The abundance of MtGS2b-a transcripts seems to be inversely
proportional to GS2 polypeptide abundance, most
notorious at 10 and 14 DAP, suggesting that the
MtGS2b-a additional 5′UTR intron functions to reduce
mRNA translation, as shown to occur for the chick
proinsulin gene, where retention of a 5′UTR intron
leads to nearly complete translation blocking without
affecting mRNA stability or transport [46]. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of regulation of a GS
gene by alternative splicing by intron retention in the
5′ UTR, but it is becoming increasingly evident that
5′ introns can have a dramatic effect on gene expression
in plants [47,48].

Page 11 of 16

The seed specific expression of the gene, strongly suggests a role related to seed metabolism. Here, evidence
is presented that the enzyme produced by MtGS2b is
catalytically and physiologically active as it was able to
rescue the phenotype of an E. coli glnA mutant (Figure
8), but GS2b enzymatic activity presents distinctive features in relation to its homologue GS2a. Although, we
were unable to purify the protein, due to difficulties of
expression in E. coli, activity tests performed on crude
extracts, revealed significant differences in the kinetic
activity of the two enzymes. The synthetase: transferase
activity ratio of the new enzyme GS2b is surprisingly
increased in relation to all the other Medicago truncatula GS isoenzymes (cytosolic or plastidic) [20]. Besides
its biosynthetic reaction, GS catalyzes the hydrolysis of
glutamine into glutamate and ammonia in the presence
of the cofactors ADP and Pi. This reaction may be
important in the production of ammonia and in providing glutamate for specific metabolic proposes. The
unique synthetase to transferase GS activity ratio of this
new GS2 isoenzyme, together with its seed specific
expression is compatible with a specific function of the
enzyme under a defined metabolic context exclusive to
seed metabolism.
The difference in kinetic activity of the two M. truncatula GS2 isoenzymes is surprising in view of the high
sequence similarity between the two GS polypeptides
(94% aminoacid identity). However there are 26 differences between the two M. truncatula amino acid
sequences with 11 of these being non-conservative.
Based on structural data [32,33] it is predicted that most
of the amino acid substitutions are not in positions critical for GS activity (Figure 6) except for residues I364,
G365 and K366. These three sequential residues are
particularly interesting since K366 integrates the GS
conserved region IV defined by Eisenberg et al. [49] and
known to participate in the active site. These three
amino acid substitutions could be responsible for the
particular GS synthetase to transferase ratio of GS2b.
At the initial stages of seed development both
M. truncatula GS2 genes are simultaneously expressed,
raising the question of whether MtGS2a and MtGS2b
perform redundant roles in the seed or if MtGS2b
acquired novel biochemical functions following gene
duplication. The expression pattern of the two genes
during seed development favours the second hypothesis.
MtGS2b was found to be exclusively and continuously
transcribed during seed development, whereas the
expression of MtGS2a was down regulated at the onset
of storage compound accumulation and reappears during post-germinative growth (Figure 5). The stronger
and specific expression of MtGS2b during seed filling,
strongly suggests that the enzyme performs a seed specific role related to reserve accumulation. In leaves, the

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

main function of plastidic GS is the reassimilation of
ammonia resulting from photorespiration [7,8]. It is
unlikely that the enzyme performs a similar function in
the seed, because seeds have low Rubisco activity [50]
and low internal O2 levels, two conditions required for
photorespiration to occur [51]. In roots, GS2 is mainly
implicated in assimilating the ammonia derived from
nitrate reduction [52]. This function is also unlikely for
the seed GS2, since the primary source of nitrogen
available to the developing seeds is amino acids, mainly
glutamine and asparagine [53]. A possible function for a
plastid-located GS in legume seeds, and particularly during seed filling, would be N-remobilization from the
amide amino acids, asparagine and glutamine to other
amino acids required for storage-protein synthesis. The
breakdown of asparagine is catalysed by asparaginase,
which releases ammonia for reasssimilation via GS.
During the filling stage, seeds accumulate proteins, oils
and carbohydrates to support seed germination and postgerminative growth [54]. M. truncatula produces protein-rich seeds (40%) with high lipid (10% fatty acids) and
low starch content (< 1%) [55]. Some of these storage
compounds are accumulated in the seed plastids, which
perform specific metabolic features and undergo deep
changes during seed development. M. truncatula possesses green embryos, and during seed development, the
chloroplasts gradually differentiate into storage plastids
[56]. Photosynthesis has a low input to the overall carbon
synthesis and seems to be mainly directed to oxygen and
ATP production to support the biosynthesis of storage
compounds [57-59]. The plastid differentiation involves
chlorophyll and photosynthetic machinery degradation
and a plastidic glutamine synthetase could also be
involved in the remobilization of nitrogen released during
the degradation of the photosynthetic machinery.
The importance of seed plastid metabolism in the partitioning of assimilates into seed storage compounds,
has been recently evidenced in several legumes. In Vicia
narbonensis, the antisense inhibition of the Glucose-6phosphate/phosphate translocator, an importer of carbon to plastids, was found to reduce the levels of starch
but to increase storage protein biosynthesis [60]. More
recently, a pea 2-oxoglutarate/malate translocator
(OMT) was also found to have a crucial role during
seed storage. OMT repression leads to reduced conversion of carbohydrates from sucrose to amino acids and
proteins and delayed storage plastid differentiation. The
authors emphasize that one of the probable causes of
the phenotype displayed is the substrate limitation of
plastidial GS/GOGAT cycle [61].

Conclusions
In conclusion, this study shows that Medicago truncatula
contains an additional GS gene encoding a plastid located

Page 12 of 16

enzyme, which is functional and exclusively expressed during seed development. GS2 gene duplicates exist in a closely related species and it is estimated that the duplication
event occurred around 10 My ago. The seed specific pattern of expression, together with the kinetic differences of
this new isoenzyme in relation to the previously characterized MtGS2a, strongly suggests that the enzyme is performing a seed specific role related to storage protein
accumulation. It is conceivable that the unique metabolism of legume seed plastids supplied the selective pressure
for the unique expression and kinetic properties of this
novel plastid located GS, in order to more efficiently support storage compound biosynthesis in M. truncatula.

Methods
Plant material and growth conditions

Plants of Medicago truncatula Gaertn. cv Jemalong and
Melilotus albus were grown under 16 h light (22°C)/8 h
dark (19°C) cycles under a light intensity of 150-200 μmol
m-2 s-1. Roots, leaves, and stems were collected from five
week old plants grown aeroponically on ammonium
nitrate in the medium described by Lullien et al. [62].
Cotyledons were collected from seedlings either kept in
the dark for two days or exposed to light. For nodule
induction, plants were nitrogen starved for seven days
before inoculation with the Sinorhizobium meliloti strain
Rm1021 pXLGD4 RCR 2011(GMI51) and root nodules
were collected 14 days after inoculation. For flower, pod
and seed collection, plants were grown on soil and fertilized once a week. For seed development studies, individual flowers were tagged on the day of flower appearance
and seeds were collected from pods harvested at different
time points from 3 to 36 days after pollination (DAP)
according to Gallardo et al. [3]. Seed coat, endosperm and
embryo were separated from seeds collected 20 DAP and
dissected under a Stereo Microscope. Finally, for seed
imbibition studies, dry seeds were surface scarified/sterilized and frozen immediately or after 1.5 and 24 hours of
water imbibition. All biological material was immediately
frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.
Nucleic acid extraction

Genomic DNA was extracted and purified from young
leaves of M. truncatula or M. album, and from BAC
DNA clone mth2-53e90 essentially as described in Sambrook et al.[63]. Total RNA was extracted from 100 mg
of plant tissue, using the RNeasy Plant mini Kit (Qiagen)
according to the manufacturer′s instructions. All Nucleic
acids were quantified using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo scientific).
Southern blot analysis

20 μg of genomic M. truncatula DNA and 5μg of BAC
mth2-53e90 DNA were digested with EcoRV, NcoI and

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

BglII (New England Biolabs, UK). DNA fragments were
separated on a 0.8% agarose gel and blotted onto Amersham Hybond™-N+ Nylon membranes (GE healthcare).
The blotted membrane was hybridized with a MtGS2a
(GenBank: AY225150.1) specific probe, corresponding to
260 bp of the 5′ coding sequence (CDS). Probe labeling
using the DIG DNA labeling Kit (Roche, Applied
Science) and hybridization were performed under high
stringency conditions, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.
Sequence analysis

MtGS2b gene identification was achieved through Blast
Database searches using NCBI server http://blast.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi and the M. truncatula sequencing
resources http://www.medicago.org/genome/. Organization of both GS2 genes and prediction of MtGS2b coding sequence was carried out using the FGENESH2.6
software from Softberry http://www.softberry.com.
MtGS2a and MtGS2b amino acid sequences were
deduced from the cDNAs and aligned using Clustal X
software [64].
Estimation of the age of split between four species of the
Vicioide subclade and M. truncatula

To estimate the age of separation of four species of the
vicioide subclade of the IRLC (the inverted-repeat-lacking) clade (see figure five in [28]) from M. truncatula,
three genes for which nucleotide sequence data are
available for at least one species of Melilotus, Trifolium,
Pisum, Vicia, and Albizia were used, namely rbcL, matK
genes and the intron region of trnL (accession numbers
are in additional file 1, Table S1). The nucleotide
sequences were aligned using ClustalX [64]. Levels of
synonymous divergence per synonymous site (Ks values
with Jukes-Cantor correction) that, under the assumption of a molecular clock, are proportional to time, were
computed using the DNasp software [65]. As a calibration point we used the 34 million years estimate for the
split between Pisum and Albizia species [27].
Estimation of the age of the M. truncatula GS2
duplication event and amplification of GS2 genes in
species inferred to have the gene duplication

To estimate the age of the M. truncatula GS2 gene
duplication event, the methodology described in the previous section was used for the following sequences:
M. truncatula MtGS2a and MtGS2b and Pisum sativum
GS2 (for calibration purposes). The estimated age of
14.9 My for the separation between Pisum and Medicago was used to estimate the age of the M. truncatula
GS2 gene duplication. The comparison of the estimated
age for the duplication event with the ages for the
separation of species of the vicioide subclade from

Page 13 of 16

M. truncatula (see previous section) revealed that the
gene duplication likely occurred before the separation of
the Medicago and Melilotus genera.
Genomic DNA from Melilotus albus was amplified
using primers Gs2F1 and Gs2R1 (additional file 2 Table
S1), designed to align with conserved regions of the coding sequence of the L. japonicus (AF459587), P. sativum
(M20664), M. truncatula MtGS2a and MtGS2b
(AY225150; AC202342), Phaseolus vulgaris (X12738),
and Glycine max (AF353620). Standard amplification
conditions were 35 cycles with denaturation at 94°C for
30 seconds, primer annealing at 50°C for 30 s, and
primer extension at 72°C for 3 min. As these primers
supported the amplification of the two GS2 genes in
M. truncatula, the Melilotus albus amplification product
of ~950 bp was cloned. This amplification product is
expected to be the result of the amplification of both
M. albus GS2 genes. Therefore, for 36 colonies the
amplification product of ~500 bp obtained with primers
GS2F2 and GS2R2 (amplification conditions as described
above) were digested with AluI and Sau3A. For each
restriction fragment three colonies were sequenced in
order to obtain a consensus sequence. The ABI PRISM
BigDye cycle-sequencing kit (Perkin Elmer, Foster City,
CA), and specific primers, or the primers for the M13
forward and reverse priming sites of the pCR2.1 vector,
were used to prepare the sequencing reactions. Sequencing was performed by STABVIDA (Lisboa, Portugal).
The Trifolium pratense sequence included in the phylogeny was obtained from the consensus of the 46 EST
sequences, out of 38109 available for this species,
retrieved using BLASTn and the M. truncatula MtGS2a
sequence as a query. It should be noted that for the
region considered these sequences are identical. Alignment was performed as described above. For Bayesian
tree estimation we used MrBayes [66] with the generalized time reversible (GTR) model of sequence evolution,
allowing for among site rate variation and a proportion
of invariable sites. Third codon positions were allowed to
have a gamma-distributed rate with a different shape
parameter than the first and second positions. Two
simultaneous, completely independent analyses starting
from different random trees were run for one million
generations (each comprising one cold and three heated
chains). Samples were taken every 100th generations. The
first 2500 samples were discarded (burnin).
RACE and MtGS2b cDNA isolation

Rapid amplification of 5′ and 3′ cDNA ends was carried
out using FirstChoice® RLM-RACE Kit (Ambion®)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with some
minor adaptations. The 5′RLM-RACE first-strand cDNA
synthesis used 6 μg of total RNA while 3′RACE used
1μg. Both 5′ and 3′ primary (outer) and nested (inner)

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

PCRs were performed using Pfu DNA polymerase (Fermentas, Life Sciences). Primers were designed according
to the coding sequence that was deduced from the
genomic sequence (additional file 2 Table S2). The
resulting PCR fragments were cloned into pCR® Blunt
Vector (Invitrogen, Life Science) and individual clones
were sequenced. Gene specific primers were designed to
anneal at the beginning of the 5′UTR and at the end of 3′
UTR. PCR amplification using these primers, Pfu DNA
polymerase (Fermentas, Life Sciences) and 50 ng of firststrand cDNA resulted in the isolation of two PCR fragments of approximately 1700 bp (GS2b-a) and 1600 bp
(GS2b-b) that were further cloned into pCR® Blunt Vector (pCR®Blunt-GS2b constructs). All sequencing results
were obtained using an automatic capillary sequencer
(Stab Vida, Portugal). RACE-PCRs and the isolation of
MtGS2b full-length cDNAs were performed on total
RNA from a pool of differently developed seeds. The primer sequences are indicated in additional file 2, Table S2.
RT-PCR Analysis

For RT-PCR, 5 μg of total RNA were reverse transcribed
using Superscript-RT™ III (Invitrogen, Life Science) and
Random Hexamers according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Semi-quantification of MtGS2b-a, MtGS2bb, MtGS2a and elongation factor 1-a (Elf1-a) transcript
levels was performed using a reaction mix composed of
50 ng of cDNA as template, 2 mM dNTP’s, 10 pmol
primers (additional file 2, Table S3), 1.5 mM Mg2+, and
0.25 units of Taq DNA Polymerase (AbGene Limited) in
a total volume of 50 μL. The amplification conditions
were as follows: (1×) 95°C, 2 min; (30×) 95°C, 30 s; each
primer pair amplification temperature, 30 s; 72°C, 30 s.
The amplified fragments were separated on 2% agarose
gels and labeled with SYBR® Safe DNA Stain (Invitrogen,
Life Science). Gel images were obtained using a
Typhoon 8600 variable mode Imager (GE Healthcare,
Lifesciences) and band intensities were quantified using
the ImageQuant 5.1 software (Molecular Dynamics).
Expression of MtGS2b recombinant protein in Escherichia
coli

MtGS2b coding sequence for the predicted mature protein, that is, without the sequence corresponding to the
transit peptide, was amplified from the pCR®Blunt-GS2b
constructs with Platinum® Taq High Fidelity enzyme
(Invitrogen, Life Science) using MtGS2b specific primer
(5′GCAATCAACTCTGGCACC3′) and M13 foward primer. The resulting 1416 bp PCR amplified fragment was
further digested with SalI (New England Biolabs) and
inserted in frame in the NcoI/XhoI sites of pTrc99A vector (GE healthcare, Lifesciences), with the NcoI site as a
blunt end. The resulting construct pTrc99a-GS2b was
transformed into the Escherichia coli glnA mutant

Page 14 of 16

ET8894 [67]. The cloning strategy used for MtGS2a is
described in Melo et al. [12] as well as the procedures
for the complementation assays.
Preparation of soluble protein extracts from E. Coli and
plant tissues and GS Activity Assays

Plant material and bacterial pellets were homogenized at
0°C to 4°C using a mortar and pestle as described before
[12]. GS activity was determined using both the transferase and biosynthetic assays [68]. One unit of activity is
equivalent to 1μmol min -1 μg-1 glutamyl hydroxamate
produced at 30°C.
Western Immunoblotting

Soluble protein concentration was measured by the Coomassie dye-binding assay (Bio Rad) using BSA as a standard. 10 μg of total soluble protein extracts were separated
by 12.5% (w/v) SDS-polyacryamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) and electroblotted onto nitrocellulose
membranes (Schleicher & Schuell). Immunodetection
was performed with a rabbit polyclonal anti-peptide
(SKSRTISKPVEHPSEL) antibody (Eurogentec), synthesized to specifically detect plastid-located GS isoenzymes
and does not recognize cytosolic GS isoenzymes. Immunodetection was performed using goat anti-rabbit peroxidase conjugated antibody (Vector Laboratories) and ECL™
(GE healthcare, Lifesciences) detection system.

Additional material
Additional file 1: GenBank accession numbers of DNA sequences
used for phylogenetic analysis. GenBank accession numbers for three
chloroplast gene regions used to estimate the age of separation of
different species of the vicioide subclade.
Additional file 2: List of primers. Sequence of the primers used to
amplify GS2 genes from Medicago truncatula and Melilotus alba.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the European Commission under the
Frameworks VI project FP6-2002-FOOD-1-506223 (GRAIN LEGUMES) and by
FCT project PTDC/AGR-AAM/099577/2008. We are grateful to Catarina Santos
and Fernando Tavares for helpful discussions.
Author details
Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular da Universidade do Porto, Rua do
Campo Alegre, 823, 4150-180 Porto, Portugal. 2Laboratoire des Interactions
Plantes-Microorganismes, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Boite Postale 52627, 31326
Castanet-Tolosan Cedex, France.

1

Authors’ contributions
ARS carried out all the experimental work, participated in the design of the
study and helped to draft the manuscript. CPV carried out the molecular
phylogenetic analysis and drafted the corresponding text. JVC participated in
the design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. HGC conceived
and coordinated the study and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

Page 15 of 16

Received: 5 April 2010 Accepted: 19 August 2010
Published: 19 August 2010
20.
References
1. Miflin BJ, Habash DZ: The role of glutamine synthetase and glutamate
dehydrogenase in nitrogen assimilation and possibilities for
improvement in the nitrogen utilization of crops. J Exp Bot 2002,
53(370):979-987.
2. Domoney C, Duc G, Ellis TH, Ferrandiz C, Firnhaber C, Gallardo K, Hofer J,
Kopka J, Kuster H, Madueno F, et al: Genetic and genomic analysis of
legume flowers and seeds. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2006, 9(2):133-141.
3. Gallardo K, Firnhaber C, Zuber H, Hericher D, Belghazi M, Henry C, Kuster H,
Thompson R: A combined proteome and transcriptome analysis of
developing Medicago truncatula seeds: evidence for metabolic
specialization of maternal and filial tissues. Mol Cell Proteomics 2007,
6(12):2165-2179.
4. Gallardo K, Le Signor C, Vandekerckhove J, Thompson RD, Burstin J:
Proteomics of Medicago truncatula seed development establishes the
time frame of diverse metabolic processes related to reserve
accumulation. Plant Physiol 2003, 133(2):664-682.
5. Verdier J, Thompson RD: Transcriptional regulation of storage protein
synthesis during dicotyledon seed filling. Plant Cell Physiol 2008,
49(9):1263-1271.
6. Bernard SM, Habash DZ: The importance of cytosolic glutamine
synthetase in nitrogen assimilation and recycling. New Phytol 2009,
182(3):608-620.
7. Orea A, Pajuelo P, Pajuelo E, Quidiello C, Romero JM, Marquez AJ: Isolation
of photorespiratory mutants from Lotus japonicus deficient in glutamine
synthetase. Physiol Plant 2002, 115(3):352-361.
8. Wallsgrove RM, Turner JC, Hall NP, Kendall AC, Bright SW: Barley Mutants
Lacking Chloroplast Glutamine Synthetase-Biochemical and Genetic
Analysis. Plant Physiol 1987, 83(1):155-158.
9. Freeman J, Marquez A, Wallsgrove RM, Saarelainen R, Forde BG: Molecular
analysis of barley mutants deficient in chloroplast glutamine synthetase.
Plant Mol Biol 1990, 14(3):297-311.
10. Li MG, Villemur R, Hussey PJ, Silflow CD, Gantt JS, Snustad DP: Differential
expression of six glutamine synthetase genes in Zea mays. Plant Mol Biol
1993, 23(2):401-407.
11. Lightfoot DA, Green NK, Cullimore JV: The chloroplast-located glutamine
synthetase of Phaseolus vulgaris L.: nucleotide sequence, expression in
different organs and uptake into isolated chloroplasts. Plant Molecular
biology 1988, 11(2):12.
12. Melo PM, Lima LM, Santos IM, Carvalho HG, Cullimore JV: Expression of the
plastid-located glutamine synthetase of Medicago truncatula.
Accumulation of the precursor in root nodules reveals an in vivo control
at the level of protein import into plastids. Plant Physiol 2003,
132(1):390-399.
13. Nogueira EM, Olivares FL, Japiassu JC, Vilar C, Vinagre F, Baldania JI,
Hemerly AS: Characterization of glutamine synthetase genes in
sugarcane genotypes with different rates of biological nitrogen fixation.
Plant Science 2005, 169(5):14.
14. Ochs G, Schock G, Trischler M, Kosemund K, Wild A: Complexity and
expression of the glutamine synthetase multigene family in the
amphidiploid crop Brassica napus. Plant Mol Biol 1999, 39(3):395-405.
15. Peterman TK, Goodman HM: The glutamine synthetase gene family of
Arabidopsis thaliana: light-regulation and differential expression in
leaves, roots and seeds. Mol Gen Genet 1991, 230(1-2):145-154.
16. Tingey SV, Tsai FY, Edwards JW, Walker EL, Coruzzi GM: Chloroplast and
cytosolic glutamine synthetase are encoded by homologous nuclear
genes which are differentially expressed in vivo. J Biol Chem 1988,
263(20):9651-9657.
17. Becker TW, Caboche M, Carrayol E, Hirel B: Nucleotide sequence of a
tobacco cDNA encoding plastidic glutamine synthetase and light
inducibility, organ specificity and diurnal rhythmicity in the expression
of the corresponding genes of tobacco and tomato. Plant Mol Biol 1992,
19(3):367-379.
18. Zozaya-Hinchliffe M, Potenza C, Ortega JL, Sengupta-Gopalan C: Nitrogen
and metabolic regulation of the expression of plastidic glutamine
synthetase in alfalfa (Medicago sativa). Plant Science 2005, 168(4):12.
19. Bernard SM, Moller AL, Dionisio G, Kichey T, Jahn TP, Dubois F, Baudo M,
Lopes MS, Terce-Laforgue T, Foyer CH, et al: Gene expression, cellular

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

localisation and function of glutamine synthetase isozymes in wheat
(Triticum aestivum L.). Plant Mol Biol 2008, 67(1-2):89-105.
Carvalho H, Sunkel C, Salema R, Cullimore JV: Heteromeric assembly of the
cytosolic glutamine synthetase polypeptides of Medicago truncatula:
complementation of a glnA Escherichia coli mutant with a plant
domain-swapped enzyme. Plant Mol Biol 1997, 35(5):623-632.
Stanford AC, Larsen K, Barker DG, Cullimore JV: Differential expression
within the glutamine synthetase gene family of the model legume
Medicago truncatula. Plant Physiol 1993, 103(1):73-81.
Mathis R, Gamas P, Meyer Y, Cullimore JV: The presence of GSI-like genes
in higher plants: support for the paralogous evolution of GSI and GSII
genes. J Mol Evol 2000, 50(2):116-122.
Medicago truncatula sequencing resources. [http://www.medicago.org/
genome].
Gasteiger E, Hoogland C, Gattiker A, Duvaud S, Wilkins MR, Appel RD, A B:
Protein Identification and Analysis Tools on the ExPASy Server. The
Proteomics Protocols Handbook Totowa: Humana Press IncWalker JM 2005,
571-607.
Emanuelsson O, Brunak S, von Heijne G, Nielsen H: Locating proteins in
the cell using TargetP, SignalP and related tools. Nat Protoc 2007,
2(4):953-971.
Zuckerkandl E, Pauling L: Molecules as documents of evolutionary history.
J Theor Biol 1965, 8(2):357-366.
Wikstrom N, Savolainen V, Chase MW: Evolution of the angiosperms:
calibrating the family tree. Proc Biol Sci 2001, 268(1482):2211-2220.
Wojciechowski MF, Lavin M, Sanderson MJ: A phylogeny of legumes
(Leguminosae) based on analysis of the plastid matK gene resolves
many well-supported subclades within the family. American Journal of
Botany 2004, 91:17.
The Lotus Japonicus genome browser. [http://www.kazusa.or.jp/lotus/].
Kass ER, Raftery AE: Bayes Factors. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 1995, 90:23.
Glevarec G, Bouton S, Jaspard E, Riou MT, Cliquet JB, Suzuki A, Limami AM:
Respective roles of the glutamine synthetase/glutamate synthase cycle
and glutamate dehydrogenase in ammonium and amino acid
metabolism during germination and post-germinative growth in the
model legume Medicago truncatula. Planta 2004, 219(2):286-297.
Seabra AR, Carvalho H, Pereira PJB: Crystallization and preliminary
crystallographic characterization of glutamine synthetase from Medicago
truncatula. Acta Crystallographica Section F 2009, 65(12):4.
Unno H, Uchida T, Sugawara H, Kurisu G, Sugiyama T, Yamaya T,
Sakakibara H, Hase T, Kusunoki M: Atomic structure of plant glutamine
synthetase: a key enzyme for plant productivity. J Biol Chem 2006,
281(39):29287-29296.
Lima L, Seabra A, Melo P, Cullimore J, Carvalho H: Phosphorylation and
subsequent interaction with 14-3-3 proteins regulate plastid glutamine
synthetase in Medicago truncatula. Planta 2006, 223(3):558-567.
Ohno S: Evolution by gene duplication. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1 1970.
Kumada Y, Benson DR, Hillemann D, Hosted TJ, Rochefort DA,
Thompson CJ, Wohlleben W, Tateno Y: Evolution of the glutamine
synthetase gene, one of the oldest existing and functioning genes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1993, 90(7):3009-3013.
Biesiadka J, Legocki AB: Evolution of the glutamine synthetase gene in
plants. Plant Science 1997, 128(1):8.
Doyle JJ: Evolution of Higher-Plant Glutamine Synthetase Genes:Tissue
Specificity as a Criterion for Predicting Orthology. Mol Biol Evol 1991,
8(3):12.
Pesole G, Bozzetti MP, Lanave C, Preparata G, Saccone C: Glutamine
synthetase gene evolution: a good molecular clock. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1991, 88(2):522-526.
Avila Saez C, Munoz-Chapuli R, Plomion C, Frigerio J, Canovas FM: Two
genes encoding distinct cytosolic glutamine synthetases are closely
linked in the pine genome. FEBS Lett 2000, 477(3):237-243.
Walker EL, Weeden NF, Taylor CB, Green P, Coruzzi GM: Molecular
evolution of duplicate copies of genes encoding cytosolic glutamine
synthetase in Pisum sativum. Plant Mol Biol 1995, 29(6):1111-1125.
Ner-Gaon H, Halachmi R, Savaldi-Goldstein S, Rubin E, Ophir R, Fluhr R:
Intron retention is a major phenomenon in alternative splicing in
Arabidopsis. Plant J 2004, 39(6):877-885.
Wang BB, Brendel V: Genomewide comparative analysis of alternative
splicing in plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(18):7175-7180.

Seabra et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/183

44. Curi GC, Chan RL, Gonzalez DH: The leader intron of Arabidopsis thaliana
genes encoding cytochrome c oxidase subunit 5c promotes high-level
expression by increasing transcript abundance and translation efficiency.
J Exp Bot 2005, 56(419):2563-2571.
45. Samadder P, Sivamani E, Lu J, Li X, Qu R: Transcriptional and posttranscriptional enhancement of gene expression by the 5′ UTR intron of
rice rubi3 gene in transgenic rice cells. Mol Genet Genomics 2008,
279(4):429-439.
46. Mansilla A, Lopez-Sanchez C, de la Rosa EJ, Garcia-Martinez V, MartinezSalas E, de Pablo F, Hernandez-Sanchez C: Developmental regulation of a
proinsulin messenger RNA generated by intron retention. EMBO Rep
2005, 6(12):1182-1187.
47. Chung BY, Simons C, Firth AE, Brown CM, Hellens RP: Effect of 5′UTR
introns on gene expression in Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Genomics 2006,
7:120.
48. Reddy AS: Alternative splicing of pre-messenger RNAs in plants in the
genomic era. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2007, 58:267-294.
49. Eisenberg D, Almassy RJ, Janson CA, Chapman MS, Suh SW, Cascio D,
Smith WW: Some evolutionary relationships of the primary biological
catalysts glutamine synthetase and RuBisCO. Cold Spring Harb Symp
Quant Biol 1987, 52:483-490.
50. Hedley CL, Harvey DM, Keely RJ: Role of PEP carboxylase during seed
development in Pisum sativum. Nature 1975, 258:3.
51. Foyer CH, Bloom AJ, Queval G, Noctor G: Photorespiratory metabolism:
genes, mutants, energetics, and redox signaling. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2009,
60:455-484.
52. Woodall J, Forde BG: Glutamine synthetase polypeptides in the roots of
55 legume species in relation to their climatic origin and the
partitioning of nitrate assimilation. Plant, Cell & Environment 1995, 19(7):11.
53. Gallardo K, Lesignor C, Darmency M, Burstin J, Thompson R, Rochat C,
Boutin J, Kuester H, Buitink J, Leprince O, Limami A, Grusak MA: From Seed
biology of Medicago truncatula. The Medicago truncatula Handbook
Ardmore, OK: The Samuel Roberts Noble FoundationMathesius U 2006
[http://www.noble.org/MedicagoHandbook/].
54. Weber H, Borisjuk L, Wobus U: Molecular physiology of legume seed
development. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2005, 56:253-279.
55. Le Signor C, Gallardo K, Prosperi JM, Salon C, Quillien L, Thompson R,
Duc G: Genetic diversity for seed protein composition in Medicago
truncatula. Plant Genetic Resources 2005, 3(1):13.
56. Borisjuk L, Nguyen TH, Neuberger T, Rutten T, Tschiersch H, Claus B,
Feussner I, Webb AG, Jakob P, Weber H, et al: Gradients of lipid storage,
photosynthesis and plastid differentiation in developing soybean seeds.
New Phytol 2005, 167(3):761-776.
57. Allen DK, Ohlrogge JB, Shachar-Hill Y: The role of light in soybean seed
filling metabolism. Plant J 2009, 58(2):220-234.
58. Borisjuk L, Rolletschek H: The oxygen status of the developing seed. New
Phytol 2009, 182(1):17-30.
59. Ruuska SA, Schwender J, Ohlrogge JB: The capacity of green oilseeds to
utilize photosynthesis to drive biosynthetic processes. Plant Physiol 2004,
136(1):2700-2709.
60. Rolletschek H, Nguyen TH, Hausler RE, Rutten T, Gobel C, Feussner I,
Radchuk R, Tewes A, Claus B, Klukas C, et al: Antisense inhibition of the
plastidial glucose-6-phosphate/phosphate translocator in Vicia seeds
shifts cellular differentiation and promotes protein storage. Plant J 2007,
51(3):468-484.
61. Riebeseel E, Hausler RE, Radchuk R, Meitzel T, Hajirezaei MR, Emery RJ,
Kuster H, Nunes-Nesi A, Fernie AR, Weschke W, et al: The 2-oxoglutarate/
malate translocator mediates amino acid and storage protein
biosynthesis in pea embryos. Plant J 2010, 61(2):350-363.
62. Lullien V, Barker DG, Lajudie Pd, Huguet T: Plant gene expression in
effective and ineffective root nodules of alfalfa (Medicago sativa). Plant
Molecular biology 1987, 9(5):11.
63. Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T: Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual.
New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 2 1989.
64. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25(24):4876-4882.
65. Rozas J, Sanchez-DelBarrio JC, Messeguer X, Rozas R: DnaSP, DNA
polymorphism analyses by the coalescent and other methods.
Bioinformatics 2003, 19(18):2496-2497.

Page 16 of 16

66. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(8):754-755.
67. MacNeil D: General method, using Mu-Mud1 dilysogens, to determine
the direction of transcription of and generate deletions in the glnA
region of Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1981, 146(1):260-268.
68. Cullimore JV, Sims AP: An association between photorespiration and
protein catabolism: studies with Chlamydomonas. Planta 1980, 150(5):4.
69. Choi YA, Kim SG, Kwon YM: The plastidic glutamine synthetase activity is
directly modulated by means of redox change at two unique cysteine
residues. 1999, 149(2):8.
doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-183
Cite this article as: Seabra et al.: Medicago truncatula contains a second
gene encoding a plastid located glutamine synthetase exclusively
expressed in developing seeds. BMC Plant Biology 2010 10:183.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
