<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Metagenomic biomarker discovery and explanation</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60. doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-6-r60"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Nicola Segata"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

METHOD

Open Access

Metagenomic biomarker discovery and
explanation
Nicola Segata1, Jacques Izard2,3, Levi Waldron1, Dirk Gevers4, Larisa Miropolsky1, Wendy S Garrett5,6,7 and
Curtis Huttenhower1*

Abstract
This study describes and validates a new method for metagenomic biomarker discovery by way of class
comparison, tests of biological consistency and effect size estimation. This addresses the challenge of finding
organisms, genes, or pathways that consistently explain the differences between two or more microbial
communities, which is a central problem to the study of metagenomics. We extensively validate our method on
several microbiomes and a convenient online interface for the method is provided at http://huttenhower.sph.
harvard.edu/lefse/.
Background
Biomarker discovery has proven to be one of the most
broadly applicable and successful means of translating
molecular and genomic data into clinical practice. Comparisons between healthy and diseased tissues have highlighted the importance of tasks such as class discovery
(detecting novel subtypes of a disease) and class prediction (determining the subtype of a new sample) [1-4],
and recent metagenomic assays have shown that human
microbial communities can be used as biomarkers for
host factors such as lifestyle [5-7] and disease [7-10]. As
sequencing technology continues to develop and makes
microbial biomarkers increasingly easily detected, this
enables clinical diagnostic and microbiological applications through the comparison of microbial communities
[11,12].
The human microbiome, consisting of the total microbial complement associated with human hosts, is an
important emerging area for metagenomic biomarker
discovery [13,14]. Changes in microbial abundances in
the gut, oral cavity, and skin have been associated with
disease states ranging from obesity [15-17] to psoriasis
[18]. More generally, the metagenomic study of microbial communities is an effective approach for identifying
the microorganisms or microbial metabolic characteristics of any uncultured sample [19,20]. Analyses of
* Correspondence: chuttenh@hsph.harvard.edu
1
Department of Biostatistics, 677 Huntington Avenue, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

metagenomic data typically seek to identify the specific
organisms, clades, operational taxonomic units, or pathways whose relative abundances differ between two or
more groups of samples, and several features of microbial communities have been proposed as potential biomarkers for various disease states. For example, single
pathogenic organisms can signal disease if present in a
community [21,22], and increases and decreases in community complexity have been observed in bacterial vaginosis [23] and Crohn’s disease [8]. Each of these
different types of microbial biomarkers is correlated
with disease phenotypes, but few bioinformatic methods
exist to explain the class comparisons afforded by metagenomic data.
Identifying the most biologically informative features
differentiating two or more phenotypes can be challenging in any genomics dataset, and this is particularly
true for metagenomic biomarkers. Robust statistical
tools are needed to ensure the reproducibility of conclusions drawn from metagenomic data, which is crucial
for clinical application of the biological findings. Related
challenges are associated with high-dimensional data
regardless of the data type or experimental platform; the
number of potential biomarkers, for example, is typically
much higher than the number of samples [24-26]. Metagenomic analyses additionally present their own specific
issues, including sequencing errors, chimeric reads
[27,28], and complex underlying biology; many microbial communities have been found to show remarkably
high inter-subject variability. For example, large

© 2011 Segata et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

differences are detected even among the gut microbiomes of twins [29], and both human microbiomes and
environmental communities are thought to be characterized by the presence of a long tail of rare organisms
[30-32]. Moreover, simply identifying potential biomarkers without elucidating their biological consistency and
roles is only a precursor to understanding the underlying mechanisms of microbe-microbe or host-microbe
interactions [33]. In many cases, it is necessary to
explain not just how two biological samples differ, but
why. This problem is referred to as class comparison:
how can the differences between phenotypes such as
tumor subtype or disease state be explained in terms of
consistent biological pathways or molecular
mechanisms?
A number of methods have been proposed for class
discovery or comparison in metagenomic data. MEGAN
[34] is a metagenomic analysis tool with recent additions for phylogenetic comparisons [35] and statistical
analyses [36]. MEGAN, however, can only compare single pairs of metagenomes, as is also the case with
STAMP [37], which does introduce a concept of ‘biological relevance’ in the form of confidence intervals. UniFrac [38] compares sets of metagenomes at a strictly
taxonomic level using phylogenetic distance, while MGRAST [39], ShotgunFunctionalizeR [40], mothur [41],
and METAREP [42] all process metagenomic data using
standard statistical tests (mainly t-tests with some modifications). Most methods for community analysis from
an ecological perspective rely on unsupervised cluster
analyses based on principal component analysis [43] or
principal coordinate analysis [44]. These can successfully
detect groups of related samples, but they fail to include
prior knowledge of phenotypes or environmental conditions associated with the groups, and they generally do
not identify the biological features responsible for group
relationships. Metastats [45] is the only current method
that explicitly couples statistical analysis (to assess
whether metagenomes differ) with biomarker discovery
(to detect features characterizing the differences) based
on repeated t statistics and Fisher’s tests on random
permutations. However, none of these methods, even
those offering nuanced analyses of metagenomic data,
provide biological class explanations to establish statistical significance, biological consistency, and effect size
estimation of predicted biomarkers.
In this work, we present the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) method to support highdimensional class comparisons with a particular focus
on metagenomic analyses. LEfSe determines the features
(organisms, clades, operational taxonomic units, genes,
or functions) most likely to explain differences between
classes by coupling standard tests for statistical significance with additional tests encoding biological

Page 2 of 18

consistency and effect relevance. Class comparison
methods typically predict biomarkers consisting of features that violate a null hypothesis of no difference
between classes; we additionally detect the subset of features with abundance patterns compatible with an algorithmically encoded biological hypothesis and estimate
the sizes of the significant variations. In particular, effect
size provides an estimation of the magnitude of the
observed phenomenon due to each characterizing feature and it is thus a valuable tool for ranking the relevance of different biological aspects and for addressing
further investigations and analyses. The introduction of
prior biological knowledge in the method contributes to
constrain the analysis and thus to address the challenges
traditionally connected with high-dimensional data
mining. LEfSe thus aims to support biologists by suggesting biomarkers that explain most of the effect differentiating phenotypes of interest (two or more) in
biomarker discovery comparative and hypothesis-driven
investigations. The visualization of the discovered biomarkers on taxonomic trees provides an effective means
for summarizing the results in a biologically meaningful
way, as this both statistically and visually captures the
hierarchical relationships inherent in 16S-based taxonomies/phylogenies or in ontologies of pathways and
biomolecular functions.
We validated this approach using data from human
microbiomes, a mouse model of ulcerative colitis, and
environmental samples, in each case predicting groups
of organisms or operational taxonomic units that concisely differentiate the classes being compared. We
further evaluated LEfSe using synthetic data, observing
that it achieves a substantially better false positive rate
compared to standard statistical tests, at the price of a
moderately increased false negative rate (that can be
adjusted as needed by the user). An implementation of
LEfSe including a convenient graphical interface incorporated in the Galaxy framework [46,47] is provided
online at [48].

Results and discussion
LEfSe is an algorithm for high-dimensional biomarker
discovery and explanation that identifies genomic features (genes, pathways, or taxa) characterizing the differences between two or more biological conditions (or
classes) (Figure 1). It emphasizes statistical significance,
biological consistency and effect relevance, allowing
researchers to identify differentially abundant features
that are also consistent with biologically meaningful
categories (subclasses; see Materials and methods).
LEfSe first robustly identifies features that are statistically different among biological classes. It then performs
additional tests to assess whether these differences are
consistent with respect to expected biological behavior;

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

Page 3 of 18

Figure 1 LEfSe mines a wide range of high-throughput genetic data to find biologically relevant features characterizing one or more
experimental conditions. The inputs to the system are the specifications of the biological hypothesis under investigation (conditions and intercondition sample groupings), the high-dimensional data obtained experimentally, and, optionally, prior knowledge from literature or databases
used to define known relationships between features (used for meaningful hierarchical organization of the discovered biomarkers) or samples
(used for testing biological consistency of potential biomarkers). LEfSe is a three-step algorithm (detailed in Figure 6). (a) LEfSe first provides the
list of features that are differential among conditions of interest with statistical and biological significance, ranking them according to the effect
size. (b) For problems with known hierarchical structure, either phylogenetic or functional, we then provide a mapping of the differences to
taxonomic or functional trees. (c) Finally, the system produces a histogram visualizing the raw data within the specified problem structure for
each relevant feature. While LEfSe has been developed primarily for metagenomic data containing taxon or gene abundances, it can be used for
biomarker discovery in any setting where prior biological knowledge regarding the structure of a comparison is coupled with statistically
significant differences in high-dimensional genomic features. KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; WGS, whole genome shotgun.

for example, given some known population structure
within a set of input samples, is a feature more abundant in all population subclasses or in just one? Specifically, we first use the non-parametric factorial KruskalWallis (KW) sum-rank test [49] to detect features with
significant differential abundance with respect to the
class of interest; biological consistency is subsequently
investigated using a set of pairwise tests among subclasses using the (unpaired) Wilcoxon rank-sum test
[50,51]. As a last step, LEfSe uses LDA [52] to estimate
the effect size of each differentially abundant feature
and, if desired by the investigator, to perform dimension
reduction.
We have specifically designed LEfSe for biomarker discovery in metagenomic data. We thus summarize our
results here from applying the tool to 16S rRNA gene

and whole genome shotgun datasets to detect bacterial
organisms and functional characteristics differentially
abundant between two or more microbial environments.
These include body sites within human microbiomes
(mucosal surfaces and aerobic/anaerobic environments),
adult and infant microbiomes, inflammatory bowel disease status in a mouse model, bacterial and viral environmental communities, and synthetic data for
quantitative computational evaluation.
Taxa characterizing body sites within the human
microbiome

Microbial community organization at multiple human
body sites is an area of active current research, since
both low- and high-throughput methods have shown
both differences and overlaps among the microbiota of

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

multiple body sites [53,54]. We examined these differences in the 16S-based phylometagenomic dataset from
24 individuals enrolled in the Human Microbiome Project [13,55]. A minimum of 5,000 16S rRNA gene
sequences were obtained for 301 samples from 24
healthy subjects (12 male, 12 female) covering 18 body
sites, including 6 main body site categories: the oral cavity (9 sub-sites sampled), the vagina (3 sub-sites
sampled), the skin (2 sub-sites sampled), the retroauricular crease (2 sub-sites sampled), the nasal cavity (1
sample) and the gut (1 sample). We validated LEfSe by
contrasting mucosal versus non-mucosal body site
classes and by comparing three levels of aerobic environments (anaerobic, microaerobic, and aerobic). In both
cases, the sub-sites within each class of body site were
used as a biological subclass.
Mucosal surfaces are colonized by diverse bacteria; nonmucosal microbiomes are strongly enriched for
Actinobacteria

Our first analysis focused on differences in microbiota
composition between mucosal and non-mucosal body
sites. The oral cavity, gut, and vaginal sites were classified as sources of mucosal communities and the anterior
fossa (skin), nasal cavity, and retroauricular crease as
non-mucosal. Mucosal environments differ greatly from
the other body sites, characterized primarily by interaction with the human immune system, oxidative challenge, and hydration [56].
LEfSe provides three main outputs (Figure 2), describing the effect sizes of differences observed among
mucosal/non-mucosal communities, the phylogenetic
distribution of these differences based on the Ribosomal
Database Project (RDP) bacterial taxonomy [57], and
the raw data driving these effects. LEfSe detected 15
bacterial clades showing statistically significant and biologically consistent differences in non-mucosal body
sites (Figure 2a).
The most differentially abundant bacterial taxa in nonmucosal body sites belong to phyla with prevalent aerobic members: Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria, including environmental organisms from the
Betaproteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria clades.
Non-mucosal overrepresented genera include Propionibacterium, Staphylococcus (found exclusively in nonmucosal samples), Corynebacterium, and Pseudomonas.
Also of note is the relevant representation of plastids
from plant organisms (chloroplasts), for which the distribution of associated taxa varies, as some are limited
to non-mucosal surfaces (environmental exposure and
potentially cosmetic products) and others to the digestive track (ingested food). No clades are consistently
present in all mucosal body sites, demonstrating the bdiversity of these communities (that is, differences

Page 4 of 18

among their population structure), but many taxa within
Actinobacteria, Bacillales, and several other clades are
relatively abundant at all non-mucosal sites. The withinsubject b-diversity at all phylogenetic levels is highlighted in Additional file 1, quantifying the extent to
which distances among different mucosal body sites are
larger than the equivalent distances among non-mucosal
sites. This leads to a lack of taxa common to all mucosal
body sites, and therefore no taxa are determined by
LEfSe to be characteristic of the mucosa as a whole.
The Actinomycetales are usually the most abundant
phylogenetic unit (order level) in non-mucosal communities, with percentages higher than 90% in several skin
samples and at most 20% in the great majority of the
oral mucosal samples and substantially lower in the
vagina and gut (Figure 2c). From a quantitative viewpoint, the taxonomic order Actinomycetales makes up
essentially all of the detected members of the phylum
Actinobacteria, except in the vaginal site, which
reported a substantial Bifidobacteriales presence. Bifidobacteriales themselves are not detected as differentially
abundant between mucosal and non-mucosal body sites,
since this is a feature only of the vaginal samples and
not of all mucosal body sites. The contrast of many
clades’ abundance versus distribution is striking; for
example, the genera Alloscardovia, Parascardovia and
Scardovia are present in all body sites at very low abundances, while Gardnerella is overrepresented only in
vaginal samples, with over three orders of magnitude
difference in abundance. A similar commonality of distribution was found for the Bacillales at an even lower
abundance. At the genus level, Propionibacterium, Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium and Pseudomonas are differentiated by both distribution and abundance. The
Staphylococcus genus in particular is detected by LEfSe
with a very high LDA score (more than five orders of
magnitude), reflecting marked abundance in non-mucosal sites (mean 10%, 18% and 21% in the skin, retroauricular crease and anterior nares body sites, respectively)
and consistently low abundance in mucosal sites (mean
less than 0.001%).
Classes with multiple levels: distinct aerobic, anaerobic,
and microaerobic communities in the human microbiome

The roles of anaerobic metabolism in the commensal
human microbiota have not yet been fully investigated
due to the difficulty of studying these communities in
culture. We thus further investigated the aerobicity
characteristics of human microbial communities at a
high level by grouping body sites into three classes with
distinct levels of available molecular oxygen. The highO2 exposure class includes body sites directly and permanently exposed to oxygen: skin, anterior nares and
retroauricular crease. The mid-O 2 exposure class

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

Page 5 of 18

Figure 2 LEfSe results on human microbiomes. (a-c) Mucosal body site analysis. Mucosal microbial communities are diverse, while nonmucosal body sites are characterized by several clades, including the Actinobacteria. The analysis reported here is carried out on initial data
from the Human Microbiome Project [55,56] assigning the main body sites to mucosal and non-mucosal classes, and using the body sites as
subclasses. These graphical outputs were generated by the publicly available LEfSe visualization modules applied on the analysis results and
integrating microbial taxonomic prior knowledge [58]. (a) Histogram of the LDA scores computed for features differentially abundant between
mucosal and non-mucosal body sites. LEfSe scores can be interpreted as the degree of consistent difference in relative abundance between
features in the two classes of analyzed microbial communities. The histogram thus identifies which clades among all those detected as
statistically and biologically differential explain the greatest differences between communities. (b) Taxonomic representation of statistically and
biologically consistent differences between mucosal and non-mucosal body sites. Differences are represented in the color of the most abundant
class (red indicating non-mucosal, yellow non-significant). Each circle’s diameter is proportional to the taxon’s abundance. This representation,
here employing the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) taxonomy [58], simultaneously highlights high-level trends and specific genera - for
example, multiple differentially abundant sibling taxa consistent with the variation of the parent clade. (c) Histogram of the Actinomycetales
relative abundances (in the 0[1] interval) in mucosal and non-mucosal body sites. Subclasses (specific body sites) are differentially colored and
the mean and median relative abundance of the Actinomycetales are indicated with solid and dashed lines, respectively. (d,e) Aerobiosis
analysis. The cladograms report the taxa (highlighted by small circles and by shading) showing different abundance values (according to LEfSe)
in the three O2-dependent classes as described in Results; for each taxon, the color denotes the class with higher median for both the small
circles and the shading. (d) The strict (all classes differential) version of LEfSe detects 13 biomarkers whereas (e) the non-strict (at least one class
differential) version of LEfSe detects 60 microbial biomarkers with abundance differential under aerobic, anaerobic, or microaerobic conditions.
Additional file 2 reports the non-strict version of LEfSe focused on the Firmicutes phylum, highlighting several low-O2 specific genera within
Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae.

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

includes the oral and vaginal body sites that can be
directly, but not permanently, atmospherically exposed,
and the low-O2 exposure class (the gut) is mainly anaerobic. The body sites included in the three classes may
have other distinguishing features in addition to different oxygen exposure and, in general, these confounding
factors can cause features unrelated with aerobiosis to
be detected as biomarkers. However, the LEfSe biological consistency step assures that the detected biomarkers are characteristic of all the subclasses of a given
class and with respect to all subclasses of the other
classes. For example, the high-abundance of a bacterial
clade in the mouth due to an oral-specific niche is not
detected as a biomarker unless the same niche is also
present in the vaginal samples (the other body site in
the mid-O 2 class) and not present in any high-O 2 or
low-O2 single body sites. So LEfSe will detect biomarkers more confidently connected with the aerobiosis
characteristics than traditional methods that do not
incorporate subclass information. Moreover, LEfSe is
specifically able to analyze ordinal classes with multiple
levels, and in agreement with established microbiology,
we observed specific microbial clades ubiquitous within
and characteristic to each of these three environments,
detailed as follows (Figure 2d).
LEfSe allows ordinal classes with more than two levels
to be analyzed in two different stringencies. The first
requires significant taxa to differ between every pair of
class values (that is, aerobicity in this example; see
Materials and methods); the discovered biomarkers
must accurately distinguish all individual classes (high-,
mid-, and low-O 2 ). In this example (Figure 2d; strict
version), we detected 13 clades with LDA scores above
2, showing three distinct abundance levels. Alternatively,
LEfSe can determine significant taxa differing in at least
one (and possibly multiple) class value(s) (non-strict version); in other words, biomarkers that distinguish at
least one individual class. Using this method (Figure 2e),
we find 60 clades with LDA scores of at least 2.
Using either approach, each oxygen level is broadly
characterized by a specific clade. The overall abundances
of the Actinobacteria phylum are higher in body sites
directly exposed to molecular oxygen with several members of the Actinomycetales order that colonize the skin.
Actinomycetales includes the Propionibacterium genus,
which is highly abundant on the skin, low in moderateO2 environments, and absent from the gut. The Lactobacillales (primarily Bacilli) are specific to moderate O2
exposure levels, with conversely lower presences in the
high-O2 exposure class, and are again absent from the
gut. The Bacteroidaceae (particularly Bacteroides) are
ubiquitous in anaerobic samples; interestingly, however,
members of this family are more abundant in high oxygen availability conditions (particularly in skin and

Page 6 of 18

retroauricular crease) than in medium oxygen availability, showing the niche diversity within the phylogenetic
branching. This is in agreement with observations that
the microenvironment of many microbial consortia
shows extreme biogeographical variation with respect to
nutrients, metabolites, and oxygen availability [58,59].
Bifidobacteria and additional clades are underrepresented
in a mouse model of ulcerative colitis

Rodent models have been established to provide a
uniquely accurate and tractable model for studying the
gut microbiota, including the molecular and cellular
mechanisms driving chronic intestinal inflammation
[60-63]. In particular, mouse models of inflammatory
bowel disease [63] facilitate a mechanistic evaluation of
the contribution of the gut microbiota to the initiation
and perpetuation of chronic intestinal inflammation, as
occurs in human Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis
[64]. One host molecular mechanism known to maintain
the balance between immune regulation and the commensal microflora is T-bet, a transcription factor
expressed in many immune cell subsets. Its loss in the
absence of an adaptive immune system results in a
highly penetrant and aggressive form of ulcerative colitis
[65] that is specifically dependent on and transmissible
through the gut flora. We thus sought to investigate the
characteristics of the fecal microbiota in a mouse model
of spontaneous colitis that occurs in a colony of Balb/c
T-bet -/- × Rag2-/- mice using 16S rRNA gene metagenomic data [66,67].
LEfSe was applied to the microbiota data of 20 T-bet-/× Rag2-/- (case) and 10 Rag2-/- (control) mice (dataset
provided in Additional File 10), finding 19 differentially
abundant taxonomic clades (a = 0.01) with an LDA
score higher than 2.0 (Figure 3). These differentially
abundant clades were consonant with both our prior
16S rRNA-based sequence analysis using complete linkage hierarchical clustering and quantitative real time
PCR-based experiments performed on the same fecal
DNA samples [67]. More specifically, the marked loss in
Bifidobacteriaceae and Bifidobacterium associated with
T-bet -/- × Rag2 -/- we observed here may explain the
positive responsiveness of this colitis to a Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis fermented milk product validated with low-throughput approaches [67].
At the family level, the Rag2-/- enrichment of Bifidobacteriaceae, Porphyromonadaceae, Staphylococcaceae
and the T-bet-/- × Rag2-/- enrichment of Lachnospiraceae confirm our reports in [68] using culture-based
and quantitative real time PCR techniques. LEfSe’s LDA
score more informatively reorders these taxa relative to
the P-values found for these families in our previous
work, highlighting the Bifidobacteria and, interestingly,
several clades within the Clostridia. These include the

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

Page 7 of 18

Figure 3 Comparison between Rag2-/- (control) and T-bet-/- × Rag2-/- (case) mice highlighting that, at the phylum level, Firmicutes are
enriched in T-bet-/- × Rag2-/- mice, whereas Actinobacteria are enriched in Rag2-/- mice. In agreement with previous culture-based studies,
Bifidobacterium species are underabundant in T-bet-/- × Rag2-/- mice [68], and LEfSe highlights several additional genus-level clades, including the
specifically depleted Roseburia and Papillibacter within the otherwise overabundant Firmicutes.

Rag2 -/- -specific Roseburia and Papillibacter genera
belonging to T-bet-/- × Rag2-/--specific families (Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae). The significant presence of Metascardovia (Bifidobacteriaceae) in Rag2-/mice is also interesting, as it may have a role similar to
Bifidobacterium and because Metascardovia has been
previously observed primarily in the oral cavity [68].
This analysis both highlights the agreement of LEfSe’s
effect size estimation with respect to low-throughput
confirmations and suggests additional clades to be
further investigated experimentally.
A comparison with current metagenomic analysis tools
using viral and microbial pathways from environmental
data

We applied LEfSe to the environmental data of [69], a
dataset with the goal of characterizing the functional
roles of viromes (that is, viral metagenomes) versus
microbiomes (that is, bacterial metagenomes). This task
was used in [45] to characterize the Metastats algorithm
on the same raw data. Among the 29 high-level functional roles (including unclassified roles) in the subsystem hierarchy of the SEED [70] and NMPDR [71]
frameworks, LEfSe identifies only the ‘Nucleosides and
nucleotides’ subsystem to be strictly differentially abundant among all environmental subclasses, specifically

with higher levels in viromes than microbiomes. This is
an accurate characterization of exactly the protein function most commonly encoded in viral genomes, whereas
bacterial genomes of course encode a wide range of less
specifically enriched functionality. When LEfSe is
relaxed to detect significant variations consistent for at
least one, rather than all, environmental subclasses, we
additionally determine the ‘Respiration’ subsystem to be
significantly enriched in microbiomes with respect to
viromes, likely reflecting the uniformly aerobic bacterial
metabolism captured by these data.
In addition to the Nucleosides and nucleotides and
Respiration subsystems, Metastats [45] reports five other
high-level functional roles as differentially abundant (P =
0.001). However, when taking the subclass structure into
account across the sampled environments, these additional
differences show much less consistent variation. This is
demonstrated in Figure 4, which reports histograms of
raw data for these cases and the different results of LEfSe,
Metastats and the KW test alone. Moreover, since the subsystem framework is hierarchical (three levels), LEfSe’s
results include a cladogram showing the significant differences on each level (see Figure 4 for a two-level cladogram, and Additional file 2 for a three-level cladogram).
Considering all three levels of SEED functional specificity, LEfSe reports 59 subsystems to be more abundant

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

Page 8 of 18

Figure 4 LEfSe highlights pathways consistently differential between bacterial microbiomes and viromes within diverse environmental
subclasses. (a) Using the SEED [71] catalog of functional pathways, LEfSe reports Nucleoside and nucleotide metabolism and Respiration to
differ consistently between bacterial microbiomes and viromes across environmental samples described in [70]. The former is significant using
the strictest all-subclasses test, the latter in the more lenient one-subclass test. (b) A two-level cladogram reporting the significant pathway
differences as visualized using the SEED hierarchy (see Additional file 3 for the three-level cladogram and detailed differences). (c) Metastats [45]
reports four additional pathways differential among these data (Carbohydrates, DNA metabolism, Membrane transport and Nitrogen
metabolism). Using only the KW test portion of LEfSe (a = 0.05), we obtain results consonant with Metastats (excluding Nitrogen metabolism).
However, as shown here, an overview of the abundance histograms of these subsystems demonstrates them to be less consistent across
environments (for example, Coral and Hyper-saline subclasses in the Carbohydrates, Membrane transport and Nitrogen metabolism) and to lose
significance within individual subclasses (as for the DNA metabolism subsystem).

in microbial metagenomes and only 7 that are more
abundant in viral metagenomes (Additional file 3). Bacterial genomes encode a much greater quantity and
diversity of biomolecular functionality than most viral
genomes, and these differences are thus to be expected.
However, they also highlight a consideration specific to
most metagenomic (and, more generally, ecological)
analyses, which typically analyze relative abundances. A
few very common subsystems in viromes (that is,
Nucleosides and nucleotides) will force the relative
abundance of all other subsystems to decrease, resulting
in apparent under-abundance. The subsystems detected
to be virus-specific may thus show this trend in part
due to the normalization of abundances in each sample.
This issue is specific to neither LEfSe nor Metastats,
however, and must be taken into account during interpretation of any relative abundance data, metagenomic
or otherwise [72].
Functional activity within the infant and adult microbiota
indicates post-weaning microbial specialization

Just as LEfSe can determine whether organisms or pathways are differentially abundant among several

metagenomic samples, it can also focus on individual
enzymes or orthologous groups. Kurokawa et al. [73]
analyzed 13 gut metagenomes from nine adults and four
unweaned infants in terms of the functions of orthologous gene families. They originally did this by comparing the COGs [74,75] found in each metagenome to a
reference database; later, White et al. [45] applied the
Metastats algorithm to directly detect differences
between infant and adult microbiomes. Using significance a values of 0.01 due to the low cardinality of the
classes (in particular the infant class), LEfSe detected
366 COGs to be enriched in either adult or infant metagenomes, 17 of which have a LDA score higher than 3
(Additional file 4).
Among the 17 COG profiles with LEfSe scores higher
than 3, 11 are also detected by Metastats. The six COGs
not detected by Metastats (Additional file 5) are Outer
membrane protein (COG1538) and Na+-driven multidrug efflux pump (COG0534), enriched in adults, and
Transposase and inactivated derivatives (COG2801,
COG2963), Transcriptional regulator/sugar kinase
(COG1940) and Transcriptional regulator (COG1309),
enriched in infants. All six COGs possess abundance

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

profiles that are completely non-overlapping between
infant and adult individuals (apart from COG1538, in
which the lowest level in adults is slightly lower than
the highest in infants) and are thus nominally quite discriminative. On the other hand, among the 192 COGs
found by Metastats, 9 are not detected by LEfSe even at
the lowest LDA score threshold (Additional file 6). All
possess overlapping abundance values between infant
and adult classes (at least two, and often more, of the
highest samples in the less abundant class overlap the
putatively more abundant class). This lack of discriminatory power precludes LEfSe from highlighting the differences as significant between adults and infants,
particularly given the low number of infant samples.
Intriguingly, LEfSe’s distinct list of functional activities
in the core infant and adult microbiomes is suggestive
of ‘generalist’ microbial activity during early life and specialization over time [76]. In fact, inspecting the five differentially abundant COGs with the highest effect sizes
for each class, we find for infants very high-level functional groups related to broad transcriptional regulation
(COG1609, COG1940, COG1309 and COG3711). In
adults, all five represent more specialized orthologous
groups, including COG1629 (Outer membrane receptor
proteins, mostly Fe transport), COG1595 (DNA-directed
RNA polymerase specialized sigma subunit, sigma24
homolog), and COG4771 (Outer membrane receptor for
ferrienterochelin and colicins). Since the number of differentially abundant COGs is very high (366), this observation was only highlighted at the top of the candidate
biomarker list due to LEfSe’s effect size quantification,
which allows the most characteristic differences among
classes to emerge. For the same reason, we can easily
confirm that sugar metabolism plays a crucial role in
the infant gut and iron metabolism in adults, as already
stated in [45,73]; the COGs with the highest LDA scores
indeed possess sugar and glucose functional activities
for infants and iron-related functionality for adults.
LEfSe achieves a very low false positive rate in synthetic
data

We further investigated the ability of LEfSe to detect
biomarkers using synthetic high-dimensional data (see
Materials and methods for the description of the dataset) in comparison with the KW test alone (a non-parametric adaptation of the analysis of variance (ANOVA))
and with Metastats [45]. The LDA effect size step of
LEfSe is not considered here for simplicity, and the artificial data are detailed in Figure 5.
Theoretically, the settings of the first two experiments
(Figure 5a,b) exactly match the application conditions for
the KW test. The false positive rate (mean 2.5%, regardless of the distance between feature means and of the
standard deviation of the normal distribution) is in fact

Page 9 of 18

consistent with the a value of 0.05, given that the negative features are half of the total. LEfSe behaved qualitatively very similar to KW, but with a considerably lower
false positive rate (less than 0.5% in the great majority of
the cases against a mean value of 2.5%) and a higher false
negative rate. In biology, false positives are often perceived as more dramatic than false negatives [77-79]; this
is often attributable to the fact that it is undesirable to
invest in expensive experimental follow-up of false positives, whereas in high-throughput settings, a few true
positives outweigh the false negatives that are left uninvestigated. With this motivation for minimizing false
positives, we conclude that LEfSe performs at least as
well as KW when no meaningful subclass structure is
available. On the other hand, when subclasses can be
identified internally to the classes and some of them do
not agree with the trend among classes, LEfSe performs
qualitatively and quantitatively much better than KW
(Figure 5c). The false positives are in fact always substantially lower than KW, whereas the false negatives are
higher only for very noisy features. Metastats [45] seems
to achieve results very similar to KW (Additional file 7)
with the same disadvantages with respect to LEfSe.

Conclusions
Gaining insight into the structure, organization, and
function of microbial communities has been proposed
as one of the major research challenges of the current
decade [80], and it will be enabled by both experimental
and computational metagenomic analyses. To this end,
we have developed the LEfSe algorithm for comparative
metagenomic studies, permitting the characterization of
microbial taxa specific to an experimental or environmental condition, the detection of pathways and biological mechanisms over- or under-represented in different
communities, and the identification of metagenomic
biomarkers in mammalian microbiomes. LEfSe is shown
here to be effective in detecting differentially abundant
features in the human microbiome (characteristically
mucosal or aerobic taxa) and in a mouse model of colitis. A comparison with existing statistical methods and
state-of-the-art metagenomic analyses of environmental,
infant gut microbiome, and synthetic data shows that
LEfSe consistently provides lower false positive rates
and can effectively aid in explaining the biology underlying differences in microbial communities.
These findings demonstrate that a concept of class
explanation including both statistical and biological significance is highly beneficial in tackling the statistical
challenges associated with high-dimensional biomarker
discovery [28,81,82]. Specifically, LEfSe determines features potentially able to explain the differences among
conditions rather than the features that simply possess
uneven distributions among classes. This is distinct

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

Page 10 of 18

Figure 5 Comparison of LEfSe and the KW test alone for false positive and negative rates in synthetic data. Both tests used a = 0.05 in
all cases, and the three artificial datasets comprise 100 samples, each in two classes, each with two subclasses of cardinality 25. The samples
consist of 1,000 synthetic features taking the place of microbial taxa, pathways, and so on; half are negative (not biomarkers) and the other half
positive. (a) LEfSe and KW false positive and negative rates at increasing values of the difference between class means. Negative features are
normally distributed with parameters (μ = 10,000, s = 100) across classes; positive features contain classes with increasingly different means. (b)
Performance as standard deviation varies within classes (rather than the difference between means, fixed at 2,000). (c) Performance as standard
deviation increases within inconsistent subclasses. Negative features have subclasses sampled from the same normal distribution (and thus not
representing consistent biomarkers). Positive features are distributed as in (b). In all cases, LEfSe sacrifices a small number of false negatives in
order to achieve a false positive rate near zero, with the goal of ensuring that biomarkers of large effect size will be both reproducible and
biologically interpretable.

from most current statistical approaches [45] and akin
to the incorporation of biological prior knowledge that
has proven highly successful in recent genome-wide
association studies [83-85]. Moreover, particularly in
(often noisy) metagenomic datasets, effect size can serve
as an orthogonal measure to complement ranking biomarkers based on P-values alone. Differences between
classes can be very statistically significant (low P-value)
but so small that they are unlikely to be biologically
responsible for phenotypic differences. On the other
hand, a biomarker with a relatively large P-value (for
example, 0.01) may correspond to a large effect size,
with statistical significance diminished by technical
noise. LEfSe investigates both aspects computationally
by testing both the consistency and the effect size of differences in feature abundance among classes with
respect to the structure of the problem. This is

performed subsequently to standard statistical significance tests and is integrated in LEfSe by assessing biologically meaningful groups of samples among subclasses
within each condition. This coupling of statistical
approaches with biological consistency and effect size
estimation alleviates possible artifacts or statistical inhomogeneity known to be common in metagenomic data,
for example, extreme variability among subjects or the
presence of a long tail of rare organisms [32,86]. Similarly, while multiple hypothesis corrected statistical significance speaks to the potential reproducibility of a
result, estimation of effect size in high-dimensional settings is crucial for addressing biological consistency and
interpretability.
The biology highlighted by these investigations speaks
to the potential of metagenomics for both microbial
ecology and translational applications. For example,

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

certain bacterial clades are frequently detected as biomarkers even in diverse environments, suggesting that
some species can adapt in surprisingly condition-specific
manners. Staphylococcus and the Bacillales, for example,
are discriminative for mucosal tissues, aerobic conditions, and murine colitis, whereas no Proteobacteria
consistently characterize any of these conditions, even
though they always represent a substantial portion of
the communities. These observations may reflect extensive microenvironmental heterogeneity and the coexistence of generalist and specialist bacteria [87-89].
In addition to these insights into microbiology, metagenomic biomarkers, including the abundances of specific organisms, abundances of entire clades, or the
presence/absence of specific organisms, can serve to
describe host phenotypes, lifestyle, diet, and disease as
well [5-10]. If the depletion of Bifidobacterium species
in ulcerative colitis proves to occur early in human disease etiology, this and comparable shifts in the microbiota have potential applications in the detection of
human disorders [90,91], especially as shifts in some
bacterial consortia can be detected easily and inexpensively. Oral microbial biomarkers, for example, can be
easily acquired and analyzed with microarray chips targeted for bacterial profiling [92]. These appear particularly promising for clinical applications [11], as the
microbial communities in the saliva seem to represent
one potential proxy for other human microbiota [93].
Other important clinical applications of metagenomic
analyses include probiotic treatments [94,95] and microbiome transplantation [96-99] for gastrointestinal
diseases.
LEfSe, the computational approach to biomarker class
comparisons detailed here, thus contributes to the understanding of microbial communities and guides biologists
in detecting novel metagenomic biomarkers. The algorithm’s effectiveness on real and synthetic data has been
highlighted by several experiments in which we successfully characterized both host-associated microbiota and
environmental microbiomes in multiple contexts. To
support ongoing metagenomic analyses, we have implemented LEfSe as a user-friendly web application that can
provide both raw data and publication-ready graphical
results, including reports of detected microbial variation
on taxonomic trees for visual and biological summarization. LEfSe is freely available online in the Galaxy workflow framework [46,47] at the following link [48].

Materials and methods
The LEfSe algorithm is introduced in overview in the
Results section, and Figure 6 illustrates in detail the format of the input (a matrix with n rows and m columns)
and the three steps performed by the computational
tool: the KW rank sum test [49] on classes, the pairwise

Page 11 of 18

Wilcoxon test [50,51] between subclasses of different
classes, and the LDA [52] on the relevant features.
Each of the n features is represented with a positivevalued vector containing its abundances in the m samples, and each sample is associated with values describing its class and, optionally, subclass and/or originating
subject. The factorial KW rank sum test is applied to
each feature with respect to the class factor; the subclass
and subject information are used as stratifying subgroups when present. Features that, according to the
KW rank sum test, do not violate the null hypothesis of
identical value distribution among classes (with default
P-value, a = 0.05) are not further analyzed. The pairwise
Wilcoxon test is applied to retained features belonging
to subclasses of different classes. For each feature, the
pairwise Wilcoxon test is not satisfied if at least one
comparison between subclasses has a P-value higher
than the chosen a or if the sign of variation is not equal
among all comparisons. For example, if a feature
appears in samples from two classes with three subclasses each, all nine comparisons between subclasses in
different classes must violate the null hypothesis, and all
signs of the differences between medians must be consistent. The features that pass the pairwise Wilcoxon
test are considered successful biomarkers. An LDA
model is finally built with the class as dependent variable and the remaining feature values, subclass, and subject values as independent variables. This model is used
to estimate their effect sizes, which are obtained by
averaging the differences between class means (using
unmodified feature values) with the differences between
class means along the first linear discriminant axis,
which equally weights features’ variability and discriminatory power. The LDA score for each biomarker is
obtained computing the logarithm (base 10) of this
value after being scaled in the [1,10 6 ] interval and,
regardless of the absolute values of the LDA score, it
induces the ranking of biomarker relevance. For robustness, LDA is additionally supported by bootstrapping
(default 30-fold) and subsequent averaging.
LEfSe’s first two steps employ non-parametric tests
because of the nature of metagenomic data. Relative abundances will, in most cases, violate the main assumption of
typical parametric tests (normal population in each class),
whereas non-parametric tests are much more robust to
the underlying distribution of the data since they are distribution-free approaches. The only assumption of the
Wilcoxon and KW tests is that the distributions in each
class are identically shaped with possible differences in the
medians. For example, the bimodal or multimodal abundance distribution of an organism violates the assumptions
of parametric tests but not those of non-parametric tests,
unless the number of peaks in the distribution (or, more
generally, the shape of the distribution) also changes

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

Page 12 of 18

Figure 6 Schematic representation of the statistical and computational steps implemented in LEfSe. Input data consist of a collection of
m samples (columns) each made up of n numerical features (rows, typically normalized per-sample, red representing high values and green
low). These samples are labeled with a class (taking two or more possible values) that represents the main biological comparison under
investigation; they may also have one or more subclass labels reflecting within-class groupings. (a) Step 1 analyzes all features, testing whether
values in different classes are differentially distributed. (b) Features violating the null hypothesis are further analyzed in step 2, which tests
whether all pairwise comparisons between subclasses in different classes significantly agree with the class level trend. (c) The resulting subset of
vectors is used to build a LDA model from which the relative difference among classes is used to rank the features. The final output thus
consists of a list of features that are discriminative with respect to the classes, consistent with the subclass grouping within classes, and ranked
according to the effect size with which they differentiate classes.

among classes. LDA is used for effect size estimation as
our experiments determined it to more accurately estimate
biological consistency compared to approaches like differences in group means/medians or support vector
machines (SVMs) [100]. A comparison between LDA and
SVM approaches for effect size estimation on the murine
model of ulcerative colitis (for which low-throughput biological validations of biomarkers are available in [67]) is
reported in our supplemental material (Additional files 8
and 9) and shows the advantages of LDA with respect to
upranking features of potential biological interest. Theoretically, this is motivated by LDA’s ability to find the axis of
highest variance and SVM’s focus on features’ combined
predictive power rather than single feature relevance. Note
that as we are performing class comparison rather than
class prediction, it is worth specifying that the effect size
estimation accuracy of an algorithm is not directly connected with its predictive ability (for example, SVM
approaches are generally considered more accurate than
LDA for prediction).
Multiclass strategies

Comparisons with more than two classes require special
strategies for applying the Wilcoxon and LDA steps,

whereas the factorial KW test is already appropriate for
this setting. Our multiclass strategy for the Wilcoxon
test depends on the problem-specific strategy chosen by
the user to define features differentially distributed
among the n classes. In the most stringent strategy, we
require that all n abundance profiles of a feature are statistically significantly distinct among all n classes. This
strategy, called ‘strict’, is implemented by requiring that
all Wilcoxon tests between classes are significant. A
more permissive strategy, called ‘non-strict’, considers a
feature as a biomarker if at least one class is significantly
different from all others. The more permissive strategy
thus needs to satisfy only a subset of the Wilcoxon
tests. Regardless of the strategy, the LDA step always
reports the highest score detected among all pairwise
class comparisons.
Subclass structure variants encoding different biological
hypotheses

Different interpretations of the biomarker class comparison problem are implemented in LEfSe by modifying the
requirements for pairwise Wilcoxon comparisons among
subclasses. If classes contain subclasses that represent
distinct strata, we test only comparisons within each

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

identical subclass (Figure 4). For example, to assess the
effect of a treatment on two sub-types of the same disease, we compare pre- and post-treatment levels within
each subclass and require that the trend observed at the
class level is significant independently for both subclasses. To implement this variant, LEfSe performs the
Wilcoxon step only comparing subclasses with the same
name. Alternatively, subclasses may represent covariates
within which feature levels may vary but for which the
problem does not dictate explicit stratification (Figure
2). In both settings, we explicitly require all the pairwise
comparison to reject the null hypothesis for detecting
the biomarker; thus, no multiple testing corrections are
needed.
Subclasses containing few samples

When few samples are available, non-parametric tests
like the Wilcoxon have reduced power to detect differences. This can affect LEfSe when subclasses are very
small, preventing the overall test from even rejecting the
null hypothesis. For this reason, small subclasses should
be avoided when possible, for example, by excluding
them from the problem or by grouping together all subclasses with small cardinalities. For cases in which
removing or grouping subclasses is not possible or disrupts the biological consistency of the analysis, LEfSe
substitutes the Wilcoxon test with a test to compare
whether subclass medians differ with the expected sign.
The user can choose the subclass cardinality threshold
at which this median comparison is substituted for the
Wilcoxon test.
Parameter settings

Except as stated otherwise in Results, all experiments in
this study were run with LEfSe’s a parameter for pairwise tests set to 0.05 for both class normality and subclass tests, and the threshold on the logarithmic score of
LDA analysis was set to 2.0. The stringency of these
parameters is easily tunable (also through the web interface) and allows the user to detect biomarkers with
lower P-values and/or higher effect size in order, for
example, to prioritize additional biological experiments
and validations. All LDA scores are determined by bootstrapping over 30 cycles, each sampling two-thirds of
the data with replacement, with the maximum influence
of the LDA coefficients in the LDA score of three orders
of magnitude.
Data description

Except as stated otherwise, taxonomic abundances for
16S samples were generated from filtered sequence
reads using the RDP classifier [101], with confidences
below 80% rebinned to ‘uncertain’. For all the datasets
described below, the final input for LEfSe is a matrix of

Page 13 of 18

relative abundances obtained from the read counts with
per-sample normalization to sum to one. Witten-Bell
smoothing [102] was used to accommodate rare types,
but due to LEfSe’s non-parametric approach, this has
minimal effect on the discovered biomarkers and on the
LDA score. This also allows our biomarker discovery
method to avoid most effects of sequence quality issues
as long as any sequencing biases are homogeneous
among different conditions, as no specific assumptions
on the statistical distribution and noise model are made
by the algorithm as is standard for non-parametric
approaches.
Human microbiome data

The 16S rRNA-based phylometagenomic dataset of the
normal (healthy) human microbiome was made available
through the Human Microbiome Project [13], and consists of 454 FLX Titanium sequences spanning the V3
to V5 variable regions obtained for 301 samples from 24
healthy subjects (12 male, 12 female) enrolled at a single
clinical site in Houston, TX. These samples cover 18
different body sites, including 6 main body site categories: the oral cavity (9 samples), the gut (1 sample),
the vagina (3 samples), the retroauricular crease (2 samples), the nasal cavity (1 sample) and the skin (2 samples). Detailed protocols used for enrollment, sampling,
DNA extraction, 16S amplification and sequencing are
available on the Human Microbiome Project Data Analysis and Coordination Center website [103], and are
also described elsewhere [55,56]. In brief, genomic DNA
was isolated using the Mo Bio PowerSoil kit [104] and
subjected to 16S amplifications using primers designed
incorporating the FLX Titanium adapters and a sample
barcode sequence, allowing directional sequencing covering variable regions V5 to partial V3 (primers: 357F
5’-CCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-3’ and 926R 5’CCGTCAATTCMTTTRAGT-3’). Resulting sequences
were processed using a data curation pipeline implemented in mothur [41], which reduces the sequencing
error rate to less than 0.06% as validated on a mock
community. As part of the pipeline parameters, to pass
the initial quality control step, one unambiguous mismatch to the sample barcode and two mismatches to
the PCR amplification primers were allowed. Sequences
with an ambiguous base call or a homopolymer longer
than eight nucleotides were removed from subsequent
analyses, as suggested previously [105]. Based on the
supplied quality scores, all sequences were trimmed
when a base call with a score below 20 was encountered. All sequences were aligned using a NAST-based
sequence aligner to a custom reference based on the
SILVA alignment [106,107]. Sequences that were shorter
than 200 bp or that did not align to the anticipated
region of the reference alignment were removed from

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

further analysis. Chimeric sequences were identified
using the mothur implementation of the ChimeraSlayer
algorithm [108]. Unique reads were classified with the
MSU RDP classifier v2.2 [58] using the taxonomy proposed by [109], maintained at the RDP (RDP 10 database, version 6). The 16S rRNA reads are available in
the Sequence Read Archive at [110].
T-bet-/- × Rag2-/- and Rag2-/- mouse data

T-bet-/- × Rag2-/- and Rag2-/- mice, their husbandry, and
their chow have been described in [67]. The animal studies and experiments were approved and carried out
according to Harvard University’s Standing Committee
on Animals as well as National Institutes of Health
guidelines. Collection, processing, and extraction of
DNA from fecal samples were performed as described
in [67]. The V5 and V6 regions of the 16S rRNA gene
were targeted for amplification and multiplex pyrosequencing with error-correcting barcodes. Sequencing
was performed using a Roche FLX Genome Sequencer
at DNAVision (Charleroi, Belgium) and data were preprocessed to remove sequences with low-quality scores.
There were 7,579 ± 2,379 high-quality 16S reads per
sample with a mean read length of 278 bp.

Page 14 of 18

the total number of features) and the false negative rate
(number of correctly detected non-discriminant features
with respect to the total number of features, that is, sensitivity). The three collections of datasets (graphically
shown in Figure 5) differ in the distribution of values in
the subclasses and in the mean/standard deviation of
the normal distribution. (a) The subclasses in the same
class have the same parameters (thus the subclass organization is meaningless). Negative features all have μ =
10,000 and s = 100, whereas one class of the positive
features has μ = 10,000 - t (s = 100) and the other μ =
10,000 + t (s = 100) where t is a parameter ranging
from 1 to 150. The performances of all methods are
assessed at regular steps of the t parameter. (b) Datasets
in this collection are defined in the same way as collection (a) but with t = 1,000 for all datasets and s ranging
from 1,000 to 10,000. (c) The negative class in the third
collection has different subclass distribution. In particular, the second subclass of the first class has the same
mean of the first subclass of the second class. The other
two subclasses have different means (μ = 10,000 - t and
μ = 10,000 + t, t = 1,000), but the feature is not considered differential since the difference is not consistent
between subclasses. The positive features are defined in
the same way as dataset (b).

Viral and microbial environmental data

We retrieved from the online supplemental material of
[69] the 80 available metagenomes (42 viromes, 38
microbiomes). We identified three environments containing at least seven samples and grouped them into
coral, hyper-saline, and marine subclasses; the fourth
subclass, other, groups all environments with few
samples.
Infant and adult microbiome data

The COG profiles of the nine adult and four unweaned
infant microbiomes were obtained from the supplemental material of [73] and used unmodified in this study.
Synthetic datasets

We built three collections of artificial datasets in order
to compare LEfSe to KW and Metastats. All datasets
have 1,000 features and 100 samples belonging evenly to
two classes, and the values are sampled from a Gaussian
normal distribution. The samples in the two classes are
further organized in four subclasses (two per class) with
equal cardinality. Of the 1,000 features, 500 features
have different means across classes and should thus be
detected as biomarkers (positive features), the other 500
features are evenly distributed among classes or among
at least one subclass in both classes and should not be
detected as discriminative (negative features). The methods are evaluated assessing the false positive rate (number of erroneously detected biomarkers with respect to

Implementation and availability of the method

LEfSe is implemented in Python and makes use of R statistical functions in the coin [111] and MASS [112]
libraries through the rpy2 library [113] and of the matplotlib [114] library for graphical output. LEfSe is provided with a graphical interface in the Galaxy
framework [46,47], which allows the user to select parameters (the primary three stringency parameters, the
multiclass setting, and other computational, statistical,
and graphical preferences), to pipeline data between
modules in a workflow framework, to generate publication-quality graphical outputs, and to combine these
results with other statistical and metagenomic analyses.
LEfSe is available at [48].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary Figure S6. Histogram of withinsubject b-diversity (community dissimilarity) between different mucosal
(red) and non-mucosal (green) body sites.
Additional file 2: Supplementary Figure S1. Cladogram representing
the differences between viromes and microbiomes on the subsystem
framework.
Additional file 3: Supplementary Figure S2. Histogram of LDA
logarithmic scores of biomarkers found by LEfSe comparing microbiomes
and viromes within the subsystem framework.
Additional file 4: Supplementary Figure S3. Histogram of LDA
logarithmic scores of COG biomarkers found by LEfSe comparing adult
and infant microbiomes.

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

Additional file 5: Supplementary Figure S4. Functional features (COGs)
that are discrimantive for the comparison between adult and infant
microbiomes according to LEfSe but not detected by Metastats among
the discriminant features with LDA score higher than 3. If we consider all
the discriminant features without threhold on LDA score, LEfSe identifies
366 COGs in total, 185 of which are not discriminant for Metastats.
Additional file 6: Supplementary Figure S5. Functional features (COGs)
that are discrimantive for the comparison between adult and infant
microbiomes according to Metastats but not detected by LEfSe. Even if
median and variance suggest the differences to be discriminative, there
are always some microbiomes (at least two) that are overlapping
between classes. This is due to the stringent a-value (0.01) set for the
KW test in LEfSe and to the fact that we use non-parametric statistics
(differently from Metastats). Notice, however, that even using a low avalue LEfSe detects many more biomarkers than metastats (366 versus
192).
Additional file 7: Supplementary Figure S9. Comparison between
LEfSe and Metastats using the synthetic data described in Figure 5 and
in the Materials and methods. LEfSe was applied as detailed in the paper;
for Metastats we used the default settings (that is, a = 0.05 and
Npermutations = 1,000) and, as for LEfSe and KW, we disabled the persample normalization as the features are independent. (a,b) Metastats
has a higher false positive rate (average 5%) than LEfSe (average below
0.5%) and lower false negative rate. (c) When the subclass information is
meaningful (see Figure 5 for the representation of the dataset), LEfSe
performs substantially better than Metastats both in terms of false
positive and false negatives. Overall, on these synthetic data, Metastats
achieves very similar results compared to KW (Figure 5) and neither of
them can make use of additional information regarding the within-class
structure, thus achieving poor results compared to LEfSe when such
kinds of information are available.
Additional file 8: Supplementary Figure S7. SVM-based effect size
estimation for the biomarkers found for the Rag2-/- versus T-bet-/-xRag2-/comparison reported in Figure 3 of the manuscript. The LDA-based
approach for assessing effect size (Figure 3) is closer to the biological
follow-up experiments and is more visually consistent. The reason for
LDA superiority over SVM approaches for effect size estimation is
theoretically connected with the ability of LDA to find the axis with the
highest variance, and the SVM effort on evaluating the combined feature
predictive power rather than single feature relevance. It is worth
specifying that the effect size estimation accuracy of an algorithm is not
directly connected with its predictive ability (SVM approaches are usually
considered more accurate than LDA for prediction).
Additional file 9: Supplementary Figure S8. Comparison between the
features with the highest SVM-based effect size (Papillibacter, on the left),
the highest LDA-based effect size (Bifidobacterium, in the center), and the
Actinobacteria phylum (on the right). From a visual analysis,
Bifidobacerium shows a larger effect size, which is also evident looking at
the ratios between class means, suggesting LDA as a better option for
effect size estimation than SVM approaches. As detailed in the
manuscript, the relevance of Bifidobacterium has been experimentally
validated. Moreover, the large difference in the score given by the SVM
approach to Actinobacteria compared to Bifidobacterium and Papillibacter
is not consistent.
Additional file 10: T-bet-/- × Rag2-/- - Rag2-/- dataset. Input LEfSe file
for the analysis of the ulcerative colitis phenotype in mice.

Abbreviations
bp: base pair; KW: Kruskal-Wallis; LDA: linear discriminant analysis; LEfSe:
linear discriminant analysis effect size; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; RDP:
Ribosomal Database Project; SVM: support vector machines.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the entire Human Microbiome Project consortium,
including the four sequencing centers (the Broad Institute, Washington
University, Baylor College of Medicine, and the J Craig Venter Institute),
associated investigators from many additional institutions, and the NIH

Page 15 of 18

Office of the Director Roadmap Initiative. This work was supported in part
by grant DE017106 from the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial
Research (JI), NIH grants AI078942 (WSG) and Burroughs Wellcome Fund
(WSG), and was funded by NIH 1R01HG005969 to CH.
Author details
Department of Biostatistics, 677 Huntington Avenue, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 2Department of Molecular Genetics,
245 First Street, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
3
Department of Oral Medicine, Infection and Immunity, 188 Longwood Ave,
Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 4Microbial
Sequencing Center, 7 Cambridge Center, The Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 5Department of Immunology and
Infectious Diseases, 665 Huntington Avenue, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 6Department of Medicine, 75 Francis Street,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 7Department of Medical
Oncology, 44 Binney Street, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, MA 02215, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
NS and CH conceived the study; NS and LM implemented the methodology;
NS: JI: LW: DG: WG: and CH analyzed the results; NS: JI: LW: DG: WG: and CH
wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript in its
final form.
Received: 4 April 2011 Revised: 31 May 2011 Accepted: 24 June 2011
Published: 24 June 2011
References
1. Golub TR: Molecular classification of cancer: class discovery and class
prediction by gene expression monitoring. Science 1999, 286:531-537.
2. Petricoin EF, Ardekani AM, Hitt BA, Levine PJ, Fusaro VA, Steinberg SM,
Mills GB, Simone C, Fishman DA, Kohn EC, Liotta LA: Use of proteomic
patterns in serum to identify ovarian cancer GLOSSARY. Lancet 2002,
359:572-577.
3. Tothill RW, Tinker AV, George J, Brown R, Fox SB, Lade S, Johnson DS,
Trivett MK, Etemadmoghadam D, Locandro B, Traficante N, Fereday S,
Hung JA, Chiew YE, Haviv I, Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group,
Gertig D, DeFazio A, Bowtell DD: Novel molecular subtypes of serous and
endometrioid ovarian cancer linked to clinical outcome. Clin Cancer Res
2008, 14:5198-5208.
4. Wei X, Li K-C: Exploring the within- and between-class correlation
distributions for tumor classification. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:6737-6742.
5. De Filippo C, Cavalieri D, Di Paola M, Ramazzotti M, Poullet JB, Massart S,
Collini S, Pieraccini G, Lionetti P: Impact of diet in shaping gut microbiota
revealed by a comparative study in children from Europe and rural
Africa. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:14691-14696.
6. Turnbaugh PJ, Bäckhed F, Fulton L, Gordon JI: Diet-induced obesity is
linked to marked but reversible alterations in the mouse distal gut
microbiome. Cell Host Microbe 2008, 3:213-223.
7. Ley RE, Peterson Da, Gordon JI: Ecological and evolutionary forces
shaping microbial diversity in the human intestine. Cell 2006,
124:837-848.
8. Manichanh C, Rigottier-Gois L, Bonnaud E, Gloux K, Pelletier E, Frangeul L,
Nalin R, Jarrin C, Chardon P, Marteau P, Roca J, Dore J: Reduced diversity
of faecal microbiota in Crohn’s disease revealed by a metagenomic
approach. Gut 2006, 55:205-211.
9. Sokol H, Seksik P, Furet JP, Firmesse O, Nion-Larmurier I, Beaugerie L,
Cosnes J, Corthier G, Marteau P, Doré J: Low counts of Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii in colitis microbiota. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2009, 15:1183-1189.
10. Ordovas JM, Mooser V: Metagenomics: the role of the microbiome in
cardiovascular diseases. Curr Opin Lipidol 2006, 17:157-161.
11. Zhang L, Henson BS, Camargo PM, Wong DT: The clinical value of salivary
biomarkers for periodontal disease. Periodontology 2000 2009, 51:25-37.
12. Zhang L, Farrell JJ, Zhou H, Elashoff D, Akin D, Park NH, Chia D, Wong DT:
Salivary transcriptomic biomarkers for detection of resectable pancreatic
cancer. Gastroenterology 2010, 138:949-957, e947.
13. NIH HMP Working Group, Peterson J, Garges S, Giovanni M, McInnes P,
Wang L, Schloss JA, Bonazzi V, McEwen JE, Wetterstrand KA, Deal C,
Baker CC, Di Francesco V, Howcroft TK, Karp RW, Lunsford RD,
Wellington CR, Belachew T, Wright M, Giblin C, David H, Mills M, Salomon R,

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.
31.

32.

33.

34.
35.

36.
37.

Mullins C, Akolkar B, Begg L, Davis C, Grandison L, Humble M, Khalsa J,
et al: The NIH Human Microbiome Project. Genome Res 2009,
19:2317-2323.
Hamady M, Fraser-Liggett CM, Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Knight R, Gordon JI:
The Human Microbiome Project. Nature 2007, 449:804-810.
Magrini V, Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mardis ER, Mahowald MA, Gordon JI: An
obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy
harvest. Nature 2006, 444:1027-1131.
Duncan SH, Lobley GE, Holtrop G, Ince J, Johnstone aM, Louis P, Flint HJ:
Human colonic microbiota associated with diet, obesity and weight loss.
Int J Obesity (Lond) 2008, 32:1720-1724.
Turnbaugh PJ, Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Knight R, Gordon JI: The effect
of diet on the human gut microbiome: a metagenomic analysis in
humanized gnotobiotic mice. Sci Transl Med 2009, 1:6ra14.
Gao Z, Tseng C-h, Strober BE, Pei Z, Blaser MJ: Substantial alterations of
the cutaneous bacterial biota in psoriatic lesions. PloS One 2008, 3:e2719.
Tringe SG, von Mering C, Kobayashi A, Salamov AA, Chen K, Chang HW,
Podar M, Short JM, Mathur EJ, Detter JC, Bork P, Hugenholtz P, Rubin EM:
Comparative metagenomics of microbial communities. Science 2005,
308:554-557.
Solovyev VV, Allen EE, Ram RJ, Rokhsar DS, Chapman J, Richardson PM,
Tyson GW, Rubin EM, Banfield JF, Hugenholtz P: Community structure and
metabolism through reconstruction of microbial genomes from the
environment. Nature 2004, 428:37-43.
Lecuit M, Lortholary O: Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease
associated with Campylobacter jejuni. Med Mal Infect 2005, 35(Suppl 2):
S56-58.
Relman DA, Schmidt TM, MacDermott RP, Falkow S: Identification of the
uncultured bacillus of Whipple’s disease. N Engl J Med 1992, 327:293-301.
Oakley BB, Fiedler TL, Marrazzo JM, Fredricks DN: Diversity of human
vaginal bacterial communities and associations with clinically defined
bacterial vaginosis. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74:4898-4909.
Tusher VG, Tibshirani R, Chu G: Significance analysis of microarrays
applied to the ionizing radiation response. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98:5116-5121.
Smyth GK: Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing
differential expression in microarray experiments. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol
2004, 3:Article3.
Clarke R, Ressom HW, Wang A, Xuan J, Liu MC, Gehan Ea, Wang Y: The
properties of high-dimensional data spaces: implications for exploring
gene and protein expression data. Nat Rev Cancer 2008, 8:37-49.
Swan Ka, Curtis DE, McKusick KB, Voinov AV, Mapa Fa, Cancilla MR: Highthroughput gene mapping in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genome Res 2002,
12:1100-1105.
Wooley JC, Ye Y: Metagenomics: facts and artifacts, and computational
challenges*. J Comput Sci Technol 2009, 25:71-81.
Turnbaugh PJ, Hamady M, Yatsunenko T, Cantarel BL, Duncan A, Ley RE,
Sogin ML, Jones WJ, Roe BA, Affourtit JP, Egholm M, Henrissat B, Heath AC,
Knight R, Gordon JI: A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins.
Nature 2009, 457:480-484.
Pedrós-Alió C: Marine microbial diversity: can it be determined? Trends
Microbiol 2006, 14:257-263.
Sogin ML, Morrison HG, Huber Ja, Welch D, Huse SM, Neal PR, Arrieta JM,
Herndl GJ: Microbial diversity in the deep sea and the underexplored
“rare biosphere”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:12115-12120.
Gobet A, Quince C, Ramette A: Multivariate Cutoff Level Analysis
(MultiCoLA) of large community data sets. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:
e155.
Dethlefsen L, McFall-Ngai M, Relman DA: An ecological and evolutionary
perspective on human-microbe mutualism and disease. Nature 2007,
449:811-818.
Huson DH, Auch AF, Qi J, Schuster SC: MEGAN analysis of metagenomic
data. Genome Res 2007, 17:377-386.
Mitra S, Gilbert JA, Field D, Huson DH: Comparison of multiple
metagenomes using phylogenetic networks based on ecological indices.
ISME J 2010, 4:1236-1242.
Mitra S, Klar B, Huson DH: Visual and statistical comparison of
metagenomes. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1849-1855.
Parks DH, Beiko RG: Identifying biologically relevant differences between
metagenomic communities. Bioinformatics 2010, 26:715-721.

Page 16 of 18

38. Lozupone C, Knight R: UniFrac: a new phylogenetic method for
comparing microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 2005,
71:8228-8235.
39. Meyer F, Paarmann D, D’Souza M, Olson R, Glass EM, Kubal M, Paczian T,
Rodriguez A, Stevens R, Wilke A, Wilkening J, Edwards RA: The
metagenomics RAST server - a public resource for the automatic
phylogenetic and functional analysis of metagenomes. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:386.
40. Kristiansson E, Hugenholtz P, Dalevi D: ShotgunFunctionalizeR: an Rpackage for functional comparison of metagenomes. Bioinformatics 2009,
25:2737-2738.
41. Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M, Hollister EB,
Lesniewski RA, Oakley BB, Parks DH, Robinson CJ, Sahl JW, Stres B,
Thallinger GG, Van Horn DJ, Weber CF: Introducing mothur: open-source,
platform-independent, community-supported software for describing
and comparing microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009,
75:7537-7541.
42. Goll J, Rusch D, Tanenbaum DM, Thiagarajan M, Li K, Methé BA, Yooseph S:
METAREP: JCVI Metagenomics Reports - an open source tool for highperformance comparative metagenomics. Bioinformatics 2010,
26:2631-2632.
43. Jolliffe IT: Principal Component Analysis New York: Springer-Verlag; 1986.
44. Gower JC: Some distance properties of latent root and vector methods
used in multivariate analysis. Biometrika 1966, 53:325-338.
45. White JR, Nagarajan N, Pop M: Statistical methods for detecting
differentially abundant features in clinical metagenomic samples. PLoS
Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000352.
46. Goecks J, Nekrutenko A, Taylor J: Galaxy: a comprehensive approach for
supporting accessible, reproducible, and transparent computational
research in the life sciences. Genome Biol 2010, 11:R86.
47. Blankenberg D, Von Kuster G, Coraor N, Ananda G, Lazarus R, Mangan M,
Nekrutenko A, Taylor J: Galaxy: a web-based genome analysis tool for
experimentalists. Curr Protoc Mol Biol 2010, Chapter 19:Unit 19.10.1-21.
48. LEfSe. [http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/lefse/].
49. Kruskal WH, Wallis WA: Use of ranks in one-criterion variance analysis. J
Am Stat Assoc 1952, 47:583-621.
50. Wilcoxon F: Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biometrics 1945,
1:80-83.
51. Mann HB, Whitney DR: On a test of whether one of two random
variables is stochastically larger than the other. Ann Math Stat 1947,
18:50-60.
52. Fisher RA: The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems.
Ann Eugenics 1936, 7:179-188.
53. Dal Bello F, Hertel C: Oral cavity as natural reservoir for intestinal
lactobacilli. Syst Appl Microbiol 2006, 29:69-76.
54. Costello EK, Lauber CL, Hamady M, Fierer N, Gordon JI, Knight R: Bacterial
community variation in human body habitats across space and time.
Science 2009, 326:1694-1697.
55. Human Microbiome Project clinical sampling protocol. [http://hmpdacc.
org/micro_analysis/microbiome_sampling.php].
56. Turner JR: Intestinal mucosal barrier function in health and disease. Nat
Rev Immunol 2009, 9:799-809.
57. Cole JR, Wang Q, Cardenas E, Fish J, Chai B, Farris RJ, Kulam-SyedMohideen AS, McGarrell DM, Marsh T, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM: The
Ribosomal Database Project: improved alignments and new tools for
rRNA analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D141-145.
58. Hilbert F, Scherwitzel M, Paulsen P, Szostak MP: Survival of Campylobacter
jejuni under conditions of atmospheric oxygen tension with the support
of Pseudomonas spp. Appl Environ Microbiol 2010, 76:5911-5917.
59. Godon J-J, Morinière J, Moletta M, Gaillac M, Bru V, Delgènes J-P: Rarity
associated with specific ecological niches in the bacterial world: the
‘Synergistes’ example. Environ Microbiol 2005, 7:213-224.
60. Shah Sa, Simpson SJ, Brown LF, Comiskey M, de Jong YP, Allen D,
Terhorst C: Development of colonic adenocarcinomas in a mouse model
of ulcerative colitis. Inflamm Bowel Dis 1998, 4:196-202.
61. Pizarro T: Mouse models for the study of Crohn’s disease. Trends Mol Med
2003, 9:218-222.
62. Panwala CM, Jones JC, Viney JL: A novel model of inflammatory bowel
disease: mice deficient for the multiple drug resistance gene, mdr1a,
spontaneously develop colitis. J Immunol 1998, 161:5733-5744.

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

63. Wirtz S, Neurath MF: Mouse models of inflammatory bowel disease. Adv
Drug Delivery Rev 2007, 59:1073-1083.
64. Sartor RB: Mechanisms of disease: pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease and
ulcerative colitis. Nat Clin Pract Gastroenterol Hepatol 2006, 3:390-407.
65. Garrett WS, Lord GM, Punit S, Lugo-Villarino G, Mazmanian SK, Ito S,
Glickman JN, Glimcher LH: Communicable ulcerative colitis induced by Tbet deficiency in the innate immune system. Cell 2007, 131:33-45.
66. Garrett WS, Gallini CA, Yatsunenko T, Michaud M, DuBois A, Delaney ML,
Punit S, Karlsson M, Bry L, Glickman JN, Gordon JI, Onderdonk AB,
Glimcher LH: Enterobacteriaceae act in concert with the gut microbiota
to induce spontaneous and maternally transmitted colitis. Cell Host
Microbe 2010, 8:292-300.
67. Veiga P, Gallini CA, Beal C, Michaud M, Delaney ML, DuBois A, Khlebnikov A,
van Hylckama Vlieg JE, Punit S, Glickman JN, Onderdonk A, Glimcher LH,
Garrett WS: Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis fermented milk product
reduces inflammation by altering a niche for colitogenic microbes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:18132-18137.
68. Masaaki O, Yoshimi B, Kai-P L, Nobuko M: Metascardovia criceti Gen. Nov.,
Sp. Nov., from hamster dental plaque. Microbiol Immunol 2007,
51:747-754.
69. Dinsdale EA, Edwards RA, Hall D, Angly F, Breitbart M, Brulc JM, Furlan M,
Desnues C, Haynes M, Li L, McDaniel L, Moran MA, Nelson KE, Nilsson C,
Olson R, Paul J, Brito BR, Ruan Y, Swan BK, Stevens R, Valentine DL,
Thurber RV, Wegley L, White BA, Rohwer F: Functional metagenomic
profiling of nine biomes. Nature 2008, 452:629-632.
70. Overbeek R, Begley T, Butler RM, Choudhuri JV, Chuang HY, Cohoon M,
de Crécy-Lagard V, Diaz N, Disz T, Edwards R, Fonstein M, Frank ED,
Gerdes S, Glass EM, Goesmann A, Hanson A, Iwata-Reuyl D, Jensen R,
Jamshidi N, Krause L, Kubal M, Larsen N, Linke B, McHardy AC, Meyer F,
Neuweger H, Olsen G, Olson R, Osterman A, Portnoy V, et al: The
subsystems approach to genome annotation and its use in the
project to annotate 1000 genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:5691-5702.
71. Greene JM, Collins F, Lefkowitz EJ, Roos D, Scheuermann RH, Sobral B,
Stevens R, White O, Di Francesco V: National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases bioinformatics resource centers: new assets for
pathogen informatics. Infect Immun 2007, 75:3212-3219.
72. Krebs CJ: Ecology: The Experimental Analysis of Distribution and Abundance
Benjamin Cummings; 2008.
73. Kurokawa K, Itoh T, Kuwahara T, Oshima K, Toh H, Toyoda A, Takami H,
Morita H, Sharma VK, Srivastava TP, Taylor TD, Noguchi H, Mori H, Ogura Y,
Ehrlich DS, Itoh K, Takagi T, Sakaki Y, Hayashi T, Hattori M: Comparative
metagenomics revealed commonly enriched gene sets in human gut
microbiomes. DNA Res 2007, 14:169-181.
74. Tatusov RL: A genomic perspective on protein families. Science 1997,
278:631-637.
75. Tatusov RL, Natale DA, Garkavtsev IV, Tatusova TA, Shankavaram UT, Rao BS,
Kiryutin B, Galperin MY, Fedorova ND, Koonin EV: The COG database: new
developments in phylogenetic classification of proteins from complete
genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:22-28.
76. Turroni F, Foroni E, Pizzetti P, Giubellini V, Ribbera A, Merusi P, Cagnasso P,
Bizzarri B, de’Angelis GL, Shanahan F, van Sinderen D, Ventura M: Exploring
the diversity of the bifidobacterial population in the human intestinal
tract. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009, 75:1534-1545.
77. Pawitan Y, Michiels S, Koscielny S, Gusnanto A, Ploner A: False discovery
rate, sensitivity and sample size for microarray studies. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:3017-3024.
78. Suzuki Y, Nei M: False-positive selection identified by ML-based methods:
examples from the Sig1 gene of the diatom Thalassiosira weissflogii and
the tax gene of a human T-cell lymphotropic virus. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21:914-921.
79. Boulesteix A-L: Over-optimism in bioinformatics research. Bioinformatics
2010, 26:437-439.
80. 2020 visions.. Nature 2010, 463:26-32.
81. Hamady M, Knight R: Microbial community profiling for human
microbiome projects: tools, techniques, and challenges. Genome Res
2009, 19:1141-1152.
82. Wooley JC, Godzik A, Friedberg I: A primer on metagenomics. PLoS
Comput Biol 2010, 6:e1000667.
83. Ritchie MD: Using prior knowledge and genome-wide association to
identify pathways involved in multiple sclerosis. Genome Med 2009, 1:65.

Page 17 of 18

84. Tintle N, Lantieri F, Lebrec J, Sohns M, Ballard D, Bickeböller H: Inclusion of
a priori information in genome-wide association analysis. Genet Epidemiol
2009, 33(Suppl 1):S74-80.
85. Lin W-Y, Lee W-C: Incorporating prior knowledge to facilitate discoveries
in a genome-wide association study on age-related macular
degeneration. BMC Res Notes 2010, 3:26.
86. Reeder J, Knight R: The ‘rare biosphere’: a reality check. Nat Methods 2009,
6:636-637.
87. Taylor MW, Schupp PJ, Dahllof I, Kjelleberg S, Steinberg PD: Host specificity
in marine sponge-associated bacteria, and potential implications for
marine microbial diversity. Environ Microbiol 2003, 6:121-130.
88. Tamames J, Abellán JJ, Pignatelli M, Camacho A, Moya A: Environmental
distribution of prokaryotic taxa. BMC Microbiol 2010, 10:85.
89. Kassen R: The experimental evolution of specialists, generalists, and the
maintenance of diversity. J Evol Biol 2002, 15:173-190.
90. Frank DN, Pace NR, Peterson DA, Gordon JI: Metagenomic approaches for
defining the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases. Cell Host
Microbe 2008, 3:417-427.
91. Young C, Sharma R, Handfield M, Mai V, Neu J: Biomarkers for infants at
risk for necrotizing enterocolitis: clues to prevention? Pediatric Res 2009,
65:91R-97R.
92. Asikainen S, Doğan B, Turgut Z, Paster BJ, Bodur A, Oscarsson J: Specified
species in gingival crevicular fluid predict bacterial diversity. PLoS ONE
2010, 5:e13589.
93. Wong D, Zhang L, Farrell J, Zhou H, Elashoff D, Gao K, Paster B: Salivary
biomarkers for pancreatic cancer detection. J Clin Oncol 2009, 27:4630.
94. Culligan EP, Hill C, Sleator RD: Probiotics and gastrointestinal disease:
successes, problems and future prospects. Gut Pathog 2009, 1:19.
95. Preidis GA, Versalovic J: Targeting the human microbiome with
antibiotics, probiotics, and prebiotics: gastroenterology enters the
metagenomics era. Gastroenterology 2009, 136:2015-2031.
96. Borody TJ, Warren EF, Leis S, Surace R, Ashman O: Treatment of ulcerative
colitis using fecal bacteriotherapy. J Clin Gastroenterol 2003, 37:42-47.
97. Khoruts A, Dicksved J, Jansson JK, Sadowsky MJ: Changes in the
composition of the human fecal microbiome after bacteriotherapy for
recurrent Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea. J Clin Gastroenterol 2010,
44:354-360.
98. Manichanh C, Reeder J, Gibert P, Varela E, Llopis M, Antolin M, Guigo R,
Knight R, Guarner F: Reshaping the gut microbiome with bacterial
transplantation and antibiotic intake. Genome Res 2010, 20:1411-1419.
99. You D, Franzos MA: Successful treatment of fulminant Clostridium difficile
infection with fecal bacteriotherapy. Ann Intern Med 2008, 148:632-633.
100. Chang Y-w, Lin C-j: Feature ranking using linear SVM. J Machine Learning
Res 2008, 3:53-64.
101. Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR: Naive Bayesian classifier for rapid
assignment of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2007, 73:5261-5267.
102. Bell TC, Cleary JG, Witten IH: Text Compression Prentice-Hall, Inc; 1990.
103. HMP Data Analysis and Coordination Center. [http://www.hmpdacc.org/
tools_protocols/tools_protocols.php].
104. Mo Bio PowerSoil kit. [http://www.mobio.com/].
105. Huse SM, Huber Ja, Morrison HG, Sogin ML, Welch DM: Accuracy and
quality of massively parallel DNA pyrosequencing. Genome Biol 2007, 8:
R143.
106. Pruesse E, Quast C, Knittel K, Fuchs BM, Ludwig W, Peplies J, Glöckner FO:
SILVA: a comprehensive online resource for quality checked and aligned
ribosomal RNA sequence data compatible with ARB. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, 35:7188-7196.
107. Schloss PD: A high-throughput DNA sequence aligner for microbial
ecology studies. PloS ONE 2009, 4:e8230.
108. Haas BJ, Gevers D, Earl AM, Feldgarden M, Ward DV, Giannoukos G, Ciulla D,
Tabbaa D, Highlander SK, Sodergren E, Methé B, DeSantis TZ, Human
Microbiome Consortium, Petrosino JF, Knight R, Birren BW: Chimeric 16S
rRNA sequence formation and detection in Sanger and 454pyrosequenced PCR amplicons. Genome Res 2011, 21:494-504.
109. Garrity GM, Lilburn TG, Cole JR, Harrison SH, Euzeby J, Tindall BJ: Taxonomic
Outline of the Bacteria and Archaea 2007 [http://www.taxonomicoutline.org/
index.php/toba/article/viewFile/190/223].
110. Sequence Read Archive: SRP002012 Human Microbiome Project 454
Clinical Production Pilot (PPS). [http://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?
study=SRP002012#].

Segata et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R60
http://genomebiology.com/2011/11/6/R60

Page 18 of 18

111. Hothorn TH, Hornik K, van De Wiel MA, Zeileis A: Implementing a class of
permutation tests: the coin package. J Stat Software 2008, 28:1-23.
112. Venables WN, Ripley BD: Modern Applied Statistics with S. 4 edition. Springer;
2002.
113. rpy2. [http://rpy.sourceforge.net/rpy2.html].
114. Hunter JD: Matplotlib: a 2D graphics environment. Computing Sci Eng
2007, 9:90-95.
doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-6-r60
Cite this article as: Segata et al.: Metagenomic biomarker discovery and
explanation. Genome Biology 2011 12:R60.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
