<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-4-34.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Database

ELISA: Structure-Function Inferences based on statistically
significant and evolutionarily inspired observations
Boris E Shakhnovich1, John M Harvey1, Steve Comeau1, David Lorenz1,
Charles DeLisi1 and Eugene Shakhnovich*2
Address: 1BioInformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215, USA and 2Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
Email: Boris E Shakhnovich - borya@bu.edu; John M Harvey - max10@bu.edu; Steve Comeau - scomeau@bu.edu;
David Lorenz - dlorenz@bu.edu; Charles DeLisi - delisi@bu.edu; Eugene Shakhnovich* - eugene@belok.harvard.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 02 September 2003
BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:34

Received: 23 May 2003
Accepted: 02 September 2003

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/34
© 2003 Shakhnovich et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in
all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

DatabaseBioinformaticsFunctional AnnotationsStructure Determination

Abstract
The problem of functional annotation based on homology modeling is primary to current
bioinformatics research. Researchers have noted regularities in sequence, structure and even
chromosome organization that allow valid functional cross-annotation. However, these methods
provide a lot of false negatives due to limited specificity inherent in the system. We want to create
an evolutionarily inspired organization of data that would approach the issue of structure-function
correlation from a new, probabilistic perspective. Such organization has possible applications in
phylogeny, modeling of functional evolution and structural determination. ELISA (Evolutionary
Lineage Inferred from Structural Analysis, http://romi.bu.edu/elisa) is an online database that
combines functional annotation with structure and sequence homology modeling to place proteins
into sequence-structure-function "neighborhoods". The atomic unit of the database is a set of
sequences and structural templates that those sequences encode. A graph that is built from the
structural comparison of these templates is called PDUG (protein domain universe graph). We
introduce a method of functional inference through a probabilistic calculation done on an arbitrary
set of PDUG nodes. Further, all PDUG structures are mapped onto all fully sequenced proteomes
allowing an easy interface for evolutionary analysis and research into comparative proteomics.
ELISA is the first database with applicability to evolutionary structural genomics explicitly in mind.
Availability: The database is available at http://romi.bu.edu/elisa.

Background
Structural genomics [1] is a science in its infancy. The
main task of structural genomics is to combine available
data on genes and gene products such as structure,
sequence, function and chromosomal proximity [2,3] in a
meaningful way so as to procure biological insight [4–10].

These patterns can later be used to characterize newly
sequenced or crystallized proteins or even complexes. Primarily the insight from structural genomics comes from
the observation that similar sequences and structures
yield similar functions. For example, recently the structural analysis of inositol monophosphate (IMPase) from

Page 1 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

M. janaschii showed an addition of "new" function to a
protein with "known" function. [11] In this case, a protein
that was thought to act as only an FBPase (1,6-fructobiphosphatase) was also implicated as an IMPase via
homology modeling. In light of cases like these we have
decided to build a database that maximizes the specificity
of functional annotation, albeit at an expense of its
sensitivity.
Evolutionary models provide a means for organization of
the diverse glut of experimental data that has become the
cornerstone of bioinformatics research. Seeking evolutionary justification for organization of data has been

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/34

adopted by many databases [12,13,5] where relationships, and sometimes tools used in determining them are
justified by some evolutionary model. In the case of structural genomics, domains can be functionally independent, can be expressed outside larger protein complexes in
genomes and are often rearranged through alternative
splicing. Thus we can infer that domains serve as a good
evolutionary unit subject to structure-function pressures
and choose to work with annotations and comparisons of
domains instead of whole proteins. We also consider all
the sequences that fold into that domain as instances of
those structures in different genomes as orthologs and in
the same genome as paralogs. (Fig. 1)

Figure 1
The basic data-type of ELISA
The basic data-type of ELISA. The template is created from a characteristic three-dimensional structure of a domain and all
sequences that fold into this domain. All sequences from the domain are mined for functional annotation, and this functional
annotation is used to build a "consensus tree". This consensus tree represents all possible functions of the collection of
sequences that fold into a structure. The multiple sequence alignment is also used in finding close homologous sequences in all
fully sequenced proteomes.

Page 2 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

Efforts to annotate function based on structure and
sequence homology alone are complicated and more
often than not lead to mis-annotations [14,15] This is
partly due to the fact that different sequences can fold into
similar structures but have different functions [16–19]
This creates the problem of similar structures performing
many, sometimes different functions. A notable example
of functional diversity inside a structurally homologous
family is the case of the P-loop NTPases. For example, the
structures of RecA (2reb) [20] and adenylate kinase
(2ak3) [21] proteins are similar. Both are alpha and beta
proteins. Both contain P-loop topology. Both are placed
in the same SCOP family. Yet, their functions are quite
distinct. RecA is a DNA repair protein, while the adenylate
kinase is a transfer protein facilitating the transfer of phosphate groups between AMP and ADP. Because of these difficulties and because of possible insights gained from
annotating from all homologs, not just the closest ones,
ELISA addresses the issue of functional annotation as one
of probabilistic analysis where the putative function is
one of many accessible upon sequence mutation of a
gene. The justification for this is evidenced further by
directed evolution studies that enable the derivation of
new function from homologous sequence [19,22] e.g. the
alternate must also be true: homologous sequences may
have different functions.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/34

Construction and Content
ELISA was built using four types of data: sequence, structure, function and genomic representation (Fig. 1). Structural templates were mined from SCOP [12] and
FSSP[9,23]. The sequence data was taken from Swiss-Prot
[8]. The alignments of Swiss-Prot sequences to templates
were done using iterative homology searches [4,24], secondary structure prediction [25] and HSSP [7] methods.
These alignments with sequences that are more than 25%
homologous to each other and to the sequence of the template constitute a node on PDUG (Fig. 1).
The connections between the nodes which represent
structural comparison were done using the DALI structure
comparison engine [9,10]. The nodes were also mapped
onto all publicly available proteomes from the NCBI website using PSI-BLAST [4]. This yields information on all
structures in the proteomes that are PDUG subgraphs. The
functional annotation of nodes was done through reconstruction of a single tree for all aligned Swiss-Prot
sequences in the node. (Fig. 1,4) This yields comprehensive information on all possible functions for that structural template.

Figure 2
Protein Domain Universe Graph (PDUG)
Protein Domain Universe Graph (PDUG). Nodes are structural templates and edges are 3-d comparisons of these templates. A
large cluster of TIM barrel domains is shown here. Edges are unweighted in the picture because this cluster was computed by
taking only those structures that are similar to each other by more than Zc = 9.

Page 3 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/34

The core of ELISA is a relational database system powered
by MySQL. http://www.mysql.org This database stores
information on all PDUG nodes, their characteristics and
connections to other nodes of PDUG. Each domain
(node) has structure, sequence and taxonomic data
recorded, as well as SCOP fold name and PDUG cluster
information. It also includes structure comparison and
sequence comparison data to other nodes on PDUG.

Utility
We provide a dynamic web interface for the underlying
relational database. The query is divided into two levels.
The final result is an SSF neighborhood with a combined
functional fingerprint[26], SCOP tree and a table describing the phylogeny of the cluster. The purpose of the first
level is to choose the closest matching sequence neighborhood via queries of sequence homology, fold type or function. The user can type in the sequence and find the
putative structures via sequence comparison. The other
query options include finding all domains with a certain
fold, function or those that occur in some organism. This
query is designed to "anchor" on the PDUG graph (Fig. 2)
and find a recently diverged set of sequences that most
closely match the query. Even though this is a set of very
recently diverged sequences a functional fingerprint is still
supplied in the form of a GO tree. The second level is
designed to delineate the limits of evolutionary divergence for the sequence, structure and function. For example, setting the structural similarity parameter to 9 finds
all structures similar to the "anchor" found on the previous level on the PDUG graph with Z-score of 9 or more.
Similarly checking off a certain function finds all the structures that share that function with the "anchor".
ELISA enables researches to perform evolutionarily
inspired queries, such as a search for possibly orthologous
proteins between proteomes. For example, we were able
to use ELISA to discover a very interesting possible adaptation between thermophiles and mesophiles. During
metabolism of arginine and proline, the cell has to convert ornithine to putrescine [27]. Ornithine decarboxylase
[28,29] (ODX), the enzyme responsible for this reaction,
exists in two forms: one [28] used by the earlier diverged
thermophiles A. aeolicus and T. maritama and another [29]
used by the mesophillic eubacteria. Strikingly, T. tengcongenesis adapts by removing this enzyme altogether and
instead utilizes a promiscuous enzyme ornithine carbomyltransferase [30], with a fold [31] that is structurally
similar (in the same structural neighborhood) to the mesophillic ODX Z= 4.1 to catalyze the ornithine to putrscine
reaction. Presumably, this example shows both the adaptation to the relaxation of thermal pressure as well as to its
reinstitution. In both cases, the organism adapts at least in
part by optimizing designability of the protein fold
responsible for ornithine decarboxylation.

Figure 3
similar protein clusters
Examples of different functional fingerprints for structurally
Examples of different functional fingerprints for structurally similar
protein clusters. The X axis signifies the functional annotation
and the Y axis is the percentage of proteins in that group that
are annotated as such. A) Functional fingerprint for protein
cluster that includes Igfold proteins. B) Functional fingerprint
for protein cluster that includes Tim fold proteins C) Functional fingerprint for protein cluster that includes Rossman
fold proteins. Importantly, the functional fingerprints have a
small subset of dominating functions that do not significantly
overlap with other clusters of structurally related proteins.

Discussion
The organization and search engine of ELISA is created
with the explicit purpose of aiding the emerging field of
structural genomics. Recent research has revealed that in
functional annotation by homology modeling the closest
homologue may lead to misannotation. This is due to the
extreme complexity of biological systems and the inherent
redundancy in the structure-function relationship. This
means that it is almost impossible to find the single best
putative function for any protein or gene sequence by
homology methods alone. Instead, the most that we can
do is limit the number of possible functions that this
sequence could perform. The reason why we can limit the

Page 4 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/34

Figure 4
Organisation of ELISA
Organisation of ELISA. Elisa is divided into two levels. On the first level, a user needs to define a domain on the PDUG with the
closest homology (blue square). This step can be done either through sequence homology, structure, function or taxonomic
representation. For example, in the sequence query the closest homologue or set of homologues is identified. After a single
domain of interest is placed, all information about the sequence, structure and function of that node is available. The next level
asks to define a complex query that delineates all neighbors of the domain in question thus delineating the SSF neighborhood.
For example, if we consider the node with a blue square, all the nodes with red squares constitute its structural neighbors at
some similarity cutoff. The constraints on delineating the neighborhoods may include structure, function or taxonomic representation characteristics. ELISA then calculates consensus functional, structural and taxonomic trees for the whole SSF neighborhood defined in the previous step (not shown on picture).

Page 5 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

number of functions is because functional fingerprints of
structural neighborhoods do not overlap.
The idea of functional fingerprints can be extended further. If the initial homology is poor, the stringency of the
thresholds can be relaxed to encompass a larger divergence time. We may consider not only the sequence
homologues but also the structurally neighboring gene
families when considering possible functions of a particular gene. ELISA allows the user to define a sequence-structure-function neighborhood by limiting the possible
structures and functions as well as genomes where the
protein is likely to be found. Through this "limitation of
divergence" of the set, the researcher can find out the prevailing trends in the evolution of the domain as well as
calculate the functional, structural and taxonomic
determinants of an almost arbitrary set of homologous
genes and gene families.

Conclusions
We organize available biological data hierarchically into
structural templates, sequences that fold into these templates and then clusters of templates Fig. 1. In this way, we
have organized PDUG into sequence-structure-function
(SSF) "neighborhoods". Each node, a sequence neighborhood, on PDUG represents a gene family of homologous
sequences that have been aligned using BLAST (Fig. 1)
[32] and show more than 25 percent sequence identity to
each other. Representative three-dimensional structures
are compared to each other using DALI and clustered into
structural "neighborhoods" (Fig. 2) These structural
neighborhoods are distantly related gene families, or
alternatively the variability available to a gene given a long
period of mutation.
We have recently found that these structural neighborhoods have unique and non-overlapping sets of functional annotations. [26] (Fig. 3) These sets can be thought
of as probabilistic distributions of functions i.e. if there is
a novel member of that neighborhood its probability of
being a certain function is distributed as the functional
fingerprint. The use of functional fingerprints essentially
limits the number of possible functional annotations for
a particular structure from several thousand possibilities
to several dozen. Three examples of functional fingerprints for three clusters of proteins sharing the same fold
are shown in (Fig 3). Functional annotation through fingerprinting maximizes the probability that the correct
function is part of the functional fingerprint albeit at the
expense of an increase in the total number of possibilities.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/34

the approach of the previous work and includes information about organismal PDUG subgraphs, SCOP annotations and ability for functional comparison among others
for greater flexibility in queries and research. ELISA enables us to create functional fingerprints for an arbitrary set
of homologous sequences, not just sequences sharing a
single fold (Fig 4). The purpose of representing putative
functions through functional fingerprints is to maximize
the probability that the functional annotation contains
the correct function i.e. the function of the protein can be
one of many, pertaining to this structure, or its structural
homologues. This organization of data is vastly different,
and shows different results upon implementation than
other domain repositories such as SMART [33], Pfam [5]
and CDD [34]. For example, our probabilistic approach of
functional annotation allows for weighted implication in
a set of possible functions for a new sequence, not just the
function belonging to the closest homologue. If the
sequence homology is poor, structural comparison may
yield additional data on functional information of the
query. The most interesting and unique feature of ELISA is
that it enables exploration at quantitatively user-defined
levels of various different characteristic evolutionary
divergence distances such as structure, function and even
taxonomy.

Availability
The database is available at http://romi.bu.edu/elisa.

Author's Contributions
BES designed the database and contributed to its development, JMH did a lot of programming for the database and
contributed to the development, SC and DL helped with
the implementation, CD and ES provided thoughtful
insights and helped in testing.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the authors of DALI and HSSP for creating an invaluable
resource. We thank Robert Berwick and Simon Kasif for helpful discussions. We also thank Joe Mellor for technical help and insightful reading.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

While the analysis and result mentioned above has been
described before elsewhere[26], we mention it here to
emphasize the utility of our database and the kind of
research that can be done using the tools. ELISA builds on

6.

Baker D and Sali A: Protein structure prediction and structural
genomics. Science 2001, 294:93-96.
Yanai I, Mellor JC and DeLisi C: Identifying functional links
between genes using conserved chromosomal proximity.
Trends Genet 2002, 18:176-179.
Mellor JC, Yanai I, Clodfelter KH, Mintseris J and DeLisi C: Predictome: a database of putative functional links between
proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:306-309.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W and
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation
of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:3389-3402.
Bateman A, Birney E, Cerruti L, Durbin R, Etwiller L, Eddy SR, Griffiths-Jones S, Howe KL, Marshall M and Sonnhammer EL: The Pfam
protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:276-280.
Dengler U, Siddiqui AS and Barton GJ: Protein structural
domains: analysis of the 3Dee domains database. Proteins 2001,
42:332-344.

Page 6 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.

Dodge C, Schneider R and Sander C: The HSSP database of protein structure-sequence alignments and family profiles.
Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26:313-315.
Gasteiger E, Jung E and Bairoch A: SWISS-PROT: connecting biomolecular knowledge via a protein database. Curr Issues Mol
Biol 2001, 3:47-55.
Holm L and Sander C: Dali/FSSP classification of three-dimensional protein folds. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:231-234.
Holm L and Sander C: Dali: a network tool for protein structure
comparison. Trends Biochem Sci 1995, 20:478-480.
Stec B, Yang H, Johnson KA, Chen L and Roberts MF: MJ0109 is an
enzyme that is both an inositol monophosphatase and the
'missing' archaeal fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. Nat Struct Biol
2000, 7:1046-1050.
Lo Conte L, Brenner SE, Hubbard TJ, Chothia C and Murzin AG:
SCOP database in 2002: refinements accommodate structural genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:264-267.
Teichmann SA, Murzin AG and Chothia C: Determination of protein function, evolution and interactions by structural
genomics. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2001, 11:354-363.
Bork P and Koonin EV: Predicting functions from protein
sequences--where are the bottlenecks? Nat Genet 1998,
18:313-318.
Hegyi H and Gerstein M: The relationship between protein
structure and function: a comprehensive survey with application to the yeast genome. J Mol Biol 1999, 288:147-164.
Murzin AG, Brenner SE, Hubbard T and Chothia C: SCOP: a structural classification of proteins database for the investigation
of sequences and structures. J Mol Biol 1995, 247:536-540.
Wise E, Yew WS, Babbitt PC, Gerlt JA and Rayment I: Homologous
(beta/alpha)8-barrel enzymes that catalyze unrelated reactions: orotidine 5'-monophosphate decarboxylase and 3keto-L-gulonate 6-phosphate decarboxylase. Biochemistry 2002,
41:3861-3869.
Nagano N, Orengo CA and Thornton JM: One fold with many
functions: the evolutionary relationships between TIM barrel families based on their sequences, structures and
functions. J Mol Biol 2002, 321:741-765.
Jurgens C, Strom A, Wegener D, Hettwer S, Wilmanns M and Sterner
R: Directed evolution of a (beta alpha)8-barrel enzyme to
catalyze related reactions in two different metabolic
pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000, 97:9925-9930.
Story RM, Weber IT and Steitz TA: The structure of the E. coli
recA protein monomer and polymer. Nature 1992,
355:318-325.
Diederichs K and Schulz GE: The refined structure of the complex between adenylate kinase from beef heart mitochondrial matrix and its substrate AMP at 1.85 A resolution. J Mol
Biol 1991, 217:541-549.
Altamirano MM, Blackburn JM, Aguayo C and Fersht AR: Directed
evolution of new catalytic activity using the alpha/beta-barrel scaffold. Nature 2000, 403:617-622.
Holm L and Sander C: Touring protein fold space with Dali/
FSSP. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26:316-319.
Aravind L and Koonin EV: Gleaning non-trivial structural, functional and evolutionary information about proteins by iterative database searches. J Mol Biol 1999, 287:1023-1040.
Stuber K: Nucleic acid secondary structure prediction and
display. Nucleic Acids Res 1986, 14:317-326.
Shakhnovich BE, Dokholyan NV, DeLisi C and Shakhnovich EI: Functional fingerprints of folds: evidence for correlated structure-function evolution. J Mol Biol 2003, 326:1-9.
Cataldi AA and Algranati ID: Polyamines and regulation of ornithine biosynthesis in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 1989,
171:1998-2002.
Kern AD, Oliveira MA, Coffino P and Hackert ML: Structure of
mammalian ornithine decarboxylase at 1.6 A resolution:
stereochemical implications of PLP-dependent amino acid
decarboxylases. Structure Fold Des 1999, 7:567-581.
Momany C, Ernst S, Ghosh R, Chang NL and Hackert ML: Crystallographic structure of a PLP-dependent ornithine decarboxylase from Lactobacillus 30a to 3.0 A resolution. J Mol Biol
1995, 252:643-655.
Lipscomb WN: Aspartate transcarbamylase from Escherichia
coli: activity and regulation. Adv Enzymol Relat Areas Mol Biol 1994,
68:67-151.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/34

31.

32.
33.
34.

Beernink PT, Endrizzi JA, Alber T and Schachman HK: Assessment
of the allosteric mechanism of aspartate transcarbamoylase
based on the crystalline structure of the unregulated catalytic subunit. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999, 96:5388-5393.
Holm L and Sander C: Protein folds and families: sequence and
structure alignments. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:244-247.
Schultz J, Copley RR, Doerks T, Ponting CP and Bork P: SMART: a
web-based tool for the study of genetically mobile domains.
Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28:231-234.
Marchler-Bauer A, Panchenko AR, Shoemaker BA, Thiessen PA, Geer
LY and Bryant SH: CDD: a database of conserved domain alignments with links to domain three-dimensional structure.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:281-283.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 7 of 7
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
