<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A species independent universal bio-detection microarray for pathogen forensics and phylogenetic classification of unknown microorganisms</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-132"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Shamira J Shallom"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A species independent universal bio-detection
microarray for pathogen forensics and
phylogenetic classification of unknown
microorganisms
Shamira J Shallom1, Jenni N Weeks2, Cristi L Galindo1, Lauren McIver1, Zhaohui Sun1, John McCormick1,
L Garry Adams3 and Harold R Garner1*

Abstract
Background: The ability to differentiate a bioterrorist attack or an accidental release of a research pathogen from a
naturally occurring pandemic or disease event is crucial to the safety and security of this nation by enabling an
appropriate and rapid response. It is critical in samples from an infected patient, the environment, or a laboratory
to quickly and accurately identify the precise pathogen including natural or engineered variants and to classify
new pathogens in relation to those that are known. Current approaches for pathogen detection rely on prior
genomic sequence information. Given the enormous spectrum of genetic possibilities, a field deployable, robust
technology, such as a universal (any species) microarray has near-term potential to address these needs.
Results: A new and comprehensive sequence-independent array (Universal Bio-Signature Detection Array) was
designed with approximately 373,000 probes. The main feature of this array is that the probes are computationally
derived and sequence independent. There is one probe for each possible 9-mer sequence, thus 49 (262,144)
probes. Each genome hybridized on this array has a unique pattern of signal intensities corresponding to each of
these probes. These signal intensities were used to generate an un-biased cluster analysis of signal intensity
hybridization patterns that can easily distinguish species into accepted and known phylogenomic relationships.
Within limits, the array is highly sensitive and is able to detect synthetically mixed pathogens. Examples of unique
hybridization signal intensity patterns are presented for different Brucella species as well as relevant host species
and other pathogens. These results demonstrate the utility of the UBDA array as a diagnostic tool in pathogen
forensics.
Conclusions: This pathogen detection system is fast, accurate and can be applied to any species. Hybridization
patterns are unique to a specific genome and these can be used to decipher the identity of a mixed pathogen
sample and can separate hosts and pathogens into their respective phylogenomic relationships. This technology
can also differentiate between different species and classify genomes into their known clades. The development of
this technology will result in the creation of an integrated biomarker-specific bio-signature, multiple select agent
specific detection system.

* Correspondence: garner@vbi.vt.edu
1
Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Shallom et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

Background
Rapid, accurate and sensitive detection of bio-threat
agents requires a broad-spectrum assay capable of discriminating between closely related microbial or viral
pathogens. In cases where a biological agent release
has been identified, forensic analysis demands detailed
genetic signature data for accurate strain identification
and attribution. Identification of genetic signatures for
detection coupled with identification of pathogenic
phenotypes would provide a robust means of discriminating pathogens from closely related but benign
species [1].
Current forensics methods based on bacteriological,
serological, biochemical and genomic strategies have
been used to detect pathogens using serological methods
[2], PCR [3], real time PCR [4,5] and Multi-loci VNTR
(variable-number tandem repeats) or MLVA [6-9].
Although bacteriological culture of Brucella spp. from
blood, milk, fetal fluids and tissues, or other host tissues
remain the ‘gold standard’ for diagnosis, bacteriologic
culture has reduced sensitivity, is labour intensive, time
consuming, typically requiring two weeks, and is a risk
for laboratory personnel [5]. Serological assays, such as
Rose Bengal, a rapid plate agglutination diagnostic test,
is currently used for diagnosing infection with Brucella
species in the field [2], however serological tests frequently have reduced specificity due to cross reactivity
with other bacteria. Specific antibodies are required to
be present at sufficiently high level and may require several weeks to develop before they are detectable. PCR
based methods are used for epidemiological trace back
and strain specific identification [3]. Although rapid in
nature, specific primers are required for specific genes
from these genomes or 16S rRNA genes or VNTR (variable-number tandem repeats) in a given genome. Real
time PCR based methods have been used to identify
Brucella species using IS711, bcsp31 and per target
genes [4,5]. In addition, assays based on single-nucleotide polymorphisms have been developed for identification of Brucella isolates at the species level. These SNPs
have been used to classify isolates into known Brucella
species [10]. Recently MLVA or multi-loci VNTR (Variable-number tandem repeats) a genotype-based typing
method and has been used as an epidemiological classification and SNP identification method for Brucella isolates in a field population [6-9]. MLVA method is used
to understand the genetic diversity in polymorphic loci
and to establish taxonomic relationships between different biovars of Brucella. It is used for microbial typing
and epidemiologic studies by amplifying loci which are
specific to a given genome and sequencing these
regions. This is a powerful approach and is being used
to create phylogenetic relationships and discovery of

Page 2 of 12

single nucleotide polymorphisms in independent loci
from different Brucella isolates [7].
Array based approaches for forensic detection utilizes
genome specific ribosomal RNA genes, genome specific
PCR markers or oligonucleotide probes. Arrays from
rRNA are derived from a combination of rRNA genes
from a given set of organisms of high priority. Universal
PCR is used to amplify one or more universal genes,
including 16S, 18S and 23S as well as screen for pathogen-specific polymorphisms [11]. One of the challenges
of this approach is the frequent and unexpected amplification of contaminating template DNA, as observed in
control reactions. Another potential problem with targeting 16S rRNA pathogen specific sequences is unexpected polymorphisms. Hence, naturally occurring
variants may not be represented on the microarray, and
failure to detect the variants would represent false
negatives [11]. Another common PCR based approach
detects pathogen type by amplification of a specific set
of genetic markers that are measured on an array that
has several probes for genes from a set of organisms.
Such tests have been used for food-borne bacteria such
as E. coli O157:H7 [12], viruses [13] and mixtures of
pathogens [14]. The drawback of using this approach
with multiplex PCR primers sets is the generation of
spurious products [11]. Array based technologies using
70-mer oligonucleotide probes derived from pathogen
specific genes have similar factors that require consideration. For instance, viral detection using a microarray
composed of 1,600 unique viral oligonucleotides
(70-mers) derived from 140 distinct viral genomes has
been previously demonstrated [15] as a powerful viral
detection mechanism, but the drawback of this strategy
is that only the group of known pathogen-specific genes
will be queried.
Given the enormous spectrum of genetic possibilities,
only a highly parallel field deployable technology that
is universal in nature has near-term potential to
address these needs. The initial vision for a universal
DNA microarray was a matrix of oligonucleotide containing features with unique n-mer probes [16]. This
matrix could in theory be used to query a biological
sample for the presence of any nucleic acid sequence.
This technique requires constructing an array that contains 4n features. Larger values of n infuse greater specificity into the arrayed probes, but as n increases the
number of required features grows rapidly. This universality is obtained by synthesizing a combinatorial nmer array containing all 4 n possible sequences of
length n [17]. The key issue is to find a value of n that
is large enough to afford sufficient hybridization specificity, yet small enough to be practically fabricated and
analyzed.

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

We have previously demonstrated the utility of a genome sequence-independent microarray for identifying
genetic differences [18,19]. The initial prototype of universal arrays used oligonucleotide probe lengths of
12 and 13 bases. From 412 possible probes, a subset of
14,283 probes was synthesized using in situ synthesis
technology and digital optical chemistry (DOC) [20-22].
Fluorescently labelled genomic DNA was hybridized to
produce unique informative patterns (i.e. bio-signatures)
on a test set of pathogens and host (Bacillus subtilis,
Yersinia pestis, Streptococcus peumoniae, Bacillus
anthracis, and Homo sapiens). In addition, we have
shown that a custom microsatellite microarray can be
used to demonstrate global differences between species
by measuring hybridization intensities for every possible
repetitive nucleotide motif from 1-mers to 6-mers [19].
Further we have used genome sequence independent
microsatellites to identify global differences in the genomes of 93 cancer, cancer-free and high risk patient cell
line samples [23]. This paper describes a larger high
density oligonucleotide microarray with 370,000 elements, called Universal Bio-signature Detection Array
(UBDA), designed by our laboratory and commercially
produced by Roche-Nimblegen (Madison, WI) using
light-directed photolithography [16,24]. The platform
design which consists mainly of probes, that are tailored
to be genome independent, is mathematically derived
and therefore unbiased (Additional file 1, Table S1).
This strategy exploits the unique signature of a sample
in the form of a pattern generated from hybridization of
any unknown genome (DNA or cDNA) to a very highdensity species-independent oligonucleotide microarray.
Brucella species and several other pathogens were used
as examples to demonstrate this forensics technology
platform. Hybridization patterns are unique to a genome, and potentially to different isolates or a mixture of
organisms. These techniques may be especially useful in
evaluating and differentiating species whose genome has
not yet been sequenced.

Results
UBDA array sensitivity and specificity of probe
hybridization

DNA microarrays using oligonucleotides are widely used
in biological research and are usually sequence specific.
Two primary types of parameters are required to evaluate the robustness and sensitivity of DNA microarray
experiments- labelling and hybridization [16]. Sensitivity
of a given array platform is often defined as the minimum signal detected by the array scanning system [25].
In our case we have used labelling controls, where specified DNA molecules (70-mer oligonucleotides) are
spiked into experimental human genomic DNA samples
prior to fluorescent labelling. A set of six synthetic 70-

Page 3 of 12

mer oligonucleotides (Additional file 2, Table S2) was
designed to be spiked into each labelling reaction and
hybridized to a constellation of 361 probes that were
replicated five times on the array. We compared signal
intensity values from control probes on the array hybridized with human genomic DNA and 70-mer oligonucleotides spiked into a separate sample of human
genomic DNA. Each spike-in concentration was added
on an individual array. We measured sensitivity of the
array as a decrease in the correlation coefficient R 2
value in the signal intensity from human genomic DNA
spiked with 70-mer oligonucleotides when compared to
the unspiked human genomic DNA sample. The sensitivity of the UBDA was examined by the addition of 70mer synthetic oligonucleotides to the labeling reaction
of human genomic DNA sample (Cy-3 label). Spike-in
control synthetic 70-mer oligonucleotides were added at
varying concentrations; 4.5 picomolar, 41 picomolar, 121
picomolar and 364 picomolar respectively. Figure 1 elucidates that the sensitivity range of detection for the
UBDA is between 364 picomolar and 121 picomolar as
seen by the decreased R2 values of 0.84 and 0.92 respectively for perfect match probes for these two concentrations when compared to the un-spiked human genomic
DNA sample. The sensitivity of detection is estimated
between a concentration of 364 picomolar and 121 picomolar. At concentrations lower than 121 picomolar, the
R2 value for perfect match probes is 0.96 which is within
the ability to resolve samples statistically and confirms
that there was no detectable variation at the lower oligonucleotide spike-in at these concentrations. This evaluation demonstrates the variability of signal intensities
contributed by differences in oligonucleotide concentrations spiked into the human DNA sample compared to
the un-spiked human DNA sample. Regression analysis
of probe signal intensity values from the mis-matched
probes in the data set are in Additional file 3, Figures
S1A-S1D. We have assessed array variability over several
arrays using a common human DNA sample in the
reference channel. We obtained an R 2 value of 0.94
+-0.06.
The specificity of the computationally derived 9-mer
probes on the UBDA array was studied using the selectivity of the middle nucleotide in each probe. We
hypothesized that DNA strands generally will not hybridize efficiently to any probe for which there are multiple
mismatches in proximity to the center-most base. The
array design was based upon the prediction that the use
of relatively short probes (15-21 mers) would result in
the middle approximately 9 bases dominating hybridization kinetics. Probes on the UBDA that contained the
StuI site (AGG^CCT) were located and classified by
the nucleotide position of the cut point, relative to the
center of the probe on the microarray by a custom

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

Page 4 of 12

Figure 1 Array sensitivity determined by control probe signal intensity values. Human genomic DNA spiked with 70-mer oligonucleotides
at different concentrations was compared against the same sample without oligonucleotides. Normalized signal intensity values from the Cy3
channel were plotted on a log scale and compared using linear regression from human genomic DNA samples with and without 70-mer
oligonucleotides spiked into the labelling reaction. The probes being assessed on this scatter plot are perfect matches to the 70-mer
oligonucleotide sequence. Each notation on the graph represents a specific concentration of spiked-in 70-mer oligonucleotides on an individual
array. The oligonucleotides were spiked into the labelling reaction at a concentration range from 4.5 pM to 364 pM. The divergence of R2 value
from that with no spike-in was used to measure the sensitivity of detection on the array.

computer code. DNA was digested to completion with
StuI, and compared to matched DNA that was not
digested. Each of the 9-mer probes with StuI restriction
enzyme sites were binned depending on the nucleotide
position of the StuI restriction site relative to the center
of the probe. Thus probes with the StuI restriction
enzyme site were binned in terms of base location
according to the position of the StuI restriction enzyme
cut site with respect to the center of the probe. As
expected, probes with restriction enzyme site in the center of the probe displayed the highest degree of specificity demonstrated by a reduction in signal. A log2 fold
change of -0.23 was obtained when comparing digested
DNA to undigested DNA, averaged over microarray
probes with the restriction enzyme site at the center of
the probe. Microarray probes with the StuI site located
at the center demonstrated reduced intensity, confirming specificity of genomic DNA to hybridize to the center of the probe. The trend of the log 2 fold change
increased as the StuI restriction enzyme site moved
away from the center of the probe with the average
results increasing towards zero (Additional file 4, Figure
S2). Thus, confirming that the center nucleotide is the
most selective in the hybridization complexes.

Identification of synthetically mixed pathogen sample

To establish the ability to decipher a synthetically mixed
sample on the UBDA array, Lactobacillus plantarum
[GenBank accession number ACGZ00000000, genome
size 3,198,761 bases] and Streptococcus mitis [26] [Genbank accession number FN568063, genome size
2,146,611 bases] genomic DNA were mixed in a ratio of
4:1 (2.53 × 10 8 copies of L. plantarum to 0.57 × 10 8
copies of S. mitis genomes) for a total of 1 μg of DNA,
and thus adjusted for copy number of each of the two
genomes and hybridized to the array. In addition, pure
genomic DNA samples from L. plantarum and S. mitis
were also hybridized individually on separate arrays. The
minimum amount of sample required to be detected by
hierarchical clustering was determined by an assumption
that the mixed sample would cluster under the same
node with known samples. As seen from Figure 2, the
mixed sample comprising of Lactobacillus plantarum
and Streptococcus mitis groups with pure samples from
L. Plantarum and S. mitis (as shown in Figure 2, lane 1,
2 and 3). These results show that if 25% of the sample
is from a second genome, it will group with the higher
copy genome on the dendogram heat map generated
from the hierarchical clustering algorithm. A sample

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

Page 5 of 12

with Lactobacillus plantarum and Streptococcus mitis
genomic DNA in a 4:1 ratio (2.53 × 10 8 copies of
L. plantarum to 0.57 × 108 copies of S. mitis genomes)
was spiked-in with 50 ng (1.54 × 1010 copies) of pBluescript plasmid (3,000 bases) [27]. However the node for
this sample (Figure 2, lane 4) did not cluster with pure
samples from Lactobacillus plantarum and Streptococcus
mitis, instead it clustered closest to a pure sample of
pBluescript (Figure 2, lane 5). Spike-in from a low complexity plasmid genome with a high copy number genome such as pBluescript can dominate the signature
pattern. The alteration of the signature pattern is so
great that the sample cannot be distinguished on the
dendogram from pure bacterial genomes. Therefore, we
are in the process of developing algorithms which will
produce a similarity score for a given genome in a
mixed genome sample by comparing it to a wide spectrum of species in our genome signature repository.
Identification of genetic signatures from closely related
Brucella species

Figure 2 Hierarchical clustering of mixed samples demonstrates
the resolution capabilities of the UBDA array. This dendogram
and heat map illustrates a unique bio-signature pattern obtained
from Lactobacillus plantarum, mixed sample (synthetic mixture in
a 4:1 ratio of L. plantarum and Streptococcus mitis), S. mitis,
mixed sample (a synthetic mixture of L. plantarum and S. mitis
genomic DNA in a ratio of 4:1 with a spike-in of pBluescript plasmid
at 50 ng) and pBluescript plasmid. Normalized data from the 9-mer
data set were filtered for intensity signals greater than the 20th
percentile. Only intensity signals with a fold change of 5 or greater
were included. These 36,059 elements were subjected to
hierarchical clustering with Euclidean distance being used as a
similarity measure. The signal intensity values were represented on
a log2 scale and range from 8.4 to 13.4.

The spectrum of organisms chosen for hybridization on
this array, were primarily bio-threat zoonotic agents
infecting farm animals. Our initial studies were based on
the ability of the 9-mer probe signal intensities to distinguish between different Brucella species. Currently,
there are nine recognized species of Brucella based on
host preferences and phenotypic preferences. Six of
those species are Brucella abortus (cattle), Brucella
canis (dogs), Brucella melitensis (sheep and goat), Brucella neotomae (desert wood rats), Brucella ovis (sheep)
and Brucella suis (pigs) [28]. All of these species are
zoonotic except B. neotomae and B. ovis. Raw signal
values from the pair data files for the Cy3 channel were
background corrected and quantile normalized [29]. Signal intensities related to the 9-mer data set were parsed
from the data file using a PERL script. These files were
imported into the GeneSpring GX (Agilent, Santa Clara,
CA) program. Data from these files was clustered using
the hierarchical clustering algorithm to generate a heat
map and identify a pattern within the underlying data.
The dendogram of this heat map which runs vertically
along the left side of the heat map in Figure 3 shows
the unique bio-signature patterns from 9-mer probes
obtained from Brucella suis 1330, Brucella abortus
RB51, Brucella melitensis 16 M, Brucella abortus 86-859 and Brucella abortus 12. Normalized data from the
9-mer data set were filtered for intensity signals greater
than the 20th percentile. Only intensity signals with a
fold change of 5 or greater were included. These 2,267
elements were subjected to a hierarchical clustering
algorithm with Euclidean distance being used as a similarity measure. Centroid linkage rule was applied in the
clustering algorithm. The signal intensity values were

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

Page 6 of 12

represented as a log2 scale. One of the array features was
pathogen specific probes designed for independent validation. These probes are species specific to a small set of
pathogens including Avian Influenza Virus, Rift Valley
Fever Virus, Foot and Mouth Disease Virus, Brucella
melitensis 16 M, Brucella suis 1330 and Brucella abortus
biovar 1 strain 9-941 (Additional file 1, Table S1).
The genomes of B. melitensis and B. suis have been
completely sequenced (28, 29). Comparative genome
analysis for these genomes shows that the two genomes
are extremely similar. The sequence identity for most
open reading frames (ORFs) was 99% or higher [30].
We computationally evaluated the published genome
sequences for B. suis 1330 [30] and B. melitensis 16 M
[31] to determine the specific instances in the genome
sequence of each 9 base core probe sequence from the
array. Normalized signal intensity for each of the
262,144 9-mer probes represented on the array were
divided by the corresponding counts of 9-mer probe
occurrences for both B. suis and B. melitensis. The
resulting values for a set of 32,000 probes were then
plotted as illustrated in Figure 4, with B. melitensis and
B. suis (signal intensity/counts) on the ordinate and
abscissa, respectively. Pearson’s correlation coefficient
was subsequently calculated (r = 0.93 as shown). This
correlation value indicates that the 9-mer probe signal
intensities are in agreement with ‘known’ genome
sequence similarity scores for B. melitensis and B. suis.

Figure 3 Unique 9-mer probe bio-signatures from
hybridization of Brucella genomes demonstrates ability to
resolve highly similar genomes. This dendogram illustrates the
unique bio-signature obtained from Brucella abortus RB51,
Brucella abortus 12, Brucella abortus 86-8-59, Brucella melitensis
16 M and Brucella suis 1330. Normalized data from the 9-mer data
set were filtered for intensity signals greater than the 20th
percentile. Only intensity signals with a fold change of 5 or greater
were included. These 2,267 elements were subjected to hierarchical
clustering with Euclidean distance being used as a similarity
measure. The signal intensity values were represented as a log2
scale. The range of log2 values are from 7.2 to 13.

Figure 4 Correlation of Brucella Suis 1330 and Brucella
melitensis 16 M was computed by a ratio of signal intensity
divided by counts of 9-mer probe occurrences in the
respective genomes. Normalized signal intensity for each of the
262,144 9-mer probes represented on the array were divided by the
corresponding counts of 9-mer probe occurrences in the respective
genome sequences for both B. suis and B. melitensis. The resulting
values for a set of 32,000 probes were then plotted, with B.
melitensis and B. suis (signal intensity/counts) on the ordinate and
abscissa, respectively. Pearson’s correlation coefficient was
subsequently calculated (r = 0.93 as shown).

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

Taxonomic phylogenetic relationships between organisms
hybridized on the UBDA array

Phylogenetic trees are used as a tool in comparative
sequence analysis to illustrate the evolutionary relationships among sequences. To create a phylogenetic tree
based on 9-mer signal intensities, genomes listed in
(Additional file 5, Table S3) were compared pair-wise,
using the Pearson correlation measure (Figure 5). In this
study, we demonstrate the use of signal intensities generated from 9-mer probe data to clearly cluster hosts
and pathogens into to their ‘known’ phylogenetic relationships. We have previously shown that a custom
microsatellite microarray can be used to demonstrate
global microsatellite variation between species as measured by array hybridization signal intensities. This

Page 7 of 12

correlated with established taxonomic relationships [19].
Data obtained from the UBDA arrays (normalized signal
intensity values) and computational analysis (log2 transformed, computed counts within sequenced genomes),
for all 262,144 9-mer probes, were treated identically for
the purposes of tree building. All 262,144 9-mer data
points for each sample were first normalized using
GeneSpring (percentile shift normalization followed
by baseline to median normalization). A Pearson’s correlation matrix was subsequently produced and then converted to a taxonomic tree using the neighbour-joining
program within the PHYLIP software suite and TreeView program [32]. Trees were not rooted to any specific organism. The lower branches of the phylogenetic
tree as shown in Figure 5 display the segregation and
differentiation of the various Brucella species. The
mixed sample comprising of L. Plantarum and S. Mitis
(4:1 ratio) was found to be closer to the L. Plantarum
(r = 0.974) versus S. mitis (r = 0.957) on the phylogenetic tree since there was a higher copy number of this
genome in the sample (Figure 5). The tree illustrates
that the 9-mer probe intensities can be used in species
differentiation. The taxonomic tree is an approximate
visualization estimation, using a distance matrix which
successfully separated mammalian, bacterial and viral
clades.
Samples subjected to DNA amplification are comparable
to unamplified samples

Figure 5 Phylogenetic relationships from the 9-mer probe set
between organisms hybridized on the UBDA array. All 262,144
9-mer data points for each of the 20 samples were RMA normalized
and log2 transformed. A Pearson correlation matrix was created by
comparing each sample against all other samples. The values were
used to generate a taxonomic relationship tree using the PHYLIP
software. The taxonomic tree, as visualized in the Treeview program,
shows the separation between mammalian, bacterial and viral
genomes.

In preparation for the UBDA becoming not only a
detection assay but also a diagnostic test for the identification of numerous pathogens, it was recognized that
pathogens may be present in a given sample at very low
copy numbers and may be further diluted by genetic
material recovered from the host. Microarrays require
0.5 - 1 μg of high-purity genomic DNA, which may be
difficult to obtain from all samples. To overcome this
limitation the potential for DNA amplification, artefacts
that may significantly alter hybridization to the microarray were examined. To analyze for this possible limitation, a 10 ng (4.89 × 106 copies) aliquot of Francisella
tularensis LVS strain genomic DNA [Accession number
NC_007880, genome size 1,895,994 bases] was amplified
using the whole genome amplification method (GenomiPhi V2, GE Healthcare). A total of 1 μg of the resulting
amplified DNA was hybridized to the UBDA array and
compared to the hybridization pattern resulting from
the hybridization of 1 μg of unamplified DNA from the
same source. Figure 6 shows a linear regression of the
two samples (all 262,144 probes) which resulted in an
R 2 value of 0.91, well within the R 2 = 0.94 +- 0.06
reproducibility found for the custom microsatellite
microarray [19]. This confirms that whole genome
amplification of pathogen material in small amounts is

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

Figure 6 Bivariate Fit of Francisella tularensis whole genome
amplified genomic DNA (log2 values) by unamplified genomic
DNA (log2 values). A linear regression of the two samples resulted
in an R2 value of 0.91, confirming that whole genome amplification
of pathogen material such as Francisella tularensis LVS genomic
DNA in small amounts (10 ng starting material) is comparable to
the unamplified genomic sample.

comparable to the unamplified genomic sample. We
obtained these results using the standard protocol with
10 ng of starting material without optimization. We are
targeting a 1-2 nanogram sample size as a starting
amount of material in an optimized robust, field sample
evaluation.

Discussion
This is a new forensics array based technology to identify any species. This unique strategy of using patterns
generated from hybridization of any unknown genome
(DNA or cDNA) to a very high-density species independent oligonucleotide microarray and comparing those
patterns to a library of patterns of known samples can
be used to identify unknown organisms. Figure 5 shows
the grouping of the different genomes into bacterial,
viral and eukaryotic genomes. Further the Brucella species grouping pattern obtained from the phylogenomic
analysis using the Pearson’s correlation matrix shown in
Figure 5 are in agreement with Brucella species showing
hierarchical clustering represented as a similarity matrix
shown in Figure 3. The UBDA hybridization patterns
are unique to a genome, and potentially to different isolates and to a mixture of organisms. In the future, this
forensics method will work by comparing signal intensity readout to a library of readouts established by interrogating a wide spectrum of species which will be
available at our website http://discovery.vbi.vt.edu/ubda/.
The phylogenetic tree illustrates the ability of 9-mer
probes to differentiate among Brucella species. Pair-wise
comparisons between different genomes can be used as

Page 8 of 12

a measure to classify bacterial, viral or mammalian genomes into their respective clades. We have begun to
amass a library of ‘signatures’ to facilitate accurate identification and classification of “unknown” samples. We
are currently expanding the repository of available biosignatures to several hundred genomes including field
isolates from bacteria, viruses, host genomes and vectors
infected with pathogens. Some of the genomes in this
repository are classified in the select agent category.
UBDA forensics application has the potential to be compatible with micro-machine based front end sample processing and preparation platforms, thus enabling the
production of a highly automated, fast and accurate
field-deployable detection system.
Other diagnostic techniques such as PCR or RT-PCR
require several primers to be designed which are specific
for each genome- bacterial, viral or host. There may be
spurious products for primers binding at low specificity.
The processing costs should also be taken into consideration for these methodologies. The current cost for
the UBDA array is approximately $350 per sample
which includes reagents and processing costs. The current turnaround time for this forensics technology is
less than 24 hours. This is a single experimental procedure compared to other technologies which involve a
series of methods such as serological, biochemical and
genomic based. Genome specific arrays are in the similar price range as the UBDA array; however researchers
can only assay a single genome or a small subset of
them. Currently the UBDA platform requires a turnaround time approximately one day from hybridization
on the array to data analysis. A diagnostic laboratory in
the field requires proximately two weeks before the
identity of a given infectious agent can be determined.
These methods usually require several standard serological and biochemical tests that are usually selected and
based on the clinical symptoms observed in the field.
Serology test results are usually available after 48 hours.
Although each of these tests is cost effective in nature,
they must be fine tuned to be pathogen specific.
The UBDA approach can be applied to any genome,
even in the presence of background contamination
(usually host DNA) for which, the unique pattern will
be known. The patterns generated from an unknown
sample (secretion, tissue culture, environmental sample,
etc) with minimal specimen processing can be identified
or at least the most similar related species will be predicted by comparison to a library or a repository of patterns. These techniques may be especially useful in
evaluating and differentiating species whose genome has
not yet been sequenced. Along with a repository of
unique hybridization signatures from the genomes of
pathogens and their hosts, this array has the ability to
rapidly and adequately identify biological threat agents

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

and newly emerging infectious pathogens that are high
risk priorities in bio-defense. Application of this technology has the potential to extend to other areas such as
food and environmental microbial monitoring and basic
research including, (a) speciation and evolution, (b)
human/animal disease biomarker discovery, (c) measurement of the genomic response to a chemical, radiation
or other exposure, but most important, (d) pathogen
forensics and characterization of natural or engineered
variants that may confound other species-specific
approaches.

Conclusions
Genetic signature discovery and identification of pathogenic phenotypes will provide a robust means of discriminating pathogens that are closely related. This array
has high sensitivity as demonstrated by the detection of
low amounts of spike-in oligonucleotides. Hybridization
patterns are unique to a specific genome and these can
be used to de-convolute and thus identity the constituents of a mixed pathogen sample. In addition it can
distinguish hosts and pathogens by their divergent phylogenomic relationships as captured in their respective
9-mer hybridization signatures. This platform has potential for commercial and government agency applications
as a cost effective reliable platform for accurately
screening large numbers of samples for bio-threat agents
in forensic analysis, screening for pathogens that routinely infect animals and humans, and as a molecular
diagnostic of micro-organisms in a clinical environment.
This platform is highly attractive, because it has multiplex capacity where knowledge can be drawn from the
array hybridization patterns without prior explicit information of the genomes in the samples. These hybridization patterns are being translated into a knowledge base
repository of bio-signatures so that future users of this
technology can compare and draw inferences related to
the sample under study. The data from these experiments and the array design are located on our web site
at http://discovery.vbi.vt.edu/ubda/.
Methods
Array design details

A custom microarray was designed by this laboratory
and manufactured by Roche-Nimblegen (Madison, WI)
as a custom 385 K (385,000 probe platform) chip to
include the following sets of probes; 9-mer, pathogen
specific probes; rRNA gene specific, microsatellite and
control 70-mer oligonucleotide probes. There were
262,144 9-mer probes, and 20,000 of them were replicated 3 times in total (Additional file 1, Table S1). The
9-mer probes were comprised of a core 9-mer nucleotide and flanked on both sides by three nucleotides,
selected to maximize sequence coverage of these basic

Page 9 of 12

15-mers. Probes with low GC content were padded with
additional bases at their termini to equalize melting
temperatures, with most probes ranging from 15-21
nucleotides in total length. For the 9-mer design, the
length of the probes was adjusted to match a melting
temperature of 54°C. The array design was based upon
the prediction that the use of relatively short probes
(15-21 mers) would result in the middle 9 bases dominating hybridization kinetics.
rRNA probes were included in the design to serve as
positive controls and confirmation of the 9-mer probes
power for differentiating genomes. The rRNA probes
were selected from the green gene data (http://greengenes.lbl.gov/cgi-bin/nph-show_probes_2_otu_alignments.cgi), utilizing the complete list of 8,935 OTUs
(Operational Taxonomic Unit). One probe was selected
for each OTU and probe length was adjusted to a Tm
equal to 54°C, as was done for 9-mer design. A mismatch probe (1 mis-match, MM) for each OTU probe
was included in the design. Perfect match (PM) 8,935
probes and 8,935 one mis-match MM probes were
included in the microarray design. All probes are replicated 3 times on the array.
Genome specific probes for Brucella spp., Avian Influenza Virus (AIV), Foot and Mouth Disease Virus
(FMDV), and Rift-Valley Fever Virus (RVFV) were
designed and included on the microarray as an independent test when the array is used to analyze these species.
Sequence alignments were performed to determine the
similar and unique regions of the pathogens, with
probes selected from the unique regions of each pathogen species or sub-type, and excluding sequences similar
to host genomes. In total, 1,062 unique probes were
selected and are replicated 3 times.
Probes dedicated to surveying microsatellite content
were designed for every 1- to 6-mer repetitive sequence.
For each 1- to 5-mer repetitive sequence, single mismatch (1 MM) probes were also designed. A total of
3,557 unique microsatellite probes were generated and
replicated at total of 3 times. Microsatellite probes were
included on this array to anchor the results to previous
experiments and to aid in the de-convolution of the
contribution of host genomic DNA. For higher life
forms typically have many microsatellite loci, whereas
bacteria and viruses have none or very few in their
genome.
Gene-specific probes were designed to target important metabolic pathways, such as alcohol dehydrogenase,
glucose-6-phosphate isomerase and SHV-like b-lactamase, by using the highly conserved sequences. In total,
432 probes were designed and replicated a total of 3
times.
For labelling controls, a set of six synthetic 70-mer oligonucleotides were designed to be spiked into each

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

labelling reaction and hybridized to a constellation of
361 dedicated probes on the array comprising of perfect
match probes (34 probes), 1 mis-match (100 probes), 2
mis-match (137 probes) and 3 mis-match probes (90
probes), ranging from 15-19 nucleotides. The set of 361
probes are replicated 5 times total (Additional file 2,
Table S2). Figure 1 shows a comparison of signal intensity values of perfect match control probes on the array
generated from human genomic DNA without spike of
oligonucleotides to samples with a spiked-in. Regression
analysis of signal intensity values from the mis-matched
probes on the data set is in Figures S1A-S1D (Additional file 3). The array design files for each feature category on the UBDA array are in Additional file 6 (9-mer
probes) and Additional file 7 (all other probes) and also
available at http://discovery.vbi.vt.edu/ubda/.
Microarray procedure

Human genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples collected from a volunteer by the McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development Genetics
Clinical Laboratory in accordance with Institutional
Review Board at UT Southwestern Medical Center (Dallas, TX). Genomic DNA from Bos taurus, Gallus gallus,
Meleagris gallopavo, Ovis aries, Capra hircus, and Equus
caballus was obtained from Zyagen (San Diego, CA).
Brucella species, Cryptosporidium parvum, Lactobacillus
plantarum, Streptococcus mitis, Escherichia coli and
Influenza virus genomic DNA was obtained from BEI
resources and ATCC (Manasses, VA). The spectrum of
organisms chosen for hybridization on the UBDA array
was primarily bio-threat zoonotic agents, agents infecting farm animals.
DNA concentration (260 nm) and purity (260/280 and
260/230 nm) was assessed by the spectrophotometer
and quality by agarose gel electrophoresis. Samples with
260/230 nm ratios greater than 1.8 were used following
established protocols for array comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH). Hybridization conditions were
optimized to ensure specificity and sensitivity. All DNA
test samples (1 μg) were labelled with Cy3 and co-hybridized with the same Cy5-labeled human reference
(Promega, Inc, Madison, WI), according to Roche Nimblegen standard microarray labelling procedures. For
each microarray, human genomic DNA (Promega,
Madison, WI) was labelled with Cy-5 and used as a
reference channel in each experiment. DNA labelling,
hybridization and data acquisition were performed by
Mogene (St. Louis, MO). We tested hybridization temperatures ranging from 30°C to 50°C. For microarray
hybridization, a custom buffer (0.5% Triton X-100, 1 M
NaCl, and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, filtered with a 0.2
micron nitrocellulose filter, prepared fresh) was used at
38°C, and microarrays were washed following Roche

Page 10 of 12

Nimblegen’s CGH standard techniques (available at
http://www.nimblegen.com). Hybridization conditions
were standardized for the UBDA array to minimize any
errors that could lead to bias resulting after processing
the slides and image scanning on an array scanner. Signals from probes complementary to labelling controls
indicate that the post-DNA preparation process, from
labelling to hybridization, washing and scanning, were
successful. Hybridization, scanning, and data extraction
were performed following Roche NimbleGen standard
protocol for CGH arrays, and the resulting raw data
were provided via secure web link.
Array data processing and organism classification

A Robust Multi-chip Average (RMA) normalization procedure was performed across all arrays. The procedure
included background subtraction and quantile normalization using Nimblescan Software (Roche NimbleGen).
After normalization, all 262,144 9-mer probes were
extracted from the 370 K array using PERL scripts and
averaged across the replicate probes. Subsequent statistical analysis was performed using GeneSpringGX 11.0
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). All signal
intensity values were log2 transformed for further analysis. Data were also filtered by intensity values (lower cut
off percentile of 20% for raw signals), and subsequent
pair-wise comparisons were performed on the sample
data set. Clustering is one of the data mining processes
for discovery and identifying patterns in the underlying
data. Clustering algorithms partition data into subsets
based on similarity and dissimilarity. Clustering methods
follow three steps: pattern recognition, use of a clustering algorithm and similarity measure matrix [33]. For
pattern recognition, pair-wise comparisons are used
between samples to select the features on which the
clustering is to be performed. Our experimental platform is comparative genome hybridization for which
hierarchical clustering is used to determine phylogenomic relationships between organisms. Hierarchical
clustering [34] transforms a distance matrix of pair-wise
similarity measurements between all items into a hierarchy of nested groupings. The hierarchy is represented
with a binary tree-like dendogram. Hierarchical clustering was performed on the resulting data sets, using the
Euclidian matrix and centroid linkage to classify various
organisms. Data sets were analyzed for Brucella species.
A cut-off of 5-fold change in hybridization intensity for
a given probe was used to reduce the data set to only
those meaningful probes that showed a difference
between at least one of the pair-wise comparisons.
Phylogenetic taxonomic tree based on array intensity

Data obtained from the Universal Bio-Detection Array
(normalized signal intensity values that were log 2

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

Page 11 of 12

transformed) and computational analysis for all 262,144
9-mer probes were treated identically for the purpose of
tree building. All 262,144 data points for each of the 20
samples were first RMA normalized. For each sample, a
Pearson’s correlation matrix was created which included
self similarity and similarity to the remaining 19 samples
from all the 262,144 data points of each sample. The
resulting distance matrix was used to produce a phylogenetic tree, using the neighbour-joining method within
the PHYLIP software suite and TreeView.

kinetics. This is shown by a reduction in probe signal intensity values
when the human genomic DNA sample was digested with StuI enzyme.
The reduction in the probe intensity signal is greater when the
restriction enzyme site is located at the center of the 9-mer probe.
Therefore the center nucleotide of the probe is the most restrictive in
determining the specificity of the probe hybridization complex.
Additional file 5: Table S3 Genomes hybridized on the array.
Genomic DNA from the following genomes was hybridized on the UBDA
array.
Additional file 6: Annotation file for 9-mer probes on the UBDA
array.
Additional file 7: Annotation file for all other probes on the UBDA
array. Genomic DNA from the following genomes was hybridized on the
UBDA array.

Whole genome amplification

Francisella tularensis LVS strain genomic DNA, starting
material, 10 nanogram was amplified using whole genome amplification method as defined (GenomiPhi V2,
GE Healthcare). We obtained 2-3 μg of whole genome
amplified DNA from 10 ng of starting genomic DNA.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1 Distribution of probe types included in
the UBDA design. The table describes the different data set features on
the array.
Additional file 2: Table S2 Sequence of labelling control
oligonucleotide probes. Sequence information of the 70-mer
oligonucleotides used in the spike-in study to determine the sensitivity
of the UBDA array.
Additional file 3: Figures S1A - S1D. Regression analysis of signal
intensity values generated from spike in of different concentrations of
70-mer oligonucleotides to human genomic DNA versus the un-spiked
sample. Average Cy3 signal intensity values were plotted on a log scale.
Normalized signal intensities from the Cy3 channel, which were human
genomic DNA samples with and without the addition of 6 spike-in 70mer oligonucleotides, were compared by linear regression. Each notation
on the graph represents an individual control probe spot on the array.
The R2 value is displayed in the lower right quadrant of the graph.
Purple × represent perfect match probes (PM), blue diamonds represent
1 mis-match (MM) probes, red squares represent probes with 2 mismatches and green triangles represent 3 mis-matches. (A) At 4.5
picomolar of oligonucleotide spike-in, an R2 value of 0.96 was obtained
for probes with a PM, 0.93 for 1 MM, 0.95 for 2 MM and 0.92 for 3 MM.
(B) At 41 picomolar of oligonucleotide spike-in, an R2 value of 0.96 was
obtained for probes with a PM, 0.87 for 1 MM, 0.94 for 2 MM and 0.86
for 3 MM. (C) At 121 picomolar of oligonucleotide spike-in, an R2 value
of 0.92 was obtained for probes with a PM (perfect match), 0.85 for 1
MM, 0.90 for 2 MM and 0.83 for 3 MM. (D) At 364 picomolar of
oligonucleotide spike-in, an R2 value of 0.84 was obtained for probes
with a PM (perfect match), 0.81 for 1 MM, 0.90 for 2 MM and 0.75 for 3
MM. Blast searches were done for all 70 mer probe combinations to the
human genome sequence. The 2 MM 70-mer oligonucleotide probes
were highly similar to the human genome and hence are not considered
informative and do not show any variation as represented by the linear
regression value.
Additional file 4: Figure S2. Analysis of probe hybridization specificity
on the UBDA array. Human genomic DNA was digested with StuI
(AGG^CCT) restriction enzyme, and then compared to undigested
human genomic DNA from the same individual. The resulting values
were plotted, with ratio of the human genomic DNA digested with StuI
and undigested human genomic DNA as log2 fold change on the
ordinate axis. The nucleotide position of the StuI restriction enzyme site
relative to the center of the 9-mer probe is plotted on the abscissa axis.
Probe specificity analysis of individual 9-mer probes is confirmed by
demonstrating that the center most base governs the hybridization

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by Department of Homeland Security through the
FAZD Center (National Center of Excellence for Foreign Animal and
Zoonotic Disease Defense) at Texas A & M University and Virginia
Bioinformatics Institute director’s funds. SJS received support from a transdisciplinary fellowship from Virginia Tech and Virginia Bioinformatics
Institute. We would like to extend a special thanks to Angela George and
Dale Preston of the Texas Animal Health Commission, Austin, Texas for
assistance with sample preparation. We thank Dr. Abey Bandara and Dr. Tom
Inzana at Virginia Tech for providing the Francisella tularensis LVS strain
genomic DNA. We would like to extend a special thanks to Greg Thorne
and Shaukat Rangwala with MoGene their valuable technical assistance. We
appreciate the assistance of Linda Gunn, Renee Nester, Traci Roberts and
Laurie Spotswood for administrative assistance. We also appreciate Zyagen
and BEI resources for providing genomic DNA.
Author details
Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA. 2St. Jude
Children’s Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN, USA.
3
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Texas A & M University, College Station, TX, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
SJS oversaw the project, coordinated the study design, carried out the
analysis and subsequent parsing and data interpretation and drafted the
manuscript. JNW initiated the project, participated in preliminary technical
analyses. CLG participated in manuscript editing. LM participated in
manuscript editing, created the UBDA website and provided computation
expertise. ZS designed the array and provided computation expertise. JM
provided useful discussions and technical assistance. LGA provided DNA
samples, data interpretation and participated in manuscript editing. HRG
conceived of the study, participated in the study design and mentored in
drafting the manuscript. All authors have agreed to all the content in the
manuscript, including the data as presented.
Received: 10 January 2011 Accepted: 14 June 2011
Published: 14 June 2011
References
1. Pannucci J, Cai H, Pardington PE, Williams E, Okinaka RT, Kuske CR, Cary RB:
Virulence signatures: microarray-based approaches to discovery and
analysis. Biosens Bioelectron 2004, 20(4):706-718.
2. Ruiz-Mesa JD, Sanchez-Gonzalez J, Reguera JM, Martin L, Lopez-Palmero S,
Colmenero JD: Rose Bengal test: diagnostic yield and use for the rapid
diagnosis of human brucellosis in emergency departments in endemic
areas. Clin Microbiol Infect 2005, 11(3):221-225.
3. Bricker BJ: PCR as a diagnostic tool for brucellosis. Vet Microbiol 2002,
90(1-4):435-446.
4. Bounaadja L, Albert D, Chenais B, Henault S, Zygmunt MS, Poliak S, GarinBastuji B: Real-time PCR for identification of Brucella spp.: a comparative
study of IS711, bcsp31 and per target genes. Vet Microbiol 2009, 137(12):156-164.

Shallom et al. BMC Microbiology 2011, 11:132
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/11/132

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

Hinic V, Brodard I, Thomann A, Holub M, Miserez R, Abril C: IS711-based
real-time PCR assay as a tool for detection of Brucella spp. in wild boars
and comparison with bacterial isolation and serology. BMC Vet Res 2009,
5:22.
Her M, Kang SI, Kim JW, Kim JY, Hwang IY, Jung SC, Park SH, Park MY,
Yoo H: A genetic comparison of Brucella abortus isolates from animals
and humans by using an MLVA assay. J Microbiol Biotechnol 2010,
20(12):1750-1755.
Whatmore AM, Perrett LL, MacMillan AP: Characterisation of the genetic
diversity of Brucella by multilocus sequencing. BMC Microbiol 2007, 7:34.
Abril C, Thomann A, Brodard I, Wu N, Ryser-Degiorgis MP, Frey J,
Overesch G: A novel isolation method of Brucella species and molecular
tracking of Brucella suis biovar 2 in domestic and wild animals. Vet
Microbiol 2011.
De Santis R, Ciammaruconi A, Faggioni G, D’Amelio R, Marianelli C, Lista F:
Lab on a chip genotyping for Brucella spp. based on 15-loci multi locus
VNTR analysis. BMC Microbiol 2009, 9:66.
Scott JC, Koylass MS, Stubberfield MR, Whatmore AM: Multiplex assay
based on single-nucleotide polymorphisms for rapid identification of
Brucella isolates at the species level. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007,
73(22):7331-7337.
Call DR: Challenges and opportunities for pathogen detection using DNA
microarrays. Crit Rev Microbiol 2005, 31(2):91-99.
Call DR, Brockman FJ, Chandler DP: Detecting and genotyping Escherichia
coli O157:H7 using multiplexed PCR and nucleic acid microarrays. Int J
Food Microbiol 2001, 67(1-2):71-80.
Chizhikov V, Wagner M, Ivshina A, Hoshino Y, Kapikian AZ, Chumakov K:
Detection and genotyping of human group A rotaviruses by
oligonucleotide microarray hybridization. J Clin Microbiol 2002,
40(7):2398-2407.
Wilson WJ, Strout CL, DeSantis TZ, Stilwell JL, Carrano AV, Andersen GL:
Sequence-specific identification of 18 pathogenic microorganisms using
microarray technology. Mol Cell Probes 2002, 16(2):119-127.
Wang D, Coscoy L, Zylberberg M, Avila PC, Boushey HA, Ganem D,
DeRisi JL: Microarray-based detection and genotyping of viral pathogens.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(24):15687-15692.
Pease AC, Solas D, Sullivan EJ, Cronin MT, Holmes CP, Fodor SP: Lightgenerated oligonucleotide arrays for rapid DNA sequence analysis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1994, 91(11):5022-5026.
Royce TE, Rozowsky JS, Gerstein MB: Toward a universal microarray:
prediction of gene expression through nearest-neighbor probe
sequence identification. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35(15):e99.
Belosludtsev YY, Bowerman D, Weil R, Marthandan N, Balog R, Luebke K,
Lawson J, Johnston SA, Lyons CR, Obrien K, Garner HR, Powdrill TF:
Organism identification using a genome sequence-independent
universal microarray probe set. Biotechniques 2004, 37(4):654-658, 660.
Galindo CL, McIver LJ, McCormick JF, Skinner MA, Xie Y, Gelhausen RA,
Ng K, Kumar NM, Garner HR: Global microsatellite content distinguishes
humans, primates, animals, and plants. Mol Biol Evol 2009,
26(12):2809-2819.
Luebke KJ, Balog RP, Mittelman D, Garner HR: Digital optical chemistry: A
novel system for the rapid fabrication of custom oligonucleotide arrays.
Microfabricated Sensors 2002, 815:87-106.
Luebke KJ, Balog RP, Garner HR: Prioritized selection of
oligodeoxyribonucleotide probes for efficient hybridization to RNA
transcripts. Nucleic Acids Research 2003, 31(2):750-758.
Balog R, Hedhili MN, Bournel F, Penno M, Tronc M, Azria R, Illenberger E:
Synthesis of Cl-2 induced by low energy (0-18 eV) electron impact to
condensed 1,2-C2F4Cl2 molecules. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
2002, 4(14):3350-3355.
Galindo CL: Sporadic breast cancer patient’s germline DNA exhibit an
AT-rich microsatellite signature. Genes, Chromosomes and Cancer 2011,
50(4):275-283.
McGall GH, Fidanza JA: Photolithographic synthesis of high-density
oligonucleotide arrays. Methods Mol Biol 2001, 170:71-101.
Kane MD, Jatkoe TA, Stumpf CR, Lu J, Thomas JD, Madore SJ: Assessment
of the sensitivity and specificity of oligonucleotide (50mer) microarrays.
Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28(22):4552-4557.
Denapaite D, Bruckner R, Nuhn M, Reichmann P, Henrich B, Maurer P,
Schahle Y, Selbmann P, Zimmermann W, Wambutt R, Hakenbeck R: The

Page 12 of 12

27.
28.
29.

30.

31.

32.
33.
34.

genome of Streptococcus mitis B6–what is a commensal? PLoS One 2010,
5(2):e9426.
Alting-Mees MA, Short JM: pBluescript II: gene mapping vectors. Nucleic
Acids Res 1989, 17(22):9494.
Morgan WJ: Brucella classification and regional distribution. Dev Biol
Stand 1984, 56:43-53.
Irizarry RA, Hobbs B, Collin F, Beazer-Barclay YD, Antonellis KJ, Scherf U,
Speed TP: Exploration, normalization, and summaries of high density
oligonucleotide array probe level data. Biostatistics 2003, 4(2):249-264.
Paulsen IT, Seshadri R, Nelson KE, Eisen JA, Heidelberg JF, Read TD,
Dodson RJ, Umayam L, Brinkac LM, Beanan MJ, Daugherty SC, Deboy RT,
Durkin AS, Kolonay JF, Madupu R, Nelson WC, Ayodeji B, Kraul M, Shetty J,
Malek J, VanAken SE, Riedmuller S, Tettelin H, Gill SR, White O, Salzberg SL,
Hoover DL, Lindler LE, Halling SM, Boyle SM, et al: The Brucella suis
genome reveals fundamental similarities between animal and plant
pathogens and symbionts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99(20):13148-13153.
DelVecchio VG, Kapatral V, Redkar RJ, Patra G, Mujer C, Los T, Ivanova N,
Anderson I, Bhattacharyya A, Lykidis A, Reznik G, Jablonski L, Larsen N,
D’Souza M, Bernal A, Mazur M, Goltsman E, Selkov E, Elzer PH, Hagius S,
O’Callaghan D, Letesson JJ, Haselkorn R, Kyrpides N, Overbeek R: The
genome sequence of the facultative intracellular pathogen Brucella
melitensis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(1):443-448.
Page RD: TreeView: an application to display phylogenetic trees on
personal computers. Comput Appl Biosci 1996, 12(4):357-358.
Frades I, Matthiesen R: Overview on techniques in cluster analysis.
Methods Mol Biol 2010, 593:81-107.
Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D: Cluster analysis and display
of genome-wide expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95(25):14863-14868.

doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-132
Cite this article as: Shallom et al.: A species independent universal biodetection microarray for pathogen forensics and phylogenetic
classification of unknown microorganisms. BMC Microbiology 2011 11:132.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
