<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Mobile DNA and evolution in the 21st century</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Mobile DNA 2010 1:4. doi:10.1186/1759-8753-1-4"/>
<meta name="Author" content="James A Shapiro"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

REVIEW

Open Access

Mobile DNA and evolution in the 21st century
James A Shapiro*

Abstract
Scientific history has had a profound effect on the theories of evolution. At the beginning of the 21st century,
molecular cell biology has revealed a dense structure of information-processing networks that use the genome as
an interactive read-write (RW) memory system rather than an organism blueprint. Genome sequencing has documented the importance of mobile DNA activities and major genome restructuring events at key junctures in evolution: exon shuffling, changes in cis-regulatory sites, horizontal transfer, cell fusions and whole genome doublings
(WGDs). The natural genetic engineering functions that mediate genome restructuring are activated by multiple stimuli, in particular by events similar to those found in the DNA record: microbial infection and interspecific hybridization leading to the formation of allotetraploids. These molecular genetic discoveries, plus a consideration of how
mobile DNA rearrangements increase the efficiency of generating functional genomic novelties, make it possible to
formulate a 21st century view of interactive evolutionary processes. This view integrates contemporary knowledge
of the molecular basis of genetic change, major genome events in evolution, and stimuli that activate DNA restructuring with classical cytogenetic understanding about the role of hybridization in species diversification.
Introduction: summary of the argument
The review assumes that readers of this journal are
familiar with the actions of mobile DNA and other genome restructuring functions. It will try to integrate that
familiarity into the historical development of evolutionary concepts and incorporate recent discoveries from
genome sequencing. Just as our knowledge of mobile
DNA has introduced new ways of thinking about hereditary change, the results of sequence analysis have
documented several types of genome alterations at key
places in evolutionary history, alterations which are
notable because they happened within a single generation and affected multiple cellular and organismal characters at the same time: horizontal transfers of large
DNA segments, cell fusions and symbioses, and whole
genome doublings (WGDs). These rapid multi-character
changes are fundamentally different from the slowly
accumulating small random variations postulated in
Darwinian and neo-Darwinian theory.
Cell mergers and WGDs are the kinds of events that
activate mobile DNA and genome restructuring. In
order to fully integrate the genomic findings with our
knowledge of mobile DNA, we have to make use of
* Correspondence: jsha@uchicago.edu
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago,
Gordon Center for Integrative Science W123B, 929 E 57th Street, Chicago, IL
60637, USA

information about the molecular regulation of mobile
DNA activities as well as McClintock’s view that cells
respond to signs of danger, frequently restructuring
their genomes as part of the response [1]. This regulatory/cognitive view of genome restructuring helps us to
formulate reasonable hypotheses about two unresolved
questions in evolutionary theory: (i) the connections
between evolutionary change and ecological disruption;
and (ii) the origins of complex adaptive novelties at
moments of macroevolutionary change.

The historical context for evolutionary ideas
Since Darwin, three issues have been seen as central to
formulating a coherent theory of evolutionary change:
(i) descent with modification (that is the inheritance
of novel characters),
(ii) the origins of hereditary variation, and
(iii) the operation of natural selection.
All evolutionists accept descent with modification as
fundamental to the evolutionary process, but views
towards issues (ii) and (iii) have depended on the existing
state of biological knowledge in each historical period.
In the 19th century, Darwin based his thinking on the
observations of animal breeders and naturalists. Lacking
detailed studies of inheritance, he postulated that change

© 2010 Shapiro; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

arose randomly as ‘numerous, successive, slight variations’ [2]. Applying the uniformitarian principle he
learned from Charles Lyell, his professor of geology [3],
Darwin extrapolated that these small changes would
accumulate over long periods of time, under the guidance of natural selection, to produce major adaptive
characters, such as the eye, and eventually would lead to
the branching off of new species. Thus, classical Darwinism was characterized by its gradualist view of change
and ascribed the major role in adaptive innovation to
the positive action of natural selection in sequentially
favouring ever fitter variants.
In the 20th century, evolutionists were confronted by
an apparent contradiction between Darwinian gradualism and the abrupt changes in individual traits that
were observed to undergo Mendelian segregations in
genetic crosses. This contradiction was resolved at midcentury by the neo-Darwinian ‘modern synthesis’ that
integrated Darwinian gradualism with mathematical
population genetics [4,5]. Like Darwin, his neo-Darwinian followers postulated that the mutational process,
which generated allelic variants of individual genes, has
to be random in nature. In opposition to Lamarckian
ideas, any possibility that organismal history could influence hereditary variation was excluded. The primary
role in determining evolutionary novelty remained with
natural selection.
In the 21st century, we have the legacy of more than
five decades of molecular biology. Knowledge of DNA
has allowed us to study the mutational process with
nucleotide and phosphodiester bond precision [6]. Our
DNA-based technology has made it possible to acquire
a growing database of genome sequences that permit us
to read the history of evolutionary events preserved in
the nucleic acid and protein record.
Molecular cell biology has uncovered sophisticated
networks in all organisms. They acquire information
about external and internal conditions, transmit and
process that information inside the cell, compute the
appropriate biochemical or biomechanical response, and
activate the molecules needed to execute that response.
These information-processing networks are central to
the systems biology perspective of the new century.
Altogether, we have a radically different conceptual perspective on living organisms than our predecessors. As a
result, we need to ask how this new perspective affects
our 21st century understanding of the evolutionary process. Posing this question and outlining a provisional
answer are the goals of this review.

Barbara McClintock: thinking about genome
change as a cognitive response to challenge
In addition to the discoveries of molecular biology, our
21st century thinking benefits from another major

Page 2 of 14

strand of 20th century research - McClintock’s cytogenetic studies that led her to recognize the internal capabilities cells possess to repair and restructure their
genomes. Starting in the 1930s with X-ray-induced
chromosome rearrangements, she analysed how maize
cells dealt with broken ends. These studies taught her
that maize had the ability to detect broken ends, bring
them together and fuse them to generate novel chromosome structures, including deletions, inversions, translocations, and rings [7-11]. She also found that cells in the
embryo, but not in the terminally differentiated endosperm, could ‘heal’ a single broken end by the addition
of a telomere. In the course of exploiting these repair
capabilities to generate deficiencies of maize chromosome IX, she made the discovery of transposable elements, for which she is best known today [12].
Although the general view is that McClintock’s discovery of transposition was most important for revealing a
novel mechanism of genomic change, she herself placed
the emphasis on another aspect of her work. In conversation, she would often say that she was far more interested in control than she was in transposition. By this,
she meant that the ability of her maize plants to regulate
expression and restructure their genomes in accordance
with their needs was more significant than the
mechanics of chromosome rearrangement. She was primarily interested in the sensory and decision-making
(that is, cognitive) capacities of cells with damaged genomes. As she expressed it at the conclusion of her
Nobel Prize lecture: ‘In the future, attention undoubtedly will be centred on the genome, with greater appreciation of its significance as a highly sensitive organ of
the cell that monitors genomic activities and corrects
common errors, senses unusual and unexpected events,
and responds to them, often by restructuring the genome’ [1]. In the next section, we will see how prescient
and compatible with molecular analysis her vision was.

The genome as a read-write (RW) memory
system, not an organism blueprint
The pioneering molecular biologists expected to provide
a firm physical-chemical basis for the traditional 20th
century view that genotype determines phenotype and
that genotype changes accidentally during replication
[13]. This expectation of one-way cellular information
transfer was articulated most succinctly in Crick’s Central Dogma of Molecular Biology [14]. Even when Temin
and Mitzutani discovered reverse transcriptase [15],
Crick insisted that the genome was the source of phenotypic information and that nucleic acids as a class were
the basic information molecules of the cell [16].
A review of the past five decades of molecular cell
biology, including an analysis of how mobile DNA operates, leads to a dramatically different picture of cellular

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

informatics [17,18]. We realize that DNA by itself is
inert. It must interact with other molecules for transcription, replication, transmission to daughter cells and
repair. DNA does not change by itself, even when
damaged. Point mutations and DNA rearrangements
depend upon the action of protein and RNA molecules,
and many organisms undergo genome restructurings as
a necessary part of the normal life cycle [19-22]. A great
deal of cellular information processing occurs outside
the genome - for example, transcript processing, protein
processing and decoration and signal transduction - yet
the results of this information processing also feed back
onto the genome in the form of alterations in nucleoprotein complexes, chromatin configurations, subnucleoid or subnuclear localization, and sequence or
structural changes. In other words, the cell is a multilevel information-processing entity, and the genome is
only a part of the entire interactive complex.
We can summarize the change from the simple linear
view of the Central Dogma to today’s complex systemsbased picture of cell informatics by writing out molecular information transfer events as sets of Boolean propositions (adapted from [18]):
• Crick’s central dogma of molecular biology:
1. DNA == >2X DNA
2. DNA == > RNA == > protein == > phenotype
Contemporary picture of molecular information transfers:
1. DNA + 0 == > 0
2. DNA + protein + ncRNA == > chromatin
3. Chromatin + protein + ncRNA == > DNA replication, chromatin maintenance/reconstitution
4. Protein + RNA + lipids + small molecules == >
signal transduction
5. Chromatin + protein + signals == > RNA (primary transcript)
6. RNA + protein + ncRNA == > RNA (processed
transcript)
7. RNA + protein + ncRNA == > protein (primary
translation product)
8. Protein + nucleotides + Ac-CoA + SAM + sugars
+ lipids == > processed and decorated protein
9. DNA + protein == > new DNA sequence (mutator polymerases)
10. Signals + chromatin + protein == > new DNA
structure (DNA rearrangements subject to stimuli)
11. RNA + protein + chromatin == > new DNA
structure
(retrotransposition,
retroduction,
retrohoming)
12. Signals + chromatin + proteins + ncRNA + lipids
== > nuclear/nucleoid localization

Page 3 of 14

SUMMARY: DNA + protein + ncRNA + signals +
other molecules < == > Genome structure and
phenotype
A helpful analogy for the role of the genome in cellular informatics is as a RW memory system. This is a
fundamentally different idea from the conventional 20th
century view of the genome as a read-only memory
(ROM) subject to accidental change. DNA is a multivalent storage medium capable of holding information in
nucleotide sequences, chemical modifications, and
nucleoprotein complexes. In thinking about how the cell
writes information back onto the genome, we can discriminate roughly three different time scales:
1. within the cell cycle, where the formation and dissolution of transient nucleoprotein complexes
predominate;
2. over several cell cycles, where heritable chromatin
configurations can be passed on and then erased or
re-imprinted;
3. over evolutionary time, where sequence variation
and genome restructuring play major roles in the
emergence of novel characters and adaptive
functions.
In this review, our focus is on evolution. So it is most
appropriate to ask what lessons we have learned from
genome sequencing. There are many, and we discuss
the ones that are most relevant to the action of mobile
DNA.

What genomes teach
Protein evolution by exon shuffling

From the first experiments clarifying the composite
structure of lambda repressor in the late 1970s [23], it
has become increasingly clear that proteins are largely
composed of independently folding and functional
domains [24]. At the start of the 21st century, the Nature paper reporting the draft human genome contained
two figures which illustrated the way the transcription
factor and chromatin binding proteins have changed by
domain accretion and swapping as they evolved from
yeast to mammals [25]. The emergence of novel
domains and protein evolution by a combinatorial process of domain shuffling are now widely recognized as
the major routes to functionally novel molecules. It is of
fundamental conceptual significance that the genomic
basis of domain-swapping involves the rearrangement of
coding segments (exons) rather than the sequential
accumulation of random single base/single amino acid
changes. Mobile DNA movements, rather than replication errors, serve as the primary engines of protein
evolution.

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

Both laboratory experiments and genome sequences
have documented roles for well-characterized mobile
elements in the origin of novel exons and in exon shuffling. By examining the sequences encoding known proteins, without applying RepeatMasker methods,
Nekrutenko and Li discovered that over 4% of human
mRNAs come from SINE (short interspersed nucleotide
element) retrotransposons [26]. Since then, additional
examples of ‘exonization’ of segments within mobile element and cDNA inserts have accumulated in the literature [27-29]. Incorporation of sequences from mobile
elements into spliced transcripts typically produces
exons that encode oligopeptides. Thus, we can recognize
well-defined mobile DNA events (transposon or retrotransposon insertions) that are capable of rapidly generating the extended sequences needed to encode novel
protein domains. In particular cases, transposase
sequences have been exapted to encode DNA binding
domains [30]. Since the genomic content of mobile elements is taxonomically specific [31], we may expect to
see differences between phylogenetic branches in the
new exons they produce.
There are well-documented cases in the DNA record
where mobile element systems have served to mobilize,
amplify and rearrange exons. The most striking case
involves the more than 3000 Pack-MULEs (Mu-like elements) discovered in the rice genome [32]. These composite MULEs have inverted terminal repeats flanking
combinations of exons and introns. In many cases, the
Pack-MULE at a particular location is flanked by a short
target site duplication indicating that it arrived by a
transposition mechanism. Some Pack-MULEs contain
complete protein coding sequences, a number of which
are duplicated in the rice genome. Many Pack-MULEs,
however, contain exons lacking translation initiation or
termination signals, and there are known rice mRNAs
that contain spliced exons from more than one adjacent
Pack-MULE. Helitrons played an analogous role in the
maize genome [33]. Intriguingly, although helitrons are
present in the Arabidopsis and rice genomes, they are
far less active in exon capture in those two species than
in maize [34].
In addition to DNA transposition, there is both genomic and experimental evidence for exon shuffling by
LINE (long interspersed element) retrotransduction. Retrotransduction occurs when LINE transcription reads
through the 3’ polyA signal and produces RNA and
cDNA molecules containing downstream sequences
from the genome. Such read-through retrotransduction
events are found in 15% of all human LINE1 inserts and
may account for fully 1% of the human genome [35].
Exon-shuffling by LINE1 retrotransduction occurs in tissue culture cells [36] and has been documented in the
evolution of primate genomes [37]. Further mechanisms

Page 4 of 14

of exon shuffling may occur when LINEs introduce double-strand (DS) breaks into a genetic locus [38] or are
involved in homologous exchanges between nearby
repeats [39].
Mobile elements and regulatory evolution
Transcription signals

The appearance of a novel coding capacity at a genetic
locus frequently results from changes in cis-acting regulatory and processing signals without any change in
exon content. Mobile DNA has long been known to
play a role in this kind of regulatory change. The phenotypes of the first bacterial mutations known to be IS
(insertion sequence) elements resulted either from the
acquisition of transcriptional stop signals [40] or from
the creation of novel transcriptional start sites [41]. In
eukaryotes, mutations activating transcription most
commonly resulted from the insertion of enhancer elements in LTR (long terminal repeat) retroelements [42].
In the case of one apoptosis regulator protein, genome
comparison shows that orthologous coding regions in
primates and rodents acquired their parallel transcription signals from independent LTR retrotransposon
insertions [43]. Sequences of Mu element insertions in
maize can alter both the initiation and termination sites
for transcription [44]. Examination of the human genome has uncovered over 100 cases where Alu elements
provided polyA addition signals at the 3’ end of
expressed sequences [45]. The role of mobile elements
in the evolution of transcriptional regulatory sites has
been extensively documented from genomic data since
the 1990s [46,47]. Many of these cases display the kind
of taxonomic specificity predicted by the phylogenetic
distribution of transposons and retrotransposons [48].
Splicing signals

It has been over two decades since Wessler and colleagues discovered the splicing of Ds insertions in maize
[49]. Not only does Ds behave as a mobile intron; it also
confers alternative splicing [50]. The same is true of
maize retrotransposons [51]. The potential of a single
genomic change to encode multiple novel products has
been documented in broad beans, where insertion of a
CACTA family transposon carries out exon shuffling
and provides sites for alternative splicing [52]. Recent
studies in the human genome are beginning to clarify
the requirements for generating novel splicing patterns
by mobile element inserts [53-55].
Chromatin signals

The insertion of a mobile element has a profound effect
on local chromatin configuration. Since a major regulatory mechanism for controlling the activity of mobile
elements is incorporation into silenced chromatin [56],
individual or clustered elements serve as nucleation sites
for heterochromatin domains [57]. Some elements, like
gypsy in Drosophila, carry chromatin insulator

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

determinants that are major contributors to their influence on genome expression [58]. In certain cases, like
the FWA and MEDEA loci in Arabidopsis, imprinted
expression reflects the action of RNAi machinery on
sequences derived from a mobile element [59]. Recent
studies of imprinted loci in Arabidopsis seeds indicate
that mobile elements provided many of the recognition
sequences for epigenetic control [60].
The connection between mobile elements and chromatin signals is less well-documented in mammals.
Nonetheless, there is intriguing evidence that retrotransposons were critical to the origin of an epigenetic control regime necessary for the emergence of mammals in
evolution. Knockout experiments in mice show that
imprinted loci derived from the Ty3/gypsy retrotransposon family are essential to placental development
[61,62]. These observations suggest that functional exaptation of retrotransposon coding sequences and signals
mediating their epigenetic control played a role in the
evolution of the placenta, a major developmental
invention.
Regulatory RNAs

We are currently learning how much regulation occurs
through the action of small RNA molecules. The examination of plant genome sequences has established
important links of many small RNAs to DNA transposons (miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements MITEs) [63] and led to the suggestion that si- and
miRNA regulation evolved from mobile element controls [64]. The rice Pack-MULEs are also associated
with small RNA coding sequences [65]. In the human
genome, 55 functionally characterized and 85 uncharacterized miRNAs arose from transposons and retrotransposons [66]. Comparison with the mouse genome
indicates that miRNAs matching L2 LINE and MIR
SINE elements are ancient and conserved, while those
matching L1 LINE and DNA elements are primate-specific. As expected from the taxonomic distribution of
SINE elements [31], the Alu-derived miRNAs are also
primate-specific [67]. Alu element recombination also
appears to have played a role in the expansion of primate miRNA coding arrays [68]. A similar conclusion
about the role of mobile elements in the generation of
taxonomically-specific miRNAs arose from analysis of
marsupial genomes [69].
Regulatory suites encompassing unlinked coding regions

One major aspect of regulatory evolution by mobile elements was illustrated by McClintock in her 1956 Brookhaven Symposium paper on intranuclear systems [70].
This is the ability of related elements to insert at two or
more distinct loci and bring them under coordinate regulation. That coregulated loci have arisen in this way
during evolution has been documented in mice, where
similar retroviral promoters initiate transcription of

Page 5 of 14

different loci in oocytes and preimplantation embryos
[71]. In the human genome, taxonomically-restricted
evolution of the vertebrate REST-controlled transcriptional network has involved LINE element insertions
into cis-regulatory sites [72]. It would clearly be of great
interest to correlate genome expression data with a survey of loci that share regulatory sequences evolved from
related mobile elements.
Intercellular horizontal DNA transfer

Molecular genetics began with the study of intercellular
horizontal DNA transfer. The first demonstration of the
genetic capacity of DNA molecules involved pneumococcal transformation [73], and bacterial genetics developed on the basis of cells’ capacities to transfer genome
segments by transformation, conjugation or viral transduction [74]. Studies of temperate bacteriophages and
antibiotic resistance made us appreciate the multiple
molecular mechanisms cells have to incorporate newly
acquired DNA independently of extensive sequence
homology [75]. From countless experiments, we now
have overwhelming evidence for horizontal DNA transfer between species and between the three kingdoms of
living cells (Table 1).
Horizontal transfer can be a major driver of evolutionary novelty because it permits the acquisition of DNA
encoding complex traits in a single event. The genomic
data is overwhelming in documenting the fundamental
importance of horizontal transfer in the evolution of
bacterial and archaeal genomes [76]. Prokaryotic genomes contain plasmids and genomic islands encoding
multi-component adaptive characters that range from

Table 1 Modes of intercellular and interkingdom DNA
transfer.
Horizontal transfer mode

Documented transfers

Uptake of environmental DNA

Bacteria – bacteria [74,168,169]
Plant – bacteria [170,171]
Plastid transfection [172]
Mammalian cell transfection
[173,174] and lipofection [175,176]

Conjugal transfer

Bacteria – bacteria [74]
Bacteria – yeast [177]
Bacteria – plant [178,179]

Viral transduction and gene
transfer agents

Bacteria – bacteria [74,180]
Bacteria – plant [181]
Animal cell – animal cell [182]
Animal cell – virus [183]

Parasitic or endosymbiotic
association

Plant – fern [184]
Plant – plant [91,90]
Bacteria – invertebrate [89]

Undetermined mechanism

Archaea – bacteria [76]

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

microbicide resistance [74,75], virulence [77,78] and
symbiosis [79] to metabolism [80] and magnetotaxis
[81]. This has led to a scheme of bacterial and archaeal
evolution which has a reticular rather than a branching
structure [82]. The possibility that different genome
components could display different phylogenies due to
horizontal transfer [83] was quite literally inconceivable
to Darwin and his mid-20th century neo-Darwinian
successors.
Although we have long been familiar with the prokaryotic story, there is rapidly growing evidence for intercellular
and interkingdom horizontal transfer events in the evolutionary history of eukaryotic genomes [84]. The data
include phylogenetically dispersed coding sequences [85]
and mobile elements [86-88], as well as the incorporation
of genomic segments from prokaryotic and eukaryotic
endosymbionts [89] and parasites [90]. There is also evidence of host-to-parasite transfer [91]. In certain microbially diverse ecosystems, such as the rumen, frequent
prokaryote to eukaryote transfer occurs [92]. In plants, but
not animals, there is extensive horizontal transfer of mitochrondrial DNA [93]. Similar transfer is very rarely seen in
the plastids [94], which may be explained by the fact that
the mitochondria have a DNA uptake system not found in
chloroplasts [95]. The functional consequences of horizontal transfer into eukaryotes range from the acquisition of
single biochemical activities to major restructuring of
metabolism [96] to integrating multiple functions needed
to occupy new ecologies, as illustrated by fungal pathogens
[97], the anaerobic human parasites Entamoeba histolytica
and Trichomonas vaginalis [98] and plant parasitic nematodes [99].
Cell fusions and intracellular DNA transfer at key
junctures in eukaryotic evolution

One of the early accomplishments of nucleic acid
sequencing was to confirm the endosymbiotic origin of
mitochondria and plastids [100]. Combined with evidence that the mitochondrion is an ancestral character
for all eukaryotes [101], this confirmation places cell
fusion events at the root of eukaryotic evolution [102].
For photosynthetic eukaryotes, the original cyanobacterial fusion that generated the ancestral plastid has been
followed by a series of secondary symbioses between
various eukaryotic lineages and either red or green algae
[103]. The most ‘basal’ photosynthetic lineage appears to
be the glaucophytes, because their plastids retain bacterial peptidoglycans [104]. Through evidence of cell
fusions and endosymbiosis, genome sequencing has
introduced another major process of rapid and multicharacter change into the established evolutionary
record. Lacking knowledge of cell biology, such a
mechanism of variation was not considered by Darwin
and has been largely ignored by his neo-Darwinian
followers.

Page 6 of 14

As the following descriptions of various endosymbioses show, DNA mobility between distinct genome
compartments was a major feature of adjustment to cell
fusion events. Sequence evidence indicates that all the
cell fusions in eukaryotic lineages were followed by massive episodes of intracellular horizontal DNA transfer
between the organelle and nuclear genomes
[102,105,106]. That is why the majority of organelle proteins are encoded by the nuclear genome. Moreover,
these organelle genomes are remarkably dynamic in
their evolution. Mitochondria display a great range of
genome size (~6 kb to ~480 kb), and a number of them
have strikingly elaborate DNA structures (for example,
multiple linear molecules, interlocked circles) and/or
modes of expression [107]. There are anaerobic eukaryotes that have lost the oxidative functions of mitochondria, but most of them retain related organelles labelled
hydrogenosomes or mitosomes [101].
The history of plastids, descended from cyanobacteria,
is somewhat different from that of mitochondria, descended from alpha-protobacteria. In higher plants and
photosynthetic algae, the chloroplast genome is relatively stable and falls within a relatively narrow size
range of 120 kb - 160 kb [108]. In heterotrophic or
parasitic species that have lost photosynthesis, the plastid genome is reduced but still retained at sizes greater
than 34 kb (Table 2) [108,109]. In the apicomplexan
parasites, plastid genomes are known to have undergone
extensive structural rearrangements [110]. Non-photosynthetic chloroplast derivatives appear to retain residual functions, such as encoding tRNAs that may be
used by mitochondria, activities involved in the biosynthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, isoprenoids, heme,
pigments and enzymes for detoxifying oxidative radicals
[111].
In cells of organisms arising from secondary symbioses
with red algae (cryptomonads) or green algae (chlorarachniophytes), there are actually four distinct genome
compartments: nucleus, mitochondrion, plastid and
nucleomorph (the descendant of the algal nucleus)
[112]. The plastid and nucleomorph compartments are
surrounded by four, rather than two, membranes which,
presumably, is a reflection of their origins by phagocytosis. The two sequenced nucleomorph genomes are 551
kb (Guillardia theta, cryptomonad) and 373 kb (Bigelowiella natans, chlorarachniophyte), each containing
three chromosomes with telomeres. These genomes
encode their own 18S eukaryotic ribosomal RNA, other
RNAs and proteins (465 and 293, respectively). The
nuclear genomes of both species contain coding
sequences of red- or green-algal origin, indicating extensive intracellular horizontal transfer [113].
In addition to the remarkable multi-genome cells just
described, there are cases of tertiary symbioses in the

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

Page 7 of 14

Table 2 Plastid genome sizes in photosynthetic organisms and their non-photosynthetic relatives [108].
Angiosperms

Plastid genome size (No. coding sequences)

Nicotiana tabacum

155.9 kb (146)

Arabidopsis

154 kb

Oryzae

135 kb

Epifagus virginiana (holoparasite)

70.0 kb (53)

Trebouxiophytes (green algae)
Chlorella vulgaris

150.6 kb (209)

Helicosporidium sp. (invertebrate pathogen)

37.5 kb (54)

Prototheca wickerhammii (saprophytic algal pathogen)

54.1 kb

Euglenids (flagellates)
Euglena gracilis

143.2 kb (128)

Euglena longa (heterotroph)

73.3 kb (84)

Apicomplexans (containing secondarily acquired red algal plastids)
Odontella sinensis (photosynthetic diatom)

119.7 kb (175)

Plasmodium falciparum (malarial parasite)

34.7 kb (68)

Toxoplasma gondii (cat parasite)

35.0 kb (65)

Eimeria tenella (poultry pathogen)

34.8 kb (65)

Theileria parva (bovine pathogen)

39.6 kb (71)

dinoflagellates, which have fused with green algae, haptophytes, diatoms and cryptomonads [114]. It appears,
from the analysis of the origins of nuclear coding
sequences for plastid-targeted proteins, that dinoflagellates and other chromalveolates have retained an ability
to phagocytose other cells and recruit fragments of their
genomes, but that the capacity was lost in the photosynthetic lineages leading to green algae, plants and red
algae [115].
Whole genome doublings at key places in eukaryotic
evolution

Genome sequencing has made it clear how important
the amplification and modification of various genome
components has been. Of particular interest has been
the formation of families of coding elements for homologous proteins within genomes. Both prokaryote and
eukaryote species encode characteristic protein families,
which are important guides to the functions those species need to thrive in their particular ecological niches.
As complete genome sequences accumulated, it became
apparent that not only the genetic loci encoding individual proteins had amplified; large chromosome regions
had also undergone duplication processes. These ‘syntenic’ regions carry genetic loci in the same order and
orientation. By comparing related taxa, it has been possible to discern phylogenic branches that have inherited
two copies of multiple ancestral segments. These segments are now understood to be the remnants of WGD
events at the base of the branch.
Genome doublings have been documented in yeasts
[116,117], ciliated protozoa [118] and plants [119].
There is even evidence of a genome tripling at the base

of the angiosperm radiation (in a letter to J D Hooker,
22 July 1879, Darwin described the rapid rise and early
diversification within the angiosperms as ‘an abominable
mystery’ [120]) [121]. In animals, the most important
WGD events have been found at the base of the vertebrate lineage, where two successive events gave rise first
to all vertebrates and then to jawed vertebrates [122].
This 2R double WGD event was originally postulated by
Ohno in his 1970 book on the essential role of duplications in evolution [123]. Later in vertebrate evolution,
there was another WGD event at the origin of teleost
fish [122,124]. Characteristic of transitions marked by
WGD events are the rapid formation of a cluster of
related species, as in Paramecium [118], or the appearance of major innovations, as with the vertebrate skeleton [125] and jaw [122]. WGD is yet another
evolutionary process outside the Darwinist perspective
that occurs suddenly (that is, within a single generation)
and simultaneously affects multiple phenotypic characters [126]. It is especially significant to note that a genome doubling means that the dispersed coding elements
for complex circuits are duplicated and the two duplicate circuits can then undergo independent modifications as distinct entities [127].
There is an important connection between WGD and
synthetic speciation. It is possible to generate new species of plants by interspecific hybridization and genome
doubling [119,128-132]. Fertile hybrids tend to have tetraploid genomes [129]. Genome doubling helps maintain
stability through meiosis because each chromosome in
the hybrid has a homologous partner for pairing and
crossing over. There is also evidence that genome

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

doubling helps maintain normal transcription patterns
[133]. The genome duplication events may occur either
during gametogenesis or after fertilization, but in plants
the most common process involves diploid gametes
[134]. The incidence of spontaneous genome doubling is
surprisingly high, reaching 1% of all fertilizations in
mice [135].
It is of great theoretical significance that synthetic speciation takes place rapidly after hybridization rather than
slowly following repeated selections, as predicted by
conventional theory. The evolutionary importance of
interspecific hybridization in promoting evolutionary
change has been appreciated since a time predating the
molecular genetics revolution [136,137]. Although most
synthetic and observational work has been done with
plants [138], there are reports of contemporary natural
hybridization involving animals [139,140]. The animal
cases include Darwin’s finches in the Galapagos Islands
[141], long taken as a paradigm of gradualist evolution.
The finch case is especially instructive because hybridization leads to abrupt, unpredictable changes in beak
shape [142].

Responses of mobile DNA systems to infection,
hybridization and genome duplications
The genomic evidence showing that cell fusions and
WGD have occurred at key junctures in eukaryotic evolutionary phylogenies leads to the question of what
effect such events (plus the related process of interspecific hybridization) have on mobile DNA and natural
genetic engineering functions. The answer is that all
these processes are major triggers of genomic instability
and restructuring, with microbial infection serving as a
proxy for cell fusions [143,144]. The data on hybridization responses are more extensive in plants (Table 3),
but we have enough cases in animals to be confident
that the answer there is equally valid (Table 4). Moreover, we know of many cases of hybrid dysgenesis in
animals, where activation of mobile elements and widespread genomic changes results from inter-population
mating [145-148]. In at least one intriguing plant case,
interspecific mating has triggered genomic instability
with formation of a zygote containing only one of the
parental genomes [149].
The rapid natural genetic engineering response to
genome doubling reflects a tendency to return to the
normal diploid state. This poorly understood process of
diploidization involves chromosome loss, deletions and
chromosome rearrangements [150]. The chief mechanistic basis for activation of natural genetic engineering in
response to hybridization and genome doubling appears
to be changes in chromatin organization and in epigenetic modifications of the DNA that normally inhibit
activity of mobile elements (Tables 3 and 4) [151-154].

Page 8 of 14

Table 3 Genomic responses to changes in ploidy and
interspecific hybridization in plants.
Taxon

Genomic response

Asteraceae
(Compositae)

Genome expansion and retrotransposon proliferation in
sunflower hybrids [185]
Chromosomal repatterning and the evolution of sterility
barriers in hybrid sunflower species [186]
Rapid chromosome evolution in polyploids [187]

Grasses

Altered methylation patterns and chromosome
restructuring in hybrids [188]

Potato

Genome instability in hybrids [189]

Nicotiana
spp.
(tobacco)
Rice

Phenotypic and epigenetic variability in a diploid hybrid
[190]
Elimination of repeated DNA in a synthetic allotetraploid
[191]
Extensive genomic variability induced by introgression
from wild rice [192]
LTR retrotransposon movements in rice lines
introgressed by wild rice [193]
Retrotransposon activation following introgression [194]

Brassica

Rapid genome change in synthetic polyploids [195]
Large scale chromosome restructuring [196]

Wheat [197]

Sequence loss and cytosine methylation following
hybridization and allopolyploidy [198]
Rapid genome evolution following allopolyploidy [199]
Changes in methylation patterns of mobile elements in
allopolyploids [200]
Parental repeat elimination in newly synthesized
allopolyploids [201]
Rapid genomic changes in interspecific and intergeneric
hybrids and allopolyploids [202]

Arabidopsis

Genomic changes in synthetic polyploids [203]
Chromosome rearrangements after allotetraploid
formation [204]

The evolutionary advantages of searching
genome space by natural genetic engineering
One of the traditional objections to Darwinian gradualism has been that it is too slow and indeterminate a
process to account for natural adaptations, even allowing for long periods of random mutation and selection.
A successful random walk through the virtually infinite
dimensions of possible genome configurations simply
Table 4 Genomic responses to hybridization in animals.
Taxon

Genomic Response

Drosophila spp.

Increased retrotransposition in interspecific hybrid
[205]

Macropus
marsupials

Centromere instability in interspecific hybrids [206]

Wallabies

Loss of retroelement methylation and chromosome
remodelling in interspefic hybrids [207]

Mouse

Amplification and double minutes in a hybrid [208]

Rice fish
(medaka)

Chromosome elimination in an interspecific hybrid
[209]

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

has too low a probability of success [155]. Is there a
more efficient way for cells to search ‘genome space’
and increase their probability of hitting upon useful new
DNA structures? There is, and the underlying molecular
mechanisms utilize the demonstrated capabilities of
mobile DNA and other natural genetic engineering systems [156,157].
Perhaps the most important aspect of evolutionary
change by natural genetic engineering is that it employs
a combinatorial search process based upon DNA modules that already possess functionality. The evolutionary
reuse of functional components has been recognized for
many years [158,159], but it is only with genome
sequencing that we have come to appreciate how fundamental and virtually ubiquitous such reuse is. A wellestablished engineering principle is to build new structures to meet specific requirements by rearranging proven, existing components, as in mechanical structures
and electronic circuits. The evolution of proteins by
domain accretion and shuffling is one example of an
analogous biological process. Mixing functional domains
in new combinations is far more likely to produce a
protein with novel activities than is the modification of
one amino acid at a time. Single amino acid changes are
more suitable for modulating existing functional properties (for example, ligand binding and allosteric
responses) than for generating capabilities that did not
previously exist. In addition to the combinatorial search
via shuffling of existing exons, further variability results
from the formation of novel exons. We do not yet know
a great deal about any biases that may exist in the exonization process. If it is correct to postulate that new
functional exons arise by the exaptation of segments of
mobile DNA, such as SINE elements, then it will be
worthwhile to investigate the coding content of these
elements to see if there is any tendency favouring
sequences that encode useful folded polypeptide
structures.
The second major aspect of evolutionary change by
natural genetic engineering is that it generally takes
place after an activating event which produces what
McClintock called a ‘genome shock’ [160]. Activating
events include loss of food [18], infection and interspecific hybridization (Tables 3 and 4) - just the events that
we can infer from the geological and genomic records
have happened repeatedly. Episodic activation of natural
genetic engineering functions means that alterations to
the genome occur in bursts rather than as independent
events. Thus, novel adaptations that require changes at
multiple locations in the genome can arise within a single generation and can produce progeny expressing all
the changes at once. There is no requirement, as in conventional theory, that each individual change be beneficial by itself. The episodic occurrence of natural genetic

Page 9 of 14

engineering bursts also makes it very easy to understand
the punctuated pattern of the geological record [161].
Moreover, the nature of activating challenges provides a
comprehensible link to periodic disruptions in earth history. Geological upheavals that perturb an existing ecology are likely to lead to starvation, alteration of hostparasite relationships and unusual mating events
between individuals from depleted populations.
A particular instance of the potential for stress-activated natural genetic engineering to produce complex
novelties is the exaptation of an existing functional network following its duplication by WGD. Domains may
be added to various proteins in the network to allow
them to interact with a novel set of input and output
molecules. In addition, insertions of connected regulatory signals at the cognate coding regions can generate
a new transcriptional control circuit that may allow the
modified network to operate under different conditions
from its progenitor.
The idea that genomic restructuring events may be
integrated functionally in order to operate coordinately
at a number of distinct loci encoding components of a
regulatory network may seem extremely unlikely. However, the basic requirement for such integration is the
ability to target DNA changes to co-regulated regions of
the genome. Precisely this kind of targeting has been
demonstrated for mobile elements in yeast, where retrotransposon integration activities interact with transcription [162] or chromatin [163] factors, and in Drosophila,
where P elements can be engineered to home in on loci
regulated by particular regulatory proteins [164]. In
addition, we know that mobile element insertion can be
coupled with replication [165] and DNA restructuring
with transcription [166]. Of course, the feasibility of
such multi-locus functional integration of genome
changes remains to be demonstrated in the laboratory.
Fortunately, the experiments are straightforward; we can
use appropriately engineered transposons and retrotransposons to search for coordinated multilocus mutations
after activation. Clearly, the subject of functionally targeted changes to the genome belongs on the 21st century mobile DNA research agenda.

Conclusion: a 21st century view of evolutionary
change
Our ability to think fruitfully about the evolutionary
process has greatly expanded, thanks to studies of
mobile DNA. Laboratory studies of plasmids, transposons, retrotransposons, NHEJ systems, reverse transcription, antigenic variation in prokaryotic and eukaryotic
pathogens, lymphocyte rearrangements and genome
reorganization in ciliated protozoa have all made it possible to provide mechanistic explanations for events
documented in the historical DNA record [6]. We know

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

that processes similar to those we document in our
experiments have been major contributors to genome
change in evolution. Using our knowledge of genome
restructuring mechanisms, we can generate precise
models to account for many duplications, amplifications,
dispersals and rearrangements observed at both the
genomic and proteomic levels.
The genome DNA record also bears witness to sudden
changes that affect multiple characters at once: horizontal transfer of large DNA segments, cell fusions and
WGDs. These data are not readily compatible with earlier gradualist views on the nature of evolutionary variation. However, we are now able to apply the results of
findings on the regulation of natural genetic engineering
functions in the laboratory and in the field to make
sense of the DNA record. Cell fusions and WGDs are
events we know to activate DNA restructuring functions
(Tables 3 and 4). Thus, it is not surprising that bursts of
intracellular horizontal transfer, genome reduction and
genome rearrangement follow these initial abrupt
changes in the cell’s DNA. How a newly symbiotic cell
or one with a newly doubled genome manages the transition to a stable genome structure that replicates and
transfers reliably at cell division is another important
subject for future research. The lessons we learn about
silencing mobile DNA by internal deletion [12] and
RNA-directed chromatin modification [167] are likely to
prove helpful starting points.
Although there remain many gaps in our knowledge,
we are now in a position to outline a distinctively 21st
century scenario for evolutionary change. The scenario
includes the following elements:
(1) hereditary variation arises from the non-random
action of built-in biochemical systems that mobilize
DNA and carry out natural genetic engineering;
(2) major disruptions of an organism’s ecology trigger cell and genome restructuring. The ecological
disruptions can act directly, through stress on individuals, or indirectly, through changes in the biota
that favour unusual interactions between individuals
(cell fusions, interspecific hybridizations). Triggering
events continue until a new ecology has emerged
that is filled with organisms capable of utilizing the
available resources;
(3) ecologically-triggered cell and genome restructurings produce organisms which, at some frequency,
will possess novel adaptive features that suit the
altered environment. Novel adaptive features can be
complex from the beginning because they result
from processes that operate on pre-existing functional systems, whose components can be amplified
and rearranged in new combinations. Competition
for resources (purifying selection) serves to eliminate

Page 10 of 14

those novel system architectures that are not functional in the new ecology;
(4) once ecological stability has been achieved, natural genetic engineering functions are silenced, the
tempo of innovation abates, and microevolution can
occur to fine-tune recent evolutionary inventions
through successions of minor changes.
This 21st century scenario assumes a major role for
the kind of cellular sensitivities and genomic responses
emphasized by McClintock in her 1984 Nobel Prize
address [1]. Such a cognitive component is absent from
conventional evolutionary theory because 19th and 20th
century evolutionists were not sufficiently knowledgeable about cellular response and control networks. This
21st century view of evolution establishes a reasonable
connection between ecological changes, cell and organism responses, widespread genome restructuring, and
the rapid emergence of adaptive inventions. It also
answers the objections to conventional theory raised by
intelligent design advocates, because evolution by natural genetic engineering has the capacity to generate
complex novelties. In other words, our best defense
against anti-science obscurantism comes from the study
of mobile DNA because that is the subject that has
most significantly transformed evolution from natural
history into a vibrant empirical science.
Abbreviations
DS: double strand; LINE: long interspersed nucleotide element; LTR: long
terminal repeats; MITE: miniature inverted-repeat transposable element;
MULE: Mu-like element; ROM: read-only memory; RW: read-write; SINE: short
interspersed nucleotide element; WGD: whole genome doubling.
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
Received: 14 August 2009
Accepted: 25 January 2010 Published: 25 January 2010
References
1. McClintock B: Significance of responses of the genome to challenge.
Science 1984, 226:792-801.
2. Darwin C: Origin of species London: John Russel 1859.
3. Lyell C: Principles of geology Edinburgh: John Murray 1830.
4. Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_evolutionary_synthesis.
5. Huxley J: Evolution: the modern synthesis London: Allen & Unwin 1942.
6. Craig NL, Craigie R, Gellert M, Lambowitz AM: Mobile DNA II Washington,
DC: American Society of Microbiology Press 2002.
7. McClintock B: A Correlation of ring-shaped chromosomes with
variegation in Zea Mays. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1932, 18:677-681.
8. McClintock B: The Production of homozygous deficient tissues with
mutant characteristics by means of the aberrant mitotic behavior of
ring-shaped chromosomes. Genetics 1938, 23:315-376.
9. McClintock B: The behavior in successive nuclear divisions of a
chromosome broken at meiosis. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1939, 25:405-416.
10. McClintock B: The stability of broken ends of chromosomes in Zea Mays.
Genetics 1941, 26:234-282.
11. McClintock B: The fusion of broken ends of chromosomes following
nuclear fusion. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1942, 28:458-463.

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

12. McClintock B: Discovery and characterization of transposable elements: the
collected papers of Barbara McClintock New York: Garland 1987.
13. Judson H: The eighth day of creation: makers of the revolution in biology
New York: Simon & Schuster 1979.
14. Crick F: On protein synthesis. Symp Soc Exp Biol 1958, 12:138-163.
15. Temin H, Mizutani S: RNA-dependent DNA polymerase in virions of Rous
sarcoma virus. Nature 1970, 226:1211-1213.
16. Crick F: Central dogma of molecular biology. Nature 1970, 227:561-563.
17. Shapiro JA: Genome informatics: The role of DNA in cellular
computations. Biological Theory 2006, 1:288-301.
18. Shapiro JA: Revisiting the central dogma in the 21st Century. Ann NY
Acad Sci 2009, 1178:6-28.
19. Kunkel B, Losick R, Stragier P: The Bacillus subtilis gene for the
development transcription factor sigma K is generated by excision of a
dispensable DNA element containing a sporulation recombinase gene.
Genes Dev 1990, 4:525-535.
20. Barbour AG, Restrepo BI: Antigenic variation in vector-borne pathogens.
Emerg Infect Dis 2000, 6:449-457.
21. Gellert M: V(D)J recombination: RAG proteins, repair factors, and
regulation. Ann Rev Biochem 2002, 71:101-132.
22. Garnier O, Serrano V, Duharcourt S, Meyer E: RNA-mediated programming
of developmental genome rearrangements in Paramecium tetraurelia.
Mol Cell Biol 2004, 24:7370-7379.
23. Pabo C, Sauer RT, Sturtevant JM, Ptashne M: The lambda repressor
contains two domains. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1979, 76:1608-1612.
24. Doolittle RF: The multiplicity of domains in proteins. Annu Rev Biochem
1995, 64:287-314.
25. Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K,
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, et al: Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 2001, 409:860-921.
26. Nekrutenko A, Li WH: Transposable elements are found in a large
number of human protein-coding genes. Trends Genet 2001, 17:619-621.
27. Sorek R: The birth of new exons: mechanisms and evolutionary
consequences. RNA 2007, 13:1603-1608.
28. Britten RJ: Transposable elements have contributed to thousands of
human proteins. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:1798-1803.
29. Bowen NJ, Jordan IK: Exaptation of protein coding sequences from
transposable elements. Genome Dyn 2007, 3:147-162.
30. Cordaux R, Udit S, Batzer MA, Feschotte C: Birth of a chimeric primate
gene by capture of the transposase gene from a mobile element. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:8101-8106.
31. Sternberg RV, Shapiro JA: How repeated retroelements format genome
function. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110:108-116.
32. Jiang N, Bao Z, Zhang X, Eddy SR, Wessler SR: Pack-MULE transposable
elements mediate gene evolution in plants. Nature 2004, 431:569-573.
33. Morgante M, Brunner S, Pea G, Fengler K, Zuccolo A, Rafalski A: Gene
duplication and exon shuffling by helitron-like transposons generate
intraspecies diversity in maize. Nat Genet 2005, 37:997-1002.
34. Sweredoski M, DeRose-Wilson L, Gaut BS: A comparative computational
analysis of nonautonomous helitron elements between maize and rice.
BMC Genomics 2008, 9:467.
35. Pickeral OK, Makalowski W, Boguski MS, Boeke JD: Frequent human
genomic DNA transduction driven by LINE-1 retrotransposition. Genome
Res 2000, 10:411-415.
36. Moran JV, DeBerardinis RJ, Kazazian HH Jr: Exon shuffling by L1
retrotransposition. Science 1999, 283:1530-1534.
37. Ejima Y, Yang L: Trans mobilization of genomic DNA as a mechanism for
retrotransposon-mediated exon shuffling. Hum Mol Genet 2003,
12:1321-1328.
38. Wheelan SJ, Aizawa Y, Han JS, Boeke JD: Gene-breaking: a new paradigm
for human retrotransposon-mediated gene evolution. Genome Res 2005,
15:1073-1078.
39. Han K, Lee J, Meyer TJ, Remedios P, Goodwin L, Batzer MA: L1
recombination-associated deletions generate human genomic variation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:19366-19371.
40. De Crombrugghe BAS, Gottesman M, Pastan I: Effect of Rho on
transcription of bacterial operons. Nature New Biology 1973, 241:260-264.
41. Pilacinski W, Mosharrafa E, Edmundson R, Zissler J, Fiandt M, Szybalski W:
Insertion sequence IS2 associated with int-constitutive mutants of
bacteriophage lambda. Gene 1977, 2:61-74.

Page 11 of 14

42. Errede B, Cardillo TS, Wever G, Sherman F, Stiles JI, Friedman LR, Sherman F:
Studies on transposable elements in yeast. I. ROAM mutations causing
increased expression of yeast genes: their activation by signals directed
toward conjugation functions and their formation by insertion of Ty1
repetitive elements. II. deletions, duplications, and transpositions of the
COR segment that encompasses the structural gene of yeast iso-1cytochrome C. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 1981, 45(Pt 2):593-607.
43. Romanish MT, Lock WM, Lagemaat van de LN, Dunn CA, Mager DL:
Repeated recruitment of LTR retrotransposons as promoters by the antiapoptotic locus NAIP during mammalian evolution. PLoS Genet 2007, 3:
e10.
44. Cui X, Hsia AP, Liu F, Ashlock DA, Wise RP, Schnable PS: Alternative
transcription initiation sites and polyadenylation sites are recruited
during Mu suppression at the rf2a locus of maize. Genetics 2003,
163:685-698.
45. Chen C, Ara T, Gautheret D: Using Alu elements as polyadenylation sites:
A case of retroposon exaptation. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:327-334.
46. Britten RJ: Cases of ancient mobile element DNA insertions that now
affect gene regulation. Mol Phylogenet Evol 1996, 5:13-17.
47. Bourque G, Leong B, Vega VB, Chen X, Lee YL, Srinivasan KG, Chew JL,
Ruan Y, Wei CL, Ng HH, Liu ET: Evolution of the mammalian transcription
factor binding repertoire via transposable elements. Genome Res 2008,
18:1752-1762.
48. Marino-Ramirez L, Lewis KC, Landsman D, Jordan IK: Transposable
elements donate lineage-specific regulatory sequences to host
genomes. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 110:333-341.
49. Wessler SR, Baran G, Varagona M: The maize transposable element Ds is
spliced from RNA. Science 1987, 237:916-918.
50. Wessler SR: The maize transposable Ds1 element is alternatively spliced
from exon sequences. Mol Cell Biol 1991, 11:6192-6196.
51. Varagona MJ, Purugganan M, Wessler SR: Alternative splicing induced by
insertion of retrotransposons into the maize waxy gene. Plant Cell 1992,
4:811-820.
52. Zabala G, Vodkin L: Novel exon combinations generated by alternative
splicing of gene fragments mobilized by a CACTA transposon in Glycine
max. BMC Plant Biol 2007, 7:38.
53. Lev-Maor G, Ram O, Kim E, Sela N, Goren A, Levanon EY, Ast G: Intronic
Alus influence alternative splicing. PLoS Genet 2008, 4:e1000204.
54. Gal-Mark N, Schwartz S, Ast G: Alternative splicing of Alu exons–two arms
are better than one. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:2012-2023.
55. Schwartz S, Gal-Mark N, Kfir N, Oren R, Kim E, Ast G: Alu exonization events
reveal features required for precise recognition of exons by the splicing
machinery. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000300.
56. Girard A, Hannon GJ: Conserved themes in small-RNA-mediated
transposon control. Trends Cell Biol 2008, 18:136-148.
57. Lippman Z, Gendrel AV, Black M, Vaughn MW, Dedhia N, McCombie WR,
Lavine K, Mittal V, May B, Kasschau KD, Carrington JC, Doerge RW, Colot V,
Martienssen R: Role of transposable elements in heterochromatin and
epigenetic control. Nature 2004, 430:471-476.
58. Gerasimova TI, Byrd K, Corces VG: A chromatin insulator determines the
nuclear localization of DNA. Mol Cell 2000, 6:1025-1035.
59. Kinoshita Y, Saze H, Kinoshita T, Miura A, Soppe WJ, Koornneef M,
Kakutani T: Control of FWA gene silencing in Arabidopsis thaliana by
SINE-related direct repeats. Plant J 2007, 49:38-45.
60. Gehring M, Bubb KL, Henikoff S: Extensive demethylation of repetitive
elements during seed development underlies gene imprinting. Science
2009, 324:1447-1451.
61. Ono R, Nakamura K, Inoue K, Naruse M, Usami T, Wakisaka-Saito N, Hino T,
Suzuki-Migishima R, Ogonuki N, Miki H, Kohda T, Ogura A, Yokoyama M,
Kaneko-Ishino T, Ishino F: Deletion of Peg10, an imprinted gene acquired
from a retrotransposon, causes early embryonic lethality. Nat Genet 2006,
38:101-106.
62. Sekita Y, Wagatsuma H, Nakamura K, Ono R, Kagami M, Wakisaka N, Hino T,
Suzuki-Migishima R, Kohda T, Ogura A, Ogata T, Yokoyama M, KanekoIshino T, Ishino F: Role of retrotransposon-derived imprinted gene, Rtl1,
in the feto-maternal interface of mouse placenta. Nat Genet 2008,
40:243-248.
63. Kuang H, Padmanabhan C, Li F, Kamei A, Bhaskar PB, Ouyang S, Jiang J,
Buell CR, Baker B: Identification of miniature inverted-repeat transposable
elements (MITEs) and biogenesis of their siRNAs in the Solanaceae: new
functional implications for MITEs. Genome Res 2009, 19:42-56.

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

64. Obbard DJ, Gordon KH, Buck AH, Jiggins FM: The evolution of RNAi as a
defence against viruses and transposable elements. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 2009, 364:99-115.
65. Hanada K, Vallejo V, Nobuta K, Slotkin RK, Lisch D, Meyers BC, Shiu SH,
Jiang N: The functional role of pack-MULEs in rice inferred from
purifying selection and expression profile. Plant Cell 2009, 21:25-38.
66. Piriyapongsa J, Marino-Ramirez L, Jordan IK: Origin and evolution of
human microRNAs from transposable elements. Genetics 2007,
176:1323-1337.
67. Lehnert S, Van Loo P, Thilakarathne PJ, Marynen P, Verbeke G, Schuit FC:
Evidence for co-evolution between human microRNAs and Alu-repeats.
PLoS One 2009, 4:e4456.
68. Zhang R, Wang YQ, Su B: Molecular evolution of a primate-specific
microRNA family. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:1493-1502.
69. Devor EJ, Peek AS, Lanier W, Samollow PB: Marsupial-specific microRNAs
evolved from marsupial-specific transposable elements. Gene 2009,
448:187-91.
70. McClintock B: Intranuclear systems controlling gene action and mutation.
Brookhaven Symp Biol 1956, 58-74.
71. Peaston AE, Evsikov AV, Graber JH, de Vries WN, Holbrook AE, Solter D,
Knowles BB: Retrotransposons regulate host genes in mouse oocytes and
preimplantation embryos. Dev Cell 2004, 7:597-606.
72. Johnson R, Gamblin RJ, Ooi L, Bruce AW, Donaldson IJ, Westhead DR,
Wood IC, Jackson RM, Buckley NJ: Identification of the REST regulon
reveals extensive transposable element-mediated binding site
duplication. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:3862-3877.
73. Avery OT, MacLeod CM, McCarty M: Studies on the chemical nature of
the substance inducing transformation of Pneumococcal types:
Induction of transformation by a desoxyribonucleic acid fraction isolated
prom Pneumococcus Type III. J Exp Med 1944, 79:137-158.
74. Hayes W: The genetics of bacteria and their viruses London: Blackwell, 2 1968.
75. Bukhari AI, Shapiro JA, Adhya SL, Eds: DNA insertion elements, plasmids and
episomes Cold Spring Harbor, New York: Cold Spring Harbor Press 1977.
76. Koonin EV, Makarova KS, Aravind L: Horizontal gene transfer in
prokaryotes: quantification and classification. Annu Rev Microbiol 2001,
55:709-742.
77. Hacker J, Carniel E: Ecological fitness, genomic islands and bacterial
pathogenicity. A Darwinian view of the evolution of microbes. EMBO Rep
2001, 2:376-381.
78. Kado CI: Horizontal gene transfer: sustaining pathogenicity and
optimizing host-pathogen interactions. Mol Plant Pathol 2009, 10:143-150.
79. Young JP, Crossman LC, Johnston AW, Thomson NR, Ghazoui ZF, Hull KH,
Wexler M, Curson AR, Todd JD, Poole PS, Mauchline TH, East AK, Quail MA,
Churcher C, Arrowsmith C, Cherevach I, Chillingworth T, Clarke K, Cronin A,
Davis P, Fraser A, Hance Z, Hauser H, Jagels K, Moule S, Mungall K,
Norbertczak H, Rabbinowitsch E, Sanders M, Simmonds M, Whitehead S,
Parkhill J: The genome of Rhizobium leguminosarum has recognizable
core and accessory components. Genome Biol 2006, 7:R34.
80. Fournier G: Horizontal gene transfer and the evolution of methanogenic
pathways. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 532:163-179.
81. Ullrich S, Kube M, Schubbe S, Reinhardt R, Schuler D: A hypervariable 130kilobase genomic region of Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense
comprises a magnetosome island which undergoes frequent
rearrangements during stationary growth. J Bacteriol 2005, 187:7176-7184.
82. Doolittle WF: Phylogenetic classification and the universal tree. Science
1999, 284:2124-2129.
83. Beiko RG, Doolittle WF, Charlebois RL: The impact of reticulate evolution
on genome phylogeny. Syst Biol 2008, 57:844-856.
84. Keeling PJ, Palmer JD: Horizontal gene transfer in eukaryotic evolution.
Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:605-618.
85. Andersson JO: Lateral gene transfer in eukaryotes. Cell Mol Life Sci 2005,
62:1182-1197.
86. Bartolome C, Bello X, Maside X: Widespread evidence for horizontal
transfer of transposable elements across Drosophila genomes. Genome
Biol 2009, 10:R22.
87. Pace JK, Gilbert C, Clark MS, Feschotte C: Repeated horizontal transfer of a
DNA transposon in mammals and other tetrapods. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008, 105:17023-17028.
88. Roulin A, Piegu B, Fortune PM, Sabot F, D’Hont A, Manicacci D, Panaud O:
Whole genome surveys of rice, maize and sorghum reveal multiple

Page 12 of 14

89.

90.
91.
92.

93.

94.

95.

96.
97.

98.

99.

100.
101.
102.
103.
104.

105.

106.
107.
108.
109.
110.

111.
112.
113.

horizontal transfers of the LTR-retrotransposon Route66 in Poaceae. BMC
Evol Biol 2009, 9:58.
Hotopp JC, Clark ME, Oliveira DC, Foster JM, Fischer P, Torres MC, Giebel JD,
Kumar N, Ishmael N, Wang S, Ingram J, Nene RV, Shepard J, Tomkins J,
Richards S, Spiro DJ, Ghedin E, Slatko BE, Tettelin H, Werren JH: Widespread
lateral gene transfer from intracellular bacteria to multicellular
eukaryotes. Science 2007, 317:1753-1756.
Mower JP, Stefanovic S, Young GJ, Palmer JD: Plant genetics: gene transfer
from parasitic to host plants. Nature 2004, 432:165-166.
Davis CC, Wurdack KJ: Host-to-parasite gene transfer in flowering plants:
phylogenetic evidence from Malpighiales. Science 2004, 305:676-678.
Ricard G, McEwan NR, Dutilh BE, Jouany JP, Macheboeuf D, Mitsumori M,
McIntosh FM, Michalowski T, Nagamine T, Nelson N, Newbold CJ,
Nsabimana E, Takenaka A, Thomas NA, Ushida K, Hackstein JH, Huynen MA:
Horizontal gene transfer from Bacteria to rumen Ciliates indicates
adaptation to their anaerobic, carbohydrates-rich environment. BMC
Genomics 2006, 7:22.
Bergthorsson U, Adams KL, Thomason B, Palmer JD: Widespread horizontal
transfer of mitochondrial genes in flowering plants. Nature 2003,
424:197-201.
Keeling PJ: Role of horizontal gene transfer in the evolution of
photosynthetic eukaryotes and their plastids. Methods Mol Biol 2009,
532:501-515.
Koulintchenko M, Konstantinov Y, Dietrich A: Plant mitochondria actively
import DNA via the permeability transition pore complex. Embo J 2003,
22:1245-1254.
Rogers M, Keeling PJ: Lateral transfer and recompartmentalization of
Calvin cycle enzymes of plants and algae. J Mol Evol 2004, 58:367-375.
Richards TA, Dacks JB, Jenkinson JM, Thornton CR, Talbot NJ: Evolution of
filamentous plant pathogens: gene exchange across eukaryotic
kingdoms. Curr Biol 2006, 16:1857-1864.
Alsmark UC, Sicheritz-Ponten T, Foster PG, Hirt RP, Embley TM: Horizontal
gene transfer in eukaryotic parasites: a case study of Entamoeba
histolytica and Trichomonas vaginalis. Methods Mol Biol 2009,
532:489-500.
Mitreva M, Smant G, Helder J: Role of horizontal gene transfer in the
evolution of plant parasitism among nematodes. Methods Mol Biol 2009,
532:517-535.
Gray MW: Origin and evolution of organelle genomes. Curr Opin Genet
Dev 1993, 3:884-890.
Embley TM: Multiple secondary origins of the anaerobic lifestyle in
eukaryotes. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2006, 361:1055-1067.
Embley TM, Martin W: Eukaryotic evolution, changes and challenges.
Nature 2006, 440:623-630.
Lane CE, Archibald JM: The eukaryotic tree of life: endosymbiosis takes its
TOL. Trends Ecol Evol 2008, 23:268-275.
Pfanzagl B, Zenker A, Pittenauer E, Allmaier G, Martinez-Torrecuadrada J,
Schmid ER, De Pedro MA, Loffelhardt W: Primary structure of cyanelle
peptidoglycan of Cyanophora paradoxa: a prokaryotic cell wall as part
of an organelle envelope. J Bacteriol 1996, 178:332-339.
Kleine T, Maier UG, Leister D: DNA transfer from organelles to the
nucleus: the idiosyncratic genetics of endosymbiosis. Annu Rev Plant Biol
2009, 60:115-138.
Martin W: Gene transfer from organelles to the nucleus: frequent and in
big chunks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:8612-8614.
Burger G, Gray MW, Lang BF: Mitochondrial genomes: anything goes.
Trends Genet 2003, 19:709-716.
Krause K: From chloroplasts to “cryptic” plastids: evolution of plastid
genomes in parasitic plants. Curr Genet 2008, 54:111-121.
Lopez-Juez E, Pyke KA: Plastids unleashed: their development and their
integration in plant development. Int J Dev Biol 2005, 49:557-577.
de Koning AP, Keeling PJ: The complete plastid genome sequence of the
parasitic green alga Helicosporidium sp. is highly reduced and
structured. BMC Biol 2006, 4:12.
Barbrook AC, Howe CJ, Purton S: Why are plastid genomes retained in
non-photosynthetic organisms?. Trends Plant Sci 2006, 11:101-108.
Archibald JM: Nucleomorph genomes: structure, function, origin and
evolution. Bioessays 2007, 29:392-402.
Gould SB, Sommer MS, Kroth PG, Gile GH, Keeling PJ, Maier UG: Nucleusto-nucleus gene transfer and protein retargeting into a remnant
cytoplasm of cryptophytes and diatoms. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:2413-2422.

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

114. Hackett J, Anderson DM, Erdner DL, Bhattacharya D: Dinoflagellates: A
remarkable evolutionary experiment. Am J Bot 2004, 91:1523-1534.
115. Nosenko T, Lidie KL, Van Dolah FM, Lindquist E, Cheng JF, Bhattacharya D:
Chimeric plastid proteome in the Florida “red tide” dinoflagellate
Karenia brevis. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:2026-2038.
116. Wolfe KH, Shields DC: Molecular evidence for an ancient duplication of
the entire yeast genome. Nature 1997, 387:708-713.
117. Scannell DR, Butler G, Wolfe KH: Yeast genome evolution–the origin of
the species. Yeast 2007, 24:929-942.
118. Aury JM, Jaillon O, Duret L, Noel B, Jubin C, Porcel BM, Segurens B,
Daubin V, Anthouard V, Aiach N, et al: Global trends of whole-genome
duplications revealed by the ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia. Nature 2006,
444:171-178.
119. Cui L, Wall PK, Leebens-Mack JH, Lindsay BG, Soltis DE, Doyle JJ, Soltis PS,
Carlson JE, Arumuganathan K, Barakat A, Albert VA, Ma H, dePamphilis CW:
Widespread genome duplications throughout the history of flowering
plants. Genome Res 2006, 16:738-749.
120. Darwin F, Seward AC, eds: More Letters of Charles Darwin London: John
Murray 1903.
121. Jaillon O, Aury JM, Noel B, Policriti A, Clepet C, Casagrande A, Choisne N,
Aubourg S, Vitulo N, Jubin C, et al: The grapevine genome sequence
suggests ancestral hexaploidization in major angiosperm phyla. Nature
2007, 449:463-467.
122. Nakatani Y, Takeda H, Kohara Y, Morishita S: Reconstruction of the
vertebrate ancestral genome reveals dynamic genome reorganization in
early vertebrates. Genome Res 2007, 17:1254-1265.
123. Ohno S: Evolution by Gene Duplication London: George Allen and Unwin
1970.
124. Semon M, Wolfe KH: Rearrangement rate following the whole-genome
duplication in teleosts. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:860-867.
125. Zhang G, Cohn MJ: Genome duplication and the origin of the vertebrate
skeleton. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2008, 18:387-393.
126. Rieseberg LH, Raymond O, Rosenthal DM, Lai Z, Livingstone K, Nakazato T,
Durphy JL, Schwarzbach AE, Donovan LA, Lexer C: Major ecological
transitions in wild sunflowers facilitated by hybridization. Science 2003,
301:1211-1216.
127. Veron AS, Kaufmann K, Bornberg-Bauer E: Evidence of interaction network
evolution by whole-genome duplications: a case study in MADS-box
proteins. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:670-678.
128. Soltis PS, Soltis DE: The role of hybridization in plant speciation. Annu Rev
Plant Biol 2009, 60:561-588.
129. Doyle JJ, Flagel LE, Paterson AH, Rapp RA, Soltis DE, Soltis PS, Wendel JF:
Evolutionary genetics of genome merger and doubling in plants. Annu
Rev Genet 2008, 42:443-461.
130. Wilson A: Wheat and rye hybrids. Edinburgh Botanical Society Transactions
1876, 12:286-288.
131. Meister G: Natural hybridization of wheat and rye in Russia. J Heredity
1921, 12:467-470.
132. Ma XF, Gustafson JP: Allopolyploidization-accommodated genomic
sequence changes in triticale. Ann Bot (Lond) 2008, 101:825-832.
133. Hegarty MJ, Barker GL, Brennan AC, Edwards KJ, Abbott RJ, Hiscock SJ:
Changes to gene expression associated with hybrid speciation in plants:
further insights from transcriptomic studies in Senecio. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 2008, 363:3055-3069.
134. Thompson J, Lumaret R: The evolutionary dynamics of polyploid plants:
origins, establishment and persistence. Trends Ecol Evol 1992, 7:302-307.
135. Eakin GS, Behringer RR: Tetraploid development in the mouse. Dev Dyn
2003, 228:751-766.
136. Anderson E, Stebbins GL Jr: Hybridization as an evolutionary stimulus.
Evolution 1954, 8:378-388.
137. Arnold ML: Transfer and origin of adaptations through natural
hybridization: were Anderson and Stebbins right?. Plant Cell 2004,
16:562-570.
138. Otto SP, Whitton J: Polyploid incidence and evolution. Annu Rev Genet
2000, 34:401-437.
139. Dowling TE, Secour CL: The role of hybridization and introgression in the
diversification of animals. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 1997, 28:593-619.
140. Arnold ML: Natural hybridization and the evolution of domesticated,
pest and disease organisms. Mol Ecol 2004, 13:997-1007.
141. Grant P, Grant BR: Hybridization of bird species. Science 1992, 256:193-197.

Page 13 of 14

142. Grant PR, Grant BR: Unpredictable evolution in a 30-year study of
Darwin’s finches. Science 2002, 296:707-711.
143. Frank O, Jones-Brando L, Leib-Mosch C, Yolken R, Seifarth W: Altered
transcriptional activity of human endogenous retroviruses in
neuroepithelial cells after infection with Toxoplasma gondii. J Infect Dis
2006, 194:1447-1449.
144. Kimura Y, Tosa Y, Shimada S, Sogo R, Kusaba M, Sunaga T, Betsuyaku S,
Eto Y, Nakayashiki H, Mayama S: OARE-1, a Ty1-copia retrotransposon in
oat activated by abiotic and biotic stresses. Plant Cell Physiol 2001,
42:1345-1354.
145. Bregliano J, Kidwell M: Hybrid dysgenesis. Mobile Genetic Elements New
York: Academic PressShapiro J 1983, 363-410.
146. Bucheton A: I transposable elements and I-R hybrid dysgenesis in
Drosophila. Trends Genet 1990, 6:16-21.
147. Periquet G, Lemeunier F, Bigot Y, Hamelin MH, Bazin C, Ladeveze V,
Eeken J, Galindo MI, Pascual L, Boussy I: The evolutionary genetics of the
hobo transposable element in the Drosophila melanogaster complex.
Genetica 1994, 93:79-90.
148. Vrana PB, Fossella JA, Matteson P, del Rio T, O’Neill MJ, Tilghman SM:
Genetic and epigenetic incompatibilities underlie hybrid dysgenesis in
Peromyscus. Nat Genet 2000, 25:120-124.
149. Wang H, Chai Y, Chu X, Zhao Y, Wu Y, Zhao J, Ngezahayo F, Xu C, Liu B:
Molecular characterization of a rice mutator-phenotype derived from an
incompatible cross-pollination reveals transgenerational mobilization of
multiple transposable elements and extensive epigenetic instability. BMC
Plant Biol 2009, 9:63.
150. Ma XF, Gustafson JP: Genome evolution of allopolyploids: a process of
cytological and genetic diploidization. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005,
109:236-249.
151. Vrana PB, Guan XJ, Ingram RS, Tilghman SM: Genomic imprinting is
disrupted in interspecific Peromyscus hybrids. Nat Genet 1998,
20:362-365.
152. Madlung A, Masuelli RW, Watson B, Reynolds SH, Davison J, Comai L:
Remodeling of DNA methylation and phenotypic and transcriptional
changes in synthetic Arabidopsis allotetraploids. Plant Physiol 2002,
129:733-746.
153. Josefsson C, Dilkes B, Comai L: Parent-dependent loss of gene silencing
during interspecies hybridization. Curr Biol 2006, 16:1322-1328.
154. Brown JD, Golden D, O’Neill RJ: Methylation perturbations in
retroelements within the genome of a Mus interspecific hybrid correlate
with double minute chromosome formation. Genomics 2008, 91:267-273.
155. Moorhead P, Kaplan MM, Brown PW, eds: Mathematical challenges to the
neo-darwinian interpretation of evolution Philadelphia: Wistar Institute Press
1967.
156. Shapiro JA: Genome system architecture and natural genetic engineering
in evolution. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1999, 870:23-35.
157. Shapiro JA: A 21st century view of evolution: genome system
architecture, repetitive DNA, and natural genetic engineering. Gene 2005,
345:91-100.
158. Jacob F: Evolution and tinkering. Science 1977, 196:1161-1166.
159. Jacob F: Complexity and tinkering. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2001, 929:71-73.
160. Comai L, Madlung A, Josefsson C, Tyagi A: Do the different parental
‘heteromes’ cause genomic shock in newly formed allopolyploids?. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2003, 358:1149-1155.
161. Gould SJ, Eldredge N: Punctuated equilibrium comes of age. Nature 1993,
366:223-227.
162. Kirchner J, Connolly CM, Sandmeyer SB: Requirement of RNA polymerase
III transcription factors for in vitro position-specific integration of a
retroviruslike element. Science 1995, 267:1488-1491.
163. Xie W, Gai X, Zhu Y, Zappulla DC, Sternglanz R, Voytas DF: Targeting of the
yeast Ty5 retrotransposon to silent chromatin is mediated by
interactions between integrase and Sir4p. Mol Cell Biol 2001,
21:6606-6614.
164. Kassis JA: Pairing-sensitive silencing, polycomb group response elements,
and transposon homing in Drosophila. Adv Genet 2002, 46:421-438.
165. Peters JE, Craig NL: Tn7 recognizes transposition target structures
associated with DNA replication using the DNA-binding protein TnsE.
Genes Dev 2001, 15:737-747.
166. Kinoshita K, Honjo T: Linking class-switch recombination with somatic
hypermutation. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001, 2:493-503.

Shapiro Mobile DNA 2010, 1:4
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/4

167. Lisch D: Epigenetic regulation of transposable elements in plants. Annu
Rev Plant Biol 2009, 60:43-66.
168. Averhoff B, Friedrich A: Type IV pili-related natural transformation
systems: DNA transport in mesophilic and thermophilic bacteria. Arch
Microbiol 2003, 180:385-393.
169. Claverys JP, Prudhomme M, Martin B: Induction of competence regulons
as a general response to stress in gram-positive bacteria. Annu Rev
Microbiol 2006, 60:451-475.
170. Kay E, Vogel TM, Bertolla F, Nalin R, Simonet P: In situ transfer of antibiotic
resistance genes from transgenic (transplastomic) tobacco plants to
bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 2002, 68:3345-3351.
171. de Vries J, Herzfeld T, Wackernagel W: Transfer of plastid DNA from
tobacco to the soil bacterium Acinetobacter sp. by natural
transformation. Mol Microbiol 2004, 53:323-334.
172. O’Neill C, Horvath GV, Horvath E, Dix PJ, Medgyesy P: Chloroplast
transformation in plants: polyethylene glycol (PEG) treatment of
protoplasts is an alternative to biolistic delivery systems. Plant J 1993,
3:729-738.
173. Wolff JA, Budker V: The mechanism of naked DNA uptake and
expression. Adv Genet 2005, 54:3-20.
174. Khalil IA, Kogure K, Akita H, Harashima H: Uptake pathways and
subsequent intracellular trafficking in nonviral gene delivery. Pharmacol
Rev 2006, 58:32-45.
175. Felgner PL, Gadek TR, Holm M, Roman R, Chan HW, Wenz M, Northrop JP,
Ringold GM, Danielsen M: Lipofection: a highly efficient, lipid-mediated
DNA-transfection procedure. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1987, 84:7413-7417.
176. Zuhorn IS, Kalicharan R, Hoekstra D: Lipoplex-mediated transfection of
mammalian cells occurs through the cholesterol-dependent clathrinmediated pathway of endocytosis. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:18021-18028.
177. Heinemann JA, Sprague GF Jr: Bacterial conjugative plasmids mobilize
DNA transfer between bacteria and yeast. Nature 1989, 340:205-209.
178. Winans SC: Two-way chemical signaling in Agrobacterium-plant
interactions. Microbiol Rev 1992, 56:12-31.
179. Broothaerts W, Mitchell HJ, Weir B, Kaines S, Smith LM, Yang W, Mayer JE,
Roa-Rodriguez C, Jefferson RA: Gene transfer to plants by diverse species
of bacteria. Nature 2005, 433:629-633.
180. Stanton TB: Prophage-like gene transfer agents-novel mechanisms of
gene exchange for Methanococcus, Desulfovibrio, Brachyspira, and
Rhodobacter species. Anaerobe 2007, 13:43-49.
181. Chung SM, Vaidya M, Tzfira T: Agrobacterium is not alone: gene transfer
to plants by viruses and other bacteria. Trends Plant Sci 2006, 11:1-4.
182. El-Aneed A: An overview of current delivery systems in cancer gene
therapy. J Control Release 2004, 94:1-14.
183. Filee J, Pouget N, Chandler M: Phylogenetic evidence for extensive lateral
acquisition of cellular genes by Nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses.
BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:320.
184. Davis CC, Anderson WR, Wurdack KJ: Gene transfer from a parasitic
flowering plant to a fern. Proc Biol Sci 2005, 272:2237-2242.
185. Ungerer MC, Strakosh SC, Stimpson KM: Proliferation of Ty3/gypsy-like
retrotransposons in hybrid sunflower taxa inferred from phylogenetic
data. BMC Biol 2009, 7:40.
186. Lai Z, Nakazato T, Salmaso M, Burke JM, Tang S, Knapp SJ, Rieseberg LH:
Extensive chromosomal repatterning and the evolution of sterility
barriers in hybrid sunflower species. Genetics 2005, 171:291-303.
187. Lim KY, Soltis DE, Soltis PS, Tate J, Matyasek R, Srubarova H, Kovarik A,
Pires JC, Xiong Z, Leitch AR: Rapid chromosome evolution in recently
formed polyploids in Tragopogon (Asteraceae). PLoS One 2008, 3:e3353.
188. Salmon A, Ainouche ML, Wendel JF: Genetic and epigenetic
consequences of recent hybridization and polyploidy in Spartina
(Poaceae). Mol Ecol 2005, 14:1163-1175.
189. Marfil CF, Masuelli RW, Davison J, Comai L: Genomic instability in Solanum
tuberosum × Solanum kurtzianum interspecific hybrids. Genome 2006,
49:104-113.
190. Marfil CF, Camadro EL, Masuelli RW: Phenotypic instability and epigenetic
variability in a diploid potato of hybrid origin, Solanum ruiz-lealii. BMC
Plant Biol 2009, 9:21.
191. Skalicka K, Lim KY, Matyasek R, Matzke M, Leitch AR, Kovarik A: Preferential
elimination of repeated DNA sequences from the paternal, Nicotiana
tomentosiformis genome donor of a synthetic, allotetraploid tobacco.
New Phytol 2005, 166:291-303.

Page 14 of 14

192. Wang YM, Dong ZY, Zhang ZJ, Lin XY, Shen Y, Zhou D, Liu B: Extensive de
Novo genomic variation in rice induced by introgression from wild rice
(Zizania latifolia Griseb.). Genetics 2005, 170:1945-1956.
193. Shen YLX, Shan X, et al: Genomic rearrangement in endogenous long
terminal repeat retrotransposons of rice lines introgressed by wild rice
(Zizania latifolia Griseb.). JOURNAL OF INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY 2005,
47:998-1008.
194. Liu B, Wendel JF: Retrotransposon activation followed by rapid
repression in introgressed rice plants. Genome 2000, 43:874-880.
195. Song K, Lu P, Tang K, Osborn TC: Rapid genome change in synthetic
polyploids of Brassica and its implications for polyploid evolution. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:7719-7723.
196. Kantama L, Sharbel TF, Schranz ME, Mitchell-Olds T, de Vries S, de Jong H:
Diploid apomicts of the Boechera holboellii complex display large-scale
chromosome substitutions and aberrant chromosomes. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2007, 104:14026-14031.
197. Feldman M, Levy AA: Allopolyploidy–a shaping force in the evolution of
wheat genomes. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 109:250-258.
198. Shaked H, Kashkush K, Ozkan H, Feldman M, Levy AA: Sequence
elimination and cytosine methylation are rapid and reproducible
responses of the genome to wide hybridization and allopolyploidy in
wheat. Plant Cell 2001, 13:1749-1759.
199. Ozkan H, Levy AA, Feldman M: Allopolyploidy-induced rapid genome
evolution in the wheat (Aegilops-Triticum) group. Plant Cell 2001,
13:1735-1747.
200. Dong YZ, Liu ZL, Shan XH, Qiu T, He MY, Liu B: Allopolyploidy in wheat
induces rapid and heritable alterations in DNA methylation patterns of
cellular genes and mobile elements. Genetika 2005, 41:1089-1095.
201. Han F, Fedak G, Guo W, Liu B: Rapid and repeatable elimination of a
parental genome-specific DNA repeat (pGc1R-1a) in newly synthesized
wheat allopolyploids. Genetics 2005, 170:1239-1245.
202. Han FP, Fedak G, Ouellet T, Liu B: Rapid genomic changes in interspecific
and intergeneric hybrids and allopolyploids of Triticeae. Genome 2003,
46:716-723.
203. Madlung A, Tyagi AP, Watson B, Jiang H, Kagochi T, Doerge RW,
Martienssen R, Comai L: Genomic changes in synthetic Arabidopsis
polyploids. Plant J 2005, 41:221-230.
204. Pontes O, Neves N, Silva M, Lewis MS, Madlung A, Comai L, Viegas W,
Pikaard CS: Chromosomal locus rearrangements are a rapid response to
formation of the allotetraploid Arabidopsis suecica genome. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:18240-18245.
205. Labrador M, Farre M, Utzet F, Fontdevila A: Interspecific hybridization
increases transposition rates of Osvaldo. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:931-937.
206. Metcalfe CJ, Bulazel KV, Ferreri GC, Schroeder-Reiter E, Wanner G, Rens W,
Obergfell C, Eldridge MD, O’Neill RJ: Genomic instability within
centromeres of interspecific marsupial hybrids. Genetics 2007,
177:2507-2517.
207. O’Neill RJ, O’Neill MJ, Graves JA: Undermethylation associated with
retroelement activation and chromosome remodelling in an interspecific
mammalian hybrid. Nature 1998, 393:68-72.
208. Brown JD, Strbuncelj M, Giardina C, O’Neill RJ: Interspecific hybridization
induced amplification of Mdm2 on double minutes in a Mus hybrid.
Cytogenet Genome Res 2002, 98:184-188.
209. Sakai C, Konno F, Nakano O, Iwai T, Yokota T, Lee J, Nishida-Umehara C,
Kuroiwa A, Matsuda Y, Yamashita M: Chromosome elimination in the
interspecific hybrid medaka between Oryzias latipes and O. hubbsi.
Chromosome Res 2007, 15:697-709.
doi:10.1186/1759-8753-1-4
Cite this article as: Shapiro: Mobile DNA and evolution in the 21st
century. Mobile DNA 2010 1:4.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
