<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Arm-specific dynamics of chromosome evolution in malaria mosquitoes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-91"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Maria V Sharakhova"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Arm-specific dynamics of chromosome evolution
in malaria mosquitoes
Maria V Sharakhova1†, Ai Xia1,3†, Scotland C Leman2 and Igor V Sharakhov1*

Abstract
Background: The malaria mosquito species of subgenus Cellia have rich inversion polymorphisms that correlate
with environmental variables. Polymorphic inversions tend to cluster on the chromosomal arms 2R and 2L but not
on X, 3R and 3L in Anopheles gambiae and homologous arms in other species. However, it is unknown whether
polymorphic inversions on homologous chromosomal arms of distantly related species from subgenus Cellia
nonrandomly share similar sets of genes. It is also unclear if the evolutionary breakage of inversion-poor
chromosomal arms is under constraints.
Results: To gain a better understanding of the arm-specific differences in the rates of genome rearrangements, we
compared gene orders and established syntenic relationships among Anopheles gambiae, Anopheles funestus, and
Anopheles stephensi. We provided evidence that polymorphic inversions on the 2R arms in these three species
nonrandomly captured similar sets of genes. This nonrandom distribution of genes was not only a result of
preservation of ancestral gene order but also an outcome of extensive reshuffling of gene orders that created new
combinations of homologous genes within independently originated polymorphic inversions. The statistical analysis
of distribution of conserved gene orders demonstrated that the autosomal arms differ in their tolerance to
generating evolutionary breakpoints. The fastest evolving 2R autosomal arm was enriched with gene blocks
conserved between only a pair of species. In contrast, all identified syntenic blocks were preserved on the slowly
evolving 3R arm of An. gambiae and on the homologous arms of An. funestus and An. stephensi.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that natural selection favors specific gene combinations within polymorphic
inversions when distant species are exposed to similar environmental pressures. This knowledge could be useful for
the discovery of genes responsible for an association of inversion polymorphisms with phenotypic variations in
multiple species. Our data support the chromosomal arm specificity in rates of gene order disruption during
mosquito evolution. We conclude that the distribution of breakpoint regions is evolutionary conserved on slowly
evolving arms and tends to be lineage-specific on rapidly evolving arms.

Background
Despite the growing recognition of the importance of
chromosomal inversions for adaptation and evolution of
species [1-4], the evolutionary forces responsible for
rearrangement establishment and maintenance remain
an enigma of evolutionary biology. Comparative mapping has yielded important insights into patterns and
mechanisms of genome rearrangements in plants, mammals, fruit flies, and yeasts [5-10]. One of the important
findings is that inversions are distributed nonuniformly
* Correspondence: igor@vt.edu
† Contributed equally
1
Department of Entomology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

across different chromosomes. Cytogenetic studies performed on malaria mosquito species of subgenus Cellia
provided some of the most obvious examples of the
nonuniform inversion distribution [11-14]. Cellia is the
largest subgenus within genus Anopheles and is
restricted to the Old World. It includes some of the
most important malaria vectors, such as, An. gambiae,
An. funestus, and An. stephensi. The polytene chromosome complement of Anopheles female consists of the X
chromosome and four autosomal arms: 2R, 2L, 3R, and
3L. A study of the distribution of 82 polymorphic inversions in An. gambiae s.s. has found that the chromosome 2 is the most inversion-rich. It has 77 inversions
versus only five inversions on chromosome 3 [13]. In

© 2011 Sharakhova et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

An. funestus and An. stephensi, polymorphic inversions
tend to cluster on the chromosomal arms that are
homologous to the 2R and 2L arms of An. gambiae
[15-18]. These observations suggest that genome rearrangements have chromosome-specific facilitators or
inhibitors. The major consequence of unequal rates of
chromosome evolution is a disproportionally large role
of genetic content of certain chromosomal arms in
adaptation and, possibly, speciation. However, the
mechanisms that govern the unequal distribution of
rearrangements among chromosomes are poorly
understood.
The common inversions 2Rb, 2Rbc, 2Rcu, 2Ru, 2Rd,
and 2La of An. gambiae s.s. are widespread in the arid
sub-Saharan Africa but almost absent in the humid
equatorial Africa [14]. Similarly, multiple inversions on
arms 2R and 3R in natural populations of An. funestus
are fixed in the southern humid rainforest area of
Cameroon and decrease in frequency going northwards,
with their complete absence in the northernmost dry
Sahelian savannas [19]. Chromosomal studies of the
Asian malaria vector An. stephensi reveal striking differences in the kinds and frequencies of paracentric inversions on 2R and 3L between rural and urban
populations, especially with respect to the common 2Rb
inversion [16]. These observations suggest that the
genes on the 2R and 2L arms of An. gambiae and on
the homologous arms of An. funestus and An. stephensi
are more sensitive to variation in the environment
experienced by these species and thus show evidence of
selective response to environmental pressures. More
recent studies provided ecological evidence that sympatric species An. gambiae and An. funestus inhabit a wide
range of the same ecoclimatic settings in Cameroon
[20,21], suggesting an intriguing possibility that polymorphic inversions capture identical sets of genes in different species and, thus, confer similar ecological
adaptations. It has been proposed that inversions 2st of
D. buzzatii and In(3R)Payne of D. melanogaster have
common genes because both inversions are associated
with body size [22]. However, the nonrandom occurrence of similar sets of genes within polymorphic inversions of different species has not yet been demonstrated.
The presence of common genes within inversions of
homologous chromosomal arms would indicate that natural selection favors certain adaptive gene combinations
when different species are exposed to similar environmental variables.
Polytene chromosomes, which are present in many
species of Anopheles, provide an opportunity to develop
high-resolution physical maps and to study genome
organization and evolution in malaria mosquitoes. We
previously reported a 1-Mb resolution physical map for
An. stephensi and analyzed the evolutionary dynamics of

Page 2 of 17

chromosomal inversions in subgenus Cellia [11]. The
study has shown that despite the paucity of inversion
polymorphisms on the X chromosome, this chromosome has the fastest rate of inversion fixation, while the
2R arm has the highest inversion fixation rate among
autosomes. The results have also indicated that the
rapidly and slowly evolving chromosomal arms have different genome landscapes characterized by distinctly
enriched gene subpopulations and classes of repetitive
DNA. Although the propensity of chromosomes to rearrangements seems to play a major role in the rates of
inversion origin, negative and positive selections may
differentially control the establishment and maintenance
of polymorphic inversions on different chromosomal
arms. For example, chromosome arms 3R and 3L of An.
gambiae and homologous arms in other mosquito species have the lowest rates of inversion polymorphism
and fixation [11,13,16,18]. The low tolerance of a chromosome to gene order disruption could contribute to
the low rate of inversion establishment. Large blocks of
genes that are conserved in the evolution of several species may represent functionally important combinations
that are maintained together by natural selection [23]
and/or genomic fragments devoid of evolutionary fragile
regions [24]. Comparative analysis of gene order preservation and disruption across species can determine possible differences in the chromosomal arm tolerance to
rearrangements.
Here, we report evolutionary insights from a comparative physical mapping among three species of malaria
mosquitoes. We demonstrated that polymorphic inversions on the 2R arm, involved in environmental adaptations in these three species, nonrandomly share similar
sets of genes. These results suggest that distantly related
species acquire parallel adaptations through capturing
common genes by independent polymorphic inversions.
We also found that the chromosomal arms differ in
their tolerance to gene order disruption during mosquito evolution. The distribution of breakpoint regions
is evolutionary conserved on slowly evolving arms and
tends to be lineage-specific on rapidly evolving arms.
The arm-specific tolerance to chromosomal breakage
could be responsible for the nonuniform establishment
of inversions.

Results
Inversion distances among An. stephensi, An. gambiae,
and An. funestus

To avoid a lineage-specific bias in pair-wise analyses of
gene orders, we estimated the chromosomal divergence
among the mosquito species. Three-way comparative
mapping can be very efficient in determining inversion
distances among species. The cDNA and BAC clones
physically and in silico mapped to polytene

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

chromosomes of An. funestus, An. stephensi, and An.
gambiae [11] were used to identify conserved gene
orders among the three species (Additional file 1). The
comparison of the physical maps of these species has
identified the whole-arm translocations and paracentric
inversions and detected no pericentric inversions or partial-arm translocations (Figures 1, 2, 3 and 4). Therefore
we were able to determine the arm homology among
species [11]. Accordingly, chromosome X (Additional
file 2) and arm 2R (Figure 1) are homologous across all
three species. The 2L arm of An. gambiae corresponds
to the 3R of An. funestus and the 3L of An. stephensi
(Figure 2). The 2L arm of An. funestus corresponds to
the 3R arms of An. gambiae and An. stephensi (Figure
3). The 2L arm of An. stephensi corresponds to the 3L
arms of An. funestus and An. gambiae (Figure 4). We
have calculated inversion distances among An. stephensi,
An. gambiae, and An. funestus based on locations of 87
common autosomal DNA markers in all three species
(Additional file 3). This comparison has been done at
the ~2.42-Mb level of resolution using the Multiple
Genome Rearrangements (MRG) program (signed
option) [25]. The MGR program has estimated 51 fixed
inversions between An. stephensi and An. gambiae, 54
fixed inversions between An. stephensi and An. funestus,
and 50 fixed inversions between An. gambiae and An.
funestus. We also used the Genome Rearrangements In
Man and Mouse (GRIMM) program without assuming
directionality of the markers (unsigned option) to perform a pair-wise analysis of rearrangements [26]. The
GRIMM program calculated 30 fixed inversions between
An. stephensi and An. gambiae, 35 fixed inversions
between An. stephensi and An. funestus, and 34 fixed
inversions between An. gambiae and An. funestus. These
data indicate that the three species have approximately
equal chromosomal divergence from each other.
Presence of similar sets of genes in polymorphic
inversions of An. gambiae, An. stephensi, and An. funestus

The presence of common genes within inversions of
homologous chromosomal arms could indicate that natural selection favors certain adaptive gene combinations
when different species are exposed to similar environments. We tested for the presence or absence of physically and in silico mapped cDNA and BAC clones,
which contained genes, in common polymorphic inversions of three mosquito species [14,16,18,27] at ~1-Mb
level of resolution (Figures 1, 2, 3 and 4). In the previous study, we performed a test on the uniformity of
the marker distribution across the chromosomes in An.
gambiae, An. stephensi, and An. funestus using the Χ2
statistic [11]. The distribution of the DNA markers was
shown to be uniform for each arm and each species.
The observed number of shared genes in polymorphic

Page 3 of 17

inversions of An. stephensi and An. gambiae (Additional
file 4), as well as of An. funestus and An. gambiae
(Additional file 5), were compared to those that would
be expected under pure chance. Under the hypothesis
that the genes are distributed due to pure chance with
respect to polymorphic inversions and to each other,
identical markers would be randomly distributed across
a pair of chromosome arms from different species. Our
results rejected this hypothesis as we found cases of
nonrandom clustering of markers within polymorphic
inversions in different species. Figure 5 shows the heat
plots for the test statistic: (Oi,j - Ei,j)2/Ei,j, which demonstrate the difference between the observed and expected
number of shared markers in each inversion of An. gambiae and An. stephensi, as well as An. gambiae and An.
funestus. Simulated p-values were computed from
Monte Carlo simulated distributions, based on our test
statistic, by considering the number of simulated replicates which were larger than the observed statistics
(Table 1). Additional file 6 shows the probabilities that
the intensity rate exceeds one for shared genes between
An. stephensi and An. gambiae. Figure 5a, b shows the
corresponding intensity heat map (based on the test statistic (Oi,j - Ei,j)2/Ei,j, which aids in visually assessing the
locations of shared hot and cold spots. We define gi,j as
the estimated factor of increased gene sharage, over
what we would expect at random (See Methods for
details). Inferred values where gi,j = 1 suggest the shared
polymorphism is in line with what we might expect to
see at random. On the 2R arm, we observed that marker
pairs 2Rf (in An. stephensi) and 2Ru (in An. gambiae)
correspond to an activity hotspot (indicated by the lightyellow color in Figure 5a) with posterior probability Pr
(gi,j > 1|Data) = 1. The level of increase over expectation
is dramatic (6.23 times). Similarly, additional file 6,
accompanied by Figure 5 c, d, details results for shared
polymorphic inversions between An. funestus and An.
gambiae. Again we observed on the 2R arm that marker
pairs between 2Rt (in An. funestus) and 2Ru (in An.
gambiae) determine a hotspot of shared polymorphisms
(Pr(gi,j > 1|Data) = 1, 6.22 times). Another example of
nonrandomly shared genes is the small 2Rb inversion of
An. gambiae (Figure 6a) and the overlapping inversions
2Rd and 2Rh of An. funestus (Figures 1 and 5c). The
large 2La inversion is the only common inversion in An.
gambiae on this arm (Figure 6b). We found from little
to no co-occurrence of the same markers in this inversion and polymorphic inversions on 3R of An. funestus
and 3L of An. stephensi (less yellow and more orange
boxes) (Figures 2 and 5b, d). The results provide evidence that several polymorphic inversions at least on
the 2R arm of An. gambiae nonrandomly share gene
combinations with inversions of An. stephensi and An.
funestus.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Page 4 of 17

Figure 1 Comparative mapping of chromosomal arms 2R of An. gambiae, An. funestus, and An. stephensi. Arrows denote oriented
conserved gene orders. The red boxes indicate positions of polymorphic inversions 2Rt of An. funestus, 2Ru of An. gambiae, and 2Rf of An.
stephensi. The yellow boxes indicate positions of polymorphic inversions 2Rd/2Rh of An. funestus, 2Rb of An. gambiae, and 2Re of An. stephensi.
Shaded divisions on the An. gambiae chromosomes denote the genomic coordinates in this species. The centromere regions are shown by
black circles at the end of the arms.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Page 5 of 17

Figure 2 Comparative mapping of chromosomal arms 2L of An. gambiae, 3R of An. funestus, and 3L of An. stephensi. Arrows denote
oriented conserved gene orders. The blue boxes indicate positions of polymorphic inversions 3Rb of An. funestus, 2La of An. gambiae, and 3Lf of
An. stephensi. Shaded divisions on the An. gambiae chromosomes denote the genomic coordinates in this species. The centromere regions are
shown by black circles at the end of the arms.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Page 6 of 17

Figure 3 Comparative mapping of chromosomal arms 3R of An. gambiae, 2L of An. funestus, and 3R of An. stephensi. Arrows denote
oriented conserved gene orders. The largest block of genes with fully conserved order is highlighted with pink. Shaded divisions on the An.
gambiae chromosomes denote the genomic coordinates in this species. The centromere regions are shown by black circles at the end of the
arms.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Page 7 of 17

Figure 4 Comparative mapping of chromosomal arms 3L of An. gambiae, 3L of An. funestus, and 2L of An. stephensi. Arrows denote
oriented conserved gene orders. The largest block of genes with partly conserved order is highlighted with yellow. Shaded divisions on the An.
gambiae chromosomes denote the genomic coordinates in this species. The centromere regions are shown by black circles at the end of the
arms.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Page 8 of 17

Figure 5 Heat plots showing where there are more (and less) shared genes than would be expected, under pure chance between
inversions. Inversions on 2R (a) and 2L (b) arms of An. gambiae and An. stephensi and on the 2R (c) and 2L (d) arms of An. gambiae and An.
funestus are shown. Light-yellow and black colors indicate nonrandom presence and absence of the same markers within inversions. Orange
color indicates the random occurrence of markers.

It is important to note that chromosomal arms 2R and
2L of An. gambiae had the most rapid reshuffling of
gene order in evolution among autosomes. The mean
length of conserved gene blocks is 1.3 Mb on 2R and
1.7 Mb on 2L (Figures 1 and 2). These lengths are
much smaller than the sizes of the common polymorphic inversions: 12.5 Mb (2Rj, 813 genes) [28], 8.24
Mb (2Rb, 548 genes) (Figure 6a), 4.67 Mb (2Rc, 329
Table 1 P-values for testing the null that the genes are
shared between inversions due to chance
Asymptotic
p-value

Simulated
p-value

An. gambiae/An. stephensi 2R/2R

< 0.00001

< 0.00001

An. gambiae/An. stephensi 2L/3L

0.1142

0.0798

An. gambiae/An. funestus 2R/2R

0.2328

0.1884

An. gambiae/An. funestus 2L/3R

0.5711

0.4447

genes) (Figure 6a), 4.02 Mb (2Ru, 264 genes) [29], and
21.6 Mb (2La, 1,281 genes) (Figure 6b) [30]. In some
cases, the presence of similar sets of genes within inversions in different species could be explained by preservation of ancestral gene orders. For example, all three
markers mapped to inversion 2Ru of An. gambiae and
inversion 2Rf of An. stephensi formed a conserved block
(Figure 1). However, many of the common markers did
not belong to conserved gene blocks. Moreover, we
observed the reshuffled positions of small conserved
blocks within polymorphic inversions in different species
(e.g., inversions 2Rb of An. gambiae, 2Re of An. stephensi, and 2Rd/2Rh of An. funestus in Figure 1). Therefore, colocalization of the common markers within
polymorphic inversions is not only a result of the ancestral gene order but also a result of new genes combinations independently originated in different species.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Page 9 of 17

Figure 6 Polymorphic inversions on chromosome 2 of An. gambiae. The heterozygote polymorphic inversions 2Rbc (a) and 2La (b) are
shown.

To support the conclusion that gene sharing is more
common in inversions than outside inversions, we have
formed a metric for comparing the outside regions to the
inverted regions. Table 2 shows the ratio of average levels
of gene sharing (as compared to expected under the null
model), between the outside regions relative to the inversions. We notice that for all comparisons the outside
regions have less shared genes than inversions, as shown
by the expected posterior assessments of the ratios being
less than 1. For all except the An. gambiae/An. funestus
2L/3R comparisons, 95% posterior credible intervals are
bounded above by 1, which demonstrate these results are
significant. For An. gambiae/An. funestus 2L/3R, the 95%
interval has strong overlap with 1, which demonstrates
the level of connectivity (as compared to expected) is
similar between inverted and outside regions.
Conservation and disruption of gene order in mosquito
evolution

To determine possible differences among chromosomal
arms in the tolerance to generating evolutionary breakpoints, we performed comparative analysis of gene order
preservation across species. Conserved gene blocks were
defined as regions with the same order and distance
between at least two markers in two or more different species. For example, there were small conserved blocks (~1
Table 2 The ratio of average levels of gene sharing (as
compared to expected under the null model), between
the outside regions relative to the inversions
Posterior
95% Credible interval
expectation
An. gambiae/An. stephensi 2R/2R 0.32

(0.20, 0.48)

An. gambiae/An. stephensi 2L/3L 0.54
An. gambiae/An. funestus 2R/2R 0.44

(0.40, 0.71)
(0.28, 0.55)

An. gambiae/An. funestus 2L/3R

(0.52, 1.65)

0.94

Mb) on arm 2R (Figure 1) as well as large conserved
blocks (up to 6-8 Mb) on arms 3R and 3L of An. gambiae
(Figures 3 and 4). In this study, we identified two types of
conserved blocks of genes: (i) blocks that were conserved
among all three species (fully conserved blocks) and (ii)
blocks that were conserved between two species, but were
disrupted in the third species (partially conserved blocks).
The largest fully conserved and disrupted gene blocks are
shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4, respectively. For each of
the four autosomal arms, we counted blocks that were
conserved between only An. gambiae and An. funestus,
An. gambiae and An. stephensi, and those that were conserved among all three species simultaneously. Given the
most recent common ancestor between each of our species of interest, disrupted blocks have accumulated
through time, accounting the current level of block disruption in our sample (see Additional file 7 for a schematic
visualization of this process). We focus our attention on
two primary features of the blocks: the number and length
of such blocks. The level of block disruption was inferred
using a compound Poisson process, in which the number
of conserved blocks follows a Poisson distribution and the
length of the chromosomal arms scales the rate of the process (see Methods for details). While we were primarily
interested in the level of block disruption, and how it differs between groups, we explicitly model levels for fully
and partially conserved blocks (conserved+disrupted),
since the counts are higher for these sets of blocks, and
yield better estimation properties. The rate parameters {lj,
gj} measure the abundance or block counts, and lengths,
respectively on arm j Î {2R, 2L, 3R, 3L}.
We denote the fitted compound Poisson process rate
parameters as {lj(c+d), gj(c+d)} and {lj(c), gj(c)}, where the
superscripts (c+d) and (c) denote whether the rates were
fitted to conserved+disrupted or conserved blocks.
The difference between these sets of rates (lj(diff) =lj(c+d)
- lj(c) and gj(diff) = gj(c+d) - gj(c)) models the rates governing

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Page 10 of 17

the disrupted blocks, which were then used to compare
the levels of block disruption between groups. We report
these rate parameters in conjunction with the combined
summary (lj(diff) gj(diff))/Lj, where Lj is the total length of
arm j. This combined summary has the interpretation of
blocks per region length per total length (See Methods for
further explanation). For both fitted processes, posterior
summaries are displayed in Table 3. We demonstrated
that the rate of accumulation of conserved and conserved
+disrupted blocks was mildly higher for arms 2R and 3L.
However, the lengths of the blocks were dramatically
smaller on 2R than those found on other arms. For inferences of disrupted blocks, we considered the difference of
these parameter pairings lj(diff) = lj(c)- lj(c+d) and (gj-1)(diff)
= (gj(c))-1 -(gj(c+d))-1. Strong overlap with zero, in each of
the above parameter differences, indicated a negligible disruption rate. On the other hand, highly negative values
indicated that the rates for the disrupted blocks were less
than those for the conserved blocks. Conversely, large
values suggested higher rates for the disrupted blocks. The
analysis revealed that the 2R arm has the highest rate of
accumulation of disrupted blocks per unit length, lj(diff),
with a probability equal to 0.905 (Figure 7, Table 3). The
effects for the other arms were less pronounced. Moreover, the 3R arm of An. gambiae and the homologous
arms of the other species had the lowest lj(diff) value with
a probability of 0.5, and all identified gene blocks in this
arm were preserved among An. gambiae, An. funestus, and
An. stephensi. The data suggest that this chromosomal
arm possesses evolutionary conserved breakpoint clusters
and has low tolerance to generating new breakpoints.

Discussion
Parallel evolution of adaptive inversion polymorphisms in
mosquito species

Natural selection seems to play a role in maintaining
inversion polymorphisms on 2R and 2L of An. gambiae
and their homologous arms in An. stephensi and An.

Figure 7 Chromosome arm-specific differences in rates of
accumulation of disrupted gene blocks. X axis shows rates of
accumulation of disrupted blocks per region length per unit length,
z = (lj(diff) gj(diff))/L. Y axis shows a density of p(z|D); p–density, D–
data.

funestus [14,16,17]. Our previous study has shown that
chromosomal arms rich in polymorphic inversions (2R,
2L) have higher gene densities [11]. This observation
confirmed the assumption that an inversion with fewer
genes would have a smaller selective advantage [31].
Moreover, the study of gene ontology terms has provided evidence that 2L is enriched with genes involved
in the structural integrity of a cuticle, while the 2R arm
has an overrepresentation of genes involved in cellular
response to stress (e.g., temperature, humidity) [11].
These data strongly support the role of natural selection
in maintaining polymorphic inversions associated with
adaptation of mosquitoes to the dry environment [14].
A study of larval ecology demonstrated that sympatric
species An. gambiae and An. funestus inhabit a wide
range of the same ecological settings in Cameroon [20].
We hypothesized that if polymorphic inversions in the

Table 3 Expected parameter values and their associated 95% credible intervals shown for both conserved and
disrupted blocks of each arm of An. gambiae*
Arm

lj(c+d)

(gj(c+d))-1

lj(c)

(gj(c))-1

lj(diff)

(gj-1)(diff)

2R

0.248
(0.139, 0.387)

0.011
(0.006, 0.018)

0.149
(0.068, 0.260)

0.007
(0.004, 0.014)

-0.990
(-2.62, 0.058)
0.905

-0.004
(-0.012, 0.0001)
0.939

2L

0.166
(0.072, 0.298)

0.037
(0.018, 0.076)

0.103
(0.034, 0.212)

0.041
(0.016, 0.100)

-0.617
(-0.214, 0.084)
0.804

0.004
(-0.043, 0.06)
0.470

3R

0.115
(0.042, 0.224)

0.066
(0.029, 0.147)

0.116
(0.043, 0.225)

0.663
(0.029, 0.148)

-0.0004
(-0.013, 0.013)
0.500

-0.0002
(-0.091, 0.091)
0.500

3L

0.268
(0.134, 0.447)

0.030
(0.017, 0.055)

0.196
(0.085, 0.352)

0.294
(0.014, 0.060)

-0.72441
(-0.332, 0.138)
0.662

-0.000816
(-0.332, 0.138)
0.662

*The last numbers in the cells for lj(diff) and (gj-1)(diff) refer to probabilities.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

distant species confer the same adaptations than similar
sets of genes can be present within inversions of these
species. The presence of similar sets of genes within
independent inversions would imply the role of natural
selection acting on similar genetic content of homologous chromosomal arms and creating parallel phenotypes of the evolutionary distant species. A theoretical
model suggests that the probability of parallel evolution
under natural selection is about two times bigger than
that under neutrality [32]. Our results demonstrated
that inversions on 2L of An. gambiae, 3L of An. stephensi, and 3R of An. funestus have almost random sets
of genes (Figure 5b, d). However, we found that the several 2R inversions in An. gambiae, An. stephensi, and
An. funestus do share common genes. The 2Rf inversion
of An. stephensi has an increased frequency in the urban
environment [16] and nonrandomly share common
genes with overlapping inversions 2Rc, 2Rd, 2Rbk, and
2Ru of An. gambiae. Another “urban” inversion in An.
stephensi, 2Rb, had a gene homology to the inversion
2Rc of An. gambiae (Figure 5a). In contrast, the 2Re
inversion of An. stephensi has an increased frequency in
the rural environment [16] and nonrandomly shares
common genes with inversion 2Rb of An. gambiae and
overlapping inversions 2Rd/2Rh of An. funestus. This
nonrandom distribution of markers is not only the
result of preservation of ancestral gene order. In fact, we
observed cases with extensively reshuffled gene orders
within independently originated polymorphic inversions
(Figure 1).
The gene shuffling is common in malaria mosquitoes
[11], and these species are phylogenetically distant
enough from each other [33,34] to have independently
originated polymorphic inversions, which differ in chromosomal positions and size. The nonrandom presence
of homologous genes within inversion 2Rb of An. gambiae and inversion 2Rh of An. funestus is especially
interesting in the light of ecological adaptations associated with these inversions. The high frequency of the
2Rb inversion of An. gambiae has been found strongly
associated with increased degree of aridity. In contrast,
the low frequencies of this inversion have been recorded
in humid areas [35]. The 2Rh inversion of An. funestus
has a similar (although reverse) pattern of association
with aridity. Correlation of the 2Rh inversion with the
higher vapor pressure has been demonstrated the strongest among all studied inversions of An. funestus. In
contrast, the standard (2Rh+) arrangement has been
found associated with the lower vapor pressure [21].
Thus, it is likely that natural selection favors adaptive
gene combinations within polymorphic inversions on 2R
when distantly related species are exposed to similar
environmental pressures. The availability of these gene
complexes would support long-term maintenance of

Page 11 of 17

polymorphic inversions. This knowledge could be useful
for the discovery of genes responsible for an association
of inversion polymorphisms with phenotypic variations
in multiple species. If candidate genes were indentified
within a polymorphic inversion in one species, the
orthologous genes in another species likely play a similar
role in adaptation if they are captured by a polymorphic
inversion involved in the parallel adaptation. Future studies should identify specific alleles associated with parallel adaptation of species of subgenus Cellia.
Arm-specific tolerance to disruption of gene order

We hypothesized that the arm-specific tolerance to
chromosomal breakage could be responsible for the
nonuniform distribution of inversions in autosomes.
The comparative analysis of conserved and disrupted
gene blocks in chromosomal arms across the three species provided evidence that 2R is more tolerant to disrupting gene orders and generating new evolutionary
breakpoints than other arms (Figure 7). We observed
that if a block on 2R was conserved between two mosquito species it was likely disrupted in the third species
(Figure 1). In contrast, all identified gene blocks remain
preserved on the 3R arm of An. gambiae and the homologous arms of the other species suggesting the existence of arm-specific constraints to breakage (Figure 4).
These constraints could be controlled by negative selection acting against disruption of certain gene combinations. It is possible that slowly and rapidly evolving
chromosomes may differ in sizes or abundance of coregulated gene clusters. Purifying selection against genomic rearrangements may preserve physical colocalization
of coexpression clusters [23]. For example, clusters of
genes deregulated in trx mutant D. melanogaster larvae
are not uniformly distributed along the genome; 60% of
them are located on chromosome 3L [36], which is a
slowly-evolving arm in Drosophila [8,37]. Physically
clustered genes may have shared regulatory regions,
common expression pattern, and chromatin-level regulation, or they may represent clusters of essential genes
[38]. Additionally, conservation of gene order in certain
regions of the genome has been explained by long-range
gene regulation [39]. If the 3R arm of An. gambiae is
enriched in large functional gene clusters, then generating inversions on this arm or inserting a transgene into
3R will likely have a negative effect on mosquito fitness.
Alternatively, the location of breakpoint clusters in only
specific chromosomal regions of the 3R arm of An. gambiae and the homologous arms of the other species
could be responsible for the preservation of the gene
order in evolution. Indeed, a recent study has shown
that fragility of certain regions rather than functional
constraints plays the main role in nonuniform distribution of inversions in Drosophila chromosomes [24]. If

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

this is the case in mosquitoes, than the distribution of
breakpoints is lineage-specific on 2R and evolutionary
conserved on the 3R arm of An. gambiae and the homologous arms of the other species. Our previous study has
found that the 2R arm has the highest density of regions
involved in segmental duplications that clustered in the
breakpoint-rich zone of the arm. In contrast, the slower
evolving 2L, 3R, and 3L, arms were enriched with
matrix-attachment regions [11]. Future analyses of the
genome sequence in different species will shed light on
the exact mechanism of breakage in each individual
chromosomal arm. Regardless of the mechanism, it is
clear that new rearrangement breaks are more easily
allowable on 2R than on other arms in different mosquito lineages, thus, contributing to the arm-specific differences in rates of chromosomal evolution in
Anopheles.

Page 12 of 17

[26] programs were utilized to calculate inversion distances among An. gambiae, An. stephensi, and An.
funestus (Additional file 3). The MGR program is available at http://www.cs.ucsd.edu/groups/bioinformatics/
MGR. The signed option of the MGR program was
used. This program implements an algorithm that minimizes the sum of the rearrangements over all the edges
of the phylogenetic tree [25]. The GRIMM program
(unsigned option) was used to perform a pair-wise analysis of rearrangements [26]. GRIMM software uses the
Hannenhalli and Pevzner algorithms for computing the
minimum number of rearrangement events and for finding optimal scenarios for transforming one genome into
another (http://grimm.ucsd.edu/GRIMM/). These algorithms use gene order information to estimate rearrangement distances.
Chromosome preparation and visualization of inversions

Conclusions
Our study demonstrated that polymorphic inversions on
the 2R arm nonrandomly captured similar sets of genes
in An. gambiae, An. funestus, and An. stephensi. This
finding suggests that natural selection favors specific
gene combinations within polymorphic inversions when
distant species are exposed to similar environmental
pressures. This knowledge could be useful for the discovery of genes responsible for an association of inversion polymorphisms with ecological adaptations in
multiple species. We also found that the autosomal
arms differ in their tolerance to disruption of syntenic
blocks during mosquito evolution. The arm 2R has the
highest level of inversion fixation among autosomal
arms and the highest tolerance to disruption of syntenic
blocks in evolution of subgenus Cellia. In contrast, the
3R arm of An. gambiae and homologous arms of the
other species have few inversions and the lowest tolerance to disruption of syntenic blocks. All syntenic
blocks found on this arm in two mosquito species were
also preserved in the third species. Therefore, the distribution of breakpoint regions tends to be evolutionary
conserved on slowly evolving arms and lineage-specific
on rapidly evolving arms. These data support the chromosomal arm specificity in rates of gene order disruption during mosquito evolution.
Methods
Calculation of rearrangement distances

The sequences of cDNA and BAC clones physically
mapped to polytene chromosomes of An. funestus and
An. stephensi were used to identify homologous
sequences in the An. gambiae genome through BLASTN
and BLASTX algorithms available at VectorBase [40] in
our previous study [11]. The MGR [25] and GRIMM

Ovaries from the An. gambiae half-gravid females prefixed in Carnoy’s fixative solution were dissected in 50%
propionic acid under a Leica MZ6 dissection microscope
(Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany). A
cover slide was placed on the follicles and pressed to
squash the cells. The banding pattern of polytene chromosomes was examined using Olympus CX-41 phasecontrast microscope (x1000) (Olympus America Inc.,
Melville, NY, USA). Slides with good chromosomal preparations were dipped in liquid nitrogen, then cover
slips were removed and slides were dehydrated in 50%,
70%, 95%, and 100% ethanol. Preparations with polymorphic inversions were imaged with an Olympus QColor 5 camera and Q-Imaging software (Olympus
America Inc., Melville, NY, USA). The chromosomal
inversions were identified using a standard cytogenetic
map for An. gambiae [41].
Analysis of presence of common markers within
polymorphic inversions of distant species

To assess the functional impact of shared genes on the
genomic inversions, we begin by assessing the rate of
accumulation of genes in inverted regions. If these genes
have no bearing on inversions, we would expect the
density of the genes located in these regions to be uniformly distributed throughout the genome. Our analysis
centers on identifying regions of the genome that exhibit
hot and cold spots for interaction. To test independence
of markers, we compared the observed number of
shared genes, in inverted regions, to those that would be
expected under pure chance. Under the hypothesis that
the genes are distributed due to pure chance, identically
classified genes would be uniformly and independently
distributed across a pair of chromosome arms (each
from different species, which share the same genes).

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Hence, if the inverted region, on each chromosome,
accounts for the fraction pi(1) , and pj(2) of the chromosome in species 1 and 2, respectively, for shared genes
(i,j), then the probability that genes would be shared
strictly by chance is p(1) pj(2). Therefore, given N total
i
homologous gene markers, the expected number of
shared genes, under pure chance, is
(1) (2)

Ei,j = Npi pj

.
For each inverted region, indexed by shared genes (i,j),
(O i,j - E i,j ) 2 /E i,j represents a discrepancy between the
expected and observed number (O i,j) of shared genes.
The statistic
(Oi,j − Ei,j )2
Ei,j

X2 =
i,j

has an c distribution when the sample size (N) is
large. We use this framework to test if the genes are distributed in a manner consistent with the null hypothesis.
While the test statistic has an asymptotic c2 distribution,
the small sample sizes may yield inaccurate p-values. To
simulate the distribution, we reposition each gene pair
(i,j) on each of the corresponding gene arms, uniformly
on each arm. For each stochastic realization, we count
(O(s)) the number of (stochastically repositioned) genes
i,j
that fall in the regions corresponding to gene pair (i,j).
Summing the test statistic ((O(s) − Ei,j )2 /Ei,j) over each
i,j
gene pair yields a random draw from the null distribution. We approximate the full distribution using 10,000
random draws and compare our test statistic, based on
the observed quantities (Oi,j, for all (i,j)-pairs). The fraction of random draws which exceed our observed test
statistic closely approximates the true p-value, without
any asymptotic assumptions.
To further study the observed arrangement of shared
polymorphisms, we estimate the multiplicative rate at
which gene sharing (for each (i,j)-pair) occurs above or
below which is explainable at random. Below, we
describe a Bayesian model for estimating these rates.
Under the hypothesis that these regions arise uniformly
and independently, the expected number of such shared
genes is

Page 13 of 17

We use a Binomial sampling model, with mean
(1) (2)

ρi,j = (λi,j + μi,j )Npi pj , for measuring the abundance
of shared genes (i,j), between species.
In the main text, we let (gi,j = l i,j + μi,j ) for ease of
explanation. We explain the parameters in this model
below. We let li,j > 0 be a unit-less intensity parameter
measuring the over/under abundance of shared genes,
based solely on the interdependence of genes (i,j), and
let μi,j correspond to an additional random effect for the
shared polymorphism being additionally hot (μi,j > 0),
additionally cold (μi,j > 0), or neutral (μi,j = 0). Explicitly, li,j models the average shared gene intensity, and
μi,j models any additional hot or cold intensity.
Since shared inversion regions are not necessarily
independent (i.e. li,jand li,j, both depend on gene j in
species 2), we factor the gene specific rate of influence
by each region, and let
(1)

λi,j = λi

2

(1) (2)

Npi pj ,

where p(1) , and pj(2) are the respective fraction of the
i
total genome length for species 1 and 2. Again, N represents the total number of homologous gene markers.

(2)

• λj ,

where λi(1) and λj(2) are marginal intensities corresponding to genes i and j, in their respective species. To
create an identifiable model, we arbitrarily set λ(1) = 1.
i
Hence, interpretation of the marginal intensity of gene
connectivity is made solely through ratios of the form
(k)

λi

(k )

λj (k,k’ Î {1,2}), which indicate the relative inten-

sity of gene i (in species k), to gene j (in species k’).
The random effects term μi,j allows for additional variation in the intensity of shared polymorphisms, which
can relate to extra cold (μ i,j < 0), or hot (μ i,j > 0)
regions. This term accounts for the increase/decrease in
shared polymorphisms, not accounted for by the averaging over gene intensities given by li,j.
The random effect model, for additional hot or cold
intensities, follows as:
p(μi,j ) = p0 δ(μi,j = 0)
+pH N(μi,j |μH, σ )δ({μi,j , μH } > 0)
+pC N(μi,j |μC , σ )δ({μi,j , μC } < 0),

where δ(condition) is an indicator function, taking on
the value 1 if the condition is true, and 0 otherwise. N
(μi,j|μH,s)δ({μi,j,μH} > 0) and N(μi,j|μC,s)δ({μi,j,μC} < 0)
represent Normal density functions, constrained to be
positive or negative, depending on if the shared polymorphisms is exceedingly hot or cold. Under our scenario, mixing weights (p0, pH, pc) are unknown, as are
the mean hot and cold temperatures: μ H and μ C ,
respectively.
Naturally, p0 + pH + pC = 1. While this model has a
rich set of parameters, the overall model is identified

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

due to the strong joint dependency in the parameter set.
That is, λi(1) and λj(2) are identified by the average gene
intensity, in species 1 and 2, respectively. The μi,j’s are
identified by the extreme over and under distribution of
shared polymorphisms which are not explained by
(1) (2)
λi,j = λi λj .
Given observed gene counts (O i,j ) for each shared
inversion region, the likelihood function follows as:
o

L( |O) ∝

ρi,ji,j (1 − ρi,j )N−oi,j p(μi,j )
i

j
(1) (2)

(1) (2)

where ρi,j = (λi λj + μi,j )Npi pj , and Δ and O
represent the matrices of intensity parameters, and associated counts of shared genes, for all (i,j) pairs. To estimate the unknown intensity parameters, we rely on a
Bayesian inferential framework. Priors were selected as
marginal reference priors. We describe these as follows.
For each li,j we let:
p(λi,j =

(1) (2)
(1) (2)
(λi λj )|pi , pj )

(1) (2) (1) (2)

∝ [λi λj pi pj ]1/2−1 (1

= Beta( 1 , 1 )
2 2
(1) (2) (1) (2) 1/2−1
− [λi λj pi pj ])
.

.
We note that this prior is a global measure on the
probability of observing shared polymorphisms between
genes (i,j), given the fractional gene lengths p(1) , pj(2).
i
Such a structure will have nearly optimal frequency coverage properties (see [42] for details). For the mean hot
and cold temperatures in the random effects compartment of the model, we specify p(μH) = p(μC)∝1. For the
mixing weights, we let p(p0) = 0.99, and p(pH) = (pC) =
0.005. We have chosen this structure so that only very
large deviations from the gene neutral model (μi,j = 0)
are declared hot or cold.
We focus on interpreting the joint quantities gi,j = li,j
+ μi,j, through their proximity to 1. That is, values of gi,j
= li,j + μi,j close to 1 will support that genes are shared
at random, for region (i,j). On the other hand, very high
(and low) values will demonstrate and over (and under)
accumulation of such genes. The relative over (or
under) connectedness of individual genes can easily be
(k)

made by considering the ratios λi

(k )

λj

Parameters were estimated using Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) [43]. Chains were burned in for
1,000,000 iterations, and used an additional 100,000
samples for estimation. Visual assessments of trace plots
showed the chains had all reached stationarity. Multiple
runs were made, starting from various distant locations
in order to ensure convergence.
To analyze the level of gene sharing outside inverted
regions, relative to that inside the inversion regions, we

Page 14 of 17

consider the average rate of connectivity (as compared
to expected) of outside regions:
N (1)
i∈out
/

γi,out +
N(1)

+

N (2)
j∈out γout,j
/
N(2) + 1

+ γout,out

,

where gi,out, gout,j, and gout,out denote the rates corresponding to outside the inversion regions on their
respective arms. N (1) and N (2) denote the number of
inverted regions on their respective arms. The sums are
explicitly indexed over regions inside inversion regions
which have connections between all outside regions.
The average rate of connectivity (as compared to
expected) within the inverted regions follows as:
N (1) ×N (2)
γi,j
i,j∈out
/
.
(1) × N (2)
N

By taking the ratio of these average rates:
N (i)
i∈out
/

N (j)
j∈out
/
N (i) ×N (j)
i,j∈out
/

γi,out +

×

γout,j + γout,out
γi,j

N × N(j)
,
N(i) + N(j) + 1
(i)

we obtain a measure of how under (or over) connected the regions outside the inversions are compared
to those within the inverted regions. Ratios near 1,
demonstrate similar levels of connectivity, whereas
under connectivity in the outside regions are demonstrated by ratios <1, and over connectivity in the outside
regions are shown by ratios >1. Bayesian posterior
assessments of these ratios are easily computed given
our MCMC samples corresponding to each gene pair.
Analysis of the rates of gene order disruption

We identified two types of conserved blocks of genes: (i)
blocks that were conserved among all three species
(fully conserved blocks) and (ii) blocks that were conserved between two species but were disrupted in the
third species (partially conserved blocks). To analyze the
rate of gene order disruption, between An. stephensi and
An. funestus, with An. gambiae, it is necessary to consider the process that describes such genetic disruptions.
Since these three separated species were descendants of
some common species, at some point in time, each species had complete preservation of gene order with
respect to the other two species. We denote this time by
t 0 = 0. This time represents the most recent time for
which all three lineages can be mapped back to their
most recent common ancestor. Through time, after
these three species speciated, each of their respective
genomes evolved at different rates, which resulted in
sets of disruptions between the species groups. For

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

discrete time points (t 0 <t 1 < ··· <t c) (t c is the current
state of time), these disruptions appeared, resulting in a
lower level of arm-specific preservation of gene order.
This process of disruption accumulation is illustrated in
Additional file 7, from which we observed that through
time the length of the conserved blocks decrease with
increased frequency. While we do not get to see this
progression through time, we do observe the level of
conservation at time tc. If this process were allowed to
continue for an infinite amount of time, all blocks
would eventually be disrupted. We note that our schematic only illustrates the basic idea, since inversions
typically alter the location of the conserved blocks. In
this analysis, we are concerned with how this process
changes for each of the chromosome arms:{2R, 2L, 3R,
3L}. Since the disrupted blocks are accumulating
through time, we account for both the number of conserved blocks and the length of each block at the current time (t c ). We model the number and length of
blocks using a compound Poisson process, where the
number of conserved blocks follows a Poisson process
and where the length of the chromosomal arm scales
the rate of the process; a separate process governs each
conserved block’s length. Formally, for each arm j Î
{2R, 2L, 3R, 3L}, with total chromosome length Lj, we
model this process by
N(Lj )

Rj =

bi,j ,
i=1

Where the number of observed blocks (N(Lj)) follows
a Poisson process, and bi,j denotes each individual block
length and R j denotes the total length of conserved
blocks on arm j (either fully conserved blocks, partially
conserved blocks or both simultaneously), which is computed by the sum of individual block lengths on arm j.
Specifically, we let
(λj Lj )n
n
bi,j ∼ exp(γj /Lj ),

Pr(N(Lj ) = n) = eλj Lj

where the arm-specific parameters l j and g j define
rates for the counting and length process, respectively.
For the counting process, we have that
E[N(Lj )] = λj Lj ,

for the block length process, gj is interpreted as the
per-unit-length rate of accumulation of blocks. Hence,
larger values of gj indicate longer block lengths, whereas,
for the block counting process, larger values of lj will
correspond to a higher quantity of blocks. It should be
noted that the process is conditioned on the length of
each chromosome (L j ), which induces conditional

Page 15 of 17

independence. However, marginally N(Lj), and bi,j are
not assumed to be independent.
The individual lengths bi,j are scaled to the total arm
length, so that
E[bi,j ] = Lj /γj

models the fraction of each arm that is occupied by a
block. Alternatively, the length of all conserved blocks
follows the distribution
Nj

bi,j ∼ Gamma(N(Lj ), γj /Lj ),

Rj =
i=1

so that E[R j ] = N(L j )L j /g j . We consider the simple
summary of the compound process
E[N(Lj )] λj γj
=
,
E[Rj ]Lj
Lj

that has the arm-specific interpretation of blocks per
region length per total length.
On its own, the number of blocks per region length
shows the density of conserved blocks within the conserved portion of each arm. Because each arm is of different length, we summarize our inferences by scaling this
density to the total length of each arm. High values correspond to short blocks and/or high counts. Specifically,
which rate is high (counts or lengths) is indistinguishable
for our purposes. Hence, when summarizing results, it is
convenient to think about lj, gj, and the above equation
together. Our primary question is if the level of conserved disruptions accumulates at a rate different from
that for fully conserved blocks. For this, we fit the process
on both fully conserved and partially conserved blocks,
and those pertaining to only fully conserved blocks. The
parameter sets associated with each of the respective processes are denoted (λ(c+d) , γj(c+d) ) and (λ(c) , γj(c) ) reprej
j
senting the partially conserved and fully conserved
processes. Other parameterizations are justifiable; however, due to the sparsity in disrupted blocks on some
arms, we prefer this parameterization. For both processes, posterior summaries (rate expectations and 95%
credible intervals) are displayed in Table 3.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Physically and in silico mapped DNA markers in
the An. gambiae, An. funestus, and An. stephensi genomes. The
markers used for calculating inversion distances among An. stephensi, An.
gambiae, and An. funestus are highlighted by yellow on 2R, green on 2L,
teal on 3R and gray on 3L arms of An. gambiae. The genomic
coordinates of polymorphic inversions are show for 2La and 2Rj in bold
black, for 2Rb in green bold font, for 2Rc in red bold font, for 2Ru in blue
bold font. The genomic coordinates of overlapping polymorphic
inversions are show for 2Rd by underline and for 2Rbk in italic font.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Additional file 2: Comparative mapping of the chromosomes X of
An. gambiae, An. funestus, and An. stephensi. Arrows denote oriented
conserved gene orders between An. gambiae and An. stephensi. Shaded
divisions on the An. gambiae chromosome denote the genomic
coordinates in this species. The centromere regions are shown by black
circles at the end of the chromosomes.
Additional file 3: Calculation of rearrangement distances using the
MGR and GRIMM programs.

Page 16 of 17

7.
8.

9.

Additional file 4: Occurrence of DNA markers inside and outside of
polymorphic inversions in An. stephensi and An. gambiae.

10.

Additional file 5: Occurrence of DNA markers inside and outside of
polymorphic inversions in An. funestus and An. gambiae.

11.

Additional file 6: Presence of common markers within polymorphic
inversions of distant species. The probabilities (top numbers in cells)
that the shared intensity is greater than 1, and shared intensity rate with
corresponding 95% probability interval.
Additional file 7: Schematic illustration of the process of
accumulation of disrupted gene orders. S - An. stephensi, G - An.
gambiae, F - An. funestus, t - time.

Abbreviations
GRIMM: Genome Rearrangements In Man and Mouse; MCMC: Markov Chain
Monte Carlo; MGR: Multiple Genome Rearrangements.
Acknowledgements
We thank Diego Ayala and Mark Kirkpatrick for helpful comments on the
manuscript. Insightful comments from three anonymous reviewers and
associate editor helped to improve the manuscript. We thank Melissa Wade
for editing the text. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health
grants 1R21AI081023 and 5R21AI074729 (to I.V.S).
Author details
1
Department of Entomology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
2
Department of Statistics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA. 3Current
Address: Entomology department, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing,
210095, P.R. of China.
Authors’ contributions
IVS designed research; IVS, AX, MVS, and SCL performed research; SCL,
contributed new analytic tools; IVS, AX, MVS, and SCL analyzed data; IVS and
SCL wrote the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

Received: 24 June 2010 Accepted: 7 April 2011 Published: 7 April 2011
21.
References
1. Noor MA, Garfield DA, Schaeffer SW, Machado CA: Divergence between
the Drosophila pseudoobscura and D. persimilis genome sequences in
relation to chromosomal inversions. Genetics 2007, 177:1417-1428.
2. Hoffmann AA, Rieseberg L: Revisiting the impact of inversions in
evolution: from population genetic markers to drivers of adaptive shifts
and speciation? Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 2008,
39:21-42.
3. Feder JL, Nosil P: Chromosomal inversions and species differences: when
are genes affecting adaptive divergence and reproductive isolation
expected to reside within inversions? Evolution 2009, 63:3061-3075.
4. Rego C, Balanya J, Fragata I, Matos M, Rezende EL, Santos M: Clinal
patterns of chromosomal inversion polymorphisms in Drosophila
subobscura are partly associated with thermal preferences and heat
stress resistance. Evolution 2010, 64:385-397.
5. Bartolome C, Charlesworth B: Rates and patterns of chromosomal
evolution in Drosophila pseudoobscura and D. miranda. Genetics 2006,
173:779-791.
6. Llorente B, Malpertuy A, Neuveglise C, de Montigny J, Aigle M,
Artiguenave F, Blandin G, Bolotin-Fukuhara M, Bon E, Brottier P, et al:
Genomic exploration of the hemiascomycetous yeasts: 18. Comparative

22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

analysis of chromosome maps and synteny with Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. FEBS Lett 2000, 487:101-112.
Gonzalez J, Casals F, Ruiz A: Testing chromosomal phylogenies and
inversion breakpoint reuse in Drosophila. Genetics 2007, 175:167-177.
Ranz JM, Maurin D, Chan YS, von Grotthuss M, Hillier LW, Roote J,
Ashburner M, Bergman CM: Principles of genome evolution in the
Drosophila melanogaster species group. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e152.
Larkin DM, Pape G, Donthu R, Auvil L, Welge M, Lewin HA: Breakpoint
regions and homologous synteny blocks in chromosomes have different
evolutionary histories. Genome Res 2009, 19:770-777.
Devos KM: Grass genome organization and evolution. Curr Opin Plant Biol
2010, 13:139-145.
Xia A, Sharakhova M, Leman S, Tu Z, Bailey J, Smith C, Sharakhov IV:
Genome landscape and evolutionary plasticity of chromosomes in
malaria mosquitoes. PLoS ONE 2010, 5:e10592.
Sharakhov IV, Serazin AC, Grushko OG, Dana A, Lobo N, Hillenmeyer ME,
Westerman R, Romero-Severson J, Costantini C, Sagnon N, et al: Inversions
and gene order shuffling in Anopheles gambiae and A. funestus. Science
2002, 298:182-185.
Pombi M, Caputo B, Simard F, Di Deco MA, Coluzzi M, della Torre A,
Costantini C, Besansky NJ, Petrarca V: Chromosomal plasticity and
evolutionary potential in the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae sensu
stricto: insights from three decades of rare paracentric inversions. BMC
Evol Biol 2008, 8:309.
Coluzzi M, Sabatini A, della Torre A, Di Deco MA, Petrarca V: A polytene
chromosome analysis of the Anopheles gambiae species complex. Science
2002, 298:1415-1418.
Coluzzi M, Di Deco M, Cancrini G: Chromosomal inversions in Anopheles
stephensi. Parassitologia 1973, 15:129-136.
Mahmood F, Sakai RK: Inversion polymorphisms in natural populations of
Anopheles stephensi. Can J Genet Cytol 1984, 26:538-546.
Costantini C, Sagnon N, Ilboudo-Sanogo E, Coluzzi M, Boccolini D:
Chromosomal and bionomic heterogeneities suggest incipient
speciation in Anopheles funestus from Burkina Faso. Parassitologia 1999,
41:595-611.
Sharakhov I, Braginets O, Grushko O, Cohuet A, Guelbeogo WM,
Boccolini D, Weill M, Costantini C, Sagnon N, Fontenille D, et al: A
microsatellite map of the African human malaria vector Anopheles
funestus. J Hered 2004, 95:29-34.
Cohuet A, Dia I, Simard F, Raymond M, Rousset F, Antonio-Nkondjio C,
Awono-Ambene PH, Wondji CS, Fontenille D: Gene flow between
chromosomal forms of the malaria vector Anopheles funestus in
Cameroon, Central Africa, and its relevance in malaria fighting. Genetics
2005, 169:301-311.
Ayala D, Costantini C, Ose K, Kamdem GC, Antonio-Nkondjio C, Agbor JP,
Awono-Ambene P, Fontenille D, Simard F: Habitat suitability and
ecological niche profile of major malaria vectors in Cameroon. Malar J
2009, 8:307.
Ayala D, Fontaine MC, Cohuet A, Fontenille D, Vitalis R, Simard F:
Chromosomal inversions, natural selection and adaptation in the malaria
vector Anopheles funestus. Mol Biol Evol 2011, 28:745-58.
Hoffmann AA, Sgro CM, Weeks AR: Chromosomal inversion
polymorphisms and adaptation. Trends Ecol Evol 2004, 19:482-488.
Hurst LD, Pal C, Lercher MJ: The evolutionary dynamics of eukaryotic
gene order. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5:299-310.
von Grotthuss M, Ashburner M, Ranz JM: Fragile regions and not
functional constraints predominate in shaping gene organization in the
genus Drosophila. Genome Res 2010, 20:1084-1096.
Bourque G, Pevzner PA: Genome-scale evolution: reconstructing gene
orders in the ancestral species. Genome Res 2002, 12:26-36.
Tesler G: GRIMM: genome rearrangements web server. Bioinformatics
2002, 18:492-493.
Gayathri Devi K, Shetty J: Chromosomal inversions in Anopheles stephensi
Liston–a malaria mosquito. J Cytol Genet 1992, 27:153-161.
Coulibaly MB, Lobo NF, Fitzpatrick MC, Kern M, Grushko O, Thaner DV,
Traore SF, Collins FH, Besansky NJ: Segmental duplication implicated in the
genesis of inversion 2Rj of Anopheles gambiae. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e849.
White BJ, Cheng C, Sangare D, Lobo NF, Collins FH, Besansky NJ: The
population genomics of trans-specific inversion polymorphisms in
Anopheles gambiae. Genetics 2009, 183:275-288.

Sharakhova et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:91
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/91

Page 17 of 17

30. Sharakhov IV, White BJ, Sharakhova MV, Kayondo J, Lobo NF,
Santolamazza F, Della Torre A, Simard F, Collins FH, Besansky NJ:
Breakpoint structure reveals the unique origin of an interspecific
chromosomal inversion (2La) in the Anopheles gambiae complex. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:6258-6262.
31. Krimbas CB, Powell JR: Introduction. Drosophila Inversion Polymorphism, CRC
Press 1992, 1-52.
32. Orr HA: The probability of parallel evolution. Evolution 2005, 59:216-220.
33. Krzywinski J, Grushko OG, Besansky NJ: Analysis of the complete
mitochondrial DNA from Anopheles funestus: an improved dipteran
mitochondrial genome annotation and a temporal dimension of
mosquito evolution. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2006, 39:417-423.
34. Green C, Hunt R: Interpretation of variation in ovarian polytene
chromosomes of Anopheles funestus Giles, A. parensis Gillies, and A.
aruni? Genetica 1980, 51:187-195.
35. Coluzzi M, Sabatini A, Petrarca V, Di Deco MA: Chromosomal
differentiation and adaptation to human environments in the Anopheles
gambiae complex. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1979, 73:483-497.
36. Blanco E, Pignatelli M, Beltran S, Punset A, Perez-Lluch S, Serras F, Guigo R,
Corominas M: Conserved chromosomal clustering of genes governed by
chromatin regulators in Drosophila. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R134.
37. Bhutkar A, Schaeffer SW, Russo SM, Xu M, Smith TF, Gelbart WM:
Chromosomal rearrangement inferred from comparisons of 12
Drosophila genomes. Genetics 2008, 179:1657-1680.
38. Ng YK, Wu W, Zhang L: Positive correlation between gene coexpression
and positional clustering in the zebrafish genome. BMC Genomics 2009,
10:42.
39. Mongin E, Dewar K, Blanchette M: Long-range regulation is a major
driving force in maintaining genome integrity. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:203.
40. Lawson D, Arensburger P, Atkinson P, Besansky NJ, Bruggner RV, Butler R,
Campbell KS, Christophides GK, Christley S, Dialynas E, et al: VectorBase: a
data resource for invertebrate vector genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37:D583-587.
41. George P, Sharakhova MV, Sharakhov IV: High-resolution cytogenetic map
for the African malaria vector Anopheles gambiae. Insect Mol Biol 2010,
19:675-682.
42. Bernardo JM, Smith AFM: Bayesian Theory. Chichester, Wiley; 1994.
43. Robert , Cassella : Monte Carlo Statistical Methods. New York, Springer;
1999.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-91
Cite this article as: Sharakhova et al.: Arm-specific dynamics of
chromosome evolution in malaria mosquitoes. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2011 11:91.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
