<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Within-species lateral genetic transfer and the evolution of transcriptional regulation in Escherichia coli and Shigella</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-532"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Elizabeth Skippington"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Within-species lateral genetic transfer and the
evolution of transcriptional regulation in
Escherichia coli and Shigella
Elizabeth Skippington and Mark A Ragan*

Abstract
Background: Changes in transcriptional regulation underlie many of the phenotypic differences observed within
and between species of bacteria. Lateral genetic transfer (LGT) can significantly impact the transcription factor (TF)
genes which drive these transcriptional changes. Although much emphasis has been placed on LGT of intact
genes, the units of transfer and recombination do not necessarily correspond to regions delineated by exact gene
boundaries. Here we apply phylogenetic and network-based methods to investigate the relationship between units
of lateral transfer and recombination within the Escherichia coli - Shigella clade and the topological properties of
genes in the E. coli transcriptional regulatory network (TRN).
Results: We carried out a systematic phylogenetic study of genetic transfer among 5282 sets of putatively
orthologous genes from 27 strains belonging to the E. coli - Shigella clade. We then used these results to examine
the evolutionary histories of TF genes, as well as the transcriptional regulation of lateral genes. We found evidence
of LGT in 2655 (50.3%) gene sets: 678 (12.8%) show evidence of recombination breakpoints within the gene
boundaries. Thus, within- and whole- gene lateral transfer is widespread among strains of E. coli and Shigella. We
found that unlike global regulators, which have mostly evolved vertically, neighbour regulators (genes which
regulate adjacent genes on the chromosome) have frequently been subject to transfer within the E. coli - Shigella
clade. At least 56 (62%) of the 90 neighbour regulator gene sets examined show evidence of LGT, 19 (34%) of
which have internal recombination breakpoints. Neighbour regulators show no evidence of co-transfer with their
nearby target genes. Rather, the frequency of recombination breakpoints, and conflicting evolutionary histories
among neighbour regulators and their target genes, suggest that the genomic regions encoding these genes have
been constructed through successive layering of LGT events within the clade. We find no difference in the relative
complexity of regulation (i.e. the number of regulators) of lateral versus vertical genes.
Conclusions: Neighbour regulators show higher frequencies of transfer than other types of regulatory genes. This
implicates the topological properties of regulatory genes in the TRN, and their physical proximity to targets on the
chromosome, as contributing to successful LGT. The prevalence of recombination breakpoints within regulatory
and target gene sets indicates that within-gene transfer has had a significant cumulative effect on the evolution of
regulatory interactions in E. coli and Shigella.

Background
Gene expression is regulated at multiple levels, from
accessibility of DNA through the steps of transcription,
post-transcriptional modification, translation and mRNA
degradation. Transcriptional regulation is a particularly
* Correspondence: m.ragan@imb.uq.edu.au
The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience and
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Bioinformatics, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia

important stage for the control of phenotypic variation
in response to internal or external signals. Transcriptional regulation is largely enacted by transcription factors (TFs) that bind to sites in genomes and, either
alone or in combination with other TFs, thereby activate
or repress the production of mRNA from one or more
target genes. In Escherichia coli K12, 175 TFs which
constitute more than 4% of the protein-coding gene

© 2011 Skippington and Ragan; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

complement have at least one annotated gene-regulatory
interaction [1].
Many TFs fall within one of two broad classes, global
or local, depending on the number of genes they regulate, the cellular processes in which they participate and
their chromosomal location relative to their target genes
[2,3]. Local regulators (also referred to as neighbour regulators) regulate a restricted number of genes that are
in close physical proximity on the chromosome, whereas
global regulators coordinately target large numbers of
genes at multiple locations along the chromosome.
Alternative criteria for defining global regulators have
been presented [2,3].
Like other types of cellular interactions, the transcriptional regulatory interactions of an organism can be
abstracted as a network in which molecules (genes or
proteins) are represented as nodes (vertices) and regulatory interactions as edges. There are many ways in
which transcriptional regulatory networks (TRNs)
evolve, including via modifications to cis-regulatory
regions of gene promoters [4], to the TF proteins themselves and to other trans-acting regulatory factors [5].
Here we focus on modifications to bacterial TRNs that
have arisen via lateral genetic transfer (LGT).
Genomic studies leave no doubt that LGT has played
a pervasive role in the evolution of prokaryotic genomes
and is a significant source of phenotypic innovation
among bacteria [6-9]. Successful LGT comprises a succession of steps: transfer and physical uptake of foreign
DNA into a host new cell; recombination into the main
chromosome, or maintenance on an extrachromosomal
element; integration into genetic regulatory and biomolecular interaction networks; and finally, establishment
in the host population [10]. Cellular networks, including
TRNs, necessarily change and evolve as new genetic
material appears and existing genetic material is overwritten or lost. In particular, newly introgressed lateral
genes must recruit transcriptional regulators to become
better integrated into host-regulatory networks and
ensure appropriate stoichiometric and condition-dependent expression [11-13]. Recent analyses indicate that in
E. coli, global regulators have mostly evolved vertically,
whereas many local regulators have been acquired by
LGT, often concurrently with the gene(s) they regulate
[14]. In addition, E. coli genes of lateral origin exhibit
more-complex regulation (tend to be regulated by more
regulators) than genes which have been inherited vertically [14].
A major limitation of these and other previous studies
of LGT and the evolution of transcription regulation is
that they have taken whole genes as the unit of analysis,
i.e. assumed that genes are transferred intact during
LGT. In doing so, they have overlooked the potential
significance of the transfer of within-gene fragments in

Page 2 of 16

the construction of genomic regions encoding trans-acting regulatory proteins and their targets. LGT does not
necessarily involve genomic regions delineated by exact
gene boundaries [15,16]. Chan et al. [16] reported clear
evidence of one or more recombination breakpoints in
at least 286 (19.6%) of 1462 sets of orthologous genes
across prokaryotes, 134 of which did not show strong
topological incongruence with the reference tree and,
taking entire genes as the unit of analysis, would not be
identified as lateral. A similar proportion of cryptic LGT
was found among 13 Staphylococcus genomes [17].
Assigning entire genes as either vertical or lateral can
thus significantly undervalue the contribution of LGT to
the evolution of cellular networks [18].
Although LGT involving clusters of neighbouring
genes and operons has been a focus of previous work
[19], lateral transfer clearly need not involve genomic
regions delineated by exact gene boundaries [15-17].
Are neighbour TF genes and their nearby target genes
transferred and integrated all at once into the host regulatory networks, as has been suggested, or have these
regions been built up via a succession of transfers?
Estimates of the frequency of LGT can be significantly
affected by the number of genomes being compared and
their relative genetic relatedness. Comparisons among
strains of the same species can therefore be particularly
informative [20]. The E. coli - Shigella clade has been
well-sampled and annotated, with complete genome
sequences of multiple diverse strains now available.
Here we have analyzed 5282 sets of single-copy, putatively orthologous genes from 27 strains of E. coli and
Shigella to determine the extent to which intact genes
and within-gene fragments have been transferred and
recombined within this clade. We report the frequencies
of within- and whole-gene transfer in neighbour and
global regulator gene sets, and examine evidence for
propensity toward co-transfer of neighbour regulators
and their nearby target genes. Finally we explore the
regulation of lateral genes, comparing the regulation of
genes which have been transferred and recombined
intact with the regulation of genes within which gene
fragments have been recombined in LGT.

Results
Lateral genetic transfer in E. coli and Shigella

We began our investigation of the impact of within-species LGT on the evolution of the E. coli TRN with a systematic study of genetic transfer more broadly among
strains belonging to the E. coli - Shigella clade. We analyzed 27 completely sequenced genomes: 20 E. coli genomes and seven genomes belonging to the closely
related genus Shigella. While Shigella species have historically been classified within a separate genus, it is
now generally accepted that the Shigella phenotype

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

evolved multiple times from different E. coli clones and
therefore are part of the E. coli species [21-25]. E. coli
strains have previously been divided into five distinct
ECOR phylogenetic groups (A, B1, B2, D and E) based
on genetic markers [26], and our dataset includes representative from each of these five groups.
We extracted 5282 positionally homologous gene sets
of size N ≥ 4 from a whole-genome alignment of the 27
E. coli and Shigella which was generated using the progressiveMauve program included in MAUVE version
2.3.0 [27]. Positional homology is implied among aligned
regions of the genomes, and the alignment can therefore
be used to extract sets of putative positional homologs
[28]. Nucleotide regions in any given genome are
aligned to any other genome only once. The 5282 gene
sets are therefore restricted to single-copy gene families
and range in size from 4 to 27 members. Using this
approach, paralogous sequences are separated into distinct gene sets, thereby reducing the complications of
paralogy for our LGT inference. Families of size N < 4
were excluded from further analysis as they do not contribute to meaningful phylogenetic inference; as a consequence, we are not able to identify within-clade LGT
affecting families of size N < 4. Figure 1 shows the size
distribution of the 5282 gene sets, and the representation of each of the 27 genomes among these gene sets is
shown in Figure 2. The genome represented in the
smallest number of the gene sets is that of the commensal E. coli Crooks strain (ATCC 8739). A number of
pathogenic E. coli strains are also represented in relatively few of these gene sets: UMN026, APEC01, S88,
UT189, ED1a and 536 are represented in fewer than
3350 families. With the exception of the group D strain
UMN026, all these strains belong to phylogenetic group
B2.
We inferred Bayesian phylogenetic trees [29,30] separately for each of the 5282 E. coli protein sets and

Figure 1 Size distribution of 5282 E. coli - Shigella gene sets.

Page 3 of 16

Figure 2 Representation of 27 E. coli and Shigella strains within
5282 E. coli - Shigella gene sets. E. coli - Shigella reference tree on
the left was reconstructed from 5282 Bayesian protein trees using
matrix representation with parsimony (MRP) [31]. Bars represent the
number of gene sets which contain a gene from the corresponding
genome.

subsequently aggregated all adequately supported bipartitions (those with posterior probability (PP) ≥ 0.95) to
generate an E. coli - Shigella reference tree using matrix
representation with parsimony (MRP) [31]. Of the 287,
315 internal bipartitions in these 5282 individual protein
trees, 113, 101 (39.4%) have posterior probability (PP) ≥
0.95 and were used to compute the MRP tree. The
resulting phylogeny (Figure 3) is our reference hypothesis about the vertical evolutionary relationships among
the 27 E. coli and Shigella. We manually rooted the
MRP tree based on the findings of Touchon et al. [32]
who reconstructed the phylogenetic history of 20 E. coli
and Shigella strains, all of which were included in our
work, using Escherichia fergusonii as an outgroup.
Our MRP tree is remarkably concordant with the E.
coli - Shigella phylogeny reported by Touchon et al.
[32], which was inferred using a maximum likelihood
approach based on 1878 concatenated E. coli - Shigella
core gene sequences (Figure 4). Like the Touchon et al.
tree, our MRP tree reconstructs four of the five ECOR
phylogenetic groups as monophyletic, with only group D
recovered as polyphyletic (Figure 4). Three group D
strains are represented in our MRP tree: two (E. coli
IAI39 and E. coli SMS-3-5) are recovered as closely
related to the group B2 strains, while the third D strain
(E. coli UMN026) forms a clade with Shigella and the
strains belonging to phylogroups A, B1 and E. Only

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Figure 3 E. coli - Shigella reference tree. Aggregate E. coli Shigella reference tree reconstructed from 5282 Bayesian protein
trees using matrix representation with parsimony (MRP) [31]. Colours
indicate membership in E. coli phylogenetic groups.

three bipartitions of our MRP tree are discordant with
the phylogeny recovered by Touchon et al. [32], all of
which occur within the B2 subtree (Figure 4).
Next, using a rigorous two-phase approach [33] we
examined each of the 5282 aligned gene sets for evidence of genetic recombination. As the second phase of
this approach is based on phylogenetic discrepancy,
inference of an internal recombination breakpoint constitutes prima facie evidence of within-gene genetic
transfer in a lineage leading to one or more of these
genes. Following the classification system proposed by
Chan et al. [15], we found clear evidence (class A, B or
C) of recombination breakpoints in 678 gene sets
(12.8% of 5282). We also compared each of the 5282
Bayesian protein trees to the MRP reference tree. Of
the 5282 gene sets, 2440 (46.3%) were found to yield
protein trees discordant with the MRP tree. These protein trees do not share the common phylogenetic signal
in the MRP reference tree and are interpreted as providing putative evidence of LGT within the E. coli - Shigella lineage.
We found evidence for LGT in 2655 (50.3%) gene sets:
678 (12.8%) show evidence of one or more observable
recombination breakpoints within the boundaries of the

Page 4 of 16

gene, while a further 1977 (37.4%) yield protein trees
that are topologically discordant with the reference tree
but do not contain one or more observable recombination breakpoints (Table 1). Using the terminology introduced by Chan et al. [16], we refer to these gene sets as
observable recombination breakpoint positive (ORB+)
and observable recombination breakpoint negative
(ORB-) respectively. The latter represent putative
instances of the lateral transfer of the entire open reading frame (or beyond) within the E. coli - Shigella lineage. Of the 678 gene sets that yielded observable
recombination breakpoints, 215 were found to be not
topologically discordant with the MRP tree.
Subtree prune-and-regraft (SPR) operations can be
applied to reconcile topological discordance between
two phylogenetic trees. In an SPR operation, any edge of
a binary tree T (i. e. a tree in which all non-leaf vertices
have degree three) is cut, thereby giving two subtrees T’
and T’’. The subtree T’’ is then regrafted by annealing
the same cut edge to a new vertex in T’ created by the
annealing operation. Each SPR operation can be interpreted as equivalent to an LGT event involving a donor
and recipient lineage. The regrafted edge corresponds to
the donor taxon and the cut edge corresponds to the
recipient taxon. Individual protein trees may be more or
less discordant with the MRP reference topology, i.e.
require different numbers of SPR operations on the
reference tree to reconcile the observed discordance
[6,34]. The minimum number of SPR operations
required to reconcile observed discordance between a
test tree and the reference tree is referred to as its edit
distance. Unfortunately, computing the edit distance
between two unrooted trees is a nondeterministic polynomial-time (NP)-hard problem [35], which in practice
means that for sufficiently large data (here, the number
of sequences related by the tree) it is impossible to
know whether a globally optimal solution has been
found. We were able to recover an edit distance for
2389 (98%) of the 2440 test trees. These distances range
between 1 (1094 trees) and 9 (1 tree); however, more
than 70% of the discordant test trees have an edit distance ≤ 2, indicative of two or fewer transfer events
(Figure 5). Although the extent of discordance is variable across gene sets, instances of discordance implying
more-complex patterns of LGT are in a clear minority.
ORB+ gene sets have a higher edit distance than ORBgene sets (P < 0.001, by Wilcoxon rank sum test; 450
ORB+ gene sets and 1939 ORB- gene sets).
Our results (summarised in Table 1) demonstrate that
within-species LGT plays an important part in the evolution of E. coli - Shigella genomes. As in the 144-genome [16] and Staphylococcus studies [17], a solely
whole-gene approach would have overlooked a major
proportion of LGT. Our next goal was to use these LGT

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Page 5 of 16

Figure 4 MRP E. coli - Shigella reference tree and a previously reported E. coli - Shigella maximum likelihood core phylogeny. Left:
Aggregate MRP phylogenetic tree of 27 E. coli and Shigella strains reconstructed from 5282 Bayesian protein trees. Right: Maximum likelihood
phylogenetic tree of 20 E. coli and Shigella strains reconstructed from the sequences of 1878 genes of the Escherichia core genome (taken
directly from [32]) The B2 subtree, which contains a subset of bipartitions that are discordant between these two trees, is highlighted by a red
box on the MRP tree.

data to assess the contribution of within-species genetic
exchange to TRN network evolution.
Lateral genetic transfer and the transcriptional regulatory
network

A list of E. coli K12 genes encoding TFs, and the corresponding target genes, were extracted from RegulonDB
[36] and used to construct a E. coli K12 TRN. In this
network, the genes are represented as nodes and regulatory interactions as directed edges. The network has
1577 nodes and 3804 edges which encompass 179
unique TF-encoding genes enacting regulation of 1533
target genes; as TF-encoding genes are themselves targets of other TFs, ‘target genes’ and ‘TFs’ are not
mutually exclusive categories.

Among the 179 TF-encoding genes in the reconstructed TRN, 85 (47.5%) were identified as lateral and
another 85 (47.5%) as vertical. A further nine remained
unclassified, as it was not possible to carry out phylogenetic analysis on the corresponding gene sets (see Methods). We calculated the out-degree and betweenness of
the TF-encoding nodes to assess whether LGT and nonLGT nodes occupy different positions in the TRN. Outdegree is the number of target genes regulated by a
given TF node, and betweenness measures the frequency
at which a given node lies on the shortest path between
any pair of nodes in the network [37]. We found that
vertical TF nodes have higher out-degree than lateral TF
nodes (P = 0.001) and also have higher betweenness (P
= 0.04, both by Wilcoxon rank sum test). Thus, vertical

Table 1 Lateral genetic transfer within the E. coli - Shigella clade.
Category

Observable recombination breakpoint
(s)

No observable recombination breakpoint
(s)

Totals

Protein tree discordant with MRP reference tree 463 Within-gene (fragmentary) lateral

1977 Whole-gene lateral

2440

Protein tree concordant with MRP reference
tree

215 Within-gene (fragmentary) lateral

2627 Vertical

2842

Totals

678

4604

5282

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Page 6 of 16

to determine if LGT has affected these different modes
of regulation differently.
Most global regulators evolve vertically within the E. coli
- Shigella clade

Figure 5 Distribution of edit distances for 2389 E. coli - Shigella
protein sets which yielded discordant protein trees. ORB+ gene
sets have a higher edit distance than ORB- gene sets (P < 0.001, by
Wilcoxon rank sum test; 450 ORB+ gene sets and 1939 ORB- gene
sets).

TF nodes regulate larger numbers of target genes and
are found at more-central positions in the TRN than are
lateral TF nodes. This suggests that high centrality may
be a barrier to intra-clade transfer of TF genes; however,
these results need to be interpreted cautiously, as the
out-degree distribution for TF nodes is skewed.
The out-degrees of the nodes of TRNs have previously
been shown to follow a scale-free distribution, characterized by a small proportion of highly connected hub
nodes and a relative large proportion of weakly connected nodes [38]. For example, in the reconstructed E.
coli K12 TRN, the 20 TFs that regulate the largest number of genes enact 2617 (68.8%) of the 3804 regulatory
interactions represented in the network. Given the large
influence of so few regulators, we have followed the
classification system used by Price et al. [14] to assign
regulatory genes into two major categories on the basis
of their corresponding number of target genes: global
regulators, which comprise the 20 TFs that regulate the
largest number of genes, and neighbour regulators,
which regulate adjacent genes in the genome. Eight TF
genes which regulate adjacent genes were excluded from
the list of neighbour regulators because they are global
regulators. Of the 179 unique regulatory genes represented in the network, 22 were assigned as global regulators and 93 as neighbour regulators. A further 64
regulatory genes fell within neither of these two categories and were treated as a third category which we
refer to as other (non-global) regulators. In the following
sections, we examine the evolutionary histories of regulatory genes in each of these three categories separately

We found that gene sets coding for global regulators are
less likely than other protein-coding genes to yield discordant protein trees (P = 0.001) and are also less likely
to be ORB+ (P = 0.048, both by Fisher’s exact test).
Among the 22 global regulatory gene sets (two of the 20
global TFs examined are active as heterodimers), only
three were found to yield protein trees that are discordant with our MRP reference tree (Table 2), and none
showed evidence of one or more internal recombination
breakpoints. This indicates that global regulators have
mostly evolved vertically within the E. coli - Shigella
clade.
Here we have assigned regulators as global on the
basis of their corresponding number of target genes, but
this definition excludes TFs that are encoded by genes
that are less well-connected in the network but are
nonetheless important for cell fitness. Martínez-Antonio
and Collado-Vides [2] have identified an alternative set
of E. coli global TFs based on expanded criteria which
included, among others, the variety of conditions under
which the regulator exerts control. Seven TFs in E. coli
satisfy all global TF criteria outlined by Martínez-Antonio and Collado-Vides [2] (CRP, FNR, ArcA, LRP, FIS,
IHF and H-NS). A second tier consisting of nine E. coli
regulators was also identified that, while less-connected
in the network, were considered important for cell fitness (NarL, Fur, CpxR, PhoB, PurR, Rob, DgsA (formerly Mlc), CspA, SoxR). This set of regulators includes
five TFs (PurR, Rob, DgsA (formerly Mlc), CspA, SoxR)
that were not included in the set of global regulators we
identified on the basis of their number of target genes.
Among all 16 E. coli global TFs identified by MartínezAntonio and Collado-Vides [2], only three yield protein
trees that are discordant with MRP reference tree, and
none shows evidence of one or more internal recombination breakpoints (Table 3). Thus, even under an alternative definition of ‘global’, these regulators have mostly
evolved vertically and are not subject to within-gene
transfer. These findings confirm and extend a previous
report that in E. coli global regulators are less susceptible to LGT than other regulatory genes [14].
Neighbour regulators have frequently been transferred
both intact and as within-gene fragments between strains
of E. coli and Shigella

In contrast to global regulators (which, as we have just
seen, have mostly evolved vertically within the E. coli Shigella clade), we found evidence for LGT in at least

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Page 7 of 16

Table 2 Lateral genetic transfer of global regulators within the E. coli - Shigella clade.
TF
Gene coding
name for the TF

Blattner
number

Number of
target genes

Is the corresponding protein tree concordant or
discordant with the E. coli - Shigella MRP tree?

Evidence for internal
recombination breakpoint(s)?

CRP

crp

b3357

435

Concordant

No

FNR
Fis

fnr
fis

b1334
b3261

282
225

Concordant
Concordant

No
No

IHF

ihfA

b1712

217

Concordant

No

IHF

ihfB

b0912

217

Discordant

No

ArcA

arcA

b4401

158

Concordant

No

H-NS

hns

b1237

144

Concordant

No

NarL

narL

b1221

114

Concordant

No

Lrp

lrp

b0889

97

Concordant

No

Fur
nsrR

fur
nsrR

b0683
b4178

85
84

Concordant
Concordant

No
No

FlhDC flhD

b1892

79

Concordant

No

FlhDC flhC

b1891

79

Concordant

No

CpxR

cpxR

b3912

56

Concordant

No

LexA

lexA

b4043

55

Concordant

No

NarP

narP

b2193

49

Concordant

No

ModE modE

b0761

47

Discordant

No

NtrC
FruR

b3868
b0080

44
40

Discordant
Concordant

No
No

glnG
fruR

ArgR

argR

b3237

38

Concordant

No

PhoP

phoP

b1130

37

Concordant

No

PhoB

phoB

b0399

37

Concordant

No

Global regulators are the 20 TFs that regulate the largest number of genes in the E. coli K12 TRN.

Table 3 Lateral genetic transfer of global regulators within the E. coli - Shigella clade using an alternative definition of
‘global regulator’.
TF
Gene coding
name for the TF

Blattner
number

Number of
target genes

Is the corresponding protein tree concordant or
discordant with the E. coli - Shigella MRP tree?

Evidence for internal
recombination breakpoint(s)?

CRP

crp

b3357

435

Concordant

No

FNR

fnr

b1334

282

Concordant

No

Fis

fis

b3261

225

Concordant

No

IHF

ihfA

b1712

217

Concordant

No

IHF

ihfB

b0912

217

Discordant

No

ArcA

arcA

b4401

158

Concordant

No

H-NS

hns

b1237

144

Concordant

No

Lrp
NarL

lrp
narL

b0889
b1221

97
114

Concordant
Concordant

No
No

Fur

fur

b0683

85

Concordant

No

CpxR

cpxR

b3912

56

Concordant

No

PhoB

phoB

b0399

37

Concordant

No

PurR

purR

b1658

31

Concordant

No

Rob

rob

b4396

18

Concordant

No

DgsA
(Mlc)

dgsA

b1594

10

Discordant

No

CspA

cspA

b3556

3

Concordant

No

SoxR

soxR

b4063

3

Discordant

No

Definition of a global regulator as given in [2].

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Page 8 of 16

Table 4 Lateral genetic transfer of neighbour regulators within the E. coli - Shigella clade.
Category

Observable recombination breakpoint
(s)

No observable recombination breakpoint
(s)

Totals

Protein tree discordant with MRP reference tree 12 Within-gene (fragmentary) lateral

37 Whole-gene lateral

49

Protein tree concordant with MRP reference
tree

7 Within-gene (fragmentary) lateral

34 Vertical

41

Totals

19

71

90

56 (62%) of the 90 neighbour regulator gene sets of size
N ≥ 4: 19 (34%) of these were found to be ORB+, while
a further 37 (41%) yielded protein trees that are topologically discordant with the reference tree but are ORB(Table 4). These sets of neighbour regulator genes are
more likely than other protein-coding genes to have
experienced within-clade LGT (P = 0.01, by Fisher’s
exact test). The proportion of neighbour regulators that
yield discordant protein trees (49 of 90, 54%) is comparable to the proportion for all protein-coding genes
(2440 of 5282, 46.2%) (the proportions are not significantly different: P = 0.1, by Fisher’s exact test); however,
neighbour regulator gene sets are more likely to be ORB
+ than are other protein-coding genes (P = 0.02, by
Fisher’s exact test).
ORB- instances of putative LGT involving neighbour
regulator gene sets are almost twice as common as ORB
+ instances. Thus the incorporation of intact neighbour
regulators is more frequent than recombination involving within-gene fragments. Neighbour regulator gene
sets were more likely to show evidence of LGT than
other non-global regulatory gene sets (Table 5) (P =
0.03) and were also more likely to be ORB+ (P = 0.02,
both by Fisher’s exact test). The proportion of neighbour regulator gene sets that yield discordant protein
trees (49 of 90, 54%) is comparable to that of other
non-global regulators (24 of 58, 41%) (the proportions
are not significantly different: P = 0.1, by Fisher’s exact
test). LGT of global, neighbour and other non-global
regulators is summarised in Figure 6.
Function of the gene product (here, a protein) is correlated with relative susceptibility, or resistance, to LGT.
In particular, genes involved in DNA replication, transcription and translation (informational genes) have
been shown to be less susceptible to transfer than are

genes participating in housekeeping functions such as
controlling energy metabolism and the biosynthesis of
nucleotides and amino acids (operational genes) [39,40].
To examine possible functional bias pertaining to the
high frequency of LGT among neighbour regulator protein sets, we used annotations from The J. Craig Venter
Institute (JCVI) Comprehensive Microbial Resource
http://cmr.jcvi.org/ to assign a functional category to all
protein-coding genes in E. coli K12. We then compared
the functions of genes regulated by global, neighbour
and other (non-global) regulators. Figure 7 shows, for
each functional category, the proportion of genes regulated by each type of regulator (global, neighbour and
other) compared to its frequency among the full set of
4149 E. coli K12 protein-coding genes.
Genes regulated by at least one neighbour regulatory
gene are significantly over- or underrepresented in ten
(more than half) of the JCVI functional categories
(Hypothetical proteins; Transport and binding proteins;
Energy metabolism; Biosynthesis of cofactors, Prosthetic
groups, and carriers; Protein fate; Regulatory functions;
Mobile and extrachromosomal element functions;
Unclassified; Protein synthesis; and Viral functions). Four
of these ten functional categories are correspondingly
over- or underrepresented for the sets of genes regulated by global and other (non-global) regulators
(Hypothetical proteins; Energy Metabolism; Protein fate;
and Mobile and extrachromosomal element functions).
We did not observe any functional categories to be
overrepresented for genes regulated by neighbour regulators but underrepresented in genes regulated by global
or other regulators. Biosynthesis of cofactors, prosthetic
groups, and carriers is the only functional category
underrepresented for genes regulated by neighbour regulators but overrepresented for genes regulated by other

Table 5 Lateral genetic transfer of other regulators within the E. coli - Shigella clade.
Category

Observable recombination breakpoint
(s)

No observable recombination breakpoint
(s)

Totals

Protein tree (amino acid) discordant with
reference

2 Within-gene (fragmentary) lateral

22 Whole-gene lateral

24

Protein tree (amino acid) concordant with
reference

2 Within-gene (fragmentary) lateral

32 Vertical

34

Totals

4

54

58

Other regulators are the regulatory gene sets which fall within neither the neighbour or global regulator categories.

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Page 9 of 16

Figure 6 Lateral transfer of TF genes within the E. coli - Shigella clade. TFs were separated into three main groups: global regulators,
neighbour regulators and other regulators. TF-encoding gene sets that yielded proteins trees that were discordant with the MRP reference tree
and/or were ORB+ were classified as LGT, whereas gene sets that yielded concordant protein trees and had no recombination breakpoints
within the gene boundaries were classified as non-LGT. The LGT genes were further divided into two groups: ORB+ and ORB-.

regulators; however, given the relatively small proportion of E. coli K12 genes that fall within this category it
is not likely to be a significant source of functional bias.
These results suggest that the differences between the
transfer frequencies of global, neighbour and other
(non-global) regulatory genes are not due to the function of the genes they regulate.
Neighbour regulators and their target genes evolve
independently via LGT within the E. coli - Shigella clade

We next examined the phylogenetic histories of neighbour regulators and their nearby target genes to determine if there is a propensity toward co-transfer of the
elements involved in neighbour regulatory interactions
(Figure 8). We introduce the term regulatory neighbourhood to describe the set of adjacent target genes whose
expression is directly modulated by a given neighbour
regulator. Each regulatory neighbourhood encodes a set
of collinear genes which includes a TF-encoding gene
that regulates all other genes in the neighbourhood. TF

genes may be upstream or downstream of their regulatory targets. We consider the neighbour regulator itself
part of the regulatory neighbourhood even if autoregulation is not present. The number of regulated genes in
the regulatory neighbourhoods investigated here varies
widely. While many TF-encoding genes regulate only
one adjacent target gene, others regulate many: the gene
encoding TF FhlA, for example, regulates 14 collinear
target genes adjacent on the E. coli K12 chromosome
(Figure 8).
If a neighbour regulator and its nearby target genes
have been co-transferred within the E. coli - Shigella
lineage, we would expect that each of the gene sets in
the regulatory neighbourhood will yield protein trees
that are topologically discordant with the MRP reference
tree and that support the same evolutionary history of E.
coli and Shigella strains. In the case of recent co-transfer
we would expect all genes in the neighbourhood to be
ORB-. Alternatively, a more-ancestral co-transfer could
be followed by successive within-region LGT events

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Page 10 of 16

Figure 7 Distribution of genes among JCVI functional categories for E. coli K12 genes. Shown for each functional category are proportions
of genes regulated by global regulators, by neighbour regulators, and by other non-global regulators. Those significantly over- or
underrepresented (P < 0.05, by Fisher’s exact test) vis-a-vis their frequency in the full set of E. coli K12 genes are marked with an asterisk.

which over time superimpose DNA onto the previously
incorporated region. In such cases, we would expect
regulatory neighbourhoods to be frequently interrupted
by internal recombination breakpoints.
In total, there are 93 neighbour regulator gene sets
corresponding to 90 unique regulatory neighbourhoods
(three regulatory neighbourhoods encode more than one
TF which regulates the same set of nearby target genes).
Among the 37 neighbour regulators found to be ORB-,
only seven belong to regulatory neighbourhoods composed exclusively of ORB- genes; of these seven, none
contains gene sets that all support the same (protein)
evolutionary history. Moreover, 56 (62%) of these 90
regulatory neighbourhoods contain at least one observable recombination breakpoint. This suggests that regulatory neighbourhoods are probably not co-transferred as
genomic stretches of collinear intact genes, or if they

are, co-transfer has often been followed by successive
layering of LGT events within the region. One possible
scenario is LGT of the regulatory neighbourhood into
the E. coli - Shigella lineage from an external clade, followed by transfer of within-neighbourhood gene fragments within the lineage. Only four of the 93
neighbourhoods investigated show no evidence of transfer within the E. coli - Shigella lineage, suggesting that
LGT has been very important in the evolution of these
regions.
Price et al. [14] reported that in E. coli, many neighbour regulatory genes have been acquired by LGT, often
simultaneously with the gene(s) they regulate. In contrast, we found no evidence to suggest that genes participating in neighbour regulatory interactions are
constrained to co-transfer within the E. coli - Shigella.
These authors used genes as the unit of analysis; here

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Page 11 of 16

Figure 8 Evolutionary histories of neighbour regulators and their nearby target genes. Shown here is a schematic representation of 93
regulatory neighbourhoods. Genes encoding TFs are represented as circles and the corresponding nearby target genes of the TF as squares.
Genes are coloured accordingly: non-LGT genes are red, ORB+ genes are dark blue, ORB- genes light blue and genes for which LGT information
is not available are white. ‘Non-LGT’ refers to gene sets that yielded a phylogeny that was concordant with the E. coli - Shigella reference tree
and had no recombination breakpoints within the gene boundaries.

we find 19 (21%) of 90 neighbour regulator gene sets
examined to be ORB+. Our finding that regulatory
neighbourhoods have been frequently interrupted by
internal recombination breakpoints suggests the DNA
has been successively superimposed onto these regions.
Such layering of LGT events may defy analysis, as signatures of ancestral co-transfer of neighbour regulators
and their target genes have been overwritten. Our findings extend an earlier report that bacterial TFs do not
usually co-evolve with their regulated genes [41].
Regulation of LGT genes is no more complex than
regulation of non-LGT genes

Network representations of transcriptional regulation
have previously revealed that, on average, each target
gene is regulated by two TFs [42-44]. We examined the
regulation of LGT genes to determine if they are more
or less likely than other genes to be regulated by multiple TFs. We found genes transferred within the E. coli Shigella clade, and genes which have evolved vertically
within the lineage, have a comparable number of regulators (P = 0.3, by the Wilcoxon rank-sum test) (Figure
9). This suggests that, at least in this case, genetic transfer among closely related strains is not constrained by
relative complexity of regulation. This result is in contrast to a previous report by Price et al. [14] that genes

of lateral origin exhibit more-complex regulation (tend
to be regulated by more regulators) than non-LGT
genes. The authors hypothesized that many LGT genes
are niche-specific and therefore require more-complex
regulation.
To account for these contrasting results, we note a
number of differences between the Price et al. study and
ours. Price et al. [14] focused on the evolutionary period
since the divergence of E. coli from Shewanella, and
included lateral transfers into the lineage from external
clades, whereas we focus only on transfers within E. coli
and Shigella. As mentioned above, Price et al. [14] took
whole genes as their units as analysis for LGT identification. We examined the regulation of ORB+ genes to
determine if they are any more or less likely than genes
which have been transferred intact to be regulated by
multiple regulators, and found no difference in the relative complexity of regulation of ORB+ and ORB- lateral
gene sets (P = 0.96, by the Wilcoxon rank sum test)
(Figure 9).

Discussion
Gene regulation at the level of transcriptional control
involves a complex network of regulatory interactions,
one aspect of which is clearly demonstrated by the combinatorial control of individual genes by multiple TFs

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Figure 9 Regulation of genes which have been laterally
transferred within the E. coli - Shigella clade. Genes without
regulation and genes belonging to families of size N < 4 are not
included. Top: ‘Non-LGT’ refers to gene sets that yielded a
phylogeny that was concordant with the E. coli - Shigella reference
tree and had no recombination breakpoints within the gene
boundaries. ‘LGT’ refers to gene sets that were found to be ORB+
and/or yielded a protein tree that was discordant with the reference
tree. LGT genes show no evidence of having more regulators than
non-LGT genes (P = 0.3, by Wilcoxon rank sum test; 803 LGT genes
and 592 non-LGT genes). Bottom: ORB- genes and ORB+ genes
show no difference in the number of genes they are regulated by
(P = 0.96, by Wilcoxon rank sum test; 250 ORB+ genes and 553
ORB- genes).

(Figure 9). How lateral genes connect into such complex
networks has remained an open issue [18], although
some general network properties of laterally transferred
genes have been identified by intersecting public network data with lists of genes detected as lateral based
on methods which assume genes are transferred as
intact units [13,14,45].
Here we inferred 678 (12.8%) of 5282 E. coli - Shigella
orthologous protein-coding gene sets to be ORB+: 215
(31.7%) of these yielded protein trees that were concordant with the E. coli - Shigella MRP tree. Thus, had we
carried out our phylogenetic analysis of LGT based on
entire genes only, we would have missed more than 30%
of the lateral signal introduced by within-gene LGT and
more than 8% (215 of 2655 lateral gene sets) of all lateral signal within the clade. The importance of accounting for within-gene transfer is even more-striking in the

Page 12 of 16

subset of protein-coding E. coli - Shigella gene sets that
code for TFs, where almost 40% of ORB+ gene sets
yield a protein tree concordant with the reference tree.
Among the 170 TF genes for which we could construct
a phylogenetic tree, 23 were inferred to be ORB+, of
which 9 (39%) were recovered as topologically concordant with the reference. Clearly, a complete picture of
how LGT genes connect into TRNs requires consideration of the impact of both whole- and within-gene
transfer on individual regulators and their target genes.
Although detection of recombination breakpoints
within gene sets has provided a more-comprehensive
view of the lateral signal in E. coli - Shigella, certain
caveats are in order. Foremost, we identified LGT only
among lineages of E. coli and Shigella, i.e. our analysis
does not identify foreign genes or gene fragments
acquired laterally from outside the clade. Second, we did
not attempt to identify donor or recipient lineages for
genes identified as whole- or within-gene lateral; here,
this would have required the identification of all possible
SPR operations that resolve observed discordance
between a discordant protein tree and the MRP reference tree. In many cases, multiple unique minimum
SPR paths are possible and the actual historical one cannot be determined [6,34]. It is even more complicated to
match donor and recipient lineages where there has
been successive layering of LGT events, as seems likely
where we infer multiple recombination breakpoints
within a gene set or neighbourhood.
Global and neighbour regulators play distinct regulatory roles. Our results confirm that these different roles
imply specific constraints on the evolvability of these
regulators. Most global regulators were found to evolve
vertically. In the rare case that a global regulator exhibited evidence of transfer within the E. coli - Shigella
clade, it appeared to have been transferred intact. In
contrast, 56 (62%) of the 90 neighbour regulator gene
sets for which we could construct phylogenetic trees
showed evidence of LGT, and 19 (34%) of these 56
showed evidence of within-gene transfer. It is apparent
that these different modes of regulation (i.e. global versus neighbour regulation) evolve in a very different
manner, at least with respect to lateral transfers within
the E. coli - Shigella clade.
If laterally acquired genetic material is to avoid being
silenced and become fixed in its new host, its expression
must be appropriately regulated and the gene products
it encodes must interact successfully with host systems.
In the case of genes encoding proteins which act as regulators, this includes establishing regulation of appropriate targets. It is striking that neighbour regulators have
undergone more-frequent lateral genetic transfer than
other non-global regulators. This suggests that lateral
regulators that have introgressed near their target genes

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

have a higher probability to become fixed within the
recipient. A possible explanation is that physical proximity to target genes, in the immediate term, provides an
advantage for the establishment of regulatory interactions following introgression of lateral regulators.
Co-transfer of TF genes with their targets might alleviate at least some of the difficulties associated with
integration into TRNs, as this would provide a means
for efficient transcriptional regulation in the short term
following introgression [18]; however, we found no evidence that neighbour regulators are transferred with
their nearby target genes. In fact, neighbour regulators
and their target genes appear to evolve independently
via LGT within the E. coli - Shigella clade. Regulatory
neighbourhoods are frequently interrupted by internal
recombination breakpoints, and consist of genomic
regions with conflicting evolutionary histories. This is
most readily explained by these regions having been
constructed through successive superimposed LGT
events which overwrite more-ancestral lateral signal and
thereby complicate, or even defy, analysis. By the same
token, we cannot rule out the possibility that ancestral
co-transfers have been overwritten by subsequent LGT
within regulatory neighbourhoods.
We found no difference in the relative complexity of
regulation (i.e. the number of regulators) of lateral versus vertical genes: relative complexity of regulation does
not appear to be a barrier to lateral transfer within the
E. coli - Shigella clade. Although homologous replacement of a gene fragment, rather than transfer of an
intact gene, might avoid some of the problems associated with recruitment of transcriptional regulators following introgression into the recipient genome [18], we
found no evidence to suggest a difference in the relative
complexity of regulation (i.e. number of TF regulators)
of whole-gene LGT genes and within-gene LGT genes.
These results are important because they suggest that
relative complexity of regulation does not govern the
impact of within-species LGT on TRNs.

Conclusions
Our results demonstrate that the transfer of both intact
genes and within-gene fragments has been frequent
within the E. coli - Shigella clade. As more than 30% of
ORB+ gene sets do not yield discordant trees, the frequency of LGT within the clade would have been significantly underestimated by a phylogenetic study that
assumed intact genes as the unit of genetic transfer. We
assessed the relative contribution of within- and wholegene transfer to the evolution of individual regulators
and their target genes as a necessary step toward understanding how lateral genes connect into TRNs and contribute to overall TRN evolution. It is clear that a

Page 13 of 16

substantial proportion of the individual gene components of TRNs have been subject to LGT within the E.
coli - Shigella clade, and that different modes of regulation are impacted by LGT differently. We found that
global regulators have mostly evolved vertically, and
neighbour regulators have frequently been subject to
genetic transfer within the E. coli - Shigella clade. Comparing genetic transfer in neighbour regulator and other
non-global regulator genes sets, we observed a lower
frequency in the latter. Given these findings, future
work is well positioned to extend the questions asked
here to consider how the lateral transfer of genetic
material among more distantly related organisms contributes to TRN evolution and if this differs from the
impact of LGT among strains of the same species.

Methods
Inference of gene sets

Twenty-seven completely sequenced E. coli and Shigella
genomes were downloaded from the NCBI ftp server
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Ftp/. A whole-genome
alignment of the complete E. coli and Shigella genomes
and four additional draft genomes (E. coli 101-1, E. coli
F11, E. coli O157H7 str EC440 and Shigella sp D9) was
performed using the progressiveMauve algorithm of the
MAUVE program version 2.3.0 [27] with default parameter settings. We then extracted sets of positionally
homologous protein-coding genes for the 27 complete
genome sequences from the alignment using the
MAUVE ‘export orthologs’ function. The draft genomes
were included in the initial alignment to provide better
representation of the strains across the species; however,
we did not include sequences from these genomes in
our sets of positional homologs as annotation of these
genomes was incomplete and we wanted to only include
annotated protein-coding genes. In total, 5282 sets of
putatively orthologous protein-coding genes of size N ≥
4 were inferred. We refer to these sets interchangeably
as protein or gene sets if one or the other term is not
required by context.
Alignment and phylogenetic tree construction

The amino acid sequences corresponding to the 5282
protein sets (families) of size N ≥ 4 were extracted from
GenBank and aligned using ProbCons [46] with default
parameter settings. Following alignment, ambiguously
aligned regions of the alignments were removed using
GBLOCKS version 0.91b [47] with the following parameter settings: minimum number of sequences for a
conserved position (n/2)+1; minimum number of
sequences for a flank position (n/2)+1; maximum number of contiguous; non-conserved positions 50; minimum length of a block 5; and all gap positions allowed,

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

where n is the total number of sequences in the aligned
data set. These relaxed settings preserve large fractions
of most alignments.
Bayesian phylogenetic inference was used to construct
individual protein-family trees from the protein alignments and was carried out using MrBayes version 3.1.2
[29,30]. Ten alternative models of sequence change
(Jones, Dayhoff, mtREV, MtMam, WAG, RtREV,
CpREV, VT, Blosum, Equalin) were assigned a prior
probability of 0.10 each. Inference was carried out using
four Markov chains, run with default heating parameters
and three of the four chains “heated”. The heating parameter was fixed at 0.5. Protein sets with < 14 sequences
were run for 1 million generations each, while sets with
≥ 14 sequences were run for 5 million generations each.
All analyses used a burn-in of 50000 generations, and
tree space was sampled every 100 generations.
Reference E. coli - Shigella tree

The E. coli - Shigella reference tree was constructed
using matrix representation with parsimony (MRP) [31].
The MRP input matrix was generated by recoding as
character states all bipartitions among the 5282 individual Bayesian proteins trees that satisfy PP ≥ 0.95. The
MRP reference tree was then computed from the matrix
using the PARS program included in the PHYLIP package [48]. The reference tree was rooted on the edge
connecting the B2 phylogenetic group and two group D
strains with the remaining strains of the E. coli - Shigella species. This rooting is supported by a previous
reconstruction of the E. coli - Shigella phylogenetic history which used closely related Escherichia fergusonii as
an outgroup [32]. We accepted the resulting fully bifurcating topology as our reference E. coli - Shigella tree.
Tree views were produced using Interactive Tree Of
Life [49]
Inference of discordant protein trees

To compare each of the 5282 protein trees with the
reference topology we used the EEEP program [6,34]
with a bootstrap collapse threshold of 95% (i.e. considering only nodes with PP ≥ 95%) and a strict reference
tree ratchet (-rR). EEEP identifies discordance between a
test tree and a reference tree and infers, when possible,
edits paths which reconcile observed instances of discordance. Protein trees that were identified as topologically
discordant with the E. coli - Shigella reference by EEEP
were considered to provide prima facie evidence of the
lateral transfer within the E. coli - Shigella clade of one
or more genes belonging to the corresponding gene set.
For protein trees which do not meet our criteria for discordance, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of concordance implying vertical inheritance.

Page 14 of 16

Inference of recombination breakpoints

For detection of recombination in nucleotide sequences,
we implemented the two-phase strategy described by
Chan et al. [33]. First, the amino acid alignments corresponding to the 5282 protein sets were computationally
reverse-translated to nucleotide alignments using the
corresponding nucleotide sequences from GenBank
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. Three statistical measures
[50-52] were then used to detect preliminary evidence
of phylogenetic discrepancies within each set. Where a
minimum of two of these three statistical tests revealed
high significance of phylogenetic discrepancy across
sites in an alignment (p-value < 0.1), potential recombination was inferred and that gene set was passed to the
second phase, the phylogenetically based but computationally intensive DualBrothers [53]. We used the
DualBrothers parameter value settings and the classification system described by Chan et al. [15] to identify
sequence sets presenting clear evidence of recombination breakpoints within the gene boundaries. Inference
of one or more recombination breakpoints has been
interpreted as evidence of within-gene genetic transfer
of one or more genes in the corresponding gene set
[15].
Network construction

A network representation of E. coli K12 transcriptional
regulation was constructed using data obtained from
RegulonDB (Release: 6.8, downloaded September 2010)
[36]. More specifically, TF-target gene interactions were
extracted from RegulonDB files network_tf_gene.txt and
network_tf_tf.txt. All nodes in the resulting network
represent genes; an edge is drawn from gene Gl to gene
G2 if Gl encodes a TF that enacts regulation of G2.
After removing RNA genes and obsolete genes, the final
TRN consisted of 179 TF-encoding genes, 1533 target
genes and 3, 804 regulatory interactions between them.
A few of the TFs are active as heterodimers; in these
cases, we included a node for each of the sub-unit
encoding genes. Nine of the 179 TF-encoding genes present in the reconstructed E. coli K12 transcriptional regulation network did not go forward to phylogenetic
analysis: six of these genes belong to protein sets of size
N < 4, and thus do not contribute to meaningful phylogentic inference, while the remaining three were not
annotated in the E. coli K12 MG1655 genome downloaded from NCBI.
Definition of neighbour regulator

A custom python script was written to identify neighbour regulators, which we define as TF-encoding genes
that regulate target genes which are encoded immediately adjacent on the chromosome. Applying this simple

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

criterion, we identify 93 neighbour regulators. Adjacent
heterodimer-encoding genes that regulate each other
but no additional adjacent genes were excluded from
the list of neighbour regulators.
Functional analysis

For functional analysis of regulated target genes, all E.
coli K12 protein-coding genes were assigned to a JCVI
functional category. A role identifier (Mainrole) for each
gene was retrieved from the JCVI Comprehensive
Microbial Resource website http://cmr.jcvi.org/.
List of abbreviations
(TF): Transcription Factor; (TRN): Transcriptional Regulatory Network; (LGT):
Lateral Genetic Transfer; (PP): Posterior Probability; (SPR): Subtree Prune-andRegraft; (ORB+): Observable Recombination Breakpoint positive; (ORB-):
Observable Recombination Breakpoint negative.
Acknowledgements and Funding
We thank Aaron Darling for providing the 31-way E. coli - Shigella Mauve
alignment and for helpful discussions regarding inference of positional
homologs using Mauve. We also thank Cheong Xin Chan, who kindly
provided scripts for breakpoint detection, and Thomas Huber for helpful
discussions. We acknowledge the support of the Australian Research Council
grant CE0348221. E.S. is supported by an Australian Postgraduate Award and
a Queensland Government Smart State PhD Scholarship. Phylogenetic
analyses were performed using high-performance computing resources of
the National Computational Infrastructure (NCI) National Facility at the
Australian National University.
Authors’ contributions
ES and MAR designed the research, analysed data and wrote the paper. ES
performed the research. ES and MAR read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 22 August 2011 Accepted: 29 October 2011
Published: 29 October 2011
References
1. Gama-Castro S, Salgado H, Peralta-Gil M, Santos-Zavaleta A, MuñizRascado L, Solano-Lira H, Jimenez-Jacinto V, Weiss V, García-Sotelo JS,
López-Fuentes A, Porrón-Sotelo L, Alquicira-Hernández S, Medina-Rivera A,
Martínez-Flores I, Alquicira-Hernández K, Martínez-Adame R, BonavidesMartínez C, Miranda-Ríos J, Huerta AM, Mendoza-Vargas A, Collado-Torres L,
Taboada B, Vega-Alvarado L, Olvera M, Olvera L, Grande R, Morett E,
Collado-Vides J: RegulonDB version 7.0: transcriptional regulation of
Escherichia coli K-12 integrated within genetic sensory response units
(Gensor Units). Nucleic Acids Res 2011, 39(Database):D98-105.
2. Martínez-Antonio A, Collado-Vides J: Identifying global regulators in
transcriptional regulatory networks in bacteria. Curr Opin Microbiol 2003,
6(5):482-489.
3. Gottesman S: Bacterial regulation - global regulatory networks. Annu Rev
Genet 1984, 18:415-441.
4. Wray GA: The evolutionary significance of cis-regulatory mutations. Nat
Rev Genet 2007, 8(3):206-216.
5. Wagner GP, Lynch VJ: The gene regulatory logic of transcription factor
evolution. Trends Ecol Evol 2008, 23(7):377-385.
6. Beiko RG, Harlow TJ, Ragan MA: Highways of gene sharing in prokaryotes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(40):14332-14337.
7. Ochman H, Lawrence JG, Groisman EA: Lateral gene transfer and the
nature of bacterial innovation. Nature 2000, 405(6784):299-304.
8. Doolittle WF: Phylogenetic classification and the universal tree. Science
1999, 284(5423):2124-2128.
9. Lerat E, Daubin V, Ochman H, Moran NA: Evolutionary origins of genomic
repertoires in bacteria. PLoS Biol 2005, 3(5):807-814.

Page 15 of 16

10. Skippington E, Ragan MA: Lateral genetic transfer and the construction of
genetic exchange communities. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2011, 35(5):707-735.
11. Navarre WW, McClelland M, Libby SJ, Fang FC: Silencing of xenogeneic
DNA by H-NS - facilitation of lateral gene transfer in bacteria by a
defense system that recognizes foreign DNA. Genes Dev 2007,
21(12):1456-1471.
12. Wellner A, Lurie MN, Gophna U: Complexity, connectivity, and
duplicability as barriers to lateral gene transfer. Genome Biol 2007, 8(8):
R156.
13. Lercher MJ, Pál C: Integration of horizontally transferred genes into
regulatory interaction networks takes many million years. Mol Biol Evol
2008, 25(3):559-567.
14. Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP: Horizontal gene transfer and the evolution
of transcriptional regulation in Escherichia coli. Genome Biol 2008, 9(1):R4.
15. Chan CX, Darling AE, Beiko RG, Ragan MA: Are protein domains modules
of lateral genetic transfer? PLoS ONE 2009, 4(2):e4524.
16. Chan CX, Beiko RG, Darling AE, Ragan MA: Lateral transfer of genes and
gene fragments in prokaryotes. Genome Biol Evol 2009, 1:429-438.
17. Chan CX, Beiko RG, Ragan MA: Lateral transfer of genes and gene
fragments in Staphylococcus extends beyond mobile elements. J Bacteriol
2011, 193(15):3964-3977.
18. Ragan MA, Beiko RG: Lateral genetic transfer: open issues. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009, 364(1527):2241-2251.
19. Lawrence JG, Roth JR: Selfish operons: Horizontal transfer may drive the
evolution of gene clusters. Genetics 1996, 143(4):1843-1860.
20. Zhaxybayeva O, Doolittle WF: Lateral gene transfer. Curr Biol 2011, 21(7):
R242-246.
21. Pupo GM, Karaolis DKR, Lan RT, Reeves PR: Evolutionary relationships
among pathogenic and nonpathogenic Escherichia coli strains inferred
from multilocus enzyme electrophoresis and mdh sequence studies.
Infect Immun 1997, 65(7):2685-2692.
22. Pupo GM, Lan RT, Reeves PR: Multiple independent origins of Shigella
clones of Escherichia coli and convergent evolution of many of their
characteristics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97(19):10567-10572.
23. Ochman H, Whittam TS, Caugant DA, Selander RK: Enzyme polymorphism
and genetic population structure in Escherichia coli and Shigella. J Gen
Microbiol 1983, 129(9):2715-2726.
24. Rolland K, Lambert-Zechovsky N, Picard B, Denamur E: Shigella and
enteroinvasive Escherichia coli strains are derived from distinct ancestral
strains of E. coli. Microbiology 1998, 144(9):2667-2672.
25. Escobar-Páramo P, Giudicelli C, Parsot C, Denamur E: The evolutionary
history of Shigella and enteroinvasive Escherichia coli revised. J Mol Evol
2003, 57(2):140-148.
26. Gordon DM, Clermont O, Tolley H, Denamur E: Assigning Escherichia coli
strains to phylogenetic groups: multi-locus sequence typing versus the
PCR triplex method. Environ Microbiol 2008, 10(10):2484-2496.
27. Darling ACE, Mau B, Blattner FR, Perna NT: Mauve: Multiple alignment of
conserved genomic sequence with rearrangements. Genome Res 2004,
14(7):1394-1403.
28. Darling AE, Mau B, Perna NT: progressiveMauve: Multiple Genome
Alignment with Gene Gain, Loss and Rearrangement. PloS ONE 2010,
5(6):e11147.
29. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F, Nielsen R, Bollback JP: Bayesian inference of
phylogeny and its impact on evolutionary biology. Science 2001,
294(5550):2310-2314.
30. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(8):754-755.
31. Ragan MA: Phylogenetic inference based on matrix representation of
trees. Mol Phylogenet Evol 1992, 1(1):53-58.
32. Touchon M, Hoede C, Tenaillon O, Barbe V, Baeriswyl S, Bidet P, Bingen E,
Bonacorsi S, Bouchier C, Bouvet O, Calteau A, Chiapello H, Clermont O,
Cruveiller S, Danchin A, Diard M, Dossat C, Karoui ME, Frapy E, Garry L,
Ghigo JM, Gilles AM, Johnson J, Le Bouguénec C, Lescat M, Mangenot S,
Martinez-Jéhanne V, Matic I, Nassif X, Oztas S, Petit MA, Pichon C, Rouy R,
Ruf CS, Schneider D, Tourret J, Vacherie B, Vallenet D, Médigue C, Rocha EP,
Denamur E: Organised genome dynamics in the Escherichia coli species
results in highly diverse adaptive paths. PLoS Genet 2009, 5(1):e1000344.
33. Chan CX, Beiko RG, Ragan MA: A two-phase strategy for detecting
recombination in nucleotide sequences. S Afr Comput J 2007, 38:20-27.
34. Beiko RG, Hamilton N: Phylogenetic identification of lateral genetic
transfer events. BMC Evol Biol 2006, 6:15.

Skippington and Ragan BMC Genomics 2011, 12:532
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/532

Page 16 of 16

35. Hickey G, Dehne F, Rau-Chaplin A, Blouin C: SPR distance computation for
unrooted trees. Evol Bioinform Online 2008, 4:17-27.
36. Gama-Castro S, Jiménez-Jacinto V, Peralta-Gil M, Santos-Zavaleta A,
Peñaloza-Spinola MI, Contreras-Moreira B, Segura-Salazar J, Muñiz-Rascado L,
Martínez-Flores I, Salgado H, Bonavides-Martínez C, Abreu-Goodger C,
Rodríguez-Penagos C, Miranda-Ríos J, Morett E, Merino E, Huerta AM,
Treviño-Quintanilla L, Collado-Vides J: RegulonDB (version 6.0): gene
regulation model of Escherichia coli K-12 beyond transcription, active
(experimental) annotated promoters and Textpresso navigation. Nucleic
Acids Res 2008, 36(Database):D120-D124.
37. Zhu XW, Gerstein M, Snyder M: Getting connected: analysis and principles
of biological networks. Genes Dev 2007, 21(9):1010-1024.
38. Babu MM, Luscombe NM, Aravind L, Gerstein M, Teichmann SA: Structure
and evolution of transcriptional regulatory networks. Curr Opin Struct Biol
2004, 14(3):283-291.
39. Jain R, Rivera MC, Lake JA: Horizontal gene transfer among genomes: The
complexity hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96(7):3801-3806.
40. Rivera MC, Jain R, Moore JE, Lake JA: Genomic evidence for two
functionally distinct gene classes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998,
95(11):6239-6244.
41. Lozada-Chávez I, Janga SC, Collado-Vides J: Bacterial regulatory networks
are extremely flexible in evolution. Nucleic Acids Res 2006,
34(16):4654-4654.
42. Balleza E, López-Bojorquez LN, Martínez-Antonio A, Resendis-Antonio O,
Lozada-Chávez I, Balderas-Martínez YI, Encarnación S, Collado-Vides J:
Regulation by transcription factors in bacteria: beyond description. FEMS
Microbiol Rev 2009, 33(1):133-151.
43. Albert R: Scale-free networks in cell biology. J Cell Sci 2005,
118(21):4947-4957.
44. Aldana M, Balleza E, Kauffman S, Resendiz O: Robustness and evolvability
in genetic regulatory networks. J Theor Biol 2007, 245(3):433-448.
45. Davids W, Zhang ZL: The impact of horizontal gene transfer in shaping
operons and protein interaction networks - direct evidence of
preferential attachment. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:23.
46. Do CB, Mahabhashyam MSP, Brudno M, Batzoglou S: ProbCons:
Probabilistic consistency-based multiple sequence alignment. Genome
Res 2005, 15(2):330-340.
47. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17(4):540-552.
48. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP–phylogeny inference package (Version 3.2).
Cladistics 1989, 5:164-166.
49. Letunic I, Bork P: Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL): an online tool for
phylogenetic tree display and annotation. Bioinformatics 2007,
23(1):127-128.
50. Jakobsen IB, Easteal S: A program for calculating and displaying
compatibility matrices as an aid in determining reticulate evolution in
molecular sequences. Comput Appl Biosci 1996, 12(4):291-295.
51. Bruen TC, Philippe H, Bryant D: A simple and robust statistical test for
detecting the presence of recombination. Genetics 2006,
172(4):2665-2681.
52. Maynard Smith J: Analyzing the mosaic structure of genes. J Mol Evol
1992, 34(2):126-129.
53. Minin VN, Dorman KS, Fang F, Suchard MA: Dual multiple change-point
model leads to more accurate recombination detection. Bioinformatics
2005, 21(13):3034-3042.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-532
Cite this article as: Skippington and Ragan: Within-species lateral
genetic transfer and the evolution of transcriptional regulation in
Escherichia coli and Shigella. BMC Genomics 2011 12:532.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
