<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>From learning taxonomies to phylogenetic learning: Integration of 16S rRNA gene data into FAME-based bacterial classification</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:69. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-69"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Bram Slabbinck"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

From learning taxonomies to phylogenetic
learning: Integration of 16S rRNA gene data into
FAME-based bacterial classification
Bram Slabbinck1,2*, Willem Waegeman2, Peter Dawyndt3, Paul De Vos1,4, Bernard De Baets2

Abstract
Background: Machine learning techniques have shown to improve bacterial species classification based on fatty
acid methyl ester (FAME) data. Nonetheless, FAME analysis has a limited resolution for discrimination of bacteria at
the species level. In this paper, we approach the species classification problem from a taxonomic point of view.
Such a taxonomy or tree is typically obtained by applying clustering algorithms on FAME data or on 16S rRNA
gene data. The knowledge gained from the tree can then be used to evaluate FAME-based classifiers, resulting in a
novel framework for bacterial species classification.
Results: In view of learning in a taxonomic framework, we consider two types of trees. First, a FAME tree is
constructed with a supervised divisive clustering algorithm. Subsequently, based on 16S rRNA gene sequence
analysis, phylogenetic trees are inferred by the NJ and UPGMA methods. In this second approach, the species
classification problem is based on the combination of two different types of data. Herein, 16S rRNA gene sequence
data is used for phylogenetic tree inference and the corresponding binary tree splits are learned based on FAME
data. We call this learning approach ‘phylogenetic learning’. Supervised Random Forest models are developed to
train the classification tasks in a stratified cross-validation setting. In this way, better classification results are
obtained for species that are typically hard to distinguish by a single or flat multi-class classification model.
Conclusions: FAME-based bacterial species classification is successfully evaluated in a taxonomic framework.
Although the proposed approach does not improve the overall accuracy compared to flat multi-class classification,
it has some distinct advantages. First, it has better capabilities for distinguishing species on which flat multi-class
classification fails. Secondly, the hierarchical classification structure allows to easily evaluate and visualize the
resolution of FAME data for the discrimination of bacterial species. Summarized, by phylogenetic learning we are
able to situate and evaluate FAME-based bacterial species classification in a more informative context.

Background
Chromatographic fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) profiling is used in many laboratories for bacterial identification. The fatty acid composition of bacterial species is
genetically conserved and the measured composition is
stable, when highly standardized culture, extraction and
analytical conditions are used. More than 300 fatty acids
have already been found in bacteria. Differences in
chain length, positions of double bonds and the binding
of functional groups make them very useful taxonomic
markers [1,2]. In the last decades, FAME profiling has
* Correspondence: Bram.Slabbinck@UGent.be
1
Laboratory of Microbiology, Ghent University, K.L. Ledeganckstraat 35, 9000
Ghent, Belgium

become a routine method since it is cheap, fast, automated and high-throughput. As a result, many institutes
have set up private FAME databases to store the massively generated numbers of FAME profiles and,
recently, a publicly accessible FAME database has been
realized by some of the present authors [3]. Such databases are an ideal target for data mining and knowledge
discovery. Where bacterial species identification is
usually performed by comparing FAME profiles against
identification libraries with fixed peak percentages,
FAME-based bacterial species identification can be
improved by the application of machine learning techniques [4,5]. However, different numerical studies on the
resolution of FAME analysis for species discrimination

© 2010 Slabbinck et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

have underscored that FAME profiling cannot be used
to discriminate all species from one another [6-9].
Nevertheless, machine learning techniques for multiclass classification are able to maximally exploit the pattern information in the FAME data to delineate the different species that constitute the different classes in this
multi-class classification problem [5].
At present, the gold standard for bacterial species discrimination is a DNA-DNA hybridization (DDH) percentage of 70%. Nonetheless, DDH should be performed
in a polyphasic study of the species because phenotypic
characteristics should agree with this definition [10,11].
Importantly, with the advent of 16S rRNA gene
sequence analysis, Stackebrandt and Goebel [12] showed
that species having 70% or greater DNA similarity
usually correspond to a 16S rRNA gene sequence identity greater than 97%. Furthermore, Konstantinidis and
co-workers evaluated the species definition in the perspective of whole-genome sequence analysis and showed
that the 70% DDH standard correlates with a 95% average nucleotide identity [13,14]. Even though DNA reassociation is the gold standard for circumscribing the
taxonomic rank of species and genome studies flourish,
16S rRNA gene sequence analysis is still widely preferred for species delineation for two important reasons:
16S rRNA gene sequence identity greater than 97% may
indicate a specific species and sequencing the 16S rRNA
gene has become much cheaper and faster due to technological advances. For these reasons, we also focus on
the 16S rRNA gene in this work. It is, however, important to remark that, as a consequence of this explosive
trend of gene sequencing, deposits in the public nucleotide sequence databases have witnessed an exponential
growth. Nonetheless, sequence analysis and phylogenetic
reconstruction studies should rely on high quality
nucleotide sequences. With the exponential growth of
the sequence databases, the number of poor quality
sequences also grows extensively and sequence curation
becomes indispensable. To circumvent manual curation,
the SILVA database project allows users to retrieve
quality controlled and aligned rRNA sequences as stored
in the EMBL sequence database [15]. In relation to this
work, we tackle the bacterial species classification problem by combining the information represented by
aligned 16S rRNA gene SILVA sequences and FAME
profiles. Due to technological advances, both these types
of data can be easily obtained at very low cost. However,
when used alone, FAME data has a limited ability to discriminate among species. Combining the knowledge
contained in FAME profiles and 16S rRNA gene
sequences could overcome some of these limitations.
At present, machine learning papers describing multiclass classification with classes structured in a taxonomy, or thus a tree topology, mainly focus on the area

Page 2 of 16

of web-, document-, text- and ontology-based classification. Many research problems involve multi-furcating
tree nodes, and most papers deal with data instances
primarily corresponding to multiple classes structured in
this kind of hierarchical setting. Classification problems
related to this issue are better known as multi-label classification. In machine learning terms, learning by
exploiting hierarchical structure information is called
hierarchical classification [16-23], learning with taxonomies [24] and structured label learning [25]. However,
these studies do not explicitly involve hierarchical classification for single-label multi-class classification, meaning that each data instance is classified at leaf level.
From another perspective, hierarchical classification has
also been proposed for standard multi-class classification
tasks. In this setting, the idea consists of improving
multi-class classification methods by constructing a tree
of binary classifiers [26-28]. The tree architecture is
defined by the considered data and tree inference is
based on different algorithms for distance calculation
between the considered classes.
In contrast to previous work, where typically a single
type of data was used for bacterial species identification,
we evaluate the integration of taxonomic and phylogenetic knowledge into FAME-based classification models.
To this end, species of the genus Bacillus are considered. We design supervised machine learning techniques
to automatically discriminate FAME profiles of bacteria
at species level, in a hierarchical classification setting
where the labels correspond to the different species. In
particular, clustering methods define the taxonomic or
phylogenic tree in a first stage and Random Forest (RF)
classifiers are trained on FAME profiles in these trees in
a second stage. Two different strategies for the integration of taxonomic and phylogenetic knowledge are
investigated. As a proof-of-concept, we consider the
integration of relationships between species solely based
on FAME data. Herein, a FAME tree is constructed by
divisive clustering and evaluated for hierarchical multiclass classification. In the core part of this paper, we
consider knowledge integration from the perspective of
bacterial phylogeny. Using 16S rRNA gene sequence
analysis, phylogenetic trees are constructed and subsequently used for hierarchical single-label multi-class
classification, in which FAME data serve as input. This
last strategy is further referred to as phylogenetic learning, an approach that combines two types of data: 16S
rRNA gene data is considered to incorporate phylogenetic knowledge in the form of a hierarchy or tree and
the hierarchically ordered classifiers are constructed
based on FAME data. Our tests indicate that this new
approach resolves some of the classification tasks that
classifiers only based on FAME data could not achieve.
In relation to other work, the use of phylogenetic tree

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

information has already been considered for classification of protein-protein interaction [29] and multi-class
classification in a taxonomic context has already been
performed based on genomic sequence data [30,31].
However, the incorporation of phylogenetic information
in hierarchical classification models for bacterial species
has not been investigated so far.

Results and Discussion
Because FAME data does not allow for a global discrimination of bacterial species, we tackle the bacterial species classification problem by combining FAME data
with taxonomic or phylogenetic knowledge. Therefore,
within the framework of bacterial taxonomy, an interesting direction for subsequent machine learning research
is that of integrating this knowledge. This is easily
achieved by learning in a hierarchical scheme or an
inferred tree. Two approaches are considered: tree inference by FAME data and inference of phylogenetic trees
based on 16S rRNA gene sequences. In this paper, we
evaluate the integration of these two particular types of
knowledge into the FAME-based bacterial species classification problem.
Learning taxonomies

As a first step, we investigated the possibility of reconstructing a small part of the phylogenetic structure of
the genus Bacillus by FAME data and RFs. Divisive clustering with classifier performance as splitting criterion
gives rise to a particular tree. In this tree, the different
species are hierarchically ordered by similarities in the
FAME data. In the resulting top-down approach, all
possible splits between species or classes are initially
considered in the root node and, subsequently, the split
corresponding to the highest RF accuracy is chosen.
Recursively, the same splitting procedure is performed
on the corresponding subsets of the initial data set.
Since the data set consists of a small number of FAME
profiles for the majority of species, we preferred to use a
divisive clustering algorithm over an agglomerative clustering algorithm. The latter approach has as disadvantage that it builds a tree in a bottom-up manner, so
that, in our setting, the clustering at leaf level could be
obtained from the results of unreliable classifiers (due to
a small number of FAME profiles for many species).
Conversely, we chose to work top-down with a divisive
clustering algorithm, because we wanted to avoid this
type of instability in the tree construction phase. Initially, we performed a proof-of-concept experiment based
on a small data set of 15 species, as selected from the
original data set. Only species corresponding to a large
number (at least 11) of FAME profiles were selected.
About half of the selected species belong to the two
known Bacillus species groups, the Bacillus cereus
group and the Bacillus subtilis group. Hierarchical

Page 3 of 16

divisive clustering starts in the root node with the training and evaluation of 16383 RF classifiers. In subsequent
steps of the clustering algorithm, classifier training
becomes less time-consuming, because the number of
trained classifiers decreases exponentially for the
remaining subtrees. In the end, a total number of 18589
classifiers were trained. The computing time to build
and evaluate the complete species hierarchy was 65 h 10
m 22 s. By this initial experiment, we evaluated whether
a FAME tree constructed with divisive clustering indeed
reveals the relations between the species of the different
species groups. Figure 1 shows the resulting tree, in
which no branch lengths are specified and AUC values
of the RF classifiers are given at each internal node. The
species representing the Bacillus cereus group or the
Bacillus subtilis group are clearly clustered together
under the same parent nodes. The two groups are
coloured in blue and green, respectively.
Consequently, one can conclude that FAME data
allows to discriminate between both species groups. We
did not expect such a result because of the large number of combinations and the high similarities between
the FAME profiles. However, this experiment clearly
shows that RFs take advantage of the relatedness
between species and/or groups of species. Consequently,
building a FAME tree using classification techniques as
treeing method could be a good base for further knowledge integration. Therefore, we evaluated the tree constructed from the different RF models also as a
hierarchical classification scheme. This classification task
follows the main strategy as reported by [26-28]. Subsequent to the construction of the tree, a RF classifier is
retrained at each node of the tree, so that now the different classifier parameters are optimized by a grid
search, as mentioned in the subsection Divisive Clustering. To this end, we considered both 3-fold and 11-fold
stratified cross-validation.
The corresponding results are reported in the upper
part of Table 1. These results show that hierarchical single-label multi-class classification with 3-fold stratified
cross-validation performs slightly worse than flat multiclass classification (see bottom part of Table 1). Performing 11-fold stratified cross-validation, however,
results in a slightly better performance than flat multiclass classification. In summary, for the 15 species data
set, we can conclude that hierarchical single-label multiclass classification results in a performance comparable
to that obtained with flat multi-class classification.
Nonetheless, we are mainly interested in the classification of the 74 Bacillus species present in our data set.
Upscaling this experiment from 15 classes to 74 is, however, computationally infeasible, because the number of
classifiers to be trained increases exponentially with the
number of classes. When considering these 74 classes in

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

Page 4 of 16

Figure 1 Divisive clustering tree. Phylogenetic tree resulting from the divisive clustering of the FAME data of 15 Bacillus species based on
classification by Random Forests. Clustering is based on AUC and average linkage of the probability estimates calculated from identification by
Random Forests. At the different nodes the corresponding AUC value is reported. The Bacillus cereus and Bacillus subtilis groups are coloured in
blue and green, respectively.

our FAME data set, 273 - 1 classifiers must be trained in
the root node. This cannot be realized in a reasonable
computing time, even when multiple processors are
used in parallel. Furthermore, to obtain a good classification performance in the proof-of-concept experiment,
we only selected species represented by a reasonable
amount of data. Nonetheless, in the full data set, a lot of
classes are present with a small number of FAME profiles (e.g. only 3 or 4 profiles) which may result in an
unreliable FAME tree. Even though the results of this
experiment with 15 species are promising, for the

reasons above, we did not further consider knowledge
integration by divisive clustering of FAME profiles.
Phylogenetic learning

An alternative to the construction of a FAME tree is to
infer a tree on data with a good resolution for species
discrimination. In this perspective, the best possibilities
are DDH, whole-genome sequence analysis and multilocus sequence analysis (MLSA). The lack of a sufficient
amount of high-quality data, however, makes these techniques not very attractive. Therefore, yet another alternative is to focus on 16S rRNA gene sequencing. This

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

Page 5 of 16

Table 1 Results from the hierarchical single-label multi-class classification, phylogenetic learning and flat multi-class
classification experiments.
Classification Results
AUC

Sensitivity

Precision

NaN

F-score

NaN

HSMC - 15 species
HSMC

0.887 ± 0.214

0.945 ± 0.059

0

0.895 ± 0.179

0

HSMC (11-fold CV)

0.916 ± 0.130

0.956 ± 0.037

0

0.930 ± 0.083

0

PhyLearn - 15 species
PhyLearn - NJ

0.992 ± 0.007

0.954 ± 0.041

0

0.924 ± 0.099

0

PhyLearn - UPGMA

0.860 ± 0.211

0.931 ± 0.064

0

0.873 ± 0.153

0

0.741 ± 0.237
0.684 ± 0.256

0.846 ± 0.181
0.860 ± 0.174

1
2

0.768 ± 0.181
0.741 ± 0.180

1
2

PhyLearn - 74 species
PhyLearn - NJ
PhyLearn - UPGMA
Multi-class
15 species

0.992 ± 0.010

0.902 ± 0.170

0.944 ± 0.054

0

0.911 ± 0.124

0

74 species

0.982 ± 0.042

0.851 ± 0.189

0.901 ± 0.121

0

0.863 ± 0.145

0

In this table, the three strategies are abbreviated as ‘HSMC’, ‘PhyLearn’ and ‘Multi-class’, respectively. The results of these three strategies are reported in the
upper, middle and bottom part of the table, respectively. The results of hierarchical single-label multi-class classification are based on the FAME tree resulting
from the divisive clustering experiment. Only the 15 species data set was considered and 3-fold and 11-fold stratified cross-validation (CV) was performed. In the
case of phylogenetic learning, two 16S rRNA gene trees were used as template: neighbor-joining (NJ) and unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean
(UPGMA). For PhyLearn, both the 15 and the 74 species data set were considered and all PhyLearn experiments were performed using 3-fold stratified CV. Also
the flat multi-class experiments were validated by this CV strategy. In the three strategies, classification performance was evaluated based on the pooled test set.
Metrics reported are the area under the ROC curve (AUC), sensitivity, precision and F-score. Based on a multi-class confusion matrix, statistics were calculated in a
one-versus-other setting with averaging of the corresponding statistic over the different classes. Standard deviations are also reported. NaN denotes the number
of classes that have resulted in a value ∞ (only in case of precision and F-score).

technique is widely preferred for species delineation
because of improved sequencing technology and the
availability of public sequence databases. Nonetheless,
the 16S rRNA gene may not allow for a delineation of
every species [10,12-14]. Currently, 16S rRNA gene
sequence analysis is one of the techniques widely used
in microbiology for phylogenetic analysis. We integrated
this knowledge in FAME-based bacterial species classification models to evaluate species identification as well
as the resolution of FAME analysis for species discrimination within a phylogenetic framework.
When using this technique as a starting point for
knowledge integration, high quality 16S rRNA gene
sequences can be exported from the SILVA database.
This database subjects EMBL 16S rRNA gene sequences
to different control procedures and annotates the corresponding sequences with quality scores [15]. In this way,
we selected exactly one 16S rRNA gene sequence for
each type strain of each Bacillus species present in the
original FAME data set. Note that the type strain of a
bacterial species is the fixed name bearer of the species
(according to the bacterial code [32]) and its phylogenetic position is hence determinative in the taxonomic
framework.
After sequence selection, distance matrices were calculated using the Jukes-Cantor nucleotide evolution
model and two phylogenetic trees were constructed
accordingly, respectively with the neighbor joining
method (NJ) and the unweighted pair group method

with arithmetic mean (UPGMA) [33-37]. The respective
trees are shown in Additional files 1 and 2. Subsequently, we used these binary trees as templates for
hierarchical FAME-based species classification. As this
hierarchical classification relies on a phylogenetic tree,
we call this approach phylogenetic learning. As the binary tree classifier is based on a rooted tree structure, we
initially selected the NJ and UPGMA methods as these
basically infer rooted trees, even though several other
tree inference methods exist (e.g. maximum parsimony
and maximum likelihood) [36]. Two different methods
were considered in order to allow for a comparison of
binary tree classifiers based on different trees.
The constructed RF classifiers were evaluated for distinguishing between the FAME patterns of the two
underlying groups of species in every node of the tree.
The collection of binary classifiers should be regarded as
one classifier wrapping the multiple hierarchically structured classifiers. Three-fold stratified cross-validation for
error estimation was performed during the training process of each classifier with pooling of the test results of
all folds [38,39], i.e. the predictions on test data are
pooled together in one big set, and the performance
measures are calculated on this set. The results of phylogenetic learning based on the NJ and UPGMA trees
are reported in the middle part of Table 1. These results
are compared with those obtained from a FAME-based
flat multi-class classification (see bottom part of Table
1), where only one multi-class classifier is trained by the

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

same cross-validation strategy. First of all, we also evaluated phylogenetic learning and flat multi-class classification for the 15 species data set (as selected in the
previous subsection). The corresponding results are
reported in Table 1. Note that the flat multi-class classification with 3-fold stratified cross-validation in this
study differs from the flat multi-class classification strategy performed in [5]. In the latter study, 10 repeated
experiments were carried out with averaging of the classifier performance on a randomly sampled test set.
Average AUC, sensitivity and precision were then given
by 0.988, 0.847 and 0.908, respectively. These metric
values are approximately equal to the values obtained in
the present study. As a result, the cross-validation with
pooled metric calculation in a flat multi-class setting
does not lead to very different estimates of classification
performance, when compared to the random test set
selection carried out in [5].
Even though flat multi-class classification of the 15
species data set results in a very high AUC value of
0.992, it is also interesting to see that higher sensitivity
and F-score values are obtained by phylogenetic learning
on this data set (based on the NJ tree). Conversely, phylogenetic learning based on a UPGMA tree performs
slightly worse than flat multi-class classification. When
the study is scaled up to 74 species, flat multi-class classification performs better than phylogenetic learning on
both trees. For the NJ and UPGMA trees, the difference
in sensitivity between both techniques and flat multiclass classification is 11% and 16.7%, respectively, while
the difference in F-score is, respectively, 9.5% and 12.2%.
The contrast between the two data sets is, logically,
based on the larger number of relations between the different species and the more complex hierarchical structure of the data. The main reason for the lower
prediction performance of phylogenetic learning can be
attributed to the 16S rRNA gene phylogenetic trees that
define the multiple learning tasks. These could become
quite hard to solve when classifying the species based
on FAME data. Flat multi-class classification is not confronted with these restrictions at all and allows for more
flexible solutions. Moreover, in a 74 species hierarchical
learning system, the probability of a misclassification
along the identification path in the tree is much larger
than the misclassification probability in a 15 species
hierarchy. Also, in the 74 species data set, some species
are known to be very closely related to each other,
increasing the probability of misclassification in the hierarchy. Despite a lower classification performance compared to flat multi-class classification, phylogenetic
learning allows to evaluate the classification scheme at
node level. In this way, it is possible to analyze the resolution of FAME data at different tree levels. Ultimately,
the goal of this approach will be to investigate how a

Page 6 of 16

particular pruning strategy could be applied by which
those species will be grouped that are hard to classify by
the machine learning method of interest. As a consequence, it will also become possible to report identification scores for groups of species that are very related in
their FAME content.
Further investigation could also be done on the
improvement of classification performance. For instance,
a variable misclassification cost could be defined along
the classification path. As an example, nodes splitting
groups of classes could be evaluated differently than
nodes splitting one species from a group of classes and
splitting two leaves. In the latter case, a more severe
misclassification cost can be assigned. Another approach
could account for the different branch lengths of the
phylogenetic tree.
As the multi-class classification problem is tackled by
hierarchically structured binary classifiers, it is also
interesting to look at the individual classes. As mentioned in the section Methods, a multi-class confusion
matrix is generated by classification of each test profile
and counting the different types of errors that are made.
As such, this matrix is constructed from several twoclass confusion matrices in a one-versus-all manner, in
which, for each class, the positive class is the class
under consideration, while the negative class corresponds to all other classes. Using the iTol webtool [40],
we have plotted a bar diagram of sensitivity and F-score
values along the tree and have aligned the corresponding bars with the corresponding leaf or class of the tree.
When an F-score resulted in a value of ∞ (i.e. sensitivity
and precision equal zero), no bar is visualized. In this
way, rapid inspection is possible to detect those classes
that are hard to identify by the phylogenetic learning
model and the flat multi-class classifier.
The results of phylogenetic learning with NJ and
UPGMA trees and those of flat multi-class classification
are displayed in Figures 2, 3 and 4. In case of flat multiclass classification, the metric values are displayed along
the 16S rRNA gene NJ tree. When comparing the sensitivity values of each species obtained by phylogenetic
learning based on the two considered 16S rRNA gene
trees to those obtained by multi-class classification, only
15% of the species have a higher sensitivity value. 57%
and 61% of the species have a lower sensitivity value, for
the NJ and the UPGMA tree, respectively. In case of the
F-score, 22% and 19% of the species have a higher Fscore value, while 69% and 70% of the species have a
lower sensitivity value, for both trees respectively. Nonetheless, when looking more deeply into the results,
those classes that are hard to distinguish from the other
classes in a multi-class classification setting are better
identified in the hiearchical classification setting. This is
clearly illustrated by the cumulative plot in Figure 5. In

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

this figure, identification by phylogenetic learning is
compared to flat multi-class identification at class level.
Even though phylogenetic learning performs globally
worse than flat multi-class classification, it is clear that,
when considering a threshold of 0.5-0.6, phylogenetic
learning has an added value due to better identification
of classes that are not well identified by multi-class
classification.
As mentioned above, a hierarchical classification
structure allows to analyze where misclassification
occurs in the tree. This offers new possibilities to
further analyze the resolution of FAME data for species
discrimination. Furthermore, it is also interesting to calculate an average misclassification path length. The
results for phylogenetic learning based on the NJ tree
are visualized in Figure 6. The results for phylogenetic
learning based on the UPGMA tree are similar and are
visualized in Additional file 3. Herein, importantly, we
only considered misclassified test profiles. It becomes
clear from both figures that misclassification mostly
occurs at nodes near the correct leaf. This is not very
surprising as, based on FAME data, a lot of species cannot be distinguished from each other. This again shows
that the resolution of FAME analysis is restricted to distantly related species and species groups.

Conclusions
In this work, we combined FAME data and 16S rRNA
gene sequences in bacterial species classification models.
Supervised machine learning techniques have shown
their value in the past for distinguishing FAME profiles
of different Bacillus species. However, bacterial species
can be closely related in terms of FAME content, making it hard to achieve a high classification performance.
With this study, we approached the classification problem from a taxonomic perspective, in which a hierarchical classification scheme with binary tree classifiers was
adopted. This machine learning technique is a perfect
method for the integration of taxonomic relationships
between the different classes or species.
Two strategies were followed with regard to tree
inference. First, a FAME tree was constructed by divisive clustering, in which classifier performance was
considered as splitting criterion. In this setting, one
can see knowledge integration as the inclusion of similarities in the FAME profiles of the considered species.
Due to a computational bottleneck, this approach was
restricted to a proof-of-concept experiment with a data
set of 15 species. Relatively good results were obtained,
as closely related species could be retained out of the
massive amount of computed clusters. Furthermore,
for these 15 species, we observed a good classification
performance that is comparable to flat multi-class
classification.

Page 7 of 16

As a second strategy, we considered knowledge integration based on 16S rRNA gene data. Using quality
controlled 16S rRNA gene sequences, two rooted phylogenetic trees were constructed for the type strains of 74
Bacillus species. The two trees, respectively constructed
with the NJ and UPGMA treeing methods, subsequently
served as taxonomies for a hierarchical classification
scheme with base classifiers trained on FAME data at
each node. Due to the integration of 16S rRNA gene as
a phylogenetic marker, we called this approach phylogenetic learning. The main advantage of phylogenetic
learning, when compared to flat multi-class classification, lies in the exploitation of the taxonomic relationships, so that the results can be easily visualized.
Moreover, the results can be better interpreted in a
post-processing phase, for example by pruning the classification tree based on the classifier performance along
the tree. Given the limitations of FAME data for species
discrimination, pruning allows to restrict identification
to internal nodes and put the identification results in a
taxonomic context. And, herein, a hierarchical classification scheme is a perfect choice, contrary to flat multiclass classification models, which cannot easily exploit
taxonomic relationships, and do not produce a score of
separability or identification of a certain species, as compared to (closely) related species.
Furthermore, when evaluating the identification performance of phylogenetic learning at leaf level, another
clear advantage is seen. Due to the hierarchical class
structure, the phylogenetic learning approach improves
the identification for species that are incorrectly classified by flat multi-class classification. So, in some sense,
the method also results in a better performance,
although we have to admit that phylogenetic learning
with the NJ and UPGMA trees shows to be less accurate
than flat multi-class classification, when evaluating the
method as a global classification scheme. Yet, as
explained above, this was not the goal of this study.

Methods
Fatty Acid Methyl Ester data

The Bacillus fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) data set of
Slabbinck et al. [5] was used. Basically, gas chromatographic FAME profiles were generated after growing the
bacteria, as described in the protocol of the Sherlock
Microbial Identification System of MIDI Inc. (Newark,
DE, USA). This protocol defines a standard for growth
and culturing of bacterial strains and reproducibility and
interpretability of the profiles is only possible by working under the described conditions. Specifically, this
protocol recommends 24 h of growth on trypticase soy
broth agar at a temperature of 28°C. Subsequent to gas
chromatographic analysis, the use of a calibration mix
and the TSBA 50 peak naming table, the resulting

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

Page 8 of 16

Figure 2 Sensitivity and F-score values by phylogenetic learning based on a 16S rRNA gene NJ tree. For each Bacillus species, the
corresponding sensitivity and F-score value of phylogenetic learning based on a 16S rRNA gene NJ tree is displayed. Sensitivity is indicated by
the light blue bars, F-score by the green bars. The tree is visualized using the iTol webtool [40]. The Bacillus cereus and Bacillus subtilis groups are
coloured in blue and green, respectively.

FAME profiles are standardized by calculating relative
peak areas for each named peak with respect to the
total named area. Our data set covers 71 identified fatty
acids (or features) and 74 validly published Bacillus species (or classes). This number is about one half of the
Bacillus species published by IJSEM as of March 2008
[41]. The total number of FAME profiles (or data
instances) is 961. The resulting data set was exported

from the joint FAME database of both the Laboratory of
Microbiology (Ghent University, Belgium) and the
BCCM™/LMG Bacteria collection.
Random Forests

In 2001, Breiman [42] proposed a new machine learning
technique consisting of an ensemble of classification
trees, better known as Random Forests. A Random Forest (RF) classifier can be defined as a classifier consisting

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

Page 9 of 16

Figure 3 Sensitivity and F-score values by phylogenetic learning based on a 16S rRNA gene UPGMA tree. For each Bacillus species, the
corresponding sensitivity and F-score value of phylogenetic learning based on a 16S rRNA gene UPGMA tree is displayed. Sensitivity is indicated
by the light blue bars, F-score by the green bars. The tree is visualized using the iTol webtool [40]. The Bacillus cereus and Bacillus subtilis groups
are coloured in blue and green, respectively.

of a collection of decision trees, where each tree casts a
unit vote for the most popular class at each input. Each
tree in the forest is first grown using N training data
points that are randomly sampled from the original data
set, and subsequently evaluated by the remaining test
data points. N equals about two-thirds of the size of the
original data set. Importantly, the random sampling procedure is done with replacement, better known as bootstrapping. Aggregation of the classifiers built upon the

bootstrap samples is called bagging or bootstrap aggregation. Bagging leads to a specific data set and the
remaining data points are called ‘out-of-bag’. When
using the latter data set for evaluating the accuracy of
the grown tree, the prediction error is, therefore, called
the out-of-bag error. Randomly sampling data sets to
grow the different trees of the forest corresponds to one
of the two randomness factors of RFs. The second factor
lies in the random split selection. When M features are

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

Page 10 of 16

Figure 4 Sensitivity and F-score values for flat multi-class classification. For each Bacillus species, the corresponding sensitivity and F-score
value of flat multi-class classification is displayed along the 16S rRNA gene NJ tree. Sensitivity is indicated by the light blue bars, F-score by the
green bars. The tree is visualized using the iTol webtool [40]. The Bacillus cereus and Bacillus subtilis groups are coloured in blue and green,
respectively.

present in the original data set, m features (m <<M) are
sampled randomly out of M features to split each node
of the tree. The final split is determined by the best split
based on the m randomly sampled features [42,43]. Note
that m is held constant during the growth process of the
forest. Each tree is maximally extended and no pruning
occurs. In our study, a grid search was performed to
optimize the number of trees and the number of split

variables. All numbers of features were considered for
split variable selection and 1000 to 4000 trees in steps
of 250 trees were selected for tuning the number of
trees.
Evaluation of the classification accuracy of a RF classifier is based on the different out-of-bag data sets. For
each data point i of the data set, all out-of-bag data sets
containing i are considered. Data point i is put down

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

Page 11 of 16

Figure 5 Comparison of performance at class level. For each class, sensitivity and F-score values resulting from phylogenetic learning based
on a 16S rRNA gene NJ or UPGMA tree are compared to those obtained by flat multi-class classification. Four plots are given. The X-axis
corresponds to thresholds set on the corresponding metric values. Threshold steps of 0.01 are chosen. For each threshold, flat multi-class
classification is evaluated at class level and those classes with metric values smaller than or equal to the threshold are selected. Classification
performance by phylogenetic learning is analyzed at class level for each set of classes. The Y-axis on the left projects the number of
phylogenetic learning classes that have a higher metric value than those obtained by flat multi-class classification. The red line expresses this
number, relative to the size of the corresponding set (Y-axis on the right).

the trees corresponding to the respective out-of-bag data
sets. Class j is set to be the class that got most votes
every time data point i was out-of-bag. The proportion
of times that j is not equal to the true class averaged
over all data points corresponds to the out-of-bag error
estimate. A RF classifier consisting of low-correlated
trees with a high individual strength results in optimal
generalization and a high accuracy. Moreover, from the
law of large numbers and the tree structure, it follows
that the generalization error of RFs converges to a certain value, implying that a RF classifier does not overfit,
given a large number of trees in the forest [42]. However, Hastie et al. [44] remark that changing the number
of trees in the forest does not cause overfitting, given
that not all features are used as split variables and the
number of noise variables is reduced.

Modeling was performed by the RFs software available
at the website of Leo Breiman [43].
Divisive clustering

A divisive clustering algorithm builds a top-down cluster
hierarchy or tree, starting from a single cluster that corresponds to the entire dataset (i.e. the root of the tree). In
every iteration of the algorithm, one cluster is selected
and split into two new clusters. If the distances between
all points in the clusters are considered, then this results
in a traditional unsupervised clustering procedure. Conversely, supervised divisive clustering also takes the class
labels of the respective data points into account, and calculates only distances between the data points with differing class labels. As a consequence, the final number of
clusters in supervised clustering equals the number of
classes present in the original data set [45,46].

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

Page 12 of 16

Figure 6 Average misclassification depth of phylogenetic learning based on a 16S rRNA gene NJ tree. The average depth of the
misclassified test profiles of each species is visualized for phylogenetic learning based on a 16S rRNA gene NJ tree. Depth equals the number of
nodes along the classification path until misclassification occurs (the corresponding node also included) and corresponds to the green bars. The
maximum or correct depth is shown by the red bars. Maximum depth equals the number of nodes along the true phylogenetic path (leaf
included).

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

Popular divisive clustering strategies are single linkage,
complete linkage, average linkage, Ward linkage, etc. In
these strategies, multiple metrics can be applied as distance measure. In our initial study, for the construction
of a tree using solely FAME data, we calculated the distance metric based on the performance of binary classifiers that were trained for all possible splits of the data.
In this setting, cluster distances are not simply computed from FAME profiles, but also the class labels are
taken into account. As first splitting criterion, the area
under the ROC curve (AUC) was considered, and in
case of ties, the splitting was refined by accounting for
the average linkage of the probability estimates of both
classes. The rationale behind this last splitting criterion
is that the classifier corresponding to the largest average
distance between the probability estimates should be
preferred over other classifiers. The Euclidean distance
was considered as metric on the probability estimates.
For each level in the divisive top-down setting, a RF
classifier is built for all possible two-group combinations
of all considered species or classes. As such, all combinations correspond to a two-class classification task. For
each node or level, this results in 2n-1 - 1 combinations,
with n the number of classes considered. Note that,
when considering four classes, the combination of
classes 1 and 2 automatically excludes the combination
of classes 3 and 4. The divisive clustering stops when
only two-class clusters are retained. To speed up the
divisive clustering and classification process, no grid
search and no cross-validation were considered. Specifically, the initial FAME data set was randomly splitted in
a stratified train and test set. One-third of the data set
was used for testing. For each combination, the according profiles for training and testing were sampled from
these two subsets. The forest size was optimized using
the default number of split variables (m = M , with M
the number of features). After fixing the forest size
resulting in the lowest error rate, the optimal number of
split variables was selected among M , 2M and M ,
2
again corresponding to the lowest error rate. Ultimately,
a rooted tree was constructed with equal branch lengths
and the different nodes were labeled with the corresponding AUC value. The resulting tree was visualized
with the treeing method of the TaxonGap software [47].
As an initial proof-of-concept, 15 Bacillus species
were selected from the original data set. Selection was
based on classes with reasonable sample size and classes
that are taxonomically closely related to each other, e.g.
species of the Bacillus cereus and Bacillus subtilis
groups. The first selection criterion was chosen to avoid
heavily imbalanced data subsets. The following species
with respective number of profiles were selected: Bacillus aquimaris (12), Bacillus atrophaeus*s (21), Bacillus
cereus*c (62), Bacillus coagulans (32), Bacillus drentensis

Page 13 of 16

(38), Bacillus fumarioli (28), Bacillus galactosidilyticus
(12), Bacillus licheniformis*s (74), Bacillus megaterium
(28), Bacillus mycoides *c (11), Bacillus patagoniensis
(12), Bacillus pumilus*s (57), Bacillus sporothermodurans
(17), Bacillus subtilis*s (64) and Bacillus thuringiensis*c
(12). Species annotated with ‘*c’ belong to the Bacillus
cereus group, while species annotated with ‘*s’ belong to
a species of the Bacillus subtilis group [41,48,49]. It is
expected that the species of these two groups cluster
together.
To further speed up the clustering process, computations were performed in parallel on an Intel Blade
cluster.
Phylogenetic analysis

The SILVA database was used for 16S rRNA gene
sequence selection. SILVA provides quality checked and
aligned 16S rRNA gene sequences. For each type strain
of each species present in our data set, a 16S rRNA
gene sequence was selected. If multiple 16S rRNA gene
sequences for each type strain were available, selection
of the final sequence was based on best quality and
longest sequence length. In SILVA, quality is denoted
three-fold: pintail quality for sequence anomaly detection, sequence quality and aligment quality [15]. A list
of the selected accession numbers can be found in Additional file 4.
Sequence distance calculation was performed by PHYLIP, the PHYLogeny Inference Package version 3.68,
using the program Dnadist [35,36]. The Jukes Cantor
evolution model was used for correcting the nucleotide
distances. This DNA sequence evolution model assumes
an equal and independent change rate for each nucleotide. So, substitution of one nucleotide by one of the
three other nucleotides occurs with equal probability.
All other parameters were used as default except for the
input format. Based on the resulting distance matrix, a
NJ and a UPGMA tree was created using the PHYLIP
program Neighbor [33,34,37]. Default parameter settings
were used, except for a randomized input order of the
species. Phylogenetic trees were created for the species
present in both the full data set and in the 15 species
data set. All trees are visualized with the iTol webtool
version 1.5 [40]
Phylogenetic learning

Based on the 16S rRNA gene phylogenetic trees, a classification scheme with a hierarchical class structure was
developed. As such, a rooted phylogenetic tree can be
regarded as a directed acyclic graph with bifurcating
nodes. The main idea is similar to that of binary tree
classifiers [26-28]. However, in contrast to our study,
these authors inferred a tree from the data used for classification, while we considered phylogenetic information
(16S rRNA gene) for tree inference and used FAME
data solely for classification. We call this approach

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

phylogenetic learning. As a simple, naïve approach, at
each node of the 16S rRNA gene phylogenetic tree, a
two-class RF classifier was trained, based on a subset of
the FAME data set. Herein, only the subset of profiles
belonging to that part of the tree was taken for training
and testing. The two branches of the node defined the
two groups of the binary classification task, and at each
node, a positive and negative dummy class label was
created.
Given the tree hierarchy, classifiers constructed on
terminal nodes and a certain number of parent nodes
can become biased due to a small training set size.
Herein, terminal nodes are regarded as nodes splitting
into two leaves. As a consequence of the small sample
size for certain species, splitting the data set into a training set and a test set was not an option. We simply
overcame this issue by using cross-validation techniques,
as explained in the next paragraph. Furthermore, the
classification performance could easily be evaluated,
since each profile was presented to the classification
hierarchy and its path was fixed. In the case of an incorrectly classified profile at a specific node in the tree,
propagation along the true path stopped, and the corresponding profile was further identified along the predicted path. Therefore, the path and ultimate predicted
class of each profile could be determined and a multiclass confusion matrix could be generated for statistical
analysis (discussed in the next subsection). As an interesting feature, this method offers the possibility to investigate where misclassification mostly occurs along the
phylogenetic tree. Hence, the misclassification distance
for each species could be estimated by averaging the
correct path length of each incorrectly classified profile.
This implies that, for such a profile, the correct path
length was incremented each time the corresponding
classifier resulted in identification of the true branch.
Incrementing continued until the considered profile
was incorrectly classified. Note that the node resulting
in misclassification also incremented the path length
and that the path length was also incremented when
ultimate identification occurred in the correct leaf. In
the latter case, the correct path length equals the maximal path length. For each class, the average correct path
length was plotted against the maximal path length. An
example is visualized in Figure 6.
Cross-validation and statistical analysis

In machine learning studies, data sets are typically split
in a training set and a test set, where the latter contains
mostly one-third to one-half of the data set. This test
set is used as hold-out set for estimation of the final
classifier error rate. To prevent over- and underfitting,
parameter optimization during the training phase should
not be performed on the test set, but on a separate validation set [45]. To overcome this problem, cross-

Page 14 of 16

validation can be used. Herein, the training set is split in
k separate validation sets for which k-fold cross-validation should be performed. In each step of the cross-validation, a different validation set is used to retrieve the
optimal parameter combination, tuned during training
on the k - 1 other validation sets [45]. In relation to our
problem setting, two important issues should be taken
into account. Our data set is not particularly large and
some classes correspond to a (very) small number of
profiles. Due to the small class sizes present in our data
set, we chose to use the test set also as validation set,
even though it is still better experimental practice to
perform a cross-validation on the training set for larger
sample sizes. In case of our FAME data set, two additional problems arise: classes are imbalanced, meaning
that a different number of profiles is present for each
species, and as mentioned above, many species contain
only a small number of profiles. To tackle a possible
imbalance effect on the classifier performance, the true
error rate can be estimated by stratifying train and test
sets [38]. For the second case, classification will also
become problematic when two-class classifiers are created based on small data sets. This can be solved by
performing cross-validation for performance estimation
[39]. A three-fold stratified cross-validation was performed for both the hierarchical classification and flat
multi-class classification. To prevent overfitting, the
number of folds is set equal to the minimum number of
profiles over all bacterial species, which is three in our
case. In this perspective, the stratification proportion
equals one-third. Given the identical nature of the probability estimates resulting from each RF model, we
chose to aggregate all test sets in a joint test set for performance evaluation. This method is also better known
as pooling [50]. Finally, for the pooled test set, an average of the error estimate for each class in a one-versusall setting was calculated, next to the average and standard deviation of the error estimates over all classes.
Statistics calculated were the AUC, accuracy, sensitivity,
precision and F-score.
Besides the calculation of global performance measures, the performance at class level between flat multiclass classification and phylogenetic learning was also
compared. The comparison is visualized in a cumulative
plot (see Figure 5). Initially, flat multi-class classification
and the corresponding classification results of each class
were considered. A threshold was set on a metric using
steps of 0.01. As metric, sensitivity and F-score were
further analyzed. The corresponding thresholds are
plotted along the X-axis.
For each threshold, those classes were selected corresponding to sensitivity or F-score values smaller than or
equal to the threshold. Secondly, for each threshold and,
thus, for each selected set of classes, the corresponding

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

metric values obtained by phylogenetic learning were
evaluated. The number of phylogenetic learning metric
values that were larger than the corresponding metric
values resulting from flat multi-class classification are
plotted against the Y-axis on the left. Also, this number
is expressed as a percentage of the corresponding class
set size. The corresponding percentages are plotted
against the Y-axis on the right.

List of abbreviations
AUC: Area under the ROC curve; DDH: DNA-DNA
hybridization; FAME: Fatty acid methyl ester; MLSA:
Multi-locus sequence analysis; NJ: Neighbor joining; RF:
Random Forest; ROC: Receiver operating characteristic;
UPGMA: Unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean.
Additional file 1: 16S rRNA gene neighbor-joining tree. Bacillus 16S
rRNA gene neighbor-joining tree as constructed by PHYLIP 3.68 and
based on sequences selected from the SILVA database. Only the species
present in the original data set are visualized. The tree is visualized using
the iTol webtool [40]. The Bacillus cereus and Bacillus subtilis groups are
coloured in blue and green, respectively.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1169-S1.PDF ]
Additional file 2: 16S rRNA gene UPGMA tree. Bacillus 16S rRNA gene
UPGMA tree as constructed by PHYLIP 3.68 and based on sequences
selected from the SILVA database. Only the species present in the
original data set are visualized. The tree is visualized using the iTol
webtool [40]. The Bacillus cereus and Bacillus subtilis groups are coloured
in blue and green, respectively.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1169-S2.PDF ]
Additional file 3: Average misclassification depth of phylogenetic
learning based on a UPGMA tree. The average depth of the
misclassified test profiles of each species is visualized for phylogenetic
learning based on a UPGMA tree. Depth equals the number of nodes
along the classification path until misclassification occurs (the
corresponding node included) and corresponds to the green bars. The
maximum or correct depth is shown by the red bars. Maximum depth
equals the number of nodes along the true phylogenetic path (leaf
included).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1169-S3.PDF ]
Additional file 4: Table S1 – Strain list and corresponding 16S rRNA
gene accession numbers. List of the 74 considered Bacillus species
together with their type strain number and the accession number of the
selected 16S rRNA gene sequence.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2105-1169-S4.PDF ]

Acknowledgements
This research is funded by the Belgian Science Policy (BELSPO, Projects C3/
00/12 and IAP VI-PAI VI/06). W.W. is supported by a postdoctoral grant from
the Research Foundation of Flanders. The authors thank the anonymous
reviewers for helpful comments and suggestions.

Page 15 of 16

Author details
1
Laboratory of Microbiology, Ghent University, K.L. Ledeganckstraat 35, 9000
Ghent, Belgium. 2KERMIT, Department of Applied Mathematics, Biometrics
and Process Control, Ghent University, Coupure links 653, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium. 3Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281 S9, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. 4BCCM™/LMG
Bacteria Collection, K.L. Ledeganckstraat 35, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
Authors’ contributions
BS carried out the full study and drafted the manuscript. WW, BDB and PD
participated in the classifier development and statistical analysis. PDV
participated in the microbiological background of the work. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 17 July 2009
Accepted: 30 January 2010 Published: 30 January 2010
References
1. Dawyndt P, Vancanneyt M, Snauwaert C, De Baets B, De Meyer H, Swings J:
Mining fatty acid databases for detection of novel compounds in
aerobic bacteria. Journal of Microbiological Methods 2006, 66(3):410-433.
2. Kunitsky C, Osterhout G, Sasser M: Identification of microorganisms using
fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) analysis and the MIDI Sherlock Microbial
Identification System. Encyclopedia of Rapid Microbiological Methods
Bethesda: PDAMiller M 2006, 3:1-18.
3. Slabbinck B, Gillis W, Dawyndt P, De Vos P, De Baets B: FAME-bank.net: a
public database for bacterial FAME profiles.http://www.fame-bank.net.
4. Slabbinck B, De Baets B, Dawyndt P, De Vos P: Genus-wide Bacillus species
identification through proper artificial neural network experiments on
fatty acid profiles. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek International Journal of General
and Molecular Microbiology 2008, 94(2):187-198.
5. Slabbinck B, De Baets B, Dawyndt P, De Vos P: Towards large-scale FAMEbased bacterial species identification using machine learning
techniques. Systematic and Applied Microbiology 2009, 32(3):163-176.
6. Heyndrickx M, Vandemeulebroecke K, Scheldeman P, Kersters K, De Vos P,
Logan NA, Aziz AM, Ali N, Berkeley RCW: A polyphasic reassessment of
the genus Paenibacillus, reclassification of Bacillus lautus (Nakamura
1984) as Paenibacillus lautus comb. nov. and of Bacillus peoriae
(Montefusco et al. 1993) as Paenibacillus peoriae comb. nov., and
emended descriptions of P. lautus and of P. peoriae. International Journal
of Systematic Bacteriology 1996, 46(4):988-1003.
7. Kämpfer P: Limits and possibilities of total fatty acid analysis for
classification and identification of Bacillus species. Systematic and Applied
Microbiology 1994, 17:86-98.
8. Stead DE: Grouping of plant-pathogenic and some other Pseudomonas
spp. by using cellular fatty acid profiles. International Journal of Systematic
Bacteriology 1992, 24(2):281-295.
9. Vancanneyt M, Witt S, Abraham W, Kersters K, Frederickson HL: Fatty acid
content in whole-cell hydrolysates and phospholipid fractions of
Pseudomonads: a taxonomic evaluation. Systematic and Applied
Microbiology 1996, 19:528-540.
10. Wayne LG, Brenner DJ, Colwell RR, Grimont PAD, Kandler O, Krichevsky MI,
Moore LH, Moore WEC, Murray RGE, Stackebrandt E, Starr MP, Trüper HG:
Report of the ad hoc committee on reconciliation of approaches to
bacterial systematics. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology 1987,
37(4):463-464.
11. Stackebrandt E, Frederiksen W, Garrity GM, Grimont PAD, Kämpfer P,
Maiden MCJ, Nesme X, Rosselló-Mora R, Swings J, Trüper HG, Vauterin L,
Ward AC, Whitman WB: Report of the ad hoc committee for the reevaluation of the species definition in bacteriology. International Journal
of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 2002, 52:1043-1047.
12. Stackebrandt E, Goebel BM: Taxonomic note: a place for DNA-DNA
reassociation and 16S rRNA sequence analysis in the present species
definition in bacteriology. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology
1994, 44(4):846-849.
13. Konstantinidis KT, Ramette A, Tiedje JM: The bacterial species definition in
the genomic era. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 2006,
361:1929-1940.
14. Konstantinidis KT, Tiedje JM: Prokaryotic taxonomy and phylogeny in the
genomic era: advancements and challenges ahead. Current Opinion in
Microbiology 2007, 10:504-509.

Slabbinck et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:69
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11/69

15. Pruesse E, Quast C, Knittel K, Fuchs BM, Ludwig WG, Peplies J, Glöckner FO:
SILVA: a comprehensive online resource for quality checked and aligned
ribosomal RNA sequence data compatible with ARB. Nucleic Acids
Research 2007, 35(21):7188-7196.
16. Koller D, Sahami M: Hierarchically classifying documents using very few
words. 14th International Conference on Machine learning, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA 1997, 170-187.
17. Mccallum A, Rosenfeld R, Mitchell T, Ng A: Improving text classification by
shrinkage in a hierarchy of classes. 15th International Conference on
Machine Learning, Madison, Wisconsin, USA 1998, 359-367.
18. Dumais S, Chen H: Hierarchical classification of web content. SIGIR-00,
23rd ACM International Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval Greece: ACM Press, New York, USBelkin NJ, Ingwersen
P, Leong MK, Athens 2000, 256-263.
19. Kriegel HP, Kröger P, Pryakhin A, Schubert M: Using support vector
machines for classifying large sets of multi-represented objects. 4th SIAM
International Conference on Data Mining, Lake Buena Vista, Florida, USA 2004,
102-144.
20. Barutcuoglu Z, Schapire RE, Troyanskaya OG: Hierarchical multi-label
prediction of gene function. Bioinformatics 2006, 22(7):830-836.
21. Cesa-Bianchi N, Gentile C, Zaniboni L: Incremental algorithms for
hierarchical classification. Journal of Machine Learning Research 2006,
7:31-54.
22. Rousu J, Saunders C, Szedmak S, Shawe-Taylor J: Kernel-based learning of
hierarchical multi-label classification models. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 2006, 7:1601-1626.
23. Vens C, Struyf J, Schietgat L, Dzeroski S, Blockeel H: Decision trees for
hierarchical multi-label classification. Machine Learning 2008, 73:185-214.
24. Hofmann T, Cai L, Ciaramita M: Learning with taxonomies: classifying
documents and words. Workshop on Syntax, Semantics and Statistics of the
17th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Whistler,
British Columbia, Canada 2003.
25. Wu F, Zhang J, Honavar V: Learning classifiers with hierarchically
structured class taxonomies. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2005,
3607:313-320.
26. Lee JS, Oh IS: Binary classification trees for multi-class classification
problems. 7th International Conference on Document Analysis and
Recognition, Edinburgh, Scotland 2003, 1-5.
27. Cheong S, Oh SH, Lee S: Support vector machines with binary tree
architecture for multi-class classification. Neural Information Processing Letters and Reviews 2004, 2(3):47-51.
28. Fei B, Liu J: Binary tree of SVM: a new fast multiclass training and
classification algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 2006,
17(3):696-704.
29. Craig R, Liao L: Phylogenetic tree information aids supervised learning
for predicting protein-protein interaction based on distance matrices.
BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8:6.
30. McHardy AC, Martin HG, Tsirigos A, Hugenholtz P, Rigoutsos I: Accurate
phylogenetic classification of variable-length DNA fragments. Nature
Methods 2007, 4:63-72.
31. Diaz N, Krause L, Goesmann A, Niehaus K, Nattkemper T: TACOA Taxonomic classification of environmental genomic fragments using a
kernelized nearest neighbor approach. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:56.
32. Lapage SP, Sneath PHA, Lessel EF, Skerman VBD, Seeliger HPR, Clark WA:
International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria: Bacteriological Code, 1990
Revision Washington D.C., USA: ASM Press 1992.
33. Sokal RR, Michener CD: A statistical method for evaluating systematic
relationships. University of Kansas Science Bulletin 1958, 38:1409-1438.
34. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: A new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution 1987,
4:406-425.
35. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP - Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2).
Cladistics 1989, 5:164-166.
36. Felsenstein J: Inferring Phylogenies Sunderland, MA, USA: Sinauer Associates,
Inc, 1 2004.
37. Dawyndt P, Demeyer H, De Baets B: UPGMA clustering revisited: A
weight-driven approach to transitive approximation. International Journal
of Approximate Reasoning 2006, 42(3):174-191.
38. Kohavi R: A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy
estimation and model selection. Fourteenth International Joint Conference

Page 16 of 16

39.
40.
41.

42.
43.
44.

45.
46.
47.

48.

49.

50.

on Artificial Intelligence Montréal, Canada: Morgan Kaufmann 1995,
2:1137-1145.
Witten IH, Frank E: Data Mining Practical Machine Learning Tools and
Techniques San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 2 2005.
Letunic I, Bork P: Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL): an online tool for
phylogenetic tree display and annotation. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:127-128.
Euzéby JP: List of Bacterial Names with Standing in Nomenclature: a
folder available on the Internet. International Journal of Systematic
Bacteriology 1997, 47:590-592.
Breiman L: Random Forests. Machine Learning 2001, 45:5-32.
Breiman L: Random Forests. 2004http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~breiman/
RandomForests/cc_home.htm.
Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman J: The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data
Mining, Inference and Prediction Springer Series in Statistics, New York, USA:
Springer-Verlag, 2 2009.
Duda RO, Hart PE, Stork DG: Pattern Classification New York: John Wiley and
Sons 2001.
Mirkin B: Clustering for data mining: a data recovery approach. Computer
Science and Data Analysis Series London, UK: Chapman and Hall/CRC 2005.
Slabbinck B, Dawyndt P, Martens M, De Vos P, De Baets B: TaxonGap: a
visualization tool for intra-and inter-species variation among individual
biomarkers. Bioinformatics 2008, 24(6):866-867.
Hansen BM, Leser TD, Hendriksen NB: Polymerase chain reaction assay for
the detection of Bacillus cereus group cells. FEMS Microbiology Letters
2001, 202(2):209-213.
Hutsebaut D, Vandroemme J, Heyrman J, Dawyndt P, Vandenabeele P,
Moens L, De Vos P: Raman microspectrometry as an identification tool
within the phylogenetically homogeneous ‘Bacillus subtilis’-group.
Systematic and Applied Microbiology 2006, 29:650-660.
Parker JP, Günter S, Bedo J: Stratification bias in low signal microarray
studies. BMC Bioinformatics 2007, 8(326):1-16.

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-69
Cite this article as: Slabbinck et al.: From learning taxonomies to
phylogenetic learning: Integration of 16S rRNA gene data into FAMEbased bacterial classification. BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:69.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
