<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Sirtuin-mediated nuclear differentiation and programmed degradation in Tetrahymena</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40. doi:10.1186/1471-2121-12-40"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kristin M Slade"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Sirtuin-mediated nuclear differentiation and
programmed degradation in Tetrahymena
Kristin M Slade1,2, Sydney Freggiaro1, Kyle A Cottrell3, Joshua J Smith3 and Emily A Wiley1*

Abstract
Background: The NAD+-dependent histone deacetylases, known as “sirtuins”, participate in a variety of processes
critical for single- and multi-cellular life. Recent studies have elucidated the importance of sirtuin activity in
development, aging, and disease; yet, underlying mechanistic pathways are not well understood. Specific sirtuins
influence chromatin structure and gene expression, but differences in their pathways as they relate to distinct
chromatin functions are just beginning to emerge. To further define the range of global chromatin changes
dependent on sirtuins, unique biological features of the ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila can be
exploited. This system offers clear spatial and temporal separation of multiple whole genome restructuring events
critical for the life cycle.
Results: Inhibition with nicotinamide revealed that sirtuin deacetylase activity in Tetrahymena cells promotes
chromatin condensation during meiotic prophase, differentiation of heterochromatin from euchromatin during
development, and chromatin condensation/degradation during programmed nuclear death. We identified a class I
sirtuin, called Thd14, that resides in mitochondria and nucleoli during vegetative growth, and forms a large subnuclear aggregate in response to prolonged cell starvation that may be peripherally associated with nucleoli.
During sexual conjugation and development Thd14 selectively concentrates in the parental nucleus prior to its
apoptotic-like degradation.
Conclusions: Sirtuin activity is important for several functionally distinct events requiring global chromatin
condensation. Our findings suggest a novel role for sirtuins in promoting programmed pycnosis by acting on
chromatin destined for degradation. The sirtuin Thd14, which displays physiological-dependent differential
localization within the nucleus, is a candidate for a chromatin condensation enzyme that is coupled to nuclear
degradation.
Keywords: programmed nuclear degradation, apoptosis, sirtuin, HDAC, Tetrahymena, ciliate, histone deacetylase

Background
Class III histone deacetylases, known as sirtuins, are a
large and ancient family of NAD + -dependent protein
deacetylases that regulate a range of cellular processes.
These phylogenetically conserved enzymes deacetylate
both histone and non-histone targets. Originally based
on the founding family member, yeast Sir2, molecular
phylogenetic analyses have since revealed five sirtuin
subclasses I-IV and U [1], which display diversity in subcellular localization and function [2,3]. For example, of
* Correspondence: ewiley@jsd.claremont.edu
1
Keck Science Department of Claremont McKenna, Pitzer, and Scripps
Colleges, W.M. Keck Science Center, 925 N. Mills Ave., Claremont, CA 91711,
USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

the seven human sirtuin homologs, several reside in the
nucleus where they have roles in genomic stability and
cell proliferation. Others act in the cytoplasm on cytoskeletal targets or work in mitochondria to regulate
energy metabolism and responses to oxidative stress
[4,5]. Sirtuins in subclass I, which include human
SIRT1-3 and yeast Hst2 and Sir2, commonly localize to
the nucleus (with exception of Hst2) where they have
various chromatin-related functions. For example, Sir2
regulates telomeric, cryptic mating-type, and rDNA
silencing [6]. This diverse set of functions underlies
numerous links between development, disease, and sirtuin activity reported in recent years [7,8].
Many sirtuin-linked cell abnormalities may relate to
their roles in chromatin dynamics. To further probe

© 2011 Slade et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

these possibilities we turned to the single-celled protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila. This ciliate expresses
eleven putative sirtuins, most are more closely related to
sirtuins in humans than to those in yeasts [9]. Tetrahymena provides several advantages for chromatin
dynamics studies. First, the cells harbor two nuclei with
different chromatin characteristics. The “macronucleus”
is transcriptionally active and contains primarily euchromatin, but undergoes widespread facultative heterochromatin formation during cell starvation [10,11].
Conversely, the “micronucleus” is transcriptionally silent
and contains chromatin that is highly condensed into
constitutive heterochromatin-like structures throughout
vegetative growth [12]. This unique nuclear dimorphism
facilitates study of factors that contribute to the differentiation and maintenance of euchromatin and heterochromatin states in the respective nuclei.
Second, nuclear differentiation into the dimorphic
micronucleus and macronucleus during sexual conjugation
involves multiple processes including DNA replication,
DNA fragmentation and elimination, chromatin remodeling/differentiation, and nuclear degradation. These events
are easily synchronized in a cell population and occur in a
strict temporal order in only a subset of the post-zygotic
nuclei (resulting from meiosis, fertilization, and mitosis).
Half of the highly condensed, transcriptionally inert postzygotic nuclei differentiate into transcriptionally active,
euchromatic nuclei, while the other half remain inert.
Another notable feature of Tetrahymena development is
the programmed degradation of select nuclei at distinct
points in the development pathway. Following meiosis,
three of four gametes degrade in the posterior end of the
cell. Later, the parental macronucleus degrades as newly
differentiating macronuclei become transcriptionally active
[12]. The latter degradation mechanism resembles that of
caspase-independent apoptosis in higher organisms in several ways, including occurrence of chromatin condensation
and production of oligonucleosome sized DNA fragments
[13], but lacks other hallmarks such as the phosphorylation
of H2A.X [14,15].
In this study we investigated the contribution of sirtuin deacetylase activity to chromatin differentiation and
programmed nuclear degradation. We found that nicotinamide, a physiological sirtuin inhibitor [16,17], prevented normal progression of both of these processes.
Furthermore, we identified one sirtuin (named “Tetrahymena histone deacetylase 14"; Thd14) that resides in
nucleoli, in mitochondria, and in distinct nuclear substructures, all in response to different physiological conditions and stages of the life cycle. Intriguingly, Thd14
accumulated in chromatin-rich regions of the degrading
macronucleus during the period of chromatin condensation that precedes global degradation.

Page 2 of 15

Results
Nicotinamide treatment affects meiotic condensation,
nuclear differentiation, and degradation of the
macronucleus during development

Phylogenetic analyses previously revealed eleven Tetrahymena proteins that possess sirtuin-type deacetylase
domains [9]. This is a larger number than what most
other organisms, including mammals, possess. Four of
the proteins cluster in sirtuin subclass I, most members
of which have nuclear functions. The potential contribution of sirtuin deacetylase activity to nuclear differentiation in Tetrahymena was examined by assessing nuclear
development in conjugating cells treated with nicotinamide (NAM), a physiological sirtuin inhibitor [17,18].
Major chromatin changes during nuclear differentiation
are accompanied by easily-distinguished changes in
nuclear morphology. Cells of two different mating types
were mixed (time 0) and immediately treated with 0, 10,
25 or 50 mM NAM. These concentrations were chosen
based on those typically used for yeast and human cells
(1-5 mM) and the fact that for Tetrahymena, other histone deacetylase inhibitors must be used at 5-10-fold
higher concentrations for effects comparable to mammalian cells [19]. Nuclear morphology in NAM-treated
conjugating pairs was compared to that of conjugating
control cells (treated with buffer only), by DAPI staining
and fluorescence microscopy at 2-3 hour intervals. Cells
treated with 50 mM NAM arrested four hours into conjugation at meiotic prophase I (Figures 1a and 1b). At
this stage micronuclei have drastically elongated and
chromosomes have decondensed and assumed a “bouquet-like” arrangement [20] (Figure 1c, right panel).
Based on the size and shape of prophase micronuclei in
the NAM-arrested cells, the majority appeared to be in
zygotene (stage III) and pachytene (stage IV) [21], even
24 hours later (Figure 1b). Cells treated with 10 mM
(data not shown) and 25 mM NAM were able to progress through meiosis (Figure 1b) but displayed other
downstream phenotypes described below. These phenotypes were detected in a greater fraction of cells treated
with 25 mM NAM; thus, this concentration was used
for further analyses.
Normally after fertilization, Tetrahymena zygotic
nuclei undergo two mitoses. Two of the four resulting
nuclei remain highly condensed, transcriptionally inert
micronuclei, while the other two differentiate into new
transcriptionally active macronuclei, called “anlagen”
(Figure 1a). NAM-treated cells that were able to progress past meiosis contained 1-7 additional nuclei per
conjugating pair after 24 hours, compared to untreated
cells that had reached “endpoint” nuclear configuration
by hour 16 (compare Figures 1c “Endpoint” and 1d).
The additional nuclei in nicotinamide-treated cells likely

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Nicotinamide treatment causes arrest in meiotic prophase and prevents macronuclear degradation. a Schematic of nuclear
events in conjugation. Macronuclei are represented as large spheres, micronuclei as small spheres. Two mating types (white and shaded) were
mixed to initiate conjugation. Asterisks represent the stages of arrest observed after nicotinamide treatment (coinciding with images in parts c
and d). Hours represent times at which untreated conjugating cells (0 mM NAM) reach the given stage. Labels below the brackets indicate
stages assessed in part b that correspond to different shades in the bar graph. “pOM+OM” are post-meiotic stages that still have a parental
macronucleus (old macronucleus; OM); “-OM” is any stage after loss of the old macronucleus. An, anlagen (new macronuclei). b The average
percentage of conjugating pairs at each of the three stages illustrated in part a by brackets: “PrM”, cells in pre-meiosis (black); “pOM+OM”, cells
that contain an old macronucleus (dark gray); “-OM”, cells that have lost the old macronucleus (light gray). Nicotinamide was added just after
mixing (time zero of conjugation) and analyzed at 5, 11, and 24 hrs postmixing. At least 200 cells over two separate trials were counted for each
time point and NAM concentration (each bar). ** P < 0.01 in a t-test when compared to 0 mM NAM at the same time point and stage of
meiosis; *P < 0.05. c Representative images of DAPI-stained wild-type (0 mM NAM) and 50 mM NAM treated cells analyzed at 24-hrs into
conjugation. M, macronucleus; An, anlagen; m, micronucleus. d DAPI images of 25 mM NAM-treated cells analyzed 24 hrs into conjugation.
“OM”, old (parental) macronucleus.

resulted from one of two events: failure of three gamete
pronuclei to degrade after meiosis, or additional mitoses
of zygotic nuclei after fertilization. The former possibility was supported based on the following: 1) gamete
pronuclei were rarely observed at the extreme posterior
end of the cells where degradation occurs; 2) never were
there fewer than four equally-sized nuclei observed in
any cell of a pair during the early conjugation stages
(normally three nuclei would appear much smaller when
degrading at the posterior end; Figure 1a).
Later in conjugation, the extra nuclei appeared to differentiate judging from nucleus size and intensity of

DAPI staining (micronuclear DNA is entirely packaged
into unacetylated heterochromatin and stains more
intensely with DAPI, while anlagen chromatin decondenses, becomes highly acetylated, and stains less intensely with DAPI). The majority of nuclei in each cell
were enlarged with diffuse chromatin, typical of anlagen
morphology (Figure 1d). To further examine the differentiated status of chromatin, nuclei in NAM-treated
conjugating cells were probed for the presence of the
micronucleus-specific linker histone (MLH) by immunofluorescence with a-MLH antiserum. MLH, a hallmark
of silent micronuclear heterochromatin, is selectively

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

eliminated in nuclei destined to become new macronuclei when euchromatin differentiation and transcriptional activity is initiated [22]. Like all normal postzygotic nuclei, NAM-treated nuclei contained MLH
prior to differentiation (Figure 2a, 10 hrs). However, by
24 hrs after mixing, most cells (~90%) contained no
MLH-positive nuclei; in approximately 10% of the cells
one MLH-positive nucleus was observed (shown for signal comparison, Figure 2a, 24 hrs.). In contrast,
untreated cells each contained one clear MLH-positive
micronucleus (and two MLH-negative anlagen), reflecting normal development at 24 hrs after mixing. The loss

Page 4 of 15

of MLH in most nuclei of NAM-treated cells indicated
that the extra nuclei were differentiating primarily into
new macronuclei containing euchromatin (anlagen) at a
ratio of 3-6 anlagen:1 micronucleus/cell (opposed to the
normal 2 anlagen:1 micronucleus/cell). This interpretation was supported by the swollen appearance and
weaker DAPI staining of these nuclei, two hallmarks of
new macronuclei. Moreover, immunofluorescence studies showed that during their development, ~90% of the
nuclei in NAM-treated cells acquired at least two other
macronucleus-specific marks that appear in developing
anlagen: the nucleolar protein Nop52 (Figure 2b), and

Figure 2 Extra nuclei in NAM-treated cells acquire new macronucleus characteristics. Cells were mixed in the absence (0 mM NAM) or
presence (25 mM NAM) of nicotinamide and fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde at either 10 or 24 hrs into conjugation (post-mixing). Fixed cells
were subjected to immunoblot analysis with a a-MLH (micronuclear linker histone; note that for the 24 hr NAM-treated sample a cell with an
unusual a-MLH-positive micronucleus is shown for signal comparison), b a-Nop52 (brackets and arrows indicate examples of nuclear bodies that
do not bind a-Nop52; “An”, anlagen), or c a-acetylated H4 (a-AcH4) antisera (arrows indicate nuclear bodies that bind a-AcH4). All fixed cells
were counterstained with DAPI.

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

acetylated histones (Figure 2c). Together, these results
suggest that sirtuin activity is necessary for the maintenance of MLH and for the development of heterochromatin in half of the post-zygotic nuclei (those destined
to differentiate into transcriptionally silent micronuclei).
Furthermore, chromatin in additional nuclei (from sirtuin inhibition) appeared to differentiate toward transcriptional competency.
During the nuclear differentiation process, the old parental macronucleus migrates to the posterior end of the
cell (Figure 1a) and degrades by a regulated mechanism
that is coordinated with other developmental events.
The mechanism shares features with apoptosis (chromatin condensation and oligonucleosome laddering) and
autophagy (fusion of mitochondria and formation of an
autophagosome) [13]. In our experiments, the old parental macronucleus failed to degrade in the majority of
NAM-treated pairs. Cells retained their parental macronucleus even 24 hrs after mixing when new macronuclei
had at least partially differentiated (Figure 1d), suggesting that sirtuin deacetylase activity was necessary for
normal macronuclear degradation, which initiates prior
to this stage. In addition, a larger fraction of cells
retained their parental macronucleus if treated with
NAM earlier in conjugation than shortly before its programmed degradation (see Additional File 1). Treatment
immediately prior to the start of macronuclear degradation (~8 hrs) resulted in only ~33% cells retaining the
old macronucleus (~2X more than untreated cells),
compared to ~79% when treated at 2 hours post-mixing
(~5X more than untreated cells).
To test whether NAM treatment compromised DNA
degradation, conjugating pairs were subjected to a
TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick end labeling) assay to detect fragmented DNA. As
expected, parental macronuclei in untreated conjugating
cells were TUNEL positive 10 hrs into conjugation
(Figure 3). In contrast, NAM-treated cells at the same
stage with (obvious anlagen) contained a TUNEL-negative parental macronucleus. This result supported the
idea that parental macronuclear DNA failed to degrade
in sirtuin-inhibited cells. Occasionally, a single TUNEL
positive micronucleus was observed later in conjugation,
likely one that normally degrades at the end of conjugation (refer to Figure 1a). Here, this served as a positive
signal comparison for “TUNEL-negative” nuclei (Figure
3, see arrow).
These results, which suggest a role for sirtuins in
apoptotic-like nuclear degradation, prompted us to identify specific sirtuins that may contribute to the degradation process. The putative sirtuin named Tetrahymena
Histone Deacetylase 14 (Thd14) was identified for
further investigation due to its localization to the parental macronucleus in preliminary studies.

Page 5 of 15

Figure 3 Nicotinamide prevents degradation of the parental
macronucleus during conjugation. Just prior to mixing, cells were
exposed to either 0 mM or 25 mM nicotinamide (NAM). At 10 hrs
into conjugation (post-mixing), the cells were fixed in 2%
paraformaldehyde, exposed to terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) reagent to assay for degraded DNA,
and stained with DAPI prior to imaging. In cells exposed to NAM,
the old macronuclei “OM” were TUNEL negative, while the OM of
nontreated cells were TUNEL positive (green). “m”, micronucleus.
Note: A cell with an unusual TUNEL-positive micronucleus is shown
for signal comparison in the NAM-treated sample.

Thd14 resembles a class 1b sirtuin

Amino acid sequence comparisons of open reading
frames predicted by the Tetrahymena Genome Database
(TGD; http://www.ciliate.org) identified gene
(TTHERM_00526990), hereafter called THD14, as one
of eleven putative sirtuins encoded in the genome [9]. A
phylogenetic tree constructed with all human, yeast, and
putative Tetrahymena sirtuins showed that Thd14 has
strongest similarity to the class 1 sirtuins, along with
three other Tetrahymena proteins (Figure 4a). Amino
acid alignments between the sirtuin core domain of
Thd14 and those of human class I sirtuins (SIRT1,
SIRT2, and SIRT3) show strong homology (SIRT1: 45%
identical, 62% similar; SIRT2: 44% identical, 61% similar;
SIRT3: 40% identical, 60% similar; see Additional File 2
for a multiple sequence alignment).
Multiple Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) spanned the
majority of the computationally-predicted coding
sequence for Thd14 (Tetrahymena Genome Database;
http://www.ciliate.org). The expected coding sequence
was confirmed using reverse transcriptase-PCR to
amplify cDNA with primers spanning the predicted
START and STOP codons, followed by cloning and
sequencing of the products. Resulting THD14 cDNA
sequence was consistent with the computationally

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

Figure 4 Thd14 resembles a class 1b sirtuin. a Phylogenetic tree
comparing the primary structure of the T. thermophila sirtuins
including Thd14 (asterisk) with that of the yeast sirtuins (Sir2 and
Hst1-4) and the seven human sirtuins (SIRT1-7) (unweighted-pair
group methods using average linkages). The scale (x-axis) represents
evolutionary distance as calculated using the Poisson correction
method, with the units of number of amino acid substitutions per
site. b Amino acid sequence of Thd14 translated from the gene
sequence. The predicted zinc finger domain is highlighted in grey
and the sirtuin domain is highlighted in black. The motifs of
conserved amino acids present within the sirtuin core domain are
in boldface type. Underlined letters indicate intraclass-conserved
residues, used for sirtuin identification. The asterisk denotes the
critical catalytic histidine residue in the ‘HG’ motif that is strictly
conserved in all known sirtuins. Boxed is a sub-motif specific to
class 1b sirtuins. c Cells expressing HA-Thd14 were grown in the
absence “(-)"or presence “(+)” of 1 μg/mL CdCl2 for 2 hrs to induce
expression from the MTT1 promoter. Total cellular proteins were
resolved by SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose membrane, and
subjected to immunoblot analysis using a-HA antiserum. d Amino
acid alignment of the UBP-type zinc-finger domain from Thd14 with
similar domains from murine and Drosophila HDAC6 (mHDAC6 and
dHDAC, respectively). Asterisks mark conserved Cys and His residues;
black asterisks denote those in HDAC6 that are essential for
ubiquitin binding [24]. Conserved residues are shaded in black (for
identical residues) and grey (for chemically similar residues).

Page 6 of 15

predicted coding sequence. The gene contains one
intron and encodes a 471 amino acid protein with two
domains: a sirtuin deacetylase domain and a UBP-like
zinc finger domain (Figure 4b). The predicted protein
molecular mass of 54.1 kD was experimentally confirmed by immunoblot analysis of lysates from cells
expressing 2 × HA epitope-tagged Thd14. Anti-HA antiserum detected a protein of ~57 kD (54 kD plus ~3 kD
2 × HA tag) according to its mobility in SDS-PAGE
(Figure 4c).
Computational analysis of Thd14 amino acid
sequence revealed a sirtuin “core domain” (Figure 4b,
black shading) with typical sirtuin motifs (Figure 4b,
bold white lettering) and highly conserved (underlined)
catalytic domain residues [1,9]. Importantly, Thd14
contains the critical catalytic histidine residue in the
‘HG’ motif that is strictly conserved in all known sirtuins (asterisk, Figure 4b). Immunoprecipitated HAThd14 catalyzed the deacetylation of acetylated Nterminal histone peptide substrates, thus confirming it
as a functional histone deacetylase (Additional File 3).
The presence of specific intraclass-conserved residues
further supported assignment of Thd14 as a class I sirtuin. In particular, the PFA sub-motif is specific to
class Ib enzymes, as is the alanine preceding the HG
motif (Figure 4b, boxed) [1].
One unique feature of Thd14 is an amino terminal
zinc-finger domain of the ubiquitin protease (UBP)-type
superfamily, commonly found on ubiquitin hydrolase
enzymes (Figure 4b, grey shading). Interestingly, the
highest domain homology is with a UBP-type domain
found on the murine class II histone deacetylase
HDAC6 (36% identical, 55% similar; Figure 4d). Named
a Polyubiquitin Associated Zinc finger (PAZ) domain, it
coordinates 3 Zn 2+ ions to bind with high affinity to
polyubiquitin protein modifications [23-25]. This
domain on Thd14 contains 11 out of the 12 highly conserved cysteine and histidine residues used to coordinate
the Zn2+ ions (Figure 4d, all asterisks). Of those residues, the domain on Thd14 contains all that are absolutely required for ubiquitin binding (2 histidines and 6
cysteines) [24] (Figure 4d, indicated by black asterisks).
Thd14 is the only one of the eleven Tetrahymena sirtuins that contains a PAZ domain.
THD14 transcription peaks in early conjugation

THD14 expression throughout the Tetrahymena life
cycle was examined. Two different mating types were
starved (CU428 and SB1969), mixed to initiate conjugation, and allowed to conjugate over a 24-hour period.
Population synchrony was monitored at regular intervals
by determining the fraction of cells in each developmental stage (Figure 5a). Throughout the entire conjugation
time course, 60 to 70% of the cells were tightly

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

Page 7 of 15

Figure 5 Thd14 expression peaks in pre-meiotic stages. a Synchrony of conjugating cells used for cDNA analyses. Cells of two different
mating types were mixed to initiate conjugation, and samples of the conjugating culture were dried and stained with DAPI for visualization of
stages by fluorescence microscopy every hour. Hours post mixing are indicated ("hrs”) above the corresponding stages illustrated. The
percentage of conjugating pairs in each stage at the corresponding time is indicated below the diagram. The last stage is percentage of single
cells. b Relative THD14 expression of starved CU428 (CU Stv) and SB1969 (SB Stv) as well as during conjugation (0-14 and 24 hours after mixing)
was determined using quantitative real-time PCR. THD14 expression was normalized to CYP1 expression (THD14/CYP1) and the levels of THD14
expression were set relative to the starved CU428 (normalized values of each sample/CU428). Error bars represent the standard deviation of three
separate trials and asterisks indicate time points that had a significant (p < 0.05) increase in expression of THD14 compared to either the starved
CU428 cells (CU Stv) or immediately after mixing (0 hrs). THD14 mRNA levels increased early in conjugation at (1-3 hours) and late (24 hours)
after completion of conjugation. c Relative THD14 expression of logarithmically growing CU428 ("Log”) as well as during starvation (hours 0
through 4) was determined using quantitative real-time PCR. THD14 expression was normalized to that of BTU1 and the levels of THD14
expression were set relative to logarithmically growing cells. Error bars represent the standard deviation of three separate trials and asterisks
indicate time points that had a significant (* p < 0.05, *** p < 0.005) increase in expression of THD14 compared to logarithmically growing cells.

synchronized and an additional 20 to 25% of the culture
was within 60 minutes of this primary synchronized
population. Reverse transcriptase-PCR (data not shown)
and qRT-PCR using cDNA made from the conjugating
cells at 1-hour intervals (and from mid-logarithmic
growing cells) was performed. THD14 transcription was
moderate in growing and 24-hour starved cells and elevated in early (pre-meiotic) stages of conjugation. Then,
Thd14 expression slowly decreased over subsequent
intervals, except at 24 hrs after mixing (once cells have
all achieved “endpoint”), where the highest expression
level was observed (Figure 5b). These results were consistent with those from microarray experiments, which
also show that the 24 hour peak initiates at 18 hrs

http://tged.ihb.ac.cn[26]. Together, these results suggest
that THD14 transcription is regulated according to physiological state and developmental stage, and raises the
possibility of a role for this sirtuin in pre-meiotic events.
In other cell types, select sirtuin activities are induced
by starvation. To examine Thd14 expression during
starvation, mRNA was quantified by qRT-PCR over a 4
hour period following nutrient depletion. Relative to
vegetatively growing cells, a dramatic increase in expression was observed immediately with starvation initiation,
and levels remained high over the interval tested (Figure
5c). This result raised the possibility that Thd14 has a
starvation-specific function that is rapidly induced with
nutrient depletion.

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

Page 8 of 15

Thd14 is in mitochondria and nucleoli during vegetative
growth, and aggregates during starvation

To examine localization of Thd14, Green Fluorescent
Protein (GFP) was fused to the amino terminus. The
fusion gene, GFP-THD14, was carried on a high-copy
Tetrahymena rDNA vector [27] and expressed from the
inducible metallothionein 1 (MTT1) promoter (Figure
6a) [27,28]. In mid-logarithmic growing cells, GFPThd14 was detected in mitochondria, which were
marked with fluorescent Mitrotracker dye (Figure 6b).
GFP-Thd14 was also detected in the multiple nucleoli
positioned around the macronuclear periphery (~90
nucleoli per nucleus; Figure 6c), which were illuminated
by differential interference microscopy (labeled “nu” on
DIC image). Food vacuoles in the cytoplasm, a common
fluorescent artifact from over-expression of GFP tagged
proteins (shown by “GFP con/DAPI” panel), were
ignored in this analysis. Consistent with nucleolar localization, immunofluorescence revealed that the nucleolar
protein Nop52 [29] co-localized to regions containing
GFP-Thd14 (Figure 6d). Furthermore, these regions
with GFP-Thd14 stained only weakly with DAPI, a common characteristic of nucleoli.
We next tested whether GFP-Thd14 remained in
nucleoli under conditions that alter rDNA metabolism.
With prolonged nutrient starvation, Tetrahymena
nucleoli aggregate to form larger masses around the
nuclear periphery [30] coincident with a global decrease
in transcription of rDNA and many protein-coding
genes. After 18-20 hours of starvation, GFP-Thd14 was
still present in the nucleoli in the majority of cells.
However, the most intense fluorescence concentrated in
a single large aggregate within the macronucleus (Figure
7a) that was visible by 30 minutes after nutrient depletion (quickly following the increase in THD14 expression; Figure 5c), and reached maximum size 4 hours
later. Of the cells showing nucleolar fluorescence around
the periphery (~85%), approximately half (45/96) contained the larger aggregate. The aggregate of fluorescence appeared as a clustering of multiple small rings,
suggesting sub-structural organization of Thd14 within
the larger aggregate (Figure 7b). As well, DAPI staining
was weaker or absent from the concentration of GFPThd14. DIC imaging mapped Thd14 aggregates to distinct structures within the nucleus (Figure 7b, right
panel). Immunofluorescence with anti-Nop52 antiserum
revealed that Nop52 ringed the entire Thd14 aggregate
(Figure 7c) indicating a relationship to nucleoli.
Thd14 concentrates inside the macronucleus immediately
prior to programmed degradation

To assess Thd14 distribution during development and
nuclear differentiation, cells expressing GFP-Thd14 were

Figure 6 Thd14 resides in mitochondria and nucleoli during
growth. a Line drawing schematic of the construct engineered on
an rDNA vector for expression of GFP-Thd14 fusion protein from the
metallothioneine promoter (MTT1pr). During conjugation, the vector
is processed and amplified as a small linear rDNA chromosome. b
Fluorescence microscopy image of a live cell showing GFP-Thd14
localizing to mitochondria (stained with Mitotracker) near the
surface of the cell. Inlays show magnification of one mitochondrialdense region. The larger region of intense staining is rarely
observed in other cells and thus considered an artifact. c Differential
interference contrast (DIC) imaging of a live cell in vegetative
growth shows locations of nuclear structures, including the
micronucleus (m) and multiple nucleoli (nu) positioned around the
macronuclear (M) periphery. Fluorescence microscopy shows a
merge of DAPI imaging with GFP-Thd14 in nucleoli (center panel).
“GFP con/DAPI” is the GFP only control (no fusion) with a DAPI
image overlay. Green spheres outside the nucleus are probably food
vacuoles, a common artifact observed with high GFP-protein
expression. Live cells were concentrated and mounted in 2%
methylcellulose for observation. d Fluorescence microscopy on a
paraformaldehyde-fixed cell nucleus (bounded by dashed circle)
showing co-localization of GFP-Thd14 and Nop52 by
immunofluorescence in regions staining poorly with DAPI (arrow
indicates an example).

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

Figure 7 Thd14 resides in a large aggregate during starvation. a
A starved live cell expressing GFP-Thd14 visualized by fluorescence
microscopy. The macronucleus is within the circled regions. Staining
outside the nucleus is in food vacuoles. White arrow points to a DAPI
poor region where GFP-Thd14 aggregates. “GFP con” is the negative
control expressing only GFP (no fusion with Thd14). b DAPI, GFP and
DIC images of a macronucleus in a live cell. Masses inside the
macronucleus observed by DIC microscopy (arrow) are ringed by
GFP-Thd14 and stain weakly with DAPI, both observed by
fluorescence imaging. c A macronucleus showing Nop52 ringing
around the large aggregate of GFP-Thd14 by immunofluorescence.

starved and mixed with wild type cells of a different
mating type to initiate sexual conjugation. Samples of
conjugating pairs were examined by fluorescence microscopy at regular intervals throughout the course of conjugation (16 hours) and 24 hours after initiation (Figure
8a). In early conjugation (2-5 hrs, micronuclear meiosis
and mitosis) the rings in the GFP-Thd14 focus became
more pronounced, then diffused throughout the macronucleus. By mid-conjugation (5-8 hrs) at stages immediately preceding old macronucleus pycnosis and
degradation, GFP-Thd14 became increasingly and selectively concentrated within the old macronucleus, but
remained absent from the young, developing new
macronuclei (Figure 8a). Within the degrading nucleus,
Thd14 localized to the area occupied by pycnotic heterochromatin within the boundary of the nuclear envelope as revealed by DIC microscopy (Figure 8b).

Page 9 of 15

Discussion
Sirtuins are known to influence chromatin dynamics
related to gene silencing, DNA repair, and maintenance of
chromosome structural features such as telomeres. In this
study we examined processes involving chromatin
dynamics that are easily synchronized and monitored using
Tetrahymena conjugation. Sirtuin inhibition with nicotinamide (NAM) affected three events requiring significant
changes to global chromatin structure: (1) meiotic chromosome condensation, (2) differentiation of transcriptionally
inert nuclei, and (3) programmed nuclear degradation.
During meiotic prophase, the germline micronucleus
elongates ~50-fold resulting in a string-like “crescent”
nucleus. Chromosomes decondense and assume a bouquet-like formation for homologous pairing and recombination, then re-condense prior to metaphase I [31,32].
With 50 mM NAM treatment, decondensation and
elongation was unaffected (normal numbers of fully
elongated crescents were observed), but re-condensation
appeared incomplete; the majority of cells arrested with
partially elongated micronuclei (Figure 1b). The class I
sirtuin, SIRT2, was previously implicated in promoting
chromosome condensation during mitosis in human
cells by deacetylating histone H4 [33]. However, evidence for sirtuin roles in meiotic chromatin dynamics
was lacking prior to this study.
Cells in a lower NAM concentration proceeded through
meiosis, but displayed other chromatin differentiation
defects. First, more than four post-zygotic nuclei were
observed in most cells. Of these nuclei, all (or most in
some cells) initiated new macronucleus chromatin development involving loss of micronuclear linker histone
(MLH) (Figure 2a), and gain of both Nop52 (Figure 2b)
and histone acetylation (Figure 2c). The ratio of differentiating macronuclei to micronuclei was 3-6:1 instead of
the normal 2:1 in most pairs (Figures 1d and 2-all parts).
These data suggest that sirtuins normally promote the
retention of MLH and development of heterochromatin in
micronucleus-destined nuclei. Our observations suggest
that the abnormally large number of nuclei in sirtuininhibited cells resulted from failure of gamete degradation
prior to fertilization (3 of the 4 gametes normally degrade),
an aberrant event that could be mechanistically related to
the failure of parental macronuclear degradation observed
later in conjugation. This idea is consistent with a previous
observation that halting macronuclear degradation with
PI-3 kinase inhibitors led to the retention and reprogramming of pronuclei to differentiate into micro- and macronuclei [34]. Our results indicate that the retained extra
nuclei are capable of differentiating from transcriptionally
silent to transcriptionally active nuclei, and that this pathway is chosen (over maintenance of the silent state) in the
absence of sirtuin activity.

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

Page 10 of 15

Figure 8 Thd14 concentrates inside the macronucleus immediately prior to pycnosis. a Fluorescence microscopy images of live
conjugating pairs showing localization of GFP-Thd14 at three points in conjugation designated “early” (before meiosis), “mid” (after meiosis, middevelopment of anlagen) and “late” (after pair separation, prior to macronuclear reabsorption). M, macronucleus; An, anlagen; m, micronucleus.
Live cells were concentrated and mounted in 2% methylcellulose. b DIC and fluorescence microscopy images of a live conjugating pair showing
GFP concentration over condensed chromatin regions in degrading macronuclei (arrows). Cells were prepared as in part a.

Unlike normal cells that lose their parental macronucleus by 16 hours into conjugation, NAM-treated cells
retained a macronucleus that exhibited little to no DNA
degradation (Figure 3). Programmed macronuclear
degradation is thought to proceed through an apoptosislike, caspase-independent mechanism that is dependent
on endonuclease G activity and apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) stored in mitochondria [35,36]. There is a
well-described relationship in which chromatin condensation precedes DNA fragmentation in apoptosis [37];
one that also applies to programmed nuclear death in
Tetrahymena [35,38,39], but the mechanistic details
underlying these chromatin changes in any system are
poorly understood. In Tetrahymena, macronuclear DNA
first condenses to less than half its original volume by
14 hours of conjugation, followed by global degradation
of chromatin and resorption by the autophagosome
[13,35,39]. This degree of condensation was inhibited in
the majority of NAM-treated cells (Figure 1b). Given
that DNA degradation also failed in these nuclei (Figure
3), sirtuin activity may be necessary for the chromatin
condensation step of nuclear degradation, a prerequisite
to global degradation. Interestingly, sirtuin inhibition did
not affect the global deacetylation of histone H4 in parental macronuclear chromatin during pycnosis (Figure
2c), but it may be targeting other histones or nonhistone

targets to mediate condensation. Our NAM treatment
time course (Additional File 1) suggests sirtuin involvement in an earlier degradation step, possibly involving
initial signaling. Normally, commitment of nuclei to
new macronuclear development at 6-7 hours into conjugation triggers destruction of the old parental macronucleus, which involves its migration to the posterior
region of the cell [38,40]. In our study, although NAMtreated nuclei committed to anlagen development, parental macronuclei failed to migrate in ~30% of cells
(Figures 1d and 3) consistent with possible disruption of
the degradation “triggering” event.
Sirtuins are involved in signaling pathways preventing
apoptosis and cellular senescence in other organisms
[41], but no direct action on chromatin destined for
degradation has been described. Although it is possible
that the NAM treatment in our study inhibited nuclear
degradation through blocking sirtuin-mediated signaling
pathways, we present evidence that at least one Tetrahymena sirtuin, Thd14, could act directly on chromatin
destined for degradation. Thd14 selectively accumulated
in the parental macronucleus (not in anlagen) at the
initial stage of chromatin condensation (~8 hrs), and in
later stages mapped precisely over the region of condensed chromatin within the macronuclear envelope
(Figures 8a and 8b). The mechanism for Thd14

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

accumulation will be the focus of future studies. We
speculate that Thd14 plays a role in macronuclear degradation by directly modifying histones. While our HDAC
assay confirmed that Thd14 is capable of deacetylating
histones in vitro (Additional File 3), it is also possible
that this enzyme may target other substrates under biologically relevant conditions. Other than histone H2AX
and H2B phosphorylation, little is known about other
modifications to apoptotic chromatin, but histone deacetylation appears critical in at least some cases. Deacetylation of yeast histone H2B by the Hos3 HDAC (class II
enzyme) is required for apoptosis [42], and apoptotic
condensation in leukemia cells was linked with global
histone deacetylation [43], but the deacetylases remain
unknown. Given their involvement in heterochromatin
formation at various genomic loci [6], sirtuins are reasonable candidates for apoptotic chromatin modifiers. Our
combined results from NAM-inhibition and Thd14 localization provide the first evidence that a sirtuin(s) acts on
chromatin destined for degradation.
One intriguing feature of Thd14 is its zinc finger
domain, which is unusual to find on a sirtuin enzyme.
Its strong homology to the PAZ domain on HDAC6
known to bind ubiquitin [23-25], suggests that Thd14
may interact with ubiquitin or ubiquitinated proteins,
especially since it contains all of the essential binding
residues [24] (Figure 4d). Since ubiquitin plays a major
role in apoptosis and labels proteins for degradation, the
PAZ and sirtuin domains of Thd14 may collaborate to
make essential apoptotic modifications. Although a single protein with both a sirtuin and PAZ domain has not
been identified in higher organisms, Thd14 may combine functions that higher-order organisms have evolved
to handle with separate, more specialized proteins. To
assess these possibilities, function of the putative PAZ
domain and its potential role in nuclear degradation will
be the subject of future studies.
Results in this study showed that Thd14 targeting was
dependent on physiological state. In the nucleus of vegetatively growing cells, Thd14 resided primarily in the
multiple nucleoli positioned around the nuclear periphery, and in mitochondria. Sirtuins in other organisms are
known to act at nucleolar loci where they stabilize rDNA
repeats and factor into RNA polymerase I transcription
and rDNA silencing [44-47]. Interestingly, nutrient starvation dramatically increased THD14 expression (Figure
5c), and caused Thd14 protein to concentrate into a prominent focus, or aggregate, inside the nucleus (Figure
7a). Like nucleoli, this aggregate was often associated
with the nuclear periphery and stained weakly with DAPI
(Figure 7a, left panel). However, it was much larger than
the typical nucleolar aggregates previously observed by
electron microscopy [48,49], and was ringed only around
the periphery by the nucleolar protein Nop52 (Figure 7c).

Page 11 of 15

Previous work showed that under certain gene overexpression conditions (PML and p53) the human Sir2
homolog, SIRT1, is recruited to discrete nuclear foci with
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein, in “PML bodies”
where it deacetylates proteins such as p53 [50]. Similarly,
Thd14 may be sequestering with other nuclear proteins,
possibly those involved in regulating cellular response to
starvation stress.
Our study raises the intriguing possibility that the sirtuin Thd14 is specialized for the formation of irreversible heterochromatin functionally linked to parental
macronucleus degradation, but not for reversible, facultative heterochromatin like meiotic chromatin in micronuclei. Despite the elevated expression in pre-meiotic
stages, Thd14 did not localize to micronuclei at any
point before or during meiosis, and formation of these
two types of heterochromatin appears mechanistically
different with respect to to histone modifications [51].
Especially intriguing is that localization results suggest
additional roles for Thd14 in nucleoli and mitochondria.
Whether they relate to nuclear degradation mechanisms
will be a focus of future studies. In one possible model
consistent with the macronuclear autophagy process,
Thd14 is delivered specifically to the parental macronucleus from mitochondria that fuse with the nucleus
prior to degradation, a mechanism previously shown to
deliver other degradation factors such as endonucleases
and AIF [35,52]. Such a model would explain the
increased concentration of parental macronuclear
Thd14 in the absence of increased expression (Figure
5b). Regardless of its concentration mechanism, we
expect future work to define a role for Thd14 in promoting or coordinating macronuclear autophagy.

Conclusions
The sirtuin inhibitor nicotinamide prevents meiotic
chromosome condensation, and normal progression of
both chromatin differentiation and programmed nuclear
degradation during development in Tetrahymena, all of
which depend on global chromatin condensation. One
sirtuin, Thd14, resides in mitochondria, nucleoli, and in
distinct nuclear sub-structures depending on physiological conditions and stages of the cell’s life cycle. Notably,
Thd14 accumulates in chromatin-rich regions of the
degrading macronucleus during the chromatin condensation stage preceding global degradation. Together, the
NAM-inhibition and Thd14 localization studies suggest
the first evidence that sirtuins act on chromatin destined
for degradation in apoptotic nuclei.
Methods
Bioinformatics

The amino acid sequences of the eleven Tetrahymena
sirtuins (Thd8 through 18), yeast Sir2 and Hst1 through

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

4, and human SIRT1 through 7 were aligned using
Tree-based Consistency Objective Function For alignment Evaluation (TCOFFEE; http://www.ebi.ac.uk/t-coffee/). The molecular phylogeny was then evaluated
using Multiple Sequence Alignment-CLUSTALW
[Kyoto University Bioinformatics Center http://www.
genome.jp/tools/clustalw/]. The CLUSTAL protein
alignment was performed using a gap open penalty of
10, a gap extension penalty of 0.05, a hydrophobic gap,
no weight transition, and a BLOSUM weight matrix.
Distances were computed using the Poisson Correction
Distance method in Molecular Evolutionary Genetic
Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0 (MEGA4) [53].
The unweighted-pair group method using an average
linkages tree was constructed from the matrix of distances according to the model using MEGA4, and the
robustness of the tree topology was tested with 1,000
bootstrap replicates. Sirtuin core domains were identified using ExPASY-PROSITE [Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics http://prosite.expasy.org/].
Statistical analyses

For qRT-PCR: results are indicated as the mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance in qRT-PCR and
NAM treatment studies was determined by independent,
two tailed t-tests in Microsoft Excel to compare differences between two groups. p-values of < 0.05 were considered significant.
Strains and cell culture conditions

Tetrahymena thermophila strains CU727 (btu1-1::btu11M350K/btu1-1::btu1-1M350K; ory-r, tax-s, V), CU724
(btu1-1::btu1-1M350K/btu1-1::btu1-1M350K, chx1-1/
chx1-1; cy-r, mp-r, ory-r, tax-s, VII), CU427 (chx1-1/
chx1-1 CHX1; cy-s, VI), and CU428 (mpr1-1/mpr1-1
MPR1; mp-s, VII) provided by the National Tetrahymena Stock Center at Cornell University, were used as
wild-type strains. For all experiments, Tetrahymena
thermophila strains including the strain expressing GFPtagged Thd14 (GFP-Thd14) were grown in 2% PPYS
medium (0.02 g/mL proteose peptone, 0.002 g/mL yeast
extract, and 0.03 mg/mL sequestrine) containing 2X PSF
(penicillin, streptomycin, and fungizone; Gibco-BRL)
with shaking (150 rpm) at 30°C, until mid-logarithmic
phase (1x105 to 3x105 cells/ml). The cells were starved
in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) for 14 to 24 hrs at a density of 3x105 cells/ml at 30°C without shaking.
For nicotinamide (NAM) treatment experiments, cells
of two different mating types (CU428 and CU427) were
mixed together after starving each strain for 18-24 hrs
in 10 mM Tris (pH 7.5). Cells were treated with 50 mM
NAM at the time of mixing ("0 hrs”), and with 25 mM
NAM at 0, 2, 4, or 6 hrs after mixing. For analysis of

Page 12 of 15

developmental morphology, at least 200 cells were
counted for each time point and NAM concentration.
HDAC activity assay

Whole cell protein lysates were generated from 7 × 106
cells of both CU427 (wild type) and cells expressing HAThd14 by vortexing for 1 min with acid-washed glass
beads (Sigma) in 350 μL of lysis buffer (25 mM Tris pH
8,15 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl 2 , 0.1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM
phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, 0.05 mM dithiothreitol).
After treatment with DNase (277 U) for 20 min, the
lysates were clarified by centrifuging at 13,000 xg for 15
min and then were incubated with Ezview Red Anti-HA
affinity gel (Sigma) for 1 hr at 4°C. The gel was washed 3
times with assay buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8, 137 mM
NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2 ) and resuspended in
the same buffer to yield a total volume of 60 μL.
Assays were performed in a 96 well plate with the
HDAC Fluorometric Assay/Drug Discovery Kit (Enzo
Life Sciences). Each 50 μL assay contained 1 μM Trichostatin A (type I and II HDAC inhibitor), 20 μL of the gellysate slurry, 200 μM nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD+) and 500 μM Fluor de Lys® substrate in assay buffer. For the blank, 1 mM NAM was added before the substrate to inhibit any sirtuin activity. After 1 hr at 37°C, 50
μL of Fluor de Lys ® developer and 1 mM NAM was
added to quench the reaction. The fluorescence intensity
of each assay was measured with a Perkin Elmer LS-55,
Molecular Devices SpectraMax Gemini EM using an
excitation of 355 nm and an emission of 460 nm.
Plasmid construction

pIGF-GTW::THD14 for GFP-Thd14 expression. The THD14
gene was amplified from Tetrahymena genomic DNA by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using forward primer 5’CACCATGAGTTCTGAAATTAGTAAAAC-3’
and
reverse primer 5’-TCAAAGGTTTTATTTCTTCTCTA-3’.
The resulting PCR product was directionally cloned into
plasmid pENTR/D-TOPO (Invitrogen) to make plasmid
pENTR-THD14, and transformed into chemically competent TOP10 Escherichia coli cells (Invitrogen). After verification of the cloned THD14 sequence, the gene was
exchanged with the Gateway cassette in pIGF-GTW [54] by
combining 150 ng of pENTR-THD14 entry clone with 400
ng of pIGF-GTW and recombinase (LR Clonase II, Invitrogen) and incubating for 20 hrs at 22°C. Following proteinase
K digestion, recombination reactions were electroporated
into DH10B Escherichia coli made electrocompetent by a
published method [55]. The resulting pIGF-GTW::THD14
plasmid contained the sequence construct to express a GFP
fusion with the amino terminus of Thd14 under control of
the MTT1 promoter. The construct was confirmed by
sequencing.

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

To make the plasmid for expression of HA-Thd14
fusion protein (pBM2HA::THD14), the THD14 sequence
with 630 bp upstream and 532 bp downstream of the
gene was cloned into pCR-BluntII-TOPO vector (Invitrogen). SalI and AvrII restriction sites were introduced
through site-directed mutagenesis (QuikChange, Stratagene) at the start codon and directly after the stop codon
respectively (pTHD14SA). After digesting the plasmid
with SalI and AvrII, the THD14 coding sequence was
removed and then inserted into pBM2HA-YFG (vector
containing the BTU1 flanking region surrounding the
MTT1 promoter upstream of the multiple cloning sites
and a sequence encoding a double HA peptide tag) for
integration into the BTU1 locus of btu1-1 cells. The
resulting plasmid was named “pBM2HA-THD14“.
Tetrahymena transformation

The HA-THD14 fusion construct (from plasmid
pBM2HA::THD14 digested with KpnI and SacI) was integrated into the taxol-sensitive beta-tubulin (btu1-1) locus
of starved Tetrahymena cells (strain CU727) through biolistic bombardment as previously described [56]. Transformants were selected by growth in the presence of 20 μM
paclitaxel (MP Biomedicals) after 5 hrs of incubation at
30°C without drug. The construct for GFP tagging of
THD14 (pIGF-GTW::THD14) was transformed into strain
CU428 by electroporation according to a previously published method [57]. Transformants were selected by
growth in the presence of 100 μg/mL paromomycin.
Reverse-transcriptase PCR, quantitative PCR, and coding
sequence determination

Genomic DNA was isolated as described previously (61).
Total RNA was isolated from vegetatively dividing, starved,
and conjugating cells using the RNeasy Total RNA kit
(Qiagen). The cDNA was made as previously described
[56] using 2 μg of total RNA for each reaction. The cDNA
was used to perform qPCR using SsoFast EvaGreen supermix with low ROX (Bio-Rad) following the manufacturer’s
directions in a MJ MiniOpticon system (Bio-Rad). Genomic DNA dilutions were used for a standard curve and
CYP1 or BTU1 primers were used for normalization of
THD14 expression levels. Expression values were set relative to the CU428 starved value in the conjugation expression experiment and logarithmically growing cells in the
starvation expression experiment. The following primer
sets were used for qPCR; THD14 and CYP1 primers were
designed to flank an intron in order to differentiate
between products from cDNA or possible contaminating
genomic DNA template for THD14:
THD14-QF (5’-CTGATTTGGTCGTCATGG-3’)
THD14-QR (5’-ACAGTTCCTTCAGGGTATGTTC-3’)
CYP1-QF (5’-AAGGATTAAGGTTAATGTGGTTCA-3’)
CYP1-QR (5’-TTTCTGTACTGCAACATAGGGATA-3’)

Page 13 of 15

BTU1-QF (5’-GATAGAATCATGGAAACCTTCTC-3’)
BTU1-QR (5’-CAAGTGGTTAAGATCACCATAAG-3’)
To determine the THD14 coding sequence, the
entire coding sequence was amplified from cDNA
using the primers for construction of pENTR-THD14
(above). The amplified sequence was subcloned onto
pENTR plasmid (Invitrogen) and sequenced using
M13-forward and M13-reverse primers. The coding
sequence was submitted to Genbank, (accession number HQ156951).
Immunoblot analysis

Whole cell protein lysates were generated from 3 × 107
cells of both CU428 (wild type) and cells expressing HAThd14. Cells were lysed in 700 μL of TLB (350 mM
NaCl, 40 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 1 mM dithiothreitol), vortexed for 1 minute, and
clarified by centrifuging at 13,000 xg for 15 minutes.
Total protein concentration was determined using Bradford Reagent (Bio-Rad). Lysate (100 μg of total protein)
was mixed with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel loading
buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 100 mM dithiothreitol,
2% [wt/vol] SDS, 0.1% bromophenol blue, 10% glycerol)
and boiled for 5 min. Samples were loaded (20 μg total
protein per sample) and resolved by SDS-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (PAGE) on a 10% polyacrylamide gel,
transferred to nitrocellulose membrane, and incubated
first with a-HA antiserum (Covance) diluted 1:2,000 with
5% milk in Tris Buffered Saline (TBS). The membrane
was washed 3 × 5 minutes in TBS and then incubated
with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat a-mouse
antiserum (Pierce) diluted 1:10,000 with 5% milk in TBS
and developed using SuperSignal West Dura Chemiluminescence Kit (Pierce) and exposed to X-ray film.
Microscopy

For all live-cell imaging, 1 mL of culture was centrifuged
at 2,000 xg and the pellet was incubated for 10 min with
0.1 μg of 4’,6 diamino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride
(DAPI; Sigma Chemicals). After dropping 5 μL of 2%
methylcellulose on a microscope slide, 1 μL of the pellet
was then added and covered with a #1.5 micro cover
slip (VWR). For mitochondrial imaging, cell cultures
were incubated with 0.5 μg/mL Mito Tracker © Red
CMXRos (Invitrogen) for at least 15 hrs and washed 3×
with 10 mM Tris Buffer (pH 7.5) prior to sample preparation. Imaging involving mitochondria was performed on an Olympus 1 × 81 fluorescence microscope
with a magnification of 100×. All other fluorescence
imaging was performed on a Nikon Eclipse E400 fluorescence microscope with a magnification of 40× or
100×. For differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy, cells were prepared in the same way as for fluorescence microscopy.

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

Indirect immunofluorescence and DAPI staining of cells

Growing and conjugating cells were fixed in 3% paraformaldehyde and processed for immunofluorescence
microscopy as previously described [58]. For detection of
micronuclear linker histone (MLH), cells were incubated
with a-MLH antiserum (1:500; generous gift from David
Allis). For detection of Nop52, cells were incubated with
a-Nop52 antiserum (1:20,000; generous gift from Ronald
Pearlman). All primary antisera were detected with rhodamine-conjugated goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G
(1:100; Jackson ImmunoResearch catalog no. 111-025003). Fixed cells were counterstained by incubation with
0.1 μg/ml DAPI in 0.1% bovine serum albumin-phosphate-buffered saline for 10 min.
TUNEL assay

Conjugating cells (CU428 × CU427) were fixed 10 hrs
after mixing in 2% paraformaldehyde and stored in 70%
ethanol at -80°C for at least 24 hrs. The TUNEL (terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling)
assay was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions for the APO-DIRECT kit (BD Pharmigen). In short,
fixed cells were incubated overnight at 30°C in DNA labeling solution (containing FITC dUTP and TdT enzyme)
and then exposed for 30 min at room temperature to Propidium Iodide/RNase staining buffer prior to imaging.

Abbrevations
GFP: green fluorescent protein; HDAC: histone deacetylase; NAM: nicotinamide; NAD+: nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide; MLH: micronuclear linker histone; MTT1:
metallothioneine; OM: old macronucleus; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; TBS: Tris buffered saline; Thd14:
Tetrahymena histone deacetylase 14; TUNEL: terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
Additional material
Additional file 1: “Time dependence of nicotinamide treatment
effects”. This data illustrates a decrease in the old macronucleus
retention phenotype with NAM treatment later in conjugation.
Additional file 2: “Thd14 sirtuin core domain resembles that of
other class I sirtuins”. This is an alignment of Thd14 with the sirtuin
domains of yeast and human enzymes. It shows strong conservation of
active site residues and metal binding residues.
Additional file 3: “Thd14 has histone deacetylase activity”. This is
data from an experiment testing for histone deacetylase activity. It shows
that Thd14 deacetylates histone amino-terminal peptides.

Acknowledgements and Funding
We are grateful for the contributions made by several colleagues: Douglas
Chalker for performing DIC imaging and for many helpful discussions, C.
David Allis for providing anti-MLH antiserum, Ronald Pearlman for providing
anti-Nop52 antiserum, Allen Chen for imaging starved cells, Linda Wang for
initial work on nicotinamide treatment experiments, and Lindsey Moneta for

Page 14 of 15

assistance with constructing GFP-Thd14. This work was supported by
National Science Foundation grant #0545560 made to E.A.W.
Author details
1
Keck Science Department of Claremont McKenna, Pitzer, and Scripps
Colleges, W.M. Keck Science Center, 925 N. Mills Ave., Claremont, CA 91711,
USA. 2Chemistry Department, Hobart and Williams Smith College, 300
Pultney St., Geneva, NY 14456, USA. 3Biomedical Sciences Department,
Missouri State University, 901 S. National Ave., Springfield, MO 65897, USA.
Authors’ contributions
KMS performed the TUNEL assays, NAM experiments, HDAC assay, GFPThd14/mitotracker microscopy, and helped draft and revise the manuscript.
SF produced the genetic constructs and transformed cell lines, initial gene
expression profiles, GFP-Thd14 nuclear localization and Nop52
immunofluorescence results, and performed some of the bioinformatics
analyses. KAC performed the qRT-PCR, some bioinformatics analyses, all
statistics, and helped revise the manuscript. JJS assisted with transformations,
helped draft and revise the manuscript, and assisted with supervision of
experiments. EAW conceived the idea, drafted the manuscript, supervised
the experiments, and performed some of the imaging. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 1 April 2011 Accepted: 21 September 2011
Published: 21 September 2011
References
1. Frye RA: Phylogenetic classification of prokaryotic and eukaryotic Sir2like proteins. Biochemical and biophysical research communications 2000,
273(2):793-798.
2. Saunders LR, Verdin E: Sirtuins: critical regulators at the crossroads
between cancer and aging. Oncogene 2007, 26(37):5489-5504.
3. Michan S, Sinclair D: Sirtuins in mammals: insights into their biological
function. The Biochemical journal 2007, 404(1):1-13.
4. North BJ, Marshall BL, Borra MT, Denu JM, Verdin E: The human Sir2
ortholog, SIRT2, is an NAD+-dependent tubulin deacetylase. Molecular
cell 2003, 11(2):437-444.
5. Dryden SC, Nahhas FA, Nowak JE, Goustin AS, Tainsky MA: Role for human
SIRT2 NAD-dependent deacetylase activity in control of mitotic exit in
the cell cycle. Molecular and cellular biology 2003, 23(9):3173-3185.
6. Vaquero A: The conserved role of sirtuins in chromatin regulation. The
International journal of developmental biology 2009, 53(2-3):303-322.
7. Finkel T, Deng CX, Mostoslavsky R: Recent progress in the biology and
physiology of sirtuins. Nature 2009, 460(7255):587-591.
8. Donmez G, Guarente L: Aging and disease: connections to sirtuins. Aging
cell 9(2):285-290.
9. Smith JJ, Torigoe SE, Maxson J, Fish LC, Wiley EA: A class II histone
deacetylase acts on newly synthesized histones in Tetrahymena.
Eukaryotic cell 2008, 7(3):471-482.
10. Wiley EA, Myers T, Parker K, Braun T, Yao MC: Class I histone deacetylase
Thd1p affects nuclear integrity in Tetrahymena thermophila. Eukaryotic
cell 2005, 4(5):981-990.
11. Jeter JR Jr, Pavlat WA, Cameron IL: Changes in the nuclear acidic proteins
and chromatin structure in starved and refed tetrahymena. Experimental
cell research 1975, 93(1):79-88.
12. Cole ES, Frankel J: Conjugal blocks in Tetrahymena pattern mutants and
their cytoplasmic rescue. II. janus A. Developmental biology 1991,
148(2):420-428.
13. Davis MC, Ward JG, Herrick G, Allis CD: Programmed nuclear death:
apoptotic-like degradation of specific nuclei in conjugating
Tetrahymena. Developmental biology 1992, 154(2):419-432.
14. Lu C, Zhu F, Cho YY, Tang F, Zykova T, Ma WY, Bode AM, Dong Z: Cell
apoptosis: requirement of H2AX in DNA ladder formation, but not for
the activation of caspase-3. Molecular cell 2006, 23(1):121-132.
15. Artus C, Boujrad H, Bouharrour A, Brunelle MN, Hoos S, Yuste VJ,
Lenormand P, Rousselle JC, Namane A, England P, et al: AIF promotes
chromatinolysis and caspase-independent programmed necrosis by
interacting with histone H2AX. The EMBO journal 2010, 29(9):1585-1599.

Slade et al. BMC Cell Biology 2011, 12:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2121/12/40

16. Grubisha O, Smith BC, Denu JM: Small molecule regulation of Sir2 protein
deacetylases. The FEBS journal 2005, 272(18):4607-4616.
17. Bitterman KJ, Anderson RM, Cohen HY, Latorre-Esteves M, Sinclair DA:
Inhibition of silencing and accelerated aging by nicotinamide, a putative
negative regulator of yeast sir2 and human SIRT1. The Journal of
biological chemistry 2002, 277(47):45099-45107.
18. Denu JM: Linking chromatin function with metabolic networks: Sir2
family of NAD(+)-dependent deacetylases. Trends in biochemical sciences
2003, 28(1):41-48.
19. Duharcourt S, Yao MC: Role of histone deacetylation in developmentally
programmed DNA rearrangements in Tetrahymena thermophila.
Eukaryotic cell 2002, 1(2):293-303.
20. Scherthan H: A bouquet makes ends meet. Nature reviews 2001,
2(8):621-627.
21. Loidl J, Scherthan H: Organization and pairing of meiotic chromosomes
in the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila. Journal of cell science 2004,
117(Pt 24):5791-5801.
22. Chicoine LG, Wenkert D, Richman R, Wiggins JC, Allis CD: Modulation of
linker histones during development in Tetrahymena: selective
elimination of linker histone during the differentiation of new
macronuclei. Developmental biology 1985, 109(1):1-8.
23. Hook SS, Orian A, Cowley SM, Eisenman RN: Histone deacetylase 6 binds
polyubiquitin through its zinc finger (PAZ domain) and copurifies with
deubiquitinating enzymes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 2002, 99(21):13425-13430.
24. Boyault C, Gilquin B, Zhang Y, Rybin V, Garman E, Meyer-Klaucke W,
Matthias P, Muller CW, Khochbin S: HDAC6-p97/VCP controlled
polyubiquitin chain turnover. The EMBO journal 2006, 25(14):3357-3366.
25. Lee JY, Koga H, Kawaguchi Y, Tang W, Wong E, Gao YS, Pandey UB,
Kaushik S, Tresse E, Lu J, et al: HDAC6 controls autophagosome
maturation essential for ubiquitin-selective quality-control autophagy.
The EMBO journal 2010, 29(5):969-980.
26. Miao W, Xiong J, Bowen J, Wang W, Liu Y, Braguinets O, Grigull J,
Pearlman RE, Orias E, Gorovsky MA: Microarray analyses of gene
expression during the Tetrahymena thermophila life cycle. PloS one 2009,
4(2):e4429.
27. Yao MC, Yao CH: Transformation of Tetrahymena to cycloheximide
resistance with a ribosomal protein gene through sequence
replacement. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 1991, 88(21):9493-9497.
28. Boldrin F, Santovito G, Gaertig J, Wloga D, Cassidy-Hanley D, Clark TG,
Piccinni E: Metallothionein gene from Tetrahymena thermophila with a
copper-inducible-repressible promoter. Eukaryotic cell 2006, 5(2):422-425.
29. McGrath KE, Smothers JF, Dadd CA, Madireddi MT, Gorovsky MA, Allis CD:
An abundant nucleolar phosphoprotein is associated with ribosomal
DNA in Tetrahymena macronuclei. Molecular biology of the cell 1997,
8(1):97-108.
30. Satir B, Dirksen ER: Nucleolar aging in Tetrahymena during the cultural
growth cycle. The Journal of cell biology 1971, 48(1):143-154.
31. Sugai T, Hiwatashi K: Cytologic and autoradiographic studies of the
micronucleus at meiotic prophase in Tetrahymena pyriformis. The
Journal of protozoology 1974, 21(4):542-548.
32. Mochizuki K, Novatchkova M, Loidl J: DNA double-strand breaks, but not
crossovers, are required for the reorganization of meiotic nuclei in
Tetrahymena. Journal of cell science 2008, 121(Pt 13):2148-2158.
33. Vaquero A, Scher MB, Lee DH, Sutton A, Cheng HL, Alt FW, Serrano L,
Sternglanz R, Reinberg D: SirT2 is a histone deacetylase with preference
for histone H4 Lys 16 during mitosis. Genes & development 2006,
20(10):1256-1261.
34. Yakisich JS, Kapler GM: The effect of phosphoinositide 3-kinase inhibitors
on programmed nuclear degradation in Tetrahymena and fate of
surviving nuclei. Cell death and differentiation 2004, 11(10):1146-1149.
35. Akematsu T, Endoh H: Role of apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) in
programmed nuclear death during conjugation in Tetrahymena
thermophila. BMC cell biology 2010, 11:13.
36. Kobayashi T, Endoh H: A possible role of mitochondria in the apoptoticlike programmed nuclear death of Tetrahymena thermophila. The FEBS
journal 2005, 272(20):5378-5387.
37. Tone S, Sugimoto K, Tanda K, Suda T, Uehira K, Kanouchi H, Samejima K,
Minatogawa Y, Earnshaw WC: Three distinct stages of apoptotic nuclear
condensation revealed by time-lapse imaging, biochemical and electron

Page 15 of 15

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.
48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

microscopy analysis of cell-free apoptosis. Experimental cell research 2007,
313(16):3635-3644.
Mpoke S, Wolfe J: DNA digestion and chromatin condensation during
nuclear death in Tetrahymena. Experimental cell research 1996,
225(2):357-365.
Kobayashi T, Endoh H: Caspase-like activity in programmed nuclear death
during conjugation of Tetrahymena thermophila. Cell death and
differentiation 2003, 10(6):634-640.
Lu E, Wolfe J: Lysosomal enzymes in the macronucleus of Tetrahymena
during its apoptosis-like degradation. Cell death and differentiation 2001,
8(3):289-297.
Liu T, Liu PY, Marshall GM: The critical role of the class III histone
deacetylase SIRT1 in cancer. Cancer research 2009, 69(5):1702-1705.
Ahn SH, Diaz RL, Grunstein M, Allis CD: Histone H2B deacetylation at
lysine 11 is required for yeast apoptosis induced by phosphorylation of
H2B at serine 10. Molecular cell 2006, 24(2):211-220.
Boix-Chornet M, Fraga MF, Villar-Garea A, Caballero R, Espada J, Nunez A,
Casado J, Largo C, Casal JI, Cigudosa JC, et al: Release of hypoacetylated
and trimethylated histone H4 is an epigenetic marker of early apoptosis.
The Journal of biological chemistry 2006, 281(19):13540-13547.
Ford E, Voit R, Liszt G, Magin C, Grummt I, Guarente L: Mammalian Sir2
homolog SIRT7 is an activator of RNA polymerase I transcription. Genes
& development 2006, 20(9):1075-1080.
Haigis MC, Guarente LP: Mammalian sirtuins–emerging roles in
physiology, aging, and calorie restriction. Genes & development 2006,
20(21):2913-2921.
Straight AF, Shou W, Dowd GJ, Turck CW, Deshaies RJ, Johnson AD,
Moazed D: Net1, a Sir2-associated nucleolar protein required for rDNA
silencing and nucleolar integrity. Cell 1999, 97(2):245-256.
Moazed D: Common themes in mechanisms of gene silencing. Molecular
cell 2001, 8(3):489-498.
Cameron IL, Guile EE: Nucleolar and Biochemical Changes During
Unbalanced Growth of Tetrahymena Pyriformis. The Journal of cell biology
1965, 26(3):845-855.
Elliott AM, Kennedy JR Jr, Bak IJ: Macronuclear events in synchronously
dividing Tetrahymena pyriformis. The Journal of cell biology 1962,
12:515-531.
Langley E, Pearson M, Faretta M, Bauer UM, Frye RA, Minucci S, Pelicci PG,
Kouzarides T: Human SIR2 deacetylates p53 and antagonizes PML/p53induced cellular senescence. The EMBO journal 2002, 21(10):2383-2396.
Ajiro K: Histone H2B phosphorylation in mammalian apoptotic cells. An
association with DNA fragmentation. The Journal of biological chemistry
2000, 275(1):439-443.
Akematsu T, Pearlman RE, Endoh H: Gigantic macroautophagy in
programmed nuclear death of Tetrahymena thermophila. Autophagy
2010, 6(7):901-911.
Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Molecular biology and
evolution 2007, 24(8):1596-1599.
Malone CD, Falkowska KA, Li AY, Galanti SE, Kanuru RC, LaMont EG,
Mazzarella KC, Micev AJ, Osman MM, Piotrowski NK, et al: Nucleus-specific
importin alpha proteins and nucleoporins regulate protein import and
nuclear division in the binucleate Tetrahymena thermophila. Eukaryotic
cell 2008, 7(9):1487-1499.
Sambrook J, Russell D: Transformation of E. coli by Electroporation. In
Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. Volume 1.. 3 edition. Cold Spring
Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2001:120-121.
Marsh TC, Cole ES, Romero DP: The transition from conjugal development
to the first vegetative cell division is dependent on RAD51 expression in
the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila. Genetics 2001, 157(4):1591-1598.
Asai DJ, Forney JD: Tetrahymena thermophila. In Methods in cell biology.
Volume 62. Edited by: L W, P M. San Diego, CA Academic Press;
2000:489-490.
Cole ES, Stuart KR, Marsh TC, Aufderheide K, Ringlien W: Confocal
fluorescence microscopy for Tetrahymena thermophila. Methods in cell
biology 2002, 70:337-359.

doi:10.1186/1471-2121-12-40
Cite this article as: Slade et al.: Sirtuin-mediated nuclear differentiation
and programmed degradation in Tetrahymena. BMC Cell Biology 2011
12:40.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
