<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1476-5926-2-S1-S22.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Comparative Hepatology

BioMed Central

Open Access

Proceedings

Clearance function of scavenger endothelial cells
Bård Smedsrød*
Address: Department of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Medical Biology, University of Tromsø, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway
Email: Bård Smedsrød* - baards@fagmed.uit.no
* Corresponding author

from 11th International Symposium on the Cells of the Hepatic Sinusoid and their Relation to Other Cells
Tucson, Arizona, USA, 25–29 August, 2002
Published: 14 January 2004
<supplement> <title> <p>11th International Symposium on the Cells of the Hepatic Sinusoid and their Relation to Other Cells</p> </title> </supplement>

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3(Suppl 1):S22
This article is available from: http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

Historical Considerations and Semantics
In two recent publications, evidence was presented that
the endothelial cell of the mammalian liver sinusoid represents a special scavenger type of endothelial cells that is
found in all vertebrates [1,2]. These endothelial cells are
located in the liver of land-based vertebrates (mammals,
birds, reptiles, amphibians), in the heart or kidney of
bony fishes, and in the gill of cartilagenous fishes, lamprey and hagfish. In all animal species studied these specialized endothelial cells show an extraordinarily high
uptake of soluble waste macromolecules from the circulation. On this basis the term "scavenger endothelial cell"
(SEC) was coined to highlight the biological function of
these cells. The first hint that these cells carry out an
important physiological function in the elimination of
waste material from the circulation was obtained in the
early 80s when it was shown for the first time that a physiological waste macromolecule, hyaluronan (HA), was
avidly and specifically eliminated from the circulation of
rats, rabbits and humans in LSEC [3]. The finding that
SEC, but not Kupffer cells (KC) were responsible for this
RES function came as a surprise because the general
understanding at that time was that blood clearance of
material that is too large for glomerular filtration
(Mw>20.000) would be eliminated mainly by uptake in
KC, which were believed to make up the RES of the liver.
In the years that followed we and others showed that an
array of physiological and foreign soluble macromolecules and colloids were eliminated from the circulation
mainly by receptor-mediated pinocytosis almost exclusively in LSEC. Experiments in other vertebrates, in particular the most numerous class, namely bony fishes, have
shown that the specificity and mode of uptake is remarkably similar among vertebrates of considerably different
phylogenetic age. This finding further justifies the use of

the common term SEC to describe these cells in all vertebrates.
To conceive the significance of SEC it is essential to understand the meaning of RES. Clearly, the meaning of RES
has changed from when it was first launched by Aschoff
[4] in 1924 and until today. A major finding that lead
Aschoff to his conclusions was the numerous studies by
him and others showing that vital stains are taken up in
certain cells of the body. Another very important finding
that contributed to the proposal of RES was Metchnikoff's
discovery of phagocytosis in macrophages about 30 years
prior to Aschoff's RES-publication [5].
Metchnikoff's introduction of phagocytosis as a means for
cells to take up material from their surroundings offered a
way to explain how vital stain was taken up in cells of RES.
It should be noted here that Metchnikoff used the term
phagocytosis to describe uptake of both large particles and
soluble material such as the vital stain carmin. Today we
distinguish between phagocytosis and pinocytosis. Phagocytosis denotes cell eating or uptake of large particles
(roughly 1 micrometer and greater), and is mainly associated with the function of the macrophages, also called
"professional phagocytes." Pinocytosis, or cell drinking,
denotes cellular uptake of soluble material (macromolecules and colloids smaller than 100 nm). Present-day textbooks in cell biology use the concept of receptormediated endocytosis as a special form of pinocytosis
("clathrin-mediated or coated pit-mediated pinocytosis").
When we use these terms today, most of us are unaware of
the fact that the concept of pinocytosis was introduced as
late as in 1931 [6].

Page 1 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3

Thus, phagocytosis was the only term available to biologists
to describe cellular uptake during the period from Metchnikoff until 1931. When Aschoff published his paper on
RES in 1924 [4] it would take another decade before the
concept of pinocytosis was introduced. Even after the
introduction of "pinocytosis" and till the present time
many scientists use the word phagocytosis to erroneously
describe any type of endocytic uptake, including pinocytosis. The type of pinocytosis that prevails in SEC is receptor-mediated endocytosis via clathrin coated pits. In fact,
since SEC are probably the most active pinocytic cell in
the vertebrate body it deserves the nick-name "professional pinocyte" for the same reason that macrophages are
referred to as "professional phagocytes". Reasoning that
uptake in RES is exclusively mediated by phagocytosis,
just like most of his contemporary colleagues, van Furth
[7] in 1972 recommended that RES be removed from the
vocabulary and replaced completely by the mononuclear
phagocyte, or "macrophage" system (MPS). This recommendation obscured our ability to discover and understand that Aschoff's RES consisted of non-macrophagic,
non-phagocytic cells in addition to macrophages. In fact,
if the hepatic RES be defined strictly on the basis of distribution of i.v. injected vital stain, as recommended by
Aschoff, pinocytosis in SEC would play a far more important role than phagocytosis in KC in the hepatic RES.
Using modern methods of identifying the different types
of liver sinusoidal cells, combined with the original vital
stain method, Kawai, et al. [8], showed that lithium carmine, the most widely used vital stain among the early
RES researchers, was taken up mostly by the LSEC of rat.
The lesson to be learned from this historical and semantic
survey is that RES of vertebrates consists of two major cell
types, namely the macrophage, which eliminates particles
from the circulation via phagocytosis, and the SEC, that
removes soluble macromolecules via a non-phagocytic
receptor-mediated endocytosis.

Scavenger Function of SEC
We know far more about mechanisms of synthesis of macromolecules than the mechanisms of degradation. This is
surprising insofar as anabolism and catabolism are
equally important in a body at homeostasis. Moreover,
focusing more on synthesis than degradation has led
many researchers to underestimate the catabolic arm
when studying the turnover of proteins. For instance, in
liver fibrosis and some other disorders associated with a
higher synthesis of connective tissue molecules, it is common to interpret increased blood levels of these to reflect
increased synthesis, and therefore increased fibrotic activity. However, the discovery that LSEC represent the major
site of elimination of connective tissue molecules from
the circulation [9-14], revealed that increased blood concentrations of these substances reflect both the rate of synthesis as well as their elimination in LSEC.

http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

SEC can bind but not internalize particles via their
endocytosis receptors
It has been shown that red blood cells coated with antired cell IgG bind avidly to Fc-gamma receptors on both
KC and SEC of rat liver [15] (see section on Fc-gamma
receptors below). Interestingly, only KC subsequently
engulfed these particles, whereas no internalization was
observed in LSEC. In a study to compare binding and
internalization of free, soluble chains and particles (1
micrometer) of chondroitin sulphate (CS) it was found
that LSEC but not KC bound and internalized the soluble
form of CS. Although the CS particles bound to both KC
and LSEC, only KC were able to internalize them [16].
These two experiments clearly suggest that KC represent
the professional phagocyte, and LSEC the professional
pinocyte in the mammalian liver RES. This share of work
between macrophages and SEC has been found in animal
species of all vertebrate classes [2].
Colloids are cleared mainly by SEC
Colloids represent small particles (in the nm range) that
behave both as soluble macromolecules and particles.
Due to their small size, colloids are generally recognized
by cells as soluble matter, and consequently are pinocytosed. We have observed that colloidal gold particles up to
at least 100 nm distribute almost exclusively to LSEC after
i.v. injection in rats (unpublished data). At variance from
colloidal gold, colloidal carbon, a substance that was frequently used in the past to test the function of RES, is
taken up mainly by KC and other macrophages that are
exposed to the blood circulation [17]. This was for some
time interpreted as evidence that colloidal carbon is
phagocytosed by macrophages. A few authors at that time
warned that colloidal carbon binds to and activates platelets, with the consequence that the accumulation of carbon in KC was due to phagocytosis of carbon-laden
aggregated platelets rather than uptake of free colloidal
carbon. The uptake of platelets due to carbon injection is
so active that transient thrombocytopenia has been
reported by some authors [18,19].
Endocytosis receptors in SEC and their macromolecular
ligands
A surprisingly low number of receptors (defined according to ligand specificity) are responsible for uptake of a
large number of different ligands. In mammals only 4 different receptors have been functionally observed in LSEC.
Moreover, studies carried out primarily in Atlantic cod
and salmon, but also in species from the other vertebrate
classes, have revealed that 3 of these receptors are present
on SEC of lower vertebrates [2]. Endocytosis receptors on
SEC and some of their physiologic ligands are described in
the next paragraphs.

Page 2 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3

The collagen-alpha chain receptor (COLLA-R) was functionally described for the first time in 1984 [9]. This receptor recognizes only free alpha chains, but not native triplehelical collagen, and is thus a receptor that mediates elimination of collagen waste molecules resulting from physiological collagenolysis. Although it is frequently thought
that collagen is a stable protein with a rather long half life,
this is not the case if one considers the overall turnover of
collagen in the body. In fact, several grams of collagen are
catabolized per day in a normal human body. Collagen
breakdown in the tissues starts with a single clip by vertebrate collagenase, releasing two large pieces of the triple
helix. At body temperature these pieces are unstable,
resulting in the generation of free alpha chains. A fraction
of these collagen alpha chains is degraded locally, some is
sequestered in lymph nodes, and the fraction that finally
enters the circulation is efficiently endocytosed and
degraded by LSEC [20]. The COLLA-R has so far been
observed only in SEC. Studies in rat and cod have revealed
that the receptor does not distinguish between different
types or species origin of collagen [21]. Uptake studies in
animal species from all classes of vertebrates indicate the
presence of a COLLA-R in all vertebrate SEC [2]. Binding
studies in rat LSEC showed that each LSEC expresses 8 ×
104 receptors with Kd 1.3 × 10-9 and 3 × 105 receptors with
Kd 7.1 × 10-9 [10]. Work is under way in our laboratory to
characterize the molecular structure of the vertebrate SEC
COLLA-R. The physiological significance of this receptor
is obvious: it prevents accumulation of gelatin in the circulation, thus preventing pathological conditions such as
autoimmunity and intravascular clotting.
The mannose-receptor (MANN-R)
Identical to the macrophage MANN-R, the MANN-R of
vertebrate SEC eliminates molecules rapidly from the circulation by Ca++-dependent recognition of mannose residues at the terminus of glycoconjugates [22]. Although a
large number of both physiological and foreign ligands
for this receptor have been reported, I focus here on 3
important physiological waste macromolecules that are
cleared from the blood by MANN-R mediated uptake in
SEC: i) lysosomal enzymes [23], ii) tissue plasminogen
activator [24], and iii) carboxyterminal propeptides of
type I procollagen [13].
i) Lysosomal enzymes
SEC contain very high specific activities of lysosomal
enzymes; with some enzymes the activity is even higher in
LSEC than in KC [25]. This observation is compatible with
the notion that SEC are extremely active in uptake and
degradation of circulating waste products, and therefore
need high activities of acid hydrolases in their endosomal/
lysosomal apparatus. The high specific activities of lysosomal enzymes in SEC is explained by the fact that the
cells recruit these enzymes from the circulation [23]. Lys-

http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

osomal enzymes are constantly being released to the circulation as part of physiological processes. Since these
enzymes carry terminal mannose they are readily recognized by the SEC MANN-R and internalized. However, at
variance from most other physiological macromolecules,
lysosomal enzymes are not readily degraded. They survive
the harsh catabolic milieu in the endosomal/lysosomal
compartment, and retain this feature even after they have
been captured by SEC. Experiments in rats showed that
more than 60% of i.v. injected 125I-labeled glycosylasparaginase (GAG) was eliminated with a t1/2 of about 0.7
min, the remaining 40% being eliminated with a t1/2 of
approx. 3 min. The enzyme was cleared almost exclusively
by the LSEC. Circulatory survival was significantly prolonged when mannose was included in the injected bolus,
signifying uptake via the MANN-R. GAG was highly resistant to degradation after uptake, 33% and 20% of the label
being detectable in liver after 1 and 2 days, respectively.
Studies with pure cultures of rat LSEC confirmed the in
vivo findings: GAG was endocytosed at a very high rate,
about 40% of added ligand being taken up in the cells
after only 60 min. of incubation. After 8 h of incubation
with 125I-GAG no degradation products could be detected.
After 24 h only 10% had been degraded. Endocytosis of
the enzyme in cultured LSEC was effectively competed for
by mannose. Determination of GAG activity in lysates of
LSEC showed that 1) the level of endogenous enzyme
decreased after 18 h of incubation in vitro, and 2) exogenous enzyme was retained intact in LSEC after endocytosis. Consequently, once captured by LSEC, GAG will carry
out its catabolic function in the acid intralysosomal environment. Another lysosomal enzyme, alpha-mannosidase, was found to be processed much the same way as
GAG in rat LSEC after endocytosis via the MANN-R
(unpublished data). Moreover, a recent study in the Atlantic cod showed that circulating lysosomal cod alpha-mannosidase is removed largely by MANN-R mediated
endocytosis in SEC, transported to the lysosomes, and
reused there for a long time (days) [26]. A recent study
showed that the concentration of 8 different lysosomal
enzymes in the blood was several-fold higher in MANN-R
deficient mice compared to wild-type mice [27].
The high content of lysosomal enzymes in SEC may alternatively be explained by a very high de novo synthesis.
Newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes acquire mannose
6-phosphate (M6P) recognition signals that direct them
from the trans-Golgi network to the prelysosomal (late
endosomal) compartment. Two receptors, a small (46
kD) cation dependent-receptor and a large (300 kD) cation independent M6P receptor, have been shown to be
involved in this sorting function in mammalian cells.
Both receptors are required for efficient sorting of lysosomal enzymes [28]. This fact, combined with the observation that LSEC carry very low levels of the large M6PR

Page 3 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3

(unpublished data) support the notion that the cells do
not make significant amounts of lysosomal enzymes on
their own, which favors the hypothesis that they recruit
lysosomal enzymes from the circulation.
ii) Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)
Lysis of a fibrin clot (fibrinolysis) is achieved by the active
enzyme plasmin obtained by activation of the proenzyme
plasminogen by plasminogen activators. The tissue type
plasminogen activator (tPA) binds specifically to fibrin,
and there increases its activity several-fold and activates
the powerful proteolytic enzyme plasmin only at the site
of clotting. We found that tPA is effectively endocytosed in
rat LSEC via the MANN-R [29]. Subsequent studies in vivo
and in vitro showed that tPA is cleared by a biphasic kinetics: an initial rapid alpha-phase that removes 76% of
injected dose with a t1/2 = 0.5 min), and a slow beta-phase
that removes 24% of the injected dose with a t1/2 = 6.3
min). Competition studies provided evidence that the signals for uptake of tPA in LSEC are terminal mannose and
galactose, respectively, which are present in the carbohydrate side-chains of tPA [30-33]. Uptake via the LSEC
MANN-R was responsible for the rapid alpha-phase,
whereas the slower beta-phase was brought about by the
galactose, or asialoglycoprotein receptor of hepatocytes.
These studies reveal that the SEC MANN-R regulates the
fibrinolytic activity by removing blood-borne tPA.
iii) Carboxyterminal propeptide of type I procollagen (PICP)
Type I collagen is the most abundant collagen species in
many soft tissues and accounts for more than 90 per cent
of the organic matrix of mineralized bone. It is synthesized in the form of a larger protein, type I procollagen,
which contains relatively long additional sequences at
both ends [34]. These sequences, known as the aminoand carboxyterminal propeptides of type I procollagen,
are removed by two specific proteinases in the extracellular space. Proper cleavage of the precursor-specific parts of
the molecule is a prerequisite for the appropriate assembly of type I collagen molecules into collagen fibers [35].
PICP contains covalently linked high-mannose type oligosaccharide, one branch per polypeptide chain [36,37].
When PICP is cleaved off en block from the procollagen
molecule, it is found in free form in interstitial fluid, e.g.,
in healing wounds [38] and also in blood, where its concentration is regarded to reflect type I collagen synthesis in
the body, preferably in the skeleton [39]. However, for the
correct interpretation of the concentration of PICP in
blood it would also be essential to know the routes along
which this compound leaves the circulation. We have
shown that uptake of PICP is another function of the SEC
MANN-R [13]. The same conclusion was recently reached
by analyzing the serum protein profile of MANN-R knockout mice [27].

http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

The hyaluronan/scavenger receptor (HA/S-R)
Studies on the turnover of the connective tissue polysaccharide hyaluronan (HA) show that this substance is eliminated from the circulation almost exclusively by receptormediated endocytosis in SEC of rat liver, salmon kidney,
and cod heart [2]. A series of experiments performed to
determine the exact specificity suggested that rat LSEC
express an endocytosis receptor with binding specificity
only for HA and the related connective tissue polysaccharide chondroitin sulphate (CS) [40]. The affinity was calculated to be rather high (Kd = 10-11 for HA of Mw 4 ×
105), and the number of receptors expressed per cell was
estimated to be about 8000 [40]. Both HA and CS are
highly negatively charged polymers, and it was speculated
that these molecules be recognized by the so-called scavenger receptor (SR), which is actually a group of different
endocytosis receptors with only one feature in common,
namely the ability to take up negatively charged macromolecules. To settle this question, receptor-ligand competition experiments were carried out to see if typical SRligands were able to inhibit binding and uptake of HA and
CS. None of these experiments yielded results to support
that HA is taken up in SEC via the SR. However, in 1988
Eskild et al. [41] reported that formaldehyde-treated
serum albumin (FSA), a frequently used test ligand for the
SR, was able to inhibit the binding and uptake of free
chains of CS, but not HA in isolated rat LSEC. Curiously,
in cross competition experiments CS was unable to
inhibit uptake of FSA. Moreover, neither FSA nor HA competed with each other for uptake. These findings left a hint
that the HA and SR were either the same protein or different receptors with overlapping ligand specificities. It was
not until McCourt et al. in 1999 published their paper on
purification of the rat LSEC HA receptor [42] that the
enigma found its solution. These workers used affinity
purification, with either HA or aminoterminal propeptide
of type I procollagen (PINP), a protein that is cleared
exclusively by the SR of rat LSEC (10, and below), and
showed that a LSEC surface protein of identical Mw (~200
and ~350 kD) was purified irrespectively of whether HA
or PINP was used. Using antibodies generated against this
protein, it was possible to inhibit endocytosis of both HA,
and various SR-ligands [42]. The inability of a number of
SRs to inhibit endocytosis of HA was explained by binding affinity, which increases with the chain length of the
polysaccharide. The reason why Eskild et al. observed that
FSA inhibited CS but not HA [41] was most likely that the
CS chains used were short (only about 10–20 kd, which
would bind with an estimated Kd of 10-6 – 10-7), whereas
the HA chains were in the order of 106 d (with a Kd of
about 10-11). Thus, the binding of these short CS chains to
the receptor was relatively weak, whereas the binding
affinity of the much longer HA-chains was 4–5 orders of
magnitudes higher. Since the competing ligand, FSA,
bound to the receptor with a Kd of about 10-9, it would

Page 4 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3

compete strongly with CS, but not with HA for binding to
LSEC.
The SR function was discovered on macrophages, and has
been attributed to the accumulation of cholesterol-laden
modified LDL and thus initiate a series of inflammatory
events in the intima of the vessel wall, leading to atherosclerosis [43]. Today several SRs are known, many of
which have been characterized and cloned. The first SR to
be cloned was the macrophage SR, or SR-A [44]. This
receptor has been found on SEC, but reports showing that
transgenic mice lacking this receptor still remove SR-ligands from the circulation as avidly as do wild-type mice,
suggest that these macromolecules are taken up from the
circulation by a different SR [45,46]. In fact, in vitro cultures of SEC from SR-A knock out mice showed the same
uptake rate and capacity of endocytosis of several SR-ligands [46]. These results, along with the recent characterization by McCourt et al. of the HA/S-R [[42], and
McCourt's article in this series of online proceedings],
show that LSEC, employing this unique receptor, represents the most important cellular site of uptake of bloodborne SR-ligands. The mouse and human forms of HA/SR have now been cloned by Politz et al. [47] (Accession
nos. AF364951 and AJ295695) under the name Stabilin-2
(see also McCourt's article in the present proceedings).

http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

thus formed assemble into collagen fibrils. It has been
generally assumed that these procollagen propeptides,
thus released to the extracellular space, would rapidly be
eliminated locally. While there may be some local elimination by unspecific endocytosis and degradation, there is
now ample evidence that these propeptides are transported with the lymph to the circulation and there rapidly
eliminated by efficient uptake in LSEC [20]. In vivo and in
vitro studies in rat have shown that PINP and PIIINP are
endocytosed via the SEC HA/S-R [14,42]. Both PINP and
PIIINP contain clusters of phosphate groups, and it is
likely that these highly negatively charged groups are recognized by the HA/S-R. The body produces several grams
of collagen per day. Knowing that one PINP molecule is
released per collagen type I molecule that is deposited in
the connective tissue, it is evident that the LSEC must have
a high capacity to eliminate these collagenous molecules
effectively from the circulation. Elimination of the carboxyterminal propeptide of type I procollagen is dealt with
under the MANN-R (see above).

In the following, I give two examples of categories of
waste substances that are eliminated by the SEC HA/S-R:
i) N-terminal propeptides of types I and III procollagen
(PINP and PIIINP), and ii) Atherogenic molecules: oxidized LDL (oxLDL) and advanced glycation end products
(AGEs). Clearance of these substances represents an
important physiological mechanism contributing to
maintaining homeostasis, and preventing atherosclerosis.

ii) Atherogenic molecules: oxidized LDL (oxLDL) and advanced
glycation end products (AGEs)
Oxidatively modified low density lipoprotein (OxLDL)
has been held as a factor that may trigger the development
of atherosclerosis. Recently advanced glycation end products (AGEs) have also been suggested as an atherogenic
substance [48]. Both OxLDL and AGEs are removed from
the circulation by SR-mediated endocytosis in KC and
SEC [49,50]. AGE-modified albumin (AGE-BSA) exists in
a wide spectrum of molecular sizes, spanning from the
smallest (monomers, the size of BSA) and up to highly
aggregated polymers. Intravenous administration of AGEBSA following separation of the molecules into high and
low Mw fractions, showed that the highly aggregated
AGE-BSA was taken up preferentially in KC, whereas the
low Mw specimens were eliminated largely by LSEC [13].
This distribution according to degree of aggregation is
compatible with the general share of work between the
two cell types, the KC taking up highly aggregated material, and SEC being specialized to take up soluble material. Due to the fact that OxLDL like AGEs represent a
rather heterogeneously sized group of molecules, it would
be of interest to see if high and low molecular size aggregates of OxLDL distribute in the two types of sinusoidal
liver cells in the same way as was observed with high and
low molecular size AGE-BSA.

i) Aminoterminal propeptides of types I and III collagen (PINP and
PIIINP)
Collagen is produced and secreted as procollagen, which
consists of large extra domains known as the procollagen
propeptides. After secretion procollagen is converted to
collagen by specific enzymes, the endopeptidases procollagen N- and C-proteinases [35]. The collagen molecules

It was recently shown that endocytosis of AGEs leads to
depletion of the SR that is responsible for clearance of
AGE, namely HA/S-R [51]. In this way AGE downregulates
its own removal from the circulation. Since OxLDL is
probably also taken up in LSEC via the same HA/S-R, it
may be speculated that one of the serious pathogenic
effects of AGE may be its tendency to lower its removal,

It is unfortunate that the name "scavenger receptor" has
been taken to name exclusively this group of receptors.
When dealing with SEC it is obvious that both the
COLLA-R, MANN-R, and Fcgamma-R must be regarded as
different types of SRs. The term "scavenger receptor" has
no logical connection to the definition presently used
("the receptor that scavenges negatively charged macromolecules"). Semantically and logically it would be better
to associate "scavenger receptor" with any clearance receptor that eliminates waste products. Thus, all endocytosis
receptors on SEC deserve the name "scavenger receptors".

Page 5 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3

with the consequence that the blood concentration of
these and other atherogenic molecules may increase, thus
increasing the risk of developing atherosclerosis and other
vascular complications.
iii) Coagulation products
Serum, but not native blood plasma, contains significant
amounts of material that is eliminated by the LSEC SR
[52]. This shows that blood coagulation in the presence of
platelets generates numerous waste macromolecules that
are readily eliminated from the circulation by receptormediated endocytosis in LSEC. Although these coagulation waste products have not yet been characterized, it has
been shown that they represent molecules of a large spectrum of molecular size, and carry a high net negative
charge. On this basis it may be speculated that they represent coagulation factors and other blood proteins that
have been tagged with negative charges by platelet-mediated phosphorylation. Based on the notion that LSEC represent an important site of elimination of atherogenic
molecules, any mechanism that attenuates this activity of
LSEC should be viewed as a potentially pro-atherogenic
mechanism. Thus, in individuals with a constant activation of platelets – as in diabetic patients [53] – it is possible that the increased load of coagulation-waste products
compete with the normal scavenging of atherogenic molecules such as oxLDL and AGE.
Fc-gamma receptor (FcgR)
FcgRs recognize the Fc domain of immunoglobulin G
(IgG). These receptors can mediate phagocytosis of large
IgG coated particles and pinocytosis of soluble IgG
immune complexes. Combined Northern analysis and
RT-PCR-studies have shown that KC and LSEC express the
three FcgRs FcgRIII, FcgRIIB1 and FcgRIIB2 [54]. Bloodborne IgG-immune complexes are taken up almost exclusively in liver, both in KC and LSEC [55,56]. Although IgG
immune complexes are removed from the blood predominantly by KC, it has been shown that following KC depletion these immune complexes become strongly associated
with LSEC [57]. Cultured KC and LSEC both avidly bind
IgG-coated erythrocytes [15]. Since soluble IgG complexes
could compete with this binding it was concluded that
both cell types bind IgG-coated red cells specifically via
FcgRs. In contrast to LSEC, only KC internalized the
bound red cells, reflecting the general principle that KC
perform phagocytosis of particles >1 micrometer, whereas
LSEC internalize only nm size colloids or truly soluble
macromolecules.

Other Functions Related to SEC Scavenger
Activity
Interaction of SEC with virus
It has long been known that SEC of mammalian liver represent an important site of uptake of blood-borne virus,

http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

for instance hepatitis virus type 3 in mice, FIV (Feline
Immunodeficiency Virus) in cats, and HIV-1 (Human
Immunodeficiency Virus type 1) in humans [58-62]. If the
virus is sorted intracellularly through a route to avoid degradation in the endosome/lysosome apparatus, it may
survive for a long time inside SEC, and/or be transferred
to neighbouring hepatocytes and bring about infection
and replication there. Recently, experiments with duck
hepatitis B virus, which replicates exclusively in hepatocytes, showed that this virus is first endocytosed by LSEC,
rescued from the endosomal/lysosomal route and then
transferred to the hepatocytes [63].
Regulation of endocytosis in SEC
A few studies have addressed the regulatory effect of
inflammatory mediators on endocytosis in SEC. Martinez
et al. [64] found that tumor necrosis factor-alpha and
interleukin-1 beta (IL-1) enhance 2–3-fold endocytosis
via the SR and MAN-R, while COLLA-R mediated endocytosis remained unaffected. Lipopolysaccharide was found
to increase endocytosis in LSEC indirectly, by stimulating
the cells to release autocrine IL-1. Another mediator, nitric
oxide decrease endocytosis via the MAN-R in LSEC [65].
Using IL-10, Knolle et al. [66] found a similar effect as that
reported with nitric oxide, namely down-regulation of
MAN-R mediated endocytosis in SEC.
Role of SEC in innate and specific immunity
SEC remove not only physiological waste products from
the general circulation; material absorbed from the gut,
including virus, lipopolysaccharide and other foreign and
pathogenic substances, are also efficiently eliminated by
these cells [3]. This unique ability to endocytose practically all physiological and foreign blood-borne, soluble
waste macromolecules shows that these cells are indeed
an important part of the vertebrate innate immune system. It was recently found that LSEC constitutively express
all molecules necessary for antigen presentation: CD54,
CD80, CD86, MHC class I and II, and CD40, and can
function as antigen-presenting cells for CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells [67,68]. In this way LSEC function as an organ-resident antigen-presenting cell inducing local specific tolerance in the liver towards soluble blood-borne antigens.
Thus LSEC-mediated immune tolerance of liver resides in
two unique features of this cell type: i) a scavenger function that removes blood-borne antigens quantitatively by
very active endocytosis, and ii) an antigen-presenting
activity that induces immune tolerance in CD4+ and CD8+
T cells.
Role of SEC in liver transplantation and bioartificial liver
(BAL)
It is now generally accepted that graft rejection in liver
transplantation is often due to malfunctioning LSEC [69].
Donor liver is very sensitive to the reperfusion insults

Page 6 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3

associated with KC activation and production of reactive
oxygen radicals, which attack SEC [70,71]. Consistent rise
in blood HA is a clear sign that the graft will be rejected
[72], supporting the idea that damage to LSEC precedes
rejection of grafted liver. Acute liver failure is associated
with 40–60% mortality, and transplantation is frequently
the only treatment that can save the patient. A bioartificial
liver (BAL) to keep the patient alive until a donor liver is
available, has recently been introduced. The most commonly used BAL consists of isolated pig hepatocytes. Liver
transplantation and BAL are often studied in pig models.
Based on what we presently know about the function of
LSEC, it is surprising that all BAL studies so far have dealt
with BALs that are made up of hepatocytes only. Moreover, it is a puzzling fact that no publications have so far
dealt with the scavenger function of liver in pig. Although
one may guess that SEC of pig liver carry out the same
scavenger functions as the corresponding cells in rats, it
remains to be shown. Two papers presented at this meeting (by Geir Ivar Nedredal and Kjetil Elvevold) show that
SEC of pig liver perform the same scavenger function as
SEC in rat liver. This is important knowledge for any laboratory that is engaged in BAL, and shows that a BAL that
comprises only hepatocytes does not have the ability to
remove waste macromolecules from the circulation. In
conclusion: A complete, functional BAL depends on the
presence of intact SEC. Of note, KC should be avoided
from BAL, since those cells are easily activated to produce
cytotoxic oxygen radicals that are very harmful to SEC
[70,71]
SEC and energy production
The final degradation products released from both mammalian and fish SEC after endocytosis of HA and CS
labeled with 14C in the carbon atoms of the pyranose rings
or with 3H in the acetyl groups have been identified as
14C-lactate and 3H-acetate [40,73]. These findings, along
with the fact that these cells contain few mitochondria,
suggest that vertebrate SEC have a largely anaerobic type
of metabolism. Recent research in our laboratory shows
that SEC produce large amounts of lactate and in this way
may supply neighbouring energy-consuming cells with
energy rich fuels such as lactate. This opens up for the possibility that SEC represent local power plants that produce
high octane fuel.

Conclusions
In this review on SEC I have focussed on the function that
is most typically associated with these cells, namely their
scavenger function. It is now clear that SEC of vertebrates
carry out many of the uptake functions that had previously been incorrectly ascribed to macrophages. As a consequence the concept and functional significance of RES
have been reborn. It is now appreciated that the hepatic
RES of mammalia consists of two different cell popula-

http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

tions, namely LSEC that eliminate soluble waste colloids
and macromolecules, and KC that remove insoluble particles of greater-than colloid size. In all vertebrates the
same share of work exists between SEC and macrophages.
Studies in phylogenetically distant vertebrate species
show that 3 functionally different endocytosis receptors
are present in SEC: the COLLA-R, the MAN-R, and the HA/
S-R. In addition LSEC of mammals express FcgR. With
these few receptors SEC eliminate a large number of
blood-borne colloidal and soluble waste macromolecules
that enter the liver both from the general circulation and
the gut. It is conceivable that SEC play a major role in
keeping the blood free of any type of macromolecular
waste. While it is obvious that this property of SEC is
highly advantageous to maintain a physiological macromolecular composition of blood, the cells represent a
major problem in drug targeting whenever an i.v. administered macromolecular drug is intended to reach a tissue
different than the liver. That is, if the goal is to target the
SEC proper, it will be an easy task to develop a carrier system, since almost any modification of native proteins will
make them a ligand for SEC endocytosis receptors. However, if the goal is to target a drug to an extrahepatic target,
it takes great skill to design the drug and its vehicle in such
a way that it is not recognized by the powerful uptake system in LSEC.
Recent research in our laboratory has shown that vertebrate SEC run a largely anaerobic metabolism. The cells
carry few mitochondria, are exposed to blood of low oxygen tension, and generate large amounts of lactate, that
may be utilized by neighbouring high energy consuming
epithelial cells as fuel for efficient production of ATP.
How important is the scavenger function of SEC for the
maintenance of normal physiology in mammals? Can we
survive without LSEC? Probably not. The fact is that these
cells are utterly important for the liver integrity; the liver
would soon stop functioning without them. This can be
illustrated by the following three examples: i) Ricin, a
highly toxic substance that is removed from the circulation mainly by MAN-R mediated endocytosis in SEC [74],
destroys the SEC specifically. About 72 h following i.v.
administration of ricin, rats die due to severe liver failure.
In comparison, depletion of KC leaves the liver apparently
fully intact. ii) A transplanted liver will be rejected if the
SEC are damaged [71]. On the other hand, if KC are
depleted from the donor liver, it increases the chances that
the transplanted liver will not be rejected. iii) The mechanism of acetaminophen (paracetamol) liver intoxication
resides in the effect of this drug on LSEC [75]: Experiments
in mice revealed that massive injury to SEC and thereby
disrupted the microcirculation of liver preceded development of liver failure [76].

Page 7 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3

http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

Research over the past 20–30 years on the endothelial cell
that comprises the wall of the mammalian liver sinusoid
has revealed that these cells represent a far more important part of the liver than just forming the wall of the sinusoids. New knowledge about the functions of these cells
leave no doubt that they represent a functional part of
liver that we cannot do without. The cells remove an array
of waste macromolecules, including virus from the blood.
Recent evidence suggests that this scavenger function is
uniquely coupled to production of lactate which supplies
the hepatocytes with high octane fuel. It is also evident
that the cells represent a dendritic-like type of cells that
present antigen to invoke specific immune tolerance.
Recent research shows that mammalian LSEC represent a
member of the vertebrate SEC system, which together
with macrophages comprise the backbone of the vertebrate RES. It is time to realize that liver biology cannot be
understood without the knowledge of the physiological
function of LSEC.

14.

References

22.

1.

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

Smedsrød B, Seternes T, Sørensen K, Lindhe Ö, Sveinbjørnsson B:
Scavenger endothelial cells. In: Cells of the Hepatic Sinusoid Volume
7. Edited by: Wisse E, Knook D, DeZanger, Fraser R. Leiden, The Netherlands, The Kupffer Cell Foundation; 1999:147-152.
Seternes T, Sørensen K, Smedsrød B: Scavenger endothelial cells
of vertebrates: a non-peripheral leukocyte system for high
capacity elimination of waste macromolecules. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2002, 99:7594-7597.
Smedsrød B, Pertoft H, Gustafson S, Laurent TC: Scavenger functions of the liver endothelial cell. Biochem J 1990, 266:313-327.
Aschoff L: Das reticulo-endotheliale system. Ergebnisse d inn Med
Kinderheilk 1924, 26:1-118.
Metchnikoff E: Lectures on the Comparative Pathology of
Inflammation Delivered at the Pasteur Institute in 1891.
(translated from French by: F.A. Starling and E.H. Starling) London: Kegan
Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co., Ltd., 1893. Reprinted by Dover Publications
Inc., NY 1968.
Lewis WH: Pinocytosis. Bull John Hopkins Hosp 1931, 49:17-26.
van Furth R, Cohn ZA, Hirsch JG, Humphrey JH, Spector WG, Langevoort HL: The mononuclear phagocyte system: a new classification of macrophages, monocytes and their precursor
cells. Bull World Health Organ 1972, 46:845-852.
Kawai Y, Smedsrød B, Elvevold K, Wake K: Uptake of lithium carmine by sinusoidal endothelial and Kupffer cells of the rat
liver: new insights into the classical vital staining and the
reticulo-endothelial system. Cell Tissue Res 1998, 292:395-410.
Smedsrød B, Johansson S, Pertoft H: Studies in vivo and in vitro on
the uptake and degradation of soluble collagen alpha 1 (I)
chains in rat liver endothelial cells and Kupffer cells. Biochem J
1985, 228:415-424.
Smedsrød B, Pertoft H, Kjellén L, Johansson S, Eskild W, Laurent TC:
Endocytosis of connective tissue macromolecules by liver
endothelial cells. In: Cells of the Hepatic Sinusoid Volume 1. Edited by:
Kirn A, Knook DL, Wisse E. Leiden, The Netherlands, The Kupffer Cell Foundation; 1986:245-250.
Smedsrød B: Aminoterminal propeptide of type III procollagen is cleared from the circulation by receptor-mediated
endocytosis in liver endothelial cells. Coll Relat Res 1988,
8:375-388.
Smedsrød B, Paulsson M, Johansson S: Uptake and degradation in
vivo and in vitro of laminin and nidogen by rat liver cells. Biochem J 1989, 261:37-42.
Smedsrød B, Melkko J, Risteli L, Risteli J: Circulating C-terminal
propeptide of type I procollagen is cleared mainly via the
mannose receptor in liver endothelial cells. Biochem J 1990,
271:345-350.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.

23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.

33.
34.
35.

Melkko J, Hellevik T, Risteli L, Risteli J, Smedsrød B: Clearance of
NH2-terminal propeptide of types I and III procollagen is a
physiological function of the scavenger receptor in liver
endothelial cells. J Exp Med 1994, 179:405-412.
Smedsrød B, Pertoft H, Eggertsen G, Sundström C: Functional and
morphological characterization of cultures of Kupffer cells
and liver endothelial cells prepared by means of density separation in Percoll, and selective substrate adherence. Cell Tissue Res 1985, 241:639-649.
Laakso T, Smedsrød B: Cellular distribution in rat liver of intravenously administered polyacryl starch and chondroitin sulfate microparticles. Int J Pharmac 1987, 36:253-262.
Donald K: Ultrastructure of the reticuloendothelial system.
In: The Reticuloendothelial System. A Comprehensive Treatise Volume 17.
Issue 1 Edited by: Carr I, Daems WT. New York and London, Plenum
Press:525-555.
Cohen PP, Braunwald J, Gardner FH: Destruction of canine and
rabbit platelets following intravenous administration of carbon particles or endotoxin. J Lab Clin Med 1965, 66:263-721.
Salvidio E, Crosby WH: Thrombocytopaenia after intravenous
injection of India ink. J Lab Clin Med 1960, 56:711-716.
Østgård G, Hellevik T, Reed RK, Smedsrød B: Lymphatic transport and organ uptake of gelatin and hyaluronan injected
into the rat mesentery. Acta Physiol Scand 1995, 153:51-60.
Smedsrød B: Endocytosis of collagen and procollagen in liver
endothelial cells. In Cells of the Hepatic Sinusoid Volume 2. Edited by:
Wisse E, Knook DL, Decker K. Leiden, The Netherlands, The Kupffer Cell
Foundation; 1989:69-72.
Magnusson S, Berg T: Extremely rapid endocytosis mediated by
the mannose receptor of sinusoidal endothelial rat liver cells.
Biochem J 1989, 257:651-656.
Smedsrød B, Tollersrud O: Sinusoidal liver endothelial cells
recruit lysosomal enzymes from the circulation by mannosereceptor mediated endocytosis. In: Cells of the Hepatic Sinusoid
Volume 5. Edited by: Wake K, Wisse E, Knook DL. Leiden, The Netherlands, The Kupffer Cell Foundation; 1995:180-183.
Smedsrød B, Einarsson M: Clearance of tissue plasminogen activator by mannose and galactose receptors in liver. Thromb
Haemost 1990, 63:60-66.
Knook DL, Sleyster EC: Isolated parenchymal, Kupffer and
endothelial rat liver cells characterized by their lysosomal
enzyme content. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1980, 96:250-257.
Sørensen K, Tollersrud OK, Evjen G, Smedsrød B: Mannose-receptor-mediated clearance of lysosomal alpha-mannosidase in
scavenger endothelium of cod endocardium. Comp Biochem
Physiol A Mol Physiol 2001, 129:615-630.
Lee SJ, Evers S, Roeder D, Parlow AF, Risteli J, Risteli L, Lee YC, Feizi
T, Langen H, Nussenzweig MC: Mannose receptor-mediated
regulation of serum glycoprotein homeostasis. Science 2002,
295:1898-1901.
Kasper D, Dittmer F, von Figura K, Pohlmann R: Neither type of
mannose 6-phosphate receptor is sufficient for targeting of
lysosomal enzymes along intracellular routes. J Cell Biol 1996,
134:615-623.
Einarsson M, Pertoft H, Smedsrod B: Endocytosis of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) by rat liver cells. Thromb Haemostas
1985, 54:270.
Einarsson M, Smedsrød B, Pertoft H: Uptake and degradation of
tissue plasminogen activator in rat liver. Thromb Haemostas
1988, 59:474-479.
Smedsrød B, Einarsson M, Pertoft H: Tissue plasminogen activator is endocytosed by mannose and galactose receptors of
rat liver cells. Thromb Haemost 1988, 59:480-484.
Pohl G, Kenne L, Nilsson B, Einarsson M: Isolation and characterization of three different carbohydrate chains from
melanoma tissue plasminogen activator. Eur J Biochem 1987,
170:69-75.
Pohl G, Einarsson M, Nilsson B, Svensson S: The size heterogeneity in melanoma tissue plasminogen activator is caused by
carbohydrate differences. Thromb Haemostasis 1985, 54:163.
Prockop DJ, Kivirikko KI, Tuderman L, Guzman NA: The biosynthesis of collagen and its disorders. N Engl J Med 1979,
301:13-23.
Miyahara M, Njieha FK, Prockop DJ: Formation of collagen fibrils
in vitro by cleavage of procollagen with procollagen proteinases. J Biol Chem 1982, 257:8442-8448.

Page 8 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3

36.

37.

38.
39.

40.
41.

42.

43.
44.
45.

46.

47.

48.
49.

50.

51.

52.
53.
54.

55.

Clark CC, Kefalides NA: Carbohydrate moieties of procollagen:
incorporation of isotopically labeled mannose and glucosamine into propeptides of procollagen secreted by
matrix-free chick embryo tendon cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1976, 73:34-38.
Clark CC: The distribution and initial characterization of oligosaccharide units on the COOH-terminal propeptide
extensions of the pro-alpha 1 and pro-alpha 2 chains of type
I procollagen. J Biol Chem 1979, 254:10798-10802.
Haukipuro K, Melkko J, Risteli L, Kairaluoma MI, Risteli J: Synthesis
of type I collagen in healing wounds in humans. Ann Surg 1991,
213:75-80.
Parfitt AM, Simon LS, Villanueva AR, Krane SM: Procollagen type I
carboxy-terminal extension peptide in serum as a marker of
collagen biosynthesis in bone. Correlation with Iliac bone
formation rates and comparison with total alkaline phosphatase. J Bone Miner Res 1987, 2:427-436.
Smedsrød B, Pertoft H, Eriksson S, Fraser JRE, Laurent TC: Studies
in vitro on the uptake and degradation of sodium hyaluronate
in rat liver endothelial cells. Biochem J 1984, 223:617-626.
Eskild W, Smedsrød B, Granum PE, Berg T: Receptor-mediated
endocytosis of formaldehyde-treated albumin, yeast invertase, and chondroitin sulphate in suspensions of rat liver
endothelial cells. Int J Biochem 1986, 18:647-651.
McCourt PA, Smedsrød BH, Melkko J, Johansson S: Characterization of a hyaluronan receptor on rat sinusoidal liver endothelial cells and its functional releationship to scavenger
receptors. Hepatology 1999, 30:1276-1286.
Brown MS, Goldstein JL: Lipoprotein metabolism in the macrophage: Implications for cholesterol deposition in atherosclerosis. Ann Rev Biochem 1983, 52:223-261.
Kodama T, Freeman M, Rohrer L, Zabrecky J, Matsudaira P, Krieger
M: Type I macrophage scavenger receptor contains a-helical
and collagen-like coiled coils. Nature 1990, 343:531-535.
Suzuki H, Kurihara Y, Takeya M, Kamada N, Kataoka M, Jishage K,
Ueda O, Sakaguchi H, Higashi T, Suzuki T et al.: A role for macrophage scavenger receptors in atherosclerosis and susceptibility to infection. Nature 1997, 386:292-296.
Hansen B, Arteta B, Smedsrød B: The physiological scavenger
receptor function of hepatic sinusoidal endothelial and
Kupffer cells is independent of scavenger receptor class A
typ I and II. Mol Cell Biochem 2002, 240:1-8.
Politz O, Gratchev A, McCourt PAG, Schledzewski K, Guillot P,
Johansson S, Svineng G, Franke P, Kannicht C, Kzhyshkowska J, Longati P, Velten FW, Johansson S, Goerdt S: Stabilin-1 and -2 constitute a novel family of fasciclin-like hyaluronan receptor
homologues. Biochem J 2002, 362:155-164.
Brownlee M: Negative consequences of glycation. Metabolism
2000, 49:9-13.
Van Berkel TJC, de Rijke YB, Krujit JK: Different fate in vivo of oxidatively modified-LDL and acetylated-LDL in rats – recognition by different scavenger receptors on Kupffer and
endothelial cells. J Biol Chem 1991, 266:2282-2289.
Smedsrød B, Melkko J, Araki N, Sano H, Horiuchi S: Advanced glycation end products are eliminated by scavenger-receptormediated endocytosis in hepatic sinusoidal Kupffer and
endothelial cells. Biochem J 1997, 322:567-573.
Hansen B, Svistounov D, Nagai R, Horiuchi S, Smedsrød B: The
effect of advanced glycation end products on endocytic scavenger function in hepatic scavenger endothelial cells. Diabetologia 2002, 45:1379-1388.
Hansen B, Melkko J, Smedsrød B: Serum is a rich source of ligands for the scavenger receptor of hepatic scavenger
endothelial cells. Mol Cell Biochem 2002, 229:63-72.
Brownlee M, Cerami A: The biochemistry of the complications
of diabetes mellitus. Ann Rev Biochem 1981, 50:385-432.
Løvdal T, Brech A, Kjeken R, Berg T: Receptor-mediated and
fluid phase endocytosis in hepatic sinusoidal cells. In: Cells of
the Hepatic Sinusoid Volume 8. Edited by: Wisse E, Knook D, De Zanger,
Arthur MJP. Leiden, The Netherlands, The Kupffer Cell Foundation;
2001:125-131.
Johansson AG, Løvdal T, Magnusson KE, Berg T, Skogh T: Liver cell
uptake and degradation of soluble immunoglobulin G
immune complexes in vivo and in vitro in rats. Hepatology 1996,
24:169-175.

http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

56.
57.

58.

59.

60.

61.
62.

63.
64.

65.
66.

67.
68.

69.

70.

71.

72.
73.

74.

Skogh T, Blomhoff R, Eskild W, Berg T: Hepatic uptake of circulating IgG immune complexes. Immunology 1985, 55:585-594.
Bogers WM, Stad RK, Van Es LA, Daha MR: Both Kupffer cells and
liver endothelial cells play an important role in the clearance
of IgA and IgG immune complexes. Res Immunol 1992,
143:219-224.
Steffan AM, Gendrault JL, Schweitzer C, Schmitt MP, Royer C, Aubertin AM, Jaeck D, Lafon ME, Kirn A: Multiplication of human
immunodeficiency virus type I (HIV-1) in cultured human
endothelial liver cells. In: Cells of the Hepatic Sinusoid Volume 3.
Edited by: Wisse E, Knook D, McCuskey RS. Leiden, The Netherlands, The
Kupffer Cell Foundation; 1991:417-422.
Steffan AM, Lafon M-E, Gendrault J-L, Schweitzer C, Royer C, Jaeck
D, Arnaud J-P, Schmitt M-P, Aubertin A-M, Kirn A: Primary cultures of endothelial cells from the human liver sinusoid are
permissive for human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:1582-1586.
Steffan AM, Lafon ME, Gendrault JL, Smedsrod B, Nonnenmacher H,
Koehren F, Gut JP, De Monte M, Martin JP, Royer C, Kirn A: Productive infection of primary cultures of endothelial cells from
the cat liver sinusoid with the feline immunodeficiency virus.
Hepatology 1996, 23:964-970.
Pereira CA, Steffan A-M, Kirn A: Kupffer and endothelial liver
cell damage renders A/J mice susceptible to mouse hepatitis
virus type 3. Virus Res 1984, 1:557-563.
Scoazec J-Y, Feldman G: Both macrophages and endothelial
cells of the human hepatic sinusoid express the CD4 molecule, a receptor for the human immunodeficiency virus.
Hepatology 1990, 12:505-510.
Breiner KM, Schaller H, Knolle PA: Endothelial cell-mediated
uptake of a hepatitis B virus: A new concept of liver targeting
of hepatotropic microorganisms. Hepatology 2001, 34:803-808.
Martinez I, Sveinbjörnsson B, Vidal-Vanaclocha F, Asumendi A, Smedsrød B: Differential cytokine-mediated modulation of endocytosis in rat liver endothelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res Com 1995,
212:235-241.
Martinez I, Sveinbjørnsson B, Smedsrød B: Nitric oxide down-regulates endocytosis in rat liver endothelial cells. Biochem Biophys
Res Com 1996, 222:688-693.
Knolle PA, Uhrig A, Hegenbarth S, Löser E, Scmitt E, Gerken G, Lohse
AW: IL-10 down-regulates T cell activation by antigen-presenting liver sinusoidal endothelial cells through decreased
antigen uptake via the mannose receptor and lowered surface expression of accessory molecules. Clin Exp Immunol 1998,
114:427-433.
Knollle PA, Gerken G: Local control of the immune response in
the liver. Immunol Rev 2000, 174:21-34.
Limmer A, Ohl J, Kurts C, Ljunggren H-G, Reiss Y, Groettrup M,
Momburg F, Arnold B, Knolle PA: Efficient presentation of exogenous antigen by liver endothelail cells to CD8+ T cells
results in antigen-specific T-cell tolerance. Nat Med 2000,
6:1348-1354.
Caldwell-Kenkel JJC, Currin RT, Tanaka Y, Thurman RG, Lemasters
JJ: Kupffer cells activation and endothelial cell damage after
storage of rat livers, effects of reperfusion. Hepatology 1991,
13:83-95.
Marzi I, Zhong Z, Lemasters JJ, Thurman RG: Evidence that graft
survival is not related to parenchymal cell viability in rat liver
transplantation. The importance of non-parenchymal cells.
Transplantation 1989, 48:463-468.
Rauen U, Elling B, De Groot H: Injury to cultured liver endothelial cells after cold preservation: Mediation by reactive oxygen species that are released independently of the known
trigger hypoxia/reoxygenation. Free Radic Biol Med 1997,
23:392-400.
Lindqvist U: Is serum hyaluronan a helpful tool in the management of patients with liver diseases? J Intern Med 1997,
242:67-71.
Seternes T, Øynebråten I, Sørensen K, Smedsrød B: Specific endocytosis and catabolism in the scavenger cells of cod (Gadus
morhua L.) generate high-energy metabolites. J Exper Biol 2001,
204:1537-1546.
Derenzini M, Bonetti E, Marinozzi V, Stirpe F: Toxic effects of ricin.
Studies on the pathogenesis of liver lesions. Virchows Arch B Cell
Pathol 1976, 20:15-28.

Page 9 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Comparative Hepatology 2004, 3

75.

76.

http://www.comparative-hepatology.com/content/3/S1/S22

DeLeve LD, Wang X, Kaplowitz N, Shulman HM, Bart JA, van der
Hoek A: Sinusoidal endothelial cells as a target for acetaminophen toxicity. Direct action versus requirement for hepatocyte activation in different mouse strains. Biochem Pharmacol
1997, 53:1339-1345.
McCuskey RS, Machen NW, Wang X, McCuskey MK, Abril E, Earnest
DL, DeLeve LD: A single ethanol binge exacerbates early
acetaminophen-induced centrilobular injury to the sinusoidal endothelium and alters sinusoidal blood flow. In: Cells of the
Hepatic Sinusoid Volume 8. Edited by: Wisse E, Knook D, De Zanger,
Arthur MJP. Leiden, The Netherlands, The Kupffer Cell Foundation;
2001:68-70.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 10 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
