<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Germ cell specification and ovary structure in the rotifer Brachionus plicatilis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2010 1:5. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-1-5"/>
<meta name="Author" content="James M Smith"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

RESEARCH

Open Access

Germ cell specification and ovary structure in the
rotifer Brachionus plicatilis
James M Smith1, Andrew G Cridge2, Peter K Dearden1*

Abstract
Background: The segregation of the germline from somatic tissues is an essential process in the development of
all animals. Specification of the primordial germ cells (PGCs) takes place via different strategies across animal phyla;
either specified early in embryogenesis by the inheritance of maternal determinants in the cytoplasm of the oocyte
(’preformation’) or selected later in embryonic development from undifferentiated precursors by a localized
inductive signal (’epigenesis’). Here we investigate the specification and development of the germ cells in the
rotifer Brachionus plicatilis, a member of the poorly-characterized superphyla Lophotrochozoa, by isolating the
Brachionus homologues of the conserved germ cell markers vasa and nanos, and examining their expression using
in situ hybridization.
Results: Bpvasa and Bpnos RNA expression have very similar distributions in the Brachionus ovary, showing
ubiquitous expression in the vitellarium, with higher levels in the putative germ cell cluster. Bpvas RNA expression
is present in freshly laid eggs, remaining ubiquitous in embryos until at least the 96 cell stage after which
expression narrows to a small cluster of cells at the putative posterior of the embryo, consistent with the
developing ovary. Bpnos RNA expression is also present in just-laid eggs but expression is much reduced by the
four-cell stage and absent by the 16-cell stage. Shortly before hatching of the juvenile rotifer from the egg, Bpnos
RNA expression is re-activated, located in a subset of posterior cells similar to those expressing Bpvas at the same
stage.
Conclusions: The observed expression of vasa and nanos in the developing B. plicatilis embryo implies an
epigenetic origin of primordial germ cells in Rotifer.

Background
The segregation of the germline from somatic tissues is
an essential process in the development of all animals.
Despite this, specification of the progenitors of the
germline, the primordial germ cells (PGCs), takes place
via two broadly different strategies across animal phyla
(reviewed in [1]). Germ cells can be specified early in
embryogenesis by the inheritance of maternal determinants inherited in the cytoplasm of the oocyte (‘preformation’), as in Drosophila, Danio rerio, Xenopus laevis
and Caenorhabditis elegans. Alternately, as in the
mouse, germ cells can be selected later in the embryonic
development from undifferentiated precursors by a
* Correspondence: peter.dearden@otago.ac.nz
1
Laboratory for Evolution and Development, Genetics Otago and the
National Research Centre for Growth and Development, Biochemistry
Department, University of Otago, PO Box 56, Dunedin, Aotearoa-New
Zealand

localized inductive signal (’epigenesis’). While the majority of genetic model organisms specify germ cells by
preformation, epigenesis is the more prevalent mechanism for PGC specification across animal phyla. This,
along with the prevalence of epigenesis for germline
specification in basal metazoans, implicates epigenesis as
the ancestral mechanism of germ line specification in
animals [2]. It should be noted, however, that the majority of studies of PGC specification are from two of the
three animal super-phyla as determined by modern phylogenetics [3], namely the Ecdysozoa and the Deuterostoma. Relatively little is known about how the germline
is specified in the Lophotrochozoa, which is the largest
(containing more than half of all animal phyla [4]) and
exhibits the greatest diversity in body plans of the three
superphyletic groups of animals.
Despite these broadly different mechanisms for the
specification of the germline, some of the proteins

© 2010 Smith et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

involved in PGC specification are highly conserved and
expressed in germ cells whether they form by epigenesis or preformation. PGC specification can thus be
reliably tracked by the expression of germline markers
such as the products of the vasa and nanos genes
(reviewed in [1]).
vasa encodes an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent RNA helicase that is a member of the DEAD box
protein family [5,6]. In Drosophila, in which vasa
expression and function has been best characterized,
Vasa protein is associated with polar granules [7], electron-dense structures within the oocyte pole plasm
which give rise to the germline, and is essential for formation of the pole plasm and progession of oogenesis.
On a molecular level, Vasa acts as a translational regulator of the oocyte-specific maternal mRNAs, such as gurken, through binding of the translation factor eIF5B [8]
and is also required for the localization of nanos RNA
[9]. Throughout animals vasa is expressed in germ cell
progenitors and other stem cell types [1], regardless of
the mechanism of germline specification. In mice, the
best characterized species that undergoes epigenesis,
vasa homologues are expressed in PGCs and are
required for development of the male germline [10].
Vasa RNA and protein have been found associated with
PGC specification and development in many species
across the metazoa [11-20]. While the precise molecular
function of vasa across evolution remains elusive, the
broad conservation of germline components with which
vasa interacts in Drosophila suggests that the mode of
action of vasa is conserved across germline development
in animals.
nanos genes have been implicated in specification of
both germline and somatic cell fate, although their roles
in the formation and/or maintenance of PGCs are more
broadly conserved [21] and are considered to be their
ancestral function. Nanos proteins contain two highly
conserved C-terminal CCHC zinc finger domains and
act as translational inhibitors [22], repressing somatic
cell fate in the developing germline in Drosophila. Roles
for Nanos in the development of somatic tissues have
been identified in insects, most notably in establishing
embryonic polarity [22], and, more recently, in a small
number of Lophotrochozoan phyla [18,23-25] where
they have been implicated in specification of somatic
cell lineages such as mesoderm.
In this study we examine the expression of vasa and
nanos in germline development of the monogonont rotifer Brachionus plicatilis. The rotifera are a diverse nonsegmented aquatic lophotrochozoan phyla containing
two major branches, the bdelloids and the monogononts. Bdelloids are obligately asexual while monogononts are facultatively sexual, producing either amictic
(diploid) or mictic (haploid) offspring. The ovary of the

Page 2 of 10

monogonont rotifer consists of a syncytial vitellarium
connected via an oviduct to a germarium containing primordial germ cells. Cytoplasmic bridges connect developing oocytes to the vitellarium, through which
maternal factors synthesized in the vitellarium are transported [26]. Morphological investigations have suggested
rotifer PGCs are produced by a preformation mechanism ([27]; referenced in [1]), though this has yet to be
confirmed by molecular analyses.

Results
Brachionus ovary anatomy and the origin of oocytes

The ovary of Brachionus females lies in the posterior
half of the animal and is regulated by nutritional status.
Starved rotifers have reduced ovaries that condense
towards the midline of the animal (Figure 1A and 1B).
Fully fed, reproductively active rotifers have large ovaries
(Figure 1C-E) with clearly visible oocytes. The Brachionus ovary is made up of three major populations of cells
(Figure 1F-I). The vitellarium, a large, nutritionally-sensitive structure, is thought to be syncytial [26]. The
vitellarium is distinguished, in well-fed animals, by large
elongate nuclei. Attached to the side of the vitellarium
is typically the developing oocyte, a large cell with a
small rounded nucleus. This cell, the oocyte, expands in
volume over time, often growing to such an extent
before laying that it deforms the structure of the ovary,
displacing the nuclei of the vitellarium, as well as pushing other internal organs of the rotifer towards the
head. The developing oocyte always forms on one side
of the ovary, anterior and to the left when the rotifer is
viewed with ovary uppermost (that is, lying over the
gut). The adjoining region of the vitellarium also harbours a population of small cells (usually 20-22 in newly
hatched adult rotifers), arranged in rows, with small
rounded nuclei, that we, and others [26,28], take to be
the precursors of the oocyte; the PGCs.
The cytoplasm of the developing oocyte and that of
the vitellarium is granulose, probably due to lipid droplets, when viewed under differential interference contrast (DIC) or phase contrast optics. These droplets are
concentrated in the oocyte (Figure 1F-I). We interpret
this to mean that these droplets are synthesized in the
vitellarium and are then transported into the developing
oocyte via cytoplasmic bridges.
Brachionus oocytes express a factor that reacts
strongly with DAB and hydrogen peroxide, staining
darkly (Figure 1J-L). It is not clear what this factor is,
other than it has putative peroxidase activity, but it is
distributed in an interesting pattern suggesting that it
may too be transported into the oocyte. Peroxidase-substrate-positive granules are distributed sparsely throughout the cytoplasm of the vitellarium (arrow in Figure
1J), increasing in density nearest the developing oocyte,

Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

Page 3 of 10

Figure 1 Structure of the Brachionus plicatilis ovary. Light and fluorescent images of the Brachionus ovary. (A-E) Differential interference
contrast (DIC) images of whole Brachionus indicating the ovary and other morphological structures. Scale bars indicate 100 μm. Rotifer range
from starved adult individuals with greatly reduced ovaries (A) to normal individuals (C), to those with a developing oocyte (D) to those with a
large oocyte deforming other structures (E). (F and G) Higher magnification image of a Brachionus ovary (annotated in G) under DIC optics
showing the structures of the vitellarium, germ cell cluster and oocyte. Scale bars represent 50 μm. Note: the granules/lipid droplets in the
vitellarium and their concentration in the oocyte. (H and I) High magnification mixed confocal/phase contrast image of a Brachionus ovary
stained with propidium iodide (red) for nuclei (annotated in I). All of the cell types of the ovary are visible. Scale bars represent 50 μm (J-L)
Expression of compounds reactive to DAB and H2O2, producing intense black staining. Staining is in the oocyte and in a tube (asterisks in J and
K), passing near the germ-cells, that appears to connect the vitellarium with the developing oocyte. Granular staining is also seen in the
vitellarium (arrowhead in J) Scale bars in J and K are 100 μm, 50 μm in L.

Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

and staining is particularly intense in a short tube or
column leading to the developing oocyte from the vitellarium, flanked by the PGCs (asterisks in Figures 1J and
1K). The cytoplasm of the oocyte itself also stains intensely for this factor. This evidence strongly implies that
the vitellarium, with its large active nuclei, makes a
number of factors - both RNA, protein and lipid droplets - that are transported into the cytoplasm of the
maturing oocyte and it may be this accumulation of
maternal products transported from the vitellarium that
swells the egg, eventually causing deformation of the
vitellarium, before the egg is finally released.
Identification of Rotifer vasa and nanos

In order to better describe the rotifer ovary and the origins of germ cells during development we isolated
orthologues of vasa and nanos, both conserved germ
cell markers.

Page 4 of 10

Brachionus sequences similar to vasa were identified
and assembled from sequencing of degenerate PCR fragments, published EST data and a pyrosequencing transcriptome sequencing project carried out using 454
technology. Sequences similar to vasa were assembled
using CAP3 and predicted protein coding sequences
obtained. By Blast analysis, these identified sequences
showed similarities to Vasa proteins from other lophotrochozoan species. Bayesian phylogenetic analysis using
Vasa protein sequences as well as protein sequences
similar to the closest DEAD box RNA helicase genes
identified in our 454 transcriptome data (Figure 2A)
indicates that this Brachionus vasa-like sequence clusters with high posterior probability with other metazoan
Vasa proteins, to the exclusion of closely related DEAD
box sequences. This implies that the sequence we have
identified is a Brachionus orthologue of Vasa. We designate the gene encoding this protein Bpvasa (Bpvas).

Figure 2 Phylogenetic analyses of Brachionus Vasa and Nanos related predicted protein sequences. (A) Rooted phylogenetic tree,
produced using Bayesian approaches, of Vasa and related proteins. Two Vasa-like DEAD box RNA helicases from Brachionus are analysed with
Vasa and p68-like sequences from animals. BpVasa (red box) groups with Vasa sequences from other animals, against p68-like sequences (with
which the tree is rooted); BpVasa-like (green box) clusters with p68-like sequences. (B) Unrooted phylogenetic analysis of Nanos-like protein
sequences including BpNos. BpNos clusters closely with Nos from Philodina, a bdelloid rotifer with a posterior probability of 1. As there are no
closely related sequences to Nos in animal genomes with which to root this tree we also examined the protein alignment (C) for the highly
conserved residues of the Nos zinc-finger domains (arrows) all of which are present.

Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

Page 5 of 10

Figure 3 Expression of Bpvas RNA in the Brachionus ovary. (A-C) Expression of Bpvas RNA at three stages of oocyte provisioning. Bpvas RNA
(blue) is present at low levels in the vitellarium and at higher levels in the germ-cell cluster and higher still in the oocyte. Scale bars indicate
100 μm, anterior to the top. (D) Magnification of an ovary showing Bpvas expression. Scale bar is 50 μm.

nanos genes encode zinc finger transcription factors
with a highly conserved DNA binding domain. Blast
searches of available Brachionus sequence data, as well
as a fragment of sequence obtained via degenerate PCR,
identified a small number of sequences with similarity
to nanos. These sequences were assembled using CAP3
and a predicted protein coding sequence obtained.
Alignment of this protein sequence with those of other
metazoan Nanos proteins (Figure 2C) showed our putative nanos homologue encoded a strongly conserved
zinc finger binding domain with two characteristic
CCHC motifs (arrowed). Similarity outside of this region
was limited (data not shown) and so Bayesian phylogenetic analysis was performed on an alignment of just
the zinc finger domain. The resulting consensus tree
(Figure 2B) shows that this Brachionus sequence is very
similar to other Nanos proteins and clusters most closely with Nanos protein from the Bdelloid rotifer Philodina. This analysis, and the conserved residues, strongly
indicates that we have identified a Brachionus homologue of nanos. We designate the gene encoding this protein Bpnanos (Bpnos).

Gene expression in the Rotifer ovary

As vasa and nos are conserved germ cell markers we
examined the distribution of RNA expression of the
Brachionus orthologues of these genes in the adult
ovary.
Bpvas RNA is expressed in all the cell types of the
ovary, but at different levels (Figure 3). Expression is
weak in the vitellarium but ubiquitously distributed.
Expression is higher in the putative germ-cell cluster. As
the oocyte begins to develop (Figure 3A-C, close-up in
3D) Bpvas RNA comes to be most highly expressed in
the oocyte with very high levels present in oocytes that
are about to be released. No Bpvas expression is seen in
any other tissue of adult rotifer.
Bpnos RNA expression has a very similar distribution
in the ovary to that of Bpvas (Figure 4). Bpnos RNA is
present ubiquitously in the vitellarium with higher levels
in the putative germ-cell cluster. As the oocyte develops
and matures Bpnos RNA expression becomes stronger
in the oocyte and germ cell cluster (Figure 4B-D). No
Bpnos RNA expression is seen in any other adult rotifer
tissue. Control staining with sense RNA probes from

Figure 4 Expression of Bpnos in the Brachionus ovary. (A-D) Bpnos RNA expression at four stages of oocyte provisioning. Bpnos RNA
expression is present at slightly lower levels in vitellarium than in the germ cells and oocytes. No expression can be seen outside of the ovary.
Scale bars indicate 100 μm, anterior to the top. (E) Magnification of an ovary showing Bpnos expression in the germ cell cluster and oocyte with
lower levels in the vitellarium. Scale bar indicates 50 μm, anterior to the top.

Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

Bpnos or Bpvas shows no staining in adult or embryonic
tissues (data not shown). In-situ hybridization using the
method described here using probes for Brachionus
pax6 RNA gives the same expression pattern as that
reported in [29] (data not shown).
vasa and nanos expression in the developing Rotifer
embryo

In order to understand the origins of germ cells in Brachionus we also examined the distribution of Bpnos and
Bpvas RNA in developing embryos. Bpvas RNA expression remains present in just-laid, 1 cell embryos; probably persisting maternal RNA (Figure 5A). Expression
remains ubiquitous in embryos (Figure 5A-E) until at
least 96 cells (as judged by nuclear staining; Figure 5E)
are present. After this stage, expression narrows to a
small cluster of two to six cells at one end of the
embryo (Figure 5F-H). This narrowing appears to be

Page 6 of 10

due to loss of RNA expression from the majority of cells
(Figure 5F). As development continues this cluster of
Bpvas positive cells remains located towards one end of
the embryo and, as morphology becomes apparent, it is
clear that this is the posterior end (Figure 5I). As the
corona and mastax become visible just before hatching,
Bpvas expression is present in a dumb-bell shaped
domain in the posterior in a region consistent with the
developing ovary (Figure 5J).
Bpnos RNA expression is also present in just-laid
eggs (Figure 5K) but expression is significantly reduced
by the two-cell stage (Figure 5L) and absent by the 16cell stage. Bpnos RNA expression is not present in the
animal until just before hatching; the RNA is located
in a dumb-bell shaped patch of cells, similar to that
seen for Bpvas staining, in the posterior regions of the
embryo, probably representng the developing ovary
(Figure 5N).

Figure 5 Bpvas and Bpnos expression in Brachionus embryos. (A-J) Expression of Bpvas RNA in Brachionus embryos. Scale bars are 100 μm.
Where known, anterior is at the top. (A) Bpvas RNA is first seen ubiquitously in the just-laid egg and continues to be expressed in all cells
through eight (B) and 16 (C) cell stages up to stages where we can count at least 96 cells (D and E). At stages later than that, Bpvas expression
is lost from most cells (F) and focuses to a small number of cells (G and H), which become partitioned into the posterior of the embryo into a
dumbbell-shaped domain just anterior to the tail, which we interpret as the developing ovary. (K-N) Expression of Bpnos RNA. All scale bars are
100 μm, where known anterior is to the top. (K) Expression of Bpnos RNA in a one-cell embryo; RNA is ubiquitous throughout the embryo. This
RNA is substantially reduced in two-cell embryos (L) and is absent by the 16-cell stage (M) throughout the rest of development until embryos
are just about to hatch (N) when expression appears in a similar dumbbell-shaped domain as emerges for Bpvas expression.

Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

Discussion
Germ cell development in Brachionus plicatilis

The expression of vasa and nos in the developing B. plicatilis embryo appears consistent with an origin of primordial germ cells via epigenesis in rotifer. There exists
no specific subpopulation of embryonic cells showing
the expression of both factors from early in development, nor is there any evidence for the germline-specific
localization of Bpvas or Bpnos RNA in the egg or
embryo until later stages. Both of these findings indicate
that preformation of PGCs is unlikely in Brachionus;
Bpvas expression is ubiquitous throughout the early
embryo, while Bpnos expression disappears from the
embryo beyond the four-cell stage and only reappears
beyond the 96-cell stage in a posterior cluster of cells
which we take to be the same subset of cells marked by
Bpvas expression. The observed expression pattern of
Bpvasa RNA in B. plicatilis, whereby the broad maternal
distribution of expression throughout the early embryo
becomes restricted to putative germline precursors as
development progresses, is consistent with that in annelid Lophotrochozoans such as Platynereis [18], Capitella
[23] and Tubifex [30].
It would seem probable that some form of inductive
event or process maintains Bpvas expression in these
cells as it is lost from the rest of the embryo and/or
induces the expression of Bpnos in the same cells (it is
not possible at present to dissect which, if either, of
these events precedes the other). Based on the maintenance of Bpvas expression throughout the embryo up to
this point, it would seem that all cells retain the ability
to become PGCs, though only a subset do, presumably
under the influence of some form of positionally specified epigenetic signal.
Our observation of an origin for PGCs via epigenesis
in rotifers contrasts with the historical literature, which
proposes PGCs are preformed prior to gastrulation
([27]; referenced in [1]). It should be noted, however,
that these studies were based on morphological characterization of cell types by light microscopy. This is the
first experimental investigation of rotifer PGC formation
by way of molecular evidence, in particular expression
profiling of conserved germ cell markers during embryogenesis. At this stage, we cannot entirely rule out preformation as a mechanism for forming PGCs in rotifer, due
to the possibility that post-translational regulation could
provide a means by which Vasa and/or Nos proteins
could be localized to specific cell types within the oocyte
throughout embryonic development - despite the the
ubiquitous mRNA distribution of vasa and the absence
of nos transcripts at these stages. Post-translational regulation of proteins involved in oogenesis is a recurring
theme in Drosophila (reviewed in [9]). Despite this we

Page 7 of 10

see no direct evidence to support preformation of PGCs
in this rotifer. Our findings are consistent with the
observation that epigenesis is the most common and
likely to be the ancestral means of generating germ cells
amongst the Lophotrochozoa [1], with only a subset of
annelid, mollusc and platyhelminth species reported to
produce PGCs via preformation.
Absence of somatic cell expression of vasa and nos

Expression of both Bpvas and Bpnos appears largely
absent from somatic cell lineages in late embryonic and
adult rotifer, save for expression in the vitellarium of
the ovary associated with ‘loading’ of the developing
oocyte with maternal transcripts. Indeed, Bpnos transcripts are absent throughout the development of the
rotifer, other than very early in embryonic development,
(presumably maternally derived) and in developing
PGCs of the ovary. This is in contrast to several Lophotrochozoan species in which nos is expressed in somatic
cell lineages and has roles in early embryonic patterning,
predominantly of mesoderm [18,23-25]. Rotifer are
known to differ from other Lophotrochozoan phyla in
key elements of early embryogenesis; while rotifer are
said to exhibit ‘modified’ spiral cleavage [31] they lack
the heavily stereotyped early cell division pattern of
canonical spiral cleavage (Spiralia), such that characteristic cells of spiral cleavage are not evident [29]. For
instance, immunohistochemistry for activated MAPK
(mitogen-activated protein kinase) which marks the 4d
micromere, the mesodermal organizer in spiralian
lophotrochozoans, [32] fails to identify an equivalent
structure in rotifer (data not shown), which suggests
that mesodermal specification may take place via alternative mechanisms than those identified in spiralian
phyla.
The expression patterns of Bpvas and Bpnos, as well
as the localization of lipid droplets/vesicles and reactivity to DAB, suggests that the vitellarium acts to nutritionally provision the oocyte. The observation of
Brachionus oocytes expressing a factor that reacts
strongly to peroxidase substrates is interesting in light
of the report of expression of a plant-like peroxidase
gene in Hydra oogenesis [33], although no homologue
to this Hydra gene (HvAPX1) was detected in our Brachionus transcriptome sequence (data not shown). Our
observation that the size of the rotifer ovary is responsive to nutrition suggests that it is a highly metabolically
active tissue that, in adverse conditions, is too expensive
to maintain. It is possible, however, that is responding
to more subtle changes in diet, such as macronutrient
status [34] or amino-acid balance [35]. The vitellarium
transports both RNA and protein in the oocyte (as well
as the lipid vesicles) and appears to maintain a

Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

cytoplasmic bridge to the oocyte until the egg is ejected.
None of the expression patterns of RNA we have examined suggests that the vitellarium acts to pattern the
early egg, although the asymmetry in the localization of
the egg, with respect to the vitellarium and ovary in the
adult, implies that the provision of patterning data is
possible.
We have described, for the first time in molecular
detail, the activity of the Brachionus ovary and the localization and formation of germ cells by epigenesis in the
developing Brachionus embryo. How the expression of
Bpvas RNA is constrained to a few cells at the putative
point of germ cell specification, and how these cells
then come to be recruited to the ovary remains to be
discovered. Indeed little is known about the molecular,
or even morphological, aspects of development in Rotifer but Brachionus, with its fast generation time and
accessible embryos, is likely to be an excellent model
system for studying development in this phylum.

Page 8 of 10

using the nanos 5‘ primer and a vector reverse primer.
This PCR product was cloned and sequenced. A new 3′
primer was designed in order to complement the very 3′
end of the Bpnos transcript, which was used in conjunction with the 5′ primer in order to amplify, clone and
sequence this fragment.
Sequences obtained were subsequently compared with
ESTs made available in the National Center for Biotechnology Information databases from B. plicatilis EST
sequencing projects [40,41] to confirm the integrity and
continuity of sequences obtained by degenerate PCR.
Additionally, sequences corresponding to vasa and
nanos were subsequently identified from a large transcriptome sequencing project undertaken using 454 pyrosequencing technology (Smith, Benton, Hyink and
Dearden, unpublished data). Sequences were assembled
using CAP3 [42] and similarity to known vasa and nos
sequences assessed using Blastx [43].
Phylogenetic analysis

Methods
Rotifer culture

B. plicatilis Nevada (Additional File 1) rotifers were cultured at 25°C in conical flasks in F2 media [36,37] made
with Instant Ocean artificial seawater (Aquarium Systems, OH, USA) and fed either Duniella sp. microalgae
or Culture Selco High Density commercial rotifer feedstock (2g/L; INVE Aquaculture, UT, USA).
Identification of B. plicatilis vasa and nanos sequences

Fragments of B. plicatilis vasa and nos genes were initially amplified from cDNA by degenerate polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). Rotifers were concentrated by centrifugation, total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen) and first-strand cDNA synthesis carried out
with Superscript III (Invitrogen, CA, USA) using an
oligo-dT primer. Degenerate PCR primers were used to
amplify the conserved domains of the vasa and nanos
genes from B. plicatilis cDNA. The sequences of primers
used were: vasa-F2 5′-GA(A/G)AAICCCAT(A/G)TCIA
(A/G)CAT-3′ and vasa-F2 5′-CAGACGGGITCIGGIAA
(A/G)AC-3′ [38]; nanos1 5′-CGGAATTCCGTG(C/T)
GTITT(C/T)TG(T/C)(G/A/C)AGIAA(C/T)AA-3′ and
nanos2 CGGGATCCCGGG(G/A)CA(G/A)TA(T/C)
TTIA(T/C)IGT(GA)TG-3′ [39]. PCR products were
cloned into pCRII-TOPO (Invitrogen) for transformation
into E. coli, sequencing and the maintenance of clones.
A modified form of 3′ RACE was used to amplify an
additional 3′ sequence of B. plicatilis nanos sufficient for
it to be used as a template for in situ hybridization
probe synthesis. Rotifer cDNAs were directionally
cloned into the Invitrogen CloneMiner cDNA Library
Construction system, pooled library plasmid DNA from
which was used as a template for PCR amplification

Phylogenetic analysis was carried out on predicted protein sequences for Vasa and Nanos aligned using ClustalX [44]. Bayesian phylogenetic analysis was carried out
with the MrBayes software [45], using either the WAG
(Vasa) [46] or BLOSUM (Nanos) models of amino acid
substitution - after being identified as the appropriate
model after initial experiments using mixed models.
Twenty-five per cent of the initial trees were discarded
as ‘burnin’ and the resulting consensus tree visualized
using Dendroscope [47].
In situ hybridization

Rotifers were harvested from culture medium by being
sieved through a 74 μm filter (Sigma CD1 cell culture
sieves). Rotifers were then resuspended in artificial seawater and relaxed with 10% ethanol for 5 min. Formaldehyde was then added to 4% and the rotifer fixed for
10-15 min. Rotifers were then washed twice in PTw
(phosphate buffered saline + 0.1% Tween 20), transferred into a glass test tube and sonicated in a Benchtop
Ultrasonic Cleaner (Model 80T, Soniclean, Thebarton,
South Australia, http://www.soniclean.com.au; 60W
pulse swept power output, fixed frequency of 33 +/-3
kHz) for 15-30 s. Rotifers were then allowed to settle
and transferred to fresh PTw and incubated with 10 μg/
μL proteinase K for 10-15 min at room temperature.
The rotifers were washed in PTw twice, formaldehyde
was added to 4% and then they were incubated at room
temperature for 15 min. The tissue was then washed six
times in PTw, transferred to hybridization buffer (50%
formamide, 4 × standard saline citrate (SSC), 1 × Denhardt’s solution, 250 μg/mL yeast total RNA, 250 μg/mL
boiled salmon sperm or calf thymus DNA, 50 μg/mL
heparin (Sigma), 0.1% Tween 20, 5% dextran sulphate)

Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

and incubated for 2-3 h at 52°. Typically, hundreds of
rotifer adults and embryos were used in each in-situ
hybridization reaction in order to provide as broad a
developmental time-course as possible.
Digoxigenin (DIG) labelled RNA probes for in situ
hybridization were prepared as described in [48]. Two
doses of 4 μL probe were digested in an equal volume
of carbonate buffer at 60° for up to 30 min (depending
on the length of the probe). One hundred microlitres of
hybridization buffer was then added to the probe. The
hybridization buffer was removed from the rotifers and
replaced with the digested probe solution and the mixture incubated overnight at 56°. Rotifers were then
washed seven times over 24 hours in 50% formamide,
2 × SSC, 0.1% Tween 20 at 56°.
Rotifers were transferred into PTw, rinsed three
times and incubated in PTw + 0.1% w/v bovine serum
albumin (BSA) for 15 min. The DIG hapten was
detected using a 1:500 dilution of anti-DIG-alkaline
phosphatase antibodies (Roche Applied Science, IN,
USA) in PTw + 0.1% BSA for 90 min at room temperature. The antibody solution was removed and the
rotifers washed six times in PTw over 2 h. Rotifers
were washed twice in alkaline phosphatase (AP) staining buffer (100 mM Tris pH 9.5, 100 mM NaCl, 50
mM MgCl2, 0.1% Tween 20) and AP activity detected
using 4.5 μL nitro blue tetrazolium chloride (75 mg/
mL in dimethylformamide (DMF), Roche Applied
Science) and 3.5 μL 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate (50 mg/mL in DMF, Roche Applied Science) in
AP buffer. Staining was monitored under a stereomicroscope and the tissues washed and transferred to
methanol for de-staining when clear staining was
observed. Tissues were rehydrated after the methanol
wash, counterstained by incubation for 1 h in PTx
containing either 1:1000 ProLong® Gold antifade
reagent with DAPI or 1 μM YOYO-1 (Invitrogen),
cleared and mounted in 70% glycerol and examined
under an Olympus BX61 compound microscope.
Histochemistry

Rotifers were harvested, fixed and sonicated as
described above for in situ hybridization. Rotifers were
placed in DAB staining solution [49] + 0.8% NiCl 2 .
After 5 min pre-incubation H2O2 was added to 0.006%
and the staining was monitored under a dissecting
microscope. Staining was stopped by washing in PTx
and the specimens were counterstained by incubation
for 1 h in PTx containing either 1:1000 ProLong® Gold
antifade reagent with DAPI, 1 uM propidium iodide or
1 μM YOYO-1 (Invitrogen). Rotifers were cleared and
mounted in 70% glycerol and examined on an Olympus
BX61 microscope.

Page 9 of 10

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplemental Figure 1. Unrooted Phylogram of
Brachionus 16 S ribosomal sequences. Three 16 S sequences from the
stock of rotifers used in this experiment cluster with Brachionus plicatilis
species against other Brachionus species and Euchlanis dilatata. Two
Brachionus species, one an isolate from Nevada with no species name in
the database, and B. manjavacas, fall within the plicatilis clade. The
rotifers used in this study cluster most closely with the Nevada isolate of
B. plicatilis. Phylogram was constructed with MrBayes using the 4by4
model of nucleotide substitution. 25% of the initial trees were discarded
as ‘burnin’ and the resulting consensus tree visualized using
Dendroscope [47].

Abbreviations
AP: alkaline phosphatase; BSA: bovine serum albumin; DIC: differential
interference contrast; DIG: digoxigenin; EST: expressed sequence tag; MAPK:
mitogen-activated protein kinase; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; PGC:
primordial germ cells; PTw: phosphaste buffered saline plus Tween.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank M J Wilson, E J Duncan, O Hyink, S Morgan
and N Kenny for their critical reading of the manuscript. The authors also
wish to thank three anonymous reviewers whose comments greatly
improved the manuscript. The research was funded via a Royal Society of
New Zealand Marsden Grant (UOO0602) to PKD.
Author details
1
Laboratory for Evolution and Development, Genetics Otago and the
National Research Centre for Growth and Development, Biochemistry
Department, University of Otago, PO Box 56, Dunedin, Aotearoa-New
Zealand. 2Institute of Natural Sciences, Massey University Albany Campus,
Private Bag 102904, North Shore MSC, Auckland, Aotearoa-New Zealand.
Authors’ contributions
JMS carried out some of the experiments, including molecular cloning, and
contributed to drafting of the paper. AGC developed the techniques used in
these analyses. PKD designed the study, carried out in-situ hybridization,
immunohistochemistry and phylogenetics and contributed to the drafting
the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests
Received: 8 December 2009 Accepted: 2 August 2010
Published: 2 August 2010
References
1. Extavour CG, Akam M: Mechanisms of germ cell specification across the
metazoans: epigenesis and preformation. Development 2003,
130:5869-5884.
2. Extavour CG, Pang K, Matus DQ, Martindale MQ: vasa and nanos
expression patterns in a sea anemone and the evolution of bilaterian
germ cell specification mechanisms. Evol Dev 2005, 7:201-215.
3. Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, Sørensen MV, Haddock SH, SchmidtRhaesa A, Okusu A, Kristensen RM, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G:
Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution of the animal tree of
life. Nature 2008, 452:745-749.
4. Giribet G: Assembling the lophotrochozoan (=spiralian) tree of life. Phil
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008, 363:1513-1522.
5. Hay B, Jan LY, Jan YN: A protein component of Drosophila polar granules
is encoded by vasa and has extensive sequence similarity to ATPdependent helicases. Cell 1988, 55:577-587.
6. Mochizuki K, Nishimiya-Fujisawa C, Fujisawa T: Universal occurrence of the
vasa-related genes among metazoans and their germline expression in
Hydra. Dev Genes Evol 2001, 211:299-308.

Smith et al. EvoDevo 2010, 1:5
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/5

7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.
21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Mahowald AP: Assembly of the Drosophila germ plasm. Int Rev Cytol 2001,
203:187-213.
Johnstone O, Lasko P: Interaction with eIF5B is essential for Vasa function
during development. Development 2004, 131:4167-4178.
Johnstone O, Lasko P: Translational regulation and RNA localization in
Drosophila oocytes and embryos. Annu Rev Genet 2001, 35:365-406.
Tanaka SS, Toyooka Y, Akasu R, Katoh-Fukui Y, Nakahara Y, Suzuki R,
Yokoyama M, Noce T: The mouse homolog of Drosophila Vasa is required
for the development of male germ cells. Genes Dev 2000, 14:841-853.
Brown FD, Swalla BJ: Vasa expression in a colonial ascidian, Botrylloides
violaceus. Evol Dev 2007, 9:165-177.
Carre D, Djediat C, Sardet C: Formation of a large Vasa-positive germ
granule and its inheritance by germ cells in the enigmatic Chaetognaths.
Development 2002, 129:661-670.
Castrillon DH, Quade BJ, Wang TY, Quigley C, Crum CP: The human VASA
gene is specifically expressed in the germ cell lineage. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2000, 97:9585-9590.
Fabioux C, Pouvreau S, Le Roux F, Huvet A: The oyster vasa-like gene: a
specific marker of the germline in Crassostrea gigas. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2004, 315:897-904.
Fabioux C, Corporeau C, Quillien V, Favrel P, Huvet A: In vivo RNA
interference in oyster-vasa silencing inhibits germ cell development.
FEBS J 2009, 276:2566-2573.
Knaut H, Pelegri F, Bohmann K, Schwarz H, Nusslein-Volhard C: Zebrafish
vasa RNA but not its protein is a component of the germ plasm and
segregates asymmetrically before germline specification. J Cell Biol 2000,
149:875-888.
Ohashi H, Umeda N, Hirazawa N, Ozaki Y, Miura C, Miura T: Expression of
vasa (vas)-related genes in germ cells and specific interference with
gene functions by double-stranded RNA in the monogenean,
Neobenedenia girellae. Int J Parasitol 2007, 37:515-523.
Rebscher N, Zelada-Gonzalez F, Banisch TU, Raible F, Arendt D: Vasa unveils
a common origin of germ cells and of somatic stem cells from the
posterior growth zone in the polychaete Platynereis dumerilii. Dev Biol
2007, 306:599-611.
Rosner A, Moiseeva E, Rinkevich Y, Lapidot Z, Rinkevich B: Vasa and the
germ line lineage in a colonial urochordate. Dev Biol 2009, 331:113-128.
Swartz SZ, Chan XY, Lambert JD: Localization of Vasa mRNA during early
cleavage of the snail Ilyanassa. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218:107-113.
Mochizuki K, Sano H, Kobayashi S, Nishimiya-Fujisawa C, Fujisawa T:
Expression and evolutionary conservation of nanos-related genes in
Hydra. Dev Genes Evol 2000, 210:591-602.
Curtis D, Apfeld J, Lehmann R: nanos is an evolutionarily conserved
organizer of anterior-posterior polarity. Development 1995, 121:1899-1910.
Dill KK, Seaver EC: Vasa and nanos are coexpressed in somatic and germ
line tissue from early embryonic cleavage stages through adulthood in
the polychaete Capitella sp. I. Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218:453-463.
Kang D, Pilon M, Weisblat DA: Maternal and zygotic expression of a
nanos-class gene in the leech Helobdella robusta: primordial germ cells
arise from segmental mesoderm. Dev Biol 2002, 245:28-41.
Rabinowitz JS, Chan XY, Kingsley EP, Duan Y, Lambert JD: Nanos is
required in somatic blast cell lineages in the posterior of a mollusk
embryo. Curr Biol 2008, 18:331-336.
Bentfeld ME: Studies of oogenesis in rotifer, Asplanchna. 1. Fine structure
of female reproductive system. Zeitschrift Zellforschung Mikroskopische
Anatomie 1971, 115:165-183.
Lechner M: Untersuchungen zur Embryonalentwicklung des Rädertieren
Asplanchna girodi de Guerne. Roux’s Arch Developmental Biol 1966,
157:117-173.
Bentfeld ME: Studies of oogenesis in rotifer, Asplanchna. 2. Oocyte
growth and development. Zeitschrift Zellforschung Mikroskopische Anatomie
1971, 115:184-195.
Boell LA, Bucher G: Whole-mount in situ hybridization in the rotifer
Brachionus plicatilis representing a basal branch of lophotrochozoans.
Dev Genes Evol 2008, 218:445-451.
Oyama A, Shimizu T: Transient occurrence of vasa-expressing cells in
nongenital segments during embryonic development in the oligochaete
annelid Tubifex tubifex. Dev Genes Evol 2007, 217:675-690.
Neilsen C: Animal Evolution: Interrelationships of the Living Phyla.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, Oxford 2001.

Page 10 of 10

32. Lambert JD: Mesoderm in spiralians: the organizer and the 4d cell. J Exp
Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2008, 310:15-23.
33. Habetha M, Bosch TC: Symbiotic Hydra express a plant-like peroxidase
gene during oogenesis. J Exp Biol 2005, 208:2157-2165.
34. Lee KP, Simpson SJ, Clissold FJ, Brooks R, Ballard JW, Taylor PW, Soran N,
Raubenheimer D: Lifespan and reproduction in Drosophila: New insights
from nutritional geometry. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:2498-2503.
35. Grandison RC, Piper MD, Partridge L: Amino-acid imbalance explains
extension of lifespan by dietary restriction in Drosophila. Nature 2009,
462:1061-1064.
36. Guillard RR, Ryther JH: Studies of marine planktonic diatoms. I. Cyclotella
nana Hustedt, and Detonula confervacea (cleve) Gran. Can J Microbiol
1962, 8:229-239.
37. Guillard RR: Culture of phytoplankton for feeding marine invertebrates.
Culture of Marine Invertebrate Animals New York: Plenum PressSmith MH
1975, 26-60.
38. Chang CC, Dearden P, Akam M: Germ line development in the
grasshopper Schistocerca gregaria: vasa as a marker. Dev Biol 2002,
252:100-118.
39. Pilon M, Weisblat DA: A nanos homolog in leech. Development 1997,
124:1771-1780.
40. Denekamp NY, Thorne MA, Clark MS, Kube M, Reinhardt R, Lubzens E:
Discovering genes associated with dormancy in the monogonont rotifer
Brachionus plicatilis. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:108.
41. Suga K, Mark Welch D, Tanaka Y, Sakakura Y, Hagiwara A: Analysis of
expressed sequence tags of the cyclically parthenogenetic rotifer
Brachionus plicatilis. PLoS One 2007, 2:e671.
42. Huang X, Madan A: CAP3: A DNA sequence assembly program. Genome
Res 1999, 9:868-877.
43. Altschul S, Gish W, Miller W, Myers E, Lipman D: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Molec Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
44. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, positions-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
45. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
46. Whelan S, Goldman N: A general empirical model of protein evolution
derived from multiple protein families using a maximum-likelihood
approach. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18:691-699.
47. Huson DH, Richter DC, Rausch C, Dezulian T, Franz M, Rupp R:
Dendroscope: an interactive viewer for large phylogenetic trees. BMC
Bioinformatics 2007, 8:460.
48. Osborne P, Dearden PK: Non-radioactive in situ hybridisation to
honeybee embryos and ovaries. Apidologie 2005, 36:113-118.
49. Patel NH: Imaging neuronal subsets and other cell types in whole-mount
Drosophila embryos and larvae using antibody probes. Drosophila
melanogaster.Practical uses in Cell and Molecular Biology London: Academic
PressGoldstein LSB, Fyrberg EA , 44 1994, 446-485, [Wilson L, Matsudaira P
(Series Editor): Methods in Cell Biology].
doi:10.1186/2041-9139-1-5
Cite this article as: Smith et al.: Germ cell specification and ovary
structure in the rotifer Brachionus plicatilis. EvoDevo 2010 1:5.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
