<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Early evolution of the LIM homeobox gene family</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010 8:4. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-4"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Mansi Srivastava"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Early evolution of the LIM homeobox gene family
Mansi Srivastava1*, Claire Larroux2, Daniel R Lu1, Kareshma Mohanty1, Jarrod Chapman3, Bernard M Degnan2,
Daniel S Rokhsar1,3

Abstract
Background: LIM homeobox (Lhx) transcription factors are unique to the animal lineage and have patterning roles
during embryonic development in flies, nematodes and vertebrates, with a conserved role in specifying neuronal
identity. Though genes of this family have been reported in a sponge and a cnidarian, the expression patterns and
functions of the Lhx family during development in non-bilaterian phyla are not known.
Results: We identified Lhx genes in two cnidarians and a placozoan and report the expression of Lhx genes during
embryonic development in Nematostella and the demosponge Amphimedon. Members of the six major LIM
homeobox subfamilies are represented in the genomes of the starlet sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis, and the
placozoan Trichoplax adhaerens. The hydrozoan cnidarian, Hydra magnipapillata, has retained four of the six Lhx
subfamilies, but apparently lost two others. Only three subfamilies are represented in the haplosclerid demosponge
Amphimedon queenslandica. A tandem cluster of three Lhx genes of different subfamilies and a gene containing
two LIM domains in the genome of T. adhaerens (an animal without any neurons) indicates that Lhx subfamilies
were generated by tandem duplication. This tandem cluster in Trichoplax is likely a remnant of the original
chromosomal context in which Lhx subfamilies first appeared. Three of the six Trichoplax Lhx genes are expressed
in animals in laboratory culture, as are all Lhx genes in Hydra. Expression patterns of Nematostella Lhx genes
correlate with neural territories in larval and juvenile polyp stages. In the aneural demosponge, A. queenslandica,
the three Lhx genes are expressed widely during development, including in cells that are associated with the larval
photosensory ring.
Conclusions: The Lhx family expanded and diversified early in animal evolution, with all six subfamilies already
diverged prior to the cnidarian-placozoan-bilaterian last common ancestor. In Nematostella, Lhx gene expression is
correlated with neural territories in larval and juvenile polyp stages. This pattern is consistent with a possible role in
patterning the Nematostella nervous system. We propose a scenario in which Lhx genes play a homologous role in
neural patterning across eumetazoans.

Background
In contrast to the centralized and highly structured nervous systems of bilaterians, some animals (cnidarians
and ctenophores) have more simply organized networks,
and still others (sponges and placozoans) appear to lack
a nervous system entirely [1]. To the extent that these
early branching animal phyla (the so called ‘basal metazoa’) have retained early metazoan characters, their
study can inform our understanding of the early evolution of the nervous system. Although early metazoan
phylogeny remains controversial [2-5], among the living
phyla sponges were likely the first animal group to
* Correspondence: mansi@wi.mit.edu
1
Center for Integrative Genomics and Department of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA

diverge, followed by the subsequent branching of placozoans, and then cnidarians/bilaterians. (The placement
of ctenophores remains contentious [3,6]). Both sponges
[7] and placozoans (that is, Trichoplax adhaerens) [8]
appear to lack a defined neuronal cell type, although
evidence for putative sponge neurons has been put forward [9], and the genes corresponding to postsynaptic
scaffolding have been identified in a demosponge [10].
In contrast, cnidarians (hydra, anemones, corals, jellyfish) all have clearly defined neurons [11], and neural
networks of varying complexity (see, for example,
[12-20]). The differences between early branching phyla
are traditionally thought to represent the evolutionary
progression of the nervous system in the first animals,
but molecular evidence supporting such gradual

© 2010 Srivastava et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

evolution has been lacking. Comparative analysis of nervous system patterning genes in diverse animal phyla
with and without nervous systems provides an avenue
for understanding the early evolution of this fundamental animal feature.
Genes of the LIM homeobox (Lhx) family perform fundamental roles in tissue-specific differentiation and body
patterning during development in both vertebrates and
invertebrates [21,22] (summarized in Additional file 1,
Table S1). These genes comprise a family of DNA-binding proteins with six subfamilies; each subfamily member
is represented once in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster and twice in mammalian species [23].
Lhx proteins are composed of two N-terminal LIM
domains (named after the founding members LIN-11,
Islet-1, and MEC-3) and a helix-turn-helix forming
homeodomain that binds regulatory DNA surrounding
target genes [22,24]. The zinc-finger forming LIM
domains are essential for protein function in several subfamilies and are thought to regulate DNA binding by the
homeodomain by interacting with other nuclear proteins
[23]. The diverse functions of Lhx proteins include the
development of kidney, pancreas, eyes, and limbs in vertebrates (by the Lhx1/5, Lhx3/4, Islet, Apterous, and Lmx
subfamilies), the patterning of wings and imaginal disc
precursor tissues in flies (by Apterous and Arrowhead),
and the formation of the vulva in C. elegans (LIN-11 or
Lhx1/5 family) [23]. Lhx genes mediate these developmental functions by specifying cellular identities and
their loss of function can result in human disease [25,26].
While Lhx proteins perform a diverse array of developmental functions, all members of the Lhx family are
prominent in specifying the fates of motorneurons, sensory neurons, and interneurons [23]. More specifically,
in both vertebrates and Drosophila, motorneuron subtype identity is determined by a combinatorial code of
Lhx genes and a particular Lhx gene defines interneuron
subtype identity, suggesting that these genes played such
roles in the common ancestor of bilaterians [23,27-29].
Lmx proteins specify serotonergic neurons [30,31]; Lmx
genes are also implicated in dopaminergic neural fates
[32]; Lhx8 and islet specify cholinergic fate [33-37];
GABAergic fates are specified by Lhx7 and Lhx6
[36,38,39]. Many Lhx genes are involved in the development of various types of sensory neurons, such as
photosensory, thermosensory, olfactory, chemosensory,
or mechanosensory neurons (see, for example, [40-44]).
Classic studies in Hydra, a hydrozoan cnidarian, and
other cnidarians showed that the adult nervous system
is composed of regionalized and overlapping populations
of cells expressing various neurotransmitters and neuropeptides [12-19]. Recently, the anatomy of the nervous
system over developmental time has been studied in the
anthozoan starlet sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis

Page 2 of 13

[20], revealing neural complexity comparable to that of
Hydra. Are cnidarian neuronal subpopulations patterned
in a manner similar to those in bilaterians, for example,
using combinatorial expression of Lhx genes? If so, are
these patterning mechanisms in place in placozoans and
sponges despite the lack of nervous systems in these
phyla?
LIM homeobox genes have been reported in the genomes of N. vectensis [45] and the demosponge Amphimedon queenslandica [46,47]. Using the recently
sequenced genomes of N. vectensis [48], Hydra magnipapillata [49], T. adhaerens [2], and A. queenslandica
(Srivastava et al.: The genome of the haplosclerid
demosponge Amphimedon queenslandica and the evolution of animal complexity, submitted), we trace the evolution of the LIM homeobox family. We then report the
expression patterns of several Lhx gene families during
embryonic development in N. vectensis and A. queenslandica. The territories of expression of these genes
broadly overlap those of known neuronal subpopulations in the sea anemone, and putative photosensory
cells in the sponge.

Results
Origin and early diversification of the LIM homeobox
protein family

Genes with the LIM-LIM homeobox domain composition were found in all the animal genomes queried in
this study. However, no putative Lhx proteins were predicted in the genome of Monosiga brevicollis, a unicellular choanoflagellate (the sister group to animals). This,
together with the absence of LIM-LIM homeobox proteins in plants, fungi and other eukaryotes suggests that
the combination of LIM domains and homeodomains is
unique to animals.
The Nematostella genome encodes six Lhx proteins,
which each fall into one of the six known subfamilies
(Figure 1). In addition to the three Lhx genes classified
into Islet, Lhx1/5 (LIN-11), and Lhx6/8 (Arrowhead)
groups previously [45], we identified orthologs of the
Lhx3/4, Lhx2/9 (Apterous) and Lmx groups in Nematostella (as found in [47]). The Lmx gene appears to have
only one LIM domain, contrary to the usual two LIM
domains followed by a homeodomain composition
known from bilaterian Lhx genes (Table 1). As is the
case with Nematostella, members of all six Lhx subfamilies are represented in the Trichoplax genome. This
implies that the six Lhx subfamilies were already established in the common ancestor of cnidarians, placozoans, and bilaterians. While the putative Trichoplax
Lhx6/8 (Arrowhead) ortholog encodes only two LIM
domains but no homeodomain, it can nevertheless be
robustly classified as a member of the Arrowhead/Lhx6/
8 subfamily.

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Phylogeny of LIM homeobox genes. The maximum likelihood tree based on an alignment of two LIM domains and the
homeodomain is shown here with support values from Neighbor-joining/Likelihood/Bayesian analyses shown for the major nodes (relationships
within the major classes were well supported only for vertebrate sequences). Neighbor-joining and Likelihood bootstrap values above 50% are
shown, as are Bayesian posterior probabilities above 0.95. Full trees from each analysis are shown in Additional file 1. Aq = Amphimedon
queenslandica(blue); Ce = Caenorhabditis elegans; Dm = Drosophila melanogaster; Dr = Danio rerio; Hm = Hydra magnipapillata (orange); Hs =
Homo sapiens; Nv = Nematostella vectensis (green); Rn = Rattus norvegicus; Sp = Strongylocentrotus purpuratus; Ta = Trichoplax adhaerens (red); Xt
= Xenopus tropicalis.

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

Page 4 of 13

Table 1 Summary of domain structures and expression evidence for LIM homeobox genes found in four early animal
genomes
Subfamily

Nematostella

Hydra

Trichoplax

Amphimedon

Domains

Expressed

Domains

Expressed

Domains

Expressed

Domains

Expressed

Apterous (Lhx2/9)

L-L-H

Y

L-L-H

Y

L-L-H

Y

-

-

Arrowhead (Lhx6/8)

L-L-H

Y

L-H

Y

L-L

Y

-

-

Islet

L-L-H

Y

-

-

L-L-H

-

L-L-H

Y

lin-11 (Lhx1/5)

L-L-H

Y

L-L-H

Y

L-L-H

Y

L-L-H

Y

Lhx3/4

L-L-H

N

-

-

L-L-H

-

L-L-H

Y

Lmx

L-H

Y

L-L-H

Y

L-L-H

-

-

-

H = homeodomain; L = LIM domain; N = not found to be expressed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); Y = expressed.

Only four Lhx genes were identified in Hydra, each
orthologous to a different Lhx subfamily (Arrowhead,
Apterous, Lmx, Lhx1/5) suggesting that members of the
other subfamilies (Islet, Lhx3/4) have been lost along
the lineage leading to Hydra, after its divergence from
anthozoans (Figure 1). The Hydra member of the
Arrowhead subfamily appears to be missing the first
LIM domain (Table 1). The Amphimedon complement
of Lhx proteins consists of members of the Islet, Lhx3/4
and Lhx1/5 families [46,47]. Given the poor support for
the relationships of Lhx subfamilies to each other, we
cannot distinguish between two scenarios: first, that
three Lhx subfamilies were lost in the Amphimedon
lineage, and second, that the common ancestor of all
animals may have only had three Lhx genes, with ancestral (and sponge) genes most resembling specific daughter families because of asymmetric evolutionary rates of
gene duplicates [47].
Though there is poor support in the tree (Figure 1) for
the Lhx1/5 and Lhx3/4 groups, Nematostella, Trichoplax, Hydra, and Amphimedon genes have been assigned
to these subfamilies because these classifications are the
most likely scenario. It is often difficult to classify genes
from early-branching animal phyla into clear bilaterian
subfamilies [47,50] and the inability to find good bootstrap support for the Lhx1/5 and Lhx3/4 groups may be
a result of high levels of divergence between the early
animal sequences relative to their bilaterian counterparts. Indeed, in an Lhx tree constructed without Trichoplax or Hydra sequences, assignment of
Nematostella and Amphimedon genes to specific subfamilies was well supported [47]. Also, given that Nematostella and Trichoplax have genes that can be
confidently placed in each one of the other subfamilies
(Arrowhead, Islet, Apterous, Lmx), it is likely that the
tree in Figure 1 has recovered the correct placements of
the Nematostella and Trichoplax Lhx1/5 and Lhx3/4
proteins.

scaffold_2 that also includes another LIM-LIM domain
containing gene (Figure 2a) (Additional file 1, Supplemental Section 2). This fourth member of the tandem
cluster can be classified as a member of the Lmo family
using phylogenetic methods (Figure 1). The three Lhx
genes in the cluster belong to the Lmx, Arrowhead and
Lhx3/4 subfamilies, and a fourth Lhx gene (of the
Apterous subfamily) is present further downstream on
scaffold_2. The classification of these proteins into distinct Lhx subfamilies suggests that these syntenic genes
are unlikely to be the result of a recent duplication in
the placozoan lineage. Therefore, this syntenic cluster of
genes likely represents (that is, is a remnant of) the
ancestral genomic context in which the different Lhx
subfamilies first evolved. The preservation of this tandem cluster in Trichoplax (with only three Lhx families
missing) and its disruption in most other genomes is
consistent with the finding that the Trichoplax genome
appears to be the least rearranged relative to the
inferred ancestral genome [2]. Of the 12 Lhx genes in
humans, 7 are located on segments in different human
chromosomes, but these segments fall into the same
ancestral linkage groups as the tandem cluster of Trichoplax Lhx genes (Additional file 1, Table S10) [51].
This suggests that the tandem Lhx gene cluster in Trichoplax descended from the same ancestral genomic
context that gave rise to modern bilaterian Lhx genes.
Introns are found in diverse bilaterian homeobox-containing genes at over 20 different positions that interrupt the homeobox [52]. In the bilaterian members of
the Lmx subfamily, the homeodomains are interrupted
by two conserved introns (Figure 2b). The first of these
introns is found to be present in the cnidarian and placozoan orthologs of Lmx as well, but the second one
has been lost in Nematostella (though it is present in
Hydra and Trichoplax Lmx genes).

Synteny and intron conservation of Lhx genes

All four Hydra Lhx genes were successfully amplified
from the cDNA of adults (some of which may have
been reproducing asexually) (Table 1). The apterous

Of the six putative Lhx genes in the Trichoplax genome,
three are present as part of a tandem cluster on

Normal and atypical Lhx genes are expressed in
Nematostella, Hydra, Trichoplax, and Amphimedon

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

Page 5 of 13

Figure 2 Synteny and intron conservation of LIM homeobox genes. (a) Four of the six Trichoplax LIM homeobox genes are present on one
scaffold, three of these are present in tandem. This tandem cluster also contains a gene coding for a protein of the LIM only (Lmo) class. This
scaffold is in the same putative ancestral linkage group as human chromosome segments that contain 6 of the 12 human LIM homeobox
genes. (b) Two introns that interrupt the homeodomain in the Lmx class proteins are well conserved across animals, but one has been lost in
both Nematostella and C. elegans. Introns are represented with square brackets with the enclosed number indicating the phase of the intron.

gene model in Hydra was found to be incorrect as 5’
rapid amplification of complementary DNA ends
(RACE) determined the expression of another exon containing the second LIM domain that was found to be
encoded in the genomic sequence upstream of the predicted gene model. However, 5’ RACE verified that the
Hydra arrowhead gene model, which also predicted only
one LIM domain, is correct. Lmx and Lhx1/5 orthologs

in Hydra also appeared to be missing a LIM domain,
but lowering the e-value threshold in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Conserved
Domain Search tool [53] identified an additional Nterminal LIM domain in the Hydra Lmx gene model
and an additional C-terminal LIM domain in the Hydra
Lhx 1/5 prediction. The expression of both LIM
domains and the homedomain in the Lmx and Lhx1/5

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

orthologs was confirmed through molecular cloning and
sequencing analysis. These findings suggest that Hydra
Lhx protein LIM domains have an accelerated rate of
evolution (resulting in decreased affinity to the position
specific weight matrices that define conserved domains),
consistent with the overall high rate of protein sequence
evolution in the Hydra lineage.
Of the six Trichoplax Lhx orthologs, apterous, arrowhead and Lhx1/5 were found to be expressed in the animals in laboratory culture (The Lmo gene in the tandem
cluster on scaffold_2 is expressed as well). Five of the
six Nematostella genes were also amplified from cDNA
of animals at various developmental stages, including
the Lmx-like gene that is missing one LIM domain
(Table 1). Thus, Lhx genes with atypical domain compositions predicted in the genomes of Nematostella, Trichoplax and Hydra, are found to be expressed in those
configurations (no atypical forms were found in Amphimedon). This finding is similar to those in other families
such as the Hedgehog ligand, where early animal phyla
are found to encode proteins with domain compositions
not seen in homologous sequences in bilaterians [54,55].
However, since these configurations are not shared
between phyla (for example, Hydra and Trichoplax
Arrowhead proteins have different missing domains),
they most likely resulted from independent evolution
along these lineages.
Nematostella Lhx genes are expressed in discrete regions
of developing embryos

The mRNA for the Lhx6/8 (arrowhead) ortholog in
Nematostella first appears faintly in the aboral ectoderm
in the early planula and subsequently its expression
resolves to mark ectodermal cells in the apical tuft in
late planula stages (Figure 3a-c). This mRNA is absent
in juvenile polyp stages (Figure 3d). Lhx1/5 (lin-11)
expression in Nematostella begins in the early planula in
endoderm cells that will form the endoderm around the
pharynx (Figure 3e-g). This expression persists in late
planula and juvenile polyp stages in discrete clusters of
cells in a ring around the pharyngeal endoderm (Figure
3g,h). The expression of this gene around the pharynx
appears to be radial, with no apparent asymmetries (Figure 3h’). A third Lhx gene, the Lmx ortholog, starts out
with strong expression in the oral ectoderm in the early
planula, and over time its expression spreads to the
pharynx and the endodermal tissue that will make the
directive mesenteries (that is, the pair of endodermal
infoldings that are the first to appear) (Figure 3i-k). In
juvenile polyps, Lmx mRNA has strong expression in
the pharyngeal endoderm and ectoderm and weak
expression in the directive mesenteries (Figure 3l). The
Lhx2/9 (apterous) ortholog in Nematostella has speckled
expression throughout the endoderm in early planula
stages, but is found in a few cells of the aboral region of

Page 6 of 13

the pharynx in the late planula stage (Figure 3m-o).
Juvenile polyps express Lhx2/9 in the aboral end of the
pharynx and in the directive mesenteries (Figure 3p,p’).
The islet gene of Nematostella is expressed in the pharynx as it starts to form and its mRNA is found in directive mesenteries and aboral endoderm of later stages
(Figure 3q-t).
Amphimedon Lhx genes are expressed during
embryogenesis

In Amphimedon, Lhx3/4 (lim-3) is expressed in the
inner cell mass with transiently higher expression levels
under the photoreceptor pigment ring as it develops
(Figure 4a-e). When pigment cells have coalesced into a
spot, Lhx1/5 (lin-11) appears to be expressed in the
outer cell layer of the embryo, with higher levels of
expression observed in cells around the pigment spot
(Figure 4f,g). Lhx1/5 expression remains associated with
the pigment ring as it forms and dramatically increases
in the inner cell mass, especially at the anterior end
(Figure 4h,i). Both of these genes appear to be ubiquitously expressed in a relatively uniform manner in the
larva just prior to hatching (Figure 4e,j). The islet gene
appears to be ubiquitously expressed during Amphimedon development (data not shown).

Discussion
The six Lhx subfamilies originally identified in flies,
nematodes, and vertebrates are all represented in the
Trichoplax and Nematostella genomes, indicating that
the diversification of the Lhx family by gene duplication
had already occurred by the time of the last common
bilaterian-cnidarian-placozoan ancestor. In Trichoplax,
four of the six Lhx genes are colocalized to a region of a
few hundred kb in the genome. This implies that the
diversification of the Lhx family took place by tandem
(or local) gene duplication, and that some of these linkages have been retained in the Trichoplax lineage. This
is analogous to the diversification of the Hox cluster,
which arose by tandem duplication in the bilaterian lineage and is preserved in multiple extant lineages. For the
Lhx cluster, only Trichoplax preserves remnants of the
ancestral organization.
The Amphimedon genome contains three Lhx subfamily members (Lhx1/5, Lhx3/4, and Islet) but we cannot
resolve whether these three represent the ancestral
metazoan Lhx complement, with Lmx, Arrowhead, and
Apterous arising by duplication from within these
families in the placozoan-cnidarian-bilaterian lineage, or
if the sponge lost these subfamilies. Interestingly, the
three Lhx gene subfamilies found on the same scaffold
as the Lhx3/4 gene in the placozoan genome are missing
from the sponge genome. From the phylogenetic tree,
we cannot reject the possibility that these three genes
arose after the divergence of sponges, from an initial

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

Page 7 of 13

Figure 3 LIM homeobox gene expression during Nematostella development. (a-d) The arrowhead (Lhx6/8) ortholog is first expressed in the
apical tuft of the late planula (c) but disappears in the juvenile polyp (d). (e-h) The lin-11 (Lhx1/5) ortholog is first expressed in the putative
pharyngeal endoderm in the early planula and later resolves into an endodermal ring around the pharynx (g’ = oral view of g; h’ = cross-section
through h). (i-l) The Lmx ortholog is first transcribed in the oral ectoderm of the early planula and then spreads into the pharynx and directive
mesenteries (l’ = oral view of l). (m-p) The apterous(Lhx2/9) ortholog is expressed in the planula endoderm in a speckled pattern and later its
expression spreads to the end of the pharynx and throughout the directive mesenteries (p’ = lateral view of p). (q-t) The islet ortholog starts out
in the putative pharyngeal endoderm and over time spreads into the directive mesenteries. This gene is transcribed in cells of the planula body
wall endoderm and in the polyp stage there it shows restricted expression in the aboral endoderm (t’ = lateral view of t).

duplication of the Lhx3/4 gene. Analysis of Lhx genes in
other sponges may resolve this issue.
In contrast to Trichoplax and Nematostella, the Hydra
genome lacks members of the Lhx3/4 and Islet subfamilies, which were evidently lost in the Hydra lineage. The
arrowhead gene in Hydra has an atypical structure, lacking one of the two LIM domains characteristic of the
family. Although such domain structures have not been
reported in bilaterians, independently evolved atypical
domain structures are also observed in Nematostella
and Trichoplax Lhx genes. Nevertheless, such genes are
expressed, suggesting that they retain some function and
are not simply pseudogenes. Some Lhx proteins show
long branch lengths on phylogenetic trees, suggesting
that these subfamily members may be experiencing
reduced constraint and/or positive selection.
In diverse bilaterians, the LIM homeobox ‘code’ is
conserved in the sense that neural types are patterned

by combinatorial expression of Lhx and other transcription factors; however, the same types are not generated
by the same Lhx combinations in different species [23].
In Nematostella, the expression of Lhx genes during
embryonic development also appears to correlate with
neural territories, although we have not shown that
these genes are expressed in neurons. Three different
LIM homeobox genes are expressed in the three major
neuralized regions: the apical tuft of the planula, and
the oral and pharyngeal nerve rings in the polyp (Figure
5) [20]. DOPA-b-monoxygenase, the enzyme involved in
epinephrine and norepinephrine synthesis, and anthoRFamide mRNA mark the oral nerve ring, a region that is
found to express the Nematostella Lmx ortholog. Over
the course of development, Lmx expression spreads into
the pharynx and directive mesenteries, mirroring the
changes in DOPA-b-monoxygenase expression. The
Lhx6/8 (arrowhead) ortholog is expressed transiently in

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

Page 8 of 13

Figure 4 LIM homeobox gene expression during Amphimedon development. (a, c, f, h) Whole-mount micrographs; (b, d, e, g, i, j)
micrographs of sectioned embryos. (a-e) The Lhx3/4 ortholog is expressed in the inner cell mass during late gastrulation, when pigment cells
form a spot (a,b) and then a ring (c,d). A stronger expression domain appears transiently under the photoreceptor ring when it is forming
(arrowheads in d). Expression is ubiquitous in the prehatched larva, with higher expression levels in the subepithelial layer (e). (f-j) The Lhx1/5
ortholog appears to be expressed in the outer layer at the pigment spot stage, especially around the spot (f,g). When the pigment ring forms (h,
i), the gene is highly expressed in the inner cell mass, especially inside the developing ring and at the anterior end. A strong expression domain
also appears in the micromeres surrounding the developing pigment ring (arrowheads in i). Expression seems to be ubiquitous in the larva
before it hatches (j).

the apical tuft, a region found to have GABAergic sensory cells. The Lhx1/5 ortholog marks clusters of cells
in an endodermal ring at the end of the pharynx, a
region that contains a ring of GABA-positive neurons.
In a recent paper, Yasuoka et al. [56] found that this
gene is expressed around the blastopore during gastrulation, and suggested that this gene had an ancestral role
as a blastoporal organizer. However, we have not
detected any Nematostella Lhx1/5 expression at this
stage.
Our data provide circumstantial evidence supporting
the hypothesis that Lhx genes in Nematostella are
involved in combinatorially specifying neuronal identity,
as they are in bilaterians, based on the coincidence of
Lhx expression territories and regions where distinct
neural populations are found. The hypothesis predicts
that Lhx genes should be expressed in neurons themselves, which has yet to be shown. There are other predictions. For example, although only one functional
neural type (adrenergic) has been found in Nematostella
mesenteries thus far, based on the combinatorial expression of islet, apterous and Lmx in this specialized endodermal tissue we predict that there should be functional
differentiation of neurons in this region relative to the
pharynx, which has only Lmx expression. Though only
the Lmx mRNA is found in the oral nerve ring and
pharynx, the oral nerve ring contains both RFamide-producing and adrenergic neurons, and a part of the pharynx contains both adrenergic and FMRFamideexpressing neurons. Evidently Lhx gene expression is
not necessary for neuronal specification in Nematostella,
however, since none of the five Lhx genes assayed here
have been found to be expressed in tentacles, although
tentacle tips contain spirocysts, GABAergic, and RFamide-expressing cells. Thus, it is likely that other

transcription factors in addition to Lhx genes are
involved in cospecifying functionally different neurons
in Nematostella (as is the case with the specification of
bilaterian neuronal identity). Indeed, other transcription
factors are known to be expressed in the neural territories where cnidarian Lhx genes are found. For example, PaxB (orthologous to bilaterian Pax2/5/8) is
expressed in an endodermal ring at the base of the
pharynx [57], corresponding to the location of the pharyngeal nerve ring.
Similar comparisons of the expression of Lhx family
members and the many documented neural populations
in Hydra [16-19] will be invaluable in understanding the
evolution of neural patterning mechanisms. In this
study, we found that the four Lhx genes encoded by the
Hydra genome are expressed in adults. We did find that
all six Trichoplax Lhx subfamilies are present in the
genome, and that three subfamilies are expressed in animals in laboratory cultures (Table 1). Trichoplax notably
has no described nervous system, and only four to five
recognized cell types [8,58]. Further characterization of
Lhx genes in Trichoplax could illuminate the ancestral
function of these genes, or alternate derived functions if
the placozoan-cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor had a nervous system that was lost in the placozoan lineage.
Our observation of patterned expression of Lhx1/5
and Lhx3/4 subfamily members during Amphimedon
larval development is consistent with a scenario in
which Lhx subfamily members were expressed in
defined territories in the last common metazoan ancestor. Although Amphimedon has no defined neurons, we
do observe correlation between Lhx gene expression and
sensory cells. Both Lhx1/5 and Lhx3/4 are expressed
around the larval pigment ring where photosensory cells
form. As the two genes are highly expressed in different

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

Page 9 of 13

Figure 5 Schematic diagrams of Nematostella developmental stages showing combinatorial expression of LIM homeobox genes and
overlap with known functionally different neural types. Neurons with putatively different functions emerge over the course of embryonic
development (as assayed by neurotransmitter antibodies and in situ hybridization to detect neuropeptide or neurotransmitter synthesis enzyme
mRNA) [20]. LIM homeobox genes have dynamic expression patterns that overlap with each other, as well as with territories of different neural
types. The oral nerve ring (marked by 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA- b-monoxygenase and RFamide), the pharyngeal nerve ring (marked by
©-aminobutyric acid (GABA)) and the apical tuft (marked by GABA) correspond to Lmx, Lhx1/5 and arrowhead expression respectively. DOPA-bmonoxygenase expression over developmental time is mirrored by Lmx expression. Two-color stripes show expression of two neural markers in
the same region.

but overlapping territories in this region, it is tempting
to speculate that the sponge Lhx genes are specifying
cell identity in a combinatorial manner, as in bilaterians
animals. If we further assume that the nervous system is
a eumetazoan synapomorphy, originating after the divergence of sponge and placozoan lineages, this hypothesis
would imply that the ancestral repertoire of three to six
metazoan Lhx genes was co-opted into differentiating
neural cell types in the first simple nervous systems.
Although inferring the original role for these genes in
the very first metazoans is difficult, gene expression patterns in Amphimedon suggest a number of possibilities,
including in the development of non-neural sensory
cells. The hypothesized linkage between Lhx gene
expression and nervous system patterning does not

exclude other roles for these genes in early metazoans.
For example, shared expression of Lhx1/5 in bilaterian
gastrulation, the cnidarian blastopore [56], and the
sponge pigment spot suggests a possible organizing role
during development. Likewise, the expression of Lhx3/4
in protochordate endoderm [59,60] and Amphimedon
inner cell mass points to a potential ancestral role in
germ layer formation.

Conclusions
Through sequence analysis we have shown that the Lhx
transcription factor family was already established, and
had duplicated and diversified, in the last common
metazoan ancestor. We find that Lhx genes are expressed
in defined, overlapping territories in the sea anemone

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

Nematostella. Combined with (1) the neural differentiation
observed in these regions and (2) the well established role
of Lhx genes in the combinatorial control of neural identity in bilaterians, this observation further suggests the
hypothesis that Lhx genes may play a homologous role in
specifying neural identify in non-bilaterians. In this scenario Lhx gene expression would be causally linked to the
structure of the cnidarian nerve net, whose complexity has
been long established in Hydra [12-19] and more recently
in Nematostella [20]. Alternately, the Lhx-neural identity
linkage is a bilaterian synapomorphy, and our observed
correlations reflect convergent evolution and/or nonhomologous processes of neural specification in cnidarians
and bilaterians. Early branching animal lineages share a
large repertoire of patterning genes with bilaterians, but
lack the overt bilaterian differentiation of body axes. We
hypothesize that the genes function in defining the molecularly distinguished cell types that various studies are
beginning to recognize in cnidarians and sponges
[10,20,61,62].

Methods
Animal culture, RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis

N. vectensis adults (descendents of the CH2 and CH6
cross) were maintained and spawned as described in
Fritzenwanker and Technau [63]. H. magnipapillata
were cultured in Hydra medium, consisting of 1% seawater. T. adhaerens of the Grell strain collected in the
Red Sea were cultured in bowls or Petri dishes filled
with filtered artificial seawater at room temperature.
Every 2 weeks the bowls were fed with 3 to 5 ml of Rhodomonas salinas and salinity and pH were maintained
between 32 ppt (parts per thousand) to 35 ppt and 8.0
to 8.4, respectively.
Nematostella embryos (collected at various time
points), Hydra adults (including animals that were
undergoing the process of budding) and Trichoplax
from laboratory cultures (animals were starved for 24 h
before collection) were collected, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C. RNA was then extracted using
standard TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) protocol.
cDNA was made using the Superscript III First-Strand
Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) for reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) kit.
cDNA for 5’ and 3’ RACE was prepared using the FirstChoice RLM-RACE Kit (Ambion, Austin, USA).
Amphimedon embryo and larval collection, RNA
extraction, and cDNA synthesis were performed as previously described [64].
Identification of LIM homeobox genes in cnidarians,
placozoans and sponges

Several known LIM homeobox (Lhx) sequences from
human, mouse and D. melanogaster genomes were
aligned using BLAST against the predicted gene models

Page 10 of 13

for the genomes of N. vectensis http://jgi.doe.gov/nematostella[48], H. magnipapillata http://hydrazome.metazome.net/cgi-bin/gbrowse/hydra[49], T. adhaerens
http://jgi.doe.gov/trichoplax[2], A. queenslandica (Srivastava et al.: The genome of the haplosclerid demosponge
Amphimedon queenslandica and the evolution of animal
complexity, submitted) and M. brevicollis http://jgi.doe.
gov/monosiga[65]. Gene models that picked up known
LIM homeobox proteins by BLAST to the database of
non-redundant proteins and contained LIM and homeobox domains were considered to be putative Lhx genes
in these animals.
Verification of gene models

Primers were designed using Primer3 http://frodo.wi.
mit.edu to amplify Nematostella, Hydra and Trichoplax
Lhx genes using TaKaRa reagents (TaKaRa Bio Inc.,
Shiga, Japan) (Additional file 1, Tables S2-6). Cloning
was performed using the Zero Blunt TOPO PCR Cloning Kit for Sequencing (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) and
minipreps were performed using the standard Qiagen
(Valencia, USA) protocol. Sequence concordance was
analyzed using Sequencher 4.5 (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, USA) and sequenced cDNAs were
BLASTed against the genome sequence for verification
followed by a Conserved Domain Search to confirm Lhx
gene identity [66].
Three of the four putative LIM homeobox predicted
proteins in Hydra and one in Nematostella contained
only one LIM domain, though all known LIM homeobox
proteins have two N-terminal LIM domains, followed by
the C-terminal homeobox (Table 1). Genomic regions 1
kb upstream of these predicted gene models were analyzed for LIM domains by translating in three frames. 5’
RLM-RACE PCR was performed (Ambion FirstChoice
RLM-RACE Kit) to verify gene model predictions for
potential upstream LIM domains in Hydra (see Additional file 1, Table S6 for primers used). The predicted
gene models were also analyzed by lowering the e-value
threshold in conserved domain searches http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cdd.shtml[66].
In Trichoplax, one scaffold contained conflicting and
overlapping gene predictions of Lhx genes (Additional
file 1, Table S8). Some of these models appeared to
have atypical domain composition such as having two
LIM domains without a homeobox, while some had
overlapping spatial location or different gene model predictions for the same locus. To determine the accuracy
of hypothetical proteins, primers were designed to
amplify all the predicted gene models by RT-PCR (Additional file 1, Table S3).
Phylogenetic analyses and identification of introns

LIM homeobox gene sequences from Nematostella,
Hydra, Trichoplax and Amphimedon were aligned with
Lhx genes from other animals known to fall into

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

different subfamilies using CLUSTALW [67,68]. The
alignments were trimmed using GBlocks [69] and
curated manually (both LIM domains and the homeodomain were used where available). Neighbor joining analyses were performed using Phylip [70] with default
parameters and 500 bootstrap replicates. Maximum likelihoods were calculated using PhyML [71] with the
WAG model of amino acid evolution, 4 substitution
rate categories, proportion of invariable sites and g distribution parameter estimated from the dataset, and 100
bootstrap replicates. Bayesian analyses were performed
using MrBayes [72,73]; 2 chains were started and
allowed to run for over 1 million generations, 1 tree was
sampled every 100 generations, and the first 1,000 trees
were discarded as burn-in. Orthologous Lhx genes from
different species were aligned for each Lhx subfamily
and conserved introns identified as described in Putnam
et al. [48].
Probe synthesis and in situ hybridization

Clones of Nematostella, Hydra, Trichoplax, and Amphimedon Lhx genes made using primers listed in Additional file 1, Tables S2-6 were used for probe synthesis.
Digoxigenin (DIG)-labeled antisense and sense RNA
probes corresponding to the putative Lhx genes in
Nematostella were synthesized using labeling mix and
T7/T3/Sp6 RNA polymerases from Roche Applied
Science (Indianapolis, USA). Nematostella embryos at
various stages were collected and fixed and in situ hybridization performed as described in Finnerty et al. [74].
DIG-labeled RNA probes were used at a concentration
of 2 ng/μl for hybridization ranging from 12 to 48 h.
Amphimedon in situ hybridizations were performed as
described in Larroux et al. [64].
Additional file 1: Supplemental data. Supplemental data including
gene model sequences and domain summaries, primers used for
amplifying Lhx orthologs, primers for 5’ and 3’ rapid amplification of
cDNA ends (RACE), polymerase chain reaction (PCR) result summaries,
ancestral linkage group assignments of human and Trichoplax Lhx genes,
and detailed phylogenetic trees.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1741-7007-8-4S1.PDF ]

Acknowledgements
We thank the Martindale Laboratory (University of Hawaii) for critical advice
on Nematostella in situ hybridization; the Patel Laboratory (University of
California at Berkeley) for liberal use of their microscope; the Weisblat
Laboratory (University of California at Berkeley) for help with sectioning and
troubleshooting. This research was supported by a grant from the Australian
Research Council to BMD.
Author details
Center for Integrative Genomics and Department of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. 2School of Biological
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
3
Department of Energy, Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA, USA.
1

Page 11 of 13

Authors’ contributions
MS and DSR designed the study on Nematostella, Hydra and Trichoplax. CL
and BMD designed study of Amphimedon genes. MS cloned and studied
expression of Nematostella genes and did the phylogenetic analyses. CL
cloned and studied expression of Amphimedon genes. DRL and KM
identified and cloned Hydra and Trichoplax genes respectively. JC identified
the tandem Lhx cluster in Trichoplax. All authors contributed to the writing;
MS and DSR organized the overall manuscript.
Received: 8 July 2009
Accepted: 18 January 2010 Published: 18 January 2010
References
1. Greenspan RJ: An introduction to nervous systems Cold Spring Harbor, New
York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press 2007.
2. Srivastava M, Begovic E, Chapman J, Putnam NH, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Kuo A, Mitros T, Salamov A, Carpenter ML, Signorovitch AY, Moreno MA,
Kamm K, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Shapiro H, Grigoriev IV, Buss LW,
Schierwater B, Dellaporta SL, Rokhsar DS: The Trichoplax genome and the
nature of placozoans. Nature 2008, 454:955-960.
3. Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P, Pick K, Borchiellini C, Boury-Esnault N,
Vacelet J, Renard E, Houliston E, Queinnec E, Da Silva C, Wincker P, Le
Guyader H, Leys S, Jackson DJ, Schreiber F, Erpenbeck D, Morgenstern B,
Worheide G, Manuel M: Phylogenomics Revives Traditional Views on
Deep Animal Relationships. Curr Biol 2009.
4. Schierwater B, Eitel M, Jakob W, Osigus HJ, Hadrys H, Dellaporta SL,
Kolokotronis SO, Desalle R: Concatenated analysis sheds light on early
metazoan evolution and fuels a modern “urmetazoon” hypothesis. PLoS
Biol 2009, 7:e20.
5. Sperling EA, Peterson KJ, Pisani D: Phylogenetic-signal dissection of
nuclear housekeeping genes supports the paraphyly of sponges and the
monophyly of Eumetazoa. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:2261-2274.
6. Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, Pang K, Browne WE, Smith SA, Seaver E,
Rouse GW, Obst M, Edgecombe GD, Sorensen MV, Haddock SH, SchmidtRhaesa A, Okusu A, Kristensen RM, Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G:
Broad phylogenomic sampling improves resolution of the animal tree of
life. Nature 2008, 452:745-749.
7. Simpson TL: The Cell Biology of Sponges New York: Springer-Verlag 1984.
8. Grell KG, Ruthmann A, Harrison FW, Westfall JA: Placozoa. Placozoa, Porifera,
Cnidaria and Ctenophora New York: Wiley-Liss 1991, 2:13-27.
9. Lentz TL: Primitive Nervous Systems New Haven: Yale University Press 1968.
10. Sakarya O, Armstrong KA, Adamska M, Adamski M, Wang IF, Tidor B,
Degnan BM, Oakley TH, Kosik KS: A post-synaptic scaffold at the origin of
the animal kingdom. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e506.
11. Brusca RC, Brusca GJ: Invertebrates Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates 2002.
12. Gillis MA, Anctil M: Monoamine release by neurons of a primitive nervous
system: an amperometric study. J Neurochem 2001, 76:1774-1784.
13. Grimmelikhuijzen CJ, Williamson M, Hansen GN: Neuropeptides in
cnidarians. Can J Zool 2002, 80:1690-1702.
14. Kass-Simon G, Pierobon P: Cnidarian chemical neurotransmission, an
updated overview. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 2007, 146:925.
15. Westfall JA: Neural pathways and innervation of cnidocytes in tentacles
of sea anemones. Hydrobiologia 2004, 530/531:117-121.
16. Hansen GN, Williamson M, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ: Two-color double-labeling
in situ hybridization of whole-mount Hydra using RNA probes for five
different Hydra neuropeptide preprohormones: evidence for
colocalization. Cell Tissue Res 2000, 301:245-253.
17. Hansen GN, Williamson M, Grimmelikhuijzen CJ: A new case of
neuropeptide coexpression (RGamide and LWamides) in Hydra, found
by whole-mount, two-color double-labeling in situ hybridization. Cell
Tissue Res 2002, 308:157-165.
18. Hayakawa E, Takahashi T, Nishimiya-Fujisawa C, Fujisawa T: A novel
neuropeptide (FRamide) family identified by a peptidomic approach in
Hydra magnipapillata. FEBS J 2007, 274:5438-5448.
19. Darmer D, Hauser F, Nothacker HP, Bosch TC, Williamson M,
Grimmelikhuijzen CJ: Three different prohormones yield a variety of
Hydra-RFamide (Arg-Phe-NH2) neuropeptides in Hydra magnipapillata.
Biochem J 1998, 332(2):403-412.

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

20. Marlow HQ, Srivastava M, Matus DQ, Rokhsar D, Martindale MQ: Anatomy
and development of the nervous system of Nematostella vectensis, an
anthozoan cnidarian. Dev Neurobiol 2009, 69:235-254.
21. Curtiss J, Heilig JS: Delimiting development. Bioessays 1998, 20:58-69.
22. Kadrmas JL, Beckerle MC: The LIM domain: from the cytoskeleton to the
nucleus. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2004, 5:920-931.
23. Hobert O, Westphal H: Functions of LIM-homeobox genes. Trends Genet
2000, 16:75-83.
24. Gehring WJ, Affolter M, Burglin T: Homeodomain proteins. Annu Rev
Biochem 1994, 63:487-526.
25. Lin Y, Zhao J, Chen S, Zeng X, Du Q, Yang Y, Lu F, Pu Y, Yang Z: A novel
mutation in LMX1B gene causes nail-patella syndrome in a large
Chinese family. Bone 2008, 43:591-595.
26. Krawchuk D, Kania A: Identification of genes controlled by LMX1B in the
developing mouse limb bud. Dev Dyn 2008, 237:1183-1192.
27. Tosney KW, Hotary KB, Lance-Jones C: Specifying the target identity of
motoneurons. Bioessays 1995, 17:379-382.
28. Gill GN: Decoding the LIM development code. Trans Am Clin Climatol
Assoc 2003, 114:179-189.
29. Dawid IB, Chitnis AB: Lim homeobox genes and the CNS: a close
relationship. Neuron 2001, 30:301-303.
30. Cheng L, Chen CL, Luo P, Tan M, Qiu M, Johnson R, Ma Q: Lmx1b, Pet-1,
and Nkx2.2 coordinately specify serotonergic neurotransmitter
phenotype. J Neurosci 2003, 23:9961-9967.
31. Ding YQ, Marklund U, Yuan W, Yin J, Wegman L, Ericson J, Deneris E,
Johnson RL, Chen ZF: Lmx1b is essential for the development of
serotonergic neurons. Nat Neurosci 2003, 6:933-938.
32. Simon HH, Bhatt L, Gherbassi D, Sgado P, Alberi L: Midbrain dopaminergic
neurons: determination of their developmental fate by transcription
factors. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2003, 991:36-47.
33. Zhao Y, Marin O, Hermesz E, Powell A, Flames N, Palkovits M, Rubenstein JL,
Westphal H: The LIM-homeobox gene Lhx8 is required for the
development of many cholinergic neurons in the mouse forebrain. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:9005-9010.
34. Elshatory Y, Everhart D, Deng M, Xie X, Barlow RB, Gan L: Islet-1 controls
the differentiation of retinal bipolar and cholinergic amacrine cells. J
Neurosci 2007, 27:12707-12720.
35. Elshatory Y, Gan L: The LIM-homeobox gene Islet-1 is required for the
development of restricted forebrain cholinergic neurons. J Neurosci 2008,
28:3291-3297.
36. Manabe T, Tatsumi K, Inoue M, Matsuyoshi H, Makinodan M, Yokoyama S,
Wanaka A: L3/Lhx8 is involved in the determination of cholinergic or
GABAergic cell fate. J Neurochem 2005, 94:723-730.
37. Manabe T, Tatsumi K, Inoue M, Makinodan M, Yamauchi T, Makinodan E,
Yokoyama S, Sakumura R, Wanaka A: L3/Lhx8 is a pivotal factor for
cholinergic differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells. Cell Death
Differ 2007, 14:1080-1085.
38. Bachy I, Retaux S: GABAergic specification in the basal forebrain is
controlled by the LIM-hd factor Lhx7. Dev Biol 2006, 291:218-226.
39. Fogarty M, Grist M, Gelman D, Marin O, Pachnis V, Kessaris N: Spatial
genetic patterning of the embryonic neuroepithelium generates
GABAergic interneuron diversity in the adult cortex. J Neurosci 2007,
27:10935-10946.
40. Cassata G, Kagoshima H, Andachi Y, Kohara Y, Durrenberger MB, Hall DH,
Burglin TR: The LIM homeobox gene ceh-14 confers thermosensory
function to the AFD neurons in Caenorhabditis elegans. Neuron 2000,
25:587-597.
41. Poche RA, Kwan KM, Raven MA, Furuta Y, Reese BE, Behringer RR: Lim1 is
essential for the correct laminar positioning of retinal horizontal cells. J
Neurosci 2007, 27:14099-14107.
42. Fischer AJ, Foster S, Scott MA, Sherwood P: Transient expression of LIMdomain transcription factors is coincident with delayed maturation of
photoreceptors in the chicken retina. J Comp Neurol 2008, 506:584-603.
43. Tsalik EL, Niacaris T, Wenick AS, Pau K, Avery L, Hobert O: LIM homeobox
gene-dependent expression of biogenic amine receptors in restricted
regions of the C. elegans nervous system. Dev Biol 2003, 263:81-102.
44. Sarafi-Reinach TR, Melkman T, Hobert O, Sengupta P: The lin-11 LIM
homeobox gene specifies olfactory and chemosensory neuron fates in
C. elegans. Development 2001, 128:3269-3281.
45. Ryan JF, Burton PM, Mazza ME, Kwong GK, Mullikin JC, Finnerty JR: The
cnidarian-bilaterian ancestor possessed at least 56 homeoboxes.

Page 12 of 13

46.

47.

48.

49.
50.
51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

Evidence from the starlet sea anemone, Nematostella vectensis. Genome
Biol 2006, 7:R64.
Larroux C, Fahey B, Degnan SM, Adamski M, Rokhsar DS, Degnan BM: The
NK homeobox gene cluster predates the origin of Hox genes. Curr Biol
2007, 17:706-710.
Larroux C, Luke GN, Koopman P, Rokhsar DS, Shimeld SM, Degnan BM:
Genesis and expansion of metazoan transcription factor gene classes.
Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:980-996.
Putnam NH, Srivastava M, Hellsten U, Dirks B, Chapman J, Salamov A,
Terry A, Shapiro H, Lindquist E, Kapitonov VV, Jurka J, Genikhovich G,
Grigoriev IV, Lucas SM, Steele RE, Finnerty JR, Technau U, Martindale MQ,
Rokhsar DS: Sea anemone genome reveals ancestral eumetazoan gene
repertoire and genomic organization. Science 2007, 317:86-94.
Chapman J, Simakov O, Rokhsar D, David CN, Steele RE: The dynamic
genome of Hydra. Nature 2010.
Peterson KJ, Sperling EA: Poriferan ANTP genes: primitively simple or
secondarily reduced?. Evol Dev 2007, 9:405-408.
Putnam NH, Butts T, Ferrier DE, Furlong RF, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Robinson-Rechavi M, Shoguchi E, Terry A, Yu JK, Benito-Gutierrez EL,
Dubchak I, Garcia-Fernandez J, Gibson-Brown JJ, Grigoriev IV, Horton AC, de
Jong PJ, Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kohara Y, Kuroki Y, Lindquist E, Lucas S,
Osoegawa K, Pennacchio LA, Salamov AA, Satou Y, Sauka-Spengler T,
Schmutz J, Shin IT, et al: The amphioxus genome and the evolution of
the chordate karyotype. Nature 2008, 453:1064-1071.
Bürglin TR, Duboule D: A comprehensive classification of homeobox
genes. Guidebook to the Homeobox Genes New York: Oxford University
Press 1994, 35-72.
Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Derbyshire MK, DeWeese-Scott C,
Gonzales NR, Gwadz M, Hao L, He S, Hurwitz DI, Jackson JD, Ke Z, Krylov D,
Lanczycki CJ, Liebert CA, Liu C, Lu F, Lu S, Marchler GH, Mullokandov M,
Song JS, Thanki N, Yamashita RA, Yin JJ, Zhang D, Bryant SH: CDD: a
conserved domain database for interactive domain family analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D237-240.
Matus DQ, Magie CR, Pang K, Martindale MQ, Thomsen GH: The Hedgehog
gene family of the cnidarian, Nematostella vectensis, and implications
for understanding metazoan Hedgehog pathway evolution. Dev Biol
2008, 313:501-518.
Adamska M, Matus DQ, Adamski M, Green K, Rokhsar DS, Martindale MQ,
Degnan BM: The evolutionary origin of hedgehog proteins. Curr Biol 2007,
17:R836-837.
Yasuoka Y, Kobayashi M, Kurokawa D, Akasaka K, Saiga H, Taira M:
Evolutionary origins of blastoporal expression and organizer activity of
the vertebrate gastrula organizer gene lhx1 and its ancient metazoan
paralog lhx3. Development 2009, 136:2005-2014.
Matus DQ, Pang K, Daly M, Martindale MQ: Expression of Pax gene family
members in the anthozoan cnidarian, Nematostella vectensis. Evol Dev
2007, 9:25-38.
Jakob W, Sagasser S, Dellaporta S, Holland P, Kuhn K, Schierwater B: The
Trox-2 Hox/ParaHox gene of Trichoplax (Placozoa) marks an epithelial
boundary. Dev Genes Evol 2004, 214:170-175.
Satou Y, Imai KS, Satoh N: Early embryonic expression of a LIMhomeobox gene Cs-lhx3 is downstream of beta-catenin and responsible
for the endoderm differentiation in Ciona savignyi embryos.
Development 2001, 128:3559-3570.
Wang Y, Zhang PJ, Yasui K, Saiga H: Expression of Bblhx3, a LIMhomeobox gene, in the development of amphioxus Branchiostoma
belcheri tsingtauense. Mech Dev 2002, 117:315-319.
Matus DQ, Pang K, Marlow H, Dunn CW, Thomsen GH, Martindale MQ:
Molecular evidence for deep evolutionary roots of bilaterality in animal
development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:11195-11200.
Richards GS, Simionato E, Perron M, Adamska M, Vervoort M, Degnan BM:
Sponge genes provide new insight into the evolutionary origin of the
neurogenic circuit. Curr Biol 2008, 18:1156-1161.
Fritzenwanker JH, Technau U: Induction of gametogenesis in the basal
cnidarian Nematostella vectensis(Anthozoa). Dev Genes Evol 2002, 212:99103.
Larroux C, Fahey B, Liubicich D, Hinman VF, Gauthier M, Gongora M,
Green K, Worheide G, Leys SP, Degnan BM: Developmental expression of
transcription factor genes in a demosponge: insights into the origin of
metazoan multicellularity. Evol Dev 2006, 8:150-173.

Srivastava et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:4
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/4

Page 13 of 13

65. King N, Westbrook MJ, Young SL, Kuo A, Abedin M, Chapman J,
Fairclough S, Hellsten U, Isogai Y, Letunic I, Marr M, Pincus D, Putnam N,
Rokas A, Wright KJ, Zuzow R, Dirks W, Good M, Goodstein D, Lemons D,
Li W, Lyons JB, Morris A, Nichols S, Richter DJ, Salamov A, Sequencing JG,
Bork P, Lim WA, Manning G, et al: The genome of the choanoflagellate
Monosiga brevicollis and the origin of metazoans. Nature 2008, 451:783788.
66. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Chitsaz F, Derbyshire MK, DeWeese-Scott C,
Fong JH, Geer LY, Geer RC, Gonzales NR, Gwadz M, He S, Hurwitz DI,
Jackson JD, Ke Z, Lanczycki CJ, Liebert CA, Liu C, Lu F, Lu S, Marchler GH,
Mullokandov M, Song JS, Tasneem A, Thanki N, Yamashita RA, Zhang D,
Zhang N, Bryant SH: CDD: specific functional annotation with the
Conserved Domain Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D205-210.
67. Higgins DG: CLUSTAL V: multiple alignment of DNA and protein
sequences. Methods Mol Biol 1994, 25:307-318.
68. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
69. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2000,
17:540-552.
70. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP – Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2).
Cladistics 1989, 5:164-166.
71. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
72. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
73. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
74. Finnerty JR, Pang K, Burton P, Paulson D, Martindale MQ: Origins of
bilateral symmetry: Hox and dpp expression in a sea anemone. Science
2004, 304:1335-1337.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-4
Cite this article as: Srivastava et al.: Early evolution of the LIM
homeobox gene family. BMC Biology 2010 8:4.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

BioMedcentral

</pre>
</body>
</html>
