<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Histopathologic characterization of the BTBR mouse model of autistic-like behavior reveals selective changes in neurodevelopmental proteins and adult hippocampal neurogenesis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7. doi:10.1186/2040-2392-2-7"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Diane T Stephenson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Histopathologic characterization of the BTBR
mouse model of autistic-like behavior reveals
selective changes in neurodevelopmental
proteins and adult hippocampal neurogenesis
Stephenson et al.

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

RESEARCH

Open Access

Histopathologic characterization of the
BTBR mouse model of autistic-like
behavior reveals selective changes in
neurodevelopmental proteins and adult
hippocampal neurogenesis
Diane T Stephenson1*, Sharon M O’Neill1, Sapna Narayan2, Aadhya Tiwari2, Elizabeth Arnold1, Harry D Samaroo1,
Fu Du3, Robert H Ring1, Brian Campbell1, Mathew Pletcher4, Vidita A Vaidya2 and Daniel Morton5

Abstract
Background: The inbred mouse strain BTBR T+ tf/J (BTBR) exhibits behavioral deficits that mimic the core deficits
of autism. Neuroanatomically, the BTBR strain is also characterized by a complete absence of the corpus callosum.
The goal of this study was to identify novel molecular and cellular changes in the BTBR mouse, focusing on
neuronal, synaptic, glial and plasticity markers in the limbic system as a model for identifying putative molecular
and cellular substrates associated with autistic behaviors.
Methods: Forebrains of 8 to 10-week-old male BTBR and age-matched C57Bl/6J control mice were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry using free-floating and paraffin embedded sections. Twenty antibodies directed against
antigens specific to neurons, synapses and glia were used. Nissl, Timm and acetylcholinesterase (AchE) stains were
performed to assess cytoarchitecture, mossy fibers and cholinergic fiber density, respectively. In the hippocampus,
quantitative stereological estimates for the mitotic marker bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) were performed to determine
hippocampal progenitor proliferation, survival and differentiation, and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
mRNA was quantified by in situ hybridization. Quantitative image analysis was performed for NG2, doublecortin
(DCX), NeuroD, GAD67 and Poly-Sialic Acid Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule (PSA-NCAM).
Results: In midline structures including the region of the absent corpus callosum of BTBR mice, the myelin markers
2’,3’-cyclic nucleotide 3’-phosphodiesterase (CNPase) and myelin basic protein (MBP) were reduced, and the
oligodendrocyte precursor NG2 was increased. MBP and CNPase were expressed in small ectopic white matter
bundles within the cingulate cortex. Microglia and astrocytes showed no evidence of gliosis, yet orientations of
glial fibers were altered in specific white-matter areas. In the hippocampus, evidence of reduced neurogenesis
included significant reductions in the number of doublecortin, PSA-NCAM and NeuroD immunoreactive cells in the
subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus, and a marked reduction in the number of 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU)
positive progenitors. Furthermore, a significant and profound reduction in BDNF mRNA was seen in the BTBR
dentate gyrus. No significant differences were seen in the expression of AchE, mossy fiber synapses or
immunoreactivities of microtubule-associated protein MAP2, parvalbumin and glutamate decarboxylase GAD65 or
GAD67 isoforms.
Conclusions: We documented modest and selective alterations in glia, neurons and synapses in BTBR forebrain,
along with reduced neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. Of all markers examined, the most distinctive changes
* Correspondence: dtstephe@gmail.com
1
Neuroscience Biology, Pfizer Global Research and Development, Eastern
Point Road, Groton, CT 06340, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Stephenson et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 2 of 21

were seen in the neurodevelopmental proteins NG2, PSA-NCAM, NeuroD and DCX. Our results are consistent with
aberrant development of the nervous system in BTBR mice, and may reveal novel substrates to link callosal
abnormalities and autistic behaviors. The changes that we observed in the BTBR mice suggest potential novel
therapeutic strategies for intervention in autism spectrum disorders.

Background
Autism is a behaviorally defined neurodevelopmental disorder consisting of impairment in reciprocal social interactions, deficits in communication, and restrictive and
repetitive patterns of behaviors and interests. Preclinical
and clinical advancement of novel therapies for the treatment of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) would be
greatly augmented by the existence of translational animal models for preclinical testing. Because the diagnostic
and clinical outcomes of autism are based solely on behavioral outcome measures, neurobehavioral assessments
have been a key focus of preclinical animal models. Several recent mouse models, generated using both forward
and reverse genetic approaches, exhibit one or more
behavioral deficits characteristic of autism [1-7].
It is widely acknowledged that the use of rodents to
model complex neuropsychiatric disorders has significant limitations. Indeed, some neuroanatomic substrates
that have been implicated in autism (for example,
regions of the brain such as the fusiform gyrus [8] and
cell types such as von Economo neurons [9]) are not
present in rodents. However, in other complex central
microtubule associated disorders, novel drug candidates
can be tested in genetically defined mouse models to
advance disease-modifying treatments. For example,
genetically modified mice overexpressing amyloid plaques can be used to test novel drug candidates, despite
the fact that these mice do not exhibit other cardinal
features of human Alzheimer disease such as neurofibrillary tangles and neurodegeneration. With regard to
autism, current human molecular genetics suggest that
no single gene defines susceptibility to idiopathic autism
[10]. Although several single-gene mouse models of
monogenic forms of ASD exhibit behavioral deficits of
autism [6,11], it is likely that no single-gene mouse
model will be reliable for evaluating novel therapeutic
candidates. Indeed, even in more homogenous single
gene disorders such as fragile × syndrome, recent studies report heterogeneity in molecular signatures, which
may translate to differential treatment responses [12].
An alternative and equally attractive approach is to
employ both forward and reverse genetic mouse models
in drug development for ASD. Mouse models of specific
chromosomal aberrations represent a viable and appealing strategy for phenotypic characterizations in psychiatric diseases [4,13]. Inbred mouse strains can be powerful
tools to decipher genes that confer susceptibility to

distinct behavioral phenotypes. For example, forward
genetics combined with quantitative trait loci mapping
has defined specific loci that underlie a phenotype of
behavioral despair [14,15]. Such approaches enhance
confidence in the predictive validity of animal models for
complex human diseases.
The BTBR inbred mouse recapitulates the three core
behavioral features that define ASD, including deficits in
social interactions as juveniles and adults, unusual vocalizations as infants, and repetitive stereotyped behaviors
[3,6,16,17]. This strain is unique in that few mouse
strains effectively model all three behavioral characteristics of autism [18]. More recent data in this model suggest that pharmacotherapy and behavioral intervention
can reverse specific subdomains of the deficits [6,19-22].
One striking feature of the BTBR mouse is the complete
absence of a corpus callosum. Agenesis of the corpus
callosum in the BTBR model represents the most robust
and fully penetrant callosal defect in any strain identified
to date [23]. Other mouse strains display either callosal
dysgenesis (partial reduction in callosal anatomy (for
example, Disc1 truncation mice [24]) or less penetrant
agenesis phenotypes (for example, in BALB/c mice, 10
to 18% of mice show callosal agenesis, and the incidence
is gender-specific [25]). Because the callosal agenesis
phenotype is fully penetrant in BTBR mice, this model
represents a unique opportunity to explore the consequences of callosal abnormalities on brain structure and
function. There is strong evidence that callosal abnormalities may be a crucial component associated with the
core behavioral deficits of ASD. Human callosal
abnormalities are rather common, with a reported frequency of 0.7 to 5.3% in the USA. Although many cases
are asymptomatic, many patients born with callosal
agenesis reportedly have cognitive and social impairments [26,27]. Despite the fact that most idiopathic
cases of ASD do not show complete callosal agenesis,
reductions in the volume of the corpus callosum is one
of the most consistent neuroimaging finding in the
brains of patients with autism [28-31]. A recent study
showing that the corpus callosum undergoes changes in
response to experience-dependent plasticity in the adult
brain [32] suggests that alterations in white-matter
microstructure can be modified by experience, and may
be amenable to treatment. Such findings support
mechanistic studies aimed at understanding the relationship between callosal abnormalities and ASD.

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

One approach to investigating the consequences of
callosal defects is to characterize cellular and molecular
changes in preclinical models, in which confounding
factors such as postmortem delay and antemortem medications can be controlled. There is a paucity of reports
describing the precise neuroanatomic, neurophysiological and neurochemical profile of the BTBR mouse. Neuroanatomic changes described to date in the BTBR
strain are probably associated with absence of corpus
callosum, and include the presence of Probst bundles
[20], reduced hippocampal commissure [23] and an
increased number of unmyelinated axons in the anterior
commissure [33]. Functional changes reported in the
BTBR model include augmented stress [34] and abnormal hippocampal neurophysiology [35,36].
We hypothesized that more complete histopathological characterization of the BTBR brain would reveal
abnormal cellular and anatomic features that may correlate with the behavioral deficits and callosal abnormalities. In this study, we profiled a panel of neuronal, glial,
synaptic and plasticity markers in the brains of BTBR
and age-matched control mice. The markers were chosen to investigate neuropathologies that have been
implicated in autism. The control inbred strain chosen
for investigation, the B6 mouse, exhibits high levels of
sociability, a low level of repetitive behaviors, and an
intact corpus callosum [18,37]. Particular emphasis was
placed on the forebrain limbic system, given the intimate relationship between the development of the corpus callosum and the limbic system, and the
involvement of limbic system structures in ASD [38].
The relationship between behavioral deficits and neuropathologic findings in the BTBR model is discussed in
terms of relevance to the translatability of the model to
ASD.

Methods
Animals

All animals used in this study were housed in a facility
accredited by the Association for Assessment and
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International.
All procedures related to animal care and treatment
were conducted according to the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Pfizer, the
National Research Council Institute for Laboratory Animal Research Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals, and the US Department of Agriculture Animal
Welfare Act and Animal Welfare Regulations.
Male BTBR mice and C57Bl/6J (B6) mice, 8 to 10
weeks old, were obtained from a colony maintained at
the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). The age
and gender were selected to match the conditions
defined for behavioral phenotyping of the BTBR model
in the literature [3], and in our own laboratory where

Page 3 of 21

we have replicated previously reported behavioral deficits [39]. Postmortem brain tissues were processed by
free-floating techniques (n = 34 per strain), paraffin-wax
embedding (n = 11 BTBR, n = 12 B6) and cryosectioning (in situ hybridization, n = 6 per strain). For histopathology, mice were anesthetized with a lethal dose of
barbiturate (50 mg/kg Nembutal®; Abbott Laboratories,
Abbott Park, IL, USA) and perfused transcardially with
0.1 mol/l phosphate buffer (pH 7.4), followed by 4% buffered paraformaldehyde. For in situ hybridization, whole
frozen brains were excised from euthanized mice, and
frozen in liquid nitrogen.
BrdU treatment paradigm

BTBR and B6 mice received a single injection (200 mg/
kg) of the mitotic marker BrdU (Sigma Aldrich., St
Louis, MO, USA). To examine the proliferation of hippocampal progenitors within the adult hippocampal
neurogenic niche, animals were euthanized 2 hours after
BrdU administration (n = 9 per strain). To examine the
long-term survival of newborn hippocampal progenitors,
animals were euthanized 21 days after BrdU administration (n = 9 per strain). A schematic representation of
the paradigm used for the study is shown (Figure 7A).
Histology
Paraffin sections

Following perfusion, brains from BTBR and B6 mice
were excised and post-fixed by immersion in fixative for
48 hours. Forebrains from six mice per strain were processed and embedded in the coronal plane in paraffin
according to standard embedding techniques. Twenty
serial sections, 5 μm in thickness, were collected from
each of three coronal levels: prefrontal cortex (starting
at Bregma 1.94 mm), striatum (starting at Bregma 0.98
mm) and dorsal hippocampus (starting at Bregma -1.70
mm). Anatomic landmarks were used to align coronal
levels across the mice according to the atlas of Paxinos
and Watson [40]. Whole brains from six mice per strain
were used to prepared mossy-fiber blocks in the sagittal
plane. Serial sections from sagittally embedded tissue
were collected at the level of the dorsal hippocampus
(starting at Bregma lateral 0.72 mm from the midline).
Routine histopathology evaluation was performed on
sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
Sectioning of all brains was carried out by attending
closely to anatomic landmarks; special efforts were
made to match levels between different mice, taking
into account the distortion of key brain structures
resulting from callosal agenesis. Brain regions implicated
in the pathophysiology of autism were investigated,
including the following high magnification regions: prefrontal cortex, corpus callosum, striatum, hippocampus
and amygdala.

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Free-floating sections

Brains from BTBR and B6 mice were prepared for cryosectioning to generate free-floating sections for immunohistochemistry and special stains. After perfusion,
brains were excised and post-fixed by immersion in fixative for 6 hours at 4°C, and subsequently immersed in
0.1 mol/l phosphate buffer (PB) containing 20% sucrose
for 72 hours. Tissue was rapidly frozen and stored at
-75°C. Serial sections (30 μm thick) were cut coronally
through the cerebrum, approximately from Bregma 2.96
mm to -4.96 mm [40]. Owing to the distortion of brain
structures resulting from callosal agenesis in BTBR
mice, different section intervals were used to match anatomic levels between the BTBR and B6 mouse brains.
Thus, every first to tenth sections of each series of ten
(for BTBR, interval = 300 μm) or twelve (for control,
interval = 360 μm) sections were collected separately.
The thickness of these sections facilitated visualization
of structural elements that included processes such as
secondary and tertiary dendrites of DCX positive neurons. One series of cryostat sections was processed for
Nissl stain by staining sections with thionin, and evaluated qualitatively for gross neuroanatomic and cellular
cytoarchitectural features.
Timm stain

Animals (n = 5 per strain) were deeply anesthetized
(Nembutal; Abbott Laboratories) and perfused transcardially with Timm perfusate (FD Rapid TimmStain Kit™;
FD Neurotechnologies, Baltimore, MD, USA), followed
by 10% neutral buffered formalin. The brains were
removed immediately, and post-fixed in the same fixative for 24 hours at 4°C. After cryoprotection in 0.1
mol/l PB containing 30% sucrose for 72 hours at 4°C,
brains were then rapidly frozen and stored at -75°C.
Serial cryostat sections 30 μm thick were cut coronally
through the cerebrum, approximately from Bregma 2.80
mm to Bregma -4.36 mm [40]. Every first section of
each series of five sections (interval 150 μm) was
mounted on microscope slides (Superfrost Plus, VWR
International, West Chester, PA, USA). After air-drying
at room temperature for 2 hours, sections were processed for Timm staining (FD Rapid TimmStain Kit™;
FD Neurotechnologies) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions http://www.fdneurotech.com. After two
rinses in 0.1 mol/l phosphate buffer (pH 7.4), sections
were incubated in the staining solution (made freshly by
mixing solutions A to D from the kit) for 50 minutes at
30°C in the dark. Sections were dehydrated in graded
ethanol, cleared in xylene, and coverslipped in mounting
medium (Permount®; Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ,
USA).
Immunohistochemistry

Antibodies Table 1 lists the antibodies used in the present study. After deparaffinization and rehydration,

Page 4 of 21

slides for immunohistochemistry requiring antigen
retrieval were pretreated with a commercial antigenretrieval system (Borg antigen retrieval; Biocare Medical,
Concord, CA, USA), pH 9, using a pressure cooker.
Slides of all levels from all animals were stained for a
single antigen using an automated stainer (Autostainer
Plus; Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA). Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3% hydrogen peroxide
prepared in 10% normal serum (Vector Laboratories,
Burlingame, CA, USA). Primary antibodies were incubated for 2 hours and visualized with horseradish peroxidase (Envision HRP; Dako) using either rabbit or
mouse secondary antibody conjugate. Immunoperoxidase reaction product was visualized with diaminobenzidine (DAB) chromagen (Dako). Paraffin- sections were
counterstained using the Lillie modification of Mayer
hematoxylin (Dako), and stained tissue sections were
coverslipped with permanent mounting medium
(Permount).
For free-floating sections, sets of sections derived from
BTBR and B6 mice were stained in series. The sections
of the first set were mounted on slides and stained with
thionin. The sections of the second set were processed
for AchE histochemistry according to the method
described by Naik [41]. The third to eighth sections of
each set were stained with antibodies directed to
selected antigens (Table 1). After inactivating the endogenous peroxidase activity with hydrogen peroxide, freefloating sections were incubated in 0.01 mol/l phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) containing 1% normal blocking serum, 0.3% Triton X-100 (Sigma, St.
Louis, MO, USA) and the primary antibody (Table 1).
The immunoreaction product was visualized according
to the avidin-biotin complex method (Vectastain elite
ABC Kit; Vector Laboratories), followed by DAB.
Stained sections were mounted on slides, dehydrated in
ethanol, cleared in xylene and coverslipped (Permount;
Fisher Scientific).
BrdU immunohistochemistry BrdU immunohistochemistry was performed on every sixth hippocampal
section. In brief, following DNA denaturation and
acid hydrolysis, sections were treated with mouse
anti-BrdU antibody and then exposed to biotinylated
secondary antibody (Vector Laboratories). To further
ascertain effects on adult hippocampal neurogenesis
in BTBR mice, the numbers of immature neurons
within the dentate gyrus that were immunopositive
for DCX, PSA-NCAM and the NeuroD were examined. Brain coronal sections (six sections per animal)
were treated overnight with DCX antibody, PSANCAM antibody or NeuroD antibody, followed by
exposure to a biotinylated secondary antibody from a
corresponding host species (Vector Laboratories). Signal amplification was carried out with an avidin-biotin

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

complex (Vector Laboratories), and detected with
DAB.
For triple-label immunofluorescence, sections subjected to DNA denaturation and acid hydrolysis were
exposed to a mixture of antibodies (BrdU, NeuN)and
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) overnight at room
temperature. Following this, the sections were treated
with a cocktail of secondary antibodies: biotinylated
anti-rat (Vector Laboratories), Alexa-555 coupled donkey anti-mouse (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and
Cy5 coupled donkey anti-rabbit (Molecular Probes Inc.,
Eugene, OR, USA) for 2 hours, followed by incubation
with fluorescein-conjugated streptavidin (Invitrogen) for
2 hours.
Antibody validation

Antibodies directed to various components of the nervous system were validated for immunohistochemistry
in paraffin embedded and free floating coronal sections
of B6 mouse brain. Validation included optimizing antibody conditions in naïve brains using antibody-titration
experiments, antigen-retrieval techniques in paraffin and
comparison of the observed staining pattern with published reports in the brain. Only those antibodies that
had the expected distributions under conditions with
optimal signal-to-noise detection were used for experimentation on the B6 and BTBR brain sections. A further
confirmation of antibody specificity included determination that specific antibodies (GAD67, vesicular glutamate transporter VGluT1 and synapsin 2) had the same
distribution in both paraffin embedded and free floating
tissue (see Table 1).
In situ hybridization

Coronal sections 20 μm thick were cut on a cryostat
(CM3050S; Leica Microsystems, Buffalo Grove, IL, USA)
from frozen BTBR and B6 forebrains. Sections were
staggered, so that each of the four sections on a slide
was spaced 200 μm apart. Before use, the sections were
immersed in 4% paraformaldehyde and then acetylated,
defatted, and dehydrated through a graded series of
alcohol.
Sense and antisense RNA probes specific for the 321
nucleotides between positions 507 and 833 in the NCBI
database sequence M61178 of the BDNF mRNA
sequence were used for in situ hybridization. A pCR3.1
plasmid (Invitrogen) was constructed with the antisense
strand exposed by the restriction enzyme BamH1, and
transcribed by the S6 promoter. The plasmid with the
sense strand used the linearization enzyme EcoRV, and
the sequence was transcribed by the T7 polymerase.
The riboprobes were labeled with 35 S-dUTP (Perkin
Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA) incorporation using a commercial kit (P6/T7 Riboprobe ® Combination System;
Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The probe was then purified twice by ethanol precipitation.

Page 5 of 21

Before hybridization, slides were incubated for 30
minutes in hybridization buffer containing 50% formamide, 2 × saline sodium citrate (SSC), 10% dextran sulfate, 1 × Denhardt solution, 1% denatured DNA, 0.01
mol/l dithiothreitol (DTT) and 10 μg/ml tRNA at 58 ºC.
Slides were then incubated overnight at 58°C in hybridization buffer containing 2 × 10 6 counts per minute
(cpm) sense or antisense probe per slide. Following
hybridization, non-specific binding was removed by a
series of stringency washes in decreasing salt concentrations at room temperature, ending with a stringency
wash at 61°C and dehydration through a graded series
of ethanol. After drying, the slides were exposed on an
imaging plate (LSG TR Imaging Plate; Fuji Medical Systems, Stamford, CT, USA) for 14 days, and then
scanned on a FLA7000 phosphorimager (Fuji Medical
Systems).
Microscopy

All stained slides were examined qualitatively using
standard light microscopy. Whole-slide digital images of
immunohistochemically stained slides were acquired
using an imaging system (Aperio Scanscope XT; Aperio
Technologies, Vista, CA, USA). Digital images were captured via a one-dimensional charge-coupled device line
scan using a 40 × objective (0.75 numerical aperture,
0.25 μm/pixel) under constant exposure and light settings. Digital images were stored in the scanner’s proprietary format (ScanScope Virtual Slide;.SVS)
(compression quality = 70) and managed in the Aperio
Spectrum database. High-magnification photomicrographs were taken with a 63 × oil immersion objective
on a microscope (E-800; Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) with
attached camera (SPOT RT; Spot Imaging Solutions,
Sterling Heights, MI, USA).
Image analysis

Quantification was carried out by an experimenter
blinded to the study code.
Aperio image analysis

Quantitative image analysis was performed on sections
in which there were qualitative changes in specific
immunoreactivities in BTBR brains compared with B6
mouse brains. Additional selected markers that did not
change were chosen as negative controls for direct comparison in the same animals. Quantification of NG2,
DCX, PSA-NCAM and GAD67 immunoreactivities was
performed using the software supplied with the imaging
system (Aperio ImageScope; Aperio Technologies). This
system is an automated whole-slide imaging system in
which digital images are acquired and image analysis
can be performed on stitched and tiled images analyzed
at various magnifications; the system is being implemented with increasing frequency in quantitative studies of

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 6 of 21

Table 1 Antibodies used for histopathological characterization of BTBR mice
Antigen

Vendor

Catalog #

Host

Dilution

Retrieval

IHC Method

BrdU

Accurate Chemical
(Westbury, NY)

OBT0030

Rat IgG

1:300

None

Free-floating

Roche Applied Science
(Indianapolis, IN)

11170376001

Mouse IgG1

1:500

None

Free-floating

CNPase

Sigma-Aldrich
(St Louis, MO)

C9743

Rabbit IgG

1:400

Borg

Paraffin

Drebrin

Sigma-Aldrich
(St Louis, MO)

D3816

Rabbit IgG

1:1300

None

Paraffin

Doublecortin

Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA)

sc-8066

Goat IgG

1:2000

None

Free-floating

GAD65

Millipore
(Temecula, CA)

AB5082

Rabbit IgG

1:500

None

Paraffin

GAD67

Millipore
(Temecula, CA)

MAB5406

Mouse IgG2a

1:1000
1:6000

Borg

Paraffin Free-floating

GFAP

Dako
(Carpinteria, CA)

Z0334

Rabbit IgG

1:5000

Borg

Paraffin

Sigma-Aldrich
(St Louis, MO)

G9269

Rabbit IgG

1:300

None

Free-floating

GluR1

Millipore
(Temecula, CA)

04-855

Rabbit IgG

1:50

Borg

Paraffin

Iba1

Wako Chemicals USA
(Richmond, VA)

19-19741

Rabbit IgG

1:1000

Borg

Paraffin

MAP2

Sigma-Aldrich
(St Louis, MO)

M4403

Mouse IgG1

1:1000

Borg

Paraffin

MBP

Abcam
(Cambridge, MA)

ab2404

Rabbit IgG

1:50

Borg

Paraffin

NeuroD

Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA)

sc-1086

Goat IgG

1:250

None

Free-floating

NeuN

Millipore
(Temecula, CA)

MAB377

Mouse IgG1

1:1000

None

Free-floating

NG2

Millipore
(Temecula, CA)

AB5320

Rabbit IgG

1:1200

None

Free-floating

Parvalbumin
PSA-NCAM

EMD/Calbiochem (Gibbstown, NJ)
Abcys
(Paris, France)
Gift from Dr. T Seki

PC255L
AbC0019

Rabbit IgG
Mouse IgM

1:700
1:5000

Borg
None

Paraffin
Free-floating

None

Mouse IgM

1:500

None

Free-floating

PSD-95

Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA)

3409

Rabbit IgG

1:100

Borg

Paraffin

Synapsin 2

Sigma-Aldrich
(St Louis, MO)

S2947

Rabbit IgG

1:1600
1:30,000

None

Paraffin Free-floating

Synaptophysin

Abcam
(Cambridge, MA)

52636

Rabbit IgG

1:250

Borg

Paraffin

VGluT1

Synaptic Systems
(Goettingen, Germany)

135303

Rabbit IgG

1:900
1:16,000

None

Paraffin Free-floating

IHC = immunohistochemistry; BrdU = 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine; CNPase = 2’,3’-cyclic nucleotide 3’-phosphodiesterase; GAD65 = glutamic acid decarboxylase 65
kDa isform; GAD67 = glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 kDa isoform; GFAP = glial fibrillary acidic protein; GluR1 = glutamate receptor 1; Iba1 = ionized calciumbinding adaptor molecule 1; MAP2 = microtubule-associated protein 2; MBP = myelin basic protein;; NeuN = neuronal nuclei; PSA-NCAM = poly-sialic acid neural
cell adhesion molecule; PSD-95 = postsynaptic density protein of 95 kDa; VGluT1 = vesicular glutamate transporter 1.

both rodent and human brain [42-45]. Acquired digital
images representing whole tissue sections were analyzed
applying the Spectrum Analysis algorithm package and
ImageScope analysis software (version 9, Aperio Technologies). Quantification of immunohistochemical

staining was performed using color translation and an
automated thresholding algorithm. Percentage positivity
per area traced was obtained using an algorithm that
detects the chromogenic colorimetric reaction product.
The area of immunoreactivity in each section was

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

averaged to generate a mean immunoreactive value for
each animal.
For NG2 quantification, image analysis was performed
in the cingulate cortex and striatum. A rectangular
region of interest (ROI) centered at the midline, 2.5
mm 2 in size, was defined using the cingulum as the
medial-lateral landmarks and the pial surface as the dorsal boundary. In addition to the midline ROI, an additional rectangular ROI (0.8 mm 2 ) centered in each
hemisphere (right and left) of the striatum was quantified for NG2 immunoreactivity. Image analysis at the
level of the dorsal hippocampus was performed for
NG2, DCX, PSA-NCAM and GAD67. Using a freehand
pen tool, an ROI was manually traced around the dentate gyrus to capture neurites in both the hilus and
molecular/granule layers. Artifacts and white spaces
were excluded by manual outlining using a negative pen
tool. For all markers examined, images were manually
uploaded from the Spectrum database and the positivepixel-count macro was applied. A constant threshold
was chosen, and all other parameters were held constant. The total area of specific stain in the defined ROI
was assessed. Image analysis was performed using segmented stitched and tiled images (256 × 256 pixels).
Data were manually exported to a spreadsheet (Excel;
Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA, USA) for data analysis.
The final measurement consisted of the ratio of thresholded area of specific stain divided by the area of total
ROI per section. The value for each animal consisted of
a mean ratio for that animal, assessed in three equally
spaced sections. For the striatum and hippocampus
measurements, a mean value of the left and right hemispheres was calculated separately for each animal, and
then averaged to yield a final mean value for each animal. Quantitative image analysis was not performed on
H&E- or Nissl stained sections.
Unbiased stereology cell-counting analysis

Quantification of BrdU-positive cells in tissue sections
was carried out using an unbiased design-based stereology protocol [46] on a microscope (AxioSkop; Zeiss,
Jena, Germany) at a magnification of × 40. Tissue for
this purpose was derived from free-floating sections.
Every sixth section was taken, spanning the rostrocaudal
extent of the hippocampus (nine sections/animal), and
BrdUmmunopositive cells directly within or touching
the subgranular zone (SGZ) or granule cell layer (GCL)
were counted. The total number of BrdU-positive cells
per SGZ or GCL was estimated by multiplying the total
number of BrdU positive cells counted by section periodicity. To determine the number of cells in the hippocampus that were positive for DCX, NeuroD or PSANCAM, the cells in the DG were quantified, and results
were expressed as the number of cells per section that
were positive for each antibody. Furthermore, we also

Page 7 of 21

examined the morphological status of DCX positive
cells by categorizing them as DCX positive cells with or
without tertiary dendrites, as described previously [47].
To examine the differentiation of BrdU-positive cells
into neurons positive for the neuronal marker NeuN, or
into glia immunopositive for the glial marker GFAP, the
percentages of BrdU positive cells that colocalized with
NeuN or GFAP were assessed. A minimum of 30 BrdU
positive cells from each animal was analyzed using zplane sectioning with a confocal microscope (LSM5;
Zeiss).
Densitometry

BDNF mRNA was quantified by measuring the densitometric expression level bilaterally on films from two to
three sections per animal. The average signal value
derived in this way was considered as n = 1 for statistical purposes. Regional analysis was performed with a
freehand drawing tool (Multi Gauge software, version
3.2; Fuji Medical Systems). Criteria for selecting the
CA1, CA2, CA3 and DG consisted of manually outlining
regions based on matched morphological features from
-1.5 to -2.5 mm Bregma [40]. The hippocampal regions
from each section were normalized to a small region of
lateral thalamus with nominal BDNF gene expression. A
logarithmic regression of a 35 S standard (American
Radiolabeled Chemicals, St. Louis, MO, USA) included
on each imaging plate was used to transform optical
density values into nCi/g for cross plate standardization
of data.
Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis of quantitative immunohistochemistry
image analysis data from the Aperio system was performed as follows: data for percentage stained area were
log-transformed and then averaged for three sections.
The averaged log-transformed data for individual animals were analyzed using a two sample t-test with equal
variance to compare the values from the two strains of
mice. The ratio of the two groups and its 95% confidence interval were also calculated. A mixed-effects
model with strain and potential covariates as fixed effect
and animal as random effect was used to quantitatively
assess variability both between and within animals, as
well as effect of strain and potential covariates.
For unbiased stereology cell counts (BrdU, DCX, PSANCAM and NeuroD immunohistochemistry and percentage colocalization of BrdU with NeuN and GFAP) data
were subjected to statistical analysis using Student t-test
with significance determined at P < 0.05 compared with
the wild-type controls (GraphPad Instat software;
GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA).
For in situ hybridization densitometry, statistical significance was achieved at P < 0.05. All analyses were
performed using SAS V9.2. Regions were compiled into

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

groups and analyzed with a two-way ANOVA and a
Bonferroni post hoc analysis (GraphPad Prism software)

Results
Gross Neuroanatomical differences exist between BTBR
and B6 strains

Brains of BTBR mice were compared with age-matched
B6 mice, using evaluations of gross morphology and
routine histology. Evaluation of brains sectioned in both
sagittal and coronal planes revealed significant lateral
displacement of specific anatomic structures in the forebrain, such as the hippocampus, lateral septum and
striatum (Figure 1). Such distortions were attributed to
callosal agenesis, and have been described previously in
this strain [23]. Ventricular dilation of the cerebral lateral and third ventricles was not seen in BTBR mice.
The cerebellum and brainstem in the sagittal sections
displayed no specific changes in BTBR versus controls
at the gross or cellular level (data not shown). No significant change in total brain weights was seen in BTBR
versus B6 mice at 8 to 10 weeks of age (BTBR: 0.55 ±
0.06 g; B6: 0.57 ± 0.06 g), which is consistent with previous observations of the BTBR versus B6 strains evaluated at 12 weeks of age [23].
Regions for analysis in the present study were based on
brain regions implicated in the neuropathology of autism
[38] and the established callosal connectivity of forebrain
structures. The following regions were evaluated: isocortex, hippocampus, amygdala, septum and striatum. In the
prefrontal cortex, there were no obvious anatomic or
morphologic differences between BTBR and B6 mice.
Interhemispheric white-matter abnormalities at the midline were apparent in both striatal and hippocampal coronal levels. The corpus callosum was consistently absent
in all BTBR mice examined. The external capsule likewise
appeared reduced in thickness in BTBR mice compared
with controls, whereas the thickness of the internal capsule and anterior commissure appeared indistinguishable
from controls, suggesting anatomic specificity in whitematter tracts. The size of the striatum and septum, thickness of the cortex and size of the ventricles were not
noticeably different in BTBR and B6 mice. At the level of
the dorsal hippocampus, lateral displacement of the hippocampus was apparent in all BTBR mice. The hippocampal commissure was reduced in size, consistent with
previous reports [23]. Specific anatomic changes in BTBR
hippocampus included an apparent reduction in the
thickness of the hippocampal dentate granule neuron
layer as well as thinning of the hilus (Figure 1E, Figure 7;
see Additional file 1, Figure S3). No obvious changes in
the anatomic structure or cytoarchitecture of the amygdala were seen. At the cellular level, no evidence of neurodegeneration or gliosis was seen in H&E-stained or
Nissl-stained sections in any brain area.

Page 8 of 21

Misorientation of selected glial fibers is present in the
BTBR forebrain

To more fully characterize glial phenotypes, localization
of astrocytes and microglia was examined using GFAP
and ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule Iba1 [48]
[AU immunohistochemistry, respectively. Figure 2 illustrates astrocyte and microglial expression in defined
white-matter regions of the forebrain, namely the cingulum and the alveus. GFAP immunoreactive fibers did
display some alterations specific to BTBR in selected
regions. The density of GFAP-immunoreactive fibers
was increased in the cingulum of the BTBR forebrain
compared with that of B6 mice (Figure 2). Astrocytic
processes were often oriented dorsoventrally rather than
mediolaterally in the cingulum and alveus at the levels
of the striatum and hippocampus (Figure 2). Likewise,
Iba1-positive microglial fibers were oriented dorsoventrally in the alveus of BTBR mice (Figure 2). Misoriented glial fibers were confined to the white matter of
these selected neuroanatomic regions, and were not
seen in the gray matter. No evidence of cellular hypertrophy or hyperplasia was seen in GFAP or Iba1-immunoreactive cells. In the gray matter, morphologic cellular
features of GFAP and Iba1-positive cells were indistinguishable in BTBR compared with B6 forebrain, consistent with a lack of astrogliosis or microgliosis. The
misorientation of glial processes was only found in brain
regions that normally receive corpus callosum innervations, indicating that these findings are likely to be a
consequence of callosal agenesis.
White-matter microstructure and NG2 oligodendrocyte
precursors are altered in BTBR forebrain

Assessment of myelin was evaluated by immunohistochemical localization of myelin basic protein (MBP) and
2’,3’-cyclic nucleotide 3’-phosphodiesterase (CNPase).
Both antigens are expressed in myelinated fiber tracks;
however, CNPase is also expressed in oligodendrocyte
cell bodies [49]. Alterations included reduced expression
of MBP and CNPase in the midline of the BTBR forebrain [at the level of the striatum (Figure 3; Figure 4) and
hippocampus, findings that are consistent with callosal
agenesis. MBP and CNPase immunoreactivities were
aberrantly expressed in small, ectopic white-matter bundles located in the cingulate cortex adjacent to the midline (Figure 3; Figure 4). These bundles extended anterior
to posterior throughout a relatively long longitudinal axis
(Bregma 2.2 to -2.06). Typically, these white-matter
structures ranged in size from 25 to 200 μm in diameter,
and there were one to four foci per hemisphere. All
BTBR mice examined had these ectopic white-matter
bundles, which were not seen in any of the B6 mice.
Polydendrocytes, the glial population defined by NG2,
play a role in migration, neurogenesis, myelin repair and

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 9 of 21

Figure 1 Callosal agenesis is present in the BTBR mouse. Nissl-stained free-floating coronal brain sections of (A, C, E) representative BTBR
and (B, D, F) B6 mice at the level of (A, B) the prefrontal cortex, (C, D) striatum and (E, F) dorsal hippocampus. Gross anatomic findings
include absence of corpus callosum (arrows) and consequential lateral displacement of the lateral septum, striatum and hippocampus. Scale bar
= 500 μm.

even modulation of synaptic activity [50,51]. An apparent increase in expression of NG2 immunoreactivity was
seen in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) of BTBR
forebrain (Figure 5) which spanned caudally into the retrosplenial cortex. Morphologic changes consisted of an
increase in the staining intensity, size and extent of processes of NG2-positive cells in the BTBR mouse brain
compared with controls (Figure 5). Quantitative image
analysis of NG2 expression found a significant increase
in the area of NG2 immunoreactivity in the cingulate
cortex of BTBR mice compared with controls (P =
0.0088, n = 6 per strain) (Figure 6). By contrast, no significant differences in NG2 expression in the striatum
from the same sections were seen (Figure 6), suggesting
that NG2 increases were spatially restricted.
Intact dendritic cytoarchitecture, mossy fibers and
cholinergic fiber density are present in the BTBR brain

No specific alterations were seen in the overall organization and density of mossy-fiber synapses in the hippocampus as assessed by Timm staining (see Additional
file 2, Figure S1D). Cholinergic fibers and neurons, as
assessed by AchE histochemistry, had no specific alterations in BTBR versus B6 mouse forebrain (see Additional

file 2, Figure S1B). To examine putative changes in the
neuronal dendritic cytoskeleton, BTBR and B6 brains
were evaluated with an antibody directed against microtubule associated protein MAP2. No specific changes
were seen in MAP2 immunoreactivity in BTBR compared
with control brain in any region (see Additional file 3,
Figure S2).
Synapse, excitatory and inhibitory markers are not
profoundly altered in BTBR brain

To evaluate the overall structural integrity of synapses in
the brains of BTBR and B6 mice, antibodies directed to
specific presynaptic and postsynaptic structures were
evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Evaluation of the
two presynaptic markers synapsin 2 and synaptophysin,
and of the postsynaptic markers postsynaptic density
protein PSD95, drebrin and the glutamate receptor
GluR1 AMPA receptor showed that there were no qualitative changes in BTBR compared with B6 mice in any
forebrain region, with one exception, which was a focal
disruption of synaptic staining in the region of the ectopic myelinated white-matter bundles present in the
ACC (Figure 4), as expected in a region composed of
white matter.

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 10 of 21

Figure 2 Astrocytes and microglia show altered orientation in specific white-matter tracts in BTBR forebrain. Low-magnification coronal
sections from representative (A, E, I) BTBR and (C, G, K) B6 mouse forebrain at the level at which misoriented glial fibers were visible. Gross
anatomic changes included lateral displacement of the (A, I) hippocampus and (E) lateral septum. Rectangular area illustrates region highlighted
at high magnification in adjacent panels: (A-D) glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunostaining of a representative BTBR versus B6 mouse
illustrated at high magnification in (B, D) the alveus at the level of the dorsal hippocampus. The orientation of GFAP-immunoreactive fibers in
the alveus seemed prominently directed in the dorsolateral axis in BTBR brain. (E-H) GFAP staining in the cingulum of (F) BTBR versus (H) B6
mouse forebrain at the level of the striatum. The orientation of GFAP-immunoreactive fibers in the cingulum seemed prominently directed in
the mediolateral direction in (F) BTBR compared with (H) B6 brain. GFAP-immunoreactive fiber density seemed to be increased in BTBR white
matter in tracks neighboring the absent corpus callosum (compare B, F with D, H). (I-L) Ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule (Iba)1
immunoreactivity in the alveus of (J) the BTBR versus (L) the B6 mouse. GFAP and Iba1 positive fibers were oriented dorsoventrally in (B, J) the
BTBR brain rather than mediolaterally as seen in (D, L) the B6 brain. (J, L) Arrows are perpendicular to the directionality of Iba1-positive fibers.
GFAP- and Iba1-immunoreactive cell bodies seemed qualitatively indistinguishable in terms of size, frequency and morphology between BTBR
and B6 mice. Scale bars = (A, C, E, G, I, K) 1000 μm; (B, D, F, H, J, L) 25 μm.

To examine potential alterations in excitatory and
inhibitory systems, the distributions of GAD67, GAD65,
parvalbumin (PVA) and vesicular glutamate transporter
VGluT1 were evaluated. No qualitative changes were
seen in VGluT1 expression throughout the forebrain,
except for an absence of immunoreactivity in the ectopic white-matter regions of the cingulate cortex, in line
with the specific reduction of synaptic markers in this
same region (Figure 4). GAD65, GAD67 and PVA
expression was found to be similar in both BTBR mice
and B6 mice in all regions examined (data not shown).
BTBR mice exhibit a significant reduction in adult
hippocampal neurogenesis

The morphology of the hippocampus in BTBR mice
appeared remarkably similar to that seen in homozygous
Emx1 knockout mice, a model characterized by callosal
agenesis [52] and defective neurogenesis [53]. This finding, as well as reports of augmented stress response in

the BTBR model [54], led us to investigate the distribution of specific neural progenitors implicated in hippocampal neurogenesis.
Antibodies directed to immature neurons in the dentate gyrus SGZ were evaluated by examining the expression of PSA-NCAM and DCX, both recognized as
markers of neurogenesis [55,56]. Marked reductions in
the density of neurons immunoreactive for DCX and
PSA-NCAM were seen throughout the hippocampal
dentate gyrus of BTBR compared with B6 mice (see
Additional file 1, Figure S3). Outside the hippocampus,
DCX and PSA-NCAM immunoreactivities were
expressed in cerebral sites of structural plasticity including the subventricular zone, the piriform and entorhinal
cortices, and the amygdala, consistent with previous
reports [57,58]. No qualitative changes in the expression
of DCX and PSA-NCAM were seen in these brain areas
in BTBR compared with B6 mice (data not shown).
Immunohistochemistry for GAD67 and NG2 in the

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 11 of 21

Figure 3 Ectopic white-matter bundles expressing myelin basic protein (MBP) immunoreactivity are present in the anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC) of the BTBR mouse. Immunostaining of MBP in representative (A, C, E) BTBR and (B, D, F) B6 brains. (A, B) Absence of the
corpus callosum was prominently seen at low magnification in BTBR. (C, D). At higher magnifications, small ectopic bundles of MBPimmunoreactive white-matter tracts were seen in the ACC of BTBR brain (arrows). (E, F) High magnification of MBP immunoreactivity in the
cingulate cortex. Scale bars = (A, B) 500 μm, (C, D) 100 μm, (E, F) 50 μm.

same region showed no specific changes in BTBR mice
compared with controls (see Additional file 1, Figure
S3). Quantitative image analysis in the dentate gyrus
revealed a significant reduction in the expression of
DCX in the BTBR compared with B6 mice (P < 0.05, n
= 6 mice per strain) (see Additional file 1, Figure S3),
whereas no changes in the oligodendrocyte precursor
NG2 or the GABAergic marker GAD67 were seen in
the SGZ (see Additional file 1, Figure S3). Such results
suggest that the alterations are specific to neural and
not glial progenitors. These results demonstrate the specificity of the alterations in DCX expression relative to
other markers in the same region. The significant reduction of DCX expression in the hippocampal dentate
gyrus in our study is consistent with decreased hippocampal neurogenesis [55,59].
To definitively address the hypothesis of alterations in
adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the present study, an
independent cohort of mice was administered BrdU, and

assessed by unbiased stereological counting in the SGZ
of the dentate gyrus. A significant decline in proliferating BrdU-positive progenitors was seen in the BTBR
mice compared with controls (P < 0.05) (Figure 7B, C).
The numbers of BrdU-positive cells persisting within
the GCL of BTBR mice 21 days after BrdU treatment
also had a similar significant reduction (P < 0.05) (Figure 7D). This decline in adult hippocampal neurogenesis
revealed by the exogenous mitotic marker BrdU was
also accompanied by a steep reduction in the numbers
of immature neurons positive for DCX, PSA-NCAM
and NeuroD within the hippocampal neurogenic niche
of BTBR mice (P < 0.05) (Figure 7E, F, H, I, M).
Whereas the numbers of DCX-positive cells were significantly reduced in BTBR mice, the extent of morphological maturation of DCX-positive immature neurons in
BTBR mice did not differ compared with B6 controls, as
shown by no change in the percentage distribution of
DCX positive immature neurons bearing tertiary

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 12 of 21

Figure 4 Ectopic white-matter bundles in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) express 2’,3’-cyclic nucleotide 3’-phosphodiesterase
(CNPase) and lack synaptic antigens. Immunostaining of CNPase and synaptic markers in the ACC of representative (A, C, E, G) BTBR and (B,
D, F, H) B6 brains. The images are nearly adjacent to those shown in Figure 3. (A) Focal white-matter bundles had strong immunoreactivity for
CNPase, a marker of oligodendrocytes and myelinated fibers. An absence of markers of pre and postsynaptic antigens, as revealed by (C) drebrin
(E) and vesicular glutamate transporter VGluT1 and (G) synaptophysin immunoreactivities, was seen in the anterior cingulate cortex of BTBR
brain. (D, F, H) Staining with synaptic markers appeared to be uniform in the corresponding cortical region from B6 mice. Scale bar = 25 μm.

dendrites (Figure 7G). Further, we addressed whether
the neuronal or glial differentiation of newborn progenitors within the hippocampal neurogenic niche was
altered in BTBR mice. We saw a robust decline in the
percentage of BrdU positive cells that colocalized with

NeuN (P < 0.05) (see Additional file 4 Figure S4). BrdU
positive cells were associated with a significant increase
in astroglial proliferation, as shown by increased percentage colocalization with GFAP (P < 0.05) (see Additional
file 4 Figure S4). Taken together, these results indicate

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 13 of 21

Figure 5 Oligodendrocyte precursors defined by neuroglial proteoglycan NG2 immunoreactivity are qualitatively increased in the
anterior cingulate cortex of the BTBR mouse. Immunoperoxidase localization of NG2 in the forebrain of representative (A, C, E, G) BTBR and
(B, D, F, H) B6 mice, at (A, B) low, (C, D) medium and (E, F, G, H) high magnifications. (B) Prominent cellular immunoreactivity of NG2 was
visible throughout the brain of B6 mice with variation in expression levels in different brain regions. For example, constitutive levels of NG2
immunoreactivity in B6 mouse brain were higher in the septum and anterior cingulate cortex (square) than in the isocortex (triangle) or striatum
(circle). (C, D) Increased magnification of (A, B) in the midline cortical region, illustrating NG2 immunoreactivity. (E, F) High-magnification
illustration of increased NG2 staining in the ACC of the BTBR compared with the B6 mouse (from square region in (A, B) and open rectangle in
(C, D), respectively). (G, H) High magnificationof NG2 staining in the BTBR and B6 mouse striatum, showing no qualitative difference in NG2
immunoreactivity (from circle region in (A, B)). Scale bars = (A, B) 1000 μm, (C, D) 500 μm, (E, F, G, H) 25 μm.

that BTBR mice exhibit a robust reduction in adult hippocampal neurogenesis, with significant decreases in
both progenitor proliferation and neuronal differentiation. Interestingly, those immature neurons that did
seem to persist in BTBR dentate gyrus exhibited normal
morphological maturation.

BDNF mRNA is significantly reduced in BTBR
hippocampus

Given the central role of BDNF in modulating experience-dependent plasticity and its role in proliferation
differentiation and survival of newly generated neurons
[60], we examined BDNF gene expression in BTBR

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 14 of 21

25

C57Bl/6
BTBR

% Stained Area
S

20

*

15

10

5

0

Anterior Cingulate Cortex

Striatum

Figure 6 Neuroglial proteoglycan NG2 immunoreactivity in the
cingulate cortex is significantly increased in BTBR brain.
Quantitative image analysis of NG2 expression in the anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) of the BTBR mouse compared with the B6
mouse. Histogram illustrates measurement of percentage NG2
stained area from three sections per animal in the region of the
ACC and the striatum. This resulted in a significant increase in the
area of NG2 immunoreactivity in BTBR versus B6 mice. (*P = 0.0088,
n = 6 mice per strain). No significant change in the expression of
NG2 in the striatum was seen in the same animals. The coronal
section illustrates the regions of interest chosen for image analysis:
ACC (large rectangle) and striatum (small rectangle).

mice. In situ hybridization of BDNF mRNA revealed a
significant reduction in the hippocampus of BTBR compared with B6 mice (Figure 8). BDNF transcripts were
decreased by 73% in the dentate gyrus (mean ± SEM
B6: 29 ± 3; BTBR: 14 ± 2; n = 6/group, P < 0.0001) and
65% in the CA3 region (B6: 14 ± 2.1; BTBR: 4.9 ± 1.4, n
= 6/group, P < 0.001) with non-significant reductions in
the CA1 and CA2 regions, suggesting spatial heterogeneity of BDNF changes.
Table 2 provides an inclusive summary of the results
of the different cellular markers in BTBR compared
with B6 mice.

Discussion
We report extensive histopathological characterization
of the brain of the BTBR inbred mouse strain, and
describe novel changes in specific markers within key
forebrain regions. Specifically, a significant increase in
the expression of the oligodendrocyte precursor NG2 in
the ACC and marked reductions in the number of
neural precursors positive for DCX, PSA-NCAM and
NeuroD in the hippocampus were seen. Despite the presence of complete callosal agenesis, surprisingly few
changes in the majority of markers were found in most
brain regions (Table 2). Given the number of neuronal-,
glial-, synaptic- and neurotransmitter-related markers

we examined, the modest extent of global changes in
neurostructural proteins in response to such a marked
perturbation of normal brain development is striking.
No evidence of structural or antigenic changes was seen
in most brain regions using markers such as MAP2 for
neuronal dendrites, Timm staining for mossy fibers, and
AchE histochemistry for cholinergic pathways, and no
specific changes in the expression of excitatory
(VGluT1) or inhibitory (GAD67, GAD65, PVA) markers
were seen. Such results do not exclude the possibility
that subtle changes might be found using higher-resolution approaches such as electron microscopy. Moreover,
non-histologic assays such as neurochemistry and electrophysiology represent complimentary mechanistic
approaches for addressing the contribution of functional
deficits to the autism-like behaviors seen in the BTBR
mouse.
Our intent was to profile a panel of diverse cellular
and molecular markers in the BTBR mouse as opposed
to addressing one or a few specific mechanistic hypotheses. Given that the BTBR model is proposed to mimic
the human behavioral impairments of autism, the relevance of our findings to human neuropathology of autism is worth consideration. The current understanding
of the neuropathology of human idiopathic autism is
based on relatively limited numbers of cases. The most
consistent findings reported to date include defective
cortical minicolumns [61], reduction in neuron number
and size in key brain areas, and increased dendritic
spine density [38,62-66]. Additional findings include loss
of Purkinje cells [67], alterations in specific GABAergic
receptors [68,69], changes in markers of the cholinergic
system [70,71], focal increases in interneurons [72], and
increased glial activation [73-75]. Based on this information, some comparisons with our present findings
include lack of changes in brain weight, and absence of
changes in cholinergic fiber density and PVA-expressing
interneurons in BTBR brain, at least as analyzed qualitatively. These results suggest that differences exist
between the pathology of BTBR and human autism.
Another difference is that we found no evidence of glial
activation in the BTBR brain. The gliosis seen in postmortem examination of human autism cases might have
arisen from environmental, inflammatory (both of which
have been implicated in autism) or other epigenetic
mechanisms that are not present in the mouse model.
Additionally, seizures, which occur in up to 30% of
patients with ASD [76,77], or concomitant drug therapy
can alter glial morphology or activation [78,79]. These
confounding factors cannot be controlled for in human
postmortem studies, and pose particular challenges in
ASD, for which a paucity of human postmortem brain
tissue is available. Such factors re-emphasize the need
for relevant translational animal models for ASD. Future

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 15 of 21

Figure 7 Regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in BTBR mice. (A) Schematic representation of the experimental design to assess
the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in BTBR mice (S time point represents time of euthanasia). Proliferation phase was assessed at
2 hours, and survival of neural precursors was examined at 21 days post bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) administration. (B) Representative
photomicrographs of BrdU-positive cells in the subgranular zone (SGZ)/granule-cell layer (GCL) of the B6 and BTBR animals. BrdU-positive cells
were seen in the SGZ at the border of the GCL and hilus. (C) Quantitative unbiased stereological analysis revealed a significant decrease in the
number of BrdU positive cells in the SGZ/GCL in the BTBR mice in the proliferation study. (D) Quantitative stereological analysis revealed a
significant decrease in the BrdU-positive cells in the SGZ/GCL of the BTBR mice in the survival study. (E) Representative photomicrographs of
DCX positive cells in the SGZ of the B6 and BTBR hippocampus, and the corresponding magnified image of the DCX positive cells with tertiary
dendrites. (F) Analysis of DCX-positive cells per section in the SGZ/GCL region revealed a significant decrease in the BTBR animals compared
with the B6. (G) Percentage of DCX positive cells with tertiary dendrites did not find any significant change between the B6 and BTBR animals.
(H) Representative photomicrographs of cells positive for PSA-NCAM from B6 and BTBR animals, and the corresponding magnified images are
shown. (I) Quantitative analysis of the PSA-NCAM positive cells in the BTBR compared with the B6 animals revealed a decreased number of PSANCAM positive cells per section in the BTBR animals. (J) Quantitative analysis revealed a significant decrease in the number of NeuroD positive
cells per section in the SGZ/GCL of the BTBR compared with B6 animals. The results are expressed as mean ± SEM (n = 9/group). *P < 0.05
compared with the B6 animals (Student t-test). (E, H) Scale bars = 50 μm (top panel), 25 μm (bottom panel). H = hilus, ML = molecular layer.

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

A. B6

Page 16 of 21

Table 2 Results of histopathological changes in BTBR
versus B6 mice

C.
C57Bl/6J
BTBR

30
20

***

***

Marker

PFC STR ACC AMG HPC

AchE

0

BrdU

N/A N/A N/A

N/A

-

N/A N/A N/A
N/A N/A N/A

N/A
N/A

+
-

+ GFAP
+ NeuN

10

35

B. BTBR

S Intensity (nCi/g)

40

0
CA1

CA2

CA3

DG

Hippocampal Region

0

0

0

CNPase

0

0

+

0

0

Drebrin

0

0

-

0

0

Doublecortin
Figure 8 Significant reduction of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF) mRNA in the BTBR hippocampus. (A) There was
prominent expression of BDNF mRNA in the hippocampus in B6
forebrain. (B) BDNF mRNA expression in the BTBR forebrain was
markedly reduced compared with the B6 forebrain (compare (A)
and (B)). (C) Quantitative densitrometry of the CA1, CA2, CA3 and
dentate gyrus (DG) subregions of the hippocampus revealed that
mRNA expression was significantly decreased in BTBR compared
with B6 mice in the CA3 and dentate gyrus. The results are
expressed as the mean ± SEM (n = 6/group). ***P ≤ 0.001 for both
CA3 and DG, two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post hoc analysis).

0

0

0

0

0

0

-

0

0

GAD67

0

0

-

0

0

GFAP

0

0

0

0

0

GluR1

0

0

-

0

0

Iba1

0

0

0

0

0

MAP2
MBP

0
0

0
0

0
+

0
0

0
0

NeuroD

N/A N/A N/A

N/A

Focal in CC region

-

GAD65

-

NG2

studies using more comprehensive evaluations such as
spine morphology, minicolumn assessments and receptor autoradiography represent suitable techniques to
compare the neuropathology of the BTBR mouse more
directly with postmortem human autistic brain. Indeed,
receptor autoradiography in BTBR mice has revealed
neurochemical changes in the serotonergic system [22]
that are consistent with alterations in serotonergic
receptor systems in human autistic brain [80].
In +the present study, we defined specific cellular and
anatomic changes in glia, a population of cells that
would be expected to change as a consequence of white
matter defects. There was reduced expression of the
myelin markers MBP and CNPase in midline forebrain
structures, findings that would be predicted from
reduced white matter content and callosal agenesis.
Likewise, misorientation of glial fibers in the alveus and
cingulum are probably a consequence of callosal agenesis, given that it is known that existing fibers can be
rerouted in different orientations. Alterations in CNPase
and MBP in focal regions of the cortex may be related
to the presence of Probst bundles, which have been
defined as aberrant, longitudinally oriented, white matter
bundles near the midline that are believed to be composed of rerouted callosal fibers [27]. Probst bundles
have been previously described in BTBR mice [20] and
in other mouse models of callosal agenesis (for example,
netrin1 [81], NF1a [82], ddN [83], RI-I [84], Emx-1 [52])
and in human patients with partial agenesis of the corpus callosum [85]. The relationship of the small ectopic
white-matter bundles in the ACC to Probst bundles is
unclear, and additional experiments, such as fiber tract
tracing experiments, which were historically used to

Comments

0

0

0

++

0

0

0

-

0

0

0

0

0

-

PSD-95

0

0

-

0

0

Synapsin 2

Focal in CC region

0

PSA-NCAM

Misorientation (alv.,
cing.)

0

Parvalbumin

Misorientation (alv.,
cing.)

0

0

-

0

0

Synaptophysin 0
Timm’s
0

0
0

0

0
0

0
0

VGluT1

0

-

0

0

0

PFC = prefrontal cortex; STR = striatum; ACC = anterior cingulate cortex; AMG
= amygdala; HPC = hippocampus; AchE = acetylcholinesterase; BrdU = 5bromo-2’-deoxyuridine; CNPase = 2’,3’-cyclic nucleotide 3’-phosphodiesterase;
GAD65 = glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 kDa isoform; GAD67 = glutamic acid
decarboxylase 67 kDa isoform; GFAP = glial fibrillary acidic protein; GluR1 =
glutamate receptor 1; Iba1 = ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1;
MAP2 = microtubule-associated protein 2; MBP = myelin basic protein; N/A:
not analyzed; NeuN = neuronal nuclei; PSA-NCAM = poly-sialic acid neural cell
adhesion molecule; PSD-95 = postsynaptic density protein of 95 kDa; VGluT1
= vesicular glutamate transporter 1.
Comments refer to alterations probably related to callosal agenesis in the
BTBR mice (-) = decreased staining compared with B6; (0) = equal staining
compared with B6; (+) = moderately increased staining compared with B6;
(++) = strongly increased staining compared with B6.

define Probst bundles [86,87], may be illuminating. Fiber
tracing experiments may also help characterize the misoriented glial fibers in the alveus and cingulum. CNPase
and MBP immunoreactive areas in regions of ectopic
white matter bundles were devoid of the synaptic antigens synaptophysin, PSD95, VGluT1, synapsin 2 and
drebrin. This is expected, given that the ectopic structures are composed of white matter. However, it is noteworthy that disruption of synaptic cytoarchitecture and
integrity in the ACC may lead to significant functional
consequences for higher-order functions such as attention, executive function, and integration of emotion and
cognitive processes. In autism, abnormalities in the ACC
have been identified using neuroimaging methods
[88-91]. Notably, the ACC is reported to display

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

anatomic and functional alterations in several human
neuropsychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia
and bipolar disease, in addition to autism [92-95].
Translational research of higher order functional circuits
using endpoints such as neuroimaging and electroencephalography in both mouse and human callosal agenesis/dysgenesis and in patients with ASD may address
key hypotheses about the relationship between ACC
alterations and neuropsychiatric conditions.
When comparing the relative changes of all the markers evaluated in our study, the most robust changes
were seen for DCX, PSA-NCAM, BDNF and NG2
expression. It is of particular interest that these markers
are known to play a role in neuronal development and
plasticity. Selective changes in such a panel of neurodevelopmental proteins are consistent with a congenital
defect in neurodevelopment. The chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycan NG2 is known to regulate cell proliferation
and motility ([96]), modulate axon growth [97], and prevent axon regeneration [98]. NG2 cells in both white
and gray matter engage not only in the genesis of oligodendrocytes during development, but also in remyelination of demyelinated axons in the adult nervous system
[99]. NG2 cells form synaptic junctions with axons, and
participate in glutamatergic [100,101] and GABAergic
[102] signaling with neurons. Very little is known about
the changes in oligodendrocyte precursors in disease
states, with the exception of multiple sclerosis, in which
NG2 has been suggested to prevent remyelination [103].
Whether the increased expression of NG2-positive cells
represents an attempt to remyelinate the absent corpus
callosum, or may function to participate in defective
neuron-glia communication is unknown. Future experiments aimed at quantifying the number of NG2 positive
cells and the changes in NG2 positive processes may
further elucidate the mechanisms of specific alterations
in polydendrocytes in this and other models of callosal
anomalies. Expression of these specific neuronal and
glial progenitors in human postmortem brain from cases
of autism or callosal agenesis has not been reported to
date. This finding represents an important area for
future investigation in human postmortem brain, and is
an example of how the BTBR mouse model has the
potential to uncover novel neuroanatomical features of
human disease.
The relationship between callosal anomalies and behavioral impairment in mice is complex. Several studies
have examined the behavioral phenotypes of mouse
models of callosal abnormalities; interestingly, very mild
phenotypes have been reported across a wide range of
basic behavioral assays [23]. Many different mouse models exhibit callosal abnormalities [104], yet only very few
reportedly exhibit behavioral deficits resembling autism
[18], indicating that the relationship, as in humans, is

Page 17 of 21

not a simple one. The BALB/c mouse is one example
other than the BTBR mouse that exhibits social deficits
and callosal abnormalities [1,23,105], yet other models
of callosal dysgenesis (such as the J1 strain, which is
phylogenetically similar to BTBR) do not exhibit
impaired social interactions. To address a putative relationship more directly, Yang et al. [20] reported that
surgical transection of the corpus callosum in B6 mice
at postnatal day 7 did not result in the same autism-like
behavioral deficits seen in the BTBR model, leading the
authors to suggest that callosal abnormalities are not
responsible for the behavioral deficits in autism. Similarly, commissurotomy in humans, also termed splitbrain or disconnection syndrome, does not result in the
same behavioral abnormalities as in cases of callosal
agenesis [27,106]. Clearly, further studies in animals and
in humans are required to directly address the hypothesis that callosal abnormalities contribute to the behavioral deficits of autism.
The most profound changes in the present study
occurred in the hippocampus. The hippocampus plays
an important role in memory functions, emotional behavior, processing of novel information and integrating
social information, all domains affected in ASD. Several
relevant genetic mouse models of neuropsychiatric disorders emphasize the potential role of reduced neurogenesis on autism-related behaviors, including
chromosome 22q11 deletion [13], mutant Disc1 transgenic mice [24] and Reelin knockout mice [107]. Moreover, reduced hippocampal neurogenesis has been
reported in the Emx1 knockout mouse, a model that
also exhibits callosal agenesis [53]. Intriguingly, Disc1
truncation produces callosal abnormalities in mice [24],
and Disc1 single nucleotide polymorphisms are associated with autism, with the strongest association occurring in males [108]. Reduced hippocampal neurogenesis
is associated with stress, depression and defects in cognitive function [109]; the observation that stress
abnormalities have been reported in BTBR mice [34]
suggests a putative link.
Reduction in BDNF mRNA in the hippocampus is
consistent with the reduction in neurogenesis. Hippocampal BDNF mRNA levels were most dramatically
reduced in the dentate gyrus, with less significant reductions noted in the CA1 region. Recently, Silverman et
al. reported reduced levels of BDNF protein in BTBR
compared with B6 hippocampus, using biochemical
methods [21], consistent with the present study. These
results are also consistent with findings in other models
of stress in which reduced neurogenesis is accompanied
by changes in BDNF; however, the magnitude of reductions in the BTBR model in our studies is more profound than has been reported under conditions of stress
[110-112]. Future experiments evaluating the effects of

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

Page 18 of 21

therapies that regulate neurogenesis and/or BDNF levels
represent opportunities to decipher the role of these
changes in reversing behavioral abnormalities. Therapeutic targets such as histamine H3 [113] and 5-hydroxytryptamine 5-HT6 receptor selective antagonists [114]
and AMPA receptor modulators [21] represent good
examples. With respect to relevance to human autism,
patients with ASD have volumetric and structural
changes in the hippocampus as revealed by neuroimaging approaches [115,116]. The recent postmortem
study illustrating that impairments in neurogenesis may
occur in some cases of human autism [117] suggests the
potential translational relevance of at least one neuropathology finding in the present study.

Conclusions
Neuropathological studies of the BTBR strain and callosal
agenesis/dysgenesis models have in general been rather
limited. The present findings extend the previous gross
anatomic findings to defining more specific cellular and
molecular changes in BTBR mice. Such findings direct
investigation of key hypotheses directed at linking anatomic changes to functional deficits, and have potential
implications for developing effective treatments for autism. Translational research is a crucial success factor for
developing successful drugs into market, and is particularly imperative in nervous system diseases, for which the
advancement of therapeutic candidates into humans is
particularly challenging [118]. Construct validity is particularly important in cases for which no clinically effective
medications exist and there is a lack of sufficient information about the etiology of the disease [119], which is
indeed the case for ASD. The finding that the BTBR
model recapitulates the three core deficits of human ASD
is important, as this is a disease that is diagnosed based
on purely behavioral outcomes. Given that behavioral
interventions and pharmacotherapies both have been
shown to reverse at least one of the core deficits in the
model [6,19,20,22], some construct validity of the BTBR
model to human autism is possible. The neuroanatomic
characteristics of the BTBR model identify pathogenic
neural substrates that may underlie behavioral deficits,
and further suggest new potential therapeutic targets or
strategies for intervention in autism.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S3 Selective reduction of doublecortin
(DCX) immunoreactivity in BTBR hippocampus. (A, B) DCX
immunoreactivity in the dentate gyrus (DG) of (A) BTBR and (B) B6
forebrain. Marked reduction in DCX-positive neural progenitors was seen
in BTBR DG (compare A with B). Specific changes included reduced
frequency of DCX-immunoreactive neurons in the SGZ. (C) Significant
reduction in DCX expression in the BTBR DG by quantitative image
analysis (*P = 0.024, n = 6 per strain). (D, E) Immunolocalization of

neuroglial proteoglycan NG2 in the hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) in
representative (D) BTBR and (E) B6 brains. NG2 immunoreactivity was
visible as polydendrocyte cell bodies and processes throughout the hilus
and DCX-positive layers. (F) No significant differences in NG2 between
BTBR and B6 DG were measured by quantitative image analysis. (G, H)
Glutamic acid decarboxylase GAD67 immunoreactivity was visible in cell
bodies and fibers and terminals in the hilus, subgranular zone (SGZ) and
DCX positive layer (GCL) of the DG. (I) No specific qualitative changes in
GAD67 immunoreactivity were seen in BTBR compared with B6
hippocampus. The free floating sections stained with each antibody are
nearly adjacent to one another. Scale bar = 50 μm.
Additional file 2: Figure S1 No overt changes in cholinergic and
mossy fibers are present in BTBR compared with B6 mouse
forebrain. Representative sections of (A, C) BTBR and (B, D) B6 mouse
forebrain stained with (A, B) acetylcholinesterase (AchE) histochemistry
or (C, D) Timm stain. No obvious qualitative differences between BTBR
and B6 sections were seen at any magnification. Scale bar = 1000 μm.
Additional file 3: Figure S2 No overt changes in dendritic
cytoarchitecture are present in BTBR compared with B6 mouse
forebrain. Representative sections of (A, C) BTBR and (B, D) B6 mouse
forebrain stained with microtubule-associated protein MAP2 at the level
of the dorsal hippocampus. (C, D) MAP2 immunoreactivity in the CA1
region of the hippocampus. No obvious differences between BTBR and
B6 sections were seen. Scale bars = (A, B) 1000 μm; (C, D) 100 μm.
Additional file 4: Figure S4 Dual localization of 5-bromo-2’deoxyuridine (BrdU) with neuronal or glial markers in the SGZ. A, B:
Representative confocal z-stack images of a BrdU-positive cell colocalized
with (A) neuronal nuclei (Neu N) or (B) glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), respectively. (C) Confocal z-stack analysis of the BrdU-positive
cells indicated that the percentage colocalization of the BrdU-positive
cells with the neuronal marker; NeuN was significantly reduced and the
astrocytic marker GFAP was significantly increased. The results are
expressed as the mean ± SEM (n = 9/group). *P < 0.05 compared with
the B6 animals (Student t-test).

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Shibing Deng for assistance with data analysis and statistics
and Dr Anthony Milici and Jim Finley for technical assistance; Dr T Seki for
the gracious gift of PSA-NCAM antibody; and Dr Gang-Yi Wu and Dr Feng
Pan for editorial comments on the manuscript. We are grateful to Dr
Jacqueline Crawley, NIMH and Dr Elliott Sherr, UCSF for active intellectual
engagement throughout the preparation of this manuscript. The first author
is grateful to Dr Larry Fitzgerald and Dr Howard Mayer for their partnership
in forming Pfizer’s autism research unit.
Author details
Neuroscience Biology, Pfizer Global Research and Development, Eastern
Point Road, Groton, CT 06340, USA. 2Department of Biological Sciences, Tata
Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai 400005 India. 3FD
Neurotechnologies, Inc, Ellicott City, MD 21041, USA. 4Compound Safety
Prediction Group, Pfizer Global Research & Development, Groton, CT 06340,
USA. 5Toxicologic Pathology, Pfizer Global Research and Development, 35
Cambridgepark Drive, Cambridge, MA 02140, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
DS designed and directed the studies, interpreted data and wrote the
manuscript. SO performed and coordinated all histopathology studies,
procured samples and tissues, prepared figures and tables, and contributed
to data interpretation and preparation of the manuscript. DM evaluated the
pathology results of most of the markers used in the study, interpreted
results and assisted in preparation of the paper. HS and SO performed the
Aperio image analysis, and cut and stained the mossy-fiber sections for
specific markers. FD carried out all the free-floating experiments and special
stains. MP, BC and RR contributed intellectually to the design and
interpretation of the results, and the editing of the manuscript. SS and AT
performed the staining and stereology experiments for the neurogenesis
measures. VV contributed intellectually to the design and interpretation of

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

the neurogenesis experiments and contributed to the manuscript. The BDNF
experiments and data analysis were performed by EA. All authors reviewed
the manuscript before submission.
Competing interests
Eight (DS, SO, EA, HS, RR, BC, MP, DM) of the twelve authors are employees
of Pfizer Global Research and Development, which funded this study at the
time of submission of the manuscript.
Received: 26 September 2010 Accepted: 16 May 2011
Published: 16 May 2011
References
1. Brodkin ES: BALB/c mice: low sociability and other phenotypes that may
be relevant to autism. Behav Brain Res 2007, 176:53-65.
2. Jamain S, Radyushkin K, Hammerschmidt K, Granon S, Boretius S,
Varoqueaux F, Ramanantsoa N, Gallego J, Ronnenberg A, Winter D, et al:
Reduced social interaction and ultrasonic communication in a mouse
model of monogenic heritable autism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:1710-1715.
3. McFarlane HG, Kusek GK, Yang M, Phoenix JL, Bolivar VJ, Crawley JN:
Autism-like behavioral phenotypes in BTBR T+tf/J mice. Genes Brain
Behav 2008, 7:152-163.
4. Nakatani J, Tamada K, Hatanaka F, Ise S, Ohta H, Inoue K, Tomonaga S,
Watanabe Y, Chung YJ, Banerjee R, et al: Abnormal behavior in a
chromosome-engineered mouse model for human 15q11-13 duplication
seen in autism. Cell 2009, 137:1235-1246.
5. Scearce-Levie K, Roberson ED, Gerstein H, Cholfin JA, Mandiyan VS,
Shah NM, Rubenstein JL, Mucke L: Abnormal social behaviors in mice
lacking Fgf17. Genes Brain Behav 2008, 7:344-354.
6. Silverman JL, Yang M, Lord C, Crawley JN: Behavioural phenotyping assays
for mouse models of autism. Nat Rev Neurosci 2010, 11:490-502.
7. Hamilton SM, Spencer CM, Harrison WR, Yuva-Paylor LA, Graham DF,
Daza RA, Hevner RF, Overbeek PA, Paylor R: Multiple autism-like behaviors
in a novel transgenic mouse model. Behav Brain Res 2011, 218:29-41.
8. van Kooten IA, Palmen SJ, von Cappeln P, Steinbusch HW, Korr H,
Heinsen H, Hof PR, van Engeland H, Schmitz C: Neurons in the fusiform
gyrus are fewer and smaller in autism. Brain 2008, 131:987-999.
9. Santos M, Uppal N, Butti C, Wicinski B, Schmeidler J, Giannakopoulos P,
Heinsen H, Schmitz C, Hof PR: von Economo neurons in autism: A
stereologic study of the frontoinsular cortex in children. Brain Res 2011,
1380:206-217.
10. Buxbaum JD: Multiple rare variants in the etiology of autism spectrum
disorders. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2009, 11:35-43.
11. Ey E, Leblond CS, Bourgeron T: Behavioral profiles of mouse models for
autism spectrum disorders. Autism Res 2011.
12. Jacquemont S, Curie A, des Portes V, Torrioli MG, Berry-Kravis E,
Hagerman RJ, Ramos FJ, Cornish K, He Y, Paulding C, et al: Epigenetic
modification of the FMR1 gene in fragile X syndrome is associated with
differential response to the mGluR5 antagonist AFQ056. Sci Transl Med
2010, 3:64ra61.
13. Meechan DW, Tucker ES, Maynard TM, LaMantia AS: Diminished dosage of
22q11 genes disrupts neurogenesis and cortical development in a
mouse model of 22q11 deletion/DiGeorge syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2009, 106:16434-16445.
14. Miller BH, Schultz LE, Gulati A, Su AI, Pletcher MT: Phenotypic
characterization of a genetically diverse panel of mice for behavioral
despair and anxiety. PLoS One 2010, 5:e14458.
15. Miller BH, Schultz LE, Long BC, Pletcher MT: Quantitative trait locus
analysis identifies Gabra3 as a regulator of behavioral despair in mice.
Mamm Genome 2010, 21:247-257.
16. Pobbe RL, Pearson BL, Defensor EB, Bolivar VJ, Blanchard DC, Blanchard RJ:
Expression of social behaviors of C57BL/6J versus BTBR inbred mouse
strains in the visible burrow system. Behav Brain Res 214:443-449.
17. Scattoni ML, Gandhy SU, Ricceri L, Crawley JN: Unusual repertoire of
vocalizations in the BTBR T+tf/J mouse model of autism. PLoS One 2008,
3:e3067.
18. Moy SS, Nadler JJ, Young NB, Perez A, Holloway LP, Barbaro RP, Barbaro JR,
Wilson LM, Threadgill DW, Lauder JM, et al: Mouse behavioral tasks
relevant to autism: phenotypes of 10 inbred strains. Behav Brain Res
2007, 176:4-20.

Page 19 of 21

19. Silverman JL, Tolu SS, Barkan CL, Crawley JN: Repetitive Self-Grooming
Behavior in the BTBR Mouse Model of Autism is Blocked by the mGluR5
Antagonist MPEP. Neuropsychopharmacology 2009.
20. Yang M, Clarke AM, Crawley JN: Postnatal lesion evidence against a
primary role for the corpus callosum in mouse sociability. Eur J Neurosci
2009, 29:1663-1677.
21. Silverman JL, Turner SM, Crawley JN: Partial rescue of social deficits in the
BTBR T+tf/J mouse model of autism by AMPA receptor modulator
CX546. Society for Neuroscience 2010.
22. Gould GG, Hensler JG, Burke TF, Benno RH, Onaivi ES, Daws LC: Density
and function of central serotonin (5-HT) transporters, 5-HT1A and 5HT2A receptors, and effects of their targeting on BTBR T+tf/J mouse
social behavior. J Neurochem 2011, 116:291-303.
23. Wahlsten D, Metten P, Crabbe JC: Survey of 21 inbred mouse strains in
two laboratories reveals that BTBR T/+ tf/tf has severely reduced
hippocampal commissure and absent corpus callosum. Brain Res 2003,
971:47-54.
24. Shen S, Lang B, Nakamoto C, Zhang F, Pu J, Kuan SL, Chatzi C, He S,
Mackie I, Brandon NJ, et al: Schizophrenia-related neural and behavioral
phenotypes in transgenic mice expressing truncated Disc1. J Neurosci
2008, 28:10893-10904.
25. Manhaes AC, Medina AE, Schmidt SL: Sex differences in the incidence of
total callosal agenesis in BALB/cCF mice. Neurosci Lett 2002, 325:159-162.
26. Badaruddin DH, Andrews GL, Bolte S, Schilmoeller KJ, Schilmoeller G,
Paul LK, Brown WS: Social and behavioral problems of children with
agenesis of the corpus callosum. Child Psychiatry Hum Dev 2007,
38:287-302.
27. Paul LK, Brown WS, Adolphs R, Tyszka JM, Richards LJ, Mukherjee P,
Sherr EH: Agenesis of the corpus callosum: genetic, developmental
and functional aspects of connectivity. Nat Rev Neurosci 2007,
8:287-299.
28. Vidal CN, Nicolson R, DeVito TJ, Hayashi KM, Geaga JA, Drost DJ,
Williamson PC, Rajakumar N, Sui Y, Dutton RA, et al: Mapping corpus
callosum deficits in autism: an index of aberrant cortical connectivity.
Biol Psychiatry 2006, 60:218-225.
29. Hardan AY, Minshew NJ, Keshavan MS: Corpus callosum size in autism.
Neurology 2000, 55:1033-1036.
30. Hardan AY, Pabalan M, Gupta N, Bansal R, Melhem NM, Fedorov S,
Keshavan MS, Minshew NJ: Corpus callosum volume in children with
autism. Psychiatry Res 2009, 174:57-61.
31. Frazier TW, Hardan AY: A meta-analysis of the corpus callosum in autism.
Biol Psychiatry 2009, 66:935-941.
32. Lovden M, Bodammer NC, Kuhn S, Kaufmann J, Schutze H, Tempelmann C,
Heinze HJ, Duzel E, Schmiedek F, Lindenberger U: Experience-dependent
plasticity of white-matter microstructure extends into old age.
Neuropsychologia 48:3878-3883.
33. Livy DJ, Schalomon PM, Roy M, Zacharias MC, Pimenta J, Lent R,
Wahlsten D: Increased axon number in the anterior commissure of mice
lacking a corpus callosum. Exp Neurol 1997, 146:491-501.
34. Benno R, Smirnova Y, Vera S, Liggett A, Schanz N: Exaggerated responses
to stress in the BTBR T+tf/J mouse: an unusual behavioral phenotype.
Behav Brain Res 2009, 197:462-465.
35. Lynch G: Mechanisms stabilizing synaptic plasticity are impaired in
models of autism associated disorders. IMFAR 2009, 107.02.
36. MacPherson P, McGaffigan R, Wahlsten D, Nguyen PV: Impaired fear
memory, altered object memory and modified hippocampal synaptic
plasticity in split-brain mice. Brain Res 2008, 1210:179-188.
37. Moy SS, Nadler JJ, Poe MD, Nonneman RJ, Young NB, Koller BH, Crawley JN,
Duncan GE, Bodfish JW: Development of a mouse test for repetitive,
restricted behaviors: relevance to autism. Behav Brain Res 2008,
188:178-194.
38. Amaral DG, Schumann CM, Nordahl CW: Neuroanatomy of autism. Trends
Neurosci 2008, 31:137-145.
39. O’Neill SP: Characterization of myelin and glial markers in the brain of
the BTBR T+ tf/J mouse, a model of autistic-like social behavior and
callosal agenesis. Keystone Conference “Towards an understanding of the
pathophysiology of autism 2010.
40. Paxinos G, Franklin K: The Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. 2 edition.
San Diego: Academic Press; 2001.
41. Naik n: Technical variations in Koelle’s histochemical method for
demonstrating cholinesterase activity. Q J Microsc Sci 1963, 104:89-100.

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

42. Josephs KA, Whitwell JL, Ahmed Z, Shiung MM, Weigand SD, Knopman DS,
Boeve BF, Parisi JE, Petersen RC, Dickson DW, Jack CR Jr: Beta-amyloid
burden is not associated with rates of brain atrophy. Ann Neurol 2008,
63:204-212.
43. Krajewska M, Xu L, Xu W, Krajewski S, Kress CL, Cui J, Yang L, Irie F,
Yamaguchi Y, Lipton SA, Reed JC: Endoplasmic reticulum protein BI-1
modulates unfolded protein response signaling and protects against
stroke and traumatic brain injury. Brain Res 2011, 1370:227-237.
44. Maximova OA, Murphy BR, Pletnev AG: High-throughput automated
image analysis of neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration enables
quantitative assessment of virus neurovirulence. Vaccine 2010,
28:8315-8326.
45. Whitwell JL, Josephs KA, Murray ME, Kantarci K, Przybelski SA, Weigand SD,
Vemuri P, Senjem ML, Parisi JE, Knopman DS, et al: MRI correlates of
neurofibrillary tangle pathology at autopsy: a voxel-based morphometry
study. Neurology 2008, 71:743-749.
46. Malberg JE, Eisch AJ, Nestler EJ, Duman RS: Chronic antidepressant
treatment increases neurogenesis in adult rat hippocampus. J Neurosci
2000, 20:9104-9110.
47. Wang JW, David DJ, Monckton JE, Battaglia F, Hen R: Chronic fluoxetine
stimulates maturation and synaptic plasticity of adult-born hippocampal
granule cells. J Neurosci 2008, 28:1374-1384.
48. Ito D, Imai Y, Ohsawa K, Nakajima K, Fukuuchi Y, Kohsaka S: Microgliaspecific localisation of a novel calcium binding protein, Iba1. Brain Res
Mol Brain Res 1998, 57:1-9.
49. Muller HW, Seifert W: Activity and immunocytochemical localization of
2’,3’-cyclic nucleotide 3’-phosphodiesterase (CNPase) in primary nerve
cell cultures from rat brain. Cell Mol Neurobiol 1982, 2:241-247.
50. Karram K, Chatterjee N, Trotter J: NG2-expressing cells in the nervous
system: role of the proteoglycan in migration and glial-neuron
interaction. J Anat 2005, 207:735-744.
51. Nishiyama A: Polydendrocytes: NG2 cells with many roles in
development and repair of the CNS. Neuroscientist 2007, 13:62-76.
52. Qiu M, Anderson S, Chen S, Meneses JJ, Hevner R, Kuwana E, Pedersen RA,
Rubenstein JL: Mutation of the Emx-1 homeobox gene disrupts the
corpus callosum. Dev Biol 1996, 178:174-178.
53. Hong SM, Liu Z, Fan Y, Neumann M, Won SJ, Lac D, Lum X, Weinstein PR,
Liu J: Reduced hippocampal neurogenesis and skill reaching
performance in adult Emx1 mutant mice. Exp Neurol 2007, 206:24-32.
54. Silverman JL, Yang M, Turner SM, Katz AM, Bell DB, Koenig JI, Crawley JN:
Low stress reactivity and neuroendocrine factors in the BTBR T+tf/J
mouse model of autism. Neuroscience 2010, 171:1197-1208.
55. Brown JP, Couillard-Despres S, Cooper-Kuhn CM, Winkler J, Aigner L,
Kuhn HG: Transient expression of doublecortin during adult
neurogenesis. J Comp Neurol 2003, 467:1-10.
56. Gascon E, Vutskits L, Kiss JZ: The Role of PSA-NCAM in Adult
Neurogenesis. Neurochem Res 2008.
57. Yang HK, Sundholm-Peters NL, Goings GE, Walker AS, Hyland K, Szele FG:
Distribution of doublecortin expressing cells near the lateral ventricles in
the adult mouse brain. J Neurosci Res 2004, 76:282-295.
58. Seki T, Arai Y: Expression of highly polysialylated NCAM in the neocortex
and piriform cortex of the developing and the adult rat. Anat Embryol
(Berl) 1991, 184:395-401.
59. Couillard-Despres S, Winner B, Schaubeck S, Aigner R, Vroemen M,
Weidner N, Bogdahn U, Winkler J, Kuhn HG, Aigner L: Doublecortin
expression levels in adult brain reflect neurogenesis. Eur J Neurosci 2005,
21:1-14.
60. Rossi C, Angelucci A, Costantin L, Braschi C, Mazzantini M, Babbini F,
Fabbri ME, Tessarollo L, Maffei L, Berardi N, Caleo M: Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is required for the enhancement of
hippocampal neurogenesis following environmental enrichment. Eur J
Neurosci 2006, 24:1850-1856.
61. Casanova MF, van Kooten IA, Switala AE, van Engeland H, Heinsen H,
Steinbusch HW, Hof PR, Trippe J, Stone J, Schmitz C: Minicolumnar
abnormalities in autism. Acta Neuropathol 2006, 112:287-303.
62. Bauman ML, Kemper TL: Neuroanatomic observations of the brain in
autism: a review and future directions. Int J Dev Neurosci 2005,
23:183-187.
63. Hutsler JJ, Zhang H: Increased dendritic spine densities on cortical
projection neurons in autism spectrum disorders. Brain Res 1309:83-94.

Page 20 of 21

64. Pickett J, London E: The neuropathology of autism: a review. J
Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2005, 64:925-935.
65. Schmitz C, Rezaie P: The neuropathology of autism: where do we stand?
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2008, 34:4-11.
66. Palmen SJ, van Engeland H, Hof PR, Schmitz C: Neuropathological findings
in autism. Brain 2004, 127:2572-2583.
67. Whitney ER, Kemper TL, Bauman ML, Rosene DL, Blatt GJ: Cerebellar
Purkinje cells are reduced in a subpopulation of autistic brains: a
stereological experiment using calbindin-D28k. Cerebellum 2008,
7:406-416.
68. Blatt GJ, Fitzgerald CM, Guptill JT, Booker AB, Kemper TL, Bauman ML:
Density and distribution of hippocampal neurotransmitter receptors in
autism: an autoradiographic study. J Autism Dev Disord 2001, 31:537-543.
69. Fatemi SH, Reutiman TJ, Folsom TD, Rooney RJ, Patel DH, Thuras PD: mRNA
and protein levels for GABAAalpha4, alpha5, beta1 and GABABR1
receptors are altered in brains from subjects with autism. J Autism Dev
Disord 2010, 40:743-750.
70. Perry EK, Lee ML, Martin-Ruiz CM, Court JA, Volsen SG, Merrit J, Folly E,
Iversen PE, Bauman ML, Perry RH, Wenk GL: Cholinergic activity in autism:
abnormalities in the cerebral cortex and basal forebrain. Am J Psychiatry
2001, 158:1058-1066.
71. Martin-Ruiz CM, Lee M, Perry RH, Baumann M, Court JA, Perry EK: Molecular
analysis of nicotinic receptor expression in autism. Brain Res Mol Brain Res
2004, 123:81-90.
72. Lawrence YA, Kemper TL, Bauman ML, Blatt GJ: Parvalbumin-, calbindin-,
and calretinin-immunoreactive hippocampal interneuron density in
autism. Acta Neurol Scand 2010, 121:99-108.
73. Laurence JA, Fatemi SH: Glial fibrillary acidic protein is elevated in
superior frontal, parietal and cerebellar cortices of autistic subjects.
Cerebellum 2005, 4:206-210.
74. Vargas DL, Nascimbene C, Krishnan C, Zimmerman AW, Pardo CA:
Neuroglial activation and neuroinflammation in the brain of patients
with autism. Ann Neurol 2005, 57:67-81.
75. Morgan JT, Chana G, Pardo CA, Achim C, Semendeferi K, Buckwalter J,
Courchesne E, Everall IP: Microglial activation and increased microglial
density observed in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in autism. Biol
Psychiatry 2010, 68:368-376.
76. Deykin EY, MacMahon B: The incidence of seizures among children with
autistic symptoms. Am J Psychiatry 1979, 136:1310-1312.
77. Volkmar FR, Nelson DS: Seizure disorders in autism. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 1990, 29:127-129.
78. Novozhilova AP, Gaikova ON: Cellular gliosis of the white matter of the
human brain and its importance in the pathogenesis of focal epilepsy.
Neurosci Behav Physiol 2002, 32:135-139.
79. Selemon LD, Lidow MS, Goldman-Rakic PS: Increased volume and glial
density in primate prefrontal cortex associated with chronic
antipsychotic drug exposure. Biol Psychiatry 1999, 46:161-172.
80. Makkonen I, Riikonen R, Kokki H, Airaksinen MM, Kuikka JT: Serotonin and
dopamine transporter binding in children with autism determined by
SPECT. Dev Med Child Neurol 2008, 50:593-597.
81. Ren T, Zhang J, Plachez C, Mori S, Richards LJ: Diffusion tensor magnetic
resonance imaging and tract-tracing analysis of Probst bundle structure
in Netrin1- and DCC-deficient mice. J Neurosci 2007, 27:10345-10349.
82. Shu T, Butz KG, Plachez C, Gronostajski RM, Richards LJ: Abnormal
development of forebrain midline glia and commissural projections in
Nfia knock-out mice. J Neurosci 2003, 23:203-212.
83. Ozaki HS, Shimada M: The fibers which course within the Probst’s
longitudinal bundle seen in the brain of a congenitally acallosal mouse:
a study with the horseradish peroxidase technique. Brain Res 1988,
441:5-14.
84. Livy DJ, Wahlsten D: Retarded formation of the hippocampal commissure
in embryos from mouse strains lacking a corpus callosum. Hippocampus
1997, 7:2-14.
85. Lee SK, Mori S, Kim DJ, Kim SY, Kim DI: Diffusion tensor MR imaging
visualizes the altered hemispheric fiber connection in callosal
dysgenesis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2004, 25:25-28.
86. Ozaki HS, Murakami TH, Toyoshima T, Shimada M: The fibers which leave
the Probst’s longitudinal bundle seen in the brain of an acallosal mouse:
a study with the horseradish peroxidase technique. Brain Res 1987,
400:239-246.

Stephenson et al. Molecular Autism 2011, 2:7
http://www.molecularautism.com/content/2/1/7

87. Ozaki HS, Wahlsten D: Cortical axon trajectories and growth cone
morphologies in fetuses of acallosal mouse strains. J Comp Neurol 1993,
336:595-604.
88. Chiu S, Widjaja F, Bates ME, Voelbel GT, Pandina G, Marble J, Blank JA,
Day J, Brule N, Hendren RL: Anterior cingulate volume in pediatric bipolar
disorder and autism. J Affect Disord 2008, 105:93-99.
89. Dichter GS, Felder JN, Bodfish JW: Autism is characterized by dorsal
anterior cingulate hyperactivation during social target detection. Soc
Cogn Affect Neurosci 2009, 4:215-226.
90. Haznedar MM, Buchsbaum MS, Metzger M, Solimando A, Spiegel-Cohen J,
Hollander E: Anterior cingulate gyrus volume and glucose metabolism in
autistic disorder. Am J Psychiatry 1997, 154:1047-1050.
91. Mundy P: Annotation: the neural basis of social impairments in autism:
the role of the dorsal medial-frontal cortex and anterior cingulate
system. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2003, 44:793-809.
92. Chana G, Landau S, Beasley C, Everall IP, Cotter D: Two-dimensional
assessment of cytoarchitecture in the anterior cingulate cortex in major
depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia: evidence for
decreased neuronal somal size and increased neuronal density. Biol
Psychiatry 2003, 53:1086-1098.
93. Fornito A, Yucel M, Dean B, Wood SJ, Pantelis C: Anatomical abnormalities
of the anterior cingulate cortex in schizophrenia: bridging the gap
between neuroimaging and neuropathology. Schizophr Bull 2009,
35:973-993.
94. Fountoulakis KN, Giannakopoulos P, Kovari E, Bouras C: Assessing the role
of cingulate cortex in bipolar disorder: neuropathological, structural and
functional imaging data. Brain Res Rev 2008, 59:9-21.
95. Haznedar MM, Buchsbaum MS, Hazlett EA, Shihabuddin L, New A, Siever LJ:
Cingulate gyrus volume and metabolism in the schizophrenia spectrum.
Schizophr Res 2004, 71:249-262.
96. Stallcup WB: The NG2 proteoglycan: past insights and future prospects. J
Neurocytol 2002, 31:423-435.
97. Yang Z, Suzuki R, Daniels SB, Brunquell CB, Sala CJ, Nishiyama A: NG2 glial
cells provide a favorable substrate for growing axons. J Neurosci 2006,
26:3829-3839.
98. Morgenstern DA, Asher RA, Naidu M, Carlstedt T, Levine JM, Fawcett JW:
Expression and glycanation of the NG2 proteoglycan in developing,
adult, and damaged peripheral nerve. Mol Cell Neurosci 2003, 24:787-802.
99. Gensert JM, Goldman JE: Endogenous progenitors remyelinate
demyelinated axons in the adult CNS. Neuron 1997, 19:197-203.
100. Bergles DE, Roberts JD, Somogyi P, Jahr CE: Glutamatergic synapses on
oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the hippocampus. Nature 2000,
405:187-191.
101. Ge WP, Yang XJ, Zhang Z, Wang HK, Shen W, Deng QD, Duan S: Longterm potentiation of neuron-glia synapses mediated by Ca2+-permeable
AMPA receptors. Science 2006, 312:1533-1537.
102. Lin SC, Bergles DE: Synaptic signaling between GABAergic interneurons
and oligodendrocyte precursor cells in the hippocampus. Nat Neurosci
2004, 7:24-32.
103. Trotter J: NG2-positive cells in CNS function and the pathological role of
antibodies against NG2 in demyelinating diseases. J Neurol Sci 2005,
233:37-42.
104. Donahoo AL, Richards LJ: Understanding the mechanisms of callosal
development through the use of transgenic mouse models. Semin
Pediatr Neurol 2009, 16:127-142.
105. Fairless AH, Dow HC, Toledo MM, Malkus KA, Edelmann M, Li H, Talbot K,
Arnold SE, Abel T, Brodkin ES: Low sociability is associated with reduced
size of the corpus callosum in the BALB/cJ inbred mouse strain. Brain
Res 2008, 1230:211-217.
106. Lassonde M, Sauerwein H, Chicoine AJ, Geoffroy G: Absence of
disconnexion syndrome in callosal agenesis and early callosotomy: brain
reorganization or lack of structural specificity during ontogeny?
Neuropsychologia 1991, 29:481-495.
107. Won SJ, Kim SH, Xie L, Wang Y, Mao XO, Jin K, Greenberg DA: Reelindeficient mice show impaired neurogenesis and increased stroke size.
Exp Neurol 2006, 198:250-259.
108. Kilpinen H, Ylisaukko-Oja T, Hennah W, Palo OM, Varilo T, Vanhala R,
Nieminen-von Wendt T, von Wendt L, Paunio T, Peltonen L: Association of
DISC1 with autism and Asperger syndrome. Mol Psychiatry 2008,
13:187-196.

Page 21 of 21

109. Pittenger C, Duman RS: Stress, depression, and neuroplasticity: a
convergence of mechanisms. Neuropsychopharmacology 2008, 33:88-109.
110. Smith MA, Makino S, Kvetnansky R, Post RM: Stress and glucocorticoids
affect the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and
neurotrophin-3 mRNAs in the hippocampus. J Neurosci 1995,
15:1768-1777.
111. Nibuya M, Takahashi M, Russell DS, Duman RS: Repeated stress increases
catalytic TrkB mRNA in rat hippocampus. Neurosci Lett 1999, 267:81-84.
112. Vaidya VA, Terwilliger RM, Duman RS: Role of 5-HT2A receptors in the
stress-induced down-regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
expression in rat hippocampus. Neurosci Lett 1999, 262:1-4.
113. Foley AG, Prendergast A, Barry C, Scully D, Upton N, Medhurst AD,
Regan CM: H3 receptor antagonism enhances NCAM PSA-mediated
plasticity and improves memory consolidation in odor discrimination
and delayed match-to-position paradigms. Neuropsychopharmacology
2009, 34:2585-2600.
114. Foley AG, Hirst WD, Gallagher HC, Barry C, Hagan JJ, Upton N, Walsh FS,
Hunter AJ, Regan CM: The selective 5-HT6 receptor antagonists SB271046 and SB-399885 potentiate NCAM PSA immunolabeling of
dentate granule cells, but not neurogenesis, in the hippocampal
formation of mature Wistar rats. Neuropharmacology 2008, 54:1166-1174.
115. Nicolson R, DeVito TJ, Vidal CN, Sui Y, Hayashi KM, Drost DJ, Williamson PC,
Rajakumar N, Toga AW, Thompson PM: Detection and mapping of
hippocampal abnormalities in autism. Psychiatry Res 2006, 148:11-21.
116. Schumann CM, Hamstra J, Goodlin-Jones BL, Lotspeich LJ, Kwon H,
Buonocore MH, Lammers CR, Reiss AL, Amaral DG: The amygdala is
enlarged in children but not adolescents with autism; the hippocampus
is enlarged at all ages. J Neurosci 2004, 24:6392-6401.
117. Wegiel J, Kuchna I, Nowicki K, Imaki H, Marchi E, Ma SY, Chauhan A,
Chauhan V, Bobrowicz TW, de Leon M, et al: The neuropathology of
autism: defects of neurogenesis and neuronal migration, and dysplastic
changes. Acta Neuropathol 2010, 119:755-770.
118. Pangalos MN, Schechter LE, Hurko O: Drug development for CNS
disorders: strategies for balancing risk and reducing attrition. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 2007, 6:521-532.
119. Markou A, Chiamulera C, Geyer MA, Tricklebank M, Steckler T: Removing
obstacles in neuroscience drug discovery: the future path for animal
models. Neuropsychopharmacology 2009, 34:74-89.
doi:10.1186/2040-2392-2-7
Cite this article as: Stephenson et al.: Histopathologic characterization
of the BTBR mouse model of autistic-like behavior reveals selective
changes in neurodevelopmental proteins and adult hippocampal
neurogenesis. Molecular Autism 2011 2:7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
