<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Analysis of a viral metagenomic library from 200 m depth in Monterey Bay, California constructed by direct shotgun cloning</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2011, 8:287. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-287"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Grieg F Steward"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

RESEARCH

Open Access

Analysis of a viral metagenomic library from 200
m depth in Monterey Bay, California constructed
by direct shotgun cloning
Grieg F Steward1* and Christina M Preston2

Abstract
Background: Viruses have a profound influence on both the ecology and evolution of marine plankton, but the
genetic diversity of viral assemblages, particularly those in deeper ocean waters, remains poorly described. Here we
report on the construction and analysis of a viral metagenome prepared from below the euphotic zone in a
temperate, eutrophic bay of coastal California.
Methods: We purified viruses from approximately one cubic meter of seawater collected from 200m depth in
Monterey Bay, CA. DNA was extracted from the virus fraction, sheared, and cloned with no prior amplification into
a plasmid vector and propagated in E. coli to produce the MBv200m library. Random clones were sequenced by
the Sanger method. Sequences were assembled then compared to sequences in GenBank and to other viral
metagenomic libraries using BLAST analyses.
Results: Only 26% of the 881 sequences remaining after assembly had significant (E ≤ 0.001) BLAST hits to
sequences in the GenBank nr database, with most being matches to bacteria (15%) and viruses (8%). When BLAST
analysis included environmental sequences, 74% of sequences in the MBv200m library had a significant match.
Most of these hits (70%) were to microbial metagenome sequences and only 0.7% were to sequences from viral
metagenomes. Of the 121 sequences with a significant hit to a known virus, 94% matched bacteriophages
(Families Podo-, Sipho-, and Myoviridae) and 6% matched viruses of eukaryotes in the Family Phycodnaviridae (5
sequences) or the Mimivirus (2 sequences). The largest percentages of hits to viral genes of known function were
to those involved in DNA modification (25%) or structural genes (17%). Based on reciprocal BLAST analyses, the
MBv200m library appeared to be most similar to viral metagenomes from two other bays and least similar to a
viral metagenome from the Arctic Ocean.
Conclusions: Direct cloning of DNA from diverse marine viruses was feasible and resulted in a distribution of virus
types and functional genes at depth that differed in detail, but were broadly similar to those found in surface
marine waters. Targeted viral analyses are useful for identifying those components of the greater marine
metagenome that circulate in the subcellular size fraction.

Introduction
Marine viruses are a source of enormous genetic diversity in the sea [1,2]. Having no inherent metabolic activity, viruses must interact with the replication machinery
of their host organisms. As a by-product of these intimate intracellular interactions, viruses are a major driver
of evolutionary change for cellular life [3]. Although
* Correspondence: grieg@hawaii.edu
1
Department of Oceanography, University of Hawaii at Manoa, 1000 Pope
Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, Hawaii
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

viruses can provide significant benefits to their hosts
[4,5], they are also a source of mortality for marine
plankton and thus affect ecology and evolutionary selection [6]. Access to sequence information harbored in
environmental viral assemblages has become of interest,
because it provides insight into the types of viruses present in different habitats, and reveals the wealth of
extracellular genetic information with which planktonic
organisms are in constant communication [7].
Shotgun libraries have been constructed and analyzed
that target marine viruses that are part of the plankton

© 2011 Steward and Preston; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

[8-13], the benthos [14,15], or are associated with marine life [16,17]. Common themes that have emerged
from such analyses are that the diversity of marine
viruses is enormous, that the functions of the majority
of sequences derived from marine viral metagenomes
are unknown [18], and that a large proportion of the
DNA-containing viruses infect prokaryotes [2], while
most RNA-containing viruses infect eukaryotes [7,19].
Here, we report an analysis of a shotgun library prepared from DNA extracted from a purified viral assemblage harvested in the epipelagic-mesopelagic boundary
in Monterey Bay, California. Unlike all previous metagenomes that have specifically targeted viruses, this
library was produced with no prior in vitro amplification
and appears to be the first reported for seawater collected on one occasion and from a single depth below
the euphotic zone.

Materials and methods
Collection and Purification of Viruses

Seawater from a depth of ca. 200 m (200 ± 1 dbar) was
collected from ten casts of a Niskin bottle rosette on

Page 2 of 14

July 25, 2001 at Station M1 (36.75° N Latitude, 122.03°
W Longitude) in Monterey Bay, CA, USA. The station
is located at the mouth of the bay over an undersea canyon with a total water depth of ca. 1000 m (Figure 1A).
A suite of sensors on the sampling rosette provided profiles (Figure 1B) of temperature and salinity (Sea-Bird
911plus), chlorophyll fluorescence (WET Labs Flash
Lamp Fluorometer), dissolved oxygen (Sea-Bird SBE 13),
light transmission (WET Labs C-star). At the depth of
collection, temperature ranged from 8.3 to 9.0°C and
salinity from 34.01 to 34.07, depending on the cast.
Approximately 1,190 liters of seawater were filtered
through 30 μm nylon mesh filter, and plankton in the
filtrate were concentrated to 415 ml final volume by
tangential flow ultrafiltration using an Amicon model
DC-10L system (Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts) with
a 30,000 Da nominal molecular weight cut-off (30 kDa
NMWCO) hollow fiber cartridge (H10P30-20, Millipore). The hollow fiber filter was subsequently backflushed with 8 L of filtrate and the flush volume was
recirculated then concentrated to 530 ml. The primary
concentrate and subsequent wash were pooled and

Figure 1 Sampling location and hydrographic properties at the time of collection. Panel A: The location of Station M1 in Monterey Bay,
CA. Panel B: Profiles of hydrographic properties from the ten casts with an instrument suite and Niskin bottle rosette with which water and data
were collected. Data for temperature, salinity, fluorescence-based chlorophyll concentration, dissolved oxygen, and transmissivity at each depth
are plotted as the mean (black lines) and range (shown in color) for the ten casts. The horizontal line at 200 dbar highlights the depth at which
water was collected.

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

further concentrated to 33 ml using a Pellicon XL50
system (Millipore) with a 30 kDa NMWCO cartridge
(Pellicon 2 Maxi Filter, Millipore). The concentrate was
centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 20 min to pellet prokaryotes and larger cells. The supernatant (containing predominantly viruses) was then preserved with sodium
azide (0.5% final conc.) and stored at 4°C (5 weeks).
To remove any residual cells, the viral concentrate was
filtered twice through a 0.2 μm syringe-tip filter (Acrodisc, Pall Gelman). Viruses in the remaining sample (ca.
32 ml) were further concentrated using a 30 kDa
NMWCO centrifugal ultrafiltration device (Ultracel PL30 membrane, Millipore) then washed by addition of 2
ml of 0.02 μm-filtered MSM followed by re-concentration. The final concentrate was recovered and the ultrafilter washed again with 500 μl of MSM. The
concentrate and the wash were pooled and the resulting
viral concentrate (1.6 ml) was stored at 4°C (three
weeks) to await further purification in a density
gradient.
Viruses in the concentrate were banded in a self-forming, CsCl equilibrium buoyant density gradient (1.5 g
ml-1 initial density) in a TLN-100 rotor at 55,000 rpm at
10°C for 48 hours. Twelve fractions (ca. 0.3 ml each)
were collected and the density of each was calculated
from volume and mass measurements using a micropipet and a microbalance [20]. Subsamples for determining the virus concentration in each fraction were diluted
into 0.02 μm-filtered MSM (450 mM NaCl, 50 mM
MgSO4, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0; Steward 2001), fixed
with formaldehyde, and then processed and enumerated
by epifluorescence microscopy using the SYBR Green I
protocol (Noble and Fuhrman 1998).
Extraction and Evaluation of Viral DNA

Four fractions from the CsCl gradient containing viruslike particles (VLPs) were pooled then concentrated in a
100 kDa NMWCO centrifugal ultrafiltration unit (Centricon 100, Millipore). CsCl and other low molecular
weight solutes were removed by washing the concentrate two times with 0.5 ml molecular-biology grade TE
buffer (Ambion, Austin, TX) according to the device
manufacturer’s instructions. The final concentrate
volume in TE was approximately 150 μl to which was
added 350 μl of sterile-filtered (0.22 μm Sterivex; Millipore) sucrose lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 40
mM EDTA, and 0.75 M Sucrose). The final concentrate
plus lysis buffer was recovered from the ultrafiltration
unit and stored at -20°C (two days).
The viral pool was thawed on ice and the volume
brought up to 900 μl with additional sucrose lysis buffer.
Proteinase K (0.5 mg ml-1 final conc., Fisher Scientific,
Pittsburgh, PA) and SDS (1% final conc., Fisher Scientific) were added followed by incubation at 55°C for 2

Page 3 of 14

hours with agitation. The sample was extracted with an
equal volume of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol
(25:24:1, v:v:v, equilibrated with TE, pH 8.0, Sigma
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The aqueous phase was then
transferred to a Centricon 100, washed three times with
1 ml TE buffer as described above, then reduced to a
minimal volume (ca. 10 μl), and stored at -80°C.
The purified DNA was analyzed by pulsed field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) using a CHEF DR II instrument
(BioRad, Hercules, CA). For comparison, a subsample of
the pooled CsCl gradient fractions was also prepared for
PFGE using a previously described protocol (Steward
2001) and run on the same gel. In this latter case,
viruses in the subsample were concentrated on a microcon filter and the retentate was rinsed twice with TE
then recovered in a volume of ca. 30 μl. Loading buffer
was added and the sample was heated to 60°C for 10
min, then cooled on ice. Size standards consisted of a 5
kb and lambda DNA ladders (BioRad). Samples and
standards were analyzed on a 1% agarose gel run for 13
hours at 16°C under an applied voltage gradient of 6 V
cm-1 with switch interval ramping linearly from 1-5 seconds. The gel was post-stained with 0.5 μg ml-1 of ethidium bromide and visualized on a FlourImager
(Amersham, Piscataway, NJ).
To check for bacterial contamination of the viral fraction, the extracted viral DNA was screened for the presence of 16S rRNA genes by PCR using bacterial
specific primers 27F and 1492R [21] as previously
described [22]. The resulting product was ligated into
the TA cloning vector 2.1 (Original TA Cloning Kit,
Invitrogen, Carslbad, CA) and transformed into E. coli
by heat shock of chemically competent cells following
the manufacturer’s instructions.
Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
analysis was performed on nine clones. One of the
insert-containing clone was sequenced by dideoxynucleotide termination using BigDye Chemistry v.3.0
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) using the M13F
and M13R primer sites on the cloning vector. Reactions
were analyzed on an ABI 3100 genetic analyzer (Applied
Biosystems).
Library Construction and Sequencing

A viral shotgun library was then constructed using
TOPO Shotgun Subcloning Kit version A (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, ca.
6 μg of DNA was added to shearing buffer and passed
through a nebulizer on ice for 90 seconds at 10 psi of
compressed, filtered air. The DNA (in 700 μl of buffer)
was then precipitated with an equal volume of isopropanol after addition of sodium acetate (0.3 M final), and
glycogen (80 μg) as a co-precipitant [23]. Precipitated
DNA was washed once with 70% ethanol and the dried

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

pellet resuspended in 24 μl of water. The DNA was
repaired to produce blunt ends with T4 and Klenow
DNA polymerases, dephosphorylated with calf intestinal
phosphatase, then precipitated in ethanol [23]. Half of
the DNA was then cloned into the pCR4Blunt-TOPO
vector (Invitrogen). The ligation reaction was desalted
by drop dialysis on a 0.025 μm pore size mixed cellulose
ester membrane (Millipore) floating on 0.5× TE buffer
for 1 hour. TOP10 electrocompetent cells (Invitrogen)
were transformed with the recombinant DNA by electroporation. Colonies were arrayed into 96-well plates
and stored at -80°C in LB amended with 50 μg/ml kanamycin (Sigma) and glycerol (7% final conc, v:v).
Initial sequencing of clones from the first library
(MBv200mA) revealed that many of the inserts were
small, so a second library (MBv200mB) was constructed
from the remaining sheared, blunt-end-repaired, dephosphorylated DNA as described above, but after size
selection. For size selection, the DNA was separated by
electrophoresis in a 1% low-melting-point agarose gel
(NuSieve, Cambrex, Rockland, ME). DNA between 1.4
to 4 kb was excised from the gel and recovered with a
S.N.A.P column (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Plasmid minipreps were prepared
using the Montage Miniprep Kit (Millipore). The average insert size of the shotgun clones was determined by
agarose gel electrophoresis of clones digested with the
restriction enzyme EcoRI. Clones from the libraries were
end-sequenced using dye terminator technology as
described above.
Bioinformatic Analyses

A total of 1,055 sequences (MBv200mA plus
MBv200mB) were processed using the Sequencher software (GeneCodes Corporation) to remove vector and
trim low quality sequence. Sequences were trimmed to a
maximum of 500 bp and sequences less than 100 bp
were discarded, leaving a total of 907 sequences for analysis. Sequences were assembled in Sequencher with the
requirement of a minimum 21 bp overlap and 98% identity. Sequences were then compared to various nucleotide and protein databases using blastx and tblastx
algorithms [version 2.2.18; [24]]. Sequences have been
deposited in the Genome Survey Sequence Database of
GenBank http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbGSS/, with
accession numbers [GenBank:JJ725428 to JJ726334].
The tblastx algorithm was used to query the nucleotide collection (nr/nt), genomic survey sequences (GSS),
and environmental sample (env_nt) databases downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) on July 2008. The blastx algorithm
was used to query the non-redundant protein sequences
(nr), environmental samples (env_nr), and clusters of
orthologous groups of proteins (COG) databases from

Page 4 of 14

NCBI and the Pfam [25] and KEGG [26] databases.
BLAST results were parsed to save the top-scoring hits
for each sequence. A Perl script was also run that
extracted any hits to a sequence containing at least one
following virus-related keywords: “phage” or “virus”
(alone or as part of a longer word), “capsid”, “tail”, “integrase”, “base plate”, “baseplate”, or “portal”. All
sequences in the automatically generated list were then
inspected individually to verify that the hits identified
were to sequences of viral origin. Information (database
queried, sequence ID, description, E-value) on the topscoring and keyword-containing hits for each sequence
in each database were compiled in a spreadsheet program (Excel, Microsoft Corp.) and individually annotated to note the sources of the matching sequences
(eukaryote, bacteria, archaea, virus, mobile element,
microbial metagenome, viral metagenome). Sequences
were also analyzed using MG-RAST [27], an online
metagenome annotation service (http://metagenomics.
anl.gov/),
We compared our library to seven other metagenomic
libraries prepared from the viral fraction of seawater by
BLAST analysis. Sequences from Mission Bay in San
Diego, CA and Scripps Pier in La Jolla, CA [11], the
Chesapeake Bay [9], and from the Sargasso Sea, Gulf of
Mexico, Coastal British Columbia, and Arctic Ocean
[10] were download from the NCBI FTP site on February 11, 2009. Each of these datasets was then compared
to the MBv200m library using tblastx. Because of the
asymmetric nature of BLAST, which was accentuated by
the large disparities in numbers and lengths of
sequences among libraries, we chose to conduct the
BLAST analysis in a reciprocal manner: MBv200m as
the query against each library and each library as the
query against MBv200m, in each case we counted hits
with E-value of ≤ 10-5. To handle the computationally
intensive nature of BLAST and parsing tasks, a custom
script was used, which uses the python SciPy library
http://www.scipy.org/[28] and runs the jobs on a 64node compute-cluster in an embarrassingly-parallel way
(each sequence blasted and parsed independently).
Results of the BLAST data were used to calculate
three parameters for each pair-wise library comparison:
1) the hits in MBv200m expressed as a percentage of
the total sequences in MBv200m, 2) the hits in each
other library expressed as a percentage of the sequences
in that library, and 3) the reciprocal of the hits in
MBv200m after normalizing to the total number of
sequences in each query library.
Differences in read length are expected to affect the
percentage of hits between two libraries [7]. To compensate for this, we calculated the same parameters as
above, but after normalizing the number of sequences in
each library to the mean read length of MBv200m (e.g.,

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

for a library with a mean read length half that of
MBv200m, the length-normalized number of sequences
in that library would be half of the total).
We also compared our library to six other marine
viral metagenomes in MG-RAST. The Scripps Pier and
Mission Bay libraries were not available in MG-RAST,
but the other five viral metagenomes noted above were.
To those we added a phage metagenome from Tampa
Bay, FL [29].
This work did not involve experimentation on humans
or animals.

Results
The Viral Concentrate

Epifluorescence microscopy of the CsCl continuous gradient fractions revealed that the VLPs in the targeted
size range were concentrated in the top four fractions of
the gradient, which had average buoyant densities ranging from 1.44-1.47 (Figure 2A). A total of 1.9 × 1011
viral particles were recovered from the CsCl gradient
fractions, which yielded 8 μg of DNA. Analysis of the

Page 5 of 14

sample by pulse field gel electrophoresis showed similar
banding patterns from the phenol:chloroform extracted
viral DNA and the viral DNA from the same sample
prepared by simply heating in TE (Figure 2B). Four
major size classes were observed, 30-45 kb, 60-80 kb,
125 kb and a greater than 146 kb fraction.
During counts of viruses in the CsCl gradient fractions, no particles that were obviously cells were
observed, but PCR amplification of the extracted DNA
using bacterial primers for 16S rRNA genes resulted in
weak amplification. Analysis of nine clones revealed a
single RFLP pattern indicating that the amplified product was dominated by a single bacterial rRNA gene
type. The sequence of a representative clone was 98%
similar (over 600 bp) to a psychrophilic marine bacterium PS03 [GenBank:AF200213].
Library Analysis

Our first viral library (MBv200mA), prepared with
sheared DNA that was not size selected, produced many
clones with short inserts (< 200 bp). The average insert

Figure 2 Buoyant density and genome size distribution of virus-like particles used to construct the library. Panel A: The density (open
circles) of each fraction collected from an equilibrium buoyant density gradient is plotted along with the concentration of viruses (filled
triangles) in the fraction. Fractions 1 through 4 from the top of the gradient were harvested and pooled to construct the library. Error bars for
density represent the standard deviation from triplicate measurements. Error bars for viral abundance represent the standard deviation of counts
from multiple fields of a single filter for each fraction. Panel B: Image of DNA from the purified viral fraction separated by pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis. Lane 1, Size standard (5 kb ladder); Lane 2, Size standard (Lambda DNA ladder); Lane 3, pooled viruses loaded after simple heat
shock in TE to release DNA; Lane 4, DNA from purified viruses after organic extraction with phenol-chloroform.

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

size of the second size-selected library (MBv200mB) was
1.9 kb. Sequences from these libraries were combined
and treated as a single library (MBv200m). Assembly of
the sequences resulted in 52 of the 907 sequences forming 26 contigs, each comprised of two sequences.
Twenty of those were contigs formed from the forward
and reverse read of the same clone. The remaining six
contigs from 12 sequences (1.3% of the total) were
formed from clones with different names (i.e., separate
clone picks in different library locations).
Sequence Analysis

After assembly, the remaining 881 sequences (389,597
bases in total) were compared to sequence databases to
identify the genes recovered. The distribution of hits to
eukaryotes, prokaryotes, or viruses varied as a function
of the threshold E-value and differed for blastx vs.
tblastx (Figure 3). At the commonly used threshold of
10-3 , the percentage of sequences with a hit to any of
these three groups of organisms was similar (26% for
blastx and 23% for tblastx), but the number of hits specifically to viral sequences was 1.6 times higher using
blastx (72 vs. 45). The greater percentage of hits to viral
sequences when using blastx was consistent across a
broad range of threshold values, but in neither case did
the viral hits exceed 42% (Figure 3). The lower proportion of hits to viruses with tblastx was compensated

Page 6 of 14

primarily by a higher proportion of hits to eukaryotes.
From the plots of the hit distribution vs. threshold Evalue, we observed sharp declines in the proportion of
hits to viruses and prokaryotes between E-values of 10-3
and 10-2 for blastx and between 10-4 and 10-3 for tblastx
(Figure 3), which was again compensated by an increasing proportion of hits to eukaryotes.
A more detailed view of the blastx hit distributions in
different E-value ranges (Figure 4) showed that the
majority of hits are to bacteria and bacteriophages in all
bins ≤ 10 -2 . Hits to archaea, eukaryotic viruses, and
mobile genetic elements occurred throughout most of
the E-value range, but were always minor contributors
(≤ 10% combined) and their contributions did not vary
systematically. In all bins having E-values ≤ 10-3, bacteriophages represented 24 to 40% of the hits. In each bin
with E-values > 10-3, the proportion of hits to bacteriophages dropped by one-third to one-half relative to the
preceding bin (Figure 4).
Analysis of MBv200 with MG-RAST v2 resulted in no
significant hits to 16S rRNA sequences, but also no protein-based hits to viruses. When re-analyzed with the
recently released MG-RAST version 3, 63 of 881
sequences (7.15%) had a significant match, and the
majority of these (55.6%) were to the subsystem “Phages,
Prophages, Transposable Elements, Plasmids”. Within
that category, 88.6% were to phages or prophages and

Figure 3 Changes in the distribution of blastx and tblastx hits as a function of E-value threshold. The proportion of top-scoring matches
to viruses (including bacteriophages), prokaryotes, or eukaryotes is plotted as a function of the E-value threshold for blastx (left panel) or tblastx
(right panel). The vertical dashed line represents the frequently used threshold of 10-3, beyond which hits would not be considered significant
(pink shaded region). The solid line in each graph shows the cumulative percentage of sequences that lie at or below a given E-value threshold.

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

Page 7 of 14

Figure 4 Distribution of blastx hits in various E-value ranges. Proportion of top-scoring blastx matches most similar to bacteriophages,
eukaryotic viruses, mobile genetic elements, or members of the Domains Bacteria, Archaea, or Eukarya for different ranges of E-values.

the remainder to pathogenicity islands. The next most
represented categories were “Nucleosides and Nucleotides” (9.5%), “DNA Metabolism” (8%) and “Protein
Metabolism” (8%).
Comparison of all sequences against the GenBank nr
database using blastx resulted in 74% of the sequences
having no significant hit (Figure 5A). Bacteriophages
and viruses accounted for 8.2% of the top hits, other
mobile elements accounted for 0.6% and hits to the
members of the domains Bacteria, Archaea and Eukarya
accounted for 15.3, 0.5, and 1.1%, respectively. Although
a large number of sequences had no significant match
to sequences of known phylogenetic affiliation in the
GenBank nr database, the majority of them had top hits
to sequences from metagenomic studies curated in the
“Environmental (env)” and “Genome Survey Sequences
(GSS)” section of GenBank (Figure 5B). Only 3.7% of
the sequences had a better hit to a sequence in GenBank nr than to sequences from marine metagenomic
studies. None of the sequences in the Monterey Bay
library had significant similarity to a 16S rRNA gene.
Since top hits are not necessarily the best guide to the
phylogenetic identity of a sequence, we also determined
what proportion of the sequences had any significant hit
to a virus sequence, even if it was not the top hit. In
this case, just over half (51%) of all significant hits
included a similarity to a viral sequence. A total of 143

sequences had a significant match to a bacteriophage,
virus, or viral metagenome sequence. Excluding the hits
to sequences from viral metagenomes, there remained
121 sequences with significant, but not necessarily best,
matches to known bacteriophages or viruses. Of these,
94% were to sequences from bacteriophages and 6%
were to eukaryotic viruses (Figure 6A). All of the bacteriophage matches were to members of the Order Caudovirales (tailed viruses; 66%) or to known or putative
prophages (30%). There were similar proportions of
matches to the Families Myoviridae (26%), Podoviridae
(20%), and Siphoviridae (17%) that comprise the Order
Caudovirales. The only eukaryotic hits were to members
of the Family Phycodnaviridae (4%) and to the mimivirus (2%).
A known or putative function was noted for 63% of
the bacteriophage or viral matches and 37% had
unknown function (Figure 6B). Of those with an
ascribed function, genes involved in DNA modification
were the most prevalent (25%), followed by structural
genes (17%). Other functions noted among the matches
were gene regulation (1%), transcription (2%), nucleotide
metabolism (6%), DNA metabolism (7%), amino acid
metabolism (1%), protein metabolism (1%), other metabolism (2%), assembly (2%) and lysis (1%). Sixteen
sequences had a significant hit to a terminase (nine of
these were the top hit) and seven to portal proteins (six

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

Page 8 of 14

library, but had the third lowest percentage of hits
(11.6%) to MBv200m. After normalizing for query library
size and differences in sequence length, the libraries prepared from other bays (Mission Bay, San Diego, CA, and
Chesapeake Bay, MD) appeared to be the most similar to
MBv200m. A library prepared from coastal California
(Scripps Pier, La Jolla) was slightly more distant. In the
reciprocal comparison, with MBv200m as the query
library, the percentage of sequences hit in the Sargasso
Sea library (6.5%) was highest, exceeding that for Mission
Bay (3.5%) and Chesapeake Bay (3.9%), but only after
normalizing for sequence length. MBv200m was less
similar to the viral metagenomes prepared from waters
from the Gulf of Mexico, coastal British Columbia, and
coastal Arctic Ocean, with the latter being the least similar by both measures.
The similarity between MBv200m and the Chesapeake
Bay library was also reflected in a clustering analysis
performed in MG-RAST v3 (not shown). MBv200m was
most similar to the metagenome prepared from the
Chesapeake Bay when clustering based on organism
classification frequencies. When clustering was based on
functional classifications, MBv200m clustered with
metagenomes from Chesapeake Bay, Tampa Bay, and
the Sargasso Sea, but was the outlier in that group. Viral
metagenomes from the Gulf of Mexico and coastal British Columbia formed a second cluster along with the
outlier Arctic Ocean.
Figure 5 Proportion of BLAST hits to sequences from various
sources. Donut charts illustrating the proportion of sequences in
the Monterey Bay viral metagenome library that had significant (Evalue ≤ 10-3), best blastx matches to bacteriophages, eukaryotic
viruses, mobile genetic elements, or members of the Domains
Bacteria, Archaea, or Eukarya, or which had no significant match (Evalue > 10-3). Panel A: BLAST results when using only the GenBank
nr database. Panel B: the distribution of top-scoring matches when
sequence data from viral and microbial metagenomes were
included in the analysis. In Panel B, eukaryotic viruses,
bacteriophages, and mobile genetic elements were combined into
the single category “Viruses” and bacteria and archaea were
combined into the category “Prokaryotes”.

were the top hit). There were four significant matches
each to tail fiber, integrase, helicase and ribonucleotide
reductase genes, and three each to phage DNA polymerases and phage major capsid proteins.
Comparison with other Viral Metagenomes

Using pair-wise, reciprocal blast analysis, we found that
the number of hits to the MBv200m library generally
increased as a function of the query library size (ranging
from a low of 0.8% for Scripps Pier to a high of 28% for
Coastal British Columbia; Figure 7). An obvious outlier
in this trend was the Arctic Ocean, which was the largest

Discussion
Viruses, for the purpose of this investigation, were operationally defined as DNA-containing particles that pass
through a 0.2 μm filter, but are retained by a 30 kDa
NMWCO membrane and have a buoyant density in the
range of ca. 1.3 to 1.5. This is a somewhat restrictive
definition that excludes low-density viruses and underrepresents or completely excludes very large viruses.
Viruses with buoyant densities in CsCl of < 1.3 and >
1.5 have been reported [30], but their contribution to
total viral DNA mass in the ocean appears to be very
small. In one previous study, all viral DNA detectable
on an agarose gel was found in fractions between 1.35
and 1.46 g ml-1 [31]. We found that virtually all of the
DNA-containing, virus-sized particles detectable by epifluorescence microscopy in the sample were within a
narrower buoyant density range than the known limits
for all viruses, and we harvested accordingly.
The virus concentration of our initial sample was not
measured, so recovery efficiency cannot be calculated
exactly. However, previous determinations of viral abundance at the same station and depth (six samplings
between June 1998 and August 1999) ranged from 3.9
to 5.5 × 109 l-1 (Steward unpublished data). Assuming
that our sample fell within this range, we estimate that

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

Page 9 of 14

Figure 6 Phylogenetic affiliations and functions of viral BLAST hits. Panel A: Proportion of sequences recovered in the Monterey Bay 200 m
viral metagenome with significant similarity to different virus types and Panel B: the proportion of different functions represented among those
sequences.

the final recovery of filtered, concentrated, and CsClpurified viruses was around 3-4%. Each of the processing steps, and the storage of the concentrate, could
have contributed to the loss of viruses, but the yield was
not quantified at each step.
Based on the final yield of virus-like particles and the
mass of DNA extracted from them, we infer an average
DNA content of 42 attograms per virus. The size distribution of virus-like genomes in the final sample was
similar to that reported previously from other marine
samples. This distribution was not significantly altered

even after organic extraction indicating that sample
handling and the extraction procedure itself did not
cause substantial DNA shearing or any obvious selective
loss of DNA from specific viral types.
Library limitations

With substantial losses of viruses during harvesting,
there are likely some biases introduced. Filtration, for
example, which was used to remove cells, will also discriminate against viruses with capsid diameters > 0.2
μm. Such large viruses are present in seawater [32-35],

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

Page 10 of 14

Figure 7 Comparison of the MBv200 m library to other viral metagenomic libraries by reciprocal BLAST analyses. Each library is
represented as a white circle, in the center of which appears the library name, the number of sequences (un-normalized), and the average read
length. The relative distances between each library and MBv200 m (solid connecting lines) were calculated by BLAST queries of each library
against the Monterey Bay library to determine the number of hits per 100 read-length-normalized sequences in the query library. In each case,
the normalized number of hits (numbers adjacent to the lines) was converted to a relative distance by taking its reciprocal. The areas of the
white circles represent 100% of the sequences in each library and the areas of the colored circles within represent the read-length-normalized
proportion of that library’s sequences that had a significant hit when queried with the other library by BLAST.

but appear to be relatively rare, with the majority of
viruses having capsid sizes in the range of 30-100 nm
[33]. However, even among viruses with capsids that are
< 0.2 μm in diameter, larger viruses and tailed viruses
appear to be preferentially lost during filtration [36].
Losses during sample storage were also likely biased, but
how and to what degree is unknown. The DNA size distribution among the harvested viruses was similar to the
multimodal distributions of virus-like genomes observed
previously [31,37] and spanned the sizes of genomes for
known bacteriophages and algal viruses [31]. The viral
genome size distribution suggests that, even if biased,
the library represents a broad spectrum of the viral
diversity.
Others have reported difficulty in generating representative libraries of viral DNA by direct cloning [11]. The

reasons for this are not clear, but it may be a result of
DNA modifications that inhibit ligation or replication of
the recombinant plasmid in E. coli. We had no difficulties
generating a library with unamplified material, and the
sequence composition as determined by BLAST was
similar to previous studies, all of which used some form
of in vitro amplification. This indicates that direct cloning
of DNA from diverse types of viruses in seawater is feasible. Assuming sufficient material is available for direct
cloning, this approach may avoid biases that can sometimes result from amplification. However, if many viruses
do indeed have DNA that is not clonable without first
being replicated in vitro, then the direct cloning approach
we employed will necessarily introduce bias as well.
As observed for other viral metagenomic libraries [e.g.,
[9-11]], the proportion of independent sequences

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

forming apparently legitimate contigs (i.e., those
assembled from independent, random fragments) was
low. Close inspection of the six putative contigs suggests
that even these were most likely assembled from identical clones that appeared twice in the library. In all but
one case, the contigs were formed between clones in
adjacent wells of a library plate, suggesting possible
cross-contamination. And in all cases, the beginning and
end position of the clones was quite similar. We therefore found no convincing evidence of there being legitimate contigs, which is not too surprising considering
the limited number of sequences comprising the library.
On the viral nature of the library

Although we specifically targeted the viral fraction of
our sample, some of our results suggested that bacterial
DNA might be present. For example, we detected weak
PCR amplification in our DNA extract with 16S rRNA
primers. The single 16S rRNA phylotype detected was
not one that had been observed in previous 16S rRNA
libraries from Monterey Bay [22]. The close affiliation of
this gene with that from a psychrophilic marine bacterial
isolate, however, suggests that the sequence may have
derived from a legitimate constituent of the Monterey
Bay mesopelagic bacterioplankton. The presence of the
gene may be due to passage of bacteria or dissolved bacterial DNA through the 0.2 μm filters, it may represent
a bacterial DNA fragment in a transducing phage, or it
may have been present as a contaminant in our PCR
reagents or solutions. No 16S rRNA sequences were
found among the viral shotgun library clones sequenced,
which was encouraging, but the library is too small relative to the size of a typical bacterial genome for this
absence to be informative.
We also found that the majority of BLAST hits with
an E-value < 10-3 were not to viruses, but to bacteria,
which has been seen in other of viral metagenomes
[9,10]. In some libraries, hits to viral sequences exceeded
those to bacterial sequences [11], but hits to non-viral
sequences are always common [2]. Although this could
reflect bacterial contamination, some have speculated
gene-transfer agents (GTAs) might be responsible [7].
GTAs are virus-like particles carrying random fragments
of DNA sampled from the host from which they derive
[38]. We cannot conclusively rule out the presence of
either bacterial contamination or GTAs as source of
bacterial signal in our library, but below we discuss evidence that suggests viral DNA dominates our library.
We did not detect bacterial cells among the viruses
harvested from the CsCl gradient, which suggests that
contamination with cells from the original sample, if
present, was low. Furthermore, our empirical estimate of
DNA content per recovered virus (4.2 × 10-17 g virus-1)
is somewhat lower than a previously reported average of

Page 11 of 14

5.5 × 10-17 g virus-1 for a variety of marine habitats [31],
but is within the range of values from which that average was calculated. This suggests that the number of
virus-like particles extracted can account for the majority of the DNA. If the viral DNA is dominated by double-stranded genomes, as was recently observed in
Chesapeake Bay [12], the calculated DNA content per
virus implies an average viral genome size of 38 kb.
With 390 kb of total sequence analyzed from our
library, a single-copy viral gene could appear up to
about ten times if all the DNA is of viral origin, but
only if present and recognizable in every virus. Most
functional categories of viral genes were present fewer
than ten times, but there were nine clones with a top
hit to phage terminases. This complementary analysis is
also consistent with the majority of DNA being derived
from viruses, and bacteriophages in particular, rather
than GTAs.
If our library is dominated by viral DNA, then the
predominance of hits to bacteria and microbial metagenomes, rather than to viruses and viral metagenomes,
might be best explained as an artifact of biased sequence
representation in GenBank and the presence of undocumented viral sequences within bacterial genome
sequences. It has been noted that even genome
sequences from purified viral isolates can generate many
top BLAST hits to bacteria [11]. The dramatic increase
in the recognition of hits to phages in the latest version
of MG-RAST suggests that this bias is being reduced as
more viral sequences become available. Our manual
annotation found many more significant hits to viruses,
however, suggesting that such automated pipelines still
have limitations.
Microbial metagenomes include many viral sequences
that may derive from the capture of free or adsorbed
viruses, prophages, and infected cells [8,39]. Identifying
the viral sequences in the large background of cellderived sequences in a microbial metagenome is challenging and requires a conservative approach [8]. Since
it is impossible to prepare a microbial metagenome free
of viruses, but viruses can be prepared virtually cell-free,
analyses of targeted viral metagenomes will be helpful in
determining the likely sources of DNA sequences in
microbial metagenomes.
Sequence analysis

Since our source material was DNA from what appears
to have been highly purified virus-like particles, the
break point in the hit distribution is a useful empirical
indicator of a threshold beyond which the quality of hits
quickly degrades. In our analysis, the E-value threshold
of 10-3 appears to be slightly conservative for blastx and
slightly generous for tblastx, but seems to be a reasonable compromise for general application. A similar

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

analysis using E-value bins rather than a running threshold provided further empirical support for the use of an
E-value threshold of 10 -3 . We therefore adopted this
commonly used threshold [9,11] when we designated
BLAST matches as “signifcant hits”. The exception was
for the inter-library comparisons where we employed a
more restrictive criterion of E ≤ 10-5 also used by others
[10]. A comparison of the hit distributions indicates that
blastx was generally more useful than tblastx for identifying meaningful matches in the GenBank databases.
However, tblastx did identify some matches to viruses
that were missed by blastx, suggesting that using both
algorithms, rather than relying on one, can be beneficial.
In many cases, the top hit was not very informative.
Our use of a keyword search of multiple databases
(especially Pfam and KEGG) was helpful in identifying
hits that were significant, but lower scoring, matches to
sequences with putative viral functions.
Although our sample was collected below the euphotic
zone, many of the virus hits were to viruses known to
infect phytoplankton (cyanophages and phycodnaviruses). This may reflect the fact that phytoplankton
(and their viruses) are continually transported into deeper waters through association with sinking particulates
[40] or via grazing by vertically migrating zooplankton
[41], but could also reflect the existence of genetically
similar viruses infecting photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic microorganisms. The depth at which we
sampled was previously found to be the depth at which
marine crenarchaea reach their peak abundance in Monterey Bay at about 20% of the total prokaryotes [42,43].
Despite this, top hits to archaeal genes comprised only
3% of the total and there were no hits to phages known
to infect archaea. This most likely reflects the fact that
cultured representatives of the marine planktonic archaea
are still scarce [44]. These marine archaea are divergent
from the better studied thermophilic and methanogenic
representatives [45,46] and viruses infecting them have
not yet been isolated or described.
The distribution of hits in our library is similar to previous viral metagenomes [9,11] in that hits to bacteriophages were more common than to eukaryotic viruses.
This is consistent with the other indirect evidence that
bacteriophages dominate the planktonic viral assemblages [reviewed in [47]]. As found for the Mission Bay
library [11], genes involved in DNA modification, specifically terminases, were the most common viral hits in
our library, followed by hits to viral structural genes. In
other libraries (e.g., Scripps Pier, Chesapeake Bay),
structural genes were the most common [9,11].
Library Comparisons

The relative greater similarity between the Monterey
Bay library and the two viral metagenomes from other

Page 12 of 14

bays suggests that water from these similar types of
eutrophic embayments have more similar communities.
We note, however, that the percentage of sequences in
the Mission Bay and Chesapeake Bay libraries that had a
significant match with any sequence in MBv200m was
still relatively small (≤ 6% even when not length-normalized). This is not too surprising since Mission Bay, Chesapeake Bay, and Monterey Bay are quite different in
their physiography and hydrography and represent
coastal waters of two different oceans. In particular, the
station sampled in Monterey Bay is more oceanic and
the sample was collected at much greater depth than
either the Mission Bay or Chesapeake Bay libraries. The
low coverage of these three libraries (873 to 5641
sequences) is also likely inadequate to properly capture
the range of diversity present at each site.
A possible artifact in similarity analyses may result
from differences in the read lengths of the libraries [7].
The three most similar metagenomes consisted of
longer reads by Sanger sequencing (mean read lengths
from 607 to 695 bp), while the four more distant
libraries were all composed of shorter reads (mean read
lengths ≤ 104 bp). To compensate for this, we normalized the number of BLAST hits by read length. This
correction decreased the distance measures between our
library and those generated by next-generation sequencing platforms, as expected, but in most cases the rank
order was unchanged. One exception was the Sargasso
Sea library, which had the third highest percentage of
sequences with a significant match to MBv200m prior
to length-normalization (data not shown), but the highest after. Many other differences in the way viruses were
harvested and purified, the manner in which DNA was
prepared for sequencing, and the sequencing methods
used, preclude us from drawing any meaningful ecological inferences from these inter-comparisons. Nevertheless, the comparisons provide some sense of the
differences in the sequence content of the libraries. We
note that the Arctic library is by far the most distant
from our library, and was also found to be the most distant from three other samples to which it was originally
compared [10].

Conclusion
The viral metagenome described in this paper is the first
to be reported from a single depth below the euphotic
zone in the ocean and with no amplification prior to
cloning. Our data suggest it is possible to clone viral
DNA with no in vitro amplification, although, as with
any of the preparation methods currently in use, there
may be biases. Indirect evidence suggests that, although
most of the top BLAST hits were to sequences annotated as bacterial or to microbial metagenomes, most of
the sequences in our library are probably of viral origin.

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

This means that the majority of viral sequences in
microbial metagenomes will be unrecognizable as such.
Analyses of virus-targeted metagenomes, like the one
reported here, are therefore a valuable complement to
studies of microbial metagenomes and may assist in discriminating the likely source of novel sequences.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the caption and crew of the R/V Pt. Lobos for
assistance in sampling, Lynne Christianson (MBARI) for assistance with viral
sequencing and bacterial 16S rRNA gene cloning, and Guylaine Poisson and
Mahdi Belcaid (Information and Computer Sciences Department, University
of Hawaii at Manoa) for assistance in executing and parsing the BLAST
analyses. The authors are grateful to Edward F. DeLong for supporting
sequencing for this project with funding from the David and Lucile Packard
Foundation. GFS was supported in part by grants from the National Science
Foundation (EF 04-24599, OCE 04-42664, and OCE 08-26650). CMP was
supported by the David and Lucile Packard Foundation. Bioinformatics
analyses were performed through the use of the INBRE/COBRE/RMATRIX
Bioinformatics and Biomedical informatics core, supported jointly by NIH
Grants P20RR018727, U54RR026136 and P20RR016467 from the National
Center for Research Resources.
Author details
1
Department of Oceanography, University of Hawaii at Manoa, 1000 Pope
Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, Hawaii. 2Monterey Bay Aquarium Research
Institute, 7700 Sandholt Road, Moss Landing, CA 95039-9644, USA.
Authors’ contributions
CMP collected and purified the viruses, constructed the library, conducted
the sequencing, co-wrote the manuscript and helped prepare figures. GFS
provided advice on sample preparation, assisted in clone picking, processed
and analyzed the sequence data, prepared the figures, and co-wrote the
manuscript. Both author’s read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 5 April 2011 Accepted: 9 June 2011 Published: 9 June 2011
References
1. Breitbart M, Thompson LR, Suttle CA, Sullivan MB: Exploring the vast
diversity of marine viruses. Oceanogr 2007, 20:135-139.
2. Edwards RA, Rohwer F: Viral metagenomics. Nature Rev Microbiol 2005,
3:504-510.
3. Villareal LP: Are viruses alive? Sci Am 2004, 100-105.
4. Paul JH: Prophages in marine bacteria: dangerous molecular time bombs
or the key to survival in the seas? ISME J 2008, 2:579-589.
5. Roossinck MJ: The good viruses: viral mutualistic symbioses. Nat Rev
Micro 2011.
6. Suttle CA: Marine viruses - major players in the global ecosystem. Nature
Rev Microbiol 2007, 5:801-812.
7. Kristensen DM, Mushegian AR, Dolja VV, Koonin EV: New dimensions of
the virus world discovered through metagenomics. Trends Microbiol 2010,
18:11-19.
8. Williamson SJ, Rusch DB, Yooseph S, Halpern AL, Heidelberg KB, Glass JL,
Pfannkoch CA, Fadrosh D, Miller CS, Sutton G, Frazier M, Venter JC: The
Sorcerer II global ocean sampling expedition: metagenomic
characterization of viruses within aquatic microbial samples. PLoS One
2008, 3:e1456.
9. Bench SR, Hanson TE, Williamson KE, Ghosh D, Radosovich M, Wang K,
Wommack KE: Metagenomic characterization of Chesapeake Bay
virioplankton. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007, 73:7629-7641.
10. Angly FE, Felts B, Breitbart M, Salamon P, Edwards RA, Carlson C, Chan AM,
Haynes M, Kelley S, Liu H, Mahaffy JM, Mueller JE, Nulton J, Olson RJ,
Parsons R, Rayhawk S, Suttle CA, Rohwer F: The marine viromes of four
oceanic regions. PLoS Biol 2006, 4:2121-2131.

Page 13 of 14

11. Breitbart M, Salamon P, Andresen B, Mahaffy JM, Segall AM, Mead D,
Azam F, Rohwer F: Genomic analysis of uncultured marine viral
communities. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:14250-14255.
12. Andrews-Pfannkoch C, Fadrosh DW, Thorpe J, Williamson SJ:
Hydroxyapatite-mediated separation of double-stranded DNA, singlestranded DNA, and RNA genomes from natural viral assemblages. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2010, 76:5039-5045.
13. Culley AI, Lang AS, Suttle CA: Metagenomic analysis of coastal RNA virus
communities. Science 2006, 312:1795-1798.
14. Helton RR, Wommack KE: Seasonal Dynamics and Metagenomic
Characterization of Estuarine Viriobenthos Assemblages by Randomly
Amplified Polymorphic DNA PCR. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009,
75:2259-2265.
15. Breitbart M, Fets B, Kelley S, Mahaffy JM, Nulton J, Salamon P, Rohwer F:
Diversity and population structure of a near-shore marine sediment viral
community. Proc Royal Soc Biol Sci Ser B 2004, 271:565-574.
16. Marhaver KL, Edwards RA, Rohwer F: Viral communities associated with
healthy and bleaching corals. Environ Microbiol 2008, 10:2277-2286.
17. Desnues C, Rodriguez-Brito B, Rayhawk S, Kelley S, Tran T, Haynes M, Liu H,
Furlan M, Wegley L, Chau B, Ruan Y, Hall D, Angly FE, Edwards RA, Li L,
Thurber RV, Reid RP, Siefert J, Souza V, Valentine DL, Swan BK, Breitbart M,
Rohwer F: Biodiversity and biogeography of phages in modern
stromatolites and thrombolites. Nature 2008, 452:340-343.
18. Allen MJ, Wilson WH: Aquatic virus diversity accessed through omic
techniques: a route map to function. Curr Opin Microbiol 2008, 11:226-232.
19. Lang AS, Rise ML, Culley AI, Steward GF: RNA viruses in the sea. FEMS
Microbiol Rev 2009, 33:295-332.
20. Lawrence JE, Steward GF: Purification of viruses by centrifugation. In
Manual of Aquatic Viral Ecology. Edited by: Wilhelm SW, Weinbauer MG,
Suttle CA. Waco, TX: American Society of Limnology and Oceanography;
2010:166-181.
21. Lane DJ: 16S/23S rRNA sequencing. In Nucleic acid techniques in bacterial
systematics. Edited by: Stackebrandt E, Goodfellow M. New York: John Wiley
and Sons, Inc.; 1991:115-175.
22. Suzuki M, Preston CM, Béja O, de la Torre JR, Steward GF, DeLong DF:
Phylogenetic screening of ribosomal RNA gene-containing clones in
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) libraries from different depths in
Monterey Bay. Microb Ecol 2004, 48:473-488.
23. Sambrook J, Russell DW: Molecular Cloning: A laboratory manual. 3 edition.
Cold Spring Harbor: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2001.
24. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
25. Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, Holm L, Sonnhammer ELL, Eddy SR,
Bateman A: The Pfam protein families database. Nucl Acids Res 2010, 38:
D211-222.
26. Kanehisa M, Goto S: KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes.
Nucl Acids Res 2000, 28:27-30.
27. Meyer F, Paarmann D, D’souza M, Olson R, Glass EM, Kubal M, Paczian T,
Rodriguez A, Stevens R, Wilke A, Wilkening J, Edwards RA: The
metagenomics RAST server - a public resource for the automatic
phylogenetic and functional analysis of metagenomes. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:386.
28. SciPy: Open source scientific tools for Python. [http://www.scipy.org].
29. McDaniel L, Breitbart M, Mobberley J, Long A, Haynes M, Rohwer F, Paul JH:
Metagenomic analysis of lysogeny in Tampa Bay: implications for
prophage gene expression. PLoS One 2008, 3:e3263.
30. Fauquet CM, Mayo MA, Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball LA, Eds.: Virus
taxonomy: Eighth report of the international committee on the
taxonomy of viruses. San Diego: Elsevier Academic Press; 2005.
31. Steward GF, Montiel JL, Azam F: Genome size distributions indicate
variability and similarities among marine viral assemblages from diverse
environments. Limnol Oceanogr 2000, 45:1697-1706.
32. Bratbak G, Haslund OH, Heldal M, Nœss A, Røeggen : Giant marine
viruses? Mar Ecol Progr Ser 1992, 85:201-202.
33. Cochlan WP, Wikner J, Steward GF, Smith DC, Azam F: Spatial Distribution
of Viruses, Bacteria and Chlorophyll-a in Neritic, Oceanic and Estuarine
Environments. Mar Ecol Progr Ser 1993, 92:77-87.
34. Garza DR, Suttle CA: Large double-stranded DNA viruses which cause the
lysis of a marine heterotrophic nanoflagellate (Bodo sp.) occur in natural
marine viral communities. Aquat Microb Ecol 1995, 9:203-210.

Steward and Preston Virology Journal 2011, 8:287
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/287

Page 14 of 14

35. Gowing MM: Large virus-like particles from vacuoles of phaeodarian
radiolarians and from other marine samples. Mar Ecol Progr Ser 1993,
101:33-43.
36. Brum JR, Steward GF: Morphological characterization of viruses in the
stratified water column of alkaline, hypersaline Mono Lake. Microb Ecol
2010, 60:636-643.
37. Wommack KE, Ravel J, Hill RT, Chun JS, Colwell RR: Population dynamics of
Chesapeake bay virioplankton: Total-community analysis by pulsed-field
gel electrophoresis. Appl Environ Microbiol 1999, 65:231-240.
38. Stanton TB: Prophage-like gene transfer agents-novel mechanisms of
gene exchange for Methanococcus, Desulfovibrio, Brachyspira, and
Rhodobacter species. Anaerobe 2007, 13:43-49.
39. DeLong EF, Preston CM, Mincer T, Rich V, Hallam SJ, Frigaard N-U,
Martinez A, Sullivan MB, Edwards R, Rodriguez Brito B, Chisholm SW,
Karl DM: Community genomics among stratified microbial assemblages
in the ocean’s interior. Science 2006, 311:496-503.
40. Silver MW, Gowing MM: The “particle” flux: Origins and biological
components. Progr Oceanogr 1991, 26:75-113.
41. Wilson SE, Steinberg DK: Autotrophic picoplankton in mesozooplankton
guts: evidence of aggregate feeding in the mesopelagic zone and
export of small phytoplankton. Mar Ecol Progr Ser 2010, 412:11-27.
42. DeLong EF, Taylor LT, Marsh TL, Preston CM: Visualization and
enumeration of marine planktonic archaea and bacteria by using
polyribonucleotide probes and fluorescent in situ hybridization. Appl
Environ Microbiol 1999, 65:5554-5563.
43. Mincer TJ, Church MJ, Taylor LT, Preston C, Karl DM, Delong EF:
Quantitative distribution of presumptive archaeal and bacterial nitrifiers
in Monterey Bay and the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. Environ Microbiol
2007, 9:1162-1175.
44. Könneke M, Bernhard AE, de la Torre JR, Walker CB, Waterbury JB, Stahl JB:
Isolation of an autotrophic ammonia-oxidizing marine archaeon. Nature
2005, 437:543-546.
45. DeLong EF: Archaea in coastal marine environments. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1992, 89:5685-5689.
46. Fuhrman JA, McCallum K, Davis AA: Novel major archaebacterial group
from marine plankton. Nature 1992, 356:148-149.
47. Wommack KE, Colwell RR: Virioplankton: Viruses in aquatic ecosystems.
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2000, 64:69-114.
doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-287
Cite this article as: Steward and Preston: Analysis of a viral
metagenomic library from 200 m depth in Monterey Bay, California
constructed by direct shotgun cloning. Virology Journal 2011 8:287.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
