<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genomic and small RNA sequencing of Miscanthus × giganteus shows the utility of sorghum as a reference genome sequence for Andropogoneae grasses</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010 11:R12. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-2-r12"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kankshita Swaminathan"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

RESEARCH

Open Access

Genomic and small RNA sequencing of
Miscanthus × giganteus shows the utility of
sorghum as a reference genome sequence for
Andropogoneae grasses
Kankshita Swaminathan1,2, Magdy S Alabady2, Kranthi Varala1, Emanuele De Paoli3, Isaac Ho4, Dan S Rokhsar4,5,
Aru K Arumuganathan6, Ray Ming2,7, Pamela J Green3,8, Blake C Meyers3, Stephen P Moose1,2,
Matthew E Hudson1,2*

Abstract
Background: Miscanthus × giganteus (Mxg) is a perennial grass that produces superior biomass yields in temperate
environments. The essentially uncharacterized triploid genome (3n = 57, x = 19) of Mxg is likely critical for the
rapid growth of this vegetatively propagated interspecific hybrid.
Results: A survey of the complex Mxg genome was conducted using 454 pyrosequencing of genomic DNA and
Illumina sequencing-by-synthesis of small RNA. We found that the coding fraction of the Mxg genome has a high
level of sequence identity to that of other grasses. Highly repetitive sequences representing the great majority of
the Mxg genome were predicted using non-cognate assembly for de novo repeat detection. Twelve abundant
families of repeat were observed, with those related to either transposons or centromeric repeats likely to comprise
over 95% of the genome. Comparisons of abundant repeat sequences to a small RNA survey of three Mxg organs
(leaf, rhizome, inflorescence) revealed that the majority of observed 24-nucleotide small RNAs are derived from
these repetitive sequences. We show that high-copy-number repeats match more of the small RNA, even when
the amount of the repeat sequence in the genome is accounted for.
Conclusions: We show that major repeats are present within the triploid Mxg genome and are actively producing
small RNAs. We also confirm the hypothesized origins of Mxg, and suggest that while the repeat content of Mxg
differs from sorghum, the sorghum genome is likely to be of utility in the assembly of a gene-space sequence of
Mxg.

Background
Domesticated and wild grass species in the Andropogoneae tribe are important as sources of food, feed, fiber and
fuel. Included within the Andropogoneae are major crops
such as maize, Sorghum bicolor (sorghum), sugarcane
(Saccharum spp.), the native North American prairie grass
Andropogon gerardii (Big Bluestem) and species in the
genus Miscanthus, which have recently emerged as leading
candidate bioenergy crops. All species within the Andropogoneae perform C4 photosynthesis, which exhibits
* Correspondence: mhudson@illinois.edu
1
Department of Crop Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA

higher rates of carbon fixation. C4 is also associated with
greater water- and nutrient-use efficiency compared to
most plant species [1,2]. These physiological properties
contribute to the very high biomass productivity observed
from cultivated Andropogoneae crop species, which often
exceeds 20 Mg/ha. Another characteristic of the Andropogoneae is a high frequency of polyploidy, with many large
and complex genomes. Though typically native to tropical
and subtropical climates, Andropogoneae crop species are
adapted to a wide diversity of environments and vary in
both their life cycle (annual versus perennial) and primary
form of harvestable carbon (sugar, grain starch or
cellulose).

© 2010 Swaminathan et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

As a result of their global economic importance as
crops, their varied biology and diversity of genome
structure, Andropogoneae species have been an important focus for plant genomics research. Early comparisons of genetic maps and local genome structure helped
elucidate the high degree of synteny among grass genomes [3]. These and other studies have also provided
insights into the contributions of transposon content,
gene duplication, and conserved noncoding sequences
to plant genome evolution [4,5]. Recently, whole-genome shotgun sequencing has produced a high coverage
draft for one of the smallest known Andropogoneae
genomes, sorghum [6]. In addition, a strategy to
sequence the maize genome using assembled BAC contigs that are anchored to genetic and physical maps is
now complete [7], and extensive EST resources exist for
Saccharum officinarum [8].
The Miscanthus genus is composed of about 15 species of rhizomatous perennial grasses native to subtropical and tropical regions of Africa and southern Asia,
with the range of at least four species (M. sinensis, M.
sacchariflorus, M. floridulus and M. × giganteus) extending north into temperate eastern Asia [9]. Sequencing of
nuclear ribosomal DNA and plastid intergenic spacers
as well as amplified fragment length polymorphism genotyping has resolved some of the phylogenetic relationships among Miscanthus spp. and accessions [9-11].
Within the Andropogoneae, Miscanthus is most closely
related to Saccharum spp. and interspecific hybrids of
Miscanthus and Saccharum have been used in genetic
improvement of sugarcane [12].
Miscanthus × giganteus [13,14] (hereafter referred to
as Mxg) is widely distributed as an ornamental and has
been evaluated for more than two decades as a biomass
crop in both Europe and the United States [15,16].
Because of these attributes, Mxg has been the most
extensively studied member of the Miscanthus genus.
Mxg is a sterile triploid (3n = 57, x = 19) that likely originated from the hybridization of M. sinensis and M.
sacchariflorus [11,17,18]. In addition to the potential for
increased vigor because of stabilized hybridity and polyploidy, Mxg is unique among C4 grasses in performing
C4 photosynthesis at temperatures as low as 5°C [19,20],
which likely contributes to a maximal 2% conversion
rate of solar energy into harvestable biomass among
established canopies [16]. This phenotype has been
interpreted as a competitive advantage since it allows
productive photosynthesis to begin earlier in spring in
temperate climates. The cold-tolerant C4 photosynthesis
phenotype is correlated with increased accumulation of
the key C4 photosynthetic enzyme pyruvate orthophosphate dikinase under chilling conditions [21,22].
Future studies of Mxg and other Miscanthus species,
as well as genetic improvement of these species as

Page 2 of 18

biomass crops, will be enhanced by knowledge of their
genome content and organization. The Mxg genome
also offers the possibility to gain information about
examples of both the M. sinensis and M. sacchariflorus
genomes, and their interactions after hybridization. As a
consequence of both its interesting biological properties
and potential as a biomass crop, Mxg is a desirable target for whole-genome sequencing. Although the large
size, complexity, and often polyploid nature of Andropogoneae genomes makes whole-genome shotgun or mapbased strategies cost-prohibitive, short-read deep
sequencing technologies enable rapid cost-effective
approaches to survey genome content and organization
[23]. Such an approach is greatly enhanced by comparisons to a closely related reference genome sequence
[24,25] and represents an efficient first step toward
characterizing complex eukaryotic genomes. We reasoned that the recently completed whole-genome shotgun genome sequence for sorghum [6] would likely
provide an appropriate initial reference sequence for
comparative analysis with the Mxg genome, both for the
characterization of conserved sequences as well as
recently diverged repeats and gene content found in
Mxg but not sorghum. The comparison of repeat composition between these two genomes has not yet been
performed, nor is it known how similar genic sequences
are likely to be between Mxg and available reference
genomes. We thus evaluated this strategy by comparing
a survey of the Mxg genome obtained by 454 Genome
sequencer FLX system (GS-FLX) pyrosequencing to the
genome sequences of sorghum, maize and rice. We also
compared the repeat sequences identified using the survey results with profiles of small RNAs (sRNAs)
obtained via Illumina sequencing-by-synthesis as it has
been previously reported that repetitive regions of plant
genomes contribute a substantial portion of the total
sRNA transcriptome [26].

Results
Genome size estimation for Miscanthus species

We used flow cytometry to estimate nuclear DNA contents from the exact clone used for this study, a single
accession of Mxg named ‘UIUC’, which was originally
established as an ornamental variety at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, but is also the source of
material used in recent agronomic trials [16]. We
obtained values ranging from 7.60 to 7.95 pg among
four independent tissues samples for the UIUC accession of Mxg (Additional file 1). These values are closely
consistent with those previously published for Mxg [27].
Cells in G0/G1 were identified using flow cytometry and
comparison to size standards (Additional file 2) and are
consistent with previous measurements [27]. Using a
value of 980 Mbp per pg DNA [28], and assuming Mxg

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

harbors three genomes of similar size, we estimate that
3C = 7.5 Gbp, and thus the three haploid genomes of
Mxg are approximately 2.5 Gbp.
Survey sequencing of Mxg

We performed a whole-genome survey of the Mxg genome using the 454 sequencing platform as described
previously for soybean [23]. Genomic DNA was isolated
from nuclei purified from Mxg leaves to minimize possible contamination from organellar or microbial DNA. A
total of 84 Mbp in 366,448 reads with an average size of
229 bp were produced from one run using the 454
LR70 FLX technology. A maximum value for chloroplast
contamination (reads with a BLASTN hit to the sorghum chloroplast genome at e < 10-6) was 0.24% (901
reads). A maximum value for mitochondrial contamination (reads with a BLASTN hit to the sorghum mitochondrial genome at e < 10-6) was 0.21% (817 reads).
These are maximum values because the nuclear genome
may contain sequences identical or near-identical to the
chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes; the 0.24% figure is similar to the proportion of the Arabidopsis
nuclear genome composed of integrated chloroplast
sequences [29]. The average GC content of the sequence
was 44%.
Hodkinson [11] suggested that the triploid genome of
Mxg is most likely derived from the cross of a diploid M.
sinensis or M. sacchariflorus with a fertile M. sinensis ×
M. sacchariflorus allotetraploid, each of which are known
to exist in Japan, where Mxg is thought to have originated. Observed patterns of meiotic chromosome pairing
[17] support the view that Mxg harbors two genomes of
high homology and a third with greater divergence. The
component genomes of Mxg share sufficiently high similarity to prevent specific detection by genome in situ
hybridization [11], but the two genomes can be distinguished by sequence variation in the internal transcribed
spacer of 18-28S rDNA genes (rDNA is DNA encoding
the tandem array of rRNA genes). Mxg is sterile due to
frequent chromosomal mispairing during meiosis [17].
For the purpose of determining coverage, we propose
that Mxg is best treated as a heterozygous diploid plus a
haploid, with a total effective genome size of 7.5 Gbp.
We therefore estimate that our survey sequencing generated approximately 1.2% coverage.
The unfiltered Miscanthus sequence reads were
aligned to version sbi1 of the sorghum genome
sequence [6] using nucleotide BLAST (BLASTN). A
total of just over 51% of Mxg reads matched at e ≤ 10-10
(Figure 1). BLASTN using the same parameters against
all other GenBank DNA sequences, including whole
genome shotgun data, showed that just 2,642 (0.7%) of
reads match a sequence other than the sorghum nuclear
genome while not matching the sorghum genome at

Page 3 of 18

this cutoff (including the 1,718 reads previously found
to be highly similar to sorghum organellar genomes).
This indicates that the Mxg genomic DNA template
used for sequencing is unlikely to be contaminated by
DNA from other organisms. The distribution of bestalignment lengths tracked the length distribution of the
reads themselves, indicating that most alignments are
full length. (The uptick at 100% identity seen in all
curves of Figure 1 is largely attributable to a subset of
BLAST alignments that are not full length.) The distribution of percent identity for Mxg reads aligned to the
whole sorghum genome has a broad peak ranging from
85 to 92% (Figure 1). We then matched the Mxg survey
reads to the predicted sorghum coding DNA sequence
(genome annotation v. 1.4), again using BLASTN. In
this case, a bimodal distribution is observed with a
broad peak spanning 84 to 90% identity, and a sharp
peak at 94 to 99% identity. Highly significant hits to
both the sorghum whole genome and to the coding
sequences were found to be evenly distributed across all
ten sorghum chromosomes, indicating no obvious and
substantial chromosomal loss in Mxg since divergence
with sorghum.
We interpret the broad peak of reads with lower
(84 to 90%) sequence identity as the result of highly
repetitive coding sequences (for example, transposasecoding genes) within the sorghum coding region dataset.
The sorghum gene models are known to contain retroelement-derived sequences despite repeat masking [6].
We therefore used the Plant Repeat Databases [30],
which are largely composed of repetitive sequences from
related grass genomes, including sorghum, to identify
1,322 likely repeat-derived coding regions within the
sorghum coding sequence dataset using BLASTN at a
10-6 e value cutoff. When these sequences were filtered
from the coding region dataset, the matches with 80 to
90% identity substantially decreased, while the peak centered at 97% identity remained (Figure 1). The peak at
lower levels of sequence identity is therefore likely to be
the result of non-cognate matches of reads to repetitive
coding regions such as the open reading frames of retrotransposons [31]. The remaining Mxg sequences matching at lower levels of sequence identity likely represent
other high-copy protein-coding sequences not excluded
by the filter. We consider the sequences present within
the peak from 94 to 99% identity are likely non-repetitive protein coding sequences and conserved non-coding
sequences. This level of similarity is consistent with the
degree of nucleotide similarity observed in comparisons
of the coding sequences for the C4 photosynthetic
enzymes ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
(Rubisco), phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase, and pyruvate orthophosphate dikinase between sorghum and
Mxg [21]. A similar degree of sequence similarity is

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

Page 4 of 18

Figure 1 Similarity of the Miscanthus × giganteus (Mxg) and other monocotyledon genomes. A sequence survey of Mxg was compared to
the sorghum whole-genome sequence (red line), the rice whole-genome sequence (blue line) and the maize whole-genome sequence (green
line). In addition to the whole-genome sequences the survey was also compared to the predicted sorghum coding regions (CDS) unfiltered
(orange line), and the sorghum coding regions with known transposon-related sequences removed (yellow line) using nucleotide BLAST. In all
cases, the percentage nucleotide identity of the match (x-axis) is plotted against the percentage of the total reads from the survey with a given
percentage identity to the relevant dataset (y-axis). No matches were observed with nucleotide identity below 75% at the e value cutoff used
(10-10).

observed in comparisons of Saccharum officinarum
ESTs to sorghum [6]. The Mxg survey sequences were
also matched to the maize genome (release 3b.50) and
the rice genome (release 6). The overall results were
similar to those for the sorghum genome, except for significantly fewer matches overall (Figure 1). As expected
from the phylogenetic proximity of sorghum to Mxg
[9-11], sorghum is the most similar fully sequenced genome to Mxg. The peak at high percentage nucleotide
identity is more obvious in maize, indicating that the
conserved, coding DNA is substantially similar between
maize and Mxg. Rice, which is not a member of the
Andropogoneae, matches substantially fewer survey
reads than maize.

The reads matching the sorghum predicted proteincoding genome at between 94% and 99% identity represent 3.4% of all total survey reads. We view this as a
likely overestimate of the true proportion of protein
coding DNA in the Mxg genome because some of these
reads overlap exon-intron boundaries and contain noncoding as well as coding DNA. Thus, the percentage of
reads matching exon sequences will be higher than the
percentage of base pairs in the genome that are within
exons. Such splicing boundary fragments are likely to be
common because the average read length from the GSFLX 454 sequences (229 bp) is comparable to the average exon sizes of approximately 250 bp observed for
rice, maize and sorghum [6,30]. Assuming that full-

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

length alignments of Mxg reads to the sorghum genome
require at least 50 bp of overlap with sorghum exons
that average 250 bp in length, then the Mxg exon space
is estimated at 66% of the total sequence with significant
matches to sorghum coding regions (Exon length/[Exon
length + Read length - 2 × 50-bp miminum overlap] =
250/[250 + 229 -100]). Thus, our estimate of the singlecopy conserved protein-coding DNA content is 2.2% of
the Mxg genome. An estimated coding DNA content of
2.2% of the 7.5 Gbp Mxg genome would represent 165
Mbp. When divided by an average of 1,500 bp of coding
sequence per gene, this leads to predictions of 110,000
genic loci per Mxg nuclear genome, or approximately
37,000 genes for each of the three component Mxg genomes. This number is comparable to recent estimates of
gene number for sorghum and rice [6], but we note that
our Mxg estimate would include any recent pseudogenes
present in Mxg as these would not be distinguished by
alignment of our short Mxg reads to sorghum, nor does
it account for any gene loss that may have occurred
after polyploidization.
Repeat content of the Mxg genome

We used a number of techniques to characterize the
repeat content of the Mxg genome. First, we compared
the 454 survey sequences with the repeat classifications
available from the Plant Repeat Databases [30] to classify each read on the basis of sequence similarity to
known repeat sequences. Because the Plant Repeat dataset does not contain Mxg sequences but does include
sorghum, we compared the abundances of hits within
these data to a sample of 500,000 sorghum capillary
sequence reads from the sorghum genome project,
which unlike the assembled genome sequence are not
depleted in unassembled (primarily centromeric, pericentromeric and rDNA) repetitive sequences, and thus
more closely mimic our Mxg genome survey dataset.
Because the Mxg and sorghum sequences were generated using different chemistry and the sorghum
sequences were generated from plasmid templates propagated in Escherichia coli, the two datasets may have
different genomic sampling biases. In addition, the read
length of the capillary sequences is substantially longer.
However, if the comparison provides similar results, it is
both an indication of the similarity of repeat content of
the two genomes and an assessment of the two sequencing chemistries in terms of their ability to represent
complex plant genomes. Both read sets match many
types of repeats, which is expected given the overall
highly repetitive nature of Andropogoneae genomes.
Thirteen percent of Mxg reads have a BLAST hit to the
known repeat database at 10-6 compared to 45% of sorghum reads. We attribute the large reduction in the
proportion of Mxg matches to repeat sequences

Page 5 of 18

compared to sorghum to the shorter reads produced by
the 454 technology and the absence of known Mxg
repeats in the Plant Repeat Database. These results also
indicate that a substantial number of Mxg sequences are
not represented within known repetitive sequences.
The overall repeat composition of the two genomes
based on the proportion of repeat classes is highly similar, with the retrotransposon class of repeats forming
more than half of the best sequence matches in both
cases (Figure 2). In both genomes the ribosomal repeats
also occupy a significant fraction of the total, with the
portion of the genome represented by rDNA in sorghum apparently substantially larger than that in Mxg.
The rDNA of both species is likely to form a substantial
portion of the total genome; however, the larger genome
of Mxg may explain the observed lower percentage of
repeats matching rDNA relative to sorghum. The genome of rice contains a 7 Mbp nucleolar organizing
region, which constitutes 1.8% of the fully sequenced
rice genome [32]. The nucleolar organizing region does
not include the 5S ribosomal RNA region, and other
dispersed ribosomal repeats. Thus, the estimates for the
rRNA coding fraction of the genome in sorghum and
rice are broadly consistent with the fraction of the rice
genome responsible for rRNA production. The rDNA
sequences obtained from the survey were fully consistent with the sequences previously deposited for the
Miscanthus genus in GenBank, which further demonstrates the high purity of the Mxg genomic DNA template used for sequencing.
Detection of new repetitive sequences in Mxg

We used the technique of non-cognate assembly [23] to
identify novel high-copy-number repeats in the Mxg
genome. As expected, a large number of Mxg reads
assembled, indicating the presence of highly repetitive
sequences. Based on a coverage estimate that our genome survey contains 1.2% of the Mxg genome, we calculate using the Lander-Waterman equations that three or
more reads that assemble into one consensus sequence
represent a multi-copy sequence present in the Mxg
genome with a probability of 0.96 (thus, the null
hypothesis is rejected at P < 0.05; see [23] for methods).
A total of 20,774 ‘cluster’ sequences were assembled
from the Mxg survey reads that we predict are significantly repetitive (Additional file 3). These ‘clusters’ do
not necessarily each represent an individual repeat
family, since multiple clusters may be derived from different regions of a repetitive element. Also, all the
repeats represented by these clusters are likely present
in at least 100 highly similar copies per (total nuclear)
genome in order to assemble; thus, this analysis will not
detect many repeats of lower copy number. Sampling of
the genome is a stochastic process; therefore, some

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

Page 6 of 18

Figure 2 Classification of repeats detected in Miscanthus × giganteus (Mxg) and sorghum by sequence comparison to the Plant Repeat
Database. Sequence surveys of Mxg and sorghum were matched to the Plant Repeat Database by nucleotide BLAST search. The proportion of
repeats in each class for these two genomes was estimated by comparing the percentage of reads matching repeats of different classes in the
database. (a) Proportion of repeats from surveys of the two species matching general classes of plant repetitive sequence. In both Mxg and
sorghum, retrotransposons are the predominant class of repeats. Transposons are class II (DNA) transposons according to the designations in the
Plant Repeat Database. (b) Further classification into repeat subfamilies, showing differing levels of miniature inverted repeat transposable
element (MITE) and transposable element families in the two species. LINE, long interspersed nuclear element; SINE, short interspersed nuclear
element.

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

Page 7 of 18

repeats present in less than 100 copies may be detected,
and some with more than 100 may not be detected. Of
these assembled, repetitive sequences, 4,394 had no significant BLASTN match to the GenBank nt nucleotide
database and 3,571 had no significant match to the draft
sorghum genome, indicating, as with the comparison to
the plant repeat database, that the Mxg genome harbors
repetitive sequences not found in other sequenced plant
genomes, including close relatives such as sorghum and
maize.
Copy number of each assembled sequence was determined by computing the depth of coverage given by all
genome survey sequences with 90% or greater similarity
across their entire length. We found that 68% of all survey reads match the de novo detected repeats from the
non-cognate assembly analysis. Note that in many cases,
more than one repeat cluster will match a given read; in
this case each read is counted only once. We thus estimate that a minimum of 68% of the Mxg genome is present in approximately 20,000 repeat families of 100 or
more copies.
The ten most-abundant sequences in Mxg by this analysis are annotated in Table 1. The most abundant
sequence in Mxg, a higher-order repeat related to the
sorghum CEN38 centromeric repeat, has an estimated
copy number of over 8,000 per genome in Mxg and
over 2,000 in sorghum. This and similar (<90% identical)
sequences are estimated to account for 0.45% of the
Mxg genome and 1.02% of the much smaller sorghum
genome (Table 1). The three-fold difference in nuclear
chromosome number between the two species (2n = 20
for sorghum versus 3x = 57 for Mxg) likely accounts for

the higher copy number of this centromeric sequence in
Mxg. Since the CEN38 sequence is internally similar
and forms higher-order repeat units, the table of mostabundant sequences based on 90% nucleotide similarity
is headed by CEN38 family repeats, each of which share
a basic repeat unit that is very similar (Additional file 3).
The nine next most abundant sequences in Mxg after
CEN38, which each are present in well over 103 copies
per genome, are predicted to be retrotransposon-derived
sequences, many of them also very similar to sequences
associated with sorghum centromeres (Table 1).
We also compared the relative abundance of specific
homologous repetitive sequences in sorghum with the
abundance of highly similar high-copy sequences in
Mxg. This was accomplished using a strategy of alignment of sorghum bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
sequences to highly similar reads from the Mxg survey
and the 500,000 sorghum capillary trace sequences, and
using this alignment to calculate the approximate copy
number of similar sequences in each genome [23]. This
method allows the comparison of overall repeat class
composition (Figure 2) with the estimates for genomic
copy number of specific homologous repeat families
that are present in both species (Figure 3).
Three sorghum BAC sequences were investigated
from the Joint Genome Institute BAC dataset, one likely
to derive from a centromeric or pericentromeric region
(accession number AC169373) and the others (accession
numbers AC169376 and AC169372) likely representing
euchromatic regions. The euchromatic BACs show that
the repetitive sequences present in these regions of the
sorghum genome are almost all higher copy number in

Table 1 The ten most abundant repetitive sequence clusters detected in the Miscanthus genome
Cluster
ID

Cluster
Estimated copy
Copy number Best
length
number in
in sorghum match in
(bp)
Miscanthus genome
genome
GenBank
nt

Best match in
sorghum
genome

Best match in Plant Repeat Database

137362

3,866

8.82 × 103

2.15 × 103

AC169373
Sorghum

Chromosome 2

AF137608 Sorghum bicolor centromere-associated
repetitive DNA element CEN38

136340

1,441

1.97 × 104

7.73 × 103

No hits

Super contig 18

AY129008 Zea mays CRM centromeric retrotranposon

137115

2,512

4

1.02 × 10

1.90 × 103

No hits

Super contig 20

AY828019 Oryza sativa (japonica cultivar-group) clone
CRR2_CH4-2 CRR2 retrotransposon

136416
137059

1,855
2,586

1.32 × 104
8.27 × 103

1.27 × 103
2.05 × 102

No hits
No hits

Chromosome 10
Chromosome 2

137200

3,655

5.61 × 103

3.68 × 102

No hits

Chromosome 9

137015

2,882

6.83 × 103

7.5 × 101

No hits

Chromosome 7

AY129008 Zea mays CRM centromeric retrotranposon
ZRSiTERTOOT00157 giepum_438D03-1
giepum_Z438D03-1 Z438D03 retrotransposon
SRSiTERTOOT00084 leviathan_98N8-1 leviathan_98N81 retrotransposon
AF078902.1 Sorghum bicolor centromere element
pHind12

137326

3,527

5.56 × 103

3.30 × 102

AF11417
Sorghum

Chromosome 2

AZ922428 MRCot4C10 Sorghum bicolor MRCot
Sorghum bicolor genomic similar to Sorghum bicolor
centromere element pHind12

137201

3,647

5.28 × 103

2.16 × 102

No hits

Chromosome 10

ZRSiTERTOOT00156 giepum_333J11-1hdnm
giepum_Z333J11-1hdnm Z333J11 retrotransposon

135786

2,456

7.82 × 103

1.89 × 102

No hits

Chromosome 4

ORSiTERTOOT00275 osr10 retrotransposon

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

Page 8 of 18

Figure 3 An estimation of copy number of sequences present in three sorghum genomic sequences in sorghum and Miscanthus ×
giganteus (Mxg). Copy number was estimated for regions of the sorghum genome in both sorghum and Mxg. Shown are three completed
sorghum BAC sequences, one centromeric and two euchromatic. Sorghum copy number was estimated by matching to a sequence dataset of
whole-genome sorghum shotgun sequences (red) and the Mxg copy number estimated by comparison to the 454 survey reads (blue) using a
blastZ alignment within a 1,000-bp sliding window. The estimated genomic copy number based on the number of reads matching each
window (y-axis) is plotted against the position of the window on the BAC (x-axis). The nucleotide identity cutoff for this analysis was 90%. The
regions of greatest copy number on BACs AC169372 and AC169376 predominantly match miniature inverted repeat transposable elements
(MITEs), transposons and retrotransposons, which are significantly more abundant in sorghum, while AC169373 contains highly abundant
centromeric repeats, for which the Mxg and sorghum copy numbers agree closely.

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

sorghum than Mxg. This is particularly notable for miniature inverted repeat transposable element (MITE)
sequences. MITEs are known to undergo rapid increases
in copy number [33] and this process likely has
occurred for the sorghum high-copy MITEs since ancestral divergence with Mxg. Notably, the centromeric
repeats from the pericentromeric BAC have the same or
higher copy number in Mxg as in sorghum. This observation possibly reflects more conserved sequence in centromeric repeats than the repetitive euchromatin since
the divergence of Mxg and sorghum. The slightly higher
abundance of the repeat sequences is consistent with
the significantly higher chromosome number of Mxg
[18,34] but could also be the result of differential selection by the two sequencing chemistries employed in this
comparison (Sanger for sorghum, 454 for Mxg) [23].
The strong correlation between the sorghum and Mxg
repeat content for AC169373 indicates that any such
bias is not severe.
Much of the sRNA transcriptome of Mxg corresponds to
repeat sequences identified in the genome survey

To correlate the repeat sequences identified in this
study with the sRNA transcriptome of Mxg, we compared the repeat consensus sequences of clusters constructed using non-cognate assembly with raw data
from deep sequencing of sRNAs from Mxg rhizomes,
stems and inflorescences [35,36]. By sequence matching of the sRNA sequences to our identified repeats,
we found that the vast majority (>94%) of the identified genomic repeat sequences also appear to match
measurable amounts of sRNAs, judging by the presence of matching signatures (Figure 4a). This is the
case regardless of the class of repeat since almost all
repeat families (including rDNA, transposons, retrotransposons and most repeats of unknown classification) shown in Figure 4a match at least one sRNA
signature. In order to compare this result with likely
single-copy sequence from the protein-coding gene
space of Mxg, we also compared the sRNAs to the
‘gene space’ survey reads. These are the survey reads
that matched the sorghum gene models after filtering
for transposon sequences (Figure 1). With one mismatch allowed in either case, a total of 586,765 sRNA
signatures matched the repeat clusters, while 194,821
matched the gene space survey sequences. With no
mismatches permitted, 64,339 reads matched the gene
space survey sequences. Whether a single mismatch
was allowed or not, a relatively small proportion of
gene-space reads match a sRNA signature (Figure 4a).
Thus, the sRNA profile and the genome survey combine to produce strong evidence of abundant repeats
in Mxg that are the origin of much of the cellular
sRNA component.

Page 9 of 18

Most sRNAs from cereals, including grasses, are in the
24-nucleotide size range [35] and thus are likely siRNAs.
In the three sRNA libraries sequenced and analyzed for
this study, between 59 and 70% of the sRNAs were 24
nucleotides in size, and 23 to 30% of the sRNAs from
these libraries matched the repeat sequences identified
from the genome survey. As shown in Figure 4, retrotransposons (class I transposons) produced the largest
portion of sRNA (32%) followed by DNA transposons
(class II transposons). Given the high abundance of retrotransposons in the genome, these results suggest that
siRNAs derived from repeats are the major component
of the Mxg small-RNA transcriptome. Similar findings
were reported in rice and Arabidopsis [26,36].
Correlation between number of sRNA matches and repeat
copy number

Since a whole-genome sequence is not available for Mxg,
the copy number and number of kilobases of each repeat
present in the genome were estimated. This was calculated
from the sequence coverage of each repeat with respect to
the expected coverage and the length of the repeat
sequence. Copy number and repeat size estimates allowed
us to normalize the number of sRNA matches to the
expected content of each repeat in the genome. We
observed a strong correlation between the estimated copy
number of a repeat in the genome and the total amount of
24-nucleotide sRNAs matching the sequence of the repeat
in the combined data from the three libraries (Figure 5).
This correlation was observed even though the number of
sRNA matches was normalized to the estimated total
genomic content of the repeat. The relationship between
sRNA number and minimum copy number of the respective bin is approximately linear (R2 = 0.84). The sRNA
number from each bin differs from the even distribution
expected under the null hypothesis in a statistically significant manner (P < 0.001 using the chi square test). We
repeated this analysis using different bin sizes (from 25 to
200), and in each case the relationship was confirmed.
Although retrotransposons constitute the largest proportion of the genome of any repeat (Figure 2) and produce the largest portion of sRNAs (Figure 4b) in the
transcriptome, they have a relatively small amount of
sRNA matching per kilobase of sequence. The single
highest copy-number repeat, the rRNA, maintains the
highest rate of sRNA matching per kilobase of repeat
sequence in the genome (Figure 5), although a substantial proportion of these sRNAs may be produced as a
result of ribosome degradation rather than sRNA biosynthesis. In the same context rRNA was previously
reported as a major source of sRNAs in Arabidopsis
[26]. The less abundant MITEs matched sRNA at a
higher rate than retrotransposons and a lesser rate than
rRNA (Figure 5), providing evidence for active sRNA

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

Page 10 of 18

Figure 4 Much of the small RNA transcriptome of Miscanthus × giganteus (Mxg) matches high copy number genomic repeats. (a)
Number of Mxg repeats, or gene space sequence reads, matching a small RNA (sRNA), as determined by matching repeat sequences to sRNA
signatures produced by sequencing sRNA from three Mxg tissues. Repeats are annotated by broad category where known. Unclassified repeats
match a sequence in the database without an assigned category; unannotated repeats do not have a database match. Gene space reads are
genome survey reads that match sorghum filtered coding sequences (Figure 1). (b) Percentages of small RNA produced by different repeat
classes. Normalized abundance of small RNA signatures was calculated in transcript per quarter (TPQ) million reads. In addition to the data
shown, telomeres and telomere-associated repeats together produced 0.09% of the total amount of sRNA (a percentage too small to effectively
display in the chart).

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

Page 11 of 18

Figure 5 Correlation between repeat copy number and amount of small RNA per kilobase of matching repeat sequences. Repeats were
binned according to their estimated copy number in the Mxg genome and then divided into categories as in Figure 4a. The number of small
RNA signatures matching the repeat sequence in each category and copy number class divided by the estimated total genomic size of the
repeat class in kilobases is plotted on the y-axis. MITE, miniature inverted repeat transposable element.

biogenesis derived from MITEs in the Mxg genome. An
exception to the correlation between copy number of a
repeat and sRNA production is that few sRNAs matched
retrotransposons of copy numbers higher than 200 (Figure 5). The highest copy-number retrotransposons,
unlike MITEs, may therefore be relatively inactive in
terms of sRNA biogenesis. Thus, small RNA production
may reflect the degree of heterochromatic silencing of
repeats in addition to copy number.
High-coverage survey sequencing reveals ancestral rDNA

The substantial sample of the RNA-coding genome produced by the Mxg genome survey presents an opportunity to test the hypothesis that Mxg originated from a
wide cross between two parental species [11], producing
a highly productive but sterile hybrid. Variants within
rDNA repeats can be identified by mining shotgun genome sequence data for variant units [37]. We used the
same approach to mine reads spanning an informative
region of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) [38] from
the 454 genome survey of Mxg. Reads matching rDNA
were filtered in order to remove those containing low
quality base pairs that could cause false phylogenetic
results. Reads producing an orthologous aligned block
from the second intergenic spacer (ITS2) [39] were then
aligned with known rDNA sequences. Since it has been
proposed that the parents of Mxg are M. sinensis and

M. sacchariflorus [11], sequences from these species
were included in the alignment in addition to the existing Mxg rDNA sequences (accession numbers AJ426562
and AJ426563) [9] and other closely related Andropogoneae rDNA sequences. A phylogenetic tree was then
generated from the ITS2 block using the Bayesian inference method [40,41]. Thus, the 454 survey of the Mxg
genome was used to sample the population of rDNA,
and to explore the parentage of this complex polyploid.
The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 6. It
can be seen that the rRNA species in the Mxg genome
match either M. sacchariflorus (ten reads) or M. sinensis
(nine reads). This result is consistent with the proposal
that Mxg descended by asexual propagation from the
progeny of a hybridization event between M. sacchariflorus and M. sinensis parents.

Discussion
We have completed a survey of the Mxg genome sufficient to give a snapshot of its overall composition and
to aid planning for genome sequencing projects aimed
at the large genome of Mxg and other complex, polyploid crops. The 454 technology used to sequence
approximately 1.2% of the Mxg genome produced a
comparable repeat profile to Sanger capillary shotgun
data for sorghum, indicating that the two technologies
exhibit a similar level of sampling bias and that much of

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

Page 12 of 18

Figure 6 Phylogenetic analysis of Miscanthus × giganteus (Mxg) based on nuclear ribosomal DNA. (a) Sites of variation in a nucleotide
alignment of the ITS1, 5.8S and the ITS2 regions of the rDNA from various Miscanthus species and Mxg survey reads. Reads from the Mxg
genome survey that matched the internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) and the 5.8S rRNA were manually aligned using Sequencher and
McClade to Miscanthus, Maize, sorghum and Saccharum sequences from GenBank and variable residues identified. (b) Phylogenetic tree of Mxg
survey reads together with related species. A Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of the residues from a 150-bp region of ITS2 spanned by several
complete reads from Mxg and shown in bold in (a) was performed using the general time reversible (GTR) model of substitution and a gamma
distribution of the rates of substitutions. Parameters estimated from the last 5,000 trees were used to calculate a posterior probability at each
node and draw a 50% majority rule consensus tree (b). The numbers at the nodes indicate the percentage confidence in the branches as
assessed using the posterior probabilities. The diamonds represent the individual Mxg survey reads from this region.

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

the repeat content is indeed shared by the genomes of
these species. Our results also indicate that GS-FLX 454
pyrosequencing is capable of producing similar datasets
in terms of genome sampling to that used to successfully assemble sorghum. However, assembly of the sorghum genome was achieved using very different data:
capillary sequence data with coverage of 7× to 8×, a
much longer read length than that provided by the GSFLX method, and reads in paired-end configuration
from relatively large molecules. Therefore, we have
demonstrated the genome sampling delivered by the 454
method is suitable for whole-genome survey work. However, greater coverage, further advances in read length
and paired-end technology may be necessary before true
de novo whole-genome sequencing of a genome such as
Mxg is feasible using non-Sanger sequencing [42].
The combination of sRNA profiling with the genome
survey extends to the grasses the earlier findings from
Arabidopsis that high-copy repeats are likely to produce
large amounts of siRNA [26]. In addition, this combination allowed us to determine a clear correlation between
copy number of genomic repeats derived from a survey,
and sRNAs matching a repeat, even when the total
amount of sequence of the repeat class present in the
genome is accounted for. Therefore, it may help to give
insights into the sRNA production process (since sRNA
levels appear in most cases to rise in proportion to both
copy number and content of a sequence in the genome).
A survey of sRNA adds significantly to a genomic
sequence survey alone, since it provides confirmation
that the repeats detected in the survey are both present
and biologically active. Many of the survey reads that
matched sorghum predicted coding regions also
matched sRNA signatures, although the percentage was
not as high as for repeats. While the known retrotransposon sequences were removed, it may be possible that
repetitive sequences remain within the set of ‘gene
space’ reads. Full characterization of the Mxg gene space
is needed to fully interpret this result.
The abundance of sRNA is, when averaged over all
the repeats in a copy number class, roughly in linear
proportion to the content of the repeat in the genome.
This is true even once the result is normalized for the
number of kilobases of the repeat present in the genome, as in Figure 5. This result is consistent with previous surveys [26,36]; however, to our knowledge it has
not yet been shown that repeat copy number alone,
regardless of the amount of DNA for the repeat present
in the genome, is a strong indicator of likely sRNA
abundance. While there are many repeats that form
exceptions to this relationship, it holds true for the average of repeats in a copy number class across a range of
bin sizes. The underlying biology of this relationship in
plant genomes warrants further investigation.

Page 13 of 18

The sRNA survey may also give insight into which
classes of transposable element are the most biologically
active in terms of sRNAs at the time of the survey. The
MITEs present at relatively low copy number in the
genome survey data produce a significant fraction of the
sRNA, indicating that MITE activity is actively silenced
in the vegetatively propagated Mxg [43]. The correlation
between sRNA production and actual transposition
activity is currently unknown. Thus, the sRNA could
indicate either actively transposing elements or strong
and effective silencing. Activation of an abundant class
of transposons, however, has the potential to significantly impact Mxg genome function by generating
somaclonal variants that, even if deleterious, may be
maintained within Mxg populations because of triploid
sterility and exclusively vegetative propagation. While
the effect of mutagenic transposon activity is likely to be
moderated by the redundancy provided by the triploid
genome of Mxg, it is possible that observed phenotypic
variation among Mxg accessions could derive from
transposon activity (a concern in a potential fuel crop).
Thus, further research is necessary to determine
whether the sRNA signatures observed are indicative of
active transposition of class I or II transposons.
We demonstrate that Mxg contains rDNA similar or
identical to that of both presumed parents, M. sinensis
and M. sacchariflorus, in approximately equal quantities.
Nuclei in Mxg with both one and two nucleoli have
been observed [17] with the two being less frequent.
Our result is compatible with the survival in Mxg of two
distinct rDNA species, which may represent the two
nucleoli previously observed [17] in some cells. Ribosomal RNA genes are propagated in a manner that tends
to unify all rDNA units within a hybrid species after
reproductive isolation in a process known as concerted
evolution [37]. While an organism such as Mxg that
propagates through clonal divison may not be expected
to undergo rapid homogenization of rDNA units, evidence from parthenogenetic lizard species suggests that
concerted evolution can operate rapidly even within
asexually reproducing hybrids [44]. Although we are not
aware of any evidence from plants for rapid homogenization of rDNA during asexual propagation, our analysis
of rDNA supports the view that Mxg is derived by asexual propagation of a hybridization event sufficiently
recent to have not yet resulted in a complete homogenization of rDNA. Further research is necessary to identify
the likely rate of homogenization, which could yield a
maximum estimate for the age of this asexually propagated hybrid.
Mxg is sterile, and self-incompatibility is common
within the Miscanthus genus. Although a low-resolution
genetic map has been developed for M. sinensis [45],
these resources are not yet sufficient for positional

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

genetics. Thus, the primary use of Mxg sequence information will be to enable functional genomics efforts.
These goals could be achieved with detailed knowledge
of the protein-coding gene space sequence, which, in
turn, could be accomplished using 454 pyrosequencing.
Despite its (currently) shorter read lengths than capillary
technology, 454 sequencing will likely be suitable for
gene-space sequencing, since the assembly would only
need to produce contigs in the range of 10 kbp, and the
repeat sequences shown to be highly abundant here
could be removed or reduced prior to sequencing. Purification of gene-space could be accomplished by direct
454 sequencing of mRNA [46] or by enrichment of the
protein-coding fraction of the genomic DNA via methods such as methylation filtration or C0t filtration [47].
Since mRNAs vary widely in abundance and are not
expressed in all tissues, it is difficult to arrive at a
whole-gene-space sequence using mRNA alone, even
with the effective normalization procedures now available. Detailed mRNA sequence is often, however, necessary to interpret genomic DNA sequence even in genic
regions and thus makes a useful addition to gene space
sequence. Thus, efforts that target the protein-coding
fraction of the genome, using gene-space enrichment
combined with mRNA sequencing, may represent the
most promising approach in the immediate future. Such
an approach has already been demonstrated for maize
and sorghum [48,49] using genomic fragments cloned
into E. coli strains that restrict methylated (hence typically repetitive) inserts.

Conclusions
We have shown that the 454 survey and non-cognate
assembly method is capable of sampling genomic repeats
in detail from an uncharacterized genome. We show that
by combining the resultant repeat catalog with sRNA
sequencing, a detailed knowledge of both the repetitive
parts of the genome and the sRNA derived from them can
be obtained rapidly. The survey also gives access to rDNA
sequence in a way that makes data available on the parentage of complex crosses such as Mxg. Such data are important because it may be feasible to recreate and improve
upon Mxg as a biofuel crop if the fertile parents of the original hybridization event can be identified. The survey
data provide sequences of several highly variable genomic
regions, in addition to the rDNA sequence, that can be
utilized to identify the most likely parental genotypes of
M. sacchariflorus and M. sinensis, information that could
be used to recreate Mxg. The high level of nucleotide similarity of the Mxg coding regions to sorghum demonstrated
here promises that the sorghum genome may provide a
useful template for an assembly-to-reference strategy for
the Mxg gene space. Improvements in costs and efficiency
offered by 454 and Illumina sequencing make obtaining

Page 14 of 18

gene space sequences of Miscanthus and other Andropogoneae species with similarly complex genomes using
short read technologies a feasible goal.

Materials and methods
Plant material

The M. × giganteus accession ‘UIUC’ was obtained from
a stand of Mxg originally established in the early 1990s
on the Ornamental Horticultural Research Farm at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, using rhizomes obtained from the Chicago Botanical Garden.
Rhizomes from this clonal stand were propagated in
potted soil in a greenhouse under controlled conditions
of 14 hour days and 10 hour nights at 22 to 25°C, and a
brief watering each morning. Leaves from newly
initiated shoots were sampled for DNA analysis.
Each flow cytometry data point shown was conducted
on nuclei isolated from young leaf tissue from a single
greenhouse-grown plant of the genotypes described,
obtained from a collection at the University of Illinois
maintained by Dr J. Juvik. Nuclei stained with propidium iodide were measured for DNA content against
chicken red blood cell standards as described by Arumuganathan and Earle [50]. The analysis was done at
the Flow Cytometry and Imaging Core laboratory,
Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle,
Washington.
M. × giganteus nuclear DNA isolation and sequencing

Nuclei were isolated from 20 g of young Mxg leaf tissue
using a protocol modified from Swaminathan [23].
Instead of using a sodium lauryl sulfate and protease K
to lyse the nuclei, they were lysed by an incubation at
60°C in CTAB lysis buffer (2% CTAB,100 mM Tris
pH9.5, 1.4 M NaCl, 1% PEG 6000, 20 mM EDTA and
0.25% b-mercaptoethanol). The lysate was extracted
twice with neutral, tris buffered, 24:23:1 phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol followed by an extraction with
chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (23:1). Nuclear DNA was
precipitated using isopropanol. The spool of genomic
DNA was washed with 70% ethanol, dried and resuspended in TE. Any contaminating RNA was removed by
an incubation at 37°C with RNaseA and repurification
through additional phenol:chloroform and chloroform
extractions, followed by ethanol precipitation and resuspension in nuclease free water. Mxg nuclear DNA (5 μg)
was supplied to the Roy J Carver Biotechnology Center
at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign [51]
for library preparation and DNA sequencing using the
Roche Genome sequencer FLX system (GS-FLX).
Datasets

Sorghum genome sequences were obtained from two
sources. To characterize repeat content and copy

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

number, we downloaded 500,000 whole genome shotgun
sequences, the sorghum_bicolor.022 portion of the sorghum whole genome shotgun dataset available from
Trace Archive. These reads are unfiltered for repeats
and hence comparable to the data generated by the FLX
runs.
Comparisons to sorghum used the current versions of
the genome assembly and coding sequence annotation:
sbi1 (genome sequence) and Sbi1-4 (coding sequences).
The BAC sequences for the copy number analysis were
downloaded from [GenBank: AC169372, AC169373 and
AC169376]. For classification of known repetitive
sequences we used the plant repeat database [30]. To
match Mxg reads to the sorghum draft genome and
derived sequences, BLASTN was used at expect value
cutoff 10-10 and with the repeat filter on and other settings as default. For comparison between survey
sequences and the Plant Repeat Database, BLASTN was
used at expect value cutoff 10-6 and with repeat filter
off. Matches to each class of repeat were counted and
percentage of each repeat class in the genome calculated, using the codes incorporated into the IDs of the
plant repetitive sequences in the Plant Repeat Database
[30].

Page 15 of 18

copy number analysis. The number of sequences that
aligned to the sorghum BAC window or Mxg repeat
cluster was calculated from the blastz output and used
to calculate copy number using the equation:
Copy number  (N  L) / (c  w)

(1)

N is the number of sequences that match a window
size of w, L is the average length of the sequence and c
the estimated coverage of the survey. For Mxg, we used
the estimate of 0.012 (1.2%) coverage of the total genome. Price et al. [55] estimated the haploid genome size
of sorghum to be 818 Mbp (note that the draft assembly
excludes telomeric, centromeric and rDNA repeats). We
thus calculated the sorghum genome coverage as coverage of the haploid genome for the 500,000 sorghum
capillary sequences at 0.63 (63%). Repeats were sorted
according to the estimated percentage of each in the
Mxg genome, calculated from the repeat cluster
sequence length, genome sequence length and estimated
copy number. The ten most abundant repeats were
identified by excluding all but one cluster annotated
with the same top hit to the Plant Repeat Database.
sRNA isolation, sequencing and analysis

Assemblies to detect novel repeats in Mxg

Overlapping, non-cognate short reads generated by the
GS-FLX run were assembled using the 64 bit manyreads
build of phrap ver 1.080721 [52]. All assemblies were
done on a 16-core Intel Xeon 2.93 GHz server with
128GB DDR2 RAM. Parameters for the phrap assembly
were the same as those used in [23], except that the
minimum overlap length for two reads to be assembled
was 14 bases at 100% nucleotide identity.
Copy number estimation

The 366,648 Mxg reads from the GS-FLX run and
500,000 sequences from sorghum whole-genome shotgun project were first matched using BLAT [53] at 90%
identity cutoff to three fully sequenced sorghum BACs
(accession numbers AC169372, AC169373 and
AC169376). The Mxg and sorghum sequences were also
matched in the same way to the repeat clusters produced by the non-cognate assembly. BLAT was run
with default parameters of a tile size of 11 and a minimum score of 30. Fully cognate alignments of the
sequences identified using BLAT as matching the BACs
or repeat clusters were then created using blastz [54].
Blastz was run with default parameters, aligning reads to
both strands with a word size of 8, no chaining and a
gap-extension penalty of 30. The threshold for maximal
scoring segment pair (MSP) and gapped alignment
threshold were set to 3,000. Any sequence that did not
match these alignment criteria was excluded from the

A total of 6,736,105 sRNA signatures (18 to 32 nucleotides in length) from three Solexa flow cell lane data
sets produced from three libraries from greenhousegrown Mxg ’UIUC’ tissues (leaf, inflorescence, and rhizome) were mapped to 20,774 Mxg repeat clusters
(derived by non-cognate assembly of genomic survey
reads, above) using GMAP (Genomic Mapping and
Alignment Program) [56]. The program parameters
were set to report all possible hits for every sRNA signature. Only sRNA hits with coverage equal to 100% and
matching identity greater than or equal to 94% were
used in the subsequent analyses. These parameters allow
only one mismatch between the sRNA signature and the
aligned genomic locus. For the gene space survey reads,
this analysis was also performed with 100% coverage
required and also 100% identity.
For the analysis of sRNA matches versus copy number, sRNA signatures were matched to the repeat cluster
collection using GMAP as above, with up to one mismatch per signature allowed. For each repeat sequence,
the number of small RNAs matching the sequence was
divided by the estimated number of kilobases of the
repeat present in the Mxg genome. This estimate of
kilobases per genome was arrived at by using Equation
1 to give an estimate of copy number multiplied by the
length of the sequence in kilobases. The total number of
sRNA signatures per kilobase in the genome for the
repeat clusters was then summed across each class of
repeat within copy number bins; for example, all sRNA

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

matching all MITE sequences expected to occur
between 151 and 200 times per genome was summed to
create a single value for MITE sRNA matches in this
repeat class.
Phylogenetic analysis

Reads that matched Mxg nuclear ribosomal sequences
[GenBank: AJ426562 and AJ426563] at 90% identity
were identified using BLAT. There were 114 unique
reads that matched either one or both Mxg nuclear ribosomal sequences using default BLAT parameters. Additional Miscanthus, Zea, Saccharum and Sorghum
nuclear ribosomal sequences previously used to construct phylogenetic trees for Miscanthus and Saccharum
[9] were obtained from GenBank. The sequences and
the reads with a minimum overlap of 50 bp and 80%
identity to AJ426562 were assembled using Sequencher
(Gene Codes, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). Regions of variations within the reads were quantified. The greatest variation lay within a 150-bp region of ITS2 (Figure 4).
The alignment matrices were then trimmed by removing
gaps present in more than 95% of the sequences and
truncating the sequence limits to this 150-bp region, to
account for poor resolution of indels, especially in
homopolymeric regions, in the sequencing method, and
maximize the number of survey reads used in the analysis. A total of 19 Mxg survey reads met these criteria
throughout the 150-bp ITS region and were retained for
this analysis. Phylogenetic relationships were estimated
using Bayesian inferences conducted in MrBayes version
3.1.2. The general time reversible model taking into
account the shape of gamma distribution was used, as
suggested by Modeltest3.7, as the most appropriate
model of sequence evolution. The analysis was run for
1.5 × 106 generations with sampling at intervals of 100
generations, thus generating 15,000 sampled trees. A
50% majority rule consensus tree was generated to
assign a posterior probability for each node using the
last 5,000 trees sampled. The tree was visualized in Dendroscope [57].
Data access

The 454 sequence data described in this publication
have been deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read
Archive [SRA:SRA010791.2]. The sRNA data discussed
in this publication have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene
Expression Omnibus [GEO:GSE20056].
Additional file 1: Estimates of nuclear DNA content in several
Miscanthus accessions, by flow cytometry.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/gb-2010-11-2r12-S1.pdf ]

Page 16 of 18

Additional file 2: Flow cytometric histogram of M. × giganteus nuclei
stained with propidium iodide.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/gb-2010-11-2r12-S2.pdf ]
Additional file 3: A table (tab delimited text format) of all repetitive
sequences detected in the Miscanthus genome.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/gb-2010-11-2r12-S3.txt ]

Abbreviations
BAC: bacterial artificial chromosome; bp: base pair; EST: expressed sequence
tag; ITS: internal transcribed spacer; MITE: miniature inverted repeat
transposable element; Mxg: Miscanthus × giganteus; rDNA: DNA encoding
the tandem array of rRNA genes; siRNA: small interfering RNA; sRNA: small
RNA.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Jack Juvik (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) for
providing tissue samples of Miscanthus accessions, Geoff Benn to for growth
and sampling of plants used in DNA and RNA isolations, Dr Karen Hudson
for critical reading of the manuscript, and the Roy J Carver Biotechnology
Center at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for generating the
454 sequencing data. Funding for the genome survey work and all analysis
was provided by the Energy Biosciences Institute to SPM, MEH, RM and DR,
funding for sRNA data was provided by NSF DBI #0638525 to BCM and PJG.
Author details
1
Department of Crop Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA. 2Energy Biosciences Institute and Institute for
Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
61801, USA. 3Department of Plant and Soil Sciences, Delaware Biotechnology
Institute, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716, USA. 4DOE Joint
Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA 94598, USA. 5Center for Integrative
Genomics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
6
Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
7
Department of Plant Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA. 8College of Marine Studies, University of Delaware,
Newark, DE 19711, USA.
Authors’ contributions
KS participated in the design, carried out all DNA-related experiments,
performed most of the data analysis, prepared Figures 2, 3 and 6 and
helped draft the manuscript. MA performed the sRNA data analysis,
prepared Figures 4 and 5 and helped with the manuscript. KV wrote scripts,
performed non-cognate assembly, copy number estimation and annotation
of the repeat survey data. EDP performed the RNA purification from Mxg
tissues, coordinated sequencing-by-synthesis of sRNAs, processed the raw
sequencing data and helped with the manuscript. IH helped develop the
comparative approaches with the sorghum genome. DR participated in the
design, helped with coverage calculations, proofed the manuscript and
helped develop comparative approaches to sorghum. AKA performed flow
cytometry and interpreted genome size measurements. RM directed
genome size measurements and helped with comparative genomics
discussions. PJG and BCM directed sRNA sequencing and contributed to the
manuscript. SPM participated in the design, grew Mxg tissue for DNA and
sRNA extraction and helped with the analysis and manuscript. MEH
conceived the study, wrote scripts, performed some analyses, prepared
Figure 1 and drafted the manuscript. All the authors read and approved the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 7 July 2009 Revised: 4 October 2009
Accepted: 3 February 2010 Published: 3 February 2010

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

References
1. Brown RH: A difference in N use efficiency in C3 and C4 plants and its
implications in adaptation and evolution. Crop Sci 1978, 18:93-98.
2. Beadle CL, Long SP: Photosynthesis - is it limiting to biomass production.
Biomass 1985, 8:119-168.
3. Moore G, Devos KM, Wang Z, Gale MD: Cereal genome evolution: grasses,
line up and form a circle. Curr Biol 1995, 5:737-739.
4. Paterson AH, Freeling M, Sasaki T: Grains of knowledge: genomics of
model cereals. Genome Res 2005, 15:1643-1650.
5. Bennetzen JL: Patterns in grass genome evolution. Curr Opin Plant Biol
2007, 10:176-181.
6. Paterson AH, Bowers JE, Bruggmann R, Dubchak I, Grimwood J,
Gundlach H, Haberer G, Hellsten U, Mitros T, Poliakov A, Schmutz J,
Spannagl M, Tang H, Wang X, Wicker T, Bharti AK, Chapman J, Feltus FA,
Gowik U, Grigoriev IV, Lyons E, Maher CA, Martis M, Narechania A, Otillar RP,
Penning BW, Salamov AA, Wang Y, Zhang L, Carpita NC, et al: The Sorghum
bicolor genome and the diversification of the grasses. Nature 2009,
457:551-556.
7. Schnable PS, Ware D, Fulton RS, Stein JC, Wei F, Pasternak S, Liang C,
Zhang J, Fulton L, Graves TA, Minx P, Reily AD, Courtney L, Kruchowski SS,
Tomlinson C, Strong C, Delehaunty K, Fronick C, Courtney B, Rock SM,
Belter E, Du F, Kim K, Abbott RM, Cotton M, Levy A, Marchetto P, Ochoa K,
Jackson SM, Gillam B, et al: The B73 Maize genome: complexity, diversity
and dynamics. Science 2009, 326:1112-1115.
8. Vettore AL, da Silva FR, Kemper EL, Souza GM, da Silva AM, Ferro MI,
Henrique-Silva F, Giglioti EA, Lemos MV, Coutinho LL, Nobrega MP,
Carrer H, França SC, Bacci Júnior M, Goldman MH, Gomes SL, Nunes LR,
Camargo LE, Siqueira WJ, Van Sluys MA, Thiemann OH, Kuramae EE,
Santelli RV, Marino CL, Targon ML, Ferro JA, Silveira HC, Marini DC,
Lemos EG, Monteiro-Vitorello CB, et al: Analysis and functional annotation
of an expressed sequence tag collection from tropical crop sugarcane.
Genome Res 2003, 13:2725-2735.
9. Hodkinson TR, Chase MW, Lledó MD, Salamin N, Renvoize SA:
Phylogenetics of Miscanthus, Saccharum and related genera
(Saccharinae, Andropogoneae, Poaceae) based on DNA sequences from
ITS nuclear ribosomal DNA and plastid trnL intron and trnL-F intergenic
spacers. J Plant Res 2002, 115:381-392.
10. Hodkinson TR, Chase MW, Renvoize SA: Characterization of a genetic
resource collection for Miscanthus (Saccharinae, Andropogoneae,
Poaceae ) using AFLP and ISSR PCR. Ann Bot 2002, 89:627-636.
11. Hodkinson TR, Chase MW, Takahashi C, Leitch IJ, Bennet MD, Renvoize SA:
The use of DNA sequencing (ITS and trnL-F), AFLP, and fluorescent in
situ hybridization to study allopolyploid Miscanthus (Poaceae). Am J Bot
2002, 89:279-286.
12. Chen YH, Chen C, Lo CC: Studies on anatomy and morphology in
Saccharum-Miscanthus nobilized hybrids: transmission of tillering,
ratooning, adaptation and disease resistance from Miscanthus spp. J
Agric Assoc China 1993, 164:31-45.
13. Greef JM, Deuter M: Syntaxonomy of Miscanthus × giganteus Greef et
Deu. Angewandte Botanik 1993, 67:87-90.
14. Hodkinson TR, Renvoize SA: Nomenclature of Miscanthus giganteus
(Poaceae). Kew Bulletin 2001, 56:759-760.
15. Clifton-Brown JC, Lewandowski I, Andersson B, Basch G, Christian DG,
Kjeldsen JB, Jørgensen U, Mortensen JV, Riche AB, Schwarz K-U, Tayebi K,
Texeira F: Performance of 15 Miscanthus genotypes at five sites in
Europe. Agron J 2001, 93:1013-1019.
16. Heaton EA, Dohleman FG, Long SP: Meeting US biofuel goals with less
land: the potential of Miscanthus. Global Change Biol 2008, 14:1-15.
17. Linde-Laursen IB: Cytogenetic analysis of Miscanthus ’Giganteus’, an
interspecific hybrid. Hereditas 1993, 119:297-300.
18. Lafferty J, Lelly T: Cytogenetic studies of different Miscanthus species
with potential for agricultural use. Plant Breeding 1994, 113:246-249.
19. Beale CV, Long SP: Can perennial C4-grasses attain high efficiencies of
radiant energy conversion in cool climates?. Plant Cell Environ 1995,
18:641-650.
20. Beale CV, Bint DA, Long SP: Leaf photosynthesis in the C4-grass
Miscanthus × giganteus, growing in the cool temperate climate of
southern England. J Exp Bot 1996, 47:267-273.
21. Naidu Sl, Al-Shoabi KA, Raines CA, Moose SP, Long SP: Cold-tolerant C4
photosynthesis in Miscanthus × giganteus. Plant Physiol 2003,
132:1688-1697.

Page 17 of 18

22. Wang D, Portis AR, Moose SP, Long SP: Cool C4 photosynthesis: Pyruvate
Pi Dikinase expression and activity corresponds to the exceptional cold
tolerance of carbon assimilation in Miscanthus × giganteus. Plant Physiol
2008, 148:557-567.
23. Swaminathan K, Varala K, Hudson ME: Global repeat discovery and
estimation of genomic copy number in a large, complex genome using
a high-throughput 454 sequence survey. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:132.
24. Wicker T, Schlagenhauf E, Graner A, Close TJ, Keller B, Stein N: 454
sequencing put to the test using the complex genome of barley. BMC
Genomics 2006, 7:275.
25. Quinn NL, Levenkova N, Chow W, Bouffard P, Boroevich KA, Knight JR,
Jarvie TP, Lubieniecki KP, Desany BA, Koop BF, Harkins TT, Davidson WS:
Assessing the feasibiality of GS FLX pyrosequencing for sequencing the
Atlantic salmon genome. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:404.
26. Lu C, Singh Tej S, Luo S, Haudenschild C, Meyers BC, Green PJ: Elucidation
of the small RNA component of the transcriptome. Science 2005,
309:1567-1569.
27. Rayburn AL, Crawford J, Rayburn CM, Juvik JA: Genome size of three
Miscanthus species. Plant Mol Biol Rep 2009, 27:184-188.
28. Bennett MD, Bhandol P, Leitch IJ: Nuclear DNA amounts in angiosperms
and their modern uses - 807 new estimates. Ann Bot 2000, 86:859-909.
29. The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative: Analysis of the genome sequence of
the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 2000, 408:796-815.
30. Ouyang S, Buell CR: The TIGR Plant Repeat Databases: a collective
resource for the identification of repetitive sequences in plants. Nucleic
Acids Res 2004, 32:D360-363.
31. Haberer G, Young S, Bharti AK, Gundlach H, Raymond C, Fuks G, Butler E,
Wing RA, Rounsley S, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Mayer KF, Messing J: Structure
and architecture of the maize genome. Plant Physiol 2005, 139:1612-1624.
32. International Rice Genome Sequencing Project: The map-based sequence
of the rice genome. Nature 2005, 436:793-800.
33. Feschotte C, Jiang N, Wessler SR: Plant transposable elements: where
genetics meets genomics. Nat Rev Genet 2002, 3:329-341.
34. Kim J, Klein PE, Klein RR, Price HJ, Mullet JE, Stelly DM: Chromosome
identification and nomenclature of Sorghum bicolor. Genetics 2005,
169:1169-1173.
35. Comparative Sequencing of Plant Small RNAs. http://smallrna.udel.edu/
project_data.php.
36. Nobuta K, Lu C, Shrivastava R, Pillay M, De Paoli E, Accerbi M, ArteagaVazquez M, Sidorenko L, Jeong D-H, Yen Y, Green PJ, Chandler VL,
Meyers BC: Distinct size distribution of endogenous siRNAs in maize:
Evidence from deep sequencing in the mop1-1 mutant. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2008, 105:14958-14963.
37. Stage DE, Eickbush TH: Sequence variation within the rRNA gene loci of
12 Drosophila species. Genome Res 2007, 17:1888-1897.
38. Alvarez I, Wendel JW: Ribosomal ITS sequences and plant phylogenetic
inference. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 29:417-434.
39. Baldwin BG: Phylogenetic utility of the internal transcribed spacers of
nuclear ribosomal DNA in plants: An example from the Compositae. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 1992, 1:3-16.
40. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogeny.
Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
41. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MRBAYES 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
42. Hudson ME: Sequencing breakthroughs for genomic ecology and
evolutionary biology. Mol Ecol Res 2008, 8:3-17.
43. Feschotte C, Pritham EJ: DNA transposons and the evolution of
eukaryotic genomes. Annu Rev Genet 2007, 41:331-369.
44. Hillis DM, Moritz C, Porter CA, Baker RJ: Evidence for biased gene
conversion in concerted evolution of ribosomal DNA. Science 1991,
251:308-310.
45. Atienza SG, Satovic Z, Petersen KK, Dolstra O, Martin A: Preliminary genetic
linkage map of Miscatnhus sinensis with RAPD markers. Theor Appl Genet
2002, 105:946-952.
46. Toth AL, Varala K, Newman TC, Miguez FE, Hutchison SK, Willoughby DA,
Simons JF, Egholm M, Hunt JH, Hudson ME, Robinson GE: Wasp brain
gene expression supports an evolutionary link between maternal
behavior and eusociality. Science 2007, 318:441-444.
47. Fu Y, Hsia AP, Guo L, Schnable PS: Types and frequencies of sequencing
errors in methyl-filtered and high C0t maize genome survey sequences.
Plant Physiol 2004, 135:2040-2045.

Swaminathan et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R12
http://genomebiology.com/2010/11/2/R12

Page 18 of 18

48. Fu Y, Emrich SJ, Guo L, Wen TJ, Aluru S, Ashlock DA, Schnable PS: Quality
assessment of maize assembled genomic islands (MAGIs) and
experimental verification of predicted novel genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2005, 102:12282-12287.
49. Bedell JA, Budiman MA, Nunberg A, Citek RW, Robbins D, Jones J, Flick E,
Rholfing T, Fries J, Bradford K, McMenamy J, Smith M, Holeman H, Roe BA,
Wiley G, Korf IF, Rabinowicz PD, Lakey N, McCombie WR, Jeddeloh JA,
Martienssen RA: Sorghum genome sequencing by methylation filtration.
PLoS Biol 2005, 3:e13.
50. Arumuganathan K, Earle ED: Estimation of nuclear DNA amounts of plants
by flow cytometry. Plant Mol Biol Rep 1991, 9:229-241.
51. W.M. Keck Center for Comparative and Functional Genomics. http://
www.biotech.uiuc.edu/centers/Keck.
52. Green P: Phrap, SWAT, CrossMatch University of Washington 2008.
53. Kent WJ: BLAT - The BLAST-Like Alignment Tool. Genome Res 2002,
12:656-664.
54. Schwartz S, Kent WJ, Smit A, Zhang Z, Beartsch R, Hardison RC, Haussler D,
Miller W: Human-mouse alignments with BLASTZ. Genome Res 2003,
13:103-107.
55. Price JH, Dillon SL, Hodnett G, Rooney WL, Ross L, Johnston JS: Genome
evolution in the genus Sorghum (Poaceae). Ann Bot 2005, 95:219-227.
56. Wu TD, Watanabe CK: GMAP: A genomic mapping and alignment
program for mRNA and EST sequences. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:1859-1875.
57. Huson DH, Richter DC, Rausch C, Dezulian T, Franz M, Rupp R:
Dendroscope: An interactive viewer for large phylogenetic trees. BMC
Bioinformatics 2007, 8:460.
doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-2-r12
Cite this article as: Swaminathan et al.: Genomic and small RNA
sequencing of Miscanthus × giganteus shows the utility of sorghum as a
reference genome sequence for Andropogoneae grasses. Genome
Biology 2010 11:R12.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
