<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>gb-2003-4-7-r44.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="petere"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Open Access

Volume
et al.
Sylvestre
2003 4, Issue 7, Article R44

Research

comment

Long mRNAs coding for yeast mitochondrial proteins of
prokaryotic origin preferentially localize to the vicinity of
mitochondria

Julien Sylvestre, Stéphane Vialette, Marisol Corral Debrinski and
Claude Jacq

Correspondence: Claude Jacq. E-mail: Claude.Jacq@biologie.ens.fr.

Published: 6 June 2003

reviews

Address: Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm 75230 Paris cedex O5, France.

Received: 26 November 2002
Revised: 27 February 2003
Accepted: 7 May 2003

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44
The electronic version of this article is the complete one and can be
found online at http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/7/R44

Background: Subcellular messenger RNA localization is important in most eukaryotic cells, even
in unicellular organisms like yeast for which this process has been underestimated. Microarrays are
rarely used to study subcellular mRNA localization at whole-genome level, but can be adapted to
that purpose. This work focuses on studying the repartition of yeast nuclear transcripts encoding
mitochondrial proteins between free cytosolic polysomes and polysomes bound to the
mitochondrial outer membrane.

Subcellular messenger RNA localization appears to be of
great importance in a wide variety of biological contexts [1–4].

In this study, we focus on the subcellular localization of yeast
nuclear mRNAs encoding mitochondrial proteins. We wish to
show that the genome-wide approach used in this work is

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44

information

Background

interactions

Conclusions: Mitochondrial biogenesis requires concerted expression of the many genes whose
products make up the organelle. In the absence of any clear transcriptional program, coordinated
mRNA localization could be an important element of the time-course of organelle construction.
We have built a 'MitoChip' localization database from our results which allows us to identify
interesting genes whose mRNA localization might be essential for mitochondrial biogenesis in most
eukaryotic cells. Moreover, many components of the experimental and data-analysis strategy
implemented here are of general relevance in global transcription studies.

refereed research

Results: Combining biochemical fractionations with oligonucleotide array analyses permits
clustering of genes on the basis of the subcellular sites of their mRNA translation. A large fraction
of yeast nuclear transcripts known to encode mitochondrial proteins is found in mitochondrial
outer-membrane-bound fractions. These results confirm and extend a previous analysis conducted
with partial genomic microarrays. Interesting statistical relations among mRNA localization, gene
origin and mRNA lengths were found: longer and older mRNAs are more prone to be localized to
the vicinity of mitochondria. These observations are included in a refined model of mitochondrial
protein import.

deposited research

Abstract

reports

© 2003 Sylvestre et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.
to that purpose. This for yeast mitochondrial proteins of studyofouter membrane. localization at whole-genome of mitochondria adapted
has been polysomes and polysomes boundimportant into prokaryotic originmRNA in unicellular organisms like yeast for which this process
cytosolic underestimated. Microarrays are to the used most eukaryoticnuclear transcripts encoding the vicinity level, but can be
Subcellular messenger RNA localization is rarely mitochondrialsubcellular preferentially localize to mitochondrial proteins between free
Long mRNAs coding work focuses on studying the repartition yeast cells, even

R44.2 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 7, Article R44

Sylvestre et al.

both useful and adaptable to addressing global mRNA localization studies. In most eukaryotic cells, mitochondrial biogenesis relies on the expression of hundreds of nuclear genes
whose protein products have to be properly addressed to
mitochondrial compartments in synchrony with the biogenesis program. Seven of the eight major products encoded by
the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial DNA are
hydrophobic subunits of respiratory complexes in the mitochondrial inner membrane. The translation of the subunits
occurs on ribosomes bound to the mitochondrial inner membrane, which implies membrane-bound nuclear-encoded
translation activators. Localization of the translation process
in the same cellular compartment ensures synthesis of mitochondrially encoded proteins near sites of their assembly into
multimeric respiratory complexes [5].
All other mitochondrial proteins are encoded by the nuclear
genome. The way these proteins are addressed to mitochondria has been studied extensively for the past three decades.
Best known are the mitochondrial targeting sequence (mts),
which is an amino-terminal presequence, and its interactions
with the mitochondrial receptor-translocator TOM-TIM
(transporter of the outer membrane - transporter of the inner
membrane) [6,7]. The steps leading to the translated precursor in its mature form, localized in the mitochondria, have
been fully analyzed by in vitro experiments [8,9]. Nevertheless, various observations suggest that this general posttranslational targeting mechanism could be preceded, in
vivo, by many processes. In particular, mRNA localization
could guide protein translation to the vicinity of mitochondria. Thirty years ago, ribosome-binding sites were observed
on yeast mitochondria [10]. Additionally, the time lag
between the completion of translation and the beginning of
the import process is very short, which suggests that the two
processes might be tightly connected [11].
More recently, several studies in human and in yeast cells
presented compelling evidence that some mRNAs are localized close to mitochondria in vivo [12,13]. In previous studies
we used microarray analyses to explore the mRNA targeting
process [14]. These analyses, which concerned only half of the
mitochondrial 'mRNA localizome', showed that a proportion
of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial transcripts are addressed
to the vicinity of the mitochondrion. They are translated on
polysomes associated with the outer mitochondrial membrane, which, in a way, is reminiscent of the case of the seven
mRNAs encoded by the mitochondrial genome and translated
on the mitochondrial inner membrane. In the study reported
here we carried out a more complete analysis based on an
improved purification protocol; this explored all the yeast
genes. These experiments provided results for 95% of nuclear
genes known to encode a mitochondrial product. This more
complete dataset revealed interesting statistical relations
involving mRNA localization. These relations and the generality of our micropurification/microarray (MPMA) approach
are discussed.

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/7/R44

Results and discussion
Subcellular fractionation
We adapted an improved micropurification procedure to
obtain enriched mitochondrial fractions. The purity of these
fractions in terms of presence or absence of mitochondria was
routinely assessed by northern blots or by reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR analysis using genes for mitochondrial,
cytosolic and plasma membrane proteins as molecular probes
(see Additional data files). However, the mitochondrial fractions thus obtained always included mRNAs from other intracellular membranes (data not shown). This is not surprising,
as mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum are known to be
highly interconnected in S. cerevisiae [15]. This was taken
into account in the following analyses. After growth in galactose and RNA extraction, the amplified samples were treated
according to the manufacturer's instructions. To assess
mRNA quality, a quality-control was included in the protocol
before amplification. Figure 1 summarizes the biological
question and the experimental strategy.

Microarray data analysis strategy
A major difficulty in studying mRNA localization with microarrays is microarray normalization. All current methods of
normalizing microarray data were developed to allow
between-chip comparison in transcriptome expression experiments [16,17]. The hypotheses they rely on - the constant
expression levels of most genes across experiments, for
instance - do not hold true when different subcellular mRNA
populations are compared. In a previous experiment, Cy5/
Cy3 ratios were ranked into percentiles and averaged to compare different experiments [14]. Diehn et al. [18] adapted a
moving-average analysis to study membrane-bound polysomes. In both cases, the method of combining results from
different experiments was not straightforward and the question of the reproducibility was not readily addressed.
In this study, a more adequate experimental design and a
more complete dataset allowed us to design a more direct
strategy, which is statistically more satisfactory. Three mRNA
populations were isolated and hybridized to distinct chips:
MP (mitochondrial and membrane bound polysomes); FP
(free cytosolic polysomes); and TOT (total polysomes, that is,
the whole transcriptome). This experiment was repeated
twice, giving six results for each probe set. Pairwise quantile
normalization was then applied (MP1 and MP2; FP1 and FP2;
TOT1 and TOT2). The expression levels were then calculated
(see Materials and methods for details). Spike mRNAs
present on Affymetrix gene chips were used to check whether
an additional normalization step was necessary to allow comparisons among the three normalized couples. As these exogenous control mRNAs, which were introduced before RNA
amplification and chip hybridization, gave almost identical
signals for the six chips, no further correction was applied
[19]. Of the probe sets 3% had at least one expression value
under an arbitrary threshold. They were eliminated from subsequent analysis, to filter against uncertain extremely low

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/7/R44

Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 7, Article R44

Sylvestre et al. R44.3

(a)
comment

MP
FP
Protein

TOT

Mitochondria

Cytoplasm

MP

reviews

Nucleus

mRNA

(b)
TOT

MP

FP
reports

(c)
log(MP) - log(FP)
MFI =

Figure 1
A microarray analysis to study the subcellular localization of mRNAs encoding mitochondrial proteins. (a) After cycloheximide blocking of translation,
polysomes associated with mitochondria (MP) and free cytoplasmic polysomes (FP) were purified and the corresponding mRNA species were purified and
treated for analysis (b) using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays. The total mRNA population from spheroplasts (TOT) was extracted in parallel
with the two other fractions and used as a reference. (c) After normalization and signal treatment, a synthetic localization value called MFI (membrane
versus free index) was calculated as indicated for each mRNA. Ninety-seven percent of the probe sets, corresponding to 96% of the genes and 94% of the
mitochondrial genes, have MFI values assigned to them.

MFIi = (log(MPi) - log(FPi))/log(TOTi) where (i = 1 or 2).

The MFI values were compared to the 'Mitochondrial Localization of RNA' (MLR) values previously obtained from a different experimental approach. This comparison was limited
to the available MLR data as the previous analysis covered

The localization results for 97% of the probe sets, corresponding to 96% of the genes (95% of the genes encoding mitochondrial products) are available online at [20]. Individual results
or lists of results can be retrieved by ORF name, gene name or
Affymetrix probe set identifier (affxid). To facilitate data

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44

information

Many mitochondrial proteins have relatively high MFIs
Validation

interactions

The MFI1 and MFI2 values were very close, indicating good
reproducibility of the whole process. Hence, the MFI1 and
MFI2 values were averaged. The methodology described
above, in particular the normalization procedure and the utilization of the total mRNA population (TOT), can be easily
generalized to efficiently analyze larger-scale experiments
involving more subcellular mRNA populations and more
chips.

only about half the genome. Despite quite different experimental designs, the comparison resulted in good correlation
values, thereby validating our new approach. More precisely,
previous localization values were calculated using data from
one to six independent experiments. Figure 2 is a plot of the
rank correlation coefficient between new values (MFI) and
old values (MLR) as a function of the number of experiments
included in the former. The graph includes 95% confidence
intervals calculated with non-parametric bootstrap [20]. The
correlation increases quite sharply from one to four experiments, after which the curve is almost flat, with a correlation
coefficient between ranks of above 0.6 from four to six experiments. This clearly demonstrates that MFIs more accurately
quantify the localization than the previous MLRs.

refereed research

intensities. A localization parameter called MFI (for membrane versus free index) was defined for each triplet of chips
(MP1, FP1, TOT1 and MP2, FP2, TOT2) and each transcript by
the formula:

deposited research

log(TOT)

Spearman correlation coefficient
between MLR and MFI

R44.4 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 7, Article R44

Sylvestre et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/7/R44

because it shows that a large proportion of the mRNAs coding
for mitochondrial proteins is actually localized to the vicinity
of mitochondria. Thus, what had been previously observed by
various experimental approaches is confirmed and quantified
at a genome-wide level.

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1
2
3
4
5
6
Number of cDNA microarray experiments

A critical point in such an approach is the procedure used to
purify the mitochondria. The basic protocol used for isolation
of mitochondria-associated polysomes is very similar to the
previous procedure published by Butow's group [10]. However, we previously observed [14] that the linear sucrose gradient step was not necessary to obtain reliable results.
Accordingly our results are consistent with those previously
obtained by Butow's group on a limited set of genes. However
it should be emphasized that this purification protocol does
not lead to pure mitochondrial fractions. Considerable contamination by diverse membrane fractions is generally considered unavoidable; nevertheless these contaminants do not
affect the general conclusion drawn from the results of Figure
3: the nuclear genes known to code for mitochondrially localized products are represented in the two extreme values of the
MFI curve.

Figure 2
Comparison of the high-density oligonucleotide analyses (MFI) with the
previous cDNA microarray analyses (MLR). A Spearman rank correlation
coefficient between the MFI values obtained in this work and the previous
MLR values from previous experiments was established as a function of
the number of MLR experiments. The MFI experiments, which are more
accurate, provide results for more than 95% of the yeast genes. Number
of genes for which the MLR was calculated: one experiment, 1,268; two
experiments, 632; three experiments, 412; four experiments, 247; five
experiments, 110; six experiments, 94.

Common features of mRNAs that are preferentially
translocated to the vicinity of mitochondria

interpretation, MFIs were grouped in 10 evenly divided gene
classes. For instance, a mitochondrial gene belonging to MFI
class 10 has its MFI among the genome's 10% highest, and
hence its mRNA is much enriched in mitochondrial outermembrane-bound polysomes. Figure 3 presents the genomewide distribution of MFI values and highlights two lists of
mitochondrial genes with extreme MFI values. More precisely, the mitochondrial genes listed on the right of the plot
have MFI values among whole-genome highest 5% (the upper
half of MFI class 10) and correspond to mitochondria-localized transcripts. In contrast, the list of mitochondrial genes
on the left of the plot have MFI values among whole-genome
lowest 5% (the lower half of MFI class 1) and correspond to
transcripts that are translated on free cytosolic polysomes.
The subcellular localization of many yeast proteins is reasonably well known. We used the public database MIPS CYGD
[21] as a reference. We then plotted the empirical cumulative
distribution functions of the MFIs for mRNAs belonging to
three separate known subcellular protein localization categories (Figure 4). As expected, genes encoding cytosolic proteins have low MFIs, whereas genes encoding plasma
membrane and endoplasmic reticulum proteins have higher
MFIs. If mitochondrial proteins were all translated from free
cytosolic polysomes, one would expect the corresponding
curve to be quite similar to that of cytosolic proteins. In contrast, the curve for mRNAs encoding mitochondrial proteins
is between the two reference curves for mRNAs translated on
cytosolic and on membrane-bound polysome fractions,
respectively. This is the most provocative aspect of these data

By making batches of alignments, Karlberg et al. [22] classified the yeast mitochondrial proteome on the basis of each
gene's evolutionary origin. The main categories they considered were: ABE (yeast genes having at least one homolog in
Archaea, one homolog in Bacteria and one homolog in the

Our extensive global study shows that more than 88 genes
coding for mitochondrial products exhibit an MFI value over
0.15. This means that the corresponding mRNA are, in normal growth conditions in galactose, more prone to be in found
in polysomes associated with mitochondria. We addressed
the specific features shared by this important mRNA class. It
should be kept in mind that for the six cases we examined, the
3' untranslated region (3' UTR) sequence of these mRNAs
contains the mitochondrial addressing information that can
target, in vivo, a tagged version of this RNA fragment [14].
Significantly, this in vivo targeting process did not require
any translational activity as it was observed with non-translatable RNAs produced by RNA polymerase III. If this
observation might be extended to the whole class of mRNAs
that are translocated to the vicinity of mitochondria, it does
not explain the raison d'être of this targeting process. To
address this question we systematically analyzed the influence of several other parameters on mRNA localization
(codon bias, codon adaptation index, amino-acid content,
presence and length of the mitochondrial presequence as predicted by mitoprot or targetP, intra-mitochondrial protein
localization, 3' UTR M-FOLD structure, and so on). Two characteristics - the phylogenetic origin and the length of the
genes - turned out to correlate with the mRNA localization
properties.

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/7/R44

Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 7, Article R44

Sylvestre et al. R44.5

350
comment

Mitochondrial genes
in MFI class 10
(among 10% highest MFIs)

Mitochondrial genes
in MFI class 1
(among 10% lowest MFIs)
300

200

150

0
−0.4

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

deposited research

50

reports

100

reviews

Number of genes

250

MSW1
MTF2
ILV1
AEP2
TOM70
MRPS5
RPO41
CBS2
ISM1
AAC3
ABC1
MGM1
SLS1
YTA12
MRS1
MEF1
TIM54
OCT1
MET13
TRM1
MMT2

QCR7
COX7
COX12
MRS5
CYC1
ATP16
ATP18
COX4
PET100
AAC1
COX6
TRX3
ATP15
ATP5
MRPL39
ATP17
INH1
ATP20
SFC1

0.5

Figure 3
Whole-genome MFI distribution. Individual results for most of the yeast genes are available at [29]. As examples, genes which are known to code for
mitochondrially localized products and belonging to the two extreme 5% MFI values are listed; thus the mRNAs of genes named on the right are translated
to the vicinity of mitochondria.

Concerning the length of the proteins, which in yeast is
closely connected to the length of the mRNA, we found a

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44

information

Our previous study had shown that there was indeed a link
between the eukaryotic/prokaryotic origin of a mitochondrial
gene and the localization of the corresponding transcript. We
found a statistically significant relation when we applied a
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to explain 358 MFI
values by four categorical evolutionary origin values. To further characterize this relation, a multiple comparison among
the four groups was done. Figure 5 highlights the results of

that more detailed analysis, with 99% confidence intervals for
each category's mean MFI. This reveals significant and
ordered differences, with (ABE, BE) having more mitochondrial-membrane-localized translation than (E, SC). Although
the results are not amenable to experimental test, this statistical observation might help in better understanding the
cooperation between the nuclear and the organellar genomes.
Interestingly, like the few remaining mitochondrially
encoded genes translated near the inner membrane, the
nuclear genes coming from the mitochondrial genome tend to
be translated in the vicinity of the outer mitochondrial
membrane.

interactions

eukaryotes); BE (at least one homolog in both a bacterium
and a eukaryote); E (at least one homolog in a eukaryote); and
SC (genes specific to S. cerevisiae). They concluded that the
yeast mitochondrial proteome has a dual origin, around half
of it having originated from the endosymbiont genome, while
the other part evolved from the nuclear genome.

refereed research

MFI (100 bars)

Empirical cumulative
distribution function

R44.6 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 7, Article R44

Sylvestre et al.

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
MFI

Figure 4
Cumulative distribution of MFIs and protein localization. Empirical
cumulative distribution functions of MFIs for mRNAs encoding proteins
localized in three kinds of subcellular compartments. The left (green) and
right (red) curves correspond to reference populations of 388 cytosolic
and 245 plasma membrane/endoplasmic reticulum localized proteins,
respectively (corresponding mRNAs are known to be translated on free
cytosolic and membrane-bound polysomes). The 358 mitochondrial
proteins are in the curve in the middle (blue), their mRNA localization
being between that of the two reference populations.

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/7/R44

This means that several mechanisms can control the mRNA
targeting process. Some of these are essential; for instance,
we recently obtained direct evidence for the genes ATP2 and
ATM1 that the 3' UTR sequence is necessary for functional
mitochondria. This suggests that, in the case of these two
genes, the mRNA targeting process linked to the 3' UTR
signal is required for mitochondrial biogenesis [25]. In addition, the initiation of translation of many mRNAs is, at least
in part, controlled by their 3' UTR structure. Thus, early
translation cis (mts, 3' UTR) and trans (NAC) factors act synergistically to control the targeting of many mRNAs coding
for mitochondrial products. It has recently been demonstrated that ribosomes can 'sense' features of nascent
polypeptide chains and modulate translation accordingly.
Our results suggest that the mts and the 3' UTR could be such
features that control mRNA translation in connection with
the mitochondrial import process [26].
What could be the role of the mRNA targeting process in the
biogenesis of mitochondria? Our favourite hypothesis is to
imagine that it might be part of the control of the time course
of production of mitochondrial proteins. One can reasonably
propose that assembly of large mitochondrial complexes
requires a temporally controlled import of the different subunits. Our observation would imply that the largest subunits
are more likely to be the basic elements of the architecture of

surprising statistical relation between mRNA length and
mRNA localization; longer mRNAs tend to be localized to the
vicinity of mitochondria (correlation coefficient: 0.67; see
Figure 6).

Evolutionary origin

George et al. [23] recently proposed a molecular mechanism
and a model for the coupling of translation and translocation
of mitochondrial mRNAs in vivo. Their model is based on the
experimental observation that the nascent-polypeptide-associated complex (NAC) promotes interaction of the ribosome
with the mitochondrial surface in vivo. Lithgow's two-step
model proposes that in an early phase most mitochondrial
mRNAs begin to be translated in the cytosol, whereas in the
late phase, when a ribosome eventually encounters the surface of a mitochondrion, the mRNA molecule remains 'stuck'
to the mitochondrion until its translation is completed. On
average, longer mRNAs have more ribosome-NAC complexes, which results in a higher affinity for mitochondrial
outer membrane. Interestingly, in a quite different context,
flock-house virus mRNA polymerase is translated on Drosophila mitochondria while its amino-terminal sequence is
inserted into the mitochondrial membrane [24]. That example shows that the existence of a mitochondrial targeting
sequence (mts) and a mitochondria-localized mRNA is not
contradictory. In addition to the coordinated action of NAC
and mts, in vivo RNA targeting analyses have shown that the
3' UTR contains sufficient information to address the corresponding RNA to the vicinity of mitochondria [14].

ABE
'Prokaryotic' genes
BE
E
'Eukaryotic' genes
SC

0

0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18
95% Tukey-Cramer confidence
intervals on mean MFI

Figure 5
Relationship between phylogenetic categories of genes coding for
mitochondrial proteins and their MFI values. Mitochondrial proteins were
previously grouped into four classes corresponding to: SC, 56 genes
specific to S. cerevisiae; E, 115 genes with homologs in eucaryotes
exclusively; BE, 80 genes with homologs in bacteria and eucaryotes; ABE,
100 genes with homologs in archaea, bacteria and eucaryotes. Genes of
prokaryotic origin are in red, and those of eukaryotic origin in green. Bars
are Tukey-Cramer 99% confidence intervals. This graph shows a very
significant effect of the prokaryotic/eukaryotic origin of genes on the MFI
of their mRNAs.

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44

Genome Biology 2003,

10,000

information

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44

interactions

Mitochondria-bound polysomes and free cytoplasmic polysomes were purified as described by Ades and Butow [30],
with few modifications. To convert cells to spheroplasts, they
were treated for 60 min with Quantazyme (1,000 U per g per
wet weight cells) (Quantum Appligene, Illkirch, France) at
30°C with shaking. Spheroplasts were allowed to regenerate
for 3 h with gentle shaking at 28°C in 1 M sorbitol, 1%
bactopeptone, 1% yeast extract, 0.1% KH2PO4, 0.12%
(NH4)2SO4 and 2% galacotose. Regeneration was stopped by
adding cycloheximide to a concentration of 300 µ/ml and 20
min later the culture was poured over frozen 1 M sorbitol, 200
µ/ml cycloheximide. The spheroplasts were harvested and
washed with 1 M sorbitol, 200 µ/ml cycloheximide. Onetwentieth of the spheroplast volume was frozen at -80°C. The
rest of the spheroplasts were homogenized in 6 ml of the following breaking buffer: 0.6 M mannitol, 30 mM Tris-HCl pH
7.4, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM magnesium acetate, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 200 µ/ml cycloheximide, 2,000 U/g yeast protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) 10,000 units RNAsin ribonuclease
inhibitor (Promega, Madison, WI) and 500 µ/ml heparin.
Cells were disrupted with 15 strokes using a glass Teflon pestle. The homogenate was centrifuged at 4,500 rpm for 10 min;
the pellet was once again disrupted and centrifuged. Both
homogenates were combined and centrifuged twice to eliminate unbroken cells and nuclei. The resulting supernatant
was further centrifuged at 11,000 rpm for 30 min. The pellet
of crude mitochondria associated with polysomes was washed
twice in mannitol-polysome buffer before storage at -80°C.
Free cytoplasmic polysomes were purified from the postmitochondrial supernatant by sedimentation through a step
gradient of 2 M and 0.5 M sucrose, each of these solutions
prepared in 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM
magnesium acetate, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 200 µ/ml
cycloheximide, 600 U/g yeast protease inhibitor cocktail
(Sigma) 2,500 units RNAsin ribonuclease inhibitor

refereed research

This study shows that a combination of subcellular fractionation, high-density oligonucleotide arrays and an appropriate
data-analysis strategy can reveal subcellular mRNA localization at a genome-wide level. Such approaches, which rely on
biochemical purification, require rigorous independent controls, as it can be problematic to distinguish between mRNAs
associated with mitochondria and with other cellular membranes. In the case of yeast mitochondrial fractions, which
always co-purified with endoplasmic reticulum membranes,
we checked, by in vivo experiments, that several mRNAs coding for mitochondrially localized proteins are actually
addressed to the vicinity of mitochondria [12]. The global
analysis presented here, which is based on oligonucleotide
arrays, describes two subcellular localizations for mRNAs
from which mitochondrially localized proteins are translated.
Such a dual localization is clearly independent of the biochemical contaminants of mitochondrial fractions. This confirms and extends our previous study [14] showing that
mRNAs of prokaryotic origin are preferentially localized to

Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain CW04 (isonuclear to W3031B: MATa, leu2-3, ura3-1, trp1-1, ade1-2, his3-11, can1-100)
was used. Yeast was grown in a galactose-rich medium (1%
bacto-yeast extract, 1% bactopeptone, 0.1% KH2PO4, 0.12%
(NH4)2SO4, 2% galactose).

deposited research

the mitochondrial complexes. This assumption should be
amenable to experimental assessment. This mitochondrial
mRNA targeting process is not specific to S. cerevisiae. Several studies in various human cells have shown that some specific mRNAs can be found next to mitochondria [27,28],
which strongly suggests that our observation can be applied
to many organisms.

Cell culture and fractionation

reports

Figure 6
Mitochondrial mRNA localization and mRNA length. The MFI values of
358 genes known to have mitochondrially localized products are plotted
against the corresponding mRNA length (semi-log scale). The Pearson
correlation coefficient between MFIs and log mRNA length is 0.67. The
red dots correspond to genes of prokaryotic origin (ABE in Figure 5). The
higher number of nascent polypeptide-chain-associated complexes (NAC)
found on the longer mRNAs could attract the corresponding polysomes
to the vicinity of mitochondria (see text for details).

Materials and methods

reviews

1000
mRNA length (amino acids)

Conclusions

Sylvestre et al. R44.7

the vicinity of mitochondria. Moreover, this new analysis
shows an unexpected relationship between mRNA length and
localization. It looks as if the primitive mRNA mitochondrial
targeting process has been predominantly conserved for
longer mRNAs, a feature that might be connected with the
mitochondrial biogenesis program. The 'MitoChip' database
we compiled, and which is available online ([29] and Additional data files), should help in designing new experiments,
on a gene-by-gene basis, to test and refine this model. We are
currently generalizing this kind of mRNA localization analysis to other types of cells and subcellular fractions.

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−0.05
−0.1
−0.15
−0.2
100

Volume 4, Issue 7, Article R44

comment

MFI

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/7/R44

R44.8 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 4, Issue 7, Article R44

Sylvestre et al.

(Promega) and 500 µ/ml heparin. The gradients were
centrifuged at 40,000 rpm for 20 h at 4°C using the TST41 Ti
rotor. The pellet, containing free cytoplasmic polysomes, was
used for RNA extraction.

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/7/R44

tions examined (Additional data file 7); figure legends and
titles (Additional data file 8), and a full dump of the online
database (Additional data files 9 and 10). Each row of the
database is composed of the following columns: Gene Name,
ORF, Affymetrix Id, MFI Value and MIPS Localization.

RNA was extracted from spheroplasts, mitochondria-bound
polysomes and free cytoplasmic polysomes using the RNeasy
Protect MIDI kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA).

Acknowledgements

Oligonucleotide array hybridizations and data analysis

We thank J.J. Daudin, L. Gautier and P. Marc for helpful discussions and
comments on the manuscripts. This project was supported by grants from
the Ministère de la Recherche and AFM (MNM 2000).

Detailed information on this aspect of the experiments can be
found in Additional data files and at [29] All the raw-values
and pictures (.cel and .dat files) are available for download.
For each of the six arrays, mRNA quality was controlled (Agilent Bioanalyzer; Agilent, Palo Alto, CA) before hybridization.
Data analysis was carried out using the Affy Package (L. Gautier and R. Izarry, unpublished), which is part of Bioconductor R bundle. Classical normalization procedures, built on the
assumption that most genes expression values do not vary
across arrays, could not be applied for all six arrays. Therefore, arrays were normalized on a pairwise basis using the
Bolstad method: MP1 with MP2; FP1 with FP2 and TOT1with
TOT2. The Bolstad method averages independently perfect
match and mismatch signal intensity values among chips at
each quantile level, which reshapes the entire intensity distributions to make them comparable. Quantile normalization
tends to align intensity boxplots and flatten MvA plots. We
then checked whether spike mRNAs gave similar results for
the six chips; as this was almost the case, no further correction was applied. Expression values were then computed
using Affymetrix's playerout algorithm. Genes (3% of total)
that had at least one of the six intensity values under an arbitrary threshold were discarded from further analysis. Interestingly, when conducted with MAS5.0, the analysis gave the
same kinds of results, but with larger variability.

Link between localization and evolution categories
We used standard one-way analysis of variance. Multiple
comparison analysis was then applied using the TukeyKramer test with α = 1%. This test is known to be somewhat
conservative for unequally sized subpopulations. The Bonferroni test gave the same results (ABE, BE) > (E, SC).

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.
15.

Additional data files

Additional data files available with the online version of this
paper and from [29] comprise supplementary figures showing: the effect of quantile normalization on MvA plots and
boxplots of log-intensities (Additional data file 1); log-intensities for spike mRNAs (Additional data file 2); MFI for replicate 1 (chips MP1, FP1, TOT1) versus MFI for replicate 2
(chips MP2, FP2, TOT2) (Additional data file 3); ANOVA
results (Additional data files 4 and 5); comparison of the
length of genes coding for mitochondrial proteins and cytoplasmic proteins in yeast (Additional data file 6); analysis of
the quality of RNA purified from the two polysomal prepara-

16.

17.

18.
19.

Palacios IM, Johnston DS: Getting the message across: the intracellular localization of mRNAs in higher eukaryotes. Annu Rev
Cell Dev Biol 2001, 17:569-614.
Chartrand P, Singer RH, Long RM: RNP localization and transport in yeast. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2001, 17:297-310.
Okita TW, Choi SB: mRNA localization in plants: targeting to
the cell's cortical region and beyond. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2002,
5:553.
Steward O: mRNA at synapses, synaptic plasticity, and memory consolidation. Neuron 2002, 36:338-340.
Sanchirico ME, Fox TD, Mason TL: Accumulation of mitochondrially synthesized Saccharomyces cerevisiae Cox2p and
Cox3p depends on targeting information in untranslated
portions of their mRNAs. EMBO J 1998, 17:5796-5804.
Schatz G: Protein transport: The doors to organelles. Nature
1998, 395:439-440.
Roise D, Schatz G: Mitochondrial presequences. J Biol Chem 1988,
263:4509-4511.
Neupert W, Brunner M: The protein import motor of
mitochondria. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2002, 3:555-565.
Pfanner N: Protein sorting: recognizing mitochondrial
presequences. Curr Biol 2000, 10:R412-R415.
Kellems RE, Butow RA: Cytoplasmic-type 80 S ribosomes associated with yeast mitochondria. I. Evidence for ribosome
binding sites on yeast mitochondria. J Biol Chem 1972, 247:80438050.
Verner K: Co-translational protein import into mitochondria:
an alternative view. Trends Biochem Sci 1993, 18:366-371.
Corral-Debrinski M, Blugeon C, Jacq C: In yeast, the 3' untranslated region or the presequence of ATM1 is required for the
exclusive localization of its mRNA to the vicinity of
mitochondria. Mol Cell Biol 2000, 20:7881-7892.
Ricart J, Izquierdo JM, Di Liegro CM, Cuezva JM: Assembly of the
ribonucleoprotein complex containing the mRNA of the
beta-subunit of the mitochondrial H+-ATP synthase requires
the participation of two distal cis-acting elements and a
complex set of cellular trans-acting proteins. Biochem J 2002,
365:417-428.
Marc P, Margeot A, Devaux F, Blugeon C, Corral-Debrinski M, Jacq
C: Genome-wide analysis of mRNAs targeted to yeast
mitochondria. EMBO Rep 2002, 3:159-164.
Achleitner G, Gaigg B, Krasser A, Kainersdorfer E, Kohlwein SD,
Perktold A, Zellnig G, Daum G: Association between the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria of yeast facilitates
interorganelle transport of phospholipids through membrane contact. Eur J Biochem 1999, 264:545-553.
Hoffmann R, Seidl T, Dugas M: Profound effect of normalization
on detection of differentially expressed genes in oligonucleotide microarray data analysis. Genome Biol 2002,
3:research0033.1-0033.11.
Schadt EE, Li C, Ellis B, Wong WH: Feature extraction and normalization algorithms for high-density oligonucleotide gene
expression array data. J Cell Biochem Suppl 2001, Suppl 37:120125.
Diehn M, Eisen MB, Botstein D, Brown PO: Large-scale identification of secreted and membrane-associated gene products
using DNA microarrays. Nat Genet 2000, 25:58-62.
Hill AA, Brown EL, Whitley MZ, Tucker-Kellogg G, Hunter CP, Slonim DK: Evaluation of normalization procedures for

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44

http://genomebiology.com/2003/4/7/R44

20.

22.
23.

25.

26.
27.

deposited research

29.
30.

reports

28.

Sylvestre et al. R44.9

reviews

24.

oligonucleotide array data based on spiked cRNA controls.
Genome Biol 2001, 2:research0055.1-0055.13.
Tibshirani RJ: An Introduction to the Bootstrap. London, UK: Chapman
& Hall; 1993.
Mewes HW, Frishman D, Guldener U, Mannhaupt G, Mayer K,
Mokrejs M, Morgenstern B, Munsterkotter M, Rudd S, Weil B: MIPS:
a database for genomes and protein sequences. Nucleic Acids
Res 2002, 30:31-34.
Karlberg O, Canback B, Kurland CG, Andersson SG: The dual origin of the yeast mitochondrial proteome. Yeast 2000, 17:170187.
George R, Walsh P, Beddoe T, Lithgow T: The nascent polypeptide-associated complex (NAC) promotes interaction of
ribosomes with the mitochondrial surface in vivo. FEBS Lett
2002, 516:213-216.
Miller DJ, Ahlquist P: Flock house virus RNA polymerase is a
transmembrane protein with amino-terminal sequences sufficient for mitochondrial localization and membrane
insertion. J Virol 2002, 76:9856-9867.
Margeot A, Blugeon C, Sylvestre J, Vialette S, Jacq C, Corral-Debrinski M: In Saccharomyces cerevisae, ATP2 mRNA sorting to the
vicinity of mitochondria is essential for respiratory function.
EMBO J 2002, 21:6893-6904.
Gong F, Yanofsky C: Instruction of translating ribosome by nascent peptide. Science 2002, 297:1864-1867.
Rings EH, Buller HA, de Boer PA, Grand RJ, Montgomery RK, Lamers
WH, Charles R, Moorman AF: Messenger RNA sorting in enterocytes. Co-localization with encoded proteins. FEBS Lett 1992,
300:183-187.
Heinrich PC, Schmelzer E, Northemann W, Kaiser C, Witt I: Rat
liver cytochrome c oxidase subunits IV and V: cell-free synthesis as larger molecular weight precursors, mRNA sizes
and sites of synthesis. Prog Clin Biol Res 1982, 102:149-159.
LGM MitoChip Project [http://www.biologie.ens.fr/lgmgml/Mito]
Ades IZ, Butow RA: The products of mitochondria-bound cytoplasmic polysomes in yeast. J Biol Chem 1980, 255:9918-9924.

Volume 4, Issue 7, Article R44

comment

21.

Genome Biology 2003,

refereed research
interactions
information

Genome Biology 2003, 4:R44

</pre>
</body>
</html>
