<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Laughter and humor as complementary and alternative medicines for dementia patients</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2010, 10:28. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-10-28"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Masatoshi Takeda, Ryota Hashimoto, Takashi Kudo, Masayasu Okochi, Shinji Tagami, Takashi Morihara, Golam Sadick, Toshihisa Tanaka"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Takeda et al. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2010, 10:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/10/28

Open Access

DEBATE

Laughter and humor as complementary and
alternative medicines for dementia patients
Debate

Masatoshi Takeda*, Ryota Hashimoto, Takashi Kudo, Masayasu Okochi, Shinji Tagami, Takashi Morihara, Golam Sadick
and Toshihisa Tanaka

Abstract
Background: The number of dementia patients has increased worldwide, with an estimated 13.7 million dementia
patients in the Asia Pacific region alone. This number is expected to increase to 64.6 million by the year 2050.
Discussion: As a result of advances in research, there several pharmacological therapies available for the treatment of
dementia patients. However, current treatments do not suppress the disease process and cannot prevent dementia,
and it will be some time before these goals are realized. In the meantime, complementary and alternative medicine
(CAM) is an important aspect in the treatment of dementia patients to improve their quality of life throughout the long
course of the disease. Considering the individuality of dementia patients, applicability of laughter and humor therapy is
discussed. Even though there are many things that need to be elucidated regarding the mechanisms underlying the
beneficial effects of laughter and humor, both may be good CAM for dementia patients if they are applied carefully and
properly.
Summary: In this debate article, the physiological basis and actual application of laughter and humor in the treatment
of dementia patients are presented for discussion on the applicability to dementia patients.
Background
Because of the rapidly increasing elderly population, the
need for psychogeriatric services will increase in coming
years. In particular, a faster aging of the population has
been observed in Asian countries compared with that in
Western countries. The World Health Organization has
proposed that for a society to be called 'aging', the proportion of elderly citizens (aged 65 years and older) must
be 7%. Once this proportion reaches 14%, a society
becomes an 'aged society' [1]. It took 24 years for Japan to
move from an aging society (in 1970) to an aged society
(in 1994); in comparison, in most Western countries this
process takes 60-120 years [1]. Korea is expected to
become an aged society by 2019, only 19 years after
becoming an aging society (2000).
Considerable progress has been made in psychogeriatric services as a result of increased knowledge of brain
science, neuroscience, molecular genetics, brain imaging,
and many other new technologies [2]. The mechanisms
* Correspondence: mtakeda@psy.med.osaka-u.ac.jp
1

Department of Psychiatry, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine,
Suita, Japan

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

underlying the cognitive impairment in dementia
patients are now understood because of findings from
brain science and neuropsychological investigations [3,4].
Electrophysiology (e.g. electroencephalography topography, event-related potentials (ERP), and magnetoencephalography (MEG), brain imaging (e.g. magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), positron emission tomography (PET) and
even newer technologies, such as near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) and magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS), are versatile tools available to confirm psychogeriatric diagnoses [5]. Furthermore, genetic information
is routinely used to evaluate the risk, as well as the prognosis, of a disease and a patient's response to drug treatment [6].
Treatment of behavioral and psychological symptoms
of dementia (BPSD) remains one of the most unmet
needs in psychogeriatrics [7,8], with more effective pharmacological [9,10] and non-pharmacological interventions [11-13] needed. Psychogeriatrics is, however, a
clinical subspecialty in which treatment should be
directed towards the person as a whole. Consideration of
the person and holistic care are essential, including a bio-

© 2010 Takeda et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Takeda et al. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2010, 10:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/10/28

psycho-socio-ethical evaluation of each patient, because
the life of the elderly is so different [1]. Furthermore, psychogeriatric services can be applied to patients in the prestages of dementia, including those with mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) [14,15] and subjective cognitive
impairment (SCI) [16]. Dementia patients, including
those with MCI and SCI, can benefit from psychogeriatric services, and the specific application of laughter and
humor therapy in the treatment of these patients is discussed in the present article.
Dementia patients require individualized and life-long
intervention

In 2005, it was reported that there were 13.7 million
dementia patients in the Asia Pacific region alone and
that this number is expected to increase to 64.6 million by
the year 2050, a 4.7-fold increase in just 45 years [1]. In
addition to its high prevalence, the considerable disruption to patients' daily lives, the burden to caregivers, and
the long duration of the disease make dementia, especially Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most malignant disease of our time.
The symptoms of AD differ between individual
patients. At the onset of dementia in some patients, certain personality traits that had been well controlled in the
past become accentuated, whereas in others there is a
'loss of personality', where the uniqueness of the patient's
personality is lost. Some patients show a more rapid deterioration of cognitive function, whereas others show a
slower rate of cognitive decline. Some patients exhibit
various types of BPSD, whereas others exhibit few abnormal behaviors [7]. Furthermore, the physical, personal,
familial, economic, and social environments differ
between patients. Thus, each patient should be evaluated
as an individual in terms of his/her needs for intervention, taking into account previous social functioning,
family structure, and the patient's living environment in
order to deliver the most appropriate care. Interventions
for dementia patients need to be individualized further
taking into consideration the different genetic and environmental factors that are specific to each patient.
The premorbid mental capacity differs between subjects and the symptoms exhibited by dementia patients
vary quite widely. Considering the difference in symptoms of dementia patients, a more individualized treatment and management program should be considered
taking into account of the emotional and affective
responses of each patient individually. In this respect, the
possibility of using laughter and humor therapy as a complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) for the
treatment of dementia patients is discussed below.

Page 2 of 7

Discussion
Laughter as a CAM

Although modern medical science has enabled correct
diagnoses to be made and proper treatments to be initiated for acute diseases caused by exogenous pathogenic
factors, there are still numerous chronic, incurable diseases caused by endogenous factors, such as cancer,
dementia, hypertension, diabetes, chronic pain etc., for
which there is no effective treatment, leaving patients
with these conditions to suffer. To facilitate the better
management of these chronic diseases, recent attention
has focused on the use of CAM, together with Oriental
and traditional medicines [17]. CAM is defined by the
American Cancer Society as '...supportive methods used
to complement evidence-based treatment. Complementary therapies do not replace mainstream treatment and
are not promoted to cure disease. Rather, they control
symptoms and improve well-being and quality of life'[18].
In contrast, alternative therapies, or alternative medicine,
involve non-mainstream treatments that are sometimes
used by patients instead of orthodox treatments. Examples of CAM include music therapy, drama therapy, aromatherapy, animal-assisted therapy, gardening, horse
riding, exercise, bathing, herbal medications, acupuncture, moxibustion, shiatsu, and yoga among others [19].
However, these therapies have not been well defined.
Some are simply based on legend or belief, whereas others are traditionally applied but without any scientific
basis.
It is widely accepted that a patient's emotional state will
affect the course of the disease. Human emotional behavior can be either negative or positive. Negative emotional
behavior is accompanied by disgust, fear, or alarm, which
induces a prompt, narrowed response to the stimulus
responsible for the life crisis. The 'fight-or-flight'
response is the general outcome of negative emotions, in
which the sympathetic autonomic nervous system is
dominant. Conversely, in safe and relaxing situations,
positive emotional behavior is associated with joy, play,
and humor, with predominant functioning of the parasympathetic system, which induces responses of
extended open behaviors that are helpful in learning new
behavioral patterns. Laughter associated with a pleasant
feeling is often observed under positive emotional conditions.
Laughter has a unique position in CAM. The benefits
of laughter have been recognized historically. As stated
by Bertrand Russell, 'Laughter is the most inexpensive
and most effective wonder drug. Laughter is a universal
medicine'. Laughter has been regarded as beneficial for
human health for a long time, with some of the benefits

Takeda et al. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2010, 10:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/10/28

Page 3 of 7

attributed to laughter including improved immunological
[20] and endocrinological [21] responses and increased
pain tolerance [22]. Laughter therapy, humor therapy,
laughter meditation, and laughter clubs all have unique
implications as group programs and as self-management
techniques. For practitioners to implement credible programs and effectively teach self-management techniques,
further empirical research on the physical, psychosocial,
and placebo effects of laughter and humor needs to be
conducted.

the temporal amygdala may provide emotional coloring
to perceptions and aid in understanding humor [26,27].
Finally, the ventral pontomedullary center for laughter
coordinates facial expressions, expirations, and emotional
vocalization.
The expression of laughter depends on two partially
independent neuronal pathways. One is the 'involuntary'
system involving the amygdala, thalamic, hypothalamic
and subthalamic areas, and the dorsal brain stem [27]; the
other is 'voluntary' and originates in the premotor opercular areas, leading through the motor cortex and the
pyramidal tract to the ventral brain stem.
The neural circuit underlying laughter may have three
main brain components: (i) cognitive areas, such as sections of the frontal lobe that help a person understand the
situation; (ii) a movement area (probably the supplemental motor area) that triggers muscle movements to induce
a smile or laughter; and (iii) an emotional component that
actuates the perception of happiness after an amusing
experience, possibly facilitated by the nucleus accumbens
[28].

Physiology of laughter and smiling

Speech and laughter are unique to humans. Although
there is considerable information regarding the neuronal
representation of speech, little is known about the neural
mechanisms of laughter. As described by Charles Darwin,
laughter, which is a ubiquitous and unique maneuver of
humans that results in a totally defenseless posture
involving movement of such a wide area of musculature,
should have some beneficial meaning in terms of the evolution of this species [23]. Laughter should mean a lot to
our lives.
Newborn babies smile within the first 5 weeks after
birth and laugh within the first 4 months. Some smiles
are voluntary and smiling can be differentiated into 16
different expressions [24], but there is only one expression of laughter. When we smile, the mouth angles are
lifted and the orbits of the eye become thin and surrounded by wrinkles as a result of the simultaneous contraction of the muscularis zygomaticus major and
orbicularis oculi. In addition to these muscles, when a
person is laughing a wider area of the musculature,
including facial, pharyngeal, and respiratory muscles, is
simultaneously contracted [24].
Laughter and smiling are usually produced as a message
of good will to others. In primates, facial expressions
showing bared teeth mean friendliness and primates use
these expressions to transmit their sociability and the fact
that they have no hostile feelings. Because some forms of
smiling are voluntary and easily faked, laughter, which
requires a more synergetic contraction of the wider musculature, is believed to have evolved in humans to express
a secure, safe message to others.
Neural circuits of laughter and smiling

Laughter is the physiological opposite of crying and is
usually an expression of happiness involving typical facial
movements and contractions of the respiratory muscles
[25]. Neural correlates for laughter may include the anterior cingulate gyrus, which provides emotional consciousness to an individual's experience and is partially
under the control of the frontal cortex [26]. The caudal
hypothalamus is also involved, acting as the center coordinating emotional changes, including laughter, whereas

Neural circuits of humor

Humor can be broadly defined as 'something that is, or is
designed to be, comical or amusing'. More specific definitions vary, but humorous communication certainly
causes increased feelings of happiness and laughter in
those who respond to it, whether due to witty comments
or amusing behavior.
Freud's psychodynamic viewpoint described humor as
the strongest form of the defense mechanism that allows
an individual to face problems and avoid negative emotion [29]. Humor is believed to be effective in distancing
oneself, framing problems with perspective, and proactively managing distress [30-32].
Although physiological research on the effects of
humor on the body is only just developing, there may be
quantifiable health care benefits of humor. Research
involving additional measurements of a sense of humor,
including self-reported instruments, peer ratings, and
comedy monologues, suggests that humor moderates the
impact of stressful life events on mood disturbances, such
as depression and anxiety, salivary immunoglobulin, and
positive affect [33-35]. Similar moderating effects of
humor have been identified for depression, insomnia,
loneliness, and self-esteem, although not for anxiety [3639].
Good humor makes people laugh just like pain makes
people cry, but humor requires complex neural circuits.
Humor is perceived at the beginning as surprise or disharmony, then the paradox is solved, and, finally, the
punch line is understood in association with a pleasant
feeling. The appreciation of humor requires a wide area
of neural circuits covering attention, working memory,

Takeda et al. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2010, 10:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/10/28

flexible thinking, extraction of word meaning, and positive mood. Patients with lesions in the right frontal lobe
have difficulty appreciating humor because of impaired
integration of cognition and emotion. Different brain
areas are activated by jokes/puns and comics [40]. Humor
is present in any social situation, and the nature of what is
perceived as amusing varies widely among individuals,
societies, and cultures. Everyone enjoys laughing, but a
misjudged humorous comment can cause offense, so
although laughter is almost always positive, humor itself
can provoke mixed emotional responses.
Classification of laughter and smiling

Laughter and smiling can be classified into one of three
categories based on evolutional staging as follows: (A)
that evoked by a release of tension; (B) that associated
with pleasant feelings; and (C) that used for social communication (Table 1).
Laughter or smiling caused by a release of tension is the
most basic biological form, and occurs spontaneously in
an individual who experiences release from a strenuous
tension. The purpose of laughter in this context has been
hypothesized to be the release of inner energy accumulated in response to the stress [23]. Laughter to relax is
important for the maintenance of mental health. Longlasting mental tension is accompanied by a hyperaroused
state of the sympathetic nervous system, which can be
released by laughing [24]. From the viewpoint of mental
health, laughter evoked in response to the release of tension is the most important.
The second category, laughter that is provoked or
accompanied by pleasant feelings, can be further subdivided into laughter caused by: (B1) fulfillment of instinctive needs; (B2) fulfillment of expectations; (B3) a feeling
of superiority; and (B4) recognition of mix-ups. As early
as 5 weeks after birth, babies smile after feeding. This is
the first laughter observed in human life, elicited by a fulfillment of instinctive needs. Similar laughter is observed
in adults after a good meal or a good sleep. When our
expectations are realized, especially after hard work and/
or endeavor, we usually laugh in association with pleasant
feelings, which can be amplified by colleagues sharing in
our achievement, with the most explosive form of laughter then being observed. Laughter caused by a feeling of
superiority is a type of scornful laughter or a cold smile
that has been proposed by some researchers to be the
prototype of laughter [23]. Laughter associated with disharmony and/or mismatch is caused by simple mistakes
or funny happenings that cause no harm. This sort of
laughter can be elicited only when the disharmony is sudden, unexpected, and the results of the misunderstanding
are harmless.

Page 4 of 7

Table 1: Relationship between laughter/smiling and the
progression of dementia
Type of laughter/smile

Preservation in dementia
Early stages

Advanced stages

A1. Release from strong
tension

+

+

A2. Release from weak
tension

+

+

B1. Fulfillment of instinctive
needs

+

+

B2. Fulfillment of
expectations

+

-

B3. Feelings of superiority

+

-

B4. Feelings of disharmony

+/-

-

C1. Cooperative

-

-

C2. Defensive

-

-

C3. Aggressive

-

-

C4. Devaluating

-

-

The type of laughter and/or smiling can be classified into one of three
categories: (A1,2) that evoked by a release of tension; (B1-4) that
associated with pleasant feelings; and (C1-4) that used for social
communication. Laughter and smiling induced by a release of
tension is regarded as the most basic type and is preserved as the
phylogenetically primitive type. Laughter and smiling associated
with pleasant feelings has developed with the evolution of humans.
Laughter and smiling as communication tools are the most
sophisticated and have developed with the sociability of humans.
Dementia patients lose the ability to laugh and smile as the disease
progresses. Laughter and smiling as communication tools may be
lost in the early stages of dementia, when the clinical symptoms of
dementia appear. Of the different forms of laughter and smiling
associated with pleasant feelings, those induced by disharmony may
be lost in early stages of dementia because of the cognitive
impairment that may limit a patient's understanding. However,
laughter and smiling induced by feelings of superiority, fulfillment of
expectations, and fulfillment of instinctive needs are preserved until
the advanced stages of dementia. Laughter and smiling in response
to a release of tension are preserved in most dementia patients.

The third category of laughter is that used as a communication tool. Facial expressions are important components of laughter and we use these expressions to
transmit our intention to be friends with others. Laughing and smiling used to communicate with others can be
further subdivided into laughter and smiling for cooperation, defense, aggression, and devaluation. A typical
example of cooperative smiling is that used as a greeting.
We usually say hello and shake hands while smiling. A
defensive smile can be observed when someone is trying
to conceal their inner feelings, whereas aggressive laughter can also be called scornful laughter. Everyone dislikes
being laughed at and, consequently, aggressive laughter is

Takeda et al. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2010, 10:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/10/28

Page 5 of 7

extremely powerful. Smiling to devalue something is
often used in daily life; for example, when the train door
shuts in our face, we often give a wry smile to cancel out
the impact of the event.

Dementia patients often show various types of BPSD
during the course of their illness. Aggression, refusal to
cooperate, negativity, and apathy are common, all of
which contribute to the further isolation of these
patients. In this sense, it is important to keep patients
with BPSD within the community.
Because BPSD can often be the most formidable barrier
to the care of dementia patients, it is highly recommended that the occurrence of BPSD is prevented. To
reduce the occurrence of BPSD in dementia patients,
patients should be kept in a stable and safe environment,
efforts should be made to ensure good communication
with the patients, and patients should be kept feeling
relaxed and safe. By doing so, the patients are more likely
to laugh and smile.
It is true that laughter and smiling decrease over time in
most dementia patients, but it is important to note that
not all forms of laughter and smiling are equally reduced.
The ability to laugh for social communication is readily
lost by dementia patients at the onset of their illness, concomitant with the loss of a social life and their ability to
process information, but laughter in response to the
release of tension is preserved until the advanced stages
of the disease. When dementia patients are released from
either physical or mental strain, they always smile. Laughter caused by feelings of disharmony is not usually preserved in dementia patients because of impaired
cognitive functioning and because these patients are no
longer able to understand the meaning of complicated
situations, which means they often cannot understand
the punch lines of jokes or appreciate humor.
As discussed above, laughter associated with pleasant
feelings can be further subdivided into four types, fulfillment of instinctive needs, fulfillment of expectations, a
feeling of superiority, and recognition of mix-ups. Most
laughter associated with pleasant feelings is preserved in
dementia patients, with observations indicating that
these patients laugh and smile when they are exposed to
pleasant stimuli. They smile when they are well fed and
when they have had a good sleep. They also smile and
laugh when they have attained self-set goals. Laughter
associated with feelings of superiority is clearly preserved
in most dementia patients; they become happy and pleasant when their superiority is recognized. Conversely,
when these patients feel humiliated, they become angry
and insulted.
Thus, the basic form of laughter is preserved in dementia patients, but the social form of laughter is sometimes
lost in the advanced stages of the disease. It is important
to ensure that dementia patients are kept in a safe and
relaxed environment (and not in alarmed and tensioned),

Laughter in dementia patients

Laughter is usually provoked or accompanied by positive
emotions. In clinical settings, it is always desirable for
patients, their families, and staff to share relaxed and
happy feelings, because patients are often under continuous strain and enormous pressure as a result of their illness. The more serious the illness, the more
overwhelming the strain to the patients and their families. Dementia patients are usually under considerable
strain, at least at the beginning of their illness. Patients'
families are placed under even more stress because of the
burden of care [41]. A positive emotion, together with
laughter, may enable dementia patients to cope with their
illness better, improve immune function, increase pain
tolerance, and decrease the stress response. When a positive attitude is shared by patients and staff, it can have a
positive effect on the emotional-affective and cognitive
functioning of the patients [42,43].
Because the social life of dementia patients is impaired
by their illness, they can easily feel isolated. Thus, a feeling that unites them, or provides some sort of bond, with
their family and the community can be very beneficial.
Dementia patients are often encouraged to participate in
daily activities with other people and the positive emotions that are shared by the patients and the care staff
help the patients maintain social contact.
Several psychosocial interventions are applied to
dementia patients in clinical settings [44]. Examples
include cognitive rehabilitation, reminiscence therapy, art
therapy, drama therapy, and aerobic exercise [45]. In
these activities, a positive attitude of patients is essential
and it is always true that a greater effect can be expected
when patients participate willingly with a positive outlook. In the case of cognitive rehabilitation, active participation is the condition under which good outcomes can
be expected. If the patients are reluctant to participate in
the activities, it is unlikely that the program will have any
beneficial effects.
Dementia patients become anxious and irritated
because they are unable to glean sufficient information
from their surroundings due to their impaired cognitive
functioning [46]. They are easily trapped in a state in
which they feel unsafe, alarmed, and insecure, which, in
turn, reduces their ability to process information from
their surroundings. With even less secure information,
they become more alarmed, leading to negative emotional behavior.

Takeda et al. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2010, 10:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/10/28

Page 6 of 7

which will make it more likely that these patients will be
able to laugh and smile.

The other reactions--anger, depression, suppression,
denial--took a little piece of me with them. Each made me
feel just a little less human. Laughter made me more open
to ideas, more inviting to others, and even a little stronger
inside. It proved to me that, even as my body was devastated and my spirit challenged, I was still a vital human
being. Scott Burton [51]

Humor in dementia patients

Humor has positive physiological and psychological
effects in a variety of situations. The psychiatric literature
purports humor as an effective tool in psychiatric illness
and psychotherapy. Benefits of humor in business, management, education, and clinical settings are widely recognized because the right perspective facilitates problem
solving both interpersonally and in a group setting. Furthermore, humor puts people at ease, promoting the
expression and exchange of ideas. Not only can humor
benefit patients, but the use of humor can facilitate the
effective management of staff and others in the health
care setting [22].
Humor is delicate and sensitive by nature. Humor can
be properly appreciated when it is expressed in the right
time, right place, and on the right occasion. Confidence,
or trust, between the sender and receiver is an important
aspect of humor. Establishing this trust is a prerequisite
for the introduction of appropriately timed humor. No
humor can be appreciated by patients when there is no
trust between the patient and care staff. If one side is
defensive or angry, he/she may find that the use of humor
by the other party is offensive or insulting [47,48].
Patients may also become upset about jokes made at their
expense, fearing humiliation and stigmatization [49]. The
appropriateness of humor depends on the culture, education, and cognitive function of the receiver. Therefore, the
use of humor must be timed wisely and it must be used
carefully.
Dementia patients may be more sensitive to jokes or
humor than healthy people because patients in the early
stages of the disease know that they have difficulties
understanding complicated things. Dementia patients
with cognitive impairment have difficulty appreciating
the disharmony in information sent as humor. Humor
should be presented to dementia patients after close evaluation. There are no definitive rules, but humor should
generally be introduced slowly; if there is no response or
the response is negative, it may be a good idea to abandon
all attempts to introduce humor, at least during that clinical encounter [50]. Humor can be used as a defense
mechanism in an adverse setting and has obvious value
for dementia patients if it is properly addressed and
accepted. But the impaired cognitive function of dementia patients must be kept in mind so that humor is presented at the right time, in the right place, and on the
right occasion. Everyone enjoys laughing, but a misjudged humorous comment can cause offense, so
although laughter is almost always positive, humor itself
can provoke mixed emotional responses.

Summary
Dementia patients should be cared for taking into consideration their individual capacities, which differ from
patient to patient. Most laughter and smiling is preserved
in dementia patients until the end of the clinical course,
even though laughter and smiling as a means of communication is lost during the early stages of the disease.
Laughter and smiling associated with pleasant feelings,
with the exception of laughing in response to feelings of
disharmony, and laughter induced by the release of tension can be used in the treatment of dementia patients.
The use of humor, covering issues of the fulfillment of
instinctive needs and expectations, as well as feelings of
superiority (Table 1), can be a good and effective complementary and alternative intervention in the treatment of
dementia patients.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
MT, TK, and TT discussed the importance of laughter and humor to dementia
patients and drafted the manuscript. MO, ST, and TM searched for the data on
the topics in the literatures. MT, RH, and GS devised the table. All authors have
read and approved the final manuscript.
Author Details
Department of Psychiatry, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita,
Japan
Received: 18 November 2009 Accepted: 18 June 2010
Published: 18 June 2010
© 2010 Takeda et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/10/28
BMC is an Open Access article distributed under the 10:28
Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2010,

References
1. Takeda M: Psychogeriatrics in Japan-Bio-Psycho-Socio-Ethical Model.
Psychogeriatrics 2001, 1:83-87.
2. Tanaka T, Tomioka M, Sadik G, Takeda M: The 13th Congress of the
International Psychogeriatric Association and recent expansion of
research into psychogeriatrics. Psychogeriatrics 2008, 8:1-3.
3. Imai K, Yamaguchi K, Watanabe M, Kainuma E, Hikake N, Saitoh S, Tanaka
M, Morita M, Sunayama T, Nomura M, Kozakai T, Wada S, Ueki K, Kimura R:
Crucial role of thalami and basal ganglia in emotional memory and
cognition: association with the recognition of Niigata Ken Chuetsu
earthquake 2004. Psychogeriatrics 2007, 7:58-63.
4. Yano M, Umeda S, Miura M: Preserved priming but insensitivity to
perceptual fluency on recognition judgements in Alzheimer's disease.
Psychogeriatrics 2008, 8:178-187.
5. Nakajima K, Takahashi M, Oishi S, Inoue A, Sawayama E, Kamiya M, Tanaka
S, Miyaoka H: The relationship between psychiatric symptoms and
regional cerebral blood flow in the patients with mild Alzheimer's
disease. Psychogeriatrics 2008, 8:108-113.
6. Kudo T, Tanii H, Takeda M: Neurodegerative dementias involving
aberrant protein aggregation. Psychogeriatrics 2007, 7:114-117.
7. Hamuro A, Isono H, Sugai Y, Mimura M, Kamijima : Characteristics of
behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia in untreated
oldest old Alzheimer's disease. Psychogeriatrics 2008, 8:8-11.

Takeda et al. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2010, 10:28
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/10/28

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

33.
34.

35.
36.

Kosaka K: Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD)
in dementia with Lewy bodies. Psychogeriatrics 2008, 8:134-136.
Tanaka T, Kazui H, Morihara H, Sadik G, Kudo T, Takeda M: Efficacy and
safety of donepezil hydrochloride in patients with Alzheimer's disease
with behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD).
Psychogeriatrics 2008, 8:114-123.
Mizukami K: Kampo therapy as an alternative to pharmacotherapy
using antipsychotic medicines for behavioral and psychological
symptoms of dementia (BPSD). Psychogeriatrics 2008, 8:137-141.
Okumura Y, Tanimukai S, Asada T: The effects of short-term
reminiscence therapy on elderly with dementia: A comparison with
everyday conversation approaches. Psychogeriatrics 2008, 8:124-133.
Kinoshita T: The role of home visit medical service to patients with
BPSD (behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia) in
community. Psychogeriatrics 2008, 8:142-147.
Takita M: How to treat BPSD, do not treat patients having symptoms
like BPSD with neuroleptics for the first time. Psychogeriatrics 2008,
8:148-150.
Meguro K: Community based measures form an aging mild cognitive
impairment: The Osaki-Tajiri Project. Psychogeriatrics 2007, 7:132-136.
Mimura M, Komatsu S: Cognitive rehabilitation and cognitive training
for mild dementia. Psychogeriatrics 2007, 7:137-143.
Takeda M, Morihara T, Okochi M, Sadik G, Tanaka T: Mild cognitive
impairment and subjective cognitive impairment. Psychogeriatrics
2008, 8:155-160.
Complementary and Alternative Medicine, When Rigorous, can be
Science. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2004, 1:1-4.
Ernst E: The role of complementary and alternative medicine in cancer.
Lancet Oncol 2000, 1:176-180.
Kawamura N, Niiyama M, Niiyama H: Long-term evaluation of animalassisted therapy for institutionalized elderly people: A preliminary
result. Psychogeriatrics 2007, 7:8-13.
Takahashi K, Iwase M, Yamashita K, Tatsumoto Y, Ue H, Kuratsune H,
Shimizu A, Takeda M: The elevation of natural killer cell activity induced
by laughter in a crossover designed study. Int J Mol Med 2001, 8:645-50.
Hayashi K, Hayashi T, Iwanaga S, Kawai K, Ishii H, Shoji S, Murakami K:
Laughter lowered the increase in postprandial blood glucose. Diabetes
Care 2003, 26:1651-2.
Stuber M, Hilber SD, Mintzer LL, Castaneda M, Glover D, Zeltzer L:
Laughter, humor and pain perception in children; a pilot study. Evid
Based Complement Alternat Med 2009, 6:271-276.
Darwin C: The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. 3rd
edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2002:1-512.
Sumitsuji N: The origin of intermittent exhalation (A! Ha! Ha!) peculiar to
human laugh. Electromyogr Clin Neurophysiol 2000, 40:305-309.
Provine R, Yong YL: Laughter: a stereotyped human vocalization.
Ethology 1991, 89:115-124.
Devinsky O, Morrell MJ, Vogt BA: Contributions of anterior cingulated
cortex to behaviour. Brain 1995, 118:279-306.
Wild B, Rodden FA, Grodd W, Ruch W: Neural correlates of laughter and
humour. Brain 2003, 126:2121-2138.
Brain Briefings Ariniello L: Humor, Laughter and the Brain. Washington:
Society for Neuroscience; 2001.
Freud S: Jokes and their relation to the unconscious. Edited by:
Stanchey J. New York: W. W. Norton and Company; 1960:1-296.
Buxman K: Humor in therapy for the mentally ill. J Psychosoc Nurs Ment
Health Serv 1991, 29:15-18.
Groves DF: "A merry heart doeth good like a medicine..". Holist Nurs
Pract 1991, 5:49-56.
Bennett MP, Lengacher C: Humor and laughter may influence
health:Part2. Complementary therapies and humor in a clinical
population. eCAM 2006, 3:187-190.
Martin R, Lefcourt HM: Sense of humor as a moderator of the relation
between stressors and moods. J Pers Soc Psychol 1983, 45:1313-1324.
Martin RA, Dobbin JP: Sense of humor, hassles, and immunoglobulin A:
evidence for a stress-moderating effect of humor. Int J Psychiatry Med
1988, 18:93-105.
Martin RA: Humor, laughter, and physical health: methodological issues
and research findings. Psychol Bull 2001, 127:504-19.
Anderson C, Arnoult LH: An examination of perceived control, humor,
irrational beliefs, and positive stress as moderators of the relation

Page 7 of 7

37.

38.
39.
40.

41.
42.
43.
44.

45.

46.

47.
48.
49.
50.
51.

between negative stress and health. Basic Appl Soc Psych 1989,
10:101-117.
Nezu AM, Nezu CM, Blissett SE: Sense of humor as a moderator of the
relations between stressful events and psychological distress: a
prospective analysis. J Pers Soc Psychol 1988, 54:520-525.
Overholser J: Sense of humor when coping with life stress. Pers Individ
Dif 1992, 13:799-804.
Porterfield A: Does sense of humor moderate the impact of life stress
on psychological and physical well-being? J Res Pers 1987, 21:306-317.
Iwase M, Ouchi Y, Okada H, Yokoyama C, Nobezawa S, Yoshikawa E,
Tsukada H, Takeda M, Yamashita K, Takeda M, Yamaguchi K, Kuratsune H,
Shimizu A, Watanabe Y: Neural Substrates of Human Facial Expression
of Pleasant Emotion Induced by Comic Films: A PET Study. NeuroImage
2002, 17:758-768.
Rokkaku R: Support for families with a family member suffering a
cognitive disorder. Psychogeriatrics 2007, 7:144-146.
Rosenheim E, Golan G: Patients reactions to humorous interventions in
psychotherapy. Am J Psychother 1986, 40:110-124.
Epstein B: The use of humor in cognitive-behavioral therapy with
outpatient depressed male adolescents. Sci Eng 1997, 57:5915.
Yamamoto-Mitani N, Matsuoka K, Fujii M: Home-based rehabilitation
program for older adults with cognitive impairment: Preliminary
results. Psychogeriatrics 2007, 7:14-20.
Yamagami T, Oosawa M, lto S, Yamaguch H: Effect of activity
reminiscence therapy as brain-activating rehabilitation for elderly
people with and without dementia. Psychogeriatrics 2007, 7:69-75.
Savaskan E, Müller SE, Boehringer A, Philippsen C, Mueller-Spahn F,
Schaechinger H: Age determines memory for face identity and
expression. Psychogeriatrics 2007, 7:49-57.
Rosenheim E, Golan G: Patients' reactions to humorous interventions in
psychotherapy. Am J Psychother 1986, 40:110-124.
Epstein B: The use of humor in cognitive-behavioral therapy with
outpatient depressed male adolescents. Sci Eng 1997, 57:5915.
Chapple A, Ziebland S: The role of humor for men with testicular cancer.
Qual Health Res 2004, 14:1123-1139.
Joshua AM, Cotroneo A, Clarke S: Humor and oncology. J Clin Oncol
2005, 23:645-648.
Burton S: Why Not Laugh? [http://www.sburton.com/
whynotlaugh.htm]. accessed Feb 2009

Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6882/10/28/prepub
doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-10-28
Cite this article as: Takeda et al., Laughter and humor as complementary
and alternative medicines for dementia patients BMC Complementary and
Alternative Medicine 2010, 10:28

</pre>
</body>
</html>
