<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Insights from Zootaxa on potential trends in zoological taxonomic activity</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-5"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Elise Tancoigne"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

DEBATE

Open Access

Insights from Zootaxa on potential trends in
zoological taxonomic activity
Elise Tancoigne1*, Cyprien Bole1, Anne Sigogneau2 and Alain Dubois1

Abstract
Background: An opinion currently shared by taxonomists and non taxonomists alike is that the work of
inventorying biodiversity is unbalanced: firstly, in favour of countries in which taxonomy has been studied for a
long time, and, secondly, in favour of vertebrates. In the current context of threats of species extinction, access for
taxonomists to biological material and information becomes crucial if the scientific community really aims at a
better knowledge of biological diversity before it is severely and irreversibly impoverished. We performed an
analysis of 748 papers published in Zootaxa in 2006 and 2007, as well as 434 questionnaires sent to their authors
to test these opinions. A generalization of these results to zoological taxonomy as a whole is discussed.
Discussion: We found that the disequilibrium is not exactly what it usually considered to be. The USA, China and
Brazil are currently the three leading countries in zoological taxonomy. Each of them presents, however, a different
pattern. Taxonomists from Asia and South America are younger and mainly work in universities, not museums. A
bias in favour of vertebrates still exists if we refer to the effort invested in each group to produce taxonomic data,
but not to the number of papers. Finally, we insist on the idea that “describing a species” is very different from
“knowing a species”.
Summary: The taxonomic involvement of a country, in terms of manpower and funding, appears to be a key factor
in the development of fruitful taxonomic research. This message seems to have been understood by the countries
that recently decided to increase considerably their taxonomic involvement. It still has to be received by those
who did not.

Background
Taxonomy is the disciplinary field of biology in charge
of collecting, studying, describing, classifying and naming living organisms and taxa. It is a fundamental discipline for biology as a whole. It is thus crucial that
taxonomists be given access to biological material and
information. Previous studies [1-4] and widespread opinions [5,6] nevertheless postulate that access to specimens is unbalanced, both as regards the different
regions of the world and the taxonomic groups. First,
countries and areas where researchers have historically
worked for a longer time on zoological taxonomy
(Europe, North America and Australia) would therefore
dominate zoological taxonomy. Second, the attention

* Correspondence: tancoigne@mnhn.fr
1
UMR 7205 OSEB, Département Systématique et Evolution, Muséum national
d’Histoire naturelle, CP 30, 25 rue Cuvier, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

paid to Vertebrata would be higher than for other taxa,
especially Arthropoda.
Yet, a quick search of all papers describing new species in the Web of Science in 2006 reveals that Brazil
and China are among the top five publishing countries
(USA: 25%, China: 13%, Germany: 8%, Japan: 7%, Brazil:
6%).
So, as concerns the distribution of zoological taxonomy, where are we now? No recent quantitative study
exists at the world scale. Such surveys were either limited to a taxon [3,7-11], or a country [12-22], or they
offered a summary of fragmented information [23-25].
However, today a mega-journal of taxonomy, Zootaxa,
provides a worldwide coverage and deals with numerous
zoological taxa. In 2004, it published far more pages
than the combined total published in the ten core journals in systematic zoology [26]. It contributed 13% of all
new taxa of animals indexed in the Zoological Record
since 2004 [27]. An analysis of this journal could

© 2011 Tancoigne et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Questionnaire

100

The 748 articles studied were written by 1778 authors.
Once multiple authorships were removed, 1384 authors
remained, 1025 of whom had mentioned an e-mail

Methods

90

Proportion of samples that fit the global population

We chose to work on the years 2006 and 2007 because
they were those when most articles had been produced
at the time of our study (n = 2138). We randomly
selected 748 articles among all those published in Zootaxa during this period. We devised a method to fix the
sampling size. This method is explained below. Then we
used three main procedures to obtain the data from our
sample: data extraction from literature, data mining on
databases and a questionnaire sent to each author of the
sample who had provided an email. The data obtained
from the articles or the questionnaire were entered into
a database built using Access2002.
Five parameters describing each publication of the
whole set of 2138 articles published in Zootaxa in 20062007 were available in the Zoological Record online: (1)
treated taxon, (2) number of pages, (3) number of
authors, (4) number of described species and (5) number of references. Three other parameters found on the
Zootaxa website [31] were added: (6) whether the article
is in open access or not, (7) its delay of publication after

95

74

50

Sampling procedure

80

In conclusion, we will discuss the possible generalization of our results to taxonomy as a whole.
We determined the countries and areas in which (1)
more works are published in zoological taxonomy; (2)
most of the active taxonomists are working; (3) foreign
taxonomists are mainly received; (4) taxonomists are
involved in collaborations; (5) more species are
described from other areas; (6) types specimens are
kept; and, finally, (7) research is carried out in museums,
which are traditional institutions for taxonomic research
[9,15,28-30].
The disequilibrium in favour of vertebrates can be
documented in terms of either taxonomic production
(publications, pages, new species), or in the means
employed for the studies (number of taxonomists, of specimens, of characters...). Therefore, we gathered additional information on (8) the taxa to which are devoted
the higher number of publications, pages, new species as
well as the taxa represented by the highest numbers of
(9) taxonomists, (10) characters and (11) specimens used.

70

1. Is zoological taxonomy still mostly practised in
countries that have historically been taxonomically
active?
2. Is zoological taxonomy still unbalanced in favour
of vertebrates, vs. arthropods?

submission and (8) its category (article or monograph).
A sampling script was written with the R language [32].
We made 1000 random samplings of 5% of the total
number of papers (function sample() without replacement of the default package base). This operation was
repeatead nine successive times with increasing sample
sizes. Thus, we obtained 1000 samplings of 107 articles,
1000 samplings of 214 articles, etc. Then we used statistical tests to determine the rate of correct samples that
each operation produced. Each of the 10,000 samples
was tested and considered correct if the eight parameters did not significantly differ from the whole set
(P < 0.05). As our data did not verify the normality condition, non-parametrical tests were performed for each
of the eight parameters: c 2 for (1); Wilcoxon/MannWhitney for (2), (3), (4), (5), (7); and binomial tests for
(6) and (8). We decided to choose the minimal sample
size for which 950 out of 1000 samples would not statistically differ from the whole set. This size is 35%, i.e.,
748 articles (Figure 1). Finally, a random sampling of
748 articles was performed. We also checked that it did
not significantly differ from the whole set for each of
the eight parameters.

60

therefore produce a useful and relevant insight on
today’s taxonomical practices in zoology.
Quantitative tools will be used in this work to answer
two questions:

Page 2 of 13

34%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

35%

40%

45%

50%

Sample sizes (fraction of the global population)

Figure 1 Proportion of samples that correctly represents the
total set of articles when the sample size is growing. Eight
parameters were tested both over the total set and over the
samples. The probability of drawing a correct sample is 95% when
the sampling size is 34% of the global population.

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

address in the paper. A questionnaire had been sent via
e-mail in May 2008 to 10% of these 1025 authors for a
preliminary study. It received 56 answers and comments
from authors from most parts of the world (except
Africa). Our questionnaire was considered approved and
it was then sent once again in May 2009 to the 939
remaining authors. It was rejected by 105 mailboxes and
received 434 answers in all (56 in 2008 and 378 in
2009). Its answer rate was thus 47%. We used EmailQuestionnaire software to send our questionnaire [33].
Data picking

We obtained data for the 748 sampled articles; the 1778
authors and their 1111 institutions; the 1413 new species that were described in it and their 1404 holotypes;
15 syntypes; 23 468 paratypes and the 4987 other specimens used in descriptions. The 1778 taxonomic authors
corresponded to 1384 “real persons”, of whom 434 taxonomists sent us personal data. Table 1 presents the data.
Each country was affiliated to a region through the
data of the CIA world factbook [34]. Major regions are
abbreviated the following way: Af (Africa), As (Asia), E
(Europe), M (Middle East), N (North America), O
(Oceania), S (South America). Given the small amount
of papers from Central America, this region was
grouped with South America.
Authors (i.e. names on paper) and taxonomists (i.e.
real persons) were distinguished. For example, a taxonomist who writes two articles represents two authors.
Analyses

The number of publications per major region or country
was computed fractionally. For example, an article written by two authors from Asia and one author who mentioned two addresses, one in South America and one in
Africa, counts for 0.5 for Asia, 0.25 for South America
and 0.25 for Africa. The number of publications per
category of institution was also calculated fractionally.
For example, an article written by two authors from the
University of Sao Paulo and one author who mentioned
two addresses, one in the University of Sao Paulo and
one in the American National Museum, counts for 0.75
for Brazilian universities and 0.25 for North American
museums. The number of type-specimens per category
of institution is calculated directly. For example, a new
species with one holotype kept in the University of Sao
Paulo and 54 paratypes kept in the American National
Museum counts 1 for North American museums and 54
for Brazilian universities. The number of taxonomists
per major region or country was calculated fractionally
once duplicated authors (authors with same name and
address) had been removed. For example, if an author
mentioned two addresses in two different major regions
s/he counts 0.5 for each region. The collaboration

Page 3 of 13

indicator of the Observatoire des Sciences et des Techniques (Paris, France) was used to study collaborations:
(number of publications of a region A with an other
region B)/(total number of publications of region A).
For instance, an article written by one author from Asia
and two from South America counts for one co-publication between Asia and South America.
All the data was analysed with the free statistical software R [32] and packages ade4 [35], RODBC [36], vcd
[37,38] and FactoMineR [39]. We used correspondence
analysis (CA) to summarize the data’s structure and
identify similarities between the variables of a contingency table [40]. CA measures the distances between
the row and column points and presents the inter-relations of variables in calculated dimensions that outlines
maximum of variance (VARIMAX rotation). The analysis determines which category values lie close together
and which are far from each other. These can be seen
on a correspondence map, where the row and column
categories are plotted along the computed factor axes.
Spatial proximity between categories does not imply a
correlation between the categories but instead a strong
specific link in relation to these factors. This graphical
method is based on a c2 test that measures the deviation
to independence model. We also performed c2 statistical
tests to compare proportions when it was needed.
Evaluation of Zootaxa biases

Our choice to work on Zootaxa inevitably represents a
bias. Because our questions treat the different areas of
the world and taxa, two possible biases concern the
representativeness of (1) the taxa studied in Zootaxa
and (2) the regions where the studies were carried out.
We compared the proportion of the different taxa studied in 2006 in Zootaxa and in all the publications
indexed in the entire volume of the Zoological Record
for 2006 (Figure 2). We observed that “taxo*”, “taxonomy” or “systematic” did not even allow us to find all
articles published in Zootaxa in 2006. We used the keyword “sp nov”, coming from the Zoological Record’s thesaurus, to find these publications in the Zoological
Record. If all categories of Figure 2 are considered, a c2
test shows significant differences (P < 0.001) between
the Zoological Record and Zootaxa. However, the distribution does not show significant differences (P = 0.12) if
we consider only three classes of taxa: ‘Arthropods’,
‘Vertebrates’ and ‘Other’. Therefore, for the purposes of
our study the taxa were grouped as ‘Vertebrates’,
‘Arthropods’ and ‘Other’.
We also compared the proportions of the different
regions where new species were described in 2006 in
Zootaxa and in all the publications with the same pattern indexed in the entire volume of the Web of Science
(WoS) for 2006 (Figure 3). We used the Analyze Results

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Page 4 of 13

Table 1 Data extracted for each article, author, institution, new species and specimen involved
Article
ZR ID number

Number attributed by the Zoological Record

Title

ZR

Abstract
Internet link
Number of pages
Delay of publication
Category of document

ZR
ZR

Internet link to the pdf article on the Zootaxa website

ZT

n = (ending page - beginning page) + 1

ZR +
H

Number of days between acceptance and publication

ZT +
H

Monograph; article

ZT

Category of work

We distinguished six categories of works. additional data: addition of sounds, karyotypes, redescriptions,
chorology, phylogenies to the knowledge of a taxon, without new taxon description; checklists or catalogue of
species/types; regional fauna: taxonomic revision at regional scale; taxonomic revision: each taxon or types
reviewed, or at least 3 different kinds of analyses done (e.g. morphological studies plus distribution plus
karyotype of a taxon); taxonomic work on isolated taxa: single or multiple descriptions of new taxa, new
descriptions plus new records of the taxon; theoretical works: biographies or nomenclatural changes only, or
theoretical work on taxonomy and nomenclature

H

Authorship presentation

Whether authorship is in alphabetical order or not. Names beginning by “De”, “Van”, are considered at letters
“D” or “V”.

H

Phylum delimitation
Taxon delimitation
Level of work

Geographic delimitation
Level of geographic
delimitation

Phylum as provided by ZR indexation

ZR

The most inclusive taxon treated in the article

H

Level of the most inclusive taxon treated in the article. Species level: any level up to and including species level;
genus level: any level from species level up to and including genus level; family level: any level from genus level
up to and including family level; above family level: any level above family level

H

The most single inclusive area treated in the article. We used political boundaries of studied areas instead of
biogeographical ones, in order to study the relationship between laboratories and studied areas

H

We used four levels of area: locality level, regional level, country level, major area level. We used other when the
study involves more than one major area. Oceans and seas were treated as regions and affiliated to a country
or a continent when specified in the article
ZR

Number of references
Price

Whether the article is in free access or not

ZT

Authors
Family name

ZR

Firstname
Article related

ZR
List of the articles written by the author in Zootaxa

Position in the article
Institution

Email
Professional status
Nationality

H
H

Institution of the author for the paper concerned. The ZR provides the address of the first co-author; the other ZR +
ones were added from the paper itself. Whenever the author is affiliated to several institutions, this information
H
was retained
Some email addresses were provided by the ZR; others were found in the article

ZR +
H

Amateur, Doctoral student, Established taxonomist researcher, Established non-taxonomist researcher, Master
student, Postdoctoral, Retired researcher, Technician

Q

Country of birth

Q

Age

Q

Sex

Q

Highest degree

Master (four or five years of faculty), PhD (or equivalent), Other, No degree

Free comment

Q
Q

Institutions
Name

The names of all institutions were checked to suppress duplicates

Type

Five categories of institutions were recognized: Museum, University, Institute, Private, Other institution

Country

ZR +
H
H
ZR +
H

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Page 5 of 13

Table 1 Data extracted for each article, author, institution, new species and specimen involved (Continued)
Continent
Level of the institution

Subordinating institution

The affiliation of a country to a major area followed the CIA World Factbook data [34]

H

Some institutions are subordinate to others, which may (or may not) appear in the address given by the
author(s). For each of them, the following information was checked using their web sites:
1: whether the institution is autonomous
2: whether it is subordinate to another institution
3: whether it is subordinate to two other institutions

H

Name of the superordinate institution if relevant

H

New species
Nomen
Specimens involved
Allotypes

ZR
List of the specimens involved

H

Whether allotypes are designated or not

H

Developmental stages

Whether numerous developmental stages are involved or not

H

Methods used for tree
construction

Parsimony, Bayesian/maximum likelihood, Distance, Combined methods

H

Morpho-anatomical, Molecular, Bio-acoustic, Karyological, Other

H

Characters used

Specimens used to describe a new species
Number of specimens
Kind of specimen
Place of collect

Institution of conservation

Number of specimens of each type for each new species

H

Holotype, Syntype, Neotype, Paratype, Other specimen

H

Collecting locality as stated in the paper, with GPS coordinates if available. Localities were distinguished
through their names or through their GPS coordinates. Each locality was referred to a country and a realm
whenever possible. The geographical delimitations used are the same as for the publications

H

Institution where specimen(s) is/are kept

H

Year of collect

H

Size (cm)
Sex

For holotypes only

H

For holotypes only. Male; Female; Hermaphrodite; Unknown when the information is lacking. Because many
authors do not indicate the sex when they use juveniles, we also added the category Juvenile

H

H: data added by hand. Q: data from the questionnaire. ZR: data from the Zoological Record online. ZT: data from the Zootaxa website.

tool of the Web of Science which computes information
on authors’ countries. Our search query “’sp nov’ OR
‘new species’” found 675 articles for Zootaxa and 4313
articles for the Web of Science. We did not use the truncated query “new sp” because it returned articles about
language ("speech”, “spoken”). If all the regions of Figure
3 are considered, a c2 test shows significant differences
(P < 0.001) between the Web of Science and Zootaxa.
However, the distribution does not show significant differences if we consider only three classes of regions:
Asia-South America (AsS), Europe-North AmericaOceania (ENO) and Africa-Middle East (AfM) (P =
0.46); or Africa-Europe-Oceania (AfEO), South America-North America (SN) and Asia-Middle East (AsM)
(P = 0.36).

Results
Publications dealing with species are predominant in
Zootaxa (74% of the works analysed). Only 17% of the
papers deal with taxa between genus and family, and 9%
with taxa above family level. Therefore, so-called “a-taxonomy”, “microtaxonomy” [41], or “eidonomy” [42] is
predominant. Works on isolated taxa (single species
descriptions, etc.) are the most numerous (57%), followed by taxonomic revisions (17%), additions of new

data for taxa already known (11%), regional faunas (8%),
checklists or catalogues of species/types (4%) and theoretical works (3%). These terms are defined in Table 1.
Most of the people who answered our questionnaire
are fully qualified researchers (60%), either taxonomists
(45% of total) or not (15%). Students come in second
position, with 15% PhD students and 7% MSc students.
Postdoctoral students account for 9% and retired
researchers, amateurs and technicians for the remaining
9%. The proportions listed above vary between the three
areas previously defined (Figure 4). Figure 4 shows the
result of the CA between the age and the region of origin
of the authors. Professional status was used as supplementary data. We deleted the ‘retired researcher’ category because it was naturally linked with the (65, 90]
category and made the map confusing. Africa is distant
on the map because it has few values (0, 2, 1, and 0)
which produce high frequencies (0, 66, 33 and 0). Dimension 1 is strongly linked with the age and pits the (25, 35]
category against the (55, 65] and (65, 90] categories. This
is very interesting because this separation depends solely
on the nationality categories. Indeed, (25, 35] is linked to
S and appear to be the category with the highest proportion of S and the (55, 65] and (65, 90] categories are
linked to M, O, N and appear to be the categories with

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Page 6 of 13

25
ZR
ZT

Proportion (%)

20

15

10

5

Birds

Miscellaneous

Nematodes

Amphibians

Reptiles

Platyhelminths

Mammals

True bugs

Protozoans

Molluscs

Lepidopterans

Crustaceans

Hymenopterans

Fish

True flies

Arachnids

Beetles

Chelicerates

Vertebrates

Insects

Chordates

Arthropods

Invertebrates

0

Figure 2 Comparison of the proportion of taxa studied in all
works publishing new species in 2006 and indexed in the
Zoological Record (ZR, 5620 articles) and in the Zootaxa subset
(ZT, 743 articles). Search query: expression “sp nov” from ZR
thesaurus AND “2006”.

WoS
ZT

50

Proportion (%)

40

30

Figure 4 Result of the CA between the authors’ nationality and
age. Af: Africa, As: Asia, E: Europe, M: Middle East, O: Oceania, N:
North America, S: South America. Professional status is used as
supplementary data.

the highest proportion of them. Being at the center of the
map, the (35, 55] category represents the average category as related to nationality. E represents 38% of (35,
55], S 23%, N 16%, As 15%, O 4%, M 2%, Af 1%.
Dimension 2 separates M from the other categories
because no individuals belonging to the (65, 90] category answered our questionnaire. The supplementary
data show that the (25, 35] category was related to technicians and postdocs, whereas (55, 65] was related to
established taxonomic researchers, established non-taxonomic researchers and amateurs. These data suggest that
the population of taxonomists is younger in As and S.
Let us now consider the twelve questions that we
posed above.

20

Which areas and countries publish more in zoological
taxonomy?
10

Central America

Middle East

Africa

Oceania

North America

Asia

Europe

South America

0

Figure 3 Comparison of the proportion of regions publishing
new species in 2006 in journals indexed in the Web of Science
(WoS, 4313 articles) and in the Zootaxa subset (ZT, 675
articles). Search query: ("sp nov” OR “new species”) AND “2006”.

The region that provided the highest number of publications is Europe, and then come, grouped together,
North America, Asia and South America (Table 2-A). In
Europe, no country provided more than 20% of publications, the most productive country being Germany
(20%). In contrast, for the other main regions, a single
country usually accounts for more than half the total
publications: the USA for most publications from North
America (76%), China for most publications from Asia
(52%), Brazil for most publications from South America
(62%), South Africa for most publications from Africa

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Page 7 of 13

Table 2 Relationships between studied regions and
regions of researchers’ labs
A
Studying regions (%)

B
Studied regions (%)

Asia

20

25

South America

21

25

Multi-areas

-

12

North America

21

8

Oceania

7

8

Europe

29

7

Africa

2

6

Middle East

2

3

Central America

1

3

Antarctica

-

1

Without region

-

2

Studying regions: percentage of a fractional count of authors of publications.
Studied regions: percentage of the number of publications. “Multi-areas”
refers to work performed on more than one continent. Asia and South
America are the most studied areas and belong to the areas with the highest
numbers of publications.

(39%) and Turkey for most publications from Middle
East (67%).
In which areas and countries are taxonomists working?

The number of publishing taxonomists per country is
the highest for Europe (27%), then for South America
(24%), North America (21%) and Asia (20%). Germany
is the first country of Europe (20%); Brazil is the first
country of South America (61%), the USA of North
America (79%) and China of Asia (51%).
Which areas and countries mainly receive foreign
taxonomists?

Concerning geographic mobility, 10% of the 427 authors
who answered the question were not working in their
country of nationality. Most were fully qualified
researchers (69%), followed by predoctoral students
(29%) and postdoctoral students (9%). Europeans are
those who move the most (53%). Europe and North
America are the areas with the highest rates of authors
originating from other areas (37% and 25%, respectively).
Unfortunately, our results on taxonomists’ mobility do
not allow us to know whether the weak mobility of taxonomists from Asia and South America to Europe,
North America and Oceania is due to short-term mobility (which cannot be measured from our data) or to a
more general lack of mobility.
How are international collaborations structured?

Collaborations are numerous: 73% of the publications
have at least two authors. Three kinds of collaboration
patterns were observed, corresponding to our previous

grouping in areas (Figure 5): regions which co-publish
with every other area of the world (ENO); regions
which mainly co-publish with themselves (AsS) or
with ENO; and regions which do not publish much
(AfM).
Authors from ENO area do not predominantly sign
the publications as first authors (c2 test, P = 0.054).
The percentages of single-author articles is greater in
ENO (28%) than in AsS (12%; c2 test, P = 9.49e-08).
In which external areas and countries are new species
described?

From a zootaxonomic point of view, Asia and South
America are the most studied regions (see Table 2-B).
Altogether they account for 50% of the publications and
61% of the new species. Latitudes are provided in the
publications for 667 of the new species. Most of them
(77%) come from latitudes higher than 10°, equally
distributed between North and South. The remaining
23% are also equally distributed North and South (c2:
P > 0.05).
Figure 6 shows the result of the CA between the
region of origin of the holotype and authors laboratories. The place of conservation of the holotype was
used as supplementary data. Dimension 1 and dimension 2 together are strongly linked with both the origin
of the holotypes and authors laboratories. They separate
three groups: holotypes from AsS, holotypes from ENO
and holotypes from AfM. AsS holotypes are linked to
AsS collaborations and ENO-AsS collaborations whereas
AfM holotypes are close to AfM, ENO-AfM, AsS-AM
and ENO-AsS-AfM collaborations. However, AsS holotypes appear to be the category which is mainly studied
by AS and ENO-AsS collaborations and AfM holotypes
appear to be the category which is mainly studied by all
areas of the world. The ENO holotypes category is
linked to ENO collaborations and ENO holotypes
appear to be studied by authors from ENO areas only.
Thus, only ENO authors work on all areas of the world.
Dimension 2 is linked with the atypical work on AM
holotypes: authors from AfM are the only ones to work
on their regions only, with numerous collaborations
from all over the world.
Which areas and countries house the holotype specimens?

The supplementary data of Figure 6 show that holotypes
are not always kept in the areas they come from.
Authors from ENO area keep their holotypes as well as
the holotypes from Africa and Middle East which they
have studied in collaboration. On the other hand,
authors from Asia and South America keep their holotypes even if studied in collaboration with authors from
Europe, North America or Oceania.

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Page 8 of 13

Figure 5 Nature of the cooperation between researchers from different areas of the world, for articles whose number of authors
exceeds 1. We used the OST (Observatoire des Sciences et des Techniques, Paris, France) indicator: (number of publications of a region A with
an other region B)/(total number of publications of region A).

Are museums preferred for carrying out taxonomic
research and keeping the type specimens?

Author affiliations to universities are numerous (47%),
followed by museums (28%), other institutions (21%) and
private addresses (4%). Figure 7 shows the result of the
CA between the geographical areas of authors and their
type of institution. The places of conservation of the
holotypes were used as supplementary data. Dimension 1
is strongly linked with geographical areas and separates
the AsM area from the AfEO area. Universities and other
institutions of work are linked to AsM and SN, whereas
Private addresses and Museums are linked to AfEO. The
supplementary data show that housing institutions differ
according to the region and follow authors’ affiliations,

except as concerns Universities. Holot_University is distant from auth_University on the map because a high
number of museums are subordinated to universities
(63% in our data), especially in AsM, and are thus not
mentioned in the authors’ address.
The proportion of museums in authors’ affiliation
decreases to 33% (AfEO), 3% (AsM) and 7% (SN) when
the institution that subordinates the museum is taken
into account. The proportion of universities also
increases to 44% for AfEO, 70% for AsM and 67% for SN.
Noteworthy is the high proportion of museums (55%)
and private collections (21%) for AfEO. 28% of the types
kept in European private collections are holotypes and
syntypes; 72% are paratypes.

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Page 9 of 13

Table 3 Proportion of publication and new species for
each taxon
% of publication

% of new species

69

81

Insecta

45

58

Arachnida

10

11

Malacostraca

8

9

Other

6

3

16

8
3

Arthropoda

Vertebrata
Amphibia

5

Actinopterygii

4

2

Reptilia

4

1

Chondrichthyes

1

1

Other

2

1

Mollusca

3

3

Platyhelminthes

2

2

Other
Figure 6 Result of the CA between the region of origin of the
holotype and authors laboratory. The place of conservation of the
holotype is used as supplementary data. cons_: region of conservation
of the holotypes; orig_: origin of the holotypes. Af: Africa, As: Asia, E:
Europe, M: Middle East, O: Oceania, N: North America, S: South America.

Are there more works on Vertebrata?

Most of the works on taxa (Table 3) deal with Arthropoda (69%), Chordata (16%), followed by Mollusca (3%)
and Platyhelminthes (2%). Other taxa occur for less than
2% each and form the 10% remaining group. Arthropods

10

6

Sum

100

100

Left: n = 735. Right: n = 1416.

are mainly Insecta (64%) and Arachnida (14%), whereas
Chordata are only represented by vertebrates.
It is thus not surprising that newly described species
are mainly arthropods (81%) and vertebrates (8%). Many
(51%) of the new species are described in taxonomic
revisions, and only 35% in isolated works.
Figure 8 shows the result of the CA between studied
phyla and the number of pages per new described species of each publication. The diversity of characters used
to describe each new species and the number of authors
of each document are used as supplementary data.
Dimension 1 is strongly linked with phyla and separates
the Vertebrata from the Arthropoda. Vertebrata is
linked to category (10, 55] whereas Arthropoda is linked
to categories with fewer pages per new species.
Are there more taxonomists involved in Vertebrata
studies?

The supplementary data of Figure 8 show that the category Arthropoda is linked to few authors categories,
whereas Vertebrata is linked to categories with more
than three authors.
In the Vertebrata, a new species is described on average by 3.4 authors, whereas the figure is 0.9 in the
Arthropoda. Thus, for an equal number of taxonomists,
taxonomists working on arthropods describe more new
species than taxonomists working on vertebrates.
Figure 7 Result of the CA between the geographical areas of
authors and their type of institution. The institution of conservation
of the holotypes is used as supplementary data. holot_: holotypes’ type
of institution; auth_: authors’ type of institution. Af: Africa, As: Asia, E:
Europe, M: Middle East, O: Oceania, N: North America, S: South America.

Are there more characters involved in Vertebrata studies?

The supplementary data of Figure 8 show that the variety of characters used to describe the new species is
higher for vertebrates. Whenever non-morphological

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Figure 8 Result of the CA between studied phyla and the
number of authors of each document. Supplementary data:
number of pages per new species, diversity of characters used to
describe each new species. auth_: number of authors; pg_: number
of pages per new species.

characters are used in Vertebrata descriptions, these are
mainly molecular or bio-acoustic.
Are there more specimens involved in Vertebrata studies?

No significant difference between taxa was found in this
respect. One species out of five was described from one
specimen only (20%), or known from one locality only
(21%). As much as 53% of the new species were collected from more than 2 localities. Two species out of
five were described from specimen(s) of one sex only.
Nine species out of 10 were described on the basis of a
single stage of development (no significant difference
between taxa). These figures vary when the year of collection is taken into account. New species known only
from 1 specimen represent 64% of the new species with
holotypes collected before the median year 1999. They
represent 33% of the new species with holotypes collected after 1999 (n = 1261, P = 5.83e-08).

Discussion
Is zoological taxonomy still more developed in countries
that have been historically taxonomically active?

This study of Zootaxa’s 2006-2007 publications supports
the idea that zoological taxonomy is still more developed in countries that have historically been taxonomically active. Taxonomists from Europe, North America
and Oceania are the only ones to collaborate largely
with those from other regions, and they do so with all
regions in the world. They also remain the only ones to

Page 10 of 13

work on very wide geographical zones and to host
researchers from abroad. A lack of studies in Africa has
already been pointed out [11,25,43]. This lack still exists,
as African regions are not well represented in our
sample.
However, this study also shows that Asian and South
American countries appear to play a prominent role in
zoological taxonomy today. Their high number of publications, the fact that they keep their own specimens and
the median age of their respondents show that they
have a developed and active community of taxonomists.
Previous studies on taxonomists’ age could not be used
for a rigorous comparison because the enquiries were
not carried out at the same time [15,20,23,28,44-46].
Are these results artefacts created by our choice of the
journal Zootaxa? We do not think so, for several reasons. First, we previously checked that our sampling was
not biased questioning this respect. Second, the taxonomic growth of the two main countries responsible for
these results (China and Brazil) has already been pointed
out in the literature [10,47]. China’s funding for research
increased by 30% each year between 1998 and 2006,
which benefited taxonomy: “The evaluation of the
funded projects in the Division [of Zoology] shows that
animal morphology and taxonomy are the main supported areas, accounting for half of the total funded“
[48]. In 2004, China became the fifth country in terms
of number of publications. The number of students has
been increasing everywhere in this country [49]. An analysis of Brazil’s scientific production carried out by The
Observatoire des Sciences et Techniques (Paris, France)
showed that it was quickly growing [50,51]. The figures
were even underestimated: a bibliometric study [50]
showed that many Brazilian articles are published in
Portuguese, in national journals. Thus they were not
included in the calculation. Moreover, a recent study on
amphibian taxonomic effort and expertise supports
these results concerning China and Brazil [52]. It also
found that the continental distribution of authors in
Zootaxa (n = 5663) was similar to the continental distribution of authors working on a given taxon (i.e. Amphibians, n = 647).
Another argument in favour of this idea involves the
geographical origin of the new species. Surprisingly, no
latitude preference was identified regarding the origin of
the newly described species. This contradicts the widespread idea that latitudes close to the equator have a
richer biodiversity [53]. Why, then, do our data fail to
find high proportion of new species in the belt of 10°
above and below the equator?
In this respect we found that places where the highest
numbers of species were described recently (China,
Brazil) are also those with the highest number of taxonomists. A correlation exists between the number of

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

taxonomists and the number of species known in a phylum [54]. It is thus likely that the high number of newly
described species in China and Brazil is a reflection of
the taxonomic involvement of these countries, in terms of
manpower and funding. Thus, if China and Brazil appear
to be the most studied regions, this is not only because
they are large countries with a rich biodiversity [55-57],
but also because they have numerous taxonomists and
have decided to invest in this branch of research.
Finally, it is striking that a high proportion of our
respondents were professionals (fully qualified researchers, students) despite the high number of amateurs in
entomology [9]. Zootaxa would therefore reflect a biased
sub-sample of the taxonomic community, including
mostly professionals. One may wonder whether part of
this phenomenon might be due to the fact that some
amateur taxonomists, especially in entomology, tend to
publish their works in their national languages in
national periodicals whenever they still exist [58]. Unfortunately, professional categories are not expressed the
same way between studies, hence our figures are hardly
comparable with previous works [15,24,28,54]. We also
have to keep in mind that the authors who provided
their email addresses are mainly the corresponding
authors - a factor that might influence our results.
Is zoological taxonomy still in favour of vertebrates, vs.
arthropods?

On the basis of taxonomic output (number of publications, number of new species), arthropods, especially
insects, appear to be much more studied than vertebrates. Vertebrates nevertheless concentrate a higher
number of taxonomists, characters and methods used
for each new species. Thus, even if more results are produced on arthropods, their study involves a lesser
amount of means (number of taxonomists, number and
diversity of methods used).
The long-studied vertebrates [2,59] are nowadays studied with modern methods. Most of the time, these
methods complement the morphological ones. As a consequence, morphological studies are a necessary step in
any taxonomic work. They are not a sign of intellectual
or technological backwardness when presented alone
[60]. They are a strong indication of the amplitude of
our ignorance of the taxon in question. The data we
gathered on the numbers of specimens, localities and
kinds of characters used to recognize and describe a
new taxon clearly show that we are very far from
“knowing” a species once it has been “described” and
named [61].
Moreover, the taxa which benefit from a high taxonomic involvement have nevertheless the lowest rates of
description of new species. If we aim at increasing the
number of known species as quickly as possible,

Page 11 of 13

taxonomists should give priority to taxa which do not
require these new methods.
We do not think that these results are artefacts created by our choice to work on the journal Zootaxa. We
previously checked that our sampling was not biased for
this question and we already know that vertebrates have
been studied for a longer time [2,59]. Our observations
match this idea.
This disequilibrium of the taxonomic effort in favour
of vertebrates is problematic if we aim at better knowing
that which we know the least. Insects represent 58% of
the new described species and vertebrates 7.2%. Yet,
according to some estimates (figures computed from the
sum of the ‘World Descr.’ and ‘Estimate World’ figures
for chordates and invertebrates in [56]), vertebrates
would only represent 0.3% of the numbers of species
that remain to be described, whereas insects represent
74%. Thus, this distribution of taxonomic effort between
taxa is unsuitable when considering the needs
[16,23,24,54,62]. The international and national scientific
communities should hire more people to focus on
arthropods, especially entomologists.
The nature of the works published in Zootaxa show
that this journal gives priority to alpha-taxonomy. “Zootaxa considers papers on all animal taxa, both living
and fossil, and especially encourages descriptions of new
taxa“ [63]. We therefore consider our main results valid
for zoological alpha-taxonomy.

Conclusions
We found that the disequilibrium does not correspond
exactly to that usually admitted. The USA, China and
Brazil are currently the three leading countries in zoological alpha-taxonomy. However, each of them presents a
different pattern. Taxonomists from Asia and South
America are younger and mainly work in universities,
rather than museums. A bias in favour of vertebrates
still exists if we refer to the effort invested in each
group to produce taxonomic data, but not for the number of papers. Finally, we insist on the idea that
“describing a species” is very different from “knowing a
species”. The taxonomic involvement of a country, in
terms of manpower and funding, appears here to be a
key factor in the development of fruitful taxonomic
research. If we aim at increasing our knowledge of the
species of the world, we still have much efforts to make
in terms of the efficient distribution of the taxonomic
effort between taxa.

Acknowledgements
We thank all those who took time out of their already busy schedules to fill
in and return the questionnaire. Thanks to Zhang Zhi-Qiang, who
encouraged this study, provided free access to Zootaxa’s articles and
provided critical comments on the work. We would also like to thank

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Sébastien Ballesteros, Julien Barnier and Gaël Millot for their statistical help. If
any statistical mistake can be found in this paper, it must nevertheless be
attributed to the authors. We would like to thank Sandra Dos Santos for her
translations of the Portuguese papers and Annie Amirda, Julie Delacôte and
Mark Judson for the English corrections. We would also like to thank
Philippe Grandcolas, Aurélien Miralles, Antoine T. Mantilleri, Ferdinando
Boero, Mark Judson and four anonymous referees for their critical
comments.
Author details
1
UMR 7205 OSEB, Département Systématique et Evolution, Muséum national
d’Histoire naturelle, CP 30, 25 rue Cuvier, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France.
2
SAP2S-DASTR, CNRS, 3 rue Michel Ange, 75794 Paris Cedex 16, France.
Authors’ contributions
ET designed the sampling procedure and the database, compiled the
database, participated in the statistical analysis and drafted the manuscript.
CB designed and participated in the statistical analysis. AS participated in the
analyses of the results and helped to draft the manuscript. AD designed the
study, participated in the analysis of the results, and helped to draft and
translate the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 19 October 2010 Accepted: 18 March 2011
Published: 18 March 2011
References
1. Wilson JRU, Proches S, Braschler B, Dixon ES, Richardson DM: The (bio)
diversity of science reflects the interests of society. Frontiers in ecology
and the environment 2007, 5:409-414.
2. Proença VM, Pereira HM, Vicente L: Organismal complexity is an indicator
of species existence value. Frontiers in ecology and the environment 2008,
6:298-299.
3. Cribb TH: Living on the edge: parasite taxonomy in Australia.
International Journal for Parasitology 2004, 34:117-123.
4. Bonnet X, Shine R, Lourdais O: Taxonomic chauvinism. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 2002, 17:1-3.
5. GBIF and Data Repatriation to Countries of Origin. [http://www.gbif.org/
index.php?id=488].
6. EDIT: Report and online catalogue on existing taxonomic training resources
in Europe. Brussels: Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences; 2006.
7. Results of Surveys of Taxonomic Expertise in Parasitology in Canada and
of Interest in National Faunal Projects on Parasites in Canada. [http://
www.biology.ualberta.ca/parasites/ParSec/texten/modgap.htm].
8. Pallini A, Fadini MAM, Venzon M, De Moraes GJ, Barros-Battesti DM:
Demandas e perspectivas para a Acarologia no Brasil (Demands and
perspectives to acarology in Brazil). Neotropical Biology and Conservation
2007, 2:169-175.
9. Löbl I, Leschen RAB: Demography of Coleopterists and Their Thoughts on
DNA Barcoding and the Phylocode, with Commentary. The Coleopterists
Bulletin 2005, 59:284-292.
10. Eggleton P: Termite species description rates and the state of termite
taxonomy. Insectes Sociaux 1999, 46:1-5.
11. Green SV: The taxonomic impediment in orthopteran research and
conservation. Journal of Insect Conservation 1998, 2:151-159.
12. House of Lords Science and Technology Committee: Systematics and
Taxonomy: Follow-up. 5th report. London 2008.
13. Valdecasas AG, Bello E, Becerra JM: La Taxonomía en España. Arbor:
Ciencia, Pensamiento y Cultura; 1992:561:77-102.
14. Tillier S, De Wever P, (Eds): Systématique: ordonner la diversité du vivant Rapport sur la science et la technologie n°11. Paris: Editions Tec & Doc; 2000.
15. Australian Government department of the Environment Water Heritage and
the Arts: Survey of Australian Taxonomic Capacity 2006.
16. Marques AC, Lamas CJE: Sistemática zoológica no Brasil: estado da arte,
expectativas e sugestões de ações futuras. Papéis Avulsos de Zoologia
2006, 46:139-174.
17. Kraus O, (Ed): Zoologischer Systematik in Mitteleuropa (Zoological
systematics in Central Europe). Hamburg & Berlin: Paul Parey; 1976.

Page 12 of 13

18. Schminke HK: Wiederaufbau von Forschung und Lehre in Zoosystematik eine nationale Aufgabe. Spektrum der Wissenschaft 1994, 9:114-116.
19. Smith GF, Buys M, Walters M, Herbert D, Hamer M: Taxonomic research in
South Africa: the state of the discipline. South African Journal of Science
2008, 140:254-256.
20. Simonetti JA: Biodiversity and a taxonomy of Chilean taxonomists.
Biodiversity and Conservation 1997, 6:633-637.
21. Salazar Vallejo SL, Gonzalez NE, Schwindt E: Taxonomia de invertebrados
marinos: necesidades en latinoamérica (Marine invertebrate taxonomy:
needs in Latin America). Interciencia 2008, 33:510-517.
22. Blackmore S, Cutler DF, (Eds): Systematics Agenda 2000: the challenge for
Europe. Cardigan: Samara Publishing for the Linnean Society; 1996.
23. Shimura J, (Ed.): Global Taxonomy Initiative in Asia. Research Report from
the National Institute for Environmental Studies. 2003.
24. Gaston KJ, May RM: Taxonomy of taxonomists. Nature 1992, 356:281-282.
25. Klopper RR, Smith GF, Chikuni AC: The Global Taxonomy Initiative in
Africa. Taxon 2002, 51:159-165.
26. Zhang ZQ: The first five years of Zootaxa. Zootaxa 2006, 1111:68.
27. Top journals for new taxa and top journals for new taxonomic/
nomenclatural acts. [http://www.organismnames.com/metrics.htm?
page=tsj].
28. Betsch J-M, (Ed): Livre Blanc de la Systématique. Société Française de
Systématique; 1989.
29. Geeta R, Levy A, Hoch JM, Mark M: Where do most taxonomists work,
and does it matter? Poster. Annual AIBS conference on “Bioethics in a
changing world"; Washington, D. C., USA 2003.
30. Tillier S: Une espèce menacée: les taxonomistes en France. In
Systématique: ordonner la diversité du vivant - Rapport sur la science et la
technologie n°11. Edited by: Tillier S, de Wever P. Paris: Editions Tec
2000:20-23.
31. Zootaxa website. [http://www.mapress.com/zootaxa/].
32. R Development Core Team: R: a language and environment for statistical
computing. Vienna, Austria 2008.
33. CompressWeb: Email Questionnaire 4.1. 2007.
34. Central Intelligence Agency: The World Factbook 2008. Washington, DC:
Central Intelligence Agency; 2008.
35. Dray S, Dufour A, Chessel D: The ade4 package-II: Two-table and K-table
methods. R News 2007, 7:47-52.
36. Ripley BD, Lapsley M: RODBC: ODBC Database Access. R package version
1.2-3. 2008.
37. Meyer D, Zeileis A, Hornik K: The Strucplot Framework: Visualizing MultiWay Contingency Tables with vcd. Journal of Statistical Software 2006,
17:1-48.
38. Zeileis A, Meyer D, Hornik K: Residual-based Shadings for Visualizing
(Conditional) Independence. Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics 2007, 16:507-525.
39. Husson F, Lê S, Pagès J: Analyse de données avec R Rennes: Presses
Universitaires de Rennes; 2009.
40. Benzecri JP: In L’analyse des correspondances. L’analyse des données. Volume
2. Paris: Dunod; 1973.
41. Mayr E, Ashlock PD: Principles of systematic zoology. New-York , Second 1991.
42. Dubois A: Drôles d’espèces. Hybridation, perturbations de la méiose et
spéciation dans le règne animal: quelques points délicats de
terminologie, d’éidonomie et de nomenclature. In Peut-on classer le
vivant? Linné et la systématique aujourd’hui. Edited by: Prat D, Raynal-Roques
A, Roguenant A. Paris: Belin; 2008:169-202.
43. Slater JA: The place of systematists in contemporary society. Bulletin of
the Entomologial Society of America 1984, 30:4-7.
44. House of Lords Science and Technology Committee: Systematic Biology
Research. 1st report 1991-92. London 1992.
45. Krebs JR, (Ed): Evolution and Biodiversity: The New Taxonomy. London:
UK Natural Environment Research Council; 1992.
46. Tillier S: Les communautés scientifiques nationales. In Systématique:
ordonner la diversité du vivant - Rapport sur la science et la technologie n°11.
Edited by: Tillier S, de Wever P. Paris: Editions Tec 2000:42-43.
47. Joly CA: Taxonomy: programmes developing in the South too. Nature
2006, 440:24-24.
48. Division of Zoology, Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science and
Aquatic Science Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science. [http://www.
nsfc.gov.cn/e_nsfc/desktop/zn/jn/0124.htm].

Tancoigne et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:5
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/5

Page 13 of 13

49. Observatoire des Sciences et des Techniques: Chine: dossier-pays OST,
décembre 2006 2006.
50. Observatoire des Sciences et des Techniques: Brésil: dossier-pays OST, juin
2003 2003.
51. Michán L, Llorente Bousquets J: Bibliometría de la sistemática biológica
sobre América Latina durante el siglo XX en tres bases de datos
mundiales. Revista de Biología Tropical 2009, 58:531-545.
52. Rodrigues ASL, Gray CL, Crowter BJ, Ewers RM, Stuart SN, Whitten T,
Manica A: A Global Assessment of Amphibian Taxonomic Effort and
Expertise. Bioscience 2010, 60:798-806.
53. Dubois A: Threatened amphibians. Alytes 2009, 27:25-37.
54. Bello E, Becerra JMG, Valdecasas A: Counting on taxonomy. Nature 1992,
357:531.
55. Biodiversity Committee of the Chinese Academy of Sciences: Species
diversity. Biodiversity in China: status and conservation needs. Beijing 1992.
56. Chapman AD: Numbers of Living Species in Australia and the World.
Canberra: Australian Biodiversity Information Services, 2 2009.
57. Lewinsohn TM, Prado PI: How Many Species Are There in Brazil.
Conservation Biology 2005, 19:619-624.
58. Dubois A: Should we care about taxonomic journals? A plea for Biotaxa,
a new kind of online subscription package. Newsletter (European
Distributed Institute of Taxonomy) 2008, 9:12-14.
59. California Academy of Sciences: A century of progress in the natural sciences,
1853-1953. San Francisco 1955.
60. La Salle J, Wheeler Q, Jackway P, Winterton S, Hobern D, Lovell D:
Accelerating taxonomic discovery through automated character
extraction. Zootaxa 2009, 2217:43-55.
61. Dubois A: List of European species of amphibians and reptiles: will we
soon be reaching stability? Amphibia-Reptilia 1998, 19:1-28.
62. Blackmore S: A Summary of UK Based Expertise in Systematic Biology. UK
SYSTEMATICS FORUM; 1996.
63. Information for authors. [http://www.mapress.com/zootaxa/support/author.
html].
doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-5
Cite this article as: Tancoigne et al.: Insights from Zootaxa on potential
trends in zoological taxonomic activity. Frontiers in Zoology 2011 8:5.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
