<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Of tests, trochs, shells, and spicules: Development of the basal mollusk Wirenia argentea (Solenogastres) and its bearing on the evolution of trochozoan larval key features</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2010 7:6. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-7-6"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Christiane Todt"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

RESEARCH

Open Access

Of tests, trochs, shells, and spicules: Development
of the basal mollusk Wirenia argentea
(Solenogastres) and its bearing on the evolution
of trochozoan larval key features
Christiane Todt1*, Andreas Wanninger2

Abstract
Background: The phylogenetic status of the aplacophoran mollusk taxon Solenogastres (Neomeniomorpha) is
controversially discussed. Some authors propose the clade to represent the most basal branch within Mollusca,
while others claim aplacophoran mollusks (Solenogastres and Caudofoveata) to be derived. Larval characters are
central in these discussions, specifically the larval test (calymma, apical cap), the ontogeny of the epidermal
scleritome, and the proposed absence of larval protonephridia. To date, developmental data are available for five
solenogaster species, but most reports are incomplete and need confirmation.
Results: Wirenia argentea deposit small batches of uncleaved embryos that are tightly enclosed by a smooth and
transparent egg hull. Cleavage is spiral and unequal. The ciliated larvae hatch about 45 hours after deposition and
swim actively in the water column. Within 48-60 hours after hatching they become mushroom-shaped with a
pronounced apical cap partly enclosing a posterior trunk. The cells covering the apical cap are large and cleavage
arrested. On the apical cap there is a prominent prototrochal band of compound cilia and an apical ciliary tuft and
the trunk bears a terminal ciliary band (telotroch). Obscured by the apical cap, a ciliary band originates in the
stomodaeal pore and surrounds the trunk. As development is proceeding, the trunk elongates and becomes
covered by cuticle with the exception of a ventral ciliary band, the future foot. The larvae have a pair of
protonephridia. At 5 days after hatching they begin to settle and within the following 7-9 days the apical cap is
gradually reduced. Scattered epidermal sclerites form under the cuticle. Wirenia argentea lack iterated groups of
sclerites at any developmental stage. At 40 days after hatching, the postlarvae have a fully developed foregut, but
the midgut and hindgut are not yet interconnected.
Conclusions: Solenogastres develop via a trochophore-like lecitotrophic larva with a preoral apical cap that at least
partly represents an enlarged prototrochal area. Homology of this larval type (pericalymma larva) to test cell larvae
of other spiralian clades is doubtful. The ontogeny of W. argentea does not provide any evidence for a derived
status of Solenogastres within Mollusca.

Background
The Solenogastres (Neomeniomorpha) supposedly constitute the most basal extant mollusk lineage [1-3]. Suggested plesiomorphic characters include a mantle
covered with cuticle and calcareous sclerites (spicules), a
simple radula without subradular membrane, the lack of
* Correspondence: Christiane.Todt@bio.uib.no
1
Department of Biology, University of Bergen, Thormøhlensgate 53a, N-5008
Bergen, Norway

a midgut gland, the general structure of the nervous system, and the presence of oblique musculature in the
body wall [4-6]. Solenogastres are known to develop via
a so-called test cell larva [(= pericalymma larva sensu
Salvini-Plawen [7]; pericalymma Type 1 sensu Nielsen
[8]], a type of lecithotrophic larva first described for
protobranch bivalves [9,10]. Characteristic for test cell
larvae is a cap-like cover (larval test) of large ciliated
cells enveloping at least part of the larval body (Fig. 1).
Cilia may be scattered, but more often they are arranged

© 2010 Todt and Wanninger; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

in distinct ciliary bands. Based on the presence of a
comparable larval type in certain polychaetes and sipunculans, the pericalymma larva has been interpreted as
the ancestral larval type of mollusks and even of all spiralians [7,11], a view strongly refuted by others [[12], for
review].
The ancestral status of Solenogastres within Mollusca
is not undisputed [13-15], with some authors proposing

Page 2 of 17

that the body organization of aplacophoran mollusks, i.
e. Solenogastres and their putative sister group, Caudofoveata (Chaetodermomorpha), is the result of simplification and character loss. Based on molecular data, this
notion has recently been brought up again [16]. Some
authors propose a shell-bearing chiton- (i.e., polyplacophoran)-like ancestor as basal for Mollusca, a hypothesis
claimed to be supported by ontogenetic data showing a

Figure 1 Oocytes, early development, and gonad structure in Wirenia argentea. A, B. Adult specimen bearing eggs in the gonad
(arrowheads) and pericardium (pd). A. Scale bar 500 μm; B. Arrow indicating posteriormost part of the gonad containing white sperm, scale bar
250 μm; C. Gonad of W. argentea, histological cross section. Oocytes of different developmental stages with large nuclei (n) containing two darkstaining nucleoli are attached to a median diaphragm (arrows) and surrounded by spermatogonia (sc); bw: body wall, mg: midgut; scale bar 50
μm; D, E. Scanning electron micrographs of an uncleaved embryo (D) and a 32 cell stage (E) covered by the smooth egg hull, scale bars 30 μm;
F-H. Light micrographs of 2-cell stage (F), 4-cell stage (G), and 8-cell stage (H), macromeres conventionally marked, the arrow in F points to the
egg hull. Note that the CD, D and 1D blastomeres are larger than the other blastomeres; scale bar 40 μm; I. Larva 12 hours after hatching, light
micrograph, scale bar 40 μm; J. Schematic drawing of a pericalymma larva depicting apical cap and trunk, stomodaeum (st), protonephridium
(pn), as well as the main ciliary bands; at: apical tuft, fc: foot ciliation, ot: oral troch, pro: prototroch, tt: telotroch.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

serial arrangement of dorsal epidermal sclerites in species of Solenogastres [17,18] and Caudofoveata [19]. The
larval/postlarval sclerite rows have been suggested to
represent rudiments of spicule rows separating reduced
serial dorsal shell fields [18]. Others [20,21] interpreted
the serially arranged sclerites as possible precursors of
the seven shell plates found in recent postmetamorphic
polyplacophorans. Seven dorsal rows of sclerites seem in
fact to occur in larvae of the caudofoveate Chaetoderma
sp. [19], but the observation of seven rows of large
imbricating scales covering the dorsal surface of a solenogaster larva (Nematomenia banyulensis) was based on
a single specimen [17] and thus requires reinvestigation.
Two postmetamorphic specimens of an unidentified
solenogaster species have been described, where the
younger specimen showed six distinct sclerite-covered
dorsal areas [18]. In larvae of Epimenia babai, by contrast, epidermal sclerites emerge scattered over the
entire dorsal surface without showing any seriality
[22,23]. To evaluate these contradictory findings, data
on additional solenogaster species are crucial.
We studied the ontogeny of Wirenia argentea, a solenogaster species classified within the Gymnomeniidae
(Pholidoskepia), a clade supposedly representing an
early branch within Solenogastres [5]. These animals are
abundant on silt and mud in water depths of about 150600 m in the northern European Atlantic and for the
present study specimens were kept in the laboratory for
several months. We describe behavioral aspects of oviposition and larval locomotion and focus on embryonic,
larval and postlarval development, taking account of
external morphology as well as of selected aspects of
organogenesis. Our results shed new light on the ancestral organization of mollusk larvae and allow for a reevaluation of evolutionary relationships among spiralian
test-cell larvae.

Results
Oogenesis, fertilization, and egg deposition

In adult living animals with the body wall musculature
not overly contracted, the individual oocytes in the
gonad are visible through the dorsal body wall as paired,
light yellowish globules. The minimum size limit for
reproduction is about one third of the maximum body
length, but large animals (8-9 mm body length) produce
considerably more eggs. Four to six ripe eggs are stored
tightly packed in the pericardium for several hours
before deposition (Fig. 1A, B). The posteriormost part of
the gonad in specimens bearing ripe eggs generally
appears as paired whitish (containing sperm?) structure
(Fig. 1B). From histological sections of fully mature specimens it becomes obvious that sperm and eggs are produced simultaneously (Fig. 1C).

Page 3 of 17

Nearly all eggs deposited in the laboratory were fertilized and underwent first stages of cleavage, even if
some showed irregularities later in development. Copulation was not observed and had probably taken place in
the natural habitat prior to sampling. Self-fertilization is
also a possibility, especially because the seminal vesicles
of several specimens depositing fertilized eggs in the
laboratory contained hardly any sperm.
During egg deposition the animals lift the posterior
part of the body (ca. 1/3 of total body length) and
expand their posteriorly located pallial cavity opening to
release two eggs, one after the other; after some minutes
the next two eggs are released, then in large specimens
two more. Six eggs appear to be the maximum in one
session. It takes 24 hours or more for the next batch of
eggs to be ready for deposition. Transport of the rather
large eggs through the spawning ducts appears to be
due to muscular activity, as rhythmic peristaltic waves
occur during the process.
The fertilized eggs are globular, measure 100 μm in
diameter, and bear a clear, smooth, slightly sticky egghull covered by a thin layer of mucus (Fig. 1D-I). The
eggs are oval in shape immediately after release, but
they become globular within two to three minutes. First
they float, but in a dish with stagnant water they sink to
the bottom within about fifteen minutes and then stick
to the substrate (detritus as well as glass or plastic).
Cleavage

At 7°C, the first cleavage is completed within three
hours after deposition of the fertilized eggs (Fig. 1F).
Subsequently, the cells divide every two to three hours,
until a 32-cell stage is reached (Fig. 1E). The first cleavage is slightly unequal, with the larger CD blastomere
bearing a large polar lobe, which appears as a whitish to
semitransparent bulge on the surface (Fig. 1F). After the
second cleavage, the A, B, and C quadrants are of equal
size, while the D quadrant is larger (Fig. 1G). After the
second cleavage a second polar lobe, similar in appearance to the first one but smaller, appears on the D
quadrant. The 1D cell of the 8-cell stage is conspicuously larger than all other cells (Fig. 1H). Cleavage is
spiral and unequal, but in later stages there are no clear
size differences between macromeres and micromeres
(Fig. 1E). Gastrulation takes place 25-27 hours after egg
deposition. About four hours later the embryos start to
rotate within the egg-hull, a movement caused by ciliary
action, which can be observed through the still entirely
transparent egg-hull. At this stage, the embryos are
roughly globular but flattened at the posterior pole.
Within the next 5-10 hours they become slightly elongated and the pseudo-blastopore - the opening of the
developing apical cap - comes to lie in a ventro-posterior position.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

Hatching and larval behavior

The larvae hatch at about 45 hours after oviposition.
During this process, they move actively, colliding with
the egg hull and thereby extending and thinning the
hull gradually until it breaks. Several small refractile
globules that may contain enzymes to soften the egghull are floating between larva and egg-hull. Once the
egg-hulls are broken, the larvae (Figs. 1I, 2A) escape
rapidly and start to swim upwards. During swimming
they rotate slowly clockwise around their longitudinal
axis. The swimming movements appear to be mostly
due to action of the long and thick compound cilia of
the main prototrochal ciliary band, while the apical
ciliary tuft, composed of 3-5 compound cilia, moves
only slowly. The larvae do not react to a light source
positioned laterally or above the culture dish. They are
negatively geotactic: In a glass cylinder with stagnant
water a maximum vertical swimming distance of 30
cm from the bottom could be observed. When disturbed, many of the young larvae stop swimming and
sink to the bottom but start swimming up again after
some minutes. Within 48-60 hours after hatching, the
still swimming larvae elongate and develop the typical
mushroom-shaped body with an apical cap partly covering a posterior trunk (Fig. 1I). Settling is not induced
by a specific substratum. When kept at 7°C, larvae
begin to settle spontaneously at about 5 days after
hatching and then complete metamorphosis within a
week. The transition from planktonic to benthic lifestyle is gradual (for morphological details see below),
with larvae spending increasingly more time close to
or on the bottom of the dish but keeping their ability
to swim for another four to five days. Upon settling,
the apical caps comprise about one third of the larvae’s
total body length. The larvae move slowly over the
bottom of the dish and their tests become reduced in
size. From the point of settling onwards, the foot cilia
gradually take over the locomotory function. Epidermal
sclerites appear about two weeks after hatching, at a
stage where the apical cap still is partly present and
the prototroch functional. At this stage, the larvae are
not able to swim up into the water column, but the
prototroch cilia may cause a rotating movement, with
the posterior tip of the trunk on or very close to the
bottom of the dish. At about 2 weeks after hatching,
the apical cap is completely reduced. Superficially, the
young postlarvae resemble miniature adults, but they
are yellowish in color (instead of pink) and the shape
of epidermal sclerites diverges from that of adult specimens (see below). At 42 days after hatching, the yellowish yolk is almost completely used up and the
young juveniles are white and slightly translucent. All
remaining juveniles were fixed at this stage.

Page 4 of 17

Larval morphogenesis
Day 1-2 after hatching

Upon hatching, the larvae are ovoid in shape with a pronounced prototrochal ciliary band (prototroch s. str.)
and a long apical ciliary tuft (Fig. 1I, 2A). After 24 hours
the larval body becomes more bell-shaped with a blunt
caudal end (Fig. 2D, 3A, B). The prototroch cells bear a
single row of compound cilia (cirri) that are composed
of about 30 locomotory cilia each (Fig. 2B). The remaining surface is devoid of cilia but covered by microvilli
(Fig. 2A, B). The pretrochal cells have a roughly triangular outline and are arranged in 2-3 rows (Fig. 3B). They
bear scattered cilia and a dense coat of microvilli. The
apical tuft is composed of 3-5 cirri, but the number of
cells underlying the apical tuft is unknown. Posterior to
the prototroch, there are two regular tiers of large cells
bearing scattered cilia that in older larvae tend to be
more densely spaced towards the posterior cell margin,
especially in the second (posterior) tier. The cells of the
anterior post-trochal tier are about twice the size of the
prototrochal cells and somewhat larger than the cells of
the posterior tier. There is a pair of cells with tufts of
cilia bordering the posterior apical cap opening (Fig.
2C). Specific characteristics of the ciliation of test cell
types are given in Table 1. All cilia have a long vertical
and a shorter horizontal rootlet.
The test cells covering the apical cap are considerably
larger than all other larval cells and their nuclei are
about four times the size of other cell nuclei (Fig. 3D,
E). Test cell numbers remain constant until reduction of
the cap after settlement, while other larval tissues show
mitosis (Fig. 3E). The density of non-test nuclei is highest in the posteriormost part of the larva, where the
trunk is formed, and in an anterior zone that probably
is associated with formation of the central nervous system (Fig. 3C, D).
Day 3-7 after hatching

The larval body is composed of a bell-shaped apical
cap and a distinct, continuously growing trunk (Fig.
4A, Fig. 5A-D). In larvae seven days after hatching all
apical cap cells contain numerous yolk granules (Fig.
6A, D-G). Some granules show a distinct layering with
a dense core and outer concentric layers of differing
electron density (Fig. 6C). Cerebral depressions can be
identified anterior to the prototroch (Fig. 6A, B): Ectodermal nervous tissue with a microvillous surface lines
a pair of short, tube-shaped invaginations (Fig. 6C).
There is a single pair of longitudinal neurite bundles
in the trunk and some neurites originating in the apex
of the apical cap, which probably are associated with
the apical organ (Fig. 5B). Large unicellular mucus
glands are opening between pretrochal cells (Fig. 6A).
The larvae have a well-developed ciliated stomodaeum

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

Page 5 of 17

Figure 2 Wirenia argentea larvae, day 1-3 after hatching, SEM micrographs. A. Newly hatched larva, apical cap covered by a single row of
prototrochal cells bearing compound prototroch cilia (pro), two rows of posttrochal cells (pt1, pt2), and pretrochal cells (prt). The compound
cilia of the apical tuft (at) are bent. Note the cilia-free surface above the prototrochal ciliary band and the dense ciliation of the posttrochal cell
rows (arrow), scale bar 30 μm; B. Detail of prototroch with compound prototroch cilia on the posterior margin of the prototroch cells (pc). Note
scattered cilia (arrow) on the adjacent posttrochal cells (pt1c), scale bar 4 μm; C. Detail of pseudo-blastopore, seen from below, showing the
second row of posttrochal cells (pt2) and the two posteriormost test cells (pt3) bearing tufts of cilia (arrows), scale bar 15 μm; D. Day 2 larva
with long apical tuft (at) and conspicuous prototroch cilia (pro). Pretrochal cells (prt) and first row of posttrochal cells densely ciliated, second
row of posttrochal cells with a posterior ciliary band (arrow); scale bar 30 μm; E. Day 3 larva in oblique adapical view with trunk (tr) and
telotroch (tt) protruding from larval test; pt1-pt3: posttrochal cell rows 1-3, scale bar 20 μm.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

Page 6 of 17

Figure 3 Wirenia argentea larvae, day 1-3 after hatching, anti-a tubulin labeling, overlay of confocal image stacks. A, B. Day 1 larva. A.
Overlay of CLSM maximum projection (anti-a-tubulin labeling) and light micrograph. Note strong signal from prototrochal (pro) ciliary band and
cilia (arrow) of second posttrochal cell row (pt2). Pretrochal cells (prt) and cells of first posttrochal row (pt1) bear scattered cilia; B. Phalloidin
labeling showing areas of high actin content (cell borders, cilia); note irregular size of pretrochal (prt) and central cells (asterisk) and regular
arrangement of prototrochal (p) and posttrochal (pt1, pt2) cells; a: apical organ, pro: prototrochal ciliary band, tr: trunk rudiment; scale bar 35 μm;
C, D. Day 3 larva in lateroventral view, scale bars 50 μm; C. Overlay of Hoechst nuclear staining and light micrograph, outermost cell layer of
apical cap omitted, thus showing small cell nuclei of mesodermal cells and ectodermal cells of the trunk (tr) and apical cap inner surface
(arrows); note ring-shaped zone devoid of nuclei (arrowheads) and cerebral ganglion anlagen (asterisks), D. Hoechst nuclear staining, showing
nuclei of outermost cell layers; note size difference of posttrochal cell tier nuclei (arrows) and cerebral depression nuclei (asterisk); nuclei of
prototroch cells (p) only faintly labeled. E. Detail of outermost cell layers of apical cap of a Hoechst-labeled three day old larva showing a large
prototroch cell nucleus (pcn), several smaller mesoderm nuclei (n), including one in mitosis (mn); note dense yolk granules (arrows); scale bar 12
μm.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

Page 7 of 17

Table 1 Apical cap of Wirenia argentea, test cell numbers
and characteristics
Cell position
(tier)

Number of
cells/row

Number of
cilia/cell

Length of
cilia (μm)

Arrangement
of cilia

Apical

?

3 × (15-20)*

40-50

tuft

Pretrochal 1

6-8

numerous

10-15

scattered

Pretrochal 2

8-10

numerous

10-15

scattered

Prototrochal

14-16

6 × (20-25)*

25-35

adapical row

Posttrochal 1

10-12

numerous

10-15

scattered

Posttrochal 2

12-14

numerous

10-15

adapical row

Posttrochal 3

2

30-40

10-15

tuft

* Arranged as compound cilia (cirri).

(Figs. 5B, D, 6D, F) that opens into the ring-shaped
furrow between apical cap and trunk (Fig. 6G) and
ends blindly. An oral ciliary band confluent with the
stomodaeal ciliation surrounds the entire anterior
trunk (Fig. 5B, C). This band is completely disguised
by the test and thus not obvious in surface views. At
that stage, the midgut is not yet developed and the
central part of the trunk contains a cluster of cells
with numerous yolk granules (Fig. 6G). A pair of protonephridia is located on both sides of the stomodaeum (Fig. 5B). Each protonephridium is composed of
a single ciliated terminal cell with a simple ultrafiltration weir (Fig. 6I), several ciliated duct cells, and opens
via a single nephropore cell into the furrow between
test and trunk (Fig. 6H). The cells covering the inner
surface of the apical cap are very similar in ultrastructure to cells lining the trunk. Most of the trunk surface
is covered by microvilli and a few single cilia that gradually become embedded into a cuticular layer. There
are conspicuous depressions, probably epidermal
glands, scattered over the dorsal and lateral trunk surface (Fig. 4A, B). A broad ciliary band marks the ventral longitudinal midline, the future foot (Fig. 4A). The
ventral cilia are spread apart and there is no distinct
boundary between this “foot” and the adjacent trunk
surface (Fig. 4B). A ring-shaped telotroch surrounds
the posteriormost trunk cells that bear a tuft of long
compound cilia.
Day 8-9 after hatching

After day seven, the larval test begins to degenerate. The
post-trochal test cells lose their regular quadrangular
shape and diminish in size and number (Fig. 4C). It
appears that they gradually get detached from the apical
cap by epidermal trunk tissue that is protruding below
them. The posttrochal cell tiers show a ventral cleft (Fig.
4A). At least in some specimens the ventral part of the
prototroch appears more strongly developed and may,
together with the ventral ciliary band, serve for creeping
on the substratum (Fig. 5C, D).

Day 10-16 after hatching

The first epidermal sclerites are formed under the cuticle (Fig. 7D). We could observe considerable heterochrony in scleritome development: some specimens
were covered in sclerites while still bearing posttrochal
cells, while in others the sclerites appeared much later
(compare Fig. 5D with, Fig. 7A, B, D). The sclerites are
simple, flat scales, measuring between 40 × 15 μm and
55 × 25 μm. They are densely and regularly arranged
over the whole body, similar to shingles on a roof, and
the posterior sclerites emerge slightly later than the
anterior ones (Fig. 7A-C). These larval/postlarval sclerites are distinctly different in shape from the sharply
pointed adult sclerites that are characterized by a distinct median keel.
With ongoing degradation of the posttrochal cells, first
the ciliary pit, then the ciliated area surrounding the stomodaeal opening (Figs. 4D, E), and finally the oral trochus (Fig. 5E) become exposed. This is paralleled by an
eversion of the apical cap rim, resulting in the smaller
ectodermal cells lining the inner surface of the cap to
form the outer surface of the anteriormost part of the
trunk. Prototrochal, pretrochal, and telotroch cells
become gradually reduced, most probably absorbed (Fig.
8E, F). Finally, the postlarval sclerites obscure last
remainders of test cells and telotroch (Fig. 7C). The prepedal ciliary pit bears a tuft of compound cilia while the
now well defined foot is covered by simple cilia that are
very densely spaced (Figs. 4E, 5E). The metamorphosing
animals have a single pair of longitudinal neurite bundles that is located laterally (Fig. 5E).
Day 17-42 after hatching

At days 17-19, larval organs (including protonephridia
and stomodaeal ciliation) are reduced, but the midgut is
not fully developed yet. The cilia surrounding the oral
opening are reduced and the ciliated stomodaeum is
replaced by a non-ciliated pharynx. Cilia visible more
posteriorly in the gut of a juvenile 30 days after hatching
probably are part of the ciliary tract of the midgut (Fig.
5F). Anterior to the mouth opening the vestibulum is
formed, endowed with bundles of sensory cilia (Fig. 5F).
In a specimen sectioned at 42 days after hatching the
yolk reserves have almost completely been absorbed.
Inner organs, including radula, midgut, and sensory
structures such as the pedal commissure sac, are well
developed. The gonopericardial system is still entirely
lacking and we could not detect a heart, pericardium, or
related structures. It appears that hindgut and midgut
have not yet fused at this stage of development.

Discussion
Fertilization in Wirenia argentea

According to the general presence of organs known to
be involved in internal fertilization (seminal receptacles,

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

Page 8 of 17

Figure 4 Wirenia argentea larvae (A-C) and postlarvae (D-E), SEM micrographs. A. Day 5 larva, ventrolateral view. The trunk (tr) is largely
exposed and bears foot cilia (fc) and a prominent telotroch (tt), the second tier of posttrochal cells (prt2) shows a ventral cleft (arrow); the
prototroch cilia (pro) are inconspicuous due to a preparation artifact; scale bar 20 μm. B. Detail of figure A; the surface of the trunk is covered by
cuticle (cu) and single scattered cilia (white arrowheads); note that there is no clear mantle margin (arrows) but that foot cilia (fc) are arranged
irregularly; the small depressions (black arrowhead) may represent gland openings; scale bar 10 μm. C. Day 7 larva with exposed trunk (tr)
bearing telotroch (tt) and large apical cap; note that the posttrochal cells (pt1, pt2) are irregular in shape and lack cilia, while the prototroch
(pro) and pretrochal area (prt) are intact; scale bar 20 μm. D. Day 10 postlarva, early crawling stage in a lateral view; the foot (f) and prepedal
ciliary pit (arrowhead) are fully developed, part of the apical cap (ac) and the telotroch are still present; scale bar 20 μm. E. Detail of anterior part
of the foot with prepedal ciliary pit (arrowhead) and oral ciliation (oc); note the sharp border between mantle cuticle and foot ciliation (arrows);
scale bar 10 μm.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

Page 9 of 17

Figure 5 Wirenia argentea larvae and postlarvae (40 days), anti-a tubulin labeling, overlay of confocal images. A, B. Day 4 larva, ventral
view; scale bars 40 μm. A. Image stack through entire Z-axis showing prototrochal ciliary band (pro), telotroch (tt), foot cilia (fc), and longitudinal
neurite bundles (arrow). B. Reduced image stack omitting outermost cell layers; note apical organ (ao) with associated nerves, paired longitudinal
neurite bundle (arrows), stomodaeum (st), and protonephridia (pn); oral troch (arrowheads). C, D. Day 6 larva, lateral view; scale bars 50 μm. C.
Overlay of light micrograph and confocal image; apical cap (ac) covers part of the trunk (t); apical organ with ciliary tuft (ao); prototrochal cilia
(pro) and telotroch (tt) brightly labeled, oral troch faintly visible (arrowheads). D. Reduced image stack omitting outermost cell layers and layers
below sagittal plane; dorsal part of oral troch (arrowhead); fc: foot cilia, pn: protonephridium, pro: prototroch cilia, st: stomodaeum, tt: telotroch.
E. Day 11 postlarva, crawling stage; pretrochal part of apical cap (prt) still present, oral troch (ot) exposed; foot cilia (fc) and prepedal ciliary pit
(asterisk); note lateral longitudinal neurite bundle (arrow); st: stomodaeum, tt: telotroch; scale bar 50 μm. F. Anterior end of a postlarva 30 days
after hatching; cilia present in the gut (arrow), but distal pharynx (ph) devoid of cilia; prepedal ciliary pit marked by asterisk, sensory nerve
endings by arrowheads; cer: cerebral ganglion, fc: foot cilia, ve: vestibular cirri, yg: yolk granules; scale bar 25 μm.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

Page 10 of 17

Figure 6 Wirenia argentea larva at day 7, TEM micrographs of cross sections through the apical cap. A. Section anterior to prototroch
depicting cerebral depressions (arrows), pretrochal cells (prc), and gland cells (gl); yg: yolk granules; scale bar 20 μm. B. Detail of A; surface of
cerebral depression with microvilli (arrow); ne: neurons; scale bar 2 μm. C. Lumen of cerebral depression (cd) surrounded by neurons (ne); yg:
yolk granule of pretrochal cell; scale bar 2 μm. D. Section through prototrochal plane; note compound prototrochal cilia (pc), large nuclei of
prototroch cells (n), stomodaeum (arrowhead), and mesodermal cell with nucleus in mitosis (arrow); scale bar 20 μm. E. Detail of D, nuclei of
prototrochal cells (n) larger and more electron-translucent than nuclei of adjacent mesoderm cells (asterisks); scale bar 10 μm. F. Detail of
stomodaeum in cross section, stomodaeal lumen (st) surrounded by epithelial cells (ste); note that some epithelial cells contain numerous yolk
granules (yg); scale bar 3 μm. G. Section posterior to prototroch, slightly oblique section plane; first tier of posttrochal cells (pt1) constituting
outermost layer of apical cap; asterisk marks stomodaeal opening; scale bar 20 μm. H. Detail of protonephridial duct (pdu) opening into cleft
between trunk (tr) and apical cap (ac); scale bar 2 μm. I. Terminal cell (tc) with ultrafiltration weir (arrows marking two pores) and protonephridial
duct (pdu); note cilia and microvilli in the duct lumen; scale bar 1 μm.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

Page 11 of 17

Figure 7 Wirenia argentea larvae and postlarvae (days 10-16), SEM micrographs. A. Day 10 larva in dorsolateral view with apical cap
consisting of pretrochal cells, prototrochal cells (pro) characterized by cilia-free surface (arrowhead), and first tier of posttrochal cells (pt1); note
that sclerites covering the posterior trunk are still partly covered with cuticle (double arrowhead); scale bar 30 μm. B. Day 12 larva in lateral view
with fully developed postlarval sclerites; prototrochal cilia (pro), some cells of first tier of posttrochal cells (pt1) and telotroch (tt) still present;
arrow marks foot; scale bar 30 μm. C. Day 16 larva in ventral view, telotroch and most of apical cap reduced; note a last prototrochal cell
(arrowhead) and some compound cilia on the anterior body tip; arrows mark foot; scale bar 30 μm. D. Day 10 larva in an apical/ventral view
showing ventral cleft between second tier posttrochal cells (pt2) exposing part of ciliary pit (cp); note that epidermal sclerites are still covered by
cuticle (arrowheads); fc: foot cilia, pro: prototroch cilia, pt1: first tier posttrochal cells, tt: telotroch; scale bar 10 μm. E. Detail of C, epidermal
sclerites flanking and partly obscuring foot cilia (fc); scale bar 10 μm.

copulatory stylets) and a sperm type characteristic for
internal fertilization, most - if not all - Solenogastres
species appear to deposit fertilized eggs [24]. Reciprocal
copulation is thought to be the general mechanism for
sperm transfer [5,25]. The low numbers of sperm in the
seminal receptacles of our investigated adult specimens,
however, raise an interesting notion. The gonad of sectioned specimens contained numerous ripening and
mature sperm cells, but we did not observe any

copulation behavior in the laboratory. Self-fertilization is
known from various mollusks, most interestingly from
certain hermaphroditic opisthobranch slugs with internal fertilization [26]. Even if at this point there is no
proof for self-fertilization in W. argentea, it is possible
that the animals can switch from fertilization via copulation (indicated by presence of sperm in the seminal
receptacles) to use of own sperm under stressful conditions, such as laboratory culture.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

Page 12 of 17

Figure 8 Wirenia argentea ontogeny - schematic representation of the development of test and epidermis. Lateral view, ventral side to
the left; test cells grey, other ectdodermal cell layers black, mesodermal tissue dotted (inner organs not depicted). A. Day 1 larva. B. Day 3 larva
with trunk rudiment. C. Day 4 larva with short trunk. D. Day 7 larva, note dense ventral ciliation (foot) and ingression of non-test ectodermal
tissue (epidermis) below posttrochal cells. E. Day 10 larva with one of the ventral posttrochal cells shed and remaining posttrochal cells sitting
on top of epidermal material; note inversion of telotroch and dorsal sclerites. F. Day 14 postlarva, posttrochal cells shed, pretrochal cells covered
by epidermis and largely absorbed.

Oviposition in Solenogastres

In Wirenia argentea, eggs are deposited shortly after fertilization and prior to the first cleavage. Brood protection has been described for other species, such as
Halomenia gravida, observed to carry larvae in the mantle cavity [27], and Epimenia babai, having at least the
capacity of retaining eggs and larvae for several days in
the mantle cavity [28]. Wirenia argentea (present data),
Nematomenia banyulensis [17], Neomenia carinata [29],
and Rhopalomenia aglaophaeniae [30] deposit uncleaved
embryos. Solenogasters lay their eggs in paired batches correlating to the paired arrangement of spawning ducts
- with several days to weeks between deposition events.
Only in E. babai the eggs of each batch are enclosed in
a thick mucus sheath [23], while generally there is only
a thin mucus coating surrounding the egg hulls. The
number of eggs deposited per batch varies largely
between species and appears to be dependent on body
size of the parent. In addition, more eggs are produced
early in the breeding period [[28]; personal observation].
Large E. babai specimens of 20 cm body length deposit
up to 100 fertilized eggs at once and up to four such
batches within one night [23]. Thompson’s single N.
carinata specimen was 2 cm long and also produced up
to 100 eggs per batch [28], while small species such as
W. argentea deposit only 4-6 eggs per batch. Egg size,

however, is not correlated in a linear way to average
species size. The largest eggs with a diameter of 700 μm
(including egg hull) have been found in N. carinata
[29], a species with a maximum body size of 3 cm,
while the eggs of the up to 20 cm long E. babai measure
350 μm [23], and the eggs of both N. banyulensis with a
maximum body length of 3 cm [30] and W. argentea
with a body length of about 0.5 cm are 200 μm in diameter. It has to be noted that in some cases (E. babai,
probably also N. carinata) the space between embryo
and egg hull is considerably larger than for example in
W. argentea.
Hatching and larval behavior in Solenogastres

As described here for Wirenia argentea, solenogaster
larvae usually hatch at a swimming stage when the prototroch ciliation is well developed [23,28,29]. In Epimenia australis, by contrast, the larvae leave the
“fertilization membrane” (egg hull) much later, namely
at the postlarval crawling stage [24]. Since these observations are based on fixed material only, they require
corroboration by in vivo studies. In contrast to the negative geotaxis observed in newly hatched larvae of Wirenia argentea, Neomenia carinata larvae seem to stay
within a 2 cm range from the bottom [29]. The basic
information available for Epimenia babai [23,28] shows
similarities to our findings on W. argentea. In the

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

former species, the younger larvae exhibit vivid spiral
swimming, typical for spiralian trochophore-like larvae,
and do not show any phototactic behavior. In E. babai,
metamorphosis starts at days seven to eight after hatching at 16°C [23]. Beating of the prototroch cilia can still
be observed at this point, but the larvae lose their ability
to swim before the trunk is covered by sclerites. This is
different to our observation on W. argentea. Probably
the relatively short prototroch cilia of the metamorphosing E. babai larvae render swimming more difficult. Epimenia babai juveniles lived up to one month after
metamorphosis without food uptake [23], which despite
of the difference in culturing temperature is similar to
W. argentea.
The pericalymma larva of Solenogastres

The larva of Wirenia argentea is a pericalymma larva
sensu Salvini-Plawen [4] or test cell larva sensu Heath
[27] and Thompson [29], with a pronounced apical cap
(preoral test). Okusu proposed homology of the somewhat reduced apical cap of Epimenia babai with the larger cap of other species [23] and we agree with this
conclusion. In general, the posterior rim of the apical
cap of solenogasters forms a ring-shaped fold (see Fig.
1J) and the relatively large cells lining the outer surface
are commonly referred to as test cells. The general
arrangement of the partly ciliated test cells stays the
same until degeneration of the cap sets in. In W. argentea, the inner surface of the posterior rim of the apical
cap - facing the trunk - is formed by smaller cells similar to epidermal cells of the trunk (Fig. 8A-F). No such
information is available for any other solenogaster species. In some, such as Epimenia babai, the free part of
the posterior apical cap rim is short and is reduced
(stretched) at an early larval stage, thus exposing the
blastopore [22,23,28]. In others, such as Wirenia argentea (described herein), Nematomenia banyulensis [17],
and Neomenia carinata [29], the apical cap is more pronounced and the rim persists until the larva settles. Rhopalomenia aglaophaeniae [30] and Halomenia gravida
[27] appear to present an intermediate stage, even if the
status of the latter species is somewhat unsure because
the brooded larvae detected in the mantle cavity of a
sectioned adult do not represent the entire developmental sequence until metamorphic competence [27]. The
fact that H. gravida and R. aglaophaeniae, that have larvae bearing a well-developed apical cap, and E. babai
with a reduced cap have been assigned to the supposedly derived order Cavibelonia [1,31] points towards a
tendency to cap size reduction within the clade.
Spiralian test cell larvae

The term “test cell larva” stems from early work on protobranch bivalve development and refers to the cover
composed of large cells that entirely enclose the developing larval body [9,10]. Test cells in general are

Page 13 of 17

cleavage arrested and deciduous, i.e., they are shed or
absorbed during metamorphosis. Salvini-Plawen used
the term pericalymma larva to describe a larval type
characterized by a test-like cover (calymma) surrounding
at least parts of the posterior larval body [7]. He proposed homology of the larval tests between protobranch
bivalve and solenogaster larvae, the so-called endolarva
of polygordiid and oweniid polychaetes, and the sipunculan “serosa” larva. He furthermore suggested this lecitotrophic larval type to represent a more ancestral
condition than the planktotrophic trochophore or veliger larvae [see also [11]]. There are, however, some conspicuous morphological differences between the diverse
pericalymma larvae. The protobranch test is a preoral
layer of large ectodermal cells enveloping the entire larval body. In older larvae it is separated from underlying
tissues by a non-cellular space and thus only loosely
connected to the remaining body [10,32,33]. Upon
metamorphosis, this entire layer of test-cells is shed.
Similar to the situation in Solenogastres, the apical-most
cells are absorbed and in Nuculoida there is a ciliated
postanal organ somewhat comparable to the posteriormost trunk area in Solenogastres [33]. As an important
difference to Solenogastres, the ecdodermal cell layer
developing under the protobranch test forms the adult
mantle epithelium and shell without any evertion process during metamorphosis. The protobranch test is
entirely ciliated or bears three ciliary bands, but never
has a single distinct locomotory band ("prototroch”).
The overall morphology of larval test and ciliation is
astonishingly similar in polychaete endolarvae and in
solenogaster pericalymma larvae. In the first, however,
the test cells are located preorally and postorally and
also anterior and posterior to the prototrochal ciliary
band, while in the latter all test cells are preoral and the
distance between prototrochal cilia and oral opening is
large. In general a metatroch appears to be lacking in
mollusks (see below). The serosa or cellular embryonic
envelope of the Sipunculus nudus (Sipuncula) larva
appears to be a peculiarity of this single species [34,35],
and already Gerould proposed it to be secondarily
derived from prototrochal cells [36]. Based on morphological differences and considering the fact that according to recent phylogenies the serosa- and endolarvae do
not occur in supposedly “basal” branches of Sipuncula
and Polychaeta, it appears more probable that “test cell
larvae” have evolved multiple times within Spiralia [see
also [12,23]]. Further knowledge about cell progeny is
crucial to assess this hypothesis.
The finding of protonephridia in larval W. argentea is
a novelty for solenogasters. These excretory organs are
an important trait because their absence in marine mollusks has been used as one of the main arguments
against the homology of annelid and mollusk

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

trochophore larvae [7]. Since then, larval protonephridia
have been found in several mollusk taxa including caudofoveates [19] and chitons [37], and the evidence for
larval protonephridia in W. argentea presented here
confirms that these organs are ancestral for Mollusca
and Trochozoa/Spiralia in general.
Trochs and other ciliation in Solenogastres

The apical cap of all hitherto described solenogaster larvae has a well-developed equatorial band of compound
cilia, the prototroch sensu stricto [17,22,23,28,29]. Heath
did not observe any ciliary bands in the brooded larvae
of Halomenia gravida [27], but this might be due to the
state of preservation of his material. In free-swimming
solenogaster larvae, compound prototrochal cilia are
generally restricted to a single row of cells. The cells of
the remaining apical cap bear single cilia, which may be
grouped into more or less diffuse bands, as for example
in the post-trochal cell tiers of W. argentea.
Solenogaster larvae have a densely ciliated ring-shaped
zone at the posterior end of their trunk, a telotroch,
which is already present in very early larval stages and
that prevails until metamorphosis [[23,29], and herein].
It is not known if the compound cilia of the telotroch
take part in locomotion. Interesting is the ciliation of
the oral area and stomodaeum in W. argentea larvae,
and the distinct troch surrounding the trunk apically
(oral troch). Such ciliation has not been described
before. Adult solenogasters have a preoral ciliary band
surrounding the sensory vestibulum but in general lack
locomotory cilia at the mouth opening and in the pharynx [38,39]. The dense oral and stomodaeal ciliation in
W. argentea larvae (especially in the earlier stages) could
thus tentatively be interpreted as rudiments of a former
planktotrophic feeding apparatus. The oral troch of W.
argentea is located in a position comparable to the
adoral ciliary zone or even to a metatroch in planktotrophic trochophore larvae (see below). In the recent,
definitely non-feeding W. argentea larvae, the oral troch
might serve to ventilate the ring-shaped cavity between
the apical cap and the anterior trunk. The pericalymma
larvae of Solenogastres in general are thought to be
non-feeding, i.e. lecitotrophic [4], but in N. carinata
Thompson shows the gut to be complete already at a
very early stage [see figure 22 in reference [29]]. If these
observations are correct, swimming stages or at least
very young postlarvae of N. carinata may be capable of
feeding. His text, however, diverges from the figures,
because he describes the fusion between midgut and
hindgut to take place during metamorphosis [29]. This
is at an early stage, compared to e.g., W. argentea or
Epimenia babai [22,28], but fits the general developmental patterns in lecitotrophic mollusk larvae [40].
The foot of W. argentea, similar to Nematomenia
banyulensis [29] and E. babai [23], arises as a simple

Page 14 of 17

ciliary band ventrally on the trunk of the swimming
larva and only later develops into a longitudinal ciliated
fold that may be protruded or retracted by means of
dorsoventral body muscles. Generally, the solenogaster
foot - in contrast to the muscular foot of chitons and
conchiferan mollusks - lacks intrinsic musculature and
locomotion is largely due to ciliary action [[25] and own
observations]. As stated for E. babai [28], there is no
indication in development that the solenogaster foot
represents a reduced muscular foot.
Homology of trochs in spiralian larvae

Cell lineage studies could confirm the homology of the
prototroch across diverse spiralians, including chitons,
polychaetes, and nemerteans [41-43]. Typically, prototrochal cells become cleavage arrested early in development, are thus larger than regularly dividing cells, and
differentiate as ciliated cells [43]. The definitions of prototroch cells and larval test cells thus are quite similar
(see above). There is little doubt that the main locomotory troch in solenogaster larvae represents a prototrochal ciliary band comparable to that, for example, of
gastropod veliger larvae or polychaete trochophores, but
this prototroch s. str. of mollusks is merely locomotory
in function [12]. Information about cell progeny is
necessary to infer if and to which degree the larval test
of solenogasters and protobranch bivalves represents an
enlarged prototrochal area. Cell lineage studies could
also shed light on the potential homology of the oral
troch of W. argentea to the adoral ciliary zone of other
lophotrochozoan larvae or to a metatroch. It shall be
noted here that the so-called “metatroch” of the gastropod Crepidula fornicata is probably not homologous to
the metatroch of annelid trochophores [44,45]. The ventral ciliation of the W. argentea larva - the future foot resembles the early foot ciliation in gastropod and
bivalve larvae, but also the locomotory neurotroch (gastrotroch) of certain polychaete trochophores [12,45]. It
is tempting to propose an evolutionary pathway leading
from such larval ventral ciliation via a pedal fold, such
as present in recent solenogasters, to the more complex
muscular foot of “higher” mollusks.
Development of epidermal hard parts in mollusks

Our results on epidermal sclerite development demonstrate that in W. argentea dorsal sclerites do not show a
serial arrangement in any ontogenetic stage. Pruvot’s
description of seven dorsal rows of imbricating scales in
N. banyulensis [17] thus remains an isolated observation
based on a single specimen. The situation described for
an unidentified solenogaster postlarva [18] is different in
that no single rows of sclerites were present, but an
arrangement the authors termed “iterated dorsal groups
of spicules”. These six groups of sclerites appeared separated by bare areas that were proposed to be homologous to polyplacophoran shell fields. The entire sclerite

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

arrangement of the postlarva was compared to the scleritome of Cambrian fossils, such as Wiwaxia corrugata
and Halkieria evangelista. Together with this remarkable
specimen, a second and slightly larger representative,
supposedly of the same species, lacking the bare areas
was found. The presence of very characteristic solid
hook-shaped sclerites [see figure 1 in reference [18],
photograph of the small postlarva] suggests an affinity
to the probably derived solenogaster clade Phyllomeniidae [31]. This phylogenetic status of the postlarvae
somewhat weakens the evolutionary arguments presented [18], but the findings are of interest when considering the ontogeny of the scleritome (sclerite armour)
in solenogasters. The merely 0.4 mm long postlarva had
a stunning diversity of sclerite types and the sclerites
were quite large in size compared to the total body
length, as common in juvenile solenogasters [46].
It has been known for a long time [23,30] that in
representatives of the supposedly derived clade Cavibelonia the hollow acicular adult sclerites are preceeded by
scale-like larval sclerites. The presence of scale-like
sclerites has been interpreted as the ancestral status,
thus rendering the order Pholidoskepia, characterized by
a merely scaly scleritome, the most “basal” clade [5,31].
Here, we show that also in Pholidoskepia species, such
as W. argentea, the adult scales have larval precursors
that are different in shape. This is an interesting analogous (?) case to shell development in gastropods with
embryonic versus adult shells. In chiton larvae no such
ontogenetic change in sclerite types is known and the
mantle sclerites arise slightly earlier than the first seven
shell plates, even though the shell plate anlagen are
obvious as dorsal grooves already earlier than the sclerites [24,47-50]. The sclerite and shell plate producing
cells are of a more diverse and partly different cell progeny as compared to the shell gland cells of conchiferan
mollusks: Conchiferan shells stem predominantly from
the 2d and to a lesser extent from the 2a, 2b, 2c and 3c
micromeres, while the spicule-producing cells of the
chiton Mopalia mucosa stem from the 1a, 1d, 2a, 2d,
and 3a micromeres and shell plates from the 2d, 3c, and
3d micromeres [41]. In chiton larvae the most anterior
part of the sclerite-bearing girdle appears anterior to the
prototroch [41,49] while in solenogaster larvae the cuticle- and sclerite-bearing epidermis is restricted to the
area posterior to the main locomotory cilary band. Data
on the progeny of solenogaster sclerite producing cells
are necessary for further interpretation of this difference.

Conclusions
Solenogastres (Neomeniomorpha) develop via a trochophore-like lecitotrophic larva with a pronounced preoral
apical cap covered by large, cleavage-arrested deciduous
cells. These cells have previously been termed test cells

Page 15 of 17

and appear at least partly to represent an enlarged prototrochal area. The morphology of the solenogaster apical cap differs considerably from the morphology of the
so-called larval test of other spiralian larvae, namely of
protobranch bivalves and selected polychaetes and
sipunculans, and thus a homology of test-cell larvae
(pericalymma larvae) across spiralian clades appears
unlikely. The presence of an oral troch encircling the
larval body and covered by the apical cap as well as the
dense ciliation of the non-functional stomodaeum in the
W. argentea larva may point towards an earlier function
in feeding and might indicate secondary lecithotrophy in
solenogaster larvae. Characters linking the solenogaster
larva to other spiralian trochophores are the presence of
paired larval protonephridia and the ventral trunk ciliation that resembles a locomotory neurotroch in certain
polychaete trochophores and later develops into the
ventral creeping sole (non-muscular foot) typical for
solenogasters. Differences to other spiralian trochophores include the long distance between the prototroch
and the stomodaeal opening and the very late appearance of the mid- and hindgut in postlarval stages. The
dorsal trunk cuticle with calcareous sclerites is an adult
character that generally arises early in solenogaster
development. In W. argentea, the sclerites are evenly
distributed and no serially arranged calcareous structures comparable to those found in polyplacophoran larvae are present. Our results provide no evidence for
promoting a chiton-like ancestor for recent mollusks,
but rather support an ancestral position of
Solenogastres.

Methods
Animal collection and cultures

About 300 specimens of adult Wirenia argentea Odhner, 1921, syn. Aestoherpia glandulosa Salvini Plawen,
1985, were collected using an environmental sledge (RP
sledge) in Hauglandsosen (Bergen, Norway), at 180-220
m deep. The animals were extracted from the sediment
samples immediately after collection and were kept in
50 ml plastic jars with 20-30 specimens per jar at 7°C in
constant darkness; light exposure occurred only during
handling. During the first week, 2/3 of the seawater was
changed and embryos and larvae collected every day,
after the first week every second day. Adults did not
feed, even though we offered a number of potential prey
organisms (diverse cnidarians). The animals started to
deposit eggs several hours to days after capture and
continued to do so for nearly 2 months. For timing of
development, embryos were transferred to similar plastic
dishes with filtered seawater directly after deposition.
Timing is based on ca. 40 individuals. Additional larvae
(ca. 200) were transferred to clean dishes at the earliest
swimming stage. Postlarvae were kept to a maximum of

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

42 days after hatching. Larvae and postlarvae were
relaxed by drop-wise addition of cold 7.14% MgCl2 and
fixed appropriately (see below).
Scanning electron microscopy

Specimens were fixed 1.5 h on ice in 1% OsO 4 in filtered sea water, dehydrated in a graded ethanol series,
critical point dried, and sputter coated with gold-palladium. Digital images were acquired using a ZEISS Supra
55VP scanning electron microscope. About 40 specimens were studied.
Histology and transmission electron microscopy

Specimens were fixed for 12 hours at 7°C in 4% glutaraldehyde in 0.2 M sodium cacodylate buffer (0.1 M NaCl,
0.35 M sucrose at pH 7.3) and postfixed for 1.5 h on ice
in 1% OsO4 in filtered sea water. The adult specimens
were decalcified for 3 h at room temperature in a 3%
solution of ascorbic acid in distilled water. All specimens were dehydrated in a graded ethanol series followed by 100% propylene oxide and embedded in Agar
Low Viscosity Resin (Agar Scientific, UK). Semithin
serial sections (1 or 2 μm) were produced on a Reichert
Ultracut S microtome using a Diatome Histo Jumbo
Knife [51] and stained with toluidine blue. Digital
images were produced using a CCD microscope camera
(Spot Insight, Diagnostic Instruments Inc., USA) on a
Leica DMB-RBE microscope. Serial sections of six adult
specimens and four larvae were produced. Ultrathin sections were cut using the same microtome, mounted on
copper slot-grids, contrasted with uranyl acetate and
lead citrate, and examined with a Morgagni 268 electron
microscope. Digital images were produced with a Mega
View III Soft Imaging System and edited using Adobe
Photoshop CS2 9.0.2 and Adobe Illustrator CS11. Our
results on internal ultrastructure are based on two larvae and two postlarvae of different stages.

Page 16 of 17

secondary antibody (Sigma) in block-PTA for 20-24 h at
room temperature, followed by four washes over 3-4 h
in PBS at room temperature. Some specimens were consecutively labeled for 30 min with the Hoechst 33342
nuclear stain (Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oregon, USA).
Specimens were mounted in Fluoromount G (Southern
Biotech, Birmingham, Alabama, USA). Image acquisition
was performed on a Leica DM IRBE microscope
equipped with a Leica TCS SP 2 confocal laserscanning
unit. Z-projections of whole-mount preparations were
obtained. The confocal images herein represent projection images produced by merging stacks of optical
sections.
Acknowledgements
We thank Christoffer Schander and Egil Severin Erichsen for support with
SEM work at University of Bergen and Natalie Bäumler, Bernhard
Ruthensteiner, and Gerhard Haszprunar for cooperation on protonephridia
ultrastructure at the Bavarian State Collection for Zoology and at the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich (Germany). CT’s stay in Munich in
March/April 2009 was supported by a DAAD (German Academic Exchange
Service) stipend (A/08/15187). This study was partly financed by an Open
Researcher Initiated Grant, University of Bergen, (226270 Friforsk_09_Todt) to
CT. Research in the lab of AW was supported by the EU-funded Marie Curie
Network MOLMORPH under the 6th Framework Programme (contract grant
number MEST-CT-2005-020542).
Author details
Department of Biology, University of Bergen, Thormøhlensgate 53a, N-5008
Bergen, Norway. 2Research group for Comparative Zoology, Department of
Biology, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 15, DK-2100
Copenhagen, Denmark.

1

Authors’ contributions
CT designed the study, carried out laboratory work, and wrote the
manuscript. AW contributed to CLSM work, interpretation of data, discussion
of results, and improved the text. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Immunocytochemical labeling, nuclear staining, and
confocal microscopy

Received: 16 October 2009
Accepted: 26 January 2010 Published: 26 January 2010

Larvae were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.1
M phosphate buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.3) for 4-12 h
on ice. After fixation, the samples were washed twice for
15 min in PBS and stored at 4°C in PBS with 0.1% NaN3
added. Specimens were permeabilized for 1 h in PBS
containing 1% Triton X-100 (PTA) at room temperature. Blocking of unspecific binding sites was carried out
using a solution of 6% normal goat serum (Jackson
Immunoresearch, West Grove, Pennsylvania, USA) in
PTA (block-PTA) for 3 h at room temperature. Antibodies raised in mouse against acetylated a-tubulin
(Sigma, Steinheim, Germany) were used in a 1:500 dilution in block-PTA. The specimens were incubated for
20-24 h at room temperature, followed by four washes
in block-PTA over 3 h at room temperature or overnight at 4°C. Subsequently, they were incubated in a
1:200 dilution of a FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse

References
1. von Salvini-Plawen L: On the phylogenetic significance of the
aplacophoran Mollusca. Iberus 2003, 21:67-97.
2. Haszprunar G, Schander C, Halanych KM: Relationships of higher
molluscan taxa. Phylogeny and Evolution of the Mollusca Berkeley, Los
Angeles, London: University of California PressPonder WF, Lindberg DR
2008, 19-32.
3. Todt C, Okusu A, Schander C, Schwabe E: Solenogastres, Caudofoveata
and Polyplacophora. Phylogeny and Evolution of the Mollusca Berkeley, Los
Angeles, London: University of California PressPonder WF, Lindberg DR
2008, 71-96.
4. von Salvini-Plawen L: On the origin and evolution of the Mollusca. Atti
Convegni Lincei 1981, 49:235-293.
5. von Salvini-Plawen L: Early evolution and the primitive groups. The
Mollusca New York: Academic PressWilbur K 1985, 10:59-150.
6. Haszprunar G: Is the Aplacophora monophyletic? A cladistic point of
view. Am Malacol Bull 2000, 15:115-130.
7. von Salvini-Plawen L: Was ist eine Trochophora? - Eine Analyse der
Larventypen mariner Protostomier. Zool Jb Anat 1980, 103:389-423.
8. Nielsen C: Animal Evolution: Interrelationships of the Living Phyla Oxford:
Oxford University Press 2001.

Todt and Wanninger Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:6
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/6

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.
20.

21.

22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

Drew GA: Some observations on the habits, anatomy, and embryology
of members of the Protobranchia. Anatom Anz 1899, 15:493-519.
Drew GA: The life-history of Nucula delphinidonta (Mighels). Quart J Mic
Sci 1901, 44:313-391.
Haszprunar G, Salvini-Plawen L, Rieger R: Larval planktotrophy - a primitive
trait in the Bilateria?. Acta Zool 1995, 76:141-154.
Nielsen C: Trochophora larvae: Cell-lineages, ciliary bands, and body
regions. 1. Annelida and Mollusca. J Exp Zool 2004, 302:35-68.
Scheltema AH: Ancestors and descendants: Relationships of the
Aplacophora and Polyplacophora. Am Malacol Bull 1988, 6:57-68.
Scheltema AH: Aplacophora as progenetic aculiferans and the coelomate
origin of molluscs as the sister taxon of Sipuncula. Biol Bull 1993,
184:57-78.
Ivanov DL: Origin of Aculifera and problems of monophyly of higher
taxa in molluscs. Origin and evolutionary radiation of the Mollusca Oxford:
Oxford University PressTaylor JD 1996, 59-65.
Wilson NG, Rouse GW, Giribet G: Assessing the molluscan hypothesis
Serialia (Monoplacophora + Polyplacophora) using novel molecular data.
Mol Phyl Evol 2010, 54:187-193.
Pruvot G: Sur le developpement d’un solenogastre. Compt Rend Acad Sc
Paris 1890, 114:1211-1214.
Scheltema AH, Ivanov DL: An aplacophoran postlarva with iterated dorsal
groups of spicules and skeletal similarities to Paleozoic fossils. Invert Biol
2002, 121:1-10.
Nielsen C, Haszprunar G, Ruthensteiner B, Wanninger A: Early development
of the aplacophoran mollusc Chaetoderma. Acta Zool 2007, 88:231-247.
von Salvini-Plawen L: Zur Morphologie und Phylogenie der Mollusken:
Die Beziehungen der Caudofoveata und der Solenogastres als Aculifera,
als Mollusca und als Spiralia. Z wiss Zool 1972, 184:205-304.
von Salvini-Plawen L, Steiner G: Synapomorphies and plesiomorphies in
higher classification of Mollusca. Origin and evolutionary radiation of the
Mollusca Oxford: Oxford University PressTaylor JD 1996, 29-51.
Baba K: The later development of a solenogastre, Epimenia verrucosa
(Nierstrasz). J Dept Agricult Fukuoka Univ 1938, 6:21-40.
Okusu A: Embryogenesis and development of Epimenia babai (Mollusca:
Neomeniomorpha). Biol Bull 2002, 203:87-103.
Buckland-Nicks J, Gibson G, Koss R: Phylum Mollusca: Polyplacophora,
Aplacophora, Scaphopoda. Atlas of Marine Invertebrate Larvae San Diego,
San Francisco: Academic PressYoung CM 2002, 245-259.
Hyman LH: Class Aplacophora. The Invertebrates New York: McGraw-Hill
Book CompanyHyman LH 1967, 6:13-70.
Pola M, Duarte MMG: Is self-fertilization possible in nudibranchs?. J Moll
Stud 2008, 74:305-308.
Heath H: Solenogastres from the eastern coast of North America. Mem
Mus Comp Zool Harvard Coll 1918, 45:185-263.
Baba K: The early development of a solenogastre, Epimenia verrucosa
(Nierstrasz). Annot Zool Japon 1940, 19:223-256.
Thompson TE: The development of Neomenia carinata Tullberg (Mollusca
Aplacophora). Proc R Soc Lond B 1960, 153:263-278.
Pruvot G: Sur l’embryogénie d’une Proneomenia. C R Acad Sci Paris 1892,
114:1211-1214.
von Salvini-Plawen L: Antarktische und subantarktische Solenogastres
(Eine Monographie 1889-1974). Zoologica 1978, 44:1-315.
Gustafson RG, Reid RGB: Development of the pericalymma larva of
Solemya reidi (Bivalvia: Cryptodonta: Solemyidae) as revealed by light
and electron microscopy. Mar Biol 1986, 93:411-427.
Zardus JD, Morse P: Embryogenesis, morphology and ultrastructure of
the pericalymma larva of Acila castrensis (Bivalvia: Protobranchia:
Nuculoida). Invert Biol 1998, 117:221-244.
Rice M: Larval development and metamorphosis in Sipuncula. Amer Zool
1976, 16:563-571.
Rice M: Observations on development and metamorphosis of
Siphonosoma cumanense with comparative remarks on Sipunculus nudus
(Sipuncula, Sipunculidae). Bull Mar Sci 1988, 42:1-15.
Gerould JH: Studies on the embryology of the Sipunculidae, I. The
embryonal envelope and its homologue. Mark Anniversary Volume New
York: Henry Holt and Co 1903, 439-452.
Bartholomaeus T: Larvale Nierenorgane bei Lepidochiton cinereus
(Polyplacophora) and Aeolidia papillosa (Gastropoda). Zoomorphology
1989, 108:297-307.

Page 17 of 17

38. Todt C, von Salvini-Plawen L: Ultrastructure and histochemistry of the
foregut in Wirenia argentea and Genitoconia rosea (Mollusca,
Solenogastres). Zoomorphology 2004, 123:65-80.
39. Todt C, von Salvini-Plawen L: The digestive tract of Helicoradomenia
(Solenogastres), aplacophoran molluscs from the hydrothermal vents of
the East Pacific Rise. Invert Biol 2005, 124:230-253.
40. Raven CP: Morphogenesis: The analysis of molluscan development.
Oxford: Pergamon Press, 2 1966.
41. Henry JQ, Okusu A, Martindale MQ: The cell lineage of the
polyplacophoran, Chaetopleura apiculata: variation in the spiralian
program and implications for molluscan evolution. Dev Biol 2004,
272:145-160.
42. Henry JQ, Hejnol A, Perry KJ, Martindale MQ: Homology of ciliary bands in
spiralian trochophores and other larvae. Integr Comp Biol 2007,
47:865-871.
43. Maslakova SA, Martindale MQ, Norenburg JL: Vestigial prototroch in a
basal nemertean, Carinoma tremaphoros (Palaeonemertea, Nemertea).
Evol Dev 2004, 6:219-226.
44. Hejnol A, Martindale MQ, Henry JQ: High-resolution fate map of the snail
Crepidula fornicata: the origins of ciliary bands, nervous system, and
muscular elements. Dev Biol 2007, 305:63-76.
45. Rouse GW: Trochophore concepts: ciliary bands and the evolution of
larvae in spiralian Metazoa. Biol J Linn Soc 1999, 66:411-464.
46. Todt C, von Salvini-Plawen L: New Simrothiellidae (Solenogastres,
Mollusca) from the Mozambique Channel, western Indian Ocean. Veliger
2003, 46:252-266.
47. Haas W: Evolution of calcareous hardparts in primitive molluscs.
Malacologia 1981, 21:403-418.
48. Haas W, Kriesten K, Watanabe N: Preliminary note on the calcification of
shell plates in chiton larvae (Placophora). Proceedings of the 3rd
International Biomineralization Symposium: The mechanisms of
biomineralization in animals and plants Tokai University PressOmori M,
Watanabe N Kanagawa 1980, 67-72.
49. Jakobs DK, Wray CG, Wedeen CJ, Kostriken R, DeSalle R, Staton RL, Gates R,
Lindberg DR: Molluscan engrailed expression, serial organization, and
shell evolution. Evol Dev 2000, 2:340-347.
50. Wanninger A, Haszprunar G: Chiton myogenesis: perspectives for the
development of larval and adult muscle systems in molluscs. J Morphol
2002, 252:103-113.
51. Blumer MJF, Gahleitner P, Narzt T, Handl C, Ruthensteiner B: Ribbons of
semithin sections: an advanced method with a new type of diamond
knife. J Neurosci Meth 2002, 120:11-16.
doi:10.1186/1742-9994-7-6
Cite this article as: Todt and Wanninger: Of tests, trochs, shells, and
spicules: Development of the basal mollusk Wirenia argentea
(Solenogastres) and its bearing on the evolution of trochozoan larval
key features. Frontiers in Zoology 2010 7:6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
