<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Multiple evidence for the role of an Ovate-like gene in determining fruit shape in pepper</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-46"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Aphrodite Tsaballa"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Multiple evidence for the role of an Ovate-like
gene in determining fruit shape in pepper
Aphrodite Tsaballa1, Konstantinos Pasentsis2, Nikos Darzentas2, Athanasios S Tsaftaris1,2*

Abstract
Background: Grafting is a widely used technique contributing to sustainable and ecological production of many
vegetables, but important fruit quality characters such as taste, aroma, texture and shape are known for years to be
affected by grafting in important vegetables species including pepper. From all the characters affected, fruit shape
is the most easily observed and measured. From research in tomato, fruit shape is known to be controlled by
many QTLs but only few of them have larger effect on fruit shape variance. In this study we used pepper cultivars
with different fruit shape to study the role of a pepper Ovate-like gene, CaOvate, which encodes a negative
regulator protein that brings significant changes in tomato fruit shape.
Results: We successfully cloned and characterized Ovate-like genes (designated as CaOvate) from two pepper
cultivars of different fruit shape, cv. “Mytilini Round” and cv. “Piperaki Long”, hereafter referred to as cv. “Round”
and cv. “Long” after the shape of their mature fruits. The CaOvate consensus contains a 1008-bp ORF, encodes a
335 amino-acid polypeptide, shares 63% identity with the tomato OVATE protein and exhibits high similarity with
OVATE sequences from other Solanaceae species, all placed in the same protein subfamily as outlined by expert
sequence analysis. No significant structural differences were detected between the CaOvate genes obtained from
the two cultivars. However, relative quantitative expression analysis showed that the expression of CaOvate
followed a different developmental profile between the two cultivars, being higher in cv. “Round”. Furthermore,
down-regulation of CaOvate through VIGS in cv. “Round” changes its fruit to a more oblong form indicating that
CaOvate is indeed involved in determining fruit shape in pepper, perhaps by negatively affecting the expression of
its target gene, CaGA20ox1, also studied in this work.
Conclusions: Herein, we clone, characterize and study CaOvate and CaGA20ox1 genes, very likely involved in
shaping pepper fruit. The oblong phenotype of the fruits in a plant of cv. “Round”, where we observed a
significant reduction in the expression levels of CaOvate, resembled the change in shape that takes place by
grafting the round-fruited cultivar cv. “Round” onto the long-fruited pepper cultivar cv. “Long”. Understanding the
role of CaOvate and CaGA20ox1, as well as of other genes like Sun also involved in controlling fruit shape in
Solanaceae plants like tomato, pave the way to better understand the molecular mechanisms involved in
controlling fruit shape in Solanaceae plants in general, and pepper in particular, as well as the changes in fruit
quality induced after grafting and perhaps the ways to mitigate them.

Background
Fruit shape is an easy to observe and measure, quantitatively inherited character. In tomato (S. lycopersicum)
fruit shape is controlled by many Quantitative Trait
Loci (QTLs) but only few of them attribute mostly to
variance: Ovate, Sun, Fruit Shape (Fs) 8.1 and Triangle
* Correspondence: tsaft@certh.gr
1
Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, School of Agriculture, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, GR-541 24, Greece
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

(Tri) 2.1/Blockiness (Dblk) 2.1 [1]. The first of these loci,
Ovate, is a major QTL that as was shown first in
tomato, encodes a negative regulator of fruit elongation
protein, acting early in flower and fruit development [2].
A single mutation creating a stop codon in the second
exon of the coding sequence of Ovate differentiates the
pear-shaped or elongated from the round-shaped
tomato fruit [2]. The mutation in Ovate sequence is not
linked to a single phenotype: depending on the genetic

© 2011 Tsaballa et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

background, the extent of fruit elongation, as a result of
the fruit’s neck constriction, is more or less distinct [3].
Recent studies in Arabidopsis implicated a second
member of the OVATE Family of Proteins (OFPs),
AtOFP1, to the regulation of cell elongation, by actually
suppressing AtGA20ox1, a gene that encodes a critical
enzyme in the gibberilin (GA) pathway [4]. AtOFP1
exerts its function through binding to KNAT1 [5], a
member of the KNOTTED1-like homeodomain
(KNOX) family of proteins already known repressors of
GA20ox1 transcription [6,7]. GA20ox1 that catalyzes the
conversion from GA19 to GA20, determines the production of GA, a plant hormone that promotes a large
number of physiological processes such as stem, root,
stamen, pistil, leaf and hypocotyl elongation in a variety
of plants [8]. Lately, in Arabidopsis, it was shown that
AtOFP1 interacts with AtKU, a protein with multiple
functions, being involved in the DNA repair also
through the non-homologous end-joining pathway [9],
consistent with previous suggestions that AtOFP1 may
control the expression of other genes, besides
AtGA20ox1[5]. AtOFP1 and AtOFP5, were shown to be
located in the cytoskeleton and direct the movement of
a member of BELL proteins family, BLH1 (another
homeodomain containing transcription factor), from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm, thus preventing its action as
transcription factor [10]. KNOX and BELL homeodomain proteins belong to the TALE (Three-Amino-acid
Loop Extension) protein superfamily and they interact
[10-14] forming heterodimers. The action of such a
BELL-KNOX heterodimer was shown to be negatively
regulated by AtOFP5 ensuring normal embryo sac
growth in Arabidopsis [15]. On the other hand, potato
TALE proteins, StBEL5 and POTH1, were shown to
interact and bind to a specific 10-bp sequence of the
promoter of GA20ox1 [16].
In pepper (C. annuum) it was also shown that fruit
shape is controlled by few major QTLs [17,18]. To gain
insight on the molecular mechanisms involved in the
determination of fruit shape in pepper, we have cloned
and characterized the full length cDNA of CaOvate
from a round fruit shaped pepper cultivar (cv.), named
cv. “Round”, by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). We then cloned the corresponding
genomic fragments from cv. “Round” and another pepper cultivar, with long shaped fruits, named cv. “Long”
and studied CaOvate in both cultivars. Real time PCR
was used for relative quantitative comparative expression analysis in various stages of flower and fruit development in these two cultivars. Critically, we successfully
silenced CaOvate in cv. “Round” plants using the
Tobacco Rattle Virus (TRV) -based Virus-Induced
Gene-Silencing (VIGS) system which resulted in obvious
change of fruit shape, followed by an increase in the

Page 2 of 16

expression of CaOvate’s target gene, CaGA20ox1. We
finally present our conclusions and discuss implications
and future directions.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of
genes involved in shaping pepper fruit, a character
known for years to be affected by grafting [19-21]. In
conjunction with the remarkable progress in genomic
sequencing of many Solanaceae species such as pepper
and other complementary -omic studies, we believe our
work is a step forward in better understanding the
molecular mechanisms involved in controlling fruit
shape in pepper.

Methods
Plant material

Seeds from two C. annuum cultivars, cv. “Mytilini
Round” (referred to from now on as cv. “Round”) and
cv. “Piperaki Long” (referred to from now on as
cv."Long”) were used in this study. The fruits of cv.
“Round” are spherical in shape and pendent, while the
fruits of cv. “Long” are oblong and erect. The seeds
from both cultivars were initially sown in small pots up
to stage of 3 to 4 true leaves. All seedlings were transplanted in bigger pots, in 3:1 mixture of soil and perlite.
Frequent fertilization was supplied as 20 units total N2,
20 units P2O5 and 20 units K2O. The plants were grown
in a growth chamber under a photoperiod of 16 hr light
(25°C) and 8 hr dark (20°C).
RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis

Samples from buds before anthesis (4-5 DBA), open
flowers, ovaries of open flowers, 5 days after anthesis (5
DAA) and 10 days after anthesis (10 DAA) developing
fruit, and early fruit were collected from several plants
of cv. “Round” and cv. “Long”, immediately frozen in
liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for a maximum of
4-5 days. Total RNA was extracted using the TRIzol
reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The quantity and purity of the extracted total RNA was measured by spectrophotometry while the quality and integrity was
estimated by gel electrophoresis.
First strand cDNA was synthesized from 1 μg of each
total RNA, using 0.5 mM dNTPs, 1× First-Strand Buffer,
10 mM DTT, 200 Units (U) SuperScript II Reverse
Transcriptase (Invitrogen) and 250 ng random hexamers
or 0.5 μgr of the 3’ RACE Adapter Primer (5’GGCCACGCGTCGACTAGTAC(T)17-3’) (Invitrogen),
in 20 μl total volume, according to the manufacturer’s
protocol.
Cloning of Ovate gene from pepper

The tomato Ovate gene [GenBank: AAN17752.1], was
used in a BLAST search at NCBI [22], to identify similar

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

sequences from pepper, and a C. frutescens BAC genomic clone [BAC 215H17, GenBank: EF517792] with
high similarity was obtained. In order to verify mRNA
expression of this putative gene and the length of 3’
Untranslated Region (UTR), primer OVATE FOR 1 (for
all primers’ sequences see Additional File 1) was specifically designed according to the sequence of the BAC
clone (position from 32356 to 32374) and used in the
subsequent 3’ RACE experiments. 1 μl of the cDNA
from cv. “Round” open flowers, synthesized with the 3’
RACE Adapter Primer (as described above), was used as
a template in a PCR reaction with 0.5 μM primers
OVATE FOR 1 and Abridged Universal Amplification
Primer (AUAP), 0.2 mM dNTPs and 1 U of DyNAzymeII DNA polymerase (Finnzymes, Espoo, Finland) in
50 μl reaction volume. The thermocycler program was 2
min at 94°C; 30 cycles of 30 s at 94°C, 30 s at 52°C, 30 s
at 72°C and a final extension step of 10 min at 72°C. A
product of about 250-bp was purified from the gel using
the Nucleospin - Extract II kit (Macherey - Nagel, Germany) and cloned into the pCR II-TOPO vector (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Five
individual clones were commercially sequenced. Sequencing results were analyzed using the DNASTAR software (DNASTAR, Madison, WI). It was confirmed that
all clones contained the appropriate fragment.
Based on this information, a pair of new primers,
OVATE FOR 2 and OVATE FINAL, was designed and
used to amplify the whole coding sequence of Ovate
from C. annuum pepper cv. “Round”. 1 μl of the synthesized, with random hexamers, cDNA from cv. “Round”
open flowers, served as template in a PCR reaction, in
which 0.5 μΜ of gene-specific primers, 0.2 mM dNTPs
and 1 U DyNAzyme II DNA polymerase (Finnzymes)
were used. The thermocycler program was 35 cycles of:
30 s at 94°C, 30 s at 52°, and 1 min at 72°C, which were
preceded by 5 min at 94°C and followed by 10 min at
72°C. Amplified fragments were cloned into a pCR IITOPO vector (Invitrogen) and commercially sequenced.
Sequencing results, analyzed as above, revealed that the
clones contained the full-length coding sequence of
Ovate, designated from now on as CaOvate [GenBank:
JF427571].
DNA isolation, amplification of CaOvate gene and
isolation of 5’ upstream sequences

Total genomic DNA was isolated from leaves of cv.
“Round” and cv. “Long” using the standard C.T.A.B
protocol [23]. DNA quantity was measured by
spectrophotometry.
For the amplification of the whole CaOvate gene from
cv. “Round” and cv. “Long”, 50 ng of genomic DNA
were used as a template in a PCR reaction using 0.5 μΜ
of primers OVATE FOR 2 and OVATE FINAL, 0.2 mM

Page 3 of 16

dNTPs and 1 U DyNAzyme II DNA polymerase (Finnzymes). The thermocycler program was 35 cycles of: 30
s at 94°C, 30 s at 52° and 1 min at 72°C, which were
preceded by 5 min at 94°C and followed by 10 min at
72°C. Amplified fragments were cloned and the resulting
clones were sequenced and analyzed as above. The
genomic sequences CaOvate obtained from both cultivars along with the genomic sequence of the C. frutescens BAC clone, were aligned using the ClustalW2
multiple sequence alignment program [24]. The alignment was edited with Bioedit [25].
For the isolation of 5’ upstream sequences of CaOvate,
the Rolling Circle Amplification of Genomic templates
for Inverse PCR technique (RCA-GIP) was employed as
described by [26]. Briefly, one μg of genomic DNA from
cv. “Long” was digested, in independent reactions, with
three restriction enzymes, EcoRI, XbaI and XhoI (New
England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) in a total volume
of 25 μl. Self-ligation and 29 DNA polymerase (New
England Biolabs) amplification of this circular genomic
DNA followed. Inverse PCR reactions were performed
using as template 1 μl of an 1:100 dilution of the rolling
circle amplification reactions, 0.2 μM of gene specific
primers for CaOvate, OVATE FOR 3 and OVATE REV
1 and 1 U DyNAzyme II DNA Polymerase (Finnzymes).
The thermocycler conditions were 2 min at 94°C; 30
cycles of 20 s at 94°C, 30 s at 58°C, 2 min at 72°C and a
final extension step of 10 min at 72°C. The RCA template from the XbaI digest library produced an amplified
product of about 3500-bp that was directly purified
using the Nucleospin - Extract II kit (Macherey Nagel). Cloning into the pCR II-TOPO vector (Invitrogen) and sequencing followed until finally one contig
was assembled. Based on these sequencing results a primer (OVATE FOR 5) was designed and used along with
primer OVATE REV1, for the amplification of a fragment belonging to the 5’ upstream region from cv.
“Round”, which was sequenced too.
Protein sequence comparisons and phylogenetic analysis
of CaOVATE

The deduced amino-acid sequence of CaOvate was used
for a search in the Pfam 24.0 database [27] and the
Pfam domain DUF623 [Pfam: PF 04844] was detected.
Following the identification of this conserved domain,
we collected all Viridiplantae proteins from Pfam and
UniProt [28] databases with a statistically significant hit
for the DUF623 domain. All the sequences collected
were aligned using MAFFT, a multiple sequence alignment program [29]. The resulting alignment was edited
with Jalview [30] and subjected to extensive manual
curation removing columns having many gap characters.
This curated alignment was used for protein subfamily
identification employing the SCI-PHY algorithm [31].

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

Page 4 of 16

After subfamily identification, the multi-RELIEF Feature
Weighting Method [32] was employed to detect specificity determining amino-acid residues among subfamilies.
For the phylogenetic analysis the MAFFT program was
also used. The resulting tree was edited with the Figtree
v1.3.1 software [33].
In an attempt to retrieve sequences homologous to
CaOvate from more Solanaceae species and therefore
study the phylogenetic depth of our sequence, we performed extensive BLAST searches using recent (Release
106 December 2010) and comprehensive plant-specific
nucleotide sequence data from EMBL-EBI [34] with our
sequence as query and an e-value of 1e-20. The databases used were the EST (Expressed Sequence Tags),
GSS (Genome Survey sequences), HTC (High throughput cDNA sequencing), HTG (High Throughput Genome sequencing), CDS (Coding sequences) and STD
(Standard - all entries not classified as above).

were provided by the Arabidopsis Biological Resource
Center (ABRC) [37] and have been described previously
[2].
For the constructs’ assembly, a pCR II-TOPO cDNA
CaOvate clone, already verified by sequencing that contains a 962-bp fragment of the mRNA of the gene (from
position 1 to position 962 of the mRNA of the CaOvate), was EcoRI digested. The digestion produced a
794-bp fragment that lacked 168-bp of the 5’ of the
mRNA (from position 1 to position 168), due to an
additional, inside the initial 962-bp fragment, EcoRI site.
This 794-bp fragment was then ligated to the pTRV2
vector, already digested with EcoRI and dephosphorylated, using 1 U of T4 DNA ligase (Invitrogen) in 1×
Ligase Reaction Buffer. 1 μl of the ligation reaction was
used for the transformation of Mach1-T1 competent
cells (Invitrogen) via electroporation (MicroPulser electroporator, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.). All constructs
were verified by restriction digestion and sequencing.

Expression analysis of CaOvate

Agro-infiltration

Relative quantitative expression analysis of CaOvate
during flower and fruit development for the two cultivars, cv. “Round” and cv. “Long”, was performed with
real-time RT-PCR using a Rotor Gene 6000 (Corbett,
Australia) real-time PCR system. OVATE FOR 3 and
REV 2 was the primer pair used, with the forward primer specifically used due to its design in the first exon intron junction to avoid amplification of genomic DNA.
The PCR was performed in 1× Platinum SYBR Green
qPCR SuperMix - UDG (Invitrogen) containing 0.5 μM
of each primer and the template was 1/10 of the cDNA,
synthesized with random hexamers, from RNA extracted
from: (a) buds (4-5 DBA), (b) ovaries of open flowers,
(c) 5 DAA and 10 DAA developing fruits and (d) early
fruits. The cycling parameters were: incubation at 50°C
for 2 min, 95°C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of incubation at 95°C for 20 s, 58°C for 20 s, 72°C for 20 s, and
a final extension step of 10 min at 72°C. To identify the
PCR products, a melting curve was performed from 65
to 95°C with observation every 0.2°C and a 5 s hold
between observations. The reactions were performed in
triplicate. Relative quantification and statistical analysis
were performed using the LinRegPCR software version
11.1 [35], which is using the linear regression analysis to
calculate the starting concentrations of mRNA’s and
individual PCR efficiencies for each sample. CaOvate
expression was normalized against the non regulated
reference gene pepper Actin [GenBank: AY572427]. Primers for pepper Actin were adapted from [36].

Initially, in order to test the effectiveness and the efficiency of VIGS in cv. “Round” plants, a test experiment
for silencing of the Pds gene was carried out. Plants of
cv. “Round” were grown in pots at 24°C in a growth
chamber under 16 hr light/8 hr dark cycle with 60-70%
humidity. For the agro-infiltration, pTRV1, pTRV2
(empty vector), and pTRV2-NbPds, were transformed
into Agrobacterium tumefaciens GV3101 via electroporation. Each strain was grown in 5 ml LB (supplemented with 50 mg/ml of kanamycin and 50 mg/ml of
gentamycin) overnight at 30°C. The overnight culture
was inoculated into 50 ml of LB medium and grown at
30°C overnight. Agrobacterium cells were harvested by
centrifugation (2000 g, 20 min, 15°C), resuspended in
infiltration medium (10 mM MES, 200 μM acetosyringone, 10 mM MgCl2), and adjusted to an O.D600 of 1.61.8. The cultures were then left at room temperature for
3-4 hr. Agrobacterium cells carrying pTRV1 and pTRV2
or pTRV2-NbPds (1:1 ratio) were infiltrated by pressuring a needle-less syringe into the cotyledons of pepper
seedlings. The plants were covered and left like this
overnight. Three weeks later the majority of the plants
infiltrated, exhibited extensive photobleaching in their
leaves. It was observed that infiltrated plants kept on
producing photobleached white leaves even four months
after the infiltration. Plants infiltrated with pTRV1 and
pTRV2 (empty vector) didn’t exhibit photobleaching.
For the VIGS of CaOvate the procedure followed was
the same as described above. After the infiltrations,
plants of cv. “Round” agro-infiltrated with pTRV1,
pTRV2 (empty vector) and the recombinant plasmids
pTRV2-CaOvate sense and pTRV2-CaOvate antisense
(1:1 ratio) were transplanted after a while into bigger
pots and frequently fertilized thereafter.

Virus Induced gene Silencing of CaOvate
Plasmid construction

pTRV1, pTRV2 vectors and pTRV2-Nicotiana
benthamiana (Nb) Phytoene Desaturare (Pds) construct

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

RT-PCR analysis of CaOvate

To investigate the expression of endogenous mRNA
CaOvate in CaOvate-silenced plants, total RNA was
extracted from leaves and small fruits, and first-strand
cDNA synthesis was carried out, as described above,
using random hexamers. For the viral RNA detection,
through RT-PCR, specific primers were used. For TRV1
detection, primer TRV1 FOR was designed specifically
on the TRV segment RNA1 complete sequence [GenBank: AF406990] (from position 5979 to 5998) while
primer OYL 198 REV was adapted from [38]. Primers
for TRV2 detection were designed on the coat protein
region of TRV RNA2-based VIGS vector pTRV2 [GenBank: AF406991] (Coat Protein FOR: position 800 to
819, Coat Protein REV: position 915 to 933). To distinguish between amplification of the endogenous mRNA
transcripts of CaOvate from the viral-derived ones, one
of the two primers used in the RT-PCR experiments
came from the 3’ UTR area of the gene outside the
region used in the pTRV2 constructs (primer OVATE
FINAL). The other one (primer OVATE FOR 4) was
designed in position 621 to 641 of the mRNA of CaOvate. The real time RT-PCR was performed as described
in the Expression analysis of CaOvate section with the
only exception the different cycling parameters which
were: incubation at 50°C for 2 min, 95°C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of incubation at 95°C for 20 s, 58°C
for 20 s, 72°C for 20 s, and a final extension step of 10
min at 72°C.
In order to identify possible effects of CaOvate silencing in the expression of its target gene, GA20ox1, we
acquired a putative GA20ox1 gene from pepper. Using
the tomato GA20ox1 sequence [GenBank: EU043161], in
a BLAST search, one EST [GenBank: GD070135] was
retrieved from the Pepper EST database [39]. Employing
the RCA-GIP technique [26] we were able to acquire
the full length genomic GA20ox1 sequence from cv.
“Long” (designated as CaGA2ox1) [GenBank: JF427572],
including the missing, from the initial EST, 5’ end. For
the relative quantification of CaGA20ox1 expression
levels of the infiltrated plants by real time RT-PCR, primers GA20ox1 FOR 2 and REV 2 were designed, based
on the sequence information obtained from RCA-GIP
experiments and the presumable intron-exon organization of the gene. The cycling parameters were: 50°C for
2 min, 95°C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of incubation at 95°C for 20 s, 58°C for 20 s, 72°C for 25 s, and a
final extension step of 10 min at 72°C.

Results
Cloning of CaOvate

A 3’ RACE approach was used along with an Ovate
gene-specific primer, OVATE FOR 1 (for all primers’
sequences see Additional File 1), designed on a specific

Page 5 of 16

region identified by BLAST, of a C. frutescens BAC
clone genomic sequence to obtain a full-length CaOvate
cDNA. The resulting cDNA fragment was isolated,
cloned and sequenced. All clones were identified as
CaOvate using BLAST. Based on this information a new
primer pair was designed (OVATE FOR 2 and OVATE
FINAL) which was used in a PCR to produce full-length
cDNA CaOvate clones from cv. “Round”. From the individual clones analyzed using the SeqMan software package (DNA Star, Madison, WI), a single contig of 1116-bp
was produced, that contained a 1008-bp ORF encoding a
335 amino-acid polypeptide. The alignment of the CaOvate cDNA sequence from cv. “Round” to the one from
the genomic BAC clone of C. frutescens showed that
there was only one nucleotide difference between the two
sequences, in position 419 of the cDNA.
The aforementioned alignment also provided hints
about the genomic organization of the CaOvate gene. In
order to verify this, OVATE FINAL was used, along
with the primer OVATE FOR 2 to obtain the genomic
sequence of CaOvate gene from DNA extracted from
young leaves of cv. “Round”. A PCR fragment of 1570bp was purified from the gel, cloned in a pCR-II TOPO
vector and sequenced. One contig was assembled that
contains the whole coding genomic sequence of CaOvate from cv. “Round”. Using this coding genomic
sequence and the Splign program at NCBI, we observed
that the genomic organization of CaOvate consists, as it
was predicted, of two exons, the first and larger of 613bp and the second, and smaller, of 395-bp. The unique
intron of the gene consists of 539-bp. After the stop
codon, a 3’ UTR of 66-bp and poly-A tail follow. The
genomic organization is conserved in the Ovate gene
from tomato, where two exons of 694-bp and 365-bp,
respectively, are interrupted by an intron of 548-bp
(Figure 1).
To examine whether genetic changes within the CaOvate sequence are responsible for the differences in the
shape of the two pepper cultivars, we obtained the genomic sequence of CaOvate from cv. “Long”, with the
elongated fruit shape. The analysis of the genomic
sequence of CaOvate from cv. “Long” revealed one Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) located in the
translated region of the first exon, position 419 resulting
in a cytosine in cv. “Round” to guanine substitution in
cv. “Long”. This replacement changes the ORF of the
sequence resulting in a ThreonineLong - to - SerineRound
polymorphism. However this change is not considered
to be decisive since threonine and serine are biochemically similar amino-acids. Another SNP is located inside
the intron, in position 746. Both sequences from the
cultivars were aligned to the genomic sequence of the
C. frutescens BAC clone. CaOvate sequence from cv.
“Long” is almost identical to the one from C. frutescens,

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

Page 6 of 16

Figure 1 Genomic organization of Ovate genes from pepper (CaOvate) and tomato. As is shown on the top, the gene in pepper has two
exons of 613- and 395-bp and a single intron of 539-bp. In addition the stop codon is indicated just before the 3’ UTR of 66-bp, followed by
the poly -A tail. At the bottom, the corresponding gene in tomato has a similar organization two exons of 694- and 365-bp and an intron of
548-bp.

with the exception of one nucleotide change but in the
intron area (position 654). CaOvate sequence from cv.
“Round” differs from the sequence of C. frutescens in
the same positions as with cv. “Long” (positions 419 and
746) plus position 654 (see Additional File 2).
Amino-acid sequence and phylogenetic analysis of
CaOVATE

We collected sequences of proteins homologous to the
CaOVATE predicted protein sequence as described in
Methods. All of the proteins retrieved share a C terminal
domain, DUF623 [Pfam: PF04844], which is an uncharacterized domain of about 70 residues found exclusively
in plants. The multiple alignment of all the sequences
highlights interesting features including the near perfect
conservation of the DUF623 domain inside the Solanaceae family (Figure 2). The conservation across the
alignment is higher in the beginning (position 1 to 17)
and in the end of the domain (position 42 to 69).
Amino-acids that appear to be very highly conserved (>
95%) across sequences are: the proline at position 4, the
phenylalanine at position 8, the serine at position 11,
the methionine at position 15, the leucine at position
46, the asparagine at position 53, the isoleucine at position 61 and finally the phenylalanine at position 65.
Using the SCI-PHY algorithm (see Methods), nine subfamilies (subf.) were identified. All the Solanaceae
OVATEs are included in one subfamily (subf. 8) along
with Arabidopsis thaliana (At) OFP6 [Uniprot:
Q0WSS3], AtOFP7 [Q9ZU65], AtOFP8 [Q3E9B4].

AtOFP1 [Q9LZW2], AtOFP2 [O04351], AtOFP3
[Q9LVL4] and AtOFP5 [Q8VZN1] are categorized in
another subfamily (subf. 6) along with the OVATElike from O. sativa [Q5JN79]. OVATEs from Z. mays
[B6UDE1 and B6SI20] are placed in subf. 2. The other
Arabidopsis OFPs are grouped into two more subfamilies:
subf. 5 which includes AtOFP11 [O23341], AtOFP12
[Q9ZVZ6], AtOFP14 [Q9S775], AtOFP16 [Q9SKV9] and
subf. 9 which includes AtOFP13 [Q9FMC8], AtOFP15
[Q9SJ45], AtOFP18 [Q9SVD5]. In subf. 5 the domain of
Ethylene Receptor (ERS) from L. chinensis [Q6W5B6] is
included. In all subfamilies DUF623 domains of predicted
or putative proteins from other species such as V. vinifera, P. trichocarpa, R. communis, O. sativa, Z. mays etc
are included (Figure 2). There are many potential specificity determining residues, i.e. capable of separating the
subfamilies, that can be seen highlighted in black background at alignment positions 23, 32, 38, 39, 40, 41 and
49. More specifically, in position 49, the polar amino-acid
tyrosine in subf. 5, 2, 6 and 9 (apart from sequences
AtOFP15 and AtOFP18) is substituted by a hydrophobic,
non polar, phenylalanine in subf. 8 and subf. 1. Positions
32, 38, 39, 40 and 41 of the alignment are occupied by
amino-acids only in subf. 9, 5 and 3. Finally, in subf. 8,
position 23 is either lysine (Solanaceae OVATEs) or arginine, which are biochemically similar amino-acids (the
only exception being AtOFP6 which contains asparagine). In subf. 6 the corresponding amino-acid in position
23 is mainly asparagine while in subf. 2 is arginine. The
amino-acid in this position in subf. 9 is mainly histidine

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

Page 7 of 16

Figure 2 Multiple alignment of DUF 623 domains from a number of OFPs. Sequences come from the family of Solanaceae (S. lycopersicum
- Sl, N. tabaccum- Nt, S. bulbocastanum - Sb, C. annuum - Ca, C. frutescens - Cf), A. thaliana (AtOFPs), Z. mays (Zm) and O. sativa (Os) as well as
from putative orthologs from the complete plant section of the Uniprot database. The alignment was generated using the MAFFT program and
edited with Jalview. The name of each sequence consists of the number of subfamily, followed by the species, its characterization in the
databases (if exists) and the Uniprot ID. Identically colored amino-acids share similar biochemical properties. Informative residues identified with
the multi-RELIEF algorithm are highlighted in black background. Several protein sequences (indicated by small blue wedges) have been hidden
for clarity.

and in subf. 5 is either glycine, lysine, or arginine (the last
two being biochemically similar).
A phylogenetic tree was also calculated based on the alignment generated by the MAFFT program. The tree depicts
the phylogenetic distance between the subfamilies, determined by SCI-PHY. Close to subf. 8 in which the OVATEs
from the Solanaceae are included, are subf. 7, subf. 2, in
which the Z. mays OVATEs are incorporated, subf. 4 and
subf. 6 with all the previous characterized AtOFPs such as
AtOFP1 and AtOFP5 (see Additional File 3).
The CaOvate cDNA sequence was then used in
extensive BLAST searches against recent and comprehensive plant nucleotide sequence databases in order

to identify further homologies especially among species
of the Solanaceae family. Indeed, several hits were
ESTs of new - compared to the alignment of Figure 2
- Solanaceous plants like eggplant (S. melongena) and
chaco potato (S. chacoense), while we also recovered a
genomic sequence from S. phureja, another new addition to the list of species our sequence apparently has
homologs in. On top of this, and as expected, numerous hits in different databases were found of plants
already present in our primary bioinformatics analysis.
Overall, these results (Additional File 4) provide supporting and additional evidence that the CaOvate
sequence is deeply conserved in the Solanaceae family,

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

thus possibly functionally relevant and potentially useful for further research and biotechnological
applications.
Expression analysis of CaOvate

The Ovate in tomato is expressed in the reproductive
organs in early stages of flower and fruit development
[2]. Ovate transcripts can be detected in flowers 10 days
before anthesis (DBA) and until 8 days after anthesis
(DAA) in developing fruit, at which time Ovate transcript levels begin to decrease [2]. To test whether this
developmental expression profile is the same in pepper,
real time PCR experiments were performed to determine expression levels of the CaOvate, on cDNAs
derived from tissues of several flower and fruit developmental stages of cv. “Round” and cv. “Long”. The highest expression of CaOvate in cv. “Round” is exhibited
after anthesis, and specifically in the 5 DAA developing
fruit. Before this peak the expression of CaOvate is
lower while after the peak the transcript level drops to a
nearly undetectable level (Figure 3A). On the contrary,
CaOvate expression in cv. “Long” follows a different
developmental profile: the highest expression is exhibited before anthesis, in the buds of 4-5 DBA and falls
sharply afterwards. Thus at the stages of buds at 4-5
DBA and 5 DAA, where cv. “Long” and cv. “Round”
exhibit a peak of CaOvate expression respectively, large
differences are observed. To quantify these differences
more accurately, a new real time PCR experiment was
conducted, including the two stages of buds 4-5 DBA
and developing fruit 5 DAA. In buds the expression of
CaOvate in cv. “Long” is higher than in cv. “Round”.
However in the developing fruit of 5DAA the expression
of CaOvate in cv. “Round” is higher than in cv. “Long”
and actually even higher than in every other sampledevelopmental stage tested (Figure 3B).
Isolation of 5’ upstream sequences

In order to explore if genetic changes in the 5’
upstream region of CaOvate in the two cultivars are
responsible for any differences in the expression levels
of CaOvate, we acquired a considerably large fragment
of this region (~2500-bp) from applying the RCA-GIP
technique [26] in cv. “Long”. Next the corresponding
region was amplified from cv. “Round”. The sequences
obtained by the two cultivars included only minimum
differences; only a SNP was spotted in pos. -1526
upstream of the start codon. The comparison of both
cultivars sequences to the sequence of the C. frutescens
BAC clone, demonstrated 5 SNPs in a region approx.
-1000 from the start codon, corresponding to the
probable promoter region of the gene. The role, if any,
of these SNPs in binding sites of regulatory elements
remains to be studied.

Page 8 of 16

VIGS of CaOvate in cv. “Round”

In order to obtain further evidence for the role of CaOvate in determining fruit shape in cv. “Round”, the
VIGS technique was used. VIGS of the Pds gene was
used as a control resulting in photobleaching that was
obvious in the majority of pepper plants infected and
persisted even 4 months after the infiltration. Photobleached leaves were collected and used as control in
the experiments described below. For VIGS constructs
with CaOvate, a 794-bp fragment was used, that contained the part of the cDNA sequence also coding for
the DUF623 domain. The choice of including this part
of the gene was consistent with the idea to simulate by
VIGS what seems to be the case in tomato, where the
disruption of the second exon by a stop codon causes
the abolishment of the DUF623 domain and thus the
change in fruit shape [2].
Firstly, in a preliminary experiment to determine the
appropriate developmental stage for applying the VIGS
technique, a small number of cv. “Round” pepper plants
was infiltrated at the stage of 4-5 true leaves, with Agrobacterium cells harboring pTRV2-CaOvate sense or
pTRV2-CaOvate antisense and one plant with pTRV1
and pTRV2 (empty vector). Approximately 2 months
after the infiltration and while the plants were developing numerous fruits, it was noticed that in a specific
plant (infiltrated with pTRV2-CaOvate sense), fruits that
exhibited a more oblong shape were co-developing next
to fruits that exhibited the typical round shape of the
cultivar cv. “Round”. The phenotypic measurements of
the mature fruits of this plant showed a statistically significant change in fruits’ length and consequently in
fruit shape index (the ratio of highest fruit height to
widest width) compared to that of the wild type (Additional File 5). This spatial expression of the VIGS phenotype is a phenomenon also noticed before by
Rotenberg et al [40], working with tomato. Furthermore,
following the findings of Chung et al [41] that for chili
peppers an earlier application of VIGS at the germinating stage cotyledons was more efficient, VIGS infiltration was applied at the cotyledon stage. Thus, the
emerging cotyledons of a total of 30 plantlets of cv.
“Round” were agro-infiltrated with pTRV1 and pTRV2CaOvate sense or pTRV2-CaOvate antisense. As a control, two more mock plants of the same cultivar at the
same developmental stage were agro-infiltrated with
pTRV1 and pTRV2 (empty vector). Approximately 9
weeks after the infiltration and while no changes were
observed in the control mock plants infiltrated with the
empty vector, one plant infiltrated with pTRV2-CaOvate
sense (from now on referred to as “infiltrated plant 1”)
began to show changes in all its fruits’ shaping becoming more oblong than the wild type (WT) fruits (see
below). A second plant infiltrated with pTRV2-CaOvate

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

Page 9 of 16

Figure 3 Expression analysis of CaOvate in different stages of flower and fruit development of cv. “Round” and cv. “Long”. A) Relative
quantitative analysis of CaOvate expression. Sampling was from 4-5 DBA (buds) until the end of fruit development (early fruit). The relative
expression ratio in each sample in comparison with the control sample, which was in both cultivars buds of 4-5 DBA, is represented by a factor of
up- or down- regulation and is shown with bars for the cultivar “Round” and “Long”. During flower’s and fruit’s development, CaOvate expression
follows different developmental expression patterns in the two cultivars: in cv. “Round” the expression reaches is highest after anthesis while in cv.
“Long” the highest expression is demonstrated before anthesis (data derive from two independent real-time RT-PCR experiments). B) New relative
quantitative analysis of CaOvate expression in two specific developmental stages: before anthesis (4-5 DBA) where the gene exhibits its higher
expression in cv. “Long”, and after anthesis (5 DAA), where the gene exhibits its higher expression in cv. “Round”. The relative expression ratio,
represented by a factor of up- or down- regulation, is shown with bars for the cultivar in each sample and in comparison with the control sample,
which in buds was the one from cv. “Round” while in 5 DAA fruit was the one from cv. “Long”. Asterisks indicate statistically significant difference (p
< .05) of the each sample compared to the corresponding control sample.

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

antisense (infiltrated plant 2) exhibited varying dispersal
of silencing effects in its fruits on different branches i.e.
more oblong fruits in one branch next to wild type
fruits in another branch, confirmed again by phenotypic
measurements (Additional File 6). Thus only infiltrated
plant 1 with a catholic elongation in all its fruits was
chosen to be further characterized in more detail.
To verify that the transcripts of the genomic RNA of
TRV1 and TRV2 were present and diffused inside the
infiltrated plant 1, showing uniformly the effects on the

Page 10 of 16

whole upper plant part, total RNA was extracted from
small fruit (approx. 10 DAA) of this plant that although
in the early stages of development, it was exhibiting an
obvious change in its shape. Total RNA was extracted,
also, from small fruit at the same developmental stage
of another plant, from now on referred to as “infiltrated
plant 3” that despite the fact that was infiltrated with
pTRV2-CaOvate sense it did not show a change in the
phenotype of its fruits. As shown in Figure 4A, transcripts of TRV1 and TRV2 were detected, through RT-

Figure 4 RT-PCR detection of TRV1 and TRV2 viral RNAs. A) In small fruits of approximately 10 DAA of infiltrated plant 1, with the changed
shape phenotype and infiltrated plant 3, with the typical round shape phenotype, 9 weeks after infiltration. White - photobleached leaves from
pepper plants infiltrated with pTRV2-NbPds were used as the control for the verification of the PCR success. TRV’s transcription is confirmed by
the presence of TRV1 and TRV2 transcripts in the infiltrated plant 1, while no TRV is detected in infiltrated plant 3. B) In leaves of the wild type
(WT) - not infiltrated plant, of mock plant 1 and mock plant 2, of infiltrated plant 1, with the changed shape pheonotype approx. 11 weeks after
infiltration. TRV1 transcripts are detected in mock 2 and infiltrated plant 1 but not in mock 1 and the WT. On the other hand, TRV2 transcripts
are detected only in mock 2. Again white - photobleached leaves from pepper plants infiltrated with pTRV2-NbPds were used as the control for
the verification of the PCR success. Pepper Actin was used for the verification of successful first strand cDNA synthesis. C) In 5 DAA fruits of the
WT - not infiltrated plant and of infiltrated plant 1, 16.5 weeks after infiltration. TRV1 but not TRV2 transcripts are detected (as in leaves earlier) in
the fruit of the infiltrated plant 1 while no transcripts are detected in the fruit taken from the WT.

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

PCR, in the small fruit of the infiltrated plant 1 but not
in the small fruit of the infiltrated plant 3, while no
amplification products were detected in the “NO reverse
transcriptase” and “NO template” negative controls.
Later on, at approximately 11 weeks after infiltration,
three to four whole leaves were also collected from the
infiltrated plant 1, the plants infiltrated with the pTRV2
empty vector (mock controls) and the wild type (WT) not infiltrated plant. The leaves from each of the plants
separately were pooled together for total RNA extraction. As shown in Figure 4B, RT-PCR analysis confirmed
the presence of TRV1 but not TRV2 transcripts in the
leaves of the infiltrated plant 1. In the two mock plants
tested, TRV1 and TRV2 transcripts were detected only
in one of them (mock 2), while in the other neither
transcript was detected (mock 1). Neither of the transcripts was detected in the wild type - not infiltrated
plant. All the negative controls included resulted in no
amplification products. Finally, 16.5 weeks after infiltration and while the infiltrated plant 1 kept on producing
fruits with more oblong shape, 5 DAA fruit from the
infiltrated plant 1 and from the not infiltrated, wild type
control plant, were used for new total RNA extraction.
Similar to results obtained with leaves analyzed 5 weeks
earlier, transcripts of TRV1 but not TRV2 transcripts
were detected, though RT-PCR analysis, in the 5 DAA
fruit of the infiltrated plant 1 and neither of the viral
transcripts was detected in the 5 DAA fruit of the not
infiltrated, wild type plant, as it is shown in Figure 4C.
All the negative controls included were free of amplification products.
Furthermore, more accurate relative quantitative RTPCRs were performed for the relative quantitative determination of endogenous CaOvate mRNA levels in the 5
DAA fruit of infiltrated plant 1 and the wild type control.
The primers used (OVATE FOR 4 and OVATE FINAL)
were selected in such a way as to amplify a 415-bp fragment, part of which is not included in the VIGS construct (see Methods). This assay was allowing us to
distinguish between the endogenous CaOvate mRNAs
and the viral derived ones. The results showed a statistically significant (p < .05) decrease of about 75% in the
levels of CaOvate expression in the 5 DAA fruit adopting
a different, more oblong shape, in comparison to CaOvate expression in the 5 DAA fruit of round shape taken
from the wild type (Figure 5). This reduction in the CaOvate levels in 5DAA fruit of the infiltrated plant 1 in
comparison to the wild type control supports the conclusion that the observed changed phenotype in infiltrated
plant 1 fruits compared to the phenotype of the WT’s
fruits (Figure 6A) is attributed to the successful silencing
of CaOvate gene by VIGS. The phenotypic measurements in the mature fruits of the infiltrated plant 1
showed a significant change in fruits’ length compared to

Page 11 of 16

Figure 5 Relative quantitative RT-PCR of CaOvate expression in
fruit of 5 DAA from the wild type (WT) and the infiltrated
plant 1. First strand cDNA synthesis was accomplished starting from
total RNA isolated from both fruits and using random hexamers and
reverse transcriptase. This first strand cDNA was used in the PCR
using gene-specific primers for CaOvate, one of them designed on
the sequence outside the area covered by the construct. The
samples from both plants were collected approx. 16.5 weeks after
the infiltration which was done when the seedlings were in the
stage of cotyledons. Asterisk indicates statistically significant
difference (p < .05) of the expression levels of CaOvate in the 5
DAA fruit of the infiltrated plant 1 when compared to expression
levels in the 5 DAA fruit of the WT. Pepper Actin was used as a
reference gene.

that of the wild type. Specifically, the average fruit shape
index is 1.14 for the fruits of the infiltrated plant 1 while
the average fruit shape index of the fruits of the WT is
0.88 (Figure 6B). This statistically significant (p < .05)
increase in the fruit shape index confirms the observation
done macroscopically that the fruits of the successfully
silenced plant are longer than the WT’s.
Expression of CaGA20ox1 in VIGS plant

Since tomato’s Ovate and AtOFP1 hold back growth
[2,5] as a result of abridged cell elongation, due to their
effect on gibberellin biosynthesis [5], we cloned and
characterized CaGa20ox1 (data not shown) and studied
its expression, by means of RT-PCR, in WT pepper
plants of cv. “Round”, as well as in the infiltrated plant
1 with the reduced CaOvate expression. As shown in
Figure 7, our results suggest that there is an increase in
the expression of CaGA20ox1 in the 5 DAA fruit of the
infiltrated plant 1 comparing to the 5 DAA fruit of the
WT, implying that CaGA20ox1 expression is affected by
CaOvate in pepper.

Discussion
In tomato, it was shown that the elongated fruit shape is
specified mainly by four loci: Ovate, Sun, Tri2.1/Dblk2.1
and Fs8.1, with the first two segregating in some cultivars. However, it is the interaction between all the

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

Page 12 of 16

Figure 6 Mature fruits collected from the infiltrated plant 1 and the WT plant and their phenotypic measurements. A) Some
characteristic mature fruits collected from the infiltrated plant 1 (left) and from the WT plant (right). B) Average fruit shape index of mature fruits
of the wild type (WT) and of the VIGS infiltrated plant 1. The fruit shape index was calculated according to [1], as the ratio of highest fruit height
to widest width. The fruits of the infiltrated plant 1 exhibit an average fruit shape index more than 1, characteristic of their oblong shape, while
the average fruit shape index of the fruits of the WT is lower than 1. The difference between the two fruit shape indices is statistically significant
(p < .05). Standard deviation bars are also shown.

aforementioned loci that may control the fate of tomato
fruit shape [1]. Ovate in particular is one of the two
major loci (Sun is the other) responsible for the modulation of fruit shape, possibly determining the polarity of
cell division early in floral development [3]. Comparative
mapping analysis has shown that the tomato Ovate has
orthologs in other Solanaceae species including pepper
[42]. In particular, [43] suggest that there exists a small
number of conserved QTLs that control fruit shape and
size between tomato and pepper. They first identified a
pepper fruit-shape QTL, Fs 2.1, localized in the tomato
Ovate gene but having a comparatively lesser effect.

More significantly however, they also identified a major
fruit-weight QTL in pepper, Fw 2.1, found to be
encoded by or tightly linked to Ovate [43], suggesting
that Ovate may control fruit characteristics in pepper
differently to tomato. The tight co-localization of
tomato Ovate gene with pepper QTLs for a number of
loci related to fruit diameter and shape, suggests a
strong synteny and close relationship between the genes
that control cell division, elongation and polarity [44].
For understanding fruit shape formation, we start in this
work from CaOvate and one of its targets, a GA20ox1
gene designated as CaGA20ox1.

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

Figure 7 RT-PCR analysis of CaGA20ox1 expression in fruit of 5
DAA from the infiltrated plant 1 and the wild type (WT). The
samples from both plants were collected approximately 16.5 weeks
after the infiltration which was done when the seedlings were in
the stage of cotyledons. Pepper Actin was used as a reference gene.
An obvious change is illustrated between the CaGA20ox1 expression
in the two fruits: there is an increase in the expression of the gene
in the 5 DAA fruit of the infiltrated plant compared to the
expression in the 5 DAA fruit of the WT.

The analysis of the CaOvate genomic sequences
obtained from the two cultivars studied showed that
sequences differ in a SNP in the first exon of the
gene, leading to a Threonine Long - to - Serine Round
polymorphism in the resulting predicted amino-acid
sequence. A C terminal DUF623 domain was identified
on the predicted amino-acid CaOVATE sequence, a
domain which exists in all AtOFPs and Solaneceaous
OVATE proteins as well as in other uncharacterized
proteins in other plants. This domain in Arabidopsis,
as shown for AtOFP1 and AtOFP5, was found to help
the contact with the BELL and KNOX homeodomains,
regulating their subcellular localization [10] while in
tomato it is the abolishment of this domain that causes
the differences in fruit shape [2]. The bioinformatics
analysis of all DUF623 domain sequences from Pfam
enabled their segregation into subfamilies (Figure 2).
The DUF623 domain of the CaOVATE was categorized in the same subfamily as other Solanaceous plants
and the DUF623 domains of AtOFP7, AtOFP8 and
AtOFP6. AtOFP7 was found to exhibit analogous function to AtOFP1, which is a known transcriptional
repressor of AtGA20ox1 [5]. AtOFP1 is categorized in
another subfamily along with other well characterized
proteins such as AtOFP2, AtOFP3, AtOFP5 and an

Page 13 of 16

OVATE-like protein from rice. AtOFP5 was shown to
be important for normal development and cell pattern
in the Arabidopsis embryo sac [15]. The two subfamilies, the one with CaOVATE, AtOFP6, AtOFP7 and
AtOFP8 and the other with AtOFP1, AtOFP2, AtOFP3
and AtOFP5, have a significant number of common
amino-acids inside the domain. According to the specificity determining residues analysis, the two subfamilies
have consistently differing amino-acids in positions 23
and 49 of the alignment (Figure 2) but the possible
similar functions between the OFPs such as AtOFP1
and AtOFP7 [5] categorized in the two subfamilies
may suggest that these changes do not alter the function of the domain, although they concern amino-acids
that are not biochemically similar. In other words, it is
possible that subfamilies 6 and 8 contain proteins acting similarly in plant growth and development, therefore placing our CaOVATE in a group of proteins that
have been shown to participate in cell size and fruit
shape determination in many plant species.
In tomato, what determines the shift from a round to
a pear-shaped cultivar is a stop codon in the second
exon of the Ovate sequence that puts an end in the
translation of the mRNA to protein in the pear-shaped
cultivar [2]. We were therefore unable to identify a similar mechanism in our two pepper cultivars.
We then examine whether different quantitative
expression levels exist between the two pepper cultivars.
The expression analysis of CaOvate showed there is a
timing difference in the expression of the gene between the two pepper cultivars of different fruit shape,
with cv. “Round” exhibiting a delay accompanied by
increased expression compared to cv. “Long” (Figure 3).
More specifically, in cv. “Round”, the peak of CaOvate
expression is observed after anthesis, in 5 DAA developing fruits. This is similar to tomato TA496, a roundfruited cultivar, in which the highest expression of
Ovate was detected also after anthesis in a developing
fruit of 4 DAA [2]. In cv. “Long” however, the peak of
CaOvate expression is observed before anthesis as in
tomato’s cv. Yellow Pear (TA503), the final pear-shaped
fruit of which is already evident in ovaries before
anthesis when Ovate expression reaches its highest
level. After anthesis of cv. Yellow Pear, Ovate expression
drops sharply as also observed in pepper cv. “Long” [2].
These results may suggest that our two pepper cultivars
exhibit quantity and timing differences in CaOvate
expression which affect fruit shape. Finally, in tomato,
the difference in the transcript levels of Ovate between
the two cultivars with the different fruit shape is likely
attributed to a 16-bp indel in the 5’ upstream region
[2]; in the pepper cultivars examined here no such
difference was observed in the sequences of the 5’
upstream region.

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

Silencing of CaOvate through VIGS in small plantlets
of cv. “Round”, resulted in plant that was further analyzed due to the altered phenotype exhibited in all of its
fruits. More specifically, the fruits that this plant produced were more oblong and varied compared to the
cultivar’s typical round shape according to phenotypic
measurements (Figure 6B). At 16.5 weeks after infiltration, by which time there were several fruits with
changed phenotype on this particular plant, 5 DAA
developing fruit was analyzed initially for the presence
of TRV transcripts. It was shown that at the time of
sampling, TRV1 but not TRV2 transcripts were
detected, although both transcripts were detected a few
weeks earlier in the same plant. This difference in
detecting the viral transcripts throughout the organs
and tissues of the infiltrated plant is likely attributed to
the fact that only small RNAs produced by the viral
transcripts travel inside the infiltrated plant. In the
mock treated plants, i.e. plants treated only with TRV1
and TRV2 empty vectors, neither viral transcripts were
detected, a finding in agreement with previous ones by
[45] attributed to the relatively minimal infection speed
of the TRV1 and TRV2 constructs in fully developed
plants. Next, the expression level of the endogenous
CaOvate gene was assessed through RT-PCR, and a statistically significant down-regulation of about 75% compared to the wild type 5 DAA fruit was detected. It is
possible then that this down-regulation of CaOvate is
involved in the alteration of the shape of fruits in cv.
“Round” adopting a more elongated shape, consistent
with previous findings describing Ovate as a growth
suppressor [2]. In other words, the down-regulation of
CaOvate accompanied by an increase in expression of
its possible target, CaGA20ox1, are potentially the promoters of growth and thus fruit elongation in pepper.
We should note that the silencing of the DUF623
domain through the application of the VIGS technique
might have led to the silencing of other genes encoding
for proteins that contain the domain in pepper (if any).

Conclusions
Our work involved the cloning and characterization of a
pepper gene, CaOvate, likely involved in the control of
an important trait character, fruit shape, known to be
affected by the widely applied technique of grafting. The
CaOvate gene was cloned and sequenced from two pepper cultivars with different fruit shape (cv. “Round” and
cv. “Long”). CaOvate encodes a protein that includes
the DUF623 domain, characteristic of OFPs. Bioinformatics analysis placed CaOVATE in the same protein
subfamily with functionally equivalent proteins from
Solanaceae plants, including tomato, and three OFP
members from Arabidopsis: AtOFP6, AtOFP7 and
AtOFP8. We also studied the transcript levels of the

Page 14 of 16

gene during the development of flower and fruit in the
two cultivars and statistically significant differences were
observed, differences not only in quantity but also in
timing; the expression of CaOvate was highest after
anthesis in cv. “Round” and before anthesis in cv.
“Long”. Additionally, the successful down-regulation of
CaOvate by VIGS in cv. “Round” plants, resulted in an
obviously more oblong fruit shape in infiltrated plants.
The transcript levels of the CaGA20ox1 - a target-gene
of CaOvate - were also affected.
Overall, we have provided significant in vivo, in vitro
and in silico evidence that we have successfully isolated
Ovate-like genes from two pepper cultivars. CaOvate is
likely involved in the determination of fruit shape. Work
is in progress to study additional pepper genes homologues to respective tomato genes involved in controlling
tomato fruit shape. We believe that our work will help
us to understand better the molecular mechanisms
involved in controlling pepper fruit shape as well as the
evolutionary conservation of these mechanisms among
Solanaceae and other more distant species. Furthermore,
since in grafted vegetables the effect of rootstocks on
scion fruit quality is well documented [46,47] including
effects in pepper fruit shape [19-21], the work described
herein could facilitate the understanding of mechanism
for graft induced changes in pepper fruits too.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary table 1. PDF table 1 - Primer
sequences used in the experiments.
Additional file 2: Supplementary figure 1. PDF figure 1 - Alignment of
the CaOvate genomic sequences from cv. “Long” and cv. “Round” along
with the genomic sequence of the BAC clone 215H17, identified due to
its high similarity to tomato Ovate. The SNPs between the sequences are
localized in position 419, which is inside the first exon of the gene while
the other two, in positions 654 and 746, are located inside the one and
only intron of the gene. All SNP positions are boxed. The alignment was
generated using the ClustalW program and edited with Bioedit.
Additional file 3: Supplementary figure 2. Word figure 2 - Phylogenetic
analysis of the DUF623 domain from the OFPs from Arabidopsis and related
protein sequences from diverse species, including species of the Solanaceae
family. The tree was generated using the MAFFT algorithm. The position of
the DUF623 domain from CaOVATE is highlighted.
Additional file 4: Supplementary table 2. Word table 2 - A summary
of the BLAST results retrieved from several EMBL plant nucleotide
sequence databases (see Methods), with the CaOvate cDNA sequence as
query. The results are presented by database (rows) and species
(columns). New/Additional species that produced significant hits and
were added in the analysis are highlighted in grey.
Additional file 5: Supplementary figure 3. PDF figure 3 - A) Fruits of a
VIGS infiltrated plant that was infiltrated in the stage of 4-5 true leaves
(preliminary experiment). Despite the different developmental stage of the
two fruits depicted in the image, it is obvious that the fruit on the left of the
picture is adopting a more oblong shape than the fruit on the right of the
picture that is typically round, B) Average fruit shape index of mature fruits
of the wild type (WT) and of the VIGS infiltrated plant that was infiltrated in
the stage of 4-5 true leaves (preliminary experiment). The fruit shape index
was calculated as the ratio of highest fruit height to widest width. The fruits
of the VIGS infiltrated plant exhibit an average fruit shape index of 1, while

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

the average fruit shape index of the fruits of the WT is lower than 1. The
difference between the two fruit shape indices is statistically significant (p <
.05). Standard deviation bars are also shown.
Additional file 6: Supplementary figure 4. PDF figure 4 - A) Some
characteristic mature fruits collected from the infiltrated plant with the
pTRV2-CaOvate antisense construct (down) and from the WT plant (up),
B) Average fruit shape index of mature fruits of the wild type (WT) and
of the VIGS infiltrated - with the antisense construct- plant (infiltrated
plant 2) that was infiltrated in the stage of the cotyledons. The fruits of
the infiltrated plant exhibit an average fruit shape index more than 1,
while the average fruit shape index of the fruits of the WT is lower than
1. The difference between the two fruit shape indices is statistically
significant (p < .05). Standard deviation bars are also shown.

Page 15 of 16

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
Acknowledgements
Tsaballa A. holds a PhD scholarship from the “Alexander S. Onassis” Public
Benefit Foundation. Continuous support for the Institute of
Agrobiotechnology/CERTH from the General Secretariat of Research and
Technology of Greece is also acknowledged.
Author details
Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, School of Agriculture, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, GR-541 24, Greece. 2Institute of
Agrobiotechnology (IN.A.), C.E.R.TH., 6th km Charilaou-Thermis Road, Thermi,
GR-570 01, Greece.

14.

15.

1

Authors’ contributions
AT participated in the design of the study, carried out cloning, expression
analyses, and sequence and phylogenetic analyses of the genes, the VIGS
experiment, and prepared the manuscript. KP participated in cloning and
expression analyses, in setting up the VIGS experiment and in the analysis of
results. ND contributed in the bioinformatics analyses and assisted in
drafting the manuscript. AST conceived the study, directed the project and
participated in the analysis of the results and finally wrote the manuscript.
All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 2 November 2010 Accepted: 14 March 2011
Published: 14 March 2011
References
1. Gonzalo M, van der Knaap E: A comparative analysis into the genetic
bases of morphology in tomato varieties exhibiting elongated fruit
shape. Theor Appl Genet 2008, 116(5):647-656.
2. Liu J, Van Eck J, Cong B, Tanksley SD: A new class of regulatory genes
underlying the cause of pear-shaped tomato fruit. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2002, 99(20):13302-13306.
3. Tanksley S: The Genetic, Developmental, and Molecular Bases of Fruit
Size and Shape Variation in Tomato. Plant Cell 2004, 16:181-189.
4. Tanaka-Ueguchi M, Itoh H, Oyama N, Koshioka M, Matsuoka M: Overexpression of a tobacco homeobox gene, NTH15, decreases the
expression of a gibberellin biosynthetic gene encoding GA 20-oxidase.
Plant J 1998, 15(3):391-400.
5. Wang S, Chang Y, Guo J, Chen JG: Arabidopsis Ovate Family Protein 1 is
a transcriptional repressor that suppresses cell elongation. Plant J 2007,
50(5):858-872.
6. Hay A, Kaur H, Phillips A, Hedden P, Hake S, Tsiantis M: The Gibberellin
Pathway Mediates KNOTTED1-Type Homeobox Function in Plants with
Different Body Plans. Curr Biol 2002, 12(18):1557-1565.
7. Sakamoto T, Kamiya N, Ueguchi-Tanaka M, Iwahori S, Matsuoka M: KNOX
homeodomain protein directly suppresses the expression of a
gibberellin biosynthetic gene in the tobacco shoot apical meristem. Gen
Dev 2001, 15(5):581-590.
8. Rieu I, Ruiz-Rivero O, Fernandez-Garcia N, Griffiths J, Powers SJ, Gong F,
Linhartova T, Eriksson S, Nilsson O, Thomas SG, et al: The gibberellin
biosynthetic genes AtGA20ox1 and AtGA20ox2 act, partially redundantly,
to promote growth and development throughout the Arabidopsis life
cycle. Plant J 2008, 53(3):488-504.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

26.

27.
28.
29.

30.

31.
32.

33.

Wang Y-K, Chang W-C, Liu P-F, Hsiao M-K, Lin C-T, Lin S-M, Pan R-L: Ovate
family protein 1 as a plant Ku70 interacting protein involving in DNA
double-strand break repair. Plant Mol Biol 2010, 1-14.
Hackbusch J, Richter K, Muller J, Salamini F, Uhrig JF: A central role of
Arabidopsis thaliana ovate family proteins in networking and subcellular
localization of 3-aa loop extension homeodomain proteins. Proc Nat
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(13):4908-4912.
Müller J, Wang Y, Franzen R, Santi L, Salamini F, Rohde W: In vitro
interactions between barley TALE homeodomain proteins suggest a role
for protein-protein associations in the regulation of Knox gene function.
Plant J 2001, 27(1):13-23.
Bellaoui M, Pidkowich MS, Samach A, Kushalappa K, Kohalmi SE,
Modrusan Z, Crosby WL, Haughn GW: The Arabidopsis BELL1 and
KNOX TALE Homeodomain Proteins Interact through a Domain
Conserved between Plants and Animals. Plant Cell 2001,
13(11):2455-2470.
Smith HMS, Hake S: The Interaction of Two Homeobox Genes,
BREVIPEDICELLUS and PENNYWISE, Regulates Internode Patterning in the
Arabidopsis Inflorescence. Plant Cell 2003, 15(8):1717-1727.
Bhatt AM, Etchells JP, Canales C, Lagodienko A, Dickinson H: VAAMANA–a
BEL1-like homeodomain protein, interacts with KNOX proteins BP and
STM and regulates inflorescence stem growth in Arabidopsis. Gene 2004,
328:103-111.
Pagnussat GC, Yu HJ, Sundaresana V: Cell-fate switch of synergid to egg
cell in Arabidopsis eostre mutant embryo sacs arises from misexpression
of the BEL1-like homeodomain gene BLH1. Plant Cell 2007,
19(11):3578-3592.
Chen H, Banerjee AK, Hannapel DJ: The tandem complex of BEL and
KNOX partners is required for transcriptional repression of ga20ox1.
Plant J 2004, 38(2):276-284.
Chaim AB, Paran I, Grube RC, Jahn M, van Wijk R, Peleman J: QTL mapping
of fruit-related traits in pepper (Capsicum annuum):. Theor Appl Genet
2001, 102(6):1016-1028.
Rao GU, Ben Chaim A, Borovsky Y, Paran I: Mapping of yield-related QTLs
in pepper in an interspecific cross of Capsicum annuum and C.
frutescens. Theor Appl Genet 2003, 106(8):1457-1466.
Yagishita N: Studies on graft hybrids of Capsicum annuum L. I. Variation
in fruit shape caused by grafting and the effects in the first and second
progenies. Botanical Magazine-Tokyo 1961, 74:122-130.
Yagishita N: Studies on graft hybrids of Capsicum annuum L. II. Variation
in fruit shape caused by grafting and the effects in the progenies.
Botanical Magazine-Tokyo 1961, 74:480-489.
Yagishita N, Hirata Y: Graft-induced change in fruit shape in Capsicum
annuum L. I. genetic analysis by crossing. Euphytica 1987, 36(3):809-814.
National Centre for Biotechnology Information. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/].
Doyle JJ, Doyle JL: A rapid DNA isolation procedure for small quantities
of fresh leaf tissue. Phytochem Bull 1987, 19:11-15.
ClustalW2. [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw2].
Hall TA: Bioedit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor
and analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acid S 1999,
41:95-98.
Tsaftaris A, Pasentzis K, Argiriou A: Rolling circle amplification of genomic
templates for inverse PCR (RCA-GIP): a method for 5’- and 3’-genome
walking without anchoring. Biotechnol Lett 2010, 32(1):157-161.
Sanger Institute. [http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk].
Universal Protein Resource. [http://www.uniprot.org/].
Katoh K, Kuma K-i, Toh H, Miyata T: MAFFT version 5: improvement in
accuracy of multiple sequence alignment. Nucl Acids Res 2005,
33(2):511-518.
Waterhouse AM, Procter JB, Martin DMA, Clamp M, Barton GJ: Jalview
Version 2- a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis
workbench. Bioinformatics 2009, 25(9):1189-1191.
Brown DP, Krishnamurthy N, Sjolander K: Automated Protein Subfamily
Identification and Classification. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3(8):e160.
Ye K, Anton Feenstra K, Heringa J, Ijzerman AP, Marchiori E: Multi-RELIEF: a
method to recognize specificity determining residues from multiple
sequence alignments using a Machine-Learning approach for feature
weighting. Bioinformatics 2008, 24(1):18-25.
Tree Figure Drawing Tool, Version 1.3.1. [http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/
figtree/].

Tsaballa et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:46
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/46

Page 16 of 16

34. European Molecular Biology Laboratory. [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/embl/
Documentation/Release_notes/current/relnotes.html].
35. Ruijter JM, Ramakers C, Hoogaars WMH, Karlen Y, Bakker O, van den
Hoff MJB, Moorman AFM: Amplification efficiency: linking baseline and
bias in the analysis of quantitative PCR data. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37(6):
e45.
36. Silvar C, Merino F, Dνaz J: Differential activation of defense-related genes
in susceptible and resistant pepper cultivars infected with Phytophthora
capsici. J Plant Physiol 2008, 165(10):1120-1124.
37. Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center. [http://www.arabidopsis.org/abrc/].
38. Hileman LC, Drea S, de Martino G, Litt A, Irish VF: Virus-induced gene
silencing is an effective tool for assaying gene function in the basal
eudicot species Papaver somniferum (opium poppy). Plant J 2005,
44(2):334-341.
39. Pepper EST database. [http://210.218.199.240/pepper/index.php].
40. Rotenberg D, Thompson TS, German TL, Willis DK: Methods for effective
real-time RT-PCR analysis of virus-induced gene silencing. J Virol Methods
2006, 138(1-2):49-59.
41. Eunsook Chung ES, Yeoung-Cheol Kim, Eun Joo Chung, Sang-Keun Oh,
Sanghyeob Lee, Jeong Mee Park, Young Hee Joung, Doil Choi: A Method
of High Frequency Virus-induced Gene Silencing in Chili Pepper
(Capsicum annuum L. cv. Bukang). Mol Cells 2004, 17(2):377-380.
42. Wang Y, Diehl A, Wu F, Vrebalov J, Giovannoni J, Siepel A, Tanksley SD:
Sequencing and Comparative Analysis of a Conserved Syntenic Segment
in the Solanaceae. Genetics 2008, 180(1):391-408.
43. Zygier S, Chaim AB, Efrati A, Kaluzky G, Borovsky Y, Paran I: QTLs mapping
for fruit size and shape in chromosomes 2 and 4 in pepper and a
comparison of the pepper QTL map with that of tomato. Theor Applied
Genet 2005, 111(3):437-445.
44. Barchi L, Lefebvre V, Sage-Palloix A-M, Lanteri S, Palloix A: QTL analysis of
plant development and fruit traits in pepper and performance of
selective phenotyping. Theor Applied Genet 2009, 118(6):1157-1171.
45. Gould B, Kramer E: Virus-induced gene silencing as a tool for functional
analyses in the emerging model plant Aquilegia (columbine,
Ranunculaceae). Plant Methods 2007, 3(1):6.
46. Traka-Mavrona E, Koutsika-Sotiriou M, Pritsa T: Response of squash
(Cucurbita spp.) as rootstock for melon (Cucumis melo L.). Sci Hortic 2000,
83(3-4):353-362.
47. Harnett RF: Resurgence of interest in grafting techniques on heated
tomato crops. Grower 1974, 82:861-862.
doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-46
Cite this article as: Tsaballa et al.: Multiple evidence for the role of an
Ovate-like gene in determining fruit shape in pepper. BMC Plant Biology
2011 11:46.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
