<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1475-9292-3-2.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease

BioMed Central

Open Access

Review

Chagas' disease and AIDS
Anil K Vaidian1, Louis M Weiss1,2 and Herbert B Tanowitz*1,2
Address: 1Department of Medicine (Division of Infectious Diseases), Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx
New York 10461, USA and 2Department of Pathology (Division of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology), Albert Einstein College of Medicine and
Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx New York 10461, USA
Email: Anil K Vaidian - avaidian@montefiore.org; Louis M Weiss - lmweiss@aecom.yu.edu; Herbert B Tanowitz* - tanowitz@aecom.yu.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 13 May 2004
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3:2

Received: 31 January 2004
Accepted: 13 May 2004

This article is available from: http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/2
© 2004 Vaidian et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Chagas' disease caused by Trypanosoma cruzi is an opportunistic infection in the setting of HIV/
AIDS. Some individuals with HIV and chronic T. cruzi infection may experience a reactivation, which
is most commonly manifested by meningoencephalitis. A reactivation myocarditis is the second
most common manifestation. These presentations may be difficult to distinguish from
toxoplasmosis in individuals with HIV/AIDS. The overlap of HIV and Trypanosoma cruzi infection
occurs not only in endemic areas but also in non-endemic areas of North America and Europe
where the diagnosis may be even more difficult. The pathological features, diagnosis and the role
of cytokines in the pathogenesis of the disease are discussed.

Background
In recent years there has been an increasing appreciation
that Chagas' disease, caused by Trypanosoma cruzi, can be
an opportunistic infection in the setting of HIV/AIDS.
Before co-infection with HIV and T. cruzi was recognized
as a syndrome, it was well known that patients with
chronic Chagas' disease who became immunosuppressed
could have a reactivation of their infection.
In the two decades since human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection was first described in the United States,
diverse viral, bacterial, and fungal pathogens have been
identified as causative agents of opportunistic disease. As
our understanding of the pathogenesis and the natural
history of these agents has grown, it has become clear that
these infections are the inevitable consequence of T-cell
depletion and depressed cell-mediated immunity. While
Pneumocystis pneumonia and Toxoplasma encephalitis are
common in the setting of advanced acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), Chagas' disease in the setting
of HIV infection is less commonly reported. However the

reports of Chagas' disease in AIDS and after blood transfusions and organ transplants highlight the potential for
the reactivation of parasitic diseases with advanced immunosuppression accompanying HIV infection.
The high prevalence of both HIV infection and parasitic
diseases in the tropical and sub-tropical world has
allowed for frequent overlap. Given the immunologic
impact of HIV infection, it is understandable that concurrent infection would adversely affect the progression and
natural history of parasitic infections. Considerable evidence has accumulated demonstrating the bi-directional
interactions between parasitic diseases and HIV/AIDS and
the deleterious influence on the natural histories of both
[1-5].
Parasitic diseases have been shown to cause enhanced and
prolonged immune activation [2,6]. Chronic immune
activation by parasites is associated with several significant immunologic features. A decline in CD4+ and CD8+
cells, impaired natural killer activity, increased T-cell

Page 1 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3

apoptosis, and cellular anergy have all been demonstrated. These changes have been linked to the preferential
activation of the Th2 type response, which in turn downregulate the Th1 type response, hinder macrophage activity, and weaken the cytotoxic T-cell response [1,6]. Such
responses may lead to a deleterious interaction with HIV
infection.
Some parasitic infections elicit the early production of IL4, which eventually promote a Th2 type response. Given
that Th1 mediated cytokines appear crucial in the containment of HIV infection, the immunologic changes associated with a predominantly Th2 type response have been
implicated in the progression of HIV infection in the setting of various parasitic diseases [1,6,7]. Parasitic infection is linked to immune activation, which appears to play
an important role in the progression of HIV disease. In
turn, the progression of HIV disease may be associated
with the immunosuppression that promotes the reactivation, parasitemia, and clinical manifestations of parasitic
disease [3,6-8]. For example, recent studies in Uganda
have demonstrated that clinical malaria and parasitemia
are significantly more common in HIV-seropositive persons. Studies of pregnant women in Malawi have shown
an increased incidence of malaria in those infected with
HIV [9]. Moreover, clinical data demonstrate a higher HIV
RNA count in persons infected with malaria and a subsequent reduction in the viral load after malaria treatment.
Although this does not necessarily prove a cause and effect
linkage, studies in mice have shown a significant increase
in viral p24 after infection with Plasmodium [2,10].
Another parasitic infection of the tropics, leishmaniasis is
appreciated as an opportunistic infection in individuals
with HIV infection. In vitro studies have shown increased
intracellular growth of Leishmania in HIV-infected macrophages. More than half of co-infected persons have detectable parasitemia reflecting uncontrolled multiplication
and dissemination [2]. Although African trypanosomiasis
and HIV infection co-exist in sub-Saharan Africa there are
no solid epidemiologic data suggesting that the clinical
course of one is exacerbated by the other.

Clinical disease and epidemiology of Chagas'
disease
Chagas' disease or American trypanosomiasis, has a widespread distribution from Mexico to Argentina. Although
autochthonous cases in the United States are extremely
rare, the confluence of factors including immigration and
AIDS have led to its emergence as a potential opportunistic infection in immunocompromised persons in Central
and South America. T. cruzi has a complex life cycle that
occurs in insect vectors and mammalian hosts. The vector,
triatomine insects, become infected when it takes a blood
meal from a mammal with circulating trypomastigotes.
These forms transform into epimastigotes in the insect gut

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/2

and multiply extracellularly. The epimastigotes ultimately
migrate to the hindgut where they differentiate into nondividing metacyclic trypomastigotes, which are discharged in the feces when the insect takes a subsequent
blood meal. Transmissions to a new mammalian host
occurs when the infective metacyclic trypomastigotes contaminate mucous membranes, conjunctivas, or breaks in
the skin and invade a variety of host cell types. Once
inside the cell, they transform into amastigotes and multiply intracellularly. They eventually cause cell rupture
with release of parasites, invade adjacent cells, spread via
the lymphatics and bloodstream to distant sites, and initiate subsequent multiplicative cycles. Transmission has
also been shown to occur by blood transfusions and organ
transplants, transplacentally, and by accidental inoculation in the laboratory [11].
In the naturally acquired infection, a chagoma may
appear at the site of entry. If the portal of entry is the conjunctiva, the patient may develop painless unilateral periorbital edema termed the Romaña's sign [11].
Dissemination of the parasite may be accompanied by
fever, malaise, edema of the extremities and face, morbilliform rash, generalized lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly. If heavy tissue parasitism occurs,
clinically significant myocarditis may ensue in a small
proportion of patients occasionally leading to congestive
heart failure and death. Life threatening arrhythmias, typical of chronic cardiac Chagas' disease, usually do not
occur in acute Chagas' disease. Amastigotes may parasitize
cells of the gray and white matter of the central nervous
system in acute infection and cause meningoencephalitis,
especially in young children. When this occurs, it is usually in conjunction with acute myocarditis and is associated with a very poor prognosis. The signs and symptoms
of acute Chagas' disease usually abate within 4–8 weeks.
They then enter the indeterminate phase in which the parasite is contained by the host's immune system or is
sequestered in intracellular spaces protected from destruction. This phase is characterized by the lack of overt symptoms, detectable antibodies to T. cruzi, and subclinical
parasitemia [11].
Chronic Chagas' disease may become clinically evident
years or decades after the initial infection. Symptoms
develop in only 10–30% of chronically infected persons,
with cardiac manifestations as the predominant findings
[11]. Congestive heart failure, arrhythmias, thrombosis,
dizziness and syncope are typical findings. However, seizures are rare in chronic Chagas' disease, unless related to
a thrombo-embolic event. Although there have been disagreements concerning the pathogenic basis of chronic
chagasic cardiomyopathy; persistence of parasites,
autoimmunity, and microvascular dysfunction have all
been cited as etiologic factors leading to progressive organ

Page 2 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3

dysfunction. The cardiomyopathy develops insidiously
often affecting the right ventricle preferentially. Once congestive heart failure ensues, life expectancy is limited. The
gastrointestinal tract is also frequently affected in chronic
Chagas' disease. Megaesophagus is the most common
clinical expression with symptoms similar to that of idiopathic achalasia such as chest pain, dysphagia,
odynophagia, cough, and regurgitation. Hypersalivation,
parotid enlargement, and repeated aspiration may also
occur. Constipation and abdominal pain are the typical
symptoms of patients with megacolon. In patients with
advanced megacolon, obstruction, perforation, and sepsis
may develop.
Although the incidence of reactivation of Chagas' disease
in the setting of immunosuppression is unknown, it often
follows a more severe clinical course than the Chagas' disease in an immunocompetent person [7]. Reactivation of
Chagas' disease has been described in patients with leukemia, and with kidney and heart transplantation. While
central nervous system involvement has not been
described in chronic Chagas' disease in immunocompetent patients, it is a common presentation of reactivation
of Chagas' disease acquired years prior to the onset of
immunosuppression [12-16].

Chagas' disease and AIDS
Chagas' disease/HIV co-infection has been well described
in the literature [5] since the initial report by del Castillo
et al [13]. In 1990, Del Castillo and colleagues reported
the first clinical observation of Chagas' disease and AIDS.
They described the case of a 19-year old man with hemophilia B who presented with fever, headaches, photophobia, and weight loss. A CT scan of the brain revealed a
large hypodense lesion comprising the right frontal lobe
with mass effect and herniation. Suspecting a glioma, the
patient underwent an emergent neurosurgical resection of
the lesion. Subsequent pathologic examination revealed
inflammatory perivascular infiltrates and clusters of T.
cruzi amastigotes. Chagas' and HIV-1 serology were both
positive and the CD4 cell count was low. He was treated
with nifurtimox for 4 weeks with stabilization of his neurologic symptoms. However the patient's clinical course
was complicated by acute myocarditis and he later died of
respiratory failure [13]. This clinical presentation highlights several key aspects concerning the presentation of
Chagas' disease in AIDS. The central nervous system is the
most commonly affected site, occurring in roughly 75% of
cases [13,15,16]. Space occupying lesions are commonly
seen with Chagas' disease in AIDS. The classic manifestations are that of an acute meningoencephalitis, with fever,
headaches, seizures, vomiting, and focal neurological deficits. Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid may show
mild pleocytosis with lymphocyte predominance,
increased protein, and the presence of T. cruzi trypomas-

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/2

tigotes [4,13,15,16]. These findings are typical for acute
Chagas' disease in the immunocompetent as well as for
reactivated Chagas' disease in the immunocompromised.
Brain imaging by CT scan often reveals a single or multiple hypodense subcortical lesions with or without
enhancement. The lesions predominantly involve the
white matter of the brain. Histopathologic examination
reveals severe inflammation associated with numerous
amastigotes parasitizing glial cells and occasionally neurons [17]. Although central nervous system Toxoplamsa
gondii infection in AIDS patients involves the basal ganglia and thalamus more commonly, the lesions of central
nervous system Chagas' disease are often mistakenly
attributed to this parasite as well as other opportunistic
infections. This lack of specificity of brain imaging and the
broad differential of space occupying lesions in individuals with AIDS underscore the usefulness of a brain biopsy
to affect accurate diagnosis and appropriate therapy.
The heart is the next most commonly affected organ recognized in 25% to 44% of cases [11]. Myocarditis as the
singular manifestation of Chagas' disease in HIV-infected
patients is uncommon. It is usually associated with central
nervous system involvement and is diagnosed clinically or
at autopsy [11,17]. Findings from necropsy studies suggest that a significant proportion of Chagas' disease in
HIV/AIDS have clinically silent cardiac disease despite
brisk inflammation with nests of parasites in the myocardium [17]. Clinical manifestations are those of heart failure and arrhythmias. Another key aspect found in HIVinfected patients who present with clinically symptomatic
Chagas' disease is that of significant immunosuppression.
Chagas' disease in HIV infected patients has been predominantly described in those with advanced disease with
CD4 counts below 200 cells/ml [3,4,13,15,16].
The histopathology of the central nervous system and the
heart associated with reactivated Chagas' disease in AIDS
has been well described [3,8,17]. The brain is grossly
enlarged in size and weight with scattered areas of softening and hemorrhage. The white matter appears to be more
involved than the gray matter. Microscopically, meningoencephalitis with necrosis and hemorrhage are found in
the scattered areas of softening. Meningitis is present in
varying degrees of intensity. Macrophages and lymphocytes account for the majority of the inflammatory
infiltrate noted in the parenchyma and perivascular
spaces, followed by plasma cells and granulocytes. Microglial nodules and disseminated multifocal astrocytic gliosis of the white matter are invariable found in most of the
cases. Heavy parasitism is noted in glial cells and in areas
of necrosis and hemorrhage. Parasites are also found in
macrophages, around blood vessels, free in intercellular
spaces but rarely in neuronal cells [3,17]. The findings in
the myocardium vary with the intensity of the inflamma-

Page 3 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3

tion provoked by T. cruzi parasitism. The myocarditis may
be mild with limited focal, intrafascicular or endomysial
infiltrates with macrophages and lymphocytes or it may
be more severe with extensive and more widespread foci
of inflammatory infiltrates. The inflammatory process has
been observed in every layer, from the endocardium to the
epicardium. Often the inflammatory cells can be seen dissecting one myocardial cell from another. Another feature
of cardiac involvement is the proliferation of connective
tissue, which may be diffuse with several areas connected
by bridging fibrous fascicles [11,17,18]. Although the precise mechanisms that drive the pathogenesis of Chagas'
disease have not been fully defined, clinical studies and
experimental models suggest that the severity of tissue
parasitism during acute disease correlates with the symptomatic and pathologic findings in chronic reactivated
disease.
As more cases have been reported, we have gained a better
understanding of the interaction between T. cruzi and HIV
during coinfection. Upon review of the case reports and
case series of investigators such as Ferreira and Sartori
from Brazil, it appears that the clinical manifestations of
Chagas' disease in the HIV-infected represent reactivation
and not primary infection with T. cruzi [4,7,13,15,19].
This is similar to T. gondii, which is regarded by some as
the prototypical opportunistic infection, which is
acquired years prior to presentation, remains in latency
for an indeterminate time, and only reactivates in the setting of AIDS to cause symptoms and disease. The cases of
Chagas' disease and HIV infection that have been reported
are described in patients presenting to tertiary care hospitals situated in urban centers. Although Chagas' disease
may be endemic in these urban areas, vector-borne transmission usually does not occur there. The typical epidemiologic sequence of events is for patients to acquire T. cruzi
infections while residing in rural areas of endemicity, to
move to urban areas where they acquire HIV infection,
and to present clinically as immunosuppression ensues
and T. cruzi reactivates [3,13,15,16,19].
The level of parasitemia observed in HIV infected individuals with symptoms of Chagas' disease is useful in diagnosis [2,20]. Direct microscopic examination of blood and
cerebrospinal fluid may reveal T. cruzi trypomastigotes
[20]. This finding may precede the clinical manifestations
of disease or it may be discovered with the onset of symptoms. Studies by Perez Ramirez and Sartori demonstrate
that HIV-infection lead to a substantial increase of T. cruzi
parasitemia in patients with Chagas' disease [4,7,21].
Moreover, the reactivation of Chagas' disease and its subsequent parasitemia has been shown to be associated with
an increase in plasma HIV-1 viral load [4]. Other studies
have shown an increased frequency of detection of T. cruzi
parasitemia in HIV-seropositive subjects with chronic

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/2

Chagas' disease than in HIV-seronegative subjects, a
higher level of parasitemia as established by xenodiagnosis, and a higher level of parasitemia in AIDS than in less
advanced HIV infection [19]. Importantly, mice coinfected with murine leukemia virus, which causes immunodeficiency, and T. cruzi have greater parasitemia, and
myocardial parasitism with inflammation than do mice
infected with T. cruzi alone [22].
HIV-infected individuals have defects in cell-mediated
immunity including decreased lymphocyte proliferation
and decreased production of IL-12 and IFN-γ, which are
often associated with progression of HIV infection. These
deficiencies are among the contributory factors leading to
opportunistic infection and may appear prior to CD4+Tcell depletion. It has recently been demonstrated that
CD154, a molecule expressed on activated CD4+ T cells is
important in the regulation of both cell mediated and
humoral immunity and critical for the resistance to
opportunistic infections. In CD4+ T cells from HIV
infected patients the expression of CD154 was impaired
in response to a number of pathogens including T. gondii.
There was a correlation with decreased production of IL12 and IFN-γ in response to Toxoplasma [23]. These
observations could be applicable to T. cruzi. Various studies point to the crucial role of cytokines such as interferon
(IFN)-γ, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)12, and nitric oxide in host resistance and susceptibility in
T. cruzi infection [6]. IFN-γ and TNF-α have been implicated in the activation of macrophages during the acute
phase of the infection [4,6]. These two cytokines induce
high levels of nitric oxide, which may contribute to the
control of parasite replication. Mice deficient in IFN-γ
have higher parasitemia and myocardial parasitism but
lower myocardial inflammation and earlier mortality. In
contrast, mice deficient in IL-12 have milder parasitemia
and myocardial parasitism but greater myocardial inflammation and later mortality. Michailowsky and colleagues
have described the role of cytokines in tissue parasitism.
In a series of experiments with mice, expression of IL-12
and IFN-γ has been shown to increase susceptibility to the
Colombian strain of T. cruzi. In contrast, IL-4 expression
has been associated with lower parasitemia and mortality
[6].
Earlier studies have postulated a correlation between
genetic diversity in T. cruzi and variability in clinical disease [21,24]. Murine models have demonstrated the different tissue tropism of T. cruzi as illustrated by the
Colombian strain's affinity for the heart and brain [6]. In
reactivated Chagas' disease and HIV coinfection, several
strains of T. cruzi may be discovered through genetic and
phylogenetic testing in any given patient. Studies by
Pacheco and Perez-Ramirez have not found a correlation
between a particular genotype and the reactivation of

Page 4 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3

Chagas' disease in HIV-seropositive patients [21,24]. On
the other hand, Marques de Brito has demonstrated that
mice infected with a particular genotypic strain express a
genetically divergent strain after immunosuppression
[25]. However, current evidence does not support a clear
link between genetic variability and clinical disease in
humans.
The treatment of acute T. cruzi infection is with Benznidazole or Nifurtimox. The usual dosing regimen for Benznidazole is 5–7 mg/kg per day in 2 divided doses for 30–90
days. The usual dosing regimen for Nifurtimox is 8–10
mg/kg per day in 3–4 divided doses for 90–120 days.
However, the duration of therapy has not been studied in
HIV/AIDS, but in the absence of immune reconstitution
chronic suppressive therapy would likely be required. In a
somewhat analogous situation, many patients with Chagas' disease undergoing organ transplantation have
required therapy during the period of immunosuppression.

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/2

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Summary
We have attempted to highlight some of the knowledge
gained in the decade following the first description of
Chagas' disease in the HIV-seropositive population. Now
well recognized as an opportunistic infection in AIDS,
more cases can be expected given the confluence of certain
demographic and epidemiologic trends. Chagas' disease is
widely distributed in Central and South America affecting
18 million people in 21 different countries [2,11]. As this
population overlaps and intersects with the growing HIVseropositive population, the incidence of disease is likely
to increase. Moreover as persons continue to migrate from
endemic areas, the potential for new cases in the United
States, Canada and Europe will also increase. Clinicians
and researchers will have to consider the risk of reactivation of latent T. cruzi infection in their approach toward
immunocompromised patients with relevant exposures.
This is particularly important when one considers that the
efficacy of specific anti-parasitic drug therapy has not been
evaluated in the setting of HIV/AIDS in a systematic manner.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.

18.
19.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Dr. Louis V. Kirchhoff for critical reading of the
manuscript. Supported by NIH grants AI-52739 and AI-12770.

20.

References
1.

2.
3.

Goncalves da Costa SC: Immunocompromised host: from the
early events until the impact of acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro 2000, 95(Suppl
1):141-144.
Gundel H, Feldmeier H: Review: HIV infection and tropical parasitic diseases – deleterious interactions in both directions?
Trop Med Int Health 2002, 7(6):479-488.
Sartori AMC, Lopes MH, Caramelli B, Duarte MIS, Pinto PLDS, Neto
VA, Shikanai-Yasuda MA: Simultaneous occurrence of acute
myocarditis and reactivated Chagas' disease in a patient with
AIDS. Clin Infect Dis 1995, 21:1297-299.

21.

22.

Sartori AMC, Neto JE, Nunes EV, Braz LMA, Caiaffa-Filho HH,
Oliveira OC Jr, Neto VA, Shikanai-Yasuda MA: Trypanosoma cruzi
parasitemia in chronic Chagas' disease: comparison between
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-positive and HIVnegative patients. J Infect Dis 2002, 186:872-875.
Weiss LM, Wittner M, Coyle C, Shah S, Tanowitz HB: Parasitic
infections of the nervous system and the eye in AIDS. Neurol
Infect Epidem 1997, 2:113-127.
Michailowsky V, Silva NM, Rocha CD, Vieira LQ, Lannes-Vieira J,
Gazzinelli RT: Pivotal Role of Interleukin-12 and Interferon-γ
Axis in Controlling Tissue Parasitism and Inflammation in
the Heart and Central Nervous System during Trypanosoma
cruzi Infection. Am J Pathol 2001, 159:1723-1733.
Sartori AMC, Lopes MH, Benvenuti LA, Caramelli B, Di Pietro AO,
Nunes EV, Ramirez LP, Shikanai-Yasuda MA: Reactivation of Chagas' disease in a Human Immunodeficiency Virus-infected
patient leading to severe heart disease with a late positive
direct microscopic examination of the blood. Am J Trop Med
Hyg 1998, 59:784-786.
Sartori AMC, Caiaffa-Filho HH, Bezerra RC, Guilherme CDS, Lopes
MH, Shikanai-Yasuda MA: Exacerbation if HIV viral load simultaneous with asymptomatic reactivation of chronic Chagas'
disease. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2002, 67:521-523.
Verhoeff FH, Brabin BJ, Hart CA, Chimsuku L, Kazembe P, Broadhead
RL: Increased prevalence of malaria in HIV-infected pregnant
women and its implications for malaria control. Trop Med Int
Hlth 1999, 4:5-12.
Whitworth J, Morgan D, Quigley M, Smith A, Mayanja B, Eotu H,
Omoding H, Okongo M, Malamba S, Ojwiya A: Effect of HIV-1 and
increasing immunosuppression on malaria parasitaemia and
clinical episodes in adults in rural Uganda: a cohort study.
Lancet 2000, 23:1051-1056.
Kirchhoff LV, Weiss LM, Wittner M, Tanowitz HB: Parasitic Diseases of the Heart. Frontiers in Bioscience 2004, 9:706-723.
Antunes AC, Cecchini FM, Bolli F, Oliveira PP, Reboucas RG, Monte
TL, Fricke D: Cerebral Trypanosomiasis and AIDS. Arq Neuropsiquiatr 2002, 60:730-733.
Del Castillo M, Mendoza G, Oviedo J, Bianco RPP, Anselmo AE, Silva
M: AIDS and Chagas' disease with central nervous system
tumor-like lesion. Am J Med 1990, 88:693-694.
Del Castillo M, Silva M: Chagas' disease: another cause of cerebral mass in AIDS. Am J Med 1994, 96:301-302.
Ferreira MS, Nishioka SDA, Silvestre MTA, Borges AS, Nunes-Araujo
FRF, Rocha A: Reactivation of Chagas' disease in patients with
AIDS: Report of three new cases and review of the literature. Clin Infect Dis 1997, 25:1397-400.
Gluckstein D, Ciferri F, Ruskin J: Chagas' disease: another cause
of cerebral mass in the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Am J Med 1992, 92:429-432.
Rocha A, Oliveira De Meneses AC, DA Silva AM, Ferreira MS, Nishioka SA, Burgarelli MKN, Almeida E, Turcato G Jr, Metze K, Lopes
ER: Pathology of patients with Chagas' disease and Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1994,
50:261-268.
Baroldi G, Oliviera SJM, Silver MD: Sudden and unexpected
death in clinically 'silent' Chagas' disease. A hypothesis. Int J
Card 1997, 58:263-268.
Sartori AMC, Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Neto VA, Lopes MH: Follow-up
of 18 patients with Human Immunodeficiency Virus infection and chronic Chagas' disease, with reactivation of Chagas' disease causing cardiac disease in three patients. Clin
Infect Dis 1998, 26:177-179.
Braz LMA, Amato Neto V, Carignani FL, De Marchi CR: Trypanosoma cruzi parasitemia observed in immunocompromised
patients: The importance of the artificial xenodiagnosis. Rev
Inst Med Trop S Paulo 2001, 43:113-115.
Perez-Ramirez L, Barnabe C, Sartori AMC, Ferreira MS, Tolezano JE,
Nunes EV, Burgarelli MK, Silva AC, Shikanai-Yasuda MA, Lima JN, DACruz AM, Oliveira OC, Guilherme C, Bastrenta B, Tibayrenc M: Clinical analysis and parasite genetic diversity in Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Chagas' disease coinfections in Brazil. Am
J Trop Med Hyg 1999, 61:198-206.
Silva JS, Barral-Neto M, Reed SG: Aggravation of both trypanosoma cruzi and murine leukemia virus by concomitant infections. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1993, 49:589-597.

Page 5 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2004, 3

23.

24.

25.

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/3/1/2

Subauste CS, Wessendarp M, Portillo JA, Andrade RM, Hinds LM,
Gomez FJ, Smulian AG, Grubbs PA, Haglund LA: Pathogen-specific
induction of CD154 is impaired in CD4+ T cells from Human
Immunodeficiency Virus-infected patients. J Inf Dis 2004,
189:61-70.
Pacheco RS, Ferreira MS, Machado MI, Brito CM, Pires MQ, Da-Cruz
AM, Coutinho SG: Chagas' disease and HIV co-infection: genotypic characterization of the Trypanosoma cruzi strain. Mem
Inst Oswaldo Cruz 1998, 93:165-169.
Marques de Brito CM, Pires MQ, Pacheco RS: Chagas' disease and
HIV co-infection: genetic analyses of two Trypanosoma cruzi
strains under experimental immunosuppression. Kinetoplastid
Biology and Disease 2003, 2:1-7.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 6 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
