<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The origin of a derived superkingdom: how a gram-positive bacterium crossed the desert to become an archaeon</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:16. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-16"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ruben E Valas"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

RESEARCH

Open Access

The origin of a derived superkingdom: how a
gram-positive bacterium crossed the desert to
become an archaeon
Ruben E Valas1*, Philip E Bourne2

Abstract
Background: The tree of life is usually rooted between archaea and bacteria. We have previously presented three
arguments that support placing the root of the tree of life in bacteria. The data have been dismissed because
those who support the canonical rooting between the prokaryotic superkingdoms cannot imagine how the vast
divide between the prokaryotic superkingdoms could be crossed.
Results: We review the evidence that archaea are derived, as well as their biggest differences with bacteria. We
argue that using novel data the gap between the superkingdoms is not insurmountable. We consider whether
archaea are holophyletic or paraphyletic; essential to understanding their origin. Finally, we review several
hypotheses on the origins of archaea and, where possible, evaluate each hypothesis using bioinformatics tools. As
a result we argue for a firmicute ancestry for archaea over proposals for an actinobacterial ancestry.
Conclusion: We believe a synthesis of the hypotheses of Lake, Gupta, and Cavalier-Smith is possible where a
combination of antibiotic warfare and viral endosymbiosis in the bacilli led to dramatic changes in a bacterium
that resulted in the birth of archaea and eukaryotes.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Patrick Forterre, Eugene Koonin, and Gáspár Jékely.

Background
Archaea were first discovered because of a distinct
sequence signature in their ribosomal RNA [1]. This
remains one of the strongest signals found anywhere in
the phylogenetic tree. It was truly a revolution in
thought when the world realized there were two distinct
types of prokaryotes. Besides placement on sequence
trees, there are three major areas where archaea and
bacteria differ greatly. First, the structures of archaeal
and bacterial ribosomes each have many unique proteins
[2]. Second, archaeal membranes are composed of glycerol-ether lipids, while bacterial membranes are composed of glycerol-ester lipids [3]. The glycerols have
different stereochemistries between the superkingdoms
as well. Third, the DNA replication machinery of these
two superkingdoms is very different; many key proteins

* Correspondence: rvalas@ucsd.edu
1
Bioinformatics Program, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

comprising this machinery have a superkingdom specific
distribution [4].
These differences as well as the rRNA tree have convinced most scientists that the root of the tree of life
must be between the prokaryotic superkingdoms. The
proposal that archaea were a different kingdom was originally considered ridiculous because no one could imagine two distinct groups of prokaryotes [5]. In 30 years
we went from the prevailing opinion that the archaea
were similar enough to bacteria to be just prokaryotes,
to the view they are so different they must each be primordial lineages.
Locating the root of the tree of life is a prerequisite
for understanding the origin and evolution of life. There
are many examples of conclusions that become radically
different if one assumes a different rooting of the tree.
For example, the proposal that LUCA was acellular
relies on a rooting between the archaea and bacteria [6].
Each of the estimates for divergence times of the prokaryotic taxa [7] would change drastically if archaea are
not the same age as LUCA.

© 2011 Valas and Bourne; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Several groups have hypothesized that the root of the
tree of life lies within bacteria and place archaea as a
taxon derived from gram-positive bacteria [8-10]. These
hypotheses are often dismissed for two reasons: 1) they
do not agree on a single rooting; 2) there is an immense
gap between archaea and bacteria in sequence trees and
in the systems mentioned above. We addressed the differences between these alternative rooting options in
[11] and concluded that it is possible for them to converge on a single root in the gram-negative bacteria.
The point of this work is to address the objection to
rooting archaea within the gram-positives.
This work is a synthesis of many creative ideas that
came before us; as a result, much of what we say here
has been said in some form before by others. However,
the arrangement of the pieces is, we believe, novel and
sheds light on the strengths and weaknesses of the various rootings of the tree of life. First, we discuss the
ideas in their original form and consider what we see as
the strengths and weaknesses of each. We take the
stance that closing the debate prematurely deprives one
of the ability to the see the many strengths of each of
these hypotheses and the large common ground
between them. We then offer novel data that helps
refine some of these ideas and show the potential for
testing them further.
Radhey Gupta and colleagues created a detailed tree of
life using rarely fixed indels (insertion-deletions) in prokaryotic groups [9]. He concluded that the root of the
tree of life is within the gram-positive bacteria, and he
places archaea as derived from firmicutes. The major
driving force in his scenario is antibiotic warfare. He
argues the differences between archaea and bacteria
coincide with many of the targets of antibiotics produced by gram-positive bacteria. We will review recent
work that demonstrates many antibiotic binding sites
have dramatically different affinities in the superkingdoms. The strength of Gupta’s phylogeny rests on the
fact that many of the branch orders are supported by
several independent indels. However, there are several
points that concern us about Gupta’s hypothesis. First,
we disagree with his polarization of Hsp70 which is
used to justify the root of the tree of life [11]. But the
focus of the present paper is the origin of archaea, so
that debate is probably better left to our other work
[11]. The transition between gram-positives and archaea
must have been a drastic event to be confronted in any
hypothesis that roots the tree of life in bacteria. Antibiotic warfare is a powerful evolutionary force, but in
Gupta’s hypothesis there seems to be a special battle
that resulted in archaea. He does not explain why antibiotic warfare only gave rise to one other prokaryotic
superkingdom. Should not one expect there to be
several different modified ribosomes in response to

Page 2 of 33

antibiotic pressure? We will invoke antibiotic warfare as
a major driver in the origin of archaea, but we feel our
scenario better sets the stage for why this was a unique
event. Antibiotic warfare on its own is not enough to
account for the vast differences between the prokaryotic
superkingdoms, but it certainly was important.
James Lake and colleagues has also constructed a
detailed tree of life using indels [10]. His group has
focused more on indels that can be polarized using
paralogous out-groups. The strength of Lake et al.’s
method is that it provides evidence for derived and
ancestral groups, which we feel is essential for understanding evolutionary histories. The polarizations are
largely independent. This allows one to refine the tree
because a flawed polarization will only affect one part of
the tree. Like Gupta, his group roots archaea within the
firmicutes and provides several independent reasons
why this makes sense [12]. Lake has also proposed that
eukaryotes had a crenarchaeal (eocyte) origin based on a
shared indel in EF-1 and similarities in their ribosomal
structure [13,14]. We find arguments like this appealing
as it is a synthesis of both sequence and structural data.
We discuss the strengths and weaknesses of that particular hypothesis at length below.
The weakness of the indel method in general is the
difficulty in properly aligning paralogs as we argued in
[11]. Fortunately, polarizations are mostly independent;
so changing a polarization does not invalidate the whole
tree, it just refines it. We argue that the refined version
of Lake’s tree is completely consistent with CavalierSmith’s [11]. There are very few universal paralogs, so
this method certainly needs to be supplemented with
other data sources.
Cavalier-Smith has discussed the relationship and origin of the superkingdoms at length [8,15,16]. The major
difference between his hypothesis and that of Gupta and
Lake is the placement of the root in the gram-negative
bacteria. He also roots archaea within or next to the
actinobacteria. Cavalier-Smith constructed his tree by
polarizing multiple types of data including indels, membrane structure, and quaternary structure. Again, if any
one of these polarizations is brought into question it
does not weaken the remainder. Cavalier-Smith included
unique supporting discussions from the prokaryotic fossil. His analysis concludes that there is no fossil to indicate archaea are older than eukaryotes, despite much
evidence that bacteria are older than eukaryotes. That
said, there are several aspects of Cavalier-Smith’s tree
that still do not sit well with us. His hypothesis relies on
the assumption that archaea are holophyletic (eukaryotes are their sisters, not their descendents). He provides some justification for this, but we will discuss
below why we believe this is not a completely safe
assumption at this time. Cavalier-Smith’s rooting of the

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

neomura (his term for archaea, eukaryotes and their last
common ancestor (LAECA)) is in the actinobacteria. He
cites traits shared between the eukaryotes and actinobacteria to support this hypothesis, but they are only
relevant if archaea are holophyletic. We provide an
alternative interpretation of this distribution by invoking
an actinobacterial endosymbiont near the root of eukaryotes. Cavalier-Smith argues thermophily was the major
force that lead to the neomuran revolution. We feel this
argument falls short for the same reason as Gupta’s; it
just does not seem to be a unique enough selective pressure to create a novel superkingdom. Cavalier-Smith
prefers the labels archaebacteria and eubacteria because
he feels the labels archaea and bacteria over emphasize
the difference between these superkingdoms. We disagree, these superkingdoms are fundamentally different.
Despite that, we still believe archaea evolved from
within bacteria.
None of these scenarios adequately addresses the origin of the DNA replication machinery shared between
archaea and eukaryotes. Therefore we invoke the ideas
of Patrick Forterre, who has proposed that cells received
the ability to replicate DNA from viruses. He proposes
this occurred three times; each event resulting in the
birth of a superkingdom [17,18]. The amazing variation
in DNA replication machinery found throughout the
virosphere supports this idea. All extant cells uses double stranded DNA, but viruses can have many other
forms of genetic material (reviewed in [19]). The plasticity of replication in the virus world certainly could lead
to innovations of great importance in the cellular world.
There are two weaknesses to this view in our opinion.
First, it is DNA centric so it necessarily neglects the
many other important differences between the superkingdoms. Second, it is firmly placed within the framework of the classical rRNA tree. Forterre even assumes
eukaryotes are a primordial lineage, as a consequence of
taking the sequence tree too literally. We will demonstrate that this view is also highly informative if archaea
are derived from bacteria. It has also been noted that
other extra chromosomal elements could play key roles
in the evolution of the different DNA replication systems [20], but that discussion is also firmly grounded in
the canonical rooting.
Taking all these viewpoints together, it would seem an
uphill battle to argue that archaea are a derived superkingdom. One needs to provide compelling evidence
archaea are derived, so we will review our data that supports that view. Any hypothesis that addresses how a
bacterium could become an archaeon would have to
explain dramatic changes in membranes, DNA replication, and ribosomes. We will demonstrate that the ribosome can have great plasticity under certain
circumstances. It has been previously argued that the

Page 3 of 33

firmicutes have many of the enzymes needed to make
archaeal membranes [21]. We will invoke viral endosymbiosis to explain the differences in DNA replication. For
the reasons discussed below the hypothesis must work if
archaea are paraphyletic or holophyletic. Finally, it must
also address the rarity of the event that lead to this
revolution. If a hypothesis could do all of these things, it
would make a compelling argument for the origin of
archaea.

Results
Three reasons why archaea are derived

Several large indels are shared between archaea and
gram-positive bacteria, and both groups only have one
membrane [9]. Thus, if there is a direct relationship
between the gram-positives and archaea the root is
either between them, or one is derived from the other.
Every piece of evidence that is polarizable implies
archaea are derived from bacteria. Arguments that
archaea and bacteria are so different that they both
evolved from LUCA sidesteps directionality altogether.
The only recent work that explicitly roots the tree in
archaea is that of Wong et al. [22]. Many of their arguments are based on assumptions about the nature of
LUCA and assumptions of what a primitive state would
look like. None of their arguments are true polarizations. To the best of our knowledge there is no single
polarized argument for an archaeal rooting that is on
par with the three we shall discuss that place archaea as
derived.
The first of these arguments is the proteasome. Proteasomes are self compartmentalized atp-dependent proteases that are found in varying degrees of complexity
across the tree of life. All archaea contain a 20S proteasome which is composed of 28 subunits and is encoded
by at least two genes that are clearly homologs. Therefore the 20S proteasome must be the result of duplication. Cavalier-Smith has argued that the simpler
bacterial homolog HslV (heat shock locus v) could be
duplicated to generate a 20S proteasome [8,16]. Loss of
a subunit in the 20S proteasome would result in an
open proteasome with no ATPase. Such a protein would
lose the essential function of controlled degradation
found in proteasomes, and does not make sense as an
intermediate. It is more likely that the 20S proteasome
is derived from a simpler structure. Cavalier-Smith
excludes the root from archaea because all archaea contain a clearly derived protein.
However, there is a counter argument to that proposal; LUCA had HslV and LACA (last archaeal common
ancestor) is the point in the tree where HslV evolves
into the 20S proteasome (Figure 1A). This would still
exclude the root from the crown archaea, but it still
allows for the possibility that the root is between the

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 4 of 33

Figure 1 Two scenarios for interpreting the three polarizations. A) Under the canonical rooting proteasome evolution would require several
selective sweeps and large-scale loss. The monomer PyrD B would have evolved from one of the more complex quaternary structures, and the
derived insert in EF-2 would occur after LACA. B) Under the gram-negative rooting, Anbu could be ancestral to both HslV and the 20S
proteasome. PyrD could evolve via stepwise increases in structural complexity, and there is no need to invoke extinct stem archaea to explain
the EF_G insert. We believe these transitions argue for a gram-negative rooting.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

extinct stems of archaea and bacteria. Excluding the
root from archaea will never be enough because one can
always invoke stem lineages that show up before the
derived trait. This would imply the 20S proteasome present in actinobacteria is probably the result of a horizontal transfer from archaea. However, we have
observed that the two proteasome genes are often in the
same operon in actinobacteria, but rarely together in
archaea. This weakly polarizes the direction of the horizontal transfer to the archaea.
However, there is stronger evidence that narrows the
root to within the bacteria. Our own work argues that
the Anbu proteasome (or peptidase according to [23]) is
more likely than HslV to be the 20S proteasome’s direct
ancestor based on both sequence data and structure
predictions [24]. This argument is much stronger than
Cavalier-Smith’s because HslV is widespread in the
gram-positives but Anbu appears to be missing in them
altogether (Figure 1B). If the divide between archaea
and bacteria is the earliest split in the tree, and our
hypothesis on proteasome evolution is correct, then
LUCA must have had Anbu. This would mean that all
extant gram-positives need to have lost Anbu while the
gram-negatives (that must be derived from gram-positives in this scenario) somehow retained Anbu. One
would have to invoke a selective sweep of the 20S proteasome in archaea, and of HslV in the gram-positives.
It is plausible that the 20S proteasome outcompeted
Anbu or HslV since they are almost never found in the
same genome. However, Anbu and HslV are found
together in many genomes, which is evidence neither
totally displaces the other in terms of function. Our
arguments about Anbu are based on structure prediction, but a crystal structure could experimentally verify
those predictions. If we are correct it may be the smoking gun for a gram-negative rooting, but even without
that there is ample evidence to support Cavalier-Smith’s
position. Even if HslV is the direct ancestor of the 20S
proteasome the root can still be excluded from all
extant archaeal lineages.
The recent analysis of proteins occur in Anbu’s
operon [23] presented evidence we are wrong in labeling
Anbu a proteasome because it lacks an associated ATPdependent protein required for unfolding substrates.
HslV and the 20S proteasome clearly have associated
ATPases dedicated to unfolding substrates. Therefore
the transition to both of them is easier from Anbu as no
ATPase would have to be lost. The origin of HslV and
the 20S proteasome would both involve the recruitment
of distinct ATPases subunits. Therefore we think this
new work strengthens our hypothesis that Anbu is
ancestral to the 20S proteasome because no intermediate would ever lose the regulatory ATPase. If our
hypothesis is correct, proteasomes would be polyphyletic

Page 5 of 33

if they are defined by the presence of the ATPase subunit as suggested in [23].
The indel in EF-2 shared between archaea and eukaryotes has been polarized using EF-Tu as an outgroup
[25]. Our alignment free analysis of this indel agrees
with the authors’ conclusions despite there being a
sequence artifact in their original alignment [11]. This
polarization robustly excludes the root from within
archaea, but does not narrow it to within bacteria.
In that analysis we also presented a novel structurebased argument for polarizing archaea. The quaternary
structure of PyrD 1B is a heterotetramer across the firmicutes and archaea. We argue that the heterotetramer
is probably derived from the homodimer PyrD 1A based
on the presence of a conserved interface. The monomeric and homodimeric versions are present in the
Gram-negatives and Actinobacteria. PyrD 1B is found
across a gram-positive group and archaea, so it would
have to be present in their last common ancestor, which
is LUCA under the canonical rooting. This could be
explained by the presence of both PyrD 1A and 1B in
LUCA. But that scenario would require PyrD 1A to be
lost in every archaea and some firmicutes, and for there
to be a reversion to the monomeric form, PyrD, across
the gram-negatives and actinobacteria. PyrD 1B is probably derived, so it follows that archaea, firmicutes, and
their last common ancestor are also derived.
The polarization of the indel in EF-2 excludes the root
from the extant archaea. Our novel polarizations of
Anbu and PyrD argue the root is within bacteria. If
these arguments only excluded the root from all extant
archaea one is left wondering why all archaea that are
not clearly derived went extinct. The combination of all
three arguments strongly supports the bacterial rooting
of the tree. If archaea are derived, there must be some
way of reconciling the major differences between them
and bacteria.
Ribosomal revolutions are historical fact

Archaea cluster separately on phylogenetic trees based
on ribosomal RNA [1]. This split has remained robust
in many trees derived since then. We will discuss three
scenarios that can explain this. The first scenario is that
the ribosomal sequences are pretty good molecular
clocks. The great splits seen in the tree reflects this
most ancient divide in cellular life and is in accordance
with the canonical rooting.
The second scenario also does not contradict the
canonical rooting. It goes as follows. The ribosome in
LUCA was incomplete. It did not have all the proteins
found in extant archaea and bacteria, only the core that
is universal between them. The addition of proteins
after the split of the superkingdoms would start a quantum evolutionary event. Some sites would be free to

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

mutate to achieve increased stability, while others would
be under evolutionary pressure to maintain a strict
structure-function relationship. The rate of mutation at
different sites on the ribosome could vary wildly and
exaggerate the true distance between the superkingdoms, even if they do represent a very ancient split.
The third scenario, which we champion here, is that
the bacterial ribosome evolved into an archaeal one.
Again this would be a quantum evolutionary event and
sequences of both rRNA and ribosomal proteins would
evolve rapidly. The point we are trying to make is that
these three scenarios would result in exactly the same
sequence tree. Hence we must look towards independent lines of reasoning to determine which of these scenarios best describes the tree branching.
We can exclude the first scenario by comparing the
structure of the ribosome in archaea and bacteria. In the
50S subunit there are six ribosomal proteins that are in
the same position on the rRNA, but have non-homologous
structures in archaea and bacteria [26,27]. These must
have changed in at least one lineage since LUCA, regardless of LUCA’s nature. Therefore, we should expect that
the distance between archaea and bacteria would be exaggerated due to compensatory mutations in the rRNA and
ribosomal proteins.
It is certainly reasonable to object to the third scenario because it seems implausible that a ribosome
would change so much between superkingdoms, yet
stay so well conserved within a superkingdom. However, there are two examples where we know that ribosome structure has indeed changed significantly.
Mitochondrial ribosomes have changed dramatically
from their bacterial ancestors. They have lost about
half their rRNA and replaced it with additional proteins [28]. The eukaryotic ribosome evolved from an
archaeal one (or technically from some sort of protoarchaeal ribsosome if the archaea are holophyletic).
There are eleven ribosomal proteins found only in the
eukaryotes, nine of which are conserved across the
superkingdom [2], and there is good separation on
rRNA trees between eukaryotes and archaea. In the
two cases where the ribosome structure has changed
we know it changed from another fully functional ribosome. Thus, why would it be out of the question for it
to happen between archaea and bacteria? There are
five ribosomal proteins present across the crenarchaea,
but absent in the euryarchaea [2]. These proteins were
either lost or gained in one of these groups after they
split. In either case there would be a transition
between two complete ribosomes. In each of these
cases we can clearly see that a ribosome can undergo
dramatic changes in macromolecular structure when
there is proper selective pressure (or relaxation of
selective pressure).

Page 6 of 33

The tree presented in [29] was constructed by concatenating 31 universal proteins. 23 of these are ribosomal
proteins and many more are directly involved in translation. Many taxa on the tree cluster together with high
bootstrap values (greater than 80%). However, there
appears to be only three connections between high level
taxa that are supported with that strength. The clustering of crenarchaea and euryarchaea is well supported, as
is the clustering of eukaryotes and archaea. There is also
a long well supported branch between the archaealeukaryal clade and bacteria. We doubt it is a coincidence that these splits correspond to the greatest
changes in ribosomal structure on the tree. It appears
the sequence tree in [29] and rRNA trees could be
merely a reflection of the large changes in ribosomal
structure that have occurred throughout the true tree of
life. This protein set would be expected to work better
as a clock within groups that have the same ribosomal
proteins. Even if ones uses more sophisticated tree
building techniques, such as those in [30], the major
changes in the ribosome are still going to be problematic. The authors concatenated many translational
proteins and the resulting tree supported the paraphyly
of archaea. Eukaryotes were placed near the archaeal
species with the most similar ribosomal structures.
However, a single gene tree of RNA polymerase alpha
subunit (RPOA) supported holophyly in the same study.
This implies some of their results are an artifact caused
by structural changes in a ribosomal revolution.
The third scenario could certainly be weakened if it
was found that all the ribosomal proteins were essential
in bacteria and there was absolutely no way they could
be tinkered with. We examined which ribosomal proteins are essential in eleven different bacterial species
using the Database of Essential Genes [31]. There are
sixteen ribosomal proteins that would need to be lost in
the transition from a bacterium to an archaeon, as they
are found across bacteria but never in archaea. None of
these ribosomal proteins were found to be essential in
all species, which is the first sign it is possible to lose
and replace them. Four of the sixteen proteins are
essential in all species except Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Table 1). Only four of these proteins are essential in
M. tuberculosis, the least of any species in this data set.
To determine whether this portion of the ribosome is
significantly flexible we calculated a p-value assuming a
binomial distribution. The essentiality of each subunit
can be considered a success or a failure. The p-value
measures the odds of seeing at most n essential subunits
in a set of sixteen random ribosomal proteins. The odds
of a random ribosomal protein being essential were estimated as the proportion of ribosomal proteins found to
be essential in that species. This was done to eliminate
experimental biases between the species sets, as some of

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 7 of 33

Table 1 Essentiality of ribosomal proteins
Species

Essential ribosomal proteins

P (ribosome is essential)

Essential but absent in Archaea

P-value

Pseudomonas aeruginosa UCBPP-PA14

32

0.5818

8

0.3373

Escherichia coli MG1655

45

0.8182

10

0.055

Bacillus subtilis 168

51

0.9273

14

0.3263

Mycoplasma pulmonis UAB CTIP

47

0.8545

10

0.0204

Francisella novicida U112

49

0.8909

13

0.2505

Helicobacter pylori 26695

29

0.5273

10

0.8493

Mycoplasma genitalium G37

51

0.9273

14

0.3263

Acinetobacter baylyi ADP1
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv

48
34

0.8727
0.6182

11
4

0.0435
0.0031

Staphylococcus aureus N315

51

0.9273

14

0.3263

Haemophilus influenzae Rd KW20

39

0.7091

9

0.1546

The essentiality of proteins that would need to be lost in the transition from an extant bacterial ribosome to an archaeal one varies from species to species.
M. tuberculosis appears preadapted for the losses that would be necessary in the transition to an archaeon.

the knockout experiments are more thorough than
others. Several species had p-values under .05, but
M. tuberculosis was by far the most significant with a
p-value of .0031. This implies that M. tuberculosis’s
ribosome is under different selective pressure than most
bacteria, and that it is the most preadapted ribosome
in this dataset capable of evolving into an archaeal
ribosome.
It is highly counterintuitive that nearly every universal
protein could be nonessential. The difference between
essential and persistent genes was discussed in [32]. The
authors point out that essentiality differs in the wild and
laboratory settings. Many of the ribosomal proteins
listed as nonessential are still highly deleterious to lose.
But the point is they can be lost under the right circumstances. It might be our proteasome centric view of the
world, but we think the presence of the 20S proteasome
in Mycobacterium could partially explain this observation. It has been proposed the major cost of mutations
and mistranslation comes from dealing with mis-folded
proteins [33]. The ribosomal proteins are among the
most highly translated proteins in the cell, so there is
lots of pressure to ensure they fold correctly. A highly
advanced degradation system, like the 20S proteasome
with a Pup targeting system [34], could greatly relax
that selective pressure. If the initial tinkering is not
lethal, one can easily imagine a scenario where compensatory mutations and structures could rapidly and significantly change the ribosome if there is proper selective
pressure. We will describe such a scenario below.
It has been observed that many bacteria contain paralogs of ribosomal proteins where one form binds Zn
and the other does not [35]. M. tuberculosis has duplicates of several ribosomal proteins, which could explain
why some (but not all) of the ribosomal proteins are not
essential in that genome. The authors note that thermophilic bacteria seem to prefer the Zn binding forms of

the ribosomal proteins, and that there are seven Zn
binding ribosomal proteins conserved across archaea
and eukaryotes that are absent in bacteria. This is consistent with our ideas that major historical changes in
the availability of Zn in the ocean were a significant
constraint on protein structure evolution [36,37]. Bacteria vary their ribosomes to optimize for both high and
low Zn conditions. One can imagine this strategy being
taken to an extreme where the tweaks are not just simple displacements, but larger rearrangements. Increased
availability of Zn, as the ocean became oxic, could be a
factor that made toying with the ribosome favorable for
the early archaea. This combined with the antibiotic
pressures discussed below, could lead to a ribosomal
revolution, just as the presence of two ribosomes leads
to a revolution at the root of eukaryotes.
There is a great divide in DNA replication machinery, but
it can be bridged

The differences between archaeal and bacterial replication machinery is vast [4]. Leipe et al. claim this difference is so great that it is unreasonable to argue that one
prokaryotic superkingdom evolved from the other. They
list four key functions of DNA replication that are performed by completely non-homologous proteins in
archaea and bacteria: the main polymerase’s polymerization domain, the phosphatase that powers the polymerase, the gap filling polymerase, and the DNA primase.
We will argue that the differences between archaea and
bacteria do not imply the root of the tree of life has to
be between them.
We must keep in mind there is some flexibility in the
DNA replication machinery despite the division across
the superkingdoms; consider two examples. First, many
proteobacteria use a PolB family polymerase as a repair
protein [38], which is almost certainly the result of
HGT. Second, PolD appears to have been present in

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

LACA, but was lost in the crenarchaea [39]. These two
examples illustrate major changes in the replication
machinery that occured in DNA based genomes possessing fully functional replication systems. We are arguing
that an even larger event occurred between the prokaryotic superkingdoms. This event entailed viral transfers
and novel innovations, but there are several proteins
whose origins can be better described by vertical inheritance from the gram-positive bacteria which we review
first.
Koonin et al. have demonstrated that many bacterial
proteins have a region that is homologous to the small
subunit of the archaeo-eukaryotic primase [40]. This
domain is present in DNA ligase D from M. tuberculosis, which can act as a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase
[41]. The rest of the protein is homologous to the ATPdependent DNA ligase found in archaea and eukaryotes.
Therefore, DNA ligase D is perfectly preadapted to
replace the primase function of DnaG. The fission of
the two halves of the protein would allow for the preservation of ligase activity while developing enhanced primase activity. A recent analysis of DNA ligases revealed
many transfers between archaea, bacteria and viruses
[42]. This history is very complicated, so it is hard to
say with certainty where the archaeal enzymes originated. The large subunit of the primase may be a true
innovation since it has no detectable bacterial homologs,
but the small subunit of the primase and ATP-dependent DNA ligases both could have been inherited from
the gram-positive ancestors of archaea.
The main helicase in bacteria is DnaB, while archaea
use MCM6. Relevant to this discussion is the recent biochemical analysis of a protein in a prophage element in
Bacillus cereus that has domains homologous to the
MCM6-AAA domain as well as the small subunit of the
archaeal primase [43]. The authors found that this protein was a functional helicase but had no primase activity. The narrow distribution of this prophage element
implies its insertion was probably too recent to play a
role in the origin of archaea. However, it demonstrates
that there can be a selective advantage for a DNA based
genome to take novel DNA handling machinery from a
virus and use it in a different context. We will come
back to this point later.
Bacteria use DnaA to define the origin of replication,
while archaea use Cdc6. These proteins have a homologous AAA+ ATPase domain, but have little similarity
otherwise. However, the bacterial protein RuvB has the
same domain combination as Cdc6. RuvB, Cdc6, and
DnaA were all put in the same superfamily in a recent
classification of AAA+ domains [44]. RuvB is recruited
to Holliday junctions by RuvA where it forms a hexamer
around the DNA [45], just like Cdc6. It is plausible that
Cdc6 evolved from RuvB.

Page 8 of 33

Archaea use a protein called Hjc to resolve Holliday
junctions instead of the bacterial RuvABC system. Hjc is
related to the alternative bacterial system RecU [46].
The only bacteria that use RecU are the firmicutes, and
they also have RuvABC. We argue below archaea are
derived from within the firmicutes. It is possible that
the redundancy in Holliday junction systems allowed
RuvB to drift in function. The homology between RecU
and Hjc could be explained by the presence of a Holliday junction resolvase in LUCA under the canonical
rooting. However, if the hypothetical RNA-DNA hybrid
LUCA proposed in [4] was dealing with Holliday junctions we argue it probably would also need topoisomerases at that point. However, since the distribution of
topoisomerases is different across the prokaryotic superkingdoms [47,48] that would imply the ancestral topoisomerase was displaced in at least one lineage. This
weakens the proposal in [4]. We feel it is more likely
archaeal topoisomerases evolved from bacterial ones as
Cavalier-Smith has proposed [16].
There are certainly large differences between archaeal
and bacterial DNA replication machineries. We have
demonstrated the divide between replication systems has
some flexibility, and this opens the door for a replication
revolution. It is possible to come up with detailed scenarios for how each of the archaeal replication proteins originated. These results are summarized in Table 2. We
will elaborate on this scenario below. However, there are
several archaeal replication proteins that do not appear to
have any homologs in bacteria; namely histones, PolD,
and the large subunit of the archaeal-eukaryal primase.
These are true innovations, but there really are not that
many of them; certainly not enough to make the transitions seem unreasonable in light of the polarizations
presented above.
The proposal of two independent inventions of DNA
replication has recently been challenged [49]. The
authors argue that ribonucleotide reduction is thermodynamically unfavorable, so convergent evolution is
highly unlikely. They note that all ribonucleotide reductases have been shown to have a monophyletic origin.
Finally, they argue that the proteins that are universally
conserved imply a high fidelity replication system in
LUCA that could not have been RNA based. The
hypothesis that the root must be between the superkingdoms is diminished when one combines these arguments with the scenarios we have outlined here.
Are the Archaea Paraphyletic or Holophyletic? We’re
agnostic

So far we have presented several independent arguments
that strongly polarize archaea as a taxa derived from
within bacteria. We have demonstrated that although
there are vast differences between the ribosomes and

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 9 of 33

Table 2 Summary of differences in DNA replication machinery of Archaea and Bacteria
Function

Superkingdom Protein

PDB ID (if
applicable)

SCOP Superfamily
Combination

Origin
recognition

Bacteria

DnaA

1l8q

_gap_,52540,48295

Archaea

Cdc6/ORC (single or
multiple homologues)

1fnn

52540, 46785

Bacteria

DnaC

3ec2

52540*

Replicative
helicase

Proposed Origin in Archaea

evolved from RuvB

Archaea

MCM

3f9v

Helicase loader Bacteria

DnaB

1b79 (n-terminal
domain)

gap, 48024

ssDNA-binding Archaea,
protein
Bacteria

SSB (one subunit)

1o7i

50249

archaeal SSB evolved from bacterial
SSB

Archaea

RPA (one or three subunits)

2b28

50249, 50249, 50249

evolved from SSB

Bacteria
Archaea

DnaG
PriA (small)

1dd9
1zt2:a

56731
56747, gap

viral transfer or vertically inherited

Archaea

PriB(large)

1zt2:b

140914

innovation

Archaea,
Bacteria

PolB (one or multiple
homologues)

1q8i

gap, 56672

viral transfer

Archaea

PolD (small)

none

gap, 56300

innovation

Archaea

PolD (large)

none

gap

innovation

Bacteria

PolC (DnaE)

2hqa

89550, large gap*

DNA sliding
clamp

Archaea

PCNA (three subunits)

3a2f

55979, 55979

Bacteria

b-clamp (dimer)

1ok7

55979, 55979, 55979

Clamp loader

Bacteria

g-Complex (three subunits)

1jr3:a

52540, 48019

Archaea
Archaea

RFC (two subunits)
Fen1

1iqp
1rxw

52540, 48019
88723, 47807

Bacteria
Archaea

RNase H
RNase HII

1jl1
1eke

53098
53098

Bacteria

PolA

53098, 56672

Archaea,
Bacteria
Bacteria

DNA ligase(ATP-DEP)

2kfz (mssing cterminal domain)
1xn9 (human)

117018, 56091, 50249

DNA ligase(NAD-DEP)

1dgs

56091, 50249, 47781

Archaea

gins

2eho(human)

158573

Primase

Replicative
Polymerase

Removal of
primers

Preinitiation
complex

viral transfer

evolved from b-clamp

evolved from g-Complex
viral origin

archaeal RNAase HII evolved from
bacterial RNAase HI

viral origin or vertical inheritance

true innovation

The list of protein functions was compiled from box 1 in [20] and table one in [129]. Italics indicate a probable horizontal transfer to a superkingdom. There are
very few proteins in archaea that are true innovations. Many of their unique replication proteins could be recruited from bacterial or viral systems. A * indicates
the Superfamily database was used to predict domain assignments of PDB entries not yet classified in SCOP.

DNA replication machinery between the prokaryotic
superkingdoms, none of the arguments associated with
their respective proteins seems insurmountable. We will
soon present a novel hypothesis to account for this; but
first we must pinpoint the bacterial roots of archaea.
One cannot properly reason about this rooting without
first discussing whether archaea are paraphyletic (eukaryotes branch within them) or holophyletic (eukaryotes
are their sisters). As there is clearly a relationship
between archaea and eukaryotes it is vital to differentiate between these two scenarios to understand their origins. We will review the current available data, and
argue that for now precise agnosticism seems the best

course, that is, any hypothesis on the origin of archaea
must accommodate both models. That said, we lean
towards holophyly and our hypothesis does as well.
Eukaryotes and Archaea are sister clades under the
standard three domain model. However, James Lake
proposed that eukaryotes had a crenarchaeal (eocyte)
origin based on a shared indel in EF-1 and similarities
in their ribosomal structures [13,14]. This hypothesis
never gained much support because there was little phylogenetic evidence to corroborate it. However, recent
work [30] has shown that there is sequence data that
implies archaea are paraphyletic and eukaryotes have a
crenarchaeal-like ancestor. Conversely, another analysis

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

done around the same time supported a deep branching
archaeon as the host of mitochondria [50], which would
be inconsistent with the eocyte hypothesis. They
demonstrate that eukaryotes inherited both crenarchaeal
and euryarchaeal specific proteins, so ancestry from
either group alone is not enough to explain the eukaryotic protein repertoire. However, several deep branching
archaeal genomes from korarchaeota and thaumarchaea
are now available and change the context of some of
these conclusions [51,52]. Both of these groups appear
to contain a mix of crenarchaeal and euryarchaeal genes
so the observation in [50] could be explained by a member of one of these groups being ancestral to eukaryotes.
Cavalier-Smith’s hypothesis on the origin of the neomura relies on a sisterhood relationship between archaea
and eukaryotes [16]. As discussed below, he mainly
roots the neomura using traits actinobacteria share with
eukaryotes, but not archaea. This only makes sense if
archaea and eukaryotes are sisters, otherwise the traits
should be present in at least some archaea. He lists
eight properties that are unique and ubiquitous in
archaea [16]. All of these traits strongly imply that
archaea are monophyletic. However, most of them do
not differentiate between whether archaea are holophyletic or paraphyletic.
For instance, the unique isoprenoid ether lipids found
in all archaeal membranes are best explained by their
presence in LACA. Eukaryotes have lipids that are more
similar to those of bacteria. It would be more parsimonious for archaea and eukaryotes to be sisters with a
single change in lipid structure. Any other scenario
requires a reversion in eukaryotes back to the bacterial
state. Even though this is not parsimonious, it is not out
of the question because the mitochondrial ancestor
would have all the necessary genes to make bacterial
membranes [53]. We have to admit that does not seem
unreasonable relative to the innovations we are discussing in this work. This certainly seems like a case where
simple parsimony in terms of any one trait, even membrane structure, will be misleading.
The only one of these properties that appeared really
informative in regard to this problem was the split gene
for RPOA. RPOA is the only single gene tree that supported the three domain model in [30], so it is clear
eukaryotes did not get this protein from the mitochondrial ancestor. Reassembling the split gene is highly
improbable, so there is no reason to doubt the fused
genes are monophyletic. This strongly contradicts the
original eocyte hypothesis. However, novel genomic data
has revealed that representatives from the deep branching phyla korarchaeota and thaumarchaeota have the
non-split form of this gene [51,52]. This opens the door
for a more specific version of the eocyte hypothesis
where eukaryotes stem from either of these groups.

Page 10 of 33

Therefore, we have examined what additional data have
to say about these taxa. The branch order between them
has not yet been resolved, but it appears safe to assume
they both branch before the split between crenarchaea
and euryarchaea. This branching is supported by several
phylogenetic trees as well as the non-split RPOA. This
assumption will be key to our subsequent reasoning in
several ways.
It seems impossible to come up with a scenario utilizing all the traits we discuss below that is completely
parsimonious for all traits at the same time. With that
in mind we have tried to reason which traits can be better explained by convergent evolution than others.
When we observe convergent evolution happening at an
indel site we do not consider it informative. Independent loss in any form is much easier than independent
invention. Loss seems to be the rule rather than the
exception in archaea. Both the thaumarchaeota and korachaeaota have traits that were thought to be specific to
either euryarchaea or crenarchaea. For instance euryarchaea use FtsZ for cell division while crenarchaea use
the cdvABC system. Intriguingly the thaumarchaeotal
genomes have orthologs of both of these systems [54].
This implies that the crenarchaea and euryarchaea each
lost one of these systems. This is not the most parsimonious solution, but it is the only one that is consistent
with the apparent branch order of these taxa. Many
other traits have the same distribution pattern. It is
clear that groups of archaea can lose proteins of major
functional importance. We will attempt to address these
distributions in our hypothesis below.
Beyond the EF-1 indel that implies paraphyly, six
highly conserved indels were found to be informative in
describing the relationship between archaea and eukaryotes in [50]. The authors only looked at derived insertions with well conserved sequences. The authors state
that four indels argue for the holophyly of archaea.
There is one indel that is shared between eukaryotes
and crenarchaea, as well as one shared between the euryarchaea and eukaryotes. This implies there was a reversion in at least one lineage or a horizontal transfer.
We have analyzed those six indels as well as EF-1 in
the context of the recently sequenced deep branching
genomes (Table 3). Only the indels that differ between
archaeal groups are useful for determining their branch
order. Therefore we only created alignments that contained archaeal sequences to ensure these indels were
not artifacts created by including eukaryotic and bacterial sequences. Where possible we also used structural
alignments from representatives of the superkingdoms
to further ensure the larger indels were real (a similar
methodology as used in [11]).
First, the reported indel shared between euryarchaea
and eukaryotes in the DNA repair protein RadA appears

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 11 of 33

Table 3 Analysis of potentially informative gene structures in korarchaeota and thaumarchaeota
Sequence
Property

Initially
reported to
support

In Korarchaeota

In Thaumarchaea

Now Supports

Notes

Split RpoA

Holophyly

X

X

Holophyly or paraphyly
(Thaumarchaeota or
Korarchaeota)

7 AA Insert in
EF-1

Paraphyly
(Crenarchaea)

2 aa insert shared X
with
thermoplasma

Paraphyly, but weakly

Must be reversion in Euryarchaea

6 AA insert in
RadA

Paraphyly
(Euryarchaea)

?

?

?

There is probably an artifact in the
original alignment.

1 AA insert in
SecY

Paraphyly
(Crenarchaea)

absent

X

Paraphyly (Crenarchaea or
Thaumarchaeota)

Single Glycine, but anchors are really
nicely conserved

1 AA insert in
proAS

Holophyly

X

absent

Probably holophyly, maybe BLAST reveals Thaumarchaeota may have
paraphyly
HGT from Firmicutes.
(Thaumarchaeota)

7 AA insert in
GatD

Holophyly

X

X

Inconclusive

Completely conserved, but its not clear
the Eukaryotes inherited this from Archaea

2 AA insert in
PBG

Holophyly

Gene is absent

Gene is absent

Inconclusive (bacterial
origin)

This protein is present in bacteria, so the
Thaumarchaeota and Korarchaeota
probably lost it

2 AA insert in
ribosomal S12

Holophyly

X

X

Inconclusive

It is conserved across the Eukaryotes and
Archaea

Each indel was analyzed by creating an alignment of archaeal sequences from BLAST searches. We consider these results to be inconclusive until
thaumarchaeota and korarchaeota are sampled better.

to be an artifact. The euryarchaeal and crenarchaeal
sequences align well in the indel region (Additional File
1; Figure S1). This is important because it was the only
line of evidence in that work that implied a relationship
between euryarchaea and eukaryotes. This new alignment, in conjunction with the split RPOA gene, implies
eukaryotes either descend from within the deep branching archaea or are their sisters.
We also argue that the two reported indels in the alignments of Beta-glucosidase/6-phospho-beta-glucosidase/
beta-galactosidase (PBG) and ribosomal protein S12 are
both uninformative based off the authors’ own analyses
(supplemental data from [50]). The indel in ribosomal
S12 is conserved across all archaea and eukaryotes, so it
implies nothing about their branch order. The indel in
PBG is uninformative because the authors conclude the
eukaryotic version of this gene is probably of bacterial
origin (supplemental data from [50]). Therefore, the state
of the gene in archaea implies nothing about the branch
order of these groups.
Two of the remaining four indels are only a single
residue. The glycine insertion in SecY is present in thaumarchaeota and eukaryotes, but absent in korarchaeota.
That weakly implies a relationship between eukaryotes
and thaumarchaeota. However, given that the insertion
is present in some of the deep branching taxa, but not
in all euryarchaea, implies there was at least one secondary loss of this insertion. This is reasonable since the
insertion is a single glycine residue, and will not have a
dramatic effect on protein structure.

The single residue insertion in prolyl-tRNA aminoacyl
synthetase initially implied archaea were holophyletic,
however, the insert is missing in the thaumarchaeal genomes. When these genes are used to seed a BLAST [55]
search they hit firmicutes more so than other archaea.
This implies a possible horizontal transfer to thaumarchaeota. If so this insert could still support holophyly, but that cannot be concluded with absolute
certainty.
This leaves us with two larger indels in EF-1 and glutamyl-tRNA amidotransferase subunit D (gatD). The
seven AA insert in gatD is well conserved in the
archaeal alignment. A structural alignment with a bacterial homolog reveals this indel is not an artifact caused
by the sequence alignment (data not shown). The phylogenetic tree for this family (presented in the supplemental data of [50]) places archaea and eukaryotes as sisters
with 100% bootstrap support. This is remarkable
because the archaeal proteins have a different domain
combination and quaternary structure than the eukaryotes and bacteria [56]. However, it seems that tree is
too good to be true. We have attempted to verify the
history of this indel, and found that the tree in [50] was
missing a bacterial paralog. E. coli has members of two
paralogous families of l-asparaginases [57], and it
appears only one of them was present in the initial tree.
The tree in Additional File 2; Figure S2 shows that fungi
and the rest of the eukaryotes received the same domain
superfamily from two distinct sources. Their sequences
are mixed in with some bacteria, which implies there

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

were some recent horizontal transfers. This tree is not
well resolved, but it certainly does not support the
notion eukaryotes inherited this protein from their
archaeal ancestor. That, as well as the differences in
domain combination and quaternary structure, implies
this indel is inconclusive with regards to holophyly
verses paraphyly.
EF-1 also appears inconclusive. The insert shared
between crenarchaea and eukaryotes is present in thaumarchaeota, but not korarchaeota. Our alignment
revealed there are actually four different forms of indel
at this site in archaea (Additional File 3; Figure S3).
This implies there is some plasticity in this region in
archaea. This is in contrast to the bacterial alignment
which has no indels in this region. A structural alignment between a bacterial representative from E. coli and
an archaeal one from Sulfolobus solfataricus reveals the

Page 12 of 33

conserved glycines in the sequence alignments are
very close in their position in both forms of this indel
(Figure 2). It is possible there were two insertions near
the root of archaea that preserved the position of that
residue. This indel’s history does not appear to be parsimonious, which weakens it usefulness as a marker.
Therefore, this indel appears to weakly support archaeal
paraphyly, but we consider it inconclusive.
The ribosomal proteins are the other side to this story.
In a previous study, five ribosomal proteins were found
in at least one crenarchaeon, but not in any of the euryarchaea (L38e, L13e, S25e, S26e and S30e) [2]. These,
as well as four others that are not universal in archaea,
are conserved across eukaryotes. We examined what
ribosomal proteins are present in the thaumarchaeal
and korarchaeal genomes (Table 4). It still appears that
Lake is correct that crenarchaea have more similar

Figure 2 Structural alignment of EF-1 and EF-Tu. The structural alignment of EF-1 (1JNYA) and EF-Tu (1EFC) in A, and the corresponding
sequence alignment in B, show the potential for two independent indels in this region that confounds analysis.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 13 of 33

Table 4 Informative ribosomal proteins in thaumarchaeota and korarchaeota
Ribosomal protein

Pfam

Eukaryotes

Bacteria

Crenarchaea

Euryarchaea

Korarchaeota

Thaumarchaeota

L38a

PF01781

182

0

7

0

0

0

L13e

PF01294

202

0

19

0

1

0

S25e

PF03297

195

0

20

0

1

0

S26e

PF01283

189

0

23

1

1

3

S30e

PF04758

179

0

22

0

1

3

L20a

No hits

No hits

Hits

Hits

No hits

No hits

L35ae

PF01247

172

0

5

10

0

0

L14e

PF01929

196

0

16

8

1

0

L34e

PF01199

208

0

21

21

1

0

No hits

No hits

hits

hits

Hits

No hits

L30e

This table was constructed from [2]. The values listed were taken from searches of the Pfam website. Ribosomal proteins L20A and L30E were not well defined in
Pfam so BLAST searches were performed instead. These results support the eocyte hypothesis, but it is plausible that there were independent losses of ribosomal
subunits in archaea based on additional data.

ribosomal proteins to eukaryotes than any other group
of archaea.
The korarchaeota are missing three ribosomal proteins
found in some crenarchaea and eukaryotes. They have
five ribosomal proteins that are present across eukaryotes that are absent in thaumarchaeota. There are two
ways we can interpret this trend. If archaea are paraphyletic then this distribution is best explained by the
invention of ribosomal proteins after LACA. LECA
could branch between the korarchaeota and crenarchaea, before the RPOA gene split. The alternative interpretation is that archaea are holophyletic and the
archaeal ancestor had all the ribosomal proteins that are
in any archaeon and at least one eukaryote. There
would have to be several independent losses of each
these ribosomal proteins. Again this is not parsimonious, but there is evidence it has occurred several
times so we must consider it. Again, it can be argued
that if a protein is present in korarchaeota and crenarchaea, but absent in euryarchaea, it must have been
lost. The archaeal ribosomal proteins are more dispensable than their counterparts in the other superkingdoms
[2], so they might not be a reliable marker for rooting
eukaryotes in archaea.
For now it seems the only reasonable stance in light of
all of this evidence is agnosticism. Only when thaumarchaeota and korarchaeota are sampled better, and
their positions in the archaeal tree are determined
robustly, will it be possible to state with confidence
whether archaea are holophyletic or paraphyletic. We
might always be left trying to weigh whether reversion
of ribosomal proteins or indels is the more parsimonious scenario. However, several of these traits clearly
exclude the root of eukaryotes from within crenarchaea
and euryarchaea. Therefore, any hypotheses on the origin of eukaryotes that invokes specific taxa within those
groups can be rejected with confidence (for a discussion

of the many hypotheses on this subject see [58]). However, it may be possible those scenarios could be
reworked to fit thaumarchaeota or korarchaeota once
they are sampled better.
Weakening the neomuran hypothesis

Now that we have argued for the true distance between
the superkingdoms we can begin to address how it
could be bridged. From our discussion above we feel we
must be cautious about declaring the debate closed on
the holophyly of archaea. Therefore, we are more interested in traits shared between a group of bacteria and
all archaea than those shared with eukaryotes. CavalierSmith has presented fourteen reasons why the root of
the neomura is probably within or next to actinobacteria
[16]. Two of these traits are shared between actinobacteria and neomura, but the other twelve are only shared
between eukaryotes and actinobacteria. Under this scenario these twelve traits would be lost in the ancestor of
archaea, which implies archaea are holophyletic. We will
review these fourteen traits, and argue that placing the
archaeal ancestor in the bacilli makes more sense. We
use the term neomura to refer to the clade of eukaryotes
and archaea, but when we refer to the neomuran
hypothesis we refer to Cavalier-Smith’s rooting of that
clade in the actinobacteria.
The first piece of evidence that places the neomuran
root near actinobacteria is the proteasome. Actinobacterial and archaeal 20s proteasomes are well separated
on phylogenetic trees which implies the presence of the
20s proteasome across these groups is not the result of
recent horizontal transfers. Recently 20S proteasomes
have also been found in sequenced genomes from verrucomicrobia [59] and leptospirillum metagenomic
sequences [60]. This somewhat weakens the actinobacterial argument for ancestry, as archaea could have
inherited a proteasome from these other groups.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

However, these recent findings do not weaken the polarization argument; it just excludes the root from these
additional groups.
The second trait apparently shared between actinobacteria and all neomura is the post translational addition
of CCA to the 3’ end of tRNAs. The gene performing
that function in archaea is tRNA CCA-pyrophosphorylase (protein cluster PRK13300 [61]). One of the
domains, PAP/Archaeal CCA-adding enzyme, does not
hit any bacteria in the Superfamily database [62]. Since
the CCA addition is performed by nonhomologous
enzymes this is not strong evidence for rooting neomura. There is also an analogous enzyme conserved
across bacilli (protein cluster PRK13299). Even if
archaea inherited this function from their bacterial
ancestors, it is not clear which gram-positive group provided it.
Now we must address the remaining dozen traits
shared between actinobacteria and eukaryotes. Although
there were initial reports of sterol synthesis in the actinobacteria [63,64], the latest work has found no evidence for a complete pathway [65]. The authors report
that the few cases of the full pathway in bacteria (all
outside the actinobacteria) are probably the result of
horizontal transfer. However, they find several sterol
synthesis enzymes are present in many actinobacteria.
They conclude these are probably the result of a transfer
from eukaryotes, but this is not supported by their trees,
which show good separation between eukaryotes and
actinobacteria. Several sterol enzymes appear to have
been inherited vertically from actinobacteria to eukaryotes. This is certainly consistent with Cavalier-Smith’s
hypothesis. This is a good example of the dangers of
closing the debate on the position of the root too soon.
Their trees clearly support an alternative hypothesis, but
that data is buried in the supplemental material without
discussion of the opposing view.
Initial reports also claimed the presence of chitin in
actinobacteria [66]. However, there is no gene for chitin
synthase in actinobacterial genomes. Several of them
have chitinase which breaks chitin down. Also, chitin is
found in metazoa and fungi, but not in archaeplastida
which implies this enzyme was not in LECA.
It is true that actinobacteria have many serine/threonine signaling systems related to cyclin-dependent
kinases [67]. This would be a key preadaptation to the
cell cycle. However, it has recently been shown that
Bacillus subtilis also has an extensive network of such
regulation [68]. Therefore this line of evidence is consistent with either gram-positive group being ancestral to
neomura.
Phosphatidylinositol is an interesting case. Recent
work on this subject confirms the presence of phosphatidylinositol synthase as well as the eukaryotic form of

Page 14 of 33

cardiolipin synthase in many actinobacteria [69]. These
enzymes are paralogs. We could not create a quality
tree for this superfamily because the alignment was
of low quality. However BLAST searches showed a
good separation between prokaryotic and eukaryotic
sequences that implies this is not the result of a recent
HGT. It is difficult to determine exactly what family
each prokaryotic homolog belongs to, so it is hard to
say with certainty what other groups of bacteria have
phosphatidylinositol. It is certainly possible eukaryotes
inherited phosphatidylinositol from actinobacteria.
Some actinobacteria do have an a-amylase with similar primary structure to the form found in metazoa, but
a recent comprehensive study found several other bacteria that did as well [70]. The authors concluded this
was probably the result of a horizontal transfer due to
their position in the phylogenetic tree as well the extremely sparse distribution of this form in actinobacteria.
Therefore, this is not evidence for actinobacterial ancestry of the neomura.
The fatty acid synthetase (FAS) complex found in actinobacteria is unique among bacteria in that it is the
same form as found in some fungi [71]. These fungi
have the FAS complex split into two genes, but actinobacteria have it fused. Our phylogenetic trees are consistent with actinobacterial ancestry (Figure 3). However,
the distribution of the fungal type complex in eukaryotes does not conclusively prove that this enzyme had
to be in LECA. The only group outside the Fungi with
this complex are stramenopiles. However, the animal
type FAS is also present in some alveolata, so there
could be some functional displacements. Actinobacteria
probably played a role in the evolution of this enzyme
in eukaryotes, but not necessarily via the neomuran
hypothesis.
The argument that the exospore structure of actinobacteria could be a precursor to eukaryotic spore structures seems sound [72], but we are unable to locate a
list of proteins involved in exospore formation. Without
specific proteins homologs we cannot begin to evaluate
this with bioinformatics. However, this argument
becomes irrelevant if one invokes a viral ancestor of the
nucleus as in [73].
Cavalier-Smith has also suggested that the C-terminal
HEH domain found in the Ku proteins of some actinobacteria is ancestral to the HEH domain found in the
eukaryotic Ku70 protein. However, the sequence analysis
in [74] conclusively demonstrates eukaryotes did not
inherit the HEH domain from actinobacteria. This
domain is very compact and common. Therefore, it is
not out of the question that it was recruited twice to
the C-terminus of similar structures. Consequently we
do not take this as evidence that eukaryotes inherited
Ku from actinobacteria.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 15 of 33

Figure 3 Maximum likelihood tree of fungal type Fatty Acid Synthase (FAS) complex. This tree implies eukaryotes did not get FAS from a
recent transfer, but it is also not clear whether or not it was in LECA. Circles indicate the split form of the gene. This gene is split in two
different places in the fungi indicated by the yellow and red circles.

Several traits initially listed as unique to actinobacteria
are now found in enough other bacterial groups to now
be considered ambiguous markers. Actinobacteria do
have tyrosine kinases, but they have recently been put
into a bacterial specific family, BY-kinase [75]. This
family is present across actinobacteria, firmicutes, and
proteobacteria, so it is does not support an actinobacterial rooting exclusively in the neomura. Many groups of

bacteria have HU (histone H1 homologs) according the
Superfamily database. This protein is relatively short, so
we should not expect sequence to resolve its history. It
is possible this protein was inherited from actinobacteria, but there are too many other possibilities to state
that with certainty. Calmodulin-like proteins are now
found in many bacteria, so this trait is not specific
enough to root neomura near actinobacteria as Cavalier-

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 16 of 33

Smith now admits [8]. The Superfamily database reveals
that trypsin-like serine proteases are present in many
groups of bacteria, but absent in archaea. This appears
to be another trait that is too general to be useful for
rooting neomura.
Evidence that supports a firmicute ancestry for archaea

Skophammer et al. compiled several reasons to argue
archaea are derived from bacilli [12]. There is an insert
in ribosomal protein S12 that is present in archaea and
bacilli (and maybe chloroflexi). Skophammer et al. conclude this indel is derived, but we argue elsewhere this
polarization is flawed [11]. The insertion appears well
conserved between archaea and bacilli regardless of
whether it is ancestral or derived.
Skophammer et al. also note that there is a shared
deletion between firmicutes and archaea in PyrD. Our
own work strengthens this connection by considering
the quaternary structure of PyrD. The form that has the
deletion also has an additional subunit, PyrK. The
sequence and structure of the firmicute PyrD 1B are
both shared by archaea. Our phylogenetic analysis of
this protein implies this is not the result of recent horizontal transfers [11].
Skophammer et al. note that many enzymes involved
in the biosynthesis of unique archaeal membranes have
previously been found in firmicutes [21]. The isoprenoid
lipid precursors of archaeal membranes are made via
the mevalonate pathway, which is five enzymes long.
The KEGG database [76] reveals the entire mevalonate
pathway is present in several bacilli as well as some actinobacteria (KEGG module M00191). The unique stereochemistry of archaeal membranes is determined by the
enzyme geranylgeranylglyceryl phosphatase. Homologs
of this enzyme are present in bacilli (protein cluster
PRK04169), but appear to be absent in actinobacteria.
The authors of an analysis of archaeal membrane biosynthesis propose that archaea became genetically isolated from bacteria once their membrane chemistry
changed [77]. They suggest that archaea branched early
from within bacteria, but their hypothesis is also consistent with a later gram-positive origin. Cavalier-Smith’s
own analysis [8] suggests that eukaryotic enzymes that
make n-linked glycoproteins, which are necessary for
the loss of peptidoglycan, evolved from the firmicute
specific gene EspE. Therefore, for several reasons, the
firmicutes are the bacterial group most preadapted to
gain archaeal membranes.
Homologs to ribosomal proteins L30e and L7ae are
found across firmicutes. This is evidence of the link
between firmicutes and archaea. Pfam [78] shows this
family in several other groups, but many firmicutes contain two copies of this family. One of these paralogs has
been characterized as a ribosomal protein, but neither is

Figure 4 Alignment of L7Ae paralogs in archaea and
firmicutes. This tree is consistent with a firmicute origin for two
archaeal ribosomal proteins.

essential [79]. We constructed phylogenetic trees to see
if they are consistent with vertical inheritance (Figure 4).
There is good separation between the paralogs in firmicutes, which implies the duplication occurred early in
firmicutes. All archaeal and eukaryotic genomes contain
at least two copies of this family. The phylogenetic tree
of the archaeal and firmicute sequences places the firmicute paralogs between the archaeal paralogs. The firmicute sequences are paraphyletic, albeit with very weak
support. If these proteins are the result of independent
duplications the archaeal sequences should cluster
together, not appear on opposite ends of the tree. However, it is possible one of the archaeal sequences evolved
rapidly after duplication.
One of the paralogs in Bacillus subtilis was found to
localize to a different portion of the ribosome than
either of the archaeal paralogs [79]. The proteins
would not only have to jump superkingdoms for a
transfer to occur, they would also have to bind to a
different region of the rRNA without interfering with
ribosome assembly. We argue it would be less disruptive for a protein already present to gradually bind a
different piece of rRNA. The separation between the
superkingdoms in the phylogenetic trees also argues
against HGT. If this is the result of vertical inheritance
only two possibilities explain it. Either the firmicutes
are ancestral to archaea, or the root lies between
archaea and firmicutes. Our polarization of PyrD 1B’s
quaternary structure eliminates the latter rooting as a
possibility. Thus this tree appears to support a firmicute ancestry for archaea, although it may just be the
result of rapid evolution of structures in different contexts in the ribosome.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

As discussed above, almost all the firmicute genomes
have a unique Holliday junction resolvase, RecU, which
is only found sparsely in other bacterial groups. It is
homologous to the archaeal Holliday junction resolvase,
Hjc [46]. Therefore the firmicutes have a DNA repair
mechanism more similar to archaea than any bacterial
group.
Hsp90 is missing in all archaeal genomes, so its presence across eukaryotes and bacteria implies it was
inherited from the mitochondrial ancestor. However, a
detailed analysis of this family did not reveal a relationship between eukaryotic and proteobacterial sequences
[80]. Instead, the eukaryotic sequences branch within
the gram-positive bacteria. The authors argue this supports the classical neomuran hypothesis, but eukaryotes
are sisters to firmicutes rather than actinobacteria in
that tree (albeit with moderate support). This would
slightly favor firmicutes over actinobacteria ancestry. In
either case it supports the view that the archaeal ancestor lost Hsp90.
Peroxisomes: the red herring?

There are several traits present in either firmicutes or
actinobacteria that argue they are ancestral to either
eukaryotes or archaea. The only trait that argues actinobacteria are ancestral to the neomura is the proteasome.
Several more traits make compelling arguments that
actinobacteria are ancestral to eukaryotes, but certainly
not the dozen traits listed in [16]. In Cavalier-Smith’s
most recent version of the neomuran hypothesis he concludes firmicutes contributed a significant number of
genes to the neomuran ancestor [81]. He proposed neomura originated as sisters of actinobacteria, and both of
these taxa are descendents of firmicutes. That proposal
is dependent on his argument that actinobacteria are
derived from firmicutes, which is one of the less developed ideas in [8]. We believe he is wrong in his assertion that our analysis of the indel in ribosomal S12 [11]
does not support firmicute ancestry of archaea. It is
only shared (and well conserved) between bacilli and
archaea regardless of the polarization of that indel.
Cavalier-Smith is also not aware of the arguments about
L7AE paralogs and RecU we present here for the first
time. So we are left with a stronger list of reasons supporting firmicute ancestry and a weaker list for actinobacterial ancestry. However, there are still some key
eukaryotic proteins that appear to have descended from
actinobacteria. We will try to reconcile this apparent
anomaly.
The peroxisome is an organelle with a single membrane, found across eukaryotes, that has various oxidative functions including the synthesis of some lipids
[82]. They have been observed to divide independently
of the rest of the cell, which initially led someto

Page 17 of 33

question whether they had an endosymbiotic origin
[83,84]. Two recent studies both concluded that the peroxisome was likely derived from the endoplasmic reticulum [85,86], which led those initial proponents of
peroxisomal endosymbiosis to abandon that idea.
However, [85] found that many peroxisomal proteins
likely originated in cyanobacteria, a-proteobacteria, or
actinobacteria. The authors suggest that the proteobacterial genes were probably transferred from the mitochondria, which is consistent with observations that
mitochondrial genes are often retargeted to other organelles [87]. However, recent work argues for an endosymbiotic origin of the peroxisome from an actinobacterium
[88]. These latter authors demonstrate that at least two
proteins imported into the peroxisome are of actinobacterial origin, and that the peroxisomal proteome has
higher average BLAST scores to actinobacteria than any
other group of prokaryotes. They argue that the retargeting of mitochondrial proteins after their genes migrate to
the host’s genome is easier than de novo targeting of
peroxisomal proteins. They propose this masks the true
history of the peroxisome.
The literature proposes two scenarios to explain the
origin of the peroxisome: either the peroxisome was an
endosymbiont, or actinobacteria were not endosymbionts. Clearly there is a third possibility; there was an
actinobacterial endosymbiont, but the peroxisome is not
a descendent of that membrane. That is to say, genes of
an endosymbiotic origin were targeted into the peroxisome, but historically they are foreigners there. How
could this be? A primitive peroxisome derived from the
endomembrane system would be beneficial because it
would separate dangerous oxidative chemistry from the
rest of the cell. Proteins would be targeted to the organelle with relative ease since that system would be
developed through mitochondrial endosymbiosis. Genes
would be copied from the actinobacterial endosymbiont
to the host genome (but not necessarily lost in the actinobacterium), and then imported into the peroxisome.
This would be advantageous because some of these
reactions would do better in that specialized environment rather than their original host. Potentially there
would be less cost involved in maintaining an organelle
that already existed versus an entire endosymbiont.
Once enough genes were present in the host, the actinobacterial endosymbiont would essentially be a parasite,
and complete gene loss would be beneficial.
Contrast the peroxisome to organelles such as plastids
and mitochondria which retained both genomes and
membranes long after they became organelles. Some
have questioned why some organelles retain any genes
at all [89]. These authors note that most genes retained
in plastids and mitochondria are membrane-spanning
proteins involved in core photosynthetic and respiratory

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 18 of 33

systems. They agree with an earlier proposal that these
proteins must be kept in the organelle to be able to
quickly respond to, and balance, redox gradients [90]. In
other words, plastids and mitochondria have retained
membranes and genes because their functions are centered on membrane based chemistry. The stripped down
endomsymbionts perform these functions better than a
novel organelle initially could, so they are left with a few
essential genes and membranes they inherited from
endosymbiosis. These genes come with a high cost
because the organelles need to import the machinery to
translate them as well as the machinery to replicate the
genes that encode them. Therefore one can hypothesize
that other endosymbionts whose functions are not as
membrane-centric could be replaced by organelles that
are not of endosymbiotic origin. Unfortunately, plastids
and mitochondria have shaped our expectations that
endosymbionts will leave both membranes and genomes
behind. We believe this is an over simplistic expectation.
We argue actinobacterial endosymbiosis accounts for
the traits shared between eukaryotes and actinobacteria,
as well the phylogenetic trees that place actinobacteria
as sisters of the peroxisomal proteins. The fact that
numerous mitochondrial proteins are imported into the
peroxisome is evidence this endosymbiosis occurred
after mitochondrial endosymbiosis. This would reconcile
the apparently conflicting signals in terms of which
gram-positive group is ancestral to archaea and

eukaryotes. We find this scenario more reasonable than
invoking an extinct lineage of gram-positives that has all
the traits listed in Table 5 and Table 6. However, if a
genome is sequenced that contains actinobacterial specific traits as well as firmicute specific traits listed here we
would have no need to invoke endosymbiosis. It is also
possible to reconcile the canonical rooting with the
traits shared by actinobacteria by invoking this endosymbiotic hypothesis.
Viruses as the missing link between the prokaryotic
superkingdoms

Now that we have argued for the true distance between
archaea and bacteria, the time has come to cross that
desert. As we have asserted above, this is a unique event
in evolution, so we must properly set the stage. The
selective pressures associated with extreme environments and antibiotic warfare are ancient, however, they
cannot cause a revolution on their own, so a significant
relaxation in selective pressure is necessary. We argue
that viral endosymbiosis could relax selective pressure
enough to start such a revolution.
Koonin has observed that the PolB family of polymerases are the most common DNA polymerase in
viruses [91]. Koonin et al. also observed that archaeoeukaryotic DNA primase was a hallmark viral protein
[19]. This hints at some connection in DNA replication
between archaea, eukaryotes, and viruses. We examined

Table 5 Summary of data used to support actinobacterial ancestry of archaea
Trait

Supports actinobacterial
ancestry of Neomura

Supports actinobacterial
Ancestry of Eukaryotes

Exclusive to Actinobacteria among Bacteria

20s proteasome
CCA added posttranscriptionally

Yes

Yes

In a few other bacterial genomes

No

No

Also in Firmicutes

Sterols

No

Yes

In a few other bacterial genomes (HGT), but only ones
that could be vertical are actinobacterial

Chitin

No

No

Not in Actinobacteria

Serine/threonine
signaling system

No

Yes

In Firmicutes too

Tyrosine Kinase

No

Yes

In many bacteria

H1 linker histone

No

Yes

In many bacteria

Calmodulin

No

Yes

In many bacteria

Phosphatidylinositol

No

Yes

Apparently unique to Actinobacteria, but related enzymes
in other groups

Serine proteases

No

Yes

In many bacteria

Primary structure of
a-amylase

No

No

In a few other bacterial genomes

Maybe

Exclusive to actinobacteria

Fatty Acid synthetase No
complex
Exospore formation

No

Yes

Exclusive to actinobacteria

HEH domain in Ku
protein

No

No

Exclusive to actinobacteria

Many of these traits argue for an actinobacterial role in eukaryogenesis but not the origin of archaea. This list of informative characters is taken from [16].

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 19 of 33

Table 6 Summary of data that supports bacilli ancestry for archaea
Trait

Supports Bacilli as ancestor of
Neomura

Supports Bacilli as ancestor of the
Archaea

Exclusive to Bacilli among Bacteria

Ribosomal S12 insert

Yes

Yes

Might be also be in Chloroflexi

Geranylgeranylglyceryl
Phosphatase

No

Yes

Also in Bacteroides

Mevanolate pathway

Yes

Yes

In a few other bacterial genomes

Ancestors of n-linked
glycoprotein

Yes

Yes

Closest hits to eukaryote genes are all
from Bacilli

PyrD 1B

No

Yes

In Firmicutes and some Thermotogae

Two L7AE paralogs

Yes

Yes

Exclusive to Firmicutes

RecU

Yes

Yes

Exclusive to Firmicutes

The bacilli are more similar to archaea in terms of DNA repair, ribosome structure, and lipid metabolism than any other group of bacteria.

the distribution of all protein families in Pfam [78] that
originated at the root of archaea and eukaryotes to see
if this connection could be extended. We defined Pfam
familiess that were present in at least 90% of archaeal
genomes (46 at the time) and 90% of eukaryotic genomes (35 at the time) and in less than 50% of bacterial
genomes (939 at the time) as originating at the root of
archaea and eukaryotes. A 90% cutoff is strict enough to
imply that the protein was present in LAECA, while a
50% cutoff is loose enough to accommodate recent

horizontal transfers. Most of these Pfam families are
well below the 50% cutoff in bacteria.
By this definition there are 74 Pfam domains that originated in LAECA; 24 of these are found in at least one
viral genome (Table 7). On average each of these Pfam
domains is present in 36.38 viral genomes (14.36 if one
excludes PolB). As an approximate measure of the significance of this result we took 10000 random samples
of 74 Pfam domains that are found in at least one cellular genome to see how often one finds 24 or more in at

Table 7 Pfam proteins that originated near LAECA and their distribution in the viral world
PFAM ID

Description

Archaea

Bacteria

Eukaryotes

Viruses

PF00136

DNA polymerase family B

45

195

31

384

PF03104

DNA polymerase family B, exonuclease domain

45

210

31

173

PF01068

ATP dependent DNA ligase domain

45

372

31

50

PF01096
PF00867

Transcription factor S-II (TFIIS)
XPG I-region

45
43

1
0

31
31

44
37

PF04566

RNA polymerase Rpb2, domain 4

45

0

32

31

PF04567

RNA polymerase Rpb2, domain 5

45

0

32

31

PF01896

Eukaryotic and archaeal DNA primase small subunit

44

159

31

30

PF04675

DNA ligase N terminus

44

167

31

20

PF04679

ATP dependent DNA ligase C terminal region

44

248

31

20

PF00752

XPG N-terminal domain

43

0

31

16

PF00705
PF01191

Proliferating cell nuclear antigen, N-terminal domain
RNA polymerase Rpb5, C-terminal domain

45
44

0
0

33
32

10
5

PF00352

Transcription factor TFIID (or TATA-binding protein, TBP)

45

0

33

4

PF01194

RNA polymerases N/8 kDa subunit

45

0

30

3

PF01981

Peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase PTH2

45

26

30

3

PF00382

Transcription factor TFIIB repeat

45

0

32

3

PF03876

RNA polymerase Rpb7-like, N-terminal domain

42

0

31

2

PF08542

Replication factor C

44

0

31

2

PF02933
PF01599

Cell division protein 48 (CDC48), domain 2
Ribosomal protein S27a

45
41

18
0

31
32

1
1

PF02359

Cell division protein 48 (CDC48), N-terminal domain

45

44

32

1

PF01873

Domain found in IF2B/IF5

45

0

33

1

PF01253

Translation initiation factor SUI1

45

287

33

1

The Pfam familiess that originated in LAECA are more common in viruses than those that originated in LBCA.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

least one viral genome. None of the random sets had
that many viral Pfam domains, which implies this set is
significantly enriched in viral proteins. However, we
must keep in mind that our sampling of the viral world
is still highly biased (discussed in [91]) and that viral
genomes evolve rapidly. Viral genomes are sampled so
poorly that none had the MCM domain from Pfam,
even though it is found in a prophage region of some
bacilli as discussed above. Further, 18 of the remaining
Pfam proteins that originate in LAECA are ribosomal,
which we assume are less advantageous for viruses to
encode than the DNA replication machinery (although
we did find several ribosomal proteins in viruses in
this set).
We can also verify whether this result is significant by
looking at the set of proteins that would be present in
LBCA (last bacterial common ancestor), but not LEACA
under the same definition, that is, Pfam domains present
in at least 90% of bacterial genomes and less than 50%
of archaeal and eukaryal genomes. There are 106 such
Pfam domains and 15 of them are found in at least one
viral genome (p-value 0.2457). Each of those 15 is in an
average of 8.33 viral genomes. It should be noted that
this is an underestimate for LBCA’s content since there
are so many parasitic bacteria with genomic sequences
available. However, in general viruses share more Pfam
domains with LAECA than LBCA.
Koonin proposes, based on PolB’s distribution, that
archaea arose from an acellular ancestor and then
retained the more ancient polymerase [91]. We find this
view hard to reconcile with the three independent arguments for the derived nature of archaea provided above.
Forterre has argued that DNA originated from a viral
endosymbiosis in each of the superkingdoms [17], but
our data argues against that scenario for the origin of
bacteria. We propose the alternative hypothesis that
viral endosymbiosis occurred in bacteria and gave rise
to archaea. This virus would supply the missing link in
terms of DNA replication machinery between the prokaryotic superkingdoms. We think this would have to
be endosymbiosis and not just a horizontal transfer
given the distribution and interdependencies of these
systems in cellular life.
To a first approximation there are three components
that define the propensity of a genome to get permanently damaged. The first is the environment. Many different extreme environments are damaging to DNA,
including radiation, high temperature and desiccation
[92]. Second is the size of the genome. The larger the
piece of DNA, the more likely damage will occur, and
the more it must be mediated. Third is the state of the
active repair system. If active repair is poor even rare
damage events will eventually accumulate. Therefore, we
argue that systems that are extreme in any one of these

Page 20 of 33

three components must routinely deal with DNA
damage during replication.
Archaea, in general, fit the description of extremophile
better than any other major taxa. It has been proposed
that the unifying trait of all archaea is adaptation to
chronic energy stress [93]. The author argues that
archaea outcompete bacteria in niches that are under
chronic stress. Thus archaea have become successful in
dealing with environments that other superkingdoms
cannot handle. The author noted that archaea do better
in environments that are consistently extreme, and are
outcompeted by bacteria in environments that fluctuate.
A corollary of chronic energy stress is chronic DNA
damage. Many of the extremophilic environments
archaea have made home severely damage DNA. On the
other hand, bacteria may face occasional stressful situations and require DNA repair. Therefore it is disadvantageous for bacteria to have their repair systems on all
the time. Conversely, archaea need to constantly repair
their DNA, so it would make sense if the line is blurred
between their replication and repair systems. An example of this prepare for the worst strategy is the unique
ability of PolB to read ahead and stall replication if a
uracil is encountered in archaea [94].
In terms of large genomes eukaryotes win hands down
(see figure 1 in [95]). A polymerase is more likely to
encounter damage somewhere in the replication of these
large genomes than a prokaryote with a smaller genome
in a similar environment. This is supported by evidence
that eukaryotes use a separate repair system during
replication of the large non-transcribed regions of their
genome [96,97].
What other situation besides chronic DNA stress and
large genome size would put similar pressure on the
DNA replication machinery? We argue, somewhat counter intuitively, that a total lack of active DNA repair systems would create a similar situation. Again it is
optimal for the replicative system to expect to encounter
damage. Viruses fit that description perfectly as they are
unable to actively maintain their genomes without their
host.
If the repair systems were turned on more and more
of the time, the main replicative system would become
free to drift. Under this scenario the ancestors of
archaea could mix and match bacterial repair and replication proteins with several molecular innovations and
some transfers from the viral endosymbiont. The end
result could be a system that is more robust to chronic
stress. The canonical rooting implies that the components of the replication machinery that are homologous,
but not orthologous, were independently recruited from
proteins that initially processed RNA. Under either scenario the same amount of molecular innovation is
required. The question then becomes, is it easier to

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

innovate function in a RNA based organism or a DNA
based organism under relaxed selective pressure? We
argue that the difference cannot be quantified, as both
scenarios predict exactly what we observe: some proteins are orthologs, some are homologs, and some are
unrelated. Therefore the way to tell the difference
between these scenarios is independent lines of evidence. The polarizations presented above imply the bacterial repair machinery was recruited to become the
replication machinery of archaea.
It is also tempting to speculate that many of the features shared between viruses and the eukaryotic nucleus
described in the viral eukaryogenesis hypothesis
[73,98,99] could be extended to this hypothesis. Bell
notes many similarities between nuclei and viral replication factories. One can imagine the ancestry of these
traits going back to LAECA with some being lost in
archaea, and others not developing until the root of
eukaryotes. This is only consistent with our hypothesis
if archaea are holophyletic, but for now it is certainly
worth considering.
The greatest battle ever fought

So far we have demonstrated that there is robust evidence that archaea are a derived superkingdom. We
have shown the bacterial ribosome could have enough
plasticity to evolve into an archaeal one. We have presented evidence that there is some link between DNA
replication in archaea, eukaryotes and viruses that could
be the result of endosymbiosis. Now we will try to combine these into the larger story of why a bacterium
would evolve into an archaeon.
As we discussed above, we feel the greatest weakness
of Gupta’s invocation of antibiotics is it is not of sufficient evolutionary pressure to cause a revolution on the
scale necessary to create the differences between the
prokaryotic superkingdoms. Observations of the vast differences in DNA replication machinery and evidence of
a viral endosymbiosis in a bacillus before LEACA will
set the stage for our subsequent hypothesis.
In the traditional antibiotic battle the gram-positives
are capable of evolving resistance to each other. This
leads to what is commonly referred to as a Red Queen
game [100]. Neither group ever really gets ahead in the
long-term war as each defensive innovation is matched
by an offensive one. But that does not mean there are
never winners in battles on shorter time scales. Winning
a battle is not a good thing in the long run. The winners
will increase in population size and consume more of an
environment’s resources. The corollary is that they
become a better target for less dominant species to kill.
If a species evolves a more resistant ribosome it just
puts more pressure on the rest of the community to hit
other targets in that species.

Page 21 of 33

One can imagine a firmicute deeply entrenched in
such warfare endowed with the gift of a complete and
novel replication system from a virus. This is supported
by the distribution of viral Pfam proteins discussed
above. The virosphere contains so much diversity that
even rare combinations of genes would eventually end
up in the same capsid at the same time as long as they
have some advantage to any virus. It would be an
incredibly rare event for the virus to be just right for
the bacterium to take up the entire replication system.
And thus the stage is partly set for why the revolution
happened but once.
The core of the DNA replication system does not
appear to be as common an antibiotic target as the
ribosomes or RNA polymerase. A search of DrugBank
revealed no antibiotics that target PolC [101]. However, there are several that target gyrase. Why the difference? Inhibition of PolC just stops a population
from growing, but the damage induced by the loss of a
functional gyrase invokes an SOS response and leads
to cell death. There are probably natural antibiotics
that target PolC, but they would not be as effective as
the numerous ones that target the ribosome and RNA
polymerase. Thus the introduction of PolB into the
bacillus genome would not be the enough to start the
revolution. This is supported by the fact that many
proteobacteria use PolB as a repair enzyme, the result
of a HGT that did not start a revolution.
As discussed above there are no bacteria that have
archaeal histones. This strongly implies they are only
compatible with the archaeal-eukaryal replication
machinery. Thus we argue that viral endosymbiosis was
a relaxation in selective pressure that in combination
with pressure from antibiotics targeting gyrase led to
the innovation of histones. This is not a trivial difference
with Cavalier-Smith’s hypothesis that the numerous differences between the DNA-handling machinery of bacteria and archaea are the result of histones dramatically
changing the way in which this machinery could interact
with DNA [16]. He argues this was an adaptation to
thermophily.
However, Forterre has presented several arguments
against Cavalier-Smith’s scenario. He argues that the
bacterial histone-like proteins that have replaced the
archaeal ones in Thermoplasma acidophilum work just
fine with the archaeal replication machinery [17]. He
also notes that many hyperthermophilic bacteria do not
use histones. At the same time hyperthermophilic bacteria exchange many genes with archaea [102]. Therefore the standard bacterial replication machinery could
probably not tolerate the invention of histones even
under selective pressure from an extreme environment.
Euryarchaea appear to have gained DNA gyrase via several independent horizontal transfers from bacteria [47].

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

The fact that several euryarchaea retain both histones
and gyrase is evidence against Cavalier-Smith’s idea that
gyrase became totally redundant with the advent of histones. That view is weakened further given that gyrase
was found to be essential in several of those genomes
[103].
Since pressure from thermophily alone could not force
histone innovation, we invoke the viral endosymbiont
hypothesis. In other bacteria an alternative system to
gyrase would not be much of an advantage, as getting
rid of gyrase would just put more pressure on targets
like the ribosome and peptidoglycan synthesis. However,
as discussed above, the bacilli have several unique ribosomal proteins. That means they could already have
some adaptations and preadaptation to antibiotic warfare that makes them a difficult target to hit. As discussed above they have EpsE [104], which could
preadapt them for functioning without peptidoglycan.
Once gyrase was no longer a useful target they could
quickly lose peptidoglycan in their cell walls. The loss of
these two major targets would be a huge advantage and
increase pressure on the ribosomes as a target.
At this point any change to the ribosome would be
highly beneficial. One can imagine a Red Queen game
where neomura have a distinct advantage over grampositives but need constant innovation in their ribosomes to maintain that advantage. The observation that
many archaeal-eukaryal ribosomal proteins bind Zn
would be consistent with pressure to ensure proper
assembly despite the antibiotics. This is supported by
the fact that bacterial hyperthermophiles, whose environment interferes with ribosomal assembly, have more
Zn binding sites than most other bacteria [35].
Thus the initial neomura would have an advantage in
antibiotic warfare as well as the ability to replicate DNA
even in the presence of damaging pressures. Their genomes could be much larger than extant prokaryotes.
A large robust genome would allow neomuran to be oligotrophic and handle extreme environments. This
would put them in direct competition with many bacteria in diverse environments. Their larger genome size
would allow for more gene duplication, which could
lead to structural innovations like the ribosomal proteins
found in neomura but not bacteria.
The strongest support for this hypothesis comes from
the antibiotic target site most studied in the ribosome:
the 23S RNA between ribosomal proteins L22 and L4.
L22 and L4 are conserved across teh superkingdoms.
They bind to the same positions on the ribosome in all
three superkingdoms. There are numerous crystal structures, from both prokaryotic superkingdoms, with antibiotics bound in these sites [105,106]. These studies
demonstrated that nine different antibiotics that bind
strongly to this site in bacteria bind with much less

Page 22 of 33

affinity in archaea. A2058 (E. coli numbering) is one of
the sites on the 23S RNA directly involved in binding
these drugs. A2058 is conserved across 99.4% of
sequenced bacterial 23S rRNAs [107]. The site is almost
universally guanine in archaea and eukaryotes. The
mutation A2058G makes many bacteria macrolide-resistant [108], while the reverse mutation can make archaea
macrolide-sensitive [109]. These differences in antibiotic
affinity are well conserved across the divide between
bacteria and neomura, and appear to be the result of
intense selective pressure from antibiotics.
Even though bacteria are able to gain resistance
through a similar mutation, it is probably not fixed
because there is a slight decrease in fitness that can be
reduced with other mutations [107]. If there were constant pressure on that site other mutations and changes
in structure could relax those costs and fix that position.
That would be completely consistent with the scenario
outlined here. If the divide between archaea and bacteria
is primordial, it is much harder to explain this difference. Ribosomal proteins L22 and L4 must have been
present in LUCA. If the ancestor of archaea was an
extremophile they should not have been in competition
with enough bacteria to need the resistance inferred by
this mutation.
It would be tempting to speculate that this mutation is
an adaptation to thermophily or some other extreme
environment to answer this nagging issue of antibiotic
pressure at the root of archaea. Examining the position
in bacterial hyperthermophiles can be tested. In both
the hyperthermophiles Aquifex aeolicus and Thermotoga
maritime this position is 100% conserved as adenine, as
it is in their thermophilic relatives (Additional file 4;
Figure S4). The thermophile Thermus thermophilus has
two copies of the 23S RNA where usually both have
adenine at that position unless they are under selective
pressure from antibiotics [110]. Thus the only explanation that appears to hold water is some extreme antibiotic pressure at the root of archaea.
The mark of antibiotic pressure can also be seen in
the proteins that would be lost at the origin of archaea.
We searched Pfam and DrugBank for antibiotic targets
that are conserved across bacteria but were clearly not
in LACA. Eight of these are listed in Table 8. Several of
these appear to have been horizontally transferred to
archaea, such as DNA gyrase. That is consistent with
the scenario under discussion because once archaea
were no longer under strong antibiotic pressure these
systems would be free to become essential again. It
would be interesting to look at each of these eight predicted losses and see what preadaptations and environmental conditions can make them non-essential.
Why would this war end and who would the winners
be? To address this question we will invoke the two

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 23 of 33

Table 8 Drug targets found across bacteria that were
probably not in LACA
Target

Example Drug

Alanine Racemase

Cycloserine

Beta-lactamase

Cefoxitin

Hsp90

Geldanamycin

Cytochrome c

Minocycline

DNA gyrase

Trovafloxacin

3-oxoacyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase 1

Cerulenin

Penicillin-binding proteins

Cefoperazone

Peptidoglycan synthetase ftsI

Ertapenem

We argue these proteins were lost in the archaeal ancestor in response to a
unique antibiotic warfare scenario. Targets in italics appear to have transferred
to archaea after LACA.

novel niches that are central to the neomuran hypothesis; phagotrophy and hyperthermophily [16]. The oligotrophic neomuran with large genomes would be able to
form many symbioses with prokaryotes because of their
diverse metabolism. Such an environment would favor
the preadapations to phagotrophy discussed in [111].
This could lead to several endosymbiotic events in a
short span of time. These would force the nucleus to
become a better separator in dealing with selective pressures proposed by several hypotheses: invasion of
introns [112], differing metabolisms [113] and ribosome
chimerism [114]. The successful phagotroph would eat
prokaryotes, so at first it would be to the advantage of
the prey to try to kill the neomura. However, that is not
the optimal strategy for dealing with phagotrophs. It is
much better to persist inside them and eat them from
the inside out, as can be seen by the numerous bacterial
taxa that have independently evolved the ability to infect
eukaryotes. Once it is possible to infect the phagotrophs,
killing them with antibiotics becomes counterproductive.
And thus a truce (or new war) would be declared on
one front of the great antibiotics war.
The early eukaryotes would outcompete and eat many
of the initial neomura, but would be at a disadvantage
in extreme environments as they began to rely on their
cytoskeletons and larger cell size more. It would be
easier for the neomura to drift into more extreme environments because of their DNA replication machinery.
Table 9 Examples of drugs targets sites with resistance in
archaea
Target Site

Example drugs

23s RNA between L22 and L4 Macrolides [106] and PTF inhibitors [105]
RNA Polymerase

GE23077 [130]

EF-Tu

Kirromycin [131]

These drugs bind targets sites present in both bacteria and archaea (or
eukaryotes), but with very different affinities. We argue this is a molecular
fossil of the unique antibiotic war that resulted in the origin of archaea.

The proto-archaea would begin to emerge as the neomura began moving into previously unoccupied niches
of extremophily. The conversion of their membranes
would probably be the commitment step in the process.
Once they began settling into environments that are
constantly extreme they would be under pressure to
streamline their genomes.
This scenario is consistent with a recent study on gene
content evolution in archaea that concluded that most
archaeal genomes have been streamlined from larger
ancestral genomes [115]. The authors conclude that the
archaeal ancestor could have had 2000 gene families, and
the extant archaeal groups are mostly created through
differential loss. The authors note this repeated loss is
consistent with the energy shock state of the archaea
described in [93], as specialization and loss are highly
favorable in consistently extreme environments. The
trend of euryarchaeal and crenarchaeal specific traits to
both be present in the deep branching archaea is also
consistent with the idea archaea became specialized from
a more generalized genomic ancestor. The redundancy in
archaeal systems such as two replicative polymerases and
two cell division systems could be remnants of the antibiotic war. That redundancy would become unnecessary
once archaea committed to extremophily. It was noted in
[2] that ribosomal protein loss is much more common in
archaea than in bacteria. Our hypothesis implies that the
distribution of ribosomal proteins in archaea is the result
of independent losses once they were no longer under
antibiotic pressure. Some of these novel proteins developed other roles to deal with extremophily so they have
been retained. The ancestral archaeal ribosome could
very well have contained all of the proteins found in any
archaeal genome, which would certainly weaken that
aspect of the eocyte hypothesis.
What about the neomura? They would be stuck in the
middle. The eukaryotes would be eating them, and they
would still be in competition with bacteria. Their only
viable strategy would be constant innovation, as they
would not really have a novel niche. However, the wave
caused by viral endosybiosis would not go on forever.
There would be diminishing returns in terms of the
resistance provided by the new innovations. Eventually
the innovations would become a disadvantage as bacteria can then release compounds that only target the
new systems. For instance aphidicolin inhibits DNA
replication in archaea and eukaryotes but not bacteria
by targeting their unique polymerase [116,117]. So the
initial advantage the neomura have in terms of antibiotic
resistance is not a stable niche. They were outcompeted
from three sides, and thus we are left with a hole in the
middle of the branches of the tree of life that often gets
mistaken as the root. This scenario is summarized in
Figure 5.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

Page 24 of 33

Figure 5 Summary of our hypothesis. A viral endosymbiosis bridges the gap in DNA machinery between the superkingdoms. That triggered
an antibiotic war that resulted in the birth of eukaryotes and archaea. The antibiotic war ended when archaea became extremophiles and the
eukaryotes became phagotrophs. Traits shared between eukaryotes and actinobacteria are the result of endosymbiosis; the peroxisome is not
the direct descendent of an actinobacterium.

Discussion
It is reasonable to ask how different archaea and bacteria would have to be for us to consider the rooting
debate closed. If the genetic material were different
between the superkingdoms it would be strong evidence
of life being polyphyletic. If the genetic codes were

somewhat different (even a few codons), that would
certainly be evidence that both groups were primordial.
If membrane proteins like SecY were not universally
conserved, we would take that as evidence LUCA was
acellular. The differences between the prokaryotic superkingdoms seem small if we consider that the last

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

prokaryotic common ancestor had a membrane and a
ribosome that used the same genetic code as all extant
life. They have more in common than can be described
by any tree.
None of the differences between archaea and bacteria
are great enough to imply a transition between the
superkingdoms is impossible. The three independent
polarizations provide compelling evidence the transition
occurred. A viral endosymbiosis in a firmicute host
could be the relaxation in selective pressure that acted
in combination with pressure from antibiotics to cause a
revolution in terms of membranes, ribosomes, and DNA
replication machinery. This is supported by the association between proteins found in viral genomes and those
that appear at the root of archaea and eukaryotes.
Gupta’s hypothesis that antibiotics led to the differences
between the superkingdoms is well supported by the
data generated in the past decade.
Archaea would certainly need to have several innovations in terms of protein structure. None of these are
deal breakers. They are present in extant cells, and are
not found in viruses. So they would have been an innovation at some point. There is no reason to assume all
structural innovations happened near the root of the
tree of life. Work from our group probing the relationship between ancient ocean chemistry and protein structure evolution is an example of one source of later
innovations [36,37]. The modern ocean has several
orders of magnitude more Zn than the ocean of LUCA’s
time [118]. Many Zn extant binding sites evolved after
that transition. As noted above, several of the ribosomal
proteins unique to the neomura have Zn binding sites.
One of the innovations needed, PolD, is predicted to
have two Zn fingers [39]. Increasing levels of Zn would
not be the only factor, but it is another example of how
the revolutionary planetary changes shape evolution as
discussed in [119]. This observation makes sense if one
places the origin of archaea after the great oxidation
event, and considers the fossil record as a supplement
to phylogenetic data. If we look at the details we may
find the rhyme and reason to the other novel structures
at the root of archaea as well. There are also many
structural innovations at the root of the eukaryotes
[120]. The fact that archaea have many unique protein
structures does not imply they are primordial.
As we have hinted above, one of the strengths of this
hypothesis is it does not rely on archaea being holophyletic. The scenario we have described implies holophyly,
but if something conclusively proved archaea were
ancestral to eukaryotes, it could be adapted. There is no
explanation in the neomuran hypothesis for the traits
shared between actinobacteria and eukaryotes besides
vertical descent. The link Cavalier-Smith has justified
could be the result of an endosymbiosis that did not

Page 25 of 33

leave its mark with an extant organelle. If archaea are
paraphyletic it just means eukaryotes did not originate
for the reasons we have hinted at here, but rather more
along the lines of the traditional endosymbiotic hypotheses. It does not change the way we have to think about
the origin and rooting of archaea, which is the central
focus of this paper.
The hypothesis we have proposed can be refined with
experiment. It seems if one really wants to understand
the likelihood of intermediates between archaea and
bacteria we need to understand why hybrid systems are
unheard of. For instance, what other proteins need to be
placed into a bacterium to allow them to use histones?
How would an archaea with a bacterial ribosome function? Trying to recreate the intermediates we believe
went extinct would certainly give insight into their plausibility. It definitely would give better insight into the
functional nuances of proteins with homologous function across the prokaryotic superkingdoms that appear
to be highly resistant to horizontal transfer. It would be
highly informative regardless of the location of the root
of the tree of life.
We have drawn our data from diverse sources that are
not usually the primary tools for studying evolution.
Viruses have been getting more attention as players in
shaping the tree of life recently [18] and better sampling
will clarify the plausibility of the endosymbiosis we have
proposed. However, essentiality and protein structure
are non-traditional tools in this field. If essentiality
experiments were performed across the ribosomes and
DNA replication machinery of bacilli under different
conditions it could give us hints as to what selective
pressures would need to be relaxed for the major transition to begin. Further study of natural antibiotics will
also continue to increase the resolution of the hypothesis. We argue this line of experiment would be useful
in its own right, since many of the firmicutes are pathogens that effect human health.
Of course indepth sampling of thaumarchaeota and
korarchaeota is going to be invaluable to this endeavor.
If the ribosomal proteins that are currently missing in
these groups are found in new genomes it would imply
independent losses and make holophyly seem a little
more appealing. The redundancy left in these genomes
could just be the first surprise. Deeper sampling may
reveal redundancy in some of the archaeal-bacterial
hybrid systems we discussed above. Finding a deep
branching archaeon that uses a bacterial system would
truly validate this hypothesis.
The proteasome is an important component of our
hypothesis. If one roots archaea in bacilli it does not
explain the presence of the proteasome across the entire
superkingdom. We think Cavalier-Smith is correct
in pointing it out as a link between archaea and

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

actinobacteria, but in light of the other evidence raised
here we do not find that argument convincing on its
own. It is not clear what direction the proteasome was
inherited. Even if the proteasome was horizontally transferred it does not weaken the polarization of archaea; it
would still be a derived structure that was present at the
root of archaea, so they must still be derived.
There are many instances in the literature where data
are only presented under the canonical rooting, when in
fact it is better explained by an alternative rooting. This
quickly leads to circular logic; a hypothesis gets buried
because no data supports it, data gets buried (in supplemental data or ad hoc invocations of HGT) because it
does not fit with the canonical rooting. As an example
look at how much data from Eugene Koonin’s group we
have cited in this work to support our hypothesis even
though he has made it clear he thinks this rooting is
unsupportable (see his reviews of [11,81] and this manuscript as well). We refute the view, and prevailing opinion, that there is no reasonable data to support a
rooting within bacteria.
For instance, one of the biggest problems with the
canonical rooting is the origin of cells. The term “RNA
world” is sometimes invoked as a miracle that could
explain anything that happened in evolution before cells
look the way they do now. But one thing RNA definitely
cannot do is to make transmembrane pores. This problem is addressed well by the obcell hypothesis of Blobel
and Cavalier-Smith [121,122]. They propose proto-cells
had very little going on inside them initially. Rather, they
were collections of ribozymes tethered to the outside of a
cell. The details of their proposal get around the problems of transmembrane RNA structures, but also
implies the first true cell had a double membrane (like
the gram-negative bacteria). Our point here is not about
which hypothesis is correct; but that both of them are
understood better in terms of the strengths and weaknesses of the other; throwing either out is essentially
operating without a null hypothesis. The differences in
these hypotheses was recently reviewed in [123].
Our view is that the debate should not be closed, but
we acknowledge the difficulty in making meaningful
contributions to that debate due to the complexity of
the problem. Clearly DNA or protein sequence data
alone does not suffice to provide a satisfactory answer.
Data from different scales of biology - structure, function, biochemical processes, cell morphology etc. as well
as the fossil record and earth’s environment at different
time points have to be applied. Fortunately, in our view,
the increasing availability of these data and the tools to
manipulate that data promise to keep the debate alive
and opinion will continue to see-saw as it has done for
the past 33 years since the pioneering work of Woese.

Page 26 of 33

Conclusions
This novel combination of hypotheses on the origin of
archaea is intended to keep the debate alive. We think
Cavalier-Smith has the best method for rooting the tree.
His attention to detail and multiple sources of data allows
one to refine his ideas as we have done here. Lake (and
Gupta) has the right root for archaea, and despite our criticism, indel polarization is a useful methodology. Gupta has
the right idea about antibiotics being a major force in this
story and of course his work on indels laid the groundwork
for our own work as well as Lake’s. Forterre is right about
viruses being major players in this event. Of course many
others have shaped our thoughts on this subject, but we
have clearly taken the most from the work of these four. In
so doing we have tried to demonstrate the value of using
opposing ideas as null hypotheses to each other.
Have we provided a scenario that explains every detail
for how archaea evolved out of gram-positive bacteria?
We certainly have not. What we have presented is a
variety of data that attempts to show it is a plausible
and defendable stance. The emergence of archea is an
amazing event in the history of life, but decipherings its
origin is not simple. However, if we close the debate we
close our eyes to the large body of evidence that supports the polarization of this transition.
We have tried to provide a novel view on the origin of
archaea that makes it clear very little is settled on this
subject. We have provided a scenario that covers most of
the transition between bacteria and archaea. The ideas
we propose here can be refined with further experiment
and more observations. The ideas are currently supported by diverse data. The study of these hypotheses
will give us insight into several tangentially related topics
that are worth pursuing such as the subtleties of antibiotic resistance in the ribosome in Gram-positives. In summary, the hypothesis we present and support here
reconciles many opposing viewpoints and strongly argues
that archaea are derived from Bacilli.
Methods
Structural alignments were performed using CE [124].
Sequence alignments were performed using MUSCLE
[125]. The alignments were visualized in Jalview [126].
Sequence trees were constructed using Phyml [127].
The essentiality of genes was determined by querying
the database of essential of genes [31]. Drug targets
were indentified from DrugBank [101]. The distribution
of those targets was examined using Pfam [78].
Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer’s report 1

Patrick Forterre, Universite Paris Sud and Institut Pasteur, Paris, France

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

In their paper, « the origin of a derived superkingdom: how a gram positive bacterium crossed the
desert to become an archaeon”, Valas and Bourne
update the previous proposal by Gupta linking
Archaea to « gram positive bacteria ». The term gram
positive bacteria is really outdated, since the work of
Carl Woese has shown that it has no phylogenetic
meaning. In fact, the title of this paper should be:
“how a Firmicutes bacterium crossed the desert to
become an archaeon ». Firmicutes are one of the 20,
30 more...(it’s not yet clear) bacterial phyla. It has
been much more extensively studied by human for
medical and biotechnological reasons, but this does
not qualify it to be more than that.
Author’s response

We find there are many compelling reasons to still consider the Gram-positives a monophyletic group as discussed in [8]. We have also presented evidence to justify
why we do not trust the rRNA tree as a tool for macrophylogeny, especially for two groups nicknamed the “low
gc gram-positives” and the “high gc gram-positives”. We
have two sources that disagree on the position of these
groups. The solution is not to make declarative statements that one data source makes looking at other
unreasonable, but rather to consider the strengths and
weaknesses of each. One of the goals of the paper is to
unify the hypotheses that question the rooting of the tree
of life between the Achaea and Bacteria. Again, we’d like
to point out that despite their differences Lake, Gupta,
and Cavalier-Smith all agree the Archaea are derived
from a Gram-positive bacterium. So even though we narrow it down to a phyla, we think this title still reflects
the larger goal of the paper.
In summary, Valas and Bourne proposed that both
Archaea and Eukaryotes derived by transmutation from
a member of Firmicutes, i.e. of one of the many bacterial phyla present today on our planet. This is revival of
the old view that bacteria are primitive organisms that
populated the planet much before all others (a sequel of
Heckel monera). In fact, Bacteria are very evolved
organisms, a superkingdom, that have been extremely
successful sice they are now present everywhere and are
usually much more abundant than members of the two
other domains. It’s unclear if they predated Archaea and
ancient Eukarya, but they will certainly survive long
after complex eukaryotes like us will have disappeared. I
suspect that Archaea and Eukarya are the only two
lineages that survive the extraordinary success of
bacteria.

Page 27 of 33

In my opinion, one of the reason for this success was
the invention of DNA gyrase. This enzyme allows to
couple directly the energetic state of the cell (the ATP/
ADP ratio) to the expression of all genes at once in
modulating the supercoiled state of the chromosome.
Once you become addict to DNA gyrase, you can’t let it
go. The last bacterial common ancestor had a DNA gyrase, and all modern bacteria still have it. Some archaea
succeeded to get gyrase from bacteria, they are now
fully dependent of it. Plants also get gyrase from cyanobacteria, one possible reason for their success ?? The
idea that a poor Firmicutes abandoned DNA gyrase to
escape antigyrase drug producers does not seem realistic
to me. Unfortunately for too many human patients,
gyrases have found many way to become multi drug
resistant without having to abandon it. In general, bacteria have been very efficient to thrive happily in all possible « deserts » that one can imagine, including hot
springs up to 95°C. Hyperthermophilic bacteria or desiccation resistant bacteria are not en route to become
archaea but bona fide bacteria. I cannot discuss in
details all ad hoc hypotheses proposed by the authors to
explain how a Firmicutes become an archaeon.
Author’s response

We argue that extreme habitats and antibiotic warfare
were not unique enough niches in the manuscript, and
this why do not think Gupta’s or Cavalier-Smith’s
hypotheses are sufficient on their own. We agree that
DNA gyrase is a big deal, and it would require some
very unique circumstances for it to be lost. If the archaea
are adapted to chronic energy stress it would not be
unreasonable from them to move away from gyrase
becuase the benefit you described above disappears if
ATP is always scarce. The question is whether the transition is impossible or implausible. We are arguing this
was a very rare event that only happened once. We feel
it is more productive to try evaluating some of the hybrid
systems we propose than to speculate about their impossibility. Once again, we regret a reviewer refuses to discuss details with us.
They have certainly done a huge amont of bibliographic work and hard thinking which will help them in
future debates on the origin of the three domains, but
in my opinion, they have reached an impasse in trying
to revive Gupta’s hypothesis. For me, all hypotheses that
invoke the transmutation of one domain (in its modern
form) into another are definitively wrong. It is the same
for hypotheses in which a combination of modern
archaea and bacteria produced a protoeukaryote.

Author’s response

Author’s response

In this manuscript we have presented three pieces of evidence that imply Bacteria did predate the Archaea. This
reviewer has not addressed why he feels those are
insufficient.

This implies there are essentially three primordial
lineages; a view that we think is definitely wrong based
on the currently available evidence. We have provided
three robust pieces of evidence why the archaea appear

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

younger than the bacteria which this reviewer has completely ignored. Other work from our group demonstrates
that we can constrain the evolution of eukaryotes based
on the biochemical history of the ocean [36,37]; that
data argues the eukaryotes are a more recent lineage
than the bacteria and archaea, and is completely independent of this work. Again this reviewer provides no
argument for why transmutation hypotheses are definitely wrong, or why the polarization evidence bears no
weight on these questions.
I fully agree with Carl Woese who already wrote several years ago that « Modern cells are fully evolved entities. They are sufficiently complex, integrated, and
“individualized” that further major change in their
designs does not appear possible, which is not to say
that relatively minor (but still functionally significant)
variations on existing cellular themes cannot occur or
that, under certain conditions, cellular design cannot
degenerate”. Firmicutes are modern cells, they cannot
have experienced “major change in their designs” to
become archaea and later on eukarya. These transmutation hypotheses put us backward in the pre-Woesian
era, when evolution was viewed as a succession of steps
from simple organism (moneraprokaryote-bacteria) to
lower eukaryotes, then to higher eukaryotes, then to
human (the scala natura). Definitely, a bacterium cannot
be transmutated into an archaeon, even by a virus.
Author’s response

Only time will tell whether our skeptical reading of the
rRNA tree will turn out to be pre-Woesian or post-Woesian. We do not express the view that evolution is just a
series of successive steps or that a bacterial cell is simple
in any way, and neither does Cavalier-Smith, Gupta, or
Lake in our opinion. However within the larger process
of evolution there are clear paths that were built in successive steps of increasing complexity. We think the best
example of this is the proteasome’s quaternary structure.
Fortunately, the proteasome has an informative phylogenetic distribution that allows us to polarize the direction
of its evolution. We argue the Archaea evolved from the
Bacteria because their proteasome is more complicated,
but that does do not imply the rest of the machinery is
simpler in the Bacteria. If there are markers that are
clear cut stories, how could using them for phylogenetic
inference be pre-Woesian? Again, we ask why there are
no polarizations that place the Bacteria as derived from
the Archaea? We think the view that there is an insurmountable divide between the superkingdoms by definition to leads to circular reasoning, instead of a
discussion about the actual data. Ironically, we see parallels between the current situation and Woese’s account
of how his ideas were first received [5].
A virus take over of the replication apparatus could
have created a bacterium with a novel replication

Page 28 of 33

apparatus, that’s all. This would not have changed bacterial lipids, membranes, ribosomes, proteasomes, ATP
synthases, transport sustems, metabolism,........ Possibly,
one day, among the ten of thousand of bacteria whose
genomes will be sequences, one will find one bacterium
with an atypical replication system of recent viral origin,
but I bet that this bacterium will have « bacterial ribosomes » and so on.
Author’s response

We would be very surprised if the DNA replication system was that different and rest of the cell was purely
bacterial. The nice thing is this is one of the few points
we disagree on that data will actually make clearer.
If one want to understand the origin of modern
domains, one has to consider that they originated in a
very different world that our present one. A world with
many lineages (domains or protodomains) that have
now disappeared, possibly back to the cellular RNA
world. This is a really difficult and fascinating objective
which requires to propose sometimes bold hypotheses,
but these hypotheses should take into account that the
divide between the three modern domains is now so
great that it cannot be crossed, even by an adventurous,
desperate Firmicutes.
Author’s response

We again refer readers to work from our group on the
evolution of the superkingdoms in relationship to history
of ocean’s biochemistry [36,37]. We will continue to
incorporate new data sources that allow us to measure
how different that world was instead of speculating
about it. For now, the many data sources we have woven
together imply there is something deeply wrong with the
canonical rooting as well the logic used to support it (see
reviewer #3’s comments). This reviewer’s advice that we
need bold hypotheses, but the rooting must be taken as
dogma makes little sense to us in light of the many problems with that rooting.
Reviewer’s report 2

Eugene V Koonin, National Center for Biotechnology
Information, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States
To this reviewer, the manuscript by Valas and Bourne
is frustrating. These authors continue to question the
primary divide in the evolution of cellular life, that
between archaea and bacteria, without any legitimate
grounds. Here they go deeper into this falsehood by trying to present arguments for one bacterial root of
archaea as opposed to another that has been proposed
by a different author, in an equally faulty manner.
Another innovation here is adding insult to injury: “This
data have been dismissed because those who support
the canonical rooting between the prokaryotic superkingdoms cannot imagine how the vast divide between
the prokaryotic superkingdoms could be crossed.” This

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

allegation is a substantial part of the exceptionally brief
abstract of Valas and Bourne. No comment seems to be
required.
My general view which I see no reason whatsoever to
change is expressed in the following quote from my
review of a previous publication by the same authors:
“The nature of the primary divide in prokaryotes - and
actually among all cellular life forms is clear, and it is
between archaea and bacteria. This view is supported by
the fundamental differences between archaeal and bacterial systems of DNA replication, core transcription,
translation, and membrane biogenesis - essentially, all
central cellular systems (not just the replication system
as noted in the present paper). I believe these differences are sufficient to close the “root debate” (regardless
of the appropriateness or lack thereof of the very notion
of a root in this context) and to base analyses and discussions aimed at the elucidation of the nature of
LUCA on that foundation.” [11]
Perhaps, it is worth adding the results of a recent
comprehensive analysis of phylogenetic trees for prokaryotic proteins that firmly supports the primary divide
between archaea and bacteria [128].
Author’s response

A large part of the motivation for this manuscript was
the review of our previous work [11]. Cleary there are
others besides us who do not find things as clear cut as
this reviewer (see reviewer #3 comments). We think there
many reasons to support the canonical rooting, as well
as reasons to questions it. We have presented our views
on much of this evidence. The reviewer has again refused
to discuss our data in any detail implying it is obvious
why we are wrong. We feel we have greatly strengthened
our previous argument by looking at the big picture in
terms of the Gram-negative rooting. This reviewer
claimed that rooting was unsupportable because it is so
obvious that Achaea did not evolve from Bacteria. We
feel we have strengthened that view, but clearly we have
not swayed this reviewer. We do not think there is anything more to say on this subject so we point readers to
the discussion between this reviewer and Cavalier-Smith
in [81].
The only other comment I wish to make is the
extreme carelessness with which the manuscript is
written. The abstract consists of 6 sentences of which
two are obviously ungrammatical. Furthermore, in the
Conclusion section of the abstract, the astonished
reader finds “antibiotic warfare and a viral endosymbiosis” for which no argument and no mention has
been made in the Results section. Perhaps, the
authors can get rid of these and other similar problems in a revision but I do want to keep it in the
record that this is how the manuscript was submitted
for review.

Page 29 of 33

Author’s response

We apologize for any issues with the form that took away
from the content, and we hope the final version is
improved. The paper is written somewhat recklessly
because it is what it is: the end of a Ph.D. dissertation.
We feel it was the right time to get these ideas out
because of our perception that the canonical rooting is
too dogmatic. This review has only supported our view
this manuscript was needed. We think a reader should
be astonished by the end of a short abstract before a
long reckless paper; it gets them to read paper.
We find it interesting that this reviewer had no comment on two aspects of this work which can be judged
independently of the rooting issue; the holophyly of the
archaea and the actinobacteria’s role in eukaryogenesis.
We have presented much evidence that the conclusion
this reviewer reached on the former, using indel data, is
flawed. It would have been informative to hear this
reviewer’s opinion on that analysis.
Reviewer’s report 3

Gaspar Jekely, European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Heidelberg, Germany
In this paper Vales and Bourne address a very difficult
problem in evolutionary cellbiology, that of the origin of
Archaea (archaebacteria). They do this after arguing at
length for the bacterial rooting of the tree of life. Such
attempts are very welcome, since these areas are extremely controversial and important, yet few people seem
to notice that there is a problem there, namely that the
conventional rooting of the tree of life between archaea
and bacteria is far from being proven and as trivial as it
seems. The evidence for this rooting, coming from paralogous gene rootings is highly questionable, and givesconflicting results when different paralogs are analyzed.
Author’s response

We thank this reviewer for demonstrating that not everyone thinks our line of questioning is as unreasonable as
reviewers 1 and 2. There are certainly problems with any
rooting, and the question is still very open at this point
in our minds. Many experts share the opinions of those
reviewers, but we feel these points are often swept under
the rug when invoking that rooting.
Notwithstanding these problems, conventional wisdom
holds, as the authors rightly point out, that the position
of the root is between the two domains (superphyla)
bacteria and archaea, since these are the groups that are
most distinct from each other. However, such rooting
based on maximum divergence can often be wrong,
since an ancestral group can give rise to highly derived
groups. I don’t have particular problems with uprooting
the tree of life and abandoning the conventional rooting,
but I find the evidence, as presented in this paper, quite
week. I also have the feeling that the three indels and

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

the distribution of the proteosome will not convince too
many people to favour one rooting over the other. In all
cases one can conceive scenarios that are in agreement
with the conventional rooting, such as the presence of
both forms in the last common ancestor and then differential losses in the stem bacterial and archaeal lineage.
I acknowledge that some of this would be less parsimonious than under a bacterial rooting, but given that
there are only very few characters that can be used,
such less parsimonious scenarios can still easily be
defended.
Author’s response

The strength of our evidence rests in the difference
between polarization and parsimony which we have
expressed before [11]:
“To us parsimony can be used to analyze events where
gain and loss have nearly equal probabilities, while
polarizations imply that one direction would evolve more
easily than the other. Consider the example of the proteasome discussed in detail in Cavalier-Smith 2002.
A parsimony argument would be that the 20s proteasome is the result of a duplication so a non duplicated
structure must precede it. The polarization argument
involves considering the structure and function of proteasomes as well as the fitness of the intermediates to argue
that evolution towards the 20s proteasome is much more
plausible than the reverse direction. There are probably
many cases where evolution has not been parsimonious,
and we do not think parsimony is a safe or productive
assumption. However, there appears to be many polarizable transitions and hopefully there are many more
waiting to be discovered. “
We do not think the polarizations make this an open
and shut case. However, we find they are sufficient to
question the canonical rooting and search for more evidence to support the alternative rooting we support here.
The rooting issue aside, my main concern is that the
scenario for the origin of archaea is not worked out well
enough at the moment, and this contrasts with the
length and ambition of the paper. The authors invoke
an endosymbiosis with a virus to explain the origin of
the archaeal DNA-handling enzymes. What does this
exactly mean? Is it a lyzogenic virus? The term viral
endosymbiosis does not seem to be the best choice here.
The authors then invoke a very improbably form of
infection with a virus that had collected from the virosphere the right combination of genes, to hand it over
to the cell. In this way they try create a unique event
that led to the unique origin of the archaea. I am not
sure that invoking such a hypothetical, extremely rare
event, for which there is no evidence, solves the problem. I acknowledge the enrichment of proteins of possible viral origin in the stem archaea, but this slight
statistical enrichment does not mean that there was

Page 30 of 33

only one virus infection involved. One could just as well
imagine a series of viral gene transfers in the framework
of the antibiotic warfare scenario that provided the
novel enzymes in a step-by step manner. Given the random sequence of events and the nature of the transferred genes, this could also lead to a lineage with
unique identity. This scenario is at present the weakest
part of the paper and should be worked out much better
in a more focused paper.
Author’s response

We completely agree with this assessment of our viral
endosymbiotic scenario. Endosymbiosis is probably not
the best term, but we want to stress the radical nature of
this interaction. We do not think our assumption about
a rare virus is off base. The virosphere is very large and
viruses are experts at manipulating genetic material in
novel ways. The DNA handling enzymes did evolve twice
despite how unlikely it was. We think a radical turnover
of the machinery is only possible in a virus. Successive
viral transfers could explain the data too, but this would
still be a rare event to account for so many genes. An
event like this would not leave much of mark besides a
statistical enrichment (if even that). If that enrichment is
real the question becomes why do the Archaea interact
differently with viruses than Bacteria? That answer cannot be developed too much more at present, but a better
sampling of the virosphere is definitely going to help here.
There are several other ideas in the paper that are
potentially interesting, but not well worked out. The
proposition of an actinobacterial symbiont during early
eukaryote evolution is one example. Such a hypothesis
could possibly be spelled out in a full paper, with a
detailed scenario and all the evidence that seems to support such a model. In this form it is just a proposition
that is hard to judge thoroughly, and is very easy to dismiss. In general, my recommendation would be to refocus the paper around one key idea, namely the origin of
archaeal DNA-handling enzymes by quantum evolution
and from viral sources as a result of an antibiotics arms
race. If the authors spell out this scenario clearly,
together with the supporting evidence, but without
going into the details of the rooting issue (discussed
already in their previous Biology Direct paper) and the
origin of eukaryotes (this could be done in a separate
paper), this could become a much more useful and
potentially influential manuscript. The title could then
be changed accordingly. In the present form the title
gives the impression that the authors wish to explain
everything, which is far from being the case (for example the unique membrane chemistry or archaeal flagella
are not covered).
Author’s response

This is a fair assessment of the manuscript. It is certainly
overly ambitious and in many ways incomplete. The goal

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

of this paper was to unite the various ideas about bacterial rootings of the Archaea. The fact that many of our
ideas could be developed further is more evidence this
debate is not as closed as the two other reviewers have
declared. While we certainly have omitted many details,
we have chosen to take a big picture view. There is an
obvious connection between the problems rooting of the
tree of life and the origin of the superkingdoms. We think
we can only judge a rooting hypothesis by assessing how
well it addresses these questions. We think the canonical
rooting is insufficient when one begins asking questions
on the origins of the superkingdoms. We hope that readers will pick and choose which ideas they like and continue to develop and test them.

Page 31 of 33

2.

3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplemental Figure 1. Alignment of RadA
sequences from representative archaea.
Additional file 2: Supplemental Figure 2. Maximum likelihood tree
of GatD argues for multiple horizontal transfers. This tree is not well
resolved, but it does not support archaeal ancestry for eukaryotic
proteins. Euryarchaeal sequences are highlighted in green, crenarchaea
are magenta, thaumarchaeota are cyan, and korarchaeota are blue. The
region of the indel is highlighted in red. There is no informative indel in
this gene as was initially reported.
Additional file 3: Supplemental Figure 3. Sequence alignment of EF-1
from representative archaea. Euryarchaeal sequences are highlighted in
green, crenarchaea are magenta, thaumarchaea are cyan, and korarchaeota
are blue. The region of the indel is highlighted in red. This alignment
implies several reversions. Therefore this indel is not robust enough to
determine whether archaea are holophyletic or paraphyletic.
Additional file 4: Supplemental Figure 4. 23s rRNA A2058 (E. coli
numbering) is well conserved across bacterial hyperthermophiles.
This implies the conserved guanine in that position in archaea is not an
adaptation to thermophily.

11.
12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.
19.
20.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Russell Doolittle, William Loomis, and the entire
Bourne laboratory for useful discussions.
Author details
Bioinformatics Program, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 2Skaggs School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

21.
22.
23.

1

24.
25.

Authors’ contributions
REV conceived the study and analyzed the data. PEB assisted in writing the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

26.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

27.

Received: 8 October 2010 Accepted: 28 February 2011
Published: 28 February 2011

28.

References
1. Woese CR, Fox GE: Phylogenetic structure of the prokaryotic domain: the
primary kingdoms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977, 74:5088-5090.

29.

Lecompte O, Ripp R, Thierry JC, Moras D, Poch O: Comparative analysis of
ribosomal proteins in complete genomes: an example of reductive
evolution at the domain scale. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:5382-5390.
De Rosa M, Gambacorta A, Gliozzi A: Structure, biosynthesis, and
physicochemical properties of archaebacterial lipids. Microbiol Rev 1986,
50:70-80.
Leipe DD, Aravind L, Koonin EV: Did DNA replication evolve twice
independently? Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:3389-3401.
Woese CR: The Archaeal Concept and the World it Lives in: A
Retrospective. Photosynth Res 2004, 80:361-372.
Koonin EV, Martin W: On the origin of genomes and cells within
inorganic compartments. Trends Genet 2005, 21:647-654.
Battistuzzi FU, Hedges SB: A major clade of prokaryotes with ancient
adaptations to life on land. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:335-343.
Cavalier-Smith T: Rooting the tree of life by transition analyses. Biol Direct
2006, 1:19.
Gupta RS: Protein phylogenies and signature sequences: A reappraisal of
evolutionary relationships among archaebacteria, eubacteria, and
eukaryotes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1998, 62:1435-1491.
Lake JA, Servin JA, Herbold CW, Skophammer RG: Evidence for a new root
of the tree of life. Syst Biol 2008, 57:835-843.
Valas RE, Bourne PE: Structural analysis of polarizing indels: an emerging
consensus on the root of the tree of life. Biol Direct 2009, 4:30.
Skophammer RG, Servin JA, Herbold CW, Lake JA: Evidence for a grampositive, eubacterial root of the tree of life. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1761-1768.
Lake JA, Henderson E, Oakes M, Clark MW: Eocytes: a new ribosome
structure indicates a kingdom with a close relationship to eukaryotes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1984, 81:3786-3790.
Rivera MC, Lake JA: Evidence that eukaryotes and eocyte prokaryotes are
immediate relatives. Science 1992, 257:74-76.
Cavalier-Smith T: The phagotrophic origin of eukaryotes and
phylogenetic classification of Protozoa. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2002,
52:297-354.
Cavalier-Smith T: The neomuran origin of archaebacteria, the
negibacterial root of the universal tree and bacterial megaclassification.
Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2002, 52:7-76.
Forterre P: Three RNA cells for ribosomal lineages and three DNA viruses
to replicate their genomes: a hypothesis for the origin of cellular
domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:3669-3674.
Forterre P: The origin of viruses and their possible roles in major
evolutionary transitions. Virus Res 2006, 117:5-16.
Koonin EV, Senkevich TG, Dolja VV: The ancient Virus World and evolution
of cells. Biol Direct 2006, 1:29.
McGeoch AT, Bell SD: Extra-chromosomal elements and the evolution of
cellular DNA replication machineries. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008, 9:569-574.
Boucher Y, Kamekura M, Doolittle WF: Origins and evolution of isoprenoid
lipid biosynthesis in archaea. Mol Microbiol 2004, 52:515-527.
Wong JT, Chen J, Mat WK, Ng SK, Xue H: Polyphasic evidence delineating
the root of life and roots of biological domains. Gene 2007, 403:39-52.
Iyer LM, Abhiman S, Maxwell Burroughs A, Aravind L: Amidoligases with
ATP-grasp, glutamine synthetase-like and acetyltransferase-like domains:
synthesis of novel metabolites and peptide modifications of proteins.
Mol Biosyst 2009, 5:1636-1660.
Valas RE, Bourne PE: Rethinking proteasome evolution: two novel
bacterial proteasomes. J Mol Evol 2008, 66:494-504.
Skophammer RG, Herbold CW, Rivera MC, Servin JA, Lake JA: Evidence that
the root of the tree of life is not within the Archaea. Mol Biol Evol 2006,
23:1648-1651.
Klein DJ, Moore PB, Steitz TA: The roles of ribosomal proteins in the
structure assembly, and evolution of the large ribosomal subunit. J Mol
Biol 2004, 340:141-177.
Harms J, Schluenzen F, Zarivach R, Bashan A, Gat S, Agmon I, Bartels H,
Franceschi F, Yonath A: High resolution structure of the large ribosomal
subunit from a mesophilic eubacterium. Cell 2001, 107:679-688.
O’Brien TW: Properties of human mitochondrial ribosomes. IUBMB Life
2003, 55:505-513.
Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

30. Cox CJ, Foster PG, Hirt RP, Harris SR, Embley TM: The archaebacterial origin
of eukaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:20356-20361.
31. Zhang R, Ou HY, Zhang CT: DEG: a database of essential genes. Nucleic
Acids Res 2004, 32:D271-272.
32. Fang G, Rocha E, Danchin A: How essential are nonessential genes? Mol
Biol Evol 2005, 22:2147-2156.
33. Drummond DA, Wilke CO: Mistranslation-induced protein misfolding as a
dominant constraint on coding-sequence evolution. Cell 2008,
134:341-352.
34. Sutter M, Striebel F, Damberger FF, Allain FH, Weber-Ban E: A distinct
structural region of the prokaryotic ubiquitin-like protein (Pup) is
recognized by the N-terminal domain of the proteasomal ATPase Mpa.
FEBS Lett 2009, 583:3151-3157.
35. Makarova KS, Ponomarev VA, Koonin EV: Two C or not two C: recurrent
disruption of Zn-ribbons, gene duplication, lineage-specific gene loss,
and horizontal gene transfer in evolution of bacterial ribosomal
proteins. Genome Biol 2001, 2:RESEARCH 0033.
36. Dupont CL, Yang S, Palenik B, Bourne PE: Modern proteomes contain
putative imprints of ancient shifts in trace metal geochemistry. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:17822-17827.
37. Dupont CL, Butcher A, Valas RE, Bourne PE, Caetano-Anolles G: History of
biological metal utilization inferred through phylogenomic analysis of
protein structures. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:10567-10572.
38. Filee J, Forterre P, Sen-Lin T, Laurent J: Evolution of DNA polymerase
families: evidences for multiple gene exchange between cellular and
viral proteins. J Mol Evol 2002, 54:763-773.
39. Tahirov TH, Makarova KS, Rogozin IB, Pavlov YI, Koonin EV: Evolution of
DNA polymerases: an inactivated polymerase-exonuclease module in Pol
epsilon and a chimeric origin of eukaryotic polymerases from two
classes of archaeal ancestors. Biol Direct 2009, 4:11.
40. Koonin EV, Wolf YI, Kondrashov AS, Aravind L: Bacterial homologs of the
small subunit of eukaryotic DNA primase. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2000,
2:509-512.
41. Della M, Palmbos PL, Tseng HM, Tonkin LM, Daley JM, Topper LM,
Pitcher RS, Tomkinson AE, Wilson TE, Doherty AJ: Mycobacterial Ku and
ligase proteins constitute a two-component NHEJ repair machine.
Science 2004, 306:683-685.
42. Yutin N, Koonin EV: Evolution of DNA ligases of Nucleo-Cytoplasmic
Large DNA viruses of eukaryotes: a case of hidden complexity. Biol Direct
2009, 4:51.
43. Samuels M, Gulati G, Shin JH, Opara R, McSweeney E, Sekedat M, Long S,
Kelman Z, Jeruzalmi D: A biochemically active MCM-like helicase in
Bacillus cereus. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:4441-4452.
44. Ammelburg M, Frickey T, Lupas AN: Classification of AAA+ proteins.
J Struct Biol 2006, 156:2-11.
45. Chen YJ, Yu X, Egelman EH: The hexameric ring structure of the
Escherichia coli RuvB branch migration protein. J Mol Biol 2002,
319:587-591.
46. Komori K, Sakae S, Shinagawa H, Morikawa K, Ishino Y: A Holliday junction
resolvase from Pyrococcus furiosus: functional similarity to Escherichia
coli RuvC provides evidence for conserved mechanism of homologous
recombination in Bacteria, Eukarya, and Archaea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1999, 96:8873-8878.
47. Forterre P, Gribaldo S, Gadelle D, Serre MC: Origin and evolution of DNA
topoisomerases. Biochimie 2007, 89:427-446.
48. Forterre P, Gadelle D: Phylogenomics of DNA topoisomerases: their origin
and putative roles in the emergence of modern organisms. Nucleic Acids
Res 2009, 37:679-692.
49. Becerra A, Delaye L, Islas S, Lazcano A: The Very Early Stages of Biological
Evolution and the Nature of the Last Common Ancestor of the Three
Major Cell Domains. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics
2007, 38:361-379.
50. Yutin N, Makarova KS, Mekhedov SL, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The deep archaeal
roots of eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:1619-1630.
51. Brochier-Armanet C, Boussau B, Gribaldo S, Forterre P: Mesophilic
Crenarchaeota: proposal for a third archaeal phylum, the
Thaumarchaeota. Nat Rev Microbiol 2008, 6:245-252.
52. Elkins JG, Podar M, Graham DE, Makarova KS, Wolf Y, Randau L, Hedlund BP,
Brochier-Armanet C, Kunin V, Anderson I, et al: A korarchaeal genome
reveals insights into the evolution of the Archaea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008, 105:8102-8107.

Page 32 of 33

53. Martin W, Muller M: The hydrogen hypothesis for the first eukaryote.
Nature 1998, 392:37-41.
54. Ettema TJ, Bernander R: Cell division and the ESCRT complex: A surprise
from the archaea. Commun Integr Biol 2009, 2:86-88.
55. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
56. Schmitt E, Panvert M, Blanquet S, Mechulam Y: Structural basis for tRNAdependent amidotransferase function. Structure 2005, 13:1421-1433.
57. Schwartz JH, Reeves JY, Broome JD: Two L-asparaginases from E. coli and
their action against tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1966, 56:1516-1519.
58. Poole AM, Penny D: Evaluating hypotheses for the origin of eukaryotes.
Bioessays 2007, 29:74-84.
59. Hou S, Makarova KS, Saw JH, Senin P, Ly BV, Zhou Z, Ren Y, Wang J,
Galperin MY, Omelchenko MV, et al: Complete genome sequence of the
extremely acidophilic methanotroph isolate V4, Methylacidiphilum
infernorum, a representative of the bacterial phylum Verrucomicrobia.
Biol Direct 2008, 3:26.
60. De Mot R: Actinomycete-like proteasomes in a Gram-negative bacterium.
Trends Microbiol 2007, 15:335-338.
61. Klimke W, Agarwala R, Badretdin A, Chetvernin S, Ciufo S, Fedorov B,
Kiryutin B, O’Neill K, Resch W, Resenchuk S, et al: The National Center for
Biotechnology Information’s Protein Clusters Database. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, 37:D216-223.
62. Wilson D, Madera M, Vogel C, Chothia C, Gough J: The SUPERFAMILY
database in 2007: families and functions. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:
D308-313.
63. Nes WR, Nes WD: Lipids in evolution New York: Plenum Press; 1980.
64. Lamb DC, Kelly DE, Manning NJ, Kelly SL: A sterol biosynthetic pathway in
Mycobacterium. FEBS Lett 1998, 437:142-144.
65. Desmond E, Gribaldo S: Phylogenomics of Sterol Synthesis: Insights into
the Origin, Evolution, and Diversity of a Key Eukaryotic Feature. Genome
Biol Evol 2009, 2009:364-381.
66. Smucker RA: Biochemistry of the Streptomyces spore sheath. In Biological,
biochemical, and biomedical aspects of actinomycetes. Volume xv. Edited by:
Ortiz-Ortiz L, Bojalil LF, Yakoleff V. Orlando: Academic Press; 1984:643.
67. Wehenkel A, Bellinzoni M, Grana M, Duran R, Villarino A, Fernandez P,
Andre-Leroux G, England P, Takiff H, Cervenansky C, et al: Mycobacterial
Ser/Thr protein kinases and phosphatases: physiological roles and
therapeutic potential. Biochim Biophys Acta 2008, 1784:193-202.
68. Macek B, Mijakovic I, Olsen JV, Gnad F, Kumar C, Jensen PR, Mann M: The
serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphoproteome of the model bacterium
Bacillus subtilis. Mol Cell Proteomics 2007, 6:697-707.
69. Sandoval-Calderon M, Geiger O, Guan Z, Barona-Gomez F, Sohlenkamp C:
A eukaryote-like cardiolipin synthase is present in Streptomyces
coelicolor and in most actinobacteria. J Biol Chem 2009, 284:17383-17390.
70. Da Lage JL, Feller G, Janecek S: Horizontal gene transfer from Eukarya to
bacteria and domain shuffling: the alpha-amylase model. Cell Mol Life Sci
2004, 61:97-109.
71. Leibundgut M, Maier T, Jenni S, Ban N: The multienzyme architecture of
eukaryotic fatty acid synthases. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2008, 18:714-725.
72. Cavalier-Smith T: The origin of eukaryotic and archaebacterial cells. Ann N
Y Acad Sci 1987, 503:17-54.
73. Bell PJ: Sex and the eukaryotic cell cycle is consistent with a viral
ancestry for the eukaryotic nucleus. J Theor Biol 2006, 243:54-63.
74. Aravind L, Koonin EV: Prokaryotic homologs of the eukaryotic DNA-endbinding protein Ku, novel domains in the Ku protein and prediction of a
prokaryotic double-strand break repair system. Genome Res 2001,
11:1365-1374.
75. Grangeasse C, Cozzone AJ, Deutscher J, Mijakovic I: Tyrosine
phosphorylation: an emerging regulatory device of bacterial physiology.
Trends Biochem Sci 2007, 32:86-94.
76. Kanehisa M: The KEGG database. Novartis Found Symp 2002, 247:91-101,
discussion 101-103, 119-128, 244-152..
77. Payandeh J, Pai EF: Enzyme-driven speciation: crystallizing Archaea via
lipid capture. J Mol Evol 2007, 64:364-374.
78. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G,
Forslund K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer EL, Bateman A: The Pfam protein
families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D281-288.
79. Sojka L, Fucik V, Krasny L, Barvik I, Jonak J: YbxF, a protein associated with
exponential-phase ribosomes in Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 2007,
189:4809-4814.

Valas and Bourne Biology Direct 2011, 6:16
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/16

80. Stechmann A, Cavalier-Smith T: Evolutionary origins of Hsp90 chaperones
and a deep paralogy in their bacterial ancestors. J Eukaryot Microbiol
2004, 51:364-373.
81. Cavalier-Smith T: Origin of the cell nucleus, mitosis and sex: roles of
intracellular coevolution. Biol Direct 2010, 5:7.
82. van den Bosch H, Schutgens RB, Wanders RJ, Tager JM: Biochemistry of
peroxisomes. Annu Rev Biochem 1992, 61:157-197.
83. De Duve C: Blueprint for a cell: the nature and origin of life Burlington, N.C.:
N. Patterson; 1991.
84. Cavalier-Smith T: Symbiotic origin of peroxisomes. In Endocytobiology IV;
Paris. Edited by: Nardon P, Gianinazzi-Pearson V, Grenier AM, Margulis L,
Smith DC. Institut national de la recherche agronomique; 1990:515-521.
85. Gabaldon T, Snel B, van Zimmeren F, Hemrika W, Tabak H, Huynen MA:
Origin and evolution of the peroxisomal proteome. Biol Direct 2006, 1:8.
86. Schluter A, Fourcade S, Ripp R, Mandel JL, Poch O, Pujol A: The
evolutionary origin of peroxisomes: an ER-peroxisome connection. Mol
Biol Evol 2006, 23:838-845.
87. Gabaldon T, Huynen MA: Reconstruction of the proto-mitochondrial
metabolism. Science 2003, 301:609.
88. Duhita N, Le HA, Satoshi S, Kazuo H, Daisuke M, Takao S: The origin of
peroxisomes: The possibility of an actinobacterial symbiosis. Gene 2009,
450:18-24.
89. Race HL, Herrmann RG, Martin W: Why have organelles retained
genomes? Trends Genet 1999, 15:364-370.
90. Allen JF: Control of gene expression by redox potential and the
requirement for chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes. J Theor Biol
1993, 165:609-631.
91. Koonin EV: Temporal order of evolution of DNA replication systems
inferred by comparison of cellular and viral DNA polymerases. Biol Direct
2006, 1:39.
92. Rothschild LJ, Mancinelli RL: Life in extreme environments. Nature 2001,
409:1092-1101.
93. Valentine DL: Adaptations to energy stress dictate the ecology and
evolution of the Archaea. Nat Rev Microbiol 2007, 5:316-323.
94. Fogg MJ, Pearl LH, Connolly BA: Structural basis for uracil recognition by
archaeal family B DNA polymerases. Nat Struct Biol 2002, 9:922-927.
95. Isambert H, Stein RR: On the need for widespread horizontal gene
transfers under genome size constraint. Biol Direct 2009, 4:28.
96. Heddle JA, Bielas JH: Unifying concept of DNA repair: the polymerase
scanning hypothesis. Environ Mol Mutagen 2005, 45:143-149.
97. Bielas JH: Non-transcribed strand repair revealed in quiescent cells.
Mutagenesis 2006, 21:49-53.
98. Bell PJ: The viral eukaryogenesis hypothesis: a key role for viruses in the
emergence of eukaryotes from a prokaryotic world environment. Ann N
Y Acad Sci 2009, 1178:91-105.
99. Bell PJ: Viral eukaryogenesis: was the ancestor of the nucleus a complex
DNA virus? J Mol Evol 2001, 53:251-256.
100. Vermeij GJ: Evolution and escalation : an ecological history of life Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press; 1987.
101. Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, Cheng D, Shrivastava S, Tzur D, Gautam B,
Hassanali M: DrugBank: a knowledgebase for drugs, drug actions and
drug targets. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D901-906.
102. Beiko RG, Harlow TJ, Ragan MA: Highways of gene sharing in prokaryotes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:14332-14337.
103. Sioud M, Possot O, Elie C, Sibold L, Forterre P: Coumarin and quinolone
action in archaebacteria: evidence for the presence of a DNA gyrase-like
enzyme. J Bacteriol 1988, 170:946-953.
104. Jolly L, Newell J, Porcelli I, Vincent SJ, Stingele F: Lactobacillus helveticus
glycosyltransferases: from genes to carbohydrate synthesis. Glycobiology
2002, 12:319-327.
105. Hansen JL, Moore PB, Steitz TA: Structures of five antibiotics bound at the
peptidyl transferase center of the large ribosomal subunit. J Mol Biol
2003, 330:1061-1075.
106. Hansen JL, Ippolito JA, Ban N, Nissen P, Moore PB, Steitz TA: The structures
of four macrolide antibiotics bound to the large ribosomal subunit. Mol
Cell 2002, 10:117-128.
107. Pfister P, Corti N, Hobbie S, Bruell C, Zarivach R, Yonath A, Bottger EC: 23S
rRNA base pair 2057-2611 determines ketolide susceptibility and fitness
cost of the macrolide resistance mutation 2058A–>G. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2005, 102:5180-5185.

Page 33 of 33

108. Vester B, Douthwaite S: Macrolide resistance conferred by base
substitutions in 23S rRNA. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2001, 45:1-12.
109. Tu D, Blaha G, Moore PB, Steitz TA: Structures of MLSBK antibiotics bound
to mutated large ribosomal subunits provide a structural explanation for
resistance. Cell 2005, 121:257-270.
110. Gregory ST, Cate JH, Dahlberg AE: Spontaneous erythromycin resistance
mutation in a 23S rRNA gene, rrlA, of the extreme thermophile Thermus
thermophilus IB-21. J Bacteriol 2001, 183:4382-4385.
111. Cavalier-Smith T: Predation and eukaryote cell origins: a coevolutionary
perspective. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009, 41:307-322.
112. Martin W, Koonin EV: Introns and the origin of nucleus-cytosol
compartmentalization. Nature 2006, 440:41-45.
113. Lopez-Garcia P, Moreira D: Selective forces for the origin of the
eukaryotic nucleus. Bioessays 2006, 28:525-533.
114. Jekely G: Origin of the nucleus and Ran-dependent transport to
safeguard ribosome biogenesis in a chimeric cell. Biol Direct 2008, 3:31.
115. Csuros M, Miklos I: Streamlining and large ancestral genomes in Archaea
inferred with a phylogenetic birth-and-death model. Mol Biol Evol 2009,
26:2087-2095.
116. Krokan H, Wist E, Krokan RH: Aphidicolin inhibits DNA synthesis by DNA
polymerase alpha and isolated nuclei by a similar mechanism. Nucleic
Acids Res 1981, 9:4709-4719.
117. Forterre P, Elie C, Kohiyama M: Aphidicolin inhibits growth and DNA
synthesis in halophilic arachaebacteria. J Bacteriol 1984, 159:800-802.
118. Anbar AD, Knoll AH: Proterozoic ocean chemistry and evolution: a
bioinorganic bridge? Science 2002, 297:1137-1142.
119. Cavalier-Smith T: Cell evolution and Earth history: stasis and revolution.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2006, 361:969-1006.
120. Aravind L, Iyer LM, Koonin EV: Comparative genomics and structural
biology of the molecular innovations of eukaryotes. Curr Opin Struct Biol
2006, 16:409-419.
121. Cavalier-Smith T: Obcells as proto-organisms: membrane heredity,
lithophosphorylation, and the origins of the genetic code, the first cells,
and photosynthesis. J Mol Evol 2001, 53:555-595.
122. Blobel G: Intracellular protein topogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1980,
77:1496-1500.
123. Griffiths G: Cell evolution and the problem of membrane topology. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007, 8:1018-1024.
124. Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: Protein structure alignment by incremental
combinatorial extension (CE) of the optimal path. Protein Eng 1998,
11:739-747.
125. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
126. Waterhouse AM, Procter JB, Martin DM, Clamp M, Barton GJ: Jalview
Version 2–a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis
workbench. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1189-1191.
127. Guindon S, Delsuc F, Dufayard JF, Gascuel O: Estimating maximum
likelihood phylogenies with PhyML. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 537:113-137.
128. Puigbo P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Search for a ‘Tree of Life’ in the thicket of
the phylogenetic forest. J Biol 2009, 8:59.
129. Kelman Z, White MF: Archaeal DNA replication and repair. Curr Opin
Microbiol 2005, 8:669-676.
130. Sarubbi E, Monti F, Corti E, Miele A, Selva E: Mode of action of the
microbial metabolite GE23077, a novel potent and selective inhibitor of
bacterial RNA polymerase. Eur J Biochem 2004, 271:3146-3154.
131. Masullo M, Cantiello P, De Paola B, Fiengo A, Vitagliano L, Zagari A, Arcari P:
Valine 114 replacements in archaeal elongation factor 1 alpha enhanced
its ability to interact with aminoacyl-tRNA and kirromycin. Biochemistry
2002, 41:14482-14488.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-16
Cite this article as: Valas and Bourne: The origin of a derived
superkingdom: how a gram-positive bacterium crossed the desert to
become an archaeon. Biology Direct 2011 6:16.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
