<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Conserved and variable correlated mutations in the plant MADS protein network</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-607"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Aalt DJ van Dijk"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Conserved and variable correlated mutations in
the plant MADS protein network
Aalt DJ van Dijk*, Roeland CHJ van Ham

Abstract
Background: Plant MADS domain proteins are involved in a variety of developmental processes for which their
ability to form various interactions is a key requisite. However, not much is known about the structure of these
proteins or their complexes, whereas such knowledge would be valuable for a better understanding of their
function. Here, we analyze those proteins and the complexes they form using a correlated mutation approach in
combination with available structural, bioinformatics and experimental data.
Results: Correlated mutations are affected by several types of noise, which is difficult to disentangle from the real
signal. In our analysis of the MADS domain proteins, we apply for the first time a correlated mutation analysis to a
family of interacting proteins. This provides a unique way to investigate the amount of signal that is present in
correlated mutations because it allows direct comparison of mutations in various family members and assessing
their conservation. We show that correlated mutations in general are conserved within the various family members,
and if not, the variability at the respective positions is less in the proteins in which the correlated mutation does
not occur. Also, intermolecular correlated mutation signals for interacting pairs of proteins display clear overlap
with other bioinformatics data, which is not the case for non-interacting protein pairs, an observation which
validates the intermolecular correlated mutations. Having validated the correlated mutation results, we apply them
to infer the structural organization of the MADS domain proteins.
Conclusion: Our analysis enables understanding of the structural organization of the MADS domain proteins,
including support for predicted helices based on correlated mutation patterns, and evidence for a specific
interaction site in those proteins.

Background
New mutations continually arise and are the source of
genetic diversity. They provide the material on which
selection acts; in large, sexual populations, beneficial
mutations will reach fixation, and most deleterious
mutations will be lost. However, in the case of deleterious mutations, a compensatory mutation may occur
that renders the two mutations neutral or beneficial as a
pair and causes them to be preserved by selection. In
protein-coding sequences, coevolution of residues can
occur as compensation of changes in e.g. volume or
charge, or because of the simultaneous involvement of
residues in e.g. ligand binding. This implies that residues
which show such correlated mutations are expected to
be located close to each other in the 3 D structure of a
* Correspondence: aaltjan.vandijk@wur.nl
Applied Bioinformatics, PRI, Wageningen UR, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB
Wageningen, The Netherlands

protein. An early observation of this kind was obtained
in a set of virus sequences, where the positions in the
sequence that showed an identical pattern of variation
were in most cases close together in the 3 D structure
[1]. Several studies have reported similar observations
and have made use of such information e.g. to engineer
artificial domains [2], to predict interhelical contacts in
transmembrane proteins [3], to analyze functional
dependencies observed within HIV genes [4], to predict
functionally important residues [5] or to distinguish
between correct and incorrect models for the 3 D structure of proteins [6].
A number of methods have been developed to search
for correlated mutations, and their results are mostly
validated by comparing with distances between residues
in crystal structures. A distinction can be made between
pairwise correlation methods (which might be based on
substitution matrix scores or related physicochemical

© 2010 van Dijk and van Ham; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

characteristics) [7,8] and information-theory based
methods [9-11]. The former seem to outperform the latter when using enrichment of residue pairs at short distances as a criterion [12,13]. Although several correlated
mutation measurements yield reasonable accuracy for
intramolecular contact map prediction, the accuracy
level drops in intermolecular contact prediction [14].
On a higher level, similarity between phylogenetic
trees is related to protein interactions in large sets of
interacting families [15-22]. However, it has been heavily
debated whether this signal is due to true coevolution,
i.e. compensatory mutations between residues in the
binding partners [23]. A number of factors affecting sets
of proteins, such as similar expression patterns or functioning in a given biochemical pathway, can generate
similarity in evolutionary rates [24]. Families with similar evolutionary rates in different organisms will present
similar trees, without the need for co-adaptation
between the corresponding proteins. Although this confounding effect takes place at the level of phylogeny,
residue-level correlated mutations also contain noise
caused by evolutionary processes related to common
ancestry, such as changes in codon usage or amino acid
frequencies [25,26]. Hence, misleading signal can be
caused by phylogenetic correlations between homologous sequences and from correlation due to factors
other than spatial proximity. This highlights the need to
distinguish between observed “covariation”, and true
“coevolution”, which is what we would like to infer
based on those observed signals which do however contain noise.
Plant MADS domain transcription factors (TFs) are
involved in regulation of a variety of developmental processes such as floral transition and flower development
[27,28]. They “do it together” [29] in the sense that they
are engaged in protein interactions and form protein
complexes that are required for binding DNA. An analysis of the interaction capacity of all members of the
family in Arabidopsis revealed the ability to form 110
different dimers [30] among 27 members of the subfamily of MIKC-type (or type II) MADS domain proteins.
These TFs have in addition to the MADS (M) domain
an I, K and C-domain [31,32].
A couple of structures are available for dimers of
MADS domains (followed by a domain with some
homology to the I domain) [33-38], but structural
information for the other domains is lacking. The
structures show that two MADS domains extensively
contact each other, but mutagenesis data indicate that
also other parts of the MIKC proteins contact each
other. In particular, the I-domain is involved in determining interaction specificity [39,40] and the
K-domain is important for dimerization [41-45]. A few
computational studies previously analyzed plant MADS

Page 2 of 15

domain protein sequences in order to find functionally
important regions, albeit without explicit reference to
their role in interaction specificity [46-48]. Other computational studies focused on the evolution of the
interaction network via duplications [49] or on simulating models for gene- and/or protein-interactions
[50-52]. Recently, we developed a method aimed at
predicting interaction sites using experimental interaction data and applied it to the MADS domain protein
family [53] followed by experimental testing of sites
governing interaction specificity [54].
Here, we present a novel approach to analyzing correlated mutations and testing their validity. We analyze
correlated mutations in a family of interacting proteins. This provides a convenient way to compare correlated mutations between those proteins and assess
whether correlated mutations are ‘conserved’ between
them. Secondly, it allows comparison of correlated
mutations observed between pairs of interacting proteins with those observed between pairs of non-interacting proteins, where the latter provide a unique
background-model for assessment of significance of
the observed intermolecular correlated mutations.
Hence, our results contribute to the interpretation of
correlated evolution signals.
We integrate our results with available structural,
bioinformatics and experimental data for the plant
MADS domain proteins and in this way we obtain clues
about the structural organization of these proteins and
their complexes.

Results
We will first discuss sequence retrieval, followed by correlated mutation analysis and validation of the results
using various types of independent data. Next, conservation of correlated mutations between homologous positions in various proteins will be analyzed, which
provides a novel way to assess the amount of information correlated mutations contain. Finally, our results
will be applied in prediction of protein interactions and
scrutinized to obtain structural insight into the MADS
proteins.
Sequence data

The workflow followed to obtain sequences and perform
further analysis is illustrated in Figure 1. In total, 1760
sequences were obtained using Interpro, 2043 using
blast and 303 from sequenced plant genomes; after clustering and filtering with a minimum of 25% sequence
identity to one of the Arabidopsis MADS proteins, 2080
sequences were retained. As explained in the Methods
section, we do not strictly define 1-to-1 orthology, but
for the sake of clarity we will refer in the sequel to these
sequences as (putative) orthologs. For the following 12

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Correlated mutation analysis of MADS domain proteins: workflow diagram. Sequences were obtained via blast, interpro and
from a set of sequenced plant genomes. Orthologs were assigned using a best-hit criterium, followed by clustering to group sequences within
each species with a very high sequence identity and filtering to remove sequences with low sequence identity to Arabidopsis MADS sequences.
Intramolecular and intermolecular correlated mutations were obtained, and validated using various datasets. Subsequently, conservation of
correlated mutations between proteins was analyzed, and correlated mutations were compared between interacting and non-interacting
proteins. A. th. is Arabidopsis thaliana.

MADS proteins there were at least 30 sequences of
putative orthologs available: AG (114 sequences), AGL6
(56), AP1 (127), AP3 (339), FUL (117), PI (235), SEP1
(95), SEP3 (107), SHP1 (77), SOC1 (65), STK (42) and
SVP (34). These proteins were analyzed for intramolecular correlated mutations (sequence identifiers are listed
in Additional File 1).
Combining the sequences with existing interaction
data [30] allowed in total 34 different pairs of interacting Arabidopsis proteins to be analyzed, with a minimum of 30 ortholog pair sequences (Additional File 2).
As background model, 34 pairs of non-interacting
MADS pairs were used for which a minimum of 30
ortholog pairs were available. Because of the way we
deal with co-orthologs (see Methods), there are cases of
MADS domain proteins that pass the threshold of 30
sequences only in the intermolecular analysis and not in
the intramolecular analysis.
Validation of correlated mutation analysis

Correlated mutations were obtained for intra- and intermolecular sequence alignments using CAPS (see

Methods). Additional Files 3 and 4 contain lists of these
results. To validate the observed correlated mutation
pairs, we compared them with available structural data
(a crystal structure is available for the human MADS
domain), previously predicted interaction motifs and
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs).
Validation: structure data

Residues which show correlated mutations are expected
to be located close to each other in tertiary and quaternary structure. Comparison of the distribution of distances for intramolecular correlated mutation residue
pairs in the crystal structure of the MADS domain
shows that there is indeed a clear enrichment at low distances, compared to all residue pairs in the crystal structure (Figure 2A). The enrichment for the analysis with
time correction (see Methods) is similar to the enrichment for the analysis without time correction; for the
former, 74% of the correlated mutation residue pairs are
within 15Å, whereas for the latter this is 77%. These
numbers should be compared with the percentage of all
residue pairs within 15Å in the crystal structure, which

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

Page 4 of 15

Figure 2 Short distance enrichment of correlated mutations in MADS domain. (A) Distribution of distances in intramolecular correlated
mutation residue pairs. All residue pairs in crystal structure (red), correlated mutation analysis without time correction (blue) and correlated
mutation analysis with time correction (green); (B) Percentage of pairs within 15 Å (left panel) and within 10 Å (right panel) for all intermolecular
residue pairs in the crystal structure (black), residue pairs resulting from correlated mutation analysis of interacting protein pairs using time
correction (dark grey), residue pairs from correlated mutation analysis of interacting pairs without using time correction (light grey) and residue
pairs from correlated mutation analysis of non-interacting protein pairs (white).

is 51%. Comparison with randomly selected subsets of
residue pairs in the crystal structure indicates that this
enrichment is statistically significant (p < 0.001).
For the intermolecular correlated mutation analysis,
the analysis of interacting protein pairs using time correction (see Methods) shows an enrichment in residues
within 15Å, compared to all residue pairs (Figure 2B).
Such enrichment is not found for interacting protein
pairs analyzed without time correction, nor for noninteracting pairs analyzed either with or without time
correction (Figure 2B). Hence, these two background
models strongly support the significance of the distance
enrichment for the resulting residue pairs in the correlated mutation analysis of the interacting MADS
domain proteins. Note that the correlated mutation analysis of non-interacting pairs results in a strikingly lower
percentage of pairs of residues with small distance
(Figure 2), an observation for which we miss a clear
interpretation.
The enrichment of residues which are in contact
(within 15Å) across the interface is reasonably strong
(55% of the correlated mutation residue pairs are in
contact vs. 39% for all residue pairs), but less so than
what is seen for the intramolecular correlated mutation
analysis. This is in line with what has been observed
previously for intermolecular correlated mutation analysis (see introduction). One reason could be that the correlated mutation analysis will inherently focus on
residues which are not conserved (because otherwise
there will be no coevolution effect). For a large part,
residues at the interface will be conserved, meaning that
a lot of residue-pairs will not show up in the correlated
mutation analysis. Another factor obviously is the
assumption (inherent to intermolecular correlated mutation analysis) that orthologs will have similar interaction
partners, a hypothesis for which evidence exists [55] but
that also has been challenged [56]. The clear difference

between the interacting and non-interacting protein
pairs does however strongly argue for the importance of
the correlated residue pairs that we recover. The results
presented here are for using a cutoff for the correlation
coefficient of 0.4, but qualitatively they are similar for
higher cutoffs (only the number of reported pairs is
lower). Because enrichment of residue pairs at small distances was only observed for the analysis with time correction, in the sequel we use results from that analysis
only. To further analyze the significance of the observed
short distance enrichment for the intermolecular correlated mutations, a resampling analysis was performed.
This is described in detail in Additional File 5; it clearly
confirmed the significance of our results.
Validation: comparison with predicted interaction motifs

For the intermolecular correlated mutation results, a comparison was made with motif pairs which were previously
predicted to determine MADS interaction specificity
[53,54]. The rationale behind this comparison is that both
motifs and correlated mutations should contain information about interaction residues. Overall, there are large differences between different interacting protein pairs with
respect to the number of correlated mutation positions
and motifs that coincide. The lowest coincidence was
found for the AGL12-AGL16 interaction for which only
10% of the residues involved in correlated mutation were
overlapped by predicted interaction motifs. In contrast,
three interacting protein pairs (ANR1-SOC1, AGL21-FUL,
and SOC1-SVP) showed over 70% of their correlated
mutation positions overlapped by predicted interaction
motifs. However, there was a clear difference between the
results for the interacting pairs and non-interacting pairs.
For the interacting pairs, 55% of the motif positions was
overlapped by at least one correlated mutation position,
and 39% of the correlated mutation positions was covered
by a motif, whereas for the non-interacting pairs, 42% of

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

the motif positions was overlapped by at least one correlated mutation position, and 32% of the correlated mutation positions was covered by a motif. Comparison with
randomly generated position pairs (see Methods) showed
that the F-score (harmonic mean of coverage of correlated
mutation positions and of predicted interaction motifs,
0.46 for the interacting pairs and 0.37 for the non-interacting pairs) was significantly different from random for the
interacting protein pairs (p < 0.001), but not for the noninteracting protein pairs (p~0.5).
Both the previously predicted motif pairs and the correlated mutation position pairs predict connections
between regions in pairs of interacting sequences. In the
comparison above, this was not taken into account, but
we would expect that overlap between motif pairs and
correlated mutation pairs would be ‘consistent’ in the
sense that the two motifs that constitute a motif pair
each overlap with one of the two positions of a given
correlated mutation pair. Analysis of the number of
ortholog pairs in which a given motif pair had such consistent overlap with correlated mutation positions indicates that this is higher for the interacting pairs than for
the non-interacting pairs (data not shown). There is one
motif pair which overlaps consistently with a correlated
mutation pair in four different interacting protein pairs,
and one which overlaps consistently in three different
interacting pairs. The former connects two parts of the
K-domain (Figure 3), whereas the latter connects two
parts of the I-domain. The various correlated mutations
which show consistent overlap with motif pairs are
shown in Additional File 6. These positions are strong
candidates for further investigation as important residues for protein-protein interactions of the MADS
domain proteins.
Validation: comparison with SNP data

Finally, we compared the intermolecular correlated
mutation positions with available Arabidopsis SNP data
[57]. For the interacting pairs, we found 207 non-

Page 5 of 15

synonymous SNPs without overlap with a correlated
mutation position, and 19 with overlap with a correlated
mutation position. For the non-interacting pairs, these
values are 581 and 74, respectively. This means that the
fraction of non-synonymous SNPs covering a correlated
mutation site is smaller for the interacting pairs (8.4%)
than for the non-interacting pairs (11.3%). Of course at
longer evolutionary distances one would expect a correlated mutation position to be variable (otherwise it
would not be detected as a correlated mutation position), but if these sites are functional (i.e. in our context,
important for the interaction) then at short evolutionary
distances it is reasonable to expect that they are conserved, and the fact that they are more conserved for
the interacting compared to the non-interacting protein
pairs is additional validation of our results. These results
are reinforced by the fact that for the synonymous
SNPs, no such difference between interacting and noninteracting pairs is observed (both display an overlap of
~10% between synonymous SNPs and correlated
mutations).
Validation: general trends

Overall, the comparison of correlated mutation positions
with structural data, interaction motifs and SNPs show
the same trend: correlated mutations from interacting
pairs have enrichment in signals compared to non-interacting pairs. In addition, the intramolecular correlated
mutations show clear distance enrichment. Hence, all
observed trends, although sometimes weak, are consistent and point towards biological significance of the
observed signals.
Conserved correlated mutations

An intriguing question is whether positions with correlated mutations in various protein subfamily members
are conserved for being correlated or not, because this
would give further insight into the mechanism behind
correlated mutations. Note that the use of the term

Figure 3 Example of consistent overlap between motif pair and correlated mutation pair. Sequence alignment of part of the K-domain
region is shown. In the interacting pairs STK-SEP3 and SHP1-SEP1, there is a correlated mutation pair (bold residues) which overlaps with the
same motif pair (underlined).

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

“conservation” here is somewhat different from its most
common use to describe sequence conservation, but was
chosen because it best describes the phenomenon of
observing a feature (correlated mutation in this case) in
multiple instances of a sequence alignment (such use is
not unprecedented, compare for example with the use
of “structure conservation”). To answer this question for
the MADS proteins, we investigated for all intramolecular correlated mutation pairs in a given protein whether
they were detected in other MADS proteins as well, in
which case they were called “conserved” in these other
proteins. We first analyzed whether there is more conservation of correlated mutations for pairs of proteins
with higher sequence identity, but this was not the case.
Overall, 63% of the correlated mutation pairs are conserved in at least one other MADS protein, and 37% are
not (conserved intramolecular correlated mutations are
listed in Additional File 7). For the non-conserved cases,
there are two possibilities: either a correlated mutation
is not conserved because the residues themselves at
these positions are conserved, i.e. not varying, in other
MADS domain proteins (which would support their
functional importance) or there is variation at the positions in other MADS domain proteins but it is not correlated. To distinguish between these two possibilities,
sequence entropy was calculated for each column in the
multiple sequence alignments (see Methods). Next,
homologous positions in various MADS domain protein
alignments were divided into two groups, one with correlated mutation occurring at that position, and one
without. Sequence entropy was compared between those
groups. This showed that correlated mutation positions
which were conserved in at least one other protein had
on average a higher sequence entropy (2.2 +/- 0.5) than
the homologous positions where the correlated mutations were not conserved (1.9 +/- 0.2). Indeed, in 74% of
the cases conserved correlated mutation positions had a
higher entropy than the homologous positions where no
correlated mutation was detected. This means that no
correlated mutation was observed in those homologous
positions because they were less variable. Correlated
mutation positions that were not conserved in any other
protein did not show such difference in sequence
entropy. Hence, for correlated mutations that are not
conserved at all, the homologous positions in other proteins are as variable as the position where the correlated
mutation occurs, but in these other proteins no compensatory correlated mutation occurs. These results fit
within the framework of correlated mutations occurring
when a second mutation compensates for an earlier
deleterious one and indicate that this is most likely the
case for correlated mutations which are conserved in at
least one other protein. For those correlated mutations
that are not conserved at all this interpretation is less

Page 6 of 15

likely because these positions show as much variation in
other proteins as in the protein where the correlated
mutation occurs.
For the intermolecular correlated mutations, several
correlated residue pairs are found in the MADS domain
for two interacting pairs of Arabidopsis MADS proteins
which can be compared with structure data as presented
above. These conserved correlated mutation pairs show
similar enrichment for short distances as observed for
all correlated mutation pairs: 11 out of 20 (55%) of
these pairs are located in each others neigbourhood in
the 3 D structure (within 15Å; see Additional File 7).
One example is the residue pair 47 - 66, which is found
as a correlated residue pair in AGL6 - SOC1 and SEP 1
- SOC1. The residues involved are located within a predicted distance of 8.8Å (Figure 4). Among the correlated
mutation pairs resulting from the non-interacting
MADS pairs, only one pair is found in two different
protein pairs; these two residues are not located in each
others neighbourhood. For the domains outside the
MADS domain, comparison with protein structure data
is not possible; however, again the resulting correlated
mutation positions are more conserved among the interacting pairs than among the non-interacting pairs. There
are in total 64 conserved groups of correlated mutation

Figure 4 Conserved intermolecular correlated mutation.
(A) Illustration of conserved correlated mutation concept: a
correlated mutation is observed at homologous positions in two
sequence alignments for two different MADS-domain protein
subfamilies (or for two different pairs of interacting MADS domain
protein subfamilies). (B) Two chains of MADS domain protein dimer
(structure with PDB id 1n6j) are shown in blue and red. Spacefill
indicates residues 47 and 66, which are located close to each other
and which are detected as a correlated mutation pair both in the
interacting pair AGL6-SOC1 and SEP1-SOC1.

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

positions in the interacting protein pairs (i.e. correlated
mutation positions that are observed in more than one
pair of interacting proteins), whereas there are only 49
such groups in the non-interacting protein pairs. Compared tot the total number of correlated mutation pairs,
for the interacting proteins this is ~0.9% and for the
non-interacting protein pairs this is ~0.4%. In addition,
each group for the non-interacting protein pairs consists
of only two different protein pairs, whereas for the
interacting protein pairs there are two larger groups.
The conserved intermolecular correlated mutations are
shown in Additional File 7.
Analysis of MADS domain protein and complex structure

Based on the analyses described above we conclude that
the correlated mutation analysis results clearly contain
biological signal. We now describe application of these
results in order to obtain insight into the structural
organization of MADS domain proteins and their complexes. In particular, we focus on the K-domain, because
structure information is already available for the MADS
and I domain (see above), and the C-terminal domain is
predicted to be unstructured.
Intramolecular organization of K-domain helices

Although structure information is only available for the
MADS and I domain, it is generally assumed that the
K-domain consists of coiled coils. Our correlated mutation analysis can be used to validate this assumption.
We predicted coiled coils in this domain (see Methods)
and compared the correlated mutation positions with
these predictions. The predicted helices are listed in
Additional File 8. Based on the intra-helical organization
of residues, one would expect a periodic pattern of connections between residues within predicted helices. This
is indeed the case: on top of the expected decay with
longer distance, there is a clear preference for residues
i-i+3, i-i+5 and especially i-i+4 to be connected to each
other, and for residues i-i+2 to be not connected. Note
that, for example, the notation i-i+3 refers to pairs of
residues which are separated in the amino acid sequence
by two intervening residues. This pattern is not found
when instead of the predicted helices, random stretches
of equal length are defined and compared with the correlated mutation positions (Figure 5A, B); the difference
in preference for i-i+4 vs i-i+2 is 9.8% (16.7% vs 6.9%, i.
e. over two-fold enrichment for i-i+4) for the predicted
helices, whereas only 10 out of 1000 randomizations
(randomly selecting sequence stretches) have a similar
or higher difference (p~0.01).
Next, we analyzed whether correlations were observed
between helices, in order to infer their orientation with
respect to each other. Because only a few intramolecular
correlated mutation positions occur between predicted

Page 7 of 15

K-domain helices (15 pairs of positions, in 3 different
proteins: AP1, SEP1 and SEP3; these predicted connections are listed in Additional File 9), our results suggest
that these helices do not directly contact each other
intramolecularly in most MADS domain proteins. This
is in line with suggestions in the literature that these
helices would be involved in intermolecular contact
[43,44]. This suggestion is reinforced by the fact that we
do observe intramolecular correlated mutations between
the K-domain helices and the MADS/I domain: 115
pairs of positions in 8 different proteins (Additional File
10). These predicted connections mainly involve the
first K-domain helix, which is indeed expected to contact the MADS/I domain as it is directly connected via
the primary sequence. Of these pairs, only 10 are showing conservation, which is quite low compared to the
overall conservation for correlated mutation pairs (63%,
see above); however, one reason might be that the I
domain is more variable and less well alignable than the
MADS or K-domain. These cases of conserved correlated mutations are shown in Additional File 10. Two
examples of such conserved predicted contacts are
between Val36 resp. Ser58 and two residues in the first
predicted K-domain helix of SEP3, and the same positions in AP1. An interesting aspect here is that Val36
and Ser58 are located close to each other (~9 Å) in a
structure model of SEP3 based on the available crystal
structure of the MADS domain, and the residues in the
K-domain helix which show correlated mutation with
these two residues have a sequential distance of 6 residues, corresponding with almost two turns of a helix,
which corresponds to ~3 Å. Taking into account that
contacts will be made via side chains, which bridge several Å, these distances show a nice match (Figure 5C).
Analysis of intermolecular interactions

We also analyzed whether patterns of correlated mutations could provide insight into the intermolecular
structural organization of the K-domain helices. One
possible organization would be that the two or three
K-domain helices from one protein form one extended
“superhelix”, which contacts an equivalent “superhelix”
of the other protein. In this case, one would expect
mainly intermolecular contacts between homologous
helices. Some suggestive drawings have appeared in literature [58,59], but the correlated mutation analysis
might give some more clear-cut insight here. The correlated mutation pairs that we observed indicated that out
of all possible helix-helix contacts, there was not a specific preference for certain helix-helix contacts to be
present (Additional File 11). This could indicate a more
compact organization of those helices (Figure 6A). Note
that the “superhelix” organization would also not be
consistent with evidence that the last part of the

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

Page 8 of 15

Figure 5 Structural implications of intramolecular correlated mutations for MADS proteins. (A) Comparison of correlated mutation pairs
with predicted helices in the K-domain: histogram of differences in sequence position for observed correlated mutation positions within
predicted coiled coil helices in the K-domain (thick line) and two representative examples of such distributions for positions within randomly
selected sequence stretches. Note that these display the same decreasing trend (as expected) but the relevant feature is the absence of the
difference between i+2 (low) and i+4 (peak), which for the real correlated mutation pairs is indicated by dots on top of the thick line.
(B) Illustration of the observed preferred distance within helices for AG. Helical wheel illustrates coil, arrows indicate correlated mutation residue
pairs. Sequence with arrows indicates correlated mutation residue positions. (C) Correlated mutation between residues from K-domain helix (left)
and MADS domain (right) is conserved between SEP3 and AP1; based on this analysis, Tyr179 is predicted to contact Ser58, and Arg185 to
contact Val36. Note that the distances between these residues within the K-domain and within the MADS domain are consistent with this
hypothesis. Dotted lines indicate observed correlated mutations.

K-domain is involved in formation of higher order complexes [43,60].
In a recent analysis of MADS interaction specificity [54]
we in particular focused on one part of the I domain
where we found a ‘motif hotspot’: experimental investigation with yeast-two-hybrid validated the importance
of this region, and using available structural information
we hypothesized that there would be an interaction
between this region and a complementary region in the
K-domain. As the motif in this region was specifically
validated for the SOC1 protein, we analyzed correlated
mutation pairs for SOC1 with interaction partners
where the position in SOC1 overlapped with this ‘hotspot’ region. Several of the complementary correlated

mutation pairs fall specifically in the first predicted helix
in the K-region, providing additional validation for our
original hypothesis (Figure 6B).

Discussion
Our analysis of correlated mutations in the MADS
domain protein family provides a unique way to investigate the amount of signal that such mutations leave in
protein sequences. We studied correlated mutations in
various family members in terms of their conservation,
and were able to compare correlated mutations between
interacting pairs of proteins and non-interacting pairs of
proteins. The intramolecular correlated mutation results
show a clear enrichment of residue pairs located close

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

Page 9 of 15

Figure 6 Structural implications of intermolecular correlated mutations for MADS proteins. (A) Intermolecular correlated mutations
between K-domain helices do not support an “extended helix organization” (left panel), but suggest a more compact configuration (right panel).
(B) Correlated mutation results support motif-based predicted interaction site. Predicted K-domain coiled coil regions (black lines), overlaid with
predicted correlated mutation positions complementary to the ‘hotspot region’ in SOC1, for SEP1 and SHP1 (red circles). Most of the correlated
mutation positions fall inside the first K-domain helix (green shade); based on motif predictions in combination with structural information, an
interaction between the ‘hotspot’ region and the K-domain was hypothesized, for which the correlated mutation results provide additional
support.

to each other in the MADS domain. There are some
variations between proteins in the number of correlated
mutation pairs and the percentage located close to each
other. We did not observe a clear correlation between
the number of sequences available for each protein and
the number of correlated mutation pairs or the short
distance enrichment. We also tested whether the number of predicted correlated mutation positions or the
distance enrichment depended on quality measures of
the alignments that were used (e.g. fraction of gaps in
the alignment) but found no such correlation.
The majority of the intramolecular correlated mutations were observed in at least two MADS proteins, i.e.
they showed conservation. We found that when such
conserved correlated mutations were not observed in
other MADS proteins, this is mostly because these positions are more conserved and not because of uncorrelated variability in these other proteins. This analysis
gives additional support to the interpretation of correlated mutations as “one mutation followed by a compensatory mutation”. Such support is important because of
the need to infer “coevolution” based on observed “covariation”, a process in which noise can be present, as
discussed in the Introduction.
A possible confounding factor for intermolecular correlated mutation analysis is that we cannot be sure that
the predicted orthologs in all the various species that we
analyze do indeed interact. To get some further insight
into this issue, we assembled a set of interacting MADS
domain proteins from various species from literature
[30,61-67]. Using sequence identity with Arabidopsis
proteins as criterium, orthology relationships were predicted, and next we assessed whether the interaction
would have been correctly predicted based on the Arabidopsis interaction data. This was the case in over 60% of

the interactions (data not shown). A random prediction
would have much lower success rate because there are
much more non-interacting than interacting pairs of
Arabidopsis MADS domain proteins. Still, this number
clearly illustrates a problem with which all intermolecular correlated mutation approaches have to deal, i.e. that
many interactions will be missed and/or incorrectly
assigned. Indeed, validation by for example structure
information shows that the fraction of residue pairs in
close contact is lower for the intermolecular correlated
mutations than for the intramolecular correlated
mutations.
Our approach is unique in using a set of interacting
protein pairs and a set of related non-interacting protein
pairs as a reference. As the latter would be expected not
to have correlations with each other, they serve as negative controls. Using these, we found i) that the overrepresentation of intermolecular residues at short
distances is higher for interacting protein pairs than for
non-interacting pairs; ii) that there is more consistency
between results from different interacting pairs than
between results from different non-interacting pairs; iii)
that there is a better overlap between correlated mutation results from interacting protein pairs and our previously predicted interaction motifs than between
correlated mutation results from non-interacting protein
pairs and those motifs; and iv) that they have less overlap with SNPs. Although some trends are weak on their
own, they are all consistent.
Our results here are complementary to our previous
analysis of sequence determinants of MADS protein
interaction specificity [53]. In particular, that analysis
focused on using sequences from Arabidopsis MADS
domain proteins in order to find motifs that are responsible for interaction specificity. In our current study, we

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

use the large amount of sequence data that is available,
in order to find correlated mutation pairs. There is no
reason why these pairs should specifically contain information about interaction specificity, but rather one
would expect that they contain information about interaction sites in general. As such, the predicted interaction
motifs would be expected to form a subset of the correlated mutation sites, and in line with that, indeed the
coverage of predicted interaction motifs by correlated
mutation positions is higher than the coverage of correlated mutation positions by predicted interaction motifs.
An important point is also that correlated mutation
positions per definition are sites which are not conserved evolutionarily, whereas the motif positions are
relatively conserved; this again limits the possible
amount of overlap between these two analyses. Still, the
fact that we do find significant overlap indicates that a
combination of these two approaches might be particularly powerful.

Conclusions
Our results provide understanding of structural properties of the important plant MADS proteins. In particular, our correlated mutation analysis confirms predicted
helices in the K-domain, and supports a specific organization of these helices in the MADS dimers. Also, we
obtain further support for an interaction region in the I
domain. Hence, in addition to obtaining general insight
into coevolution signals at the protein level, we also
demonstrate the use of these signals to test specific
hypothesis about structural properties of proteins.
Methods
Datasets

A set of type II MADS proteins was obtained as follows
(Figure 1). Interpro [68] was used to obtain UniProtKB
identifiers of sequences in various species that contained
both a MADS domain and a K-domain (PFAM domains
PF00319 and PF01486, respectively); these sequences
were retrieved from UniProt [69]. Secondly, the NCBI
web_blast.pl script was used with in turn each Arabidopsis type II sequence as query, searching the NR database with blastp. Hmmsearch [70] was used to select
sequences with both a MADS domain and a K-domain.
Thirdly, the genome sequences of rice [71], poplar [72],
grape vine [73], Physcomitrella patens [74], maize
http://www.maizesequence.org, medicago http://www.
medicago.org/genome, papaya [75] and sorghum [76]
were scanned using hmmsearch [70] to obtain
sequences with both a MADS domain and a K-domain.
Next, orthologs were assigned to the various Arabidopsis sequences. We used a “best hit” criterion, based
on the value of the sequence identity (calculated using
gaps as non-indentical residues) after separately aligning

Page 10 of 15

each of the obtained sequences with each of the Arabidopsis sequences, using Muscle [77]. For the sequences
obtained from the eight genomes (where we are relatively sure that all relevant sequences are obtained) this
criterium was applied bi-directional, whereas for the
other sequences it was only required that the respective
Arabidopsis sequence was their best hit (and not that
they were also the best hit of that Arabidopsis
sequence). We tested however also the use of a bidirectional best-hit criterium for these other sequences, and
found that it did not improve results. Note that a recent
study suggested that it is beneficial to include both
orthologs and paralogs in the multiple sequence alignment used as input for correlated mutation analysis
[78]. Hence, a more restrictive bi-directional best hit
approach would not necessarily be expected to give better results.
Subsequently, in each species separately, blastclust
with sequence identity cutoff of 95% was used for each
group of sequences which simultaneously were “best
hits” for a given Arabidopsis sequence (the cutoff of
95% was based on the observation that this keeps the
Arabidopsis MADS proteins apart). A representative for
each cluster was chosen randomly, except that preference was given to Interpro-based sequences compared
to blast-based sequences and sequences from the genomes were preferred over both Interpro-based
sequences and blast-based sequences. In addition, at
least 25% sequence identity between a sequence and the
Arabidopsis sequence which was it best hit, was
required.
Our choice to detect orthologs using blast hits is a
pragmatic one. A more elaborate and time-consuming
approach would be to make use of phylogenetic trees,
which however have their own degree of uncertainty.
We tested how different the results would be upon
application of phylogenetic relationships from previously
published phylogenetic trees for the MADS domain proteins AP1 and FUL [79]. When comparing with structure data, resulting correlated mutations for these cases
did not contain more residue pairs at lower distances
than what was obtained when using blast (data not
shown). Hence we do not further discuss these results.
To analyze intramolecular correlated mutations, the
only step to take next was to align the sequences of
each Arabidopsis MADS domain protein with all its
associated sequences, for which Muscle [77] was used.
The alignments were used for the correlated mutation
analysis if at least 30 sequences were present. For intermolecular correlated mutation analysis, interaction data
from De Folter et al. were used [30]. We combined for
each pair of interacting Arabidopsis sequences their predicted orthologs within each species. If in one species
multiple sequences were best hits with one of the two

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

interacting sequences we combined each of those with
the best hits in that species of its interaction partner.
For example, if Arabidopsis protein X and Arabidopsis
protein Y interact and both have two best hits in a
given species, in that species there are 2 * 2 = 4
combinations.
After alignment, the resulting sets of interaction pairs
(each consisting of one original Arabidopsis interaction
pair and the ortholog pairs obtained for various other
species) were used as input for the correlated mutation
analysis if at least 30 pairs were present. As a background model, non-interacting pairs with at least 30
associated sequence pairs were used as input.
Note that the cutoff on the number of sequences (30)
that we use is somewhat arbitrarily but such cutoff is
clearly needed because the smaller the number of
sequences, the less reliable the correlated mutation
results are.
Correlated Mutation analysis with CAPS

CAPS [8] compares the correlated variance of the evolutionary rates at two sites in a multiple sequence alignment by comparing the transition probabilities between
each pair of amino acids at the two sites, using the
BLOSUM substitution matrix [80]. Because sequences
that diverged longer ago are more likely to fix mutations
at two sites by chance, BLOSUM values are normalized
by the time of divergence between sequences using Poisson corrected amino acid distances; we performed analysis both with and without this time correction. The
coevolution between two sites is then estimated as the
correlation in the pairwise amino acid variability, relative
to the mean variability per site. Correlated mutation
pairs are grouped based on their connectivity to each
other; only those “correlated groups” were analyzed.
To determine significance of these correlations, resampling can be performed. However, because this is
computationally expensive (keeping in mind that we
perform correlated mutation analysis for various MADS
domain proteins and various pairs of MADS domain
proteins), we chose to use a cutoff on the value of the
correlation coefficient, which we set to 0.4, in agreement
with previous correlated mutation analyses [3]. This is a
conservative threshold as it is slightly above the lowest
correlation coefficient values found to be significant in
an earlier application of CAPS [81]. We performed
resampling afterwards for a number of MADS protein
pairs to analyze the significance of the results obtained
when comparing the correlated mutations with available
structural data (see below, randomization trials). We
also tested a previously described approach to remove
spurious phylogenetic correlation by using subalignments where specific clades are removed [8]. This
approach was implemented by using small subunit

Page 11 of 15

ribosomal RNA sequences obtained from http://gobase.
bcm.umontreal.ca/searches/gene.php to obtain distances
between species and using Clustalw [82] to build a tree.
As the results of this analysis did not improve compared
to the results without this correction, we only present
the latter results. This is in line with an analysis that
showed that tree-aware correlated mutation methods
did not outperform tree-ignorant methods [83].
Comparison with protein structure data and predicted
interaction motifs

Although no structure for plant MADS domain proteins
is available, a couple of structures of human MADS
domains are available. Of these, 1tqe, 1n6j, 1egw and
3kov are crystal structures of MEF2-type MADS
domains, which are most related to plant MIKC (type
II) MADS domains [84]. Because 1egw, the structure of
human MEF2A [35] has the best resolution of these
structures we chose this structure for comparison of the
correlated mutation analysis results with structure data.
The structure of human MEF2B, 1n6j [33], has the second-best resolution and we used this structure for comparison. Results of using this structure are almost
indistinguishable from that of using 1egw, so we only
report results for the latter.
Correlated mutation pairs were compared with protein
structure data as follows. For all intra-and inter-molecular pairs of residues in the PDB structure 1egw, the
shortest heavy-atom distance was obtained. Mapping of
the Arabidopsis sequence to the structure was obtained
via Muscle alignment. For this, residues 2-69 of the
structure were used. For residues 2-59, which constitute
the MADS domain, there is high overall sequence similarity with the plant MADS domain, and for residues
60-69 there is also reasonable sequence similarity with
the first part of the plant I domain. For the various proteins, this similarity (amount of conservative substitutions) is at least 7 out of 10. However, the sequence
identity with the plant I domain is lower than for the
MADS domain, meaning that the results of comparison
with this part of the structure could be more noisy.
In addition, correlated mutation pairs were compared
with previously predicted interaction motifs [53].
Because these interaction motifs are grouped into pairs
of complementary motifs, correlated mutation positions
were compared both to individual motifs and to pairs of
complementary motifs.
To predict coiled coils in the K-domain, a method
which compares sequences with sequences of known
coiled-coil proteins [85] was used, which is available via
http://npsa-pbil.ibcp.fr/cgi-bin/npsa_automat.pl?page=npsa_lupas.html. Default settings were used (scoring
matrix 2-MTIDK, no upweighting of positions a and d),
and a window length of 14, minimum coil probability of

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

0.5 and minimum length of 4 residues was applied to
predict coiled coil helices based on the predicted coil
probabilities. Helical wheel representations were generated with http://rzlab.ucr.edu/scripts/wheel/wheel.cgi.
Modelling of the structure of the MADS domain of
SEP3 was performed using Modeller [86]. Out of 1000
generated models, the 10 best based on the objective
score were used for docking. Modelling of a K-domain
helix was performed in CNS [87]. Dihedral angle
restraints were defined for backbone angles phi, -65° ±
20° and psi -40° ± 20°, respectively, and hydrogen bond
restraints were defined between each O(i)-N(i+4) pair
(lower and upper bound 2.3 and 3.5 Å, respectively) and
O(i)-HN(i+4) pair (lower and upper bound 1.7 and 2.5
Å, respectively). The anneal.inp CNS-script was used,
which applies a high-temperature torsion-angle
dynamics phase followed by a torsion angle dynamics
cooling phase and a second cartesian dynamics cooling
phase. Ten structures were calculated, and the lowest
energy structure was used. Protein structure figures
were prepared using Molscript [88] and Raster3 D [89].
Correlated mutations and sequence entropy

For the intramolecular correlated mutation analysis, correlated mutation positions in a given protein were compared with the homologous positions in all other
proteins, and these pairs were either designated ‘conserved’ correlated mutation if they showed a correlated
mutation as well, and ‘non-conserved’ correlated mutation if they did not. To compare sequence variability at
‘conserved’ vs ‘non-conserved’ sites, sequence entropy
was used, which for alignment column k is defined as
Sk = −

∑

P jk ln P jk

j =1,20

where Pjk is the frequency of amino acid j at position
k.
Randomization trials

Here we describe the various random trials that were
performed in order to test for statistical significance. To
assess the statistical significance of the intramolecular
distance enrichment, 1000 random subsets of residue
pairs were generated (with the size of the subset equal
to the number of correlated mutation residue pairs). For
these, the fraction of residues within 15Å of each other
was calculated.
To assess the significance of observed intermolecular
short distance enrichment for correlated mutation positions, we applied a randomization procedure where the original pairs of sequences that formed an input set for CAPS
were randomly shuffled. This was repeated 1000 times.

Page 12 of 15

To assess the significance of the observed overlap
between correlated mutation residues and predicted
interaction motifs, random ‘correlated mutation’ pairs
were generated by replacing each position in an
observed correlated mutation position pair with a randomly generated sequence position. In doing so, we
took into account that a position could occur in several
correlated mutation pairs; such position was replaced by
the same random position in all its correlated mutation
position pairs.
Finally, to assess the statistical significance of the
observed preferred sequence-distance for correlated
mutation positions within helices in the K-domain, we
analyzed whether similar preferred sequence-distances
occurred within randomly generated stretches of the
sequence. The number and length distribution of these
stretches was similar to that of the predicted K-domain
coils, but their position within the sequence was
randomized.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Sequence identifiers for intramolecular correlated
mutation analysis. This file contains the sequences identifiers of the
sequences used in the intramolecular correlated mutation analysis.
Additional file 2: Input data for intermolecular correlated mutation
analysis. This file contains the pairs of interacting proteins used for the
intermolecular correlated mutation analysis.
Additional file 3: Intramolecular correlated mutation results. This
files contains the correlated mutation pairs obtained from the
intramolecular analysis.
Additional file 4: Intermolecular correlated mutation results. This
files contains the correlated mutation pairs obtained from the
intermolecular analysis.
Additional file 5: Short distance enrichment significance. This file
contains an analysis of the statistical significance of the observed short
distance enrichment for the intermolecular correlated mutations.
Additional file 6: Correlated mutations that have consistent overlap
with predicted interaction motifs. This file contains correlated
mutations that have consistent overlap with predicted interaction motifs
and are strong candidates to be important residues for protein-protein
interactions of the MADS domain proteins.
Additional file 7: Conserved correlated mutations. This file contains
correlated mutations which are conserved, i.e. appearing in more than
one MADS domain protein (both intramolecular and intermolecular
correlated mutations).
Additional file 8: Prediction of helices in K-domain. This file contains
predicted helices in the K-domain.
Additional file 9: Predicted intramolecular contacts between helices.
This file contains contacts predicted between K-domain helices using
correlated mutations.
Additional file 10: Predicted intramolecular contacts helices MADS/I domain. This file contains contacts predicted between Kdomain helices and the MADS/I domain.
Additional file 11: Correlated mutations based analysis of
intermolecular MADS domain protein helix - helix interactions. This
file contains an analysis of intermolecular contacts predicted between Kdomain helices.

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the BioRange programme (SP 2.3.1) of the
Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre (NBIC), which is supported through the
Netherlands Genomics Initiative (NGI), and by the Netherlands Organization
for Scientific Research (NWO, NWO-VENI Grant 863.08.027 to ADJvD). We also
thank Richard Immink for helpful discussions.
Authors’ contributions
ADJvD and RCHJvH conceived and designed the study, and wrote the
paper. ADJvD performed the experiments and analyzed the data. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 18 March 2010 Accepted: 28 October 2010
Published: 28 October 2010
References
1. Altschuh D, Lesk AM, Bloomer AC, Klug A: Correlation of Coordinated
Amino-Acid Substitutions with Function in Viruses Related to Tobacco
Mosaic-Virus. Journal of Molecular Biology 1987, 193(4):693-707.
2. Socolich M, Lockless SW, Russ WP, Lee H, Gardner KH, Ranganathan R:
Evolutionary information for specifying a protein fold. Nature 2005,
437(7058):512-518.
3. Fuchs A, Martin-Galiano AJ, Kalman M, Fleishman S, Ben-Tal N, Frishman D:
Co-evolving residues in membrane proteins. Bioinformatics 2007,
23(24):3312-3319.
4. Travers SAA, Tully DC, McCormack GP, Fares MA: A study of the
coevolutionary patterns operating within the env gene of the HIV-1
group M subtypes. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2007, 24(12):2787-2801.
5. Kuipers RKP, Joosten HJ, Verwiel E, Paans S, Akerboom J, van der Oost J,
Leferink NGH, van Berkel WJH, Vriend G, Schaap PJ: Correlated mutation
analyses on super-family alignments reveal functionally important
residues. Proteins-Structure Function and Bioinformatics 2009, 76(3):608-616.
6. Miller CS, Eisenberg D: Using inferred residue contacts to distinguish
between correct and incorrect protein models. Bioinformatics 2008,
24(14):1575-1582.
7. Afonnikov DA, Kolchanov NA: CRASP: a program for analysis of
coordinated substitutions in multiple alignments of protein sequences.
Nucleic Acids Research 2004, 32:W64-W68.
8. Fares MA, Travers SAA: A novel method for detecting intramolecular
coevolution: Adding a further dimension to selective constraints
analyses. Genetics 2006, 173(1):9-23.
9. Martin LC, Gloor GB, Dunn SD, Wahl LM: Using information theory to
search for co-evolving residues in proteins. Bioinformatics 2005,
21(22):4116-4124.
10. Buslje CM, Santos J, Delfino JM, Nielsen M: Correction for phylogeny, small
number of observations and data redundancy improves the
identification of coevolving amino acid pairs using mutual information.
Bioinformatics 2009, 25(9):1125-1131.
11. Buck MJ, Atchley WR: Networks of coevolving sites in structural and
functional domains of serpin proteins. Molecular Biology and Evolution
2005, 22(7):1627-1634.
12. Horner DS, Pirovano W, Pesole G: Correlated substitution analysis and the
prediction of amino acid structural contacts. Briefings in Bioinformatics
2008, 9(1):46-56.
13. Fodor AA, Aldrich RW: Influence of conservation on calculations of amino
acid covariance in multiple sequence alignments. Proteins-Structure
Function and Bioinformatics 2004, 56(2):211-221.
14. Halperin I, Wolfson H, Nussinov R: Correlated mutations: Advances and
limitations. A study on fusion proteins and on the cohesin-dockerin
families. Proteins-Structure Function and Bioinformatics 2006, 63(4):832-845.
15. Pazos F, Valencia A: Similarity of phylogenetic trees as indicator of
protein-protein interaction. Protein Engineering 2001, 14(9):609-614.
16. Goh CS, Bogan AA, Joachimiak M, Walther D, Cohen FE: Co-evolution of
proteins with their interaction partners. Journal of Molecular Biology 2000,
299(2):283-293.
17. Sato T, Yamanishi Y, Horimoto K, Kanehisa M, Toh H: Partial correlation
coefficient between distance matrices as a new indicator of proteinprotein interactions. Bioinformatics 2006, 22(20):2488-2492.
18. Pazos F, Ranea JAG, Juan D, Sternberg MJE: Assessing protein co-evolution
in the context of the tree of life assists in the prediction of the
interactome. Journal of Molecular Biology 2005, 352(4):1002-1015.

Page 13 of 15

19. Izarzugaza JMG, Juan D, Pons C, Ranea JAG, Valencia A, Pazos F: TSEMA:
interactive prediction of protein pairings between interacting families.
Nucleic Acids Research 2006, 34:W315-W319.
20. Ramani AK, Marcotte EM: Exploiting the co-evolution of interacting
proteins to discover interaction specificity. Journal of Molecular Biology
2003, 327(1):273-284.
21. Waddell PJ, Kishino H, Ota R: Phylogenetic methodology for detecting
protein interactions. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2007, 24(3):650-659.
22. Juan D, Pazos F, Valencia A: High-confidence prediction of global
interactomes based on genome-wide coevolutionary networks.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2008, 105(3):934-939.
23. Hakes L, Lovell SC, Oliver SG, Robertson DL: Specificity in protein
interactions and its relationship with sequence diversity and
coevolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2007, 104(19):7999-8004.
24. Pazos F, Valencia A: Protein co-evolution, co-adaptation and interactions.
Embo Journal 2008, 27(20):2648-2655.
25. Noivirt O, Eisenstein M, Horovitz A: Detection and reduction of
evolutionary noise in correlated mutation analysis. Protein Engineering
Design & Selection 2005, 18(5):247-253.
26. Fraser HB, Hirsh AE, Wall DP, Eisen MB: Coevolution of gene expression
among interacting proteins. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2004, 101(24):9033-9038.
27. Angenent G, de Folter S, Nougalli I, Immink R: Protein complexes make
the flower. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology a-Molecular &
Integrative Physiology 2006, 143(4):S167-S167.
28. Ng M, Yanofsky MF: Function and evolution of the plant MADS-box gene
family. Nat Rev Genet 2001, 2(3):186-195.
29. Immink RGH, Angenent GC: Transcription factors do it together: the hows
and whys of studying protein-protein interactions. Trends in Plant Science
2002, 7(12):531-534.
30. de Folter S, Immink RGH, Kieffer M, Parenicova L, Henz SR, Weigel D,
Busscher M, Kooiker M, Colombo L, Kater MM, et al: Comprehensive
interaction map of the Arabidopsis MADS box transcription factors. Plant
Cell 2005, 17(5):1424-1433.
31. Parenicova L, de Folter S, Kieffer M, Horner DS, Favalli C, Busscher J,
Cook HE, Ingram RM, Kater MM, Davies B, et al: Molecular and
phylogenetic analyses of the complete MADS-box transcription factor
family in Arabidopsis: New openings to the MADS world. Plant Cell 2003,
15(7):1538-1551.
32. De Bodt S, Raes J, Van de Peer YV, Theissen G: And then there were many:
MADS goes genomic. Trends in Plant Science 2003, 8(10):475-483.
33. Han AD, Pan F, Stroud JC, Youn HD, Liu JO, Chen L: Sequence-specific
recruitment of transcriptional co-repressor Cabin1 by myocyte enhancer
factor-2. Nature 2003, 422(6933):730-734.
34. Pellegrini L, Tan S, Richmond TJ, Dominguez R, Souchon H, Spinelli S,
Dauter Z, Wilson KS, Chauvaux S, Beguin P, et al: Structure of serum
response factor core bound to DNA. Nature 1995, 376(6540):490-498.
35. Santelli E, Richmond TJ: Crystal structure of MEF2A core bound to DNA at
1.5 A resolution. J Mol Biol 2000, 297(2):437-449.
36. Huang K, Louis JM, Donaldson L, Lim FL, Sharrocks AD, Clore GM: Solution
structure of the MEF2A-DNA complex: structural basis for the
modulation of DNA bending and specificity by MADS-box transcription
factors. Embo J 2000, 19(11):2615-2628.
37. Mo Y, Ho W, Johnston K, Marmorstein R: Crystal structure of a ternary
SAP-1/SRF/c-fos SRE DNA complex. J Mol Biol 2001, 314(3):495-506.
38. Hassler M, Richmond TJ: The B-box dominates SAP-1-SRF interactions in
the structure of the ternary complex. Embo J 2001, 20(12):3018-3028.
39. Krizek BA, Meyerowitz EM: Mapping the protein regions responsible for
the functional specificities of the Arabidopsis MADS domain organidentity proteins. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 1996, 93(9):4063-4070.
40. Riechmann JL, Krizek BA, Meyerowitz EM: Dimerization specificity of
Arabidopsis MADS domain homeotic proteins APETALA1, APETALA3,
PISTILLATA, and AGAMOUS. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 1996, 93(10):4793-4798.
41. Hill K, Wang H, Perry SE: A transcriptional repression motif in the MADS
factor AGL15 is involved in recruitment of histone deacetylase complex
components. Plant Journal 2008, 53(1):172-185.

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

42. Lim J, Moon YH, An G, Jang SK: Two rice MADS domain proteins interact
with OsMADS1. Plant Molecular Biology 2000, 44(4):513-527.
43. Yang YZ, Jack T: Defining subdomains of the K domain important for
protein-protein interactions of plant MADS proteins. Plant Molecular
Biology 2004, 55(1):45-59.
44. Yang YZ, Fanning L, Jack T: The K domain mediates heterodimerization of
the Arabidopsis floral organ identity proteins, APETALA3 and
PISTILLATA. Plant Journal 2003, 33(1):47-59.
45. Kaufmann K, Anfang N, Saedler H, Theissen G: Mutant analysis, proteinprotein interactions and subcellular localization of the Arabidopsis Bsister (ABS) protein. Molecular Genetics and Genomics 2005, 274(2):103-118.
46. Martinez-Castilla LP, Alvarez-Buylla ER: Adaptive evolution in the
Arabidopsis MADS-box gene family inferred from its complete resolved
phylogeny. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2003, 100(23):13407-13412.
47. Nam J, Kaufmann K, Theiben G, Nei M: A simple method for predicting
the functional differentiation of duplicate genes and its application to
MIKC-type MADS-box genes. Nucleic Acids Research 2005, 33(2).
48. Hernandez-Hernandez T, Martinez-Castilla LP, Alvarez-Buylla ER: Functional
diversification of B MADS-Box homeotic regulators of flower
development: Adaptive evolution in protein-protein interaction domains
after major gene duplication events. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2007,
24(2):465-481.
49. Veron AS, Kaufmann K, Bornberg-Bauer E: Evidence of interaction network
evolution by whole-genome duplications: A case study in MADS-box
proteins. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2007, 24(3):670-678.
50. Lenser T, Theissen G, Dittrich P: Developmental Robustness by Obligate
Interaction of Class B Floral Homeotic Genes and Proteins. Plos
Computational Biology 2009, 5(1).
51. Espinosa-soto C, Padilla-Longoria P, Alvarez-Buylla ER: A gene regulatory
network model for cell-fate determination during Arabidopsis thalianal
flower development that is robust and recovers experimental gene
expression profiles. Plant Cell 2004, 16(11):2923-2939.
52. Mendoza L, Thieffry D, Alvarez-Buylla ER: Genetic control of flower
morphogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana: a logical analysis. Bioinformatics
1999, 15(7-8):593-606.
53. van Dijk ADJ, Ter Braak CJF, Immink RG, Angenent GC, van Ham RCHJ:
Predicting and understanding transcription factor interactions based on
sequence level determinants of combinatorial control. Bioinformatics
2008, 24(1):26-33.
54. van Dijk ADJ, Morabito G, Fiers M, Van Ham RCHJ, Angenent GC,
Immink RGH: Sequence motifs in MADS transcription factors responsible
for specificity and diversification of protein-protein interaction. Plos
Computational Biology .
55. Yu HY, Luscombe NM, Lu HX, Zhu XW, Xia Y, Han JDJ, Bertin N, Chung S,
Vidal M, Gerstein M: Annotation transfer between genomes: Proteinprotein interologs and protein-DNA regulogs. Genome Research 2004,
14(6):1107-1118.
56. Mika S, Rost B: Protein-protein interactions more conserved within
species than across species. Plos Computational Biology 2006, 2(7):698-709.
57. Clark RM, Schweikert G, Toomajian C, Ossowski S, Zeller G, Shinn P,
Warthmann N, Hu TT, Fu G, Hinds DA, et al: Common sequence
polymorphisms shaping genetic diversity in Arabidopsis thaliana. Science
2007, 317(5836):338-342.
58. Kaufmann K, Melzer R, Theissen G: MIKC-type MADS-domain proteins:
structural modularity, protein interactions and network evolution in land
plants. Gene 2005, 347(2):183-198.
59. Melzer R, Theissen G: Reconstitution of floral quartets in vitro involving
class B and class E floral homeotic proteins. Nucleic Acids Research 2009,
37(8):2723-2736.
60. Immink RGH, Tonaco IAN, de Folter S, Shchennikova A, van Dijk ADJ,
Busscher-Lange J, Borst JW, Angenent GC: SEPALLATA3: the ‘glue’ for
MADS box transcription factor complex formation. Genome Biology 2009,
10(2).
61. Ciannamea S, Kaufmann K, Frau M, Tonaco IAN, Petersen K, Nielsen KK,
Angenent GC, Immink RGH: Protein interactions of MADS box
transcription factors involved in flowering in Lolium perenne. Journal of
Experimental Botany 2006, 57(13):3419-3431.
62. Cseke LJ, Ravinder N, Pandey AK, Podila GK: Identification of PTM5 protein
interaction partners, a MADS-box gene involved in aspen tree
vegetative development. Gene 2007, 391(1-2):209-222.

Page 14 of 15

63. Fornara F, Parenicova L, Falasca G, Pelucchi N, Masiero S, Ciannamea S,
Lopez-Dee Z, Altamura MM, Colombo L, Kater MM: Functional
characterization of OsMADS18, a member of the AP1/SQUA subfamily of
MADS box genes. Plant Physiology 2004, 135(4):2207-2219.
64. Kane NA, Danyluk J, Tardif G, Ouellet F, Laliberte JF, Limin AE, Fowler DB,
Sarhan F: TaVRT-2, a member of the StMADS-11 clade of flowering
repressors, is regulated by vernalization and photoperiod in wheat. Plant
Physiology 2005, 138(4):2354-2363.
65. Shan HY, Su KM, Lu WL, Kong HZ, Chen ZD, Meng Z: Conservation and
divergence of candidate class B genes in Akebia trifoliata
(Lardizabalaceae). Development Genes and Evolution 2006, 216(12):785-795.
66. Shitsukawa N, Tahira C, Kassai KI, Hirabayashi C, Shimizu T, Takumi S,
Mochida K, Kawaura K, Ogihara Y, Murai K: Genetic and epigenetic
alteration among three homoeologous genes of a class E MADS box
gene in hexaploid wheat. Plant Cell 2007, 19(6):1723-1737.
67. Sundstrom J, Engstrom P: Conifer reproductive development involves Btype MADS-box genes with distinct and different activities in male
organ primordia. Plant Journal 2002, 31(2):161-169.
68. Mulder NJ, Apweiler R, Attwood TK, Bairoch A, Bateman A, Binns D, Bork P,
Buillard V, Cerutti L, Copley R, et al: New developments in the InterPro
database. Nucleic Acids Research 2007, 35:D224-D228.
69. Bairoch A, Consortium U, Bougueleret L, Altairac S, Amendolia V,
Auchincloss A, Argoud-Puy G, Axelsen K, Baratin D, Blatter MC, et al: The
Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) 2009. Nucleic Acids Research 2009, 37:
D169-D174.
70. Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998, 14(9):755-763.
71. Goff SA, Ricke D, Lan TH, Presting G, Wang RL, Dunn M, Glazebrook J,
Sessions A, Oeller P, Varma H, et al: A draft sequence of the rice genome
(Oryza sativa L. ssp japonica). Science 2002, 296(5565):92-100.
72. Tuskan GA, DiFazio S, Jansson S, Bohlmann J, Grigoriev I, Hellsten U,
Putnam N, Ralph S, Rombauts S, Salamov A, et al: The genome of black
cottonwood, Populus trichocarpa (Torr. & Gray). Science 2006,
313(5793):1596-1604.
73. Velasco R, Zharkikh A, Troggio M, Cartwright DA, Cestaro A, Pruss D,
Pindo M, FitzGerald LM, Vezzulli S, Reid J, et al: A High Quality Draft
Consensus Sequence of the Genome of a Heterozygous Grapevine
Variety. PLoS ONE 2007, 2(12):e1326.
74. Rensing SA, Lang D, Zimmer AD, Terry A, Salamov A, Shapiro H,
Nishiyama T, Perroud PF, Lindquist EA, Kamisugi Y, et al: The
Physcomitrella genome reveals evolutionary insights into the conquest
of land by plants. Science 2008, 319(5859):64-69.
75. Ming R, Hou SB, Feng Y, Yu QY, Dionne-Laporte A, Saw JH, Senin P,
Wang W, Ly BV, Lewis KLT, et al: The draft genome of the transgenic
tropical fruit tree papaya (Carica papaya Linnaeus). Nature 2008,
452(7190):991-U997.
76. Paterson AH, Bowers JE, Bruggmann R, Dubchak I, Grimwood J,
Gundlach H, Haberer G, Hellsten U, Mitros T, Poliakov A, et al: The Sorghum
bicolor genome and the diversification of grasses. Nature 2009,
457(7229):551-556.
77. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Research 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
78. Ashkenazy H, Unger R, Kliger Y: Optimal data collection for correlated
mutation analysis. Proteins-Structure Function and Bioinformatics 2009,
74(3):545-555.
79. Shan HY, Zhan N, Liu CJ, Xu GX, Zhang J, Chen ZD, Kong HZ: Patterns of
gene duplication and functional diversification during the evolution of
the AP1/SQUA subfamily of plant MADS-box genes. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 2007, 44(1):26-41.
80. Henikoff S, Henikoff JG: Amino-Acid Substitution Matrices from Protein
Blocks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 1992, 89(22):10915-10919.
81. Travers SAA, Fares MA: Functional coevolutionary networks of the Hsp70Hop-Hsp90 system revealed through computational analyses. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 2007, 24(4):1032-1044.
82. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: Clustal-W - Improving the
Sensitivity of Progressive Multiple Sequence Alignment through
Sequence Weighting, Position-Specific Gap Penalties and Weight Matrix
Choice. Nucleic Acids Research 1994, 22(22):4673-4680.
83. Caporaso JG, Smit S, Easton BC, Hunter L, Huttley GA, Knight R: Detecting
coevolution without phylogenetic trees? Tree-ignorant metrics of

van Dijk and van Ham BMC Genomics 2010, 11:607
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/607

84.

85.
86.
87.

88.

89.

Page 15 of 15

coevolution perform as well as tree-aware metrics. Bmc Evolutionary
Biology 2008, 8.
Becker A, Theissen G: The major clades of MADS-box genes and their
role in the development and evolution of flowering plants. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 2003, 29(3):464-489.
Lupas A, Vandyke M, Stock J: Predicting Coiled Coils from Protein
Sequences. Science 1991, 252(5009):1162-1164.
Sali A, Blundell TL: Comparative Protein Modeling by Satisfaction of
Spatial Restraints. Journal of Molecular Biology 1993, 234(3):779-815.
Brunger AT, Adams PD, Clore GM, DeLano WL, Gros P, Grosse-Kunstleve RW,
Jiang JS, Kuszewski J, Nilges M, Pannu NS, et al: Crystallography & NMR
system: A new software suite for macromolecular structure
determination. Acta Crystallographica Section D-Biological Crystallography
1998, 54:905-921.
Kraulis PJ: Molscript - a Program to Produce Both Detailed and
Schematic Plots of Protein Structures. Journal of Applied Crystallography
1991, 24:946-950.
Merritt EA, Murphy MEP: Raster3 d Version-2.0 - a Program for
Photorealistic Molecular Graphics. Acta Crystallographica Section DBiological Crystallography 1994, 50:869-873.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-607
Cite this article as: van Dijk and van Ham: Conserved and variable
correlated mutations in the plant MADS protein network. BMC Genomics
2010 11:607.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
