<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-4-53.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Software

GeneViTo: Visualizing gene-product functional and structural
features in genomic datasets
Georgios S Vernikos†, Christos G Gkogkas†, Vasilis J Promponas and
Stavros J Hamodrakas*
Address: Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, 15701, Athens, Greece
Email: Georgios S Vernikos - gverniko@yahoo.gr; Christos G Gkogkas - mubiol@yahoo.com; Vasilis J Promponas - vprobon@biol.uoa.gr;
Stavros J Hamodrakas* - shamodr@cc.uoa.gr
* Corresponding author †Equal contributors

Published: 31 October 2003
BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:53

Received: 22 July 2003
Accepted: 31 October 2003

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53
© 2003 Vernikos et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: The availability of increasing amounts of sequence data from completely sequenced
genomes boosts the development of new computational methods for automated genome
annotation and comparative genomics. Therefore, there is a need for tools that facilitate the
visualization of raw data and results produced by bioinformatics analysis, providing new means for
interactive genome exploration. Visual inspection can be used as a basis to assess the quality of
various analysis algorithms and to aid in-depth genomic studies.
Results: GeneViTo is a JAVA-based computer application that serves as a workbench for genomewide analysis through visual interaction. The application deals with various experimental
information concerning both DNA and protein sequences (derived from public sequence databases
or proprietary data sources) and meta-data obtained by various prediction algorithms, classification
schemes or user-defined features. Interaction with a Graphical User Interface (GUI) allows easy
extraction of genomic and proteomic data referring to the sequence itself, sequence features, or
general structural and functional features. Emphasis is laid on the potential comparison between
annotation and prediction data in order to offer a supplement to the provided information,
especially in cases of "poor" annotation, or an evaluation of available predictions. Moreover, desired
information can be output in high quality JPEG image files for further elaboration and scientific use.
A compilation of properly formatted GeneViTo input data for demonstration is available to
interested readers for two completely sequenced prokaryotes, Chlamydia trachomatis and
Methanococcus jannaschii.
Conclusions: GeneViTo offers an inspectional view of genomic functional elements, concerning
data stemming both from database annotation and analysis tools for an overall analysis of existing
genomes. The application is compatible with Linux or Windows ME-2000-XP operating systems,
provided that the appropriate Java Runtime Environment is already installed in the system.

Background
The impressive progress in Molecular Biology, enhanced
by the development of rapid genome sequencing technol-

ogies, led to an exponential growth of the number of
available DNA/protein sequences deposited in public
databases. Between the early 90's, when the Human
Page 1 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

Genome Project began, and 1996 the complete genome
sequences of 5 unicellular organisms had been determined. By the time of this writing (September 2003) 160
genomes (including the Human Genome) have been
completely sequenced, while 643 genome projects are still
in progress [1,2]. On the other hand, the intensive
research activity in the field of Bioinformatics generates a
large amount of heterogeneous meta-data which, examined on a large-scale, demand further analysis in order to
extract valuable biological information.
DNA or protein sequence retrieval from specialized
curated databases (GenBank [3], SWISS-PROT [4]) is
quite effective, by the means of well-established tools,
such as SRS [5] or Entrez [6]. Cross-references between
entries from disseminated biological databases are abundant, helping for easy navigation over the World Wide
Web, but are unable to offer an overview of the way
sequence features are distributed in ordered sequence sets,
such as complete genomes.
Moreover, several bioinformatics analysis and prediction
tools are available, either as web services or as standalone
applications, attempting to give further insight to existing
sequence information. These tools produce different output, according to the analysis type, and results representation is mainly oriented towards a per functional element
basis. These analyses complement experimental data and
guide further research activities.
Once information concerning a genome is obtained
(sequence, annotation and meta-data), an integration
step is required in order to come to advanced biological
conclusions. Such a task is time-consuming and painstaking, as long as data for hundreds/thousands of sequences
are "thick-set" in structured text files. Furthermore, the
monotonous machine-readable file format does not
reveal at once features contained in a set of sequences in
an intuitive way. It becomes quite clear, especially in cases
of completely sequenced genomes, that organizing data in
text files constitutes only a primordial level of presentation. Thus, a more sophisticated approach for easier, efficient, more productive and less chaotic representation is
required.
Data visualization, using specialized Computer Graphics
Software, act as an intermediate link between raw data
and the user for more effective and elaborate manipulation of numerous genomes. Such computational workbenches become even more useful when they incorporate,
apart from the already deposited data, additional tools,
making large-scale in silico experiments easier.
Several powerful genome visualization tools are already
available, mainly focused on features related to nucleotide

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

sequences: gff2ps [7], Artemis [8], SeqVista [9], NCBI Map
Viewer [10], TIGR Genome browser [11], ENSEMBL
project viewer [12], ERGO™ [13]. Each of these methods
follows a different philosophy in the type of input data
(e.g. sequences, maps, nucleotide sequence features), the
accepted formats and the way that features are visualized.
Our approach is mainly focused in presenting features
related to gene products and their distribution along
genomic regions.
We have developed GeneViTo, a JAVA-based computer
application to incorporate in a single depiction sequence
features existing in annotation records from nucleotide
and protein sequence databases (GenBank, SWISS-PROT)
and prediction methods output (e.g. PRED-CLASS [14],
PRED-TMR2 [15], orienTM [16], SIGNALP [17]).
GeneViTo provides interfaces to additional analysis tools,
as well as several search utilities, to easily manipulate and
further examine sequenced genomes. Existing annotations may easily be extracted with a mouse click on the
color boxes representing structural genes (protein coding
regions or functional RNA products).
The GeneViTo working environment attempts to unify the
representation of data from genome-proteome resources
and bioinformatics meta-data scattered around the Internet. The scope is to achieve a holistic yet detailed image of
an entire organism and help with genome annotation,
phylogenetic studies and comparative genomics efforts.
The open system architecture combined with object oriented JAVA programming allows future incorporation of
numerous bioinformatics tools with various outputs, thus
alleviating the need to develop program-specific visualization software for a given biological task.

Implementation
Java-based Object Oriented Design
GeneViTo has been fully implemented in the Java programming language, exploiting its implicit object oriented
design and graphical representation capabilities. Two
main Java classes (MyFrame and MyPanel) serve as the
core modules for data depiction and user interaction
respectively, whereas additional classes are used for efficient data handling utilities (such as required transformations, raw data processing and analysis). Object oriented
software design enables for ease of code reusability and
provides interfaces for linking new software (or software
modules) to build systems of extended capabilities.

Furthermore, the Java programming language has become
very popular among programmers for its expressive power
and elegance and, at the same time, very attractive to users
for reasons of portability. Standard Java interpreters do

Page 2 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Table 1: Performance Benchmark Tests

Task

Main Memory Usage (Mbytes)

Execution Time

Minimum
Preparing a
Genome
Loading a
Genome
Browsing

Maximum

10.5

31.0

See Figure 1

30.0

80.0

1–5 sec

30.0

80.0

Instant

Performance tests used to collect the data presented in Table 1 and
Figure 1 have been executed on a personal computer with an Intel
Celeron 2 GHz processor and 256 MB of main memory.

Figure 1
Execution Time of data transformation against Genome Size
Execution Time of data transformation against
Genome Size. This drawing represents the relationship
between execution time and genome size. The test has been
performed for the genomes of C. trachomatis (genome size
1,042,519 bp), M. jannaschii (1,664,970 bp), E. coli (4,639,221
bp) and six artificially constructed genomes (3,329,940 bp,
4,994,910 bp, 6,659,880 bp, 8,324,850 bp, 9,278,442 bp and
9,989,820 bp) respectively.

not build architecture-specific binaries but bytecode interpreted by the Java Virtual Machine, which makes Java
applications, conceptually, cross-platform.
Performance Benchmark Tests
To assess the performance of GeneViTo, we have run several tests to address computational issues, such as memory usage. A summary of these tests is provided in Table 1.
Memory usage (in the worst case 80 MBytes of main memory) is not a limiting factor, since it not correlated with the
displayed genome's size (data not shown). Figure 1 as well
as data available in Table 1 also demonstrate that, in practice, execution time has to be considered only in the stage
of initial data transformation, which is only held once for
each genome data-set. Nevertheless, a small but not substantial increase in time is expected when the number of
genomic elements whose properties have to be incorporated into GeneViTo increases (data not shown). Loading
genomic data is quite fast, requiring just a few seconds
(Table 1).

Concerning the visualization process, GeneViTo uses true
color (a minimum of 256 colors suffices for old graphics
cards) and genome browsing is very fast even on typical
desktop computers. Graphics displayed on screen can be
saved in high-quality JPEG graphics files. The resolution
of these snapshots is only limited by the screen resolution.

Input Description
GeneViTo requires data to be specially formatted in order
to display all desired information (Figure 2). The application offers an internal automatic procedure to transform
available data into GeneViTo native format, which is
mainly tab-delimited plain text and XML, and store them
in a user-defined directory on the local hard drive. Related
genomic data are extracted from GenBank (e.g. .ptt, .fnn
files), while proteomic data (sequence, sequence related
features) are derived from the EBI Proteome Analysis
Server [18] (in SWISS-PROT format). Prediction concerning the number and topology of helical transmembrane
segments stem from PRED-TMR2 and orienTM respectively, while predicted protein structural classes originate
from the PRED-CLASS algorithm. The SIGNALP server
provides prediction on protein signal peptides. Restriction
enzyme sites are predicted by Webcutter [19], while COGs
database [20] offers information about orthologous gene
groups. All the aforementioned web resources (see Table
2) are freely available for public use, but are not limiting
GeneViTo's functionality; in practice, any properly formatted user-defined prediction data can be used.

The original data files are necessary only for the initial formatting step and all essential information is included in
the special files created by this procedure. More details
about supported file formats, data gathering and organization, are provided through the application's detailed
"Help" utility.

Results and Discussion
GUI description
The main window of the application contains 5 panels
and a circular map. The "Central Graphics Panel" (Figure
3) contains a graphic display of the selected genome, in
which genes are represented by colored boxes placed on a
thin black line, marked with the respective length subdivisions (in bp) of the genome. The location and width of
each colored box represents the relative position of the

Page 3 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Figure 2
GeneViTo system flowchart
GeneViTo system flowchart.

Table 2: Availability of GeneViTo input data.

Online Resources

Type of Data

Essential

URL

GenBank

Protein Table
FASTA nucleotide coding regions file
FASTA Nucleic Acid file
Cluster of Orthologous Groups (COGs)
Translation table

yes
yes
yes
no
no

Proteome Analysis Server (EBI)
SwissProt
WebCutter
PRED-CLASS
PRED-TMR2 and orienTM *

Complete Proteome

yes

Restriction Enzymes Sites
Protein Structural Classification
Prediction of TM region location and
orientation
Signal Peptides

no
no
no

ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/genomes/
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Utils/
wprintgc.cgi?mode=c
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/proteome/index.html
http://us.expasy.org/sprot/
http://www.firstmarket.com/cutter/cut2.html
http://biophysics.biol.uoa.gr/PRED-CLASS/
http://biophysics.biol.uoa.gr/PRED-TMR2/, and
http://biophysics.biol.uoa.gr/orienTM/
http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/

SIGNALP

no

A list of web-based resources and tools providing input data for visualization with GeneViTo. Essential data types are the minimum required dataset in order to load a Genome into GeneViTo. * PRED-TMR2 and orienTM can be executed in a single step from the orienTM web-server http://
biophysics.biol.uoa.gr/orienTM/

Page 4 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

corresponding gene and its length. The part of the genome
being displayed each time on the "Central Graphics
Panel" is a bulk of 280000 bp and all included genomic
elements therein. Species information exists on the top of
this panel; further on the right resides a clickable "Circular
Map" with a red pointer indicating the currently selected
genomic element.
The sequence of the selected element is displayed in the
"Sequence Features Panel", along with all the relevant
information available from nucleotide or protein
sequence databases (GenBank, SWISS-PROT) and data
available from prediction algorithms (PRED-CLASS,
PRED-TMR2, orienTM, SIGNALP). In the "General Features Panel", information about the selected item is displayed in red, such as: gene name, position on the
genome (bp), length (bp) and coding strand (5'-3', 3'-5').

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Information about the respective protein product (in case
of protein coding genes) is available in blue: protein identification, subcellular location, enzyme class, predicted
structural class (PRED-CLASS), number of annotated
(SWISS-PROT) and predicted transmembrane segments
(PRED-TMR2).
The "Color panel" is a tree-like structure indexing the
color choices corresponding to the indications displayed
in the "Central Graphics Panel", so that users can consult
the color patterns each time. Extra information available
from SWISS-PROT and user-defined annotation on each
protein or gene is displayed in a more detailed way in the
"Annotation Features Panel". The "Central Graphics
Panel" is dynamically connected to all other panels and
the circular map and their information is updated in real
time on each selection.

Figure 3
GeneViTo screenshot
GeneViTo screenshot. A general overview of the graphics interface; feature panels are marked with nametags.

Page 5 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Figure 4
Searching for a given gene or protein
Searching for a given gene or protein.

Functionality
A genome of interest may be loaded by selecting the
option "Open a project" and choosing the folder where
the specially formatted files were initially stored. Genomic
elements are selected by simple mouse-clicks on the
respective boxes. Consequently, all available information
is instantly displayed in the relative panels according to
the already defined options, while at the same time the
red pointer is dragged on the circular map to the respective position of the gene. In addition, an arrow displayed
near the selected gene, indicates the DNA strand where the
gene is placed on (red left_to_right arrow for the 5'-3' and
blue right_to_left arrow for the 3'-5' DNA strand).

"Browsing" a genome
"Browsing" throughout a loaded genome is performed in
280000 bp steps. An alternative search utility offers navigation through the genome, by entering the name, full or
partial sequence of a genomic element (gene/protein) in
the input dialog provided from the Edit menu (Figure 4);
once the above task is initiated, the genome representation "slides" accordingly, and the search result will be
highlighted with a pink arrow pointing above it. In the
case that the query includes a sequence segment existing
in more than one genes or proteins the transition will take
place consecutively indicating each gene or protein that
matches the search.

Page 6 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Table 3: Subcellular Locations

cofactors etc. Moreover annotated transmembrane segments, enzyme active sites and signal peptides of a protein
are highlighted on the sequence.

Outer-Membrane
Inner-Membrane
Membrane associated
Golgi
Chloroplast
Glyoxysome
Secreted
Lysosome
Type-I Membrane Protein
Type-II Membrane Protein
Endoplasmic Reticulum
Cell Wall
Peroxisome
Mitochondrion
Integral Membrane
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
No Annotation

Structural RNA coding genes
Apart from protein coding genes (default option), structural RNA coding genes (t-RNAs, r-RNAs), can also be
viewed. Once this option is activated, extra genes are
depicted on the genome in the form of "sticks", colored
according to the amino acid residue they carry (in case of
t-RNAs) or the corresponding ribosomal subunit (in case
of r-RNAs). There are several features available on each
RNA-coding gene, such as genome position, length,
sequence, and the RNA type it belongs to, displayed in the
"Sequence Features Panel".
Protein sequence related features
Organizing and grouping information cited in SWISSPROT features in GeneViTo format, facilitates an "along
the genome" depiction of such element distribution.
Annotation referring to the subcellular location of a protein has been organized into 18 distinct categories (Table
3). Similarly, using the Enzyme Code (E.C.) listed in the
SWISS-PROT annotation, the six known general enzyme
classes (Ligases, Transferases, Hydrolases, Lyases, Oxydoreductases and Isomerases) are also embodied for
representation. Each genomic element may be colored
according to the above criteria, thus giving the opportunity to acquire an overall image about the location and
function of proteins distributed along the genome. For
example, Figure 5 illustrates a cluster of M. jannaschii protein coding genes whose products are annotated as
"Hydrolases", indicating possible operon structures along
the genome [21]. Functional annotation about the protein product of each gene is available in detail, offering a
more integrated view of the specific protein, including:
possible function, metabolic pathways, subunits, coenzymes, similarity with other proteins, catalytic activity,

Predictions for protein sequences
Prediction algorithms provide information on protein
sequences, concerning: possible transmembrane domains
(PRED-TMR2) along with their topology (orienTM),
structural classification into four distinct classes (PREDCLASS; Membrane, Globular, Fibrous, Mixed), signal peptide and cleavage site prediction (SIGNALP). These
features are a valuable mean of annotating genomic Open
Reading Frames with no structural or functional assignment or as a mean of evaluation.
View Clusters of Orthologous groups (COGs)
The NCBI COGs database offers a phylogenetic classification of proteins in an entire genome. Each COG consists
of proteins that likely share a common function or
domain, which in turn has a role in a given cellular process (or processes). Different COGs functional categories
can be highlighted in a different color in order to view the
genes that encode such proteins. Once this option is activated, interesting conclusions can be inferred about
organization and topological characteristics of the
genome (Figure 6).
View restriction sites on the genome
Possible recognition sites of restriction enzymes are highlighted on the whole genome, using Webcutter (Figure 7).
Several restriction enzyme sites are available by this application. A pink triangle indicates recognition positions for
restriction endonucleases, while clicking on it provides
the respective position (in bp) along with the sequence
pattern recognized by the selected restriction enzyme.
User defined annotation
Adding personal annotation for a specific gene or protein
is supported. By doing so, each time the genome is loaded
this user-defined information will also be available, with
the option of modifying (erasing or updating) it. This feature allows storage of personal proteomic-genomic
research data that can easily be retrieved.
View the whole genome in a circular map
By mouse clicking on the miniature of the circular map on
the top-right site of the Graphics Panel, a circular map of
the genome is depicted in a new window. In this case, all
genes are colored according to the 26 COGs categories
(Figure 8). Selection of a particular region on this map
will highlight the selected region on the main window in
pink color.

Page 7 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Figure 5
Illustrating the distribution of gene-products belonging to the main enzyme classes
Illustrating the distribution of gene-products belonging to the main enzyme classes. A screenshot where genes are
colored according to the annotated E.C. number of their protein product, in M. jannaschii. A "cluster" of contiguous genes coding hydrolases is highlighted in black color.

Saving a Jpeg snapshot
An additional feature provided by GeneViTo is the ability
to save the current display in a high-resolution color
image file in JPEG format, suitable for direct incorporation into scientific publications or further inspection.
Additionally, a color palette enables the modification of
the graphics panel background color, according to the
user's personal taste.
Searching for similarities
Possible local sequence similarities can be acquired for
any selected element running the BLAST [22] algorithm
(BlastN, BlastP, BlastX) on a particular sequence (DNA or
protein) against some default databases. Any database of
choice can also be defined, given that it follows the Fasta

format. In this case, GeneViTo offers a utility to format the
given file according to the BLAST standards. BLAST results
are automatically displayed in a new window after the
procedure has been completed.
Searching for a protein sequence motif
An additional tool that is incorporated in the GeneViTo
workbench, gives the opportunity of searching for particular sequence motifs in aminoacid sequences throughout
the entire coding part of the genome. This procedure is
invoked after entering the motif of interest into the relative Input dialog. The output window indicates all protein
sequences found to comply with the given motif (Figure
9).

Page 8 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Figure 6
Illustrating Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COGs)
Illustrating Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COGs). A screenshot depicting the 26 COGs functional categories. The
"Amino acid transport and metabolism" group has been selected and the results are highlighted in light-green color, in the M.
jannaschii genome.

Extra Graphs
A number of extra graphs, especially suitable for an overall
image of the genome-proteome, are available to the user,
either in the form of a Bar Chart or in the form of a Pie
Chart. Being more specific, length distribution of the nontransmembrane segments (loops) is displayed in a Bar
Chart (Figure 10), offering information about the length
of the transmembrane proteins or the possible domains
built by those loops. A Pie Chart displays the percentage
of the transmembrane proteins whose C-terminal and Nterminal ends appear with a particular topology (N-in, Nout, C-in, C-out). Transmembrane N, C termini topology
can lead to valuable conclusions, for instance, the fact that
in most organisms there is a strong bias for both the N-ter-

minal and C-terminal ends to be located inside the cell
[23].
Additionally, Pie Charts display the fraction of: a) proteins that have been predicted as membrane, globular,
fibrous or mixed by the PRED-CLASS algorithm, b) proteins that belong in one of the 6 Enzyme classes (Figure
11). Moreover, the number of the transmembrane proteins with a given number of transmembrane segments is
displayed in a Bar Chart, while the percentage of the
proteins located in a certain subcellular location is displayed in a Pie Chart. Composition analysis of nucleotide
or amino acid sequences, or the entire genome (e.g. G+C
content) is provided. In addition, the percentage of the

Page 9 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Figure 7
Illustrating Restriction Enzyme Sites
Illustrating Restriction Enzyme Sites. A screenshot in which the recognition sites of HindIII restriction enzyme are highlighted with a pink triangle on the genome of C. trachomatis. The recognition site at the position 91603 bp has been selected.

protein-coding, RNA-coding and non-coding part of the
genome, is a feature available in a Pie Chart.
Detailed help for all options and tools supported by
GeneViTo is organized in a tree-like structure, through the
«Help» menu.
Comparison to other genome browsers
Availability of huge amounts of genomic data during the
last decade urged the development of computer applications for the analysis and visualization of this enormous
information. Consequently, several approaches have been
made to the problem of genome visualization, resulting in
diverse (as far as both the capabilities and the overall philosophy) genome browsers. Each system seems to have

been developed primarily to serve investigators' needs in
a 'project' environment, paying more attention to
incorporate features needed to accomplish specific tasks.
This fact makes direct comparisons of such software difficult and, to some extent, arbitrary. In this section, we compare GeneViTo to three well known and widely used
browsers: the TIGR genome browser [11], the ENSEMBL
project viewer[12] and ERGO™ [13] (actually its freely
available version ERGO Light).
The TIGR genome browser is freely available through the
TIGR web server, providing access to all TIGR in-house
data. This genome browser comes with some very useful
features, such as the graphical display of alternative
sources of annotations (e.g. multiple gene-finder predic-

Page 10 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Figure representation of a bacterial genome
Circular8
Circular representation of a bacterial genome. A screenshot of the circular map representing the whole genome of M.
jannaschii; genes are colored according to the COGs categories.

tions), matches of gene products to characteristic
sequence motifs and so on. Again, the software system is
not available to install locally and users are not able to
upload their genomic data along with annotations or predictions, so it has to be considered as an interface to TIGR
genomic data.
The ENSEMBL genome browser is a valuable set of
genome analysis and visualization tools, offering a functional working environment for web-based data mining
and information viewing. Individual gene products are
linked to automatically created annotation, while users
can save and alter annotations when new experimental
evidence become available. Moreover the entire package

can be downloaded to be used for individual research
purposes.
ERGO is a commercial software suite with excellent capabilities, including metabolic pathway information, but it
is mostly data-centric. More important to its great computational power is the underlying data annotation handled
by a team of experts. The freely available ERGO Light version, offers free access to a smaller amount of data, yet the
same computational tools, but users cannot upload their
own data to the server.
GeneViTo, as well as all the above software resources,
come with intuitive user friendly GUIs, allowing for easy
navigation through the vast amount of genomic data.

Page 11 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Figure 9
A screenshot of a motif search results
A screenshot of a motif search results. Proteins complying with the given motif are listed in a separate window.

GeneViTo, as a stand alone application, enables the incorporation of user defined-data: genomes, annotations and/
or computational predictions. Its main advantage, is the
clear presentation of sequence feature distribution along
genomic regions. In the input layer GeneViTo uses data
from public databases and free bioinformatics tools, so in
most of the cases users will be able to easily visualize available data through a simple mouse-click. Simultaneous
display of computationally predicted features along with
available annotations (often derived by computational
means as well) provides a useful environment, which may
complement the already existing tools for genome annotation and visualization.

Conclusions
Genome wide analysis is a difficult task due to the large
amount of primordial data and the "non-productive" way
in which they are stored and displayed. Several genome
viewers already exist, each one of them serving different
needs and research interests. GeneViTo offers an easy to
use computer environment that incorporates experimental data combined with prediction algorithms results. Primordial data and meta-data are all embodied in a clear
display that offers instantly an intuitive aspect of a
genome and a large amount of biological information at
hand. The information offered can lead to valuable
conclusions and cover a wide variety of biology issues
concerning entire organisms.

Page 12 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Figure 10
Length distribution of non-transmembrane segments (loops), in M. jannaschii
Length distribution of non-transmembrane segments (loops), in M. jannaschii.

GeneViTo has already been applied to visualize the
genomes of two microbial organisms: the bacterium C.
trachomatis and the archaeon M. jannaschii. Future plans
to extend the software platform include the ability to
handle multichromosomal genomes as unique sets or the
simultaneous display and analysis of complete genomes.
In order to achieve that goal, some modifications will be
necessary, as we have to efficiently handle the differences
in eukaryotic genome organization (e.g. exon-intron
structure). Such issues should be taken into account both
in the data storage and handling processes and in the
visualization philosophy. Computational issues, such as
memory requirements, are not raised, as clearly illustrated
in Table 1.

genomic data are freely available at the URL http://bioin
formatics.biol.uoa.gr/GENEVITO/index.html.

Availability and Requirements
Project Name: GeneViTo
Project Home Page: http://bioinformatics.biol.uoa.gr/
GENEVITO/index.html
Operating System(s): Extensively tested on Windows,
Linux (Intel). Theoretically, GeneViTo should work on
any other platform with Java Runtime Environment (JRE)
1.4.1 installed.
Programming Language: JAVA

GeneViTo will be available to download upon request to
the authors. Download instructions, along with the
"ready to run" microbial genome files accompanied with
a detailed online manual for preparing and viewing

Other requirements: Installation of JRE 1.4.1.
License: Free for Academic use.

Page 13 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Figure 11
Percentage of proteins annotated to belong to the different main enzyme classes in M. jannaschii
Percentage of proteins annotated to belong to the different main enzyme classes in M. jannaschii.

Any restrictions: None.

References
1.

Abbreviations
GUI: Graphical User Interface
COGs: Clusters of Orthologous Groups

2.
3.
4.

Authors' contributions
GV created the Graphical User Interface and part of the
genome processing programming, CG carried out most of
the genome processing programming, VP has tested the
software proposing useful improvements and SH
coordinated the whole project, suggesting the general
directions and innovating features of the application. All
authors have read and accepted the final manuscript.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the two anonymous referees for their valuable
comments and suggestions that substantially helped to improve the final
manuscript. Pantelis Bagos MSc kindly provided help on performing and
presenting the Benchmark tests.

5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Bernal A, Ear U and Kyrpides N: Genomes OnLine Database
(GOLD): a monitor of genome projects world-wide. Nucleic
Acids Res 2001, 29:126-7.
GOLD: Genomes OnLine Database [http://wit.integratedge
nomics.com/GOLD/]
Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J and Wheeler DL:
GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:23-7.
Boeckmann B, Bairoch A, Apweiler R, Blatter MC, Estreicher A,
Gasteiger E, Martin MJ, Michoud K, O'Donovan C, Phan I, Pilbout S
and Schneider M: The SWISS-PROT protein sequence database and its supplement TrEMBL in 2003. Nucleic Acids Res
2003, 31:365-70.
Zdobnov EM, Lopez R, Apweiler R and Etzold T: The EBI SRS
server – recent developments. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:368-73.
Schuler GD, Epstein JA, Ohkawa H and Kans JA: Entrez: molecular
biology database and retrieval system. In: Methods in Enzymology
Volume 266. Edited by: Doolittle RF. San Diego: Academic Press;
1996:141-62.
Abril JF and Guigó R: gff2ps: visualizing genomic annotations.
Bioinformatics 2000, 16:743-4.
Rutherford K, Parkhill J, Crook J, Horsnell T, Rice P, Rajandream MA and Barrell B: Artemis: sequence visualization and
annotation. Bioinformatics 2000, 16:944-5.
Hu Z, Frith M, Niu T and Weng Z: SeqVISTA: a graphical tool for
sequence feature visualization and comparison. BMC
Bioinformatics 2003, 4:1.
NCBI Map Viewer [http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/mapview/]
TIGR Genome Browse [http://www.tigr.org/tigr-scripts/CMR2/
choose_genome.spl]

Page 14 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

23.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/53

Hubbard T, Barker D, Birney E, Cameron G, Chen Y, Clark L, Cox T,
Cuff J, Curwen V, Down T, Durbin R, Eyras E, Gilbert J, Hammond M,
Huminiecki L, Kasprzyk A, Lehvaslaiho H, Lijnzaad P, Melsopp C,
Mongin E, Pettett R, Pocock M, Potter S, Rust A, Schmidt E, Searle S,
Slater G, Smith J, Spooner W, Stabenau A, Stalker J, Stupka E, UretaVidal A, Vastrik I and Clamp M: The Ensembl genome database
project. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:38-42.
Overbeek R, Larsen N, Walunas T, D'Souza M, Pusch G, Selkov E Jr,
Liolios K, Joukov V, Kaznadzey D, Anderson I, Bhattacharyya A, Burd
H, Gardner W, Hanke P, Kapatral V, Mikhailova N, Vasieva O, Osterman A, Vonstein V, Fonstein M, Ivanova N and Kyrpides N: The
ERGO™ genome analysis and discovery system. Nucleic Acids
Res 2003, 31:164-79.
Pasquier C, Promponas VJ and Hamodrakas SJ: PRED-CLASS: cascading neural networks for generalized protein classification
and genome-wide applications. Proteins: Structure, Function, and
Genetics 2001, 44:361-9.
Pasquier C. and Hamodrakas SJ: An hierarchical artificial neural
network system for the classification of transmembrane
proteins. Protein Eng 1999, 12:631-4.
Liakopoulos TD, Pasquier C and Hamodrakas SJ: A novel tool for
the prediction of transmembrane protein topology based on
a statistical analysis of the SwissProt database: the orienTM
algorithm. Protein Eng 2001, 14:387-90.
Nielsen H, Engelbrecht J, Brunak S and von Heijne G: Identification
of prokaryotic and eukaryotic signal peptides and prediction
of their cleavage sites. Protein Eng 1997, 10:1-6.
EBI Proteome Analysis Server [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/proteome/
index.html]
Webcutter [http://www.firstmarket.com/cutter/cut2.html]
Tatusov RL, Natale DA, Garkavtsev IV, Tatusova TA, Shankavaram
UT, Rao BS, Kiryutin B, Galperin MY, Fedorova ND and Koonin EV:
The COG database: new developments in phylogenetic classification of proteins from complete genomes. Nucleic Acids Res
2001, 29:22-28.
TIGR, Gene pairs for Methanococcus jannaschii [http://
www.tigr.org/tigr-scripts/operons/pairs.cgi?taxon_id=57]
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W and
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation
of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:3389-402.
Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G and Sonnhammer ELL: Predicting
Transmembrane Protein Topology with a Hidden Markov
Model: Application to Complete Genomes. J Mol Biol 2001,
305:567-80.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 15 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
