<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>SNIT: SNP identification for strain typing</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Source Code for Biology and Medicine 2011, 6:14. doi:10.1186/1751-0473-6-14"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ravi Vijaya Satya"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Vijaya Satya et al. Source Code for Biology and Medicine 2011, 6:14
http://www.scfbm.org/content/6/1/14

SOFTWARE REVIEW

Open Access

SNIT: SNP identification for strain typing
Ravi Vijaya Satya, Nela Zavaljevski and Jaques Reifman*

Abstract
With ever-increasing numbers of microbial genomes being sequenced, efficient tools are needed to perform strainlevel identification of any newly sequenced genome. Here, we present the SNP identification for strain typing
(SNIT) pipeline, a fast and accurate software system that compares a newly sequenced bacterial genome with
other genomes of the same species to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and small insertions/
deletions (indels). Based on this information, the pipeline analyzes the polymorphic loci present in all input
genomes to identify the genome that has the fewest differences with the newly sequenced genome. Similarly, for
each of the other genomes, SNIT identifies the input genome with the fewest differences. Results from five
bacterial species show that the SNIT pipeline identifies the correct closest neighbor with 75% to 100% accuracy.
The SNIT pipeline is available for download at http://www.bhsai.org/snit.html
Background
Rapid and accurate identification of an infectious agent
is of the utmost importance for the surveillance and
treatment of infectious diseases. Traditionally, strain typing has been performed using assays that probe a few
previously known polymorphic loci [1]. However, due to
the inherent limitations of using only a few loci, these
methods offer low specificity.
Because of the rapid decrease in costs of genome
sequencing, strain typing can now be performed in silico
by first sequencing the sample, and then comparing the
genome sequence with other available genomes of the
same species to identify the closest strain. This approach
has the potential to offer a much higher specificity
because it uses the entire genome rather than a few preselected loci. Moreover, a comprehensive listing of all
polymorphisms in a newly sequenced genome might
also be useful in predicting the virulence or pathogenicity of the new strain.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are the most
abundant form of genetic variation. Many previous methods have used “in-house” pipelines to identify and catalog
the SNPs between pathogens of the same species [2,3].
However, with the exception of SNPsFinder [4] and inGAP
[5], these pipelines are seldom publicly available. The
SNPsFinder pipeline is a Web-based application that
* Correspondence: jaques.reifman@us.army.mil
Biotechnology HPC Software Applications Institute, Telemedicine and
Advanced Technology Research Center, U.S. Army Medical Research and
Materiel Command, Fort Detrick, MD 21702, USA

requires users to upload the genome sequences that need
to be compared, which might be time consuming when a
large number of genomes are involved. In addition, the use
of a public server is not desirable if confidentiality of the
data is a concern. The inGAP pipeline provides many useful functionalities for the analysis of next-generation
sequencing data, however, the SNP identification routines
do not scale well with the number of genomes because of
their reliance on multiple sequence alignments. In our
comparative investigation, inGAP successfully produced
SNPs for four Shigella flexneri genomes, but repeatedly
crashed when run for seven Burkholderia mallei genomes
(the Results Section contains details of the configuration of
the systems on which these comparisons were performed).
Here, we present the SNP Identification for Strain
Typing (SNIT) pipeline, a computationally efficient,
light-weight application that analyzes multiple genomes
and identifies SNPs and small indels. The pipeline has
many advantages: 1) it is a stand-alone application with
a graphical user interface (GUI) that runs on the user’s
workstation, thus eliminating issues of data confidentiality; 2) it is accurate, fast, and highly scalable, owing to
the use of pairwise alignments to achieve the basic functionality of SNP finding; and 3) it automatically identifies the closest neighbor for each genome without the
need for manual processing of the SNP data.

Implementation
The input to the pipeline can be any combination of
complete genomes or draft assemblies. Optionally, the

© 2011 Satya et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Vijaya Satya et al. Source Code for Biology and Medicine 2011, 6:14
http://www.scfbm.org/content/6/1/14

Page 2 of 5

user can also provide quality scores for draft assemblies
to enable masking low-quality bases and ignoring the
SNPs reported at these positions. In the first step, the
tandem repeat regions in the input genomes are masked
to avoid reporting ambiguous variations from these
regions. We used the program Tandem Repeat Finder
(TRF) [6] to mask these tandem repeat regions. In the
second step, SNIT performs pairwise alignments
between each input genome and a user-selected reference genome (from the list of input genomes) using the
nucmer program of the MUMmer software [7]. SNIT
uses the delta-filter utility of MUMmer to filter these
alignments and obtain a one-to-one mapping between
the query and the reference. The pipeline then processes
these filtered alignments to tabulate a list of SNPs and
small indels. Figure 1 shows a high-level outline of the
pipeline.
The polymorphisms from the individual pairwise alignments are then combined into a single table that contains
the position of each polymorphism in the reference genome and the individual variants in each of the input genomes. In compiling these tables, any position in the query
genome that is not part of a filtered alignment with the
reference is considered as missing (i.e., part of a large
insertion or deletion) in the query genome. Various filters
can be applied in building this table, including requirements on the length of conserved sequence on either side
of a polymorphism and the selection of only those polymorphisms that are present in all input genomes. The
numbers of differentiating SNP/indel loci between each
pair of input genomes are computed by comparing the
corresponding columns in this table. For each input genome, the pipeline analyzes the polymorphic loci present in
all input genomes and reports the genome with the fewest
differences as the closest neighbor.

Accuracy and efficiency with draft and complete
genomes

We tested the accuracy and efficiency of the SNIT pipeline for five different bacterial species. For each species,
we ran SNIT using all publicly available strains that
were included in published phylogenies [3,8-11], including strains for which only draft genomes were available.
These phylogenies were used to estimate the accuracy of
the SNIT pipeline. Table 1 lists the input parameters
used in these comparisons.
Table 2 summarizes the results for the five bacterial
species. The SNIT pipeline took < 2 min to compare
four S. flexneri genomes. In contrast, the SNPsFinder
pipeline took 20 min, and the multiple genome comparison module of inGAP took 31 min. The SNIT pipeline
was able to efficiently process a large number of input
genomes, taking only 45 min to compare 20 large Burkholderia pseudomallei genomes, while the SNPsFinder
and inGAP pipelines repeatedly failed to produce any
results for this test case. Overall, the SNP pipeline scales
linearly with the number of input genomes, as each genome is only compared against the selected reference
genome.
The SNIT pipeline correctly identified the closest
neighbors for 100% of the genomes in four out of the
five test cases, including clonal species, such as Bacillus
anthracis and Francisella tularensis. For the fifth test
case, B. pseudomallei, the accuracy was 75% (15 out of
20). The lower accuracy for B. pseudomallei is not surprising, because the strains of this species are highly
divergent, with horizontal transfer playing a significant
role in their evolutionary history. A more sophisticated
approach than simple SNP and indel counts would be
necessary for accurate typing of such highly divergent

(optional)
Mask tandem
repeats using TRF

Input genomes
S1,S2,…,Sn
+
Reference

Closest neighbor
estimation from
SNP/indel counts

Results

POS
23
49
…

Ref
G
A

S1
T
C

S2 … Sn
T
G
A
C

Pairwise alignments with
the reference genome
using MUMmer

SNP/indel identification
and filtering

Figure 1 Outline of the SNP identification pipeline. The tandem repeat regions in the input genomes can be masked using the Tandem
Repeat Finder (TRF) program. Each input genome is aligned against a user-specified reference genome. The lists of differentiating SNPs and
indels between each pair of input genomes are constructed from these pairwise alignments.

Vijaya Satya et al. Source Code for Biology and Medicine 2011, 6:14
http://www.scfbm.org/content/6/1/14

Performance on larger data sets

Table 1 Input parameters used for testing SNIT
Parameter

Value

Minimum MUMmer cluster length

100

Minimum MUMmer exact match

50

Maximum MUMmer gap

49

Minimum large indel size

50

Minimum conserved flank length

50

species as B. pseudomallei. The details of the genomes
and phylogenies used in these comparisons are provided
in Additional file 1.
The SNIT pipeline provides a GUI that allows users to
select the input genomes, settings, and run the SNP
identification pipeline. Figure 2 provides a screenshot of
the GUI.
Accuracy with next-generation sequencing data

To test the applicability of SNIT to assemblies generated from next-generation sequencing (NGS) data, we
selected the recently published Yersinia pestis KIM
D27 genome [12]. The Y. pestis D27 strain is a derivative of Y. pestis KIM 10 strain (accession no.
NC_004088). The Y. pestis KIM D27 draft genome
(accession no. ADDC00000000) was generated from a
hybrid assembly of reads generated from 454 XLR
Titanium and Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx platforms. We configured a SNIT run with a total of 21 Y.
pestis genomes, which included both draft and finished
genomes. In the first run, we selected the Y. pestis
KIM D27 draft genome as the reference. In this run,
SNIT correctly identified the Y. pestis KIM 10 strain as
the closest neighbor for Y. pestis KIM D27. Next, we
repeated the run with Y. pestis CO92 selected as the
reference genome. Again, SNIT correctly identified Y.
pestis KIM 10 as the closest neighbor. These results
suggest that the SNIT pipeline can be applied to
assemblies generated from NGS data.

Table 2 Summary of the results for five different
bacterial species
Species

Bacillus anthracis
Francisella tularensis

No. of
Genomes

Combined
Size
(Mbp)

7
11

36
22

Time Accuracy
(min)
(%)
4
3

Page 3 of 5

100
100

Shigella flexneri

4

18

2

100

Burkholderia mallei

10

59

19

100

Burkholderia
pseudomallei

20

144

45

75

Accuracy is defined as the percentage of genomes for which the correct
closest neighbors were identified based on published phylogenies for the
species. The runs were performed using a single processor on a 3.6 GHz dual
processor system with 4 GB RAM.

To test the efficiency of the pipeline on even larger data
sets, we ran SNIT with 50 arbitrarily selected Escherichia coli genomes downloaded from PATRIC [13]. For
these 50 genomes, the pipeline completed the analysis
(with the TRF option selected) in 145 min. However,
nearly 110 of these 145 min were spent in running TRF
on the input genomes. The pipeline completed the analysis in less than 32 min without the TRF option. These
results indicate that the SNP pipeline can handle large
data sets of 50 (or more) genomes.

Discussion
In principle, the SNIT pipeline can be applied to contigs
obtained from the sequencing of clinical samples, to
perform strain-level identification of the pathogens present in the sample. The accuracy of such analysis will
depend on the fraction of the target pathogen’s genome
covered by the contigs and the overall diversity among
the different strains of the pathogen. However, the provided options to filter low-quality bases should reduce
the effect of sequencing errors and, because SNIT’s SNP
identification is relative to the compared sequenced genomes, any remaining sequencing errors in the target
sequence should not constitute a significant problem.
The efficiency of the SNIT pipeline stems from the
use of pairwise alignments based on exact matches.
However, this approach limits the application of the
pipeline to bacterial and eukaryotic genomes. Due to the
high variability in viral genomes, multiple genome alignments, possibly in the amino acid domain, will be necessary to identify discriminative polymorphisms for strain
identification. Similar to other reference-based pairwise
alignment approaches, such as SNPsFinder, the SNIT
pipeline can only report SNP loci that can be mapped
to the reference genome. While this capability is sufficient for strain typing, it should be noted that the pipeline is not intended to provide a comprehensive list of
all SNPs among the input genomes. For instance, in the
case of two genomes that share a large insertion compared with the reference genome, the variations within
this large insertion would not be reported by SNIT
unless one of them was selected as the reference.
Hence, the SNIT pipeline is not ideal for use with
strains with significant contributions from large insertions, deletions, or horizontal transfer events in their
evolutionary history.
In general, we do not expect the performance of the
pipeline to be drastically different on NGS data. While
it is true that the error rate is higher for NGS data,
sequencing errors should only have minimal, secondorder effects on the overall results. This is because
SNIT performs and reports the results of relative analysis, and it is highly unlikely that the same sequencing

Vijaya Satya et al. Source Code for Biology and Medicine 2011, 6:14
http://www.scfbm.org/content/6/1/14

Page 4 of 5

Figure 2 Graphical user interface of the SNIT pipeline. The screenshot of the main interface, showing the default values of the various input
parameters.

error would be repeated in two genomes, to make them
appear closer than they should be. In addition, SNIT
provides options to ignore variations at low-quality
bases and at either end of contigs, which would help
eliminate at least some of the sequencing errors from
the analysis.
The results presented here indicate that the SNIT
pipeline is highly accurate in identifying the closest
neighbor even in cases of clonal species, such as Bacillus anthracis, Francisella tularensis, and B. mallei.
Therefore, the pipeline can be useful as a rapid, automated tool for identifying the closest neighbor of a
newly sequenced genome. The SNP identification

modules from SNIT have been incorporated as part of
the TOFI [14] and TOPSI [15] pipelines for designing
pathogen diagnostic assays with strain-specific
signatures.

Availability and requirements
• Project name: SNIT
• Project home page: http://www.bhsai.org/snit.html
• Operating systems: Linux
• Programming language: Perl
• Other requirements: MUMmer 3.22 or greater, BioPerl, Tandem Repeat Finder (TRF) and Java Runtime
Environment (JRE) 1.5 or greater

Vijaya Satya et al. Source Code for Biology and Medicine 2011, 6:14
http://www.scfbm.org/content/6/1/14

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary data. Detailed results used to
compute the accuracy for each of the five species detailed in Table 1 of
the main text.

Acknowledgements
This work was sponsored by the U.S. DoD High Performance Computing
Modernization Program, under the High Performance Computing Software
Applications Institutes Initiative.
The opinions and assertions contained herein are the private views of the
authors and are not to be construed as official or as reflecting the views of
the U.S. Army or the U.S. Department of Defense. This paper has been
approved for public release with unlimited distribution.

Page 5 of 5

13. Snyder EE, Kampanya N, Lu J, Nordberg EK, Karur HR, Shukla M, Soneja J,
Tian Y, Xue T, Yoo H, et al: PATRIC: the VBI PathoSystems Resource
Integration Center. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D401-406.
14. Vijaya Satya R, Zavaljevski N, Kumar K, Bode E, Padilla S, Wasieloski L,
Geyer J, Reifman J: In silico microarray probe design for diagnosis of
multiple pathogens. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:496.
15. Vijaya Satya R, Kumar K, Zavaljevski N, Reifman J: A high-throughput
pipeline for the design of real-time PCR signatures. BMC Bioinformatics
2010, 11:340.
doi:10.1186/1751-0473-6-14
Cite this article as: Vijaya Satya et al.: SNIT: SNP identification for strain
typing. Source Code for Biology and Medicine 2011 6:14.

Authors’ contributions
RVS implemented the SNIT pipeline and the user interface. RVS and NZ
analyzed the results from SNIT. JR provided overall project guidance. RVS
and JR wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 31 May 2011 Accepted: 8 September 2011
Published: 8 September 2011
References
1. Maiden MC, Bygraves JA, Feil E, Morelli G, Russell JE, Urwin R, Zhang Q,
Zhou J, Zurth K, Caugant DA, et al: Multilocus sequence typing: a portable
approach to the identification of clones within populations of
pathogenic microorganisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998, 95:3140-3145.
2. Foster JT, Beckstrom-Sternberg SM, Pearson T, Beckstrom-Sternberg JS,
Chain PS, Roberto FF, Hnath J, Brettin T, Keim P: Whole-genome-based
phylogeny and divergence of the genus Brucella. J Bacteriol 2009,
191:2864-2870.
3. Pearson T, Giffard P, Beckstrom-Sternberg S, Auerbach R, Hornstra H,
Tuanyok A, Price EP, Glass MB, Leadem B, Beckstrom-Sternberg JS, et al:
Phylogeographic reconstruction of a bacterial species with high levels of
lateral gene transfer. BMC Biol 2009, 7:78.
4. Song J, Xu Y, White S, Miller KW, Wolinsky M: SNPsFinder–a web-based
application for genome-wide discovery of single nucleotide
polymorphisms in microbial genomes. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2083-2084.
5. Qi J, Zhao F, Buboltz A, Schuster SC: inGAP: an integrated next-generation
genome analysis pipeline. Bioinformatics 2010, 26:127-129.
6. Benson G: Tandem repeats finder: a program to analyze DNA sequences.
Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:573-580.
7. Kurtz S, Phillippy A, Delcher AL, Smoot M, Shumway M, Antonescu C,
Salzberg SL: Versatile and open software for comparing large genomes.
Genome Biol 2004, 5:R12.
8. Champion MD, Zeng Q, Nix EB, Nano FE, Keim P, Kodira CD, Borowsky M,
Young S, Koehrsen M, Engels R, et al: Comparative genomic
characterization of Francisella tularensis strains belonging to low and
high virulence subspecies. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000459.
9. Larsson P, Elfsmark D, Svensson K, Wikstrom P, Forsman M, Brettin T,
Keim P, Johansson A: Molecular evolutionary consequences of niche
restriction in Francisella tularensis, a facultative intracellular pathogen.
PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000472.
10. Van Ert MN, Easterday WR, Huynh LY, Okinaka RT, Hugh-Jones ME, Ravel J,
Zanecki SR, Pearson T, Simonson TS, U’Ren JM, et al: Global genetic
population structure of Bacillus anthracis. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e461.
11. Ye C, Lan R, Xia S, Zhang J, Sun Q, Zhang S, Jing H, Wang L, Li Z, Zhou Z,
et al: Emergence of a new multidrug-resistant serotype × variant in an
epidemic clone of Shigella flexneri. J Clin Microbiol 2010, 48:419-426.
12. Losada L, Varga JJ, Hostetler J, Radune D, Kim M, Durkin S, Schneewind O,
Nierman WC: Genome sequencing and analysis of Yersina pestis KIM
D27, an avirulent strain exempt from select agent regulation. PLoS ONE
2011, 6:e19054.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
