<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genomic insights into an obligate epibiotic bacterial predator: Micavibrio aeruginosavorus ARL-13</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-453"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content="Bacterial predation; Predator-prey interaction; Integrative and conjugative elements (ICEs); Hemolysin-related protein; Quorum sensing, RNA-Seq"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Zhang Wang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Genomic insights into an obligate epibiotic
bacterial predator: Micavibrio aeruginosavorus
ARL-13
Wang et al.
Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453 (21 September 2011)

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Genomic insights into an obligate epibiotic
bacterial predator: Micavibrio aeruginosavorus
ARL-13
Zhang Wang1, Daniel E Kadouri2 and Martin Wu1*

Abstract
Background: Although bacterial predators play important roles in the dynamics of natural microbial communities,
little is known about the molecular mechanism of bacterial predation and the evolution of diverse predatory
lifestyles.
Results: We determined the complete genome sequence of Micavibrio aeruginosavorus ARL-13, an obligate
bacterial predator that feeds by “leeching” externally to its prey. Despite being an obligate predator depending on
prey for replication, M. aeruginosavorus encodes almost all major metabolic pathways. However, our genome
analysis suggests that there are multiple amino acids that it can neither make nor import directly from the
environment, thus providing a simple explanation for its strict dependence on prey. Remarkably, despite apparent
genome reduction, there is a massive expansion of genomic islands of foreign origin. At least nine genomic islands
encode many genes that are likely important for Micavibrio-prey interaction such as hemolysin-related proteins.
RNA-Seq analysis shows substantial transcriptome differences between the attack phase, when M. aeruginosavorus
seeks its prey, and the attachment phase, when it feeds and multiplies. Housekeeping genes as well as genes
involved in protein secretion were all dramatically up-regulated in the attachment phase. In contrast, genes
involved in chemotaxis and flagellum biosynthesis were highly expressed in the attack phase but were shut down
in the attachment phase. Our transcriptomic analysis identified additional genes likely important in Micavibrio
predation, including porins, pilins and many hypothetical genes.
Conclusions: The findings from our phylogenomic and transcriptomic analyses shed new light on the biology and
evolution of the epibiotic predatory lifestyle of M. aeruginosavorus. The analysis reported here and the availability of
the complete genome sequence should catalyze future studies of this organism.
Keywords: Bacterial predation, Predator-prey interaction, Integrative and conjugative elements (ICEs), Hemolysinrelated protein, Quorum sensing, RNA-Seq

Background
Predatory bacteria are a diverse group of bacteria that
attack and feed on other bacteria. They live in various
habitats and likely play an important role in microbial
ecosystems [1-3]. Predation probably has originated
multiple times in Bacteria, as examples of predators
have been found in dispersed major lineages including
Proteobacteria, Chloroflexi, Cytophagaceae, and Gram* Correspondence: mw4yv@virginia.edu
1
Department of Biology, University of Virginia, 485 McCormick Road,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22903, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

positive bacteria [4]. Bacterial predators prey using a
number of strategies. For example, Myxobacteria are
facultative predators. They attack as a “wolf pack” and
feed on, among other substrates, various live and dead
bacteria. On the other hand, Bdellovibrio and like organisms (BALOs) are obligate predatory bacteria – they can
only survive by preying on other bacteria [5]. Unlike
Myxobacteria, which use excreted hydrolytic enzymes to
degrade prey cells, obligate predation requires close and
irreversible contact between the predator and the prey.
Bdellovibrio invade the periplasmic space of their prey,
where they replicate at the expense of the prey’s cellular

© 2011 Wang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

content and eventually lyse the cell. Micavibrio, on the
other hand, feed by “leeching” externally to the surface
of the prey cell and therefore has an epibiotic lifestyle
[6-9].
First isolated in 1983 from wastewater, Micavibrio aeruginosavorus is Gram-negative, relatively small in size
(0.5 to 1.5 μm long), rod shaped, curved and has a single polar flagellum [7]. Like BALOs, Micavibrio spp. are
characterized by an obligatory parasitic life cycle. Micavibrio’s life cycle is believed to consist of an attack
phase, in which motile Micavibrio seek their prey, and
an attachment phase, in which Micavibrio attach irreversibly to the cell surfaces of prey bacteria. At this
point the attached Micavibrio feed on their prey and
divide by binary fission, leading to the death of the
infected prey cells [7,9-11]. Micavibrio usually exhibit a
high degree of prey specificity. For example, M. aeruginosavorus was initially reported to prey only on Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia and Klebsiella
pneumoniae [7,8]. However a breach in prey specificity
was recently demonstrated and M. aeruginosavorus was
found to be able to prey on many other bacterial species
including Escherichia coli [6].
Myxobacteria and Bdellovibrio, both belonging to the
delta-proteobacteria, have been extensively studied
[12,13]. Members from both groups (M. xanthus
DK1622 and B. bacteriovorus HD100) have recently
been sequenced [14,15]. In comparison, Micavibrio,
members of the alpha-proteobacteria, have received
much less attention, at least partly due to the difficulty
to obtain axenic culture and partly due to the lack of
good genetic tools to study them. In order to gain
greater insights into its predatory lifestyle and to further
understand the evolution of bacterial predation in general, we sequenced one of the better studied strains,
Micavibrio aeruginosavorus ARL-13 [6,8,9] and characterized its transcriptome during the attachment and
attack stages of its growth cycle.

Results and Discussion
Genome summary

The complete genome of Micavibrio aeruginosavorus
ARL-13 consists of 2,481,983 base pairs on a single circular molecule with a G+C content of 54.7%. Major features of the genome are summarized in Table 1 and
Figure 1. The genome exhibits two clear GC skew transitions that likely correspond to the DNA replication
origin and terminus (Figure 1). 90.3% of the genome is
predicted to code for 2434 open reading frames (ORFs),
40 tRNA genes and one rRNA operon. Only 50.5% of
the predicted ORFs can be assigned to a putative function. No extragenomic DNA molecules (plasmid or
phage) were identified from the genome sequence
assembly. CRISPRs (Clustered Regularly Interspaced

Page 2 of 12

Table 1 Main features of the genome of M.
aeruginosavorus ARL-13
Feature

Value

Genome Size, bp

2,481,983

GC%

54.7

Predicted open reading frames (ORFs)
ORFs with assigned function

2434
1228 (50.5%)

Conserved hypothetical ORF

193 (7.9%)

Unknown function ORF

124 (5.1%)

Hypothetical ORF

746 (30.6%)

Average ORF length, bp

919

Percent of genome that is coding

90.3

Ribosomal RNA operon

3

Transfer RNA
CRISPR element

40
0

Plasmid

0

Short Palindromic Repeats) function as the immune system of bacteria and archaea that defends against exogenous DNA such as phages and plasmids [16].
Accordingly, no CRISPRs elements were identified from
the genome.
Repetitive DNAs facilitate genome arrangement and
increase the genome plasticity through homologous
recombination. Strikingly, only 0.10% of the M. aeruginosavorus genome is repetitive (at least 50 bp with at
least 97% identity; in comparison, 2.7% of E. coli genome contains repeats). The only large repeat (> 100 bp)
that can be identified from the genome is a 1200 bp
fragment encoding the elongation factor Tu gene, whose
duplication is known to be widespread among proteobacteria [17]. The genome is completely devoid of
mobile genetic elements including transposons, retrotransposons and insertion sequences. The paucity of
repetitive DNA has been attributed to extensive genome
streamlining [18]. Observations of genomes with such
an infrequent occurrence of repeats have been limited
to obligate intracellular bacteria (e.g., Buchnera, Rickettisa and Chlamydiales) and the free-living bacteria Prochlorococcus and Pelagibacter that have gone through
extensive genome reduction [18-22]. Micavibrio’s genome is moderate in size. At 2.4 Mbp, it is almost twice
as large as most obligate intracellular alpha-proteobacteria, but is still substantially smaller than most free-living alpha-proteobacteria, and about 35% smaller than B.
bacteriovorus HD100 (3.7 Mbp) [14]. M. aeruginosavorus’ genome does not have the extreme GC% bias
typical of intracellular bacteria and is almost completely
devoid of pseudogenes.
Phylogeny and taxonomy

Micavibrio spp. have many morphological and physiological features resembling those of the Bdellovibrio spp.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

Page 3 of 12

Figure 1 Main features of the M. aeruginosavorus chromosome. From the outside inward the circles show: (1) and (2) predicted proteincoding regions on the plus and minus strands (colors were assigned according to the color code of functional classes; (3) tRNA genes (purple)
and rRNA genes (blue); (4) gene expression level as measured by the natural logarithm of Gene Expression Index (GEI), attack phase (green) and
attachment phase (red); (5) GC skew plot; (6) GC%; (7) tri-nucleotide chi-square score; (8) genomic islands.

As a result, historically, Micavibrio spp. have been
affiliated with Bdellovibrio and classified as delta-proteobacteria [23]. However, recent studies based on the 16s
rRNA and several protein-coding genes have placed
Micavibrio as a deep branch lineage within the alphaproteobacteria [9], which is strongly supported by our
genome-level phylogenetic analysis using 31 housekeeping genes (Figure 2). Its closest relative with a sequenced

genome is “Candidatus Puniceispirillum marinum”, a
member of the ubiquitous marine bacterioplankton
SAR116 group [24]. Together, they form a sister clade
to the Rhodospirillales order that is otherwise distinct
from all the major alpha-proteobacterial groups that are
currently recognized. Based on our own and previous
phylogenetic analyses, we recommend that the taxonomy of Micavibrio to be revised.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

Page 4 of 12

Methylobacterium radiotolerans

80
42

Xanthobacter autotrophicus

100

Methylocella silvestris
99

Nitrobacter winogradskyi

97

Rhizobiales

Agrobacterium radiobacter

94
99
100

Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus
Bartonella bacilliformis

66

Hyphomicrobium denitrificans

98

Parvibaculum lavamentivorans
Hirschia baltica

100
60

Hyphomonas neptunium

99

Brevundimonas subvibrioides

100
78

Rhodobacterales/
Caulobacterales

Maricaulis maris
Parvularcula bermudensis
Rhodobacter sphaeroides
68

Erythrobacter litoralis

Sphingomonadales

Micavibrio aeruginosavorus

73

Candidatus Puniceispirillum marinum
Magnetospirillum magneticum

100
94

Rhodospirillum rubrum

94

Rhodospirillum centenum

98

Rhodospirillales

Acidiphilium cryptum

100

Gluconobacter oxydans
Ehrlichia ruminantium
100
100

Anaplasma marginale
Wolbachia pipientis

100

Neorickettsia sennetsu

100

100

Rickettsiales

Orientia tsutsugamushi
Rickettsia typhi
Candidatus Pelagibacter ubique

Figure 2 A maximum likelihood genome tree of alphaproteobacterial representatives. A maximum likelihood tree was
built from concatenated protein sequences of 31 universal
housekeeping genes and rooted by gamma- and betaproteobacteria. Bootstrap support values (out of 100 runs) for
branches of interest are shown beside them.

General metabolic features

Although an obligate predator depending on prey for
cell replication, M. aeruginosavorus has a free-living
attack phase during which it swims around and seeks
out the prey. Analysis of the genome shows that it has
many features of a free-living bacterium (Additional file
1). For example, it has an elaborate suite of genes
involved in cell wall and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) biosynthesis; it is predicted to cover all major metabolic
pathways, including glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid
(TCA) cycle, the electron transport and respiration systems and ATP synthase, indicating that it is fully capable of generating ATP on its own by converting
carbohydrate, fats and proteins into carbon dioxide and
water. It also possesses a complete pentose phosphate
pathway and a full set of genes for nucleotide metabolism, allowing it to synthesize nucleotides from scratch.
Not surprisingly, it does not encode any known nucleotide transporters. It has a slightly reduced set of 43

genes devoted to biosynthesis of cofactor, prosthetic
groups and carriers. Obligate intracellular bacteria such
as Buchnera depend on their hosts for most of their
nutrients, and as a result of the reduced selection pressure, they have lost a lot of biosynthetic genes [19]. The
gene loss in M. aeruginosavorus is modest in comparison, suggesting that there is considerable selective pressure acting on the remaining genes. This is consistent
with the finding that there are rarely any pseudogenes
or signs of active gene degradation in the genome.
Amino acid biosynthesis and transport

Since M. aeruginosavorus is an obligate predator and
has not been cultured axenically, it is of particular interest to use the genome sequence to understand its nutritional needs. Analysis of the genome sequence revealed
that M. aeruginosavorus encodes genes to synthesize 13
amino acids needed for protein synthesis. However, it is
missing almost the entire biosynthesis pathways for the
other 7 amino acids: Alanine, Arginine, Histidine, Isoleucine, Methionine, Tryptophan and Valine, suggesting
that it can not synthesize these amino acids either de
novo or from metabolic intermediates, and has to obtain
them directly from external sources. Strikingly, the genome is completely devoid of any known transporters for
amino acids, peptides and amines, although it contains
82 ORFs predicted to transport ions, carbohydrates,
organic alcohols and acids and other unknown
substrates.
Our genome analysis suggested that M. aeruginosavorus is deficient in amino acid biosynthesis and uptake
from the environment, which at least partially explains
why M. aeruginosavorus could not be cultured in nutrient rich media [7,9] (Daniel Kadouri, unpublished data).
It would be extremely difficult for Micavibrio to revert
to a lifestyle independent of prey, as it would entail the
acquisition of many eliminated genes including those
involved in amino acid metabolism. This could explain
the failure to isolate prey-independent variants of Micavibrio using rich media as described for Bdellovibrio
[25,26] (Daniel Kadouri, unpublished data). In contrast,
although B. bacteriovorus is capable of synthesizing only
11 amino acids [14], it has a large repertoire of 113
transporters for transporting amino acids, peptides or
amines. Therefore, Bdellovibrio is capable of importing
amino acids that it cannot make on its own from the
environment. Accordingly, spontaneous mutants of
Bdellovibrio that grow in rich media have been isolated
at a frequency of 10-6 to 10-7 and higher [25,27].
Among all bacterial and archaeal species sequenced to
date, only a few species such as Buchnera spp. and
Nanoarchaeum equitans encode no known amino acid
transporters in their genomes. Buchnera are bacterial
endosymbionts engaged in a classical example of

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

Page 5 of 12

metabolic symbiosis with their host aphids: Buchnera
supply aphids with essential amino acids and in return,
aphids provide complementary non-essential amino
acids to the bacteria. The shuttling of the amino acids
between the host and the endosymbiont is most likely
carried out by transporters encoded by the host genome
but not the bacterial genome itself [19,28]. Nanoarchaeum equitans represents a more interesting analogy to
Micavibrio spp. It is an obligate epibiotic parasite that
lives on another archaeon Ignicoccus. It attaches to the
surface of the host cell and presumably acquires its
nutrients from the host cell because its tiny genome of
0.5 Mbp does not encode genes for biosynthesis of
amino acids, nucleotides or cofactors, nor does it encode
transporters for these substrates that allow direct import
from the environment [29]. Consequently, Nanoarchaeum must stay in direct contact with the host organism
to survive.
Recently, it has been shown that bacteria can
exchange cellular constituents (small molecules, proteins and DNAs) through intercellular nanotubes that
connect neighboring cells, even between evolutionarily
distant species [30]. It remains unclear how epibiotic
parasites and predators extract nutrients from the host
or prey, however. For Nanoarchaeum equitans, electron microscopy showed a close attachment of the
parasite to the surface of the host, although no fixed
structure was observed [31]. In the case of the bacterial predators Vampirococcus and Ensifer adhearens,
they adhere to the exterior of the prey and appear to
attack via a specialized cytoplasmic bridge that is
clearly visible as electron-dense materials under the
electron microscope [5,32]. The outer membrane of
the predator is breached where the dense material
appears. Presumably, nutrients can be imported into
predators through this junction. It is possible that
Micavibrio use a similar mechanism to acquire substrates from their prey, as close attachment of Micavibrio spp. to prey cells has been shown for strains ARL13, ARL-14 and EPB previously [6,7,9,11].

Hemolysin-related proteins

Micavibrio grow at the expense of the prey eventually
leading to its death. Therefore, it is interesting that M.
aeruginosavorus encodes six hemolysin-related proteins
that belong to the RTX (repeats in the toxin) toxin
family, as they all bear the calcium-binding, tandemrepeated GGXGXD signature motif in their sequences
(Table 2). RTX toxins are produced by a broad range of
bacteria and represent a diverse group of hemolysins,
cytolysins, proteases and bactericides. They bind to the
host cell membrane and play important roles in bacteria-host interactions [33]. Functions of many RTX toxins have been well studied, among which the alphahemolysin from E. coli has been best characterized.
After secretion, alpha-hemolysin inserts itself into the
host cell membrane, forms a transmembrane pore and
lyses the cell [34]. It has been suggested that bacteria
may use hemolysin to obtain nutrients from the host
cells (e.g., irons released from lysed red blood cells) [35].
The hemolysin-related proteins encoded in the M.
aeruginosavorus genome vary greatly in length and
structural features (Table 2). Further examination of
their sequences suggests that they might play important
roles in prey recognition and adhesion as well. In addition to the glycine-rich tandem-repeats, two proteins
also contain motifs known to mediate cell adhesion and
recognition. For instance, GMV2456 contains a bacterial
lectin-like domain. Numerous bacterial species produce
surface lectins, which are calcium-dependent carbohydrate binding modules typically associated with pili. It is
well known that bacterial lectins mediate cell-cell recognition and play key roles in infection by promoting bacterial adherence to the host cells [36]. An early study
demonstrated that carbohydrate receptors are involved
in Micavibrio-prey interaction [37], although a recent
study suggested this needs to be further investigated
[38]. Cell adhesion can be boosted further with two Von
Willebrand factor (VWF) type A domains identified in
GMV0107. VWF domain mediates cell-cell adhesion via
metal ion-dependent adhesion sites [39]. It was

Table 2 Hemolysin-related proteins encoded by M.aeruginosavorus
Type I secretion
system signal

GEIa in attachment/
attack phase

6

+

30.0/124.4

0
5

+
+

1.8/27.2
16.9/0.3

+
+

4.1/1.5
4.8/2.2

+
+

+

0.4/0.1

+

Gene

Length
(aa)

No. of Hemolysin-type calcium
binding repeat

GMV0092

559

GMV0093
GMV0107

495
2892

GMV0287
GMV1777

1876
1296

11
17

GMV2456

1238

18

a

GEI: gene expression index

Other Motifs

Von
Willebrand
factor

Lectin

Located within a
genomic Island

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

originally discovered in extracellular eukaryotic proteins
but recently was found to be widespread in bacteria as
well.
Notably, hemolysin-related protein is one of few protein families that have been expanded in the Micavibrio
genome. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the expansion is not a result of recent gene duplications. In light
of the strong genome streamlining in Micavibrio, we
argue that hemolysin-related proteins play an important
role in predation in order for the family to expand and
to be maintained in the genome. This is supported by
our transcriptomic analysis showing five of the six
hemolysin-related genes were actively expressed in
either the attack, the attachment, or both stages (Table
2). It is possible that once M. aeruginosavorus attaches
to a prey cell, it releases hemolysins into the cell junction, which can then insert themselves into the cell
membrane of the prey cell, form pores and open up
channels for substrates trafficking. The finding that
Bdellovibrio insert their own outer membrane pore proteins into the prey cell membrane supports this hypothesis [40,41].
Secretion system and degradative hydrolytic enzymes

The genome of M. aeruginosavorus contains a complete
type I and a functional type II secretion systems for protein secretion. However, there is no evidence for the
presence of type III or IV secretion system. Type I
secretion system transports various substances like
RTX-toxins, proteases, lipases, and S-layer proteins to
the extracellular space, many of which are important in
bacteria pathogenesis. The six hemolysin-related genes
in M. aeruginosavorus genome all possess type I secretion signals and therefore are predicted to be extracellularly translocated by the type I secretion pathway. In E.
coli and other bacteria, the genes encoding alpha-hemolysin (hlyA) and type I secretion system components
(hlyB and hlyD) are transcribed as one operon [42].
Interestingly, GMV0107, the largest hemolysin-protein
in M. aeruginosavorus genome with 2892 amino acids, is
located immediately upstream of a cluster of genes
encoding type I secretion system components TolC
(GMV0108), hlyB (GMV0110) and hlyD (GMV0111). It
has been suggested that this arrangement allows the
timely export of toxins without damage to the membrane of the bacteria producing them [42].
Type II is responsible for the extracellular secretion of
toxins and hydrolytic enzymes, many of which contribute to pathogenesis in both plants and animals. Proteins secreted through the type II system depend on the
Sec or twin-arginine translocation (TAT) system for
initial transport into the periplasm. The genome
encodes a complete TAT secretion system (TatABCD),
and a complete Sec secretion system (SecABDEFGY,

Page 6 of 12

YajC, FtsY, SRP). The type II secretion apparatus is
composed of at least 12 different gene products that are
thought to form a multiprotein complex. Some components of the type II secretion system, including
GspCGHK, are absent in the genome annotation. It is
possible that they can be substituted by type IV pilus
proteins encoded in the genome, as they are homologous and functionally equivalent [43]. Based on the presence of the complete TAT and Sec transport systems,
we think the type II secretion system is likely to be
functional.
M. aeruginosavorus encodes an impressive arsenal of
hydrolytic enzymes. A large fraction of the genome
(4.3%) was predicted to encode 49 proteases and peptidases, 12 lipases, 2 DNases, 4 RNases and 37 other
hydrolases (Additional file 2). Although hydrolytic
enzymes are required for the routine maintenance of
cellular structures, we expect a sizeable portion of Micavibrio’s hydrolytic enzymes to be devoted to digest the
prey cell macromolecules. For example, it has been
demonstrated that a lytic proteinase of around 39 kDa
(+/- 1.5 KDa) isolated from Micavibrio admirandus is
able to lyse E. coli cells [44]. M. aeruginosavorus
encodes one proteinase in this molecular weight range –
GMV0053 is predicted to encode a 40 kDa peptidase
M23 family protein. Although their roles in Micavibrio
predation remain to be elucidated, with the gene
sequences now it is possible to have the hydrolases heterologously expressed and experimentally characterized,
as they may be valuable for the development of enzymebased anti-microbial agents.
Flagellum and pili

Micavibrio spp. are motile and possess a single, sheathless, polar flagellum. Motility gives Micavibrio the
advantage of being able to actively search for prey. In
addition, M. aeruginosavorus is capable of biofilm predation [6,8]. Flagellum might provide the necessary force
for the predator to penetrate and attack biofilms, as
demonstrated in Bdellovibrio [45]. As expected, M. aeruginosavorus encodes a plethora of genes related to flagellum biosynthesis and chemotaxis (Additional file 3).
The genome also possesses multiple dispersed pil genes
encoding type IV pili, including three operons encoding
eight proteins with prepilin-type cleavage/methylation
signal at the N-terminus. Proteins with prepilin-like leader sequences are typically involved in type IV pili biogenesis or type II secretion system [46]. Type IV pili in
bacteria are in general involved in adherence and invasion of host cells [46] and is believed to play a role in B.
bacteriovorus predation [47,48]. Although Micavibrio are
epibiotic predators and do not invade prey cells, type IV
pili can play an important role in predation by mediating cell adhesion. This is supported by our

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

transcriptomic data showing that four pili-related genes
were highly expressed in the attack or attachment phase
(GMV0530, 0902, 0903,1530, see Additional file 4).
Notably, gene GMV0530 encoding a flp/Fap pilin component family protein was one of the most actively transcribed genes in the attack phase.
Signal transduction and quorum-sensing

Unlike other obligate parasitic bacteria such as Mycoplasma that live exclusively inside the prey cell, M. aeruginosavorus is an epibiotic predator constantly exposed
to the environment. Moreover, in the attack phase it has
to actively search for its next prey. M. aeruginosavorus
is poised to respond to diverse environmental cues
through a suite of signal transduction pathways and processes. For example, the organism has at least 41 genes
of two-component signal transduction systems, which is
remarkable given its genome size. Intriguingly, the M.
aeruginosavorus genome encodes at least four genes
involved in quorum-sensing: one autoinducer synthase
(LuxI, GMV1999), two autoinducer binding proteins
(LuxR, GMV0289 and 0290) and one regulator protein
(LuxO, GMV1999). Quorum sensing is important for
group predation, which requires a quorum of predators
and coordinated release of hydrolytic enzymes to
degrade the prey. “Wolf pack” predation has been
observed in Myxobacteria and Lysobacter but not in
Micavibrio or Bdellovibrio, at least under laboratory
conditions. Micavibrio are known to attack the prey on
an one-to-one basis [7,9,11], so it is not clear what the
biological role of the quorum-sensing genes is. One possibility is that Micavibrio can use quorum-sensing to
detect their own density and avoid having two or more
predators attacking the same prey cell. Multi-predation
on a single cell can spell disaster because one prey cell
usually does not have enough resource to support the
replication of multiple predators. It is also possible that
Micavibrio can use quorum-sensing to detect the density of the prey population when predating on biofilm.
Our RNA-Seq data show that LuxO was expressed at
low level during the attack phase but not in the attachment phase, LuxR was expressed at low level in both
phases while LuxI was not expressed in either phase
(Additional file 4). It will be extremely interesting to
elucidate the biological function of the quorum-sensing
genes in Micavibrio, to investigate whether Micavibrio
are capable of quorum-sensing, and if so, to deduce its
role in the evolution of predation.
Lateral gene transfers

Since M. aeruginosavorus preys on other Gram-negative bacteria, it has the potential to take up prey’s
DNAs during the feeding process and incorporate
them into its own genome. Using BLAST search, we

Page 7 of 12

did not find any examples of highly similar stretches of
DNA (> 100 bp and 97% identity) shared between M.
aeruginosavorus and P. aeruginosa, the strain that has
been used in the laboratory to maintain Micavibrio.
Similarly, there is no evidence of recent lateral gene
transfer from prey into B. bacteriovorus [14]. Foreign
DNA usually has a nucleotide composition distinct
from that of the native DNA and therefore can be
detected using chi-square test of base homogeneity,
although sequence bias can arise from other sources as
well. Our tri-nucleotide chi-square analysis identified
numerous regions deviating significantly from the rest
of the genome (Figure 1). Among them are operons
encoding the rRNA genes and ribosomal proteins,
where sequence biases are most likely due to either
secondary structure constraint (rRNAs) or biased
codon usage (ribosomal proteins). However, we also
identify nine genomic islands of possible foreign origins (Additional file 5). Their sizes range from 11.4
Kbp to 27.4 Kbp.
Features found on these islands suggest that they
belong to a group of integrative and conjugative elements (ICEs). Four out of nine islands are flanked by
tRNA genes on one side and seven out of nine contain
the signature integrase related to lambda phages (Additional file 5). tRNA genes are known hotspots for ICE
insertion [49,50]. Some also contain helicases, DNA primase, resolvase and reverse transcriptase, mobilization
gene (e.g., mobA/L) and addiction modules important
for ICE maintenance. ICEs normally replicate as part of
the host chromosome. But under certain conditions,
they can excise from the chromosome, circularize and
then transfer to new hosts by conjugation. ICEs therefore combine features of phages and plasmids and can
mediate lateral gene flow between distantly related bacterial species [49,50]. It is not immediately clear whether
any of the Micavibrio ICEs are still functional, i.e.,
whether they can move within the genome or to other
bacterial species. Our transcriptomic data show that at
least five integrases were actively expressed during the
attachment or attack phase, suggesting that the ICEs
can be active.
ICEs allow bacteria to rapidly adapt to new environmental niches [50] and often carry genes such as antibiotic resistance genes and virulence genes (e.g.,
adhesins, toxins, invasins on the pathogenicity island)
[51,52] that confer selective advantages to the cell. M.
aeruginosavorus strain ARL-13 was originally isolated
from sewage water. Not surprisingly, heavy metal (copper, cobalt, zinc, cadmium) resistance genes are found
within the M. aeruginosavorus genomic islands. Interestingly, three hemolysin genes are also located on the
ICEs, in addition to a few genes encoding peptidoglycan
binding proteins (Additional file 5).

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

Since ICEs can move between distantly related species
by conjugation, it is natural to ask where did the ICEs
in Micavibrio come from? ICEs have been found in
many bacteria including Micavibrio’s prey, P. aeruginosa.
It is possible, at least in theory, that ICEs are passed
from the prey to Micavibrio during predation. After all,
epibiotic predation and conjugation share an unmistakable common ground – both involve intimate cell-cell
contact and interaction. Phylogenetic analysis of the
integrase genes does not support prey being the ICE
source. Instead, it indicates that Micavibrio ICEs are
mostly closely related to those of other alpha-proteobacteria. Therefore, these ICEs either only move among
alpha-proteobacteria, or they were present in the ancestor of Micavibrio and have been inherited through vertical descent.
Transcriptome analysis

To identify genes important in the predatory life cycle of
Micavibrio, we analyzed the transcriptomes of M. aeruginosavorus in the attachment and attack phases using
RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq). We obtained a total of
8,451,083 reads by Illumina sequencing. 96% of the
attack and 60% of the attachment reads were mapped
unambiguously to the M. aeruginosavorus genome. Of
the unmapped reads, the vast majority (92%) were actually the sequences of the prey P. aeruginosa. This shows
that the prey cells coexisted with the predator cells in
the attachment phase but were nearly absent in the
attack phase, indicating our strategy of obtaining Micavibrio cells at both stages was working. Although we
estimated that more than 90% of ribosomal RNAs had
been removed during the mRNA preparation, they still
constituted the bulk of our illumina reads, as seen previously [53].
Approximately 72.6% of the genome (coding and noncoding) is covered by at least one read, suggesting that
more than 27.4% of the genome was not transcribed or
was transcribed at low levels in either phase. In addition,
91.6% of reads match predicted ORFs, indicating that
there was very little background noise due to potential
DNA contamination in our mRNA preparation. RNASeq has provided reliable quantitative estimates of gene
expression in yeast and bacteria [53-55]. To allow for
quantitative comparisons between samples, we calculated the gene expression index (GEI) as the mean coverage depth of the gene normalized by the total number
of reads mapped to non-rRNA regions of the genome.
Additional file 6 shows a tight correlation between GEI
and the transcript level determined by real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR, R2 = 0.85),
confirming that our RNA-Seq data provide reliable estimates of gene expression. In addition, as we show
below, the expression levels of genes within a particular

Page 8 of 12

pathway are fairly consistent, indicating that there was
little bias in our RNA-Seq library construction. For
example, our RNA-Seq data show strong up-regulation
of gene expression in all 54 ribosomal proteins encoded
in the genome in the attachment phase.
The transcriptome differs substantially between the
attack and attachment phases. Overall, 80.0% of genes
were transcribed in the attachment phase, but only
33.4% of genes were transcribed in the attack phase.
Genes that were up-regulated in the attack phase are
flagellar genes, chemotaxis genes and many hypothetical
genes. Genes that were up-regulated in the attachment
phase include housekeeping genes involved in DNA
replication (e.g., chromosome replication initiation protein, DNA polymerase, DNA topoisomerase, helicase,
gyrase), transcription (e.g., RNA polymerase, sigma 70,
transcription terminator), translation (e.g., ribosomal
proteins, translation initiation and elongation factors),
energy production (e.g., TCA cycles, electron transport
system, ATP synthase) and cell division (e.g., Fts proteins, cell shape determining factor MreB) (Additional
file 4). The gene expression pattern is consistent with
what we know about the life cycle of Micavibrio. During
the attack phase, powered by a single polar flagellum
attached at one end of the cell, Micavibrio seek out
their prey. Once attached to the prey, Micavibrio lose
their motility, start to feed on their prey, grow, and multiply by binary fission [7,9,11]. Accordingly, genes
involved in chemotaxis and flagella biosynthesis were
highly expressed in the attack phase but were shut
down in the attachment phase. Genes of the two-component signal transduction system were also up-regulated in the attack phase. On the other hand, genes
involved in active cell growth and division were highly
expressed in the attachment phase, providing the necessary energy and other resources for the cell to replicate.
Our genome-wide expression data is consistent with the
fact that M. aeruginosavorus is an obligate predator that
depends on prey to multiply and lacks the ability to propagate in rich media.
Genes involved in protein secretion were also substantially up-regulated in the attachment phase. For example, our RNA-Seq data reveal a uniform increase of gene
expression of the entire Sec secretion system (SecABDEFGY, YajC, FtsY, SRP), averaging a 17-fold increase
when compared to the attack phase. Similarly, the entire
twin-arginine translocation (TAT) system, the type I
secretion system, and most of the type II secretion system were also significantly up-regulated. This is in
agreement with the idea that while attached to the prey
cells, Micavibrio actively inject hydrolytic enzymes and
toxins into prey cells for prey degradation and nutrient
uptake. The expression levels of hydrolytic enzymes
were nearly unchanged (attachment/attack = 1.29). It is

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

possible that hydrolytic enzymes are produced and accumulate in the attack phase, which can then be readily
discharged in the next round of attachment phase.
Interestingly, three cold-shock protein genes
(GMV0274, 1414, 2249) were highly expressed in the
attachment phase but were not transcribed in the attack
phase. Cold-shock proteins of E. coli act as mRNA chaperons to promote single-strandedness of mRNA molecules at low temperature to facilitate their translation
[56]. A recent study in Bacillus subtilis demonstrated
that cold-shock proteins are also essential for cellular
growth and efficient protein synthesis at optimal growth
temperature [57]. Since the attachment cells were never
exposed to cold shock before they were mixed with
RNAlater, we believe the up-regulation of cold-shock
protein genes in M. aeruginosavorus serves to maximize
the translation efficiency [58]. This is consistent with
our observation that genes involved in the translation
process were all up-regulated in the attachment phase.
Intriguingly, although the heat-shock protein sigma 32
was highly expressed in both phases, its expression was
further boosted in the attack phase by 12-fold. Heat
shock has been shown to induce axenic growth of B.
bacteriovorus in rich media, possibly by generating or
simulating signals normally derived from prey [59].
Sigma 32 is one of the few functionally characterized
genes that were up-regulated in Micavibrio during the
attack phase, suggesting that it might play an important
role in the attack phase by promoting the transcriptions
of other genes.
The most highly expressed gene (other than the rRNA
genes) in the attachment phase is a porin-encoding gene
GMV0043. Porins form aqueous channels on the outer
membrane of Gram-negative bacterial cells, and control
the diffusion of small metabolites like sugars, ions and
amino acids across the outer membrane. GMV0043 was
expressed at low level in the attack phase but was dramatically up-regulated in the attachment phase by more
than 400-fold. The timing and intensity of the gene
expression strongly argue that it plays a critical role in
the attachment phase by facilitating the uptake of small
metabolites derived from degrading prey cells. Similarly,
Lambert et al. have showed that the maltose porin gene
in Bdellovibrio is highly upregulated during predation,
when sugars derived from the prey degradation are
available for uptake [60]. Of the five other porin-encoding genes identified in the Micavibrio genome, four
were actively transcribed in the attachment phase, albeit
at subdued levels (GMV0953, 1742, 1033, 0975, see
Additional file 4).
Strikingly, most of the highly expressed genes in the
attack phase are hypothetical genes. This is in sharp
contrast to the gene expression pattern of the attachment phase, where most of the highly expressed genes

Page 9 of 12

are well-known housekeeping genes. The fact that the
hypothetical genes are highly expressed and the RNASeq reads match nicely to the gene models suggest that
they are real genes. While uncharacterized, they most
likely code for actual proteins that play cryptic but
important functions in the unique lifestyle of
Micavibrio.

Conclusions
The phylogenomic and transcriptomic analyses of M.
aeruginosavorus revealed many features consistent with
what we know about its epibiotic predatory lifestyle.
Analysis of the genome has also provided new perspectives on the biology of this species and the evolution of
bacterial predation in general. Because of the lack of
good genetic tools for Micavibrio, their predation has
remained molecularly enigmatic. The analysis reported
here and the availability of the complete genome
sequence should open up new opportunities and catalyze future studies of this organism.
Methods
Bacteria culture and genomic DNA preparation

M. aeruginosavorus strain ARL-13 was used in this
study [7,8]. M. aeruginosavorus was maintained as plaques in double-layered diluted nutrient broth (DNB)
agar, a 1:10 dilution of nutrient broth amended with 3
mmol l-1 MgCl2 6H2O and 2 mmol l-1 CaCl2 2H2O [pH
7 2] and agar (0 6% agar in the top layer). To initiate a
lysate, cocultures were obtained by adding a plug of
agar containing M. aeruginosavorus plaque to washed
overnight grown P. aeruginosa PA14 prey cells (1 × 109
CFU ml -1) in DNB and incubated at 30°C on a rotary
shaker set at 200 rev min-1 until the coculture became
clear (stock lysate). To harvest the predators, cocultures
were prepared in which 20 ml of washed P. aeruginosa
PA14 cells were incubated with 20 ml of stock lysate in
200 ml of DNB and incubated for 48 hrs. Thereafter,
the cocultures were passed 10 times through a 0.45-μm
Millex pore-size filter (Millipore) to remove residual
prey and cell debris. The filtered lysate was spun down
for 30 min at 15,000 × g. The supernatant was removed
and the pelleted cells were taken for chromosomal DNA
extraction using Puregene-Genomic DNA purification
kit (Gentra systems) [6].
Genome sequencing and annotation

The genome was sequenced by 3Kbp paired-end 454
pyrosequencing, in the University of Virginia Department of Biology Genome Core Facility, and was
assembled using GS De Novo Assembler (Newbler). The
initial Newbler assembly contained 21 contigs in one
scaffold. The Phred/Phrap/Consed software package was
used for quality assessment in genome assembly. PCR

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

and Sanger sequencing was used to close the gaps
between contigs to get the complete genome sequence,
which was then annotated by the IGS annotation engine
[61]. The complete sequence has been assigned GenBank accession number: CP002382. DNA repeats of at
least 50 bp with at least 97% sequence identity were
identified using the program Vmatch [62].
Genome tree construction

Protein sequences of 31 housekeeping genes (dnaG, frr,
infC, nusA, pgk, pyrG, rplA, rplB, rplC, rplD, rplE, rplF,
rplK, rplL, rplM, rplN, rplP, rplS, rplT, rpmA, rpoB,
rpsB, rpsC, rpsE, rpsI, rpsJ, rpsK, rpsM, rpsS, smpB, tsf)
from genomes of interest were identified, aligned,
trimmed and concatenated using the software
AMPHORA [63]. The concatenated protein sequence
alignment was then used to build a maximum likelihood
tree using Phyml [64].
RNA isolation, library construction, and transcriptome
sequencing

To isolate RNA from attachment phase M. aeruginosavorus cells, cocultures were prepared as before using P.
aeruginosa PA14 as the prey. The cocultures were incubated for 8 hrs to allow attachment of the predator to
its prey. Thereafter, the cocultures were collected in a
50 ml tube and a fraction containing mainly preyattached M. aeruginosavorus cells was isolated by low
speed centrifugation at 4,000 × g for 5 min at room
temperature. The pellet was then resuspended in 0.5 ml
of RNAlater stabilization solution (Applied Biosystems).
For isolating RNA from attack phase M. aeruginosavorus
cells, the cocultures were incubated for 48 hrs allowing
the killing of the prey cells and growth and enrichment
of the predator. The clear culture was collected and
passed 5 times through a 0.45-μm Millex pore-size filter
to remove any residual prey and M. aeruginosavorus
cells which are still firmly attached to the prey. The filtered lysate was spun down at 4°C for 30 min at 15,000
× g and the pellet containing attack phase M. aeruginosavorus was resuspended in RNAlater stabilization solution until RNA extraction.
Total RNA for both attachment and attack samples
were isolated from bacteria pellet using RiboPure-Bacteria Kit (Ambion) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, with genomic DNA removed using DNase
I. RNA was quantified using Quant-iT™ RNA Assay Kit
(Invitrogen). 23S and 16S rRNA were removed for
mRNA enrichment using MICROBExpress Kit
(Ambion). RNA quality analysis using Bioanalyzer (Agilent) indicated that about 90% rRNA was removed.
cDNA libraries for Illumina sequencing were then constructed using NEBNext mRNA Sample Prep Master
Mix Set 1 (New England Biolabs) following the

Page 10 of 12

manufacturer’s protocol. Libraries were tagged, amplified
by 15 cycles of PCR and sequenced with one lane of
Illumina GA IIx 43 cycle single-end sequencing.
RNA-Seq reads mapping and visualization

FASTX-Toolkit [65] was used to split the pooled reads
into separate attachment and attack phase categories,
and to eliminate the tag barcodes from the reads. We
mapped reads from both attachment and attack sample
to the M. aeruginosavorus genome using Maq [66], allowing up to 2 mismatches to occur. The gene expression
index (GEI) was calculated as the mean coverage depth
of the gene, normalized by the total number of reads
mapped to non-rRNA regions of the genome. The medium coverage of intergenic regions calculated this way
was 0.7. Therefore, based on the RNA-Seq coverage,
genes were classified into 4 categories using a schema
similar to the one described in [53]: 1) not expressed
(coverage < 0.7), 2) low expression (0.7 < = coverage <
10), 3) medium expression (10 < = coverage < 25), 4)
high expression (coverage > = 25). The gene expression
levels were plotted and visualized in Artemis [67].
Quantitative real-time PCR

Total RNA for attachment phase sample was reverse
transcribed to cDNA using SuperScript® II Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen). The primer premier 5 software
was used to design and select optimum primers for an
amplification product of about 350 bp. The quantitative
RT-PCR was performed with Fast SYBR-Green master
mix (Applied Biosystems) in 7500/7500 Fast Real-Time
PCR system. Three replicates were conducted for each
gene and the average Ct value was obtained (the cycle
number when the fluorescence is detected above the
background level). The relative abundance for each gene
was calculated based on the 2-ΔΔCt method [68].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Comparison of major metabolic pathways
between Micavibrio aeruginosavorus, Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus and
Escherichia coli. A word file listing the number of genes identified in
each pathway with the percentage of the genome in parentheses.
Additional file 2: Hydrolytic Enzymes encoded by M.
aeruginosavorus. A word file listing hydrolytic enzymes identified in M.
aeruginosavorus genome and their predicted locations by pSort.
Additional file 3: Flagellum biosynthesis and chemotaxis genes of
M. aeruginosavorus. A word file listing genes involved in flagellum
biosynthesis and chemotaxis.
Additional file 4: Gene expression index (GEI) derived from RNASeq. A excel file listing the gene expression index for all ORFs of M.
aeruginosavorus in the attachment and the attack phases.
Additional file 5: Genomic islands in M. aeruginosavorus ARL-13. A
word file listing the genomic islands and their locations, sizes and the
genes of interest.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

Additional file 6: Correlation between qRT-PCR and RNA-Seq. An
image file in PNG format showing the correlation between qRT-PCR and
RNA-Seq data for selected genes in the Micavibrio attachment sample.
Genes were selected to represent a broad range of gene expression
levels. They were: GMV0043 (porin), GMV0092, GM0093, GMV0107
(hemolysin-related proteins), GMV1700 (flagellar hook-basal body
complex FliE family), GMV2023 (bacterial regulatory tetR family protein)
and GMV2138 (ribosomal protein S7).

Page 11 of 12

11.

12.
13.
14.

List of abbreviations
ORF: open reading frame; BALOs: Bdellovibrio and like organisms (BALOs);
GEI: gene expression index; CRISPRs: Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short
Palindromic Repeats; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; TCA: the tricarboxylic acid; RTX:
repeats in the toxin; VWF: Von Willebrand factor; TAT: twin-arginine
translocation; ICEs: integrative and conjugative elements; RNA-Seq: RNA
sequencing; qRT-PCR: real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR; T4SSs:
type IV secretion systems; CFU: colony forming unit.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr. Michelle Gwinn-Giglio for her help on annotating the
genome sequence. Part of this study was supported by a grant to MW by
the Thomas F. Jeffress and Kate Miller Jeffress Memorial Trust.

15.

16.
17.
18.

19.
Author details
1
Department of Biology, University of Virginia, 485 McCormick Road,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22903, USA. 2Department of Oral Biology, University
of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey 07101, USA.
Authors’ contributions
ZW carried out laboratory work of genome and transcriptome sequencing
and bioinformatic analysis and contributed to manuscript writing. DK
prepared the cell cultures for genome and transcriptome sequencing and
helped to draft the manuscript. MW conceived and designed the
experiments, analyzed the data and wrote the paper. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

20.

21.

22.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

23.

Received: 4 May 2011 Accepted: 21 September 2011
Published: 21 September 2011

24.

References
1. Casida LE: Bacterial Predators of Micrococcus luteus in Soil. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1980, 39:1035-1041.
2. Germida JJ, Casida LE: Ensifer adhaerens Predatory Activity Against Other
Bacteria in Soil, as Monitored by Indirect Phage Analysis. Appl Environ
Microbiol 1983, 45:1380-1388.
3. Chen H, Athar R, Zheng G, Williams HN: Prey bacteria shape the
community structure of their predators. Isme J 2011.
4. Jurkevitch E: Predatory prokaryotes: biology, ecology, and evolution Berlin;
New York: Springer; 2007.
5. Jurkevitch E, Davidov Y: Phylogenetic Diversity and Evolution of
Predatory Prokaryotes. Microbiology Monographs 2007, 4:11-56.
6. Dashiff A, Junka RA, Libera M, Kadouri DE: Predation of human pathogens
by the predatory bacteria Micavibrio aeruginosavorus and Bdellovibrio
bacteriovorus. J Appl Microbiol 2010, 110:431-444.
7. Lambina VA, Afinogenova AV, Romay Penobad Z, Konovalova SM,
Andreev LV: New species of exoparasitic bacteria of the genus Micavibrio
infecting gram-positive bacteria. Mikrobiologiia 1983, 52:777-780.
8. Kadouri D, Venzon NC, O’Toole GA: Vulnerability of pathogenic biofilms to
Micavibrio aeruginosavorus. Appl Environ Microbiol 2007, 73:605-614.
9. Davidov Y, Huchon D, Koval SF, Jurkevitch E: A new alpha-proteobacterial
clade of Bdellovibrio-like predators: implications for the mitochondrial
endosymbiotic theory. Environ Microbiol 2006, 8:2179-2188.
10. Afinogenova AV, Markelova N, Lambina VA: Analysis of the
interpopulational interactions in a 2-component bacterial system of

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

Micavibrio admirandus - Escherichia coli. Nauchnye Doki Vyss Shkoly Biol
Nauki 1987, 6:101-104.
Lambina VA, Afinogenova AV, Romai Penabad S, Konovalova SM,
Pushkareva AP: Micavibrio admirandus gen. et sp. nov. Mikrobiologiia 1982,
51:114-117.
Berleman JE, Kirby JR: Deciphering the hunting strategy of a bacterial
wolfpack. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2009, 33:942-957.
Sockett RE: Predatory lifestyle of Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus. Annu Rev
Microbiol 2009, 63:523-539.
Rendulic S, Jagtap P, Rosinus A, Eppinger M, Baar C, Lanz C, Keller H,
Lambert C, Evans KJ, Goesmann A, et al: A predator unmasked: life cycle
of Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus from a genomic perspective. Science 2004,
303:689-692.
Goldman BS, Nierman WC, Kaiser D, Slater SC, Durkin AS, Eisen JA,
Ronning CM, Barbazuk WB, Blanchard M, Field C, et al: Evolution of sensory
complexity recorded in a myxobacterial genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2006, 103:15200-15205.
Horvath P, Barrangou R: CRISPR/Cas, the immune system of bacteria and
archaea. Science 2010, 327:167-170.
Lathe WC, Bork P: Evolution of tuf genes: ancient duplication, differential
loss and gene conversion. FEBS Lett 2001, 502:113-116.
Andersson SG, Zomorodipour A, Andersson JO, Sicheritz-Ponten T,
Alsmark UC, Podowski RM, Naslund AK, Eriksson AS, Winkler HH,
Kurland CG: The genome sequence of Rickettsia prowazekii and the
origin of mitochondria. Nature 1998, 396:133-140.
Shigenobu S, Watanabe H, Hattori M, Sakaki Y, Ishikawa H: Genome
sequence of the endocellular bacterial symbiont of aphids Buchnera sp.
APS. Nature 2000, 407:81-86.
Stephens RS, Kalman S, Lammel C, Fan J, Marathe R, Aravind L, Mitchell W,
Olinger L, Tatusov RL, Zhao Q, et al: Genome sequence of an obligate
intracellular pathogen of humans: Chlamydia trachomatis. Science 1998,
282:754-759.
Rocap G, Larimer FW, Lamerdin J, Malfatti S, Chain P, Ahlgren NA,
Arellano A, Coleman M, Hauser L, Hess WR, et al: Genome divergence in
two Prochlorococcus ecotypes reflects oceanic niche differentiation.
Nature 2003, 424:1042-1047.
Giovannoni SJ, Tripp HJ, Givan S, Podar M, Vergin KL, Baptista D, Bibbs L,
Eads J, Richardson TH, Noordewier M, et al: Genome streamlining in a
cosmopolitan oceanic bacterium. Science 2005, 309:1242-1245.
Garrity GM, Bell JA, Lilburn TG: Taxonomic outline of the prokaryotes. Bergey’s
manual of systematic bacteriology. Second edition. Springer-Verlag, New
York; 2004.
Oh HM, Kwon KK, Kang I, Kang SG, Lee JH, Kim SJ, Cho JC: Complete
genome sequence of “Candidatus Puniceispirillum marinum“ IMCC1322, a
representative of the SAR116 clade in the Alphaproteobacteria. J
Bacteriol 2010, 192:3240-3241.
Seidler RJ, Starr MP: Isolation and characterization of host-independent
Bdellovibrios. J Bacteriol 1969, 100:769-785.
Ishiguro EE: Minimum nutritional requirements for growth of hostindependent derivatives of Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus strain 109 Davis.
Can J Microbiol 1974, 20:263-264.
Dashiff A, Kadouri DE: A New Method for Isolating Host-Independent
Variants of Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus Using E. coli Auxotrophs. Open
Microbiol J 2009, 3:87-91.
Wilson AC, Ashton PD, Calevro F, Charles H, Colella S, Febvay G, Jander G,
Kushlan PF, Macdonald SJ, Schwartz JF, et al: Genomic insight into the
amino acid relations of the pea aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum, with its
symbiotic bacterium Buchnera aphidicola. Insect Mol Biol 2010, 19(Suppl
2):249-258.
Waters E, Hohn MJ, Ahel I, Graham DE, Adams MD, Barnstead M, Beeson KY,
Bibbs L, Bolanos R, Keller M, et al: The genome of Nanoarchaeum
equitans: insights into early archaeal evolution and derived parasitism.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:12984-12988.
Dubey GP, Ben-Yehuda S: Intercellular nanotubes mediate bacterial
communication. Cell 2011, 144:590-600.
Huber H, Hohn MJ, Rachel R, Fuchs T, Wimmer VC, Stetter KO: A new
phylum of Archaea represented by a nanosized hyperthermophilic
symbiont. Nature 2002, 417:63-67.
Casida LE: Ensifer adhaerens gen. nov., sp. nov.: a bacerial predator of
bacteria in soil. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology 1982,
32:339-345.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:453
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/453

33. Lally ET, Hill RB, Kieba IR, Korostoff J: The interaction between RTX toxins
and target cells. Trends Microbiol 1999, 7:356-361.
34. Bhakdi S, Mackman N, Nicaud JM, Holland IB: Escherichia coli hemolysin
may damage target cell membranes by generating transmembrane
pores. Infect Immun 1986, 52:63-69.
35. Litwin CM, Calderwood SB: Role of iron in regulation of virulence genes.
Clin Microbiol Rev 1993, 6:137-149.
36. Sharon N, Lis H: Lectins as cell recognition molecules. Science 1989,
246:227-234.
37. Chemeris NA, Afinogennova AV: Role of carbohydrate receptors in the
interaction of Micavibrio admirandus and host-bacterium. Zentbl Mikrobiol
1986, 141:557-560.
38. Dashiff A, Keeling TG, Kadouri DE: Inhibition of Predation by Bdellovibrio
bacteriovorus and Micavibrio aeruginosavorus via Host Cell Metabolic
Activity in the Presence of Carbohydrates. Appl Environ Microbiol 2011,
77:2224-2231.
39. Ruggeri ZM, Ware J: von Willebrand factor. Faseb J 1993, 7:308-316.
40. Beck S, Schwudke D, Appel B, Linscheid M, Strauch E: Characterization of
outer membrane protein fractions of Bdellovibrionales. FEMS Microbiol
Lett 2005, 243:211-217.
41. Tudor JJ, Karp MA: Translocation of an outer membrane protein into prey
cytoplasmic membranes by bdellovibrios. J Bacteriol 1994, 176:948-952.
42. Frey J: Genetics and phylogeny of RTX cytolysins. In The comprehensive
sourcebook of bacterial protein toxins.. 3 edition. Edited by: Alouf JE, Popoff
MR. Amsterdam; Boston: Elsevier; 2006:570-577.
43. Sandkvist M: Biology of type II secretion. Mol Microbiol 2001, 40:271-283.
44. Severin AI, Markelova NY, Afinogenova AV, Kulaev IS: Isolation and some
physicochemical properties of lytic proteinase of the parasitic bacterium
Micavibrio admirandus. Biokhimiya 1987, 52:1594-1599.
45. Medina AA, Shanks RM, Kadouri DE: Development of a novel system for
isolating genes involved in predator-prey interactions using host
independent derivatives of Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus 109J. BMC Microbiol
2008, 8:33.
46. Mattick JS: Type IV pili and twitching motility. Annu Rev Microbiol 2002,
56:289-314.
47. Evans KJ, Lambert C, Sockett RE: Predation by Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus
HD100 requires type IV pili. J Bacteriol 2007, 189:4850-4859.
48. Mahmoud KK, Koval SF: Characterization of type IV pili in the life cycle of
the predator bacterium Bdellovibrio. Microbiology 2010, 156:1040-1051.
49. Wozniak RA, Waldor MK: Integrative and conjugative elements: mosaic
mobile genetic elements enabling dynamic lateral gene flow. Nat Rev
Microbiol 2010, 8:552-563.
50. Burrus V, Waldor MK: Shaping bacterial genomes with integrative and
conjugative elements. Res Microbiol 2004, 155:376-386.
51. Gal-Mor O, Finlay BB: Pathogenicity islands: a molecular toolbox for
bacterial virulence. Cell Microbiol 2006, 8:1707-1719.
52. Schmidt H, Hensel M: Pathogenicity islands in bacterial pathogenesis. Clin
Microbiol Rev 2004, 17:14-56.
53. Oliver HF, Orsi RH, Ponnala L, Keich U, Wang W, Sun Q, Cartinhour SW,
Filiatrault MJ, Wiedmann M, Boor KJ: Deep RNA sequencing of L.
monocytogenes reveals overlapping and extensive stationary phase and
sigma B-dependent transcriptomes, including multiple highly
transcribed noncoding RNAs. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:641.
54. Nagalakshmi U, Wang Z, Waern K, Shou C, Raha D, Gerstein M, Snyder M:
The transcriptional landscape of the yeast genome defined by RNA
sequencing. Science 2008, 320:1344-1349.
55. Yoder-Himes DR, Chain PS, Zhu Y, Wurtzel O, Rubin EM, Tiedje JM, Sorek R:
Mapping the Burkholderia cenocepacia niche response via highthroughput sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:3976-3981.
56. Jiang W, Hou Y, Inouye M: CspA, the major cold-shock protein of
Escherichia coli, is an RNA chaperone. J Biol Chem 1997, 272:196-202.
57. Graumann P, Wendrich TM, Weber MH, Schroder K, Marahiel MA: A family
of cold shock proteins in Bacillus subtilis is essential for cellular growth
and for efficient protein synthesis at optimal and low temperatures. Mol
Microbiol 1997, 25:741-756.
58. Sommerville J: Activities of cold-shock domain proteins in translation
control. Bioessays 1999, 21:319-325.
59. Gordon RF, Stein MA, Diedrich DL: Heat shock-induced axenic growth of
Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus. J Bacteriol 1993, 175:2157-2161.

Page 12 of 12

60. Lambert C, Hobley L, Chang CY, Fenton A, Capeness M, Sockett L: A
predatory patchwork: membrane and surface structures of Bdellovibrio
bacteriovorus. Adv Microb Physiol 2009, 54:313-361.
61. IGS Annotation Engine. [http://ae.igs.umaryland.edu/cgi/index.cgi].
62. Kurtz S: The Vmatch large scale sequence analysis software. 2004.
63. Wu M, Eisen JA: A simple, fast, and accurate method of phylogenomic
inference. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R151.
64. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
65. FASTX-Toolkit: FASTQ/A short-reads pre-processing tools. [http://
hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/index.html].
66. Maq: Mapping and Assembly with Qualities. [http://maq.sourceforge.net/].
67. Rutherford K, Parkhill J, Crook J, Horsnell T, Rice P, Rajandream MA, Barrell B:
Artemis: sequence visualization and annotation. Bioinformatics 2000,
16:944-945.
68. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD: Analysis of relative gene expression data using
real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods
2001, 25:402-408.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-453
Cite this article as: Wang et al.: Genomic insights into an obligate
epibiotic bacterial predator: Micavibrio aeruginosavorus ARL-13. BMC
Genomics 2011 12:453.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
