<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Recent acquisition of imprinting at the rodent Sfmbt2 locus correlates with insertion of a large block of miRNAs</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-204"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Qianwei Wang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Recent acquisition of imprinting at the rodent
Sfmbt2 locus correlates with insertion of a large
block of miRNAs
Qianwei Wang1†, Jacqueline Chow1†, Jenny Hong1†, Anne Ferguson Smith2, Carol Moreno3, Peter Seaby4,
Paul Vrana5, Kamelia Miri1, Joon Tak1, Eu Ddeum Chung1, Gabriela Mastromonaco4,6, Isabella Caniggia7 and
Susannah Varmuza1*

Abstract
Background: The proximal region of murine Chr 2 has long been known to harbour one or more imprinted genes
from classic genetic studies involving reciprocal translocations. No imprinted gene had been identified from this
region until our study demonstrated that the PcG gene Sfmbt2 is expressed from the paternally inherited allele in
early embryos and extraembryonic tissues. Imprinted genes generally reside in clusters near elements termed
Imprinting Control Regions (ICRs), suggesting that Sfmbt2 might represent an anchor for a new imprinted domain.
Results: We analyzed allelic expression of approximately 20 genes within a 3.9 Mb domain and found that Sfmbt2
and an overlapping non-coding antisense transcript are the only imprinted genes in this region. These transcripts
represent a very narrow imprinted gene locus. We also demonstrate that rat Sfmbt2 is imprinted in extraembryonic
tissues. An interesting feature of both mouse and rat Sfmbt2 genes is the presence of a large block of miRNAs in
intron 10. Other mammals, including the bovine, lack this block of miRNAs. Consistent with this association, we
show that human and bovine Sfmbt2 are biallelic. Other evidence indicates that pig Sfmbt2 is also not imprinted.
Further strengthening the argument for recent evolution of Sfmbt2 is our demonstration that a more distant
muroid rodent, Peromyscus also lacks imprinting and the block of miRNAs.
Conclusions: These observations are consistent with the hypothesis that the block of miRNAs are driving
imprinting at this locus. Our results are discussed in the context of ncRNAs at other imprinted loci.
Accession numbers for Peromyscus cDNA and intron 10 genomic DNA are [Genbank:HQ416417 and Genbank:
HQ416418], respectively.

Background
Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic process that affects
a small subset of genes resulting in their expression/
repression in a parent of origin dependent fashion. One
set of imprinted genes is expressed only from the paternally inherited allele, while another set is expressed only
from the maternally inherited chromosome. The imprint
is reset at each generation when the two haploid genomes are separate, either during gametogenesis or

* Correspondence: s.varmuza@utoronto.ca
† Contributed equally
1
Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, 25 Harbord
St., Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

immediately after fertilization, when the two genomes
are physically separated in their own pronuclei.
Imprinted genes generally reside in clusters around a
cis acting element called an Imprinting Control Region
(ICR) that exerts its effects over a large chromosomal
domain (up to 4 Mb) (reviewed in [1]). Imprinted
domains can contain genes that are biallelic, paternally
expressed or maternally expressed. Monoallelic expression can be universal (ie in all tissues tested), or limited
to a subset of tissues. The most common type of tissue
specific limitation is to the extraembryonic lineages,
exemplified by the placenta and the yolk sac. This latter
observation has provided strong support for the idea
that the evolutionary origins of imprinting are rooted in
extraembryonic tissue biology.

© 2011 Wang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

In mouse uniparental embryos, the tissue most severely
affected is the trophoblast, the precursor of several placental cell types. Gynogenetic/parthenogenetic embryos
have almost none by midgestation, whereas androgenetic
embryos have hyperplastic trophoblast. Moreover, derivation of trophoblast stem cells from parthenogenetic
mouse blastocysts is extremely inefficient, and is accompanied by selective loss of imprinting of several genes
(Miri and Varmuza, Parthenogenetic embryos are
impaired in their ability to make TS cells, manuscript in
preparation). These observations led us to hypothesize
that a gene critical for trophoblast establishment/function in blastocysts is expressed from a paternally-inherited chromosome, and is therefore missing from
gynogenetic/parthenogenetic embryos. A microarray
comparison of the transcriptomes of androgenetic and
gynogenetic blastocysts revealed that the PcG gene
Sfmbt2 is expressed almost exclusively from the paternal
allele starting at the blastocyst stage [2]. Monoallelic
expression in all tissues is preserved up to e7.5, after
which a high level monoallelic expression is preserved in
extraembryonic tissues, while significantly reduced, but
biallelic, expression in somatic tissues can be observed.
These observations place Sfmbt2 in the class of imprinted
genes that are specific to the extraembryonic tissues.
Sfmbt2 maps to the proximal region of Chromosome
2. This region was mapped as imprinted through the
chromosome translocation studies of Cattanach and colleagues [3,4], but no imprinted gene had been identified
until our study [2]. Here we extend our analysis of the
domain surrounding Sfmbt2, and the search for a potential ICR. Our results indicate that Sfmbt2 is the only
gene within a 4 Mb region that is imprinted, and that
we find no evidence of a classical ICR displaying robust
germline specific DNA methylation that is preserved
after fertilization. We also show that imprinting appears
to be unique to mice and rats, and is associated with
the acquisition of a block of miRNAs in one of the
introns. Our results suggest that we have caught a gene
“in the act” of becoming imprinted.

Page 2 of 11

With the exception of Sfmbt2, none of the genes
assayed displayed monoallelic expression in Domesticus
X Castaneus or Castaneus X Domesticus placenta or
yolk sac (Figure 1 and Additional file 1, Figure S1).
Interestingly, a recent study of e9.5 hybrid embryos,
using a massively parallel sequencing approach, revealed
several new imprinted genes. However, none were found

Results
Sfmbt2 is the only imprinted gene in this domain

The largest imprinted cluster, the Snrpn locus, is 3.7
Mb. We therefore assessed the allelic expression of 23
annotated protein coding genes, including Sfmbt2,
within a 4.3 Mb domain, from Gata3 to Mrc1. Several
unannotated genes were also tested for allelic expression, but these will not be discussed further. Gata3 lies
500 kb proximal to Sfmbt2; the next most proximal
gene, Cugbp2, is 3.3 Mb upstream of Gata3, indicating
the presence of a gene desert. Prkcq, immediately telomeric to Sfmbt2, is not expressed in extraembryonic tissues (data not shown).

Figure 1 Representative SNP Analysis of Sfmbt2 Domain Genes.
A. Twenty two genes flanking Sfmbt2 were analysed for allelic
expression in placenta or yolk sac from C57BL6 (D) X Castaneus (C)
mid gestation fetuses. Illustrated is a screen shot of the UCSC
genome browser image of the region encomapssing Gata3 to Mrc1
on Chromosome 2. Prkcq is not expressed in extraembryonic tissues.
B. Shown are three representative genes, Ankrd16, Itih5 and Fbxo18,
analysed by allele-specific expression RFLP. The two parental alleles
are clearly present in placenta cDNA for all three genes. Results for
the other genes can be seen in Additional file 1, Figure S1.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

in the proximal region of Chromosome 2, including
Sfmbt2 [5]. This is consistent with our observation that
Sfmbt2 becomes biallelic in embryo-derived somatic tissues. None of the neighbouring genes is imprinted in
embryo. Together with our findings, these results indicate that Sfmbt2 is the only imprinted gene within a 4.3
Mb region of proximal Chromosome 2, and only in
early embryo and extraembryonic tissues.
Sfmbt2 has multiple transcriptional starts, stops and
differential splicing (see Ensembl or UCSC database).
The two transcriptional starts sites (TSS) are utilized
differently; the more 5’ start is specific to extraembryonic tissues, while the 3’ start is ubiquitous [2]. There is
a non-coding antisense transcript that starts in the first
common intron downstream of the two Sfmbt2 TSS.
The putative promoter for this antisense transcript
embodies part of a CpG island (described below). In placenta, this transcript is also imprinted and like Sfmbt2 is
expressed from the paternal allele (Figure 2). This result
is in contrast with other imprinted gene domains that

Figure 2 A non-coding antisense transcript is expressed from
the paternal allele. Several annotated SNPs in the predicted noncoding antisense transcript that starts in the first common intron
were located in the downstream exons. cDNAs from Domesticus X
Castaneus (DC) and the reciprocal (CD) placentae were sequenced
and found to contain only paternal alleles. Five polymorphisms
were observed, two of which are illustrated here. None of the exons
in the antisense transcript overlap exons in processed Sfmbt2
transcripts.

Page 3 of 11

possess antisense non-coding transcripts, for example
the Kcnq1ot1 and Airn transcripts in the Kcnq1 and
Igf2r loci, respectively (reviewed in [6]). In these latter
cases, the antisense transcript is expressed from the
opposite allele as the sense transcript.
Oocyte DMR is Sparse and Largely Asymmetric

Fifteen imprinted domains are regulated by germline
Differentially Methylated Regions (DMRs); twelve are
methylated on the maternal chromosome in somatic tissues and in oocytes, while three are methylated on the
paternal allele in somatic tissues and in sperm [7]. Several other DMRs have been identified, but not tested for
ICR function. In addition, many imprinted genes display
a characteristic chromatin signature [8]. A search of the
Broad Institute ChIP-seq database revealed strong peaks
of H3K4Me3 and H3K27Me3 binding across the Sfmbt2
sense and antisense TSS and coinciding with a CpG
island; however, in contrast with other germline DMRs,
there was no discernible H3K9Me3 or H4K20Me3 binding in ES cells [9].
There is a large CpG cluster of approximately 5.3 kb
that spans the TSS for Sfmbt2, including the start site that
is used only in extraembryonic tissues (herein called Promoter 1), and extends 3 kb downstream of the ubiquitous
TSS (herein called Promoter 2). The TSS for the non coding (nc) antisense RNA also resides within the CpG island.
Five amplicons from this region were queried for methylation by bisulfite mutagenesis in oocyte and sperm genomic
DNA (Figure 3A). Two of the five amplicons, Me3 and
CG3, contained polymorphisms that allowed us to distinguish parental alleles after bisulite mutagenesis and
sequencing; these two amplicons were analysed in placental DNA from C57BL6 X Castaneus F1 placentae. Unlike
other DMRs from well conserved imprinted domains, the
CpG cluster spanning the promoter region of Sfmbt2 did
not contain a block of methylated CpGs; methylated cytosines were distributed sparsely throughout the CpG cluster
(Figure 3B). The amplicon spanning the Promoter 1 start
site (Me3) is not noticeably methylated in either sperm or
oocyte, although there is a slight increase in methylation
on the maternal allele in both oocyte and placenta. Methylation of Me3 in fetal brain is similarly sparse, and does
not display any allelic bias (not shown). Four of the amplicons contained CpG sites that were methylated in oocyte
but not sperm; however, in two cases this observation was
confined to a single site, and in one case to four out of 40
potential sites. Interestingly, three of these four amplicons
contained methylated asymmetric cytosines in oocyte
DNA, a conclusion that was drawn from the fact that all
unique clones contained Cs at these positions. Following
this observation, the other strand of CG3 was subjected to
bisulfite mutagenesis and sequencing to assess the symmetry of the four CpG sites identified in the initial analysis.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

Page 4 of 11

Figure 3 Methylation of Sfmbt2 CpG Island. A. Five amplicons representing 140 CpG sites across the transcriptional start sites for both the
sense and antisense transcripts at the Sfmbt2 locus were queried for methylation in sperm and oocyte genomic DNA by bisulfite mutagenesis.
Two amplicons, at the 5’ and 3’ extremes of the CpG island, Me3 and CG3, were also examined in C57BL6 X Castaneus F1 placenta genomic
DNA to determine parental allele methylation. Black circles represent CpGs that survived bisulfite conversion; open circles represent CpGs that
were converted to TG; red circles represent asymmetric cytosines in oocyte genomic DNA that survived conversion in most clones; grey circles
represent cytosines in a CpG context that were methylated on only the bottom strand in oocyte genomic DNA. Each line represents a unique
clone; duplicate clones were not scored. Bisulfite conversion was approximately 95%. The apparent two CpG sites in CG1 are only separated by a
single base pair, and are therefore assumed to be a single site. B. Relative location of bisulfite amplicons within CpG island. Hatched boxes
represent amplicons for which only one strand was queried; solid box (CG3) was analysed on both the top and bottom strands. Hash marks
indicate the relative location of the methylated cytosines in oocyte genomic DNA; black = CpG, red = asymmetric. Of 25 methylated cytosines,
18 were confirmed to be asymmetric, including the four CpG sites in CG3 illustrated in panel A.

All four proved to be asymmetrically methylated, and an
additional five asymmetric sites were identified. This
observation strongly suggests that DNA methylation may
be a secondary consequence of ordered chromatin structure in oocytes. None of the maternal methylated cytosines
in CG3 was conserved in placental DNA.
Rat Sfmbt2 is Imprinted, but Bovine Sfmbt2 is Biallelic

The human Sfmbt2 gene is not imprinted (Additional
file 2, Figure S2). In examining the genomic sequences
within and near mouse and human genes, it became
apparent that the mouse gene differs from the human
gene in two respects:
1. The syntenic region of the mouse and human
domains is quite different. A comparison of human,
mouse, rat and cow syntenic regions indicates that the
rat domain is likely ancestral; the human gene has

undergone one small translocation; the mouse and
bovine domains are rearranged significantly (Figure 4A).
2. Rat and mouse genes possess a large block of miRNAs in intron 10, while all other mammals with well
annotated genomes, including human and bovine, do
not have this block of miRNAs (Figure 4B and Additional files 3 and 4, Figures S3 and S4). The miRNAs
fall within the mir-467 family.
These observations raised the possibility of testing
whether chromosomal arrangements are important for
acquisition of the imprint in the mouse gene, or
whether the block of miRNAs is the critical feature driving imprinting at this locus. If the rat gene is biallelic,
then some aspect of the chromosomal rearrangement in
the mouse may have led to the acquisition of monoallelic expression through some kind of position effect. On
the other hand, if the rat gene is imprinted, then recent

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

Page 5 of 11

Figure 4 Genomic organization of Mammalian Sfmbt2 Genes. A. Diagram illustrating the syntenic organization of the Sfmbt2 domain from
four mammals - rat, mouse, human and cow - with different blocks of genes represented by arrows. The location of Sfmbt2 is indicated with “S”.
The rat domain may be ancestral. B. Intron 10 in mice and rats possesses a large block of miRNAs, while other mammalian genes do not.

insertion of the block of miRNAs may play a pivotal role
in the establishment of a new imprinted domain.
We found a polymorphism in the 3’ UTR of the rat
Sfmbt2 gene in F344 and Sprague Dawley rats, and
assayed allelic expression in mid-gestation placenta, yolk
sac and brain from (F344 X SD) F1 and (SD X F344) F1
fetuses. As with mice, placenta and yolk sac expressed
predominantly the paternal allele, while brain showed
clear biallelic expression (Figure 5).
The bovine genomic region encompassing Sfmbt2 has
undergone significant rearrangements in comparison
with rat, mouse and human (Figure 4A). Polymorphisms
between two species of cattle, Bos taurus and plains
bison, were used to assess allelic expression in F1 blastocysts. Unlike mouse blastocysts, which display monoalleic expression from the paternal allele, bovine
blastocysts are clearly biallelic (Figure 6). Thus, chromosomal rearrangements are not associated with the acquisition of imprinting, at least not in cattle.

10 sequences against MirBase revealed that only kangaroo
rats possessed a single potential mir-467 family miRNA
sequence that folds appropriately with RNAFold (Figure 7).
In the rodent phylogeny, kangaroo rats are within the
mouse-related clade, although at a distance from Mus and
Rattus [10]. Peromyscus, or deer mice, are indigenous to

Peromyscus Sfmbt2 Lacks a Large Block of miRNAs and is
Biallelic

Figure 5 Rat Sfmbt2 is Imprinted in Extraembryonic Tissues.
SNPs were identified in the 3’ UTR of the rat Sfmbt2 gene in
Sprague Dawley (SD) and F344 (F) strains. Midgestation placentas,
yolk sacs and brains from crosses of SD females with F344 males
(SF) and the reciprocal (FS) were analysed for allelic expression
using polymorphic AciI sites. While genomic DNA and brain cDNA
displayed clear biallelic patterns, both yolk sac and placenta cDNA
contained mainly paternal alleles.

The observation that the Old World rodent Sfmbt2 gene is
imprinted, while other mammalian genes are not,
prompted us to investigate the gene in other rodents. Rabbits, guinea pigs, squirrels and kangaroo rats are represented in the genome database. A BLAST search of intron

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

Figure 6 Bovine Sfmbt2 is Biallelic. Several SNPs in the 3’ UTR of
the bovine Sfmbt2 gene were found to be biallelic in two pools of
5 blastocysts each. The sperm used for fertilizing all of the oocytes
was from the same male Plains bison. The second set of SNPs (right
panel) is uninformative in pool 6.

North America, and are evolutionarily more distant from
Old World rodents (approximately 24 Mya), than rats and
mice are from each other (approximately 12 Mya), but are
closer than the other rodents with genomic sequence in
the public database. They are represented by several species that occupy separate ranges, with clearly defined
hybrid zones, where interbreeding is limited. There is evidence that some of the hybrid dysgenesis may be a function of incompatible genomic imprinting [11,12]. The
Peromyscus genome is represented in the public database
by 1.4 fold coverage of unassembled shotgun sequence
traces. We used mouse exonic plus flanking intronic
sequences to BLAST search the Peromyscus sequence
database, and were able to assemble most of the Sfmbt2
coding sequence by analysing cDNA derived from P. maniculatus placenta. Primers from the exons flanking intron
10 were used to amplify a 10 kb sequence from P. maniculatus genomic DNA. Sequence analysis of this intron
revealed the presence of three potential mir-467 sequences
with good folding properties (Figure 7), although none of
the putative pre-miRNAs resembled mouse or rat mir-467
outside of the mature miRNA sequence.
We next examined the allelic expression of Sfmbt2 in
Peromyscus placenta. Analysis of placenta cDNA from
reciprocal crosses of two sister species, P. polionotus
and P. maniculatus, revealed that the Peromyscus
Sfmbt2 gene is not imprinted in either species of deer
mice (Figure 8).

Discussion
The Sfmbt2 gene represented an entrée into a new
imprinted domain, whose extent was unknown. Our

Page 6 of 11

Figure 7 Peromyscus and Kangaroo Rat Putative pre-miRNAs
in Intron 10. Intron 10 sequence was BLAST searched against the
mirBase database. Sequences that displayed homology with mir-467
family members were then subjected to folding with RNAFold to
assess the liklihood of correct processing by Drosha and Dicer.
Alignment of the putative pre-miRNAs with known mir-467 family
members revealed the position of processed miRNAs in relation to
the stem-loop (arrows). The Pero1 and Pero2 sequences are
predicted by MiPred to be real, the Pero3 sequence is predicted to
be a false miRNA hairpin, and the Kangaroo rat sequence is
predicted to be a pseudo miRNA. Note that the region with highest
homology to known mir-467 family members in the Kangaroo rat is
too close to the Drosha base.

analysis has revealed that it comprises a single coding
gene, with a spliced antisense transcript that is transcribed from the first common intron and is also
imprinted; this latter is likely a lincRNA [9], and its

Figure 8 Peromyscus Sfmbt2 is Biallelic. Peromyscus placentas
from interspecies crosses of P. maniculatus (M) and P. polionotus (P)
display biallelic expression at several SNPs, indicating that the gene
is not imprinted in either sub-species.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

imprinted expression may reflect open/closed chromatin
states of the parental alleles. No other genes tested
within 4.3 Mb of Sfmbt2 display monoalleic expression
in placenta, and published data from another study indicates that no genes in this domain are imprinted in e9.5
somatic tissues [5]. A recent computational analysis supported placental imprinting of Sfmbt2, using criteria
heavily dependent on the two histone marks, H3K4Me3
and H3K27Me3, mentioned above [13]. No other genes
within the domain examined in our study passed the
computational test in this study, although one could
argue that the criteria chosen for the machine learning
exercise may have been biased.
The CpG island that spans the TSSs for the various
Sfmbt2 transcripts is not likely to be regulated by DNA
methylation since very little methylation exists at this
locus in both placental and somatic tissues as measured
by bisulfite sequencing. Only seven CpG sites (out of
140) display consistent methylation in oocyte genomic
DNA. The four maternal CpGs from CG3 that were
queried in placental DNA did not remain methylated,
suggesting that DNA methylation is a secondary consequence of silencing mediated by some other mechanism.
Indeed, methylation was largely asymmetric; of 25 cytosines that survived bisulfite mutagenesis in oocyte genomic DNA, 18 were asymmetric, and four of these
resided within the context of a CpG dinucleotide, raising
a question about whether reports of CpG methylation
based on sequence analysis of only one strand are
indeed symmetric as is assumed by most investigators.
A recent report of extraembryonic tissue development
in the absence of DNMT1, 3A and 3B supports the
notion that DNA methylation has little if any function
in placenta and yolk sac [14]. It is possible that asymmetric methylation of oocyte genomic DNA, perhaps
mediated by DNMT3A/DNMT3L/DNMT3B, may drive
establishment of a heritable chromatin structure that
does not depend on continued DNA methylation.
There are three additional CpG islands within and
near Sfmbt2; one in intron 11, one in intron 14 and
another between Sfmbt2 and the next telomeric gene
Prkcq (which is not expressed in extraembryonic tissues). None of these CpG islands is conserved between
rats and mice, the intron 11 CpG island is methylated
on both alleles in mouse placenta (not shown), and the
other two CpG islands, which are part of a recently
expanded retrotransposon family, are not present in
Mus castaneus (not shown). The TSS CpG island is
therefore the most likely regulatory region for Sfmbt2.
Single gene imprinted domains comprise a small subset of imprinted genes. Of six reported genes (Gatm,
Nnat, Nap1l5, Inpp5f_v2, Htr2a and Slc38a4), five have
well documented methylation analyses (Gatm, Nnat,
Nap1l5, Inpp5f_v2 and Slc38a4). Four of these display

Page 7 of 11

methylation of the silenced (maternal) TSS [15-17],
while no DMR could be found near Gatm [18], similar
to our observations for Sfmbt2.
The Broad Institute ChIP-seq database indicates that
there is very strong association of the CpG island with
Ring1b, EZH2, SUZ12, H3K4 Me2/3 and H3K27Me3,
but not H3K9 Me2 or Me3, nor H4K20Me3 in ES cells.
Interestingly, the human gene also displays high
H3K4Me3 and H3K27Me3 binding, and measurable
although reduced EZH2 and Ring1b association in ES
cells. Moreover, the human gene is associated with two
antisense lincRNAs, one at each end of the SFMBT2
primary transcript. This is interesting because the
human gene is not imprinted. Some other aspect of
chromatin structure may be important for imprinted
regulation of Sfmbt2 in extraembryonic tissues.
Rodents from the Mus and Rattus genuses imprint
their Sfmbt2 gene, while other mammals do not, including rodents from the Peromyscine genus. The acquisition of a large block of miRNAs within an intron of the
rodent gene strongly suggests that some aspect of
miRNA biology is driving silencing of this locus from
the maternal allele in early embryos and extraembryonic
tissues. A survey of miRBase reveals that there are
approximately 370 miRNA loci, some of which are clusters, in the mouse genome, which is roughly equivalent
to 1.5% of protein coding genes. Of 96 imprinted genes,
11 (12.5%) contain miRNAs, while 20% contain some
kind of small ncRNA including miRNAs; 84% of these
gene arrangements are conserved in humans. The numbers represent a significant enrichment among
imprinted genes for co-regulation by some kind of
ncRNA. One could speculate that local expansion of
ncRNAs might flag a gene for silencing in one of the
parental germlines, and that selection would fix the
silencing, perhaps by insertion of a more efficient DMR,
thus obviating the need for retention of the ncRNA
cluster.
The annotated miRNAs in both the rat and mouse
arrays are from the mir-467 family. However, it is clear
that there are likely more miRNAs in each block than
have been annotated. Dot plots of mouse and rat introns
against both themselves and each other reveal significant
repetitive sequence homology, even after the annotated
miRNAs are removed (Additional file 3, Figure S3). In
addition, both mouse and rat arrays can be organized
into tandem repeats of approximately 2 kb (Additional
file 4, Figure S4), although the rat repeats suffer from
gaps in the sequence database. In contrast, no other
mammalian introns examined contain repetitive
sequences. There may be more miRNAs, or at least
miRNA-like sequences, in both mouse and rat introns
that remain to be annotated. For example, a small random section of the rat intron was subjected to analysis

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

with MiPred [19] to reveal the presence of two additional predicted pre-miRNA sequences from the mir467 family (Additional file 5, Figure S5).
Kangaroo rats and deer mice fall within the mouse
related clade of rodents [10]. Both possess potential
mir-467 miRNA sequences in intron 10, although these
do not resemble the mir-467 pre-miRNA sequences in
rats and mice, apart from the putative mature miRNA.
It is unclear whether these potential miRNAs in kangaroo rats and Peromyscus are evolutionary precursors
or remnants.
Several of the miRNAs from the murine Sfmbt2 locus
are expressed and processed in placenta (Additional file
6, Figure S6), not surprising given that they are part of
the primary transcript for Sfmbt2, which is robustly
expressed in placenta. Recent analysis of small RNA
libraries with massively parallel sequencing strategies
have indicated that several of the miRNAs from the
cluster are expressed in ES cells [20]; interestingly, the
number of reads does not correlate with the frequency
of the miRNA within the block of repeats, suggesting
that the primary transcript likely folds in a complex
manner that only allows processing of a subset of the
potential miRNAs. Whether these miRNAs mediate any
functions in placental biology remains an open question.
There are mir-467 family members in other mammalian
genomes, notably human and pig, although in far fewer
numbers than in rodents. Moreover, there are several
mmu-mir-467 at other locations in the mouse genome.
Any of the miRNAs processed from the Sfmbt2 primary
transcript would be imprinted, although testing this is
problematical given the highly repetitive nature of the
array itself, and the presence of other family members at
other locations in the genome.
Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic mechanism that
is restricted to mammals and angiosperm plants. There
is mounting evidence that it is mediated by maternal
factors, possibly as a means of controlling extraembryonic tissues that parasitize the maternal reproductive
tract [21]. Studies of the evolution of imprinting indicate
that it seems to have emerged at different times at different loci [22-24]. Interestingly, several imprinted clusters contain miRNAs or SNORDs, and some of these
have been demonstrated to be imprinted themselves.
The role of ncRNAs in imprinting also includes regulatory functions, such as that exerted by the Kcnq1ot1
antisense transcript at the Kcnq1 locus, and the Airn
transcript at the Igf2r locus [6].
RNAi biology is providing interesting new insights
into gene regulation. Studies in plants and yeast have
revealed a wide array of effects, from post transcriptional gene silencing involving both mRNA degradation
and translational control, to heterochromatin formation,
particularly at centromeres. A recent report of the

Page 8 of 11

ncRNA clusters at the Dlk1 and Snrpn imprinted loci
has revealed that transcripts containing precursors of
the miRNAs or SNORDs from these loci are retained by
the nucleus [25]. This raises the interesting notion that
the function of the ncRNAs at these loci may be more
similar to the regulation of centromeres in yeast than to
“traditional” cytoplasmic RNAi. Such a role is also
implied by the phenotype of both Dicer and Ago2 conditional null alleles in mouse oocytes, which fail to complete the first meiotic division due to misaligned
chromosomes [26,27]. Interestingly, maternal loss of
Dgcr8, a component of the miRNA processing pathway,
is without effect on development, even though the profile of misexpressed miRNAs in maternal Dicer -/- and
Dgcr8 -/- zygotes is the same [28]. It is tempting to
speculate that expression of a subset of the miRNAs
from the Sfmbt2 cluster provides the RNAi transcriptional silencing biochemistry with the molecular substrates that allow it to target the repeated sequences at
the Sfmbt2 intron for transcriptional epigenetic silencing
on the maternal allele.
The evolution of miRNAs is highly dynamic, and is
characterized by expansions and contractions, partly
through segmental duplication/deletion events. The mir467 family was acquired by amniotes approximately 350
Mya [29], and has remained relatively small; humans
possess one copy on Chromosome 3, and another on
the X chromosome, while pigs and orangutans possess
only the X linked gene. Mice have acquired, in addition
to the large cluster at Sfmbt2, several other copies on
Chromosomes 5, 9, 10, 11 and 13, although current
miRNA annotation and archiving may be incomplete for
this family. Interestingly, a large cluster of miRNAs in a
different family expanded in primates after divergence
from the rodent lineage, and is expressed exclusively in
placenta [30]. This cluster maps to Chromosome
19q13.4, and is near several loci that display either
imprinted expression or parent of origin effects in
humans (see imprinted gene catalogue records http://
igc.otago.ac.nz/Search.html). A recent report demonstrated paternal expression of the primary transcript
encoding this miRNA cluster in human placenta [31].
The primary transcript is associated with a classic germline DMR; this locus is however much older than the
cluster at the rodent Sfmbt2 gene by at least 30 million
years. As mentioned above, two other imprinted loci,
the Dlk1 domain and the Snrpn region, also contain
large clusters of non-coding RNAs (miRNAs and
SNORD genes). They also possess classic germline
DMRs. The lack of any noticeable germline methylation
at Sfmbt2 may reflect its youth as an imprinted domain,
suggesting that imprinted regulation precedes establishment of differential methylation. This raises the possibility that one general mechanism by which genes or gene

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

domains become imprinted is through local expansion
of miRNAs [32], and that the rodent Sfmbt2 locus is a
window on an actively evolving imprinted domain. How
these clusters of ncRNAs mediate gene silencing at the
transcriptional level will be an interesting puzzle to
solve.

Conclusions
The very recent insertion of a large block of miRNAs
into the intron of the PcG gene Sfmbt2 in old world
rodents coincides with the acquisition of placental
imprinting at this locus. The transcriptional start site
CGI does not display heritable differential methylation,
suggesting that maternal silencing by other chromatin
mechanisms mediates imprinting at this locus.
Methods
Animals

Mice and rats were bred using standard animal husbandry. Timed pregnancies were assessed by the appearance
of a vaginal plug on day 0.5 in mice, and by the presence of a copulatory plug in the bottom of the cage on
day 0.5 in rats. Peromyscus (PO - P. polionotus and BW
- P. maniculatus stocks) were obtained from the breeding colonies of the Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center.
Reciprocal interspecific hybrids were produced by pairing PO with BW animals. Peromyscus pregnancies were
assessed visually. Bovine blastocysts were produced by
in vitro fertilization of domestic cattle oocytes matured
from follicles obtained from slaughterhouse ovaries with
frozen-thawed plains bison sperm stored in liquid nitrogen at the Toronto Zoo. Bovine embryos were cultured
in modified synthetic oviductal fluid medium supplemented with 2% steer serum until the expanded blastocyst stage before extraction of RNA from pools of five
embryos. All procedures involving laboratory animals
were approved by the Canadian Council on Animal
Care, by a licence from the UK Government Home
Office (80/2042), or by the Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals, USA.
Human placenta

This study was conducted according to the principles
expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent
was obtained from each individual patient and tissue collections were approved by the Mount Sinai Hospital’s
Review Committee on the Use of Human Subjects and
carried out in accordance with the participating institutions’ ethics guidelines. First and second trimester human
placental tissues were obtained immediately following
elective termination of pregnancies by dilatation and curettage, or suction evacuation. Gestational age was determined by the date of the last menstrual period and first
trimester ultrasound measurement of crown-rump-length

Page 9 of 11

(CRL). Term placental tissue was collected at the time of
delivery from healthy pregnancies with normally grown
fetuses that did not have signs of placental dysfunction.
Samples were collected randomly from central and peripheral placental areas and snap frozen immediately after
delivery. Calcified, necrotic and visually ischemic areas
were excluded from collection.
cDNA Synthesis

Total RNA isolated with Trizol reagent according to
manufacturer’s instructions was used as template for the
synthesis of cDNA, using random hexamers as primers
and either Superscript III (Invitrogen) or RevertAid
(Fermentas) cDNA synthesis kits. All cDNA synthesis
reactions were preceded by a DNAse I step to eliminate
any contaminating genomic DNA; an aliquot of the
DNAse treated RNA was set aside as a zero R.T control.
No PCR product was ever obtained with the zero R.T
control samples. PCR was performed with either LA
Taq (Takara) or Bioline Taq (Bioline International).
Peromyscus Sfmbt2 cDNA and Genomic Sequence

BLAST analysis of sequence trace files for Peromyscus
maniculatus using murine exon sequence plus some
flanking intron sequence as search query yielded fourteen
coding exons with strong homology. The seven missing
exons were recovered with primers designed from the
Peromyscus sequence derived either from the database or
from first pass sequence analysis of Sfmbt2 cDNA (Additional file 7, Table S2). The Peromyscus Sfmbt2 cDNA
sequence accession number is [Genbank:HQ416417].
For analysis of Peromyscus intron 10, forward and
reverse primers were designed from the exonic
sequences of exons 9 and 10, respectively for amplification of genomic DNA. PCR product was sequenced with
a series of primers in a walk from each end until the
amplifiable intron sequence was small enough to clone
into pT-Easy. Subclones of the pT-Easy intron fragments were sequenced with universal primers, and the
full length intron 10 sequence was assembled. Some of
the intron sequence was obtained from the sequence
trace files. The Peromyscus intron 10 genomic DNA
sequence accession number is [Genbank:HQ416418}.
SNP analsysis

Annotated SNPs were chosen for analysis; where possible, SNPs that created RFLPs were selected. Primers
were designed to amplify the selected SNPs, and PCR
product was subjected either to restriction enzyme
digestion or direct sequence analysis. Primers and analysis strategy are listed in Additional file 7, Tables S1 and
S2. Where no SNPs could be found in the public database, genomic DNA from parental species was surveyed
by sequence analysis.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

Page 10 of 11

Bisulfite Mutagenesis

Genomic DNA was treated with sodium bisulfite, using a
MethylCode kit from Invitrogen. For the isolation of
oocyte genomic DNA, 10 - 20 females aged 5-10 weeks
were superovulated with 5 I.U. of PMS administered
intraperitoneally followed 48 hours later by 5 I.U. of
hCG. Eighteen hours after the hCG injection, oocytes
were retrieved from the oviducts and stripped of cumulus
cells with a combination of hyaluronidase treatment, vigourous pipetting, and removal of the zona pellucida with
acidic tyrodes. This latter step ensured that all cumulus
cells were removed from the sample before extraction of
genomic DNA, which involved a 5 hour treatment with
Proteinase K followed by ethanol precipitation.
With the exception of CG3 top strand, bisulfite primers were designed with the aid of the MethPrimer web
based tool (http://www.urogene.org/methprimer/index1.
html) (Additional file 7, Table S3). Only one strand was
sequenced for amplicons Me3, CG1, (bottom strands),
and Me4, CG2 (top strands). CG3 was sequenced from
both strands. The primers used for amplification of the
top strand were manually designed to avoid bias generated by asymmetric methylation. Oocyte genomic DNA
required further amplification with nested primers, so
all samples were subjected to nested amplification prior
to cloning into pGEM-TEasy, using a kit from Promega.
Plasmid DNA was purified from individual clones and
subjected to sequence analysis with the T7 universal primer. Occasional samples were sequenced with the SP6
universal primer. Only unique clones were reported;
uniqueness was assessed by random PCR generated
SNPs, some of which were the result of less than complete bisulfite mutagenesis. Only clones exhibiting 95%
mutagenesis of non-CG cytosines were scored.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1 Human SFMBT2 is Biallelic. Placenta RNA
from four individuals (#6 - 18 weeks gestation; #8 - 39 weeks gestation;
#9 - 40 weeks gestation; #10 - 41 weeks gestation) was converted to
cDNA as described in Materials and Methods, and amplified with primers
for two SNPs found at high frequencies in the human population (see
Primer Table for details). Two samples amplified successfully with SNP1
primers, and three with SNP3 primers. In both cases, alleles were
identified by digestion with diagnostic restriction enzymes; asterisks (*)
indicate one allele and number sign (#) indicates the other allele. Sample
#6 was homozygous for both SNPs. The other samples contained two
alleles, indicating the presence of both maternal and paternal alleles.
Additional file 2: Figure S2 Allelic Analysis of Genes in the Murine
Sfmbt2 Domain. Placenta cDNA from e14.5 (C57BL6 X Castaneus) F1
embryos was analysed either by direct sequencing of PCR product, or by
restriction enzyme digestion with the indicated enzymes.
Additional file 3: Figure S3 Dot Plot Comparison of Rat and Mouse
Intron 10. Sequence from rat and mouse Sfmbt2 intron 10 was plotted
against each other or against itself. Note the large segment of highly
repetitive sequence, even after the removal of annotated miRNA
sequence. In contrast, human, kangaroo rat and cow introns generate
the predicted diagonal line when self plotted.

Additional file 4: Figure S4 Alignment of Repeats in Mouse and Rat
Intron 10. The block of miRNAs is arranged in a series of tandem
repeats of an approximately 2.5 kb sequence, each of which contains 6-7
miRNAs. The mouse repeats align well with each other, while the rat
repeats are less well conserved.
Additional file 5: Figure S5 Annotation of miRNAs May Be
Incomplete. A small segment of the rat intron close to an annotated
miRNA (yellow highlighting), when subjected to MiPred reveals the
presence of two additional potential mir-467 family members (green
highlighting) that fold into good potential pre-miRNAs with RNAFold
(http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAfold.cgi).
Additional file 6: Figure S6 MiRNAs from the Intron 10 Cluster Are
Expressed in Placenta. Five of the most commonly annotated miRNAs
from the Sfmbt2 intron 10 cluster were assayed by RT-PCR in placenta
RNA. The asterisk indicates a primer dimer artifact.
Additional file 7: Tables S1-S4. Tables 1-4 list primer sequences used
for analyses described in the paper.

Abbreviations
Mb: megabase; e7.5: embryonic day 7.5; miRNA: micro RNA; kb: kilobase;
DMR: differentially methylated region; ChIP-seq: chromatin
immunoprecipitation massively parallel sequence; H3K4Me3: histone H3
lysine 4 trimethylation; H3K27Me3: histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation;
H3K9Me3: histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation; H4K20Me3: histone H4 lisine 20
trimethylation; ES: embryonic stem cells; 3’UTR: 3’ untranslated region; Mya:
million years ago; lincRNA: long intergenic non coding RNA; DNMT: DNA
methyltransferase; ncRNA: non coding RNA; TSS: transcriptional start site
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr Allan King for his help obtaining the bovine samples
and Julia Varmuza for assistance with bioinformatic analyses. This work was
funded by grants from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada [138636 to S.V; 371932-09 to G.M.], the Medical Research
Council UK to AFS and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research [MOP14096 to IC]. RS is recipient of a Mining Industry Training and Adjustment
Council graduate student internship.
Author details
Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, 25 Harbord
St., Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G5, Canada. 2Department of Physiology,
Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge, CB2 3EG, UK. 3Department of Physiology, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road Milwaukee, WI, USA, 53226, USA.
4
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Rd. E.,
Guelph, Ontario, N1G 2W1, Canada. 5Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center &
Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia,
SC 29208, USA. 6Reproductive Physiology, Toronto Zoo, 361A Old Finch
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M1B 5K7, Canada. 7Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Joseph and Wolf Lebovic Health Complex,
600 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X5, Canada.
1

Authors’ contributions
All of the molecular analysis was performed by QW, JC, JH, JT, EDC, KM and
SV. Some of the work was performed in the lab of AFS while SV was on
sabbatical leave. Bovine embryo cDNA was provided by PS and GM.
Peromyscus tissues were provided by PV. Human cDNA placental cDNA was
provided by IC. Rat genomic sequence data were provided by CM. The
manuscript was written by SV, with input from all authors; all authors
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 21 January 2011 Accepted: 21 April 2011
Published: 21 April 2011
References
1. Edwards C, Ferguson-Smith AC: Mechanisms regulating imprinted genes
in clusters. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2007, 19:281-289.

Wang et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:204
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/204

2.

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Kuzmin A, Han Z, Golding M, Mann M, Latham K, Varmuza S: The PcG gene
Sfmbt2 is paternally expressed in extraembryonic tissues. Gene Expr
Patterns 2008, 8:107-116.
Cattanach B, Kirk M: Differential activity of maternally and paternally
derived chromosome regions in mice. Nature 1985, 315:496-498.
Cattanach B: Parental origin effects in mice. J Embryol Exp Morphol 1986,
97(Supplement):137-150.
Babak T, Deveale B, Armour C, Raymond C, Cleary M, van der Kooy D,
Johnson J, Lim L: Global survey of genomic imprinting by transcriptome
sequencing. Curr Biol 2008, 18:1735-1741.
Hudson QJ, Kulinski TM, Huetter SP, Barlow DP: Genomic imprinting
mechanisms in embryonic and extraembryonic mouse tissues. Heredity
2010, 1-12.
Kobayashi H, Suda C, Abe T, Kohara Y, Ikemura T, Sasaki H: Bisulfite
sequencing and dinucleotide content analysis of 15 imprinted mouse
differentially methylated regions (DMRs): paternally methylated DMRs
contain less CpGs than maternally methylated DMRs. Cytogenet Genome
Res 2006, 113:130-137.
McEwen K, Ferguson-Smith AC: Distinguishing epigenetic marks of
developmental and imprinting regulation. Epigenetics & Chromatin 2010,
3:2, 2010.
Guttman M, Amit I, Garber M, French C, Lin MF, Feldser D, Huarte M, Zuk O,
Carey BW, Cassady JP, Cabili MN, Jaenisch R, Mikkelson TS, Jacks T,
Hacohen N, Bernstein BE, Kellis M, Rinn JL, Lander ES: Chromatin signature
reveals over a thousand highly conserved large non-coding RNAs in
mammals. Nature 2009, 458:223-227.
Blanga-Kanfi S, Miranda H, Penn O, Pupko T, DeBry RW, Huchon D: Rodent
phylogeny revised: analysis of six nuclear genes from all major rodent
clades. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2009, 9:71.
Duselis A, Wiley C, O’Neill M, Vrana P: Genetic evidence for a maternal
effect locus controlling genomic imprinting and growth. Genesis 2005,
43:155-165.
Loschiavo M, Nguyen Q, Duselis A, Vrana P: Mapping and identification of
candidate loci responsible for Peromyscus hybrid overgrowth.
Mammalian Genome 2006, 18:75-85.
Brideau C, Eilertson K, Hagarman J, Bustamante C, Soloway P: Successful
computational prediction of novel imprinted genes from epigenomic
features. Mol Cell Biol 2010, 30:3357-3370.
Sakaue M, Ohta H, Kumaki Y, Oda M, Sakaide Y, Matsuoka C, Yamagiwa A,
Niwa H, Wakayama T, Okano M: DNA methylation is dispensable for the
growth and survival of the extraembryonic lineages. Current Biology 2010,
20:1452-1457.
Kikyo N, Williamson CM, John RM, Barton SC, Beechey CV, Ball ST,
Cattanach BM, Surani MA, Peters J: Genetic and functional analysis of
neuronatin in mice with maternal or paternal duplication of distal
chromosome 2. Dev Biol 1997, 190:66-77.
Smith RJ, Dean W, Konfortova G, Kelsey G: Identification of novel
imprinted genes in a genome-wide screen for maternal methylation.
Genome Research 2003, 13:558-569.
Wood AJ, Roberts RG, Monk D, Moore GE, Schulz R, Oakey RJ: A screen for
retrotransposed imprinted genes reveals an association between X
chromosome homology and maternal germline methylation. PlOS
Genetics 2007, 3(2):e20.
Sandell LL, Guan XJ, Ingram R, Tilghman SM: Gatm, a creatine synthesis
enzyme, is imprinted in mouse placenta. Proc Nat Acad Sci 2003,
100:4622-4627.
Jiang P, Wu H, Wang W, Ma W, Sun X, Lu Z: MiPred: classification of real
and pseudo microRNA precursors using random forest prediction model
with combined features. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:W339-W344[http://
www.bioinf.seu.edu.cn/miRNA/index.html].
Chiang HR, Schoenfeld LW, Ruby JG, Auyeung VC, Spies N, Baek D,
Johnston WK, Russ C, Luo S, Babiarz JE, Blelloch R, Schroth GP, Nusbaum C,
Bartel1 DP: Mammalian microRNAs: experimental evaluation of novel
and previously annotated genes. Genes Dev 2010, 24:992-1009.
Miri K, Varmuza S: Genomic imprinting and extraembryonic tissues mom takes control. International Review of Cell & Molecular Biology 2009,
276:216-262.
Rapkins RW, Hore T, Smithwick M, Ager E, Pask AJ, Renfree M, Kohn M,
Hameister H, Nicholls R, Deakin JE, Graves JA: Recent assembly of an
imprinted domain from non-imprinted components. PLoS Genet 2006, 2:
e182.

Page 11 of 11

23. Hore T, Rapkins R, Marshall Graves JA: Construction and evolution of
imprinted loci in mammals. Trends Genet 2007, 23:440-448.
24. Edwards CA, Mungall AJ, Matthews L, Ryder E, Gray DJ, Pask A, Shaw G,
Graves J, Rogers J, SAVOIR consortium, Dunham I, Renfree MB, Ferguson
Smith A: The evolution of the DLK1-DIO3 imprinted domain in mammals.
PLoS Biol 2008, 6:e135.
25. Vitali P, Royo H, Marty V, Bortolin-Cavaillé M-L, Cavaillé J: Long nuclearretained non-coding RNAs and allele-specific higher-order chromatin
organization at imprinted snoRNA gene arrays. J Cell Sci 2010, 123:70-83.
26. Murchison P, Stein P, Xuan Z, Pan H, Zhang M, Schultz R, Hannon G:
Critical roles for Dicer in the female germline. Genes Dev 2007,
21:682-693.
27. Kaneda M, Tang F, O’Carroll D, Lao K, Surani MA: Essential role for
Argonaute2 protein in mouse oogenesis. Epigenetics & Chromatin 2009,
2:9.
28. Suh N, Baehner L, Moltzahn F, Melton C, Shenoy A, Chen J, Blelloch R:
MicroRNA function is globally suppressed in mouse oocytes and early
embryos. Curr Biol 2010, 20:271-277.
29. Peterson K, Dietrich M, McPeek M: MicroRNAs and metazoan
macroevolution: insights into canalization, complexity, and the
Cambrian explosion. BioEssays 2009, 31:736-747.
30. Bentwich I, Avniel A, Karov Y, Aharonov R, Gilad S, Barad O, Barzilai A,
Einat P, Einav U, Meiri E, Spector Y, Bentwich Z: Identification of hundreds
of conserved and nonconserved human microRNAs. Nature Genetics 2005,
37:766-770.
31. Noguer-Dance M, Abu-Amero S, Al-Khtib M, Lefèvre A, Coullin P, Moore G,
Cavaillé J: The primate-specific microRNA gene cluster (C19MC) is
imprinted in the placenta. Hum Mol Genet 2010.
32. Zhang YJ, Qu LH: Non-coding RNAs and the acquisition of genomic
imprinting in mammals. Sci China Ser C-Life Sci 2009, 52:195-204.
33. Seitz H, Royo H, Bortolin ML, Lin SP, Ferguson-Smith AC, Cavaille J: A large
imprinted microRNA gene cluster at the mouse Dlk1-Gtl2 domain.
Genome Research 2004, 14:1741-1748.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-204
Cite this article as: Wang et al.: Recent acquisition of imprinting at the
rodent Sfmbt2 locus correlates with insertion of a large block of
miRNAs. BMC Genomics 2011 12:204.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
