<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The nucleotide addition cycle of RNA polymerase is controlled by two molecular hinges in the Bridge Helix domain</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010, 8:134. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-134"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Robert OJ Weinzierl"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The nucleotide addition cycle of RNA polymerase
is controlled by two molecular hinges in the
Bridge Helix domain
Robert OJ Weinzierl

Abstract
Background: Cellular RNA polymerases (RNAPs) are complex molecular machines that combine catalysis with
concerted conformational changes in the active center. Previous work showed that kinking of a hinge region near
the C-terminus of the Bridge Helix (BH-HC) plays a critical role in controlling the catalytic rate.
Results: Here, new evidence for the existence of an additional hinge region in the amino-terminal portion of the
Bridge Helix domain (BH-HN) is presented. The nanomechanical properties of BH-HN emerge as a direct
consequence of the highly conserved primary amino acid sequence. Mutations that are predicted to influence its
flexibility cause corresponding changes in the rate of the nucleotide addition cycle (NAC). BH-HN displays
functional properties that are distinct from BH-HC, suggesting that conformational changes in the Bridge Helix
control the NAC via two independent mechanisms.
Conclusions: The properties of two distinct molecular hinges in the Bridge Helix of RNAP determine the functional
contribution of this domain to key stages of the NAC by coordinating conformational changes in surrounding
domains.

Background
RNA polymerases (RNAPs) play a central role in the
regulation of gene expression. Like the majority of the
enzymes involved in fundamental biological information-processing functions (for example, replication, transcription, recombination, repair), RNAPs are probably
best viewed as intricate molecular machines. The movement of nucleic acid substrates, coupled with various
types of active site chemistries, requires a precisely
orchestrated sequence of conformational changes of
protein domains during the transcription cycle (for
recent reviews see [1-4]).
The nanomechanical mechanisms guiding the structural
rearrangements of domains within the active site are still
very poorly understood. Thus far, models of the fundamental reaction catalyzed by RNAPs, the nucleotide addition cycle (NAC), have predominantly been derived from
a series of crystal structures that contain RNAPs as apoenzymes (for example [5-9]), or complexed with various
Correspondence: r.weinzierl@imperial.ac.uk
Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK

substrates and inhibitors (for example [10-15]). Such
structures, revealing (among other features) pre- and posttranslocation states of RNAPs, have provided the basis for
various hypotheses concerning the molecular mechanism
of the NAC [1-4,16,17]. There are, however, two potential
shortcomings associated with such approaches. First, in
order to ‘freeze’ the RNAPs in a crystallizable conformation, substrate analogs or inhibitors need to be chosen
that stop the reaction cycle at a specific point. This may
result in the adoption of ‘off-pathway’ conformations that
do not represent normal enzyme states. A second, more
fundamental, problem is that short-lived intermediate
structures cannot be captured in crystals because they are
thermodynamically or kinetically unstable. Yet, it is likely
that an awareness of the existence and functional significance of such intermediates will be required to develop a
deeper understanding of the mechanisms operating within
molecular machines.
We have designed new experimental tools to complement ongoing structural investigations. Based on the
ability to assemble an active RNAPII-like enzyme from
recombinant subunits in vitro, it is possible to modify

© 2010 Weinzierl; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

any residue within an intact RNAP to introduce a variety of targeted mutations into any functional domain
participating in the NAC [18]. Such a strategy not only
allows specific predictions based on available X-ray
structures to be tested, but also can be used to explore
systematically the functional contributions of individual
domains to biochemically detectable activities. New
robotic methods that facilitate the labor-intense highthroughput mutagenesis/assembly steps and transcription assays allow this approach to be implemented on a
large scale [19]. In a recent study we systematically
replaced each of 17 consecutive residues of the Bridge
Helix domain with all other 19 possible amino acid side
chains [20]. The Bridge Helix, a 35 amino acid a-helix
spanning the RNAP active site, controls the flow of
nucleic acid substrates and nucleotide precursors
through the catalytic site (Figure 1A). Some of the earliest models of the NAC were based on the observation
that the C-terminal portion of the Bridge Helix was
kinked in some X-ray crystal structures of bacterial

Page 2 of 15

RNAPs [5,8], but appeared straight in numerous other
crystals of bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic RNAPs.
The existence of two alternative Bridge Helix conformations made it seem likely that a periodic oscillation
between straight and kinked conformations would be
implicated in translocating RNAPs in single base-pair
steps along the DNA template strand [7,10,21-24].
High-throughput mutagenesis of the C-terminal portion
of the Bridge Helix provided unexpectedly clear evidence in support of Bridge Helix kinking; mutations
destabilizing the normal a-helical conformation in certain positions cause a substantial increase in the specific
activity of RNAPs. This phenomenon, referred to as
superactivity, relieves a constraint on the catalytic
mechanism by increasing the frequency of Bridge Helix
isomerization between straight and kinked conformations [20,25].
While the combination of structural observations and
mutagenesis data clearly highlights the functional contribution of the C-terminal portion of the Bridge Helix

Figure 1 Evolutionary conservation and arrangement of domains in the RNAP active site. (A) Most structures are shown in space-filling
mode to emphasize spatial connections. The Bridge Helix is shown in green, with the regions subjected to high-throughput mutagenesis in this
study highlighted in yellow. The template DNA is pale blue, the RNA is red, the NTP in the insertion site is shown as a pink stick model and
catalytic metal ions as magenta spheres. Three additional domains that surround the Bridge Helix N-terminus, b-D II domain (turquoise) and Link
(light purple) and the Trigger Loop (dark blue cartoon) are shown. (PDB #2E2H). (B) Alignment of Bridge Helix sequences from bacteria
(Escherichia coli K12 (Genbank BAE77332); Thermus aquaticus (Genbank RPOC_THEAQ); Thermus thermophilus (Genbank RPOC_THET8) and
eukaryotes (Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Genbank CAA26904) and Homo sapiens (Genbank EAW90183)) against the archaeon M. jannaschii (Genbank
A64430). Residues identical to the archaeal sequence are shown in red. The region mutagenized is highlighted with yellow background. The
residues contacted by a-amanitin (eukaryotic RNAPII) and streptolydigin (bacterial RNAPs) are boxed. The numbers flanking the sequences
represent the location of the sequences within the open reading frame of the complete subunit.

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

towards controlling the rate of the NAC, the role of the
N-terminal portion of the Bridge Helix has thus far
remained enigmatic. The primary sequence of this
region is exceptionally highly conserved during evolution; for example, the sequences of the N-terminal 15
amino acids are identical between the archaeon Methanocaldococcus jannaschii and humans, and differ by
only a single residue from yeast (Figure 1B). Such a high
degree of structural conservation over more than two
billion years of evolution can be partially accounted for
by the fact that the Bridge Helix N-terminus is tightly
surrounded by other domains and may therefore be spatially and evolutionarily constrained due to the need to
maintain an extensive network of protein-protein interactions (Figure 1A; Additional files 1, 2 and 3;
[12,15,25,26]). In apparent agreement with this view, all
available X-ray structures of RNAPs show the N-terminal portion of the Bridge Helix in a rigidly a-helical
conformation, suggesting the absence of significant conformational changes. For this reason, none of the current models of RNAP function consider the Bridge
Helix N-terminus to play any dynamic role during the
NAC [1-4,16,17].
New evidence presented here, based on a combination
of high-throughput mutagenesis studies and molecular
dynamics simulations, demonstrates that such a static
view of the Bridge Helix N-terminus is untenable. The
results show that this region contains a highly localized
molecular hinge, and that the conformation of this site
has a substantial influence on the rate of the NAC. In
combination with the previously identified C-terminal
hinge region, the data reinforces the overarching concept that the Bridge Helix plays a predominantly nanomechanical role during the translocation stage of the
NAC by coordinating conformational changes in surrounding domains.

Results
High-throughput mutagenesis reveals evidence for an
N-terminal hinge

The N-terminus of the Bridge Helix of the RNAP from
the euryarchaeon Methanocaldococcus jannaschii was
dissected by high-throughput mutagenesis [19,20]. In this
automated approach, each amino acid within the target
region (Figure 1B) was replaced with all other 19 residues
to reveal local structural requirements. The mutants
were then assayed in robotic promoter-independent transcription assays, which provide a consistent measure of
the synthetic rate of the NAC and correlate directly with
results obtained from a variety of promoter-dependent,
abortive- and elongation transcription assays ([18-20]; S.
Wiesler and ROJW, unpublished data).
The results reveal unexpected insights into the function
of the Bridge Helix N-terminus (Figure 2A). The most

Page 3 of 15

eye-catching phenotypes are associated with the mjA’
M808 position, which constitutes - both qualitatively and
quantitatively - a hotspot for superactivity caused by a
chemically diverse range of substitutions. This suggests
that the M808 position is structurally very delicately
balanced and substitutions with more hydrophilic, bulky
hydrophobic, and/or charged residues cause a substantial
local disturbance. The degree of superactivity in the
strongest N-terminal substitution (mjA’ M808-P; >240%
superactivity) greatly exceeds the highest level of superactivity displayed by the strongest C-terminal mutant
(mjA’ S824-P; approximately 170% superactivity; Figure
2A). The observation that the replacement of M808 with
proline results in the highest increase in specific activity
immediately suggests that the phenotypes are caused predominantly by disruption of the local secondary structure; proline residues destabilize a-helices due to a lack
of hydrogen bonding and steric interference with the
backbone of the preceding turn [27]. In a manner highly
reminiscent of the previously characterized mjA’ S824-P
substitution phenotype, proline substitutions of the residues immediately surrounding mjA’ M808 cause a sharp
drop in RNAP catalytic activity, emphasizing the highly
localized effect of such conformationally induced changes
(Figure 2B; [20]). The locations of two functionally acceptable proline substitutions thus mark the presence of two
discrete and separate molecular hinges, that will subsequently be referred to as BH-HN (’Bridge Helix - Hinge
N-terminal’; typified by mjA’ M808-P) and BH-HC (’Bridge
Helix - Hinge C-terminal ’; typified by mjA’ S824-P). The
shared functional property of M808-P and S824-P substitutions, causing maximal levels of superactivity, emphasizes that increased Bridge Helix kinking at the two
hinges correlates directly with an increased rate of
nucleotide addition [20,25].
Extensive database searches, covering completed genome sequences of a large variety of pro- and eukaryotic
species, show that naturally occurring proline substitutions
in the Bridge Helix primary sequences are exceptionally
rare. The only known instances of proline residues occurring naturally anywhere in the N-terminal part of the
Bridge Helix are found in the bacteria Orientia tsutsugamushi [28,29], and certain isolates of Arcobacter butzleri
[30] and Bacillus subtilis [31]. In each case, the substituted
position is precisely orthologous to mjA’ M808 (Figure
2C). In the C-terminal half of the Bridge Helix, the highly
divergent plant RNAPIV and RNAPV enzymes display a
strong tendency for a proline residue at the position
orthologous to archaeal S824 (Figure 2C; [32,33]).
Molecular dynamics reveal a structural basis for the BHHN hinge mechanism

Insights into the conformational changes of the BH-HC
are based on certain X-ray structures of bacterial

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

Page 4 of 15

Figure 2 High-throughput mutagenesis of the Bridge Helix. (A) The specific activities in recruitment-independent transcription assays of
systematic substitutions of archaeal Bridge Helix residues H806 to R830 are shown as a heat map relative to the activity of the wildtype enzyme
(see adjacent scale for comparison). Substitutions in M808 cause an exceptional increase in catalytic activity with chemically diverse side chains.
Previously published data (L814 to R830; [20]) are included to provide context. All assays were performed in at least quadruplicate with standard
deviations within 12% of the average value. (B) Plot of proline substitutions across the Bridge Helix. The wildtype activity level (100%) is marked
with a dashed red line. The substituted residues in the M. jannaschii Bridge Helix are shown along the horizontal axis. Most proline substitutions
cause a severe reduction in the specific activity, except at positions M808 and S824, where proline substitutions cause superactivity. All assays
were performed in at least quadruplicate, with error bars showing standard deviation from the average value. (C) Naturally occurring prolinesubstitutions (highlighted in boxes). The Bridge Helix sequences of three bacterial species, Orientia tsutsugamushi (Genbank YP_001248195
(Boryong)/YP_001938485 (Ikeda)), isolates of Arcobacter butzleri (Genbank AAZ80810) and Bacillus subtilis (Genbank BAA10999), as well as
representative examples of plant RNAP IV and V Bridge Helix sequences from Arabidopsis thaliana (Genbank AAY89363 and NP_181532,
respectively) and Oryza sativa (Genbank EEE70198 and EEE56320, respectively) are aligned against the M. jannaschii sequence (Genbank A64430).
The bacterial sequences each contain a single proline residue corresponding to mjA’ M808, whereas proline substitutions in RNAP IV and V align
with mjA’ S824. Residues identical to the archaeal sequence are shown in red.

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

RNAPs that were fortuitously crystallized in a kinked
Bridge Helix conformation [5,8]. Kinking of BH-HC is
stabilized by intramolecular interactions between amino
acid side chains flanking each side of the hinge ([8,20];
Heindl et al., unpublished observations). The location of
the BH-H C and its kinking properties are thus predetermined by the local amino acid sequence. This
raises the question as to whether intrinsic structural features could also account for the molecular mechanism
underlying BH-HN function. Inspection of the primary
sequence surrounding BH-H N , coupled with insights
obtained from molecular dynamic (MD) simulations
[34-36], provide a plausible explanation for the structural basis of the BH-HN hinge. Systematic sampling of
conformational states at five picoseconds (ps) intervals
in a series of 27 independent 200 ps semi-quantitative
MD simulations highlights the presence of distinct areas
prone to local unfolding, with the most prominent peak
centered around mjA’ G810 (Figure 3A). Under these
simulation conditions, most other regions of the Bridge
Helix, including the N- and C-termini, maintain their ahelical conformations at all stages throughout the simulations. Closer inspection of the simulated structures
formed by BH-HN kinking reveals a molecular switching
mechanism that can be rationalized directly on the basis
of the primary amino acid sequence and a-helical geometry (Figure 3B). The kinking of BH-H N critically
involves the two glycine residues G809 and G810 that
are located immediately C-terminal to M808 and are
essentially invariant in all archaeal and eukaryotic RNAPIIs (Figure 1B). Glycine residues display low helixforming propensity because their high conformational
flexibility is entropically unfavourable within geometrically constrained a-helical structures [37,38]. This
increased flexibility allows G809 and G810 to flip out of
the a-helical conformation to create a flexible hinge
(Figure 3B). The flipped conformation is then stabilized
further through a variety of non-covalent interactions of
M808 with R811 and E812 (Figure 3C). The kinking
model is based on elementary structural and thermodynamic principles (as represented by the MD force field),
but also strongly supported by the phenotypes of the
G809 and G810 mutagenesis series (Figure 2A). In both
positions, any residue other than glycine causes a severe
reduction in the catalytic activity of RNAP due to an
increased helix propensity, which reduces the likelihood
of BH-HN kinking. In contrast, another glycine residue
located slightly more C-terminal, G813, is noticeably
less sensitive to change (Figure 2A). Similarly, the stabilization of BH-H N through van der Waals contacts
between M808 and R811 and E812 appears to be relatively non-specific, so that a chemically diverse group of
side chains are either acceptable (especially in the R811
position), or result in enhanced stabilization of the

Page 5 of 15

BH-HN kink (M808 substitution series). The fundamental requirement for a large side-chain in the M808 position is particularly evident from the fact that certain
amino acids with smaller groups (G, A) are not capable
of causing the superactivity associated with enhanced
BH-HN kinking. It is therefore apparent that the molecular properties of BH-HN, such as its structural stability, are directly determined by the primary amino acid
sequence and emerge spontaneously from MD simulations as a property inherent in the primary sequence of
the Bridge Helix domain. Mutagenesis changes the biophysical properties of BH-HN, which is, in turn, directly
reflected in altered NAC rates (Figure 2A).
BH-HN and BH-HC operate in environments with widely
different structural constraints

The presence of two distinct hinges in the Bridge Helix
raises the question whether BH-H N and BH-H C are
involved in the same mechanism during the NAC. Kinking of either of the two hinges will result in considerable
local distortions, predicted to include a spatial redeployment of amino acid side chains and changes in the overall length, flexibility and general topology of the Bridge
Helix domain. Kinking of BH-HN could result in altered
interactions with adjacent domains, such as the bD-II,
Link and F-Loop domains (Figure 1A; Additional files 1,
2 and 3), whereas hinge movements in BH-H C are
expected to affect the position and/or mobility of
the DNA-RNA hybrid and Trigger Loop conformation
(Figure 1A; [20]).
Intriguingly, RNAP IV Bridge Helices also contain an
additional two amino acid deletion, which would cause
an even more radical change in the Bridge Helix by
creating a local 180° twist of the a-helical structure (Figure 2C). This class of mutants combines strictly confined effects (removal of two adjacent side chains) with
complex long range effects (realignment of remaining
side chains on either side of the deletion to new positions and localized underwinding of the helical structure), which may possibly be coupled with the
propagation of stress forces to the N- and C-terminal
anchoring points of the Bridge Helix. The radical nature
of such twisting mutations serves as an ideal tool to
gain a deeper insight into structural constraints acting
on the entire Bridge Helix. A series of two-amino acid
deletions was prepared (Figure 4A). The results show
that the BH-HC region is indeed remarkably resistant to
such major conformational changes (Figure 4B).
Although X-ray structures provide apparently persuasive
arguments for certain residues of the Bridge Helix
domain assisting in catalytic functions (for example,
residues orthologous to T821 contacting the 3’ end of
the nascent transcript and/or the incoming rNTP [22]),
the deletion phenotypes described here prove that such

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Structural basis of BH-HN kinking. (A) Overview of local unfolding events incurred by a M. jannaschii Bridge Helix model during 27
independent 200 picosecond MD simulations. The number of 5 picosecond windows during which a specific part of the Bridge Helix adopts a
‘coil’ conformation are plotted against the Bridge Helix sequence shown on the horizontal axis. A major area of a-helical instability, BH-HN
(centered on mjA’G810), is evident from this semi-quantitative analysis. Additional unstable regions include BH-HC (centered on mjA’ G825) and a
‘labile region’ (spanning mjA’Q817 to R820; see Discussion for more details). (B) Examples of kinked BH-HN conformations arising from MD
simulations. The Bridge Helix on the left represents the starting conformation as modelled on the yeast RNAPII structure PDB #2E2H. The minor
bulge near the center of the Bridge Helix corresponds to the V819 position. During unrestrained simulation, different types of kinked BH-HN
structures (circled) involving mjA’ G809/G810 (pale blue) and M808 (pale green), R811 (blue) and E812 (red) side-chain interaction emerge
stochastically. (C) Structural details of BH-HN kinking models. The relevant residues are shown in space-filling mode to illustrate spatial
relationships. Two glycine residues, mjA’ G809 and G810 (pale blue) form a highly flexible hinge that allows M808 (pale green) to interact
extensively via van der Waals interactions with the side-chains of R811 (blue) and E812 (red). In some cases these interactions create a stretched
310 helix immediately C-terminal to R811 and E812.

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

Page 7 of 15

insensitivity to the deletions centered on mjA’ ΔD816/Q817 and
mjA’ ΔA822/Q823 are discernible. All assays were performed in at
least quadruplicate, with error bars showing standard deviation from
the average value. (C) Position of the deletion-insensitive region of
the Bridge Helix relative to other elements of the catalytic site. The
Bridge Helix and other structures are shown using the same colorscheme as used in Figure 1A (yeast RNAPII elongation complex;
[PDB #2E2H]). Residues orthologous to residues displaying the
highest activity (>50%) levels in the two-amino acid scan (mjA’
D816, Q817, T821, A822 and Q823) are highlighted in yellow.

Figure 4 Creation of locally twisted Bridge Helix structures. (A)
Sequences of the deletion constructs. A two-amino acid deletion
window is moved systematically in a single residue step through
the entire Bridge Helix primary sequence. The deletions remove two
adjacent residues, but, more importantly, join the sequences
bordering the mutation with 180° twist because of the removal of
half an a-helical turn. (B) Activity of Bridge Helix mutants containing
two-amino acid deletions shown relative to wildtype activity (100%).
The amino acid pairs deleted from the primary sequence are shown
vertically along the horizontal axis. Two distinct peaks of relative

contributions are either redundant or non-existent in
our archaeal system, which is highly conserved in this
region. The results furthermore illustrate that, although
BH-HC is located much closer than BH-HN to the substrates involved in the NAC, there are surprisingly few
topological restraints. In marked contrast, none of the
two-amino acid deletions support significant activity in
the N-terminal part of the Bridge Helix (Figure 4B),
proving that conformational changes are much more
restricted in that region (which is consistent with the
higher degree of evolutionary identity in the N-terminal
half of the Bridge Helix compared to the C-terminal
half; Figure 1). The results from the two amino acid
deletion scan thus provide a first indication that the
local conformational requirements for BH-HN and BHHC differ quite radically.
The substitutions mjA’ M808-P and S824-P provide
the strongest pieces of evidence for the existence and
functional significance of BH-HN and BH-HC, respectively (Figure 2B[20]). Work in other systems has shown
that the physicochemical properties of residues adjacent
to prolines contribute considerably to the prevalence of
cis/trans peptide bond isomers and therefore strongly
influence kink geometry [39-42]. Additional proline substitutions of the positions immediately N- and C-terminal to either M808 or S824 (that is, mjA’ A807-P/
M808-P; M808-P/G809-P and Q823-P/S824-P; S824-P/
G825) revealed examples of further intriguing differences between BH-HN and BH-HC: the double-proline
substitution in BH-H N abolished the superactivity
caused by M808-P, whereas the presence of an additional proline residue N-terminal to S824 continued to
support the superactivity of S824-P (Figure 5B). The
activity of the Q823-P/S824-P double mutant proves
explicitly that the presence of two proline residues in
this particular location of the Bridge Helix is not only
compatible with catalytic function, but also compatible
with superactivity. Prolyl-proline preferentially adopt an
elongated polyproline II structure (87%), or less frequently (13%) a b-turn (Additional file 4A; [43,44]).
Either of the structures would cause a substantial local
increase in the flexibility of BH-HC.

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

In order to investigate this unexpected tolerance to
the presence of two adjacent prolines in positions 823
and 824 in more detail, a complete substitution series of
the residues around position mjA’ S824-P was prepared,
generating an assortment of systematic double-mutants
(Figure 5A; mjA’ Q823-X/S824-P and S824-P/G825-X;
with X denoting 19 different variants). All substitutions
N-terminal to S824-P (i.e. mjA’ Q823-X/S824-P) displayed an almost completely invariant degree of extensive superactivity that was indistinguishable from the
original S824-P mutant (Figure 5B). This result is
remarkable because previous mutagenesis of Q823
revealed a broad spectrum of activity, ranging from substantial loss of function (Q823-C or I) to superactivity
(Q823-D or E; [20]). It is evident that in the doublemutants the chemical nature of the side-chain residue in
position 823 exerts no further functional influence, presumably because of the major distortion already caused
by the proline substitution in position 824. Once such a
gross structural alteration has occurred in S824-P, any
additional changes in the adjacent N-terminal residue
become structurally irrelevant.
Because Q823-P/S824-P displayed no loss of superactivity, the residue immediately N-terminal to the doubleproline substitution was also permutated, resulting in
variants containing three adjacent substitutions in the
BH-HC hinge region (Figure 5A; mjA’ A822-X/Q823-P/
S824-P). The majority of these substitutions, including
the triple proline mutant A822-P/Q823-P/S824-P (Figure
5C; Additional file 4B), still displayed clearly detectable
superactivity, albeit at a slightly reduced level. The tolerance of the BH-HC hinge to radical mutagenesis, as previously observed in the two-amino acid deletion screen,
is therefore also reflected in the unexpectedly high tolerance to multiple proline substitutions in that region. This
geometric freedom is, however, also spatially limited:
substitutions in positions C-terminal to S824-P (Figure
5A) were mostly inactive, indicating that despite the
structural flexibility of the positions N-terminal to S824P, the C-terminal positions are functionally constrained
(Figure 5D; a similar trend is also apparent in the two
amino acid deletion scan data [see Figure 4B]).
BH-HN and BH-HC control activity of the catalytic site
differently

Taken together, the extensive body of mutagenesis data
leads to the conclusion that the BH-H N and BH-H C
structures operate within intramolecular environments
that vary widely in their conformational constraints. The
chemistry of the NAC is typically catalyzed by two magnesium ions, immobilized non-covalently within the
active site (via the ‘metal A’ and ‘metal B’ motifs; for
example, [45,46]). A complete substitution of Mg2+ by
Mn 2+ reduces the activity of archaeal RNAP to

Page 8 of 15

approximately 40% (data not shown); the reduced activity is probably caused by the slightly larger Mn2+ ions
causing suboptimal spacing [47], and Mn 2+ -catalyzed
reactions being more promiscuous in their requirements
for alignment of the reactive groups [48]. Intriguingly,
assays of superactive BH-HN and BH-HC mutants in the
presence of Mn2+ demonstrated that they fell into distinct categories. mjA’ M808-D, M808-E and M808-P
continued to display superactivity, whereas the activities
of S824-P or Q823-P/S824-P only reached wildtype
levels under these conditions (Figure 6). We can therefore conclude that the superactive substitutions in the
BH-HN and BH-HC regions have different consequences
because conformational changes in different parts of the
Bridge Helix affect separate stages of the NAC. The
reduced catalytic activity caused by the presence of Mn2
+
ions in the active site becomes rate-limiting in Q823D/E or S824-P, whereas M808-P overcomes this limitation to a large extent by stimulating transcription
through an independent pathway, most likely involving
the b-D II and Link domains.

Discussion
An expanded conformational repertoire of the Bridge
Helix domain

The results presented here reveal several new surprising
insights, including compelling evidence for the existence
of a molecular hinge region in the N-terminal portion
of the Bridge Helix and evidence for an unexpectedly
large degree of tolerance to radical structural changes in
the C-terminal part of this domain. It is apparent that
the Bridge Helix domain displays a much greater conformational freedom than anticipated from currently
available X-ray structures of RNAPs. Few, if any, of the
residues of the Bridge Helix appear to make any specific
contribution to catalysis other than through defining the
nanomechanical properties intrinsic to the a-helical
structure. The implications for mechanistic models
aimed at describing the NAC are manifold, ranging
from a re-evaluation of the structural basis of the RNAP
translocation mechanism, to highlighting the hitherto
neglected role of highly conserved domains in the catalytic site, and to obtaining a better understanding of the
evolutionary diversity of Bridge Helices in different
organisms.
Currently, we have only a limited understanding of the
forces acting on the Bridge Helix that could drive localized conformational changes. Attempts to model the full
NAC using molecular dynamics studies are severely limited by the large size of multi-subunit RNAPs and the
immense computational effort that would be required to
simulate the molecular events expected to last from 10s
to 100s of milliseconds for the extension of a nascent
transcript by a single nucleotide (approximately 30 ms/

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

Page 9 of 15

A822

G825

Q823

Y826

Figure 5 Functional dissection of the BH-HC region. (A) Position of mutagenized residues. The residues that differ from the archaeal wildtype
sequence in the various mutagenesis constructs are shown in red. Wildtype sequences of the M. jannaschii and S. cerevisiae Bridge Helix
sequences are shown for comparison. The position of BH-HC is marked with an arrow. (B) The center of the panel provides an overview
depicting the orthologous residues in space-filling mode within the mutagenized part of the Bridge Helix modelled on the yeast RNAPII
structure (PDB #2E2H); yeast residues E823 and T824 were replaced in silico with Q and P, respectively, to reveal the approximate location of
these amino acids relative to the DNA-RNA hybrid and catalytic site). Adjacent parts of the Bridge Helix domain are shown as a transparent
ribbon. All other colors are coded as in Figure 1A (template DNA is pale blue, the nascent transcript is red, the NTP in the insertion site is pink
and catalytic metal ions are shown as magenta spheres). All mutants shown here contain the mjA’ S824-P substitution (yellow). The results of
promoter-independent activity assays are plotted relative to wildtype activity (indicated with a red dashed line). Two of the bar charts show the
effect of introducing systematic substitutions in positions located immediately N- or C-terminal to S824-P (mjA’ Q823 [lime green; upper right];
mjA’ G825 [orange; lower left]). The other two bar charts show the functional consequences of introducing additional systematic substitutions in
positions located immediately N-terminal to the double proline substitution Q823-P/S824-P (mjA’ A822 [olive green; upper left]), or immediately
C-terminal to the double proline substitution S824-P/G825 (mjA’ Y826 [brown; lower left]). The colors of the histogram bars match the colors of
the substituted residues in the structural model. All assays were performed in at least quadruplicate, with error bars showing standard deviation
from the average value.

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

Figure 6 Differential effect of Mn2+ on superactivity in the BHHN and BH-HC Region. The activities of the most superactive
substitutions in BH-HN and BH-HC are compared in Mn2+ substituted
reactions relative to the wildtype enzyme. The BH-HN substitutions
(mjA’ M808-D, -E and -P) continue to display a high degree of
superactivity, whereas BH-HC substitutions (mjA’ Q823-D, -E and
S824-P) only transcribe at rates comparable to wildtype RNAP.

rNTP incorporation under optimal in vivo conditions; for
example, [49]). The study of the intrinsic structural properties of individual domains by fully atomistic computer
simulations reveal, however, interesting nanomechanical
properties that have functional implications for the
RNAP translocation mechanism [50-52]. The Bridge
Helix domain contains intrinsically unstable a-helical
regions that undergo spontaneous kinking motions, even
in the absence of externally applied forces (Figure 3A).
At least two of these unstable regions correspond precisely to the biochemically-mapped BH-HN and BH-HC
regions. Strategically-placed glycine residues, such as
mjA’ G809, G810 (for BH-H N ) and G825 (for BH-H C )
provide the structural basis for forming these molecular
hinges, with surrounding residues determining additional
kinking parameters, such as the likelihood of kinking
and/or the half-life of the kink after its isomerization
(Figure 2A; Heindl et al., unpublished observations).
Interestingly, the simulations also highlight a potential
third structurally labile region near the center of the
Bridge Helix domain, spanning residues mjA’ Q817 to
R820. The relative sensitivity of this sequence to proline
substitutions (Figure 2B) suggests, however, that this area
of instability behaves functionally differently to BH-HN
and BH-HC. It is possible that structural fluctuations in
the central part of the Bridge Helix play a more dynamic
role in supporting short-lived conformational changes
that can either compensate for major structural rearrangements due to BH-HN and BH-HC kinking, or act as a
store of ‘fast’ motions to lubricate the kinking of the
hinge regions kinetically [34]. Although such hypotheses

Page 10 of 15

are currently beyond experimental proof, it is interesting
to note that several, structurally unexplained superactivity mutants map to this central sequence (for example,
mjA’ D816-N; Q817-S/T/C/K and V819-K;Figure 2A
[20]), and that this region is also exceptionally tolerant to
radical twisting of the a-helical axis induced by deletions
of two-amino acid segments (Figure 4B). Furthermore,
data from anisotropic network mode analysis suggests
that rigid body movements of the clamp domain may
exert forces onto the center of the Bridge Helix via the
Switch domains, potentially linking transcription to a
ratchet-like translocation mechanism (Additional file 5;
[53]). The Bridge Helix thus appears to have evolved specific nanomechanical properties that result in the controlled and highly localized isomerization of its
conformation in response to allosteric alterations in the
surrounding protein domains and nucleic acid substrates.
The Bridge Helix N-terminus is tightly surrounded by
other domains, such as the b-D loop II [54], the experimentally uncharacterized Link domain [25,55], and the
F-Loop [26]. As evident from the exceptionally high
degree of sequence conservation (Additional files 1A,
2A and 3A), each of these domains is likely to play key
roles in the NAC. The b-D II domain is a loop-like
structure that interacts extensively in a side-way interaction with the central part of the Bridge Helix, while
simultaneously maintaining direct physical contact with
the most recently incorporated nucleotide (i-1 position).
The interaction between the b-D II domain and nascent
transcript also creates an extended binding pocket for
the rNTP (additional file 1B, C). Similarly, the highly
conserved Link domain is strategically placed to interact
with the Bridge Helix N-terminus, b-D II domain, nascent transcript (i-1 and i-2 positions) and the incoming
rNTP (Additional file 2B). Finally, an N-terminal extension of the Bridge Helix, the F-Loop, forms an extensive
cap-like structure that contacts the Link domain and the
tip of the Trigger Loop (Additional file 3B; [26]). The
differential response of superactive substitutions in BHHN and BH-HC to the presence of Mn2+ in the catalytic
site supports the view that conformational changes in
these regions cause a distinct effect in the catalytic site
of RNAP. While the C-terminal Bridge Helix operates
predominantly by influencing Trigger Loop conformation, kinking of the N-terminus via BH-HN most likely
alters the positions and/or conformations of the b-D II
and Link domains, which are in direct physical contact
with the nucleotide and nucleic acid substrates.
In vivo occurrence of proline-substituted Bridge Helix
hinges

The existence and biological relevance of the experimentally determined hinge positions that tolerate proline substitutions is independently confirmed by a small

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

number of naturally occurring Bridge Helix variants.
Considering the large number of genomes sequenced
thus far (currently including approximately 1,200 microbial and approximately 800 eukaryotic genomes; http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/genome/), it can already be
stated with confidence that naturally occurring proline
substitutions are an exceedingly rare phenomenon. The
three bacterial species that contain naturally occurring
proline-substitutions in BH-HN represent two diverse
bacterial phyla (Figure 7), and each of these phyla contains other closely related species with sequenced genomes, which do not contain any prolines in their Bridge
Helices. Proline substitutions in the BH-H N region
therefore appear to evolve spontaneously and independently in different bacterial lineages and subsequently
remain restricted to individual species or strains. In at
least some cases this evolutionary adaptation may be
associated with significant simplifications of the transcriptional machinery, such as loss of the ω-RNAP subunit and absence of transcription-coupled repair (O.
tsutsugamushi; [28,29]). These proline-containing Bridge
Helix variants do not only provide strong and independent in vivo confirmation of the results identified in the
high-throughput mutagenesis screen (Figure 2B), but
prove that the results obtained in an archaeal model system also apply to the bacterial and eukaryotic domains;
Bridge Helix kinking via two structurally independent
molecular hinges is a universal mechanism operating
across the entire evolutionary spectrum.

Conclusions
The application of a high-throughput in vitro mutagenesis approach to the N-terminal portion of the M. jannaschii bridge helix domain has revealed a range of new
insights that could not be anticipated from previously
available structural and genetic data. The data sets (Figures 2A, 4B and 5B) clearly illustrate that many of the
most interesting insights were derived from substitutions that would almost certainly not have been
designed using a rational, structure-led approach (for
example, mjA’ M808-P; ΔD816/Q817; A822-P/Q823-P/
S824-P). Furthermore, widely used methods, based predominantly on alanine-scanning mutagenesis [56], are
also limited in their capacity to uncover some of the
most interesting phenotypes (Figure 2A). It is therefore
clear that automated high-throughput methods for generating site-directed mutants and assaying their phenotypic consequences will play an increasingly important
role in exploratory investigations of protein structure/
function relationships as part of a diverse strategy aimed
at obtaining new insights into complex biological systems [57].

Page 11 of 15

Methods
High-throughput mutagenesis

Combinatorial permutation libraries, containing all 19
variants with codon replacements optimized for expression in E. coli were purchased for mjA’ H806, A807,
M808, G809, G810, R811, E812, G813, Q823-X/S824-P,
A822-X/Q823-P/S824-P, S824-P/G825-X, and S824-P/
G825-P/Y826-X from GeneArt (Regensburg, Germany).
The mutations, located within a BstBI-SbfI fragment of
the codon-optimized C-terminus of the Bridge Helix
[19] were transferred to a pET21a bacterial expression
vector for the production of full-length, intein-free mjA’
subunits. The presence of the desired mutations in the
expression constructs was verified by DNA sequencing.
DNA constructs containing the two amino-acid deletions across the Bridge Helix were purchased from GeneArt as synthetic gene fragments and transferred to
bacterial expression plasmids as described above.
RNAP Factory

The robotic procedures for high-throughput growth of
bacterial expression strains, recombinant subunit purification and automated assembly into recombinant
RNAPs (the ‘RNAP Factory’) have been described previously [19,20,58]. Briefly, bacterial constructs expressing
the Bridge Helix mutants were transformed into chemically competent Acella cells (ΔendAΔrecA derivatives of
E. coli BL21 [DE3]; EdgeBio, Gaithersburg, Maryland,
USA). After growth for 16 to 18 hours at 37°C in 24well plates in autoinduction medium (OverNight
Express, Novagen, Nottingham, UK) the bacteria were
harvested and used for a centrifugation-based robotic
inclusion body purification protocol. The mjA’ inclusion
bodies were automatically solubilised in the presence of
8 M urea and quantitated at 562 nm with the bicinchoninic acid assay. Recombinant RNAPs containing the
mjA’ variants were assembled in a 96-well format dialysis cell using an urea-gradient from 6 M to urea-free
spanning 16 hours at room temperature [19]. Each
mutant subunit was expressed, purified and assembled
in vitro at least in quadruplicate to assure consistency
and reproducibility. The assembled RNAPs were harvested and used immediately for robotic transcription
assays (see below). The assembly efficiencies of key
mutants (including, among others, mjA’ M808-P; A807P/M808-P; M808-P/G809-P; S824-P; Q823-P/S824-P;
S824-P/G825-P; A822-P/Q823-P/S824-P) were compared to assembly rates achieved with the wildtype mjA’
subunit by assaying the reconstituted polymerases at
limiting and saturating template DNA concentrations
(see Additional file 19 in [20] for details and examples);
no differences between wild-type and mutant enzymes

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

Page 12 of 15

Figure 7 Evolutionary positions of bacterial species with proline-containing Bridge Helices. The evolutionary relationship between three
bacterial species with proline-containing Bridge Helices is shown on a rooted phylogenetic tree calculated using maximum-likelihood methods
from a concatenation of representative protein sequences [63]. The three species occupy widely divergent branches, strongly suggesting that
the proline substitutions evolved independently, rather than were derived from a recently shared ancestor.

were detected. For replacement of Mg2+ ions in the catalytic site with Mn2+ (for the transcription assays shown
in Figure 6), the in vitro assembly process was carried
out as described above, but with dialysis- and transcription buffers containing 10 mM Mn2-O-acetate instead
of Mg2-O-acetate.
In vitro transcription assays

The robotically implemented high-throughput trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation assays, measuring the
incorporation of (a-32P) rUTP into TCA-insoluble products, were carried out exactly as previously described
[19,20]. Briefly, assay mixtures were incubated for 45
minutes at 70°C in thin-wall PCR plates before precipitating the radiolabeled transcripts by the addition of icecold TCA solution. After incubation for 30 minutes at
1°C, the nucleic acid precipitates were collected by
vacuum filtration on a 96-GF/F glass fiber filter plate
(Whatman, Maidstone, UK) and extensively washed
with further aliquots of ice-cold TCA solution. After
drying the filters, scintillant (MicroScint-O; PerkinElmer, Cambridge, UK) was added and the amount of
incorporated (a-32P) rUTP quantified with a microplate
counter (TopCount NXT, Packard, Cambridge, UK).

High-throughput molecular dynamics simulation

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were performed
using GROMACS [59]. In preparation for MD simulations, the archaeal Bridge Helix was modelled on the S.
cerevisiae ’active elongation’ RNAPII structure (PDB
#2E2H) using the SwissModel server in automated
mode [60]. The simulation production runs were executed in a fully solvated atomistic production mode
without restraints. The energies of the modelled structures were initially minimized in vacuum using GROMACS with an AMBER force field (http://ambermd.org/
) on a CPU cluster of the National Grid Service (NGS).
During pre-processing the system was warmed to 200K
under the control of a Berendsen thermostat with a coupling constant of 1.0 ps. All structures were energyminimized in pre-equilibrated simulation boxes filled
with TP3 water, and sodium and chloride ions were
added to a final concentration of approximately 150
mM. For production runs the temperature was increased
to 300 K (27°C). The equations of motion were integrated using a step-size of two femtoseconds. The trajectories generated by 27 independent 200 picoseconds
simulation runs, were analyzed using STRIDE [61], as
implemented in VMD [62]. The frequencies of

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

particular residues adopting a ‘coil’ conformation during
5 ps analysis windows were plotted relative to the Bridge
Helix sequence.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Evolutionary conservation and structure of the bD II domain. (A) Alignment of b-D II domain sequences from bacteria (E.
coli K12, T. thermophilus) and eukaryotes (S. cerevisiae and H. sapiens)
against the archaeon M. jannaschii. Residues identical to the archaeal
sequence are shown in red. The numbers flanking the sequences
represent the location of the sequences within the open reading frame
of the complete subunit. One of the residues in close contact with the
nascent transcripts is boxed and identified with an arrow. (B)
Arrangement of the b-D II domain relative to the RNAP active site. Most
structures are shown in space-filling mode to emphasize spatial
connections. The Bridge Helix is shown in green (with the BH-HN region
(corresponding to mjA’ M808-E812) highlighted in yellow), the b-D II
domain in turquoise, the template DNA is pale blue, the RNA is red, the
NTP in the insertion site shown as a pink stick model and catalytic metal
ions as magenta spheres. The rNTP binding pocket is indicated with a
white-dashed oval. (C) Close-up view of the b-D II domain. Note the
extensive contacts between the b-D II domain with the rNTP and the i-1
position of the nascent transcript. Two potential b-D II/Bridge Helix
contacts are mediated via residues orthologous to mjA’ R811 and L814.
((PDB #2E2H); visualized with PyMOL).
Additional file 2: Evolutionary conservation and structure of the
Link domain. (A) Alignment of Link domain sequences from bacteria (E.
coli K12, T. thermophilus) and eukaryotes (S. cerevisiae and H. sapiens)
against the archaeon M. jannaschii. Residues identical to the archaeal
sequence are shown in red. The numbers flanking the sequences
represent the location of the sequences within the open reading frame
of the complete subunit. Residues in close contact with the rNTP or
nascent transcripts are indicated by boxes and arrows. (B) Arrangement
of the Link domain relative to the RNAP active site. Most structures are
shown in space-filling mode to emphasize spatial connections. The
Bridge Helix is shown in green (with the BH-HN region (corresponding to
mjA’ M808-E812) highlighted in yellow), the Link domain in light purple,
the template DNA is pale blue, the RNA is red, the NTP in the insertion
site shown as a pink stick model and catalytic metal ions as magenta
spheres. The rNTP binding pocket is indicated with a white-dashed oval.
Additional file 3: Evolutionary conservation and structure of the
Link domain. (A) Alignment of F-Loop domain sequences from bacteria
(E. coli K12, T. thermophilus) and eukaryotes (S. cerevisiae and H. sapiens)
against the archaeon M. jannaschii. Residues identical to the archaeal
sequence are shown in red. The numbers flanking the sequences
represent the location of the sequences within the open reading frame
of the complete subunit. (B) Arrangement of the F-Loop domain relative
to the RNAP active site. Most structures are shown in space-filling mode
to emphasize spatial connections. The Bridge Helix is shown in green
(with the BH-HN region (corresponding to mjA’ M808-E812) highlighted
in yellow), the F-Loop domain in lime, the template DNA is pale blue,
the RNA is red, the NTP in the insertion site shown as a pink stick model
and catalytic metal ions as magenta spheres.
Additional file 4: Analysis of proline conformational space in
proteins. (A) Conformation of peptide backbones containing a single (XP-X; X is any other non-proline residue; left panel), two (X-P-P-X; central
panel), or three subsequent proline residues (X-P-P-P-X) in protein
structures displayed as Ramachandran plots (data generated using the
web-based server described in [64]). The relative frequency of occurrence
of particular /ω angle is encoded by the brightness of the square at the
intersection of the coordinates. The /ω angle combination compatible
with standard a-helical conformation is indicated with a dashed purple
oval (left and central panels). Single proline residues conform to a-helical
geometry when present at the extreme N- and C-termini of the a-helix,
thus accounting for the occurrence of single prolines in the a-helical
part of the plot in the left panel. For two or three adjacent proline

Page 13 of 15

residues, the only conformational space is in the top left quadrant of the
plot, corresponding to polyproline-specific conformations. (B) Model of the
extended poly-proline stretch in the mjA’ A822-P/Q823-P/S824-P triple
proline substitution mutant. The triple substitution mutant displays
approximately 150% of activity in comparison to the wildtype enzyme
(Figure 4B). The three proline substitutions are shown as yellow stick models
and T821 is shown in red as a reference point pointing towards the catalytic
site. The structure shown here was constructed using the M. jannaschii
Bridge Helix sequence and conforms to the typical /ω angle combinations
observed in a-helices and in polyproline structures. The structure is not
necessarily an accurate model, but serves to demonstrate the increased local
flexibility due to the presence of three subsequent proline residues. The
model was created with Abalone http://www.biomolecular-modeling.com/
Abalone/index.html.
Additional file 5: Gaussian Network Model Analysis. The yeast RNAP
elongation complex (PDB #2E2H) was subjected to Gaussian Network Model
simulation (ignm.ccbb.pitt.edu; 6Å cut-off) to assess the distribution of forces
within intact RNAPs. Slow-mode motions (rank 4, 6 and 8) affect particularly
the center of the Bridge Helix (as indicated by green/gold color-coding),
whereas the N- and C-terminal region remain immobile. The slow modes
identify predominantly the response of individual domains to mechanical
forces exerted on them from other structures during the simulation. It
should be noted that such simulations do not take the chemical nature of
residues into account and would therefore not be able to detect the
intrinsic kinking properties of the BH-HN and the BH-HC regions.
Abbreviations
BH-Hc: molecular hinge located within the carboxy-terminal portion of the
Bridge Helix; BH-HN : molecular hinge located within the amino-terminal
portion of the Bridge Helix; NAC: nucleotide addition cycle; rNTP:
ribonucleotide triphosphate; ps: picosecond; RNAP: RNA polymerase; TCA:
trichloroacetic acid.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Wellcome Trust project grant [078043/Z/05/Z]
to ROJW. I would like to thank Dominic Conquest for help with the
subcloning of the M808-X and G813-X expression clone libraries into
expression vectors. I would also like to thank Hans Heindl for advice on the
molecular dynamics simulations, Noam Weingarten for programming and
Tamas Kiss and Gabor Terstyanszki for advice and provision of computing
resources on the UK National Grid Service. I also appreciate the helpful
comments on the manuscript received from Martin Buck, Patricia Burrows
and Simone Wiesler.
Received: 20 September 2010 Accepted: 29 October 2010
Published: 29 October 2010
References
1. Brueckner F, Ortiz J, Cramer P: A movie of the RNA polymerase nucleotide
addition cycle. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2009, 19:294-299.
2. Erie DA, Kennedy SR: Forks, pincers, and triggers: the tools for nucleotide
incorporation and translocation in multi-subunit RNA polymerases. Curr
Opin Struct Biol 2009, 19:708-714.
3. Svetlov V, Nudler E: Macromolecular micromovements: how RNA
polymerase translocates. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2009, 19:701-707.
4. Kireeva M, Kashlev M, Burton ZF: Translocation by multi-subunit RNA
polymerases. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010, 1799:389-401.
5. Zhang G, Campbell EA, Minakhin L, Richter C, Severinov K, Darst SA: A
crystal structure of Thermus aquaticus core RNA polymerase at 3.3 Å
resolution. Cell 1999, 98:811-824.
6. Cramer P, Bushnell DA, Fu J, Gnatt AL, Maier-Davis B, Thompson NE,
Burgess RR, Edwards AM, David PR, Kornberg RD: Architecture of RNA
polymerase II and implications for the transcription mechanism. Science
2000, 288:640-649.
7. Cramer P, Bushnell DA, Kornberg RD: Structural basis of transcription: RNA
polymerase II at 2.8. Å resolution. Science 2001, 292:1863-1876.
8. Vassylyev DG, Sekine SI, Laptenko O, Lee J, Vassylyeva MN, Borukhov S,
Yokoyama S: Crystal structure of a bacterial RNA polymerase holoenzyme
at 2.6 Å resolution. Nature 2002, 417:712-719.

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.

27.
28.

29.

30.
31.

32.

33.

Korkhin Y, Unligil UM, Littlefield O, Nelson PJ, Stuart DI, Sigler PB, Bell SD,
Abrescia NG: Evolution of complex RNA polymerases: the complete
archaeal RNA polymerase structure. PLoS Biol 2009, 5:7.
Gnatt AL, Cramer P, Fu J, Bushnell DA, Kornberg RD: Structural basis of
transcription: an RNA polymerase II elongation complex at 3.3 A
resolution. Science 2001, 292:1876-1882.
Westover KD, Bushnell DA, Kornberg RD: Structural basis of transcription:
separation of RNA from DNA by RNA polymerase II. Science 2004,
303:1014-1016.
Wang D, Bushnell DA, Westover KD, Kaplan CD, Kornberg RD: Structural
basis of transcription: role of the trigger loop in substrate specificity and
catalysis. Cell 2006, 127:941-954.
Vassylyev DG, Vassylyeva MN, Perederina A, Tahirov TH, Artsimovitch I:
Structural basis for transcription elongation by bacterial RNA
polymerase. Nature 2007, 448:157-162.
Brueckner F, Cramer P: Structural basis of transcription inhibition by
alpha-amanitin and implications for RNA polymerase II translocation. Nat
Struct Mol Biol 2008, 15:811-818.
Kaplan CD, Larsson KM, Kornberg RD: The RNA polymerase II trigger loop
functions in substrate selection and is directly targeted by alphaamanitin. Mol Cell 2008, 30:547-556.
Borukhov S, Nudler E: RNA polymerase: the vehicle of transcription.
Trends Microbiol 2008, 16:126-134.
Vassylyev DG: Elongation by RNA polymerase: a race through roadblocks.
Curr Opin Struct Biol 2009, 19:691-700.
Werner F, Weinzierl RO: A recombinant RNA polymerase II-like enzyme
capable of promoter-specific transcription. Mol Cell 2002, 10:635-646.
Nottebaum S, Tan L, Trzaska D, Carney HC, Weinzierl RO: The RNA
polymerase factory: a robotic in vitro assembly platform for highthroughput production of recombinant protein complexes. Nucleic Acids
Res 2008, 36:245-252.
Tan L, Wiesler S, Trzaska D, Carney HC, Weinzierl RO: Bridge helix and
trigger loop perturbations generate superactive RNA polymerases. J Biol
2008, 7:40.
Klug A: Structural biology. A marvellous machine for making messages.
Science 2001, 292:1844-1846.
Bar-Nahum G, Epshtein V, Ruckenstein AE, Rafikov R, Mustaev A, Nudler E: A
ratchet mechanism of transcription elongation and its control. Cell 2005,
120:183-193.
Sousa R: Machinations of a Maxwellian demon. Cell 2005, 120:155-156.
Kaplan CD, Kornberg RD: A bridge to transcription by RNA polymerase. J
Biol 2008, 7:39.
Weinzierl RO: Nanomechanical constraints acting on the catalytic site of
cellular RNA polymerases. Biochem Soc Trans 2010, 38:428-432.
Miropolskaya N, Artsimovitch I, Klimasauskas S, Nikiforov V, Kulbachinskiy A:
Allosteric control of catalysis by the F loop of RNA polymerase. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:18942-18947.
Barlow DJ, Thornton JM: Helix geometry in proteins. J Mol Biol 1988,
201:601-619.
Cho NH, Kim HR, Lee JH, Kim SY, Kim J, Cha S, Kim SY, Darby AC,
Fuxelius HH, Yin J, Kim JH, Kim J, Lee SJ, Koh YS, Jang WJ, Park KH,
Andersson SG, Choi MS, Kim IS: The Orientia tsutsugamushi genome
reveals massive proliferation of conjugative type IV secretion system
and host-cell interaction genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:7981-7986.
Nakayama K, Yamashita A, Kurokawa K, Morimoto T, Ogawa M, Fukuhara M,
Urakami H, Ohnishi M, Uchiyama I, Ogura Y, Ooka T, Oshima K, Tamura A,
Hattori M, Hayashi T: The whole-genome sequencing of the obligate
intracellular bacterium Orientia tsutsugamushi revealed massive gene
amplification during reductive genome evolution. DNA Res 2008, 15:185-199.
Stoeva K, Ward BF: Genome mapping of Arcobacter butzleri. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 2006, 256:290-297.
Yasumoto K, Liu H, Jeong SM, Ohashi Y, Kakinuma S, Tanaka K, Kawamura F,
Yoshikawa H, Takahashi H: Sequence analysis of a 50 kb region between
spo0H and rrnH on the Bacillus subtilis chromosome. Microbiology 1996,
142:3039-3046.
Huang L, Jones AME, Searle I, Patel K, Vogler H, Hubner NC, Baulcombe DC:
An atypical RNA polymerase involved in RNA silencing shares small
subunits with RNA polymerase II. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2008, 16:91-93.
Ream TS, Haag JR, Wierzbicki AT, Nicora CD, Norbeck A, Zhu JK, Hagen G,
Guilfoyle TJ, Paša-Tolić L, Pikaard CS: Subunit compositions of the RNA-

Page 14 of 15

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

43.
44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.
50.
51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

silencing enzymes Pol IV and Pol V reveal their origins as specialized
forms of RNA Polymerase II. Mol Cell 2009, 33:1-12.
Karplus M, McCammon JA: Dynamics of proteins: elements and function.
Annu Rev Biochem 1983, 53:263-300.
Karplus M, McCammon JA: Molecular dynamics simulations of
biomolecules. Nat Struct Biol 2002, 9:646-652.
Adcock SA, McCammon JA: Molecular dynamics: survey of methods for
simulating the activity of proteins. Chem Rev 2006, 106:1589-1615.
Pace CN, Scholtz JM: A helix propensity scale based on experimental
studies of peptides and proteins. Biophys J 1998, 75:422-427.
López-Llano J, Campos LA, Sancho J: α-helix stabilization by alanine
relative to glycine: roles of polar and apolar solvent exposures and of
backbone entropy. Proteins 2006, 64:769-778.
Grathwohl C, Wüthrich K: The X-Pro peptide bond as an nmr probe for
conformational studies of flexible linear peptides. Biopolymers 1976,
15:2025-2041.
Frömmel C, Preissner R: Prediction of prolyl residues in cis-conformation
in protein structures on the basis of the amino acid sequence. FEBS Lett
1990, 277:159-163.
Pal D, Chakrabarti P: Cis peptide bonds in proteins: residues involved, their
conformations, interactions and locations. J Mol Biol 1999, 294:271-288.
Pahlke D, Freund C, Leitner D, Labudde D: Statistically significant
dependence of the Xaa-Pro peptide bond conformation on secondary
structure and amino acid sequence. BMC Struct Biol 2005, 5:8.
Hudáky I, Perczel A: Prolylproline unit in model peptides and in
fragments from databases. Proteins 2008, 70:1389-1407.
Saha I, Chatterjee B, Shamala N, Balaram P: Crystal structures of peptide
enantiomers and racemates: probing conformational diversity in
heterochiral pro-pro sequences. Biopolymers 2008, 90:537-543.
Sosunov V, Sosunova E, Mustaev A, Bass I, Nikiforov V, Goldfarb A: Unified
two-metal mechanism of RNA synthesis and degradation by RNA
polymerase. EMBO J 2003, 22:2234-2244.
Sosunov V, Zorov S, Sosunova E, Nikolaev A, Zakeyeva I, Bass I, Goldfarb A,
Nikiforov V, Severinov K, Mustaev A: The involvement of the aspartate
triad of the active center in all catalytic activities of multisubunit RNA
polymerase. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:4202-4211.
Castro C, Smidansky E, Maksimchuk KR, Arnold JJ, Korneeva VS, Götte M,
Konigsberg W, Cameron CE: Two proton transfers in the transition state
for nucleotidyl transfer catalyzed by RNA- and DNA-dependent RNA and
DNA polymerases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:4267-4272.
Huang Y, Beaudry A, McSwiggen J, Sousa R: Determinants of ribose
specificity in RNA polymerization: effects of Mn2+ and deoxynucleoside
monophosphate incorporation into transcripts. Biochemistry 1997,
36:13718-13728.
Mason PB, Struhl K: Distinction and relationship between elongation rate
and processivity of RNA Polymerase II in vivo. Mol Cell 2005, 17:831-840.
Feig M, Burton ZF: RNA polymerase II flexibility during translocation from
normal mode analysis. Proteins 2010, 78:434-46.
Seibold SA, Singh BN, Zhang C, Kireeva M, Domecq C, Bouchard A,
Nazione AM, Feig M, Cukier RI, Coulombe B, Kashlev M, Hampsey M,
Burton ZF: Conformational coupling, bridge helix dynamics and active
site dehydration in catalysis by RNA polymerase. Biochim Biophys Acta
2010, 1799:575-587.
Huang X, Wang D, Weiss DR, Bushnell DA, Kornberg RD, Levitt M: RNA
polymerase II trigger loop residues stabilize and position the incoming
nucleotide triphosphate in transcription. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:15745-15750.
Yildirim Y, Doruker P: Collective motions of RNA polymerases. Analysis of
core enzyme, elongation complex and holoenzyme. J Biomol Struct Dyn
2004, 22:267-280.
Toulokhonov I, Zhang J, Palangat M, Landick R: A central role of the RNA
polymerase trigger loop in active-site rearrangement during
transcriptional pausing. Mol Cell 2007, 27:406-419.
Tavormina PL, Reznikoff WS, Gross CA: Identifying interacting regions in
the β subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase. J Mol Biol 1996,
258:213-223.
Cunningham BC, Wells JA: High-resolution epitope mapping of hGHreceptor interactions by alanine-scanning mutagenesis. Science 1989,
244:1081-1085.
O’Malley MA, Elliott KC, Haufe C, Burian RM: Philosophies of funding. Cell
2009, 138:611-615.

Weinzierl BMC Biology 2010, 8:134
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/134

Page 15 of 15

58. Wiesler SC, Weinzierl ROJ: The Linker domain of basal transcription factor
TFIIB controls distinct recruitment and transcription stimulation
functions. Nucl Acids Res 2010.
59. Van Der Spoel D, Lindahl E, Hess B, Groenhof G, Mark AE, Berendsen HJ:
GROMACS: fast, flexible, and free. J Comput Chem 2005, 26:1701-1718.
60. Arnold K, Bordoli L, Kopp J, Schwede T: The SWISS-MODEL workspace: a
web-based environment for protein structure homology modelling.
Bioinformatics 2006, 22:195-201.
61. Heinig M, Frishman D: STRIDE: a web server for secondary structure
assignment from known atomic coordinates of proteins. Nucleic Acids Res
2004, , 32 Web Server: W500-502.
62. Humphrey W, Dalke A, Schulten K: VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J Mol
Graph 1996, 14:33-38.
63. Bern M, Goldberg D: Automatic selection of representative proteins for
bacterial phylogeny. BMC Evol Biol 2005, 5:34.
64. Berkholz DS, Krenesky PB, Davidson JR, Karplus PA: Protein Geometry
Database: a flexible engine to explore backbone conformations and
their relationships to covalent geometry. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:
D320-325.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-134
Cite this article as: Weinzierl: The nucleotide addition cycle of RNA
polymerase is controlled by two molecular hinges in the Bridge Helix
domain. BMC Biology 2010 8:134.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
