<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution and diversity of secretome genes in the apicomplexan parasite Theileria annulata</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:42. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-42"/>
<meta name="Author" content="William Weir"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolution and diversity of secretome genes in the
apicomplexan parasite Theileria annulata
William Weir1*, Tülin Karagenç2, Margaret Baird1, Andy Tait1, Brian R Shiels1

Abstract
Background: Little is known about how apicomplexan parasites have evolved to infect different host species and
cell types. Theileria annulata and Theileria parva invade and transform bovine leukocytes but each species favours a
different host cell lineage. Parasite-encoded proteins secreted from the intracellular macroschizont stage within the
leukocyte represent a critical interface between host and pathogen systems. Genome sequencing has revealed that
several Theileria-specific gene families encoding secreted proteins are positively selected at the inter-species level,
indicating diversification between the species. We extend this analysis to the intra-species level, focusing on allelic
diversity of two major secretome families. These families represent a well-characterised group of genes implicated
in control of the host cell phenotype and a gene family of unknown function. To gain further insight into their
evolution and function, this study investigates whether representative genes of these two families are diversifying
or constrained within the T. annulata population.
Results: Strong evidence is provided that the sub-telomerically encoded SVSP family and the host-nucleus targeted
TashAT family have evolved under contrasting pressures within natural T. annulata populations. SVSP genes were
found to possess atypical codon usage and be evolving neutrally, with high levels of nucleotide substitutions and
multiple indels. No evidence of geographical sub-structuring of allelic sequences was found. In contrast, TashAT
family genes, implicated in control of host cell gene expression, are strongly conserved at the protein level and
geographically sub-structured allelic sequences were identified among Tunisian and Turkish isolates. Although
different copy numbers of DNA binding motifs were identified in alleles of TashAT proteins, motif periodicity was
strongly maintained, implying conserved functional activity of these sites.
Conclusions: This analysis provides evidence that two distinct secretome genes families have evolved under
contrasting selective pressures. The data supports current hypotheses regarding the biological role of TashAT family
proteins in the management of host cell phenotype that may have evolved to allow adaptation of T. annulata to a
specific host cell lineage. We provide new evidence of extensive allelic diversity in representative members of the
enigmatic SVSP gene family, which supports a putative role for the encoded products in subversion of the host
immune response.

Background
Apicomplexan parasites are major pathogens of humans
and domesticated animals. Infection of the mammalian
host requires establishment within a range of different
host cell types that can vary in a species-specific manner. While the molecular mechanisms these parasites
use to manipulate the phenotype of the infected cell are
beginning to be understood [1], little is known about
* Correspondence: w.weir@vet.gla.ac.uk
1
Division of Veterinary Infection and Immunity, University of Glasgow,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Comparative Medicine, Bearsden
Road, Glasgow, Scotland, G61 1QH, UK

how different parasite species within a genus have
evolved to establish infection in cells of different
lineages or novel host species. The genus Theileria
encompasses species of tick-transmitted parasitic protozoa that infect domestic livestock and other mammals.
Of the five species that cause clinical disease in cattle,
the two most important are T. annulata, the agent of
tropical theileriosis, which is widespread in North
Africa, Southern Europe and Asia and T. parva, the
agent of East Coast fever a highly fatal disease of cattle
in East and Central Africa. Following inoculation by the
tick vector, the parasite invades and transforms host

© 2010 Weir et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

leukocytes, which divide in synchrony with the intracellular multi-nucleate macroschizont stage. For T. annulata, parasite infection results in establishment of
transformed myeloid cells but never T lymphocytes. For
T. parva, T cells are the preferred host cell type and
while macrophages can be infected they are not transformed [2]. Establishment of the transformed leukocyte
is characterised by activation of a number of host cell
transcription factors and the production of inflammatory
cytokines, the profile of which varies considerably
between T. annulata and T. parva infected cells [3]. In
T. annulata, recovery from primary challenge results in
non-sterile immunity, involving T cell recognition of
class I presented parasite peptides, followed by the
development of the persistent carrier state [4]. This
state is highly important for transmission of the parasite
and in T. annulata causes significant economic losses
due to sub-clinical infection [5]. The mechanisms by
which the parasite avoids clearance from the host are
obscure although in part, it is believed that low-grade
infection is maintained by macroschizont-infected leukocytes residing in immunologically privileged sites [4]. It
is also likely that the macroschizont-infected cell actively
evades and subverts the bovine immune response [2,3,6]
but the molecular mechanisms involved have not been
elucidated.
A comparative analysis of the genomes of T. annulata
and T. parva has shown that genes encoding polypeptides predicted to be either on the surface of the merozoite (the extra-cellular, bloodstream stage) or secreted
by the macroschizont exhibit relatively high inter-species
ratios of non-synonymous to synonymous nucleotide
substitutions (dN dS) [7]. For the macroschizont stage,
this indicates that genes encoding secreted proteins are
more likely to be under positive selection at an interspecies level than genes encoding non-secreted products. In many other pathogens, elevated d N d S ratios
have been observed for antigen-encoding genes. In an
early study, dNdS ratios of a large number of homologous sequences lodged in Genbank were calculated,
identifying 17 groups of genes across a range of species
as being under the influence of positive selection, nine
of which encoded surface antigens of parasites and
viruses [8]. It has been shown that significant allelic
diversity of antigen genes with positive d N d S ratios
occurs within pathogen species [9] and in the case of T.
annulata merozoite surface antigens, positive selection
for allelic diversity has been attributed to host immune
selection [10]. However, it is unlikely that full-length
Theileria proteins expressed by the macroschizont are
directly exposed to the host immune response since no
parasite-encoded products have been identified on the
surface of the infected leukocyte, despite intensive investigation [11]. Thus the reasons for elevated dN dS and

Page 2 of 17

positive selection in macroschizont-expressed genes
encoding secreted products remain to be determined.
A number of genus-specific gene families have been
identified in the genomes of T. annulata and T. parva,
several of which are predicted to encode products
secreted by the macroschizont into the host cell compartment [7]. Together with a number of single-copy
genes, these families encode the predicted Theileria
secretome that is likely to represent a critical interface
between host and parasite systems. The present study
was designed to investigate parasite gene families encoding products that may play a role at this interface and
are evolving under positive, diversifying selection. In this
study we have conducted an analysis of allelic diversity
of T. annulata secretome gene families in order to provide insight into their evolution and putative function.
For example, genes that have evolved to allow adaptation to a particular biological niche, such as a cell lineage or host species, would be predicted to be conserved
within a parasite species but show divergence between
species that exploit different host backgrounds or cell
types. Consequently, gene families involved in host
adaptation would be predicted to stabilise within each
species and this would be reflected in evidence of purifying selection operating at the allelic level. In contrast,
a gene family representing multiple paralogous antigens
may be predicted to show evidence of diversification at
both the inter-species and intra-species level. To investigate this hypothesis, the published Theileria genomes
were compared in order to identify two positively
selected gene families with distinctive and contrasting
bioinformatic signatures. This would allow representative genes to be identified and the broad pattern of
diversity exhibited by each family to be characterised
and interpreted.

Results
Identification of secretome families subject to interspecies diversifying selection

The ratios of non-synonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitutions (dNdS values) were determined for T.
annulata families compared to their T. parva orthologues for all genes where an orthologous relationship had
been determined and the mean value for each family
computed. This analysis was performed using the 14
Tribe-MCL families that contain seven or more genes
[7], together with two additional groups - genes annotated as antigens (such as TaMS1/TpMS1 [10] and
SPAG/p67 [12]) and TashAT family genes [13,14]. Gene
families were found to fall into two types - those with
either below or above the average d N d S values for all
genes (Figure 1). The nine families with below average
d N d S consist of enzymes such as ATPases, protein
kinases, RNA helicases and other housekeeping genes

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

such as the ABC transporters, which are integral membrane proteins encoded in sub-telomeric regions. The
variance of the dNdS value of these gene families is generally low, with the exception of the small E2 ubiquitinconjugating enzyme family. Only two of the seven
families with higher than average values encode products which belong to protein superfamilies present in
other protozoan parasites, namely a family of cysteine
proteases and a family of putative haloacid dehalogenase-like hydrolases. The remaining five groups of genes
with higher than average dNdS values are Theileria-specific and comprise: (1) SVSP-encoding genes, (2)
TashAT genes, (3) SfiI sub-telomeric genes, (4) known
antigen-encoding genes and (5) Tar/Tpr genes. SVSP
genes had the lowest variance, with almost all members
exhibiting a high dNdS value while the two highest-ranking groups were the antigen-encoding genes and Tar/
Tpr gene families, with mean dNdS values of 0.211 and
0.223 respectively. The known antigen-encoding genes
include single-copy genes encoding GPI-anchored merozoite surface antigens which have been previously
shown to be associated with elevated inter-species dNdS
[7]. This group, therefore, cannot be classified as a
major secretome gene family. A summary of the

Page 3 of 17

Theileria-specific secretome gene families, with higher
than average dNdS, is shown in Table 1.
The TashAT family is a 17-member family which is
present in T. annulata with an orthologous family of
genes in T. parva (TpHN) that show a significant level
of synteny [13-15]. The majority of TashAT-encoded
proteins are either predicted to be or have been demonstrated to locate to the host nucleus [1,13,14]. In T.
annulata, experimental evidence indicates that they are
likely to function as modulators of host cell phenotype,
possibly in concert with activated host cell transcription
factors [13,16]. Typically, a TashAT protein comprises
several domains with predicted functions including a
signal peptide for secretion, nuclear localisation/DNA
binding motifs, phosphorylation sites for the cell cycle
dependent p34cdc2 kinase (CDK) [17] and PEST motifs
[13,14] enriched in proline (P), glutamic acid (E), serine
(S) and threonine (T) that act as a signal for proteolytic
degradation in a number of important regulatory proteins [18]. TashAT and TpHN proteins also contain a
FAINT (Frequently Associated IN Theileria) domain, a
Theileria-specific polymorphic domain of unknown
function that is present in 166 predicted polypeptides in
T. annulata and an equivalent number in T. parva, the

Figure 1 Selection within T. annulata/T. parva gene families. Fifteen gene families were identified in the genomes of T. annulata and T.
parva containing seven or more members, together with a group of putative single-copy antigen-encoding genes (n = 10). The mean dNdS
value along with the standard error for each of these families was calculated and the families ranked according to increasing mean dNdS. The
low dNdS group consists of ‘housekeeping’ gene families and the high dNdS group includes several gene families which encode secreted
products.

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

Page 4 of 17

Table 1 T. annulata/T. parva-specific genes families with elevated dNdS
Family
name

Number of
genes in T.
a.

Putative
product

macro

mero

piroplasm

SVSP

51

hypothetical
proteins

sub-telomeric
arrays

+

-

TashAT

17

host nuclear
proteins

internal locus
(Chr. II)

+

SfiI subtelomeric

72

hypothetical
proteins

sub-telomeric

Tar/Tpr

93

integral
membrane
proteins

internal loci

Multiple
TMDs

√

Chromosomal
location

EST data

Number of genes encoding
a predicted signal sequence
in T.a.

Predicted
Function

-

49

unknown

-

-

15

control of
host cell
phenotype

+/-

-

-

26

unknown

+/-

+/-

+/-

20

unknown

+ majority of members have associated EST hits, +/- minority of members have associated EST hits.

majority of which posses a signal peptide [1,7]. Representative examples of PEST and FAINT domain distribution for TashAT and SVSP sequences can be viewed
in [7] and in Additional file 1. Significant divergence has
occurred between the TashAT and TpHN gene families
[1,15], and this is most easily detected by the specific
absence of AT-hook DNA binding/nuclear localisation
motifs in T. parva. However, the majority of the orthologous pairs encode the same basic putative functional
motifs, which occur in the same general order and are
frequently located in an identical or similar position [1].
Together with phylogenetic analysis [15] this strongly
indicates that expansion and divergence of TashAT and
TpHN genes have occurred to allow functions specific
for each species to evolve, a postulation which predicts
that functional motifs specific to orthologues of one species would be conserved within that species. To investigate this hypothesis, members of the TashAT gene
family were selected for analysis of sequence diversity
across different parasite isolates.
To determine which of the other secretome gene
families of T. annulata was most suitable to compare
and contrast with the TashAT family, the SVSP-encoding genes, SfiI sub-telomeric genes and Tar/Tpr genes
were bioinformatically screened to determine in which
families the majority of proteins are predicted to be
components of the macroschizont secretome. The Tar/
Tpr family was considered for a similar analysis of selection but for the reasons outlined below was not considered as suitable for such analysis. This is the largest
gene family in T. annulata, encoding 93 hypothetical
proteins in the genome. Using available algorithms, only
20 Tar/Tpr members were found to encode polypeptides with a predicted signal sequence (11 of which are
predicted to be membrane anchored) while a large proportion of family members encode multiple trans-membrane domains. Therefore, the available data suggests
that many Tar/Tpr genes encode integral membrane

proteins and it can be postulated that the majority of
members are unlikely to contribute to the secretome.
This observation coupled with current data indicating
expression across multiple life-cycle stages and the possibility that dNdS values represent a degree of misalignment between orthologous genes meant that this gene
family was not selected for comparison with the
TashAT family.
Sub-telomerically-encoded gene families

SfiI sub-telomeric proteins are a large family of
hypothetical proteins in T. annulata (n = 72). Only a
subset of SfiI family members are expressed at the
macroschizont stage and not all of these are predicted
to be secreted [19]. In contrast, SVSP genes encode a
family of Variable Sub-telomerically-encoded Secreted
Proteins (SVSPs), of which almost all are expressed at
the RNA level by the macroschizont stage of T. annulata and T. parva [1,7,20]. The 51 SVSP genes in T.
annulata are distributed across every sub-telomere in
short arrays, that are generally flanked by an ABC
transporter centromerically and an SfiI sub-telomeric
gene telomerically. Typically, SVSP genes comprise a
single exon with the hypothetical product possessing a
signal peptide at the N-terminus. Organelle-targeting
motifs have not been identified in the majority of T.
annulata SVSP proteins [19] suggesting they are
secreted into the host cytosol. Direct orthologues, in T.
parva have been identified for over half the family [7]
and although nucleotide identity between orthologues
ranges from 56% to 71%, mean amino acid identity is
only 46%. To identify additional orthologous relationships, the amino acid sequences of SfiI sub-telomeric
and SVSP genes in both species were aligned and clustered (data not shown). This process revealed a number
of closely related sequence pairs from within each species, indicating paralogous genes probably arising from
duplication events. For a number of genes, including
most SfiI sub-telomeric genes, the closest neighbour was

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

identified as a paralogue located in a different telomere,
implying a high level of duplication and recombination
within these families. A schematic representation of the
gene organisation of a sub-telomere of chromosome II
is depicted in Figure 2 and this organisation is typical of
the other sub-telomeres. While both gene families display significant diversity within T. annulata and T.
parva [7], transcriptional data indicates that unlike SfiI
sub-telomeric genes, SVSP family genes of T. annulata
are expressed in a stage-specific manner by the macroschizont [7] and that the majority of the gene products
contribute to the secretome [1,7] and see Additional file
2. While SVSP genes bear general similarity with
TashAT genes, by both encoding a signal peptide and
the previously defined FAINT domain, unlike TashATs
they do not bear clear functional motifs shared across
family members [7]. SVSP genes also show atypical
codon usage compared to the TashATs and other major
secretome gene families. A preliminary analysis was
undertaken to investigate diversity by focussing on differential codon usage among secretome gene families.
The set of macroschizont-expressed genes that encode
secreted products was analysed using correspondence
analysis to investigate whether particular genes showed
bias in codon usage (Figure 3). The results revealed a
cluster of genes with atypical codon usage on the right

Page 5 of 17

hand side of the graph and these were identified as
SVSP genes. Relative Synonymous Codon Usage (RSCU)
is the ratio of the observed frequency of a codon relative to that expected if codon usage is uniform, i.e.
values tending towards one indicate an absence of bias.
When correspondence analysis was performed using
RSCU, the SVSP genes continued to cluster separately
(data not shown) indicating that the atypical codon
usage was independent of amino acid composition. In
contrast to SVSPs, TashAT genes show no bias in
codon usage. The finding of codon bias in SVSP genes
could be explained by translational selection for the use
of optimal codons as seen in trypanosome parasites
[21], and may be a requirement for elevated synthesis
or translational control of SVSP proteins.
On the basis of the results outlined above, the SVSP
family was selected for allelic sequencing in order to
compare the results with that of TashAT family. Thus,
these gene families represent polypeptides of the T.
annulata secretome, which are subject to positive selection at the inter-species level although available genomic evidence suggests they are likely to perform
contrasting functions. This study was undertaken to test
the hypothesis that differential selection pressures have
operated during evolution of the TashAT and SVSP
gene families and that this relates to the potential

Figure 2 Sub-telomeric regions of chromosome II of T. annulata and T. parva. Synteny is partially conserved between T. annulata and T.
parva at sub-telomeric loci. For the majority of genes, direct orthologues were identified in each genome at the same locus (e.g. SVSP1) or at
different loci (e.g. SVSP4) together with evidence of gene duplication and chromosomal recombination within each species. Chromosome
numbers are shown in roman numerals

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

Page 6 of 17

Figure 3 Codon usage of the secretome. Codon usage was analysed across the set of macroschizont expressed T. annulata genes encoding a
signal peptide with an orthologue in T. parva (n = 218). Correspondence analysis was used to transform the data in order to explore variation in
codon usage among these genes. 33% of the variation present in the dataset is illustrated on the graph as the first two principal components of
the analysis and this clearly shows that SVSP-encoding genes display atypical codon usage.

biological function that the proteins of these respective
families perform.
Allelic sequencing of selected members of the T. annulata
SVSP and TashAT gene families

Four SVSP genes, denoted SVSP1 (TA16025), SVSP2
(TA17485), SVSP3 (TA17545) and SVSP4 (TA16045)
were selected for sequencing to investigate allelic diversity within a panel of Tunisian and Turkish isolates of
T. annulata (see Additional file 3). All four genes have
direct orthologues in T. parva, with relatively high dNdS
values ranging from 0.1796 for SVSP3 to 0.4037 for
SVSP1 (see Additional file 4). SVSP1 and SVSP4 are
located in the same sub-telomere in chromosome II of
T. annulata (Figure 2) while SVSP3 (chromosome III)
and SVSP4 (chromosome I) encode a predicted nuclear
localisation signal. The latter genes were selected in
order to investigate whether diversity for nuclear-targeted SVSP genes (n = 5) differed from the majority of
SVSPs which lack a predicted NLS motif. Four members
of the TashAT family were also selected for allelic
sequencing, each of which is expressed in the macroschizont and encode signal peptides together with an
NLS motif. TashAT2 (TA20095), TashAT3 (TA20082)
and SuAT1 (TA03135) each bear a different number of
AT-hook DNA binding motifs: one for SuAT1, three for
TashAT2 and four for TashAT3 [7,13,14,22]. Additionally, TashHN (TA20090) allelic sequences were obtained

because, together with TashAT2, TashHN flanks the
gene cluster [1] and shows a high level of identity across
predicted functional motifs (including NLS) with its T.
parva orthologue [23]. Based on this result it was predicted that TashHN performs a conserved function and
will show low divergence within a species. Tunisian and
Turkish T. annulata DNA samples were used as templates for PCR amplification (see Additional file 3) and
multiple allelic sequences were identified for each locus.
Near full-length sequences were generated for all four
SVSP genes, TashHN and SuAT1, while 20% and 32%
coverage respectively was obtained for TashAT2 and
TashAT3 sequences, corresponding to the AT-hook
domain of these proteins.
Analysis of the allelic sequences of four SVSP genes
indicates they are highly diverse and are evolving
neutrally

A summary of the allelic sequencing results is shown in
Table 2. Between 21 and 30 alleles were identified for
each SVSP member and at each locus considerable
length polymorphism was evident. Allelic amino acid
sequences were aligned and each site containing a gap
was removed from the alignment (indel sites are illustrated in Additional file 1). For SVSP genes, the number of polymorphic sites identified in the un-gapped
alignments broadly correlated with the length of each
gene, with the largest gene (SVSP1) possessing 151

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

polymorphic sites. Nucleotide diversity ranged between
1.4% for SVSP3 and 2.8% for SVSP1. To investigate
whether allelic variation was related to geographical origin, neighbour-joining trees were constructed for each
gene, which included identical alleles generated from
different DNA templates and an example for SVSP3 is
illustrated in Figure 4. Minimal geographical sub-structuring is evident, with alleles from Tunisian and Turkish
samples interspersed on the tree. A similar pattern was
shown for SVSP2 (data not shown) and this is reflected
in low levels of molecular variance among populations
for these two genes (Table 2). SVSP1 and SVSP4 showed
limited evidence of geographical sub-structuring and
higher levels of molecular variance among populations,
however the alleles from each country did not cluster
discretely (data not shown) and therefore overall there is
no clear evidence for geographical sub-structuring of
SVSP alleles.
Several tests of neutrality were undertaken for each
gene using both the overall allelic dataset and then
using Turkish-derived alleles alone (Table 2). For each
SVSP gene, negative test values were returned and only
in the case of Turkish alleles of SVSP1 were low positive scores obtained, 0.389 for Tajima’s D test and

Page 7 of 17

0.011 and 0.126 for Fu and Li’s D and F tests respectively. For each gene, none of these values exceeded
the upper 95% confidence limit for a neutrally evolving
population as determined by coalescence simulation.
On this basis, there is no evidence for positive selection acting on these genes within the two populations
analysed.
TashAT alleles exhibit geographical sub-structuring

For the TashAT genes in T. annulata, 16 distinct
alleles were identified for both TashHN and SuAT1
and similar to the SVSPs, length polymorphism was
identified among all TashAT genes (Table 2). The AThook domain of TashAT2 (33 alleles) and TashAT3 (9
alleles) showed the greatest level of length polymorphism with proteins differing by up to 108 and 47 residues respectively. Among the TashHN alleles, a single
four amino acid indel was identified which contrasts
with the large number of insertions and deletions evident towards the 5’ end of SuAT1 (see Additional file
1). Overall, TashHN showed only 20 polymorphic sites
together with the lowest average number of nucleotide
differences per site (6). TashAT2 and TashAT3 contained a complex pattern of indels that precluded the
generation of a meaningful un-gapped alignment. In

Figure 4 DNA neighbour-joining trees. Neighbour-joining trees were generated using allelic nucleotide sequence corresponding to eight loci
(SVSP1, SVSP2, SVSP3, SVSP4, SuAT1, TashHN, TashAT2 and TashAT3). Representative trees for SVSPs (SVSP3) and TashAT family genes (TashHN) are
illustrated with leaves colour-coded to differentiate alleles representing Tunisian clones and each of the four highly heterogeneous Turkish
isolates.

0.567
0.484
0.440

The number in italics below the value for each test is the upper limit of the 95% confidence interval, calculated by coalescence simulation based on θπ and free-recombination, n = number of sequences compared,
S = number of segregating sites, π = nucleotide polymorphism and θπ = theta (an estimator of genetic variation) based on nucleotide polymorphism. * C9 is the name of the T. annulata Ankara clone used in the
genome sequencing project. Results for TashAT2 and TashAT3 were not generated as the large number of gaps in the alignment precluded a meaningful analysis.

1.015
0.898
0.928

1.122

-1.379
-1.299

0.912
1.066

-1.031
20
0.012
52
8
1.381

1.045
0.972

1.025

0.942

1.621
30
100
81%
463 - 494
SuAT1

71%

16

0.031

0.536

-0.184
-0.263

0.500
0.439

0.137
5
0.005
13
10
-0.510

0.557
0.509

-0.677

0.422

0.155
6
20
100%
333 - 337
TashHN

18%

16

0.006

0.800

-0.851
-0.870

0.731
0.620

-0.405
33
0.022
116
22
-1.676

0.601
0.622

-1.749

0.456

-0.767
35
138
92%
476 - 508
SVSP4

25%

30

0.021

0.495
-0.859
0.458
-0.858
0.415
-0.055
15
0.011
53
19
0.561
-2.889
0.508
-2.888
0.435
-1.548
27
104
94%
408 - 420
SVSP3

3%

29

0.014

0.453

-0.147
-0.039
-0.370
30
0.024
92
13
-0.579
-0.520
-0.437
32
101
97%
409 - 414
SVSP2

1%

21

0.025

0.126
0.011

0.427
0.391

0.389
37
0.028
111
12

0.483
0.425
0.371

-0.834
-0.947
-0.192
41
151
89%
551 - 576

26%

23

0.028

D
(Fu &
Li)
D
(Tajima)
θπ
π
D
(Fu &
Li)
D
(Tajima)
θπ

SVSP1

Molecular variance among
populations
Coverage of C9* by
ungapped consensus
Amplicon
length (bp)
Gene
name

Table 2 Summary of sequencing results, neutrality tests and AMOVA

S

π

Page 8 of 17

n

Overall diversity & neutrality

F
(Fu &
Li)

n

S

Diversity & neutrality in Turkey

F
(Fu &
Li)

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

contrast to SVSPs, for both SuAT1 and TashHN geographical sub-structuring of the allelic sequences is
evident, with the Turkish and Tunisian alleles tending
to cluster independently and this is illustrated for
TashHN in Figure 4. Unexpectedly, identical alleles
were found among Tunisian samples, even though
they were isolated from different geographical locations and a single outlying Tunisian allele was identical to a Turkish allele. SuAT1 showed the highest
level of DNA polymorphism of all genes in the study
(π = 3.1%) and the greatest geographical sub-structuring with 71% of the molecular variation in the allelic
dataset directly attributed to differences between
Tunisian and Turkish alleles. Contrasting results were
obtained with the neutrality tests between TashHN
and SuAT1. For TashHN, in the Turkish allelic dataset and the entire population, a low positive Tajima’s
D statistic together with negative values for Fu and
Li’s tests were calculated, although the low number of
alleles and the minimal sequence diversity limited the
power of these tests. For SuAT1, positive neutrality
test values were calculated for the entire allelic dataset and a positive Tajima’s D statistic indicated a low
level of both low and high frequency polymorphisms.
This may be interpreted as evidence of a decrease in
population size or balancing selection, but can most
readily be explained by the evident geographical
structuring of SuAT1 alleles. This is supported by the
fact that all three neutrality test statistics became
negative when the Turkish population was analysed in
isolation (Table 2).
Although highly diverse, SVSP alleles appear not to be
positively selected

Allelic dNdS values were calculated for each of the six
genes in T. annulata (Table 3). All SVSPs displayed
similar ratios with values ranging from 0.350 to 0.547,
each gene displaying higher values compared to the
inter-species comparison. All the SVSP genes showed a
higher number of negatively selected sites than positively selected. A codon-by-codon analysis of each
SVSP gene revealed that positively and negatively
selected codons are distributed throughout the protein,
with little evidence of clustering (data not shown). To
test for evidence of positive selection within T. annulata compared with T. parva, the McDonald-Kreitman
test was undertaken for each gene. This test measures
whether synonymous or non-synonymous differences
are skewed within or between species and this is
expressed as a neutrality index showing an excess or
deficit of within-species non-synonymous polymorphisms. Under neutrality, the ratio of non-synonymous to
synonymous substitutions between species will be equal
to the ratio obtained within a species. The results are
shown in Table 3, and for the SVSP genes the obtained

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

Page 9 of 17

values ranged from 0.754 for SVSP4 to 0.834 for SVSP2
suggesting that these genes are evolving neutrally. Multiple indels were identified within SVSP alleles particularly
in PEST domains and an amino acid alignment of the
region of SVSP1 hyper-variable for indels and amino
acid substitutions is shown in Figure 5. A complex pattern of insertions and deletions was identified in this
region that is rich in proline (P), glutamine (Q), aspartic
acid (D) and glutamic acid (E). Indels were found in
PEST domains of each of the four SVSP genes. In direct
contrast, a highly-conserved motif, LEPETIPVEIGSDED, was identified in the midst of this polymorphic region and its relative position varied within
the proteins as a result of the indels (Figure 5). The
codons encoding the first, third and ninth residues in
this motif show synonymous substitutions and together
with the monomorphic codons, the data suggest that
the motif may be under purifying selection. Interestingly, LEPETIPVEIGSDED related motifs are found in a
total of 16 SVSP predicted proteins encoded by different
paralogous genes. The motif also shows strong conservation within the TashAT gene family (14 of 17 paralogous sequences), including SuAT1 and TashAT2 and
TashAT3, and can be present in up to 4 copies located
in different regions of the predicted polypeptides [13].
TashAT genes show evidence of purifying selection and
conservation of functional motifs

Contrasting results were obtained for TashHN and
SuAT1 in T. annulata using tests for positive selection.
TashHN was found to be highly conserved at the allelic
level and was the only gene where more synonymous
than non-synonymous changes were identified (11 vs 9,
Table 3) with a low total number of mutations reflecting
limited nucleotide diversity (0.6%, Table 2). When compared with T. parva, an excess of non-synonymous substitutions was identified relative to synonymous
substitutions at an inter-species level and this resulted
in a lower neutrality index than that of SVSPs. SuAT1

showed elevated dNdS at the intra-species level, although
no statistically significant positively selected codons
were identified. An excess of non-synonymous substitutions were detected within T. annulata compared to
synonymous substitutions (49 vs 16) and when compared to the fixed differences between species gave an
elevated neutrality index of 1.510 (Table 3). To test
whether geographic sub-structuring of allelic types
could account for this result, the analysis was repeated,
with each country tested separately, and this revealed
similar d N d S and neutrality indices to those from the
whole dataset (Table 3). This shows it is likely that
within-population selection has occurred, although the
value for the neutrality index was not statistically different from 1. Analysis of an alignment of SuAT1 alleles
over the AT-hook region of the protein showed remarkable conservation of these motifs but revealed differences between the predicted proteins derived from
Tunisia and Turkey. AT-hooks are small motifs with a
related sequence pattern rich in arginine (R) and lysine
(K) around a central GRP core that binds to the minor
groove of short stretches of AT-rich DNA [24]. The
majority of SuAT1 alleles (14/16) show a double AThook arrangement with the first AT-hook showing a
RGRPR motif while the second AT-hook has a RGRPK
motif (Figure 6). The spacing between the motifs is
strongly conserved with the majority of Turkish alleles
displaying a spacing of 14 amino acids between the GRP
core, while Tunisian alleles show spacing of 15 residues.
In the alignment shown in Figure 6, where amino acid
substitutions disrupt the first AT-hook in four of the
Tunisian alleles (Tunisia_4 to Tunisia_7), with a single
exception, additional substitutions compensate by reconstituting the basic double AT-hook pattern displayed by
the majority of alleles. Two sequences showed variants
of this basic pattern: the C9 (genome strain) allele
encodes a protein that posses only AT-hook 1 and a
Tunisian allele encodes a protein that only posses AT-

Table 3 dNdS and McDonald-Kreitman results
Gene
name

No. of
sequences
analysed

Positively
selected sites (p
< 0 .25)

Negatively
selected sites (p
< 0.25)

T.a.
allelic
dNdS

T.a. vs
T.p.
dNdS

SVSP1

23

8

27

0.547

0.404

SVSP2

21

5

23

0.464

SVSP3

29

4

21

SVSP4

30

2

12

TashHN

16

0

SuAT1
SuAT1

16 (total)
8 (Tunisian)

SuAT1

8 (Turkish)

p value
(Fisher’s
exact test)

Polymorphic
changes
within T.
annulata

Fixed
differences
between
species

Syn

Nsyn

Syn

42

108

113

361

0.805

0.329

0.312

36

69

127

292

0.834

0.480

0.369

0.180

37

63

133

288

0.786

0.343

0.350

0.209

45

77

148

336

0.754

0.186

5

0.211

0.265

11

9

84

139

0.494

0.153

0
0

9
3

0.502
0.611

0.219
0.219

16
8

49
27

174
178

353
359

1.510
1.673

0.205
0.265

0

4

0.478

0.219

9

27

175

358

1.466

0.364

Neutrality
index

Nsyn

T. annulata sequences compared with T. parva, Syn = number of synonymous changes, Nsyn = number of non-synonymous changes

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

Page 10 of 17

Figure 5 Hypervariable region of SVSP1. Amino acid sequences representing alleles of SVSP1 were aligned, identifying hypervariability in the
PEST domain in the centre of the protein. At each site the second (green), third (gold), fourth (blue) and fifth (grey) most frequent amino acids
are indicated and the conserved motif L(Q/*)PET(V/I)PVE(V/I) is highlighted.

hook 2 (Tunisia_7). An additional upstream NLS is also
highly conserved, with only a single di-morphic amino
acid residue identified among alleles (data not shown).
The LVPETIPVEIGSDEE motif, starting at position 352
is completely conserved across SuAT1 alleles with a single synonymous mutation evident encoding the valine
residue in position eight (data not shown). It may be
concluded from the two fully-analysed TashAT family
genes, that despite a degree of allelic polymorphism,
there is evidence of major conservation over the entire
encoded protein (TashHN) and specifically there is conservation of known functional motifs (SuAT1).
The high number of indels in the TashAT2 and
TashAT3 sequences precluded formal d N d S analysis.
Despite this variation, AT-hook motifs were found to be
highly conserved across all allelic sequences. To investigate the relationship of these domains in TashAT2 and
TashAT3, a neighbour-joining tree was created based on
the entire AT-hook region of allelic sequences (Figure
7). TashAT3 alleles cluster together, the majority encoding predicted polypeptides with four AT-hooks and two
Tunisian alleles encoding five. Similarly, the majority of
TashAT2 alleles encode either three or four AT-hooks,
with a single Tunisian allele encoding only two. As with
SuAT1, the spacing between AT-hooks remained constant, with the majority of core motifs separated by 14
residues. Over the entire dataset, spacing between AThook motifs was distributed around three basic sizes: 14
(± 1), 29 (+1) and 44 residues. The relative positioning
of pairs of hooks and associated spacing showed

variation across the predicted proteins, with evidence of
a mosaic type pattern. Thus, the possession of two or
more AT-hook motifs in these sequences shows absolute conservation but the patterning of AT-hooks for
different TashAT polypeptides shows considerable variability. A degree of geographical sub-structure is evident
in TashAT2 alleles, with four of the six Tunisian
sequences clustering (Figure 7).

Discussion
Large multi-gene families located at the sub-telomeres
of protozoan parasite genomes often encode antigens
that display sequence hyper-variability to allow escape
from a protective immune response, while genes encoding proteins that engender adaptation to particular host
environments are more likely to be conserved withinspecies. In this study we have analysed allelic diversity
of members of two distinct families of proteins of T.
annulata that are predicted to be secreted into the host
compartment and have been considered as candidate
parasite molecules that enable evasion of a protective
immune response (SVSPs [20]) or function to control
host cell phenotype (TashATs [14,22]). SVSP genes are
arranged in sub-telomeric arrays while all the TashATs
are located in an internal cluster on chromosome one.
Allelic sequencing identified a high level of diversity at
the nucleotide and amino acid level across the length of
all four SVSP genes analysed, with hyper-variability
identified at the site of the predicted PEST degradation
motifs (see Figure 5). However, the combined analyses

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

Page 11 of 17

Figure 6 DNA binding motifs in SuAT1. Amino acid sequences representing alleles of SuAT1 were aligned and DNA binding motifs termed
‘AT-hooks’ are highlighted in orange. Block differences distinguish the five Tunisian alleles at the bottom of the alignment and the Turkishderived alleles. The Tunisian sequences Tunisia_1 and Tunisia_2 and the C9 sequence (Turkey) at the top of the alignment are intermediate
between the archetypal Tunisian and Turkish alleles.

Figure 7 TashAT2 and TashAT3 AT-hook domains. The AT-hook domains of TashAT2 and TashAT3 were aligned and used to generate a
neighbour-joining tree. The figure illustrates the number of AT-hooks (indicated in pink) and the distance between core ‘GRP’ motifs for
each allele. Tunisian sequences are indicated by an asterisk.

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

performed in this study indicate that the SVSP genes are
evolving in a neutral manner. The McDonald-Kreitman
test, specifically designed for detecting intra-specific
selection, also indicated these genes have not been subject to a strong positive selective pressure (see Table 2)
with Tajima’s D and Fu and Li’s D and F tests failing to
provide any evidence of a deviation from neutrality.
Thus, with a large proportion of neutral mutations,
SVSP genes appear to be evolving in the absence of
strong purifying selection within T. annulata populations. In contrast to the findings for SVSPs, the level of
allelic diversity of the four TashAT family genes that
were analysed was, in general, less extensive with evidence for strong conservation of the predicted AT-hook
functional motifs. Moreover, analysis of the TashHN
sequences provided significant data for purifying selection to conserve amino acid sequence at the intra-specific level, while the SuAT1 alleles showed evidence for
positive selection, with a greater number of non-synonymous mutations compared to synonymous mutations
resulting in a higher within-species ratio and a neutrality
index greater than one. We conclude that it is likely that
the differences in the pattern of allelic diversity in extant
populations displayed by the representative loci of these
two major secretome gene families are a consequence of
different evolutionary pressures that reflect contrasting
functional properties of the proteins they encode.
Motif prediction analysis suggests the majority of
SVSP proteins are secreted into the leukocyte cytoplasm
[7] and it can be postulated that they play a role in the
interaction between the parasite and the infected host
cell. In addition, many SVSPs in both T. annulata and
T. parva encode predicted nuclear localisation NLS
motifs, and the vast majority possess the ‘frequently
associated in Theileria’ FAINT domain, characteristic of
proteins that constitute the macroschizont secretome.
The conservation of the NLS in the allelic sequences of
SVSP 3 and 4 identified in this study indicate this motif
is functionally conserved, supporting the recent demonstration in T. parva that a typical SVSP protein can
locate to the nucleus of transfected mammalian cells
[20]. In addition, the allelic sequence data highlighted
the L-PETIPVEIGSDED motif notable for its level of
conservation in the midst of a region that was shown to
be divergent. Related motifs can be identified in a number of predicted proteins of the T. parva secretome
(data not shown) and nearly all TashAT family members
[1]. Despite the identification of conserved motifs, a biological function for SVSPs has yet to be proposed.
Although a T. parva-encoded SVSP (TP03_0882) was
shown to locate to the nucleolus in transfected U2OS
cells, a host nuclear/nucleolar location for SVSPs in
Theileria infected cells was not demonstrated [20].
Indeed, detection of macroschizont reactivity by an anti-

Page 12 of 17

SVSP serum was limited to a small number of cells and
endogenous polypeptide was not detected by immunoblotting [20]. This is in stark contrast to members of
the TashAT cluster analysed in this study, which have
been shown to be present at significant levels in the
nucleus of the majority of T. annulata macroschizontinfected leukocytes [13,14].
One explanation for the difficulty in detecting SVSPs
is that these proteins are likely to be rapidly degraded
within the host compartment, and the possession of
multiple PEST motifs that are known to target eukaryotic proteins for proteolytic degradation supports this.
The presence of such motifs and signal peptide on
SVSPs is compatible with the hypothesis that these proteins are secreted into the host compartment, degraded
and subsequently presented as peptides on MHC Class I
molecules [25]. Recognition of class I presented peptides
by cytotoxic T cells (CTL) has been shown to play an
important role in protective immunity against T. parva
[26] and an SVSP family member has been identified
among a panel of T cell antigens in this species (I. Morrison, personal communication). The recognition of
pathogen peptides by CTL is known to exert an immune
selection pressure that results in selection of amino acid
substitutions in critical residues of the epitope [27], and
evidence for diversifying selection of a predominant
(non-SVSP) T cell epitope of T. annulata has been
obtained (Weir and Morrison, unpublished data). However, despite showing a significant level of allelic diversity, none of the T. annulata SVSP gene sequences
analysed in this study provide evidence to support the
hypothesis that divergent allelic forms of the SVSP proteins studied have evolved to escape recognition by
CTL. Nevertheless, it has been argued that Theileria
CTL antigens may be subject to weak selection as a
result of bovine MHC Class I polymorphism [28] and
therefore this possibility cannot be completely
discounted.
The SVSP family of genes are located at the sub-telomeric regions of the chromosomes and show evidence
of expansion and diversification in T. annulata and T.
parva. A telomeric location of gene families can promote ectopic recombination and the presence of a large
number of indels across T. annulata SVSP allelic
sequences (see Figure 5) suggests that generation of
sequence diversity via recombination could be a relatively frequent event, at least in the family members studied. These characteristics bear similarity to families of
sub-telomerically located genes in other protozoan parasites that perform an essential biological function but,
due to exposure to a protective immune response, have
evolved into multiple divergent antigenic forms. Variant
expression of different antigenic types allows escape
from protective immunity, and the genes act as a

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

contingency against parasite killing. The two most
extensively studied systems are the vsg [29] and var [30]
gene families of Trypanosome and Plasmodium parasites, respectively. The manner in which these contingency gene families have evolved has been difficult to
assess and consequently there is no experimental data
for or against diversifying selection or neutrality. Moreover, since it is possible that selection against contingency genes operates, in principle, against the whole
antigenic repertoire, the finding of neutrality for allelic
diversity of SVSPs does not exclude a role for SVSPs as
a contingency gene family. Indeed, the observation that
SVSP sub-telomeric gene location bears similarity to vsg
and var gene families has been made and it was proposed that restricted expression of individual SVSPs
could be responsible for the small number of parasites
expressing detectable SVSP antigens [20].
For SVSPs to act as a family of classical contingency
genes, like the vsg and var genes, it can be expected that
SVSP mRNA expression patterns would show evidence of
variant expression between distinct parasite genotypes and
over time. However, transcription profiling of SVSP genes
in both T. annulata and T. parva infected cell lines does
not fit the classical pattern of variant expression, as the
majority of SVSP genes are co-expressed at the RNA level
[7,20]. In addition, comparison of different infected cell
lines showed that the SVSP expression profile was largely
comparable and did not vary over time. While the possibility of differential translational control or protein stability
cannot be discounted, an alternative model that merits
consideration is that in all macroschizont infected cells,
the majority of SVSP proteins are continually generated
and rapidly degraded. If such a situation occurred then
each infected cell would simultaneously generate a
plethora of random variant peptides with the potential to
be presented at the host cell surface with either class I or
class II MHC antigens, assuming the SVSPs contain the
relevant motifs for presentation. The consequence of this
large peptide repertoire on subversion of the host immune
response to these proteins is unknown, but it would be
reasonable to predict that a wide range of peptide specificities would be generated with each peptide present at a
relatively low frequency. Like the contingency theory,
selection for a particular amino acid variant may not operate, as it is the generation of the divergent pool itself that
confers a selectable advantage. Investigation of SVSP gene
expression at the level of the single infected cell and evidence for stimulation of cells of the immune response by
SVSP peptides will be required to provide supporting evidence for the postulation that the SVSP family has evolved
to subvert the bovine immune response.
In direct contrast to the results obtained from analysis
of T. annulata SVSP genes, TashHN was found to have
very limited allelic diversity within the species. Indeed,

Page 13 of 17

several codons were found to be under the influence of
negative selection whereas none showed evidence of
positive selection. The lack of diversity within T. annulata is not unexpected as there is a high level of
sequence identity with the T. parva orthologue and predicted functional motifs are located in identical positions
within the polypeptide [23]. Based on this, it is proposed
that an ancestral gene with significant identity to
TashHN was present in the common ancestor of T.
annulata and T. parva. TashHN has no identified DNA
binding domains but is known to locate to the leukocyte
nucleus [31]. Evidence for phosphorylation of the protein has been generated and its expression levels are significantly elevated in infected cell lines that show an
attenuated phenotype [31]. In conclusion, the results
obtained in this study strongly support the hypothesis
that the function of the TashHN protein as a modulator
of host cell phenotype is conserved across transforming
Theileria species and predicts that sequence diversity
would also be limited in T. parva.
Unlike TashHN, T. annulata TashAT family genes
encoding polypeptides possessing AT-hook motifs
(TashAT1-3 and SuAT1-3) show significant divergence
from their T. parva orthologues, which completely lack
AT-hooks. This finding could be interpreted as indication that the AT-hook motifs do not perform a critical
biological function. However, the results of this study
clearly imply that species-specific functional divergence
of TashAT family genes has occurred following the T.
annulata/T. parva split, as strong conservation of the
AT-hook motifs was observed in all TashAT and
SuAT1 sequences analysed in this study. Further studies
are required to demonstrate whether motifs specific to
the T. parva orthologues are conserved across alleles.
Interestingly, the TashAT3 allele cluster does not segregate at the first branch of the tree displayed by Figure 7,
suggesting that the ancestral TashAT3 may have been
more closely related to particular alleles of TashAT2,
and that complete sequence divergence has not occurred
at these loci. For the majority of SuAT1 alleles, strong
conservation of the sequence defining AT-hook 1 and 2
was found, together with conservation of the spacing
between the motifs. This suggests that binding to the
target AT-rich sequence is an essential function of this
protein. In mammalian systems, specificity of promoter
recognition by AT-hook proteins has been attributed to
differences in core motif sequence and spacing between
motifs: the HMGA1 protein, for example, has three AThooks and specifically binds to tandem repeats of ATrich sequence in the INF-b gene using the central AThook in combination with either the first or third hook
[32]. The arrangement of AT-hook motifs in TashAT
sequences (Figures 6 and 7) shows similarity to HMGA
proteins and the AT-hook region of TashAT2 has been

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

shown to bind tandem repeats of AT-rich DNA [14].
We conclude that the results of this study support the
postulation that members of the TashAT gene family
have evolved to modulate the activation outcome of the
host cell lineage preferentially infected by T. annulata.
Despite displaying strong conservation of functional
motifs, variation was identified across TashAT/SuAT
allelic sequences. Firstly, TashAT2 and 3 alleles display
extensive variability over the AT-hook region with allelic
variants having between one and five hook motifs. There
is also variation in the distance between pairs of hook
motifs, fixed around three gap sizes, and different alleles
show different combination of AT-hook gaps. Variation
in number of and spacing between AT-hook motifs has
been documented for a number of proteins in different
organisms and is thought to be associated with distinct
target recognition [32]. AT-hooks have been described as
evolutionary mobile modules dispersed by translocation
of complete and contiguous units of the motif [24] and
our results support this model. Why T. annulata exhibits
this level of diversity in DNA binding proteins implicated
in modulation of host cell gene expression is not clear. In
this context, further allelic sequence analysis of other
members of the gene family will determine whether these
conclusions apply to the family as a whole. It is of interest to note that different T. annulata and T. parva
infected cell lines show significant variability in the profile of cytokine genes they express [33,34], despite activation of the same host cell transcription factors [35].
Geographical sub-structuring of TashHN and SuAT1
allelic sequences (Figures 4 and 6) was identified in this
study. The simplest explanation for this divergence is
isolation and genetic drift, whereby mutations in the
gene arising in separate areas eventually resulted in different allelic types. However, to date clear sub-structuring of divergent allelic sequences appears to be
restricted to TashAT family genes, as this property is
limited or absent for all other loci analysed to date. In
addition, the evidence of positive selection of SuAT1
sequences within the species is most likely to be due to
the evolution of two distinct groups of SuAT1 alleles
that show significant differences in amino acid sequence,
but maintain the predicted basic functional motifs. A
more radical hypothesis is that evolution of TashAT
family proteins has been driven by recognition of differences in chromatin targets and that these have evolved
to be subtly different in cattle or buffalo indigenous to
geographically distinct regions endemic for T. annulata.

Conclusions
The results of this study indicate that contrasting selection pressures have shaped the evolution of two gene
families encoding secretome proteins of T. annulata
and that these differences are likely to relate to the

Page 14 of 17

function of the encoded proteins. SVSP genes have
evolved to be divergent (or perform a function that has
limited requirement for amino acid conservation) and a
logical prediction is that SVSP proteins interact at an
undefined level with the bovine immune system. In contrast, TashHN shows a high level of constraint and may
function to alter a property of the host leukocyte that is
fundamental to infection by both T. annulata and T.
parva. Finally, TashAT genes are constrained within, but
not between, species and show clear evidence of divergence in the arrangement of conserved functional
motifs. These proteins are most likely to perform a species-specific function that allows adaptation to infection
and activation of the preferred host cell for each species
and, more controversially, host genetic backgrounds.

Methods
Genomic analysis

The published genomes of T. annulata and T. parva
were used as a primary resource for this study [7,23].
Orthologous relationships between genes were defined
in the initial comparative genomic analysis [7] using a
reciprocal BLASTing method and this information is
available via the T. annulata genome browser [19]. To
confirm these results within the gene families under
study, a combination of methods was used including
phylogenetic analysis. ClustalX [36] was used for aligning both nucleotide and amino acid sequences and
PHYLIP trees generated from alignments were viewed
using TreeViewX [37]. Additionally, chromosomal
sequences were directly compared using the Artemis
Comparison Tool [38] in order to investigate synteny.
Expressed sequence tag (EST) data were available for
the macroschizont, merozoite and piroplasm stages of T.
annulata (10,000 reads per stage), which mapped to a
total of 2,078 genes across the 3,793 coding sequences
in the genome [7]. The SignalP2.0 HMM algorithm was
utilised to identify proteins which enter the secretory
pathway on the basis of encoding a signal peptide [39]
and an improved version, SignalP3.0 [40], was used in
the analysis of SVSP genes. Trans-membrane protein
topology was determined using a hidden Markov model
algorithm [41] and GPI-anchored proteins were identified using proprietary software, DGPI v. 2.04 [42]. Proteins containing a nuclear localisation signal (NLS) were
identified using PredictNLS software, which compares a
query protein sequence with a set of known NLS, also
identifying DNA binding motifs [43]. PEST motifs are
defined as hydrophilic stretches of at least twelve amino
acids with a high local concentration of the amino acids
proline (P), glutamic acid (E), serine (S) and threonine
(T), the presence of which considerably reduces the
half-life of a protein [18,44]. These were identified using
the PESTfind algorithm http://emboss.bioinformatics.nl/

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

cgi-bin/emboss/pestfind. The Tribe-MCL protein clustering algorithm [45] was used to group T. annulata
proteins into putative families. A list of the top 30 T.
annulata family clusters can be found in Table S3 of
the online supplementary data that accompanied publication of the genome [7]. Codon usage was analysed
using the CodonW package http://codonw.sourceforge.
net/. This software calculates several standard indices of
codon usage and gene composition and can be used to
identify putatively optimal codons and it also implements correspondence analysis. Correspondence analysis
is a data ordination technique, which can determine the
major trends in the variation of the data and may be
used to distribute genes along continuous axes in accordance with identified trends. Such an approach is necessary to summarise and explain the complex variation
that may be encountered when analysing codon usage
among a large number of genes.
Allelic sequencing

The origin and type of T. annulata-infected material are
listed in Additional file 3. DNA was prepared from 300
μl of EDTA blood samples taken from four infected cattle from Turkey using the Wizard® Genomic DNA purification system (Promega). Ten Tunisian macroschizontinfected cell lines were cultured in 25 cm2 tissue culture
flasks using Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)
1640 medium, supplemented with 15% foetal calf serum.
Approximately 10 7 infected cells were centrifuged at
1500 g for five minutes and the cell pellet washed in
phosphate buffered saline (PBS), re-suspended in PBS
and DNA purified using a Qiagen QIAamp DNA Mini
Kit. Previous multi-locus genotyping demonstrated that
the Turkish field isolates represented multiple parasite
genotypes, while the Tunisian cell lines each represented
a single haploid genotype [46,47].
Forward and reverse PCR primers for each of six
genes (SVSP1, SVSP2, SVSP3, SVSP4, TashHN and
SuAT1) were designed in the signal peptide and 3’
downstream sequences respectively, with only two
exceptions: (i) the forward primer for SVSP1 was located
just upstream of the translation initiation codon and (ii)
an intragenic reverse primer was designed for SuAT1
for samples that would not amplify with the primer
located in the 3’ sequence. Primer design was based on
the published genome [7] and the oligonucleotide
sequences are listed in Additional file 5. PCR primers
flanking the sequence corresponding to the AT-hook
regions of TashAT2 and TashAT3 loci were also
designed (see Additional file 5).
An aliquot of each DNA preparation was PCR amplified in a total reaction volume of 20 μl under conditions
previously described [48], using a Techne TC-512 thermocycler with the following settings: 94°C for 2 minutes,
30 cycles of 94°C for 50 seconds, 50°C for 50 seconds

Page 15 of 17

and 65°C for 90 seconds, with a final extension period
of 15 minutes at 65°C. A mixture of Taq polymerase
and a proofreading polymerase (Pfu) at a ratio of 15:1
was used to improve the fidelity of the reaction and the
PCR products were subsequently cloned into the
sequencing vector pCR4®-TOPO® (Invitrogen). For each
gene, a number of colonies were selected and up to 20
μg of plasmid DNA was isolated from each culture
using a proprietary kit (Qiagen). Turkish blood preparations were known to contain multiple genotypes and
therefore eight colonies were selected for sequencing
each gene. For each Tunisian isolate, a single colony
was selected as each cell line was known to represent a
single genotype. 2 μg of air dried DNA was prepared for
use in each sequencing reaction, which was performed
by MWG Biotech, Germany. M13 universal and reverse
primer sites in the vector flanking sequence were used
to generate sequence reads to provide at least 2× coverage of every nucleotide. A number of allelic sequences
were determined for SVSP1 [Genbank: GU373065GU373088], SVSP2 [Genbank: GU373089-GU373111],
SVSP3 [Genbank: GU373112-GU373154], SVSP4 [Genbank: GU373155-GU373193], TashHN [Genbank:
GU373194-GU373219], SuAT1 [Genbank: GU373220GU373241], TashAT2 [Genbank: GU373242-GU373274]
and TashAT3 [Genbank: GU373056-GU373064].
DNA sequence polymorphism was evaluated using
DnaSP [49]. Fu and Li’s D and F tests [50] and Tajima’s
D test [51] were performed, as described, and the confidence intervals of these neutrality test statistics were
estimated by coalescence modelling. DNA sequence variation was measured within and between populations
using the McDonald-Kreitman test [52]. To test whether
the level of synonymous or non-synonymous polymorphisms deviated from the neutral prediction of
equal numbers, within T. annulata or between species,
Fisher’s exact test of significance was applied to the
results for each gene; a low p value reflecting a departure from neutrality. The ‘neutrality index’ odds ratio
was also calculated for each locus [53] to indicate if
there was an excess (ratio > 1) or deficiency (ratio < 1)
of non-synonymous substitutions within alleles from the
same species. This was used as a qualitative and quantitative indicator of the direction and degree of selection.
A maximum likelihood method was used to detect
amino acid sites under positive selection and to determine dNdS values across alleles [54] and this was performed using the HyPhy platform [55]. The dNdS ratio
was determined for each codon and where d N was
greater or less than d S , a p value was derived from a
two-tailed binomial distribution to assess the significance. Analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) was
performed using ‘Genalex6’ [56] in order to investigate
the distribution of genetic variation among allelic

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

sequences and to determine the level of population differentiation. Pair-wise estimates of genetic distance
among populations within each species were calculated
using FPT, the proportion of variance among populations relative to total variance.
Additional file 1: SVSP and TashAT genes selected for allelic
sequencing. A schematic representation of the eight genes chosen for
allelic sequencing
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1142-S1.PDF ]
Additional file 2: The SVSP family in T. annulata. Details of each SVSP
family member in the T. annulata genome including EST expression data,
bioinformatic motif predictions and information about orthologous
genes in T. parva
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1142-S2.PDF ]
Additional file 3: Parasite material. The type and origin of parasite
material used to prepare template DNA
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1142-S3.PDF ]
Additional file 4: Genes selected for allelic sequencing. Details of
each of the genes chosen for allelic sequencing including orthologous
genes in T. parva, interspecies dNdS values, EST expression data in T.
annulata and bioinformatic motif predictions
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1142-S4.PDF ]
Additional file 5: PCR and sequencing primers. Oligonucleotide
sequences for the PCR and sequencing primers used in this study
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1142-S5.PDF ]

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Wellcome Trust Animal Health in the
Developing World Grant entitled, ‘An integrated approach for the
development of sustainable methods to control tropical theileriosis’ [07582/
A/04/Z]. The Trust encouraged publication of this research in an open-access
journal for the benefit of the general research community. Support for
William Weir was provided by a Miller Scholarship from the University of
Glasgow Veterinary School.
Author details
1
Division of Veterinary Infection and Immunity, University of Glasgow,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Comparative Medicine, Bearsden
Road, Glasgow, Scotland, G61 1QH, UK. 2Department of Parasitology, Adnan
Menderes University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Batı Kampus, Işıklı,
Aydın, Turkey.
Authors’ contributions
WW participated in the design of the study, carried out the bulk of the
molecular work, performed the analyses and drafted the manuscript. TK
participated in sample collected and purification of genomic DNA. MB
carried out molecular work, amplifying and cloning alleles of two loci. AT
participated in the design and co-ordination of the study. BRS participated
in the design of the study and helped draft the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript
Received: 31 July 2009
Accepted: 18 January 2010 Published: 18 January 2010

Page 16 of 17

References
1. Shiels B, Langsley G, Weir W, Pain A, McKellar S, Dobbelaere D: Alteration
of host cell phenotype by Theileria annulata and Theileria parva: mining
for manipulators in the parasite genomes. Int J Parasitol 2006, 36:9-21.
2. Campbell JD, Spooner RL: Macrophages behaving badly: infected cells
and subversion of immune responses to Theileria annulata. Parasitol
Today 1999, 15:10-16.
3. Preston PM, Hall FR, Glass EJ, Campbell JD, Darghouth MA, Ahmed JS,
Shiels BR, Spooner RL, Jongejan F, Brown CG: Innate and adaptive
immune responses co-operate to protect cattle against Theileria
annulata. Parasitol Today 1999, 15:268-274.
4. Ilhan T, Williamson S, Kirvar E, Shiels B, Brown CG: Theileria annulata:
carrier state and immunity. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1998, 849:109-125.
5. Gharbi M, Sassi L, Dorchies P, Darghouth MA: Infection of calves with
Theileria annulata in Tunisia: Economic analysis and evaluation of the
potential benefit of vaccination. Vet Parasitol 2006, 137:231-241.
6. Preston PM, Darghouth M, Boulter NR, Hall FR, Tall R, Kirvar E, Brown CG: A
dual role for immunosuppressor mechanisms in infection with Theileria
annulata: well-regulated suppressor macrophages help in recovery from
infection; profound immunosuppression promotes non-healing disease.
Parasitol Res 2002, 88:522-534.
7. Pain A, Renauld H, Berriman M, Murphy L, Yeats CA, Weir W, Kerhornou A,
Aslett M, Bishop R, Bouchier C, et al: Genome of the host-cell
transforming parasite Theileria annulata compared with T. parva. Science
2005, 309:131-133.
8. Endo T, Ikeo K, Gojobori T: Large-scale search for genes on which positive
selection may operate. Mol Biol Evol 1996, 13:685-690.
9. Conway DJ, Polley SD: Measuring immune selection. Parasitology 2002,
125:S3-16.
10. Katzer F, McKellar S, Ben Miled L, d’Oliveira C, Shiels B: Selection for
antigenic diversity of Tams1, the major merozoite antigen of Theileria
annulata. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1998, 849:96-108.
11. Boulter N, Hall R: Immunity and vaccine development in the bovine
theilerioses. Adv Parasitol 2000, 44:41-97.
12. Katzer F, Carrington M, Knight P, Williamson S, Tait A, Morrison IW, Hall R:
Polymorphism of SPAG-1, a candidate antigen for inclusion in a sub-unit
vaccine against Theileria annulata. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1994, 67:1-10.
13. Shiels BR, McKellar S, Katzer F, Lyons K, Kinnaird J, Ward C, Wastling JM,
Swan D: A Theileria annulata DNA binding protein localized to the host
cell nucleus alters the phenotype of a bovine macrophage cell line.
Eukaryot Cell 2004, 3:495-505.
14. Swan DG, Stern R, McKellar S, Phillips K, Oura CA, Karagenc TI, Stadler L,
Shiels BR: Characterisation of a cluster of genes encoding Theileria
annulata AT hook DNA-binding proteins and evidence for localisation to
the host cell nucleus. J Cell Sci 2001, 114:2747-2754.
15. Weir W, Sunter J, Chaussepied M, Skilton R, Tait A, de Villiers EP, Bishop R,
Shiels B, Langsley G: Highly syntenic and yet divergent: a tale of two
Theilerias. Infect Genet Evol 2009, 9:453-461.
16. Oura CA, McKellar S, Swan DG, Okan E, Shiels BR: Infection of bovine cells
by the protozoan parasite Theileria annulata modulates expression of
the ISGylation system. Cell Microbiol 2006, 8:276-288.
17. Moreno S, Nurse P: Substrates for p34cdc2: in vivo veritas?. Cell 1990,
61:549-551.
18. Rechsteiner M, Rogers SW: PEST sequences and regulation by proteolysis.
Trends Biochem Sci 1996, 21:267-271.
19. The T. annulata genome browser. http://www.genedb.org/.
20. Schmuckli-Maurer J, Casanova C, Schmied S, Affentranger S, Parvanova I,
Kang’a S, Nene V, Katzer F, McKeever D, Muller J, et al: Expression analysis
of the Theileria parva subtelomere-encoded variable secreted protein
gene family. PLoS ONE 2009, 4:e4839.
21. Horn D: Codon usage suggests that translational selection has a major
impact on protein expression in trypanosomatids. BMC Genomics 2008,
9:2.
22. Swan DG, Phillips K, Tait A, Shiels BR: Evidence for localisation of a
Theileria parasite AT hook DNA-binding protein to the nucleus of
immortalised bovine host cells. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1999, 101:117-129.
23. Gardner MJ, Bishop R, Shah T, de Villiers EP, Carlton JM, Hall N, Ren Q,
Paulsen IT, Pain A, Berriman M, et al: Genome sequence of Theileria parva,
a bovine pathogen that transforms lymphocytes. Science 2005,
309:134-137.

Weir et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:42
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/42

24. Aravind L, Landsman D: AT-hook motifs identified in a wide variety of
DNA-binding proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26:4413-4421.
25. Ahmed JS, Mehlhorn H: Review: the cellular basis of the immunity to and
immunopathogenesis of tropical theileriosis. Parasitol Res 1999,
85:539-549.
26. Morrison WI, McKeever DJ: Immunology of infections with Theileria parva
in cattle. Chem Immunol 1998, 70:163-185.
27. Kubota R, Hanada K, Furukawa Y, Arimura K, Osame M, Gojobori T, Izumo S:
Genetic stability of human T lymphotropic virus type I despite antiviral
pressures by CTLs. J Immunol 2007, 178:5966-5972.
28. McKeever DJ: Bovine immunity - a driver for diversity in Theileria
parasites?. Trends Parasitol 2009, 25:269-276.
29. Donelson JE: Antigenic variation and the African trypanosome genome.
Acta Trop 2003, 85:391-404.
30. Barry AE, Leliwa-Sytek A, Tavul L, Imrie H, Migot-Nabias F, Brown SM,
McVean GA, Day KP: Population genomics of the immune evasion (var)
genes of Plasmodium falciparum. PLoS Pathog 2007, 3:e34.
31. Swan DG, Stadler L, Okan E, Hoffs M, Katzer F, Kinnaird J, McKellar S,
Shiels BR: TashHN, a Theileria annulata encoded protein transported to
the host nucleus displays an association with attenuation of parasite
differentiation. Cell Microbiol 2003, 5:947-956.
32. Yie J, Liang S, Merika M, Thanos D: Intra- and intermolecular cooperative
binding of high-mobility-group protein I(Y) to the beta-interferon
promoter. Mol Cell Biol 1997, 17:3649-3662.
33. Ahmed JS, Schnittger L, Mehlhorn H: Review: Theileria schizonts induce
fundamental alterations in their host cells. Parasitol Res 1999, 85:527-538.
34. Graham SP, Brown DJ, Vatansever Z, Waddington D, Taylor LH, Nichani AK,
Campbell JD, Adamson RE, Glass EJ, Spooner RL: Proinflammatory cytokine
expression by Theileria annulata infected cell lines correlates with the
pathology they cause in vivo. Vaccine 2001, 19:2932-2944.
35. Dobbelaere D, Heussler V: Transformation of leukocytes by Theileria parva
and T. annulata. Annu Rev Microbiol 1999, 53:1-42.
36. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:4876-4882.
37. Page RD: TreeView: an application to display phylogenetic trees on
personal computers. Comput Appl Biosci 1996, 12:357-358.
38. Carver TJ, Rutherford KM, Berriman M, Rajandream MA, Barrell BG, Parkhill J:
ACT: the Artemis Comparison Tool. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:3422-3423.
39. Nielsen H, Engelbrecht J, Brunak S, von Heijne G: Identification of
prokaryotic and eukaryotic signal peptides and prediction of their
cleavage sites. Protein Eng 1997, 10:1-6.
40. Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, von Heijne G, Brunak S: Improved prediction of
signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J Mol Biol 2004, 340:783-795.
41. Krogh A, Larsson B, von Heijne G, Sonnhammer EL: Predicting
transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model:
application to complete genomes. J Mol Biol 2001, 305:567-580.
42. von Heijne G: A new method for predicting signal sequence cleavage
sites. Nucleic Acids Res 1986, 14:4683-4690.
43. Cokol M, Nair R, Rost B: Finding nuclear localization signals. EMBO Rep
2000, 1:411-415.
44. Rogers S, Wells R, Rechsteiner M: Amino acid sequences common to
rapidly degraded proteins: the PEST hypothesis. Science 1986,
234:364-368.
45. Enright AJ, Van Dongen S, Ouzounis CA: An efficient algorithm for largescale detection of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:1575-1584.
46. Weir W: Genomic and population genetic studies on Theileria annulata.
PhD Thesis University of Glasgow 2006.
47. Weir W, Ben Miled L, Karagenc T, Katzer F, Darghouth M, Shiels B, Tait A:
Genetic exchange and sub-structuring in Theileria annulata populations.
Mol Biochem Parasitol 2007, 154:170-180.
48. MacLeod A, Tweedie A, Welburn SC, Maudlin I, Turner CM, Tait A:
Minisatellite marker analysis of Trypanosoma brucei: reconciliation of
clonal, panmictic, and epidemic population genetic structures. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:13442-13447.
49. Rozas J, Sanchez-DelBarrio JC, Messeguer X, Rozas R: DnaSP, DNA
polymorphism analyses by the coalescent and other methods.
Bioinformatics 2003, 19:2496-2497.
50. Fu YX, Li WH: Statistical tests of neutrality of mutations. Genetics 1993,
133:693-709.

Page 17 of 17

51. Tajima F: Statistical method for testing the neutral mutation hypothesis
by DNA polymorphism. Genetics 1989, 123:585-595.
52. McDonald JH, Kreitman M: Adaptive protein evolution at the Adh locus in
Drosophila. Nature 1991, 351:652-654.
53. Rand DM, Kann LM: Excess amino acid polymorphism in mitochondrial
DNA: contrasts among genes from Drosophila, mice, and humans. Mol
Biol Evol 1996, 13:735-748.
54. Pond SL, Frost SD: Not so different after all: a comparison of methods for
detecting amino acid sites under selection. Mol Biol Evol 2005,
22:1208-1222.
55. Pond SL, Frost SD, Muse SV: HyPhy: hypothesis testing using phylogenies.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21:676-679.
56. Peakall R, Smouse PE: GENALEX6: genetic analysis in Excel. Population
genetic software for teaching and research. Molecular Ecology Notes 2006,
6:288-295.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-42
Cite this article as: Weir et al.: Evolution and diversity of secretome
genes in the apicomplexan parasite Theileria annulata. BMC Genomics
2010 11:42.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
