<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Avipoxviruses: infection biology and their use as vaccine vectors</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2011, 8:49. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-49"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Simon C Weli"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

REVIEW

Open Access

Avipoxviruses: infection biology and their use as
vaccine vectors
Simon C Weli1*, Morten Tryland2,3

Abstract
Avipoxviruses (APVs) belong to the Chordopoxvirinae subfamily of the Poxviridae family. APVs are distributed
worldwide and cause disease in domestic, pet and wild birds of many species. APVs are transmitted by aerosols
and biting insects, particularly mosquitoes and arthropods and are usually named after the bird species from which
they were originally isolated. The virus species Fowlpox virus (FWPV) causes disease in poultry and associated
mortality is usually low, but in flocks under stress (other diseases, high production) mortality can reach up to 50%.
APVs are also major players in viral vaccine vector development for diseases in human and veterinary medicine.
Abortive infection in mammalian cells (no production of progeny viruses) and their ability to accommodate
multiple gene inserts are some of the characteristics that make APVs promising vaccine vectors. Although abortive
infection in mammalian cells conceivably represents a major vaccine bio-safety advantage, molecular mechanisms
restricting APVs to certain hosts are not yet fully understood. This review summarizes the current knowledge
relating to APVs, including classification, morphogenesis, host-virus interactions, diagnostics and disease, and also
highlights the use of APVs as recombinant vaccine vectors.
Introduction
Avipoxviruses (APVs) are among the largest and most
complex viruses known. APVs belong to the Chordopoxvirinae subfamily of the Poxviridae family [1]. They
infect and cause diseases in poultry, pet and wild birds
of many species which result in economic losses to the
poultry industry. Infections have also been reported in a
number of endangered species or species in captivebreeding recovery programs [2-4]. APVs are transmitted
via biting insects and aerosols and are usually named on
the basis of the bird species from which the virus was
first isolated and characterized [4]. The disease, which is
characterized by proliferative lesions of the skin and
diphtheric membranes of the respiratory tract, mouth
and oesophagus has been described in avian species
[4,5]. Although APV infections have been reported to
affect over 232 species in 23 orders of birds [6], our
knowledge of the molecular and biological characteristics of APV is largely restricted to fowlpox virus
(FWPV) and canarypox virus (CNPV) for which fullgenome sequences are available [7,8]. Currently, only
ten avipoxvirus species are listed under the genus by the
* Correspondence: simonweli@hotmail.com
1
National Veterinary Institute, Ullevålsveien 68, N-0106 Oslo, Norway
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses
(ICTV) [1]; Table 1. Thus, it is safe to assume that
many APVs have yet to be characterized. Recombinant
APVs have been evaluated for use as vaccine vector candidates against infectious diseases [7,9]. APV-vectored
vaccines are already in use in veterinary medicine
[10-14], and it is likely that such vaccines will also be
used against human diseases in the future. This fact
emphasizes the need to learn more about the molecular
characteristics of APVs, which underpins the development of safe APV-vectored recombinant vaccines. This
review summarizes current knowledge of APVs as avian
pathogens, including classification, morphogenesis, hostvirus interactions, diagnosis, as well as issues relevant to
their use as recombinant vaccine vectors.

Definition
Avipoxviruses are large, oval-shaped enveloped viruses
whose genome consists of double stranded DNA ranging
in size from 260 to 365 kb [8]. Unlike most other DNA
viruses, APVs replicate easily in the cytoplasm of infected
avian cells which results in a characteristic cytopathic
effect (CPE) 4 to 6 days post infection depending on the
virus isolate [4]. APVs also multiply on the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) of embryonated eggs, resulting in

© 2011 Weli and Tryland; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

Page 2 of 15

Table 1 Members of the genus Avipoxvirus and their host spectrum
Type species

Hosts

Latin names

Mode of infection

Disease confirmation

References

Fowlpox virus1a

Chicken

Gallus gallus

E, N

HP, CAM, EM, PCR/Seq

[7,21,27,113]

Canarypox virus1b

Canary (several species)

Serinus canarius

E, N

HP, CAM, EM, PCR/Seq

[8,17,114,115]

Juncopox virus1

Slate coloured Junco

Junco hyemalis

E

GE

[48]

Mynahpox virus1

Greater hill mynahs

Gracula religiosa

E, N

HP

[116]

Psittacinepox virus1

Parrot

Amazona finschi

HP,CAM

[62]

Quailpox virus1

Scaled quail

Callipepla squamata

N

HP, CAM, EM

[117]

Sparrowpox virus1

Sparrows

Passer domesticus

N

HP, CAM, EM, PCR/Seq

[16,18]

Starlingpox virus1
Turkeypox virus1

Regal starling
Turkey

Cosmopsarus regius
Meleagris gallopavo

N
N

HP, CAM, EM
HP, CAM, EM, PCR

[118]
[119]

Crowpox virus2

Hawaiian crows

Corvus hawaiiensis

N

HP, CAM

[4]

Peacockpox virus2

Peacock

Pavo cristatus

N

HP, CAM

[120]

Penguinpox virus2

Penguin

Spheniscus demersus

N

CAM

[59]

Pigeonpox virus

Pigeon

Palumbus palumbus

N

HP, CAM, EM, PCR/Seq

[16,18]

Flamingopox virus

Flamingo

Phoenicopterus roseus

N

PCR/Seq

[121]

Partridgepox virus

Partridges

Perdix perdix

N

HP, EM, PCR/Seq

[122]

Sea Eaglepox virus
Great titpox virus

Sea eagle
Great tit

Haliaeetus albicilla
Parus major

N
N

HP, PCR/Seq
HP, EM, PCR/Seq

[123]
[18,124]

Curlewpox virus

Curlew

Burhinus oedicnemus

N

HP, EM, PCR/Seq

[125]

Common buzzardpox virus

Common buzzard

Buteo buteo

N

HP, CAM, EM, PCR/Seq

[126]

American crowpox virus

American crow

Corvus brachyrhynchos

N

HP

[127]

Ostrichpox virus

Ostrich

Struthio camelus

N

HP, CAM

[128,129]

Owlpox virus

Owl

Strix varia

N

HP, CAM

[130]

Goosepox virus

Canada Goose

Branta canadensis

N

HP, CAM

[15]

Magpiepox virus
Mockingbirdpox virus

Magpie
Mockingbird

Pica pica
Mimus polyglottus

N
N

HP, CAM, EM
HP, EM

[16]
[131]

Mode of infection: N, natural; E, experimental; HP, histopathological; CAM, chorioallantoic membrane; EM, electron microscopy; PCR, polymerase chain reaction;
Seq, sequencing and GE, genetic and antigenic characterization.
1
Currently classified by ICTV as members that belong to genus Avipoxvirus.
2
Currently classified by ICTVas tentative members of genus Avipoxvirus.
a
Complete genome sequences exists: Fowlpox virus FP9 (plaque-purified tissue culture-adapted attenuated European virus; accession number: AJ581527) and
Fowlpox challenge virus (Animal Health Inspection Service Centre for Veterinary Biologicals, Ames Iowa; accession number: AF198100).
b
Complete genome sequence exists: Canarypox virus strain Wheatley (American Type Culture Collection; ATCC VR-111).

the formation of compact, proliferative pock lesions that
are sometimes focal or diffuse [15]. However, some isolates, especially from the host species great tit (Parus
major), have failed to multiply on CAM of chicken
embryos [16]. APVs are the etiologic agent of disease
characterized by skin lesions in both wild and domestic
birds [4,5]. Histologically and ultrastructurally, APVs
undergo morphologic stages that are similar to other
chordopoxviruses, including the formation of intracytoplasmic inclusions bodies, a characteristic which has
been observed in some epithelial and mononuclear cells
of permissive hosts. APV particles can be detected and
further characterized by use of transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) [17,18].

Classification
Great discoveries made in the mid-nineteenth century
facilitated major advances in pox virology. Based on the
report by Bollinger [5] on poxvirus infected cells in

chickens, and subsequent work by Fenner and Burnet
[19], APVs and other poxviruses were classified on the
basis of original host, growth and morphological characteristics in the CAM of embryonated eggs or cell cultures and on clinical manifestations in different diseases
of humans, birds and animals [20] rather than on
genetic identity, which may provide both rapid and reliable virus identification [21-23]. These criteria have
remained the basis for subsequent classification of APVs
despite development of new molecular tools that have
the capability of resolving the issue of species specificity
of APV.
Members of the genus Avipoxvirus belong to the subfamily Chordopoxvirinae which shares several biological
features with other poxviruses [7,8]. Currently, little is
known of the number of species within the genus.
While only ten strains have so far been identified and
classified Worldwide as APV [1], avian poxvirus infections have been reported to affect a wide range of bird

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

species [6]. These strains vary in virulence and host specificity, demonstrating an urgent need for further analyses and characterization of new isolates.

Structure
Avipoxviruses share several morphological, biochemical
and physiochemical features with other poxviruses.
Virus particles measure 270 × 350 nm and are composed of an electron dense, centrally located core and
two lateral bodies that are visible in fixed and stained
ultra-thin sections. In negative stained preparations,
such as phosphotungstic acid (PTA) the membrane displays an outer-coat composed of a random arrangement
of tubules [24]; Figure 1. APV particles have been
shown to be resistant to ether, but sensitive to chloroform treatment [25], although resistance to both chloroform and ether have been reported for pigeonpox virus
and two pigeonpox virus mutants [26].
Genome
Avipoxviruses have low G+C content (30 to 40%) and
consist of a single linear molecule of double-stranded
DNA of between 260-365 kb. The central region of the
genome is flanked by two identical inverted terminal
repeats (ITRs) which are covalently linked by hairpin
loops and contains several hundred closely spaced open
reading frames [7]. The central region contains about
90-106 homologous genes that are involve in basic replication mechanisms, including viral transcription and
RNA modification, viral DNA replication, and proteins

Figure 1 Negative stain EM of a characteristic FWPV-particle
propagated in baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells at 72 hour
post infection.

Page 3 of 15

involved in structure and assembly of intracellular
mature virions and extracellular enveloped virions [8].
In general, genes located in this region have common
molecular functions and are relatively conserved among
poxviruses [8]. This is in contrast to the more variable,
terminally located genes that have been shown to
encode a diverse array of proteins involved in host
range restriction [8].
Complete genomes of the two most studied APVs,
FWPV US (FP-challenge virus; Animal Health Inspection
Service Centre for Veterinary Biologicals, Ames Iowa,
USA), FWPV-FP9 (a plaque-purified tissue cultureadapted attenuated European virus) and a CNPV virulent
strain (Wheatley C93, American Type Culture Collection;
ATCC VR-111) have been sequenced [7,8,27]. Although
nucleotide and amino acids sequences for these two
viruses are known, the functions of some putative genes
and proteins remain to be fully assigned. Comparison of
the FP9 strain with FWPV US revealed 118 differences;
of which 71 genes were affected by deletion (26 of 1-9334
bp), insertion (15 of 1-108 bp), substitution, termination
or frame-shift [27]. FP9 strain is a derivative of European
FWPV HP1 which was obtained through over 400 passages in chicken embryo fibroblast (CEF). Analysis of
FWPV HP1 sequences at the loci in which differences
exist between FP9 and FWPV US show that 68 of 118
loci differ from the FWPV US, but were identical to FP9.
This thus indicate that more than half of the differences
between the two geographic FWPV lineages represented
differences between the parent virulent viruses FWPV
HP1 and FWPV US [27]. Further comparison of molecular data; show that FWPV and CNPV share high aminoacid identity, significant gene-sequence rearrangements,
deletions and insertions [8]. The CNPV genome is about
80-100 kbp larger than the FWPV genomes. Both FWPV
and CNPV express cellular gene homologues with immunomodulatory functions, which might be responsible for
their different virulence and host-range [8], but CNPV
shows a broader tissue tropism in permissive avian hosts
[17] than FWPV. CNPV has additional sequence of over
75 kbp, 39 genes lacking in FWPV homologues and
approximately 47% amino-acid divergence [8]. These
divergences are primarily found in the terminal nonconserved regions [7,8]. Genes located in the non
conserved regions are more prone to mutation and
recombination and are implicated in host range, immunomodulation and pathogenesis [28], and may be responsible in some aspects of cell and/or tissue tropism or
perform other cellular functions [8].
Virulence genes are generally of non-conserved nature
and influence the pathological profile of viruses in an
infected host. These genes are important in viral evolution and have been used in studies to provide insight
into how some poxviruses evolve strategies to ensure

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

their replication [29]. Many of these strategies can be
traced back to discoveries made with knockout (KO)
viruses, in which a targeted disruption of a specific viral
gene produced phenotypic changes reflective of the normal biological function of its protein product. Deletions
of some non-conserved genes have also resulted in conditional replication defects in specific cell types [30],
such as the demonstration of spontaneous deletion of
host range genes of vaccinia virus resulting in the compromised growth in the mammalian cell [31]. The K1L
and C7L genes of vaccinia virus have been shown to be
essential for completion of the replication cycle of vaccinia virus in human cells [32,33]. In a knockout experiment, vaccina virus was unable to complete its
replication cycle in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells,
since replication was aborted shortly after virus binding
and entry, at the stage of intermediate gene expression
[34]. But the insertion of another host range gene,
CHOhr from cowpox virus into vaccinia virus allowed
vaccinia virus to grow in CHO cells in which they are
normally restricted [35-37]. Through use of these techniques, we now have a better understanding of the biology of vaccinia and other poxviruses, including their
host range restriction. Although, some major advances
have been made in genome sequencing and in vitro
characterization of APVs [7,8,38,39], studies on APV
host range genes are scarce. A wide array of gene homologues with likely host range functions such as NK-cell
receptors, chemokines, serine protease inhibitors and
homologues of genes involved in apoptosis, cell growth,
tissue tropism and avian host range, have been identified
in APVs, which suggests significant viral adaptation in
the avian host [7]. Molecular knockout studies that target identification and further characterization of viral
genes involved in regulation of cell proliferation, chromatin remodelling, virulence and apoptosis, in different
APV-infected mammalian and avian cells are needed to
better understand the tissue tropism and host range
characteristics of APVs, including the abortive infection
in mammalian cells.

Host-virus interaction
Compared to other poxviruses, such as vaccinia virus,
mechanisms that account for APV pathogenesis is
poorly understood. APVs have evolved a variety of elegant mechanisms to deliver their genes and accessory
proteins into host cells. Like many other DNA viruses,
APV probably devotes much of its genes to allow it to
evade host immune responses. Such viral genes commonly encode proteins that are critical for the virus to
undergo molecular transformation that leads to successful membrane fusion, penetration and intracellular
transport. These includes genes that encodes proteins
which act on early innate pathways such as pathways

Page 4 of 15

involving interferon [40], pattern recognition receptors
as Toll-like receptor (TLR) [41], chemokines [42] and
cytokines [43], as well as pathways that act on subsequent adaptive responses [44,45]. The infection of a cell
by a virus is a complex process, during which the virus
must overcome several host factors restriction points
and the host immune response. Host protein interaction
networks and biochemical pathways are in most cases
altered by the viral proteins that free the virus from normal cellular controls and allow nucleotide metabolism in
cells that have shut down DNA synthesis [46]. Hence,
understanding viral protein functions and their interactions with host proteins is a prerequisite, not only to
understand the infection biology of the virus-host system in question, but also for the rational development
of target vaccines, based on specific antigens and possibly immunomodulatory factors, as well as antiviral
compounds.
Replication

Since the first isolation of APVs in cell culture, these
viruses have been recognized as highly host specific.
They are believed to replicate only in avian cells, notably
chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEF; American Type Culture Collection; ATCC, Rockville, Maryland, USA; CRL1590) [47]. CEF cells have a good split ratio compared
to other cell lines, and are thus useful for large-scale
propagation of virus, such as antigen production for vaccines or as a diagnostic tool. APVs have also been
shown to replicate in chicken embryo kidney, chicken
embryo dermis [48,49] and quail cell lines, such as QT35, although the presence of viable endogenous herpesvirus and Marek’s disease virus (MDV) in QT-35 cells,
limits their use for preparation of vaccines [4,50]. APV
have been isolated once from a mammal. In 1969, viable
FWPV was isolated from a terminally ill rhinoceros [51].
The isolate was identified as atypical FWPV, based on
pathological, virological and serological characteristics
[51]. Nelson (1941) [52] reported mild pathology in
mice following intranasal inoculation with FWPV, with
no virus replication. Recent studies have also shown
replication of APV in mammalian cell cultures, such as
embryonic bovine tracheal cells [53] and baby hamster
kidney cells [54] that are defined by the presence of
infectious viral particles and CPE. These studies raise
questions about the species specificity and mechanisms
that restrict these viruses to certain hosts, and challenge
the hypothesis that APV cannot undergo a full replication cycle in mammalian cells.
Morphogenesis

The cellular entry and exit of APV is complicated by the
existence of at least two distinct forms of virus that can
productively infect cells, namely the intracellular mature

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

virus (IMV) and the extracellular enveloped virus (EEV).
These two forms are surrounded by different lipid membranes and surface proteins that are yet to be fully
characterized.
After virus binding to cellular membranes, a fusion
step, which is generally poorly understood, results in the
release of the virion core into the cytoplasm of the cell
[39]. The released core, which contains the endogenous
RNA polymerase and transcription factors, initiates the
first wave of early viral gene transcription by synthesizing viral mRNA under the control of early viral promoters. This is followed by the uncoating stage, the release
of viral DNA into the cytoplasm where it serves as a
precursor for viral DNA replication as well as the source
of intermediate and late viral gene transcription. As a
late viral gene product accumulates, the virus undergoes
assembly and morphogenesis of infectious virus particles. During morphogenesis, APVs induce the formation
of inclusion bodies in the cytoplasm of infected cells
(Figure 2A and 2B). The inclusions, which may also be
termed viral factories, viroplasms, or viral replication
complexes, are generally believed to be the sites of
active viral replication and particle assembly within
infected cells [17]. One model for the function of viral
inclusion bodies is that they act to concentrate and
sequester proteins, nucleic acids, and other small molecules essential for viral processes.
In permissive cells, the first viral structures detectable by electron microscopy are the crescent-shaped
forms (Figure 3A), consisting of a membrane with spicules on the convex surface [39]. These structures
develop into non-infectious spherical immature viruses

Page 5 of 15

(IV) (Figure 3B) from which the intracellular mature
virus (IMV) is formed by a series of maturation steps
(Figure 3C). The IMV represents the majority of infectious progeny from each infected cell [17,39,55]. There
are three possible mechanisms by which poxviruses are
released from host cells depending on the strain of
virus, cell type and the post-infection time [54-56].
They can be released by cytolysis, in which case IMV
are released when the cell undergoes lysis as a result
of CPE at the advanced stage of infection. It can also
be released via virus-induced exocytosis. The third way
of release is by budding, in which case IMV migrates
out of the virus factory through the plasma membrane.
Budding is shown to be the main exit route for APV
[39] in contrast to the orthopoxviruses which exit by
exocytosis of intracellular enveloped virus (IEV) [57].
These exit processes all result in the acquisition of an
additional double membrane [39,55]. In non-permissive
African green monkey cells (CV-1, Vero) and in a
human cell line (MRC-5), there is a blockade of the
APV morphogenesis cycle. This occurs in steps following the formation of immature virus and is shown to
be devoid of an alteration in early gene expression
[47,58,59], indicating that this blockade may not be
associated with cell receptors.
Poxvirus tropism may not be dependent upon specific
cell surface receptors, but rather upon the ability of a
given cell to provide intracellular complementing factors
needed for productive virus replication, and on the ability of the specific virus to successfully manipulate intracellular signaling networks that regulate cellular antiviral
processes following virus entry [28]. APVs have large

Figure 2 A and B Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of FWPV-infected (A) bird skin tissue showing outer layers of epidermis,
with typical inclusion bodies (Bollinger bodies) in the dermis (bar = 20 μm) and (B) cells with characteristic intracytoplasmic inclusion
bodies containing viral particles (bar = 2 μm).

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 A, B and C Virion morphology of avipoxviruses in chicken embryo fibroblast cells (CEF). (A) Electron microscopy showing
crescent-shaped structures consisting of a membrane with spicules on the convex surface, (B) spherical non-infectious immature viruses (IV)
which give rise to formation of (C) intracellular mature virions (IMV) by a series of maturation steps.

genomes that would enable them to express unique collections of viral proteins that function as host range factors, which specifically target and manipulate host
signaling pathways to establish optimal cellular conditions for viral replication. However, in some cells, especially mammalian cells, APV replication is blocked. This
may be due to the ability of APV to specifically activate
signalling pathways or mediators, for example interferon
pathways, in those cells. The role of mediators and
immunopathology of APV is complex and not well
understood. However, considering the numerous steps
involved in APV morphogenesis, it is relevant to note
that these viruses induce several mediators that allow
them to survive and interact with the host cells. Some
potential mediators have been identified [7] and are
awaiting proper functional characterization. These molecules alone may not fully explain the events that have
been documented in mammalian cells that have supported the replication of APV [54]. Hence, identification
of new mediators that are up or down-regulated in
response to APV infected mammalian and avian cells
could help advance our knowledge of immune responses
against APV and the related immune-mediated pathology and cell tropism. It would be of vital importance to
investigate these characteristics further, especially for
the cell types that were recently shown to support APV
replication [53,54].

Pathogenicity
APV infections are associated with significant levels of
morbidity and mortality in domestic and wild bird populations [6,60]. Most of the investigations and reported
cases are based on single APV isolates, which makes it
difficult to address the pathogenicity of different APVs in
different bird species. Chickens are commonly used to

determine the pathogenicity of new isolates, but chickens
may not be the ideal host, since APVs from wild birds
may not multiply in chickens. In an attempt to identify
and characterize the pathogenicity of APVs, Tripathy and
others [4] found that wild isolates of Hawaiian crowpox
virus had a generally mild pathogenicity in domestic
chickens, characterized by relatively minor lesions of
short duration at the sites of inoculation, which were in
contrast to the general ability of FWPV strains to produce extensive proliferative lesions [4]. In another experimental study, two APV isolates obtained from
endangered Hawaiian wild birds, the Hawaiian Goose
(Branta sandvicensis) and the Palila (Loxioides bailleui),
were compared with FWPV in specific-pathogen-free
chickens. Immune responses were measured by ELISA
before and after immunization with Hawaiian APVs and
after challenge with FWPV. Both isolates from Hawaiian
birds developed only a localized lesion of short duration
at the site of inoculation in chickens and did not provide
protection against subsequent challenge with virulent
FWPV, in which severe lesions were observed. In contrast to high antibody response in chickens immunized
with FWPV, birds immunized with either of the two
Hawaiian isolates developed low to moderate antibody
responses against viral antigens [61]. Pathogenicity studies of APVs in parrots [62], turkeys, pigeons and canaries have also been reported. Canaries were highly
susceptible to CNPV, but showed resistance to turkeypox
virus, FWPV and pigeonpox virus [4,63,64]. A poxvirus
from a Canada goose (Branta canadensis) was transmissible to domestic goose, but not to chickens or domestic
ducks [15]. Pigeonpox virus produced mild infection in
chickens and turkeys, but was more pathogenic for
pigeons [62]. Poxvirus isolates from magpies (Pica pica)
and great tits (Parus major) did not infect young

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

chickens [16], however, poxvirus isolated from blackbacked magpie (Gymnorhina tibicen) produced lesions in
chickens. These studies were based on clinical manifestations in the chickens and suggest host specificity and
pathogenicity.
Despite the worldwide prevalence of APV infections,
experimental infection studies in birds using APVs have
centred on relatively few viral isolates. Analyses of variation have essentially focused on a FWPV strain termed the
prototype, while a minority of experimental studies have
been reported on CNPV, quailpox, juncopox, and pigeonpox virus isolates [4,48,49]. In fact, in the last twenty years,
approximately 50% of published studies on APVs have
been on the FWPV isolate directly (based on a PubMed
search on APVs). The important nature of APVs which
has been used successfully for vaccine development mandates that a larger pool of viral strains should be analyzed
both for consideration of pathogenesis and determination
of immune correlates of protection.
Antigenic and genetic variability among APVs

Our present understanding of the antigenic variation of
APVs has been based on a limited number of virus isolates in assays that includes complement-fixation, passive
hemagglutination, agar-gel precipitation, immunoperoxidase, virus neutralisation and immunofluorescence
[48,49,65]. In addition to the immunological assays, variation of APVs has also been addressed through genetic
assays, such as restriction enzyme analysis. Genomes of
FWPV and quailpox virus isolates were compared by
using BamHI, EcoRI, and HindIII endonucleases and distinct fragment patterns were observed between the isolates. The patterns of three quailpox virus isolates were
similar to each other with a high proportion of comigrating fragments. However, when immunogenic proteins of three FWPVs, two quailpox viruses, a juncopox
virus, and a pigeonpox virus isolates were examined by
immunoblotting, shared as well as unique antigens were
detected. The greatest disparity was observed between
quailpox virus and FWPV [48,49], indicating extensive
variation between the quailpox virus and FWPV, which
would predict differences in immunogenicity and antigenicity, including neutralization sensitivity. Nucleotide
sequence based studies for rapid identification of poxvirus species by PCR with specific primers and hybridisation are well established [21]. These approaches have
concentrated on single genes or portions of genes that
exhibits variations in their sequence and are important
for quick analysis of genetic variability [22].
Phylogeny

Understanding the phylogenetics of APVs is essential to
the understanding of host specificity and virulence, but
also to provide insights into the variation of different

Page 7 of 15

viruses. Although the complete genome sequences of
FWPV and CNPV are available [7,8], little is known
about APV phylogeny. This is probably because of the
difficulty in identifying pan-genus or species-specific PCR
primers that can be used to amplify different genes. The
most common PCR locus used until now has been the
P4b locus [21]. Recent phylogenetic studies of APV isolates based on this locus [22,23] indicated that most isolates clustered around either CNPV or FWPV, while
another study based on the same locus demonstrated a
third cluster, from psittacine birds [66]. Amano and coworkers [38] showed that the CNPV thymidine kinase
locus was highly diverged from that of FWPV. The extent
of this divergence was further illustrated by the fact that
the amino acid similarity between CNPV and FWPV
orthologue P4b was only 64.2% [23,38]. A recent study,
based on three different genes including the P4b, revealed
that penguinpox virus, isolated from lesions around the
eyes of African penguins (Spheniscus demersus), was
most closely related to turkeypox virus, ostrichpox virus
and pigeonpox virus [67].

Diseases
During avipox outbreaks, mortality can reach 80 to
100% in canaries and other finches. This is in contrast
to a generally lower mortality seen in chicken and turkey [60]. Transmission of virus can occur through a
break in the skin or, more commonly, when vectored by
biting insect such as mosquitoes and mites [68]. Aerosols generated from infected birds, or the ingestion of
contaminated food or water have also been implicated
as a source of transmission [69]. The disease is most
commonly characterized by cutaneous proliferative
lesions consisting of epithelial hyperplasia of the epidermis that resulting in proliferative, wart-like projections.
They are primarily confined to unfeathered parts of the
body, such as legs, feet, eyelids and the base of the beak
(Figure 4). Scars are usually visible after recovery and
healing of skin lesions. The mortality in wild birds is
usually low, depending on the number and size of the
proliferative lesions. However, if infection occurs in
feather-free areas of the skin, with secondary bacterial
infection, mortality may be high. The other and less
common form of APV infections is the diphtheritic or
wet form [70] which occurs as fibrino-necrotic and proliferative lesions in the mucosa of the digestive and
upper-respiratory tracts, and generally has a higher mortality than the cutaneous form [60]. In some instances,
birds display both cutaneous and diphtheritic forms and
in those cases, mortality rates are often higher compared
to the cutaneous form alone. Despite the variety of hosts
and virus strains, associated pathology remains the same
in infected domestic birds, although clinical signs vary
depending on the virulence of the virus, susceptibility of

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

Page 8 of 15

Figure 4 Avipoxvirus infection of a great tit (Parus major) (left) and a common magpie (Pica pica) (right). The protecting feather coat is
destroyed. Proliferative lesions and crust are seen, with secondary bacterial infection (Photo: Gunnar Holt, National Veterinary Institute, Oslo,
Norway).

the host, distribution and type of lesions [60]. There
exist a relationship between FWPV and the avian retrovirus, reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) (see section on
APVs and REV). However, the possible roles that simultaneous REV infection arising from the provirus integration into the FWPV genome might play in the
expression FWPV during disease outbreak remain unresolved. It is well known that REV infection leads to
immunosuppresion [71] in affected birds. Thus, it is
plausible to suggest that the presence of REV in FWPV
infection may exacerbate disease progression. In spite of
the fact that some mammalian cell lines seems to be
able to support the replication of APVs, there is no evidence that APVs have caused clinical disease in humans,
in contrast to what is known for other poxviruses, such
as several parapox and orthopoxviruses.

Diagnosis of APV infections
Clinical diagnosis

Clinical features of infected birds show multiple skin
lesions varying from papules to nodules. Gross lesions
in both the cutaneous and the diphtheritic forms, seen
on birds and during necropsy, are usually sufficient to
suspect APV infection [60]. However, these signs are
sometimes not sufficient for definitive diagnoses of APV
infection as other agents, such as papilloma virus, scaly
leg mites [72] and mycotoxins may produce similar
lesions in the skin [60], and conditions like candidiasis,
capillariasis and trichomoniasis may give lesions in the
oral cavity similar to the diphtheritic form of APV

infection [73]. It is therefore crucial to secure samples
and confirm the viral etiology of the condition.
Laboratory diagnosis
Histopathology and electron microscopy

Suspicion of clinical signs of APV infection can if possible
be supported by necropsy, especially if the oral cavities to
reveal the diphtheritic form. Further, histopathology on
tissue sections using the classic Wright’s Giemsa stain
may reveal typical large, solid or ring-like, eosinophilic
intracytoplasmic inclusions known as Bollinger bodies [5];
Figure 2A and 2B. Transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) may also reveal definite proof of APV infection,
demonstrating the typical APV particles within inclusion
bodies. APV identification may also be carried out by
negative staining electron microscopy with 2% phosphotungstic acid (PTA) on infected cells (Figure 1). This
method has typically been used by national reference or
research laboratories to identify APV [18].
Virus isolation

Demonstration of infectious virus by inoculation of
homogenates of clinical samples of typical APV skin
lesions onto the CAM of embryonated hen’s eggs is the
gold standard method for diagnosis of APV, although
some strains of APV do not grow readily on chicken
embryos [16]. Eggs are first swabbed with 70% alcohol
and a pore is made in an area over the air-cell and
another one on the other side of the egg to make a false
air sac and lower the CAM by negative pressure using a
rubber bulb. Inoculation of infectious samples by the

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

CAM route is performed with sterile disposable 1 mL
syringe with approximately 0.1-0.2 mL of inoculum.
Eggs are incubated at 37°C for 5 days with daily candling to check for embryo death. Pock lesions measuring
in size 0.5-1.5 mm are observed on the membrane
3-5 days after inoculation, depending on the virulence
of the virus [15,16]. Another method of isolation of
APV requires the excision and homogenization of clinical skin lesions and inoculation of a homogenate supernatant onto a permissive cell culture, such as CEF cells.
This results in the formation of CPE within 4-6 days
post inoculation, depending on the virus isolate and on
the multiplicity of infection (MOI) [4].
Molecular techniques for detection and characterization

APV are increasingly being detected and characterized by
PCR, Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP),
Southern blot hybridization, and cycle sequencing, directed at specific genes such as the 4b core protein gene
[22,23]. PCR allows for sensitive and specific detection of
viral nucleic acids and has been shown to increase the
diagnostic sensitivity for many viral pathogens when
compared to culture. A PCR amplicon sequence allows a
rapid search for homologous sequences in gene databases, to verify and identify the virus in question and to
address phylogenetic relationships. Detection by realtime PCR has been used to identify recombinant APV
from individual plaques [74]. This method eliminates the
need for amplification and hybridization from the transient dominant protocol and results in significant savings
of time at each round of plaque purification [74].
Serological assays

The conventional serological techniques of passive neutralization and agar-gel immunodiffusion are in continued global use for surveillance and disease control
efforts in domestic poultry species [75,76], despite the
availability of modern molecular and immunoassay techniques. The tests are time consuming, especially when
carried out with large numbers of sera, and sensitivity
appears to be low when compared with other detection
method, such as enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) [77]. ELISA has been described as a non-species
specific test approach for birds [78]. It is a faster and
easier method to detect antibodies against APV, particularly when large numbers of sera are to be tested. The
technique is also more sensitive than the neutralization
test [18,78]. ELISA protocols have also been developed
and used to test the efficacy of FWPV vaccines in commercial and wild bird species where agar-gel immunodiffusion is ineffective due to lack of precipitating
antibodies [61,79].

Prevention and treatment
The challenges of controlling APV disease in poultry are
driven by economics, and require strategies that keep

Page 9 of 15

cost low while maintaining treatment efficacy. Prophylaxis can be achieved by vaccination [39]. Doyle [80]
reported the use of live FWPV or Pigeonpox virus for
vaccination against APV infection. Since then, recombinant and live modified vaccines have been developed
and used to prevent APV infections in chickens,
pigeons, turkeys and quails [79,81,82]; Table 2. These
vaccines are very effective and have undoubtedly contributed immensely to the prevention of the disease in
commercial poultry farming [47,81]. Since different
APVs are isolated from a wide range of bird species and
since only a few isolates have been characterized, development of a taxon-specific vaccine, directed to all species, has been difficult. Thus, available vaccines are
often applied on the basis of experimentation, and more
knowledge of molecular biology, pathology and epidemiology of these viruses is necessary to develop vaccines
that effectively can protect a range of bird species. As in
most viral infections, there is no specific treatment for
avian poxvirus infections in birds [39,83]. Available
treatments include the use of iodine-glycerin application
on proliferating skin lesions to aid healing [84], antibiotics to control secondary bacterial infections and vitamin
A to aid healing [85].

Avipoxviruses and reticuloendotheliosis virus
(REV)
In the poultry industry, prophylactic measures against
FWPV are achieved primarily by vaccination with live
FWPV or antigenically similar pigeonpox virus strains
produced in CEF cells [60]. In the past two decades,
numerous outbreaks have been reported in vaccinated
flocks, suggesting that vaccines used against the disease
were not effective. In the United States a commercial
FWPV vaccine was shown to be contaminated with REV
and caused lymphoma among broiler chickens [86]. It
has been shown that sequences of REV have been integrated into the DNA of FWPV vaccines as well as in field
FWPV isolates [81,87-90]. The integration site is constant, while the size of the integrated fragments differs
between various isolates and strains. Two different types
of integrated sequences are reported; long terminal
repeats (LTRs) with size of approximately 200 to 600 bp
and the near-full-length REV provirus of about 800 bp
[87,90,91]. Most vaccine strains carry only an LTR
remnant while most FWPV field isolates carry the nearfull-length provirus. Singh and others [81], however,
detected REV LTRs of various lengths in the genome of
two commercial FWPV vaccine strains and four field isolates, while several studies have shown that the source of
REV infection was REV-contaminated FWPV [86,92-94]
and herpesvirus of turkeys vaccines [92,94-97]. Reticuloendotheliosis is a tumorigenic and immunosupressive
disease. REV strains have been reported to cause diseases

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

Page 10 of 15

Table 2 Avipoxvirus vector-based vaccines licensed for commercial veterinary use
Recombinant viral vector

Inserts Targeted Pathogen

Species

Distributor

Country

ALVAC

G

Cats

Merial, Inc.

USA, Canada

[109]

ALVAC

HA and Canine distemper virus
F
PrM-E
West-Nile virus

Dogs,
ferrets
Horses

Merial, Inc.

[132]

Merial, Inc.

USA, Argentina, Brazil,
Colombia, Canada, Uruguay
USA, Canada

Env,
Gag/
pol
H5 HA

Feline leukaemia virus

Cats

Merial, Inc.

Europe, USA, Canada

[135-137]

Avian influenza virus

Chickens Merial, Inc.

USA, Canada

[110]

ALVAC (plus tetanus toxoid
and Carbopol adjuvant)

HA

Equine influenza virus

Horses

Europe, USA

[111]

FWPV

HN
and F
LT+AE

Newcastle disease virus

Chickens Biomune

USA

[13,138]

Chickens Biomune Co.
(Lenexa, KS, USA)
Chickens Biomune Co.

USA

[139]

USA

[140]

ALVAC
ALVAC

FWPV

FWPV- Laryngotracheitis
Vaccine
FWPV- Mycoplasma
gallisepticum Vaccine

Rabies virus

Infectious Laryngotracheitis
virus
MG+AE Avian Encephalomyelitis and
Mycoplasma gallisepticum

Merial, Inc.

References

[133,134]

Note: HA from influenza virus H5; HA, hemagglutinin; HN, haemagglutinin-neuraminidase protein; ALVAC, attenuated canarypox virus; FWPV, fowlpox virus; F,
fusion protein; G, glycoprotein G; Env, envelope glycoprotein; Gag, group specific antigen; Pro, protease; prM-E, pre-membrane and envelope proteins; MG+AE,
Mycoplasma gallisepticum + Avian Encephalomyelitis; LT+AE, Laryngotracheitis virus+Avian Encephalomyelitis.

characterized by chronic lymphoma, non-neoplastic
lesions and a runting-stunting syndrome in chickens, turkeys, and quails [98,99]. REV are group of avian retroviruses and representatives include the defective REV-T
and the non-defective REV-A, spleen necrosis virus
(SNV), duck infectious anemia virus, and chick syncytial
virus (CSV) [98]. The presence of REV in FWPV vaccines
and the failure of currently used FWPV vaccines to evoke
high level immunological protection against field challenge of FWPVs are of major concern to the poultry
industry [100], which emphasizes the need for research
into alternative vaccines.

Avipoxviruses as vaccine vectors
In 1796 Edward Jenner [101] published his landmark
findings that vaccination of humans with cowpox virus
could prevent infection with variola virus, the causative
agent of smallpox [101,102]. This traditional vaccine
technology, based on live viruses and immunological
cross protection, has given rise to a wide range of effective vaccines against a wide variety of infectious agents,
both in veterinary and human medicine. However, the
emergence of new deadly human pathogens and cancers,
have proven less amenable to the application of traditional vaccine platforms, indicating the need for new
approaches. The use of a live virus vector represent an
attractive way to deliver and present vaccine antigens
that may offer advantages over traditional platforms, by
improving the quality and strength of the immune
response, such as in the case of HIV-1 where two different strains of vaccinia virus have been used as vectors.
The NYVAC vector has been shown to induce the CD4
+
T cell-dominant response, whereas modified vaccinia

virus Ankara (MVA) induces a stronger CD8 + T cell
response with accompanying CD4+ T cell responses that
are required for protection [103]. Although this assertion remains unproven (there are to date no virally vectored vaccines licensed for human use), virally vectored
vaccines offer an avenue of possibilities, either as homologous regimens, or as heterologous (prime-boost) regimens in which different serotypes of a given vector,
different vectors or vectors and traditional technologies
such as recombinant protein in adjuvant are administered sequentially.
Currently, representatives of a wide range of virus
families are under intensive development as vaccine vectors for human or veterinary use. Of these, FWPV and
CNPV appear to be of great interest as vectors, and
some veterinary APV-vectored vaccines are already
licensed and in commercial use in North America,
South America and Europe (Table 2). The most important characteristics of APVs as vaccine vectors are that
unlike most other DNA viruses, APV replicate in the
cytoplasm of the infected cell and enzymatic functions
used for transcription and replication are provided by
the virus itself. This has several consequences regarding
the use of these viruses as vaccine vectors. For example,
APV promoters must be used for efficient transcription
of recombinant genes and as APV transcripts are not
spliced, genes cloned into APV vectors cannot contain
introns [70,104]. Other reasons include (1) their ability
to accommodate and effectively express large amounts
of foreign DNA or multiple genes that encode antigens
[47], (2) their inability to conduct a full replication cycle
in non-avian species [105-107], (3) antisera against
orthopoxviruses do not neutralize APV and thus, prior

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

Page 11 of 15

exposure to vaccinia virus (i.e., vaccination against
smallpox) and exposure to other orthopoxviruses such
as cowpox virus does not impact the immunogenicity of
FWPV and CNPV vectors, and (4) the fact that FWPV
and CNPV do not elicit high levels of neutralizing antibodies, which means that their vectors can be used multiple times without the diminished potency usually seen
with repeated use of vaccinia virus vectors. This attribute is of crucial importance for a therapeutic vaccine,
requiring repeated booster shots [108].
APV-vectored vaccines have been used as vaccines
against several animal infections including West Nile
virus (WNV), canine distemper virus, feline leukemia
virus, rabies virus, and equine influenza virus [109];
Table 2. Notably among them is the Trovac AI H5, a
recombinant FWPV that express the H5 antigen of avian
influenza virus. This product has had a conditional
license for emergency use for chickens in the United
States since 1998 and has been widely used in Central
America, with over 2 billion doses administered [110].
ALVAC vectored vaccines have recently been registered
for veterinary use in the European Union (Proteq-Flu)
[111] and the United States (Recombitek). The equine
influenza virus vaccine with CNPV vector expresses the
hemagglutinin genes of the H3N8 Newmarket and Kentucky strains and contains a polymer adjuvant (Carbopol;
Merial Ltd.). With the induction of both cell-mediated
and humoral immunity, it is claimed that the vaccine
produced sterile immunity 2 weeks after the second of
two doses. The new vaccine is also designed to protect
horses against the highly virulent N/5/03 American strain
of equine influenza virus and to prevent the virus from
spreading through the elimination of viral shedding.
Despite these notable advances in APV-vectored vaccine development, the list of licensed viral vectored vaccines for human medicine is short, with only a few
vaccines that have entered clinical trials [112]; Table 3.

This may be in part owing to stringent safety requirements that must be met for viruses, that in their natural
state have the potential to be human pathogens, to be
used as viral vaccine vectors that may replicate in vivo
in a manner similar to their wild-type parental viruses.
Another reason may be fear of risk of spontaneous
recombination between virus vectors and naturally
occurring viral relatives in the ecosystems in which the
vaccine is used. Even if APVs are not generally expected
to replicate in mammals, the vaccine vectors may reach
bird populations via animal populations. It is also possible that the vector, through spontaneous recombination
and mutation events, may restore its replication competence. To cater for this, the aim during design and
development of a virus vector is always to introduce at
least two gene deletions crucial for viral to undergo a
full replication cycle to assure a very low probability
that replication competence could be restored. To our
knowledge, such reversions have not been identified in
clinical trials of APV-vectored vaccines. In addition to
concerns regarding reversion or recombination, another
safety signal was recently identified in an in vitro experiment that showed APV replication in cell clones derived
from embryonic bovine trachea [53] and Syrian baby
hamster kidney (BHK) cells. In this experiment, infectious IMV was observed; indicating complete virus replication had taken place [54]. These findings are in
contrast to the general dogma that APVs are restricted
to infection of cells of avian origin, and are an indication
that there is still more to learn about the replication
mechanisms and virus-host interactions of these viruses,
including evasion of immune responses, cell tropism
and host range mechanisms.

Conclusions
APVs cause disease of economical importance for the
poultry industry, and also in pet and wild birds. Thus,

Table 3 Avipoxvirus vector based vaccines and prime-boost immunization regimes in clinical development for
human use
Recombinant viral vector

Targeted
pathogen/
disease

Inserts

ALVAC containing the gene
encoding HIV-1 gp160, and
protein gp120

HIV-1

ALVAC-HIV (vCP1452) and LIPO5+vCP1452

HIV-1

Developer/Sponsors

Clinical
phase

References

gp160 and gp120 ALVAC-HIV vCP1521 prime
and AIDSVAX-gp120 subtype
B/E boost

U.S. Army Medical
Research and Materiel
Command

III

[141]

LIPO-5

ALVAC-HIV (vCP1452) LIPO-5

NIH

I/II

[142]

VACV and ALVAC or FWPV with Cancer
or without combination therapy

CEA
(pancarcinoma)

TRICOM vectors co-express
B7.1, ICAM1 and LFA3

NIH

I/II

[143]

FWPV (FP9)

Circumsporozoite
(CSP) protein

Attenuated FP9 and
Circumsporozoite (CSP)
protein

Gates Malaria
Partnership

I

[144]

Malaria

Vaccine details

HIV-1, human immunodeficiency virus 1; ALVAC, attenuated canarypox virus; gp160, glycoprotein 160; gp120, glycoprotein 120; VACV, vaccinia virus; FWPV,
fowlpox virus; CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen; TRICOM, triad of costimulatory molecules; ICAM1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1; LFA3, lymphocyte functionassociated antigen 3; LIPO-5, Lipopeptide 5; CSP, circumsporozoite protein; FP9, attenuated fowlpox virus 9; NIH, US National Institutes of Health.

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

prophylactic measures, such as vaccination, will always be
required, and there is a need for more efficient and safe
vaccines. One promising approach is the use of APVs as
vectors for recombinant vaccines, increasing the efficacy
and avoiding the potential contamination with REV and
other agents. Many recombinant APV constructs are
already licensed for use in veterinary medicine, and a
range of vaccine candidates are currently being tested for
use in vaccines against numerous infectious diseases in
animals and man. Thus, it is likely that recombinant
APV-vectored vaccines in the near future will also be
used against human diseases. APVs have many advantages as vaccine vectors, including a large genome which
allows for the inclusion of many heterologous genes,
such as genes coding for antigens, cytokines and other
immuno-modulating factors. The major safety argument
for using APVs rather than vaccinia virus or other mammalian viruses as vectors, is that APVs are not zoonotic
and are not able to conduct a full replication cycle in
mammals. However, it was recently shown that FWPV
was able to replicate and produce progeny virions in
some established mammalian cell lines. This illustrates
the fact that general knowledge of APVs is scarce.
Indeed, only a few isolates have been characterized and
classified. New molecular tools have led to a greater resolution of factors and mechanisms that restrict viruses to
certain hosts, for example HIV and SARS. Mechanisms
of host restriction, pathogenicity, host immunity and
viral immune evasion strategies are of crucial importance
regarding use of APVs as vectors in multispecies-targeted
vaccines. A good understanding of the molecular properties of APVs underpins the development of safe APVvectored vaccines.
Abbreviations
ALVAC: attenuated canarypox virus CNPV; APVs: Avipoxviruses; ATCC:
American Type Culture Collection; BHK: Baby hamster kidney; CAM:
chorioallantoic membrane; CEA: carcinoembryonic antigen; CEF: chicken
embryo fibroblast; CHO: Chinese hamster ovary; CPE: cytopathic effect; CSP:
circumsporozoite protein; EEV: extracellular enveloped virus; ELISA: enzyme
linked immunosorbent assay; Env: envelope glycoprotein; F: fusion protein;
FP9: attenuated fowlpox virus 9; FWPV: fowlpox virus; G: glycoprotein G; Gag:
group specific antigen; gp120: glycoprotein 120; gp160: glycoprotein 160;
HA: hemagglutinin; HA5: Hemagglutinin from influenza virus H5; HIV-1:
human immunodeficiency virus 1; HN: haemagglutinin-neuraminidase
protein; ICAM1: intercellular adhesion molecule 1; IEV: intracellular enveloped
virus; IMV: intracellular mature virus; ITRs: inverted terminal repeats; IV:
immature virus; LFA3: lymphocyte function-associated antigen 3; LIPO-5:
Lipopeptide 5; MDV: Marek’s disease virus; MOI: multiplication of infection;
NIH: US National Institutes of Health; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; prM-E:
pre-membrane and envelope proteins; Pro: protease; PTA: phosphotungstic
acid; REV: Reticuloendotheliosis virus; RFLP: restriction fragment length
polymorphism; TEM: transmission electron microscopy; TLR: Toll-like receptor;
TRICOM: triad of costimulatory molecules; VACV: vaccinia virus; WNV: West
Nile virus;
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Veterinary Institute, Oslo, Norway grant
for the Strategic institute program #1869071. We are grateful to Gunnar Holt,

Page 12 of 15

National Veterinary Institute, Oslo, for letting us use the pictures of clinical
avipoxvirus cases and to Duncan Colquhoun for reviewing the manuscript.
Author details
National Veterinary Institute, Ullevålsveien 68, N-0106 Oslo, Norway. 2Section
of Arctic Veterinary Medicine, Department of Food Safety and Infection
Biology, Norwegian School of Veterinary Science, Stakkevollveien 23, N-9010
Tromsø, Norway. 3GenØk-Centre for Bio-safety, The Science Park, Breivika, PO
Box 6418, N-9294 Tromsø, Norway.

1

Authors’ contributions
SCW and MT contributed equally in drafting and reviewing the manuscript.
All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 9 November 2010 Accepted: 3 February 2011
Published: 3 February 2011
References
1. Fauquet CM, Mayo MA, Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball LA, Virus Taxonomy:
VIIIth Report of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses”.
Elsevier Academic Press; 2005.
2. Bohls RL, Linares JA, Gross SL, Ferro PJ, Silvy NJ, Collisson EW: Phylogenetic
analyses indicate little variation among reticuloendotheliosis viruses
infecting avian species, including the endangered Attwater’s prairie
chicken. Virus Res 2006, 119:187-94.
3. Bailey TA, Silvanose C, Manvell R, Gough RE, Kinne J, Combreau O,
Launay F: Medical dilemmas associated with rehabilitating confiscated
houbara bustards (Chlamydotis undulata macqueenii) after avian pox
and paramyxovirus type 1 infection. J Wildl Dis 2002, 38:518-32.
4. Tripathy DN, Schnitzlein WM, Morris PJ, Janssen DL, Zuba JK, Massey G,
Atkinson CT: Characterization of poxviruses from forest birds in Hawaii.
J Wildl Dis 2000, 36:225-30.
5. Bollinger O: Ueber Epithelioma contagiosum beim havshuhn und die
Sogenannten pocken des Geflugels. Archive fur pathologische Anatomie
und Physiologie und fur klinishe medizin 1873, 58:349-361.
6. Bolte AL, Meurer J, Kaleta EF: Avian host spectrum of avipoxviruses. Avian
Pathol 1999, 28:415-432.
7. Afonso CL, Tulman ER, Lu Z, Zsak L, Kutish GF, Rock DL: The genome of
fowlpox virus. J Virol 2000, 74:3815-3831.
8. Tulman ER, Afonso CL, Lu Z, Zsak L, Kutish GF, Rock DL: The genome of
canarypox virus. J Virol 2004, 78:353-66.
9. Boyle DB: Genus Avipoxvirus. In Poxviruses. Edited by: Mercer AA, Schmidt
A, Weber O. Birkhauser Verlag, Basel; 2007:217-251.
10. Binns MM, Avery R: Developing novel vaccines. Poultry International 1986,
28:12-14.
11. Binns MM, Boursnell MEG, Tomley FM, Mockett APA, Cavanagh D,
Brown TDK: Prospect for a novel genetically engineered vaccine against
infectious bronchitis. Israeli J Vet Med 1986, 42:124-127.
12. Boyle DB, Coupar BE: Construction of recombinant fowlpox viruses as
vectors for poultry vaccines. Virus Res 1988, 10:343-56.
13. Taylor J, Weinberg R, Kawaoka Y, Webster RG, Paoletti E: Protective
immunity against avian influenza induced by a fowlpox virus
recombinant. Vaccine 1988, 6:504-8.
14. Beard CW, Schnitzlein WM, Tripathy DN: Protection of chickens against
highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (H5N2) by recombinant fowlpox
viruses. Avian Dis 1991, 35:356-9.
15. Cox WR: Avian pox infection in a Canada goose (Branta canadensis).
J Wildl Dis 1980, 16:623-626.
16. Holt G, Krogsrud J: Pox in wild birds. Acta Vet Scand 1973, 14:201-203.
17. Sadasiv EC, Chang PW, Gulka G: Morphogenesis of canary poxvirus and its
entrance into inclusion bodies. Am J Vet Res 1985, 46:529-35, 1985.
18. Weli SC, Okeke MI, Tryland M, Nilssen O, Traavik T: Characterization of
avipoxviruses from wild birds in Norway. Can J Vet Res 2004,
68:140-5.
19. Fenner F, Burnet FM: A short description of the poxvirus group (vaccinia
and related viruses). Virology 1957, 4:305-314, 1957.
20. Fenner F: Adventures with poxviruses of vertebrates. FEMS Microbiology
Reviews 2000, 24:123-133.

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

21. Huw Lee L, Hwa Lee K: Application of the polymerase chain reaction for
the diagnosis of fowl poxvirus infection. J Virol Methods 1997, 63:113-9.
22. Luschow D, Hoffmann T, Hafez HM: Differentiation of avian poxvirus
strains on the basis of nucleotide sequences of 4b gene fragment. Avian
Dis 2004, 48:453-462.
23. Weli SC, Traavik T, Tryland M, Coucheron DH, Nilssen O: Analysis and
comparison of the 4b core protein gene of avipoxviruses from wild
birds: evidence for interspecies spatial phylogenetic variation. Arch Virol
2004, 149:2035-2046.
24. Carter JKY, Cherville NF: Isolation of surface tubules of fowlpoxvirus. Avian
Dis 1981, 25:454-462.
25. Andrews C, Pereira HG: Virus vertebrates. Wildy publishing Tindall, London,
4 1978, 356-389, 1978.
26. Tantwai HH, Al Falluji MM, Shony MO: Heat-selected mutants of pigeon
poxvirus. Acta Virol 1979, 23:249-252.
27. Laidlaw SM, Skinner MA: Comparison of the genome sequence of FP9, an
attenuated, tissue culture-adapted European strain of Fowlpox virus,
with those of virulent American and European viruses. J Gen Virol 2004,
85:305-22.
28. Seet BT, Johnston JB, Brunetti CR, Barrett JW, Everett H, Cameron C,
Sypula J, Nazarian SH, Lucas A, McFadden G: Poxviruses and immune
evasion. Annu Rev Immunol 2003, 21:377-423.
29. Johnston JB, McFadden G: Technical knockout: understanding poxvirus
pathogenesis by selectively deleting viral immunomodulatory genes. Cell
Microbiol 2004, 9:695-705.
30. Perkus ME, Goebel SJ, Davis SW, Johnson GP, Limbach K, Norton EK,
Paoletti E: Vaccinia virus host range genes. Virology 1990, 179:276-286.
31. Drillien R, Spehner D, Kirn A: Host range restriction of vaccinia virus in
Chinese hamster ovary cells: relationship to shutoff of protein synthesis.
J Virol 1978, 28:843-850.
32. Gillard S, Spehner D, Drillien R, Kim A: Localization and sequence of a
vaccinia virus gene required for multiplication in human cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1986, 83:5573-5577.
33. Gillard S, Spehner D, Drillien R: Mapping of a vaccinia host range
sequence by insertion into the viral thymidine kinase gene. J Virol 1985,
53:316-318.
34. Ramsey-Ewing A, Moss B: Apoptosis induced by a postbinding step of
vaccinia virus entry into Chinese hamster ovary cells. Virology 1998,
242:138-149.
35. Hsiao JC, Chung CS, Drillien R, Chang W: The cowpox virus host range
gene, CP77, affects phosphorylation of eIF2 and vaccinia viral translation
in apoptotic HeLa cells. Virology 2004, 329:99-212.
36. Oguiura N, Spehner D, Drillien R: Detection of a protein encoded by the
vaccinia virus C7L open reading frame and study of its effect on virus
multiplication in different cell lines. J Gen Virol 1993, 74:1409-1413.
37. Spehner D, Gillard S, Drillien R, Kirn A: A cowpox virus gene required for
multiplication in Chinese hamster ovary cells. J Virol 1998, 62:1297-1304.
38. Amano H, Morikawa S, Shimizu H, Shoji I, Kurosawa D, Matsuura Y,
Miyamura T, Ueda Y: Identification of the canarypox virus thymidine
kinase gene and insertion of foreign genes. Virology 1999, 256:280-290.
39. Boulanger D, Smith T, Skinner MA: Morphogenesis and release of fowlpox
virus. J Gen Virol 2000, 81:675-87.
40. Mann BA, Huang JH, Li P, Chang HC, Slee RB, O’Sullivan A, Anita M, Yeh N,
Klemsz MJ, Brutkiewicz RR, Blum JS, Kaplan MH: Vaccinia virus blocks
Stat1-dependent and Stat1-independent gene expression induced by
type I and type II interferons. J Interferon Cytokine Res 2008, 28:367-80.
41. Bowie AG, Unterholzner L: Viral evasion and subversion of patternrecognition receptor signalling. Nature Reviews Immunology 2008,
8:911-922.
42. Alcami A: New insights into the subversion of the chemokine system by
poxviruses. Eur J Immunol 2007, 37:880-3.
43. Alcamí A, Smith GL: A soluble receptor for interleukin-1 beta encoded by
vaccinia virus: a novel mechanism of virus modulation of the host
response to infection. Cell 1992, 71:153-67.
44. Dasgupta A, Hammarlund E, Slifka MK, Früh K: Cowpox Virus Evades CTL
Recognition and Inhibits the Intracellular Transport of MHC Class I
Molecules. The Journal of Immunology 2007, 178:1654-1661.
45. Antoniou AN, Powis SJ: Pathogen evasion strategies for the major
histocompatibility complex class I assembly pathway. Immunology 2008,
124:1-12.

Page 13 of 15

46. Boehmer PE, Lehman IR: Herpes simplex virus DNA replication. Annu Rev
Biochem 1997, 66:347-84.
47. Paoletti E: Application of pox virus vectors: an update. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1996, 93:11349-11353.
48. Ghildyal N, Schnitzlein WM, Tripathy DN: Genetic and antigenic
differences between fowl pox and quail pox viruses. Arch Virol 1989,
106:85-92.
49. Schnitzlein WM, Ghildyal N, Tripathy DN: A rapid method for identifying
the thymidine kinase genes of avipoxviruses. J Virol Methods 1988,
20:341-352.
50. Yamaguchi T, Kaplan SL, Wakenell P, Schat KA: Transactivation of latent
Merak’s disease herpesvirus gene in QT35, a quail fibroblast cell line, by
herpesvirus of turkeys. J Virol 2000, 74:10176-10186.
51. Mayr A, Mahnel H: Characterization of a fowlpox virus isolated from a
rhinoceros. Arch Gesamte Virusforsch 1970, 31:51-60.
52. Nelson JB: The behaviour of poxviruses in respiratory tract: IV. The nasal
instillation of fowlpoxvirus in chickens and in mice. J Exp Med 1941,
31:203-12.
53. Sainova IV, Kril AI, Simeonov KB, Popova TP, Ivanov IG: Investigation of the
morphology of cell clones, derived from the mammalian EBTr cell line
and their susceptibility to vaccine avian poxvirus strains FK and Dessau.
J Virol Methods 2005, 124:37-40.
54. Weli SC, Nilssen O, Traavik T: Avipoxvirus multiplication in a mammalian
cell line. Virus Res 2005, 109:39-49.
55. Hatano Y, Yoshida M, Uno F, Yoshida S, Osafune N, Ono K, Yamada M, Nii S:
Budding of fowlpox and pigeonpox viruses at the surface of infected
cells. J Electron Microsc (Tokyo) 2001, 50:113-24.
56. Weli SC, Nilssen Ø, Traavik T: Morphogenesis of fowlpox virus in a baby
hamster kidney cell line. Med Electron Microsc 2004, 37:225-235.
57. Smith GL, Law M: The exit of vaccinia virus from infected cells. Virus Res
2004, 106:189-97.
58. Somogyi P, Frazier J, Skinner MA: Fowlpox virus host range restriction:
gene expression, DNA replication, and morphogenesis in non-permissive
mammalian cells. Virology 1993, 197:439-444.
59. Stannard LM, Marais D, Kow D, Dumbell KR: Evidence for incomplete
replication of a penguin poxvirus in cells of mammalian origin. J Gen
Virol 1998, 79:1637-46.
60. Tripathy DN, Reed WM: Poxvirus. In Diseases of Poultry. Edited by: Saif YM,
Barnes HJ, Glisson JR, Fadly AM, McDougald LR, Swayne DE. Iowa State
University Press, Ames, IA; 2003:253-269.
61. Kim T, Tripathy DN: Evaluation of pathogenicity of avian poxvirus isolates
from endangered Hawaiian wild birds in chickens. Avian Dis 2006,
50:288-91.
62. Boosinger TR, Winterfield RW, Feldman DS, Dhillon AS: Psittacine poxvirus:
virus isolation and identification, transmission and cross-challenge
studies in parrots and chickens. Avian Dis 1982, 26:437-444.
63. Mayr A, Mahnel H, Munz E: Systematiserung und differenzier ung der
pockenviren. Zbl Vet Med B 1962, 19:69-88.
64. Mayr A: Neue verfahren fürdie differenzierung der geflügelpockenviren.
Berl Münch Tierärztl Wochenschr 1963, 76:316-324.
65. Chung YS, Spradbrow PB: Studies on poxvirus isolated from a magpie in
Queensland. Australian. Vet J 1977, 53:334-336.
66. Jarmin S, Manvell R, Gough RE, Laidlaw SM, Skinner MA: Avipoxvirus
phylogenetics: identification of a PCR length polymorphism that
discriminates between the two major clades. J Gen Virol 2006,
87:2191-2201.
67. Carulei O, Douglass N, Williamson AL: Phylogenetic analysis of three
genes of Penguinpox virus corresponding to Vaccinia virus G8R (VLTF-1),
A3L (P4b) and H3L reveals that it is most closely related to Turkeypox
virus, Ostrichpox virus and Pigeonpox virus. Virol J 2009, 6:52.
68. Proctor H, Owens I: Mites and birds: Diversity, parasitism and coevolution. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 2000, 15:358-364.
69. Clubb SL: Avian pox in cage and aviary birds. In Zoo and wild animal
medicine. Edited by: Fowler ME. WB Saunders Company, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; 1986:213-219.
70. Moss B: Vaccinia and other poxvirus expression vectors. Curr Opin
Biotechnol 1992, 3:518-522.
71. Walker MH, Rup BJ, Rubin AS, Bose HR Jr: Specificity in the
immunosuppression induced by avian reticuloendotheliosis virus. Infect
Immun 1983, 40:225-35.

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

72. Pennycott TW: Scaly leg, papillomas and pox in wild birds. Vet Rec 2003,
152:444.
73. Riper C van, Forrester DJ: Avian pox. In Infectious diseases of wild birds.
Edited by: Thomas NJ, Hunter DB, Atkinson CT. Blackwell Publishing, Ames,
Iowa, USA; 2007:131-176.
74. Boyle DB, Anderson MA, Amos R, Voysey R, Coupar BE: Construction of
recombinant fowlpox viruses carrying multiple vaccine antigens and
immunomodulatory molecules. Biotechniques 2004, 37:104-6, 108-11.
75. Baxi MK, Oberoi MS: Comparative evaluation of cell culture-adapted and
chicken embryo-adapted fowl pox vaccine strains. Avian Dis 1999,
43:16-21.
76. Tadese T, Potter EA, Reed WM: Development of a mixed antigen agar gel
enzyme assay (AGEA) for the detection of antibodies to poxvirus in
chicken and turkey sera. J Vet Med Sci 2003, 65:255-8.
77. Smits JE, Tella JL, Carrete M, Serrano D, López G: An epizootic of avian pox
in endemic short-toed larks (Calandrella rufescens) and Berthelot’s pipits
(Anthus berthelotti) in the Canary Islands, Spain. Vet Pathol 2005,
42:59-65.
78. Buscaglia C, Bankowski RA, Miers L: Cell-culture virus-neutralization test
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for evaluation of immunity in
chickens against fowlpox. Avian Dis 1985, 29:672-680.
79. Wang J, Meers J, Spradbrow PB, Robinson WF: Evaluation of immune
effects of fowlpox vaccine strains and field isolates. Vet Microbiol 2006,
116:106-19.
80. Doyle TM: Immunisation of fowls against fowlpox by means of pigeon
pox virus. J Comparative Pathol 1930, 43:40-45.
81. Singh P, Kim TJ, Tripathy DN: Re-emerging fowlpox: evaluation of isolates
from vaccinated flocks. Avian Pathol 2000, 29:449-55.
82. Taylor J, Tartaglia J, Rivière M, Duret C, Languet B, Chappuis G, Paoletti E:
Applications of canarypox (ALVAC) vectors in human and veterinary
vaccination. Dev Biol Stand 1994, 82:131-5.
83. Redig PT: Infectious diseases. In First Aid and case of wild birds. Edited by:
Cooper JE, Eley JT. Davis and Charles Limited, Newton Abbot, UK;
1979:118-139.
84. van Heelsbergen T: Handbuch der Geflugelkrankheiten und der
Geflugelzucht. Stuttgart, Ferdinand Enke Verlag; 1929, 230-262.
85. Cooper JE: Veterinary aspect of captive bird of prey. Standfast Press,
Cherington, UK; 1985, , supplement: 256.
86. Fadly AM, Witter RL, Smith EJ, Silva RF, Reed WM, Hoerr FJ, Putnam MR: An
outbreak of lymphomas in commercial broiler breeder chickens
vaccinated with a fowlpox vaccine contaminated with
reticuloendotheliosis virus. Avian Pathol 1996, 25:35-47.
87. Singh P, Schnitzlein WM, Tripathy DN: Reticuloendotheliosis virus
sequences within the genomes of field strains of fowlpox virus display
variability. J Virol 2003, 77:5855-62.
88. García M, Narang N, Reed WM, Fadly AM: Molecular characterization of
reticuloendotheliosis virus insertions in the genome of field and vaccine
strains of fowl poxvirus. Avian Dis 2003, 47:343-54.
89. Hertig C, Coupar BE, Gould AR, Boyle DB: Field and vaccine strains of
fowlpox virus carry integrated sequences from the avian retrovirus,
reticuloendotheliosis virus. Virology 1997, 235:367-76.
90. Kim TJ, Tripathy DN: Reticuloendotheliosis virus integration in the fowl
poxvirus genome: not a recent event. Avian Dis 2001, 45:663-9.
91. Diallo IS, Mackenzie MA, Spradbrow PB, Robinson WF: Field isolates of
fowlpox virus contaminated with reticuloendotheliosis virus. Avian Pathol
1998, 27:60-6.
92. Bagust TJ, Dennett DP: Reticuloendotheliosis virus: experimental infection
of poultry and immunofluorescent identification of Australian isolates.
Aust Vet J 1977, 53:506-8.
93. Bendheim U: A neoplastic disease in turkey following fowlpox
vaccination. Refu Vet 1973, 30:35-41.
94. Jackson CA, Dunn SE, Smith DI, Gilchrist PT, Macqueen PA: Proventriculitis,
“nakanuke” and reticuloendotheliosis in chickens following vaccination
with herpesvirus of turkeys (HVT). Aust Vet J 1977, 53:457-9.
95. Kawamura H, Wakabayashi T, Yamaguchi S, Taniguchi T, Takayanagi N:
Inoculation experiment of Marek’s disease vaccine contaminated with a
reticuloendotheliosis virus. Natl Inst Anim Health Q (Tokyo) 1976,
16:135-40.
96. Koyama H, Suzuki Y, Ohwada Y, Saito Y: Reticuloendotheliosis group virus
pathogenic to chicken isolated material infected with turkey herpesvirus
(HVT). Avian Dis 1977, 20:429-434.

Page 14 of 15

97. Yuasa N, Yoshida I, Taniguchi T: Isolation of a reticuloendotheliosis virus
from chickens inoculated with Marek’s disease vaccine. Natl Inst Anim
Health Q (Tokyo) 1976, 16:141-51.
98. Witter RL, Fadly AL: Reticuloendothelosis. In Diseases of poultry. 11 edition.
Edited by: Saif YM, Barnes HJ, Glisson J, McDougald LR, Swayne D. Iowa
State University Press, Ames, IA; 2003:517-535.
99. Payne LN: Retrovirus-induced disease in poultry. Poult Sci 1998,
77:1204-12.
100. Fatunmbi OO, Reed WM: Evaluation of a commercial quail pox vaccine
(Bio-Pox Q) for the control of “variant” fowl poxvirus infections. Avian Dis
1996, 40:792-7.
101. Jenner E: An inquiry into the causes and effects of the variolae vaccinae,
a disease discovered in some of the western counties of England,
particularly Gloucestershire and known by the name of the cow pox.
Law, London; 1798.
102. Cook GC: The smallpox saga and the origin(s) of vaccination. J Royal Soc
Health 1996, 116:253-255, 1996.
103. Mooij P, Balla-Jhagjhoorsingh SS, Koopman G, Beenhakker N, van Haaften P,
Baak I, Nieuwenhuis IG, Kondova I, Wagner R, Wolf H, Gómez CE, Nájera JL,
Jiménez V, Esteban M, Heeney JL: Differential CD4+ versus CD8+ T-cell
responses elicited by different poxvirus-based human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 vaccine candidates provide comparable efficacies in
primates. J Virol 2008, 82:2975-88.
104. Perkus ME, Tartaglia J, Paoletti E: Poxvirus-based vaccine candidates for
cancer, AIDS, and other infectious diseases. J Leukoc Biol 1995, 58:1-13,
1995.
105. Boyle D, Heine H: Recombinant fowlpox virus vaccines for poultry.
Immunol Cell Biol 1993, 71:391-397.
106. Tartaglia J, Perkus ME, Taylor J, Norton EK, Audonnet JC, Cox WI, Davis SW,
van der Hoeven J, Meignier B, Riviere M, Languet B, Paoletti E: NYVAC: a
highly attenuated strain of vaccinia virus. Virology 1992, 188:217-232.
107. Taylor J, Weinberg R, Languet B, Desmettre P, Paoletti E: Recombinant
fowlpox virus inducing protective immunity in non-avian species.
Vaccine 1988, 6:497-503.
108. Marshall JL, Gulley JL, Arlen PM, Beetham PK, Tsang KY, Slack R, Hodge JW,
Doren S, Grosenbach DW, Hwang J, Fox E, Odogwu L, Park S, Panicali D,
Schlom J: Phase I study of sequential vaccinations with fowlpox-CEA
(6D)-TRICOM alone and sequentially with vaccinia-CEA (6D)-TRICOM,
with and without granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, in
patients with carcinoembryonic antigen-expressing carcinomas. J Clin
Oncol 2005, 23:720-731.
109. Taylor J, Meignier B, Tartaglia J, Languet B, VanderHoeven J, Franchini G,
Trimarchi C, Paoletti E: Biological and immunogenic properties of a
canarypox-rabies recombinant, ALVAC-RG (vCP65) in non-avian species.
Vaccine 1995, 13:539-49.
110. Bublot M, Pritchard N, Swayne DE, Selleck P, Karaca K, Suarez DL,
Audonnet JC, Mickle TR: Development and use of fowlpox vectored
vaccines for avian influenza. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2006, 1081:193-201.
111. Minke JM, Audonnet JC, Fischer L: Equine viral vaccines: the past, present
and future. Vet Res 2004, 35:425-43.
112. Clinical Trials database. [http://clinicaltrials.gov].
113. Diallo IS, Taylor J, Gibson J, Hoad J, De Jong A, Hewitson G, Corney BG,
Rodwell BJ: Diagnosis of a naturally occurring dual infection of layer
chickens with fowlpox virus and gallid herpesvirus 1 (infectious
laryngotracheitis virus). Avian Pathol 2010, 39:25-30.
114. Shivaprasad HL, Kim T, Tripathy D, Woolcock PR, Uzal F: Unusual pathology
of canary poxvirus infection associated with high mortality in young
and adult breeder canaries (Serinus canaria). Avian Pathol 2009, 38:311-6.
115. Johnson BJ, Castro AE: Canary pox causing high mortality in an aviary. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 1986, 189:1345-7.
116. Reed WM, Schrader DL: Pathogenicity and immunogenicity of mynah pox
virus in chickens and bobwhite quail. Poult Sci 1989, 68:631-8.
117. Wilson MH, Crawford JA: Poxvirus in scaled quail and prevalences of
poxvirus-like lesions in northern bobwhites and scaled quail from Texas.
J Wildl Dis 1988, 24:360-3.
118. Pilaski J, Rotschuh L, Encke W: Ein Pockenausbruch in einem
Ziervogelbestand des Krefelder Zoologischen Gartens.
Verhandlungsberichte des 32. Internationalen Symposiums uber die
Erkrankungen der Zoo- und Wildtiere, Eskilstuna 1990, 157-164.
119. Prukner-Radovcić E, Lüschow D, Ciglar Grozdanić I, Tisljar M, Mazija H,
Vranesić D, Hafez HM: Isolation and molecular biological investigations of

Weli and Tryland Virology Journal 2011, 8:49
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/49

120.
121.
122.

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.
130.
131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

avian poxviruses from chickens, a turkey, and a pigeon in Croatia. Avian
Dis 2006, 50:440-4.
Al Falluji MM, Tantawi HH, Al-Bana A, Al-Sheikhly S: Pox infection among
captive peacocks. J Wildl Dis 1979, 15:597-600.
Terasaki T, Kaneko M, Mase M: Avian poxvirus infection in flamingos
(Phoenicopterus roseus) in a zoo in Japan. Avian Dis 2010, 54:955-7.
Brower AI, Cigel F, Radi C, Toohey-Kurth K: Beak necrosis in Hungarian
partridges (Perdix perdix) associated with beak-bits and avian poxvirus
infection. Avian Pathol 2010, 39:223-5.
Saito K, Kodama A, Yamaguchi T, Gotoh Y, Sakai H, Fukushi H, Masegi T,
Yanai T: Avian poxvirus infection in a white-tailed sea eagle (Haliaeetus
albicilla) in Japan. Avian Pathol 2009, 38:485-9.
Palade EA, Biro N, Dobos-Kovács M, Demeter Z, Mándoki M, Rusvai M:
Poxvirus infection in Hungarian great tits (Parus major): case report. Acta
Vet Hung 2008, 56:539-46.
Lierz M, Bergmann V, Isa G, Czerny CP, Lueschow D, Mwanzia J, Prusas C,
Hafez HH: Avipoxvirus infection in a collection of captive stone curlews
(Burhinus oedicnemus). J Avian Med Surg 2007, 21:50-5.
Rampin T, Pisoni G, Manarolla G, Gallazzi D, Sironi G: Epornitic of avian pox
in common buzzards (Buteo buteo): virus isolation and molecular
biological characterization. Avian Pathol 2007, 36:161-5.
Grove DM, Zajac AM, Spahr J, Duncan RB Jr, Sleeman JM: Combined
infection by avian poxvirus and Collyriclum faba in an American crow
(Corvus brachyrhynchos). J Zoo Wildl Med 2005, 36:111-4.
Shivaprasad HL, Kim TJ, Woolcock PR, Tripathy DN: Genetic and antigenic
characterization of a poxvirus isolate from ostriches. Avian Dis 2002,
46:429-36.
Raidal SR, Gill JH, Cross GM: Pox in ostrich chicks. Aust Vet J 1996, 73:32-3.
Deern SL, Heard DJ, Fox JH: Avian pox in eastern screech owls and
barred owls from Florida. J Wildl Dis 1997, 33:323-7.
Orós J, Rodríguez F, Rodríguez JL, Bravo C, Fernández A: Debilitating
cutaneous poxvirus infection in a Hodgson’s grandala (Grandala
coelicolor). Avian Dis 1997, 41:481-3.
Pardo MC, Bauman JE, Mackowiak M: Protection of dogs against canine
distemper by vaccination with a canarypox virus recombinant
expressing canine distemper virus fusion and hemagglutinin
glycoproteins. Am J Vet Res 1997, 58:833-6.
Siger L, Bowen RA, Karaca K, Murray MJ, Gordy PW, Loosmore SM,
Audonnet JC, Nordgren RM, Minke JM: Assessment of the efficacy of a
single dose of a recombinant vaccine against West Nile virus in
response to natural challenge with West Nile virus-infected mosquitoes
in horses. Am J Vet Res 2004, 65:1459-62.
Minke JM, Siger L, Karaca K, Austgen L, Gordy P, Bowen R, Renshaw RW,
Loosmore S, Audonnet JC, Nordgren B: Recombinant canarypoxvirus
vaccine carrying the prM/E genes of West Nile virus protects horses
against a West Nile virus-mosquito challenge. Arch Virol Suppl 2004,
18:221-30.
Poulet H, Brunet S, Boularand C, Guiot AL, Leroy V, Tartaglia J, Minke J,
Audonnet JC, Desmettre P: Efficacy of a canarypox virus-vectored vaccine
against feline leukaemia. Vet Rec 2003, 153:141-5.
Tartaglia J, Jarrett O, Neil JC, Desmettre P, Paoletti E: Protection of cats
against feline leukemia virus by vaccination with a canarypox virus
recombinant, ALVAC-FL. J Virol 1993, 67:2370-5.
Hofmann-Lehmann R, Tandon R, Boretti FS, Meli ML, Willi B, Cattori V,
Gomes-Keller MA, Ossent P, Golder MC, Flynn JN, Lutz H: Reassessment of
feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) vaccines with novel sensitive molecular
assays. Vaccine 2006, 24:1087-94.
Sun HL, Wang YF, Tong GZ, Zhang PJ, Miao DY, Zhi HD, Wang M, Wang M:
Protection of chickens from Newcastle disease and infectious
laryngotracheitis with a recombinant fowlpox virus co-expressing the F,
HN genes of Newcastle disease virus and gB gene of infectious
laryngotracheitis virus. Avian Dis 2008, 52:111-7.
Davison S, Gingerich EN, Casavant S, Eckroade RJ: Evaluation of the
efficacy of a live fowlpox-vectored infectious laryngotracheitis/avian
encephalomyelitis vaccine against ILT viral challenge. Avian Dis 2006,
50:50-4.
Zhang GZ, Zhang R, Zhao HL, Wang XT, Zhang SP, Li XJ, Qin CZ, Lv CM,
Zhao JX, Zhou JF: A safety assessment of a fowlpox-vectored
Mycoplasma gallisepticum vaccine in chickens. Poult Sci 2010, 89:1301-6.
Rerks-Ngarm S, Pitisuttithum P, Nitayaphan S, Kaewkungwal J, Chiu J,
Paris R, Premsri N, Namwat C, de Souza M, Adams E, Benenson M,

Page 15 of 15

Gurunathan S, Tartaglia J, McNeil JG, Francis DP, Stablein D, Birx DL,
Chunsuttiwat S, Khamboonruang C, Thongcharoen P, Robb ML, Michael NL,
Kunasol P, Kim JH, MOPH-TAVEG Investigators: Vaccination with ALVAC
and AIDSVAX to prevent HIV-1 infection in Thailand. N Engl J Med 2009,
361:2209-20.
142. Pialoux G, Gahéry-Ségard H, Sermet S, Poncelet H, Fournier S, Gérard L,
Tartar A, Gras-Masse H, Levy JP, Guillet JG, ANRS VAC 04 Study Team:
Lipopeptides induce cell-mediated anti-HIV immune responses in
seronegative volunteers. AIDS 2001, 15:1239-49.
143. Kaufman HL, Lenz HJ, Marshall J, Singh D, Garett C, Cripps C, Moore M, von
Mehren M, Dalfen R, Heim WJ, Conry RM, Urba WJ, Benson AB, Yu M,
Caterini J, Kim-Schulze S, Debenedette M, Salha D, Vogel T, Elias I,
Berinstein NL: Combination chemotherapy and ALVAC-CEA/B7.1 vaccine
in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2008,
14:4843-9.
144. Imoukhuede EB, Berthoud T, Milligan P, Bojang K, Ismaili J, Keating S,
Nwakanma D, Keita S, Njie F, Sowe M, Todryk S, Laidlaw SM, Skinner MA,
Lang T, Gilbert S, Greenwood BM, Hill AV: Safety and immunogenicity of
the malaria candidate vaccines FP9 CS and MVA CS in adult Gambian
men. Vaccine 2006, 24:6526-33.
doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-49
Cite this article as: Weli and Tryland: Avipoxviruses: infection biology
and their use as vaccine vectors. Virology Journal 2011 8:49.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
