<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A Rooted Net of Life</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:45. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-45"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="David Williams"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

REVIEW

Open Access

A Rooted Net of Life
David Williams1*†, Gregory P Fournier2*†, Pascal Lapierre3, Kristen S Swithers1, Anna G Green1, Cheryl P Andam1
and J Peter Gogarten1*

Abstract
Phylogenetic reconstruction using DNA and protein sequences has allowed the reconstruction of evolutionary
histories encompassing all life. We present and discuss a means to incorporate much of this rich narrative into a
single model that acknowledges the discrete evolutionary units that constitute the organism. Briefly, this Rooted
Net of Life genome phylogeny is constructed around an initial, well resolved and rooted tree scaffold inferred from
a supermatrix of combined ribosomal genes. Extant sampled ribosomes form the leaves of the tree scaffold. These
leaves, but not necessarily the deeper parts of the scaffold, can be considered to represent a genome or pangenome, and to be associated with members of other gene families within that sequenced (pan)genome.
Unrooted phylogenies of gene families containing four or more members are reconstructed and superimposed
over the scaffold. Initially, reticulations are formed where incongruities between topologies exist. Given sufficient
evidence, edges may then be differentiated as those representing vertical lines of inheritance within lineages and
those representing horizontal genetic transfers or endosymbioses between lineages.
Reviewers: W. Ford Doolittle, Eric Bapteste and Robert Beiko.
Open peer review
Reviewed by W. Ford Doolittle, Eric Bapteste and Robert
Beiko. For the full reviews, see the Reviewers’ Comments
section.
Background
The use of DNA and protein sequence residues as character states for phylogenetic reconstruction was a profound
breakthrough in biology [1]. It has facilitated advances in
population genetics and reconstructions of evolutionary
histories encompassing all life with most of the molecular
diversity found among microorganisms [2]. While progress
in theoretical aspects of reconstruction has allowed more
confident and detailed inferences, it has also revealed the
necessity for caution, as these inferences can be misleading
if methodologies are not applied with care. At the same
time, exponentially growing sequence databases including
complete genome sequences [3] have allowed a more
complete picture of biological lineages over time to be

reconstructed, revealing new aspects of the evolutionary
process.
Substantial incongruities in gene histories and uneven
taxonomic distributions of gene families within groups of
organisms have challenged a tree-like bifurcating process
as an adequate model to describe organismal evolution
[4-6]. In addition, evidence is abundant that the evolutionary history of Eukarya includes numerous primary,
secondary and tertiary endosymbiotic events often providing important traits such as photosynthesis [7]. These
inferences have caused a shift in the consensus among
evolutionary biologists towards a view that the horizontal
transfer of genetic material relative to vertical inheritance
is a major source of evolutionary innovation [5,8,9]. With
a growing recognition for the need to represent more
than just the lines of vertical inheritance, various alternative models have been suggested. These vary in detail but
broadly describe a reticulated network representation of
organismal relationships [4,6,10-12].

* Correspondence: david.williams@uconn.d-dub.org.uk; g4nier@mit.edu;
jpgogarten@gmail.com
† Contributed equally
1
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
CT 06269-3125, USA
2
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

The Rooted Net of Life
In this manuscript we present a model, the Rooted Net of
Life, in which the evolutionary relationships of organisms
are more fully described than in existing Tree of Life
concepts [13,14]. Importantly, we address the observation
that organisms consist of many discrete evolutionary

© 2011 Williams et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

units: open reading frames, operons, plasmids, chromosomes and in some cases plastids and other organelles,
each with discrete and possibly different evolutionary histories. These multiple histories are combined and plotted
as a single reticulated network phylogenetic representation in which misleading artifacts of reconstruction and
loss of information due to the averaging of phylogenetic
signals are minimized. In some instances it may be possible to assign some edges as representative of ancestral
vertical descent by genetic inheritance and other edges as
reticulations due to horizontal genetic transfers. In other
instances, this decision is less certain, for example, did
the ancestor of the Thermotogales acquire the ribosome
from a relative of the Aquificales, or did the Thermotogales acquire most of their genes from the clostridia?
(See “Highways of Gene Sharing” below for details.)
Despite the distinct evolutionary histories among the
genes in an organism, when they are found together in
an extant genome, they are assigned to the same terminal
node and edge that remains intact until their histories
differ. This organism-genome definition includes histories of endosymbioses, which evolved to a point of
bidirectional dependence e.g., mitochondria and plastids
with the “host” cell [7], but excludes parasitisms and
mutualisms in which partners are facultative or interchangeable e.g., the gut microflora of animals [15]. Ribosomal RNA and protein sequences are combined into a
supermatrix and used to infer a well-resolved phylogenetic tree scaffold which we anticipate to mostly, but not
necessarily, approximate the vertical descent of a coherent biological entity (but see the “Endosymbioses” section
below). One terminal node may represent a group of
sequenced genomes sharing very similar ribosomal
sequences. All other genetic sequences including plasmids and chromosomes are assigned to tips by membership within these ribosome-defined pan-genomes and are
further grouped into homologous gene families across
other tips. Reconstructed phylogenetic trees of each are
superimposed on top of the scaffold, forming reticulations where necessary.

The Ribosomal Tree Scaffold
The complex relationship between individual genetic
components and the evolutionary history of organisms
must be well understood in order for a biologically meaningful, comprehensive history of life to be assembled
from molecular data. Since species are propagated by the
reproduction of individuals within a population, and generated by the divergence of populations over time, cytologically speaking, a single vertical tree of descent exists, at
least for prokaryotes that procreate through division of
the parent cell. However, in principle, this “tree of cellular divisions” [16] (ToCD) can only be indirectly inferred
from molecular data, as opposed to gene trees, which are,

Page 2 of 20

in practice, explicitly described by molecular phylogenies.
As such, the ToCD is only knowable insofar that a vertical signal is preserved; if all gene histories were dominated by random horizontal transfer, there would be no
connection between cellular and genetic history. Additionally, the ToCD concept fails when a new cell is created through the fusion of two cells. If this fusion is part
of the sexual life cycle, the principle of the ToCD is violated, but the deviations may be inconsequential if phylogeny is considered at a larger scale. However, instances
of symbioses that lead to lineage and/or cell fusions
between divergent partners (as in the serial endosymbiosis theory for eukaryogenesis, if mitochondria and plastids are no longer considered individual cells) lead to
reticulations in the ToCD. Therefore, when all life is
included, the ToCD does not represent a strictly bifurcating process.
Bridging the gap between gene and species trees has
traditionally been approached via two methods: (1) supermatrix methods, which seek to infer a species tree by the
concatenation of a large number of genes, integrating
across many sites within aligned sequences to arrive at a
well-supported, comprehensive tree [17]; and (2) supertree
methods, which integrate across phylogenies calculated for
many individual genes [18]. Both methods attempt to
arrive at a consensus phylogeny to approximate the species tree by overcoming the insufficient and occasionally
conflicting phylogenetic information that each molecular
unit (typically genes) can provide. However, if applied
indiscriminately, biased horizontal gene transfer can invalidate these methodologies, as multiple strong, distinct
phylogenetic patterns can exist within a dataset [10,19]. In
this case, it is possible that the resulting phylogeny will
not only be incorrect, but even contain bipartitions not
supported by any subset of the data due to fallacious averaging between signals [20]. While these approaches
acknowledge that a comprehensive history of life must
take into account many individual gene histories, it is clear
that, at best, this is insufficient for capturing the true complexity of the evolution of life.
In supermatrix approaches, to avoid averaging over phylogenies with conflicting phylogenetic signal, gene families
with conflicting gene phylogenies are usually removed.
This results in genome or species phylogenies that only
represent a small fraction of the genetic information
within each organism, the so-called “tree of one percent”
[13,21]. While such empirical approaches naturally result
in a dataset dominated by the ribosomal machinery, they
are philosophically unsatisfying not only in that they disregard all other gene histories (many, if not most, of which
will be congruent across most of the tree, with the possible
exception of closely related groups where transfers are far
more frequent), but also because they are not definitive;
revisiting gene phylogenies and definitions of sequence

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

similarity with more advanced techniques could always
add or remove genes from the dataset, affecting the
inferred conclusions. The history of accounting for horizontal gene transfer (HGT) within phylogenies shows a
normalizing progression from the filtering of genomic
“noise”, to the cataloging of HGT events as unique exceptions, to the acknowledgement of HGT as a major force in
evolution [5,9,22]. Acceptance of the relevance of HGT for
reconstructing life’s history also follows this progression,
and any serious attempt to capture a universal evolutionary schema must include reticulations, not merely as a
decoration, but as intrinsic and essential to the understanding of the whole.
However, it is clear that regardless of its primacy (or
lack thereof), a reference tree representing a robust, consistent evolutionary signal is an essential initial scaffold
for any such holistic effort. Such a reference tree should
be not only highly resolved and robust against artifacts,
but reflect a biological reality consistent with its central
organizing role, as opposed to an empirically determined
collection of genes which are solely defined by their universal presence. A ribosomal tree, derived from the concatenated sequences of both ribosomal RNAs and
proteins, is well-suited to this purpose [4,23,24]. The
high level of sequence conservation within the ribosome,
combined with infrequent horizontal transfer of its constituent molecular elements between distantly related
groups, makes this an ideal candidate for providing a
scaffold reference phylogeny [22,25].
To verify the congruence of the evolutionary signal
within the ribosome, highly supported bifurcations
between all sets of ribosomal gene trees were compared,
identifying cases where specific topologies were consistently in conflict with others. In such cases, the particular
sequences for those species in the conflicted area of the
tree would not be included in the concatenation, in order
to avoid fallacious signal averaging within the dataset. The
vast majority of comparisons showed no highly supported
conflicts, while 23 intra-order conflicts were identified
within 10 groups across three domains. As these groups
tend to be highly similar to one another at the ribosomal
sequence level, and do not challenge the relationships
between larger phylogenetic categories that are of the
most evolutionary interest in a ToL/rooted Net of Life
(RNoL), these were preserved within the dataset. Additionally, three inter-order conflicts were detected, with Methanosaeta thermophila L29 showing strong support for
grouping with Methanomicrobiales, and Staphylococcus
aureus S19 and L5 showing strong support for grouping
with Lactobacilliales. No inter-domain conflicts were
detected. It is important to note that this methodology
does not specifically detect horizontal transfers; rather, it
simply identifies well-supported conflicts that would
violate the assumptions necessary for a concatenated

Page 3 of 20

ribosomal dataset. As many ribosomal protein sequences
are very short, there is limited phylogenetic information
per protein, and the resulting tree topologies reflect this in
their lack of resolution. Therefore, a stringent criterion is
required for the identification of clear conflicts, as poorly
supported conflicts within these trees may merely reflect a
very weak power of detection for actual events.
The use of the ribosome in providing a scaffold for a Net
of Life reconstruction is also fitting in that a recent study
has also used universal ribosomal proteins for an empirical
rooting of their respective universal tree [19]. In this study,
ancestral reconstruction of ribosomal protein sequences
identified a unique compositional signature along the
branch on the bacterial side of the tripartition between the
three domains. Compared with simulations and other
parts of the tree, this branch showed a significant underrepresentation of amino acids presumed to be more recent
additions to the genetic code (Tyr, Trp, Phe, Cys), and a
significant over-representation of those presumed to be
the most ancient (Gly, Ala). As the current state of the
genetic code is a character shared between all domains,
this signal should be preferentially detected on the branch
closest to its formative state, that is, the branch that contains the root.
While, strictly speaking, this only explicitly roots the
“ribosomal tree of life” [19], it is a reasonable starting
point for rooting the reticulate phylogeny, as it serves to
polarize the proposed scaffold, allowing the full complexity
of reticulations in a comprehensive evolutionary history to
also be rooted with respect to one another. The majority
of molecular phylogenies rooted using ancient gene duplications placed the root in the same location (see review in
[26]); and the deep split between Bacteria and Archaea is
also recovered from genome-wide analyses using midpoint
rooting of splits trees, and averaging over phylogenies of
nearly universal protein families [27-29]. Interestingly,
reconciliations of gene trees to the reference scaffold tree
can also provide further support for the correct rooting, as
alternative placements of the root should consistently
force less parsimonious reconciliations, if incorrect. It may
even be seen that a distinct subset of reconciliations for
related genes are more parsimonious with an alternative
rooting (e.g., on the archaeal or eukaryotic branch), supporting HGT events occurring between the stem groups
of each domain, which would be extremely difficult to
infer otherwise.

Examples of reticulations
There are many organismal lineages that have been
involved in horizontal genetic transfers, some at frequencies sufficient to be considered highways of gene sharing
[10,24], thus leading to many different gene histories in
the chromosome(s) of one organism [8]. When these
organismal histories are considered internally consistent

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

and tree-like, conventional phylogenetic reconstruction
methods that combine sequence data often reflect an
average between distinct signals. This is especially a problem in those cases where highways of gene sharing
between divergent organisms dominate the phylogenetic
information retained in the analyzed genomes. Multiple
endosymbioses have occurred in many lineages, therefore
organismal histories are better represented by a Rooted
Net of Life able to reflect both vertical descent and horizontal genetic transfers. Here we outline examples that
demonstrate a bifurcating tree-like phylogeny as an
inadequate depiction of the history of life.
Horizontal genetic transfer

There are numerous important gene sharing events,
some between members of different Domains of life, that
are lost when only a singular tree of life is considered.
These include inventions of new metabolic pathways,
such as a single transfer event in which genes encoding
acetate kinase and phosphoacetyltransferase were transferred to the Methanosarcina from cellulolytic clostridia
allowing the use of acetate as a substrate for methanogenesis (acetoclastic methanogenesis) [30]. There are also
many examples of gene transfers from bacterial to single
celled eukaryotes. The Fungi acquired many genes
involved in various metabolic processes from both the
Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria [31-36]. The protozoan Blastocystis, found in various gut environments, has
acquired genes involved in energy metabolism, adhesion
and osmotrophy from bacteria. These transfers have
allowed for successful adaptation of Blastocystis spp. to
digestive environments [37]. Genes involved in organic
carbon and nitrogen utilization, the urea cycle, cell wall
silification and DNA replication, repair and recombination have all been transferred from bacteria to the diatoms [38]. Bdelloid rotifers, metozoan freshwater
invertebrates, have acquired genes for a xylosidase, cell
wall peptidoglycan synthesis and various reductases and
dehydrogenases from bacteria [39]. A pivotal gene transfer from the bacteria to the Cnidarians allowed for the
development of the stinging cells that this lineage uses to
capture prey [40]. The gene encodes a polyanionic polymer (PGA), which, when present in large quantities in
the stinging cells (nematocysts), causes an explosive,
stinging discharge to be released upon contact [41].
Examples of gene transfers from bacteria to multicellular
eukaryotes include ancestral bacterivorous nematodes
acquiring cell wall degradation genes from a bacterial
lineage [42-44]. These genes are required for the initial
step in parasitizing plants, enabling the free living nematode to “transition” into a parasite [45]. Other examples
include Wolbachia endosymbiont sequences in the X
chromosome of the host adzuki bean beetle [46] and in
the Aedes aegypti genome [47].

Page 4 of 20

Highways of gene sharing

There is evidence that Thermotogales have a significant
portion of their genomes transferred from the Firmicutes
and Archaea, about 48% and 11%, respectively [48].
Averaging across the whole genome with supertree or
supermatrix methods places the Thermotogales with the
Firmicutes [48,49] and neither highways of gene sharing,
nor the history of the ribosome emerges from the averaged signal. A similar case is seen for the Aquificales,
which according to averaging methods are placed with
the Epsilonproteobacteria, apparently due to an overwhelming number of HGTs from that group [50]. 16S
rRNA gene trees and concatenated ribosomal gene trees
place both the Thermotogales and the Aquificales, as
deeply branching bacterial lineages [48,50]. Other examples include the Thermoplasmatales, an acidophilic euryarchaeal order, with about 58% of their genome inferred
to have been transferred from the phylogenetically
distant crenarchaeal Sulfolobales [51-53]; and Methanosarcina mazei, with about 33% of its genome identified as
transferred from bacteria [54]. Such examples continue
to emerge, and more are likely to be discovered as the
number of sequenced genomes increases.
Endosymbioses

We consider an organism to be a group of distinct evolutionary units currently engaged in an obligate mutualism.
Thus we include the bacterium Thermotoga petrophila
with its set of ancestrally archaeal genes as a single organism, assigned to a single terminal node on the Rooted Net
of Life. Likewise, we would consider an animal with its
numerous mitochondria-containing cells or a plant with
its many mitochondria-and chloroplast-containing cells as
respectively assignable to terminal nodes.
The events that led to these relationships can be considered large-scale horizontal genetic transfers in which an
entire chromosome, along with a cell membrane, is
engulfed via endosymbiosis. Subsequent evolution leads to
an obligate mutualism [55] with gene transfer from the
endosymbiont chromosome to the host nuclear chromosomes [56]. The primary endosymbiosis leading to plastids
refers to an original uptake and retention of an ancestral
cyanobacterium by an ancestral eukaryote [57]. Extant
organisms retaining this ancestral condition are the Glaucophytes, Red Algae and Green Algae. Other lineages
underwent secondary and even tertiary endosymbioses [7]
providing not only prominent morphological features but
also defining metabolic pathways (e.g., photosynthesis). In
tracing the genealogies of these discrete evolutionary
units, numerous reticulations within the ribosomal tree
scaffold itself are necessary, and these reticulations are
congruent with the lineages of other genes present on the
endosymbiont chromosome. These examples illustrate the
reticulate complexities within all Domains of Life, and

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

Page 5 of 20

show that the assumption of a single, bifurcating organismal tree is problematic not only within specific groups of
prokaryotes. However, to say the history of life is better
represented by a Rooted Net of Life is not to say there is
no structure or form to it; rather, that the structure and
story is too complex for a single tree-like narrative to contain [58].

Reconstructing the Rooted Net of Life
Phylogenetic reconstruction suffers less stochastic error
when more data are available for most branch-length scenarios [59]. In reconstructing the Rooted Net of Life
model proposed here, whole-genome data sets are
required to provide both the tree-like ribosome scaffold
and the potential reticulations from other gene trees.
One extreme approach for mitigating stochastic error
would be multiple whole-genome alignments, but this
would not be realistic (or even possible given the incomplete homology of gene families across extant life)
because the discrete evolutionary histories within organisms would not described. Where regions of a genome
are likely to have had the same histories, combining
sequences to improve resolution is a useful approach and
is discussed in detail below. It is important to note that
even well resolved phylogenies may be deceptive, with
reconstruction artifacts masking complex evolutionary
events if the reconstruction model was inadequate to
describe the evolutionary process [60]. This is especially
likely when incorporating diverse homologous sequences
as is necessary in a Net of Life reconstruction.
Mitigation of stochastic error: combining sequences for
improved resolution

To solve difficult phylogenies, it is sometimes advantageous to use information from many genes in order to
extract phylogenetic signals which otherwise may be too
dilute if taken from individual genes. As previously mentioned, two widely used methods consist of concatenation
of multiple genes (supermatrix) [17] and construction of
consensus phylogenies using several trees calculated
from individual genes (supertrees) [18]. It is believed that
these phylogenomic methods are capable of capturing a
plurality consensus of a dataset while minimizing the
presence of artifacts in the data such as presence of gene
transfers or low phylogenetic signals. However, if too
many conflicts are present in the datasets or the phylogenetic signal is too weak, the resulting consensus tree may
not be informative, as it may not accurately reflect the
history of any of its constituent datasets [61]. This can be
illustrated using simple genome simulations involving a
single highway of gene sharing between two unrelated
lineages (Figure 1) where supertrees based on embedded
quartet decomposition outperformed gene concatenations (Figure 2). When genes were transferred to a

Figure 1 Phylogenetic tree used to simulate genome evolution
including a directed highway of gene sharing. Two different
trees were tested, one having a slightly longer internal branch of
0.05 substitutions per site compared to the other tree with only
0.01 substitutions per site. Genome B’ was used as a donor for
genes transferred into the lineage leading to genome F. Genome B’
was not included in the phylogenetic reconstruction and genes
from genome B’ were used as replacements for their orthologs in
genome F. The simulations were repeated with increasing amount
of transfers from genome B’ to F. The genome sequences were
generated using Evolver from the PAML package [113]. Each
simulated genomes contained a total of 100 genes, each 300 amino
acids long.

lineage whose neighboring branch was separated by 0.05
substitutions per site (Figure 2A), the supermatrix
approach (concatenation of genes) was able to recover
the correct tree topology only when less than 25% of the
genes underwent homologous replacement. In contrast,
embedded quartet decomposition followed by supertree
reconstruction recovered the correct topology, even
when 45% of the genes underwent HGT replacement
(Figure 2A). At more than 50% HGT, genome F was
recovered as the sister group to B, reflecting a situation
where the signal due to ancestry is overwhelmed by a
highway of gene sharing. When the recipient lineage is
positioned closer to its sister group, the supermatrix
approach was even more susceptible to HGT (Figure 2B).
The presence of 10 to 15% of misleading signal in the
concatenated dataset was sufficient to induce the recovery of the wrong topology in the majority of cases. In the
same situation, the quartet based supertree approach
failed in the presence of 35% or more of conflicting signals. In contrast, when no gene transfers were simulated
and the amount of phylogenetic signal varied only
between datasets, supermatrix approaches fared better in

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

Page 6 of 20

Figure 2 Comparison of supermatrix and supertree approaches for recovering the correct tree following horizontal genetic transfer.
Horizontal genetic transfer was simulated between lineage B’ and F (Figure 1) with an internal branch of 0.05 (A) or 0.01 substitutions per site
(B). The frequency with which the correct tree is recovered from supermatrix and supertree approaches from data that include increasing
amounts of genes transferred along a single highway of gene sharing was tested. Each simulated genome contained a total of 100 genes, each
300 amino acids long. Genes were concatenated into a single sequence from each simulated genome for the supermatrix tree calculation or
alternatively, gene trees were calculated individually from each gene for the supertree approach. The sequences were not realigned to avoid any
additional artifact potentially introduced from alignment algorithms. Neighbor-joining trees were calculated with Kimura correction in ClustalW
version 2.0.12 [114]. Maximum likelihood trees were calculated with PhyML V.3.0 [115] with Pinvar, JTT model and estimated gamma distribution
under 4 categories. The embedded quartet trees [116] as well as the resulting plurality trees (supertree) were calculated from the individual gene
family trees using Quartet Suite v.1.0 [117]. The simulations were repeated 100 times to measure the reproducibility of the different tree
reconstruction methods in recovering the original tree topology.

extracting the correct phylogenetic signal compared to
supertrees (data not shown).
These results indicate that when using sets of genes
that are known to be less frequently transferred, as may
be case for ribosomal proteins, a supermatrix approach
is preferable, whereas for datasets where cryptic highways of gene sharing may connect divergent organisms,
supertree approaches such as quartet decomposition
may be more accurate. An additional source of error
caused by the stochastic way in which lineages sort during speciation can result in anomalous gene trees in
phylogenetic inference [59]. This can arise during periods of rapid diversification where short edges are present in gene trees and is not mitigated by combining
more genes into a single analysis.

Accounting for heterogeneous evolutionary processes

The reconstruction of phylogenetic trees from biological
sequences relies on estimation of the evolutionary distance between the sequences of interest. This estimate is
obtained from evolutionary models that describe the
probability of different nucleotide or amino acid substitutions [62]. Traditional evolutionary models are based on
a set of simplifying assumptions, and when these assumptions are violated by the dataset examined, incorrect trees
may be recovered [62,63]. In phylogenetic reconstruction
on a RNoL scale, where a large degree of sequence diversity is included, these simplifying assumptions run an
even greater risk of violating observed biological realities
not explicitly described within the reconstruction model.
Some of these challenges to evolutionary models are

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

described below, along with the work being done to overcome them.
Extant lineages can substantially differ in base and
amino acid composition, a phenomenon known as compositional heterogeneity [62,64]. In many cases, this is
driven by physiological adaptation to environments with
distinct demands on protein physiochemistry (e.g., thermophily, halophily). Changes in nucleotide composition
of the genome (e.g., high or low G+C content) can also
occur within specific lineages, indirectly affecting amino
acid composition. Models that assume compositional
homogeneity (constant sequence composition throughout the tree) tend to group lineages with similar compositions together, regardless their actual evolutionary
history, and produce high bootstrap values for these
incorrect topologies [62]. A solution to the problem of
describing compositionally heterogeneous datasets is the
implementation of models that allow for different equilibrium frequencies (parameters to describe sequence
composition) on different parts of the tree [62,64].
Another challenge for evolutionary models is heterotachy, the variability in evolutionary rate at a site on different branches of the tree [63]. Heterotachy can cause
evolutionary models to group taxa on long branches
together, affecting both maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methods [65], and producing incorrect
trees with high bootstrap support [63]. The deleterious
effect of heterotachy on phylogenetic reconstruction can
be mitigated by the use of probabilistic models with sufficient parameters to correctly describe this phenomenon
[63,65].
Most current evolutionary models are also ignorant of
secondary and tertiary structure - that is, they assume that
substitutions at one site are completely independent of
substitutions at another, an assumption that is violated by
the sequence evolution of protein and ribozyme coding
genes (including ribosomal RNA). Models of nucleotide
substitution that weigh the rate of nonsynonymous
nucleotide substitutions by their effect on protein tertiary
structure [66], or that estimate the variation in nonsynonymous substitution rate in a sequence [67], are being
developed. These models show promise, especially for the
detection of positive selection, but remain computationally
expensive and are outperformed at phylogenetic reconstruction by site-independent models [68]. Accounting for
structural information is also known to improve RNA
alignments, especially in divergent sequences [69], and
models that account for secondary structure when performing phylogenetic reconstruction are under development. These models improve phylogenetic trees in some
situations [70], but produce incorrect results in some
others [69]. Nevertheless, they show promise and deserve
further investigation.

Page 7 of 20

Improvements to evolutionary models are constantly
being made, and lead to improved ability to distinguish
phylogenetic information from noise. These new models
increase the number of parameters used to describe the
data, and this strategy is merited in many cases. However,
it is important to recognize that adding unimportant
parameters decreases the power to draw conclusions
[64], and that not all datasets will be best described by
the same model. Including more parameters does not
necessarily improve reconstruction - for example, evolutionary models that use different parameters for each
branch of the tree are often outperformed by models that
allow for only two different sets of parameters, one for
each major clade on a tree [64,71]. As evolutionary models are being developed and improved, it is important
that methods for selecting the best model for a dataset
also be explored [71], as has been done in some cases
[64], and developed for use by wider audiences.
Other artifacts can also be present within reconstructions, independent of rate and composition model parameters. Longer branches will tend to group together
regardless of their true relationships [72], a phenomenon
seen in the artifactual placement of microsporidia as a
deep branching eukaryotic lineage [73,74]. Periods of rapid
diversification causing shorter branches will leave reconstruction vulnerable to the node-density effect where
branch lengths may be overestimated in areas of the tree
with more nodes [75]. Although balanced taxon sampling
may mitigate some of these artifacts, the course of evolution is not obliged to supply phylogenetic distributions
that are easily reconstructed across the whole Net of Life
[73], thus the development of improved algorithms is an
important area of research.
Acknowledging diversity within the Rooted Net of Life

Biological evolution has manifested itself in an impressive array of diversity. Life histories among organisms
vary widely with corresponding differences in population
dynamics and modes of diversification (“speciation”),
perhaps most significantly between unicellular and multicellular lineages. These two groups differ greatly in
their propensity for horizontal genetic transfer with
implications for the interpretation of gene tree conflicts.
For multicellular organisms with somatic cell lines, the
probability of horizontally transferred genetic material
being copied into the progeny of the host is much lower
than for unicellular organisms. However, examples of
the former do exist. As noted above, these are often
transfers from a bacterial symbiont to the host genome.
Interpretation of gene trees conflicting with the backbone reference tree should thus be informed by life histories and other prior biological knowledge of the
lineages concerned: a conflicting topology among

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

unicellular taxa is more likely to be due to HGT than is
a conflict among multicellular taxa where an alternative
hypothesis of differential gene loss or incomplete lineage
sorting may be preferred.
When considering macroevolutionary relationships,
conflicting topologies within closely related groups,
which are more likely even for ribosomal genes, will not
change the deeper relationships. Of 568 species of Bacteria and Archaea represented in the NCBI Complete
Microbial Genomes database in late 2009 [76], 235 had
diversity among multiple 16S rRNA copies [77]. In the
majority of cases intragenomic sequence diversity is less
than that conventionally defined for interspecies diversity
[78]. Of the 2.5% of species with sequenced representatives that exceeded the interspecies limit [77]Thermoanaerobacter tengcongensis with 6.7% diversity and certain
lineages of Halobacteriales including Haloarcula carlsbadense [79] and Halomicrobium mukohataei JCM 9738(T)
[80] are of particular note. While resolution at deeper
levels would be unaffected, there is sufficient divergence
in this small minority potentially to cause resolution problems at the genus level. The use of a supermatrix
including ribosomal proteins, which are single copy
genes [77], would mitigate this. Thus the use of ribosomal sequences (protein and rRNA) as a scaffold of mostly
vertical descent onto which a Rooted Net of Life can be
inferred is not negated. However, the correlation between
scaffold and vertical inheritance is not inviolate, or essential to the construction of such a Rooted Net: the transfer
of an entire ribosome may be inferred by a topological
incongruity between the initial scaffold and a large
majority of the other gene phylogenies associated with
that lineage.
Reconciling gene histories

Various approaches for obtaining a single supertree from
several gene trees within the same set of genomes (sometimes referred to as a “species tree” in the literature) have
been proposed [81-83]. As emphasized above, such
approaches are only appropriate for situations where
HGT between divergent lineages is unlikely - either
because of the nature of the lineages considered (multicellular) or the nature of the sequences used (e.g., ribosomal). Rather than infer a new topology representing a
“species” tree, related algorithms have been developed by
Beiko and Hamilton [84] and Lawrence and Alm [85]
using a predetermined reference topology with similarities to the model proposed here. In the latter, through a
process called “reconciliation”, gene tree topologies are
chosen that both support the sequence data and minimize a cost function determined by gene loss, gain and
transfer relative to a reference phylogeny. Reticulations
representing HGT are therefore accommodated, although
unlike the model proposed here, the initial topology

Page 8 of 20

exclusively and explicitly represents a history of vertical
descent. For this reason, even if the initial reference
topology is carefully chosen, a simple application of this
approach has a limited capacity to reflect a comprehensive evolutionary history of life. However, these
approaches can be accommodated within the RNoL
model by removing assumptions equating the reference
tree with vertical inheritance, and extending subsequent
analyses to take more complex events into account, such
as those previously described (e.g., endosymbioses, lineage-specific trends of HGT vs. duplication). In these
models as in the RNoL, there will be an inevitable “thinning” of edges towards the root because of genetic losses
(genes, plasmids, organelles etc). Assigning these losses
to HGT events or to lineages of vertical descent will not
be possible in regions of lower phylogenetic resolution
where there are ambiguities associated with HGT; but in
principle this model provides a retrodictive representation of biological evolution

Conclusion
As more genome sequence data have become available
and are analyzed, evolutionary biologists and philosophers have begun to question the legitimacy of the Tree
of Life concept. Various analytical approaches for dealing
with the newly inferred and distinctly non tree-like nature of organismal lineages have been presented with differing underlying assumptions with respect to the nature
of the evolutionary process [28,58,86-88]. We have
described a Rooted Net of Life model of evolution,
accommodating the numerous examples of reticulated
histories, that is better able to describe the history of life
than the pervasive Tree of Life concept while retaining
retrodictive power. Retrodiction is lost in some alternative propositions that phenetically cluster extant organisms by patterns of diversity left by the evolutionary
process. The macromolecular sequences of the ribosome,
homologous in all cellular life, provide the information to
reconstruct an initial scaffold of predominately, but not
necessarily, vertical descent. This averages over many
reticulations at lower taxonomic levels, and includes a
few large-scale reticulations where the ribosomes in the
eukaryotic organelles are mapped to the same tips as
those of the nucleocytoplasmic components. All other
genetic sequences can then be recruited to combine with
this ribosome-based scaffold to more fully depict and
better define both the vertical and horizontal components of the history of life.
Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer 1: W. Ford Doolittle, Dalhousie University

“Rooted Net of Life” might well be the right name for what
I suspect is currently the most popular way of thinking
about microbial phylogeny within the systematics and

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

evolution community, and Williams et al. do a fine job of
articulating this view as a model. Still, some critique seems
called for.
First, one might object that there is a conflict with the
other paper from the Gogarten lab included in this special thematic series of Biology Direct. If gene transfer can
be so biased as to assume responsibility for certain aminoacyl tRNA synthetase tree topologies - which I take to
be the import of the Andam and Gogarten submission then why do we not also assume that to be the case for
genes that do not so readily lend themselves to analysis
as do those homeoallelic exemplars? And why do we
assume that “phylogenetic bias” so often trumps other
sorts of physiological, ecological or geographical biases?
No doubt the Tree of Life, constructed by either supermatrix or supertree methods (which Willams et al.
distinguish very nicely) tells us something about central
tendencies in prokaryotic evolution, but it is only the
“complexity hypothesis” that holds out some promise
that the first of these methods might give us something
like the Tree of Cell Divisions.
Authors’ response: To avoid confusion, we briefly want
to summarize the interplay between HGT and our rooted
Net of Life proposal. In light of the homeoallelic exemplars
and other evidence for biased gene transfer [89-91], we
indeed need to reconcile our proposal to the possibility of
phylogenetically biased transfers.
Transfer of ribosomal components between close relatives: Undoubtedly, highly conserved ribosomal components
are frequently transferred between close relatives and following transfer are integrated into the recipient’s genome.
At least for ribosomal RNAs, it was shown convincingly
that a gene acquired through transfer does recombine with
the homolog already present in the recipient (see discussion
in [22,92]and [93] for examples), thus turning the ribosomal RNA into a mosaic. However, most of these transfers
are indeed between close relatives and only become detectable when many genomes of close relatives are analyzed.
The proposed ribosomal scaffold averages over these transfers and subsequent recombination events. Consequently,
the transfers between close relatives will only rarely affect
the relative placement of families and higher taxonomic
units; however, the scaffold may be an unreliable reference
for within family and within-genera phylogenies.
Transfer of ribosomal components between divergent
organisms: Screening individual ribosomal protein families
for phylogenetic conflict, and assigning the sequences from
the recipient and its descendants to different data partitions, will avoid averaging over transfers between less
related organisms. However, individual ribosomal proteins
contain little phylogenetic information, and thus this screen
will be unreliable for within-family transfers. The ribosomal scaffold will tell us about the central tendency of the
ribosome, after removing transfers between divergent

Page 9 of 20

organisms (such as described in [94]) from the averaging.
This scaffold is not intended to tell us anything about the
central tendency of the genome or of the organism. If for
part of the phylogeny the central tendency of the genome
agrees with the central tendency of the ribosome, then there
is no indication for highways of gene sharing that are not
biased by close relationship. If the two conflict, such as in
case of the extreme thermophilic bacteria, we can conclude
that genes were transferred with a bias determined by
other factors such as the ecological niche. We cannot distinguish a priori the transfer of the ribosome from a highway
of gene-sharing through which the majority of genes were
transferred; however, increased taxon sampling may detect
transfers spread out over time, as would be expected for a
transfer bias caused by a shared ecological niche, and
thereby allow us to discriminate this from a single event
leading to the formation of a chimera between two
partners.
Trickle-down transfer vs shared ancestry: We cannot
exclude the possibility that an organism replaced its ribosome, either though acquisition of a superoperon in a single
transfer, or through many transfer events that are biased
not by close relationship (reflecting recent shared ancestry)
but through other factors, such as a shared ecological niche.
The ribosomal scaffold would place the recipient’s ribosome
close to the donating lineage. In case frequent transfer and
recombination events occur within a group, individuals
within this group in the ribosomal scaffold will appear
more related to one another, and organisms not participating in the frequent within-group transfers may be left
behind [22]. In either of these cases, the ribosomal scaffold
does not represent the tree of cells but only the history of the
ribosome. In many instances it will be possible to further
elucidate the history of the genome, as is exemplified by the
thermophilic bacteria [48,50], and this might allow further
inference regarding a likely tree of cells. However, the relationship between organisms is not sufficiently described by
a single tree, and the RNoL provides a first step to elucidate
the history. If the complexity hypothesis is true for the ribosomal components, the ribosomal scaffold may be similar
to the tree of cell divisions. However, this is not a precondition to reconstruct the RNoL. Reconstructing the RNoL will
identify those parts of life’s history where a single tree of cell
divisions provides an incomplete narrative.
Reviewer 1 continued: Second, we might ask why the
microbial systematics and evolution community still feels
that we need some single way of describing the relationships of organisms and some singly historical “metanarrative” to undergird it. I’d guess our colleagues doing human
linguistic, cultural and social history would see this as an
unnecessarily simplistic and ultimately misleading aspiration (see for instance [95]). Is it just our need to defend
Darwinism from its politically powerful opponents that
causes us to cling to it?

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

Authors’ response: This is a fascinating question. In
the context of this manuscript, we make the assumption
that there is a single “true” sequence of events or organization of matter on the temporal and spatial biological
scale (i.e., Life on Earth). The goal of reconstructing the
resulting relationships between organisms is therefore to
recover a single, historical description - but any such
attempts are limited by the methods used and the data
available (which at present do impose limitations on the
confidence of historical events/relationships).
Indeed, this proposed Rooted Net of Life is intended as a
phylogeny of biological lineages that accounts for the horizontal exchange of genetic material and is composed from
gene families found in sequenced genomes. It therefore has
the same limitations as conventional phylogenetic comparative methods (it requires accurate alignments for
homologous comparisons, three or more tips for a rooted
reconstruction etc). We think a strength of this model is its
direct depiction of evolutionary events allowing historical
inferences rather than phenetic approaches (such as splitgraphs representations or clustering genomes by genome
content etc). which serve a different purpose in evolutionary
biology.
Reviewer 2: Eric Bapteste, Université Pierre et Marie Curie

Peter Gogarten and his team play a major role in the
debate on the Tree of Life (TOL). Therefore, their contribution to this special issue on how to go beyond the TOL
is of unquestionable importance. They propose the reconstruction of a “rooted net of life” (rNOL) as a new reasonable goal for phylogenomics. In many respect, this notion
seems sound: it is likely a research program that many
phylogenomicists will be tempted to embrace. In particular, I entirely agree that organisms consist of many discrete
evolutionary units, with multiple histories, a fact that is
lost with the TOL, and therefore the TOL is not sufficient
to capture true complexity of the evolution of life. It is
also important to reckon that a universal evolutionary
schema must include reticulations, not merely as decoration but as an intrinsic feature.
Two major comments however. First, the rNOL is not
the only possible research path for evolutionists “beyond
the TOL”. Second, if embraced, important conceptual clarifications are still required to interpret the rNOL, because
it cannot be done merely with the concepts of the TOL. A
well understood rNOL is not just a TOL plus some fancy
lateral edges, it is not quite “phylogenetic business almost
as usual”.
Major comments
1. The rNOL is not the TOL
This claim is crucial and should be made more significant, because it has practical and conceptual implications. The move from a TOL to a rNOL is more than
just an extension of the TOL, through the addition of

Page 10 of 20

lateral branches to this tree. The rNOL research program
really goes beyond the research program associated with
the TOL. The former nodes and edges are not directly
comparable to the nodes and edges represented in the
TOL. Therefore the nodes and edges of the rNOL and of
the TOL cannot really be interpreted alike. It would be
misleading, therefore, and for the sake of convenience - a
rhetorical trick - to describe the rNOL with the words
and notions designed to analyze the TOL. Tree-thinking
should not be directly imported en bloc into rNOLthinking, as if not much was changing when the rNOL
replaces the TOL to represent evolution. If the interest of
evolutionists shifts from the TOL to the rNOL, some
new concepts are needed to interpret the rNOL. This
fundamental aspect of the transition from a TOL to a
rNOL should be made much more explicit in this MS. I
would like to suggest that the authors devote a short but
entirely novel section to the issue of rNOL-thinking, that
shows that going from the TOL to the rNOL requires
significant (and not just minor) conceptual adjustments.
Authors’ response: We agree that adoption of the
RNoL concept requires conceptual adjustments. Change is
no longer gradual along a lineage, but often instantaneous
due to HGT. Nodes no longer represent exclusively events
of lineage divergence, but also the confluence of genetic
information. Most microbiologists do recognize the importance of the processes that lead to reticulation, but only
phylogeneticists have struggled to incorporate the diversity
of biological processes into their reconstruction of evolutionary history. Given that processes of reticulated evolution are the focus of much research in microbiology, we do
not think it necessary do devote additional space in the
current manuscript to its discussion.
Reviewer 2 continued: For example, the authors propose that each organism in a rNOL is represented by a
single node and a single edge, unless the organism
changes. For them a node is a meeting place for a possible genetic melting pot: the organism lies where various
units join in a collective obligate mutualism. This notion
of an organism is interesting, but is it the organismal
notion associated with the TOL? I would say “no”.
Authors’ response: By “terminal node” we mean to
refer to the “tips” of the inferred gene and ribosome trees
from which the network will be constructed. All sequences
at these tips are taken from sequenced genomes (that is
all chromosomes and plasmids sequenced from a sampled
“organism”) and so members of different gene families can
be confidently associated with one another, at the tips, on
that basis. This model is intended as a phylogeny as
opposed to a more general clustering scheme based on
evolutionary relationships. Internal nodes do, therefore,
represent ancestral organisms inasmuch as the resolution
of the data allows. Gene family members lost from an
ancestral organism along a lineage cannot of course be

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

represented via this comparative approach and thus internal edges and nodes can only be a partial representation
of the genome complement of an ancestral organism.
(Further inferences of what could be missing from such an
inferred ancestral genome complement could perhaps be
made though). It would be permissible to take a single
ribosome as representative of a group of sequenced genomes (defined by ribosome gene sequence similarity) and
include the pan-genome of those organisms in the same
way.
Reviewer 2 continued: Why does it matter? Because
then the vertical backbone of the rNOL does not track
organismal evolution. It tracks the evolution of the least
mobile units of this collective obligate mutualism, or, if
one wishes, it captures the “(less mobile) background
organism”.
Authors’ response: The reviewer makes an insightful
observation here and below. However, something we perhaps failed to make clear in the original MS is that the
ribosomal tree-shaped scaffold need not represent the line
of vertical descent if the topologies of the other gene
families suggest otherwise. In fact, where there is insufficient evidence to attribute any one set of internal edges to
the line of vertical descent, we do not consider an agnostic
attitude to be a problem. But we do anticipate that many
of the edges will be less ambiguous and assignable as
either representative of a horizontal genetic transfer or
vertical genetic inheritance. The ribosomal scaffold serves
only as an initial, well resolved rooted phylogeny with
which other gene family phylogenies can be compared as
a means of inferring a rooted net. The meaning of the
term “reconciliation” as most often used in the literature
(in the context of a “species tree” and several “gene trees”)
would be inappropriate here and so we agree the term
“species tree” is best avoided. Another reason to object to
the term “species” is the difficulty in applying the already
troublesome idea of a macrobial species to the microbial
diversity of which most of the RNoL consists.
However, we would suggest the term “organismal lineage”
is not such a problem. As the reviewer suggests for the
RNoL model, the identity of the organism will change along
a set of “vertical” edges as nodes due to reticulations are
crossed and genes are gained. This seems comparable to
the accepted use of this term in a ToL model where the
conceptual identity of an organism could change along an
edge due to adaptation to a changing environment, or even
more abruptly before and after a bifurcating speciation
event.
We agree with the reviewer that these vertical edges,
where identified, are likely to capture more of the “(less
mobile) background organism"’, because of the difficulty of
mapping with any certainty to map the more mobile
genetic elements to deeper edges. However, a vertical edge
midway between the root and tip of the RNoL would in

Page 11 of 20

fact consist of many edges from the combined phylogenies
of the gene families and ribosome. Tracing that vertical
edge either towards or away from the root will cross nodes
at which reticulations will leave or join it, so that all
genomic components of an ancestral organism for which
the phylogenetic comparative approach is suited will be
represented, regardless of mobility. Notable omissions are
discussed below.
Reviewer 2 continued: However, with such a definition,
the organism itself changes each time a new genetic unit
(i.e. one or several genes, or a symbiont) comes in or goes
out of the collective obligate mutualism. Therefore, in the
rNOL every lateral connection in addition to the vertical
splits gives rise to a new organism. New names are needed
to describe these nodes, which do not exist on a tree. This
in turn has an important consequence for another default
notion of tree-thinking: the notion of (phylogenetic) species. Phylogeneticists cannot track species as easily on a
rNOL as they were hoping to do on a TOL. What type of
“chunk of the rNOL” corresponds to a species cannot
probably be decided without considering what biological
features the in-edges and out-edges provide or remove
from the “background organism”. In other words, not
every edge (and not all sets of nodes/not every node) creates a new species. How is it decided what edge does and
what edge does not define a new species? We need names
to distinguish these edges. (And this is without mentioning
the fact that sometimes “species” of interest lie in the very
mesh of the lateral edges, precisely when gene exchanges
are the defining criteria of an evolutionary unit one wishes
to call a species rather than organisms with a conserved
vertical core). As the rNOL would be a real opportunity to
acknowledge the multiple processes at play in evolution,
this clarifying goal is also part of this new research program. It likely requires creating suitable concepts, rather
than importing “good old notions” that worked (to some
extent) soley for the vertical process (e.g. the tree of cell
division is not telling us where a species starts or ends,
etc.). Advocates of the rNOL should therefore refrain from
calling the vertical part of the rNOL the “species tree” or
the “organismal tree": species/organisms may not be
defined by vertical processes to start with. There are many
reasons to give a more accurate name to that likely important vertical backbone, while not conflating it with a “species tree”. I encourage the authors to rephrase their MS
accordingly, where necessary, and to replace “species tree”
or “organismal tree” or “TOL” by “vertical backbone” or
by “tree of the least frequently transferred units” when
that is what they mean. Discriminating a vertical backbone
in the net of life matters, and calling it the TOL may limit
the deeper meaning of the rNOL enterprise. (Interested
readers can also refer to [96]).
Authors’ response: We agree with the reviewer and
have updated the manuscript accordingly.

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

Reviewer 2 continued: 2. The rNOL presented here
is a rNOC, but is the rNOC inclusive enough to
describe evolution?
As it is described in the MS, the rNOL seems first concerned with the evolution of cells and that of cellular
genomes. Where are the plasmids and the viruses in the
rNOL? Is their evolution also modeled by it, and where?
Or, unfortunately their evolution is not really represented, meaning that the rNOL has room only for cellular genomes and not all evolving elements with DNA
genomes? It is unclear how the many plasmidic and viral
genomes (some of which are without homologues to cellular genomes and to other plasmids and viruses), or
even how ORFan genes, or all the sequences too divergent to be aligned and put in a tree, or the many environmental genes, could fit in a single rNOL. Where do they
fit? The reference scaffold of the rNOL, based on ribosomal RNAs and proteins, seems largely to act as the reference phylogeny of ribocells [97].
Authors’ response: The limitations of the RNoL are the
same as those of the comparative methods that are used
to construct it. True ORFans (i.e. open reading frames
that have no detectable homolog in any other genome)
would not provide information on the topology but could
be included in the model as tip metadata (quantified per
genome). Comparison of the tips, each being all sequence
data from a sampled organism or the pan-genome of a
group of organisms with similar ribosome sequences, provides the internal topology.
Thus the contents of a plasmid can be treated in the
same way as any other chromosomal gene: its position at
the tips is defined by the other sequences sampled with it
from an organism or group. We would expect to recognize
reticulations leading from these gene trees closer to the
tips than is typically found for chromosomal genes. Prophage sequences can be incorporated in the same way.
Although tips are defined as organismal (pan)genomes,
viral genomes are not in principle excluded and the
reviewer makes a salient enquiry in this respect. The only
limitation for inclusion is homology shared with enough
for phylogeny reconstruction.
Reviewer 2 continued: As such, the rNOL describes a
larger part of the history of life than the TOC (tree of
cells), yet it does not really describe the “full history of
life”. That’s why it is important to acknowledge that
going beyond the TOL could be achieved by using additional/alternative paths than the rNOL.
Authors’ response: In “The Rooted Net of Life” section
we say “evolutionary relationships of organisms are more
fully described than in existing Tree of Life concepts”. This
was the meaning intended in the conclusion but was miscommunicated in error and the manuscript has been
revised. The reviewer is correct in pointing out limitations
of the RNoL. While the RNoL provides an approach to

Page 12 of 20

reconstruct life’s history, this reconstruction will often be
ambiguous and incomplete. For example, at present no
algorithm exists that would allow the reconstruction of
ancient gene families that have left no extant descendants.
While a complete reconstruction of life’s phylogeny will
likely be impossible, we believe that the RNoL will provide
a more detailed and more accurate phylogeny than is possible under the ToL paradigm.
Reviewer 2 continued: Other research paths are also
possible beyond the TOL.
This is not a major criticism, simply an observation:
the evolutionary literature about what evolutionists
could do if the TOL were no longer their default option
is a bit more heterogeneous than suggested in this MS.
Some more literature could have been cited at places to
put the rNOL solution retained by the authors in a larger scientific perspective. I can think of at least two very
different options that were not discussed here, and I
would like to encourage the authors to quote them
somewhere in the slightly revised version of their MS:
a) Pattern pluralism [58] that questions whether we need
to replace a unique representation by another unique
representation. See also [98] that explicitly proposes to
model different evolutionary outcomes with different evolutionary patterns (one tree, one rNOL, disconnected genome networks based on shared sequences, etc.). About
these latter genome networks, see all the refs in [99], and
the research program suggested in [100].
b) Analyses of phylogenetic forests [28,86-88]. Unrooted
gene trees can be analyzed through various methods of
tree-cutting, the most famous so far being the methods of
quartet decomposition that can inform us about evolution
without necessarily providing a grand rooted unified evolutionary scheme, or requiring the reduction to a single
graph (tree-like or web-like).
I feel it is important to acknowledge that how to go
beyond the TOL is itself debated.
Authors’ response: We added and discussed some of
the suggested citations in the revised manuscript and we
expanded the discussion of the RNoL concept. However,
the goal of this manuscript was to propose an approach
that allows reconstructing evolutionary history. There are
many very useful approaches in comparative genomics
that allow identification of genomic islands, molecular
parasites, prophages and agents of gene transfer that are
important in understanding microbial genetics and
mechanisms of molecular evolution. However, these have
only limited value for reconstructing the more ancient history of life. We already devoted a significant portion of
the manuscript to discuss consensus tree approaches and
their limitations; however, we do not think it will improve
readability of the manuscript if we add a more detailed
discussion of other approaches that use phylogenetic information retained in gene families to detect plurality and

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

conflicting phylogenetic signals. We and others have coauthored manuscripts on this question in the past
[101,102], and the interested reader is invited to consult
these and the manuscripts mentioned by the reviewer for
further information on how to extract and use phylogenetic information from genome data.
Reviewer 2 continued:
Minor comments
The authors indicate that “many, if not most of [the
genes] will be congruent across most of the tree”. I do
not think we know that (most of the time this is not
tested but assumed), and for the datasets that I tested I
did not observe this kind of agreement. Rather most of
the prokaryotic/viral/plasmidic genes are surprisingly
incongruent. We will hopefully have some data published on that question in future works (Leigh et al., in
prep.), but the thousands upon thousands of microbial
trees I had the opportunity to view are in my opinion
more messy than suggested here. See also [103] for multiple phylogenetic histories in E. coli strains.
Authors’ response: As is now better described in the
manuscript using more precise nomenclature, the objective of testing for ribosomal congruence was to determine
to what extent the ribosomal proteins could be used as a
rooted reference backbone tree upon which to map gene
reticulations. To this end, we constructed phylogenies for
ribosomal proteins (both universal core proteins and
domain-specific proteins). Comparing highly supported
bifurcations between all sets of trees, we identified cases
where specific proteins were consistently in conflict with
others. As such, the particular sequences for those species
in the conflicted area of the tree would not be included in
the concatenation, in order to avoid fallacious signal
averaging within the dataset. The vast majority of comparisons showed no highly supported conflicts, while 23
intra-order conflicts were identified within 10 groups
across three domains. As these groups tend to be highly
similar to one another at the ribosomal sequence level,
and do not challenge the relationships between larger
phylogenetic categories that are of the most evolutionary
interest in a ToL/RNoL, these were preserved. Additionally, three inter-order conflicts were detected, with Methanosaeta thermophila L29 showing strong support for
grouping with Methanomicrobiales, and Staphylococcus
aureus S19 and L5 showing strong support for grouping
with Lactobacilliales. No inter-domain conflicts were
detected.
It is important to note that this methodology was not
designed to detect horizontal transfers; rather, simple
well-supported conflicts that would violate the assumptions necessary for a concatenated ribosomal dataset.
As many ribosomal protein sequences are very short,
there is limited phylogenetic information per protein, and
the resulting tree topologies reflect this in their lack of

Page 13 of 20

resolution. Therefore, a stringent criterion is required for
the identification of clear conflicts, as poorly supported
conflicts within these trees reflect a very weak power of
detection for biological events. The manuscript has been
changed to communicate more clearly communicate the
objectives of the conflict detection, and to elaborate on the
details of the methodology. As is also now stated in the
manuscript, it is important to note that the RNoL methodology is initially agnostic about “transfers” since the
backbone reference tree is simply meant to be a cohesive
scaffold; gene phylogenies are reconciled to this scaffold,
resulting in reticulations. Only once a robust, rooted
network of life is generated can something approximating
a “vertical” signal be discerned (if even then), and then
reticulations with respect to this history be described as
horizontal gene transfers. However, this being said, it is
not surprising that a technique dedicated to detecting possible transfer events (instead of highly-supported conflicts
among greater taxonomic categories), would find more
conflicts.
As far as the comment referring to evidence within E.
coli strains for multiple histories, while transfers between
closely related groups may be universally occurring at
high rates, mediated by homologous recombination
machinery acting on high sequence similarity, these kinds
of events are omitted by the resolution of our approach, as
they are not “interesting” from the perspective of deep evolutionary questions, and may fundamentally differ in
mechanism.
Reviewer 2 continued: The sentence “it is clear that
[. . . ] a reference tree representing a history of predominantly vertical descent is an essential scaffold for any
such holistic effort” is certainly correct, but maybe not as
dramatically as evolutionists have long thought. First,
such a unique reference tree cannot be produced for all
evolving forms. Viruses and plasmids from isolated
genetic worlds (see [99]) can never branch in a single vertical tree. More than one vertical tree would be required
to describe their history. If the number of viruses without
direct connection to the cellular gene pool increases, this
genetic disconnection will increasingly become a problem. Second, the “organizing importance” of the historical tree also largely depends on the (relative) lack of
information regarding other possible organizing metadata: had we more knowledge on DNA vehicles and organismal lifestyles for instance, we might decide that
lifestyle is an essential scaffold for an holistic effort.
Maybe it would be worth encouraging, along with the
reconstruction of a rNOL, the development of additional
organizing scaffolds for microbial evolution rather than
to give this major role only to the history of vertical descent. Yes, history matters (we would not be evolutionists
otherwise), but to what extent it is of “organizing importance” is largely an empirical question : what proportion

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

of the genetic characters are well explained based on the
vertical tree vs what proportion are well explained
(although in different terms) using another interpretative
framework [88]? In lineages with open pangenomes, lifestyle may matter more than vertical descent, at least at
some scale of the analysis. Open lineages [104] will also
be a problem.
What the “biological meaning” is of the central (vertical) trend is a really good question, and should be treated
first like that: as a question, even though it may be tempting to assume that the vertical trend has good explanatory power. Many evolutionists hope it does, but we do
not really know that. In the reconstruction of the rNOL,
it should be carefully tested to what extent the gene histories are (largely) disconnected from the vertical history.
In other words, maybe the authors could add some
thoughts to the following issue: Should the methodological approach to the rNOL be quite the same than the
methodological approach to the TOL, or would not be
additional and better congruence tests required to justify
the vertical backbone? Can the goal of obtaining a rNOL
be a sufficient justification for combining sequences for
improved resolution (a classical approach well described
in the authors’ text) without testing the congruence of
these sequences? Should the assumption that there is a
real meaningful vertical history recorded in the genes
used to build the background be tested? It seems that
rNOL builders should not rely on a priori assumptions
about the rate of HGT of genes, and that some tests are
critical. The authors have convincingly argued that,
depending on the expected rate of HGT, supermatrices
or supertrees should be preferred: what to do when we
do not know the amount of HGT in our taxa, over time ?
The transition from TOL to rNOL is largely determined
by the fact that HGT may be major in some genomes
and lineages, not the TOL. Thus, maybe a little section
entitled ‘Practical consequences of the TOL to rNOL
transition” could discuss this aspect in a few sentences? If
one wants to put his/her hopes in algorithmic development to improve tree reconstruction models, improved
models should account for lineages with different rates of
HGT (as the developments discussed in “Accounting for
heterogeneous evolutionary processes” clearly indicate).
Authors’ response: Many interesting points are raised
here. With reference to the “organizing importance” of evolutionary events, the ToL has been used to apply a strictly
hierarchical classification system to extant organisms.
Although we are promoting the RNoL an improved alternative phylogeny, we are not promoting a specific means of
classification based on it. We agree that any felling of a
ToL concept and its associated tree-thinking casts doubt
over the utility of a hierarchical classification system also
“rooted” in the same concept.

Page 14 of 20

Reviewer 2 continued: “118 species": what species?
Please be precise: prokaryotes, eukaryotes?
Authors’ response: We sampled across available genomes of Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukaryotes to the Order
and Phylum level, respectively.
Reviewer 2 continued: The authors suggest that rooting the ribosomal tree of life should help by polarizing
the complex reticulations of the many gene trees
mapped onto it. This seems optimistic: individual gene
phylogenies can be so messy (due to duplication, losses,
and recombinational lateral gene transfer in addition to
speciation) that even knowing how to root the ribosomal tree may not be that decisive for the polarization of
these gene trees. What can be done when there are multiple copies of the same species? And why should we
root patchy gene trees, for instance trees with three bacteria and one archaeon, between archaea and bacteria?
Such small trees are typical outcomes of lateral gene
transfers: rooting them according to the ribosomal tree
of life would hide these transfers by making us believe
that patchy gene families are ancestral gene families lost
everywhere but in these particular lineages.
Authors’ response: We agree that mapping a gene tree
onto the ribosomal scaffold is a complex, non-trivial process that needs to consider probabilities of gene duplications, gene loss, and gene transfer. Certainly, mapping a
gene with sporadic disjoint distribution will need to incorporate gene transfer relative to the ribosomal scaffold.
Furthermore, the comment on messiness is entirely correct.
In many instances multiple mappings are possible, especially if extinct and unsampled lineages are taken into
consideration. Especially for small gene families the distinction between gene-transfer donor and recipient often
is not possible. The identification of donors and recipients
is certainly probabilistic and not absolute. However, these
limitations not withstanding, the availability of a rooted
reference tree greatly facilitates the integration between
gene and reference tree [84,85].
Reviewer 2 continued: “The majority of molecular
phylogenies rooted using ancient gene duplications . . .":
Please remind the readers how many phylogenies did
that amount to?
Authors’ response: The better resolved phylogenies
with ancient gene duplications include the ATPase catalytic and noncatalytic subunits, several aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases, elongation factor proteins, dehydrogenases,
carbamoylphosphate synthetases, and the signal recognition particle/ftsZ proteins. For details see [26].
Reviewer 2 continued: There are many more examples of bacterial HGT to eukaryotes (in algae, rotifers,
cnidarian), . . .
Authors’ response: More examples have been added
to the manuscript

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

Reviewer 2 continued: “more complex than a single
tree-like narrative": I agree entirely, and you could have
quoted [58] on about that topic (and other things)
Authors’ response: We broadly subscribe to process
and “pattern pluralism”, specifically that different representations of relationships will be appropriate for different
purposes. We hope we have been more precise in communicating that the rooted Net of Life is intended as a phylogeny retaining the power of retrodiction where the
resolution of reconstructed component gene trees allows.
Other (and we would say, less narrative) ways of depicting
relationships between extant organisms are certainly
valuable as discussed in our response above. These
approaches, such as an unrooted network with weighted
edges defined by the proportion of homologous sequences
shared between pairs of nodes representing genomes
(Figure 1in [105]), and different approaches to extract
and compare phylogenetic information retained in a set of
genome [87,88,105-108]certainly depict evolutionary
information, but largely serve a different purpose. In addition to the ribosome, other characteristics have been used
to place organisms into a taxonomic framework, and, perhaps surprisingly given what we have learned about gene
transfer, many of these approaches have resulted in similar groups as the ribosomal rRNA [109]. There is value in
exploring different taxonomic classification schemes [110],
but here we restrict ourselves to discussing a particular
phylogenetic framework, that at least initially will not
impact current microbial taxonomic practice. Given that
the rooted Net of Life includes reticulations, it is not
intended as an explanandum for Darwin’s explanans
[58].
Reviewer 2 continued: “if too many conflicts are present in the datasets or the phylogenetic signal is too
weak [. . . ] these artifacts”. Please add a few references
after this sentence - there are many
Authors’ response: More references have been added
to the manuscript
Reviewer 2 continued: I understand and appreciate
why the authors prefer to use the ribosomal genes over an
average tree to build the vertical backbone, yet as a pluralistic thinker I would be happier if several rNOLs were
reconstructed based on different vertical backbones (i.e.
for different gene selections), so users could estimate how
important the choice of the vertical backbone may be (or
finally may not be) for future evolutionary conclusions.
Authors’ response: There is no other dataset that has
as strong a signal and as biologically valid justification as
the ribosome. Other backbones would likely represent
more horizontal transfers between divergent organisms
than the ribosomal backbone. However, there are a few
systems, such as the multi-subunit V/A/F-ATPases [111]
that have good phylogenetic resolution over most of the
evolutionary history of cellular organisms. One of the first

Page 15 of 20

steps in implementing the RNoL concept will be to reconcile the history of these co-evolving systems of wellresolved protein-coding genes with the ribosomal scaffold.
Reviewer 3: Robert Beiko, Dalhousie University

In this paper, the authors describe a representation of
evolution they feel would be appropriate to capture both
the vertical and important lateral phylogenetic signals of
gene trees. The model would use a tree based on a concatenated ribosomal dataset as a “scaffold” over which
could be laid frequently observed conflicting signals à la
Thermotogae, Aquificae, Thermoplasmatales, etc.
The idea is certainly an attractive one, but the paper is
quite short on detail and I’m not sure how this model
will hold up in the face of the data. Specifically:
Ribosomal proteins clearly do tend to stick together in
interaction and evolutionary terms, but the statements
about there being no LGT outside the order level in a
whole bunch of ribo-proteins very much conflicts with our
results and those of other groups. For example, the Aquificae have some ribosomal proteins that are shared exclusively with Archaea, or have strongest affinities with them.
Please elaborate on your unpublished results. Are they
based on a somehow restricted subset of ribosomal proteins? Did you use special reconstruction techniques (e.g.,
correcting for compo or rate biases as alluded to later in
the manuscript)? Is the result based on concatenations, or
comparisons of individual gene trees?
Authors’ response: See response to Reviewer 2. In this
way, the concatenated ribosomal tree is only special in its
robust consistent phylogenetic signal, which increases confidence in reconciliation topologies. While the resulting inferences about vertical inheritance may very well map to this
ribosomal tree in many instances, this is not an a priori
assumption in our method, nor is it an assured outcome.
Reviewer 3 continued: There is a LOT of LGT, and
considering all lateral relationships leads to the “hazes” of
the Dagan/Martin papers. Of course these trees are presented in a way to maximize the visual impact of LGT, but
there is still the question of how an insane number of
alternative relationships are going to be displayed on a
reference backbone. Do you envision some kind of filtering procedure by which infrequent avenues of gene sharing are suppressed? Would filtering be based on numbers
of events relative to genome size? Would short-distance
paths (e.g., within genera or named species) be suppressed
since they are expected to occur for various mechanistic
reasons ?
How would the tree/network actually be inferred and
displayed? It is not a trivial matter to overlay a large set
of reticulations onto a tree. Galled networks and cluster
networks aim to do this, but even they have considerable difficulty in capturing the complex relationships
among a relatively small set of trees [112].

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

Authors’ response: These are excellent points.
Firstly, as we have now articulated better in the manuscript, phylogenetically biased transfers occurring over
“short” distances are averaged over so that sub-order
relationships with potentially high frequencies of genetic
exchange are not explicitly depicted.
On a broader scale, there may still be a sufficiently
high frequency of reticulations to demand special consideration when plotting. Effectively depicting a reticulated
phylogeny covering all three domains in a static two
dimensional figure probably is not possible. A filtering
procedure is a good idea, perhaps in the context of a
computer based interactive graphical display so that
levels of detail can be adjusted for clarity when viewing
a particular part of the model. A range of filtering criteria could be implemented including, where known,
inferred function, distance over vertical edges, frequency
between certain lineages. Using a range of filtering criteria could also be adapted to inferring the nature of
biases (including more frequent avenues) among certain
gene families and between certain lineages.
Reviewer 3 continued: “...the ToCD is only knowable
insofar that a vertical signal is preserved...” To this I
would add “and identifiable as such”. It very well may be
that whatever extant set of organisms are the closest cellular sisters to the Aquificae do indeed share some phylogenetic affinities with them, but short of privileging
certain molecular systems such as the ribosome or cell
wall synthesis, it is statistically very difficult to decide
which of the phylogenetic affinities, none of which constitutes a majority of the overall signal, is the one to be
pinned down as “sister” to the Aquificae.
Authors’ response: We agree that it has not yet been
proven beyond reasonable doubt that the Aquificales are
not epsilonproteobacteria that picked up a ribosome from
an ancient lineage by HGT. The assumption that the ribosome of the Aquficales and Thermotogales reflects their vertical ancestry indeed reflects bias in considering the
phylogenetic import of particular molecular systems. We
note that this bias is not a prerequisite for reconstructing
the RNoL; however, it does influence the interpretation.
There is no a priori reason why such bias is unreasonable
or undesirable, provided it is not arbitrary; even in traditional taxonomies, the usefulness of characters is evaluated
based on their utility in defining groups, frequency of gain/
loss, or ease of identification. In the light of gene-based phylogenies and horizontal transfer, the problem therefore
appears to be that no quantitative, objective means yet
exists for weighing the often disparate phylogenetic signals
inferred for different parts of the molecular machinery. It is
clear that different kinds of genes are transferred with different frequencies between groups at varying taxonomic
levels, and that this is influenced by protein function, the
structure of macromolecular systems, as well as other

Page 16 of 20

factors. While beyond the methodologies and scope of this
manuscript, once a rNOL is constructed, a carefully developed set of such criteria could be used to evaluate reticulations, determining to what degree signals reflect vertical
descent, artifacts, noise, highways of gene transfer, or other
patterns of inheritance. For now, while the choice of the
ribosome is arbitrary in the absence of initial assumptions
of vertical vs. horizontal inheritance, it is deliberate in the
cohesive, robust signal it represents, which is necessary in a
scaffold.
Reviewer 3 continued: “The transfer of an entire ribosome...” Wait, doesn’t this invalidate the whole model and
contradict what you have been saying for the entire manuscript? Many of the concatenated ribo analyses (e.g., Boussau et al. 2008, which you cite) ultimately make some
assertion that the ribosome is king, and that this signal is
the one that must be correct, even in the face of overwhelming evidence from other gene trees and systems. To
continue beating the unicellular, hyperthermophilic Aquifex horse, most molecular systems (e.g., broken out by
COG category) favour Epsilonproteobacteria-Aquificae
linkages rather than the canonical, ribosomal Aquificae
+Thermotogae story. What would it take, then, to convince someone that the ribosome really has been transferred, and that Aquificae+Epsilonproteobacteria is “real"?
Authors’ response: In the original abstract where we
said “predominantly vertical lines of descent” and in the
introduction where we said “the mostly vertical evolutionary descent of a coherent biological entity” with
respect to the ribosome phylogeny scaffold, we were
anticipating that a ribosome would prove to be rarely
transferred for the reasons discussed below. We realize
this speculation may have been unhelpful and have
made revisions emphasizing that vertical inheritance of
the ribosome need not be the rule. We also realize the
sub-heading “The Reticulated Ribosomal Tree” was positively misleading (reticulations are only labeled HGTs
given sufficient evidence) and apologize accordingly! Our
speculation that total ribosomal transfer is extremely
unlikely, was due to these reasons:
1. Several operons (of both protein and RNA) would
all have to be transferred, involving many many kilobases of sequence and numerous independent events;
2. Ribosomal components are highly expressed, and
for all these dozens of extra proteins and large RNAs,
the cellular economy would provide strong selection
against their successful transfer unless there was
some major advantage;
3. What major advantage could an entire transfer
provide? Antibiotic resistance could be achieved by
the transfer of single riboproteins, in most cases;
4. Having two functional ribosomes with so many
highly similar, but slightly different subunits floating

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

around would likely poison both assembly processes
and be extremely lethal;
5. Since the native ribosome must be lost, and this
can’t happen without the new one being replaced,
both must be expressed at the same time, but see (4);
6. In the case that subunits are compatible enough to
avoid toxicity, then one would expect more random
subunit loss resulting in a hybrid ribosome. This is
not observed.
Data that would convince us of a ribosomal transfer to
the ancestor of the Thermotogales or Aquificales would be
a strong coherent signal for many other genes placing a
large part of the remainder of the genome at a single
point, e.g., a finding that the majority of genes in the
Thermotogales appear specifically related to the Thermoanaerobacter lineage would support these as a possible
sistergroup to the Thermotogales in a tree of cell division.
However, this is not what we observe. If the ribosome were
transferred in a trickle down fashion (see above) then different signals for different ribosomal components might be
detected. Our preliminary data suggest the opposite, that
genes from clostridia and archaea appear to be continuously acquired in the different lineages of the Thermotogales. In contrast, the ribosomal components contain a
weak but consistent signal that is reinforced as more ribosomal components are added to the analysis.
Reviewer 3 continued: A self-serving comment: our
2008 paper in Systematic Biology [61] dealt extensively
with the averaging of phylogenetic signals that goes on
in genome phylogeny analysis; it may be worth citing in
the discussion of phylogenetic signal averaging, since it
demonstrates that the robustness of inference is highly
dependent on both the rate and regime of LGT.
Authors’ response: We added this citation to the
discussion
Reviewer 3 continued: Finally, a grammatical comment: Compound adjectives must be hyphenated, e.g.
“genome-wide analyses” and elsewhere.
Italicize “Methanosarcina mazei”.
Authors’ response: We changed the text as suggested.
List of abbreviations
RNoL: rooted net of life; HGT: horizontal genetic transfer; ToCD: tree of
cellular divisions; ToL: tree of life.
Acknowledgements and Funding
This work was supported by National Science Foundation Assembling the
Tree of Life (DEB 0830024) and NASA exobiology (NNX08AQ10G,
NNX07AK15G) programs. GPF is recipient of a NASA Postdoctoral Fellowship
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The Leverhulme Trust funded
the publication charges as part of the project “Questioning the Tree of Life”.
Author details
1
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs,
CT 06269-3125, USA. 2Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts

Page 17 of 20

Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 3BiotechnologyBioservices Center, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-3149, USA.
Authors’ contributions
JPG, GPF and DW conceived of the study. PL, GPF and CPA performed data
analyses. JPG, DW, GPF, PL, KSS and AGG participated in its design and
wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
GPF and DW contributed equally.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 7 February 2011 Accepted: 21 September 2011
Published: 21 September 2011
References
1. Zuckerkandl E, Pauling L: Molecules as documents of evolutionary history.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 1965, 8(2):357-66.
2. Woese CR, Kandler O, Wheelis ML: Towards a natural system of organisms
- proposal for the domains archaea, bacteria, and eucarya. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1990,
87(12):4576-4579.
3. Wu DY, Hugenholtz P, Mavromatis K, Pukall R, Dalin E, Ivanova NN, Kunin V,
Goodwin L, Wu M, Tindall BJ, Hooper SD, Pati A, Lykidis A, Spring S,
Anderson IJ, D’haeseleer P, Zemla A, Singer M, Lapidus A, Nolan M,
Copeland A, Han C, Chen F, Cheng JF, Lucas S, Kerfeld C, Lang E,
Gronow S, Chain P, Bruce D, Rubin EM, Kyrpides NC, Klenk HP, Eisen JA: A
phylogeny-driven genomic encyclopaedia of Bacteria and Archaea.
Nature 2009, 462(7276):1056-1060.
4. Dagan T, Artzy-Randrup Y, Martin W: Modular networks and cumulative
impact of lateral transfer in prokaryote genome evolution. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2008,
105(29):10039-10044.
5. Doolittle WF: Phylogenetic classification and the universal tree. Science
1999, 284(5423):2124-2128.
6. Hilario E, Gogarten J: Horizontal transfer of ATPase genes - the tree of life
becomes a net of life. BioSystems 1993, 31(2-3):111-119.
7. Keeling PJ: Diversity and evolutionary history of plastids and their hosts.
American Journal of Botany 2004, 91(10):1481-1493.
8. Gogarten J, Townsend J: Horizontal gene transfer, genome innovation
and evolution. Nature Reviews Microbiology 2005, 3(9):679-687.
9. Ochman H, Lawrence J, Grolsman E: Lateral gene transfer and the nature
of bacterial innovation. Nature 2000, 405(6784):299-304.
10. Beiko R, Harlow T, Ragan M: Highways of gene sharing in prokaryotes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2005, 102(40):14332-14337.
11. Gribaldo S, Brochier C: Phylogeny of prokaryotes: does it exist and why
should we care? Research In Microbiology 2009, 160(7):513-521.
12. Valas RE, Bourne PE: Save the tree of life or get lost in the woods. Biology
Direct 2010, 5.
13. Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311(5765):1283-1287.
14. Simonson AB, Servin JA, Skophammer RG, Herbold CW, Rivera MC, Lake JA:
Decoding the genomic tree of life. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2005, 102:6608-6613.
15. Wostmann BS, Larkin C, Moriarty A, Brucknerkardoss E: Dietary-intake,
energy-metabolism, and excretory losses of adult male germfree Wistar
rats. Laboratory Animal Science 1983, 33:46-50.
16. Cavalier-Smith T: Rooting the tree of life by transition analyses. Biology
Direct 2006, 1.
17. Delsuc F, Brinkmann H, Philippe H: Phylogenomics and the reconstruction
of the tree of life. Nature Reviews Genetics 2005, 6(5):361-375.
18. Bininda-Emonds ORP: The evolution of supertrees. Trends In Ecology &
Evolution 2004, 19(6):315-322.
19. Fournier GP, Gogarten JP: Rooting the ribosomal tree of life. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 2010, 27(8):1792-1801.
20. Wilkinson M, Cotton JA, Lapointe FJ, Pisani D: Properties of supertree
methods in the consensus setting. Systematic Biology 2007, 56(2):330-337.
21. Dagan T, Martin W: The tree of one percent. Genome Biology 2006, 7(10).

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

22. Gogarten J, Doolittle W, Lawrence J: Prokaryotic evolution in light of gene
transfer. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2002, 19(12):2226-2238.
23. Gogarten JP: The early evolution of cellular life. Trends In Ecology &
Evolution 1995, 10(4):147-151.
24. Swithers KS, Gogarten JP, Fournier GP: Trees in the web of life. Journal of
Biology 2009, 8(6):54.
25. Sorek R, Zhu YW, Creevey CJ, Francino MP, Bork P, Rubin EM: Genomewide experimental determination of barriers to horizontal gene transfer.
Science 2007, 318:1449-1452.
26. Zhaxybayeva O, Lapierre P, Gogarten JP: Ancient gene duplications and
the root(s) of the tree of life. Protoplasma 2005, 227:53-64.
27. Dagan T, Roettger M, Bryant D, Martin W: Genome Networks Root the
Tree of Life between Prokaryotic Domains. Genome Biology and Evolution
2010, 2:379-392.
28. Puigbo P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The tree and net components of prokaryote
evolution. Genome Biol Evol 2010, 2:745-56.
29. Wolf YI, Aravind L, Grishin NV, Koonin EV: Evolution of aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases - analysis of unique domain architectures and phylogenetic
trees reveals a complex history of horizontal gene transfer events.
Genome Research 1999, 9(8):689-710.
30. Fournier G, Gogarten J: Evolution of acetoclastic methanogenesis in
Methanosarcina via horizontal gene transfer from cellulolytic Clostridia.
Journal of Bacteriology 2008, 190(3):1124-1127.
31. Hall C, Brachat S, Dietrich FS: Contribution of horizontal gene transfer to
the evolution of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Eukaryotic Cell 2005,
4(6):1102-1115.
32. Fitzpatrick DA, Logue ME, Butler G: Evidence of recent interkingdom
horizontal gene transfer between bacteria and Candida parapsilosis. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2008, 8.
33. Garcia-Vallve S, Romeu A, Palau J: Horizontal gene transfer of glycosyl
hydrolases of the rumen fungi. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2000,
17(3):352-361.
34. Schmitt I, Lumbsch HT: Ancient Horizontal Gene Transfer from Bacteria
Enhances Biosynthetic Capabilities of Fungi. PLoS One 2009, 4(2).
35. Marcet-Houben M, Gabaldon T: Acquisition of prokaryotic genes by
fungal genomes. Trends In Genetics 2010, 26:5-8.
36. Strope PK, Nickerson KW, Harris SD, Moriyama EN: Molecular evolution of
urea amidolyase and urea carboxylase in fungi. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2011, 11.
37. Denoeud F, Roussel M, Noel B, Wawrzyniak I, Da Silva C, Diogon M,
Viscogliosi E, Brochier-Armanet C, Couloux A, Poulain J, Segurens B,
Anthouard V, Texier C, Blot N, Poirier P, Ng GC, Tan K, Artiguenave F,
Jaillon O, Aury JM, Delbac F, Wincker P, Vivares C, El Alaoui H: Genome
sequence of the stramenopile Blastocystis, a human anaerobic parasite.
Genome Biology 2011, 12(3):R29.
38. Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP, Rayko E, Salamov A, Vandepoele K,
Beszteri B, Gruber A, Heijde M, Katinka M, Mock T, Valentin K, Verret F,
Berges JA, Brownlee C, Cadoret JP, Chiovitti A, Choi CJ, Coesel S, De
Martino A, Detter JC, Durkin C, Falciatore A, Fournet J, Haruta M,
Huysman MJJ, Jenkins BD, Jiroutova K, Jorgensen RE, Joubert Y, Kaplan A,
Kroger N, Kroth PG, La Roche J, Lindquist E, Lommer M, Martin-Jezequel V,
Lopez PJ, Lucas S, Mangogna M, McGinnis K, Medlin LK, Montsant A,
Oudot-Le Secq MP, Napoli C, Obornik M, Parker MS, Petit JL, Porcel BM,
Poulsen N, Robison M, Rychlewski L, Rynearson TA, Schmutz J, Shapiro H,
Siaut M, Stanley M, Sussman MR, Taylor AR, Vardi A, von Dassow P,
Vyverman W, Willis A, Wyrwicz LS, Rokhsar DS, Weissenbach J, Armbrust EV,
Green BR, Van De Peer Y, Grigoriev IV: The Phaeodactylum genome reveals
the evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature 2008,
456(7219):239-244.
39. Gladyshev EA, Meselson M, Arkhipova IR: Massive horizontal gene transfer
in bdelloid rotifers. Science 2008, 320(5880):1210-1213.
40. Denker E, Bapteste E, Le Guyader H, Manuel M, Rabet N: Horizontal gene
transfer and the evolution of cnidarian stinging cells. Current Biology
2008, 18(18):R858-R859.
41. Candela T, Fouet A: Poly-gamma-glutamate in bacteria. Molecular
Microbiology 2006, 60(5):1091-1098.
42. Mayer W, Schuster L, Bartelmes G, Dieterich C, Sommer R: Horizontal gene
transfer of microbial cellulases into nematode genomes is associated
with functional assimilation and gene turnover. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2011, 11:31.

Page 18 of 20

43. McCarter JP: Nematology: terra incognita no more. Nature Biotechnology
2008, 26(8):882-884.
44. Mitreva M, Smant G, Heider J: Role of horizontal gene transfer in the
evolution of plant parasitism among nematodes. Horizontal Gene Transfer:
Genomes in Flux 2009, 517-535.
45. Dieterich C, Sommer RJ: How to become a parasite - lessons from the
genomes of nematodes. Trends In Genetics 2009, 25(5):203-209.
46. Kondo N, Nikoh N, Ijichi N, Shimada M, Fukatsu T: Genome fragment of
Wolbachia endosymbiont transferred to X chromosome of host insect.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2002, 99(22):14280-14285.
47. Klasson L, Kambris Z, Cook PE, Walker T, Sinkins SP: Horizontal gene
transfer between Wolbachia and the mosquito Aedes aegypti. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10.
48. Zhaxybayeva O, Swithers KS, Lapierre P, Fournier GP, Bickhart DM,
Deboy RT, Nelson KE, Nesbo CL, Doolittle WF, Gogarten JP, Noll KM: On the
chimeric nature, thermophilic origin, and phylogenetic placement of the
Thermotogales. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 2009, 106(14):5865-5870.
49. Gophna U, Doolittle WF, Charlebois RL: Weighted genome trees:
refinements and applications. Journal of Bacteriology 2005,
187(4):1305-1316.
50. Boussau B, Gueguen L, Gouy M: Accounting for horizontal gene transfers
explains conflicting hypotheses regarding the position of aquificales in
the phylogeny of Bacteria. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2008, 8.
51. Angelov A, Liebl W: Insights into extreme thermoacidophily based on
genome analysis of Picrophilus torridus and other thermoacidophilic
archaea. Journal of Biotechnology 2006, 126:3-10.
52. Frickey T, Lupas AN: PhyloGenie: automated phylome generation and
analysis. Nucleic Acids Research 2004, 32(17):5231-5238.
53. Futterer O, Angelov A, Liesegang H, Gottschalk G, Schleper C, Schepers B,
Dock C, Antranikian G, Liebl W: Genome sequence of Picrophilus torridus
and its implications for life around pH 0. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2004,
101(24):9091-9096.
54. Deppenmeier U, Johann A, Hartsch T, Merkl R, Schmitz R, Martinez-Arias R,
Henne A, Wiezer A, Bäumer S, Jacobi C, Brüggemann H, Lienard T,
Christmann A, Bameke M, Steckel S, Bhattacharyya A, Lykidis A, Overbeek R,
Klenk HP, Gunsalus R, Fritz HJ, Gottschalk G: The genome of
Methanosarcina mazei: Evidence for lateral gene transfer between
bacteria and archaea. Journal of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology
2002, 4(4):453-461.
55. Goksøyr J: Evolution of eucaryotic cells. Nature 1967, 214:1161.
56. Martin W, Brinkmann H, Savonna C, Cerff R: Evidence for a chimeric nature
of nuclear genomes - eubacterial origin of eukaryotic glyceraldehyde-3phosphate dehydrogenase genes. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 1993, 90(18):8692-8696.
57. Jarvis P, Soll M: Toc, Tic, and chloroplast protein import. Biochimica Et
Biophysica Acta-molecular Cell Research 2001, 1541(1-2):64-79.
58. Doolittle WF, Bapteste E: Pattern pluralism and the Tree of Life
hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2007, 104(7):2043-2049.
59. Degnan J, Rosenberg N: Discordance of species trees with their most
likely gene trees. PLoS Genetics 2006, 2(5):762-768.
60. Rodriguez-Ezpeleta N, Brinkmann H, Roure B, Lartillot N, Lang BF,
Philippe H: Detecting and overcoming systematic errors in genome-scale
phylogenies. Systematic Biology 2007, 56(3):389-399.
61. Beiko RG, Doolittle WF, Charlebois RL: The Impact of Reticulate Evolution
on Genome Phylogeny. Systematic Biology 2008, 57(6):844-856.
62. Galtier N, Gouy M: Inferring phylogenies from DNA-sequences of unequal
base compositions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 1995, 92(24):11317-11321.
63. Kolaczkowski B, Thornton JW: Performance of maximum parsimony and
likelihood phylogenetics when evolution is heterogeneous. Nature 2004,
431(7011):980-984.
64. Foster PG: Modeling compositional heterogeneity. Systematic Biology 2004,
53(3):485-495.
65. Philippe H, Zhou Y, Brinkmann H, Rodrigue N, Delsuc F: Heterotachy and
long-branch attraction in phylogenetics. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2005, 5.

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

66. Robinson DM, Jones DT, Kishino H, Goldman N, Thorne JL: Protein
evolution with dependence among codons due to tertiary structure.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 2003, 20(10):1692-1704.
67. Huelsenbeck JP, Jain S, Frost SWD, Pond SLK: A Dirichlet process model
for detecting positive selection in protein-coding DNA sequences.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 2006, 103(16):6263-6268.
68. Rodrigue N, Kleinman C, Philippe H, Lartillot N: Computational methods
for evaluating phylogenetic models of coding sequence evolution with
dependence between codons. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2009,
26(7):1663-1676.
69. Letsch HO, Kuck P, Stocsits RR, Misof B: The impact of rRNA secondary
structure consideration in alignment and tree reconstruction: simulated
data and a case study on the phylogeny of hexapods. Molecular Biology
and Evolution 2010, 27(11):2507-2521.
70. Erpenbeck D, Nichols SA, Voigt O, Dohrmann M, Degnan BM, Hooper JNA,
Worheide G: Phylogenetic analyses under secondary structure-specific
substitution models outperform traditional approaches: case studies
with diploblast LSU. Journal of Molecular Evolution 2007, 64(5):543-557.
71. Dutheil J, Boussau B: Non-homogeneous models of sequence evolution
in the Bio++ suite of libraries and programs. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2008, 8.
72. Felsenstein J: Cases in which parsimony or compatibility methods will be
positively mislead. Systematic Zoology 1978, 27:401-410.
73. Inagaki Y, Susko E, Fast N, Roger A: Covarion shifts cause a long-branch
attraction artifact that unites microsporidia and archaebacteria in EF-1α
phylogenies. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2004, 21(7):1340-1349.
74. Keeling PJ, McFadden GI: Origins of microsporidia. Trends In Microbiology
1998, 6:19-23.
75. Webster A, Payne R, Pagel M: Molecular phylogenies link rates of
evolution and speciation. Science 2003, 301(5632):478.
76. NCBI Complete Microbial Genomes. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
genomes/MICROBES/Complete.html].
77. Pei AY, Oberdorf WE, Nossa CW, Agarwal A, Chokshi P, Gerz EA, Jin ZD,
Lee P, Yang LY, Poles M, Brown SM, Sotero S, DeSantis T, Brodie E,
Nelson K, Pei ZH: Diversity of 16S rRNA genes within individual
prokaryotic genomes. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 2010,
76(12):3886-3897.
78. Stackebrandt E, Goebel BM: A place for DNA-DNA reassociation and 16S
ribosomal-RNA sequence analysis in the present species definition in
bacteriology. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology 1994,
44(4):846-849.
79. Boucher Y, Douady C, Sharma A, Kamekura M, Doolittle W: Intragenomic
heterogeneity and intergenomic recombination among haloarchaeal
rRNA genes. Journal of Bacteriology 2004, 186(12):3980-3990.
80. Cui HL, Zhou PJ, Oren A, Liu SJ: Intraspecific polymorphism of 16S rRNA
genes in two halophilic archaeal genera, Haloarcula and Halomicrobium.
Extremophiles 2009, 13:31-37.
81. Ané C, Larget B, Baum D, Smith S, Rokas A: Bayesian estimation of
concordance among gene trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2007,
24(2):412-426.
82. Kubatko L, Carstens B, Knowles L: STEM: species tree estimation using
maximum likelihood for gene trees under coalescence. Bioinformatics
2009, 25(7):971-973.
83. Bansal MS, Burleigh JG, Eulenstein O: Efficient genome-scale phylogenetic
analysis under the duplication-loss and deep coalescence cost models.
BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11.
84. Beiko RG, Hamilton N: Phylogenetic identification of lateral genetic
transfer events. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2006, 6.
85. Lawrence AD, Alm EJ: Rapid evolutionary innovation during an Archean
genetic expansion. Nature 2011, 469:93-96.
86. Puigbo P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Search for a ‘Tree of Life’ in the thicket of
the phylogenetic forest. Journal of Biology 2009, 8(6):59.
87. Lapointe FJ, Lopez P, Boucher Y, Koenig J, Bapteste E: Clanistics: a multilevel perspective for harvesting unrooted gene trees. Trends In
Microbiology 2010, 18(8):341-347.
88. Schliep K, Lopez P, Lapointe FJ, Bapteste E: Harvesting Evolutionary
Signals in a Forest of Prokaryotic Gene Trees. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 2011, 28(4):1393-1405.
89. Hooper SD, Mavromatis K, Kyrpides NC: Microbial co-habitation and lateral
gene transfer: what transposases can tell us. Genome Biology 2009, 10(4).

Page 19 of 20

90. Andam CP, Williams D, Gogarten JP: Biased gene transfer mimics patterns
created through shared ancestry. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2010, 107(23):10679-10684.
91. Popa O, Hazkani-Covo E, Landan G, Martin W, Dagan T: Directed networks
reveal genomic barriers and DNA repair bypasses to lateral gene
transfer among prokaryotes. Genome Research 2011, 21(4):599-609.
92. Morandi A, Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP, Graf J: Evolutionary and
diagnostic implications of intragenomic heterogeneity in the 16S rRNA
gene in Aeromonas strains. Journal of Bacteriology 2005, 187(18):6561-6564.
93. Silver AC, Williams D, Faucher J, Horneman AJ, Gogarten JP, Graf J:
Complex Evolutionary History of the Aeromonas veronii Group Revealed
by Host Interaction and DNA Sequence Data. PLoS One 2011, 6(2).
94. Brochier C, Bapteste E, Moreira D, Philippe H: Eubacterial phylogeny based
on translational apparatus proteins. Trends In Genetics 2002, 18:1-5.
95. Gray RD, Bryant D, Greenhill SJ: On the shape and fabric of human
history. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
2010, 365(1559):3923-3933[http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/
365/1559/3923.abstract].
96. Bapteste B, Burian : Evolutionary Genomics: Statistical and Computational
Methods Humana press; 2011, chap. Philosophy and evolution: minding the
gap between Evolutionary Patterns and Tree-like Patterns.
97. Forterre P: Manipulation of cellular syntheses and the nature of viruses:
The virocell concept. Comptes Rendus Chimie 2011, 14(4):392-399[http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1631074810001724].
98. Bapteste E, Burian R: On the need for integrative phylogenomics, and
some steps toward its creation. Biology and Philosophy 2010, 25(4):711-736
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10539-010-9218-2].
99. Halary S, Leigh J, Cheaib B, Lopez P, Bapteste E: Network analyses
structure genetic diversity in independent genetic worlds. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 2010, 107:127-132[http://www.pnas.org/
content/107/1/127.abstract].
100. Skippington E, Ragan MA: Lateral genetic transfer and the construction of
genetic exchange communities. FEMS Microbiology Reviews 2011,
35(5):707-735[http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6976.2010.00261.x].
101. Xu Y, Gogarten J: Computational Methods for Understanding Bacterial
and Archaeal Genomes. In Series on Advances in Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology. Volume 7. Imperial College Press; London; 2008.
102. Zhaxybayeva O: Detection and quantitative assessment of horizontal
gene transfer. Methods in Molecular Biology 2009, 532:195-213.
103. Touchon M, Hoede C, Tenaillon O, Barbe V, Baeriswyl S, Bidet P, Bingen E,
Bonacorsi S, Bouchier C, Bouvet O, Calteau A, Chiapello H, Clermont O,
Cruveiller S, Danchin A, Diard M, Dossat C, El Karoui M, Frapy E, Garry L,
Ghigo J, Gilles A, Johnson J, Le Bouguénec C, Lescat M, Mangenot S,
Martinez-Jéhanne V, Matic I, Nassif X, Oztas S, Petit M, Pichon C, Rouy Z,
Ruf C, Schneider D, Tourret J, Vacherie B, Vallenet D, Médigue C, Rocha E,
Denamur E: Organised genome dynamics in the Escherichia coli species
results in highly diverse adaptive paths. PLoS Genetics 2009, 5: [http://
www.scopus.com/scopus/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.059249089471&partnerID=40].
104. Boucher Y, Bapteste E: Revisiting the concept of lineage in prokaryotes: a
phylogenetic perspective. Bioessays 2009, 31(5):526-536[http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/bies.200800216].
105. Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP: Bootstrap, Bayesian probability and
maximum likelihood mapping: exploring new tools for comparative
genome analyses. BMC Genomics 2002, 3.
106. Zhaxybayeva O, Lapierre P, Gogarten JP: Genome mosaicism and
organismal lineages. Trends In Genetics 2004, 20(5):254-260.
107. Hamel L, Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP: PentaPlot: A software tool for the
illustration of genome mosaicism. BMC Bioinformatics 2005, 6.
108. Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten J, Charlebois R, Doolittle W, Papke R:
Phylogenetic analyses of cyanobacterial genomes: Quantification of
horizontal gene transfer events. Genome Research 2006, 16(9):1099-1108.
109. Woese CR: Bacterial Evolution. Microbiological Reviews 1987, 51(2):221-271.
110. Bapteste E, Boucher Y: Lateral gene transfer challenges principles of
microbial systematics. Trends In Microbiology 2008, 16(5):200-207.
111. Gogarten JP, Starke T, Kibak H, Fishmann J, Taiz L: Evolution and Isoforms
of V-ATPase Subunits. Journal of Experimental Biology 1992, 172:137-147.
112. Beiko R: Telling the Whole Story in a 10,000-Genome World. Biology
Direct 2011, 6:34[http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/34].
113. Yang Z: PAML 4: Phylogenetic analysis by maximum likelihood. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 2007, 24(8):1586-1591.

Williams et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/45

Page 20 of 20

114. Larkin M, Blackshields G, Brown N, Chenna R, McGettigan P, McWilliam H,
Valentin F, Wallace I, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson J, Gibson T, Higgins D:
Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(21):2947-2948.
115. Guindon S, Dufayard J, Lefort V, Anisimova M, Hordijk W, O G: New
algorithms and methods to estimate maximum-likelihood phylogenies:
assessing the performance of PhyML 3.0. Systematic Biology 2010,
59:307-21.
116. Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP: An improved probability mapping approach
to assess genome mosaicism. BMC Genomics 2003, 4.
117. Piaggio-Talice R: Quartet suite v1.0 (supertrees by quartets). 2004 [http://
genome.cs.iastate.edu/CBL/download/].
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-45
Cite this article as: Williams et al.: A Rooted Net of Life. Biology Direct
2011 6:45.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
