<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Confocal analysis of nervous system architecture in direct-developing juveniles of Neanthes arenaceodentata (Annelida, Nereididae)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17. doi: 10.1186/1742-9994-7-17"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Christopher J Winchell, Jonathan E Valencia, David K Jacobs"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Open Access

RESEARCH

Confocal analysis of nervous system architecture in
direct-developing juveniles of Neanthes
arenaceodentata (Annelida, Nereididae)
Research

Christopher J Winchell1, Jonathan E Valencia2 and David K Jacobs*1

Abstract
Background: Members of Family Nereididae have complex neural morphology exemplary of errant polychaetes and
are leading research models in the investigation of annelid nervous systems. However, few studies focus on the
development of their nervous system morphology. Such data are particularly relevant today, as nereidids are the
subjects of a growing body of "evo-devo" work concerning bilaterian nervous systems, and detailed knowledge of
their developing neuroanatomy facilitates the interpretation of gene expression analyses. In addition, new data are
needed to resolve discrepancies between classic studies of nereidid neuroanatomy. We present a neuroanatomical
overview based on acetylated α-tubulin labeling and confocal microscopy for post-embryonic stages of Neanthes
arenaceodentata, a direct-developing nereidid.
Results: At hatching (2-3 chaetigers), the nervous system has developed much of the complexity of the adult (large
brain, circumesophageal connectives, nerve cords, segmental nerves), and the stomatogastric nervous system is
partially formed. By the 5-chaetiger stage, the cephalic appendages and anal cirri are well innervated and have clear
connections to the central nervous system. Within one week of hatching (9-chaetigers), cephalic sensory structures
(e.g., nuchal organs, Langdon's organs) and brain substructures (e.g., corpora pedunculata, stomatogastric ganglia) are
clearly differentiated. Additionally, the segmental-nerve architecture (including interconnections) matches descriptions
of other, adult nereidids, and the pharynx has developed longitudinal nerves, nerve rings, and ganglia. All central roots
of the stomatogastric nervous system are distinguishable in 12-chaetiger juveniles. Evidence was also found for two
previously undescribed peripheral nerve interconnections and aspects of parapodial muscle innervation.
Conclusions: N. arenaceodentata has apparently lost all essential trochophore characteristics typical of nereidids.
Relative to the polychaete Capitella, brain separation from a distinct epidermis occurs later in N. arenaceodentata,
indicating different mechanisms of prostomial development. Our observations of parapodial innervation and the
absence of lateral nerves in N. arenaceodentata are similar to a 19th century study of Alitta virens (formerly Nereis/
Neanthes virens) but contrast with a more recent study that describes a single parapodial nerve pattern and lateral
nerve presence in A. virens and two other genera. The latter study apparently does not account for among-nereidid
variation in these major neural features.
Background
Mid 19th century studies of nereidid polychaetes were
among the first to examine annelid nervous systems [1,2].
Since then, much has been learned about the neurobiology of adult annelids (reviews: [3-6]). With its capacity to
effect various modes of movement (swimming, creeping,
* Correspondence: djacobs@ucla.edu
1 Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Los
Angeles, 621 Charles E. Young Drive South, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606 USA

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

burrowing) and to integrate afferent signals from a diversity of cephalic and appendicular sense organs, the nereidid nervous system exhibits all the hallmarks of complex
annelids, yet does not show exceptional specialization; its
generalized morphology is traditionally considered
archetypal within Annelida [3]. Furthermore, based on
arguments that Aciculata, a modern polychaete clade
including Nereididae, is most closely related to stem
annelids [7,8], the nereidid nervous system may be little
changed from an early, errant polychaete ancestor.

© 2010 Winchell et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Despite advances made in understanding adult annelid
nervous systems, exceedingly few studies focus on their
nervous system development, the notable exception
being studies on leech (e.g., [9-11]).
As molecular systematists began to revolutionize views
of animal phylogeny in the late 1990s (reviews: [12,13];
recent analyses: [14-16]), it became clear that the bilaterian superphylum Lophotrochozoa, which includes
Annelida, has received less attention than the other bilaterian superphyla, Ecdysozoa and Deuterostomia. Knowledge of lophotrochozoan body plans and developmental
processes is critical to reconstructing the morphologic,
developmental, and genetic properties of the protostomedeuterostome ancestor [17-19]. Consequently, the
Lophotrochozoa represent a major frontier for the field of
evolutionary developmental biology (evo-devo).
The nereidid polychaete Platynereis dumerilii is currently a leading model in evo-devo studies of the bilaterian nervous system. With an emphasis on comparative
developmental genetics, this species has been investigated for its photoreceptor organs and cell types [20,21],
the early development of sensory-neurosecretory cell
types in its brain [22], and the early neurogenesis of its
trunk (primarily the ventral nerve cord) [23-25]. P.
dumerilii and its confamilial Alitta virens (formerly
Nereis/Neanthes virens) are the subjects of numerous
other evo-devo studies, where gene expression patterns
are often observed in the nervous system, but whose relations to specific neural structures are obscure. This is due
in large part to insufficient knowledge of early life-stage
internal anatomy. As noted by Ackerman et al. [26], careful description of the microanatomy of juvenile nereidids
is greatly needed to corroborate and enhance studies of
developmental gene expression. Furthermore, morphologic analysis with modern tools is needed to resolve
long-standing discordances in the literature, such as the
absence [27] or presence [28] of intersegmental lateral
nerves among nereidids, and the conflicting descriptions
of parapodial innervation presented in these studies.
The present study contributes to these objectives by
analyzing the nervous system architecture in multiple
juvenile stages of Neanthes arenaceodentata, a nereidid
polychaete exhibiting direct development. The central
approach used here, confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM) of immunolabeled acetylated α-tubulin, has
proven useful in revealing (often in exquisite detail) the
nervous system organization in widely diverse annelids
(e.g., [29-34]). Because the microtubules of cilia and neuronal cell processes (axons and dendrites) are enriched
with the acetylated isoform of α-tubulin [35,36], this
method can be used to detect ciliated sense organs, and
to produce comprehensive reconstructions of a nervous
system's "wiring", although perikarya (neuronal cell bodies) are seldom labeled. To view the acetylated α-tubulin

Page 2 of 19

labeling in more informative contexts, the specimens
analyzed here were also counterstained with a fluorescent
nuclear label and in some cases with phalloidin, an Factin label for muscle.
This study presents a comprehensive confocal overview
of the nervous system in N. arenaceodentata juveniles.
The results 1) reinforce much of the classic literature on
adult nereidid neural architecture based on methylene
blue staining, histologic reconstruction, electron microscopy, and neurophysiology; 2) reveal previously unknown
peripheral nerve interconnections and aspects of parapodial muscle innervation; 3) promote the notion that
Smith [28] overlooked variation in parapodial nerve
architecture and the presence/absence of lateral nerves
among his study taxa; and 4) determine the approximate
stages of juvenile ontogeny by which key features of the
cephalic nervous system become morphologically distinguishable. Examples of the latter include, first, portions of
the stomatogastric system, consisting of the nerves and
ganglia responsible for foregut innervation; second, the
corpora pedunculata, prominent structures of the anterior brain thought to integrate information from the various cephalic sensory organs, and that are potential
homologs of arthropod mushroom bodies [3,37]; and
third, two pairs of ciliated sense organs: the chemosensory nuchal organs of the posterior head, and the poorly
understood Langdon's organs of the anterior head.

Results and Discussion
Summary of juvenile development and external gross
anatomy

Herpin [38] and Reish [39] described the basic aspects of
reproduction and juvenile development of Neanthes
arenaceodentata. Unlike many nereidids, reproductive
individuals of this species do not undergo mass spawning
as swarming epitokes, producing planktonic embryos
that soon become ciliated larvae. Instead, mating individuals of this species form pairs that live together and
spawn in a mucoid tube. The female dies shortly after
spawning, and the male, capable of mating multiple times
throughout life [40], broods his direct-developing clutch
inside the tube for approximately 30 days (at ≈21°C).
Growth and development are remarkably synchronous
among clutch members. At about ten days post-fertilization, the embryos hatch from the egg capsules. Because
no larval stage or metamorphosis occurs, these hatchlings are referred to as juveniles.
Hatchling, 3-, and 4-chaetiger stages

The presence of two or three chaetigers (chaetae-bearing
segments), a slightly elongated posterior end bearing the
pygidium, and a distinct anterior mound (the nascent
prostomium) characterize the hatchling stage (Fig. 1A).
Several small, ventrolateral protuberances are also present. These correspond to the sensory first and second

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Page 3 of 19

Figure 1 SEM of juvenile developmental stages and basic external morphology of N. arenaceodentata. These worms were reared at ≈21°C,
and all ages are approximate. Scale bars: A-I = 100 μm; H = 4 mm. Specimens processed for SEM experienced approximately 30% shrinkage. A is a
lateral view, anterior to the left and ventral down; B, C, D, and G are ventral views, anterior to the left; E is a ventrolateral view, anterior to the upper
left; F, I, and J are dorsal views with anterior up in I, and to the upper left in F and J. A. Hatchling, 10 days post-fertilization (dpf). B. Mid 3-chaetiger
stage, 11 dpf. C. Late 3-chaetiger stage, 12 dpf. D. 6 chaetigers, 15 dpf. E. 9 chaetigers, 17 dpf. F. 13 chaetigers, 22 dpf. G. 20 chaetigers, 30 dpf. H.
Transverse view (anterior side) of an adult parapodium taken from a mid-body segment. I and J are light micrographs. I. 4 chaetigers, 13 dpf. The developing pharynx underlies the asterisk. J. Adult, 70 dpf. 1st, 2nd, 3rd nascent parapodia, an antenna, ana anal cirrus, ant anterior cirrus, dc dorsal cirrus,
dnl dorsal notopodial ligule, mo mouth, NE neuropodium, nec neurochaetae, nel neuropodial ligule, NO notopodium, noc notochaetae, pa palp, pl prechaetal lobe, pr prostomium, py pygidium, vc ventral cirrus, vnl ventral notopodial ligule.

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

anterior cirri (the second of which is chaetigerous), and to
the first and second parapodia. The prostomium and
anterior cirri ultimately form the head (see below). Four
large yolk-filled macromeres fill the hatchling and give it
a humpback appearance. These cells stop dividing after
the third embryonic cleavage, become enclosed within
the digestive tract, and are expended as a food source
during juvenile development [39]. By the mid 3-chaetiger
stage (Fig. 1B), sensory feeding palps, located ventrally on
the prostomium, begin to take shape, and the sensory
anal cirri appear as small knobs on the pygidium. By the
late 3- and 4-chaetiger stages (Fig. 1C, I), the prostomium
has enlarged significantly and bears emerging antennae at
its anterior terminus. Behind the prostomium, a definite
mouth has formed on the ventral surface. The anus
appears as a cleft between the anal cirri, and the initial,
achaetigerous developmental phase of several parapodial
pairs can be distinguished in the posterior growth zone
anterior to the pygidium.
Further juvenile development

Parapodial lengthening, a relatively continuous rate of
posterior segment addition, and changes in the anterior
cirri characterize the next stages of juvenile development
(Fig. 1D-F). In 6-chaetiger juveniles (Fig. 1D), the third
(anteroventral) anterior cirri begin to emerge below the
first (anterodorsal) ones, and by the 13-chaetiger stage
(Fig. 1F), the second (posterodorsal) anterior cirri
cephalize, changing from chaetigerous parapodia-like
structures (Fig. 1C) to long head appendages lacking
chaetae. Development of the fourth (posteroventral)
anterior cirri was not observed in any juvenile stage
examined here, but they are present in adults below the
second cirri. Cephalization of larval/juvenile anterior
parapodia is typical of nereidids and related families (e.g.,
Hesionidae, Chrysopetalidae) [41]. In nereidids, this process forms a post-prostomial ring of tissue, often referred
to as the peristomium, bearing all anterior cirri. The peristomium is traditionally defined as an anterior, pre-segmental body region developmentally distinct from the
trunk segments behind it. However, Ackermann et al.
[26] show that the anterior cirri of P. dumerilii arise from
the same embryonic blastomeres that produce the segmented trunk. Given this finding, it seems safe to conclude that, first, two highly modified and fused segments
bear the anterior cirri; second, the ganglion shared by
each pair of anterior cirri (in adults, there is an anterior
and posterior pair on each side) is serially homologous to
the parapodial ganglia of the more typical trunk segments
[42]; and third, the bi-segmented ring carrying the anterior cirri in nereidids should no longer be called the peristomium, "achaetous ring" [43] should instead be used.
Whether nereidids retain any trace of a peristomium
remains to be answered (see Ackermann et al. [26] for
more on this controversy); some authors consider it lim-

Page 4 of 19

ited to lips, the ventral epidermis surrounding the mouth
[41].
20-chaetiger and older stages

At approximately 20 chaetigers (Fig. 1G), juveniles disperse from the parental tube and begin feeding. By this
stage only one or two pre-pygidial segments exhibit
parapodial morphogenesis, whereas earlier stages exhibited a growth zone with at least five pre-pygidial morphogenetic segments (Fig. 1E). Fig. 1J shows an adult
specimen, and Fig. 1H shows an isolated parapodium.
Parapodia have two main divisions, a dorsal notopodium
and a ventral neuropodium. Each of these is further
divided into smaller processes: the dorsal and ventral cirri
are the main parapodial sensory structures; the ligules are
highly vascularized gill-like structures, also apparently
capable of sensation; and chaetae (bristles) project from
between the pre- and post-chaetal lobes. Embedded
between these lobes is a chaetal sac, from which the chaetae develop and are basally anchored [44]. During chaetal
movement (specifically muscle-controlled protraction
and retraction), the chaetal sac glides along the aciculum
[45], a stiff internal support rod originating at the proximal base of each parapodial division and tapering to a
fine point in the pre-chaetal lobe.
CLSM overview of hatchlings

Because N. arenaceodentata embryos lack ciliation [39],
and because no residual trochophore-specific neuronal
elements (apical ganglion, larval eyes, circumferential
nerve rings) were detected in hatchlings, it appears that
this species, having evolved a derived mode of development, has concomitantly lost all essential larval features
of its ancestors. Consistent with this, the major neural
features observed in hatchlings reflect the basic organization of the adult nereidid nervous system. In particular,
the central nervous system (CNS) is well developed, with
a large anterior brain joined to the two prominent tracts
of the ventral nerve cord (VNC) via circumesophageal
connectives (CCs) (Fig. 2A). Key parts of the peripheral
nervous system (PNS), most notably the 2nd segmental
nerves, are also well developed. These nerves link the
anterior cirri and parapodia (both of which appear as
dense, ventrolateral cell clusters) to the VNC. Other, less
conspicuous peripheral nerves observed at this stage
include the 1st and 4th segmental nerves, which are
rooted in the VNC and course laterally between the segmental appendages (Fig. 2A). In addition, a nerve ring
with bilateral roots in the brain circles the stomodeum
(Fig. 2A) and appears to be the first component of the
stomatogastric nervous system to develop.
Other confocal analyses of developing polychaetes
show that major components of the adult nervous system
begin to form during larval life, before metamorphosis
occurs. For example, late larvae of the serpulid Pomatoc-

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Page 5 of 19

Figure 2 Various components of the juvenile nervous system of N. arenaceodentata. Acetylated α-tubulin immunoreactivity is red; cell nuclei
are blue. Scale bars = 100 μm in A, B, G, J, K; 50 μm in C, H, I; 25 μm in D-F. A. Hatchling; ventral view, anterior to the top. Segmental nerves 1 and 4
are visible within the dashed box. B. 5-chaetiger juvenile; ventral view, anterior to the upper right. Arrows point to the first (medial-most) pair of stomatogastric nerves. C. 9-chaetiger juvenile; ventrolateral view between chaetigers 5 and 6, anterior to the left. Numerals 1-4 refer to segmental nerves
1-4. Dashed circles and dashed boxes enclose regions expected to contain nerve interconnections described in the text. Dashed green ellipses represent
parapodial ganglia; closed double arrowheads point to axons of the sn2/4 interconnection; dots are positioned near the bases of the four main parapodial nerve branches, pn1-4 (in order from anterior to posterior); and open double arrowheads point to nerves with uncertain dorsal termini. D-F. Contiguous Z-projections of the dorsal portion of a 9-chaetiger juvenile's pharynx, anterior to the top. D. Dorsal-most Z-projection (above the pharyngeal
lumen). Arrows point to commissural nerves, and punctate labeling probably represents innervation of pharyngeal muscle. E. Middle Z-projection.
Brackets contain regions of the main dorsal pharyngeal nerves that show fine neurite connections to cells of presumed ganglia. The dashed line separates the pharynx from the esophagus. F. Ventral-most Z-projection. Arrows point to the bases of the developing jaws, the tips of which are outlined
for clarity. G. 12-chaetiger juvenile anterior end; ventral view, anterior to the top. Arrows point to stomatogastric nerves 1-5 (anterior to posterior). H.
Anterior cirri of a 12-chaetiger juvenile (left side of head). The anterodorsal cirrus is at the bottom of the panel; the posterodorsal cirrus is above the
latter. I. Anal cirri of an 8-chaetiger juvenile; ventral view. J, K. 20-chaetiger juvenile; ventral view, anterior to the top. J. Mid-body segments. A single
pair of VNC ganglia is boxed, and an arrow points to its pre-septal portion. Dashed green lines delimit a single segment. All other labeling (zoom in to
see) follows panel C. K. Posterior end. 1st/2nd nascent parapodia, ag antennal ganglion, an antenna, ana anal cirrus, ant anterior cirrus, br brain, cc circumesophageal connective, cn cirrus nerve, dpn dorsal pharyngeal nerve, irc immunoreactive cell, mln median longitudinal nerve of the vnc, ne
nephridium, npw nerve of palp wall, pa palp, pn axial palp nerve, rcc root of the circumesophageal connective, sc sensory cilia, sn2 segmental nerve 2,
st stomodeum, vnc ventral nerve cord.

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

eros lamarckii [46] and the sabellariid Sabellaria alveolata [47] have rudimentary brains, CCs, VNCs, and
segmental peripheral nerves. Therefore, despite N. arenaceodentata's derived developmental mode, its hatchling
nervous system exhibits major features typical of larval
polychaetes.
In addition to the nervous system, the cilia of developing nephridia are immunoreactive to acetlylated α-tubulin and are visible in the third chaetiger (the segment
bearing the second pair of parapodia) of hatchlings (Fig.
2A). These excretory organs are more apparent in later
stages (Fig. 2B, C, J). The anterior funnels of the nephridia
are embedded in the intersegmental septum between the
4th and 1st segmental nerves of adjacent segments, and
their ducts meander posteriorly to discharge filtrate anterior to the parapodial bases [48].
Sensory appendages

By the 5-chaetiger stage, the cephalic appendages (antennae, palps, anterior cirri) are richly innervated, and the
axial palp nerves, composed of sensory fibers from the
palp tips, have clearly formed in the ventral brain (Fig.
2B). The cephalic appendages, as well as the anal and
parapodial cirri, are generally regarded as chemoreceptors, and they are all related in adult nereidids by their
expression of a similar sensory morphology. They bear
many multiciliate penetrative bipolar sensory neurons,
the most common receptor type among annelids [49].
Along with their associated glia, multiple receptors are
grouped into small sensory organs on each appendage
[50-52]. Each organ's bundled peripheral processes (dendrites) terminate in short tufts of sensory cilia that penetrate the overlying cuticle. The central processes (axons)
of an organ are also bundled, and as they travel proximally toward the CNS, they usually converge with the
central processes of other sensory organs to form a discrete nerve at the appendage base. Our observations did
not resolve all grouped cells of the appendicular sense
organs, but sensory cell processes, including the epicuticular ciliary tufts, are easily detected in juvenile palps and
antennae (Fig. 2B, G), anterior cirri (Fig. 2H), anal cirri
(Fig. 2I), and parapodial cirri (Fig. 3D, F). In the case of
the antennal sense organs, bundled central processes pass
into a ganglion at the antennal base, and the antennal
nerve forms caudal to this ganglion (Fig. 4I and 5C, E).
Note that numerous acetylated α-tubulin immunoreactive cells in the pygidium cluster around the base of each
anal cirrus nerve (Fig. 2I); the significance of these cells is
uncertain.
Segmental nerve roots and position of VNC ganglia

A close inspection of the roots of the segmental nerves
(where they connect to the VNC) in 9-chaetiger juveniles
(Fig. 2C) shows a pattern identical to that described for

Page 6 of 19

the adults of three nereidid genera (P. dumerilii, A. virens,
and Hediste diversicolor) by Smith [28]. Each trunk segment bears four main pairs of peripheral nerves that are
numbered 1-4 (from anterior to posterior), and each pair
provides sensory and motor innervation to non-overlapping portions of the segment [28]. The 2nd segmental
(parapodial) nerve, by far the largest of the four, alone
provides direct parapodial innervation. The position of
VNC ganglia in nereidids is out of register with the trunk
segments [27,28]; consequently, the anterior-to-posterior
order of segmental nerves depends on whether a segmental or a ganglionic perspective is taken. To clarify, the
anterior portion of each ganglion is pre-septal, and
because this portion bears the 4th segmental nerve, the
nerve order for each ganglion is 4, 1, 2, 3, whereas for
each segment it is 1, 2, 3, 4. This distinction is most easily
made in 20-chaetiger juveniles; by this stage the VNC has
become clearly ganglionated (Fig. 2J, K). In addition, the
VNC contains a median longitudinal nerve (Fig. 2C), considered part of the annelid groundplan [53]. This nerve
was observed under high magnification in N. areanaceodentata juveniles through the 20-chaetiger stage (data
not shown), but may be lost during later ontogeny, as has
been reported for A. virens [54].
Absence of lateral nerves

Smith's [28] reconstruction of the nereidid nervous system includes a pair of "lateral nerves". These two nerves
run along opposite outer edges of the ventral longitudinal
muscle bands and connect the 3rd segmental nerves of
successive segments (note that they are not equivalent to
the peripheral longitudinal nerves discussed by Orrhage
and Müller [53]). He classified the 3rd segmental and lateral nerves as primarily proprioceptive (i.e., they presumably sense stretch in the ventral longitudinal muscles),
and he hypothesized the importance of their intersegmental connections in facilitating the suprasegmental
rhythm of body undulation required for efficient swimming. Similarly, Quatrefages [2], studying the nereidid
Eunereis longissima, described a segmental nerve that is
rooted in the VNC ganglion of one segment and penetrates the intersegmental septum to make a neural connection in the preceding segment.
Whether the lateral/intersegmental nerves described
by Smith [28] and Quatrefages [2] are homologous is
uncertain, but their presence suggests at least a common
neuroarchitectural theme in some nereidids. However,
Hamaker [27] was adamant about the absence of such
nerves based on his examination of A. virens. Moreover,
the present analysis of N. arenaceodentata juveniles finds
no compelling evidence for any trans-septal peripheral
nerve linking all 3rd segmental nerves. The apparent
presence of lateral nerves in some nereidids and absence
in others suggests among-nereidid variation in a major

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Page 7 of 19

Figure 3 Parapodial innervation and developmental sequence of parapodial processes in N. arenaceodentata. The parapodia shown were
isolated from different 13-chaetiger juveniles. Panels A-D are Z-projections of nearly entire parapodia; fluorescent signal from deep structures is muted. Acetylated α-tubulin immunoreactivity is green; labeling of F-actin is red; cell nuclei are blue. Scale bars = 50 μm in A-D; 25 μm in E, F. A. 15th
parapodium (pre-chaetigerous), anterior aspect. This Z-projection excludes anterior optical sections that show pn1. B. 13th (youngest chaetigerous)
parapodium, anterior aspect. C. 12th parapodium, anterior aspect. D-F. 3rd parapodium, posterior aspect. D. Entire parapodium. E. Close-up of
parapodial ganglion; Z-projection of 5 internal optical sections. The putative neuronal growth cone (gc?) is tipped with red F-actin labeling (zoom in
to see). F. Close-up of dorsal cirrus. acn acicula-associated nerve, ci ciliary tuft, cn cirrus nerve, dbv dorsal blood vessel, dc dorsal cirrus, dlm dorsal longitudinal muscle, dnl dorsal notopodial ligule, dpm dorsal parapodial muscle, necl neuropodial chaetal lobe, nel neuropodial ligule, nepm neuropodial
protractor muscle, nocl notopodial chaetal lobe, om oblique muscle, pg parapodial ganglion, plm parapodial levator muscle, pn1/pn2/pn3 1st/2nd/
3rd branch of the parapodial nerve, po/pr post- and pre-chaetal lobes of the neuropodium, sc sensory cilia, vc ventral cirrus, vlm ventral longitudinal
muscle, vnc ventral nerve cord, vnl ventral notopodial ligule.

neural feature. But what could explain the opposing findings of Hamaker [27] and Smith [28] regarding the
absence/presence of lateral nerves in A. virens? It is possible that Smith's [28] reconstruction of nereidid lateral
nerves — and of parapodial innervation (see below) — is
representative of only P. dumerilii, which claimed the
lion's share of his attention (his study, bearing on many
aspects of segmental innervation, incorporated 150 preparations of P. dumerilii but only 30 of H. diversicolor and a
mere 10 of A. virens). Further investigation is necessary to
substantiate the possible variation in this character, assess
its phylogenetic utility, and determine whether other
neural adaptations are in place (such as a CNS pathway
connecting 3rd segmental nerves) to account for the
absence of lateral nerves.

Peripheral nerve interconnections

Within each segment, Smith [28] also identified two
types of interneurons of the PNS, each type connecting a
different pair of segmental nerves: the 2nd and 4th, and
the 3rd and 4th. Confocal analyses of N. arenaceodentata
juveniles revealed these same interconnections. First, the
interneuron (interneurons?) connecting the 2nd and 4th
segmental nerves resides in a cell cluster immediately
posterormedial to the parapodial ganglion (Fig. 2C,
dashed white circles). A short dendrite (dendrites?)
emerges from this cell cluster and extends anteriorly
toward the 2nd nerve, while a long axon (axons?) extends
posteromedially to meet the 4th nerve. In forming the
second interconnection (between the 3rd and 4th segmental nerves), the 3rd nerve extends laterally from the

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Page 8 of 19

Figure 4 Overview of the cephalic nervous system in hatchlings, late 3-, and 5-chaetiger juveniles of N. arenaceodentata. Acetylated α-tubulin immunolabeling is red; cell nuclei are blue. Scale bars = 100 μm in A; 50 μm in B-I. A. Hatchling; ventrolateral view, anterior to the top. Dashed ovals
approximate the locations of the developing palps. B-I are dorsal views of heads, anterior to the top. B-E. Contiguous Z-projections (dorsal-most to
ventral-most) of a late 3-chaetiger juvenile. In B, positions of the PDBGs are inferred from panel A. In D and E, dashed lines indicate densely innervated
regions of the lateral prostomium, where developing brain ganglia and sensory cells reside. F-I. Contiguous Z-projections (dorsal-most to ventralmost) of a 5-chaetiger juvenile. Dashed arcs in H and I indicate the numerous roots of cephalic nerves in the lateral neuropile; many are presumed to
be tegumentary nerve roots. 1st nascent parapodium, adc anterodorsal cortex of brain, ag antennal ganglion, amc anteromedian cortex of brain, an
antenna, ann antennal nerve, ant anterior cirrus, avc anteroventral cortex of brain, br brain, cc circumesophageal connective, dln dorsolateral longitudinal nerve, lcr lateral common root of numerous cephalic nerves, nc nuchal organ cilia, ng nuchal ganglion, nn nuchal nerve, np neuropile, pdc posterodorsal cortex of brain, pdbg posterodosal brain ganglion, ph pharynx, rcc root of a circumesophageal connective, sgn stomatogastric nerve (of the
first pair), st stomodeum, sn1/2/4 segmental nerves 1/2/4, vnc ventral nerve cord.

VNC and gradually arcs posteriorly toward the 4th nerve.
Where the two meet, the 3rd nerve terminates in a cell
cluster, presumably synapsing with the interneurons
making the connection (Fig. 2C, dashed white boxes).
Smith [28] hypothesized that for both interconnections,
excitation is transmitted to the 4th segmental nerve,
which is likely the primary conduit of motor impulses to
the dorsal and ventral longitudinal muscles. Corroborating the latter notion, Wilson [55] recorded action potentials in Neanthes brandti's dorsal longitudinal muscle
upon electrical stimulation of the 4th segmental nerve.
Thus, activity of the longitudinal muscles (which contract
to generate body flexure) may be adjusted by efferent signals related to parapodial orientation (from the 2nd/4thnerve interconnection) and the degree to which the ventral longitudinal muscle is stretched (from the 3rd/4thnerve interconnection). This coordination of parapodial
movement and body flexure is likely necessary to achieve
finely controlled ambulation and swimming [28].

Two other peripheral nerve interconnections were
observed that, to the authors' knowledge, have not previously been described. The first is a small plexus (Fig. 2C
and 2J, dashed yellow boxes) located ventrolaterally in
each segment, just dorsolateral to the 3rd/4th segmental
nerve interconnection. This plexus may serve to integrate
fibers from three different nerves: the 4th segmental
nerve, pn4 (the 4th, posterior-most branch of the parapodial nerve), and a nerve that extends from an uncertain
dorsal location. This latter nerve appears to contact the
posterior set of dorsal parapodial muscles or has a connection with pn3 in that vicinity (data not shown). The
cell-body locations and specific identities of the neurons
interacting here are as yet unknown; there may also be an
association with fibers of the 2nd/4th segmental nerve
interconnection (Fig. 2C, within dashed white circles),
potentially increasing the complexity of this plexus. The
second previously undescribed interconnection (Fig. 2C,
dashed yellow circles) occurs between the proximal end,

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Page 9 of 19

Figure 5 Overview of the cephalic nervous system in older N. arenaceodentata juveniles. A-D. Contiguous Z-projections (in order from dorsalmost to ventral-most) of a 9-chaetiger juvenile head. The dashed ellipses in A correspond to cell clusters at the terminal ends of presumed axonal tracts,
and thus probably represent posterior brain ganglia. Dashed curves in C indicate roots in the lateral neuropile of presumed tegumentary nerves. Arrowheads in D indicate the roots of the second stomatogastric nerves. E. 13-chaetiger juvenile head. The optical sections comprising this Z-projection
(located ventrally in the head) were selected to highlight the distinct paths of cephalic nerves leading to the dorsal and ventral masses of the corpora
pedunculata. F. 20-chaetiger juvenile anterior end; nearly full Z-projection showing superficial features. The corpora pedunculata (cp) are evident by
their intense nuclear staining. 1st, 2nd parapodia, adc anterodorsal cortex of the brain, ae anterior eye, ag antennal ganglion, an antenna, ann antennal
nerve, ant anterior cirrus, cc circumesophageal connective, cp corpora pedunculata, dcp dorsal mass of the corpora pedunculata, drcc dorsal root of
cc, gHa? presumed Hamaker's commissural ganglion, gHo? presumed Holmgren's cerebral commissural ganglion, lcr lateral common root of several
cephalic nerves, Lo Langdon's organ, nant nerve of anterior cirrus, nc nuchal organ cilia, ndcp nerve of the dcp, ng nuchal ganglion, nLo nerve of Langdon's organ, nn nuchal nerve, np neuropile, nvcp nerve of the vcp, pa palp, pe posterior eye, pn base of axial palp nerve, sgg stomatogastric ganglion,
sgn stomatogastric nerve, teLo terminal endings of sensory-cell peripheral processes from Langdon's organ, vcp ventral mass of the corpora pedunculata, vrcc ventral root of cc.

posterior side of pn3 and another nerve with an undetermined dorsal terminus (although it appeared to course
dorsomedially a short distance beyond the dorsoventral
midpoint of the body, where it connected to muscle or
another nerve [data not shown]). We infer this as a connection between two separate nerves, as opposed to a
branch point of pn3, because a small node of cells appears
to couple the intersecting fibers. Further research is
needed to confirm this supposition. The two nerves with
undetermined dorsal termini contributing to the aforementioned peripheral interconnections cross paths just
posterior to the parapodium, at an approximately median
location along the dorsoventral body axis (Fig. 2C).

Stomatogastric nerves and pharyngeal innervation

The stomatogastric nerves, which equip the alimentary
canal (primarily the pharynx) with motor and sensory
innervation, are fundamental components of annelidan
nervous systems [3,53]. The presence of five pairs of
stomatogastric nerves rooted in the ventral brain (1st and
2nd pairs) and CCs (3rd, 4th, and 5th pairs) is characteristic of nereidids [56]. In N. arenaceodentata juveniles,
the 1st (medial-most) pair of stomatogastric nerves
develops by the 5-chaetiger stage (Fig. 2B), and the
remaining four pairs develop by the 12-chaetiger stage
(Fig. 2G). Nerves within the pharynx itself are well developed by the 9-chaetiger stage (Fig. 2D-F). A pair of longitudinal pharyngeal nerves runs along the dorsal side of

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

the pharynx, continuing into the esophagus. Along the
way, several commissures connect the left and right longitudinal nerves (Fig. 2D). The presence of these commissures, coupled with the arrangement of fine nerve fibers
projecting into the pharyngeal tissue (Fig. 2E), indicates
the existence of one anterior and possibly two posterior
pharyngeal ganglia. The close proximity of the two putative posterior ganglia, which occur posterior and medial
to the jaws (Fig. 2F), suggests they could instead be one
large ganglion. In support of this, Henry [57], who examined the basic pharyngeal innervation of several polychaetes, diagrammed one very large ganglion behind each
jaw in A. virens; she also determined that only the 2nd
and 3rd stomatogastric nerves (Fig. 2G, second and third
arrows down) terminate at these ganglia. Apart from this
information (to the authors' knowledge), no detailed analysis of the stomatogastric nervous system of a nereidid
has been published. Brief examination of the ventral pharyngeal innervation in N. arenaceodentata juveniles suggests a general pattern similar to the dorsal pharynx. In
addition, commissures of the dorsal longitudinal nerves
connect to commissures of the ventral longitudinal
nerves, forming more-or-less continuous nerve rings.
Pharyngeal nerve rings are known from a diversity of
other polychaetes (nephtyids, eunicids, aphroditids, phyllodocids, and capitellids) [3,58], suggesting such structures were present in the annelid stem species.
Developmental sequence of parapodial processes

The 15th parapodium of a 13-chaetiger juvenile is the
earliest stage of parapodial development reported here
(Fig. 3A). The 16th and 17th parapodia are also present
(closer to the pygidium) in these juveniles, but were difficult to dissect from the body, which is less than two millimeters long. The 15th parapodium already exhibits five
processes. From dorsal-to-ventral, these are: dorsal cirrus, ventral notopodial ligule, neuropodial chaetal lobe,
neuropodial ligule, and ventral cirrus (Fig. 3A). Of these,
the middle three are smaller and less distinct than the
dorsal and ventral cirri, suggesting the cirri develop first.
This is incongruent with other nereidids [59-61] but not
surprising, as no two nereidids are yet known to share the
same developmental sequence of parapodial processes
[61]. This incongruence may reflect a methodological difference, as the analyses done here involve progressively
older parapodia (from posterior to anterior) in a single
ontogenetic stage (13-chaetigers), whereas previous studies analyze the same parapodium (one of the most anterior ones) in progressively older larvae/juveniles.
The least developed parapodium displaying emerged
chaetae is the 13th. Neither it nor the 12th exhibit newly
developed processes, but internal differentiation of the
notopodial chaetal lobe is indicated by the development
of muscles and nerves (Fig. 3B, C; see below). The 3rd

Page 10 of 19

parapodium shows significant changes (Fig. 3D). Namely,
the dorsal notopodial ligule has developed and grown to
nearly the same size as most other processes, and preand post-chaetal portions of the neuropodial chaetal lobe
are present. The notopodial chaetal lobe, in contrast, is
just beginning to emerge. The late formation of the dorsal
notopodial ligule, which ultimately becomes the largest
parapodial process (Fig. 1H), followed by the even later
emergence of the notopodial chaetal lobe, is consistent
with parapodial development in A. virens [60], suggesting
a phylogenetic signal in the developmental sequence of
parapodial processes.
CLSM analysis of parapodial innervation
Parapodial nerve branch 1 (pn1)

Nervous impulses are conducted between the VNC and
each parapodium via the parapodial (2nd segmental)
nerve, which, at the base of the parapodium, passes into a
parapodial ganglion. These ganglia, known from most
errant polychaete families [3], are prominent components
of the PNS, and reside, at least in nereidids, between the
ventral longitudinal muscle and the base of the ventral
cirrus (Fig. 2C and 3A, D, E). In N. arenaceodentata juveniles, each parapodial nerve divides into four main
branches (dots in Fig. 2C, J). These branch points are
characterized as either preganglionic or postganglionic
with respect to the parapodial ganglion. The parapodial
nerve's first (most anterior) branch, pn1, is preganglionic
(arising proximal to the ganglion) and ascends the anterior face of the parapodium (Fig. 3B, C). About halfway
up, it divides into three smaller branches: the largest continues dorsomedially and terminates at the dorsal
parapodial muscles, whereas the other branches, which
are minute, appear to terminate distally in the developing
notopodial chaetal lobe, possibly in chaetal sac musculature or at a peripheral connection shared with pn3 (see
below).
Parapodial nerve branch 2 (pn2)

The course of the parapodial nerve's second branch, pn2,
which innervates only the neuropodium, is similar to
Hamaker's [27] description of the same nerve found in A.
virens. A short distance beyond the parapodial ganglion,
pn2 divides into anterior and posterior branches, both of
which proceed distally along the ventral side of the neuropodial chaetal lobe (Fig. 3A, B, C). The neuropodial
ligule receives fibers from the posterior branch (Fig. 3D).
Approximately midway along the neuropodial chaetal
sac, both the anterior and posterior branches of pn2 turn
abruptly back toward the midline. Hamaker's [27]
description of pn2 goes no further, but he probably could
not trace it beyond this point, as its dark staining would
be difficult to detect against the opaque neuroaciculum.
However, the analyses done here reveal one very conspicuous branch of pn2 that courses backward to the very

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

base of the neuropodial chaetal lobe, roughly paralleling
the neuroaciculum. This acicula-associated nerve terminates on muscles originating at the acicular head (Fig. 3B,
C), one of which inserts at the tip of the notopodium (Fig.
3C) and has been described in H. diversicolor as a neuropodial protractor [45]. During creeping, this muscle
permits full neuropodial extension, an action that
enhances the parapodium's backward power stroke to
push the segment forward. Although not observed here,
other important features of pn2 can be inferred from
parapodial analyses of other polychaetes. In the polynoid
Harmothoe [62] and the nereidids A. virens and H. diversicolor [51], neuropodial bristle receptors with finely
branching dendrites lie directly on the chaetae. Their
ability to sense chaetal movement has been demonstrated
by the recording of action potentials in the parapodial
nerve upon gentle touch to any neurochaeta [51,62].
Additionally, multiple bipolar stretch receptors reside in
the ventral neuropodial wall of Harmothoe [62], and in
the anterior and posterior neuropodial walls of A. virens
and H. diversicolor [51]. Dorsett's [51] drawing of the
nereidid neuropodial bristle and stretch recpetors shows
their axons joining separate ventral parapodial nerves;
these are interpreted here as the anterior and posterior
branches of pn2. Further work to detect bristle and
stretch receptors using antibodies against certain neurotransmitters is merited. For example, the use of serotonin antibodies revealed chaetal sac neurons in
sabellariid larvae [47], although it is unknown whether
these are sensory or motor.
Parapodial nerve branch 3 (pn3)

The parapodial nerve's largest branch, pn3, arises from
the parapodial ganglion, ascends the posterior wall of the
parapodium, and in general divides and follows paths
similar to those described for the same nerve in A. virens
[27]; CLSM analysis is nevertheless useful in elaborating
its anatomy. At the level of the notopodium, a branch
from pn3 extends dorsomedially and, like the dorsomedial branch of pn1, terminates at the dorsal parapodial
muscles (Fig. 3A-D) (the difference is that pn1 and pn3 go
to anterior and posterior sets of these muscles, respectively). Like the neuropodial protractor and other acicular
muscles, the dorsal parapodial muscles function in creeping. They are most important during the preparatory
stroke, pulling the parapodium inward, upward, and forward before the backward-deflecting power stroke [45].
pn3's dorsomedial branch may also terminate on the
parapodial levator (Fig. 3D), a muscle that originates at
the dorsal parapodial wall and inserts via separate bundles on the notopodial and neuropodial chaetal lobes.
This muscle lifts the parapodium from the substrate
while pulling in its tips, and is thus another important
player during the preparatory stroke [45]. Above the leva-

Page 11 of 19

tor and dorsal parapodial muscles, tufts of cilia were
sometimes observed emanating from the outer body wall
(Fig. 3A, C). The nature of the cells bearing these cilia is
uncertain. No neural connections to them were evident,
suggesting they are not sensory; they may instead serve to
move gas-exchanging water currents over capillaries that
reside in this region of the integument [63].
Laterally, pn3 branches separately to each ligule of the
notopodium (Fig. 3D). In anterior aspects of the parapodia, and just medial to the ventral ligule, a long straight
nerve running parallel to the acicula-associated nerve of
the neuropodium courses medially to muscles surrounding the notopodial acicular head (Fig. 3B, C). The origin
of this notopodial acicula-associated nerve is uncertain. It
may be a branch from pn3 that projects anteriorly toward
the lateral branches of pn1 before turning medially
toward the acicular head. However, individual confocal
optical sections (rather than the Z-projections presented
in Fig. 3B and 3C) hint at the possibility of a multicellular
node, near the base of the ventral notopodial ligule, linking certain lateral branches of pn1 and pn3, the notopodial acicula-associated nerve, and ligular nerve fibers
(data not shown). This node may represent the notopodial ganglion observed by Henry [57], but further investigation is needed to confirm its presence and to resolve
the spatial relations among these nerves. pn3 receives the
sensory nerve of the dorsal cirrus (Fig. 3D, F); in contrast,
sensory fibers from the ventral cirrus do not fasciculate
into a single nerve. Instead, many fine fibers and several
larger bundles independently extend into the parapodial
ganglion (the Z-projection of Fig. 3E shows two of the
larger bundles). Some nerve fibers of the ventral cirrus
may also combine with pn2 outside of the parapodial
ganglion, as observed in A. virens [27]. Other components of pn3 not observed here but whose presence is
inferred from analyses of other nereidids [51] include
three mechanoreceptor types: notopodial bristle receptors, a notopodial flap receptor (a large tripolar neuron
residing in the dorsal notopodial ligule, sensing its flexure
during locomotion), and a dorsal cirrus receptor (a bi- or
tripolar neuron residing below the base of the dorsal cirrus, sensing its side-to-side, muscle-controlled movement).
Parapodial nerve branch 4 (pn4)

As described above, pn4 is the posterior-most branch of
the parapodial nerve; it also has the proximal-most
branch point along the parapodial nerve, diverging
slightly before pn1, the only other preganglionic branch
(the other branches, pn2 and pn3, diverge distal to the
parapodial ganglion) (Fig. 2C, J and Fig. 3A-D). Unlike the
other parapodial-nerve branches, pn4 barely enters the
parapodium; it instead passes posterolaterally into the
peripheral plexus described above.

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Among-nereidid variation in parapodial innervation

In Smith's [28] reconstruction of the nereidid pattern of
parapodial innervation, he apparently overlooked variation that is present among his three study taxa: P. dumerilii, H. diverisicolor, and A. virens. He presented a single
pattern in which there are five main branches of the
parapodial nerve: two that ascend the anterior parapodial
face (first and second branches), one restricted to the
underside (third branch), one represented by the central
fibers of the ventral cirrus sensory organs (fourth
branch), and one that ascends the posterior face (fifth
branch). This contrasts with the pattern observed in A.
virens by Hamaker [27], which is very similar to the pattern observed here for N. arenaceodentata. The basic differences are that in N. arenaceodentata and A. virens,
only one nerve, pn1, ascends the anterior parapodial face,
and no pn4-equivalent is present in Smith's [28] reconstruction. Furthermore, Dorsett's [51] diagram showing
basic aspects of parapodial innervation in A. virens and
H. diversicolor is consistent with the pattern observed
here in that his second branch, like pn2, innervates the
neuropodium, not the anterior parapodial face. Despite
these differences, Smith's [28] third and fourth branches
have a distribution similar to pn2, and his fifth branch
appears to be equivalent to pn3.
CLSM analysis of the cephalic nervous system
Hatchling and late 3-chaetiger stages

With the general labeling strategy employed here, the
hatchling brain appears as a compact mass of neuronal
cell bodies and processes. Its chief attributes are a dense
region of ventral commissures occurring between the
roots of the CCs (Fig. 2A), and three bush-like groupings
of processes: one that occupies the entire dorsal brain,
and two others occurring contralaterally just above the
developing palps (Fig. 4A). A bilateral pair of cell clusters
abuts the brain posterolaterally, and several neuronal processes extend between each cluster and the neighboring
brain region (Fig. 4A; only one cluster is shown). These
conspicuous clusters are interpreted here as the posterodorsal-most brain ganglia; the significance of their separation from the rest of the brain and the process by which
it occurs is not understood. Another conspicuous feature
of the hatchling head is a dorsolateral longitudinal nerve
that joins the dorsal root of the CC and appears to make
connections with peripheral nerves posterior to the brain
(Fig. 4A).
By the late 3-chaetiger stage, the prostomium has proliferated outward from the yolk, acquiring a more threedimensional geometry (Fig. 1C). As a corollary, the brain
has expanded along the anterior-posterior axis, but it
remains relatively simple, as few recognizable ganglia and
cephalic nerves have formed (Fig. 4B-E). Cells intercalated by an abundance of neuronal processes characterize

Page 12 of 19

the brain's superior-most cortex (dorsal to the neuropile),
which is referred to here as the posterordosal cortex (Fig.
4B). This part of the brain is situated superficially in the
head; a distinct morphological separation between it and
an overlying epidermis has apparently not yet developed.
The posterodorsal-most brain ganglia reside at this level
of the head, although their locations could only be
approximated from the dorsal aspect examined here (Fig.
4B; note that cell proliferation in the brain and neighboring regions begins to fill the space that isolated these ganglia in hatchlings). The nuchal ganglia, the bipolar
primary chemosensory neurons of the nuchal organs [64]
(see below), are present in the posterior brain just inferior
and slightly anterior to the posterodorsal-most brain ganglia, and are rooted in the dorsal neuropile via the nuchal
nerves (Fig. 4C). The development of the nuchal system
in early juveniles of N. arenaceodentata is congruent with
the polychaete Capitella (distantly related to nereidids),
whose nuchal system becomes recognizable by mid-larval
stages [65].
Also at the dorsal level of the prostomium, a large mass
of brain cells, here referred to as the anterordorsal cortex,
occupies a broad medial domain between the neuropile
and anterior head (Fig. 4C). Ventral to this cortex, cells
near the bases of the developing antennae likely correspond to the antennal ganglia (seen definitively in later
stages; see below), which are rooted in the neuropile via
antennal nerves (Fig. 4D). The dense mass of cell bodies
occurring at this level of the brain, between the developing antennal nerves and in front of the neuropile, is
referred to here as the anteromedian cortex. Ventral to
the latter, near the floor of the brain and at a level exposing the roots of the CCs, is the anteroventral cortex (Fig.
4E). Until a more sophisticated understanding of the
juvenile nereidid brain is achieved, these broad divisions
of the cortex may be helpful in describing, for example,
domains of developmental gene expression. Small portions of the neuropile angle slightly forward at this level
of the brain (Fig. 4E); most of their fibrous content probably consists of the axial palp nerves, but because other
lateral cephalic nerves converge on these structures, they
are referred to here as "lateral common roots".
5-chaetiger stage

In 5-chaetiger juveniles, the brain's posterodorsal cortex
is bilobed. The rounded edges of these lobes reach the
posterior border of the prostomium and presumably
house the posterodorsal-most brain ganglia (Fig. 4F). The
area between the lobes, which is dorsal to the pharynx, is
only sparsely populated with cells, and may not be part of
the brain. By this stage distinct cilia have developed distal
to each nuchal ganglion (Fig. 4G, H), yielding a more
complex nuchal organ. These are likely sensory cilia of
the dendrites of nuchal organ perikarya, and may thus
reside in newly differentiated olfactory chambers. This

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

labeling may also indicate differentiation of the nuchal
organ supporting cells, which become ciliated, form an
epidermis overlying the olfactory chambers, and generate
water currents to facilitate chemosensation (see [66] and
reviews by Purschke [49,64]). The antennal nerves are
clearly visible coursing along the sides of the anteromedian cortex (Fig. 4H), and like the antennal nerves of
other nereidids, are rooted posterolaterally in the neuropile [56]. The many smaller nerves joining the neuropile
laterally (marked by dashed arcs in Fig. 4H and 4I) may
represent nerves of the palp walls and the multiple fibers
that condense during juvenile growth to form the adult
head's tegumentary nerves, which supply a subepidermal
plexus (in A. virens; [42]). Lastly, a pair of nascent ganglia
appears to be present on the midline of the anteromedian
cortex (Fig. 4H), and the 1st pair of stomatogastric nerves
has developed into conspicuous structures penetrating
the anteroventral cortex (Fig. 4I).
9-chaetiger stage

Cells of the brain and prostomial epithelium are still generally continuous in 9-chaetiger juveniles; no obvious epidermis has formed (as seen in histologic sections of
plastic-embedded specimens; data not shown). This is
consistent with H. diversicolor, where brain ganglion cells
of at least eight-segmented juveniles fill the head from the
neuropile outward to the periphery [42]. By adulthood,
however, the nereidid brain is internalized within the
prostomium, surrounded by a fibrous neural lamella, and
separated from a thick epidermis [6]. Interestingly, in the
polychaete Capitella, brain internalization and separation from a distinct epidermis occurs much earlier:
within about a week of development at 19°C — before larval metamorphosis [65,67]. The cephalic nervous system
in N. arenaceodentata is nevertheless remarkably complex in 9-chaetiger juveniles (Fig. 5A-D). The posterior
brain has developed distinct ganglia, each of which
appears to be connected by its own processes to the dorsal-most portion of neuropile (Fig. 5A; note that this Zprojection is positioned approximately 27 μm below the
surface of the head, thus the posterodorsal-most brain
ganglia may not be visible). Identification of these immature ganglia awaits more thorough investigations of brain
morphogenesis through ontogeny. Knowledge of the
organization of nereidid brain ganglia is based primarily
on the adults of H. diversicolor (e.g., [68,69]); given the
possibilities of interspecific differences and spatial shifting of ganglia during ontogeny, brain anatomy of juvenile
N. arenaceodentata may not accurately reflect that of
adult H. diversicolor. However, it is thought that across all
nereidids, ganglia in this portion of the brain (including
the nuchal ganglia) are related functionally as hormone
releasing centers controlling growth and sexual maturation. They accordingly contain high concentrations of

Page 13 of 19

neurosecretory cells, some types of which are found
nowhere else in the brain (e.g., [70-73]).
Cilia of the nuchal organs have apparently lengthened
beyond the cuticle by the 9-chaetiger stage (Fig. 5A), suggesting the presence of fully functional epidermal supporting cells, possibly even fully functional nuchal
organs. In some 9-chaetiger juveniles, the two pairs of
eyes had not yet assumed their final positions relative to
one another. Such is the case for the specimen figured
here, as the anterior eyes are present on the rounded
sides of the head just ventral (not anterior) to the posterior eyes (Fig. 5B). The optic nerves were not detected;
they likely form during later development. At the same
level as the anterior eyes (i.e., Fig. 5B), the nuchal nerves
and ventral portions of the nuchal ganglia are present in
the posterior brain, and the anterodorsal cortex fills the
anterior brain in front of the neuropile. Below this, many
fine nerve fibers issue from the front of the neuropile and
pass into the anteromedian cortex (medial to the antennal nerves; Fig. 5C). Some of these fibers disappear into
what may be the dorsal portion of a bilateral pair of stomatogastric ganglia that abut the mid-sagittal plane. Inferiorly (in the anteroventral cortex), these ganglia are more
apparent, and minute connections between them and the
1st pair of stomatogastric nerves are present where the
nerves arc posteriorly toward the pharynx (Fig. 5D). The
roots of the 2nd pair of stomatogastric nerves, unlike the
1st pair, lack defined ganglia in front of the neuropile; this
may be why they do not project forward before arcing
posteriorly toward the pharynx (Fig. 5D, arrowheads).
Antennal ganglia and corpora pedunculata

The neuropile of 9-chaetiger juveniles expands considerably at its sides and displays an outward radiation of
nerves at the level of the anteromedian cortex (Fig. 5C).
Most of these nerves join the neuropile laterally (dashed
arcs), and as described above for 5-chaetiger juveniles,
probably represent nerves of the palp walls and other tegumentary nerves of the head. The largest nerves of this
radiation extend anteriorly from the neuropile. First, each
antennal nerve courses toward an ipsilateral ganglion
located just posterior to the antenna (Fig. 5C). To the
authors' knowledge, these antennal ganglia, which appear
to receive the central processes of the antennal sensory
organs (Fig. 2G and 5E), have not been described for
nereidids. It is not clear from the data presented here
what function they serve, but they may contain interneurons that relay signals from the antennal sensory organs
to the brain (see Smith's [28] Fig. 23). Second, a bilateral
pair of nerves joins the neuropile lateral to the antennal
nerves (Fig. 5C, E). The pronounced ganglia at their distal
ends are interpreted here as the rudimentary dorsal
masses of the corpora pedunculata, as they exhibit several features of adult nereidid corpora pedunculata [3,74]:
1) they reside semi-dorsally in the brain, developing in a

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

position between the antennal and axial palp nerves, 2)
they show intense nuclear staining, suggesting they contain globuli cells (minute, tightly packed, and chromatinrich neurons), and 3) in the latest juvenile stage examined
(20 chaetigers), the nerves rooting them in the neuropile
develop into thick stalks in close proximity to the palp
nerve roots and medial to the anterior eyes (data not
shown).
At the level of the CCs and their roots (Fig. 5D), evidence is found for a second, ventral pair of masses
belonging to the corpora pedunculata. This result is consistent with Hamaker [27], who found that the corpora
pedunculata (which he called "mushroom bodies"
because of their similarity to structures of the same name
in arthropod brains) of A. virens consist of both dorsal
and ventral masses. In 9-chaetiger juveniles of N. arenaceodentata, these nascent ventral masses are barely compact enough to be recognized, but their presence is
evident by the distinct nerves connecting them to the
anterior neuropile (Fig. 5D). These nerves are at slight
angles to, and occur just below, the nerves of the dorsal
masses of the corpora pedunculata. The nerves of both
masses are joined proximally (just medial to the palp
nerves), indicating they share a common root location
(Fig. 5E; here, the dorsal masses overlie the ventral
masses, obscuring their view). In 20-chaetiger juveniles,
the corpora pedunculata of N. arenaceodentata occupy a
larger proportion of the prostomium, and are positioned
more anteriorly than the adult corpora pedunculata of
other nereidid species (e.g., H. diversicolor; [74]) (Fig. 5F).
Langdon's organs and commissural ganglia

Langdon's organs are evident just lateral to the ventral
masses of the corpora pedunculata (Fig. 5D, E). Langdon
[50], studying A. virens, described the microanatomy of
these elongate sensory organs, which reside in the dorsal
prostomium between the antennae and palps; GilpinBrown [42] provided their name. Although the stimulus
to which these organs respond is unknown, they are a
common feature among nereidids, having been found in
H. diversicolor [68,75], Perinereis cultrifera [76], and
Nereis pelagica [56]. The sensory-cell processes within
the Langdon's organs of N. arenaceodentata juveniles
were not readily detectable, but patches of intense acetylated α-tubulin immunoreactivity are present at their
anterior termini (Fig. 5D, E). These likely correspond to
the subcuticular, bunched terminal endings of the sensory cells' peripheral processes. In 20-chaetiger juveniles,
these bunched peripheral processes are located immediately in front of the ventral masses of the corpora pedunculata, at the anterolateral edge of the prostomium,
precisely as Langdon [50] drew them (Fig. 5F; her Fig. 28).
Lastly, by the 9-chaetiger stage, faint nerve fibers emanate laterally from the dorsal roots of the CCs and from
the confluences of the dorsal and ventral roots of the CCs

Page 14 of 19

(Fig. 5D). These may be the constituent fibers of developing ganglia that have been identified at the aforesaid locations in the adults of several nereidid genera. First,
Holmgren's cerebral commissural ganglia abut the dorsolateral sides of the dorsal roots, and lie laterally in the
prostomium just below the anterior eyes [27,68,76].
Despite their proximity to the eyes, these ganglia probably do not function in vision, as their fibers are directed
only toward ganglia found at the second location:
Hamaker's commissural ganglia [27,56]. These reside at
the junctions of the roots of the CCs. Issuing from
Hamaker's commissural ganglia are three types of nerves:
a stomatogastric nerve, a tegumentary nerve, and a small
"extra root" of the CC [56]. These nerves are not evident
in Fig. 5D because neither the stomatogastric nor the tegumentary nerve appears to have developed, and the extra
root is obscured by the overlying dorsal root. The stomatogastric nerve, however, is clearly developed by the 12chaetiger stage (Fig. 2G, third arrow down).
Directions for prospective research

Continued research on the morphology and development
of polychaete nervous systems will be valuable for achieving a deeper understanding of bilaterian evolution. Several relevant issues are outlined here. First, further finescale morphologic analyses are needed to determine the
topographic origins and spatial dynamics of developing
brain ganglia and cephalic sense organs. Investigations of
wholemount heads using CLSM and antibodies to a variety of neural markers will be informative, particularly
when the labeling is analyzed by modern 3D reconstruction software (e.g., [77]). Use of such software to reconstruct internal head anatomy from histologic serial
sections (for light or transmission electron microscopy)
will be equally useful (e.g., [78]), as will studies incorporating immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization
for neural-patterning genes. Extensive knowledge of
cephalic neuroanatomy through ontogeny will enable
more accurate identification of gene expression domains,
lending support to hypotheses of gene function and to
arguments for, or against, various homologies in different
taxa. For example, if the development of polychaete corpora pedunculata is accompanied by expression of the
same genes deployed during the development of arthropod mushroom bodies, then homology of these brain
structures, which has been proposed on morphological
grounds [79], would be supported. In addition, polychaete nuchal organs and vertebrate olfactory mucosa
share several ultrastructural similarities [66]; comparative
developmental genetics of these sensory structures may
indicate an evolutionary relationship such as cell-type
homology.
A second intriguing avenue for future research lies in
the descriptive morphology and development of the inad-

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

equately explored stomatogastric nervous systems (SNSs)
of polychaetes. Comparisons both within Annelida and to
other bilaterian phyla may reveal patterns of SNS development and functionality, as well as characters potentially useful for phylogeny reconstruction. In terms of
phylogeny, relevant characters may derive from the number and position of stomatogastric nerve roots, longitudinal nerves, nerve rings, ganglia, and motor axon termini.
Relating to development and functionality, it will be
interesting to examine whether developmental-genetic
mechanisms are shared between the SNSs of annelids and
other bilaterian phyla, and whether annelid SNSs, like
those of arthropods, are capable of autonomously controlling multiple types of rhythmic foregut movement.
Among arthropods, much is known about SNS development in insects [80], and the crustacean SNS is a leading
model in the study of peripheral neuronal circuits and
their control over rhythmic behaviors [81]. In the lobster
foregut, for example, separate stomatogastric circuits
control gastric chewing, pyloric peristalsis, and water
swallowing (to increase internal body pressure for ecdysis) [82]. The foreguts of errant polychaetes also exhibit
multiple behaviors. In nereidids, for example, the isolated
esophagus spontaneously contracts with a complex,
rhythmic pattern [83], and different patterns of pharyngeal protrusion and jaw movement appear to correlate
with feeding, burrowing, and fighting (CJW, unpublished
observations). Thus, it is reasonable to anticipate that
morphological and physiological analyses will reveal the
existence of SNS circuits that regulate the varied motor
responses of polychaete foreguts.
Third, the organization of motor innervation of polychaete somatic muscles is poorly known and controversial. In nereidids and polynoids, very few (approximately
nine) motor neurons have been found in each VNC ganglion [28,84]. These surprisingly small cell counts have
led to several hypotheses concerning motor architecture
[28]: 1) efferent signals from a single VNC motor neuron
may be routed directly to a set of functionally related
muscles via one highly branched axon; 2) axons of the
VNC motor neurons may synapse with a system of
peripherally located, second-order motor neurons, such
as within the parapodial ganglion, that divide the primary
efferent signal and relay it to multiple muscles; and 3)
reflex circuits may be present in the PNS that effect
responses to sensory stimuli without communication
with the CNS. In support of hypothesis 1, two VNC
motor neurons of the polynoid Harmothoe appear to
branch multiple times upon leaving the cord, with each
major branch coursing directly to a separate muscle [84].
Providing support for the presence of motor neurons in
the parapodial ganglia (hypothesis 2, partially), and for
peripheral reflex circuits independent of the CNS
(hypothesis 3), isolated parapodia of N. brandti

Page 15 of 19

responded with repeatable patterns of contraction upon
chemical and tactile stimulation, with no response
observed in parapodial isolates lacking a ganglion [55].
Dorsett [51] observed another neuromuscular arrangement for what he called the parapodial retractor muscle
in nereidids. Basically, three motor axons emerged from
the VNC (they were not part of any segmental nerve) and
terminated directly on this muscle. He therefore deemphasized the role of peripheral motor neurons in polychaetes, and concluded that one fast, one slow, and one
inhibitor motor neuron triply innervate this muscle, similar to certain arthropod muscles. Mettam [45], however,
downplayed the importance of polyneuronal innervation.
He pointed out that Dorsett's [51] parapodial retractor is
actually three muscles: the posterior parapodial obliques.
These function in rapid parapodial deflection during
swimming and thus do not require slow motor innervation [45]. Efforts to establish a clearer understanding of
polychaete parapodial ganglia and motor-neuronal
arrangements for somatic musculature will benefit from
the fine-scale resolution and efficiency of CLSM. Retrograde labeling with DiI [85,86] and immunohistochemistry for various myoactive substances such as serotonin
[87], Polychaete Excitatory Peptide [88], and acetylcholine [5] (visualized with antibodies to choline acetyltranferase [89]) should prove effective in locating motorneuronal perikarya and mapping their axonal pathways to
muscle.

Conclusions
The direct-developing juveniles of N. arenaceodentata
appear to have lost all essential larval features. Their
developing neuroanatomy accords well with the organization of adult nereidid nervous systems. Many elements
of the cephalic nervous system (e.g., stomatogastric
nerves and ganglia, nuchal organs, sensory appendages,
and corpora pedunculata) become morphologically distinguishable during early juvenile stages, approximately
two weeks before emergence from the parental tube and
the onset of feeding. The difference in the timing of brain
internalization noted for Capitella versus nereidids indicates divergent mechanisms of prostomial development.
Capitella's early internalization and the apparent posterior displacement of its brain (see Meyer and Seaver's [67]
Fig. 1K) may have evolved as a means of protecting the
brain from the physical impacts of this worm's actively
burrowing lifestyle. Similar arguments have been made
for clitellate annelids (e.g., [29]).
In terms of peripheral trunk innervation, Smith's [28]
influential study apparently does not account for variation among the nereidids Platynereis dumerilii, Hediste
diversicolor, and Alitta virens. The single arrangement of
parapodial nerves he presented for these genera contrasts
with Hamaker's [27] description for A. virens, which is

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Page 16 of 19

very similar to the pattern found here for N. arenaceodentata. Furthermore, no evidence was found here for
Smith's [28] lateral nerves. Given Hamaker's [27] firm
conviction that no such nerves exist in A. virens, it seems
that lateral nerves are another variable character among
nereidids. Taxonomic bias is another reason to expect
greater variation in nereidid neuroanatomy than previously appreciated, as neural morphology is yet to be
investigated in most of the major nereidid subgroups (see
the phylogeny of Santos et al. [43]).
Immunohistochemistry combined with CLSM is an
effective approach for analyzing peripheral nervous systems [53]. Accordingly, the current study reveals previously undescribed aspects of parapodial muscle
innervation and peripheral nerve interconnections. First,
dorsomedial branches of the parapodial nerves pn1 and
pn3 respectively innervate the anterior and posterior sets
of dorsal parapodial muscles; pn3 appears to also innervate the parapodial levator muscle. Second, acicular muscles, including the neuropodial protractor, are innervated
at their origins around the acicular base by acicula-associated nerves, which traverse most of the parapodium's
width in a distal-to-proximal direction to reach their termini. Third, a segmental peripheral plexus located ventrolaterally appears to integrate fibers from the 4th
segmental nerve, the parapodial nerve pn4, and a nerve
that extends from the posterodorsal parapodium. Fourth,
a peripheral interconnection occurs between the parpodial nerve pn3 and a nerve that courses dorsomedially but
whose terminus in that direction is uncertain.
Finally, direct-developing nereidids like N. arenaceodentata serve as interesting comparisons to indirectdeveloping nereidids like P. dumerilii and A. virens. Early
developmental comparisons involving, for example, morphology or gene expression may shed light on the mechanisms underlying evolutionary loss of larvae.
Additionally, several features associated with N. arenaceodentata's direct development make it an experimentally tractable animal. For example, its large eggs, around
450 μm in diameter, are roughly 15 times larger than P.
dumerilii and A. virens eggs, and may thus be easier to
manipulate. With no feeding requirement, large broods
of around 400 synchronously developing individuals can
be easily harvested from the parental tube up through the
20-chaetiger stage.

ral population (Ballona Lagoon; Venice, CA). Specimens
used for this study came from both the old and new
UCLA populations. Adult worms were kept in an air-conditioned (≈21°C), moderately sunlit room in a 5-gallon
aquarium with 5-μM filtered seawater (salinity ≈32 ppt)
and a layer of fine sand that measured ≈1 cm deep. A
Whisper Power Filter 10 circulated the water. Adults were
fed 3 times weekly a 2:1 mixture of finely chopped Ulva
clathrata (collected from the Ballona Lagoon, rinsed in
filtered seawater, and stored frozen) and crushed saltwater fish flakes; enough food was used to completely cover
the sand. Feeding proceeded for 4-6 hours, during which
the filter was turned off. Afterward, the seawater and
remaining food were siphoned away and replaced with
clean seawater. Reproductive pairs were chosen [39,90]
and placed in 1-gallon jars fitted with bubblers. Seawater
in the jars was exchanged once weekly, at which time the
pair was fed only chopped Ulva. Extra Ulva was provided
for tube construction. Juveniles were harvested from
parental tubes and either fixed for analysis (see below) or
transferred to a 5-gallon aquarium for population perpetuation. Near the onset of feeding, the latter worms were
given a 1:1 mixture of finely ground Gerber Mixed Grain
Cereal For Baby and saltwater fish flakes. The adult diet
was provided when juvenile tubes could be seen clearly
with the naked eye. At this point, sand was added incrementally as the juveniles aged.

Methods

Specimens were taken from storage and rehydrated as
above, but the methanol solutions were in 0.1M sodium
cacodylate buffer plus 0.1% Tween 20 (SCTw). Additional
fixation was done for 2 hours with parafomraldehyde/
glutaraldehyde, 2.5% each, in SCTw. Following three 5min washes in SCTw, specimens were postfixed with 1%
osmium tetroxide in SCTw for 1 hour. After 3 more 5min washes in SCTw, the specimens were dehydrated

Animal culturing

An initial laboratory population of Neanthes arenaceodentata was established at UCLA using individuals from
Dr. Donald Reish's long-standing "Los Angeles Harbor"
colony at California State University-Long Beach. Due to
poor reproductive success, the initial population crashed
and was replaced with worms isolated from a local natu-

Specimen fixation and storage

Worms were relaxed in 7.3% MgCl 2 until no movement
was observed, and then fixed with 4% formaldehyde in
seawater overnight at 4°C. Fixative was washed away with
three 5-min washes in phosphate buffered saline plus
0.1% Tween 20 (PBTw), followed by two 5-min washes in
water plus 0.1% Tween 20. Specimens were then dehydrated with 5-min rinses in a series of increasing concentrations of methanol (25%, 50%, 75%, 2× 100%), and
finally stored at -20°C in 100% methanol. Prior to use,
specimens were rehydrated with 5-min rinses in decreasing concentrations of methanol in PBTw (75%, 50%, 25%,
3× 100% PBTw). For F-actin labeling, specimens were
fixed as above, but with 4% paraformaldehyde. They were
then washed 5× in PBTw, and stored at 4°C in PBTw with
1 mg/mL sodium azide.
Scanning electron microscopy

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

Page 17 of 19

with 5-min rinses in increasing concentrations of ethanol
(25%, 50%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 3× 100%). Specimens were
then rinsed for 10 min in 1:1 ethanol:HMDS (hexamethyldisilizane), rinsed 2× 10 min in 100% HMDS, air dried
for 2 hours, affixed to double-coated carbon tabs on aluminum stubs, sputter-coated with gold, and visualized
with a JEOL JSM-6700F field emission scanning electron
microscope. Specimens processed for SEM experienced
approximately 30% shrinkage relative to those fixed only
in formaldehyde.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Fluorescent labeling, microscopy, and image analysis

Author Details
1Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Los
Angeles, 621 Charles E. Young Drive South, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606 USA
and 2Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, 1200 East California
Boulevard, MC 156-29, Pasadena, CA 91125 USA

After rehydration, whole specimens were digested with
20 μg/mL Proteinase K in PBTw (dissected specimens
were not subjected to this treatment). This lasted 5 min
for juveniles with up to 4 chaetigers, 8 min for 5- to 10chaetiger juveniles, and at least 12 min for all older juveniles. Note that, despite the longer proteinase incubation
times for older specimens (12- and 20-chaetigers), sufficient labeling intensity was difficult to achieve and varied
considerably among specimens. The proteinase activity
was terminated with 3 rinses (2 quick and 1 for 5-min) in
freshly prepared 2 mg/mL glycine in PBTw, followed by 3
more rinses in PBTw. The specimens were then refixed
with 4% formaldehyde in PBTw for 30 min, followed by
five 5-min washes in PBTw. Further permeablization was
accomplished with a 1-hour wash in phosphate buffered
saline plus 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBTr). Non-specific binding sites were blocked for 1 hour with 2.5 mg/mL bovine
serum albumin (BSA) in PBTr. The primary antibodies,
monoclonal anti-acetylated α-tubulin (Sigma-Aldrich),
were diluted 1:800 in PBTr+BSA, and applied for 18
hours at 4°C. This was followed by 1 hour of washing with
at least 4 changes of PBTr, and 1 hour of blocking in
PBTr+BSA. The fluorescent secondary antibodies, Alexa
Fluor 568 (or 488) goat anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen), were
diluted 1:200 in PBTr+BSA and applied for 18 hours at
4°C. Following 1 hour of washing in PBTr and then 5
quick washes in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), the
specimens were cleared and mounted in Vectashield
(Vector Laboratories) containing 1:500 TOTO-3 iodide
(Invitrogen), a fluorescent nuclear stain.
Following immunolabeling, some specimens were
labeled for F-actin. To achieve this, an aliquot of Alexa
Fluor 568 phalloidin (Invitrogen) was dried by spinning in
a lidless centrifuge and resuspended to 1:40 in
PBTr+BSA. Specimens were incubated in this solution
for 1 hour, washed 3× 5 min in PBTr, washed 5× quickly
in PBS, and mounted in Vectashield plus 1:500 TOTO-3
iodide.
The Leica TCS-SP1 MP system for confocal laser scanning microscopy was used to visualize fluorescent labels.
Image adjustment and production of Z-projections of
optical sections was accomplished with ImageJ software.

Authors' contributions
CJW collected and cultured Neanthes, carried out all aspects of specimen preparation, performed the CLSM, and drafted the manuscript. CJW conceived the
study with DKJ, and DKJ contributed to writing of the manuscript. JEV scanned
the specimens for SEM. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank Donald Reish for supplying our initial Neanthes laboratory population, and Wei-Chung Chen for technical advice. This work was supported by a
GAANN fellowship to CJW and NASA Astrobiology funding to DKJ.

Received: 22 October 2009 Accepted: 16 June 2010
Published: 16 June 2010
© 2010 Winchell et al; from: http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17
This is anin is availablelicensee BioMed Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Frontiers Open Access article distributed under the
article Zoology 2010, 7:17

References
1. de Quatrefages A: Sur le système nerveux des annélides. Ann Sci Nat Sér
3 Zool 1844, 2:81-104.
2. de Quatrefages A: Études sur les types inférieures de l'embranchement
des annelés. Ann Sci Nat Sér 3 Zool 1850, 14:329-398.
3. Bullock TH, Horridge GA: Structure and Function in the Nervous System
of Invertebrates. Volume 1. San Francisco: WH Freeman and Co; 1965.
4. Dorsett DA: Organization of the nerve cord. In Physiology of Annelids
Edited by: Mill PJ. London: Academic Press; 1978:115-160.
5. Dhainaut-Courtois N, Golding DW: Nervous system. In The Ultrastructure
of Polychaeta. Microfauna Marina 4 Edited by: Westheide W, Hermans CO.
Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag; 1988:89-110.
6. Golding DW: Polychaeta: nervous system. In Microscopic Anatomy of
Invertebrates. Vol. 7. Annelida New York: Wiley-Liss; 1992:153-179.
7. Westheide W, McHugh D, Purschke G, Rouse G: Systematization of the
Annelida: different approaches. Hydrobiologia 1999, 402:291-307.
8. Purschke G: On the ground pattern of Annelida. Org Divers Evol 2002,
2:181-196.
9. Stent GS, Kristan WB, Torrence SA, French KA, Weisblat DA: Development
of the leech nervous system. Int Rev Neurobiol 1992, 33:109-193.
10. Shankland M: Formation and specification of neurons during the
development of the leech central nervous system. J Neurobiol 1995,
27:294-309.
11. Shain DH, Stuart DK, Huang FZ, Weisblat DA: Cell interactions that affect
axonogenesis in the leech Theromyzon rude. Development 2004,
131:4143-4153.
12. Adoutte A, Balavoine G, Lartillot N, de Rosa R: Animal evolution: the end
of intermediate taxa? Trends Genet 1999, 15:104-108.
13. Halanych KM: The new view of animal phylogeny. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst
2004, 35:229-256.
14. Helmkampf M, Bruchhaus I, Hausdorf B: Phylogenomic analyses of
lophophorates (brachiopods, phoronids, and bryozoans) confirm the
Lophortrochozoa concept. Proc R Soc B 2008, 275:1927-1933.
15. Hejnol A, Obst M, Stamatakis A, Ott M, Rouse GW, Edgecombe GD,
Martinez P, Baguñà J, Bailly X, Jondelius U, Wiens M, Müller WEG, Seaver E,
Wheeler WC, Martindale MQ, Giribet G, Dunn CW: Assessing the root of
bilaterian animals with scalable phylogenomic methods. Proc R Soc B
2009, 27:4261-4270.
16. Paps J, Baguñà J, Riutort M: Bilaterian phylogeny: a broad sampling of 13
nuclear genes provides a new lophotrochozoa phylogeny and
supports a paraphyletic basal acoelomorpha. Mol Biol Evol 2009,
26:2397-2406.
17. Balavoine G, Adoutte A: The segmented Urbilateria: a testabe scenario.
Integr Comp Biol 2003, 43:137-147.
18. Carroll SB, Grenier JK, Weatherbee SD: From DNA to Diversity: Molecular
Genetics and the Evolution of Animal Design. 2nd edition. Malden:
Blackwell Publishing; 2005.

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

19. Jacobs DK, Hughes NC, Fitz-Gibbon ST, Winchell CJ: Terminal addition,
the Cambrian radiation and the Phanerozoic evolution of bilaterian
form. Evol Dev 2005, 7:498-514.
20. Arendt D, Tessmar K, de Campos-Baptista Medeiros M-I, Dorresteijn A,
Wittbrodt J: Development of pigment-cup eyes in the polychaete
Platynereis dumerilii and evolutionary conservation of larval eyes in
Bilateria. Development 2002, 129:1143-1154.
21. Arendt D, Tessmar-Raible K, Snyman H, Dorresteijn AW, Wittbrodt J: Ciliary
photoreceptors with a vertebrate-type opsin in an invertebrate brain.
Science 2004, 306:869-871.
22. Tessmar-Raible K, Raible F, Christodoulou F, Guy K, Rembold M, Hausen H,
Arendt D: Conserved sensory-neurosecretory cell types in annelid and
fish forebrain: insights into hypothalamus evolution. Cell 2007,
129:1389-1400.
23. Denes AS, Jékely G, Steinmetz PRH, Raible F, Snyman H, Prud'homme B,
Ferrier DEK, Balavoine G, Arendt D: Molecular architecture of annelid
nerve cord supports common origin of nervous system centralization
in Bilateria. Cell 2007, 129:277-288.
24. Simionato E, Kerner P, Dray N, Le Gouar M, Ledent V, Arendt D, Vervoort M:
atonal- and achaete-scute-related genes in the annelid Platynereis
dumerilii: insights into the evolution of neural basic-Helix-Loop-Helix
genes. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:170.
25. Kerner P, Simionato E, Le Gouar M, Vervoort M: Orthologs of key
vertebrate neural genes are expressed during neurogenesis in the
annelid Platynereis dumerilii. Evol Dev 2009, 11:513-524.
26. Ackermann C, Dorresteijn A, Fischer A: Clonal domains in postlarval
Platynereis dumerilii (Annelida: Polychaeta). J Morphol 2005,
266:258-280.
27. Hamaker JI: The nervous system of Nereis virens Sars. A study in
comparative neurology. Bull Mus Comp Zool Harv 1898, 32:89-124.
28. Smith JE: The nervous anatomy of the body segments of nereid
polychaetes. Philos T Roy Soc B 1957, 240:135-196.
29. Hessling R, Westheide W: CLSM analysis of development and structure
of the central nervous system of Enchytraeus crypticus ("Oligochaeta",
Enchytraeidae). Zoomorphology 1999, 119:37-47.
30. Müller MC, Westheide W: Structure of the nervous system of Myzostoma
cirriferum (Annelida) as revealed by immunohistochemistry and cLSM
analyses. J Morphol 2000, 245:87-98.
31. Hessling R: Metameric organization of the nervous system in
developmental stages of Urechis caupo (Echiura) and its phylogenetic
implications. Zoomorphology 2002, 121:221-234.
32. Müller MCM, Westheide W: Comparative analysis of the nervous
systems in presumptive progenetic dinophilid and dorvilleid
polychaetes (Annelida) by immunohistochemistry and cLSM. Acta
Zool-Stockholm 2002, 83:33-48.
33. Forest DL, Lindsay SM: Observations of serotonin and FMRFamide-like
immunoreactivity in palp sensory structures and the anterior nervous
system of spionid polychaetes. J Morphol 2008, 269:544-551.
34. Worsaae K, Rouse GW: The simplicity of males: dwarf males of four
species of Osedax (Siboglinidae; Annelida) investigated by confocal
laser scanning microscopy. J Morphol 2010, 271:127-142.
35. Piperno G, Fuller MT: Monoclonal antibodies specific for an acetylated
form of α-tubulin recognize the antigen in cilia and flagella from a
variety of organisms. J Cell Biol 1985, 101:2085-2094.
36. Ferreira A, Cáceres A: The expression of acetylated microtubules during
axonal and dendritic growth in cerebellar macroneurons which
develop in vitro. Dev Brain Res 1989, 49:205-213.
37. Loesel R, Heuer CM: The mushroom bodies-prominent brain centres of
arthropods and annelids with enigmatic evolutionary origin. Acta
Zool-Stockholm 2010, 91:29-34.
38. Herpin R: Recherches biologiques sur la reproduction et le
développement de quelques annélides polychètes. Bull Soc Sci Nat
l'Ouest Fr Sér 4 1925, 5:1-250.
39. Reish DJ: The life history of the polychaetous annelid Neanthes caudata
(delle Chiaje), including a summary of development in the Family
Nereidae. Pac Sci 1957, 11:216-228.
40. Reish DJ, De Callibus K, Dewar J, Bube C: Reproductive longevity in two
species of polychaetous annelids. Zoosymposia 2009, 2:391-395.
41. Rouse GW, Pleijel F: Polychaetes. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2001.
42. Gilpin-Brown JB: The development and structure of the cephalic nerves
in Nereis. J Comp Neurol 1958, 109:317-348.

Page 18 of 19

43. Santos CSG, Pleijel F, Lana P, Rouse GW: Phylogenetic relationships
within Nereididae (Annelida: Phyllodocida). Invertebr Syst 2005,
19:557-576.
44. Specht A: Chaetae. In The Ultrastructure of Polychaeta. Microfauna Marina
4 Edited by: Westheide W, Hermans CO. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag;
1988:45-59.
45. Mettam C: Segmental musculature and parapodial movement of Nereis
diversicolor and Nephthys hombergi (Annelida: Polychaeta). J ZoolLondon 1967, 153:245-275.
46. McDougall C, Chen W-C, Shimeld SM, Ferrier DEK: The development of
the larval nervous system, musculature and ciliary bands of
Pomatoceros lamarckii (Annelida): heterochrony in polychaetes. Front
Zool 2006, 3:16.
47. Brinkmann N, Wanninger A: Larval neurogenesis in Sabellaria alveolata
reveals plasticity in polychaete neural patterning. Evol Dev 2008,
10:606-618.
48. Bartolomaeus T, Quast B: Structure and development of nephridia in
Annelida and related taxa. Hydrobiologica 2005, 535/536:139-165.
49. Purschke G: Sense organs in polychaetes (Annelida). Hydrobiologia
2005, 535/536:53-78.
50. Langdon FE: The sense-organs of Nereis virens Sars. J Comp Neurol 1900,
10:1-77.
51. Dorsett DA: The sensory and motor innervation of Nereis. P Roy Soc
Lond B Bio 1964, 159:652-657.
52. Dorsett DA, Hyde R: The fine structure of the compound sense organs
on the cirri of Nereis diversicolor. Z Zellforsch 1969, 97:512-527.
53. Orrhage L, Müller MCM: Morphology of the nervous system of
Polychaeta (Annelida). Hydrobiologia 2005, 535/536:79-111.
54. Ushakova OO, Yevdonin LA: Architectonic of larval nervous system in
Nereis virens Sars (Polychaeta, Nereidae). Untersuchungen der
Meeresfauna 1985, 34:128-131.
55. Wilson DM: Nervous control of movement in annelids. J Exp Biol 1960,
37:46-56.
56. Orrhage L: On the microanatomy of the cephalic nervous system of
Nereidae (Polychaeta), with a preliminary discussion of some earlier
theories on the segmentation of the polychaete brain. Acta ZoolStockholm 1993, 74:145-172.
57. Henry LM: The nervous system and the segmentation of the head in
the Annulata. Section III, Polychaeta. Microentomology 1947, 12:83-100.
58. Michel C: Rôle physiologique de la trompe chez quatre annélides
polychètes appartenant aux genres Eulalia, Phyllodoce, Glycera et
Notomastus. Cah Biol Mar 1970, 11:209-228.
59. Dales RP: The reproduction and larval development of Nereis
diversicolor O.F. Müller. J Mar Biol Assoc UK 1950, 29:321-360.
60. Bass NR, Brafield AE: The life cycle of the polychaete Nereis virens. J Mar
Biol Assoc UK 1972, 52:701-726.
61. Mazurkiewicz M: The ontogeny of parapodia and setae in Laeonereis
culveri (Webster) (Polychaeta: Nereididae). Zoosymposia 2009,
2:369-377.
62. Horridge GA: Proprioceptors, bristle receptors, efferent sensory
impulses, neurofibrils and number of axons in the parapodial nerve of
the polychaete Harmothoë. P Roy Soc Lond B Bio 1963, 157:199-222.
63. Nicoll PA: The anatomy and behavior of the vascular systems in Nereis
virens and Nereis limbata. Biol Bull 1954, 106:69-82.
64. Purschke G: Ultrastructure of nuchal organs in polychaetes (Annelida)new results and review. Acta Zool-Stockholm 1997, 78:123-143.
65. Bhup R, Marsden JR: The development of the central nervous system in
Capitella capitata (Polychaeta, Annelida). Can J Zool 1982, 60:2284-2295.
66. Whittle AC, Zahid ZR: Fine structure of nuchal organs in some errant
polychaetous annelids. J Morphol 1974, 144:167-184.
67. Meyer NP, Seaver EC: Neurogenesis in an annelid: characterization of
brain neural precursors in the polychaete Capitella sp. I. Dev Biol 2009,
335:237-252.
68. Holmgren N: Zur vergleichenden Anatomie des Gehirns von
Polychaeten, Onychophoren, Xiphosuren, Arachniden, Crustaceen,
Myriapoden und Insekten. K svenska Vetensk-Akad Handl 1916, 56:1-303.
69. Fewou J, Dhainaut-Courtois N: Research on polychaete annelid
osmoregulatory peptide(s) by immunocytochemical and physiological
approaches. Computer reconstruction of the brain and evidence for a
role of angiotensin-like molecules in Nereis (Hediste) diversicolor OF
Müller. Biol Cell 1995, 85:21-33.

Winchell et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/7/1/17

70. Golding DW: The diversity of secretory neuones in the brain of Nereis. Z
Zellforsch 1967, 82:321-344.
71. Dhainaut-Courtois N: Étude histologique et ultrastructurale des cellules
nerveuses du ganglion cérébral de Nereis pelagica L. (Annélide
Polychète). Comparaison entre les types cellulaires I-VI et ceux décrits
antérieurement chez les Nereidae. Gen Comp Endocrinol 1968,
11:414-443.
72. Golding DW, Whittle AC: Neurosecretion and related phenomena in
annelids. Int Rev Cytol 1977:189-302.
73. Bell K, Marsden JR: Age-related histological changes in neurosecretory
cells in the supraoesophageal ganglion of Nereis virens (Annelida,
Polychaeta). Can J Zool 1980, 58:1735-1740.
74. Heuer CM, Loesel R: Immunofluorescence analysis of the internal brain
anatomy of Nereis diversicolor (Polychaeta, Annelida). Cell Tissue Res
2008, 331:713-724.
75. Retzius G: Zur Kenntnis des Gehirnganglions und des sensibelen
Nervensystems der Polychaeten. Biol Untersuch 1895, 7:6-11.
76. Binard A, Jeener R: Morphologie du lobe préoral des polychètes. Rec
Inst Zool Torley-Rousseau 1928, 2:117-240.
77. Bergter A, Brubacher JL, Paululat A: Muscle formation during
embryogenesis of the polychaete Ophryotrocha diadema
(Dorvilleidae)-new insights into annelid muscle patterns. Front Zool
2008, 5:1.
78. Neusser TP, Heß M, Schrödl M: Tiny but complex - interactive 3D
visualization of the interstitial acochlidian gastropod Pseudunela
cornuta (Challis, 1970). Front Zool 2009, 6:20.
79. Heuer CM, Loesel R: Three-dimensional reconstruction of mushroom
body neuropils in the polychaete species Nereis diversicolor and
Harmothoe areolata (Phyllodocida, Annelida). Zoomorphology 2008,
128:219-226.
80. Hartenstein V: Development of the insect stomatogastric nervous
system. Trends Neurosci 1997, 20:421-427.
81. Selverston AI: A neural infrastructure for rhythmic motor patterns. Cell
Mol Neurobiol 2005, 25:223-244.
82. Ayali A: The role of the arthropod stomatogastric nervous system in
moulting behaviour and ecdysis. J Exp Biol 2009, 212:453-459.
83. Krajniak KG, Greenberg MJ: The localization of FMRFamide in the
nervous and somatic tissues of Nereis virens and its effects upon the
isolated esophagus. Comp Biochem Physiol 1992, 101:93-100.
84. Horridge GA: Analysis of rapid responses of Nereis and Harmothoë
(Annelida). P Roy Soc Lond B Bio 1959, 150:245-262.
85. Sink H, Whitington PM: Location and connectivity of abdominal
motoneurons in the embryo and larva of Drosophila melanogaster. J
Neurobiol 1990, 22:298-311.
86. Landgraf M, Bossing T, Technau GM, Bate M: The origin, location, and
projections of the embryonic abdominal motorneurons of Drosophila.
J Neurosci 1997, 17:9642-9655.
87. Miron M-J, Anctil M: Serotoninlike immunoreactivity in the central and
peripheral nervous system of the scale worm Harmothoe imbricata
(Polychaeta). J Comp Neurol 1988, 275:429-440.
88. Matsushima O, Takahama H, Ono Y, Nagahama T, Morishita F, Furukawa Y,
Iwakoshi-Ukena E, Hisada M, Takuwa-Kuroda K, Minakata H: A novel
GGNG-related neuropeptide from the polychaete Perinereis
vancaurica. Peptides 2002, 23:1379-1390.
89. D'este L, Kimura S, Casini A, Matsuo A, Bellier J-P, Kimura H, Renda TG: First
visualization of cholinergic cells and fibers by immunohistochemistry
for choline acetyltransferase of the common type in the optic lobe and
peduncle complex of Octopus vulgaris. J Comp Neurol 2008,
509:566-579.
90. Reish DJ: Culture methods for rearing polychaetous annelids through
sexual maturity. In Laboratory Animal Management: Marine Invertebrates
Edited by: Committee on Marine Invertebrates, National Research
Council. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1981:180-198.
doi: 10.1186/1742-9994-7-17
Cite this article as: Winchell et al., Confocal analysis of nervous system architecture in direct-developing juveniles of Neanthes arenaceodentata (Annelida, Nereididae) Frontiers in Zoology 2010, 7:17

Page 19 of 19

</pre>
</body>
</html>
