<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>GPCR-SSFE: A comprehensive database of G-protein-coupled receptor template predictions and homology models</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-185"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Catherine L Worth"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

DATABASE

Open Access

GPCR-SSFE: A comprehensive database of
G-protein-coupled receptor template predictions
and homology models
Catherine L Worth1,2, Annika Kreuchwig1, Gunnar Kleinau1,3 and Gerd Krause1*

Abstract
Background: G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) transduce a wide variety of extracellular signals to within the
cell and therefore have a key role in regulating cell activity and physiological function. GPCR malfunction is
responsible for a wide range of diseases including cancer, diabetes and hyperthyroidism and a large proportion of
drugs on the market target these receptors. The three dimensional structure of GPCRs is important for elucidating
the molecular mechanisms underlying these diseases and for performing structure-based drug design. Although
structural data are restricted to only a handful of GPCRs, homology models can be used as a proxy for those
receptors not having crystal structures. However, many researchers working on GPCRs are not experienced
homology modellers and are therefore unable to benefit from the information that can be gleaned from such
three-dimensional models. Here, we present a comprehensive database called the GPCR-SSFE, which provides initial
homology models of the transmembrane helices for a large variety of family A GPCRs.
Description: Extending on our previous theoretical work, we have developed an automated pipeline for GPCR
homology modelling and applied it to a large set of family A GPCR sequences. Our pipeline is a fragment-based
approach that exploits available family A crystal structures. The GPCR-SSFE database stores the template
predictions, sequence alignments, identified sequence and structure motifs and homology models for 5025 family
A GPCRs. Users are able to browse the GPCR dataset according to their pharmacological classification or search for
results using a UniProt entry name. It is also possible for a user to submit a GPCR sequence that is not contained
in the database for analysis and homology model building. The models can be viewed using a Jmol applet and
are also available for download along with the alignments.
Conclusions: The data provided by GPCR-SSFE are useful for investigating general and detailed sequencestructure-function relationships of GPCRs, performing structure-based drug design and for better understanding the
molecular mechanisms underlying disease-associated mutations in GPCRs. The effectiveness of our multiple
template and fragment approach is demonstrated by the accuracy of our predicted homology models compared
to recently published crystal structures.

Background
Due to their fundamental role in signal transduction, G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the target of a
large proportion of medical drugs. GPCR structural data
are important for understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying diseases caused by mutations in these
receptors, as well as for structure-based drug design. Up
until November 2010, experimentally determined three* Correspondence: gkrause@fmp-berlin.de
1
Leibniz-Institut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), 13125 Berlin, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

dimensional structures of family A GPCRs were only
available for four members - see Topiol and Sabio [1]
for a review of these structures. This is in stark contrast
to the total number of family A GPCRs, which for
humans alone has recently been estimated at 750 receptors [2]. All of the family A GPCR structures share a
common molecular architecture of seven transmembrane helices (TMHs), therefore the deficit in GPCR
experimental structures can be rectified by building
molecular models of GPCRs of unknown structure using
homology modelling techniques [3]. Currently, there are

© 2011 Worth et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

seven different GPCR structures to choose from when
building homology models of GPCRs in the inactive
state: bovine rhodopsin (Swiss-Prot:opsd_bovin) [4];
Japanese flying squid rhodopsin (Swiss-Prot:opsd_todpa)
[5,6]; common turkey beta-1 adrenergic receptor (SwissProt:adrb1_melga) [7]; human beta-2 adrenergic receptor (Swiss-Prot:adrb2_human) [8,9]; human adenosine
receptor A2A (Swiss-Prot:aa2ar_human) [10]; human
dopamine D3 receptor (Swiss-Prot:drd3_human) [11]
and human CXCR4 chemokine receptor (Swiss-Prot:
cxcr4_human) [12]. However, despite the common general architecture of these structures, key differences do
exist between them. The choice of which experimental
GPCR structure(s) to use for building a comparative
model of a particular GPCR is unclear and without
detailed structural and sequence analyses, could be
arbitrary.
In order to help clarify the choice of template selection for GPCR homology modelling, we recently developed a workflow for identifying the most appropriate
template to use for building homology models of family
A GPCRs [13]. We analyzed in detail conserved and
unique sequence motifs and structural features in the
five experimentally-determined GPCR structures available at the time. Our analysis provided deeper insight
into specific and important structural features of GPCRs
and valuable information for template selection. Using
key features, we formulated a workflow for identifying
the most appropriate template(s) for building homology
models of GPCRs of unknown structure. Our analysis
revealed that the available crystal structures represent
only a subset of all possible structural variation in family
A GPCRs. Some GPCRs have structural features that are
distributed over different crystal structures or which are
not present in the templates, suggesting that homology
models should be built using a fragment approach
whereby template selection is carried out for each
TMH, rather than the receptor as a whole.
There are a number of web resources available which
focus on GPCRs. The IUPHAR database of GPCRs provides a comprehensive catalogue of peer-reviewed pharmacological, chemical, genetic, functional and
anatomical information on human, rat and mouse nonsensory GPCRs, as well as links to other relevant
resources [14]. The GPCRDB is an online information
system for GPCRs which provides multiple sequence
alignments, mutation data, ligand binding data and various tools such as an alignment builder and predicting
the effects of mutations [15]. Interactions between
human GPCRs, G proteins and effectors can be visualized using human-gpDB [16] whilst GPCR oligomer
information is provided by GPCR-OKB [17]. Where
structural data are provided by the aforementioned
resources, they are limited to the handful of GPCRs

Page 2 of 10

with crystal structures available. The specialized GPCR
databases SSFA [18] and GRIS [19] provide homology
models of GPCRs, although these are restricted to the
three glycoprotein hormone receptors. Zhang and coworkers used their threading assembler refinement
method to build molecular models of 907 human
GPCRs [20]. Although the models are available for
download, they are currently not stored in a database
and they were generated at a time when only the structure of bovine rhodopsin was available.
We have now extended our previous theoretical work
and automated our workflow and applied it to a set of
5025 family A GPCR sequences. Based on these automated template suggestions, homology models were
built of the seven TMHs and helix 8 of the 5025 receptors. Here, we present the GPCR-Sequence Structure
Feature Extractor (SSFE) database, which stores the
template predictions, the identified sequence and structure motifs and homology models of 5025 family A
GPCRs. Users are able to browse the GPCR dataset
stored in GPCR-SSFE or search for results using a UniProt entry name [21]. It is also possible for a user to
submit a GPCR sequence that is not contained in the
database for analysis, with the template suggestions for
the seven TMHs and helix 8 returned along with a
molecular model. The molecular models presented in
GPCR-SSFE represent the most comprehensive set of
GPCR models created so far and offer a valuable starting point for in silico functional predictions, docking
studies and structure-based drug design.

Construction and content
GPCR dataset

GPCR-SSFE contains all family A GPCRs sequences that
were stored in the GPCRDB as of October 2009, totalling 5025 receptors [15].
Template selection and homology modelling

A profile hidden markov model (HMM) was used to
align the 5025 GPCRs to the five template structures
available at the time (before November 2010) (PDB
codes: 1U19, 2Z73, 2VT4, 2RH1 and 3EML) [22].
HMMER2 http://hmmer.janelia.org/ was used to generate the profile HMM from a multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of the five templates plus 54 other family
A GPCRs (see additional file 1 for a list of the GPCRs
used to produce the HMM). The 54 GPCRs were
selected so as to maximize the coverage of the phylogenetic tree for family A GPCRs [23]. After alignment,
template selection was carried out for each TMH and
helix 8 based on our previously published workflow
[13], which for the purposes of this work was automated
using python scripts. The workflow uses the presence or
absence of structural features such as proline

Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

distortions, disulphide bridges and insertions as well as
sequence similarity comparisons to select the best template(s) for modelling a given GPCR. Modeller 9v7 was
used to generate homology models of query GPCRs
using the alignments and templates suggested by GPCRSSFE [24]. Three models were produced for each GPCR
but only the one with the lowest DOPE score [25] is
stored in GPCR-SSFE.
Database implementation

GPCR-SSFE was built by combining an Apache web server
http://www.apache.org, PHP Hypertext Pre-processor
scripts (PHP 5) and a relational database management system (MySQL 5). The web interface is based on HTML,
JavaScript and Cascading Style Sheets (CSS). The GPCR
homology model structures are displayed using the Jmol
structure viewer (Jmol: an open-source Java viewer for
chemical structures in 3D http://www.jmol.org/.

Utility
The GPCR-SSFE website

The GPCR-SSFE has a user-friendly interface with a menu
and a facts and questions (FAQ) page to aid usability. On
the homepage of GPCR-SSFE (Figure 1), users can find
information about the database and the template structures used for analysis and homology modelling, including
a link to a Jmol applet showing the five template structures
superimposed onto one another (Figure 2).
Searching GPCR-SSFE

Results can be retrieved by either browsing or searching
the database. By navigating to the “Browse SSFE” menu
option, the user is presented with a list of 19 family A
GPCR subgroups (Figure 3A): Amine, Peptide, Hormone
protein, (Rhod)opsin, Olfactory, Prostanoid, Nucleotidelike, Cannabinoid, Platelet activating factor, Gonadotropin-releasing hormone, Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
& Secretagogue, Melatonin, Viral, Lysophingolipid &
LPA (EDG), Leukotriene B4 receptors, Ecdysis triggering
hormone receptor, Other, CAPA and Class A orphan/
other. These subgroups correspond to those used in the
GPCRDB and are based on the pharmacological classification of GPCRs. Each subgroup can be expanded by
clicking on it, revealing either further subgroupings or
(if the final node is reached) a list of GPCRs within the
subgroup. Clicking on the UniProt entry name of a
GPCR will take the user to the results page for that particular receptor. Alternatively, users may retrieve results
by entering the UniProt entry name onto the “Search
SSFE” webpage (Figure 3B).
GPCR-SSFE results page

The results returned by GPCR-SSFE include (Figure 4):
i) the templates used for analysis and links to the PDB

Page 3 of 10

[26]; ii) the multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of the
five templates and the query sequence for each individual transmembrane helix and helix eight; iii) the MSA
of the profile HMM GPCR sequences and the query
sequence, which spans the entire serpentine domain; iv)
the HMMER2 e-value assigned to the full-length MSA;
v) the template suggestions (and reasons) for the seven
TMHs and helix eight; vi) the sequence similarity score
between the suggested template(s) and the query
sequence; vii) the rationale for the suggested templates;
viii) a Jmol applet displaying the homology model(s) of
the query GPCR based on the template suggestions; ix)
the amino acid sequences of the intracellular and extracellular loops and x) links to UniProt, the GPCRDB and,
where applicable, to the Human-gpDB and GPCR-OKB
databases. The loops are not modelled and therefore the
loop sequences are provided to the user so that software
such as SuperLooper may be used for modelling these
regions [27]. Files containing results ii, iii, viii and ix are
made available for download (Figure 4E). Additionally,
for stereochemical quality checking a PROCHECK [28]
generated Ramachandran plot of each model is provided
and information about how to interpret the results are
provided on the FAQ page.
Running GPCR-SSFE

In some instances, GPCR-SSFE might not store results
for particular family A GPCRs e.g. newly identified
orphan GPCRs. For such cases, users can submit their
GPCR sequence (in FASTA format) to GPCR-SSFE for
analysis and homology model building by navigating to
the “Run SSFE” webpage (Figure 5). Modeller 9v7 is
used for homology modelling, therefore, users must
obtain a Modeller license key before they can use this
tool. This key is freely available for academic users and
easily obtainable at: http://salilab.org/modeller/registration.shtml. To start the template analysis and homology
modelling, the user enters their GPCR sequence onto
the webpage (by either uploading or copying and pasting
it), along with their Modeller licence key and email
address. Once the results are ready, a web-link is
emailed to the user. Results are stored on the server for
seven days. The results page looks exactly like those
retrieved when searching the database, except that links
to external databases are not provided.
Performance: A case study

Since completion of the large-scale GPCR model building and submission of the manuscript, two new family
A GPCR crystal structures were published - the human
dopamine D3 receptor (Swiss-Prot:drd3_human) [11]
and the CXCR4 chemokine receptor (Swiss-Prot:
cxcr4_human) [12]. These receptor structures therefore
provide us with an ideal means of assessing the

Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

Page 4 of 10

Figure 1 The home page of the GPCR-SSFE database. The menu at the top of the page allows users to easily navigate the site. The
background to the database is provided, along with information about the templates used for homology modelling.

performance of the models produced by GPCR-SSFE as
they were not included in the pool of crystal structure
templates used by GPCR-SSFE and we can now calculate the RMSD of our predicted models to the crystal
structures. In order to assess the impact of increased
template similarity on the accuracy of the homology
models we used different sets of templates for

modelling, based on their sequence similarity across the
entire serpentine domain:
1) Bovine rhodopsin (PDB:1U19) and Japanese flying
squid rhodopsin (PDB:2Z73
2) 1U19, 2Z73 and human Adenosine receptor A2A
(PDB:3EML)

Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

Page 5 of 10

Figure 2 Structural superimposition of the GPCR template structures. Users can access a Jmol applet displaying the five crystal structures
used for analysis and homology modelling via the home page.

3) 1U19, 2Z73, 3EML, common turkey Beta-1 adrenergic receptor (PDB;2VT4) and human Beta-2 adrenergic receptor (PDB:2RH1)
In order to assess the impact of using multiple templates for building homology models compared to using
the single most similar template, we also built a model
for each of the two GPCRs using only the GPCR structure with the highest sequence similarity across the
entire serpentine domain, which in both cases was:
4) 2VT4
5) Finally, we used I-TASSER [29], which was
ranked 1 in the server category of the Critical
Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP) 20072009, to build a model of both drd3_human and
cxcr4_human, excluding their respective crystal
structures from template selection.
For steps 1 to 4, three models were produced using
Modeller 9v7 with the model having the lowest DOPE
score selected for further accuracy analysis. I-TASSER
produces five models and provides a confidence score
(C-score) to indicate the likely best model. Therefore,
we chose the I-TASSER model with the highest C-score
for further accuracy analysis.

The accuracy of the models generated using the different template sets and methods above were assessed by
calculating the RMSD between the C-a residues in the
transmembrane region using the align feature of Pymol
(Table 1). Unsurprisingly, the results indicate that where
multiple templates are used, the addition of more similar templates improves the models e.g. models produced
using the two rhodopsin templates (lowest sequence
similarity templates to the two targets) had higher
RMSDs than the models produced using all five templates. The use of multiple templates compared to a single template produces fairly similar RMSDs, although
the multiple template model produced for drd3_human
is slightly better than that produced using the single closest template (0.88Å compared to 0.94Å). Furthermore,
where the full number of templates are used for modelling with GPCR-SSFE, the model produced for drd3_human is similar in accuracy to that produced by ITASSER and better than I-TASSER in the case of
cxcr4_human.
We also did a comparable analysis of the five template
structures and observed similar results to those observed
for drd3_human and cxcr4_human, although in some
instances the models produced by I-TASSER are significantly worse due to part of the transmembrane domain
being modelled on the T4 lysozyme insertion found in

Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

Page 6 of 10

Figure 3 Querying the GPCR-SSFE database. Results may be retrieved from the database by either A) browsing the database via a list of 19
family A GPCR subgroups or B) by searching using a UniProt entry name.

some GPCR crystal structures (See additional file 2,
Tables S1-S5).
These results validate the effectiveness of the multiple
template and fragment approach to homology model
building employed by SSFE and indicate that the models
are as accurate and, in some cases, better than those produced by one of the current best performing homology
modelling programs (as measured by the CASP [30]). We
plan to incorporate these two new structures to GPCRSSFE’s workflow and pool of available templates in the
very near future and then re-run the template analysis
and model building for the 5025 GPCRs in the database.
Our results show that the addition of more similar
templates improves the quality of the models and that
the single template generated models are similar or
slightly worse than the multiple template models.
Finally, our results demonstrate that the models produced for the human CXCR4 chemokine receptor and

the human dopamine D3 receptor are native like, having
RMSDs compared to their crystal structures of 1.7 and
0.9 respectively.

Discussion
A recent study demonstrated that automated modelling
of human neurokinin-1 receptor was enriched by a factor of 2.6 when a combination of bovine rhodopsin and
beta-2 adrenergic receptor were used as templates rather
than when used singly [31]. Similarly, Mobarec and
coworkers found that the use of multiple templates can
provide similar or slightly improved models of the transmembrane regions of GPCRs compared to receptor
models obtained using single templates [32]. Although a
modelling study on opioid receptors demonstrated that
it is not always true that a GCPR homology model built
using multiple templates is structurally better than those
built using one [33].

Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

Page 7 of 10

Figure 4 GPCR-SSFE template prediction and homology model results. Results are shown for adenosine receptor A1 and include A) the
templates used for analysis and links to the PDB; B) the multiple sequence alignments of the individual helices and the alignment spanning the
entire serpentine domain; C) The template predictions, sequence similarity scores and prediction reasons; D) A Jmol applet displaying the
homology model of the query GPCR; E) Downloadable files of the alignments, loops and homology model and F) links to entries in other
relevant databases.

Our approach to building homology models of GPCRs
has a number of advantages over other recent similar
studies. Firstly, GPCR-SSFE uses all available family A
GPCR templates (that were available at the time of performing the work) to estimate all of the sequence
related structural features for a particular receptor and
to generate an optimal GPCR model. Secondly, the template for each transmembrane helix is selected individually, meaning that either a single template or a
fragment-based approach can be used for model building. This is an important feature considering that it has
been shown that sometimes models that are built using
one template are better than those built using multiple
templates, whereas at other times multiple template
models are better [31,32]. Thirdly, GPCR-SSFE has been
applied to a very large set of family A GPCRs and all of
the homology models have been made available for
download and stored in a database. The availability of

these initial models allows researchers who are not
experienced homology modellers to access three-dimensional data of GPCRs that they are interested in. The
user should be aware however, that some GPCR
sequences lack particular motifs that are responsible for
structural features and which currently occur in all of
the available templates, for example, the helix bulges
caused by prolines in TMH 5. Since the prolines and
bulges are present in all of the templates, they also subsequently occur in the homology models, even when a
proline is not present in the corresponding position in a
target sequence. Thus, in such cases further refinement
of the initial model may be required.
Due to their variability in sequence, length and conformational flexibility, the loop regions of GPCRs are far
more difficult to predict by both homology modelling
and de novo modelling techniques [34,35]. Based on
their dockings studies on human beta-2 adrenergic

Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

Page 8 of 10

Figure 5 GPCR-SSFE sequence submission page. Where a family A GPCR is not contained in the database, a user may submit their sequence
of interest to GPCR-SSFE for template prediction and homology modelling. Users must obtain a licence key for Modeller before they are able to
use this function.

receptor, Mobarec and coworkers speculate that GPCR
models without loops may constitute a better alternative
for flexible ligand-rigid protein docking than those with
loops [32]. Therefore, although the models built using
GPCR-SSFE are loopless, we are confident that they will
be extremely useful for i) investigating the mechanisms
underlying structural and/or functional effects of mutations; ii) performing docking studies and iii) structurebased drug design. Nevertheless, the provided initial

models can be completed by building the loops with suitable software tools [20].

Conclusions
Our previous analysis indicates that, in general, the
structural features of target GPCRs cannot be captured
using only one of the experimental GPCR structures as
a template for homology modelling. Consequently, we
suggest that using transmembrane fragments from

Table 1 The RMSD of cxcr4_human and drd3_human homology models compared to their crystal structures
Method used for template selection

Templates used

Accuracy cxcr4_human
(RMSD)1

Accuracy drd3_human
(RMSD)2

Sequence similarity across entire serpentine
domain

2VT4

1.72

0.94

Sequence similarity for each TMH

1U19 and 2Z73

1.78

1.21

SSFE workflow or sequence similarity for each 1U19, 2Z73 and 3EML
TMH

1.97

1.04

SSFE workflow
I-TASSER

1.73
1.91

0.88
0.82

1
2

1U19, 2Z73, 3EML, 2VT4 and 2RH1
Crystal structure of query protein
excluded

RMSD between cxcr4_human model and 3ODU (TMH region)
RMSD between drd3_human model and 3PBL (TMH region)

Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

multiple templates when building comparative models of
GPCRs is likely to lead to more accurate results, an
approach that has also been advocated by other published studies on molecular modelling of GPCRs [3,20].
GPCR-SSFE is the first comprehensive GPCR-focused
database to store homology models based on the crystallographic advances made in recent years. The fragmentbased models stored in GPCR-SSFE serve as a valuable
starting-point for molecular analyses of GPCRs based on
their structure, such as structure-based drug design or
the detailed molecular analysis of mutations. We believe
that GPCR-SSFE will be of increasing importance as
more crystal structures become available because the
problem of template selection will become more
complex.

Page 9 of 10

acid; MSA: multiple sequence alignment; PDB: Protein Data Bank; TMH:
transmembrane helix; RMSD: Root Mean Squared Deviation
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a DAAD Kurt Hahn research grant to CLW.
Author details
Leibniz-Institut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), 13125 Berlin, Germany.
Structural Bioinformatics Group, Charité - Universitätsmedizin, 13125 Berlin,
Germany. 3Institut für Experimentelle Pädiatrische Endokrinologie, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Augustenburgerplatz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany.
1
2

Authors’ contributions
CLW performed the algorithm development, homology modelling, designed
the database, developed the web interface and wrote the manuscript. AK
implemented the search function. CLW and GKr conceived of the study. AK,
GKr and GKl conducted the testing. All the authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Received: 22 September 2010 Accepted: 23 May 2011
Published: 23 May 2011

Availability and requirements
Availability

GPCR-SSFE is freely available for use on the web at:
http://www.ssfa-7tmr.de/ssfe/. The database is publicly
and freely accessible, requiring no registration and with
no restrictions on use. The GPCR-SSFE server tool
requires users to have a Modeller license key, which can
be easily and quickly obtained by academic users at the
Modeller website http://www.salilab.org/modeller/registration.html.
Technical requirements

GPCR-SSFE requires that the web browser used supports JavaScript and CSS and that Java is installed and
working. It is recommended that one of the following
browsers is used: Mozilla Firefox 3 on Linux, Mac OSX
or Windows, Internet Explorer 8 on Windows, Safari 4
on Mac OXS or Windows, Chrome on Linux or
Windows.

Additional material
Additional file 1: List of the GPCRs in the HMMER profile used for
alignment. List of GPCRs used to build the HMMER profile used for
sequence alignment by GPCR-SSFE. The identifier used in the alignment,
UniProt entry name, phylogenetic group and cluster (according to the
phylogenetic tree for family A [23]) and the receptor type are given. The
five GPCRs with crystal structures are highlighted in grey. The amino acid
sequences of 3EML, 2VT4 and 2RH1 were modified compared to wildtype (due to either substitutions or deletions) and therefore the wildtype sequences were also included in the profile.
Additional file 2: Accuracy analysis for the five template structures.
Contains the RMSD values for the models produced using the single
most similar template, multiple templates of increasing similarity and ITASSER.

Abbreviations
CASP: Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction; CSS: cascading style sheets;
FAQ: Facts and Questions; GPCR: G protein-coupled receptor; HMM: Hidden
Markov Model; HTML: Hypertext Markup Language; LPA: lysophosphatidic

References
1. Topiol S, Sabio M: X-ray structure breakthroughs in the GPCR
transmembrane region. Biochem Pharmacol 2009, 78:11-20.
2. Fredriksson R, Schioth HB: The repertoire of G-protein-coupled receptors
in fully sequenced genomes. Mol Pharmacol 2005, 67:1414-25.
3. Yarnitzky T, Levit A, Niv MY: Homology modeling of G-protein-coupled
receptors with X-ray structures on the rise. Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel
2010, 13:317-25.
4. Palczewski K, Kumasaka T, Hori T, Behnke CA, Motoshima H, Fox BA, Trong
Le I, Teller DC, Okada T, Stenkamp RE, Yamamoto M, Miyano M: Crystal
structure of rhodopsin: A G protein-coupled receptor. Science 2000,
289:739-45.
5. Murakami M, Kouyama T: Crystal structure of squid rhodopsin. Nature
2008, 453:363-7.
6. Shimamura T, Hiraki K, Takahashi N, Hori T, Ago H, Masuda K, Takio K,
Ishiguro M, Miyano M: Crystal structure of squid rhodopsin with
intracellularly extended cytoplasmic region. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:17753-6.
7. Warne T, Serrano-Vega MJ, Baker JG, Moukhametzianov R, Edwards PC,
Henderson R, Leslie AG, Tate CG, Schertler GF: Structure of a beta1adrenergic G-protein-coupled receptor. Nature 2008, 454:486-91.
8. Cherezov V, Rosenbaum DM, Hanson MA, Rasmussen SG, Thian FS,
Kobilka TS, Choi HJ, Kuhn P, Weis WI, Kobilka BK, Stevens RC: Highresolution crystal structure of an engineered human beta2-adrenergic G
protein-coupled receptor. Science 2007, 318:1258-65.
9. Rasmussen SG, Choi HJ, Rosenbaum DM, Kobilka TS, Thian FS, Edwards PC,
Burghammer M, Ratnala VR, Sanishvili R, Fischetti RF, Schertler GF, Weis WI,
Kobilka BK: Crystal structure of the human beta2 adrenergic G-proteincoupled receptor. Nature 2007, 450:383-7.
10. Jaakola VP, Griffith MT, Hanson MA, Cherezov V, Chien EY, Lane JR,
Ijzerman AP, Stevens RC: The 2.6 angstrom crystal structure of a human
A2A adenosine receptor bound to an antagonist. Science 2008,
322:1211-7.
11. Chien EY, Liu W, Zhao Q, Katritch V, Han GW, Hanson MA, Shi L,
Newman AH, Javitch JA, Cherezov V, Stevens RC: Structure of the human
dopamine D3 receptor in complex with a D2/D3 selective antagonist.
Science 2010, 330:1091-5.
12. Wu B, Chien EY, Mol CD, Fenalti G, Liu W, Katritch V, Abagyan R, Brooun A,
Wells P, Bi FC, Hamel DJ, Kuhn P, Handel TM, Cherezov V, Stevens RC:
Structures of the CXCR4 chemokine GPCR with small-molecule and
cyclic peptide antagonists. Science 2010, 330:1066-71.
13. Worth CL, Kleinau G, Krause G: Comparative sequence and structural
analyses of G-protein-coupled receptor crystal structures and
implications for molecular models. PLoS One 2009, 4:e7011.
14. Harmar AJ, Hills RA, Rosser EM, Jones M, Buneman OP, Dunbar DR,
Greenhill SD, Hale VA, Sharman JL, Bonner TI, Catterall WA, Davenport AP,
Delagrange P, Dollery CT, Foord SM, Gutman GA, Laudet V, Neubig RR,
Ohlstein EH, Olsen RW, Peters J, Pin JP, Ruffolo RR, Searls DB, Wright MW,
Spedding M: IUPHAR-DB: the IUPHAR database of G protein-coupled
receptors and ion channels. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D680-5.

Worth et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:185
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/185

15. Horn F, Weare J, Beukers MW, Horsch S, Bairoch A, Chen W, Edvardsen O,
Campagne F, Vriend G: GPCRDB: an information system for G proteincoupled receptors. Nucleic Acids Res 1998, 26:275-9.
16. Satagopam VP, Theodoropoulou MC, Stampolakis CK, Pavlopoulos GA,
Papandreou NC, Bagos PG, Schneider R, Hamodrakas SJ: GPCRs, G-proteins,
effectors and their interactions: human-gpDB, a database employing
visualization tools and data integration techniques. Database (Oxford)
2010, 2010:baq019.
17. Khelashvili G, Dorff K, Shan J, Camacho-Artacho M, Skrabanek L, Vroling B,
Bouvier M, Devi LA, George SR, Javitch JA, Lohse MJ, Milligan G, Neubig RR,
Palczewski K, Parmentier M, Pin JP, Vriend G, Campagne F, Filizola M: GPCROKB: the G Protein Coupled Receptor Oligomer Knowledge Base.
Bioinformatics 2010, 26:1804-5.
18. Kleinau G, Kreuchwig A, Worth CL, Krause G: An interactive web-tool for
molecular analyses links naturally occurring mutation data with threedimensional structures of the rhodopsin-like glycoprotein hormone
receptors. Hum Mutat 2010, 31:E1519-25.
19. Van Durme J, Horn F, Costagliola S, Vriend G, Vassart G: GRIS: glycoproteinhormone receptor information system. Mol Endocrinol 2006, 20:2247-55.
20. Zhang Y, Devries ME, Skolnick J: Structure modeling of all identified G
protein-coupled receptors in the human genome. PLoS Comput Biol 2006,
2:e13.
21. The UniProt Consortium: The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in
2010. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D142-8.
22. Durbin R, Eddy S, Krogh A, Mitchison G: The theory behind profile HMMs.
Biological sequence analysis: probabilistic models of proteins and nucleic acids
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1998.
23. Fredriksson R, Lagerstrom MC, Lundin LG, Schioth HB: The G-proteincoupled receptors in the human genome form five main families.
Phylogenetic analysis, paralogon groups, and fingerprints. Mol Pharmacol
2003, 63:1256-72.
24. Sali A, Blundell TL: Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of
spatial restraints. J Mol Biol 1993, 234:779-815.
25. Shen MY, Sali A: Statistical potential for assessment and prediction of
protein structures. Protein Sci 2006, 15:2507-24.
26. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H,
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000,
28:235-42.
27. Hildebrand PW, Goede A, Bauer RA, Gruening B, Ismer J, Michalsky E,
Preissner R: SuperLooper–a prediction server for the modeling of loops
in globular and membrane proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:W571-4.
28. Laskowski RA, MacArthur MW, Moss DS, Thornton JM: PROCHECK - a
program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J.
App. Cryst 1993, 26:283-91.
29. Zhang Y: I-TASSER server for protein 3D structure prediction. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:40.
30. Zhang Y: I-TASSER: fully automated protein structure prediction in
CASP8. Proteins 2009, 77(Suppl 9):100-13.
31. Kneissl B, Leonhardt B, Hildebrandt A, Tautermann CS: Revisiting
automated G-protein coupled receptor modeling: the benefit of
additional template structures for a neurokinin-1 receptor model. J Med
Chem 2009, 52:3166-73.
32. Mobarec JC, Sanchez R, Filizola M: Modern Homology Modeling of GProtein Coupled Receptors: Which Structural Template to Use? J Med
Chem 2009, 52(16):5207-16.
33. Bera I, Laskar A, Ghoshal N: Exploring the structure of opioid receptors
with homology modeling based on single and multiple templates and
subsequent docking: A comparative study. J Mol Model 2010, Epub ahead
of print.
34. Michino M, Abola E, Brooks CL, Dixon JS, Moult J, Stevens RC: Communitywide assessment of GPCR structure modelling and ligand docking: GPCR
Dock 2008. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2009, 8:455-63.
35. Michino M, Chen J, Stevens RC, Brooks CL: FoldGPCR: structure prediction
protocol for the transmembrane domain of G protein-coupled receptors
from class A. Proteins 2010, 78:2189-201.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-185
Cite this article as: Worth et al.: GPCR-SSFE: A comprehensive database
of G-protein-coupled receptor template predictions and homology
models. BMC Bioinformatics 2011 12:185.

Page 10 of 10

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
