<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>HomPPI: a class of sequence homology based protein-protein interface prediction methods</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-244"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Li C Xue"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

HomPPI: a class of sequence homology based
protein-protein interface prediction methods
Li C Xue1,3*, Drena Dobbs2,3 and Vasant Honavar1,3

Abstract
Background: Although homology-based methods are among the most widely used methods for predicting the
structure and function of proteins, the question as to whether interface sequence conservation can be effectively
exploited in predicting protein-protein interfaces has been a subject of debate.
Results: We studied more than 300,000 pair-wise alignments of protein sequences from structurally characterized
protein complexes, including both obligate and transient complexes. We identified sequence similarity criteria
required for accurate homology-based inference of interface residues in a query protein sequence.
Based on these analyses, we developed HomPPI, a class of sequence homology-based methods for predicting
protein-protein interface residues. We present two variants of HomPPI: (i) NPS-HomPPI (Non partner-specific
HomPPI), which can be used to predict interface residues of a query protein in the absence of knowledge of the
interaction partner; and (ii) PS-HomPPI (Partner-specific HomPPI), which can be used to predict the interface
residues of a query protein with a specific target protein.
Our experiments on a benchmark dataset of obligate homodimeric complexes show that NPS-HomPPI can reliably
predict protein-protein interface residues in a given protein, with an average correlation coefficient (CC) of 0.76,
sensitivity of 0.83, and specificity of 0.78, when sequence homologs of the query protein can be reliably identified.
NPS-HomPPI also reliably predicts the interface residues of intrinsically disordered proteins. Our experiments
suggest that NPS-HomPPI is competitive with several state-of-the-art interface prediction servers including those
that exploit the structure of the query proteins. The partner-specific classifier, PS-HomPPI can, on a large dataset of
transient complexes, predict the interface residues of a query protein with a specific target, with a CC of 0.65,
sensitivity of 0.69, and specificity of 0.70, when homologs of both the query and the target can be reliably
identified. The HomPPI web server is available at http://homppi.cs.iastate.edu/.
Conclusions: Sequence homology-based methods offer a class of computationally efficient and reliable
approaches for predicting the protein-protein interface residues that participate in either obligate or transient
interactions. For query proteins involved in transient interactions, the reliability of interface residue prediction can
be improved by exploiting knowledge of putative interaction partners.

Background
Protein-protein interactions are central to protein function; they constitute the physical basis for formation of
complexes and pathways that carry out virtually all
major cellular processes. These interactions can be relatively permanent or “obligate” (e.g., in subunits of an
RNA polymerase complex) or “transient” (e.g., kinasesubstrate interactions in a signalling network). Both the
* Correspondence: me.lixue@gmail.com
1
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011,
USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

distortion of protein interfaces in obligate complexes
and aberrant recognition in transient complexes can
lead to disease [1].
With the increasing availability of high throughput
experimental data, two related problems have come to
the forefront of research on protein interactions: i) prediction of protein-protein interaction partners; and ii)
prediction of protein binding sites or protein-protein
interfaces (PPIs). Although most effort to date has
focused on one or the other of these problems, it is possible to use information from predicted protein-protein
interaction networks as input for interface prediction

© 2011 Xue et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

methods, and predicted interface residues can be used as
input for interaction partner predictions, a concept
explored in a recent study of Yip et al. [2]. In the current study, we focus on the prediction of protein-protein
interfaces, specifically, the use of sequence homologybased methods to predict which residues of a query protein participate in its physical interaction with a partner
protein or proteins.
Computational Prediction of Protein-Protein Interfaces

Several different genetic, biochemical, and biophysical
methods have been used to identify and characterize
protein interfaces [1]. These experiments are very valuable and have contributed greatly to our knowledge of
protein-protein interfaces. However, the high cost in
time and resources required for these experiments call
for reliable computational approaches to identify interface residues. In addition to providing important clues
to biological function of novel proteins, computational
predictions can reduce the searching space required for
docking two polypeptides [3].
To distinguish interface residues from non-interface
surface residues, a wide range of sequence, physicochemical and structural features have been investigated
[3-18], and many in silico approaches to protein-protein
interface prediction have been explored in the literature
(reviewed in [19-21]). Protein-protein interface prediction algorithms can be classified into three categories: (i)
sequence-based methods, which use only the primary
amino acid sequence of the query protein as input
[3,22-28]; (ii) structure-based methods, which make use
of information derived from the structure of the query
protein [5,18,29-31]; and (iii) methods that use both
sequence and structure derived information in making
predictions [32,33].
Several sequence-based protein-protein interface prediction methods have been explored in the literature
[3,22-28]. Most, if not all, of these methods, extract for
each residue in the query protein, a fixed length window
that includes the target residue and a fixed number of
its sequence neighbours. Each residue is classified as an
interface residue or a non-interface residue based on
features of the amino acids in the corresponding window. Various methods differ both in the specific
machine learning algorithms or statistical methods
employed and in terms of the specific features of the
amino acids used. Commonly used features include the
identity of the amino acids in the window [27], the
amino acid composition of interfaces [34], the physicochemical properties of the amino acids [35], and the
degree of conservation of the amino acids (obtained by
aligning the query sequence with homologous
sequences) [3]. Some studies report substantial improvements in interface residue prediction when predicted

Page 2 of 24

structural properties, e.g., solvent surface accessibility
and secondary structure of the residues are utilized [21].
A number of structure-based methods [5,18,29-31] or
hybrid methods that combine both sequence and structure-derived information [32,33] have been proposed for
predicting protein interfaces. The performance of the
best-performing sequence-based methods is generally
lower than that of structure-based methods (see [21] for
a comparison). A possible explanation for the difference
in the performance of sequence-based and structurebased protein interface residue predictors is that the latter can trivially eliminate non-surface residues from the
set of candidate interface residues and potentially exploit
a rich set of features derived from the 3D structures.
The use of structure-based methods, however, is limited to proteins for which the structure of the query
protein is available, and the number of solved structures
significantly lags behind the number of protein
sequences [35]. Even when the structure of a query protein is available, the application of structure-based prediction methods is complicated by conformational
changes that take place when some proteins bind to
their partners. Structure-based methods rely on structural features extracted from the structure in the
unbound state or from a bound complex that has been
separated into constituent proteins. It is unclear whether
such structural features are indeed reliable predictors of
interfaces for proteins that undergo significant conformational changes upon binding [20,36]. Moreover,
higher organisms have a large number of intrinsically
disordered proteins/regions (IDPs/IDRs) that undergo
induced folding only after binding to their partners [37].
Such disordered regions - for which experimental structure information is, by definition, lacking - participate in
many important cellular recognition events, and are
believed to contribute to the ability of some hub proteins to interact with multiple partners in protein-protein interaction networks [38]. Hence, there is an urgent
need for sequence-based methods for reliable prediction
of protein-protein interfaces.
Analysis of Interface Residue Conservation

The relationship between sequence conservation and
various aspects of protein structure, interaction, expression, and function has been the focus of many studies
over the past decades [39,40], and sequence homologybased methods have been used for predicting both protein structure and protein function [41-53]. Thus, it is
natural to ask whether protein-protein interface residues
can be reliably identified using sequence homologybased methods. Published studies disagree on whether
protein-protein interfaces are more conserved than the
rest of the protein sequences. Grishin and Phillips [54],
after examining five enzyme families, concluded that the

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

degree of conservation of interfaces is same as that of
protein sequences as a whole. The studies by Caffrey et
al. [55] as well as Reddy and Kaznessis [56], found that
the interacting surface-patches are not significantly
more conserved than other surface-patches. Caffrey et
al. [55], based on their study of 64 protein-protein interacting chains, found that interface residues are slightly
more conserved than the rest of the protein surface residues. Reddy and Kaznessis [56], based on their study of
28 hetero transient and non-transient complexes, found
that the fraction of highly conserved interface residues
is greater than that of highly conserved non-interface
surface residues. They suggested that the number of
conserved residue positions is more predictive of protein-protein binding sites than the average conservation
index of residues in the target patch. Choi et al. [57]
analyzed 2,646 protein interfaces based on a conservation score that measures the position-specific evolutionary rate estimated using a phylogenetic tree [58], and
concluded that protein interface residues are more conserved than non-interface surface residues.
Despite the disagreement regarding whether interface
residues are conserved or not, several researchers have
used conservation of residues to predict protein-protein
interfaces with varying degrees of success. For example,
the Evolutionary Trace (ET) method [59,60] and its variants [58,61-64] calculate conservation score for each
residue using a phylogenetic tree built from a multiple
sequence alignment. Residues with conservation scores
above a certain threshold are mapped onto the 3D
structure of the protein to identify putative binding
sites. Carl et al. [65] used a dataset of sixteen transient
protein chains to explore the feasibility of predicting
protein-protein binding sites based on their membership
in structurally conserved surface patches (where conserved patches are identified using structural alignment
of a query protein with one or more of its structural
homologs). Bordner and Abagyan [66] and Wang et al.
[67] calculated evolution rate for each amino acid of
protein sequences using phylogenetic trees, and used
evolution rate as an attribute along with other physicochemical and sequential attributes to train a SVM classifier for interface residue prediction. Panchenko et al.
[68] predicted functional sites of proteins using spatial
averages of sequence conservation scores. Shoemaker et
al. [69] have recently developed a web server for predicting protein binding sites by inspecting homologous proteins with similar structures. Based on a statistical
analysis of target-template sequence alignments on a
benchmark dataset of 329 two-chain complexes, Kundrotas and Vakser [70] have shown that it is possible to
obtain high quality alignment of interface residues even
when the overall alignment quality is rather poor. Specifically, they concluded that in approximately 50% of the

Page 3 of 24

complexes considered, the overall accuracy of the modelled interfaces was good enough for guiding docking.
Overview of the Paper

Against this background, we study a class of sequence
homology-based methods for protein-protein interface
prediction. We introduce a novel measure of interface
conservation that captures the degree to which interface
residues in each protein are conserved among its
sequence homologs. First, we describe the results of our
analysis of the interface conservation among homologous sequences using several large non-redundant datasets of protein-protein interfaces extracted from the
Protein Data Bank (PDB) [71], including datasets that
allow us to compare “obligate” versus “transient” interfaces. To explore the extent to which interface conservation can be exploited in the prediction of interface
residues, we systematically examined the relationship
between interface conservation and six sequence-based
variables. In one set of experiments, we examined binding interfaces in homologous proteins without specifying
a specific interaction partner (i.e., non-partner specific,
NPS-interfaces). The results of this analysis indicated
that interfaces in obligate complexes are, in general,
more highly conserved than those in transient complexes. In a complementary set of experiments, we
examined interfaces in complexes between specific pairs
of proteins (i.e., partner-specific, PS-interfaces). In contrast to the results for NPS-interfaces, by focusing on
the interface of each query protein with a specific binding partner, we discovered a high degree of sequence
conservation in transient PS-interfaces. This analysis
revealed that transient interfaces tend to be highly partner-specific.
Second, based on the results of protein interface conservation analysis we propose HomPPI, a class of
sequence homology-based approaches to protein interface prediction. We present two variants of HomPPI: (i)
NPS-HomPPI (non partner-specific HomPPI), which can
be used to predict interface residues of a query protein
in the absence of knowledge of the interaction partner;
and (ii) PS-HomPPI (partner-specific HomPPI), which
can be used to predict the interface residues of a query
protein with a specific target protein. The performance
of both HomPPI methods was evaluated on several
benchmark datasets, including a large non-redundant
set of transient complexes. Due to the increasing importance of intrinsically disordered proteins in understanding molecular recognition mechanics and in rational
drug design and discovery [72-75], we also tested NPSHomPPI on two datasets of intrinsically disordered
proteins.
Finally, we compare the performance of HomPPI with
that of other web-based servers for interface residue

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

prediction, using several performance measures that
assess the reliability of correctly predicting, on average,
interface and non-interface residues in a given protein.
We discuss the relative advantages and limitations of
homology-based methods for interface residue
prediction.

Results
To define conditions under which it should be possible
to infer protein-protein interface (PPI) residues using
conservation of interfaces in homologous proteins and/
or complexes, we systematically examined the relationship between interface residue conservation and
sequence similarity (based on BLAST alignments). Our
analyses are based on the following datasets: Nr6505 (a
large non-redundant dataset of protein chains extracted
from PDB [71]), Oblig94 and Trans135 (a non-redundant obligate/transient binding dataset taken from [76]),
and nr_pdbaa_s2c (BLAST database) (see Methods for
additional details).
Conservation of PPIs in Non-Partner Specific (NPS)
Interfaces

First, we examined the conservation of PPI residues in
the absence of knowledge of interaction partners. For
this study, we analyzed interfaces in putative homologs
(hereafter, we refer to putative homologs as “homologs”
for simplicity) of each protein in a large non-redundant
dataset, Nr6505. After removing chains with interfaces
containing fewer than 3 amino acids, we were left with
5853 chains. For each of the 5853 remaining proteins,
we extracted homologs from the nr_pdbaa_s2c database
using BLASTP [77] with expectation value (EVal) ≤ 10
from the resulting set of homologs, we eliminated those
that were nearly identical to the query sequence (to
ensure an accurate estimate of conservation). To ensure
that the interface residues of the homologs could be
reliably determined, we retained only those homologs
that were part of complexes with resolution 3.5 Å or
better. For each query-homolog pair in sequence alignments generated by BLASTP, we used the interface residues of the homolog(s) to predict the interface residues
of the query protein. We calculated the correlation coefficient (CC) between the predicted and actual interface
residues of the query protein, and refer to this value as
the interface conservation (IC) score, i.e., the degree of
conservation of interface residues between the query
protein and its homologs (see Methods for details).
We examined the dependence of the interface conservation score on six NCBI BLAST alignment statistics:
Expectation value (EVal), Identity Score, Positive Score,
Local Alignment Length (LAL) and two Alignment Length
Fractions (LAL/Query Length) and (LAL/Homolog
Length). The EVal is a statistic that estimates the number

Page 4 of 24

of hits expected by chance when searching database of a
particular size; the lower the EVal value, the more significant the score. The Identity Score is a measure of the
degree of sequence identity between two amino acid
sequences. The Positive Score returned by BLASTP is the
number of positive-scoring matches in an alignment. It
takes into account observed substitutions that preserve
the physicochemical properties of the original residue.
The LAL is the length of the local alignment; Alignment
Length Fractions are LAL normalized by the length of
the query or the length of the identified homologous
sequence. We represent each query-homolog pair as a six
dimensional vector defined by these six variables.
Principal Components Analysis of NPS-interface
Conservation Space

As a first exploratory step, PCA (Principal Component
Analysis) was applied to visualize the relationships
between the interface conservation (IC) scores and the
six BLAST alignment statistics. PCA, which is a dimensionality reduction technique, is typically used to represent dimensions that explain maximum variability and
provide a simple and parsimonious description of the
covariance structure [78].
Figure 1 shows a PCA biplot in which each data point,
representing a query-homolog pair, is projected from
the original 6-dimensional space to a 2-dimensional
space defined by the first and second principal components (PC1 and PC2). A large fraction (88.58%) of the
variance is explained by the first two principal components (48.75% + 39.83%). Based on IC scores, the PCA
biplot can be subdivided into three regions that correspond to: (i) Dark Zone: containing query-homolog
pairs with poorly conserved interface residues (blue and
green data points), corresponding to low values of the
CC between predicted and actual interfaces and thus
low IC scores; (ii) Twilight Zone: containing pairs with
moderately conserved interfaces (yellow and orange data
points); and (iii) Safe Zone: containing pairs with highly
conserved interfaces (red data points).
The PCA analysis allows us to identify highly correlated explanatory variables. In Figure 1, the axes of the
original 6 dimensional space are represented as blue
vectors with red circles at their tips in the 2-dimensional
space defined by PC1 and PC2. Highly correlated vectors (variables) have small angles between them. This
type of analysis reveals, for example, that the two Alignment Length Fractions are highly correlated with each
other, as are the Positive Score and Identity Score. Explanatory variables that are highly correlated with each
other make similar contributions to the IC score.
BLAST EVal is a strong indicator of NPS-interface
conservation

We studied the relationship of each individual variable
with interface conservation. A scatter plot in which the

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

Page 5 of 24

Figure 1 Principal Component Analysis of Interface Conservation Scores and Sequence Alignment Statistics. Proteins in the Nr6505 and
their homologs were analyzed. The data points in the biplot correspond to the projection of a 6-dimensional vector representing each proteinhomolog onto a 2-dimensional space defined by the first and second principal components (PC1 and PC2). Blue lines with red circles at their
tips represent the axes of the original 6-dimensional space for the 6 variables used in PCA analysis: -log(EVal), Identity Score, Positive Score, log
(LAL), alignment length fractions (LAL/query length) and (LAL/homolog length). Each data point is colored according to its computed interface
conservation (IC) score, with higher IC scores (red/orange) indicating higher interface conservation and lower IC scores (blue/green) indicating
lower interface conservation (see text for details). The large gray arrow indicates the direction of increasing degree of interface conservation,
from Dark to Twilight to Safe Zone.

IC score for each query-homolog pair is plotted against
log(EVal) is shown in Figure 2. One can see that log
(EVal) is a good indicator of protein interface conservation. When log(EVal) > -50 the median values of IC
scores cluster around 0 (low conservation). In the region
of log(EVal) ≤-50 (that is, EVal ≤ 1.9287E-022) the medians of IC scores increase as the log (EVal) decreases.
When log(EVal) < -100 the medians of IC scores tend to
be greater than 0.5 (strong conservation).
NPS-interface conservation in Twilight/Safe Zone is strongly
positively correlated with log(LAL)

Figure 3 is a scatter plot showing the IC score for each
query-homolog pair plotted against the log of its LAL
value. We can clearly see that when log(LAL) is larger
than 4, the medians of IC score show a strong positive
correlation with log(LAL). When the LAL is shorter than
55 residues (log(LAL) <4), the probability that interface
is conserved in these homologs is low (the medians of
the IC scores are ~0). We define this region as the Dark
Zone. When the LAL is longer than 700 residues (log

Figure 2 EVal is a Good Indicator of Interface Conservation.
Each blue dot in the scatter plot corresponds to a query-homolog
pair. Red dots are the median values of IC scores for a specific EVal.
To avoid log(0), we set log(EVal) = -450 when EVal = 0.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

Figure 3 Interface Conservation (IC) Scores are Linearly Related
to the Log of the Local Alignment Score (LAL). Each blue dot in
the scatter plot corresponds to a query-homolog pair. Red dots are
the median values of IC scores for a specific LAL. Note the trend of
increasing median IC score with log(LAL) observed with the
transitions from Dark to Twilight to Safe Zone.

(LAL)>6.55), interface conservation is high (the medians
of IC scores are usually > 0.7). We define this region as
the Safe Zone.
A high BLAST Positive Score reflects NPS-interface
conservation

The relationship between IC scores and the Positive
Scores of query-homolog alignments is shown in
Figure 4. The median values of the IC scores begin to
increase at a BLAST Positive Score of ~ 90%.
We also studied the relationship of IC score with the
Identity Score, and the Local Alignment Length Fractions (LAL/Query Length) and (LAL/Homolog Length).
As expected, the Identity Score results were similar to
those for the Positive Score. The IC score was not as
strongly linearly related to LAL fraction as it was to the
log(LAL) (data not shown). Taken together, these results
provide guidelines for choosing sequence similarity
thresholds that reflect the degree of conservation in
NPS interfaces.
NPS-Interface Conservation in Transient versus Obligate
Binding Proteins

In light of reports that protein interfaces in transient
complexes are not as conserved as those in obligate
(permanent) complexes [57], it is interesting to ask
whether the query-homolog pairs with near-zero IC
scores (Figure 2 and Figure 3) tend to involve proteins
that participate in transient interactions. To address this
question, we further studied the differences in protein

Page 6 of 24

Figure 4 A High BLAST Positive Score Reflects NPS-Interface
Conservation. Each blue dot in the scatter plot corresponds to a
query-homolog pair. Red dots are the median values of IC scores for
a specific Positive Score. Note that medians of IC scores are near
zero until Positive Scores become larger than 90%.

interface conservation among proteins that participate
in transient versus obligate interactions.
To compare protein interfaces in transient and obligate complexes, we used the Trans135 and Oblig94
dataset obtained from [76], which includes a total of 270
chains from transient and 188 chains from obligate
complexes. We extracted the homologs of each chain
from nr_pdbaa_s2c using BLASTP with EVal ≤ 10
Query and homolog proteins with interfaces containing
fewer than 3 amino acids were removed, as were homologs that were nearly identical to the query proteins. We
extracted 43,115 query-homolog pairs containing chains
that participate in transient interactions and 24,212
pairs containing chains that participate in obligate
interactions.
In agreement with previous studies [57], our analyses
showed that PPIs are conserved in both obligate and
transient binding proteins. As before, we performed
PCA to examine the conservation of interfaces as a
function of log(EVal), Identity Score, Positive Score, log
(LAL), and alignment length fractions (LAL/Query
Length) and (LAL/Homolog Length). The PCA biplots in
Figure 5 show that data points corresponding to different IC scores (different colors) are partially segregated,
indicating that the six alignment statistics can distinguish query-homolog pairs with highly conserved interface residues (red) from those in which interface
residues are not conserved (blue or green).
The results in Figure 5 also reveal that interface residues in proteins from obligate complexes (left panel) are
more conserved among their sequence homologs than
those from transient complexes (right panel). Figure 6

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

Page 7 of 24

IC score

(a)

IC score

(b)

Figure 5 Principal Component Analysis of Interface Conservation Scores and Sequence Alignment Statistics for Obligate versus
Transient Complexes. The PCA biplots shown are for (a) proteins from obligate complexes and (b) proteins from transient complexes. Please
see Figure 1 legend for additional details.

further illustrates differences in interface conservation in
obligate (left) versus transient complexes (right). The
median values of IC scores plotted as a function of log
(LAL) are more frequently above 0 for pairs that involve
obligate binding proteins (Figure 6a) than for those that
involve transient binding proteins (Figure 6b). Regression analysis of these data confirms that log(LAL) for the
obligate dataset has a larger coefficient (0.095) than that
for the transient dataset (0.052), which confirms that
protein interfaces are more conserved in the obligate
complexes than in transient complexes analyzed in this
study.
Figure 6c reveals an obvious pattern of interface conservation in obligate binding proteins: a strong trend of
increasing median IC score with decreasing log(EVal). In
contrast, Figure 6d shows that for transient binding proteins, more of the median values of IC scores cluster
around 0, indicating that log(EVal) has little relation to
interface conservation in transient complexes.
Also, comparison of Figure 6e and 6f reveals that the
Positive Score is a good indicator of interface conservation in the case of proteins from obligate complexes;
however, this is not the case for proteins from transient
complexes. For obligate binding proteins, when the Positive Score exceeds 45%, the medians of IC scores begin
to show an increasing trend (Figure 6e). In contrast, in
the case of transient binding proteins, medians of IC
scores do not begin to increase until the Positive Score
approaches 70% (Figure 6f).
It is important to emphasize that all of the interfaces
analyzed above are what we refer to as “non partnerspecific” (NPS). That is, the interface residues of a query
protein represent the complete set of its interface

residues with all of its partners. However, a given query
protein can interact with different binding partners
through different interfaces. A possible explanation for
the low IC scores for NPS-transient interfaces is that
the union of all interface residues of a transient binding
protein are not highly conserved across its homologs.
This does not preclude the possibility that such interfaces are conserved in the context of partner-specific
interactions. We investigate this possibility in the following section.
Conservation of PPIs in Partner-Specific (PS) Interfaces

To examine the conservation of partner-specific (PS)
interfaces in transient protein complexes, we again used
the Trans135 dataset of protein pairs that participate in
transient interactions [76]. For each of the proteins in
an interacting pair, we separately extracted the corresponding homologs, using BLASTP with expectation
value EVal≤10 against the nr_pdbaa_s2c database. We
removed homologs that are part of complexes with resolution worse than 3.5 Å. If query proteins A and B form
a complex A-B, and have homologs A’ and B’ that interact in a complex A’-B’, we consider A’-B’ as a homointerolog of A-B. To ensure an accurate estimate of
conservation, from the resulting set of homo-interologs,
we eliminated those that were within the same PDB
complex as the query proteins, and those that were
nearly identical to the query pairs (see Methods for
additional details). For each protein chain in a query
pair, we use the interface residues of its homolog in a
homo-interolog to infer the PS interface residues of the
query protein chain. Thus, we use the interface residues
of A’ in the homo-interolog (A’-B’) of query pair A-B to

Page 8 of 24

IC score

IC score

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

(a)

(d)

(e)

log(EVal)

IC score

log(EVal)

IC score

(c)

IC score

IC score

(b)

(f)

Figure 6 Comparison of Interface Conservation in Proteins from Obligate versus Transient Complexes. Proteins from obligate complexes
are analyzed in a, c and e (left panels); proteins from transient complexes are analyzed in b, d, and e (right panels). Scatter plots show IC scores
plotted as a function of: (a, b) log (local alignment length); (c, d) log (EVal); and (e, f) Positive Score. Red dots are median values of IC scores for a
specific value on the x-axis.

infer the interfaces of A with B, based on the sequence
alignment between A and A’ obtained using BLASTP.
We measure the similarity between a pair of interacting
proteins A-B and its homo-interolog A’-B’, in terms of
the metrics for the quality of sequence alignment
between A and A’ and between B and B’, using the six
BLAST alignment statistics described above.

We used PCA of 3, 456 candidate homo-interologs to
explore the relationship between interface conservation
(IC score) and the six alignment statistics computed
from the predicted PS interfaces, e.g., of chain A when
it interacts with B, using known interfaces of A’ with B’.
This analysis revealed that much of the observed variance in IC scores is explained by three factors: (i) the

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

average log (EVal); (ii) the average Positive Score of the
homo-interolog and (iii) the alignment fractions FracA,
FracA’, FracB, and FracB’ computed from the alignments
of constituent chains (A with A’ and B with B’) (see
Methods for additional details).
The results in Figure 7 show that transient interfaces
are highly conserved in homo-interologs. The trend of
increasing median IC scores, as a function of decreasing
logEval (Figure 7a) or increasing Positive Score (Figure
7b) or the combination of Positive Score and Frac A ×
FracA’ is clear (Figure 7d). The trend of increasing IC
scores as a function of FracB × FracB’ is similar to that
as a function of Frac A × Frac A’ (data not shown). In
contrast, the, logLAL, which is the average of alignment
length between A and A’, and between B and B’, is not

Page 9 of 24

strongly correlated with interface conservation for PSinterfaces (Figure 7c).
A comparison of the results for PS-interface conservation in transient complexes here (Figure 7a and 7b) with
those obtained for NPS-interface conservation in transient complexes above (Figure 6d and 6f), reveals that the
conservation of transient interfaces can be detected
easily when the binding partner sequence information is
utilized. The seemingly weak conservation of interfaces
in transient complexes shown in Figure 6 is thus a consequence of the specificity of transient interfaces for different partners. Therefore, we conclude that interfaces
in transient complexes are both highly partner-specific
and highly conserved, when their partner-specificity is
taken into account.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 7 PS-Interface Conservation in Transient Complexes. Homo-interologs corresponding to complexes in the Trans135 dataset were
analyzed (see text for details). (a-c) Scatter plots show IC scores (blue dots) plotted as a function of: (a) log EVal; (b) Positive Score; (c) log LAL.
Red dots are median values of IC scores for a specific value on the x-axis. (d) Scatter plot of Positive Score as a function of FracA × FracA’. Each
data point in (Fig. 7d only) is colored using according to its IC score.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

HomPPI - Homologous Sequence-Based Protein-Protein
Interface Prediction

Based on the results of our analysis of protein interface
conservation described above, we developed HomPPI, a
family of sequence homology-based algorithms for protein interface prediction. We implemented two variants
of HomPPI:
1. NPS-HomPPI - Given a query protein sequence,
NPS-HomPPI searches the nr_pdbaa_s2c database to
identify homologous proteins that are components of
experimentally determined complexes with one or more
other proteins. NPS-HomPPI labels a residue of the
query sequence as an “interface” residue if a majority of
residues in a selected subset of homologs in alignment
of the query sequence with its homologs are interface
residues, and as “non-interface” residue otherwise. Specifically, given a query protein, we first use NPSHomPPI to search for sequence homologs within the
Safe Zone. If at least one homolog in the Safe Zone is
found, NPS-HomPPI uses the Safe homolog(s) to infer
the interfaces of the query protein. Otherwise, the process is repeated to search for homologs in the Twilight
Zone or the Dark Zone. If no homologs of the query
protein can be identified in any of the three zones, NPSHomPPI does not provide any predictions. The Safe,
Twilight, and Dark Zone homologs of the query protein
sequence to be used for interface prediction are identified by searching the nr_pdb_s2c database using
BLASTP with thresholds based on the interface conservation analysis (see Methods Section for details) (after
removing the query sequence and any highly similar
sequences from the same species as the query sequence,
in order to allow unbiased evaluation of the performance of NPS-HomPPI).
2. PS-HomPPI - Given the sequences of a query protein A and its putative binding partner B, PS-HomPPI
searches the nr_pdbaa_s2c database to identify homologous complexes i.e., the homo-interologs of A-B. PSHomPPI labels a residue of the query sequence as an
“interface” residue (with respect to its putative binding
partner) if a majority of the residues in the corresponding position in homologous complexes are interface residues, and as “non-interface” residues otherwise. PSHomPPI uses homo-interologs in Safe and Twilight
Zones to make predictions. The PS-HomPPI prediction
process is thus analogous to that for NPS-HomPPI,
using thresholds for “close homo-interologs” based on
the results of interface conservation analysis of PS-interface conservation (see Methods Section for additional
details).
Performance Evaluation of HomPPI Methods

We report several performance measures that provide
estimates of the reliability of interface (and non-

Page 10 of 24

interface) residue predictions obtained using the
HomPPI family of predictors. We compare the performance of HomPPI predictors with several state-of-theart interface prediction methods on a benchmark dataset. We evaluate the effectiveness of HomPPI in predicting the interface residues of disordered proteins. Finally,
we compare the partner-specific and non-partner-specific versions of HomPPI.
We focus our discussion on results using several performance measures that assess the effectiveness of the
methods in reliably predicting, on average, the interface
and non-interface residues of any given protein (See
Methods for details). However, because several of the
published studies report performance measures that
assess the effectiveness of the methods in reliably assigning interface versus non-interface labels, on average, to
any given protein residue, we also include results using
“residue-based” performance measures in Supplementary
Materials (See http://homppi.cs.iastate.edu/supplementaryData.html).
(i) NPS-HomPPI Performance on the Benchmark180 Dataset

Among the 180 protein sequences in the Benchmark180
dataset (taken from [79]), 125 sequences had at least
one homolog that met the thresholds for the Safe or
Twilight Zones, based on zone boundaries determined
using Trans135 (Table 1). We examined the performance of NPS-HomPPI in predicting interface residues
on each of the four different protein complex types in
Benchmark180. As shown in Table 2, NPS-HomPPI performed best on obligate homodimers, in terms of CC
(0.76), sensitivity (0.83), specificity (0.78) and accuracy
(0.94). Performance on obligate heterodimers was comparable, although slightly lower. NPS-HomPPI performance on transient interfaces was substantially lower
than on obligate interfaces. For transient enzyme
Table 1 Boundaries of Safe, Twilight and Dark Zones
used by NPS-HomPPIa
log(EVal)

≥5.2
≤ -50

Positive Score

≥65%

log(LAL)

≥4

log(EVal)
Positive Score

≤1
≥60%

log(LAL)

Twilight Zone 2b

≥80%

log(EVal)
Twilight Zone 1b

≤ -100

Positive Score
log(LAL)

Safe Zone

≥4

log(EVal)

a

≤1

Positive Score

≥0

log(LAL)

Dark Zone

≥0

Thresholds were chosen based on interface conservation analysis of proteins
in Trans135.
b
Twilight Zone is divided into two sub-zones: Twilight Zone 1 with stricter
thresholds, and Twilight Zone 2 with looser thresholds.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

Page 11 of 24

Table 2 Interface Residue Prediction Performance of NPS-HomPPI on Benchmark180
Binding Type

Homology Zone

Prediction Coverage

CCP

SensitivityP

SpecificityP

AccuracyP

Enzyme-inhibitor,- Transient

Safe/Twilight

67% (24/36)

0.53

0.67

0.58

0.86

Non-enzyme-inhibitor-Transient (NEIT)

Safe/Twilight

60% (18/30)

0.45

0.54

0.58

0.83

Hetero-dimer - Obligate

Safe/Twilight

85% (23/27)

0.63

0.72

0.69

0.88

Homo-dimer - Obligate

Safe/Twiight

69% (60/87)

0.76

0.83

0.78

0.94

Prediction coverage reflects that predictions are made only on proteins for which HomPPI can identify Safe/Twilight Zone homologs.

inhibitor complexes, the accuracy was 0.86, with a CC of
0.53; for transient non enzyme-inhibitor complexes, the
accuracy was 0.83, with a CC of 0.45. These results are
consistent with the finding from our statistical analyses
that NPS-obligate interfaces are more conserved than
NPS-transient interfaces in their homologs.
We also evaluated the prediction performance of NPSHomPPI using homologs with different degrees of
sequence homology. In Table 3, the prediction performance is shown separately for sets of test proteins for
which HomPPI can identify at least one homolog in
Safe, Twilight, or Dark Zones. As expected, Safe Zone
homologs consistently gave the most reliable prediction
performance for all four types of complexes (CC values
ranged from 0.55 to 0.84). Both obligate and transient
interfaces were predicted with moderate to high reliability (CC values ranged from 0.12 to 0.67) even using only
distant homologs from the Twilight or Dark Zones.
(ii) Comparison of NPS-HomPPI with other PPI Prediction
Servers

Direct comparison of NPS-HomPPI with other methods
described in the literature is complicated by the limited
availability of implementations of the underlying methods
(many of which are available only in the form of servers),
and differences in the choice of training and evaluation

datasets, evaluation procedures and evaluation measures
[80]. Hence, we limit our comparisons of HomPPI with
five state-of-the-art methods available as web-based servers: Promate [18], Cons-PPISP [33,81], meta-PPISP [82],
PIER [83] and PSIVER[22]. All of these methods except
PSIVER take advantage of both sequence and experimentally determined protein structure of the query proteins.
They have been reported to be among the best performing
methods currently available for predicting PPIs (see
[20,21] for reviews). PSIVER is one of the most recently
published methods for interface residue prediction that
only uses protein sequence-derived information. Although
direct comparisons of the data representation and the
algorithms used by PSIVER with those used by other
sequence-based interface residue predictors are currently
not available, PSIVER has been reported to outperform
two other sequence-based servers: ISIS [3] and the
sequence-based variant (made available as an experimental
version in 2008) of SPPIDER [84].
Promate samples the protein surface using circular
patches around a set of anchoring dots and estimates
the probability that each surface dot belongs to an interface, based on the distribution of various physicochemical properties within interface and non-interface
patches. Cons-PPISP is a consensus method that

Table 3 Prediction Performance of NPS-HomPPI using Homologs from the Safe, Twilight, Dark Zones
Prediction Coverage

CCP

SensitivityP

SpecificityP

AccuracyP

Safe

14% (5/36)

0.55

0.62

0.57

0.94

Twilight
Dark

50% (18/36)
19% (7/36)

0.52
0.12

0.69
0.23

0.58
0.20

0.83
0.83

Total

83% (30/36)

0.44

0.58

0.50

0.85

Safe

23% (7/30)

0.56

0.64

0.60

0.91

Twilight

37% (11/30)

0.37

0.48

0.57

0.78

Dark

33% (10/30)

0.36

0.37

0.50

0.86

Total

93% (28/30)

0.42

0.48

0.55

0.84

Binding Type

Homology Zone

Enzyme-inhibitor, - Transient

Non-enzyme-inhibitor, - Transient (NEIT)

Safe

52% (14/27)

0.70

0.81

0.72

0.91

Twilight
Dark

33% (9/27)
15% (4/27)

0.52
0.44

0.58
0.66

0.64
0.47

0.82
0.80

Total

Hetero-dimer, - Obligate

96% (26/27)

0.60

0.71

0.66

0.86
0.96

Safe
Homo-dimer, - Obligate

38% (33/87)

0.84

0.90

0.84

Twilight

31% (27/87)

0.67

0.74

0.71

0.91

Dark

28% (24/87)

0.36

0.47

0.44

0.84

Total

97% (84/87)

0.65

0.73

0.68

0.91

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

combines six neural networks trained on six datasets.
Meta-PPISP is a consensus method that combines the
output from cons-PPISP, Promate, and PINUP [85].
PIER relies on partial least squares (PLS) regression of
surface patch properties of the query protein. PSIVER
uses PSSM profiles and predicted solvent accessibility as
input features, and uses a Naïve Bayes classifier with
parameters obtained using kernel density estimation.
Because NPS-HomPPI does not take structural information into account, to compare its performance with the
structure-based servers, we mapped the interfaces predicted by each server onto the full sequence of each
query protein in order to evaluate prediction performance on the entire protein sequence.
We compared the performance of NPS-HomPPI with
all five PPI servers on a subset of the Benchmark180

Page 12 of 24

dataset [79], specifically, 125 out of 180 proteins for
which NPS-HomPPI was able to identify homologs in
the Safe or Twilight zones. The sensitivity-specificity
plots (also called precision-recall plots) are shown in
Figure 8. Each data point corresponds to a different
classification threshold value. The prediction score of
NPS-HomPPI is simply the normalized vote (for each
residue total votes for interfaces from homologs are normalized by the number of homologs) from 10 (or fewer
available) homologs. Thus, NPS-HomPPI produces a
limited number of distinct prediction scores.
For the two transient complex types, enzyme-inhibitors
(Figure 8a) and transient non-enzyme-inhibitors, transient
(Figure 8b), NPS-HomPPI consistently outperforms Promate, PIER, meta-PPISP, cons-PPISP, and PSIVER except
for sensitivity values lower than 0.2 (which is very low to

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 8 Performance of NPS-HomPPI Compared with Web-based PPI Servers. Performance was evaluated on four different protein
complex types from Benchmark180: (a) Enzyme-inhibitors, transient. (b) Non-enzyme-inhibitors (NEIT), transient. (c) Hetero-dimers, obligate. (d)
Homo-dimers, obligate. Servers compared were: NPS-HomPPI: red circles; Meta-PPISP: green squares; Cons-PPISP: blue triangles; Promate: brown
stars; PIER: purple stars; PSIVER: yellow stars.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

be useful in practice). On both obligate heterodimers (Figure 8c) and homodimers (Figure 8d), NPS-HomPPI outperforms all five servers across the full range of sensitivity
and specificity values for which it can generate homologybased predictions. It should be noted that structure-based
methods predict which surface residues are interface residues. In contrast, sequence-based methods have the more
challenging task of identifying interface residues from the
set of all residues. In other words, structure-based methods can trivially eliminate all non-surface residues from
the set of candidate interface residues. Viewed in this light,
the observed predictive performance of NPS-HomPPI, a
purely sequence-based method, suggests that it is possible
to make reliable non-partner-specific interface residue predictions using only the sequences of a protein by taking
advantage of the conservation of interfaces in the context
of non-partner-specific interactions.
(iii) Performance of NPS-HomPPI on Intrinsically Disordered
Proteins

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) and proteins containing intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) are attractive targets for drug discovery [73]. The lack of defined
tertiary structure in IDPs/IDRs poses a major challenge
to structure-based interface prediction methods. Hence,
we compared the performance of NPS-HomPPI with
ANCHOR [86], a recently published method for the prediction of binding regions in disordered proteins. For this
comparison, we used two non-redundant disordered protein datasets, S1 and S2, recently collected by Meszaros
et al. [87]. Some of the test proteins are based on data
from NMR structures. In order to compare NPS-HomPPI
with ANCHOR on the largest possible number of cases
available to us, we extracted interface residues from these
NMR cases; however, we used only sequence homologs
with interface residues determined from X-ray structures
to make predictions.

Page 13 of 24

Figure 9 shows the performance comparison of NPSHomPPI with ANCHOR on the prediction of interface
residues in disordered proteins. NPS-HomPPI significantly outperforms ANCHOR over a broad range of
sensitivity and specificity for both short as well as long
disordered proteins for which sequence homologs are
available in Safe, Twilight or Dark Zones (Figure 9a and
9b respectively). For example, as shown in Figure 9b, on
the S2 dataset, at a prediction sensitivity value of 0.70,
ANCHOR achieves a specificity of ~0.40, whereas NPSHomPPI achieves a specificity of ~0.64.
At present, NPS-HomPPI has relatively high prediction coverage for long disordered proteins (78%; 31 out
of 40 interfaces of disordered proteins), but lower coverage for short disordered proteins (50%; 28 out of 56
interfaces of disordered proteins). This is in part due to
that fact that many disordered proteins available in the
PDB have only NMR structures, which were excluded
from the current study. Incorporation of data from
NMR structures in the future can be expected to
increase the coverage of NPS-HomPPI for disordered
proteins.
(iv) Performance of NPS-HomPPI versus PS-HomPPI

Our analysis of the conservation of PS-transient interfaces described earlier suggests that many interfaces in
transient protein complexes are highly partner-specific.
Thus, we implemented a variant of HomPPI, designated
PS-HomPPI, to evaluate the possibility that prediction
of interface residues, especially in transient complexes,
can be improved by using sequence information about
specific binding partners, when available.
We first evaluated the performance of PS-HomPPI on a
transient complex dataset, Trans135 (dimers from the
dataset in [76]). PS-HomPPI found at least one homointerolog that meets the Safe or Twilight similarity
thresholds for 60% (162/270) proteins in the Trans135

Figure 9 Performance of NPS-HomPPI Compared with ANCHOR in Predicting Interface Residues in Disordered Proteins. Two datasets of
disordered proteins were used: (a) S1: short disordered proteins. (b) S2: long disordered proteins. NPS-HomPPI: red circles; ANCHOR: green
squares.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

dataset. Overall, PS-HomPPI had an average CC of 0.65,
sensitivity of 0.69, specificity of 0.70 and accuracy of 0.92.
To investigate whether the partner information is, in
fact, helpful in predicting interfaces we directly compared the performance of PS-HomPPI with NPSHomPPI on the Trans135 dataset. In Trans135, there
were 139 out of 270 chains that for which predictions
could be generated by both NPS-HomPPI (using homologs) and PS-HomPPI (using homo-interologs) from the
Safe or Twilight zones (see Methods for details).
The results shown in Figure 10 indicate that, at least
for transient interfaces in the Trans135 dataset, PSHomPPI outperforms NPS-HomPPI. Although the average values over proteins (green dots) for CC, sensitivity
and specificity are similar, the median values (the red
bar in the box) for PS predictions (left panel) are much
higher than that for NPS predictions (right panel). Also,
the observed variance (length of the box) of PS predictions (left panel) is much smaller than that of NPS predictions (right panel). These results suggest that the
reliability of interface residue predictions can be
improved by exploiting the knowledge of the binding
partner of a query protein.

Discussion
Protein Interface Conservation across Structure Space

The study of protein interface conservation among proteins with similar structures has received considerable
attention in recent years. By analyzing the structural
similarity of representative protein-protein interfaces in
dimeric proteins, Gao and Skolnick [88] showed that the
vast majority of native interfaces have a close structural
neighbor with similar backbone Ca geometry and interface contact pattern.
In a related study, Zhang et al. [89] explored the conservation of interface residues among structural neighbors of
a query protein (i.e., proteins that share the same SCOP
family, superfamily or fold, or a high degree of structural

Figure 10 Performance comparison of PS-HomPPI and NPSHomPPI. Only proteins for which predictions could be generated
by both PS-HomPPI and NPS-HomPPI (139 out of 270 chains from
Trans135) were used in this evaluation. The lower (Q1), middle (Q2)
and upper (Q3) quartiles of each box are 25th, 50th and 75th
percentile. Interquartile range IQR is Q3-Q1. Any data value that lies
more than 1.5 × IQR lower than the first quartile or 1.5 × IQR higher
than the third quartile is considered an outlier, which is labelled
with a red cross. The whiskers extend to the largest and smallest
value that is not an outlier. Averages are marked by green dots.

Page 14 of 24

similarity regardless of their SCOP classification). They
showed that: (i) interfaces are indeed conserved among
structural neighbors; (ii) the degree of interface conservation is most significant among proteins that have a clear
evolutionary relationship. They further showed that conservation of interface residues among structural neighbors
can be successfully exploited to predict protein-protein
interfaces based on protein structure information.
To investigate the extent to which conservation of
interface residues can be used to improve the prediction
of protein-protein interfaces based on protein sequence
information, we systematically studied interface conservation across sequence space. Our results demonstrate
that protein interfaces from different binding types are
conserved among proteins with homologous sequences.
We further showed that the degree of conservation of
interfaces is even greater when putative interaction partners are taken into account. The IC score, our measure
of interface conservation, unlike those used in previous
studies [57] (e.g., residue conservation in sequence alignments), makes direct use of experimentally determined
interface residues to measure the degree of interface
conservation. Specifically, the IC score directly measures
the extent to which the interface residues of sequence
homologs of a query protein are predictive of the interface residues of a query protein. Hence, the IC score
provides the basis for setting the parameters of our
sequence homology-based interface prediction methods.
Distance Functions for Identifying Putative Homologs
with Conserved Interfaces

Because we do not know the IC score for a query
sequence with unknown interface residues, we identified
several statistics associated with the BLASTP alignment of
a query sequence with its homologs that are correlated
with the IC score. We found that interface residues of a
query protein can be reliably predicted from the known
interfaces of its homologs (and in the case of partner-specific predictions, the homologs of its interaction partner as
well) when the homologs are selected taking into account
measures of quality of sequence alignment, specifically
NCBI BLAST sequence alignment statistics. The HomPPI
methods presented here use simple linear combinations of
BLAST sequence alignment statistics, determined using
PCA analysis of the relationship between the statistics and
the IC score. It would be interesting to explore optimal,
perhaps non-linear, combinations of parameters to maximize the desired performance criteria (e.g., sensitivity, specificity, or some combination thereof).
Conservation of Interfaces in Obligate and Transient
Complexes

Our results are consistent with previous studies [57], in
that we found interface residues to be more highly

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

conserved than non-interface residues, in both obligate
and transient complexes. We also found that when
information regarding the specific binding partner of a
query protein is not taken into account in estimating
the conservation score, interfaces in transient complexes
appear to be less highly conserved than those in obligate
complexes. Our results further show that transient interfaces are highly partner-specific, and that the partnerspecific interfaces in transient complexes are, in fact,
highly conserved. Interfaces of intrinsically disordered
proteins that nevertheless form ordered complexes with
globular proteins are also highly conserved (see below).
Interfaces of Disordered Proteins Are Highly Conserved
and Non Partner-Specific

Compared with its performance on transient binding
proteins in the Benchmark180 dataset, NPS-HomPPI
performs much better on interfaces of disordered proteins in the S1 and S2 datasets. This is consistent with
the conclusion of Meszaros et al. [90] that interfaces of
intrinsically disordered proteins are evolutionarily conserved. The high degree of conservation of interface
(binding) regions in IDPs also reflects the important
biological functions in which many disordered proteins
participate. It is believed that the flexibility of disordered
binding regions may facilitate the binding of IDPs using
the same set of binding residues to different binding
partners (at different times) [91]. Our results suggest
that this specialized disorder-to-order transition as a
result of binding may be associated with a high degree
of interface conservation.
The conservation of interfaces in IDPs may contribute
to the generally successful application of interface residue predictors to interfaces in IDPs. Several groups have
developed methods for predicting disordered binding
regions, including PONDR VL-XT [92,93], ANCHOR
[86], and other examples reviewed in [94], that have
produced encouraging results. The success of these predictors suggests that at least some sequence features are
likely to be conserved within binding regions of different
IDPs.
The fact that disordered interfaces can be reliably
inferred by NPS-HomPPI indicates that disordered
interfaces are non-partner-specific, which is consistent
with findings that these proteins are able to bind a
broad range of ligands through common binding regions
[95,96].
Performance of HomPPI Compared with Published
Methods

Our results show that whenever the interfaces of the
close sequence homologs of a query protein are available, NPS-HomPPI outperforms several state-of-the-art
protein interface prediction servers (many of which take

Page 15 of 24

advantage of the structure of the query protein), over a
broad range of sensitivity and specificity values. In the
case of transient complexes (Figure 8a and 8b), NPSHomPPI consistently outperforms Promate, PIER, metaPPISP, cons-PPISP, and PSIVER except for sensitivity
values lower than 0.2. On obligate dimers (Figure 8c
and 8d), NPS-HomPPI significantly outperforms all five
servers across the full range of sensitivity and specificity
values for which it can generate homology-based predictions. These results strongly suggest that it is possible to
reliably predict protein interface residues using only
sequence information whenever the interface residues of
sequence homologs of the query protein are known.
Each of the webbased PPI servers with which we compared our NPS-HomPPI server, except PSIVER, take
advantage of the structure of the query proteins to
determine surface residues, and restrict the predicted
interface residues to a subset of the surface residues.
This trivially reduces the number of false positive interface residue predictions (relative to the total number of
residues in the query protein) which, in turn, yields a
substantial increase in the specificity of interface predictions produced by structure-based servers. Consequently, purely sequence-based protein interface
prediction servers have a handicap relative to structurebased prediction servers. When viewed in this light, performance of NPS-HomPPI relative to the state-of-theart protein interface prediction methods is especially
impressive.
The HomPPI methods for interface residue prediction
do have an important limitation, however, in that they rely
on the availability putative homologs for which experimentally-determined structures of bound complexes are
available in the PDB. One may ask whether the coverage
of the HomPPI family of protein-protein interface prediction methods is broad enough to be sufficiently useful in
practice. We address this question below.
Prediction Coverage of HomPPI Methods

The current coverage of HomPPI protein interface prediction methods can be assessed from our results as
follows:
NPS-HomPPI

• Benchmark180 dataset: NPS-HomPPI found at
least one homolog that meets the similarity thresholds for Safe or Twilight Zones for 73% (83/114) of
the obligate binding chains (homo and heterodimers). Among these, 82% (68/83) were predicted
with both sensitivity and specificity ≥0.50, simultaneously. Similarly, at least one homolog was found
for 62% (42/66) of transient binding chains (enzymeinhibitors and non-enzyme inhibitors) in this dataset.
Among these 55% (23/42) were predicted with both
sensitivity and specificity ≥0.5.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

• Trans135 dataset: In the case of transient query
proteins in the Trans135 dataset, NPS-HomPPI
found at least one homolog that meets the similarity
thresholds for Safe or Twilight Zones for 75% (202/
270) of chains. Among these, 37% (74/202) were
predicted with both sensitivity and specificity ≥0.5.
• Disordered protein datasets S1 and S2: In the
case of disordered proteins, NPS-HomPPI found at
least one homolog that meets the similarity thresholds for Safe or Twilight or Dark Zones for 50% (26/
52) of interfaces of disordered proteins in S1, the
short disordered protein set, and 75% (30/40) of
interfaces of disordered proteins in S2.
PS-HomPPI

• Trans135 dataset: PS-HomPPI found at least one
homo-interolog that meets the Safe or Twilight similarity thresholds for 60% (162/270) proteins in the
Trans135 dataset. Among these, 80% (130/162)
where predicted with sensitivity and specificity ≥0.5,
simultaneously.
Based on these results, we estimate that, at present,
the coverage of the HomPPI protein interface prediction
methods is in the range of 60-70% of all query proteins.
As the structural genomics projects currently underway
generate increasing numbers of structures of proteinprotein complexes [97], we can expect corresponding
increases in the coverage of HomPPI family of protein
interface prediction methods. In the meantime, one can
envision hybrid methods that combine HomPPI with
one or more machine learning based methods that do
not require the availability of putative homologs for
which experimentally determined structures of bound
complexes are available in the PDB.
Parameters for HomPPI Can Be Relaxed for Obligate
Interactions

The current default parameters for HomPPI are intentionally rather stringently set based on the results of our
statistical analysis of interface conservation using
Trans135, which is a dataset of transient binding proteins. Our analyses suggest that NPS-HomPPI has wider
Safe and Twilight Zones for obligate binding proteins
than for transient binding proteins. Furthermore, even
Dark Zone homologs yield interface predictions that are
accurate enough to be useful in practice, with average
specificity of 0.47 and sensitivity of 0.66 for hetero-obligate dimers, average specificity of 0.44 and sensitivity of
0.47 for homo-obligate dimers (see Table 3). Therefore,
for obligate interactions, if a query protein has little
sequence similarity with proteins in the PDB, the
thresholds of NPS-HomPPI can be relaxed to allow
identification of more distant homologs with potentially

Page 16 of 24

conserved interfaces that still provide reliable interface
predictions.
Prediction of Binding Partners vs. Prediction of Interface
Residues

Protein interface (binding site) predictions and protein
interaction (partner) predictions answer closely related,
but different questions. Non partner-specific protein
interface predictors are designed to identify the residues in a query protein that are likely to make contact
with the residues of one or more unspecified interaction
partner proteins. Partner-specific protein interface predictors are designed to identify the residues in a query
protein that are likely to make contact with residues of
a putative interaction partner protein. In contrast, protein interaction predictors are designed to predict
whether or not a given pair of proteins is likely to interact [98-101]. Although our study does not directly
address the latter question, it is possible to use PSHomPPI predictions to determine whether or not two
query proteins interact: Given a pair of protein
sequences, say A and B, we can first use PS-HomPPI to
predict the interface residues of A with its putative partner B; and the interface residues of B with its putative
partner A. If, in both cases, some number of interface
residues are predicted, we can infer that proteins A and
B are likely to interact with each other. Conversely, it is
possible to use information from predicted protein-protein interactions to refine interface predictions. Yip et al.
[2] have proposed an approach to utilize residue level
information to improve the accuracy of protein level
predictions, and vice versa. They have shown that a
two-level machine learning framework that allows information flow between the two levels through shared features yields predictions that are more accurate than
those obtained independently at each of the levels.
Using Interface Predictions to Steer Docking and to Rank
Docked Conformations

Reliable partner-specific interface predictions can be
used to restrict the search space for protein-protein
docking by specifying the contacts that need to be preserved in the docked conformation. It is also possible to
rank the conformations produced by docking, based on
the degree of overlap between the interface of a query
protein and its binding partner in the docked conformation with the interface generated by a partner-specific
interface prediction method, e.g. PS-HomPPI. In related
work[102], we have shown that PS-HomPPI provides
reliable interface predictions on a large subset of a
Docking Benchmark Dataset, and is both fast and robust
in the face of conformational changes induced by complex formation. The quality of the ranking of docked
conformations by PS-HomPPI interface prediction is

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

consistently superior to that produced using ClusPro
cluster-size-based and energy-based criteria for 61 out
of 64 docking complexes for which PS-HomPPI produces interface predictions[102].

Page 17 of 24

Both NPS-HomPPI and PS-HomPPI have been implemented in a server available at: http://homppi.cs.iastate.
edu/.

Methods
Conclusions
We studied a large number of sequence alignments
between protein pairs with known interfaces to explore
the conditions under which conservation of protein
interface residues, as determined by the alignment of a
query sequence against its homologs/homo-interologs,
can be used to reliably predict protein-protein interfaces.
Based on the results of these analyses, we developed
HomPPI, a simple sequence-based method for predicting interface residues based on the known interface residues in homologous sequences. HomPPI has two
variants: NPS-HomPPI (for predicting interface residues
of a query protein with unspecified interaction partners)
and PS-HomPPI (for predicting interface residues of
query proteins with a specified putative interaction
partner).
Our systematic evaluation of NPS-HomPPI showed
that, when close homologs can be identified, NPSHomPPI can reliably predict interface residues in both
obligate and transient complexes, with a performance
that rivals several state-of-the-art structure-based interface prediction servers. NPS-HomPPI can also be used
as a reliable tool for identifying disordered binding
regions. In this regard, NPS-HomPPI has an advantage
over structure-based interface predictors, which cannot
be used to predict binding sites in disordered regions of
proteins because they do not form stable structures in
their unbound state. In addition, the HomPPI family of
interface prediction methods are fast enough for proteome-wide analyses.
Many studies on in silico identification of protein
interfaces have been published in the past decade. However, despite the fact that many proteins are very specific in their choice of binding partners, the majority of
studies focus on only one side of the bound complex. In
this study, we implemented a novel partner-specific protein interface prediction method, PS-HomPPI, which
infers interface residues based on known interfaces in
the homo-interologs, i.e., complexes formed by homologs of the query protein and its putative interaction
partner. When homo-interologs can be identified, PSHomPPI can reliably predict highly partner-specific
transient interfaces.
Although our focus in this study was on prediction
of protein-protein interfaces, these methods could be
useful in other settings, such as sequence-based prediction of protein-DNA, protein-RNA, and proteinligand interfaces, and the prediction of B and T cell
epitopes.

Datasets

Five datasets were used in this paper:
• Nr6505 - For analyzing the protein interface
conservation.
• Oblig94 and Trans135 - For comparing the degree
of conservation of protein interfaces in transient/
obligate binding proteins.
• Benchmark180 - For evaluating the prediction performance of HomPPI.
• S1 and S2 - For evaluating the performance of
NPS-HomPPI on interfaces of disordered proteins.
• nr_pdbaa_s2c - For BLASTP searching for close
sequence homologs
Nr6505

We extracted a maximal non-redundant set of known
protein-protein interacting chains from the Protein Data
Bank (PDB) [71] available on 2/4/2010. We used the following steps to build Nr6505 to eliminate the influence
of over-represented protein families in PDB:
1. Extract all the X-ray derived protein structures
with resolution 3.5 Å or better in PDB. Remove proteins with less than 40 residues. We obtained
102,853 protein chains.
2. Remove redundancy of the resulting dataset in
step 1 using PISCES[103]. All the remaining
sequences have less than or equal to 30% sequence
similarity. We obtained 6505 chains.
Oblig94 and Trans135

This dataset of 94 obligate protein-protein dimer complexes and the dataset of 135 transient dimer complexes
was obtained from a large non-redundant dataset of 115
obligate complexes and 212 transient complexes (3.25 Å
or better resolution, determined using X-ray crystallography) previously generated by Mintseris and Weng
[76] to study the conservation of protein-protein interfaces. In ordered to exclude the influence of other types
of interfaces, we extracted 94 obligate dimers and 135
transient dimers from the original dataset and get
Oblig94 and Trans135. In Oblig94, 1QLA has been
superseded by 2BS2. In Trans135, 1DN1 and 1IIS have
been superseded by 3C98 and 1T83, respectively, and
1F83, 1DF9, 4CPA and 1JCH have since been deemed
as obsolete and hence discarded from PDB.
Benchmark180

We tested NPS-HomPPI on a benchmark dataset manually collected and used as evaluation dataset by Bradford

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

and Westhead [79]. This dataset consists of 180 protein
chains taken from 149 complexes; 36 of these are
involved in enzyme-inhibitor interactions, 27 in heteroobligate interactions, 87 in homo-obligate interactions,
and 30 in non-enzyme-inhibitor transient (NEIT)
interactions.
Disordered protein datasets S1 and S2

We evaluated the performance of NPS-HomPPI on a
non-redundant disordered dataset that has been
recently collected by Meszaros et al [87]. S1 consists
of 46 complexes of short disordered and long globular
proteins. S2 consists of 28 complexes of long disordered and long globular proteins. Note that a protein
complex e.g., 1fv1 C:AB formed by a disordered protein C with two ordered proteins A and B, yields two
sets of interface residues for C (corresponding to
interfaces between C with A and C with B). As a
result, 46 complexes in S1 and 28 complexes in S2
(respectively) correspond to 56 and 40 interfaces of
disordered proteins. We focused on cases in which
NPS-HomPPI is able to identify Safe/Twilight/Dark
zone homologs for the query proteins resulting in
NPS-HomPPI interface predictions for 28 out of 56
and 31 out of 40 interfaces of disordered proteins in
S1 and S2 respectively.
BLAST nr_pdbaa_s2c

This dataset is used for BLASTP searches. We used
the fasta files from S2C database [104] to generate our
BLAST database nr_pdbaa_s2c. We removed proteins
with resolution worse than 3.5 Å from S2C fasta formatted database. We built a non-redundant database
for BLAST queries from the S2C fasta formatted database. To generate the non-redundant BLAST database,
we grouped proteins with identical sequences into one
entry. We used the resulting database to search for
homologs of a query sequence using BLASTP 2.2.22+
[77]. There are 36,352 sequences and 9,549,671 total
residues in nb_pdbaa_s2c.

Page 18 of 24

Interface Definition

This paper adopts a stringent definition of protein-protein interfaces. Surface residues are defined as residues
that have the relative solvent accessible area (RASA) at
least 5% [84]. Interface residues are defined as surface
residues with at least one atom that is within a distance
of 4 Å from any of the atoms of residues in the chain.
The ratios of interface residues versus the total number
of residues for the datasets used in this work are summarized in Table 4. Interface information was extracted
from the ProtInDB server http://protInDB.cs.iastate.edu.
Mapping Interfaces in Structures to Sequences

We label the protein sequences as interface or noninterface residues (according to the definition of interface residues given above) as follows: We first calculate
the relevant distances between atoms using the atom
coordinates in ATOM section in PDB files. Then, by
associating the ATOM section to residues in the
SEQRES section, we can map the corresponding residues to protein sequences. However, various errors in
PDB files make this a non-trivial task. Hence, we used
the mapping files from S2C database, which offers corrected mapping information from ATOM section to
residues in the SEQRES section of PDB files, to map
interfaces determined in structures to full sequences.
NCBI BLAST Parameters

The amino acid substitution matrix and gap cost are
essential parameters that need to be specified in BLAST
searches. In this study, we used the substitution matrices
and gap costs recommended for the different query
lengths [105] (See Table 5).
Performance Evaluation

To evaluate the extent to which protein interfaces are
conserved in query-homolog pairs and to estimate the

Table 4 The Proportion of Interface Residues in Datasets used in this Study
Dataset

Number of Interface Residuesa

Total Number of Residuesb

% Interface Residues

Nr6505

145,498

1,377,630

10.6%

Benchmark180

6,401

43,013

14.9%

Trans135

6,460

55,217

11.7%

Oblig94

10,273

55,400

18.5%

Disordered S1c

585

1,171

50.0%

1,797

11,400

15.8%

c

Disordered S2
a

When a chain interacts with more than one other chain, the interfaces are counted separately. For example, for protein complex 2phe C:AB, the interface of C
with A and the interface of C with B are regarded as two disordered interfaces.
b
Residues that missing from PDB structures are not counted.
c
For disordered interface datasets S1 and S2, only disordered interfaces are counted.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

Page 19 of 24

Table 5 BLAST Substitution Matrices and Gap Costs used
for BLASTP searches in this paper
Query Length

Substitution Matrix

Gap Costs

<35

PAM-30

(9,1)

35-50

PAM-70

(10,1)

50-85

BLOSUM-80

(10,1)

85

BLOSUM-62

(10,1)

performance of HomPPI and other predictors that we
compare with in predicting the interface residues of a
novel protein (i.e., one not used to train the predictor),
we consider several standard performance measures
including sensitivity (recall), specificity (precision), accuracy and Matthews correlation coefficient (CC) [106].
Specifically, for each test protein i, we calculate the corresponding performance measures for each protein i as
follows:
TPi
TPi + FNi
TPi
speciﬁcityi =
TPi + FPi
TPi + TNi
accuracyi =
TPi + FPi + FNi + TNi
TPi × TNi − FPi × FNi
CCi =
(TPi + FNi )(TPi + FPi )(TNi + FPi )(TNi + FNi )
sensitivityi =

where TP i , FP i , TN i and FN i are respectively the
number of interface residues of protein i that are correctly predicted to be interface residues, the number
of residues of protein i that are incorrectly predicted
to be interface residues, the number of residues of
protein i that are correctly predicted to be non-interface residues, and the number of residues of protein i
that are incorrectly predicted to be non-interface
residues.
We calculate the protein-based overall performance
measures as follows:
N
i=1 sensitivityi

sensitivityP =
speciﬁcityP =
accuracyP =
CCP =

N
N
i=1 speciﬁcityi
N
i=1

N
accuracyi
N

N
i=1 CCi

N

where N is the total number of test proteins.
These measures describe different aspects of predictor
performance. The overall sensitivity is the probability,
on average, of correctly predicting the interface residues

of a given protein. The overall specificity is the probability, on average, that a predicted interface residue in any
given protein is in fact an interface residue. The overall
accuracy corresponds to the fraction of residues in any
given protein, on average, that are correctly predicted.
The overall Matthews correlation coefficient measures
of how predictions correlate, on average, with true interfaces and non-interfaces.
Often it is possible to trade off one performance measure (e.g., specificity) against another (e.g., sensitivity) by
varying the threshold that is applied to the prediction
score to generate the binary (interface versus non-interface) predictions. Hence, we include of the overall sensitivity against overall specificity for different choices of
the threshold. The resulting specificity-sensitivity plots
or precision-recall plots show the trade-off between sensitivity and specificity and hence provide a much more
complete picture of predictive performance.
The performance measures described above provide
an estimate of the reliability of the predictor in predicting interface residues of a novel protein. It is worth noting that most of the papers in the literature on interface
residue prediction report performance measures by averaging over residues (as opposed to proteins). The residue-based overall performance measures are calculated
as follows:
sensitivityR =
speciﬁcityR =
accuracyR =
R

CC =

N
i=1 TPi
N
i=1 (TPi + FNi )
N
i=1 TPi
N
i=1 (TPi + FPi )
N
i=1 (TPi + TNi )
N
(TPi + FPi + FNi +
i=1
N
i=1 TPi ×

N
i=1 (TPi

+ FNi ) ×

TNi )
N
i=1

N
i=1 (TPi

TNi −

+ FPi ) ×

N
i=1

FPi ×

N
i=1 (TNi

N
i=1

FNi

+ FPi ) ×

N
i=1 (TNi

+ FNi )

Residue-based specificity-sensitivity plots in this case
show how the trade-off between specificityR and specificityR is obtained by varying the threshold applied to the
prediction score. The residue-based performance measures provide an estimate of the reliability of the predictor in correctly labelling a given residue. However, in
practice, it is useful to know how well a predictor can
be expected to perform on a given protein sequence as
opposed to a residue. sensitivityP, specificityP, accuracyR,
and CCP are more informative than their residue-based
counterparts. Hence, in this paper, we report results
based on the protein-based measures although, for the
purpose of comparison with other published methods,
we include the results based on the residue-based measures in Supplementary Materials in HomPPI website.
Interface Conservation (IC) Scores

In protein interface conservation analysis, we used the
CC (defined above) as a measure of the extent to which
the interface residues in query protein are similar to

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

those in a putative homolog. For clarity, we refer this
measure as the Interface Conservation (IC) score.
NPS-HomPPI

NPS-HomPPI is a Non-Partner-Specific Homologous
Sequence-Based Protein-Protein Interface Prediction
algorithm. NPS-HomPPI is based on the conclusion
from statistical analysis of protein interface conservation
on Nr6505, Trans135 and Oblig94, i.e., that protein
interfaces are conserved across close sequence
homologs.
As illustrated in Figure 11, NPS-HomPPI predicts
interface residues in a query protein based on the
known interface residues of a selected subset of homologs in a sequence alignment. Homologs of the query
protein sequence are identified by searching the
nr_pdb_s2c database using BLASTP. Note that, in our
experiments, in order to allow unbiased evaluation of
>1byfA
MDYEILFSDETMNYADAGTYCQSRGMALVSSAMRD
STMVKAILAFTEVKGHDYWVGADNLQDGAYNFLWN
DGVSLPTDSDLWSPNEPSNPQSWQLCVQIWSKYNL
LDDVGCGGARRVICEKELDD

Page 20 of 24

the performance of NPS-HomPPI, the query sequence
itself and sequences that share a high degree (≥95%) of
amino acid sequence identity with, and are from the
same species as the query sequence are deleted from the
set of putative homologs.
If at least one homolog in the Safe Zone is found by
the BLASTP search, NPS-HomPPI uses the Safe Zone
homolog(s) to infer the interfaces of the query protein.
Otherwise, the search is repeated for homologs in the
Twilight and Dark Zones. If NPS-HomPPI cannot find
homologs in any of the three zones, it does not provide
any predictions. The default zone boundaries used by
NPS-HomPPI (and hence the parameters used in NPSHomPPI search for homologs of a query sequence) is
based on our interface conservation analysis on the
dataset of transient dimers Trans135 (Table 1). The
choice of these default parameter thresholds for NPSHomPPI is intentionally rather conservative; the

BLAST

Interface observed
in the query
sequence

>1byfA
MDYEILFSDETMNYADAGTYCQSRGMALVSSAMRDSTMVKAILAFTEVKGHD...DVGCGGARRVICEKELDD
?111111111000000000100010000000000001101100110011000...00000000000000010?

Interface observed
in the homolog
sequence

>1byfB
?111111111000000000100000000000000001101100110011000...00000000100000010?
>1tlgA
?111111111000000000100010000000000001101100110011000...00000000100000010?
>1tlgB
?111111111000000000100010000000000001101100110011000...00000000000000010?

Interface
predicted by
NPS-HomPPI

>prediction for 1byfA
?111111111000000000100010000000000001101100110011000...00000000100000010?

Prediction score is 3/3=1 (3 interfaces in
this position out of 3 homologs).
Using score cut-off 0.5, the amino acid in
this position is correctly predicted as
interface.

Prediction score is 2/3=1.
Using score cut-off 0.5, the
amino acid in this position is
wrongly predicted as interface.

Figure 11 An example of Interface Residue Prediction using NPS-HomPPI. The sequence of the query protein 1 byf chain A is BLASTed
against nr_pdb_s2c database. In this case, 3 sequences meet the thresholds set by NPS-HomPPI for “close homolog” in Safe Zone or Twilight
Zone defined in Table 1. If there are more than K = 10 homologs met the zone thresholds in Table 1, regression equation 1 is used to
determine the nearest K homologs for final prediction. For each position in the alignment, an amino acid residue in the query sequence is
predicted to be an interface residue if the majority of the amino acid residues in the alignment are interface residues. Otherwise, it is predicted
to be a non-interface residue. Interface residues are denoted by red 1’s; Non-interface residues are denoted by black 0’s. Question marks denote
residues for which coordinates are missing from PDB files.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

Page 21 of 24

thresholds can be relaxed if additional information is
available (e.g., if we know that the query protein is an
obligate binding protein). The IC score of each of the
homologs of a query sequence in the alignment
returned by BLASTP is predicted using the regression
model for the IC score (see eq. 1) from the BLASTP
statistics for the alignment of each homolog with the
query sequence. For a given query sequence, at most K
closest (Safe, Twilight, or Dark Zone homologs, as the
case may be, in that order) are selected from the alignment of the query sequence with its homologs to be
used to infer the interface residues of the query
sequence. In our experiments, K, the maximum number of homologs used in the prediction was set equal
to 10. At most K homologs of the query sequence are
determined by ranking the homologs in the alignment
in decreasing order of their predicted IC scores and
choosing (at most) K Safe zone homologs (or Twilight
zone homologs if no Safe zone homologs exist or Dark
zone homologs if neither Safe nor Twilight zone
homologs exist). Once the (at most) K closest homologs to be used for predicting the interface residues of
the query sequence are chosen, each residue in the
query sequence is labelled as an interface or non-interface residue based on the majority (over the set of at
most K closest homologs of the query sequence) of the
labels associated with the corresponding position in
the alignment. More specifically, each of the at most K
homologs provides a positive vote for a given position
in the query sequence if the corresponding residue of
the homolog is an interface residue; and a negative
vote if it is a non-interface residue. The prediction
score of NPS-HomPPI for that position in the query
sequence is simply the number of positive votes
divided by the total number of votes. A query
sequence residue with a HomPPI score ≥0.5 is predicted to be an interface residue (See Figure 11 for an
example); otherwise, it is predicted to be a non-interface residue. This procedure can be seen as an application of the (at most) K nearest neighbor classifier at
each residue of the query sequence.
NPS-Interface Conservation As a Function of Sequence
Alignment

We built a linear model for NPS-interface conservation
based on the most important sequence alignment statistics identified in the PCA analysis: logEVal, Positive
Score, logLAL.
The model is
IC Score = β0 + β1 log(EVal) + β2 PositiveS + β3 log(LAL)

(1)

Variables, parameter estimates and coefficients are
shown in Table 6. All the coefficients are significant.

Table 6 Variables, Parameter Estimates and Significance
Values for the Linear Model for NPS-Interface
Conservation
Variable

Parameter Estimate

Standard Error

t Value

Pr > |t|
<.0001

b0

-0.5655

0.0080

-70.66

b1

-0.0004

0.0000

-23.30

<.0001

b2

0.0037

0.0000

54.44

<.0001

b3

0.1057

0.0011

94.62

<.0001

PS-HomPPI

PS-HomPPI predicts the interface residues in a protein
chain based on the known interface residues of its closest homo-interologs. Given a query protein A and its
interaction partner B, PS-HomPPI first identifies the set
homo-interologs of A-B using BLASTP to identify the
homologs of A and homologs of B. From the BLASTP
results, we identify a set of homo-interologs that meet
sequence similarity thresholds (determined based on the
results of our partner-specific interface conservation
analysis, as described in the Results Section). We discard the whole PDB complex that contains A-B, to
ensure an objective assessment of the reliability of our
prediction procedure. For query A-B and its homologous interacting pair A’-B’, we also discard the interacting protein pair A’-B’ if A and A’ or B and B’ share
≥95% sequence identity and belong to the same species.
PS-HomPPI uses homo-interologs in the Safe and
Twilight Zones to make predictions. The zone boundaries were determined using Trans135 and are shown in
Table 7. The PS-HomPPI prediction process is similar
to that of NPS-HomPPI in that it progressively searches
for homointerologs from higher, then lower, homology
zones: i.e., if PS-HomPPI cannot find at least one homointerolog in the Safe Zone, it next looks for homo-interologs in the Twilight Zone.
PS-HomPPI predicts whether an amino acid in query
sequence A is an interface residue or not based on the
corresponding position in its alignment with (at most) K
of the closest homo-interologs of A-B (based on their
predicted IC scores). In our experiments, K was set
equal to 10. Given a query-partner pair A-B, we label
each position in the amino acid sequence of protein A
as an interface or non-interface based on whether or
not a majority of the corresponding positions of the
homologs of A within the homo-interologs of A-B are
interface residues. More specifically, each of the at most
K homo-interologs provides a positive vote for a given
position in the query protein sequence A if the corresponding residue of its homolog A’ in its homo-interolog is an interface residue; and a negative vote if it is a
non-interface residue. The prediction score of PS-

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

Page 22 of 24

Table 7 Boundaries of Safe, Twilight and Dark Zones
used by PS-HomPPI
LogEVal

≤ -100

PositiveS

≥70%

FraceAA’

≥80%

FraceBB’

Safe Zone

≥80%

LogEVal

≤ -50

PositiveS

≥60%

FraceAA’

≥60%

FraceBB’

Twilight Zone 1

≤1

PositiveS

≥55%

FraceAA’

≥40%

FraceBB’

≥40%

LogEVal

≤1

PositiveS

≥0

FraceAA’

≥0

FraceBB’

Dark Zone

(2)

Variables, parameter estimates and coefficients are
shown in Table 8. All the coefficients are significant.

Availability and Requirements
* Project name: HomPPI
* Project home page: http://homppi.cs.iastate.edu/
* Programming language: Perl

≥60%

LogEVal
Twilight Zone 2

IC Score = β0 + β1 logEVal + β2 PosiTiveS + β3 FracAA + β4 FracBB

≥0

Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part by the National Institutes of Health grant
GM066387 to Vasant Honavar and Drena Dobbs and in part by a research
assistantship funded by the Center for Computational Intelligence, Learning,
and Discovery. The authors sincerely thank Irina Kufareva in Abagyan Lab at
the University of California for providing PIER prediction results. The authors
also thank Rafael Jordan and Fadi Towfic for helpful discussions and
assistance with the web server implementation. The work of Vasant Honavar
while working at the National Science Foundation was supported by the
National Science Foundation. Any opinion, finding, and conclusions
contained in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

HomPPI for that position in the query sequence is simply the number of positive votes divided by the total
number of votes. A residue in the query protein A with
a prediction score ≥0.5, is predicted as interface, otherwise, it is predicted as non-interface.

Author details
1
Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011,
USA. 2Department of Genetics, Development and Cell Biology, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50011, USA. 3Bioinformatics and Computational Biology
Program, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

PS-Interface Conservation As a Function of Sequence
Alignment

Authors’ contributions
All authors of this research paper have directly participated in the design,
implementation, or analysis of this study.

We built a linear model for PS-interface conservation
based on the important sequence alignment statistics
identified in the PCA analysis: logEVal, Positive Score,
FracAA’ and FracBB’, where
log(EValAA ) + log(EValBB )
2
PositiveSAA + PositiveSBB
PositiveS =
2
FracAA = FracA × FracA
logEVal =

FracBB = FracB × FracB
LALAA
LALAA
LALBB
LALBB
FracA =
, FracA =
, FracB =
, FracB , =
lengthA
lengthA
lengthB
lengthB

A-B is query protein pair and A’-B’ is the homo-interolog of A-B. EValAA’ and EValBB’ are the EVal between
A and A’, and between B and B’. positiveSAA’ and positiveSBB’ are the BLAST Positive Score between A and A’,
between B and B’. The model is
Table 8 Variables, Parameter Estimates and Significance
Values for the Linear Model for PS-Interface
Conservation.
Coefficient Parameter Estimate Standard Error t Value Pr > |t|
b0

-0.505

0.040

-12.62

<.0001

b1

0.001

0.000

6.16

<.0001

b2

0.009

0.001

14.6

<.0001

b3

0.341

0.027

12.54

<.0001

b4

0.205

0.028

7.4

<.0001

Received: 25 May 2010 Accepted: 17 June 2011 Published: 17 June 2011
References
1. Shoemaker BA, Panchenko AR: Deciphering protein-protein interactions.
Part I. Experimental techniques and databases. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3:
e42.
2. Yip KY, Kim PM, McDermott D, Gerstein M: Multi-level learning: improving
the prediction of protein, domain and residue interactions by allowing
information flow between levels. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:241.
3. Ofran Y, Rost B: ISIS: interaction sites identified from sequence.
Bioinformatics 2007, 23:e13-16.
4. Jones S, Marin A, Thornton JM: Protein domain interfaces:
characterization and comparison with oligomeric protein interfaces.
Protein Eng 2000, 13:77-82.
5. Jones S, Thornton JM: Analysis of protein-protein interaction sites using
surface patches. J Mol Biol 1997, 272:121-132.
6. Jones S, Thornton JM: Principles of protein-protein interactions. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:13-20.
7. Larsen TA, Olson AJ, Goodsell DS: Morphology of protein-protein
interfaces. Structure 1998, 6:421-427.
8. Argos P: An investigation of protein subunit and domain interfaces.
Protein Eng 1988, 2:101-113.
9. Bogan AA, Thorn KS: Anatomy of hot spots in protein interfaces. J Mol
Biol 1998, 280:1-9.
10. Chakrabarti P, Janin J: Dissecting protein-protein recognition sites. Proteins
2002, 47:334-343.
11. Chothia C, Janin J: Principles of protein-protein recognition. Nature 1975,
256:705-708.
12. Janin J, Chothia C: The structure of protein-protein recognition sites. J
Biol Chem 1990, 265:16027-16030.
13. Lo Conte L, Chothia C, Janin J: The atomic structure of protein-protein
recognition sites. J Mol Biol 1999, 285:2177-2198.
14. Lijnzaad P, Berendsen HJ, Argos P: Hydrophobic patches on the surfaces
of protein structures. Proteins 1996, 25:389-397.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

15. Sheinerman FB, Norel R, Honig B: Electrostatic aspects of protein-protein
interactions. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2000, 10:153-159.
16. Tsai CJ, Lin SL, Wolfson HJ, Nussinov R: Studies of protein-protein
interfaces: a statistical analysis of the hydrophobic effect. Protein Sci
1997, 6:53-64.
17. Glaser DMSF, Vakser IA, Ben-Tal N: Residue frequencies and pairing
preferences at protein-protein interfaces. Proteins 2001, 43:89-102.
18. Neuvirth H, Raz R, Schreiber G: ProMate: a structure based prediction
program to identify the location of protein-protein binding sites. J Mol
Biol 2004, 338:181-199.
19. Ezkurdia I, Bartoli L, Fariselli P, Casadio R, Valencia A, Tress ML: Progress and
challenges in predicting protein-protein interaction sites. Brief Bioinform
2009, 10:233-246.
20. Zhou HX, Qin S: Interaction-site prediction for protein complexes: a
critical assessment. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2203-2209.
21. de Vries SJ, Bonvin AM: How proteins get in touch: interface prediction in
the study of biomolecular complexes. Curr Protein Pept Sci 2008,
9:394-406.
22. Murakami Y, Mizuguchi K: Applying the Naive Bayes classifier with kernel
density estimation to the prediction of protein-protein interaction sites.
Bioinformatics 2010, 26:1841-1848.
23. Florencio Pazos MH-C, Ausiello Gabriele, Valencia Alfonso: Correlated
Mutations Contain Information About Protein-protein Interaction. J Mol
Biol 1997, 271:511-523.
24. Sikic M, Tomic S, Vlahovicek K: Prediction of protein-protein interaction
sites in sequences and 3D structures by random forests. PLoS Comput
Biol 2009, 5:e1000278.
25. Chen P, Li J: Sequence-based identification of interface residues by an
integrative profile combining hydrophobic and evolutionary information.
BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:402.
26. Yan C, Dobbs D, Honavar V: Identification of surface residues involved in
protein-protein interaction - a support vector machine approach.
Intelligent Systems Design and Applications 2003, 53-62.
27. Yan C, Dobbs D, Honavar V: A two-stage classifier for identification of
protein-protein interface residues. Bioinformatics 2004, 20(Suppl 1):
i371-378.
28. Res I, Mihalek I, Lichtarge O: An evolution based classifier for prediction
of protein interfaces without using protein structures. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:2496-2501.
29. Bahadur RP, Zacharias M: The interface of protein-protein complexes:
analysis of contacts and prediction of interactions. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008,
65:1059-1072.
30. Fariselli P, Pazos F, Valencia A, Casadio R: Prediction of protein–protein
interaction sites in heterocomplexes with neural networks. Eur J Biochem
2002, 269:1356-1361.
31. Fernandez-Recio J, Abagyan R, Totrov M: Improving CAPRI predictions:
optimized desolvation for rigid-body docking. Proteins 2005, 60:308-313.
32. Li N, Sun Z, Jiang F: Prediction of protein-protein binding site by using
core interface residue and support vector machine. BMC Bioinformatics
2008, 9:553.
33. Chen H, Zhou HX: Prediction of interface residues in protein-protein
complexes by a consensus neural network method: test against NMR
data. Proteins 2005, 61:21-35.
34. Ofran YaR B: Predicted protein-protein interaction sites from local
sequence information. FEBS Lett 2003, 544:236-239.
35. Chen XW, Jeong JC: Sequence-based prediction of protein interaction
sites with an integrative method. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:585-591.
36. Wodak SJ, Mendez R: Prediction of protein-protein interactions: the
CAPRI experiment, its evaluation and implications. Curr Opin Struct Biol
2004, 14:242-249.
37. Dunker AK, Obradovic Z, Romero P, Garner EC, Brown CJ: Intrinsic protein
disorder in complete genomes. Genome Inform Ser Workshop Genome
Inform 2000, 11:161-171.
38. Dunker AK, Obradovic Z: The protein trinity–linking function and
disorder. Nat Biotechnol 2001, 19:805-806.
39. Sander C, Schneider R: Database of homology-derived protein structures
and the structural meaning of sequence alignment. Proteins 1991,
9:56-68.
40. Rost B: Twilight zone of protein sequence alignments. Protein Eng 1999,
12:85-94.

Page 23 of 24

41. Marti-Renom MA, Stuart AC, Fiser A, Sanchez R, Melo F, Sali A: Comparative
protein structure modeling of genes and genomes. Annu Rev Biophys
Biomol Struct 2000, 29:291-325.
42. Thielmann Y, Weiergraber OH, Ma P, Schwarten M, Mohrluder J, Willbold D:
Comparative modeling of human NSF reveals a possible binding mode
of GABARAP and GATE-16. Proteins 2009, 77:637-646.
43. Guex N, Peitsch MC, Schwede T: Automated comparative protein
structure modeling with SWISS-MODEL and Swiss-PdbViewer: a historical
perspective. Electrophoresis 2009, 30(Suppl 1):S162-173.
44. Sharma M, Khanna S, Bulusu G, Mitra A: Comparative modeling of
thioredoxin glutathione reductase from Schistosoma mansoni: a
multifunctional target for antischistosomal therapy. J Mol Graph Model
2009, 27:665-675.
45. Abascal F, Valencia A: Automatic annotation of protein function based on
family identification. Proteins 2003, 53:683-692.
46. Andrade MA: Position-specific annotation of protein function based on
multiple homologs. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 1999, 28-33.
47. Pandit SB, Gosar D, Abhiman S, Sujatha S, Dixit SS, Mhatre NS,
Sowdhamini R, Srinivasan N: SUPFAM–a database of potential protein
superfamily relationships derived by comparing sequence-based and
structure-based families: implications for structural genomics and
function annotation in genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:289-293.
48. Valencia A: Automatic annotation of protein function. Curr Opin Struct Biol
2005, 15:267-274.
49. Zehetner G: OntoBlast function: From sequence similarities directly to
potential functional annotations by ontology terms. Nucleic Acids Res
2003, 31:3799-3803.
50. Nair R, Rost B: Sequence conserved for subcellular localization. Protein Sci
2002, 11:2836-2847.
51. Aytuna AS, Gursoy A, Keskin O: Prediction of protein-protein interactions
by combining structure and sequence conservation in protein interfaces.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2850-2855.
52. Espadaler J, Romero-Isart O, Jackson RM, Oliva B: Prediction of proteinprotein interactions using distant conservation of sequence patterns
and structure relationships. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:3360-3368.
53. Matthews LR, Vaglio P, Reboul J, Ge H, Davis BP, Garrels J, Vincent S,
Vidal M: Identification of potential interaction networks using sequencebased searches for conserved protein-protein interactions or
“interologs”. Genome Res 2001, 11:2120-2126.
54. Grishin NV, Phillips MA: The subunit interfaces of oligomeric enzymes are
conserved to a similar extent to the overall protein sequences. Protein
Sci 1994, 3:2455-2458.
55. Caffrey DRSS, Hughes JD, Mintseris J, Huang ES: Are Protein-Protein
Interfaces More Conserved in Sequence than the Rest of the Protein
Surface? Protein Sci 2004, 13:190-202.
56. Reddy BV, Kaznessis YN: A quantitative analysis of interfacial amino acid
conservation in protein-protein hetero complexes. J Bioinform Comput
Biol 2005, 3:1137-1150.
57. Choi YS, Yang JS, Choi Y, Ryu SH, Kim S: Evolutionary conservation in
multiple faces of protein interaction. Proteins 2009, 77:14-25.
58. Pupko T, Bell RE, Mayrose I, Glaser F, Ben-Tal N: Rate4Site: an algorithmic
tool for the identification of functional regions in proteins by surface
mapping of evolutionary determinants within their homologues.
Bioinformatics 2002, 18(Suppl 1):S71-77.
59. Lichtarge O, Bourne HR, Cohen FE: An evolutionary trace method defines
binding surfaces common to protein families. J Mol Biol 1996,
257:342-358.
60. Lichtarge O, Sowa ME: Evolutionary predictions of binding surfaces and
interactions. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2002, 12:21-27.
61. Landgraf R, Fischer D, Eisenberg D: Analysis of heregulin symmetry by
weighted evolutionary tracing. Protein Eng 1999, 12:943-951.
62. Armon A, Graur D, Ben-Tal N: ConSurf: an algorithmic tool for the
identification of functional regions in proteins by surface mapping of
phylogenetic information. J Mol Biol 2001, 307:447-463.
63. Madabushi S, Yao H, Marsh M, Kristensen DM, Philippi A, Sowa ME,
Lichtarge O: Structural clusters of evolutionary trace residues are
statistically significant and common in proteins. J Mol Biol 2002,
316:139-154.
64. Engelen S, Trojan LA, Sacquin-Mora S, Lavery R, Carbone A: Joint
evolutionary trees: a large-scale method to predict protein interfaces
based on sequence sampling. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000267.

Xue et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:244
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/244

65. Carl N, Konc J, Janezic D: Protein surface conservation in binding sites. J
Chem Inf Model 2008, 48:1279-1286.
66. Bordner AJ, Abagyan R: Statistical analysis and prediction of proteinprotein interfaces. Proteins 2005, 60:353-366.
67. Wang B, Wong HS, Huang DS: Inferring protein-protein interacting sites
using residue conservation and evolutionary information. Protein Pept
Lett 2006, 13:999-1005.
68. Panchenko AR, Kondrashov F, Bryant S: Prediction of functional sites by
analysis of sequence and structure conservation. Protein Sci 2004,
13:884-892.
69. Shoemaker BA, Zhang D, Thangudu RR, Tyagi M, Fong JH, MarchlerBauer A, Bryant SH, Madej T, Panchenko AR: Inferred Biomolecular
Interaction Server–a web server to analyze and predict protein
interacting partners and binding sites. Nucleic Acids Research 2010, 38:
D518-D524.
70. Kundrotas PJ, Vakser IA: Accuracy of protein-protein binding sites in highthroughput template-based modeling. PLoS Comput Biol 2010, 6:
e1000727.
71. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H,
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000,
28:235-242.
72. Tompa P, Fuxreiter M, Oldfield CJ, Simon I, Dunker AK, Uversky VN: Close
encounters of the third kind: disordered domains and the interactions
of proteins. Bioessays 2009, 31:328-335.
73. Metallo SJ: Intrinsically disordered proteins are potential drug targets.
Curr Opin Chem Biol 14:481-488.
74. Fong JH, Panchenko AR: Intrinsic disorder and protein multibinding in
domain, terminal, and linker regions. Mol Biosyst 2010, 6:1821-1828.
75. Vacic V, Oldfield CJ, Mohan A, Radivojac P, Cortese MS, Uversky VN,
Dunker AK: Characterization of molecular recognition features, MoRFs,
and their binding partners. J Proteome Res 2007, 6:2351-2366.
76. Mintseris J, Weng Z: Structure, function, and evolution of transient and
obligate protein-protein interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:10930-10935.
77. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
78. Johnson RAWD, Ed: Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis. Prentice Hall;,
5 2002.
79. Bradford JR, Westhead DR: Improved prediction of protein-protein
binding sites using a support vector machines approach. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:1487-1494.
80. Caragea C, Honavar V: Machine Learning in Computational Biology.
Encyclopedia of Database Systems 2008.
81. Zhou HX, Shan Y: Prediction of protein interaction sites from sequence
profile and residue neighbor list. Proteins 2001, 44:336-343.
82. Qin S, Zhou HX: meta-PPISP: a meta web server for protein-protein
interaction site prediction. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:3386-3387.
83. Kufareva I, Budagyan L, Raush E, Totrov M, Abagyan R: PIER: protein
interface recognition for structural proteomics. Proteins 2007, 67:400-417.
84. Porollo A, Meller J: Prediction-based fingerprints of protein-protein
interactions. Proteins 2007, 66:630-645.
85. Liang S, Zhang C, Liu S, Zhou Y: Protein binding site prediction using an
empirical scoring function. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:3698-3707.
86. Dosztanyi Z, Meszaros B, Simon I: ANCHOR: web server for predicting
protein binding regions in disordered proteins. Bioinformatics 2009,
25:2745-2746.
87. Meszaros B, Simon I, Dosztanyi Z: Prediction of protein binding regions in
disordered proteins. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000376.
88. Gao M, Skolnick J: Structural space of protein-protein interfaces is
degenerate, close to complete, and highly connected. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2010, 107:22517-22522.
89. Zhang QC, Petrey D, Norel R, Honig BH: Protein interface conservation
across structure space. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:10896-10901.
90. Meszaros B, Tompa P, Simon I, Dosztanyi Z: Molecular principles of the
interactions of disordered proteins. J Mol Biol 2007, 372:549-561.
91. Fong JH, Shoemaker BA, Garbuzynskiy SO, Lobanov MY, Galzitskaya OV,
Panchenko AR: Intrinsic disorder in protein interactions: insights from a
comprehensive structural analysis. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000316.

Page 24 of 24

92. Li X, Romero P, Rani M, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z: Predicting Protein
Disorder for N-, C-, and Internal Regions. Genome Inform Ser Workshop
Genome Inform 1999, 10:30-40.
93. Dunker K: Sequence Data Analysis for Long Disordered Regions
Prediction in the Calcineurin Family. Genome Inform Ser Workshop Genome
Inform 1997, 8:110-124.
94. He B, Wang K, Liu Y, Xue B, Uversky VN, Dunker AK: Predicting intrinsic
disorder in proteins: an overview. Cell Res 2009, 19:929-949.
95. Oldfield CJ, Meng J, Yang JY, Yang MQ, Uversky VN, Dunker AK: Flexible
nets: disorder and induced fit in the associations of p53 and 14-3-3 with
their partners. BMC Genomics 2008, 9(Suppl 1):S1.
96. Russell RB, Gibson TJ: A careful disorderliness in the proteome: sites for
interaction and targets for future therapies. FEBS Lett 2008,
582:1271-1275.
97. Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: The impact of structural genomics:
expectations and outcomes. Science 2006, 311:347-351.
98. Pan XY, Zhang YN, Shen HB: Large-scale prediction of human proteinprotein interactions from amino acid sequence based on latent topic
features. J Proteome Res 2010, 9:4992-5001.
99. Hue M, Riffle M, Vert JP, Noble WS: Large-scale prediction of proteinprotein interactions from structures. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:144.
100. Cho YR, Zhang A: Identification of functional hubs and modules by
converting interactome networks into hierarchical ordering of proteins.
BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 3):S3.
101. Xia JF, Wang SL, Lei YK: Computational methods for the prediction of
protein-protein interactions. Protein Pept Lett 2010, 17:1069-1078.
102. Xue LC, Jordan RA, El-Manzalawy Y, Dobbs D, Honavar V: Ranking Docked
Models of Protein-Protein Complexes Using Predicted Partner-Specific
Protein-Protein Interfaces: A Preliminary Study. Proceedings of the
International Conference On Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (ACMBCB); Chicago, Illinois, August 1-3, 2011 .
103. Wang G, Dunbrack RL Jr: PISCES: a protein sequence culling server.
Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1589-1591.
104. S2C-A database correlating sequence and atomic coordinate residue
numbering in the Protein Data Bank. [http://dunbrack.fccc.edu/Guoli/s2c/
index.php].
105. BLAST Substitution Matrix. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/html/
sub_matrix.html].
106. Baldi P, Brunak S, Chauvin Y, Andersen CA, Nielsen H: Assessing the
accuracy of prediction algorithms for classification: an overview.
Bioinformatics 2000, 16:412-424.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-244
Cite this article as: Xue et al.: HomPPI: a class of sequence homology
based protein-protein interface prediction methods. BMC Bioinformatics
2011 12:244.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
