<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Biodiversity of Archaea and floral of two inland saltern ecosystems in the Alto Vinalopó Valley, Spain</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Saline Systems 2010, 6:10. doi:10.1186/1746-1448-6-10"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Basilio Zafrilla"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

SALINE SYSTEMS

RESEARCH

Open Access

Biodiversity of Archaea and floral of two
inland saltern ecosystems in the Alto Vinalopó
Valley, Spain
Basilio Zafrilla1, Rosa M Martínez-Espinosa1, María A Alonso2, María J Bonete1*

Abstract
Background: The extraction of salt from seawater by means of coastal solar salterns is a very well-described
process. Moreover, the characterization of these environments from ecological, biochemical and microbiological
perspectives has become a key focus for many research groups all over the world over the last 20 years. In
countries such as Spain, there are several examples of coastal solar salterns (mainly on the Mediterranean coast)
and inland solar salterns, from which sodium chloride is obtained for human consumption. However, studies
focused on the characterization of inland solar salterns are scarce and both the archaeal diversity and the plant
communities inhabiting these environments remain poorly described.
Results: Two of the inland solar salterns (termed Redonda and Penalva), located in the Alto Vinalopó Valley
(Alicante, Spain), were characterized regarding their geological and physico-chemical characteristics and their
archaeal and botanical biodiversity. A preliminary eukaryotic diversity survey was also performed using saline water.
The chemical characterization of the brine has revealed that the salted groundwater extracted to fill these inland
solar salterns is thalassohaline. The plant communities living in this environment are dominated by Sarcocornia
fruticosa (L.) A.J. Scott, Arthrocnemum macrostachyum (Moris) K. Koch, Suaeda vera Forsk. ex Gmelin
(Amaranthaceae) and several species of Limonium (Mill) and Tamarix (L). Archaeal diversity was analyzed and
compared by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based molecular phylogenetic techniques. Most of the sequences
recovered from environmental DNA samples are affiliated with haloarchaeal genera such as Haloarcula, Halorubrum,
Haloquadratum and Halobacterium, and with an unclassified member of the Halobacteriaceae. The eukaryote
Dunaliella was also present in the samples.
Conclusions: To our knowledge, this study constitutes the first analysis centered on inland solar salterns located in
the southeastern region of Spain. The results obtained revealed that the salt deposits of this region have marine
origins. Plant communities typical of salt marshes are present in this ecosystem and members of the
Halobacteriaceae family can be easily detected in the microbial populations of these habitats. Possible origins of
the haloarchaea detected in this study are discussed.

Background
Salts in general, and particularly sodium chloride, have
played an important role in human history, not only
because of their nutritional value but also because of
their applications in several industrial processes and
their impact on agricultural practices. Hypersaline lakes,
salt marshes, hot springs, saline ponds and salt deposits
* Correspondence: mjbonete@ua.es
1
División de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de Alicante, Ap. 99, E-03080 Alicante, Spain
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

are distributed throughout the world and constitute natural resources from which salt has been extracted for
many centuries. For geologists, some of these environments represent a model system to study salt precipitation and related biogeochemical processes in shallow
evaporitic environments [1].
In warm and arid areas, salt can be recovered from
seawater thanks to several procedures that involve solar
salterns. The solar salterns are filled with seawater that
is concentrated gradually by the effects of the wind and
temperature. Thus, solar salterns are restricted to areas

© 2010 Zafrilla et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

such as Mediterranean regions, where the climate is
characterized by periods during which evaporation
exceeds precipitation. This process is especially rapid in
summertime when highly salted water flows through an
increasingly concentrated pool until ponds crystallize.
In addition to a high salt concentration, the environment of solar salterns is also characterized by its pH
(range from 6 up to 11). Although halophilic microorganisms living in these environments are distributed
among all three domains of life, it has been extensively
reported that members of the Halobacteriaceae family
constitute the dominant microbial population, especially
in those environments where the NaCl concentration
ranges from 20% (w/v) up to halite saturation (<32%
(w/v)) [2-5]. In fact, the red color associated with hypersaline lakes and ponds is mainly due to the pigmentation of halophilic archaea and the eukaryote Dunaliella
[6]. However, this does not mean that these are the only
inhabitants contributing to the red color of these environments. Populations of halophilic bacteria and other
members of Eukarya are also present in saltern ponds
[7,8]. To thrive under these conditions, halophilic
archaea accumulate potassium ions inside their cells to
balance the high salt content of the environment. This
ability differentiates them from halophilic bacteria that
usually accumulate compatible solutes (betaine, ectoine)
to counteract the high external salt concentrations
[9-11]. Nevertheless, it has been found that some halophilic bacteria such as Salinibacter use the same strategy
as haloarchaea to cope with osmotic stress [7]. Because
halophilic archaea are the predominant microorganisms
in hot and hypersaline environments, it is possible that
they sustain key metabolic cycles under these conditions; indeed the understanding of life under such
extreme circumstances has become a key area of
research recently [12,13].
By amplifying 16S rDNA sequences directly from
environmental samples, halophilic archaea have been
detected in different hypersaline environments such as
the crystallizer ponds of a marine saltern [10,14], alkaline soda lakes [15] or sediments of hypersaline Antarctic lakes and coastal salt marshes [16,17]. Microbial
research in saline environments is important for several
reasons: i) there are potential biotechnological applications of halophilic microorganisms [18,19]; ii) knowledge
about microbial diversity in terrestrial saline environments may shed light on the properties of salt deposits
and saline environments found on Mars [20,21]; and iii)
primitive life on earth might have started in this kind of
extreme environment, so these systems are ideal to
understand the evolution of the biosphere on Earth [22].
Regarding the biodiversity of these halophilic environments, it is also very interesting to analyze the nature of
the plant communities because of the various mechanisms

Page 2 of 12

that they have developed to cope with such extreme saline
conditions. Plant growth is highly limited by salty soil conditions. The soils surrounding solar salterns are characterized by a high salt concentration. This places limitations
on plant growth because the soil’s osmotic potential is
low, making it difficult for the plants to extract water from
the soil (hydric stress situations) and in order to get water
throughthe roots, the plant’s internal osmotic potential
must be lower than that of the soil. Consequently, plants
have developed mechanisms to adapt to high salt levels
in soil.
The exploitation of saltworks has become a very successful industry, with large scale production in southeastern Spain where Solvay developed a method to
produce caustic soda from NaCl in 1817 [23]. Salt
obtained from plants has been used since the second
half of the nineteenth century for the production of
glass, dyes and soap. Although these plants are no
longer used in industry today, they still have a great
environmental value. Some irrigation methods, along
with increased desertification in arid and semiarid
regions, resulting in increases soil salinization. In
response to these phenomena, some scientists have studied halophilic plants as a tool to manage soils that
have undergone the salinization processes [24-29].
The United Nations’ environmental program focuses
on desertification processes and has drawn attention to
the use of halophilic vegetation to restore degraded
lands, provide food for livestock and fix some atmospheric carbon dioxide. In most cases, the aim is not to
remove the salt from the ground so much as it is to
allow for some tracts of land to be useful again. Planting
halophilic species could be very useful in areas where
salinization has been caused by human activities (thus
making it impossible to sustain traditional agricultural
activities). The most interesting aspect of these halophilic plants is that they can be irrigated even with
sea water. In any case, a good vegetation cover protects
the underlying soil against erosion, improving its structure and assisting drainage processes against capillary
ascent [24-29].
In Alicante County (Spanish Mediterranean coast)
there are many examples of well-characterized coastal
solar salterns from which salt is extracted for human
consumption [30]. However, the inland solar salterns
located in this county remain poorly described to this
day [31]. In the inland solar salterns, the groundwater
interacts with underground salt deposits, resulting in an
increase in water salinity. The saline water is then
pumped into the ponds, where salt is extracted in a
manner similar to that used in coastal solar salterns.
The aim of this study was to describe general environmental aspects of two of the three inland solar salterns
located in the municipality of Villena (northwest

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

Alicante County, Figure 1). We have paid special attention to the ecological parameters and the properties of
the collected brine; we have also assessed the Archaeal
diversity of the crystallization ponds using (PCR)-based
molecular phylogenetic approaches. Properties of the
plant communities surrounding these inland solar salterns have also been studied in detail. Recently, this area
has been catalogued as a “Wetland of interest” in the
Alicante province http://www.cth.gva.es/areas/espacios/
zonas_humedas/zon/Ficha-35.PDF, as it constitutes an
optimum environment for a number of birds and salt
marsh plant communities.

Results and Discussion
Description of the region

The valley where the solar salterns are located has an
average altitude of 500 meters above sea level, with an
approximate surface area of 94 Km2. Geomorphologically, this valley could be considered a corridor from the
coast to the central regions of the Iberian Peninsula.
Both sides of the valley are delimited by mountain
ranges, but it is not crossed by any of these ranges. This
results in a corridor valley phenomenon that increases
the speed of winds running across the valley, which in
turn also increases the evaporation rate in the “artificial
shallow ponds”. This is an important phenomenon for
the salt extraction process, considering that, in the study
region, evaporation is the most important contributing
factor in the process of salt crystallization.
The valley studied in this work is the coldest, driest,
and also the farthest inland in the Eastern Iberian
Peninsula. The temperature ranges between -8 and 10°C
in winter, and easily reaches 40°C and above in summer.
These yearly temperature fluctuations are mainly due to
the convergence of two meteorological phenomena in
this zone. The first is known as “thermal inversion” and
refers to overnight decreases in temperature in atmospheric layers that are in contact with the ground,
resulting in dense fog banks that do not disappear until
solar radiation heats the bottom layers or the winds are
strong enough to disperse the fog [32,33]. The second
meteorological phenomenon, known as “rain shadow”, is
related to the impact of mountain topography on rainfall. The valley is surrounded by mountains, which are
low-pressure points that attract cloudy fronts and
decrease recorded rainfall to less than 350 mm per year
in the valley. Most of that scarce rainfall occurs in
autumn and spring [31].
The main geological formations observed in the
geographical area of the Alto Vinalopó Valley are calcareous and dolomitic mountain ranges from the Cretaceous and Jurassic periods, whose sedimentation creates
a quaternary valley. The valley is crossed by an alignment of Triassic diapires (Keuper facies) composed of

Page 3 of 12

red clay and gypsum, which constitute the geological
source of the salinity. The diapiric phenomena originated between the Tertiary and Quaternary periods and
formed a closed basin. Subterranean wells spilled water
within these endorheic basins, forming the old lagoon
known as “La Laguna” (Figures 1 &2), which has a surface area of around 15 km2. It was desiccated in 1803,
but nowadays it is possible to distinguish the waterline
because of the presence of fine gray salty slime. Most of
this area is currently used for agriculture.
Description of the Redonda and Penalva solar salterns

The salterns of Redonda, Fortuna and Penalva are
located quite close to the perimeter of the aforementioned old lagoon. They are composed of several artificial shallow ponds and have been used for the last few
centuries to obtain sodium chloride for human consumption. The present study focuses mainly on the
Redonda and Penalva salterns (Figure 1B, Figure 2).
These constitute around 1.25% of the overall area of
solar salterns in the Alicante region, and along with the
inland solar salterns located in the municipality of Salinas, they are the only inland evaporation systems in this
region.
Currently, only the Penalva ponds are being used for
NaCl production. The Redonda and Fortuna crystallizing ponds are the oldest in this region, which explains
their irregular shapes (Figure 2).
In the Penalva salterns, a distinction can be made
between heating and crystallizing ponds. The heating
ponds are filled with salty water pumped from ground
soil. As previously mentioned, saline water results from
the interaction between groundwater and salt deposits,
and the salt concentration at the pumping point, as estimated by a Baumé hydrometer, is 10°Bé which corresponds to 10% salt. In summertime (from May to
September) especially, the water evaporation process
becomes very rapid, resulting in an increased salt concentration. The water then turns into brine, which is
driven from heating ponds to crystallizing ponds where
NaCl precipitates when the total salt concentration
increases to just above 300 g/l.
Physico-chemical characterization of the saline water and
brine from the Redonda and Penalva salterns

To shed light on the characterization of these inland
solar salterns, we used different approaches, such as
physico-chemical characterization of the saline water
and brine samples. Several parameters, such as temperature, pH and conductivity, were measured in the field
immediately before the collection of water samples from
the Redonda and Penalva ponds. The results summarized in table 1 show that, in both cases, the pH is quite
close to neutrality and there is no spatial or temporal

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

Page 4 of 12

Figure 1 Geographical location of the Alto Vinalopó Valley, Alicante, Spain (A). The three salterns are located at the margins of the old
lagoon, called “La Laguna”: 1, Fortuna; 2, Redonda; and 3, Penalva (B). Scale in panel B is 1:25,000.

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

Page 5 of 12

Figure 2 A) Aerial view of the old lagoon, showing the locations of the saltern ponds (B, C and D).

variation in pH. Samples obtained from the center of
the ponds also exhibited the same conductivity and salinity as those obtained from the margins; however, the
optical density values of the margin samples were higher
due to the accumulation of Dunaliella caused by the
winds, as confirmed by optical microscopy analysis.
Conductivity and salinity values obtained from the

Redonda ponds were similar to those obtained from
Penalva. Conductivity, or specific conductance, is a measure of the ability of the solution to carry an electrical
current; in general, the greater the salinity, the greater
the conductivity. However, this salinity-conductivity
relationship is not straightforward because the same
conductivity values can be obtained from samples with

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

Page 6 of 12

Table 1 Physico-Chemical characterization of the
samples
Parameters

Redonda ponds

Temperature (°C)

30

Penalva ponds
32

pH

7.5

7.5

Conductivity
(mS cm-1 at 25°C)

226 ± 15

221 ± 24

Salinity (ppt)

145 ± 10

142 ± 15

O.D. (600 nm)

0.000*
1.937**

0.000*
1.235**

Average values for several parameters obtained from salted water collected
from the surface of the crystallizer ponds at the Redonda and Penalva inland
salterns; parameters were measured at the time of sample collection. Water
from the center (*) and margins (**) of the ponds.

different ion compositions and concentrations [34]. This
is because conductivity is a function of the specific ions
present in the solution, as well as the level of concentration of the ions. For this reason, complete chemical analyses of saline water and brine were undertaken.
Chemical analysis of the saline water samples from
Penalva revealed that the main cations were Na+ (121 g/l),
Ca2+ (0.6 g/l) and Mg2+ (4 g/l); while Cl - (187 g/l) and
SO42- (21 g/l) were the main anions detected. Other trace
elements such as potassium and manganese were also
found. It is also important to note that non-negligible
concentrations of CaSO 4 (2 g/l), MgSO 4 (22 g/l) and
MgCl 2 (0.1 g/l) were detected. Similar results were
obtained from the Redonda salterns. Hypersaline waters
are defined as those with total salt concentrations greater
than that of seawater (i.e., >3.5%). On the basis of the
chemical composition of the water, saline water can be
classified into two categories: Thalassohaline water
(derived from seawater, with Na+ and Cl- as the predominant ions) and Athalassohaline (with an ionic composition markedly influenced by the area where the pond
develops) [35]. Athalassohaline waters usually contain
higher concentrations of bivalent ions such as calcium,
magnesium and sulfate, in contrast to the relative dominance of monovalent ions (sodium and chloride) in seawater [22,35]. The results obtained from chemical
analysis of saline water samples from the Redonda and
Fortuna salterns, which clearly show that Na+ and Cl- are
the dominant ions, indicate that these are thalassohaline
environments.
Brine samples from the Penalva salterns, which had a
pH value of around 7.8, were collected to estimate their
inorganic composition, as described in the Methods section. The results obtained showed that 99.8% of the
brine salt is NaCl, which has been collected for human
consumption. The hypersaline brine obtained had a final
composition similar to that reported for brine obtained
in coastal solar salterns [35], where calcite (CaCO 3 ),
gypsum (CaSO4.2H2O), halite (NaCl), sylvite (KCl) and

carnallite (KCl.MgCl2.6H2O) precipitate out sequentially
as evaporation occurs. Therefore, the data obtained
from these chemical analyses strongly support a seawater origin for the salt deposits of the Alto Vinalopó
Valley.
Analysis of the plant communities

In salt marshes all around the world, halophytic plant
communities usually are present low species diversity.
This is due to the saline soils, whose osmotic effect inhibits mesophilic plant growth by reducing the ability of
the plants to take up groundwater. The effects of excess
ion concentration on plant cells have also been very
well described [[36]; see also Table 1 in reference [35]].
The studied area has a very dry climate, which is a
determining factor in the landscape of the areas around
the Penalva and Redonda Salt marshes. In these areas,
the landscape shows low-density and high-diversity
communities, unlike the salt marshes, where plant communities are dense and present low diversity with a high
production rate.
A total number of 20 halophylous taxa were identified.
These taxa are members of eight different botanical
families. Plumbaginaceae and Amaranthaceae are highly
represented, with seven and five species, respectively
(Table 2).
In examining the adaptation strategies of halophytes,
we can distinguish two principal approaches.

Table 2 List of plants found in the studied marshes
Species

Family

Arthrocnemum macrostachyum

Amaranthaceae

Sarcocornia fruticosa

Amaranthaceae

Atriplex glauca

Amaranthaceae

Halimione portulacoides

Amaranthaceae

Suaeda vera

Amaranthaceae

Limonium caesium

Plumbaginaceae

Limonium cossonianum

Plumbaginaceae

Limonium delicatulum

Plumbaginaceae

Limonium parvibracteatum

Plumbaginaceae

Limonium supinum

Plumbaginaceae

Limonium thiniense

Plumbaginaceae

Limonioum xeugeniae

Plumbaginaceae

Tamarix canariensis

Tamaricaceae

Tamarix boveana

Tamaricaceae

Puccinellia fasciculata

Poaceae

Cynomorium coccineum

Cynomoriaceae

Frankenia corymbosa

Frankeniaceae

Inula crithmoides

Asteraceae

Juncus maritimus

Juncaceae

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

Some species are able to decrease their intracellular
osmotic potential by storing salt or just by synthesizing
soluble sugars such as sucrose or glucose which are also
stored within the cells [37]. Without these special adaptations, halophytes would not be able to obtain the
water that they need to survive. The species displaying
such adaptations in the studied locations are: Arthrocnemum macrostachyum; Sarcocornia fruticosa (Figure 3)
and Suaeda vera. As a result of this physiological adaptation, these species present a succulent morphology,
which allows them to maintain control over the progressive accumulation of salt. Such succulent morphology is
only found in plants that live in chloride-rich soils. The
storage of chloride ions causes the cytoplasm to swell,
giving plants their characteristic appearance (succulence). This succulence could be due in part to the nature of the proteins, which usually are halophilic and
present a highly negative surface charge [38,39]. This
property makes the proteins more soluble and flexible at
high salt concentrations. Nevertheless, the high surface
charge has to be neutralized, mainly by tightly-bound
water dipoles that probably contribute to the accumulation of water. Halophilic plants living in soils in which
chloride is not the main ion do not present succulent
morphology. By contrast, these ionic environments exert
the opposite effect on cytoplasmic proteins [40].
In the second type of adaptation, some species are
able to secrete salt through leaf glands (e.g., the vesicle
hairs on the Atriplex genus or other types of glands
found in the Limonium (Figure 4), Tamarix or Frankenia genera).
Before examining the plant communities, it is necessary to consider that plants also adapt to periodic fluctuations in salt concentrations in the soil, and respond
differently to different ions. These fluctuations are influenced by factors such as temperature, humidity and the
salt concentration and composition. For these reasons,

Page 7 of 12

the plant communities observed in the Penalva and
Redonda ecosystems are distributed according to the
characteristics of the soil.
Arthrocnemum macrostachyum communities grow in
drier soils with higher salt concentrations. When the
land becomes wetter, Sarcocornia fruticosa communities
develop. Both of these Amaranthaceae are succulent
species with a high biomass production and represent a
very important vegetation cover.
There are some other non-succulent halophilic plants
that can grow in the salty soils surrounding the Penalva
and Redonda ponds. These plants do not produce a
high biomass but they play an important role in biodiversity in this kind of ecosystem. The most important
genera are Limonium, Tamarix and Atriplex, all of
which present a very high degree of speciation. In both
ecosystems (Penalva and Redonda), it is possible to
observe seven different Limonium species. (L. supinum, L. thiniense, L. delicatulum, L. cossonianum,
L. parvibracteatum, L. caesium and Limonium xeugeniae). All seven Limonium species are restricted to the
Ibero-Levantine area and are included in the Plant
Red List [41]. It is important to note that other endemic halophilic plants such as Atriplex glauca or Frankenia corymbosa are also present. It is even possible to
observe the halophilic parasite Cynomorium coccineum
growing close to Suaeda vera, Atriplex glauca or Halimione portulacoides. The most developed plant communities in these analyzed habitats are small forests
dominated by Tamarix species (T. boveana, y T.
canariensis) (Figure 5).
Analysis of Archaeal diversity

In view of the archaeal-specific primers used and the
repeated isolation of haloarchaea from similar environments, we expected our amplification products to be
haloarchaeal. Haloarchaeal sequences were indeed

Figure 3 Succulency of Sarcocornia fruticosa (A). SEM of transverse section of Sarcocornia stem with sodium chloride in the parenchyma (B).
Detail of sodium chloride (NaCl) (C). Bar scales are included in the pictures.

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

Page 8 of 12

Figure 4 Leaves of the genus Limonium with salt secretions (A). SEM of salt gland (B). Bar scale is included in panel B.

identified from both inland saltern systems (Redonda
and Penalva). The BLAST comparisons revealed the
existence of several genera belonging to the Halobaceriaceae family, which has colonized these artificial
environments.
The phylogenetic tree shown in figure 6 represents
phylotypes obtained in this study and their closest relatives. Most of the sequences obtained from the Redonda
ponds (1R-5R) were grouped into cluster 1, which
showed the highest degree of similarity to Haloquadratum walsbyi (98-99% similarity). However, the highest
degree of diversity was found in the Penalva samples. In
this case, the 16S rRNA gene sequences were similar to

those of the genera Haloarcula (1P, 93% similarity),
Haloquadratum (5P, 93% similarity) and Halobacterium
(3P, 99% similarity), as well as an unclassified member
of the Halobacteriaceae (represented by sequences 2P,
6P-8P; 96-98% similarity). Other haloarchaea such as
Haloferax were not detected based on the 16S rRNA
sequences. Studies conducted in an Australian crystallizer pond found that, although Haloferax can frequently
be isolated on plates, it was not detected based on 16S
rRNA sequences, mainly because it is not a dominant
group [42]. These results suggest that haloarchaea as
well as several halophilic bacteria are the dominant
microbial flora in hypersaline waters with near-saturation

Figure 5 Effects of soil salinity on the spatial distribution of halophytic vegetation.

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

Page 9 of 12

Figure 6 Phylogenetic tree inferred from 16S rRNA gene sequences. Sequences from the library clones from the salty water have been
included. Numbers at nodes are bootstrap confidence values expressed as percentage of 500 bootstrap replications. Bootstrap values higher
than 80% are indicated in the main nodes. Bar, 0.02 expected nucleotide substitutions per site.

salt levels [42]. Although this study is does not focus on
halophilic bacterial communities, research on this topic
should be conducted in inland solar salterns.
In summary, six of the thirteen sequences were
identified as Haloquadratum walsbyi. This squareshaped microbe constitutes the dominant fraction of
the microbial community in the crystallizers of Santa
Pola (on the Mediterranean coast, Alicante region)
[43], supporting the idea that this organism constitutes the dominant population in hypersaline environments. Nevertheless, the archaeal communities
inhabiting these environments could be very diverse
on the basis of the nutrient-enriched source water or
weather conditions. For example, H. walsbyi, which
has been detected in this study, represents only a
minor fraction of the sequences recovered from Adriatic solar salterns [44].
Considering that these ponds are artificial systems, it
is quite interesting to look for the origin of the archaeal

populations. Several research groups all over the world
have isolated microorganisms from rock salt or halite
brine that suggest that microorganisms, mainly halophiles, may survive over geological time in evaporite
deposits, although they are not necessarily as old as the
formations themselves [45,46]. As haloarchaea remain
viable within halite crystals for considerable periods of
time [35], it is possible that haloarchaea detected in
Redonda and Penalva could have been entrapped within
fluid inclusions in halite deposits. This possibility has
been previously suggested by other authors, who have
demonstrated that haloarchaea can remain “alive” within
such fluid inclusions rather than within the halite crystal
structure [47].
Eukaryotes in general are scarce in environments with
greater than 20% (w/v) salt concentrations, with the
exception of phototrophic flagellates of the genus Dunaliella or the brine shrimp Artemia salina, which frequently impart pigmentation to brine [48]. Dunaliella

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

cells were harvested from Penalva and Redonda saline
water, as described in the Methods section. High concentrations of these organisms were collected in samples
from the upwind side of the ponds. The red color that
the ponds display mainly in summer is due to carotenoid pigments that protect cells from the harmful effects
of ultraviolet light [49] or to the retinal protein bacteriorhodopsin. However, Artemina salina was not
detected during the sampling season.

Conclusions
This work contributes to our knowledge of inland solar
salterns located in the south-eastern region of Spain.
The biodiversity and location of plants were clearly
determined by the soil’s salt concentration and composition. The adaptations described here allow plant communities to inhabit salterns, raising the possibility of
their use in soil bioremediation, which could be of great
interest in regions where desertification has become a
major problem. The ponds, characterized by their red
color in summer, provide perfect ecosystems for the
growth of haloarchaea and Dunaliella. Along these
lines, the micro-biodiversity described in the Redonda
and Penalva ponds is similar to that described in coastal
solar salterns. This is an expected result, considering
that the saline water was found to be thalassohaline.
A most interesting question is whether the halophilic
microorganisms isolated from seaside or coastal solar
ponds are the descendants of populations that became
trapped in salt when the evaporites formed millions of
years ago. The survival of haloarchaea or other halophilic microorganisms in a state of dormancy over geological time periods remains to be proven unequivocally,
and the salt ponds described here could provide a good
model to analyze this important question.

Page 10 of 12

measured in the field by means of a portable conductimeter (Mettler Toledo, Mod Seven Easy) and portable
pH meter (Mettler Toledo, Mod Seven Easy). Measures
of the specific gravity of the water were also undertaken
in the field, using a Baumé hydrometer. From these
measurements, the salt concentration of the samples
was estimated based on correlations between Baumé
degrees and NaCl concentration for different solutions,
taking into account that a hydrometer placed in pure
water reads 0°Bé (0% salts). All of the parameters were
measured three times to get average values and errors.
To analyze the optical density of the samples, water was
collected from both the center and the margins of the
ponds, as the water in these areas differed in color.
For the chemical characterization procedures, 1 ml
from each sample was used to determine the inorganic
ion composition and concentration (Na +, Ca2+, Mg 2+,
Cl-, SO42-), following UNE standard methods (Spanish
Association for Standardization and Certification:
http://www.aenor.es/desarrollo/normalizacion/normas/
buscadornormas.asp?pag=p): UNE 34204:1981; UNE EN
77041:2002; UNE 34233:1984
DNA isolation

DNA was isolated from environmental samples using
the protocol summarized in the Halohandbook [50]:
total DNA was isolated from six different samples from
each saltern (Redonda and Penalva) by passing 5 ml of
each sample through a nitrocellulose filter (0.2 μm, Ministar) and resuspending the organic material in 500 μl of
ultrapure distilled water. After incubation at 100°C for
15 min, the samples were centrifuged (13,000 rpm for 5
min). The lysate supernatant was extracted with an
equal volume of buffered phenol. This step was repeated
twice. Finally, 100 μl of aqueous phase was used for the
amplification of 16S rRNA.

Methods
Location of the study region

The salterns of Redonda, Fortuna and Penalva are
located in a border zone between the regions of
Alicante, Albacete, and Murcia (northwest Alicante
Province, Spain; Redonda salterns: 38°39’16.23′’N,
00°55′45.77’’W; Penalva salterns: 38°36’58.20’’N, 00°
54’16.12’’W).
Collection and physico-chemical analysis of the samples

Water from the center and the margins of six crystallizing ponds in each saltern (Redonda and Fortuna) was
collected during July and September 2008; the water
was collected in sterile 15-ml flasks and kept aseptically
at 4° until analysis. Samples were stored for no longer
than 48 hours before analysis. Brine from the Penalva
ponds was collected between of August and September
2008. The temperature and pH of the saline water were

PCR amplification and construction of rDNA and clone
libraries

Archaeal 16S rRNA genes were amplified using the
GenAmp PCR System 2700 system (Applied Biosystems)
with the following program: 95°C (5 min) followed by
35 cycles (1 min denaturation at 95°C, 1 min annealing
at 54°C and 2 min elongation at 72°C, with a final
extension step at 72°C for 8 min). The archaeal-specific
primers were: 16SFor (5′-TTCCGGTTGATCC TGCGGGA-3′) [51] and 16SRev (5′-GGTTACCTTGTTACGACT-3′) [52]. Each reaction (50 μl) contained 200 nM
of the primers, 0.2 mM dNTPs, 3 mM MgCl2, 4 μl of
PCR buffer, 125 ng DNA and 2 U Taq polymerase. The
amplification products were purified from a 1% agarose
gel using a GFX kit from Healthcare. Then they were
ligated into a pSTBlue-1 Acceptor Vector (pSTBlue-1
Acceptor Vector Kit, from Novagen) and subsequently

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

used to transform E. coli NOVABLUE cells. The resulting clones were screened for 16S rDNA inserts by colony PCR using 20 pmol M13 forward and M13 reverse
primers.
16S rRNA gene sequencing and phylogenetic analyses

Archaeal 16S rRNA genes were sequenced using M13For
(5′-TGTAAAACGACGACGGCCAGT-3′), M13Rev (5′ATGACCATGATTACGCC-3′) and 16Sec (5′-TTATTGGGCCTAAAGCGTCCGTAG-3′) primers. The amplified sequences were cloned into a pGEM vector (pGEM®T Easy Vector kit, from PROMEGA) and sequenced using
a Big Dye Sequencing kit ver. 3.1 (Applied Biosystems)
and an ABI PRISM 3100 sequencer (Applied Biosystems).
The EMBL accession numbers for the nucleotide
sequences determined in this work are FN669141
(1P), FN669142 (2P), FN669143 (3P), FN669144 (4P),
FN669145 (5P), FN669146 (6), FN669147 (7P), FN669148
(8P), FN669149 (1R), FN669150 (2R), FN669151 (3R),
FN669152 (4R) and FN669153 (5R).
Relevant 16S rRNA sequences from halophilic
haloarchaea were obtained from GenBank http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov using BLASTN and BLASTP. Alignments of the 16S rRNA sequences were created using
CLUSTALW.
Tree topologies were evaluated using the maximum
likelihood (fastDNAml) method.
Assessment of the presence of Dunaliella and Artemia in
samples

A volume of 0.5 ml from each sample was used to
assess the presence of Dunaliella and Artemia by optical
microscopy with an Axiostar Zeiss microscope or a
magnifying glass, respectively.
Parenchymal images

For scanning electron microscopy (SEM), parenchymal
samples from Sarcocornia and Limonium were coated
with gold for 5-10 min and examined under a JEOL-840
microscope.
Plants identification

To study the floral community, the traditional botanic
system has been used: plants were collected and dried
to store them at the herbarium (ABH) [53] located at
the University of Alicante. To obtain proper taxa
nomenclature, methods proposed by Tutin et al. [54],
Castroviejo et al. [55], Bolòs et al. [56] and Mateo and
Crespo [57] were followed.
Acknowledgements
The authors express their gratitude to the Penalva managers for their help in
characterizing the inland salterns. Financial support was obtained from

Page 11 of 12

grants CGL2008-05056 (MICINN-Spain), GRE08-P01, BIO2008-00082 (MICINNSpain, Fondos FEDER) and VIGROB-016 (Universidad de Alicante).
Author details
1
División de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias,
Universidad de Alicante, Ap. 99, E-03080 Alicante, Spain. 2Departamento de
Ciencias Ambientales y Recursos Naturales, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
de Alicante, Ap. 99, E-03080 Alicante, Spain.
Authors’ contributions
BZ did the fieldwork, the PCR amplification of rDNA genes, the library
construction and the phylogenetic and chemical analyses of the samples.
RMME compiled the historical, geological and ecological data related to the
Fortuna and Penalva inland solar salterns, and co-wrote the manuscript.
MAA was involved in the flora characterization as well as in the description
of the habitat. MJB designed the study and co-wrote the manuscript. All
authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 9 August 2010 Accepted: 13 October 2010
Published: 13 October 2010
References
1. Blatt H, Middleton G, Murray R: Origin of sedimentary rocks. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ. Prentice Hall 1980.
2. Benlloch S, Acinas SG, Martínez-Murcia AJ, Rodríguez-Valera F: Description
of prokaryotic biodiversity along the salinity gradient of a multipond
solar saltern by direct PCR amplification of 16S rDNA. Hydrobiologia 1996,
329:19-31.
3. Benlloch S, López-López A, Casamayor EO, Øvreås L, Goddard V,
Daae FL, Smerdon G, Massana R, Joint I, Thingstad F, Pedrós-Alió C,
Rodríguez-Valera F: Prokaryotic genetic diversity throughout the
salinity gradient of a coastal solar saltern. Environm Microb 2002,
4:349-360.
4. Oren A: Molecular ecology of extremely halophilic Archaea and Bacteria.
FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2002, 39:1-7.
5. DasSarma S, DasSarma P: Halophiles, Encyclopedia of life Sciences. Wiley,
London 2006.
6. Mancinelli RL: Microbial Life in Brines, Evaporites and Saline Sediments:
The Search for Life on Mars. In Water on Mars and Life. Edited by: Tetsuya
Tokano. Adv Astrobiol Biogeophys; 2005:277-297.
7. Antón J, Roselló-Mora R, Rodríguez-Valera F, Amann RI: Extremely
halophilic Bacteria in crystallizer ponds from solar salterns. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2000, 66:3052-3057.
8. Oren A, Rodríguez-Valera F: The contribution of halophilic Bacteria to the
red coloration of saltern crystallizer ponds. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2001,
36:123-130.
9. da Costa MS, Santos H, Galinski EA: An overview of the role and diversity
of compatible solutes in Bacteria and Archaea. Adv Biochem Eng
Biotechnol 1998, 61:117-153.
10. Ochsenreiter T, Pfeifer F, Schleper C: Diversity of Archaea in hypersaline
environments characterized by molecular-phylogenetic and cultivation
studies. Extremophiles 2002, 6:267-274.
11. Roberts MF: Organic compatible solutes of halotolerant and halophilic
microorganisms. Saline Systems 2005, 1:5.
12. Bonete MJ, Martínez-Espinosa RM, Pire C, Zafrilla B, Richardson D: Nitrogen
metabolism in haloarchaea. Saline Systems 2008, 4:9.
13. Falb M, Müller K, Königsmaier L, Oberwinkler T, Horn P, von Gronau S,
Gonzalez O, Pfeiffer F, Bornberg-Bauer E, Oesterhelt D: Metabolism of
halophilic archaea. Extremophiles 2008, 12:177-196.
14. Antón J, Llobet-Brossa E, Rodríguez-Valera F, Amann RI: Fluorescence in
situ hybridization analysis of the prokaryotic community inhabiting
crystallizer ponds. Environ Microbiol 1999, 1:517-523.
15. Grant S, Grant WD, Jones BE, Kato C, Li L: Novel archaeal phylotypes from
an East African alkaline saltern. Extremophiles 1999, 3:139-145.
16. Bowman JP, McCammon SA, Rea SM, McMeekin TA: The microbial
composition of three limnologically disparate hypersaline Antartic lakes.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2000, 183:81-88.

Zafrilla et al. Saline Systems 2010, 6:10
http://www.salinesystems.org/content/6/1/10

17. Munson MA, Nedwell DB, Embley TM: Phylogenetic diversity of archaea in
sediment samples from a coastal salt marsh. Appl Envion Microbiol 1997,
63:4729-4733.
18. Oren A: Diversity of halophilic microorganisms: environments,
phylogeny, physiology and applications. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 2002,
28:56-63.
19. DasSarma P, Coker JA, Huse V, DasSarma S: Halophiles, industrial
applications. In Encyclopedia of industrial biotechnology: bioprocess,
bioseparation and cell technology. Edited by: Michael C Flickinger. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2010.
20. Gendrin A, Mangold N, Bibring JP, Langevin Y, Gondet B, Poulet F,
Bonello G, Quantin C, Mustard J, Arvidson R, LeMouélic S: Sulfates in
Martian layered terrains: the OMEGA/Mars Express view. Science 2005,
307:1587-91.
21. Langevin Y, Poulet F, Bibring JP, Gondet B: Sulfates in the north polar
region of Mars detected by OMEGA/Mars Express. Science 2005,
307:1584-6.
22. Jiang H, Dong H, Yu B, Liu X, Li Y, Ji S, Zhang CL: Microbial response to
salinity change in Lake Chaka, a hypersaline lake on Tibetan plateau.
Environ Microbiol 2007, 9:2603-2621.
23. Lagasca M: Memoria sobre las plantas barrilleras en España. Imprenta
Real Madrid 1817.
24. Strogov BP, Kavanov VV: Plants in relation to waterlogging and salinity. In
Irrigation and drainage of arid lands. Edited by: Van Den Berg C. F.A.O.UNESCO; 1967.
25. Yadav JSP: Salt affected soils and their management in India. Agrokémia
és Talajtan 1981, 30:29-46.
26. Malcom CV: Production from salt affected soils. Reclam Reveg Res 1986,
5:343-361.
27. Cantero JJ, Omar C, Gaich G: Pasto laguna, especie forrajera native de
importancia para suelos salinos del sur-este de Córdoba. Información
técnica N° 1 UNRC-INTA (Córdoba, Argentina) 1990.
28. Glenn E: Halophyte crop production from sea water. III Reunión Nacional
de Halófitos y Manejo de Aguas y Suelos Salinos Montecillo, México 1993.
29. Zurayk RA, Baalbaki R: Inula crithmoides: a candidate plant for saline
agriculture. Arid Soil Research and Rehabilitation 1996, 10:213-223.
30. de Wit R, Grimalt JO: Microbial ecosystems in Spanish coastal Salinas; an
ecological and geochemical study of biomarkers. Limnetica 1992,
8:205-212.
31. Alonso MA: Flora y Vegetación del Valle de Villena (Alicante).Edited by:
Instituto de Cultura Juan Gil-Albert. Textos Universitarios, Alicante;
1996:1-263.
32. Peinado M, Monje L, Martínez-Parras JM: El Paisaje vegetal de Castilla-La
Mancha. Manual de Geobotánica. Editorial Cuarto centenario 2008, 610.
33. National Weather Service. US. Glossary [http://www.nws.noaa.gov].
34. Last WM, Ginn FM: Saline systems of the Great Plains of western Canada:
an overview of the limnogeology and paleolimnology. Saline Systems
2005, 1:10.
35. Grant WD: Life at low water activity. Phil Trans R Soc Lond 2004,
359:1249-1267.
36. Munns R: Comparative physiology of salt and water stress. Plant Cell
Environ 2002, 25:239-250.
37. Barceló J, Nicolás G, Sabater B, Sánchez R: Fisiología Vegetal. Editorial
Pirámide 1988, 823.
38. Mevarech MM, Frolow F, Gloss LM: Halophilic enzymes: proteins with a
grain of salt. Biophys Chem 2000, 86:155-164.
39. Kennedy SP, Ng WN, Salzberg SL, Hood L, DasSarma S: Understanding the
Adaptation of Halobacterium Species NRC-1 to Its Extreme Environment
through Computational Analysis of Its Genome Sequence. Genome Res
11:1641-1650.
40. Walter H: Zonas de vegetación y clima.Edited by: Omega, Barcelona 1977,
245.
41. Bañares A, Blanca G, Güemes J, Moreno JC, Ortiz S: Atlas y Libro Rojo de la
Flora Vascular Amenazada de España.Edited by: Dirección General de
Conservación de la Naturaleza, Madrid 2003, 1-1072.
42. Burns DG, Camakaris HM, Janssen PH, Dyall-Smith ML: Combined use of
cultivation-dependent and cultivation-independent methods indicates
that members of most haloarchaeal groups in an Australian Crystallizer
pond are cultivable. Appl Environ Microbiol 2004, 70:5258-5265.
43. Bolhuis H, Poele EM, Rodriguez-Valera F: Isolation and cultivation of
Walsby’s square archaeaon. Environ Microbiol 2004, 6:1287-1289.

Page 12 of 12

44. Pašic L, Galán Bartual S, Poklar Ulrih N, Grabnar M, Herzog Velikonja B:
Diversity of halophilic archaea in the crystallizers of an Adriatic solar
saltern. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2005, 54:491-498.
45. McGenity TJ, Gemmell RT, Grant WD, Stan-Lotter H: Origins of halophilic
microorganisms in ancient salt deposits. Environ Microbiol 2000, 2:243-250.
46. Mormile MR, Biesen MA, Gutierrez MC, Ventosa A, Pavlovich JB, Onstott TC,
Fredrickson JK: Isolation of Halobacterium salinarum retrieved directly
from halite brine inclusions. Environ Microbiol 2003, 5:1094-1102.
47. Norton CF, Grant WD: Survival of halobacteria within fluid inclusions in
salt crystals. J Gen Microbiol 1988, 134:1365-1373.
48. Oren A: A hundred years of Dunaliella research: 1905-2005. Saline systems
2005, I:2.
49. Shahmohammadi HR, Asgarini E, Terat H, Saito T, Ohyama Y, Gekko K,
Yamamoto O, Ide H: Prospective roles of bacterioruberin and intracellular
KCl in the resistance of Halobacterium salinarum against DNA damaging
agents. J Radiat Res 1998, 39:251-262.
50. Dyall-Smith M: The halohandbook. Protocols for haloarchaeal genetics.
Edited by: Dyall-Smith M. University of Melbourne, 3010 Australia; 2008:69.
51. López-García P, Gaill P, Moreira D: Wide bacterial diversity associated with
tubes of the vent worm Riftia pachyptila. Environ Microbiol 2002,
4:204-215.
52. López-García P, Moreira D, López-López A, Rodríguez-Valera F: A novel
haloarchaeal-related lineage is widely distributed in deep oceanic
regions. Environ Microbiol 2001, 3:72-78.
53. Thiers B: Index Herbariorum: A global directory of public herbaria and
associated staff. New York Botanical Garden’s Virtual Herbarium 2008
[http://sweetgum.nybg.org/ih/], (continuously updated).
54. Tutin TG, Heywood VH, Burges N, Moore DM, Valentine DH, Walters SM,
Webb DA: Flora Europaea. (I-V). Ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(1964-1980).
55. Castroviejo S: Flora Ibérica. Flora Ibérica. Plantas vasculares de la
Península Ibérica e Islas Baleares. Vol. I-VIII, X, XIII-XV, XVII, XXI. Real
Jardín Botánico. C.S.I.C. Madrid 1986.
56. Bolos O, VIGO J: Flora dels Països Catalans (I-IV).Edited by: Barcino.
Barcelona; 1984.
57. Mateo Sanz G, Crespo MB: Manual para la determinación de la flora
valenciana. Ed. Moliner-40, Valencia 2009.
doi:10.1186/1746-1448-6-10
Cite this article as: Zafrilla et al.: Biodiversity of Archaea and floral of
two inland saltern ecosystems in the Alto Vinalopó Valley, Spain. Saline
Systems 2010 6:10.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
