<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Identification of genotype 4 Hepatitis E virus binding proteins on swine liver cells</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2011, 8:482. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-482"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Wen Zhang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zhang et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:482
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/482

RESEARCH

Open Access

Identification of genotype 4 Hepatitis E virus
binding proteins on swine liver cells
Wen Zhang1,2†, Xiuguo Hua1†, Quan Shen2, Shixing Yang1, Hong Yin3 and Li Cui1*

Abstract
Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a zoonotic pathogen of which several species of animal were reported as reservoirs. Swine
stands out as the major reservoir for HEV infection in humans, as suggested by the close genetic relationship of
swine and human virus and cross-species infection of HEV. Up to now, the mechanism of cross-species infection of
HEV from swine to humans is still unclear. This study sought to identify receptor element for genotype 4 HEV on
swine liver cells using the viral overlay protein binding assay (VOPBA) technique and Mass Spectrometry
fingerprinting. A single virus binding band with natural molecular weight about 55 kDa was observed, and mass
spectrometry revealed that this virus binding band contained 31 different proteins. Infection inhibition assay
suggested that this 55 kDa protein could prevent HEV from infecting its susceptible A549 cell line, which was
further confirmed by the HEV genome detecting in the inoculated cells. Further research should be performed to
elucidate the accurate receptor of HEV on the swine liver cells.
Keywords: Hepatitis E virus, Receptor, VOPBA, Mass Spectrometry Fingerprinting

Introduction
Hepatitis E virus (HEV), a member of the genus Hepevirus, is a non-enveloped virus with a positive-stranded
RNA genome approximately 7.2 kb in length, which
consists three open reading frames (ORF1-3)[1]. ORF1
locates at the 5’ of genome and encodes non-structural
proteins, including the methyltransferase, protease, helicase and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) [2].
ORF2 maps to the 3’ terminus and encodes for a major
structural protein, and ORF3 overlaps both and encodes
a thus far unknown function [3]. It has been hypothesised that zoonosis is involved in the transmission of
HEV [4]. HEV isolates were divided into 4 distinct genotypes which were recently proposed to be further classified into 24 subtypes [5]. Genotypes 1 and 2 have been
identified exclusively in humans, while genotypes 3 and
4 have been found in humans and several species of animals. Swine stands out as a reservoir for hepatitis E
virus (HEV) infection in humans, as suggested by the
close genetic relationship of swine and human virus and
cross-species infection of HEV [6,7].
* Correspondence: lcui@sjtu.edu.cn
† Contributed equally
1
School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai JiaoTong University, 800
Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Viral overlay protein binding assay (VOPBA) has been
used to identify receptor proteins for various viruses,
such as Bovine adenovirus [8], Dengue Virus [9], Fowl
Adenovirus [10], and pancreatic necrosis virus [11]. This
assay is sensitive enough to detect the binding of less
than 100 mg of protein in a crude membrane preparation or to detect 5 mg of purified glycophorin [12]. As a
cross-species infection pathogen, identification of receptor of HEV to enter cells is very important for elucidating the mechanisms of cross-species infection between
humans and animals. However, there is little information on the interaction between HEV and liver cells
nowadays, therefore, the present study aimed to use
VOPBA combining MS analysis to identify the virus
binding protein on the swine liver cell.

Materials and Methods
Viruses Sample and Purification of Viral Particles

HEV positive swine fecal sample was form an experimentally infected pig with a genotype 4 HEV strain
(GenBank accession no.: EF570133). This sample was
proved to be negative for PEVs (including PTV and
PEV1-10), haemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus,
Aujeszky’s disease virus, porcine circovirus type 2, porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus,

© 2011 Zhang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zhang et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:482
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/482

classical swine fever virus, Japanese encephalitis virus,
porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus, porcine epidemic diarrhoea virus, porcine rotavirus, porcine sapovirus, cytomegalovirus, porcine Torque-Teno virus and
porcine parvovirus by RT-PCR/PCR methods. The fecal
sample was converted to 10% (w/v) suspensions in PBS
(pH7.4) and clarified by centrifugation at 15, 000 g for
30 min. Supernatants were purified by passage through
0.22 μm microfilters (Millex-GV, Millipore) before virus
inoculation or purification for viral overlay protein binding assay (VOPBA). For purification of viral particles,
150 ml of the purified virus suspension were mixed with
polyethylene glycol 6000 (PEG 6000) and NaCl to final
concentrations of 6% and 0.3 M, respectively. The mixture was stirred at 4°C for 6 h, then centrifuged at 20,
000 g for 90 min at 4°C. The precipitated sediment was
resuspended in 15 ml PBS. A 10-60% (w/v) discontinuous sucrose density gradient was made in a Beckman 25
× 76 mm Ultraclear tube (Beckman Instruments, USA)
using a modification of the method described previously
[13]to purified the HEV particles. The sample between
20% and 30% was collected and proved to contain HEV
particles, of which the virus antigens were detected by
western blotting [14,15] and virus particles were
observed by Electron Microscope (EM) [16].

Page 2 of 6

Healthcare Bio-Sciences, UK) in accordance with the
manufacturer’s protocol.
Mass Spectrometry

Mass spectrometry was undertaken commercially by the
Research Centre for Proteome Analysis, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China. Band was subjected to tryptic
digestion for 16 h followed by Matrix Assisted Laser
Desorption Ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry and
was performed with a Micromass Maldi Time of Flight
(MALDI-TOF) Mass Spectrometer. Spectra were
acquired in the mass range 400-2000 Da. Spectra were
searched against Suina Protein Data Bank in NCBI.
Inhibition of Infection

Proteins in band were electroeluted using D-Tube Dialyzers & D-Tube Electroelution Kit (Novagen, Darmstadt,
Germany) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. The purified HEV supernatant was pre-incubated
with eluted proteins, or purified swine fecal suspension
which was collected from SPF pigs, and was then incubated with the human lung carcinoma A549 cell line
according to the previous report [18]. The cytopathic
effects (CPE) were then investigated and HEV genomes
in infected cells were detected by RT-PCR method [19].

Membrane Protein Preparation

Swine liver tissue was gifted from the Institute Animal
Medicine of Shanghai Jiaotong University. Tissues were
first ground with Liquid Nitrogen in mortar and membrane protein was extracted from swine liver tissue
using Plasma Membrane Protein Extraction Kit (BioVision, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. The concentration of protein was quantified by the
Bradford method [17].
Viral Overlay Pprotein Binding Assay (VOPBA)

Membrane proteins (60 to 100 μg) were subjected to
electrophoresis through an 8% sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS)-polyacrylamide gel and transferred to PVDF
membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The membrane containing transferred proteins was blocked with
5% skim milk in TBS at room temperature for 1 h.
The membranes were incubated with suitable amount
of purified HEV particles in 1% skim milk in TBS for
12 h at room temperature and washed three times
with TBS buffer. Subsequently, the membranes were
incubated with a specific rabbit anit-HEV-ORF2 antibody (Affinity BioReagents, USA) at a dilution of 1:100
in 5% skim milk in TBS buffer. The viral binding band
was visualized by incubation with a secondary horseradish peroxidase-conjugated sheep anti-rabbit IgG.
Finally, the signal was developed using the ECL
Advanced™ Western Blotting Detection kit (GE

Results
Virus Particles and Antigens

To confirm the existence of the HEV particles and antigens, the sucrose density gradient centrifugation purified
sample were subjected to EM and western blotting
observation. Results were presented in Figure 1. Figure
1A indicated the transmission electron micrographs of
HEV particles in the purified sample, with a diameter
about 30 nm. Figure 1B and 1C showed the SDS-PAGE
and western blotting results of the purified samples,
respectively, where we can see the bands of HEV capsid
proteins with molecular weight about 75kDa. These
results proved that the purified sample contained applicative HEV particles which could be used for the
VOPBA method.
Viral Overlay Protein Binding Assay

To preliminarily identify the molecules on swine liver
cells involved in binding HEVs, the virus overlay protein
binding assay (VOPBA) methodology was utilized.
Membrane proteins from swine liver cells were isolated
and separated by SDS-PAGE on two parallel 8% gels.
One gel was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250
(Figure 2C), while the other gel was transferred to
PVDF membrane by wet electroblotting. The resulting
PVDF membrane was hybridized with HEV particles. A
single virus binding band of approximately 55 kDa was

Zhang et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:482
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/482

Figure 1 Identification of virus particles and antigens in the
sucrose density gradient centrifugation purified sample. (A)The
transmission electron micrographs show the HEV particles with a
diameter of 30 nm; (B) and (C) the SDS-PAGE and western blotting
results of the purified samples, respectively, where we can see the
75kDa bands of HEV capsid proteins. Position of protein marker
bands are shown in kDa

Page 3 of 6

Figure 2 VOPBA analysis of HEV on swine liver cell membrane
proteins. (A)The electroeluted protein was pre-incubated with virus
particles before hybridization; (B) the transferred protein was directly
incubated with the anit-HEV-ORF2 antibody without incubating with
virus particles; (C) gel containing the swine liver cell membrane
proteins was stained with Coomassie brilliant blue; (D) The PVDF
membrane was incubated with virus particles and western blotting
was then performed using a specific rabbit anit-HEV-ORF2 antibody,
a single virus binding band about 55kDa was observed. Position of
protein marker bands are shown in kDa

Mass Spectrometry Fingerprint Analysis

visualized by subsequent western blotting using a specific rabbit anit-HEV-ORF2 antibody (Figure 2D). To
investigate the band was not directly produced by the
anit-HEV-ORF2 antibody with the proteins on the
PVDF membrane, one separate PVDF membrane with
transferred protein was directly incubated with the anitHEV-ORF2 antibody without incubating with virus particles. No specific binding band was visualized (Figure
2B), which suggested the 55 kDa binding band was produced by the interaction between HEV particles and the
transferred proteins. To investigate the position in the
gel stained with Coomassie brilliant blue was corresponding to the position of the VOPBA binding band,
the position equivalent to the major virus binding band
was extracted from the gel and the proteins in the gel
was electroeluted. The electroeluted protein was then
pre-incubated with virus particles before hybridization
between virus particles and the PVDF membrane containing transferred membrane proteins. Result was indicated in Figure 2A, where there was no specific binding
band. This result suggested that corresponding position
of the gel could be used for the subsequent inhibiting
assay and mass spectrometry fingerprint analysis.

To investigate the protein content of the virus binding
band, the position equivalent to the major virus binding
band was extracted from the duplicate gel and sent for
commercial mass spectrometry fingerprint analysis. The
basepeak and peptide mass fingerprinting of MALDITOF analysis of HEV binding band from VOPBA
experiment were shown in Figure 3A and 3B, respectively. Protein search results indicated that proteins in
the virus binding band was rather complicated, containing 31 different proteins (Additional file 1). These
results meant that the accurate binding protein couldn’t
be identified based on the mass spectrometry analysis.
Inhibition of Virus Infection

To investigate whether the electroeluted protein from
the virus binding band could inhibit the HEV infection
of the susceptible cell line A549, an infection inhibiting
assay was performed. Before infection, HEV suspension
was pre-incubated with the electroeluted protein, and
then the mixture was used to infect the A549 cell line.
The cell shape was investigated every 24 hours and the
7 th day results were indicated in Figure 4. Figure 4A
showed the cells in negative control, which were

Zhang et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:482
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/482

Page 4 of 6

Figure 3 Basepeak (A) and peptide mass fingerprinting (B) pictures of MALDI-TOF analysis of dengue virus binding band from VOPBA
experiment.

inoculated with SPF pig fecal suspension, testing the
effect of the fecal suspension without any pathogen on
A549 cell line. There was no evident CPE in this control
group, which suggested that the fecal suspension had no

effect on the A549 cell line. Figure 4B showed the
results of cells that were inoculated only with electroeluted virus binding proteins for testing the effect of the
virus binding proteins on A549 cell lines. There was no

Zhang et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:482
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/482

Figure 4 Microscope of A549 cell lines seven days postinoculation. (A) cells inoculated with SPF pig fecal suspension,
without evident CPE; (B) cells inoculated only with electroeluted
virus binding proteins, without evident changes; (C) cells inoculated
with virus suspension, there was evident CPE; (D) cells inoculated
with the mixture of virus suspension and electroeluted virus binding
proteins, there were little CPE, which were significantly less than
that in (C).

evident changes in this group, which suggested that the
electroeluted virus binding proteins had no significant
effect on the cell line. Figure 4C indicated the cells that
were infected by virus suspension, where there was evident CPE. Figure 4D indicated the infection inhibiting
group, where the mixture of virus suspension and electroeluted virus binding proteins were used to inoculated
to A549 cells. In this group, there were little CPE phenomena, which were significantly less than that in Figure 4C, which suggested that the virus binding protein
could inhibit the infection of HEV to the susceptible
A549 cell line. In order to investigate whether HEV genome could be detected in these groups, RT-PCR method
was used, and results indicated that only the cells shown
in Figure 4C were positive for HEV genome, which confirmed that the virus binding protein could inhibit the
infection of HEV to the susceptible A549 cell line.

Discussion
There is gathering evidence that HEV is enzootic and pigs
are considered one of the major reservoirs of human infection with this virus. The zoonotic transmission of HEV
from pigs to humans has been suggested previously, particularly for cases in non-endemic areas. This hypothesis
was mainly based on phylogenetic analysis, which showed
that swine and human HEV strains from same geographic
regions share a high genomic similarity [4,7,20-22]. The
initial interaction between a cell and a virus is a critical

Page 5 of 6

determinant of viral tropism and thus of pathogenicity;
therefore, considerable interest lies in determining the nature of the proteins used by viruses to enter cells. While
infections with HEV present a significant worldwide problem, especially the regions with poor sanitation. Although
some research about the putative receptor-binding sites on
HEV capsid protein has been performed [23], little progress has been made in identifying the extracellular proteins utilized by HEV to gain entry into cells. Therefore,
identification of receptor of HEV to enter cells is very
important for elucidating the mechanisms of cross-species
infection between humans and animals and for the development of gene-engineering vaccine.
Using a combination of VOPBA and MS analysis, we
have identified a virus binding protein on the swine
liver cell with nature molecular weight about 55kDa.
The infection inhibition analysis indicated that this virus
binding protein could prevent the HEV from infecting
the A549 cell line [Figure 4]. The peptide fingerprint
analysis and protein search showed that the virus binding band containing 31 different proteins (Additional
file 1). This meant that the accurate receptor of HEV
couldn’t be identified in the present study. However,
among the 31 proteins, four proteins could be ever identified as receptor of virus or other proteins. They are
Integral membrane protein 2B [24,25], Moesin-B [26],
ATP synthase subunit alpha liver isoform [27], and
Cytochromo P450 [28]. Next step, we will aim to clone
these genes form pigs and humans to further elucidate
whether they can be used as HEV receptors.
In the present study, we only used genotype 4 HEV for
identifying the virus binding proteins in swine liver cells,
because among the four genotypes of HEV, only genotype 3 and 4 belong to zoonotic pathogens. This study
will provide some reference for the research of identifying the binding proteins of the other HEV genotypes.
Although the aim of our study was identifying the binding proteins on the surface of swine cell so as to finding
the candidate receptor of HEV, some of proteins in the
aim band were not membrane proteins, which may be
due to slight solubility of membrane proteins. Therefore,
more effective method for membrane protein extraction
should used during the future research for identifying the
receptors of virus using VOPBA methods.

Conclusion
Taken together, we have identified a virus binding protein on the swine liver cell with nature molecular weight
about 55kDa by using a combination of VOPBA and
MS analysis, and this virus binding protein could prevent the HEV from infecting the A549 cell line. The
peptide fingerprint analysis and protein search showed
that this virus binding band containing 31 different proteins. Although the accurate receptor of HEV has not

Zhang et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:482
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/482

been identified, the present study will lay a foundation
for further research of the receptor of HEV.

Page 6 of 6

8.

9.

Additional material
10.
Additional file 1: Protein component of the HEV binding band from
VOPBA. The protein band was subjected to MALDI-TOF and the resulted
mass spectra were searched against Suina Protein Data Bank in NCBI. The
table listed the proteins in the binding band which was rather
complicated and contained 31 different proteins.

11.

12.

13.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China No. 31070132, the Professional Research Foundation for
Advanced Talents of Jiangsu University under Grant No.10JDG059, and the
Open Fund of State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology No.
SKLVEB2010KFKT002. Authors would like to thank Research Centre for
Proteome Analysis, Key Lab of Proteomics, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological, Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.
Author details
1
School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai JiaoTong University, 800
Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China. 2School of Medical Science and
Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu
212013, China. 3State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology,
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute of Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu 730046, China.
Authors’ contributions
WZ, LC, and XH conceived the study. WZ, QS, SY, and HY performed all the
experiments. WZ and LC wrote the paper. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 6 August 2011 Accepted: 27 October 2011
Published: 27 October 2011

21.

References
1. Zhang W, Yang S, Ren L, Shen Q, Cui L, Fan K, Huang F, Kang Y, Shan T,
Wei J, Xiu H, Lou Y, Liu J, Yang Z, Zhu J, Hua X: Hepatitis E virus infection
in central China reveals no evidence of cross-species transmission
between human and swine in this area. PLoS One 2009, 4:e8156.
2. Koonin EV, Gorbalenya AE, Purdy MA, Rozanov MN, Reyes GR, Bradley DW:
Computer-assisted assignment of functional domains in the
nonstructural polyprotein of hepatitis E virus: delineation of an
additional group of positive-strand RNA plant and animal viruses. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1992, 89(17):8259-8263.
3. Tam AW, Smith MM, Guerra ME, Huang CC, Bradley DW, Fry KE, Reyes GR:
Hepatitis E, virus (HEV): molecular cloning and sequencing of the fulllength viral genome. Virology 1991, 185(1):120-131.
4. Zhang W, He Y, Wang H, Shen Q, Cui L, Wang X, Shao S, Hua X: Hepatitis E
virus genotype diversity in eastern China. Emerg Infect Dis 2010,
16:1630-2.
5. Lu L, Li C, Hagedorn CH: Phylogenetic analysis of global hepatitis E virus
sequences: genetic diversity, subtypes and zoonosis. Rev Med Virol 2006,
16:5-36.
6. Meng XJ, Purcell RH, Halbur PG, Lehman JR, Webb DM, Tsareva TS,
Haynes JS, Thacker BJ, Emerson SU: A novel virus in swine is closely
related to the human hepatitis E virus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997,
94:9860-5.
7. Zheng Y, Ge S, Zhang J, Guo Q, Ng MH, Wang F, Xia N, Jiang Q: Swine as
a principal reservoir of hepatitis E virus that infects humans in eastern
China. J Infect Dis 2006, 193:1643-9, 23.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Li X, Bangari DS, Sharma A, Mittal SK: Bovine adenovirus serotype 3
utilizes sialic acid as a cellular receptor for virus entry. Virology 2009,
392:162-8.
Jindadamrongwech S, Smith DR: Virus Overlay Protein Binding Assay
(VOPBA) reveals serotype specific heterogeneity of dengue virus binding
proteins on HepG2 human liver cells. Intervirology 2004, 47:370-3.
Taharaguchi S, Kono Y, Ohta H, Takase K: Putative host cell receptor for
fowl adenovirus detected in gizzard. J Vet Med Sci 2007, 69:1203-5.
Orpetveit I, Gjøen T, Sindre H, Dannevig BH: Binding of infectious
pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) to membrane proteins from different
fish cell lines. Arch Virol 2008, 153:485-93.
Gershoni JM, Lapidot M, Zakai N, Loyter A: Protein blot analysis of virus
receptors: identification and characterization of the Sendai virus
receptor. Biochim Biophys Acta 1986, 856:19-26.
McCombs RM, Rawls WE: Density gradient centrifugation of rubella virus.
J Virol 1968, 2(5):409-14.
Haqshenas G, Huang FF, Fenaux M, Guenette DK, Pierson FW, Larsen CT,
Shivaprasad HL, Toth TE, Meng XJ: The putative capsid protein of the
newly identified avian hepatitis E virus shares antigenic epitopes with
that of swine and human hepatitis E viruses and chicken big liver and
spleen disease virus. J Gen Virol 2002, 83:2201-9.
Huang R, Nakazono N, Ishii K, Kawamata O, Kawaguchi R, Tsukada Y:
Existing variations on the gene structure of hepatitis E virus strains from
some regions of China. J Med Virol 1995, 47:303-308.
Johne R, Plenge-Bönig A, Hess M, Ulrich RG, Reetz J, Schielke A: Detection
of a novel hepatitis E-like virus in faeces of wild rats using a nested
broad-spectrum RT-PCR. J Gen Virol 2010, 91:750-8.
Bradford MM: A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of
microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye
binding. Anal Biochem 1976, 72:248-254.
Wei S, Walsh P, Huang R, To SS: 93G, a novel sporadic strain of hepatitis E
virus in South China isolated by cell culture. J Med Virol 2000, 61:311-8.
Cooper K, Huang FF, Batista L, Rayo CD, Bezanilla JC, Toth TE, Meng XJ:
Identification of genotype 3 hepatitis E virus (HEV) in serum and fecal
samples from pigs in Thailand and Mexico, where genotype 1 and 2
HEV strains are prevalent in the respective human populations. J Clin
Microbiol 2005, 43:1684-1688.
Fernández-Barredo S, Galiana C, García A, Gómez-Muñoz MT, Vega S,
Rodríguez-Iglesias MA, Pérez-Gracia MT: Prevalence and genetic
characterization of hepatitis E virus in paired samples of feces and
serum from naturally infected pigs. Can J Vet Res 2007, 71:236-40.
Takahashi M, Nishizawa T, Miyajima H, Gotanda Y, Iita T, Tsuda F,
Okamoto H: Swine hepatitis E virus strains in Japan form four
phylogenetic clusters comparable with those of Japanese isolates of
human hepatitis E virus. J Gen Virol 2003, 84:851-62.
Zhang W, Shen Q, Mou J, Gong G, Yang Z, Cui L, Zhu J, Ju G, Hua X:
Hepatitis E virus infection among domestic animals in eastern China.
Zoonoses Public Health 2008, 55:291-298.
Miao J, Zheng Z, Wu T, Xie M, Tang M, Zhang J, Ng MH, Xia N: Putative
receptor-binding sites of hepatitis E virus. He S, J Gen Virol 2008, 89:245-9.
Levin Perlman S, Jordan M, Brossmer R, Greengard O, Moscona A: The use
of a quantitative fusion assay to evaluate HN-receptor interaction for
human parainfluenza virus type 3. Virology 1999, 265:57-65.
Zimmer G, Klenk HD, Herrler G: Identification of a 40-kDa cell surface
sialoglycoprotein with the characteristics of a major influenza C virus
receptor in a Madin-Darby canine kidney cell line. J Biol Chem 1995,
270:17815-22.
Schneider-Schaulies J, Dunster LM, Schwartz-Albiez R, Krohne G, ter
Meulen V: Physical association of moesin and CD46 as a receptor
complex for measles virus. J Virol 1995, 69:2248-56.
Osanai T, Magota K, Tanaka M, Shimada M, Murakami R, Sasaki S, Tomita H,
Maeda N, Okumura K: Intracellular signaling for vasoconstrictor coupling
factor 6: novel function of beta-subunit of ATP synthase as receptor.
Hypertension 2005, 46:1140-6, 14.
Swanson HI: Cytochrome P450 expression in human keratinocytes: an
aryl hydrocarbon receptor perspective. Chem Biol Interact 2004, 149:69-79.

doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-482
Cite this article as: Zhang et al.: Identification of genotype 4 Hepatitis E
virus binding proteins on swine liver cells. Virology Journal 2011 8:482.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
