<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The evolutionary history of the catenin gene family during metazoan evolution</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-198"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Zi-Ming Zhao"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The evolutionary history of the catenin gene
family during metazoan evolution
Zi-Ming Zhao1, Albert B Reynolds2 and Eric A Gaucher1*

Abstract
Background: Catenin is a gene family composed of three subfamilies; p120, beta and alpha. Beta and p120 are
homologous subfamilies based on sequence and structural comparisons, and are members of the armadillo repeat
protein superfamily. Alpha does not appear to be homologous to either beta or p120 based on the lack of
sequence and structural similarity, and the alpha subfamily belongs to the vinculin superfamily. Catenins link the
transmembrane protein cadherin to the cytoskeleton and thus function in cell-cell adhesion. To date, only the beta
subfamily has been evolutionarily analyzed and experimentally studied for its functions in signaling pathways,
development and human diseases such as cancer. We present a detailed evolutionary study of the whole catenin
family to provide a better understanding of how this family has evolved in metazoans, and by extension, the
evolution of cell-cell adhesion.
Results: All three catenin subfamilies have been detected in metazoans used in the present study by searching
public databases and applying species-specific BLAST searches. Two monophyletic clades are formed between beta
and p120 subfamilies using Bayesian phylogenetic inference. Phylogenetic analyses also reveal an array of
duplication events throughout metazoan history. Furthermore, numerous annotation issues for the catenin family
have been detected by our computational analyses.
Conclusions: Delta2/ARVCF catenin in the p120 subfamily, beta catenin in the beta subfamily, and alpha2 catenin
in the alpha subfamily are present in all metazoans analyzed. This implies that the last common ancestor of
metazoans had these three catenin subfamilies. However, not all members within each subfamily were detected in
all metazoan species. Each subfamily has undergone duplications at different levels (species-specific, subphylumspecific or phylum-specific) and to different extents (in the case of the number of homologs). Extensive annotation
problems have been resolved in each of the three catenin subfamilies. This resolution provides a more coherent
description of catenin evolution.

Background
Catenin (derived from “catena”, “chain” in Latin) is a
gene family that links the transmembrane protein cadherin to the cytoskeleton and functions in cell-cell adhesion [1]. The catenin family is composed of three
subfamilies; p120 subfamily, beta subfamily and alpha
subfamily. The p120 subfamily includes seven members,
which are p120 (also named delta1 catenin), Armadillo
Repeat protein deleted in Velo-Cardio-Facial syndrome
(ARVCF), delta2 catenin (also named NPRAP/Neurojungin), plakophilin (pkp) 4 (also named p0071), pkp1,
pkp2, and pkp3 [2]. The beta subfamily includes gamma
* Correspondence: eric.gaucher@biology.gatech.edu
1
School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

catenin (also named plakoglobin) in addition to beta
catenin [3]. The alpha subfamily includes alpha1 catenin
(also named alpha-E-catenin), alpha2 catenin (also
named alpha-N-catenin) and alpha3 catenin (also named
alpha-T-catenin) [4].
The biomolecular functions and evolutionary history
for the catenin family have not been well studied except
for beta catenin [3]. Beta catenin functions in both cadherin-associated cell adhesion (adherens junction) and
Wnt signaling pathways. This subfamily participates in
development and human diseases such as cancer [3,5].
Previous evolutionary analyses demonstrate that gamma
catenin duplicated from beta catenin in vertebrates and
there have been two separate beta catenin duplications
specific to Caenorhabditis elegans [3]. Gamma (also

© 2011 Zhao et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

Page 2 of 13

Results

the outgroup used for our study. We selected species in
the phyla of Vertebrata, Urochordata, Arthropoda,
Nematoda, and Cnidaria to represent metazoans. We
used Mammalia, Aves, Amphibia and Ray-finned fish to
represent classes for Vertebrata; Homo sapiens (human)
for Mammalia, Gallus gallus (chicken) or Taeniopygia
guttata (finch) for Aves, Xenopus laevis or Xenopus tropicalis (frog) for Amphibia, and Danio rerio (fish) for
Ray-finned fish. For Aves and Amphibia, chicken/finch
and X. laevis/X. tropicalis were used depending on the
sequence availability, sequence length and quality. We
used Ciona intestinalis (sea squirt) for Urochordata,
Drosophila (fruit fly) and/or other insects for Arthropoda, C. elegans and/or others for Nematoda, Nematostella vectensis (sea anemone) and/or Hydra
magnipapillata for Cnidaria. Vertebrata and Urochordata together formed the Chordata phylum, and Bilateria and Cnidaria containing Radiata formed the
Metazoa clade. Based on this species tree of metazoan
evolution, we determined presence/absence of catenin
family members.
In Figure 1, green shaded boxes in the table indicate
the presence of catenin family members detected in the
representative organisms from the species tree. The distribution demonstrates that all three subfamilies have
been detected in all the selected metazoan species but
not in the premetazoan M. brevicollis. Furthermore, we
performed presence/absence analyses to other nonmetazoans including the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, the protist Cryptosporidium parvum, three fungi
(Aspergillus, Saccharomyces, and Schizosaccharomycetes),
three unicellular algae (Ostreococcus, Chlamydomonas,
and Thalassiosira), and the plant Arabidopsis. None of
the catenin members have been detected in the above
non-metazoans. We infer that these three catenin subfamilies were therefore present in the last common ancestor of metazoans, but none were present in nonmetazoans. All members of the p120 subfamily except
ARVCF and delta2 are present in only vertebrates. This
scenario also holds for gamma catenin from the beta
subfamily and alpha1 catenin from the alpha subfamily.
The annotation of the catenin members in non-vertebrates is based on extensive analyses and discussed in
the annotation section.
We further extended presence/absence analyses to
other non-catenin gene families involved in desmosome
formation. These included both desmosomal cadherins
desmogleins and desmocollins, as well as desmoplakins.
All of these genes have been detected only in vertebrates
but not detected in non-vertebrates.

Origins of the catenin subfamily members during
metazoan evolution

Evolution of an ancient duplication in the catenin family

Figure 1 shows a cladogram for metazoan evolution [10]
with the premetazoan choanoflagellate M. brevicollis as

Figure 2 shows that the p120 subfamily forms a monophyletic clade supported by a posterior probability (PP)

named plakoglobin) and the four plakophilins are all
components of the desmosome [6]. Previous studies
have also shown a relationship between p120 and
human cancer [2], while limited evolutionary information has been revealed for the p120 subfamily [7]. The
detailed functions and histories of the p120 and alpha
subfamilies, however, have not yet been extensively studied. Thus evolutionary studies for the whole catenin
family seem appropriate given the sufficient amount of
metazoan sequence data currently available and the
interest of the biomedical community in the catenin
family. Additionally, the availability of the genomic
sequence from the premetazoan unicellular choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis [8] enables us to make inferences about the catenin family before the emergence of
metazoans.
In the present study, we analyzed the gene presence/
absence for members of the catenin family from fully
sequenced representative metazoans by searching public
databases and applying species-specific BLAST searches.
All three subfamilies (but not all members of each subfamily) are present in all metazoan species analyzed here.
This implies that the last common ancestor of metazoans
had all three catenin subfamilies, but members of catenin
subfamilies have duplicated at different points in evolutionary history. We applied Bayesian phylogenetic analysis for the p120 and beta subfamilies together, and each
of the three catenin subfamilies separately. The results
demonstrate that p120 and beta catenins form monophyletic groups and that catenins have undergone multiple
duplications at different levels (species-specific, subphylum-specific or phylum-specific) and to different extents
(in the case of the number of paralogs).
Our bioinformatics and evolutionary analyses have
also helped to resolve some existing annotation issues
associated with catenin members in both vertebrates
and non-vertebrates [9]. The annotation issues include
wrong annotations, confusing annotations (different
names related or not related to the true name), and
hypothetical annotations. Confusing or hypothetical
annotations for unknown genes or gene families exist
because they have not been functionally well characterized. Wrong annotations occur frequently in highly
similar or highly divergent homologs, since it is hard to
resolve annotation by sequence information alone [9].
Thus, the application of evolutionary analyses to the
annotation of new sequences in large gene families can
hold considerable value.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 The presence/absence of catenin family members in species during metazoan evolution. The cladogram of metazoans on the
left is based on metazoan evolution with the premetazoan choanoflagellate as the outgroup. Species have been selected in the phyla of
Vertebrata, Urochordata, Arthropoda, Nematoda, and Cnidaria to represent metazoans. Vertebrata and Urochordata together formed the
Chordata phylum, Arthropoda and Nematoda formed the Ecdysozoa clade, Chordata and Ecdysozoa formed the Bilateria clade, and Bilateria and
Cnidaria containing Radiata formed the Metazoa clade. We applied different colors for species in different phyla, such as blue for all vertebrates,
black for the urochordate sea squirt and the premetazoan choanoflagellate, green for the nematode C. elegans, brown for the arthropod fruit fly,
and red for the cnidarian sea anemone. Same color patterns were applied for species from different phyla in Figure 3, Figure 4, Additional file 1,
Additional file 2 and Additional file 3. Based on the species tree, we determined presence/absence of catenin family members. The table on the
right side of the species tree includes all catenin genes, and each shaded green box indicates the presence of the specific gene in the particular
species shown in the tree, while the white box indicates the absence of the specific gene. The partially-shaded green boxes indicate unresolved
presence/absence of the delta2 and ARVCF members. These species had either a delta2 or an ARVCF but the current analyses cannot resolve the
relationship.

equal to 0.8 and the beta subfamily forms a separate
monophyletic clade (PP = 1.0). The alpha subfamily
does not appear to be homologous with p120/beta
according to sequence and structural analyses. Representative tertiary structures from the three catenin subfamilies were extracted from the Protein Data Bank [11]:
PDB ID accessions 3L6X, 2Z6G, and 1L7C for the p120,
beta and alpha subfamilies, respectively. Figure 2 shows
cartoon representations of the tertiary structures for the
alpha and the p120/beta subfamilies. To the eye, these
structures clearly lack analogous folds. Specifically, the
p120/beta subfamilies contain armadillo domain (ARM)
repeats, while the alpha subfamily contains vinculin
homolog domains. An attempt to align the three subfamilies failed to identity conserved anchors that would
have allowed us to align homologous regions. Thus, our
structural and sequence analyses suggest the alpha subfamily is not evolutionarily related to the p120/beta

subfamilies, and the catenin family has undergone an
ancient duplication resulting in the p120 and beta
subfamilies.
Origins and duplications of p120 subfamily members

Figure 3 shows the Bayesian phylogeny for p120 subfamily members with delta2/ARVCF catenin from sea
anemone serving as the outgroup. The complete tree
with branch lengths and NCBI sequence identifiers is
shown in Additional file 1. Figure 3 shows that p120
and ARVCF in vertebrates form a clade (PP = 1.0) with
ARVCF from sea squirt as the outgroup (PP = 1.0). This
figure also shows that delta2 catenin and pkp4 in vertebrates form a clade (PP = 1.0) with delta2 from sea
squirt as the outgroup (PP = 1.0). Figure 3 shows that
pkp1, pkp2 and pkp3 in vertebrates form a clade (PP =
1.0) within which pkp1 and pkp2 form a monophyletic
clade (PP = 1.0). All of the above genes in chordates

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

Page 4 of 13

Figure 2 The evolution of the catenin family. The cladogram of each catenin subfamily is based on the individual subfamily topology with
sea anemone from the Cnidaria phylum as the outgroup. The tree was condensed to the higher level (the phylum level), including the phyla of
Vertebrata, Urochordata, Arthropoda, Nematoda, and Cnidaria. Non-Chordata and Non-Vertebrata were labelled additionally. The taxon names in
the tree are a combination of the gene name and the phylum name. The p120 subfamily and the beta subfamily are homologous, thus were
shown together in the phylogeny. Asterisks indicate duplication events. The tertiary structures were presented along the phylogeny, with PDB ID
accessions 3L6X, 2Z6G, and 1L7C for the p120, beta and alpha subfamilies, respectively.

form a monophyletic clade (PP = 1.0) with all non-chordate delta2/ARVCF positioned outside the clade. In
total, these results suggest that: p120 and ARVCF in
vertebrates share a common ancestor with ARVCF in
the urochordate; delta2 and pkp4 in vertebrates share a
common ancestor with delta2 catenin in the urochordate; pkp1, pkp2 and pkp3 in vertebrates share a common ancestor, and all of the above genes share a
common ancestor with delta2/ARVCF catenin in nonchordates.
Our analyses suggest that the seven members of the
p120 subfamily in vertebrates emerged by non-contemporaneous duplication events but the majority of these
subfamily members (five out of seven) occurred with the
origin of vertebrates. Delta2 and ARVCF diverged with
the origin of chordates while p120 duplicated from
ARVCF with the origin of vertebrates and pkp4 duplicated from delta2 catenin with the origin of vertebrates.

It is unclear exactly which member of the p120 subfamily pkp1, pkp2 and pkp3 duplicated from since this
monophyletic group does not confidently clade with
either ARVCF or delta2 from the urochordate. We can
assume, however, that pkp1, pkp2 and pkp3 ultimately
evolved from delta2/ARVCF because the ancestor of
chordates appears to have had only one p120 member
(delta2/ARVCF).
In addition to vertebrate-specific subphylum and chordate-specific phylum duplications, the p120 subfamily
may have undergone species-specific duplications in
Cnidaria. We cannot rule out the possibility that this
duplication occurred at a higher level since only a single
cnidarian species was incorporated in our analyses. Support of the former scenario, however, comes from an
analysis of two truncated p120 subfamily homologs
from Hydra (with NCBI protein identifiers 221130487
and 221131941 separately). A phylogenetic analysis

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

Page 5 of 13

Figure 3 The evolution of the p120 subfamily. The Bayesian phylogeny is supported with posterior probabilities, having sea anemone as the
outgroup. Asterisks indicate duplication events. Coloring scheme is identical to Figure 1.

groups the two sea anemone delta2/ARVCF as a monophyletic clade to the exclusion of the two delta2/ARVCF
from Hydra that also form a monophyletic clade (not
shown since the sequences are not complete). It is possible that delta2/ARVCF has undergone species-specific
duplications in sea anemone and Hydra separately, but a
more confident conclusion will depend on complete
sequences from Hydra and/or the availability of
sequences from other cnidarians.
In total, all p120 subfamily members share a common
ancestor with delta2/ARVCF from non-chordates. This
subfamily experienced multiple vertebrate-specific subphylum duplications, a single chordate-specific phylum
duplication and possible species-specific duplications in
the Cnidaria phylum.
Origins and duplications of beta subfamily members

Figure 4 shows the Bayesian phylogeny for beta subfamily members with beta catenin from sea anemone

serving as the outgroup. The complete tree with branch
lengths and NCBI sequence identifiers is shown in
Additional file 2. Figure 4 shows that gamma and beta
in vertebrates form a monophyletic clade (PP = 0.99)
with all non-vertebrate betas positioned outside the
clade. This result suggests that gamma and beta catenin
in vertebrates share a common ancestor with beta in
non-vertebrates, and gamma duplicated from beta with
the origin of vertebrates.
In addition to a vertebrate-specific subphylum duplication, the beta subfamily has undergone species-specific
and phylum-specific duplications. Figure 4 shows that in
the Nematoda phylum, three monophyletic clades are
formed by bar1, wrm1, and hmp2 separately (all having
PP = 1.0), suggesting two Nematoda-specific phylum
duplications. However, only two of the four species (C.
elegans and C. Briggsae) studied here contain the complete three beta catenin paralogs, while Pristionchus and
Brugia seem to have lost wrm1. Additionally, Brugia

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

Page 6 of 13

Figure 4 The evolution of the beta catenin subfamily. The Bayesian phylogeny is supported with posterior probabilities, having sea anemone
as the outgroup. Asterisks indicate duplication events. Coloring scheme is identical to Figure 1.

contains two beta paralogs (labelled as beta2 and beta3
arbitrarily by us) within the bar1 clade, indicating a Brugia species-specific duplication within the Nematoda
phylum. Thus the beta subfamily has undergone a species-specific duplication in Brugia and two phylum-specific duplications.
For the Arthropoda phylum, two monophyletic clades
(both having PP = 1.0) are formed from two individual
species-specific duplications in the pea aphid and the body
louse. Each group is the result of a single duplication
resulting in two paralogs. Beetle also contains what
appears to be a species-specific duplication but the paralogs do not group together so we cannot rule out an
ancient origin for this duplication. As for the Cnidaria
phylum, we have found two beta catenin homologs in sea
anemone and only one in Hydra. We only show one beta
catenin (442 amino acids, aa) for sea anemone in Figure 4
since the other potential paralog (with the NCBI protein
identifier 156615300) has been truncated to 298 aa, and

this short length makes it hard to resolve the phylogenetic
position for this paralog. The potential presence of two
beta catenin homologs in sea anemone indicates a possible
species-specific duplication in the Cnidaria phylum.
In total, all beta subfamily members share a common
ancestor with beta catenin from non-vertebrates. This
subfamily experienced a vertebrate-specific subphylum
duplication, two nematode-specific phylum duplications,
a species-specific duplication in the Nematoda phylum,
multiple species-specific duplications in the Arthropoda
phylum and a possible species-specific duplication in the
Cnidaria phylum. The conflict between the gene tree of
the beta subfamily and the species tree of metazoan evolution for the position of the urochordate sea squirt is
caused by a combination of slow evolution outside the
nematode clade and rapid evolution inside the nematode
clade (Additional file 2). This difference in evolutionary
rates is supported by Wilcoxon rank and KolmogorovSmirnov tests, both with P values < 0.0001.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

Origins and duplications of alpha subfamily members

The alpha subfamily has not experienced extensive
duplication events similar to the p120 and beta subfamilies. Thus, the evolutionary history of this gene subfamily is easier to resolve. Additional file 3 shows that
alpha1 and alpha2 in vertebrates form two monophyletic
clades (both having PP = 1.0) and together form a clade
(PP = 1.0) to the exclusion of alpha3 - forming its own
monophyletic clade (PP = 1.0). The two vertebrate-specific and one amniote-specific alphas form a monophyletic clade with all non-vertebrate alphas positioned
outside the clade. Our analyses suggest alpha1 duplicated from alpha2 with the origin of vertebrates. It is
unclear exactly which member of the alpha subfamily
alpha3 duplicated from since this monophyletic group
does not confidently clade with either alpha1 or alpha2
from vertebrates. We can assume, however, that alpha3
ultimately evolved from alpha2 because the ancestor of
vertebrates appears to have had only one alpha member
(alpha2). Our results show that the alpha subfamily
experienced a vertebrate-specific subphylum duplication
and an amniote-specific duplication. In total, all alpha
subfamily members share a common ancestor with
alpha2 from non-vertebrates.
Annotation issues for the catenin family

Our evolutionary studies have resolved annotation issues
in all three catenin subfamilies (Additional file 4) and
have allowed us to identify nomenclature of catenin
genes present before the diversification of vertebrates.
Some issues are similar between subfamilies while other
issues are unique to specific subfamilies.
The urochordate sea squirt contains a p120 subfamily
homolog that has been annotated as ‘p120’. Our analysis
shows that the sea squirt sequence annotated as p120 is
slightly more similar in sequence identity to ARVCF
members in vertebrates (36-41%) than p120 members in
vertebrates (36-40%). We therefore had to perform additional analyses to resolve this ambiguity. First, a
BLASTP search using this sea squirt ‘p120/ARVCF’ as
the query against only p120s and ARVCFs from vertebrates was carried out. This analysis demonstrated that
all ARVCFs have higher BLASTP scores (bits) and lower
E-values to the sea squirt sequence than the p120s from
vertebrates. Second, we performed MEGA pairwise distance comparisons of the sea squirt ‘p120/ARVCF’ to
vertebrate p120s and ARVCFs using both Dayhoff and
JTT models (no. of sites = 728aa). Both models gave the
same results; the distances between the sea squirt ‘p120/
ARVCF’ and the vertebrate ARVCFs are shorter than
the distances between the sea squirt ‘p120/ARVCF’ and
the vertebrate p120s, and this difference in distance is
statistically significant (P value equals 0.05) if both
human ARVCF and p120 are removed from the analysis.

Page 7 of 13

We extended these analyses to include measures of
functional divergence. We used the DIVERGE software
package to identify type-II functional sites (a site that is
conserved-but-different between clades) to help resolve
the annotation of the sea squirt ‘p120/ARVCF’. Of the
70 type-II sites identified by DIVERGE, 36% of sites (25)
support the annotation of sea squirt as ARVCF while
only 20% (14) support the annotation as p120. The
remaining sites do not have resolution in favor of one
annotation over the other. Thus, the BLASTP, MEGA
and DIVERGE analyses all suggest that the sea squirt
‘p120/ARVCF’ is more similar to the ARVCF group
than the p120 group.
The other p120 subfamily homolog in the urochordate
sea squirt has been annotated as ‘delta2’. Given the
close relationship between delta2 and pkp4 (Figure 3
and Additional file 1), we applied the same analyses
used for the sea squirt ‘p120/ARVCF’ to resolve the
annotation of the sea squirt ‘delta2/pkp4’. Both BLASTP
and MEGA analyses suggest that the sea squirt ‘delta2/
pkp4’ is closer to delta2 than pkp4. The MEGA result is
statistically significant as supported by Wilcoxon rank
and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests, both with P values
equal to 0.01. DIVERGE analysis further supported the
annotation of the sea squirt sequence as delta2. Of the
88 type-II sites identified by DIVERGE, 32% of sites (28)
support the annotation of sea squirt as delta2 while only
17% (15) support the annotation as pkp4. The remaining
sites do not have resolution in favor of one annotation
over the other. This implies that delta2 members
evolved prior to the evolution of pkp4 members.
Accordingly, we retain the original annotation of this
sea squirt gene as delta2.
In regards to the p120 subfamily, only two p120 subfamily members are present in the urochordate sea
squirt. This indicates they are the two oldest members
of this subfamily. Bayesian phylogenetic analysis confirmed that all the p120 subfamily homologs in nonchordates share a common ancestor with all seven
members of the p120 subfamily in vertebrates (Additional file 1). This phylogeny, however, does not provide
conclusive evidence for which of the two oldest p120
subfamily members (ARVCF or delta2) gave rise to the
vertebrate expansion of the subfamily. Therefore we performed extensive BLASTP analyses and series of MEGA
pairwise distance comparisons to infer whether delta2 or
ARVCF may be the more ancient member of the p120
subfamily. Both BLASTP and MEGA analyses suggest
that the p120 subfamily homologs in non-chordates are
closer to delta2 than ARVCF. This conclusion holds for
all vertebrates except when the urochordate sea squirt is
included in the analysis, and this is probably caused by
rapid evolution as seen from the long branches leading
to sea squirt delta2 and sea squirt ARVCF (Additional

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

file 1). The MEGA analysis, however, is not statistically
significant. Further, a DIVERGE analysis did not reveal
sites that could help resolve the annotation of non-chordate p120 subfamily members. As such, it is not possible
to apply one particular annotation to the non-chordates
over another annotation.
Our analyses point to a delta2/ARVCF origin for the
entire p120 subfamily since only delta2 or ARVCF is
inferred to exist in non-chordates and the diversification
of this subfamily occurred with the evolution of chordates. Unfortunately, gene annotation does not follow
this pattern. Numerous non-chordate homologs in the
p120 subfamily have been annotated as p120, armadillo
repeat protein, plakophilins or fibronectins. To resolve
these discrepancies we performed three BLASTP analyses using the ‘mis-annotated’ homologs as queries; #1)
a BLASTP search of the non-redundant protein database, #2) a BLASTP search of the human protein database, and #3) a BLASTP search of the individual
genomes from which the mis-annotated homolog
resides. For both analyses #1 and #2, all queries resulted
in trusted top-hits annotated as p120 subfamily members. For analysis #3, only a single homolog was identified in the individual genomes of arthropods and
nematodes while searches of the cnidarian genomes
retrieved two homologs (as discussed above, this duplication appears to be species-specific). We, therefore,
annotated all these p120 subfamily homologs in nonchordates as delta2/ARVCF (Additional file 4).
For the beta subfamily, our presence/absence and phylogenetic analyses suggest that gamma catenin is the
result of a duplication event from beta catenins that
took place during the origin of vertebrates and thus
there should not be any gamma catenins present in
non-vertebrates. One gene from S. mansoni, however, is
annotated as gamma catenin. We performed the same
series of three BLAST searches described above. These
analyses suggest that this homolog is neither more similar in sequence to gamma nor beta as it appears to have
experienced an episode of rapid evolution along the
branch leading to S. mansoni (data not shown). However, since our presence/absence and phylogenetic analyses suggest that only beta is present in nonvertebrates, we infer that this gene evolved from a beta
catenin and has since lost most of the sequence signatures that separate beta from gamma (it has retained
enough signatures that allow us to confidently identify
this as a member of the beta subfamily). Thus our analyses suggest that this gene arose from a duplication
event of beta catenin in S. Mansoni and we re-annotated
this gamma as beta catenin (Additional file 4). Aplysia
californica is the other species from the same phylum as
S. mansoni that has whole genome (shotgun) sequence
available. A BLAST search of this genome reveals only a

Page 8 of 13

single gene belonging to the beta subfamily. This suggests that the paralogs in S. mansoni arose via a speciesspecific duplication event. In total, our analyses suggest
that beta is the most ancient member of this subfamily
with gamma arising during the origin of vertebrates
while other duplication events have taken place in individual species such as S. mansoni.
For the alpha subfamily, our presence/absence and
phylogenetic analyses suggest a vertebrate origin for
alpha1 catenin. Both BLASTP and MEGA analyses suggest the alpha subfamily member present in non-chordates is more similar to the alpha2 than the alpha1 from
vertebrates. The MEGA results are statistically significant as determined using both Wilcoxon rank and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests (P equals 0.01 and 0.02,
respectively). The distance to the arthropod fruit fly,
however, was not significant, presumably due to the
short branch leading to the fly (Additional file 3). Our
series of three BLAST analyses identified only a single
alpha subfamily homolog in each of the non-vertebrates
studied here. Thus all alpha subfamily homologs in nonvertebrates should be alpha2. As such, the annotated
alpha1 in Pediculus humanus corporis (body louse)
would be incorrectly annotated. We propose that members of the alpha subfamily in non-vertebrates be annotated as alpha2 (Additional file 4).
Distant relatives of catenins in non-metazoans

The p120 subfamily members have been detected in all
metazoans, but not in the premetazoan M. brevicollis or
other non-metazoans. However, relatives of this subfamily have been detected in non-metazoans by our BLAST
searches. These included armadillo repeat-containing
protein (armc) 3, armc4, the importin alpha family, and
vac8p.
The beta subfamily members have been detected in all
metazoans, but not in the premetazoan M. brevicollis or
other non-metazoans. However, several potential beta
catenin homologs and beta catenin-like genes have been
detected in non-metazoans by BLAST. These genes
included aardvark, vac8p, arabidillo-1/-2, physcodillo-1/2, and beta-catenin-like.
We did extensive analyses by BLASTP and Bayesian
phylogenetics to determine the relationship of distant
homologs of both the p120 and beta subfamilies. Our
analyses show that arabidillo-1/-2 and physcodillo-1/-2
formed a well-supported clade (PP = 1.0), and aardvark,
vac8p, beta-catenin-like, armc3, armc4 and importin
alpha all form individual monophyletic clades (PP = 1.0,
phylogeny not shown). Thus, none of these distant
homologs grouped with the beta or p120 subfamilies in
our phylogenetic analyses.
Alpha subfamily members have been detected in all
metazoans but not in the premetazoan M. brevicollis.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

However, a relative of this subfamily (vinculin-like) has
been detected in the premetazoan M. brevicollis. An
additional relative (alpha-catulin) was detected by our
BLAST analyses but present only in metazoans. Bayesian
phylogenetic analyses showed that alpha catenins, vinculin and alpha-catulin all formed three monophylogenetic
clades (PP equals 0.99, 0.97 and 1.0, respectively).

Discussion
Origins and evolution for the catenin family

Despite similar names, alpha catenins are not homologous to p120 and beta catenins. This is evident from
sequence and structural comparisons (Figure 2). Conversely, this figure shows that beta and p120 share a common ancestor as a result of a duplication event prior to
the diversification of metazoans. This evolutionary relationship from sequence-based analyses is consistent with
the differences in secondary structures between alphas
versus p120s/betas. The p120 subfamily contains 9
ARM repeats [12] and the beta subfamily contains 12 of
these ARM repeats [3]. The alpha subfamily, however,
contains three vinculin homolog domains instead of
ARM repeats, and belongs to the vinculin superfamily
[4]. Therefore, catenin should not be called a family,
since it is just a group of proteins binding C-terminal of
classical cadherins. For the p120 subfamily, we conclude
that it is more appropriate to refer to the p120 subfamily as delta. We suspect that this change in nomenclature will be difficult to accept at first (as all name
changes are) but our proposed change more accurately
reflects the evolution of this subfamily and the new
nomenclature is more functionally consistent for experimental biologists.
Delta2 or ARVCF is the oldest member of the p120
subfamily according to our analyses but we did not
detect it in the premetazoan M. brevicollis. This suggests
a metazoan origin for the p120 subfamily. Unlike the
p120 subfamily, we have detected the relatives of this
subfamily beyond metazoans, such as armc3, armc4, the
importin alpha family, and vac8p. This suggests that
these armadillo repeat proteins share a common ancestor. This can be further inferred by their sequence and
structural conservations though they have diverse functions in different kingdoms including animals, fungi and
plants [13].
Beta catenin is the oldest member of the beta subfamily according to our analyses but we did not detect it in
the premetazoan M. brevicollis. This indicates a
metazoan origin for the beta subfamily. Previous studies
also suggested the potential metazoan origin of beta
catenin and its involvement in cell adhesion for multicellular organisms [14]. Several types of genes in nonmetazoans, however, have been considered potential
beta catenin homologs [13] and thus some have been

Page 9 of 13

annotated as beta catenin or beta catenin-like. These
genes included aardvark in amoeba, vac8p in fungi and
plants, arabidillo-1/-2 and physcodillo-1/-2 in plants,
and beta-catenin-like in both animals and plants. The
aardvark gene in amoeba participates in adherens junctions and cell signaling, and it may be the amoeba’s version of a precursor to beta catenin [15]. Vac8p has 11
ARM repeats and this is close to the 12 ARMs that
compose beta catenin [16]. None of these potential beta
homologs grouped with the beta subfamily in our phylogenetic analyses, thus supporting our hypothesis of a
metazoan origin for the beta subfamily.
Our analyses also revealed a significantly higher mutation rate within the Nematode clade for beta catenin
paralogs specific to this clade. The high rate can be correlated to experimental work showing subfunctionalization of cellular adhesion and transcriptional activation
(signalling) among the three paralogs in C. elegans
revealed by their protein-binding partners [17]. It
remains to be determined whether this is due to relaxation of selective constraints or due to positive selection.
Alpha2 catenin is the oldest member of the alpha subfamily according to our analyses but we did not detect it
in the premetazoan M. brevicollis. This suggests a
metazoan origin for the alpha subfamily. We did however detect a vinculin-like gene in the premetazoan M.
brevicollis. This suggests that the alpha subfamily duplicated from vinculin-like genes after the separation of
metazoans/premetazoans but prior to the diversification
of metazoans.
In summary, our analyses did not identify any p120,
beta or alpha subfamily members in the premetazoan
M. brevicollis. We confirmed this absence by extending
our analyses to other non-metazoans such as the
amoeba D. discoideum, the protist C. parvum, three
fungi (Aspergillus, Saccharomyces, and Schizosaccharomycetes), three unicellular algae (Ostreococcus, Chlamydomonas, and Thalassiosira), and the plant Arabidopsis.
Again, none of these non-metazoans contained a member of the catenin family. We conclude that the catenin
family arose during the origin of metazoans while some
other armadillo repeat proteins and vinculin-like proteins were present prior to the evolution of metazoans.
Evolution-related physiology of the catenin family

The members of the three catenin subfamilies emerged
at different points during metazoan evolution. It would
be interesting to correlate gene evolution of catenins to
the cellular physiology associated with the functional
divergence of this gene family.
Our results suggest that either delta2 or ARVCF is the
oldest member of the p120 subfamily - one evolved with
the origins of metazoan while the other evolved with
the origins of chordates. Pkp4, p120, pkp1, pkp2, and

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

pkp3 show vertebrate origins and this is consistent with
the conclusions of other analyses [18]. Functional divergence between delta2 and ARVCF in chordates is highlighted by delta2’s neuron-specific expression while
ARVCF is ubiquitously expressed [2]. Both ARVCF and
p120 are ubiquitously expressed in epithelial tissue [2],
but their expression is mutually exclusive [19] and have
complementary distributions in epithelial adherens junctions as interpreted from BioGPS [20]. Our evolutionary
studies show that p120 duplicated from ARVCF during
the origin of vertebrates. The origin of p120 members
appears to coincide with the vertebrate origin of p120’s
binding partner Kaiso [18], a nuclear factor participating
in signaling pathways [21]. This interaction might relate
to epigenetic transcriptional regulation and Wnt signaling modulation via methyl-CpG islands [22] and the
transcription factor TCF [23], participating in vertebrate-specific development and transcriptional regulation [18]. The nuclear signaling functions of ARVCF
have not yet been identified but it is known that it interacts with the novel protein Kazrin localized in both the
cytoplasm and nucleus [5]. P120 is unique among the
members of the p120 subfamily because it interacts in
the nucleus with the nuclear transcription repressor
Glis2 [24]. This demonstrates that p120 has diverged
from ARVCF due to its unique interaction with Glis2
and its vertebrate-specific interaction with Kaiso, but
p120 still shares functional redundancy with ARVCF
since they can rescue one another’s null mutants [25].
Another unique feature of p120 is the absence of the Cterminal PDZ binding domain. The lack of this domain
may enable p120 and its binding cadherins to evolve
with more flexibility in a PDZ-independent manner [18].
In support of this view is the observation that the function of delta2 catenin in spine density regulation is independent of cadherins but dependent on an interaction
with PDZ-domain containing proteins while p120 regulates spine density using an alternative mechanism that
depends on Rho GTPases [26].
Both p120 and ARVCF, but neither delta2 nor pkp4,
have different isoforms that result from alternative splicing at the 5’ portion of the transcript [19,27]. Translating the conserved N-terminal coiled coil domain during
such isoform switching, and in coordination with the
dynamic cadherin switching (e.g., E-cadherin to N-cadherin), occurs during the transformation from epithelial
and other sessile cell types to mesenchymal (e.g., fibroblasts) and other motile cell types (e.g., neurons) [2].
This process might be important in development,
wound healing and cancer [18].
Pkp4 duplicated from delta2 during the origin of vertebrates and both have neuron-specific expression patterns, however this pattern of expression is reciprocal
according to BioGPS. Delta2 is predominantly expressed

Page 10 of 13

in the brain while pkp4 is expressed in the brain but
also ubiquitously expressed in other tissues. Pkp4 differs
from delta2 in that pkp4 participates in desmosome formation in addition to adherens junctions according to
numerous experimental reports [28], however one study
failed to verify this dual functionality [29]. Pkp1, pkp2,
and pkp3 are vertebrate-specific and are well known for
their functions in desmosomes instead of adherens junctions [30]. The origins of these plakophilins appear to
coincide with our assumption of the origin of desmosomes in vertebrates since our analyses reveal that other
desmosome-specific genes are found only in vertebrates
(further discussion is provided below).
Our results suggest that beta is the oldest member of
the beta subfamily since it is present in all metazoans
while gamma is a more recent acquisition since it is
found only in vertebrates. Both beta and gamma are
ubiquitously expressed at basal levels but gamma is
uniquely highly-expressed in some tissues such as tongue. Beta and gamma both function in the formation of
adherens junctions however gamma has functionally
diverged from beta since gamma can also participate in
desmosome formation [6].
Gamma (also called plakoglobin) and the four plakophilins (discussed above) are all components of the desmosome [6] and all have vertebrate origins according to
our analyses. This suggests to us that the desmosome
evolved in conjunction with the origin of vertebrates. To
further validate this hypothesis we performed computational analyses of other non-catenin gene families
involved in desmosome formation. These included both
desmosomal cadherins desmogleins and desmocollins, as
well as desmoplakins and thus we confirmed that the
presence of genes involved in desmosome formation is
limited to vertebrates and not observed in non-vertebrates. All of our results are consistent with the observation that desmosome-containing tissues (e.g., certain
cardiac and skeletal muscles [31], keratin-containing
hair [32], and others) have evolved with or after the origin of vertebrates.
Our results suggest that alpha2 is the oldest member
of the alpha subfamily since it is present in all metazoans while alpha1 is a more recent acquisition since it is
found only in vertebrates. Alpha1 and alpha2 display
both similar and reciprocal expression and distribution
patterns in the dorsal root ganglia and spinal cord at
the lumbar level where sciatic nerves originate [33]. The
two are similar in that they both display brain-specific
expression patterns however they display reciprocal
expression patterns in terms of the specific types of tissues in the brain [34]. Unlike alpha1, alpha2 functions
by binding the nuclear transcription repressor ZASC1
[35]. Alpha2 knockouts in mice mainly affect the nervous systems by causing cerebellar deficient folia [4].

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

Alpha1 knockouts in mice are lethal at the blastocyst
stage but its knockout mainly affects the epithelial tissues such as skin [4].
Alpha3 is the most recently evolved member of the
alpha subfamily since it is found only in amniotes. The
observation that alpha3 and alpha2 share identical exonexon boundaries [36] suggests to us that alpha3 evolved
via a gene duplication of alpha2 coinciding with the origin of amniotes. Unlike alpha1 and alpha2, alpha3 interacts with pkp2 in the area composita (a hybrid adherens
junction in the heart muscle), yet co-expresses with
alpha1 at intercalated discs of cardiomyocytes [37]. We
could not find a physiological link between the amniotespecific alpha3 and the observation that it is highly
expressed in the testis and participates in adherens junctions between sertoli and germ cells, highly expressed in
the testis interstitial tissue or highly expressed in peritubular myoid cells of the testis [38] because the above
cells or tissues are also found in the non-amniote fish.
However, alpha3 interacts with 1-adadin and this interaction, along with a truncated isoform of alpha3 present
in the testis [39], may be unique to spermatogenesis in
amniotes. No alpha3 knockout experiments have been
performed in mice [4].
Overall, delta2, alpha2 and N-cadherin are present in
nearly all metazoans and all are expressed in neural-specific tissues. Their vertebrate-counterparts p120, alpha1
and E-cadherin, however, are mainly expressed in
epithelial tissues in addition to neural tissues. Extensive
co-evolution exists between the catenin family and their
binding partners; these include p120 with Kaiso, delta2/
alpha2 with N-cadherin, p120/alpha1 with E-cadherin,
and pkps/plakoglobin (gamma catenin) with desmosomal cadherins.

Conclusions
The p120, beta and alpha subfamilies are present in all
metazoans, but none of the subfamilies are present in
non-metazoans. This indicates a metazoan origin for the
catenin family. Each catenin subfamily has undergone
duplications at different levels (species-specific, subphylum-specific or phylum-specific) and to different extents
(in the case of the number of homologs).
Vertebrate-specific duplications occurred in all three
subfamilies: p120, pkp4, pkp1, pkp2, and pkp3 in the
p120 subfamily; gamma in the beta subfamily; and
alpha1 in the alpha subfamily. All three subfamilies had
extensive annotation issues and these have been effectively resolved by our studies. We anticipate that this
resolution in combination with our evolutionary analyses will make it easier for experimental biologists to
correlate diverse catenin physiologies to interesting evolutionary innovations such as the development of multicellularity and the role of adhesion during this

Page 11 of 13

development and the evolution of terrestrial organisms
and their ability to prevent desiccation.

Methods
Gene presence/absence for the catenin family

A list of species with complete genome sequences was
chosen to represent the species tree for metazoan evolution together with the premetazoan unicellular choanoflagellate M. brevicollis serving as the outgroup (Figure
1). The presence/absence of catenin was determined in
all the selected species by searching gene names in public databases and/or via species-specific BLAST searches.
For all BLAST analyses conducted in the present study,
hits having E-values less than 0.05 and sequence identity
greater than 15% were considered significant. Detailed
BLAST searches against genomic databases were performed for non-vertebrates only in order to determine
the history of catenins before the origin of vertebrates.
Species-specific duplications in vertebrates have
occurred for catenin subfamilies but are not the focus of
our current study [18].
Datasets

The protein sequences were extracted for evolutionary
analyses and sequence identifiers can be found in the
additional files. All sequence identifiers are NCBI protein sequence GI numbers with only two exceptions.
The first exception is the pkp1 gene from frog. It was
downloaded from the Joint Genome Institute (JGI)
Xenopus tropicalis assembly v4.1 [40], and it can be
queried using the protein ID ‘156321’. The second
exception is the gamma catenin from finch. The
sequence is derived from mRNA sequence in the NCBI
nucleotide database (nucleotide identifier: 224086507)
and translated by the Translate tool on the ExPASy server [41].
Phylogenetic analyses and tertiary structures

Sequence alignments were performed by ClustalW [42].
Phylogenetic analysis was carried out using MrBayes
3.1.2 Unix version [43]. The MPI version of MrBayes
was run in parallel on eight nodes with MPICH2
installed [44]. Bayesian trees with posterior probabilities
were constructed with mixed amino acid models, a
gamma distribution for rate variation among sites, and a
proportion of invariable sites. MrBayes was executed
with two runs (four chains for each run), one million
generations of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
analyses, with 1000 as the sample frequency. The number of MCMC generations indicated convergence of the
two runs by having a standard deviation of split frequencies less than 0.05. The posterior probability of
each split was estimated by sumt with 250 trees discarded as burnin based on the plot of ‘generation vs. log

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

Page 12 of 13

probability’. Parameters were summarized by sump with
250 burnin, and values for the Potential Scale Reduction
Factor (PSRF) were all close to 1.0 for all parameters.
Bayesian phylogenies with branch lengths and posterior
probabilities are shown in Additional files 1, 2, 3, with
each tree having sea anemone as the outgroup.
Sequence/taxon names in the trees are a combination of
gene name, species name, and NCBI sequence identifier.
Similar color patterns were applied for species of different phyla as in Figure 1. For all phylogenies, scale bars
represent amino acid replacements per site per unit evolutionary time. The tertiary structures for representative
genes were generated by using PyMOL [45] (Figure 2).

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Georgia Institute of Technology and a
NASA Exobiology grant to EAG. ZMZ is grateful to Lee S. Katz, Jianrong
Wang, Joshua G. Stern, Benjamin Hsieh and James T. Kratzer for assistance.

Annotation validation

References
1. McCrea PD, Gu D: The catenin family at a glance. J Cell Sci 2010, 123(Pt
5):637-642.
2. Anastasiadis PZ, Reynolds AB: The p120 catenin family: complex roles in
adhesion, signaling and cancer. J Cell Sci 2000, 113(Pt 8):1319-1334.
3. Schneider SQ, Finnerty JR, Martindale MQ: Protein evolution: structurefunction relationships of the oncogene beta-catenin in the evolution of
multicellular animals. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2003, 295(1):25-44.
4. Kobielak A, Fuchs E: Alpha-catenin: at the junction of intercellular
adhesion and actin dynamics. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2004, 5(8):614-625.
5. McCrea PD, Gu D: The catenin family at a glance. J Cell Sci 123(Pt
5):637-642.
6. Desai BV, Harmon RM, Green KJ: Desmosomes at a glance. J Cell Sci 2009,
122:(Pt 24):4401-4407.
7. McCrea PD, Park JI: Developmental functions of the P120-catenin subfamily. Biochim Biophys Acta 2007, 1773(1):17-33.
8. King N, Westbrook MJ, Young SL, Kuo A, Abedin M, Chapman J,
Fairclough S, Hellsten U, Isogai Y, Letunic I, et al: The genome of the
choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis and the origin of metazoans.
Nature 2008, 451(7180):783-788.
9. Benner SA, Gaucher EA: Evolution, language and analogy in functional
genomics. Trends Genet 2001, 17(7):414-418.
10. Adoutte A, Balavoine G, Lartillot N, Lespinet O, Prud’homme B, de Rosa R:
The new animal phylogeny: reliability and implications. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2000, 97(9):4453-4456.
11. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H, Shindyalov IN,
Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28(1):235-242.
12. Choi HJ, Weis WI: Structure of the armadillo repeat domain of
plakophilin 1. J Mol Biol 2005, 346(1):367-376.
13. Coates JC: Armadillo repeat proteins: beyond the animal kingdom. Trends
Cell Biol 2003, 13(9):463-471.
14. Hobmayer E, Hatta M, Fischer R, Fujisawa T, Holstein TW, Sugiyama T:
Identification of a Hydra homologue of the beta-catenin/plakoglobin/
armadillo gene family. Gene 1996, 172(1):155-159.
15. Coates JC, Harwood AJ: Cell-cell adhesion and signal transduction during
Dictyostelium development. J Cell Sci 2001, 114(Pt 241):4349-4358.
16. Tang F, Peng Y, Nau JJ, Kauffman EJ, Weisman LS: Vac8p, an armadillo
repeat protein, coordinates vacuole inheritance with multiple vacuolar
processes. Traffic 2006, 7(10):1368-1377.
17. Natarajan L, Witwer NE, Eisenmann DM: The divergent Caenorhabditis
elegans beta-catenin proteins BAR-1, WRM-1 and HMP-2 make distinct
protein interactions but retain functional redundancy in vivo. Genetics
2001, 159(1):159-172.
18. Carnahan RH, Rokas A, Gaucher EA, Reynolds AB: The molecular evolution
of the p120-catenin subfamily and its functional associations. PLoS One
5(12):e15747.
19. Mariner DJ, Wang J, Reynolds AB: ARVCF localizes to the nucleus and
adherens junction and is mutually exclusive with p120(ctn) in Ecadherin complexes. J Cell Sci 2000, 113(Pt 8):1481-1490.
20. Wu C, Orozco C, Boyer J, Leglise M, Goodale J, Batalov S, Hodge CL,
Haase J, Janes J, Huss JW, et al: BioGPS: an extensible and customizable
portal for querying and organizing gene annotation resources. Genome
Biol 2009, 10(11):R130.

Sequence similarity comparisons were conducted by
BLAST [46]. Pairwise distance comparisons were conducted using MEGA4 [47] with the Dayhoff model [48]
and the JTT model [49]. Statistical significance in the
differences between two groups of pairwise distances
was evaluated by Wilcoxon rank and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests implemented in R [50]. Bayesian trees with
posterior probabilities were constructed to determine
evolutionary relationships. Functional divergence among
homologs was inferred using the DIVERGE software
package [51].
Tissue specific gene expression

We accessed the BioGPS database to identify divergent
patterns in gene expression and attempt to correlate
potential functional differences between catenin members. BioGPS (an online resource containing gene
expression data based on Affymetrix microarrays) was
used to visualize and compare gene expression patterns
for catenin family members and catenin-related genes in
human and mouse cells [20].

Additional material
Additional file 1: The Bayesian phylogeny for the p120 subfamily.
Additional file 2: The Bayesian phylogeny for the beta catenin
subfamily.
Additional file 3: The Bayesian phylogeny for the alpha catenin
subfamily.
Additional file 4: Summary of annotation problems for the catenin
family. ‘armp’ stands for ‘armadillo segment polarity protein’. *Multiple GI
numbers in the same box referred to the case that the same gene has
been sequenced multiple times by different groups, and they are about
99-100% identical.

Abbreviations
P120: p120 catenin; beta: beta catenin; alpha: alpha catenin; ARVCF:
Armadillo Repeat protein deleted in Velo-Cardio-Facial syndrome; pkp:
plakophilin; aa: amino acids; PP: Posterior Probability; ARM: armadillo; MCMC:
Markov chain Monte Carlo; PSRF: Potential Scale Reduction Factor.

Author details
1
School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA.
2
Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 37232,
USA.
Authors’ contributions
ZMZ, EAG and ABR conceived the study, ZMZ and EAG carried out the
analyses, and ZMZ, EAG, and ABR wrote the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 3 November 2010 Accepted: 8 July 2011
Published: 8 July 2011

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:198
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/198

21. Daniel JM: Dancing in and out of the nucleus: p120(ctn) and the
transcription factor Kaiso. Biochim Biophys Acta 2007, 1773(1):59-68.
22. Klose RJ, Bird AP: Genomic DNA methylation: the mark and its mediators.
Trends Biochem Sci 2006, 31(2):89-97.
23. Ruzov A, Hackett JA, Prokhortchouk A, Reddington JP, Madej MJ,
Dunican DS, Prokhortchouk E, Pennings S, Meehan RR: The interaction of
xKaiso with xTcf3: a revised model for integration of epigenetic and
Wnt signalling pathways. Development 2009, 136(5):723-727.
24. Hosking CR, Ulloa F, Hogan C, Ferber EC, Figueroa A, Gevaert K,
Birchmeier W, Briscoe J, Fujita Y: The transcriptional repressor Glis2 is a
novel binding partner for p120 catenin. Mol Biol Cell 2007,
18(5):1918-1927.
25. Fang X, Ji H, Kim SW, Park JI, Vaught TG, Anastasiadis PZ, Ciesiolka M,
McCrea PD: Vertebrate development requires ARVCF and p120 catenins
and their interplay with RhoA and Rac. J Cell Biol 2004, 165(1):87-98.
26. Arikkath J, Peng IF, Ng YG, Israely I, Liu X, Ullian EM, Reichardt LF: Deltacatenin regulates spine and synapse morphogenesis and function in
hippocampal neurons during development. J Neurosci 2009,
29(17):5435-5442.
27. Mo YY, Reynolds AB: Identification of murine p120 isoforms and
heterogeneous expression of p120cas isoforms in human tumor cell
lines. Cancer Res 1996, 56(11):2633-2640.
28. Hatzfeld M, Green KJ, Sauter H: Targeting of p0071 to desmosomes and
adherens junctions is mediated by different protein domains. J Cell Sci
2003, 116(Pt 7):1219-1233.
29. Hofmann I, Schlechter T, Kuhn C, Hergt M, Franke WW: Protein p0071 - an
armadillo plaque protein that characterizes a specific subtype of
adherens junctions. J Cell Sci 2009, 122(Pt 1):21-24.
30. Hatzfeld M: Plakophilins: Multifunctional proteins or just regulators of
desmosomal adhesion? Biochim Biophys Acta 2007, 1773(1):69-77.
31. S OO, Saitou N: Phylogenetic relationship of muscle tissues deduced
from superimposition of gene trees. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16(6):856-867.
32. Eckhart L, Valle LD, Jaeger K, Ballaun C, Szabo S, Nardi A, Buchberger M,
Hermann M, Alibardi L, Tschachler E: Identification of reptilian genes
encoding hair keratin-like proteins suggests a new scenario for the
evolutionary origin of hair. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105(47):18419-18423.
33. Shibuya Y, Murata M, Munemoto S, Masago H, Takeuchi J, Wada K, Yokoo S,
Umeda M, Komori T: Alpha E- and alpha N-catenin expression in dorsal
root ganglia and spinal cord. Kobe J Med Sci 2003, 49(3-4):93-98.
34. Stocker AM, Chenn A: Differential expression of alpha-E-catenin and
alpha-N-catenin in the developing cerebral cortex. Brain Res 2006, , 10731074: 151-158.
35. Bogaerts S, Vanlandschoot A, van Hengel J, van Roy F: Nuclear
translocation of alphaN-catenin by the novel zinc finger transcriptional
repressor ZASC1. Exp Cell Res 2005, 311(1):1-13.
36. Janssens B, Mohapatra B, Vatta M, Goossens S, Vanpoucke G, Kools P,
Montoye T, van Hengel J, Bowles NE, van Roy F, et al: Assessment of the
CTNNA3 gene encoding human alpha T-catenin regarding its
involvement in dilated cardiomyopathy. Hum Genet 2003, 112(3):227-236.
37. Goossens S, Janssens B, Bonne S, De Rycke R, Braet F, van Hengel J, van
Roy F: A unique and specific interaction between alphaT-catenin and
plakophilin-2 in the area composita, the mixed-type junctional structure
of cardiac intercalated discs. J Cell Sci 2007, 120(Pt 12):2126-2136.
38. Janssens B, Goossens S, Staes K, Gilbert B, van Hengel J, Colpaert C,
Bruyneel E, Mareel M, van Roy F: alphaT-catenin: a novel tissue-specific
beta-catenin-binding protein mediating strong cell-cell adhesion. J Cell
Sci 2001, 114(Pt 17):3177-3188.
39. Goossens S, Janssens B, Vanpoucke G, De Rycke R, van Hengel J, van Roy F:
Truncated isoform of mouse alphaT-catenin is testis-restricted in
expression and function. FASEB J 2007, 21(3):647-655.
40. X. tropicalis genome assembly v4.1. [http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Xentr4/
Xentr4.home.html].
41. Gasteiger E, Gattiker A, Hoogland C, Ivanyi I, Appel RD, Bairoch A: ExPASy:
The proteomics server for in-depth protein knowledge and analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(13):3784-3788.
42. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, et al: Clustal W and
Clustal × version 2.0. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(21):2947-2948.
43. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(12):1572-1574.

Page 13 of 13

44. Altekar G, Dwarkadas S, Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: Parallel Metropolis
coupled Markov chain Monte Carlo for Bayesian phylogenetic inference.
Bioinformatics 2004, 20(3):407-415.
45. DeLano WL: The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System. Palo Alto, CA, USA:
DeLano Scientific LLC; 2002.
46. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
47. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(8):1596-1599.
48. Schwarz RM, Dayhoff MO: Matrices for detecting distant relationships, In
Dayhoff M, editor, Atlas of protein sequences. National Biomedical
Research Foundation 1979, 353-358.
49. Jones DT, Taylor WR, Thornton JM: The rapid generation of mutation data
matrices from protein sequences. Comput Appl Biosci 1992, 8(3):275-282.
50. Team RDC: R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria; 2008.
51. Gu X, Vander Velden K: DIVERGE: phylogeny-based analysis for functionalstructural divergence of a protein family. Bioinformatics 2002,
18(3):500-501.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-198
Cite this article as: Zhao et al.: The evolutionary history of the catenin
gene family during metazoan evolution. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011
11:198.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
