<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Identification and analysis of candidate fungal tRNA 3-end processing endonucleases tRNase Zs, homologs of the putative prostate cancer susceptibility protein ELAC2</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:272. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-272"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Wei Zhao"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Identification and analysis of candidate fungal
tRNA 3’-end processing endonucleases tRNase Zs,
homologs of the putative prostate cancer
susceptibility protein ELAC2
Wei Zhao, Haiyan Yu, Shuzhen Li, Ying Huang*

Abstract
Background: tRNase Z is the endonuclease that is responsible for the 3’-end processing of tRNA precursors, a
process essential for tRNA 3’-CCA addition and subsequent tRNA aminoacylation. Based on their sizes, tRNase Zs
can be divided into the long (tRNase ZL) and short (tRNase ZS) forms. tRNase ZL is thought to have arisen from a
tandem gene duplication of tRNase ZS with further sequence divergence. The species distribution of tRNase Z is
complex. Fungi represent an evolutionarily diverse group of eukaryotes. The recent proliferation of fungal genome
sequences provides an opportunity to explore the structural and functional diversity of eukaryotic tRNase Zs.
Results: We report a survey and analysis of candidate tRNase Zs in 84 completed fungal genomes, spanning a
broad diversity of fungi. We find that tRNase ZL is present in all fungi we have examined, whereas tRNase ZS exists
only in the fungal phyla Basidiomycota, Chytridiomycota and Zygomycota. Furthermore, we find that unlike the
Pezizomycotina and Saccharomycotina, which contain a single tRNase ZL, Schizosaccharomyces fission yeasts
(Taphrinomycotina) contain two tRNase ZLs encoded by two different tRNase ZL genes. These two tRNase ZLs are
most likely localized to the nucleus and mitochondria, respectively, suggesting partitioning of tRNase Z function
between two different tRNase ZLs in fission yeasts. The fungal tRNase Z phylogeny suggests that tRNase ZSs are
ancestral to tRNase ZLs. Additionally, the evolutionary relationship of fungal tRNase ZLs is generally consistent with
known phylogenetic relationships among the fungal species and supports tRNase ZL gene duplication in certain
fungal taxa, including Schizosaccharomyces fission yeasts. Analysis of tRNase Z protein sequences reveals putative
atypical substrate binding domains in most fungal tRNase ZSs and in a subset of fungal tRNase ZLs. Finally, we
demonstrate the presence of pseudo-substrate recognition and catalytic motifs at the N-terminal halves of tRNase
ZLs.
Conclusions: This study describes the first comprehensive identification and sequence analysis of candidate fungal
tRNase Zs. Our results support the proposal that tRNase ZL has evolved as a result of duplication and diversification
of the tRNase ZS gene.

Background
The endonuclease tRNase Z (also called RNase Z or 3’tRNase) participates in maturation of tRNA 3’-end by
removing the 3’-trailer sequence from tRNA precursors
(pre-tRNAs, for reviews, see [1-4]). It belongs to the
metallo-b-lactamase (MBL) superfamily, the members of
* Correspondence: yhuang@njnu.edu.cn
Nanjing Engineering and Technology Research Center for Microbiology,
Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Biotechnology, School of Life
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210046, China

which have diverse functions from hydrolysis and inactivation of b-lactam antibiotics to processing of RNA precursors [5-9]. Other nucleases in the MBL superfamily
that act on nuclei acids include members of the b-CASP
(MBL-associated CISF Artemis SNM1/PSO2) family: the
cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor 73 kDa
subunit (CPSF-73) [10] and the Integrator complex subunit 11 (Int11) [11], which are involved in eukaryotic
mRNA and small nuclear RNA (snRNA) 3’-end formation, respectively; RNase J, which functions in rRNA

© 2010 Zhao et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

maturation and mRNA stability in bacteria [12] and the
eukaryotic Pso2/Snm1/Artemis proteins, which play a
role in DNA repair [7]. Although displaying distinct
substrate specificity defined by their specific domains,
these proteins appear to have a similar catalytic
mechanism since their active sites are composed of
highly conserved motifs including the histidine motif
(HxHxDH, where x is any hydrophobic residues).
There are two forms of tRNase Z. The long form
(tRNase Z L ) with 800-900 aa (amino acids) is about
twice the size of the short form (tRNase ZS) with 300400 aa [9]. Sequence analysis suggests that tRNase ZL
has evolved by gene duplication from tRNase Z S followed by sequence divergence [9]. The species distribution of tRNase Z is not homogenous. tRNase ZS exists
in all three domains of life (i.e. Bacteria, Archaea, and
Eukarya) whereas tRNase Z L has been found only in
eukaryotes so far. The number of tRNase Zs varies
among different organisms. The largest number of
tRNase Zs was detected in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana (two tRNase ZSs and two tRNase ZLs) [13]. The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe contains two
tRNase ZLs. Unexpectedly, the human genome encodes
one tRNase ZS and one tRNase ZL. Human tRNase ZL
gene (also termed ELAC2) was originally identified as
the first prostate cancer susceptibility gene by positional
cloning [9]. However, the mechanism by which specific
mutations in human tRNase ZL lead to an increased risk
of prostate cancer remains unknown. In contrast, the
budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster and the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans have just one tRNase ZL.
An intriguing question is why species have evolved to
have more than one tRNase Z. One explanation is that
additional tRNase Zs are targeted to organelles such as
mitochondria and chloroplasts in which organelleencoded pre-tRNAs must also be processed. Indeed, one
of two S. pombe tRNase Z L s is targeted to the mitochondria, and has been suggested to play a role in mitochondrial-encoded pre-tRNA processing [14]. In A.
thaliana, three of four tRNase ZLs are targeted to organelles [13]. However, it appears that the majority of
tRNase ZL s identified thus far are imported both into
the nucleus and mitochondria. Another explanation is
that additional tRNase Zs may provide a back-up
mechanism for nuclear tRNA 3’-end processing. The
third explanation is that additional tRNase Zs may have
different functions.
Recently, tRNase Z L itself has been either demonstrated or suggested to have additional functions other
than tRNA 3’-end processing. For example, human
tRNase ZL has been shown to play a role in generation
of non-tRNA noncoding RNAs [15,16] and viral microRNAs (miRNAs) [17]. Moreover, human tRNase ZL has

Page 2 of 16

been proposed to cleave a subset of miRNAs in the
cytoplasm [18]. In S. cerevisiae, tRNase ZL has been suggested to have additional functions including rRNA biogenesis, mRNA splicing and mitochondrial maintenance
[19]. Similarly, our previous study also suggested that
the nuclear-localized tRNase ZL in S. pombe may play a
role beyond tRNA 3’-end processing [14].
Our current understanding of tRNase Z evolution is
limited since there has been only one comprehensive
survey on tRNase ZSs from prokaryotes [3]. Of eukaryotes, the Fungi is a large and diverse kingdom encompassing roughly 1.5 million species and spanning one
billion years of evolution [20]. Sequence-based phylogenies show that the Chytridiomycota is the most basal
phylum (group) among the Fungi, followed by the Zygomycota, with the Ascomycota and Basidiomycota as two
largest phyla that together comprise the subkingdom
Dikarya (also referred to as the “Higher Fungi”) [21-24].
The Ascomycota (also known as sac fungi, yeasts or
ascomycetes) is the largest and most diverse phylum in
the Fungi, accounting for approximately 75% of all
known fungi. Many popular model organisms such as S.
cerevisiae, S. pombe, Neurospora crassa, Aspergillus
nidulans and Candida albicans are classified in this
phylum. This phylum is further divided into three major
monophyletic subphyla (subgroups): Pezizomycotina,
Saccharomycotina and Taphrinomycotina [25]. The
Pezizomycotina (also known as euascomyces) is the largest subphyla and contains over 90% of total Ascomycota species. They are multicellular filamentous fungi
and grow by hyphal extension and branching. In contrast, the Saccharomycotina (also known as true yeasts)
comprises the majority of unicellular species. The Taphrinomycotina is thought to be the earliest diverging
group sister to the Saccharomycotina and Pezizomycotina. It constitutes a diverse group of organisms including unicellular yeast (for example, Schizosaccharomyces),
multicellular filamentous fungi, and dimorphic fungi
that can switch between yeast and hyphal growth forms.
Like the Pezizomycotina, the Basidiomycota consists of
primarily filamentous fungi.
Currently, most of eukaryotic species with sequenced
genomes belong to the kingdom Fungi. The public fungal genome databases cover a broad range of fungal
taxonomic groups with the majority coming from the
Ascomycota and Basidiomycota. The availability of a
large number of fungal genome sequences, together
with the vast diversity of fungal morphology and lifestyle, provides an opportunity to identify tRNase Zs in
the kingdom Fungi and to study evolution of eukaryotic
tRNase Z.
In the present study, we performed a comprehensive
survey of candidate tRNase Zs from 84 publicly available
fungal genomes. To explore the evolutionary

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

relationship among fungal tRNase Zs, we conducted a
phylogenetic analysis of predicted fungal tRNase Zs.
Finally, we examined their domain architectures. Our
results support the view that tRNase Z L comes from
tRNase ZS.

Results
Identification of putative fungal tRNase Zs

As part of our efforts to better understand functional
and structural diversity of tRNase Zs, we conducted
extensive BLAST and PSI-BLAST homology searches
against the publicly available fungal genome databases.
Currently, the majority of sequenced species belong to
the Dikarya, with a much higher proportion of Ascomycota species. Since other fungal phyla are poorly represented in public databases (three Zygomycota, three
Microspordia, and three Chytridiomycota species), it is
difficult to assess the true diversity of tRNase Z in these
basal groups of fungi.
The initial candidates from the BLAST and PSIBLAST were verified by multiple sequence alignment
and reciprocal searches against the GenBank. Protein
sequence alignment revealed a number of incorrectly
predicted candidates, most likely due to misprediction
of exon/intron boundaries or existence of gaps in the
genome sequence. For example, the sequence (Broad
accession no. CC1G_14814.2) annotated as the candidate Basidiomycete Coprinopsis cinerea tRNase Z in the
fungal genome database at the Broad Institute has mispredicted exon/intron junctions. This 946-aa-long candidate is devoid of a histidine motif, which is a signature
motif for the MBL superfamily, indicating that the exon
encoding the histidine motif was likely mispredicted.
After re-evaluating intron splicing pattern of the gene
sequence, we were able to predict the exon encoding
the histidine motif. The correctly predicted protein has
967 aa, and has the histidine motif. The sequence annotated as the candidate Pezizomycotina Botrytis cinerea
(also named Botryotinia fuckeliana) tRNase Z (Broad
accession no. BC1G_03733.1) is an example of misprediction due to the presence of sequence gaps in the genome. This sequence has 444 aa. However, examination
of the genomic sequence revealed that its 5’-coding
sequence contains gaps. Thus, this sequence was
excluded. In back-searches, no candidate that shows
homology to metallo-b-lactamase was found, but a limited number of candidates were found to show homology to the yeast homolog of CPSF-73 (Ysh1). Such
candidates were also excluded from our final list. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that certain candidates may not be correctly predicted despite our
efforts devoted to verification of these candidates.
We identified a total of 90 candidate tRNase ZLs and
19 candidate tRNase ZSs proteins from 84 fungal species

Page 3 of 16

including 67 Ascomycota, 14 Basidiomycota and 3 Chytridiomycota (Additional file 1). Candidate tRNase Zs
from two taxonomic groups, the Zygomycota and
Microspordia, were not listed since their full-length protein sequences could not be correctly predicted. Of the
proteins identified here, only tRNase ZLs from S. cerevisiae and S. pombe have been experimentally characterized [14,19,25-27].
All species of the Ascomycota we have examined lack
tRNase ZS. The Pezizomycotina and Saccharomycotina
species have a single tRNase ZL. Surprisingly, in contrast
to the Pezizomycotina and Saccharomycotina species, all
four sequenced Schizosaccharomyces species (S. pombe,
Schizosaccharomyces octosporus, Schizosaccharomyces
japonicus and a recently described Schizosaccharomyces
cryophobus) in the Taphrinomycotina have two tRNase
ZLs, which we term tRNase ZL1 and tRNase ZL2, respectively. tRNase ZL1 s and tRNase ZL2 s have been either
shown or predicted to localize to the nucleus and mitochondria, respectively (Additional file 2 and data not
shown) [28]. Since in the current databases, all
sequenced Taphrinomycotina species come from only
Schizosaccharomyces, it would be interesting to see
whether species in other genera also contain two tRNase
ZLs.
Like Ascomycota species, all sequenced Basidiomycota
species (except for Agaricus bisporus) have a single
tRNase ZL. However, unlike the situation in the Ascomycota, tRNase ZS was found in all sequenced Basidiomycota species. While the majority of Basidiomycota
species have a single tRNase ZS, four Basidiomycota species (A. bisporus, C. cinerea, Laccaria bicolor and Postia
placenta) have two tRNase ZSs. Among the Basidiomycota species examined, A. bisporus has the largest number of tRNase Zs (two tRNase ZLs and two tRNase ZSs).
The number of tRNase Z seems to be variable in the
three sequenced chytrid species. Allomyces macrogynus
and Spizellomyces punctatus have two tRNase Z L s
whereas Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis appears to
have one tRNase Z L . Moreover, tRNase Z S was only
identified in S. punctatus. Although we could not correctly predict the full-length tRNase Zs in three
sequenced Zygomycota species (Rhizopus oryzae, Mucor
circinellodes and Phycomyces blakesleeanus) and in three
sequenced Microspordian species (Encephalitozoon cuniculi, Enterocytozoon bieneusi and Nosema ceranae), it is
important to note that tRNase ZS appears to exist in all
sequenced Zygomycota fungi but not in sequenced
Microspordian fungi known for extreme genome reduction and compaction [29].
Phylogenetic analysis

To explore evolutionary relationships among fungal
tRNase Zs, we performed a phylogenetic analysis of the

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Page 4 of 16

Figure 1 A phylogenetic tree inferred using Bayesian analysis of fungal tRNase Zs. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm was used
to assess the reliability of nodes in the phylogeny. Numbers above or below branches represent posterior probabilities for each node which
were generated by using Bayesian MCMC sampling. Only Bayesian posterior probability values less than 1.00 are indicated. The scale bar
indicates 0.4 nucleotide substitutions per site. The accession number for fungal tRNase Zs can be found in Additional file 1. Taxonomic
designations are indicated on the right side of the tree.

amino acid sequences of all tRNase Zs predicted from
the fungal genome databases. Figure 1 shows the phylogenetic tree for 109 fungal tRNase Zs. In addition to the
fungi species, tRNase Z S s from B. subtilis and E. coli
were included as reference. It is seen that tRNase Zs are

clearly separated into a small cluster containing both
fungal and bacterial tRNase ZSs and a large cluster containing fungal tRNase ZLs. Moreover, within the tRNase
Z L cluster, tRNase Z L s can be grouped according to
their taxonomic classification (Figure 1), although some

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Bayesian posterior probability values for grouping are
not strong. It appears that the phylogenetic relationships
among fungal tRNase Z L s is basically congruent with
the currently accepted fungi phylogenies based on cladistic analyses of RNA and/or protein sequences
[21-24]. Notably, tRNase ZL2s from four fission yeasts
together form a group sister to a group formed by
tRNase ZL1s from the same fission yeasts, albeit with a
posterior probability of only 0.77. Likewise, the two
tRNase Z L s in the Basidiomycete Agaricus bisporus
(AbiTrz1 and AbiTrz2) are sister to each other with a
posterior probability value of 1.
Analysis of fungal tRNase ZLs

The sizes of predicted tRNase Z L s vary considerably
among fungal species, ranging from 648 to 1140 aa with
an average size of ~924 aa. The variation in protein size
is due to a high degree of length and sequence variation
of N-terminal and C-terminal extensions and many
insertions and/or deletions. Remarkably, tRNase ZLs in
Sordaria macrospora and three Neurospora species (N.
crassa, Neurospora discreta and Neurospora discreta)
have a very long N-terminal extension (~200 residues).
This feature appears to be family-specific since all these
species belong to the family Sordariaceae.
A number of fungal tRNase ZLs have a variable length
N-terminal extension predicted to contain a canonical
MTS (Additional file 2). In addition, tRNase ZL2s from
four Schizosaccharomyces species we have examined also
contain a putative MTS in their N-terminal extensions.
The N-terminal extensions found in fungal tRNase ZLs
may serve as transit sequences for directing the proteins
to the mitochondria. It is interesting to note that tRNase
Z Ls from D. melanogaster and humans also contain a
canonical MTS.
To assess the extent of sequence and structural conservation among fungal tRNase ZLs, we aligned sixteen
tRNase ZL protein sequences from fifteen taxonomically
diverse fungal species including eleven species of the
Ascomycota, three species of the Basidiomycota, and
one species of the Chytridiomycota (Table 1). Since the
amino acid sequence of tRNase ZL can be divided into
an N-terminal half, which contains a substrate binding
site, and a C-terminal half, which contains a catalytic
center and most of the conserved motifs, we aligned the
N- and C-terminal halves of tRNase ZLs separately, and
first examined the C-terminal half. For comparison, we
also included non-fungal eukaryotic tRNase ZLs from D.
melanogaster, A. thaliana and humans. Figures 2 and 3
show sequence comparison of representative fungal and
non-fungal eukaryotic tRNase ZLs (For a full list of all
aligned fungal tRNase ZLs, see Additional file 3).
Although tRNase Z L s from closely related species
share the high degree of sequence similarity, the

Page 5 of 16

sequence similarity among fungal tRNase Z L s is low.
Overall, sequence conservation of fungal tRNase ZLs is
largely confined to highly conserved Motifs I-V (Motif II
is also called the histidine motif) and the PxKxRN,
HEAT and HST loop motifs at the C-terminal halves of
the proteins (Figure 2). Except for the PxKxRN loop and
Motif I, which were found to play a role in pre-tRNA
acceptor stem binding and CCA anti-determination
[30], all other motifs are involved in zinc binding and
catalysis [31-33]. Motifs I-V contain invariant histidine
and/or aspartate residues essential for the tRNase Z
activity. In particular, the histidine and aspartate residues in the histidine motif, together with the histidine
residues in Motifs III and V and the aspartate residue in
Motif IV are involved in the coordination of the two
zinc ions at the catalytic center [1,3,4].
All characterized tRNase Zs contain a characteristic
domain of 30~50 aa residues, termed a flexible arm (or
an exosite), which is important for substrate binding
[34,35]. Based on sequence comparison, three types of
flexible arms, termed the zinc-dependent phosphodiesterase (ZiPD)-, ELAC2- and Thermotoga maritima
(TM)-type flexible arms, have been found in tRNase Zs.
The ZiPD- and ELAC2-type flexible arms were typical
for bacterial tRNase Z S s and eukaryotic tRNase Z L s,
respectively, whereas the TM-type flexible arm is an atypical one found only in tRNase ZSs from T. maritima
and A. thaliana. Interestingly, tRNase ZS in T. maritima
itself is an atypical enzyme as it cleaves CCA-containing
pre-tRNAs after CCA. Although having sequence and
length variations, both ZiPD- and ELAC2-type flexible
arms comprise a GP motif rich in glycine and proline
residues [35], followed by a Walker A-like motif [9].
However, unlike the ZiPD- and ELAC2-type flexible
arms, the TM-type flexible arm is short and lacks the
GP motif. Instead it contains a short stretch of mainly
basic amino acids [35].
As anticipated, ELAC2-type flexible arm containing
both the GP and Walker A-like motifs was found in the
majority of the N-terminal halves of fungal tRNase ZLs
(Figure 3 and Additional file 3). Unexpectedly, a subset
of fungal tRNase ZLs appear to have an atypical ELAC2type flexible arm which either lacks or contains an
incomplete GP-motif (Figure 4). Moreover, unlike the
TM-type flexible arm, this atypical flexible arm does not
encompass a short cluster of basic amino acids.
Besides the flexible arm, the conserved domain search
against the NCBI Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cdd.shtml
combined with manual evaluation revealed regions of
sequences that match the Motifs I-IV and the PxKxRN
loop in the N-terminal halves of tRNase ZLs. However,
they appear to be nonfunctional as they differ from their
original patterns in many positions including the key

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Page 6 of 16

Table 1 Representatives of candidate fungal tRNase Zs used in sequence alignment
Species#

Taxonomy

Protein name

Form

Accession Number
L

Database

No. aa+

Ashbya gossypii (Ago)

Ascomycota

AgoTrz1

tRNase Z

NP_984308

NCBI

821

Aspergillus nidulans (Ani)

Ascomycota

AniTrz1

tRNase ZL

ANID_11892.1

Broad

1083

Candida albicans (Cal)

Ascomycota

CalTrz1

tRNase ZL

XP_717703

NCBI

857

Coccidioides immitis (Cim)

Ascomycota

CimTrz1

tRNase ZL

CIHG_00067.1

Broad

962*

Fusarium graminearum (Fgr)

Ascomycota

FgrTrz1

tRNase ZL

FGSG_06635.3

Broad

840

Neurospora crassa (Ncr)

Ascomycota

NcrTrz1

tRNase ZL

NCU00232.4

Broad

1099

Pyrenophora tritici-repentis (Ptr)

Ascomycota

PtrTrz1

tRNase ZL

XP_001940780

NCBI

988*

Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Sce)
Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Spo)

Ascomycota
Ascomycota

SceTrz1
SpoTrz1

tRNase ZL
tRNase ZL1

NP_013005
SPAC1D4.10

NCBI
Broad

838
809

Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Spo)

Ascomycota

SpoTrz2

tRNase ZL2

SPBC3D6.03C

Broad

678

Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (Ssc)

Ascomycota

SscTrz1

tRNase ZL

XP_001586541

NCBI

832

Yarrowia lipolytica (Yli)

Ascomycota

YliTrz1

tRNase ZL

XP_500027

NCBI

815

Cryptococcus neoformans (Cne)

Basidiomycota

CneTrz1

tRNase ZL

CNBG_1589.2

Broad

1035

Malassezia globosa (Mgl)

Basidiomycota

MglTrz1

tRNase ZL

XP_001729151

NCBI

1109

Puccinia graminis (Pgr)

Basidiomycota

PgrTrz1

tRNase ZL

PGTG_11198.2

Broad

854

Spizellomyces punctatus (Spu)
Agaricus bisporus (Abi)

Chytridiomycota
Basidiomycota

SpuTrz2
AbiTrz3

tRNase ZL
tRNase ZS

SPPG_00513.2
106812

Broad
JGI

799*
376

Agaricus bisporus (Abi)

Basidiomycota

AbiTrz4

tRNase ZS

123256

JGI

469

Coprinopsis cinerea (Cci)

Basidiomycota

CciTrz2

tRNase ZS

CC1G_14603.2

Broad

390

Coprinopsis cinerea (Cci)

Basidiomycota

CciTrz3

tRNase ZS

CC1G_03806.2

Broad

544

Laccaria bicolor (Lbi)

Basidiomycota

LbiTrz2

tRNase ZS

XP_001876619

NCBI

406

Laccaria bicolor (Lbi)

Basidiomycota

LbiTrz3

tRNase ZS

XP_001874963

NCBI

476

Malassezia globosa (Mgl)

Basidiomycota

MglTrz2

tRNase ZS

EDP42443

NCBI

484*

Melampsora laricis-populina (Mla)
Postia placenta (Ppl)

Basidiomycota
Basidiomycota

MlaTrz2
PplTrz2

tRNase ZS
tRNase ZS

111950
94043

JGI
JGI

473*
386

Postia placenta (Ppl)

Basidiomycota

PplTrz3

tRNase ZS

92595

JGI

483*

Puccinia graminis (Pgr)

Basidiomycota

PgrTrz2

tRNase ZS

PGTG_13150.2

Broad

498

Spizellomyces punctatus (Spu)

Chytridiomycota

SpuTrz3

tRNase ZS

SPPG_06028.2

Broad

395

#

Species abbreviations used in this study are shown in parentheses.
+
The number of amino acids in fungal tRNase Zs
* Indicates that mispredicted sequences obtained from the databases have been corrected.

residues critical for tRNase Z functions. We collectively
termed these sequences pseudo-motifs. Figure 5 shows
pseudo-motifs in representative candidate fungal tRNase
Z L s. For comparison, we also include four metazoan
tRNase ZLs from C. elegans, D. melanogaster, A. thaliana and humans. Since the pseudo-PxKxRN loops of C.
elegans and human tRNase ZLs are indiscernible from
their protein sequences, they are not included. Except
for the pseudo-histidine motif [36], these pseudo-motifs
have not been reported previously, which may reflect
the difficulty in identifying these sequences. It appears
that only the pseudo-histidine motif is widespread; the
distributions of other pseudo-motifs are highly variable
among fungal tRNase ZL s. Moreover, pseudo-Motif V
could not be identified. It is likely that some of pseudomotifs may have diverged too far and thus are no longer
similar enough to the conserved motifs for homology to
be detected by the NCBI conserved domain search. It is
also notable that these pseudo-motifs were in the same

relative order as their original motifs in tRNase ZSs and
in the C-terminal halves of tRNase ZLs.
Analysis of fungal tRNase ZSs

Like fungal tRNase ZLs, the lengths of predicted fungal
tRNase Z S s are variable, ranging from 376 to 554 aa
with an average size of ~442 aa. Sequence alignment of
15 selected representatives of fungal and non-fungal
tRNase ZSs is presented in Figure 6. A list of all aligned
fungal tRNase Z S s is provided in Additional file 4.
Alignment revealed that like B. subtilis and human
tRNase ZSs, fungal tRNase ZSs contain Motifs I-V and
the PxKxRN, HEAT and HST loops (Figure 6). However, they display flexible arm diversity. A candidate
flexible arm was also found in most of fungal tRNase
Z S s. However, they exhibit considerable variation in
amino acid sequence. Fungal tRNase ZSs can be grouped
according to the presence or absence and the nature of
sequences of the flexible arm. One group containing

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Page 7 of 16

Figure 2 Sequence conservation between the C-terminal halves of fungal and non-fungal eukaryotic tRNase ZLs. Multiple sequence
alignment of the C-terminal halves of representative fungal and non-fungal eukaryotic tRNase ZLs. Fungal tRNase ZLs are from A. gossypii
(AgoTrz1), S. cerevisiae (SceTrz1) [19], C. albicans (CalTrz1), Yarrowia lipolytica (YliTrz1), A. nidulans (AniTrz1), Coccidioides immitis (CimTrz1),
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (SscTrz1), Pyrenophora tritici-repentis (Ptrtrz1), N. crassa (NcrTrz1), Fusarium graminearum (FgrTrz1), S. pombe (SpoTrz1 and
SpoTrz2) [14], Cryptococcus neoformans (CneTrz1), M. globosa (MglTrz1), Puccinia graminis (Pgr Trz1) and S. punctatus (SpuTrz1). Non-fungal tRNase
ZLs are from A. thaliana (AthTrz4) [13], D. melanogaster (DmeTrz1) [54] and Homo sapiens (HsaTrz2) [9]. Protein accession numbers are described
in Table 1. The alignment was constructed using the program Clustal W [49]. Identical residues are on a black background and conserved
residues shaded in gray. Also indicated above the sequence alignment are the conserved motifs involved in substrate binding and catalysis. The
conserved motifs are labeled according to references [30,31,44]. Numbers in parentheses are the positions of the amino acid sequences. The
numbers in brackets indicate the length of the region in tRNase Z, which are species-specific and could not be correctly aligned. Hyphens
represent gaps introduced into sequences for maximum alignment. The positions of amino acid residues of the D. melanogaster tRNase ZL
critical for catalytic efficiency [30,31] are indicated by asterisk.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Page 8 of 16

Figure 3 Sequence conservation between the N-terminal halves of fungal and non-fungal eukaryotic tRNase ZLs. Multiple sequence
alignment of the N-terminal halves of representative fungal and non-fungal eukaryotic tRNase ZLs according to the same legend as in Figure 2.
The positions of amino acid residues of the D. melanogaster tRNase ZL that contribute to substrate binding are marked with an asterisk [44].
Open circle denotes the residue in the D. Melanogaster tRNase ZL that makes the largest contribution to substrate binding [44].

candidates from Basidiomycota species A. bisporus
(AbiTrz4), C. cinerea (CciTrz3), L. bicolor (LbiTrz3) and
P. placenta (PplTrz3) does not seem to contain the flexible arm, which is located between Motif III and Motif
IV. Interestingly, all these species have two tRNase ZSs.

The second group including candidates from Basidiomycota species Agaricus bisporus (AbiTrz3), Coprinopsis
cinerea (CciTrz2), Postia placenta (PplTrz2) and Laccaria bicolor (LbiTrz2) lacks a recognizable GP motif
but retain the Walker A-like motif. The third group

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Page 9 of 16

Figure 4 Amino acid alignments of putative atypical flexible arms in fungal tRNase ZLs. The top panel alignment shows putative atypical
flexible arms found in certain fungal tRNase ZLs from Chaetomium globosum (CglTrz1), Myceliophthora thermophila (MthTrz1), Thielavia terrestris
(TteTrz1), Y. lipolytica (YliTrz1), Microsporum canis (McaTrz1), Microsporum gypseum (MgyTrz1), Trichophyton rubrum (TruTrz1), Magnaporthe grisea
(MgrTrz1), F. graminearum (FgrTrz1), Fusarium oxysporum (FoxTrz1), Fusarium verticillioides (FveTrz1), Nectria haematococca (NhaTrz1), Trichoderma
atroviride (TatTrz1), Trichoderma virens (TviTrz1), Trichoderma reesei (TreTrz1), N. crassa (NcrTrz1), N. tetrasperma (NteTrz1), N. discreta (NdiTrz1),
Podospora anserina (PanTrz1). The bottom panel alignment shows typical flexible arms found in tRNase Zs from B. subtilis (BsuTrz1) [55], S.
cerevisiae (SceTrz1) [19], S. pombe (SpoTrz1) [14], D. melanogaster (DmeTrz1) [54] and H. sapiens (HsaTrz2) [9]. The predicted tRNase ZLs are
defined in Additional file 1. The GP and Walker A-like motifs are indicated. Invariant and conserved amino acids are highlighted in Black and
gray, respectively. The Asterisk indicates key residues in the D. Melanogaster tRNase ZL that contribute to substrate binding [44]. The open circle
denotes the residue in the D. Melanogaster tRNase ZL that makes the largest contribution to substrate binding. Inverted triangles indicate the
conserved glycine and proline residues in the GP motif, which are no longer conserved in certain fungal tRNase ZLs. Dark shading indicates
identical residues, and gray shading designates conserved residues. Secondary structure assignment is based on the structure of the B. subtilis
tRNase ZS [34]. The secondary structures for a-helices, b-strands and 310-helix are indicated with Greek letters. Asterisks indicate key residues in
the D. Melanogaster tRNase ZL that contribute to substrate binding [44].

including Basidiomycota species Malassezia globosa
(MglTrz2), Melampsora laricis-populina (MlaTrz2) and
Puccinia graminis (PgrTrz2), and chytrid species Spizellomyces punctatus (SpuTrz3) lacks both recognizable GP
and Walker A-like motifs and is considerably longer
than those of the second group. Moreover, the sequence
similarity between the flexible arms of fungal tRNase
ZSs and the ZiPD-type flexible arm is mostly confined
to their C-terminal sequences.

Discussion
The phylogenetic distribution of tRNase Z in fungi

tRNase ZL is widespread in fungi and the majority of
fungal species appear to have a single tRNase ZL. This
latter finding is somewhat unexpected given striking differences in the genome size, life cycle and morphology
of species of fungi. The Pezizomycotina and Saccharomycotina belong to later diverging fungi. Their genomes
vary considerably in size due to gene gain and loss
events including tandem gene duplication, whole-

genome duplication and extensive gene loss [37,38]. The
Saccharomycotina genome sizes vary from ~9 (Pichia
pastoris) to ~24 Mb (Candida parapsilosis), whereas the
genome sizes of the Pezizomycotina fungi range from 23
(Microsporum canis) to 43 Mb (N. crassa). Furthermore,
Pezizomycotina and Saccharomycotina fungi range in
complexity from unicellular yeasts to filamentous molds.
However, despite their remarkable differences in genome size, life cycle and morphology, the Pezizomycotina
and Saccharomycotina fungi tend to contain only one
tRNase ZL. These results indicate that the diversity of
tRNase Z in fungi is not directly proportional to either
the difference in genome size or the complexity of the
life cycle and the morphology.
In contrast to tRNase Z L , tRNase Z S has a limited
phylogenetic distribution. The apparent lack of the
tRNase ZS gene in the genomes of Ascomycota species
suggests that it has been deleted from the genomes of
Ascomycota fungi. It is possible that tRNase ZS existed
before the divergence of the Ascomycota from the

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Page 10 of 16

Figure 5 Pseudo-motifs in representative candidate fungal tRNase ZLs. The top panel shows alignment for pseudo substrate recognition
and catalytic motifs found in tRNase ZLs from S. cerevisiae (SceTrz1) [19], A. gossypii (AgoTrz1), C. albicans (CalTrz1), A. nidulans (AniTrz1), C.
immitis (CimTrz1), S. sclerotiorum (SscTrz1), P. tritici-repentis (PtrTrz1), N. crassa (NcrTrz1), F. graminearum (FgrTrz1), C. elegans (CelTrz1)[56], D.
melanogaster (DmeTrz1) [54], A. thaliana (AthTrz4) [13] and humans (HsaTrz2) [9]. The bottom panel shows alignment for the corresponding
conserved motifs in tRNase Zs from B. subtilis (BsuTrz1) [55], Archaeoglobus fulgidus (ArcTrz1; accession no. NP_069772), Halobacterium salinarum
(HalTrz1; accession no. NP_280881), Methanosarcina acetivorans (MacTrz1; accession no. NP_617924), Enterococcus faecalis (EfaTrz1; accession no.
NP_815399), Lactococcus lactis subsp (LlaTrz1; accession no. NP_266786), Nanoarchaeum equitans (NeqTrz1; accession no. NP_963358),
Methanococcus maripaludis (MmaTrz1; accession no. NP_988026) and Pyrococcus abyssi (PabTrz1; accession no. NP_126781). The pseudo-PxKxRN
loops of C. elegans and human tRNase ZLs are not included since they are indiscernible. The candidate fungal tRNase ZLs are defined in
Additional file 1. GenBank accession numbers that are not listed in Additional file 1 are indicated. The alignment was extended to include
surrounding regions to illustrate the further homology revealed by searching the Conserved Domain database (CDD), which could aid in the
identification of pseudo-motifs. Similar or identical amino acid residues are shaded as described in the legend to Figure 2. The positions of
amino acid residues of the D. melanogaster tRNase ZL critical for catalytic efficiency [30,31] are indicated by asterisk.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Page 11 of 16

Figure 6 Multiple alignment fungal and non-fungal eukaryotic tRNase ZSs. tRNase ZSs are from A. bisporus (AbiTrz3 and AbiTrz4), C. cinerea
(CciTrz2 and CciTrz3), P. placenta (PplTrz2 and PplTrz3), L. bicolor (LbiTrz2 and LbiTrz3), S. punctatus (SpuTrz3), M. globosa (MglTrz2), Melampsora
laricis-populina (MlaTrz2) and P. graminis (PgrTrz2), as well as in H. sapiens (HsaTrz1) [9], B. subtilis (BsuTrz1) [55] and E. coli (EcoTrz1) [57]. See
Table 1 for protein description. Alignment of eukaryotic tRNase ZSs is as described in the legend to Figure 2.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Basidiomycota, and was subsequently lost after the
appearance of a novel structure (tRNase Z L ). This is
supported by the finding that tRNase ZS is retained in
the genomes of Basidiomycota, Chytridiomycota and
Zygomycota fungi.
Most of Basidiomycota species examined contain one
tRNase ZS. The fungal tRNase ZSs appear to be unique
among all known tRNase ZSs in either lacking the flexible arm or having an atypical flexible arm (see discussion below). One explanation of existence of tRNase ZS
genes in Basidiomycota species is that these genes may
represent pseudo-tRNase ZS genes. Another explanation,
which we favor, is that fungal tRNase ZS, at least some
of them, may play a back-up or different role. Support
for this hypothesis comes from recent studies of tRNase
Z S in A. thaliana and humans. In A. thaliana, one
tRNase Z S may represent a back-up for the nuclear
tRNA 3’-end processing in case of dysfunction of
nuclear-localized tRNase ZL, whereas the other plays a
role in chloroplasts [13]. In human cells, tRNase ZS is
located in the cytosol and likely have substrates other
than pre-tRNA [39].
The flexible arms of candidate fungi tRNase Zs display
remarkable diversity

An unexpected and striking result of this analysis is the
diversity of the flexible arms within candidate fungal
tRNase Zs, particularly tRNase ZSs. The most characteristic features of the typical flexible arm found in tRNase
Zs are the GP- and Walker-A like motifs. A subset of
fungal tRNase ZLs and all fungal tRNase ZSs appear to
lack the GP-motif, and some fungal tRNase ZSs do not
seem to have the Walker A-like motif. In the most
extreme case, the flexible arm is missing in fungal
tRNase Z S s. It is not yet understood why the flexible
arms of fungal tRNase Zs display diversity in the primary sequence.
It is interesting to note that four Basidiomycota species contain two candidate tRNase Z S s, one of which
lacks the flexible arm. It is likely that these two tRNase
ZSs form heterodimers that would look like tRNase ZL,
where only the N-terminal half has a flexible arm.
The apparent lack of the GP-motif in some fungal
tRNase Z L s and all fungal tRNase Z S s that we have
examined raises the question of whether this motif is
absolutely required for substrate binding. Structural and
biochemical evidence suggests that the GP-motif may
not be essential for pre-tRNA binding. To date, the
three-dimensional structures of tRNase ZSs from B. subtilis, E. coli and T. maritima have been solved by X-ray
crystallography [34,40-43]. Remarkably, the flexible arms
of T. maritima tRNase ZS lacking the GP motif and the
other two tRNase ZSs harboring the GP motif have very
similar structures, composed of a compact globular

Page 12 of 16

domain and an extended two-stranded stalk, which
extrude from the tRNase ZS core. However, they have
different lengths and globular domains. The globular
domains at the end of the flexible arms of B. subtilis
and E. coli tRNase ZSs are composed of two a-helices,
two b-strands and one 310-helix, whereas the counterpart in T. maritima tRNase Z S consists of one very
short a-helix, one long helix and one 3 10 -helix. The
conserved GP-motif, particularly the proline residues,
appears to add rigidity to two flexible arm helices since
it is localized between them [42]. It would be interesting
to know how the flexible arm lacking the GP-motif participates in substrate binding.
Recent biochemical studies have also suggested that
the GP-motif may not be essential for substrate binding.
Single alanine substitutions across the GP motif in D.
melanogaster tRNase ZL only moderately affect substrate
binding. In contrast, substitution of a conserved leucine
residue at the boundary of the globular domain and
stalk with alanine almost completely abolishes substrate
binding as the globular domain deletion [44]. Similarly,
deletion of the GP motif in B. subtilis tRNase ZS does
not eliminate pre-tRNA binding but alters the cleavage
specificity of the enzyme [45]. These results suggest that
the GP motif may be important but not essential for
substrate binding.
The evolutionary relationship between tRNase ZS and
tRNase ZL

In eukaryotes, tRNase ZL appears to take over tRNase
ZS in endonucleolytic 3’-end processing of pre-tRNAs,
which raises the question of how it evolves. The protein
sequence of tRNase ZS is much more similar to the Cterminal half of tRNase ZL than to the N-terminal half
of tRNase Z L . Furthermore, the C-terminal half of
tRNase ZL retains all conserved motifs for proper catalytic function but has lost the flexible arm involved in
substrate binding, whereas the N-terminal half has lost
all active motifs but contains the flexible arm. These
observations led to the proposal that tRNase Z L has
evolved from tRNase ZS by gene duplication and subsequent sequence divergence [9]. To assess whether phylogenetic evidence exists that is consistent with this
notion, we estimated phylogenetic relationships among
fungal tRNase Zs by using a Bayesian phylogenetic
method. The clustering of all fungal tRNase Z Ss with
representative bacterial tRNase ZSs support the notion
that tRNase ZL comes to eukaryotes through duplication
of tRNase ZS gene. Further evidence that the N-terminal
half of tRNase ZL is derived from an ancient tRNase ZS
comes from our findings that the N-terminal half of
fungal tRNase ZL contains candidate pseudo-motifs and
that these pseudo-motifs are present in the same relative
order as their original motifs appeared in tRNase Z S.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

These pseudo-motifs likely represent relics of original
tRNase ZS motifs that were inactivated during diversification of the eukaryotic tRNase ZL gene.
The reason for the adoption of tRNase ZL over tRNase
S
Z in eukaryotes is unknown. One possibility is that eukaryotic cells may require more efficient tRNase Z enzymes.
Support for this proposal comes from biochemical characterization of human tRNase Zs. In vitro characterization of
recombinant human tRNase Zs have shown that tRNase
ZL cleaves pre-tRNA significantly more efficiently compared to tRNase ZS [46]. Although strong structural evidence to support that tRNase Z L evolved into a more
efficient enzyme than tRNase ZS is still lacking, it is interesting to note that tRNase ZS and tRNase ZL may have different processing center numbers which would make
much difference in the efficiency of pre-tRNA 3’-end processing. Three-dimensional structures of three bacterial
tRNase ZSs have revealed that the proteins form homodimers [34,40-43]. In particular, the crystal structure of B.
subtilis tRNase ZS in complex with tRNA shows that the
dimer has two identical processing centers with two substrate binding and catalytic sites. In contrast, a molecular
modeling study has suggested that both the N-terminal
and C-terminal halves of human tRNase ZL can fold into
two distinct MBL domains with one domain containing a
fully functionally catalytic site and the other containing a
candidate substrate binding domain [3].
Schizosaccharomyces fission yeasts have two tRNase ZLs,
most likely targeted to the nucleus and mitochondria,
respectively

Schizosaccharomyces fission yeasts including S. pombe
appear to be unique among the Ascomycota in having two
tRNase ZLs (tRNase ZL1 and tRNase ZL2) that appear to
be localized to the nucleus and mitochondria, respectively,
as suggested in our previous study of tRNase Z L in S.
pombe [28]. Our fungal tRNase Z phylogeny shows that
the two tRNase Z L s in fission yeasts may have arisen
through gene duplication (Figure 1). Although the whole
genome duplication found in the Saccharomycotina yeasts
does not seem to occur in fission yeasts such as S. pombe
[47], the tRNase ZL gene could be duplicated by other
mechanisms such as tandem and segmental gene duplication. The two tRNase ZLs in each Schizosaccharomyces
species all have very limited homology with each other
(20-23% identity and 31-33% similarity, see Additional file
5), indicating that these two proteins have diverged considerably from each other since their duplication. It is
interesting to note that the tRNase ZL gene could also be
duplicated in non-fungal eukaryotic species A. thaliana.
However, the two plant tRNase ZLs are highly related to
each other (69% identity and 72% similarity).
Why do Schizosaccharomyces fission yeasts have two
tRNase ZLs? In our previous study, it was found that the

Page 13 of 16

nuclear-targeted tRNase ZL1 (SpoTrz1) is involved in
nuclear pre-tRNA 3’-end processing in S. pombe [14].
Furthermore, its function can be compensated by either
S. cerevisiae or human tRNase ZL. Although the role of
mitochondrial-targeted tRNase Z L2 (SpoTrz2) remains
to be determined, it is likely that this protein plays an
essential role in mitochondrial RNA processing [14].
Based on these results, it is possibly that the presence of
two tRNase ZLs reflects that the nuclear and mitochondrial tRNA processing activities are associated with two
different tRNase Z L s in Schizosaccharomyces fission
yeasts. This may also hold true for wheat and potato
since in these plants, enzymes involved in nuclear and
mitochondrial tRNA 3’-end processing appear to be different [48]. However, it is important to note that the
nuclear and organelle tRNase Z activities in the majority
of organisms described to date seem to reside in the
same enzyme.

Conclusions
A survey of fungal databases shows that tRNase Z L
appears to be universally present in fungi, whereas the
presence of tRNase Z S is restricted to certain fungal
phyla, indicative of the fundamental role of tRNase ZL
in eukaryotic tRNA biogenesis. The apparent lack of
tRNase ZS in the Ascomycota suggests that tRNase ZS
may have lost before divergence of the Ascomycota and
the Basidiomycota. A striking aspect of the tRNase ZL
distribution is that there are two different tRNase ZLs in
Schizosaccharomyces fission yeasts. These two tRNase
ZLs are likely present in different cellular compartments,
suggesting functional partitioning between these two
proteins. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that tRNase ZS
is ancestral to tRNase Z L and that tRNase Z L gene
duplications may have occurred in certain fungal taxa,
including Schizosaccharomyces fission yeasts. Sequence
analysis reveals that the domain architecture of tRNase
Z L s is highly conserved among fungi and metazoa. A
surprising result of sequence analysis is the sequence
diversity in the putative flexible arm of candidate fungal
tRNase Zs. Our analysis also reveals pseudo-motifs at
the N-terminal halves of tRNase Z L s. These findings
support the view that tRNase ZL evolved through duplication and divergence of the tRNase ZS gene.
Methods
Fungal genome database search and protein sequence
analysis

To identify candidate tRNase Zs, we conducted BLAST
and PSI-BLAST searches using the known tRNase Z
protein sequences as queries against fungal genomes
databases including the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
sutils/genom_table.cgi?organism=fungi), the Broad

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

Institute http://www.broadinstitute.org/science/data, the
Joint Genome Institute http://genome.jgi-psf.org/pages/
fungi/home.jsf, the Genome Center at Washington University http://genome.wustl.edu/ and the Universal Protein Resource http://www.uniprot.org. All candidate
sequences were obtained by using the cut-off E-value of
0.01. All candidate proteins were subjected to validation,
which was carried out by using a variety tests that evaluate the likelihood of annotation errors and the amino
acid sequence conservation within and among taxonomic groups. First, confirmation of true candidate
tRNase Zs was done by back-searching individual candidate protein sequence against the GenBank database.
Second, the gene sequences for the predicted tRNase Zs
were manually checked for possible sequence gaps.
Third, multiple protein sequence alignment was used to
identify candidate proteins that were discordant due to
possible genomic sequencing errors and/or intron misprediction. In most cases, we changed the splicing pattern of candidate tRNase Z either using gene prediction
programs Fgenesh http://linux1.softberry.com/berry.
phtml?topic=fgenesh&group=programs&subgroup=gfind
and Geneid http://genome.crg.es/geneid.html or manually to restore the high degree of sequence conservation.
Multiple sequence alignment was performed by using
Clustal W [49], and the resulting alignment was further
manually examined and adjusted to improve the detection of conserved regions. The putative subcellular localization signals of tRNase Zs were predicted by using
the programs MitoProt http://ihg2.helmholtz-muenchen.
de/ihg/mitoprot.html and PSORT II http://psort.hgc.jp/.
Phylogenetic analysis of fungal tRNase Zs

Full-length amino acid sequences of tRNase Zs from
fungi and two bacteria, B. subtilis and E. coli were
aligned by using Clustal W implemented in Mega 4.0
[50]. Conserved regions were selected and ambiguous
aligned regions were removed by using the program
Gblocks 0.91b [51]. tRNase ZSs from B. subtilis and E.
coli were chosen as reference. The phylogenies were
estimated by Bayesian inference with MrBayes 3.1.2 [52]
using a mixture of the fixed amino acid models and the
gamma distribution. Statistical confidence was assessed
by using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling
approaches. Four simultaneous Markov chains were run
for one million generations sampling every 1,000 generation in two replicate runs. The first 250 trees were
discarded as burn-in and the convergence of the chains
was evaluated using AWTY implemented in MrBayes
3.1.2 [53].

List of abbreviations
pre-tRNA: tRNA precursor; tRNase Z: tRNA 3’ endonuclease; tRNase ZS: the short form of tRNase Z; tRNase

Page 14 of 16

Z L : the long form of tRNase Z; aa: amino acid; MBL:
metallo-b-lactamase; NLS: nuclear localization signal;
MTS: mitochondrial targeting signal; no: number; kDa:
kiloDaltons

Additional material
Additional file 1: Distribution of candidate fungal tRNase Zs.
a
Abbreviations for species names are indicated in the parentheses. bThe
number of amino acids in fungal tRNase Zs. calso known as Histoplasma
capsulatum. dalso known as Blastomyces dermatitidis. ealso known as
Gibberella zeae falso known as Sporotrichum thermophile galso known as
Fusarium solani halso known as Stagonospora nodorum ialso known as
Filobasidiella neoformans ND denotes the sequence could not be
predicted correctly likely due to sequencing errors. *Indicates that
mispredicted sequences obtained from the databases have been
corrected.
Additional file 2: Putative N-terminal mitochondrial targeting
signals in candidate fungal tRNase Zs. The accession numbers for the
proteins are listed in Additional file 1. The numbers refer to amino acid
position starting from the N-terminus. #SpoTrz2 (SPBC3D6.03C) is
localized to the mitochondria [28].
Additional file 3: Alignment of candidate fungal tRNase ZLs. Similar
or identical amino acid residues are shaded as described in the legend
to Figure 2. The conserved motifs are labeled according to references
[30,31,44].
Additional file 4: Alignment of candidate fungal tRNase ZSs. Similar
or identical amino acid residues are shaded as described in the legend
to Figure 2. The conserved motifs are labeled according to references
[30,31,44].
Additional file 5: Pairwise sequence comparisons of tRNase ZLs
from Schizosaccharomyces species. The accession numbers for proteins
are listed in Additional file 1. The pairwise percent identity (I) and
percent similarity (S) between tRNase ZLs from Schizosaccharomyces
species were calculated using the Clustal W program [49].

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Jie Yan and two anonymous reviewers for improving the
quality of the manuscript. We are grateful to Dr. Guang Yang for the use of
his laboratory facilities to construct the phylogenetic tree. This work was
supported by grants from the National Science Foundation of China
(30771178) and Nanjing Normal University (2007104XGQ0148).
Authors’ contributions
WZ conducted online database searches and carried out the sequence
alignment. SL constructed the phylogenetic tree. WZ, HY and YH analyzed
the data. YH wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 26 April 2010 Accepted: 6 September 2010
Published: 6 September 2010
References
1. Ceballos M, Vioque A: tRNase Z. Protein Pept Lett 2007, 14:137-145.
2. Hartmann RK, Gossringer M, Spath B, Fischer S, Marchfelder A: Chapter 8
The Making of tRNAs and More - RNase P and tRNase Z. Prog Nucleic
Acid Res Mol Biol 2009, 85C:319-368.
3. Redko Y, Li de Lasierra-Gallay I, Condon C: When all’s zed and done: the
structure and function of RNase Z in prokaryotes. Nat Rev Microbiol 2007,
5:278-286.
4. Spath B, Canino G, Marchfelder A: tRNase Z: the end is not in sight. Cell
Mol Life Sci 2007, 64:2404-2412.
5. Aravind L: An evolutionary classification of the metallo-beta-lactamase
fold proteins. In Silico Biol 1999, 1:69-91.

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

Daiyasu H, Osaka K, Ishino Y, Toh H: Expansion of the zinc metallohydrolase family of the beta-lactamase fold. FEBS Lett 2001, 503:1-6.
Dominski Z: Nucleases of the metallo-beta-lactamase family and their
role in DNA and RNA metabolism. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 2007,
42:67-93.
Schiffer S, Rosch S, Marchfelder A: Assigning a function to a conserved
group of proteins: the tRNA 3’-processing enzymes. EMBO J 2002,
21:2769-2777.
Tavtigian SV, Simard J, Teng DH, Abtin V, Baumgard M, Beck A, Camp NJ,
Carillo AR, Chen Y, Dayananth P, Desrochers M, Dumont M, Farnham JM,
Frank D, Frye C, Ghaffari S, Gupte JS, Hu R, Iliev D, Janecki T, Kort EN,
Laity KE, Leavitt A, Leblanc G, McArthur-Morrison J, Pederson A, Penn B,
Peterson KT, Reid JE, Richards S, et al: A candidate prostate cancer
susceptibility gene at chromosome 17p. Nat Genet 2001, 27:172-180.
Sullivan KD, Steiniger M, Marzluff WF: A core complex of CPSF73, CPSF100,
and Symplekin may form two different cleavage factors for processing
of poly(A) and histone mRNAs. Mol Cell 2009, 34:322-332.
Baillat D, Hakimi MA, Naar AM, Shilatifard A, Cooch N, Shiekhattar R:
Integrator, a multiprotein mediator of small nuclear RNA processing,
associates with the C-terminal repeat of RNA polymerase II. Cell 2005,
123:265-276.
Mathy N, Benard L, Pellegrini O, Daou R, Wen T, Condon C: 5’-to-3’
exoribonuclease activity in bacteria: role of RNase J1 in rRNA maturation
and 5’ stability of mRNA. Cell 2007, 129:681-692.
Canino G, Bocian E, Barbezier N, Echeverria M, Forner J, Binder S,
Marchfelder A: Arabidopsis encodes four tRNase Z enzymes. Plant Physiol
2009, 150:1491-1502.
Zhao Z, Su W, Yuan S, Huang Y: Functional conservation of tRNase ZL
among Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe and
humans. Biochem J 2009, 422:483-492.
Lee YS, Shibata Y, Malhotra A, Dutta A: A novel class of small RNAs: tRNAderived RNA fragments (tRFs). Genes Dev 2009, 23:2639-2649.
Wilusz JE, Freier SM, Spector DL: 3’ end processing of a long nuclearretained noncoding RNA yields a tRNA-like cytoplasmic RNA. Cell 2008,
135:919-932.
Bogerd HP, Karnowski HW, Cai X, Shin J, Pohlers M, Cullen BR: A
mammalian herpesvirus uses noncanonical expression and processing
mechanisms to generate viral MicroRNAs. Mol Cell 2010, 37(1):135-142.
Elbarbary RA, Takaku H, Uchiumi N, Tamiya H, Abe M, Nishida H,
Nashimoto M: Human cytosolic tRNase ZL can downregulate gene
expression through miRNA. FEBS Lett 2009, 583:3241-3246.
Chen Y, Beck A, Davenport C, Chen Y, Shattuck D, Tavtigian SV:
Characterization of TRZ1, a yeast homolog of the human candidate
prostate cancer susceptibility gene ELAC2 encoding tRNase Z. BMC Mol
Biol 2005, 6:12.
Hawksworth DL: Fungal diversity and its implication for genetic resource
collections. Stud Mycol 2004, 50:9-18.
Fitzpatrick DA, Logue ME, Stajich JE, Butler G: A fungal phylogeny based
on 42 complete genomes derived from supertree and combined gene
analysis. BMC Evol Biol 2006, 6:99.
James TY, Kauff F, Schoch CL, Matheny PB, Hofstetter V, Cox CJ, Celio G,
Gueidan C, Fraker E, Miadlikowska J, Lumbsch HT, Rauhut A, Reeb V,
Arnold AE, Amtoft A, Stajich JE, Hosaka K, Sung GH, Johnson D, O’Rourke B,
Crockett M, Binder M, Curtis JM, Slot JC, Wang Z, Wilson AW, Schüssler A,
Longcore JE, O’Donnell K, Mozley-Standridge S, et al: Reconstructing the
early evolution of Fungi using a six-gene phylogeny. Nature 2006,
443:818-822.
Liu Y, Leigh JW, Brinkmann H, Cushion MT, Rodriguez-Ezpeleta N,
Philippe H, Lang BF: Phylogenomic analyses support the monophyly of
Taphrinomycotina, including Schizosaccharomyces fission yeasts. Mol Biol
Evol 2009, 26:27-34.
Robbertse B, Reeves JB, Schoch CL, Spatafora JW: A phylogenomic analysis
of the Ascomycota. Fungal Genet Biol 2006, 43:715-725.
Hibbett DS, Binder M, Bischoff JF, Blackwell M, Cannon PF, Eriksson OE,
Huhndorf S, James T, Kirk PM, Lücking R, Thorsten Lumbsch H, Lutzoni F,
Matheny PB, McLaughlin DJ, Powell MJ, Redhead S, Schoch CL,
Spatafora JW, Stalpers JA, Vilgalys R, Aime MC, Aptroot A, Bauer R,
Begerow D, Benny GL, Castlebury LA, Crous PW, Dai YC, Gams W,
Geiser DM, et al: A higher-level phylogenetic classification of the Fungi.
Mycol Res 2007, 111:509-547.

Page 15 of 16

26. Takaku H, Minagawa A, Takagi M, Nashimoto M: A candidate prostate
cancer susceptibility gene encodes tRNA 3’ processing
endoribonuclease. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:2272-2278.
27. Takaku H, Minagawa A, Takagi M, Nashimoto M: The N-terminal halfdomain of the long form of tRNase Z is required for the RNase 65
activity. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:4429-4438.
28. Matsuyama A, Arai R, Yashiroda Y, Shirai A, Kamata A, Sekido S, Kobayashi Y,
Hashimoto A, Hamamoto M, Hiraoka Y, Horinouchi S, Yoshida M: ORFeome
cloning and global analysis of protein localization in the fission yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Nat Biotechnol 2006, 24:841-847.
29. Keeling PJ, Slamovits CH: Simplicity and complexity of microsporidian
genomes. Eukaryot Cell 2004, 3:1363-1369.
30. Zareen N, Hopkinson A, Levinger L: Residues in two homology blocks on
the amino side of the tRNase Z His domain contribute unexpectedly to
pre-tRNA 3’ end processing. RNA 2006, 12:1104-1115.
31. Karkashon S, Hopkinson A, Levinger L: tRNase Z catalysis and conserved
residues on the carboxy side of the His cluster. Biochemistry 2007,
46:9380-9387.
32. Minagawa A, Takaku H, Takagi M, Nashimoto M: A novel endonucleolytic
mechanism to generate the CCA 3’ termini of tRNA molecules in
Thermotoga maritima. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:15688-15697.
33. Spath B, Kirchner S, Vogel A, Schubert S, Meinlschmidt P, Aymanns S,
Nezzar J, Marchfelder A: Analysis of the functional modules of the tRNA
3’ endonuclease (tRNase Z). J Biol Chem 2005, 280:35440-35447.
34. de la Sierra-Gallay IL, Pellegrini O, Condon C: Structural basis for substrate
binding, cleavage and allostery in the tRNA maturase RNase Z. Nature
2005, 433:657-661.
35. Schilling O, Spath B, Kostelecky B, Marchfelder A, Meyer-Klaucke W, Vogel A:
Exosite modules guide substrate recognition in the ZiPD/ElaC protein
family. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:17857-17862.
36. Vogel A, Schilling O, Spath B, Marchfelder A: The tRNase Z family of
proteins: physiological functions, substrate specificity and structural
properties. Biol Chem 2005, 386:1253-1264.
37. Dujon B, Sherman D, Fischer G, Durrens P, Casaregola S, Lafontaine I, De
Montigny J, Marck C, Neuvéglise C, Talla E, Goffard N, Frangeul L, Aigle M,
Anthouard V, Babour A, Barbe V, Barnay S, Blanchin S, Beckerich JM,
Beyne E, Bleykasten C, Boisramé A, Boyer J, Cattolico L, Confanioleri F, De
Daruvar A, Despons L, Fabre E, Fairhead C, Ferry-Dumazet H, et al: Genome
evolution in yeasts. Nature 2004, 430:35-44.
38. Kellis M, Birren BW, Lander ES: Proof and evolutionary analysis of ancient
genome duplication in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2004,
428:617-624.
39. Takahashi M, Takaku H, Nashimoto M: Regulation of the human tRNase ZS
gene expression. FEBS Lett 2008, 582:2532-2536.
40. Ishii R, Minagawa A, Takaku H, Takagi M, Nashimoto M, Yokoyama S: Crystal
structure of the tRNA 3’ processing endoribonuclease tRNase Z from
Thermotoga maritima. J Biol Chem 2005, 280:14138-14144.
41. Ishii R, Minagawa A, Takaku H, Takagi M, Nashimoto M, Yokoyama S: The
structure of the flexible arm of Thermotoga maritima tRNase Z differs
from those of homologous enzymes. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol
Cryst Commun 2007, 63:637-641.
42. Kostelecky B, Pohl E, Vogel A, Schilling O, Meyer-Klaucke W: The crystal
structure of the zinc phosphodiesterase from Escherichia coli provides
insight into function and cooperativity of tRNase Z-family proteins. J
Bacteriol 2006, 188:1607-1614.
43. Li de la Sierra-Gallay I, Mathy N, Pellegrini O, Condon C: Structure of the
ubiquitous 3’ processing enzyme RNase Z bound to transfer RNA. Nat
Struct Mol Biol 2006, 13:376-377.
44. Levinger L, Hopkinson A, Desetty R, Wilson C: Effect of changes in the
flexible arm on tRNase Z processing kinetics. J Biol Chem 2009,
284:15685-15691.
45. Minagawa A, Ishii R, Takaku H, Yokoyama S, Nashimoto M: The flexible arm
of tRNase Z is not essential for pre-tRNA binding but affects cleavage
site selection. J Mol Biol 2008, 381:289-299.
46. Yan H, Zareen N, Levinger L: Naturally occurring mutations in human
mitochondrial pre-tRNASer(UCN) can affect the transfer ribonuclease Z
cleavage site, processing kinetics, and substrate secondary structure. J
Biol Chem 2006, 281:3926-3935.
47. Wood V, Gwilliam R, Rajandream MA, Lyne M, Lyne R, Stewart A, Sgouros J,
Peat N, Hayles J, Baker S, Basham D, Bowman S, Brooks K, Brown D,
Brown S, Chillingworth T, Churcher C, Collins M, Connor R, Cronin A,

Zhao et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:272
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/272

48.
49.

50.

51.
52.
53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

Page 16 of 16

Davis P, Feltwell T, Fraser A, Gentles S, Goble A, Hamlin N, Harris D,
Hidalgo J, Hodgson G, Holroyd S, et al: The genome sequence of
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Nature 2002, 415:871-880.
Mayer M, Schiffer S, Marchfelder A: tRNA 3’ processing in plants: nuclear
and mitochondrial activities differ. Biochemistry 2000, 39(8):2096-2105.
Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23:2947-2948.
Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:540-552.
Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
Nylander JA, Wilgenbusch JC, Warren DL, Swofford DL: AWTY (are we
there yet?): a system for graphical exploration of MCMC convergence in
Bayesian phylogenetics. Bioinformatics 2008, 24:581-583.
Dubrovsky EB, Dubrovskaya VA, Levinger L, Schiffer S, Marchfelder A:
Drosophila RNase Z processes mitochondrial and nuclear pre-tRNA 3’
ends in vivo. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(1):255-262.
Pellegrini O, Nezzar J, Marchfelder A, Putzer H, Condon C: Endonucleolytic
processing of CCA-less tRNA precursors by RNase Z in Bacillus subtilis.
EMBO J 2003, 22(17):4534-4543.
Smith MM, Levitan DJ: The Caenorhabditis elegans homolog of the
putative prostate cancer susceptibility gene ELAC2, hoe-1, plays a role in
germline proliferation. Dev Biol 2004, 266(1):151-160.
Ezraty B, Dahlgren B, Deutscher MP: The RNase Z homologue encoded by
Escherichia coli elaC gene is RNase BN. J Biol Chem 2005,
280(17):16542-16545.

doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-272
Cite this article as: Zhao et al.: Identification and analysis of candidate
fungal tRNA 3’-end processing endonucleases tRNase Zs, homologs of
the putative prostate cancer susceptibility protein ELAC2. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:272.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
