<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>PathLocdb: a comprehensive database for the subcellular localization of metabolic pathways and its application to multiple localization analysis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:S13. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S4-S13"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Min Zhao"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zhao and Qu BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S13

PROCEEDINGS

Open Access

PathLocdb: a comprehensive database for the
subcellular localization of metabolic pathways
and its application to multiple localization
analysis
Min Zhao1,2, Hong Qu1*
From Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) Ninth International Conference on
Bioinformatics (InCoB2010)
Tokyo, Japan. 26-28 September 2010

Abstract
Background: In eukaryotes, the cell is divided into several compartments enclosed by unitary membranes. Such
compartmentalization is critical for cells to restrict different pathways to be carried out in different subcellular
regions. The summary and classification of subcellular localizations of metabolic pathways are the first steps
towards understanding their roles in spatial differentiation and the specialization of metabolic pathways in different
organisms.
Results: Integrating the subcellular localization of enzymes and their pathways from UniProt Knowledgebase and
KEGG pathway databases, we present the first database for subcellular localization of 43014 pathways from 80676
UniProt entries and their pathway annotations from UniProt and KEGG pathway databases. To extract pathway
localization across organisms, we defined 889 superpathways as clusters of basic pathways with the same pathway
annotations from different organisms. Over eighty-eight percent of superpathways in the Swiss-Prot dataset occur
in cytoplasm and mitochondria. And over seventy percent of UniProt superpathways have multiple localization
annotations. We summarized four common reasons for the multiple localization of superpathways. Based on this
database, we also discovered 88 potential transport systems between different steps of multiply localized pathways
and 45 duplicated genes from 17 pathways, occurring in parallel in several locations in humans.
Conclusions: PathLocdb is a free web-accessible database that enables biochemical researchers to quickly access
summarized subcellular localization of pathways from UniProt and KEGG pathway databases. As the first effort to
systematically integrate pathway localization, this database is very useful in discovering the variation of localization
of pathways between organisms and also cross-talk between different organelles within a pathway. The Pathlocdb
database is available at http://pathloc.cbi.pku.edu.cn.

Background
In eukaryotes, cells are subdivided into membranebound subcellular organelles [1]. Subcellular localization
of metabolic enzymes can give precise control over
* Correspondence: quh@mail.cbi.pku.edu.cn
1
Center for Bioinformatics, National Laboratory of Protein Engineering and
Plant Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
100871, P.R. China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

where these are synthesized and operate [2]. Such compartmentalization of metabolic enzymes and metabolites
of pathways provides a regulatory mechanism to control
metabolic pathways. Moreover, many pathways such as
the b-oxidation of fatty acids occur in several subcellular
organelles. The differentiation of localization of these
pathways often causes the differences in their efficiency
in utilizing the metabolites [3,4]. The regulatory
mechanisms for coordinating the different metabolic

© 2010 Zhao and Qu; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zhao and Qu BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S13

environments in different organelles are more complex
[1]. Furthermore, incorrect localization of enzymes are
often implicated in serious diseases [5]. Thus, understanding the distribution patterns of pathway localization is essential in discovering potential regulatory
mechanisms and the localization of metabolic pathways.
In addition, the spatial distribution pattern information
of pathways is also important in clarifying pathway
boundaries and in discovering the mechanism of intermediate communication between different subcellular
compartments [6].
However, the subcellular localization information of
pathways and their related enzymes has not been systematically integrated. The popular pathway databases
such as KEGG, BioCyc, MPW and aMAZE are constructed for specific research tasks such as the graphic
representation or reconstruction of metabolic pathways
[7-10]. Thus, they seldom provide integrated localization
information.
Summary and classification of subcellular localization of
metabolic pathways are the first steps towards understanding their roles in spatial differentiation and functional
specialization. Here, we present the first effort to
systematically collect pathway localization information
from the UniProt [11] and KEGG Ligand databases [7].
The strategy to summarize pathway localization is mainly
based on the pathway and subcellular localization annotations of their participating enzymes. Using an automatic
pipeline, the subcellular localization data of 43014 pathways were integrated from 80676 UniProt entries and
their pathway annotations from UniProt and KEGG pathway databases. Furthermore, 889 superpathways involving
33953 organisms were summarized from the 43014 pathways. Our results indicate that over eighty-eight percent of
superpathways in the UniProt dataset occur in the cytoplasm and the mitochondria. Also, over 70% of UniProt
superpathways contain multiple locations. From our
data, we have proposed four common reasons for multiple
localization of superpathways. As the first system-wide
collection for the subcellular localization of metabolic
pathways, PathLocdb provides a valuable understanding of
distribution patterns of metabolic pathways among cellular
organelles in different organisms.

Results
Integration of UniProt and KEGG Ligand databases provides many clues for studying pathways and pathway
evolution. Here we present four types of applications for
further studies.
Differences in data content and pathway localization
annotations from UniProt and KEGG databases

Our strategy to summarize the pathway localization was
mainly based on the pathway and subcellular localization

Page 2 of 7

annotations from their participating enzymes. Thus, only
enzymes with both subcellular localization and pathway
annotations satisfied our criterion. The enzyme localization data are from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (version 56.8)
in UniProt (version 14.8, Feb. 2009) databases. The pathway annotations were fro UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (version
56.8) and KEGG ligand databases (version 44.0). In total,
the Pathlocdb database consists of subcellular localization
information of 43014 pathways summarized from 80676
UniProt entries and their pathway annotations from UniProt and KEGG pathway databases. To extract pathway
localization across organisms, we defined a superpathway
as a cluster of basic pathways with the same name from
different organisms. A total of 889 superpathways across
33953 organisms were extracted from 43014 pathways.
Due to differences in data quality and in pathway annotations, three datasets were collected. The high quality
dataset contains 3448 pathways with localization information as well as 337 annotated superpathways across
795 organisms summarized from 6630 UniProtKB/SwissProt entries. The KEGG pathway localization dataset
includes 2535 pathways and 215 superpathways with
localization information of the participating enzymes
summarized from 12281 UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot entries of
42 organisms. A comprehensive dataset including 37029
pathways with localization information was collected
from 70566 UniProt entries involving 33953 organisms.
A quick comparison of localization distribution of
superpathways in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and KEGG
datasets reveals different pathway notations. The top ten
subcellular locations where superpathways localize in
UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot dataset cover more than 99% of
annotated superpathways (Fig. 1a). Although the top ten
organelle locations in KEGG dataset also have a high
coverage of all annotated superpathways, organelle locations and their coverage are different from those of the
UniProtKB/ Swiss-Prot dataset (Fig. 1b). Over 88% of
superpathways in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot dataset
occur in cytoplasm and mitochondria, whereas more
nuclear and cell membrane superpathways are summarized in the KEGG dataset. On average, as the KEGG
pathways usually combine multiple pathways from different organisms, each one of them spans over 8 locations. By contrast, most of UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot
superpathways are localized in less than four organelles
(Fig. 1c). Regarding the organisms involved, 63 of 337
UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot superpathways occur in single
organisms while the remaining 274 superpathways occur
in multiple organisms. Also from the view of pathway
localization, our comparison of superpathway localization clearly reveals that UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot pathways
are smaller in size than pathways from the KEGG dataset. Thus caution should be taken when interpreting
pathway localization from different pathway databases.

Zhao and Qu BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S13

Page 3 of 7

Figure 1 Data contents of PathLocdb and the classification of multiple localizing superpathways. (a, b) Distribution of 337 Swiss-Prot
superpathways and 215 KEGG superpathways in their top ten organelles. For each bar, superpathways unique to the subcellular locations on Y
axis are represented in black; the pathways with two or more than three locations including that on the Y axis are shown in red and blue
respectively, (c) Distribution of 337 Swiss-Prot superpathways with different numbers of localizations. For each bar, superpathways specific to
single organism are represented in black; the pathways with two, three or more than four organisms including that on the Y axis are shown in
red, blue and navy respectively, (d) Venn diagram for the multiple locations of 235 Swiss-Prot superpathways. The ORG_MSL represents the
superpathways with multiple locations from different organisms; The STEP_MSL represents pathways carried out through a series of steps
spanning several subcellular locations; the PAR_MSL shows pathways occurring parallel in several subcellular locations ; and the PR_MSL
represents the count of pathways with multiple localizing enzymes.

Discovery of conserved pathway locations across
organisms and organism specific pathway localization

As the pathways in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot do not combine biological processes of different organisms, it is
useful to survey pathway localization differences in different organisms. Many fundamental biological processes with conserved localization are functionally
related to diseases. For instance, the pathway “polyol
metabolism; myo-inositol degradation into D-glucuronate; D-glucuronate from myo-inositol” in our database
is involved in the phosphatidylinositol second messenger
system (PI-cycle). The change of its conserved location
in the cytoplasm to other regions could cause many
neurological diseases [5]. The simplest conserved pathway localization pattern is the 85 superpathways with
one single conserved location across several organisms

in our database. We also find nine superpathways across
more than 17 organisms satisfying the simplest conservation criterion of one single location: five in cytoplasm,
three in mitochondria and one in peroxisome (Table 1).
Consistent with previous studies [12], the three fundamental pathways in mitochondria have highly conserved
localization. “Oxidative phosphorylation” localizes to the
mitochondria in 33283 organisms in the UniProt dataset, making it the most conserved localization of superpathway in our database.
Using our database, 63 organism specific superpathways are found (Fig. 1c), 35 of them being plant-specific
such as “abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthesis” [13], and 21
being fungi-specific. Pathway localization specific to certain organisms could also be found by sorting out completely different patterns of localization between

Zhao and Qu BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S13

Page 4 of 7

Table 1 Nine superpathways with one single conserved location across organisms
Supepathway

Location

Organisms

Amino-acid biosynthesis ; S-adenosyl-L-methionine biosynthesis ; S-adenosyl-L-methionine from L-methionine

cytoplasm

44

Carbohydrate degradation ; glycolysis ; D-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate from glycerone phosphate

cytoplasm

16

Cofactor biosynthesis; ubiquinone biosynthesis

mitochondria

21

Energy metabolism; oxidative phosphorylation

mitochondria

178

Fermentation ; pyruvate fermentation to lactate ; (S) -lactate from pyruvate

cytoplasm

59

Lipid metabolism; peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation

peroxisome

18

Phenylpropanoid metabolism ; cinnamic acid biosynthesis ; trans-cinnamic acid from L-phenylalanine

cytoplasm

36

Porphyrin metabolism ; protoporphyrin-IX biosynthesis ; 5-aminolevulinate from glycine
Purine metabolism ; GMP biosynthesis ; GMP from XMP (glutamine route)

mitochondria
cytoplasm

20
18

The Organism row is the count of all the organisms with single conserved superpathway localization.

different organisms. For instance, the gene Cullin-1 in
our database belonging to “protein modification; protein
neddylation” in Arabidopsis thaliana mainly localizes to
the nucleus during interphase and preprophase [14].
This is obviously different from homologous genes in
mammals with their cellular membrane and lipid raft
localization [15]. In total, 56 superpathways with such
completely different localization patterns across organisms have been discovered (Additional file 1). Moreover,
184 superpathways with partially different localization
patterns between organisms (Additional file 2) have also
been found. For example, “glycan biosynthesis; starch
biosynthesis” in all surveyed plants are carried out in
the chloroplast and the plastid, but the superpathways
from some plants could localize additionally to the
amyloplast.
Classification of multiple subcellular locations of
metabolic pathways and prediction of
potential transport systems

Pathways with multiple locations are a prevalent
phenomenon. Among the annotated 337 UniProtKB/
Swiss-Prot superpathways, 235 of them occur in multiple
locations. Here we propose four common possible reasons giving rise to these multiple localization annotation
of 337 UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot superpathways at the subcellular level. Firstly, different organisms have different
pathways, resulting in multiple annotations of subcellular
localization of superpathways. The most common examples for this category are the pathways which generate
ATP from mitochondria and chloroplasts in different
organism groups. Secondly, many pathways are composed of a series of steps spanning several subcellular
locations. Like a production line, many intermetabolites
are produced from one organelle to another, stepwise in
pathways. Thirdly, some pathways occur in parallel in
several subcellular locations in a single organism. The
obvious example is fatty acid b-oxidation occurring in
the mitochondria as well as the peroxisome [1]. The
other most common reason for multiple annotation

of pathways is the fact that they are summarized from
multiple localizing enzymes. An extreme example
here is the first enzyme of GPI biosysthesis in
humans, with five subunits [16-18]. Four of its five
subunits localize in the endoplasmic reticulum and
the remaining one in the cytoplasm. However, the
above four phenomena are often mixed together when
we try to analyze the reasons for multiple localization
of pathways (Fig. 1d).
Regardless of the complex reasons leading to multiple
annotation of pathway localization, each possible reason
is useful for researchers to further explore its potential
significance. The transport system or cross-talk between
organelles are made up of common processes for translocation of intermediates [6,19]. Focusing on the 3448
pathways of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot dataset, 88 pathways with multiple locations are summarized from the
multiple localizations of their translocation steps (Additional file 3). These results provide information on the
potential existence of a transport system between these
pathways with different locations and different steps.
For instance, the pathway titled “amine and polyamine
degradation; betaine degradation; sarcosine from
betaine” consists of two steps in human, mouse and rat.
The first step of this pathway occurs in cytoplasm in the
three organisms, while the second step is in the mitochondria. Further experimental studies on the potential
transport system between the first and second steps of
the pathway in mammals may be interesting and useful.
Pathways occurring in parallel in multiple locations and
duplicated pathways in human

Using our database, 28 pathways occurring in parallel in
several locations in human are found. On combini ng
these pathways with the gene duplication dataset in
human [20,21], 45 genes from 17 of the 28 pathways are
detected to be duplicated during evolution (Additional
file 4). Taking two duplicated genes 17-beta-HSD 1 and
17-beta-HSD 12 as examples, their protein products are
localized to the cytoplasm and the endoplasmic reticulum

Zhao and Qu BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S13

respectively. Both proteins are involved in the “Steroid
biosynthesis; estrogen biosynthesis” pathway. Similar
phenomena also exist in the “Protein modification; protein sumoylation” and “Protein modification; protein ubiquitination” pathways in human. Occurrence of such a
high proportion of enzyme duplication during pathway
evolution also deserves further study.

Discussion
To our knowledge, the present study represents the first
of its kind, presenting a genome-wide collection of subcellular localization of metabolic pathways in cells across
33953 organisms. With high quality data from the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and KEGG databases, we have compared the pathway localization annotations of the two
databases and found that the contributions from KEGG
are larger than those from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot.
A characteristic feature of this study is the summary
of common reasons for the multiple annotations of
pathway localization. Recently high throughput proteomics data suggest that proteins with multiple locations
constitute 39 percent of the total 1404 proteins in
mouse liver [22]. Our database shows that over 70% of
UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot superpathways have multiple

Page 5 of 7

localization annotations. The consistent phenomena at
the pathway level confirm that differentiation of localization of biological function is prevalent. Intensive studies
on the pathways which are carried out through a series
of steps spanning several subcellular locations reveal 88
potential transport systems between different steps of
multiple localizing pathways.
Based on the multiple localization pathways from different organisms, we discovered possibly for the first
time, all the conserved pathway localizations across
organisms and organism-specific pathway localizations.
This systematic comparison of pathway localization
between organisms reveals that numerous pathways
occur at different locations, providing clues for the differentiation and specialization of the pathway localizations between organisms.
Focusing on the 28 pathways occurring in parallel in
multiple locations in human, we identified 17 pathways
containing gene duplication events to gain new locations. According to one of the most popular pathway
evolution models, the “patchwork model”, enzymes with
broad substrate specificities are more likely to be
recruited to execute a new metabolic function [23].
Although our analyses show that a high proportion of

Figure 2 Web interface of PathLocdb. There are four functions for users to obtain data: key word query, batch accession number download,
Blast search against all the proteins in PathLocdb and also browse all the data from different features such as subcellular localization. By typing
accession numbers, users can get the multiple sequences in PathLocdb at one retrieve. And in browser menu, users could browse data
hierarchically.

Zhao and Qu BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S13

enzyme duplication occurs during pathway evolution,
the mechanism of gaining new locations need to be elucidated. Phylogenetic distribution of N-terminal targeting signals of mitochondrial localizing proteins suggest
that inter-compartmental duplication events could bring
novel localization of gene products and expand the catalytic as well as the RNA processing repertoire [24].
While multiple localizations of metabolic pathways provide more valuable clues for researchers to discover
potential evolution routes, we hope further study will
elucidate the possible mechanisms.
In conclusion, these analyses demonstrate that our
database is valuable in the discovery of potential crosstalk between different steps and the variation of localization of pathways between organisms.

Conclusions
PathLocdb was constructed as a free web-accessible
database and analysis server to enable biochemical
researchers to quickly access to summarized subcellular
localization of metabolic pathways of UniProt and
KEGG pathway database. As the first effort to systematically collect pathway localization, this database is very
useful in discovering the variation of localization of
pathways between organisms and also cross-talk
between different organelles within a pathway. The
PathLocdb database can be accessed at http://pathloc.
cbi.pku.edu.cn.
Methods
Data source and automation of data collection

An automatic computational pipeline was implemented
to extract subcellular localization and pathway annotations from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and KEGG ligand
databases using Perl scripts and the Swissknife module
[25]. Eukaryotic protein entries were screened by its taxonomy identification within the taxonomic groups
including fungi, invertebrates, vertebrates, plants, mammals, rodents and human. As our investigation was
focused on the cellular organelle level, all the subcellular
localization descriptions were formatted at the organelle
level. For instance, the “Mitochondrial intermembrane
space” is assigned to Mitochondria. All the subcellular
localization descriptions marked with “By similarity”,
“Probable” and “Potential” were also accepted. In UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, pathway annotations are in free text
and step information was extracted using keywords,
such as “step 2/2”.
To compare the subcellular localization annotations of
pathways from different organisms, we defined a superpathway as a cluster of pathways having the same annotation from different organisms. The reference pathways
in KEGG are combined multiple pathways from

Page 6 of 7

different organisms [8]. Thus, the superpathway name of
the KEGG dataset is the same as the name of reference
pathways. As the pathway names from UniProt are also
formatted to structured controlled vocabulary in UniPathway [26], the superpathway name of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot dataset is the same as that in
UniPathway.
As an automatic pipeline for data collection, our database will be easy to update regularly when new versions
of Swiss-Prot and KEGG Ligand are available. Besides,
more data from other pathway databases and literatures
will be compiled in the future.
Web interface construction

All data and information in PathLocdb were stored in a
MySQL relational database on a Linux server. The database provides a web interface that allows researchers to
hierarchically browse the subcellular localizations of 887
superpathways using different features (Fig. 2). Webbased queries to the database were implemented in Perl
scripts running in an Apache environment. PathLocdb
allows users to query by enzyme or gene, to browse by
KEGG pathway maps, subcellular localization, or to run
BLAST searches against the sequences in PathLocdb.
For an advanced study, this database provides all protein
sequences in FASTA format. A feedback page was
implemented to collect comments on existing records or
suggestions of new pathway localization from users.
Additional file 1: The 56 superpathways with completely different
locations across organismsThe summarized 56 superpathways with
completely different locations across organisms are shown in Additional
file 1.
Additional file 2: The 184 superpathways with partially different
localization patterns between organismsThe 184 superpathways with
partially different localization patterns between organisms are shown in
Additional file 2.
Additional file 3: The 88 pathways with multiple locations
summarized from the multiple locations of their stepsThe 88
pathways with multiple locations summarized from the multiple
locations of their steps are shown in Additional file 3. They provide
information on potential existence of transport system between these
pathways with different localizations and different steps.
Additional file 4: The 45 genes from 17 of the 28 pathways which
are detected to be duplicated during evolutionThe 45 genes from 17
of the 28 pathways which are detected to be duplicated during
evolution are shown in Additional file 4.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the China National High-tech 863 Programs
(2006AA02Z334, 2006AA02Z314, 2006AA02A312, 2007AA02Z165), 973
Programs (2006CB910404, 2007CB946904). And we gratefully acknowledges
the support of K. C. Wong Education Foundation, Hong Kong.
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 11
Supplement 4, 2010: Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010): Computational Biology. The full contents of the supplement are
available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11?issue=S4.

Zhao and Qu BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S13
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S13

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1
Center for Bioinformatics, National Laboratory of Protein Engineering and
Plant Genetic Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing,
100871, P.R. China. 2Key Laboratory of Evolutionary Systematics of
Vertebrates, Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100044, China.
Authors’ contributions
MZ conceived of the work, carried out all analyses and helped write the
manuscript. HQ helped write the manuscript.
Published: 2 December 2010
References
1. Lehninger AL: Lehninger principles of biochemistry. NewYork :: W.H.
Freeman;D.L. Nelson and M.M. Cox , 5th ed. 2008.
2. Ovadi J, Saks V: On the origin of intracellular compartmentation and
organized metabolic systems. Mol Cell Biochem 2004, 256-257(1-2):5-12.
3. Masterson C, Wood C: Mitochondrial and peroxisomal beta-oxidation
capacities of organs from a non-oilseed plant. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences 2001, 268(1479):1949-1953.
4. Yu XX, Drackley JK, Odle J: Rates of mitochondrial and peroxisomal betaoxidation of palmitate change during postnatal development and food
deprivation in liver, kidney and heart of pigs. Journal of Nutrition 1997,
127(9):1814-1821.
5. Kim H, McGrath BM, Silverstone PH: A review of the possible relevance of
inositol and the phosphatidylinositol second messenger system (Picycle) to psychiatric disorders -focus on magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS) studies. Human Psychopharmacology-Clinical and
Experimental 2005, 20(5):309-326.
6. Walter L, Hajnoczky G: Mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum: the
lethal interorganelle cross-talk. J Bioenerg Biomembr 2005, 37(3):191-206.
7. Aoki KF, Kanehisa M: Using the KEGG database resource. Curr Protoc
Bioinformatics 2005, Chapter 1:Unit 1-12.
8. Caspi R, Karp PD: Using the MetaCyc pathway database and the BioCyc
database collection. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics 2007, Chapter 1:Unit1-17.
9. Selkov E Jr., et al: MPW: the Metabolic Pathways Database. Nucleic Acids
Res 1998, 26(1):43-5.
10. Lemer C, et al: The aMAZE LightBench: a web interface to a relational
database of cellular processes. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(Database issue):
D443-8.
11. Bairoch A, Apweiler R, Wu CH, Barker WC, Boeckmann B, Ferro S,
Gasteiger E, Huang H, Lopez R, et al: Universal Protein Resource (UniProt).
Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(Database issue):154-9.
12. Calvo S, et al: Systematic identification of human mitochondrial disease
genes through integrative genomics. Nature Genetics 2006, 38(5):576-582.
13. Nambara E, Marion-Poll A: Abscisic acid biosynthesis and catabolism.
Annual Review of Plant Biology 2005, 56:165-185.
14. Shen WH, et al: Null mutation of AtCUL1 causes arrest in early
embryogenesis in Arabidopsis. Molecular Biology of the Cell 2002,
13(6):1916-1928.
15. Chen YZ, et al: APP-BP1 mediates APP-induced apoptosis and DNA
synthesis and is increased in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Journal of Cell
Biology 2003, 163(1):27-33.
16. Inoue N, et al: PIG-C, one of the three human genes involved in the first
step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis is a homologue of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae GPI2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1996,
226(1):193-9.
17. Miyata T, et al: The Cloning of Pig-a, a Component in the Early Step of
Gpi-Anchor Biosynthesis. Science 1993, 259(5099):1318-1321.
18. Watanabe R, et al: The first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol
biosynthesis is mediated by a complex of PIG-A, PIG-H, PIG-C and GPI1.
Embo J 1998, 17(4):877-85.
19. Bick JA, Lange BM: Metabolic cross talk between cytosolic and plastidial
pathways of isoprenoid biosynthesis: unidirectional transport of
intermediates across the chloroplast envelope membrane. Archives of
Biochemistry and Biophysics 2003, 415(2):146-154.

Page 7 of 7

20. Bailey JA, et al: Recent segmental duplications in the human genome.
Science 2002, 297(5583):1003-7.
21. Bailey JA, et al: Segmental duplications: organization and impact within
the current human genome project assembly. Genome Res 2001,
11(6):1005-17.
22. Foster LJ, et al: A mammalian organelle map by protein correlation
profiling. Cell 2006, 125(1):187-199.
23. Rison SC, Thornton JM: Pathway evolution, structurally speaking. Curr
Opin Struct Biol 2002, 12(3):374-82.
24. Szklarczyk R, Huynen MA: Expansion of the human mitochondrial
proteome by intra- and inter-compartmental protein duplication.
Genome Biology 2009, 10(11):-.
25. Hermjakob H, Fleischmann W, Apweiler R: Swissknife - ‘lazy parsing’ of
SWISS-PROT entries. Bioinformatics 1999, 15(9):771-2.
26. consortium, T.S.-P.g.a.t.U.: UniPathway: a metabolic door to UniProtKB/
Swiss-Prot. In-Silico Analysis of Proteins - Celebrating the 20th anniversary of
Swiss-Prot Fortaleza, Brazil; 2006.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S4-S13
Cite this article as: Zhao and Qu: PathLocdb: a comprehensive database
for the subcellular localization of metabolic pathways and its
application to multiple localization analysis. BMC Genomics 2010 11
(Suppl 4):S13.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
