<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Leaderless genes in bacteria: clue to the evolution of translation initiation mechanisms in prokaryotes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-361"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Xiaobin Zheng"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Leaderless genes in bacteria: clue to the
evolution of translation initiation mechanisms in
prokaryotes
Xiaobin Zheng1,2,3, Gang-Qing Hu1,2,4, Zhen-Su She1,2 and Huaiqiu Zhu1,2,3*

Abstract
Background: Shine-Dalgarno (SD) signal has long been viewed as the dominant translation initiation signal in
prokaryotes. Recently, leaderless genes, which lack 5’-untranslated regions (5’-UTR) on their mRNAs, have been
shown abundant in archaea. However, current large-scale in silico analyses on initiation mechanisms in bacteria are
mainly based on the SD-led initiation way, other than the leaderless one. The study of leaderless genes in bacteria
remains open, which causes uncertain understanding of translation initiation mechanisms for prokaryotes.
Results: Here, we study signals in translation initiation regions of all genes over 953 bacterial and 72 archaeal
genomes, then make an effort to construct an evolutionary scenario in view of leaderless genes in bacteria. With
an algorithm designed to identify multi-signal in upstream regions of genes for a genome, we classify all genes
into SD-led, TA-led and atypical genes according to the category of the most probable signal in their upstream
sequences. Particularly, occurrence of TA-like signals about 10 bp upstream to translation initiation site (TIS) in
bacteria most probably means leaderless genes.
Conclusions: Our analysis reveals that leaderless genes are totally widespread, although not dominant, in a variety
of bacteria. Especially for Actinobacteria and Deinococcus-Thermus, more than twenty percent of genes are
leaderless. Analyzed in closely related bacterial genomes, our results imply that the change of translation initiation
mechanisms, which happens between the genes deriving from a common ancestor, is linearly dependent on the
phylogenetic relationship. Analysis on the macroevolution of leaderless genes further shows that the proportion of
leaderless genes in bacteria has a decreasing trend in evolution.

Background
As the first stage of protein synthesis in gene expression,
translation is a key process highly conserved in the biological system. Up to now, 31 universally occurring genes
identified in 191 species are shown being involved in the
translation process [1]. However, translation initiation
shows great variation in the three kingdoms. In eukaryotes, the ribosome binds at the 5’-end of the capped
mRNA and slides downstream to find the first start codon
and then initiate the translation, which is the so-called
scanning mechanism [2]. In prokaryotes, there are two
known mechanisms. The Shine-Dalgarno (SD) initiation
* Correspondence: hqzhu@pku.edu.cn
1
State Key Laboratory for Turbulence and Complex Systems and Department
of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing
100871, China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

mechanism was found early in Escherichia coli [3]. For this
mechanism, a short motif called SD sequence in the 5’untranslated region (5’-UTR) on mRNA binds with the 3’end of 16S rRNA on the ribosome and helps the ribosome
directly identify the translation initiation site (TIS). The
other one, namely leaderless initiation, was found later in
l-phage of E. coli [4]. In this case, the mRNA lacks a 5’UTR and hence has no SD sequence in it, thus the start
codon itself serves as the most important signal for the
translation initiation. There were ever propositions that
signals downstream of the start codon called “downstream
boxes” may bind with the 16S rRNA and help translation
initiation of leaderless genes, but these suggestions were
then refuted by experimental evidences [5]. In fact, several
studies reported that leaderless initiation uses an alternative way which is like that in eukaryotes and the leaderless
lcI gene can be faithfully translated in vitro in all three

© 2011 Zheng et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

kingdoms [6-8]. What is more, this suggests that this
initiation way may be the one used by the last universal
common ancestor (LUCA) and is conserved in all three
kingdoms [2,7,9].
Regarding the diversity of translation initiation mechanism, SD initiation has long been considered the dominant
way in prokaryotes. However, recent studies revealed that
leaderless initiation should be as important as SD initiation in archaea, one of two branches in prokaryotes. Computational study of 144 genes in the archaeal Sulfolobus
solfataricus indicated that distal genes in operon are SDled while single genes and proximal genes in operon are
leaderless [10]. Further computational analysis showed
that leaderless genes are demonstrated with a rather high
proportion in the archaeal Pyrobaculum aerophilum [11].
Torarinsson et al. also analyzed 18 complete archaeal genome sequences and estimated the number of SD-led genes
as well as leaderless genes, their results indicate that at
least 12 of 18 archaeal genomes have plenty of leaderless
genes [12]. In addition, experimental study in Pyrobaculum aerophilum and Haloarchaea also reported that the
majority of transcripts are leaderless in those archaeal genomes [11,13].
In spite of above-noted efforts to understand on
archaea, little is known about the bacteria-wide situation
of leaderless genes. One of major reasons is that translation initiation was believed more complex in archaea
than in bacteria [12], which led to lack of attention on
this issue and continuing to use the canonical explanation by neglecting leaderless initiation mechanism in bacteria. Recently, a few experimental verified leaderless
genes were reported in bacteria [5], however it is extremely difficult to explore a clear scenario of the leaderless
genes at the bacteria-wide level since them seem to scatter occasionally in some bacterial genomes with a shortage of known data. Nevertheless, there were some
computational analyses in respect of the translation
initiation mechanism in bacteria, however mainly based
on the genes likely using SD-led initiation way, other
than the leaderless one. SD sequences in 21 bacterial and
9 archaeal species were investigated and found their
occurrence varied from 10.8% to 90.1% [14]. Chang et al.
also studied 141 bacterial and 21 archaeal complete genomes and gave number estimates of SD-led genes from
11.6% to 90.8% [15]. A most recent work is noteworthy:
Nakagawa et al. analyzed 277 prokaryotes (249 bacteria
and 28 archaea) to survey the proportion of SD-led genes
in each genome, and then to discuss the link with initiation mechanism [2]. However, knowing the proportion of
SD-led genes does not lead to the knowledge of the leaderless ones. Moreover, to estimate the number of SDled genes, most of these algorithms usually detected SD
signals by a simple scanning method which may ignore
the nucleotide composition bias of each genome. At the

Page 2 of 13

same time, lack of the test of statistical significance
would not give a solid evidence for meaningful signals
detected in these algorithms. With currently more than
thousand of complete bacterial genomes deposited in the
public database or in sequencing, it is more and more
significant to reveal the translation initiation mechanism
by a clear picture of leaderless genes at the state of the
art bacteria-wide level, which should be based on a more
accurate and reliable analytical study.
The objective of this study is to answer the question to
understand the translation initiation mechanism and its
evolutionary scenario in view of leaderless genes in bacteria. We developed an algorithm, which is validated with
statistical significance, to classify the initiation regulatory
signals upstream to gene start into SD-like, TA-like and
atypical signals for all genes in each prokaryotic genome.
The method leads to definite identification of both leadered and leaderless genes in a genome. We examined
953 bacterial and 72 archaeal genomes and annotated
diverse translation initiation signals in these genomes.
Focusing on the leaderless genes and their initiation signals, our analysis reveals that leaderless genes are totally
widespread, although not dominant, in a variety of
groups in bacteria. What more useful is the quantitative
relationships of evolution of initiation signals in bacteria,
which might provide a clear picture of the evolution of
translation initiation mechanisms.

Results
We have performed a thorough analysis on 953 bacterial
as well as 72 archaeal genomes (TIS upstream sequences
20 bp for bacteria and 50 bp for archaea) by classifying
all genes in each genome into categories of being SD-led,
TA-led or atypical, meanwhile annotating the translation
initiation signal for each gene. The definition and algorithm can be seen in Materials and methods for details.
The translation initiation signal annotations are available
at our webpage [16]. Generally speaking, TA-like signals
are found in many genomes including both archaea and
bacteria. In archaea, it has been discussed that TA-like
signals at around 30 bp upstream to the TIS mean leaderless genes, which use leaderless initiation. While in
bacteria, TA-like signals (Figure 1) are identified at
around 12 bp upstream to the TIS (Figure 2), and have a
consensus of TANNNT, which resembles the -10 box of
s 70 factor binding site “TAtaaT” in E. coli [17]. These
TA-like signals are likely to be transcription promoters
and should appear at 10 bp upstream to the transcription
start sites (TSSs) [17]. Therefore, the TA-led genes have
very short or missing 5’-UTRs and are thus leaderless
genes. In brief, our analysis demonstrates that many bacterial genomes have a substantial proportion of leaderless
genes. Based on the profile of signals recovered from the
more than one thousand genomes, we then report our

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Sequence logos of TA-like signals in bacteria.
Sequence logo [51] of TA-like signals found in four bacterial
genomes: (A) Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) (Actinobacteria); (B)
Deinococcus radiodurans R1 (Deinococcus-Thermus); (C) Aquifex
aeolicus VF5 (Aquificae); and (D) Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis Il1403
(Firmicutes). The height of a letter on a given position is
proportional to its frequency of occurrence. A letter is shown
upside-down if the frequency is lower than background.

survey on translation initiation mechanism in the following subsections.
Validation of the algorithm

To demonstrate how sure we can be that the relationship between the signals detected through the algorithm
and gene translational initiation, we first show evidence
for the statistical significance of the TA-like signals

0.24

0.20

S. coelicolor
D. radiodurans
A. aeolicus

Frequency

0.16

L. lactis
0.12

0.08

0.04

0.00
-20

-18

-16

-14

-12

-10

-8

-6

Position of the first "T" in the promoter

Figure 2 Positional distribution of TA-like signals to translation
initiation site (TIS) in bacteria. Four bacterial genomes are:
Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) (Actinobacteria); Deinococcus
radiodurans R1 (Deinococcus-Thermus); Aquifex aeolicus VF5
(Aquificae); and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis Il1403 (Firmicutes). Y
axis shows the frequency that a signal located X bps, counted from
the first “T” in the “TANNNT” core, upstream to TIS is a Pribnow box.
The position of TIS is defined as 0.

found in bacterial genomes, and then estimate the accuracy of our prediction for leaderless genes. A limiting
case of examples is the E. coli-K12 genome, which is
commonly known with leadered genes. For this genome,
the algorithm positively detects the SD-like genes and a
small quantity of atypical genes. Herein we go on
further to make the assessment on strain Streptomyces
coelicolor A3(2), which belongs to a family of ubiquitous
gram-positive soil bacteria used to produce the natural
antibiotics, and is also a model organism for the study
of leaderless genes [18]. The S. coelicolor A3(2) genome
has one chromosome and two plasmids. In the chromosome, 20 bp TIS upstream sequences of totally 7769
protein-coding genes are extracted. As a result, among
the 7769 genes the gene-classification procedure identifies 1469 genes (18.9%) that have the TA-like signal and
they are hence classified as leaderless genes. A shuffling
test (See Method for details) shows that no more than
400 TA-led genes would be identified in random
sequences retaining dinucleotide frequency (Figure 3A).
The validation was also performed on all other genomes
in which leaderless genes are detected (as below 59
archaeal genomes, and 206 bacterial genomes detected
with leaderless genes in addition to S. coelicolor A3(2)),
similar results demonstrate that our algorithm is based
on a statistical significance (Figure 3B).
A search is further performed in Google Scholar with
the key words “leaderless and Streptomyces coelicolor“
followed by reading the literatures, it reveals only 13 leaderless genes documented for S. coelicolor A3(2), of
which most of the TSSs are coincident with the first
nucleotide of putative TISs. Among the 13 genes, 10
genes (Table 1) have an apparent Pribnow box upstream
to their TISs (Other three are whiH, with a -10 promoter GCCGACAA recognized by s WhiG factor [19], as
well as the genes ptsH [20] and sigJ [21], which are both
likely to be regulated by s factors other than the s70).
Our annotation demonstrates that 9 of these 10 leaderless genes (except vanH) are predicted by us (9/10 =
90%), and the predicted Pribnow boxes generally agree
with those proposed in the literatures (see Table 1).
It should be noted that the current algorithm is not
sensitive enough to the genome when it has a few leaderless genes. In addition, with a widely-used Pribnow
box as reference consensus (see Methods for details), the
algorithm maybe fail in detecting some few leaderless
genes with non-Pribnow signal for bacteria in this study.
So when a bacterial genome is not judged by the algorithm having leaderless genes, it does not simply mean
that the genome has not any leaderless genes, perhaps
its leaderless genes are very small in number or without
the common Pribnow signal. However in summary, the
simulation based on large sample size shows that our
TA-like signal prediction has a significant difference

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

Page 4 of 13

Table 1 Documented leaderless genes in S. coelicolor
A3(2)

A

Gene name

Number of simulated samples

Sequence upstream of TIS1

Probability2

absA

CGCTCTTGTAGCGTGCTGGAATG

0.95

[52]

devA

CGAAGTTGTAGCGTTTGGTCGTG

0.93

[53]

fabD
furA

200

CCTCAAGAGAGAGTGTGAGAGTG
CAGGGAGTAGGTTCGCCGCCATG

0.51
0.80

[54]
[55]

150

100

KbpA
Number of TA-led

50

GACGCGGTTACTTTGACGGCATG

0.93

[56]

malR

GACAGGTACAGTCCACCCCTGTG

0.63

[57]

phoRP

GCCGTGCCTAACCTGGAGACATG

0.91

[58]

vanH

genes in real data

GAGGCGCCTTGAATAGAGGCATG

0.27

[59]

vanK
200

B

400
600
800
1000
Number of TA-led genes

1200

2000

0.78

[59]

0.85

[59]

ptsH
sigJ

1400

CGACTCGTAATCTCGACACCATG
CACCTGAAGGGCAGCATCACATG
GCCTCGGGTAGAAAATCCACATG

0.00
0.03

[20]
[21]

whiH

0

CCGCCGCCTTGACTGGGGGCATG

vanR

0

Max number of TA-led genes in shuffled data

Ref.

TCGGCGCCGACAAAGGATGCGTG

0.09

[19]

1

1500

Archaea
Bacteria

1000

The last three characters are triplet for start codons, experimentally
determined TSSs are bold, and the most-likely Pribnow boxs are italic. The -10
promoters proposed in literature, if available, are underlined.
2
The probability that a gene is a leaderless gene regulated by s70 was
calculated by Eq. 5.

genomes missing leaderless genes are Desulfurococcus
kamchatkensis, Hyperthermus butylicus and Staphylothermus marinus respectively (For a list of these Latin
names and their relations, see Additional File 1:

500

0
0

500
1000
1500
Number of TA-led genes in real data

2000

Figure 3 Validation of the signal detection algorithm. (A)
Distribution of number of TA-like signals identified in randomly
shuffled TIS upstream sequences retaining dinucleotide frequency of
7769 genes for the S. coelicolor A3(2) genome. (B) Simulative test for
the statistical significance of TA-like signals detected by the
algorithm. X axis is the number of TA-led genes detected in the real
data. Y axis shows the maximum number of TA-led genes detected
in 1000 shuffled datasets. All points are remarkably below the Y = ×
line. All 206 bacterial genomes detected with leaderless genes have
been analyzed.

Table 2 Distribution of leaderless genes in sequenced
prokaryotic genomes
Number1

Avg. Percentage2 (%)

Crenarchaeota

21 (/24)

49.5 (6.1, 66.7)

Euryarchaeota

36 (/46)

31.7 (3.8, 63.3)

Nanoarchaeota
Other Archaea

1 (/1)
1 (/1)

71.8 (71.8, 71.8)
41.2 (41.2,41.2)

Group
Archaea

Bacteria
Acidobacteria

from the random strings by the background. This may
lead to identifying leaderless genes with a statistical
reliability in the current study. Although it is difficult to
estimate the prediction accuracy due to lack of experimental data, our prediction is still shown to include
most of the known leaderless genes literature-documented at least in this example.

3 (/3)

13.3 (9.7, 19.4)

Actinobacteria

86 (/89)

19.2 (2.3, 29.8)

Aquificae

2 (/5)

26.5 (20.7, 32.4)

Bacteroidetes/Chlorobi

1 (/37)

2.4 (2.4, 2.4)

Chloroflexi

4 (/12)

4.7 (4.0, 5.7)

Deinococcus-Thermus
Firmicutes

5 (/5)
56 (/209)

39.4 (35.9, 46.1)
4.2 (2.4, 16.6)

a-Proteobacteria

2 (/117)

6.3 (4.7, 7.8)

b-Proteobacteria

9 (/71)

6.8 (2.8, 10.6)
4.5 (3.0, 5.7)

g-Proteobacteria

15 (/239)

High usage of leaderless genes in archaea

δ-Proteobacteria

8 (/33)

15.8 (5.7, 20.6)

Based on the leaderless genes identified for each genome, we then present an overall view of leaderless genes
in all archaea studied here (see Table 2). On the whole,
59 of 72 sequenced genomes are shown to have leaderless genes, with an average proportion of 38.9%. Among
them, 21 of 24 Crenarchaeal organisms have averaged
49.5% leaderless genes in their genomes. The three

ε-Proteobacteria

2 (/26)

2.9 (2.7, 3.2)

Spirochaetes

6 (/18)

3.9 (1.8, 6.9)

Other Bacteria

8 (/20)

7.8 (1.4, 16.1)

1

The number of genomes having leaderless genes. The numbers in
parentheses show how many genomes have been sequenced in these groups.
2
The average percentages of leaderless genes. The numbers in brackets are
the minimum and maximum percentages of leaderless genes in these
genomes.

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

Table S1). In Euryarchaeota, 36 of 46 sequenced genomes have averaged 31.7% leaderless genes. Actually, all
euryarchaeal genomes missing leaderless genes belong
to Methanogens, which is consistent with the notion
that leaderless genes are undetectable in M. kandleri
and M. jannaschii [12]. However, we identified leaderless genes in 12 of the 23 Methanogens. The 12 genomes have an averaged G+C content of 47.2 ± 8.7%
while the remaining 11 genomes have G+C content of
34.4 ± 9.0%. This shows that the presence of leaderless
genes is related to the G+C content of the genomes. In
addition, the two deep branching archaeal genomes,
Korarchaeum cryptofilum OPF8 and Nanoarchaeum
equitans Kin4-M, have 41.1% and 71.8% leaderless
genes, respectively. Therefore, our analysis well demonstrates the common sense that the archaeal genomes
have a high proportion of leaderless genes [10,11], in
more detail, with a wide variation from 3.8% to 71.8%.
Diverse distribution of leaderless genes in bacteria

It is of great interest in this study to discuss the leaderless genes in bacteria. Below we report the analysis of
leaderless genes in all bacterial genomes (see Table 2).
Overall, the results show that the algorithm detects 207
among 953 bacterial genomes having leaderless genes,
and these 207 genomes include Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria, Aquificae, Bacteroidetes/Chlorobi, Chloroflexi,
Deinococcus-Thermus, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria (a, b,
g, δ, and ε), Spirochaetes, and one unclassified in RefSeq.
Unlike in archaea, leaderless genes are not identified in
most genomes, however are shown to concentrate in a
few groups. The most notable group is Actinobacteria,
including high-GC and gram-positive genomes. The
Actinobacteria usually live in a variety of natural environments such as soil, freshwater and the sea, and some
of them being human pathogens, meanwhile are well
known as secondary metabolite producers and are
important in pharmaceutical industry [22]. Due to their
importance, 89 species have been completely sequenced.
Despite the biodiversity in the 89 genomes, our method
detects leaderless genes in nearly all (86 genomes) with
proportions around 20%. This is in accordance with previous reports of leaderless genes found in Streptomyces
and Corynebacterium [23]. The Deinococcus-Thermus
group is also noticeable, although there are only five
genomes completely sequenced. Our analysis shows that
all five have leaderless genes with high proportions
(around 40%). Among them, the Deinococcus radiodurans R1 genomes is detected with the highest occurrence
of leaderless genes (46.1%) in all bacteria. In fact, this
group includes the Deinococcus species which are radiation-resistant, and Thermus thermophilus which is thermophilic. The high presence of leaderless genes in these
genomes may highly probably correspond to their

Page 5 of 13

extreme habitat, as suggested for archaea [24]. Besides
these two groups, leaderless genes are shown to present
in a few genera or species for other groups. For example
in g-Proteobacteria, leaderless genes are most found in
Xanthomonadales and Legionellales, which are located
near the root of g-Proteobacteria, showing that the missing of leaderless genes in other g-Proteobacteria may be
due to one loss event during the genome evolution. In
Firmicutes, leaderless genes concentrate in two clades,
Lactobacillales and Mycoplasma. In Lactobacillales, leaderless genes are identified in two subclades: the Lactococcus-Streptococcus and the Oenococcus-Leuconostoc
clade, while not in Enterococcus and Lactobacillus.
Neither genomes with leaderless genes nor those without leaderless genes form a monophyletic group, probably showing the complex evolution of translation
initiation mechanism in Lactobacillales. In addition, leaderless genes are found in five genomes in Mycoplasma,
with an averaged occurrence of 18.3%.
It has been reported that metabolic-related genes, especially for energy production and conversion, tend to
show a higher proportion of SD-containing genes [2].
Here we did a similar study on the COG (cluster of
orthologous groups [25]) function categories of leaderless
genes in all genomes having leaderless genes. The results
show that the information storage and processing categories have relatively higher proportion of leaderless
genes (Figure 4). Especially in the COG categories of
RNA processing and modification (A) and Chromatin
structure and dynamics (B), the proportion of leaderless
genes is much higher than in other categories. It is worth
noting that these two categories have only a small number of genes in prokaryotes, but are more widespread in
Eukaryotes. Leaderless genes are also more likely to present in genes belonging to the COG category of transcription (K), but less likely to present in genes of
translation (J). The cellular processes and signaling categories generally have lower proportion of leaderless
genes.
As the transcription promoters well as the translation
initiation signals for leaderless genes, the TA-like signals
detected in bacteria merit a conscientious attention. In
fact as shown in Figure 1, our results revealed the variation of the detected TA-like signals across species. In
high-GC (> 60%) groups such as Actinobacteria and Deinococcus-Thermus, the signals have a TAnnnT pattern
where the three positions in the middle provide but little
information (Figure 1A-B); in medium-GC (40-60%)
groups such as Aquificae and Chloroflexi, the signals
have a TAtaaT pattern just like the typical Pribnow box
in E. coli [17] where the three positions in the middle
become more informative (Figure 1C); while in Firmicutes, which have mostly low-GC (< 40%) genomes, the
signals became TAtAAT, where the two As in the middle

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

nontrivial and worth further studying. More specifically,
this tendency is most probably related with genome evolution in some phylogenetic bacterial groups.

3.0

Relative proportion of leaderless genes

Page 6 of 13

2.5

Atypical genes in prokaryotes

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
A B K H R F S L E O I

D J M Q T C V G P Z U N

COG function category

Figure 4 Relative proportion of leaderless genes in COG
function categories. The function categories are: A, RNA
processing and modification (information storage and processing);
B, chromatin structure and dynamics(information storage and
processing); K, transcription (information storage and processing); H,
coenzyme transport and metabolism (metabolism); R, general
function prediction only (poorly characterized); F, nucleotide
transport and metabolism (metabolism); S, function unknown
(poorly characterized); L, replication, recombination, and repair
(information storage and processing); E, amino acid transport and
metabolism (metabolism); O, posttranslational modification, protein
turnover, and chaperones (cellular processes and signaling); I, lipid
transport and metabolism (metabolism); D, cell cycle control, cell
division, and chromosome partitioning (cellular processes and
signaling); J, translation, ribosomal structure, and biogenesis
(information storage and processing); M, cell wall/membrane/
envelope biogenesis (cellular processes and signaling); Q, secondary
metabolite biosynthesis, transport, and catabolism (metabolism); T,
signal transduction mechanisms (cellular processes and signaling); C,
energy production and conversion (metabolism); V, defense
mechanisms (cellular processes and signaling); G, carbohydrate
transport and metabolism (metabolism); P, inorganic ion transport
and metabolism (metabolism); Z, cytoskeleton (cellular processes
and signaling); U, intracellular trafficking, secretion, and vesicular
transport (cellular processes and signaling); N, cell motility (cellular
processes and signaling).

became as high as the A and T in the second and sixth
positions (Figure 1D). Moreover in several low-GC genomes, the TG peak before Pribnow box can be observed
as seen in Figure 1D, which has been reported to substitute for the function of the -35 region [17]. For example
in Lactococcus, the TG peak is extremely strong and this
probably means that the -35 region is missing in this
genus. This is probably because the signal is AT-rich,
and in low-GC genomes, the signal needs to be strengthened to remain informative, while in high-GC genomes,
it degrades weaker as the TAnnnT pattern already provides enough information. Considering our algorithm has
been designed to compensate the nucleotide composition
bias from genomic background, such a tendency of signal
conservation by different GC content seems to be

Besides the typical TA-like and the SD-like signals, the
algorithm also identifies a lot of so-called atypical signals. Genes bearing these signals, namely atypical genes,
are probably SD-less leadered genes, however they could
also be leaderless genes with unknown promoter signals.
In fact, several clades, for example Mycoplasma, Cyanobacteria and Bacteroidetes, are shown to have a substantial number of atypical genes. It is still uncertain to
understand the atypical signals detected in both bacteria
and archaea. For example in halophilic archaea, most
leadered transcripts have no SD sequence in their leader
regions [13], and this genes use new translation initiation mechanisms that are still unknown [26]. However,
some atypical signals are shown conserved across species and have conserved position distributions relative to
TIS. For instance in Cyanobacteria, Proteobacteria and
other groups, a conserved dipyrimidine is located immediately upstream to the TISs, which is consistent with
the findings in the previous study [27]. Another AT-rich
signal without strong consensus is found in Bacteroidetes and many other groups. These AT-rich signals are
suggested to bind ribosomal protein S1 [2] or facilitate
translation initiation by affecting mRNA secondary
structure [28]. Other atypical signals are likely to be patterns of coding regions, transcription factor binding
sites, or other unknown translation or transcription signals. Altogether such signal can serve as a target for
biologists to decipher its regulation role by experiments,
thus leading to a better understanding of the initiation
mechanism.
To sum up as a result, our analysis described above
revealed that the translation initiation mechanism in bacteria is far from a simple scenario as previously imaged,
and therefore a complex scenario with diversity should
be rebuilt. Though SD-led genes are dominant in Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and many other groups as previously regarded, leaderless genes are found with high
occurrence in many groups such as Actinobacteria and
Deinococcus-Thermus. Moreover, many genomes in Cyanobacteria and Bacteroidetes use neither SD-led genes
nor leaderless genes. The translation initiation mechanisms in those genomes are largely unknown yet to be
unravelled. In the following part, we try to understand
this diversity from an evolutionary point of view.
Evolution scenario of translation initiation mechanisms

It is believed that the mechanism of translation initiation
has dynamically changed during the prokaryotic genome
evolution [2]. However, it is difficult to speculate an

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

Page 7 of 13

0.4

ancestor, is linearly dependent on the phylogenetic relationship in these species. Moreover, this nontrivial ratio
seems to be universal since a similar ratio 1.67 is obtained
by comparing 40 genomes in the class Streptococcaceae
and Streptococcus pyogenes M1 GAS (Figure 5).
The distance calculation gives a quantitative description for the substitution rate of translation initiation signals, but it does not give any evolutionary direction. Is
there any trend in the macroevolution of translation
initiation mechanism? To this end, a tree of the 16S
rRNA sequences of 903 bacterial genomes was built and
rooted with archaea outgroups. As shown in Figure 6,
the 903 genomes were then sorted and put into 15 bins
according to their distance to root on the tree. The 60
genomes nearest to root were put into the first bin; the
61-120th nearest were put the second bin, and so on.
For genomes in each bin, an average proportion of leaderless gene was calculated. The proportions show a
rapid decrease from over 15% to lower than 3% followed
by fluctuation around that level. This trend indicates
that slower evolving bacteria have more leaderless genes
in their genome. If the trend holds, it gives a scenario
that the LUCA have even more leaderless genes than
15% in its genome, and leaderless genes have been lost
during evolution. Similarly, 64 archaeal genomes were
put into two bins according to their distance to root on
the 16S rRNA tree. The average proportion of leaderless
genes in short-branch genomes is 21.5%, while the number in long-branch genomes is 39.5%. This trend, opposite to that in bacteria, is in accordance with previous
report that high levels of leaderless genes predominate
in the longer-branch archaea, while organisms with the

Actinobacteria
Streptococcaceae

0.16

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0.00

0.05

0.10

Distance on 16S rRNA Tree

0.15

0.20

Figure 5 Substitution rate of translation initiation signals. The Y
axis shows the change rate between TA signal and SD signal usage.
The X axis shows the evolutionary distance of 16S rRNA. Each black
point denotes an Actinobacterial genome, and all the distances are
calculated by comparing with Streptomyces Coelicolor A3(2); each
red point denotes a genome in Streptococcaceae, and the distances
are calculated by comparison with Streptococcus pyogenes M1 GAS.
The linear regressions are y = 0.04+1.61x (black line, R = 0.77) and y
= -0.03+1.67x (red line, R = 0.77), both with p-value < 0.0001.

Average proportion of leaderless genes

Distance estimated from translation initiation signal

evolutionary history for the translation initiation mechanism even by a rough trend. Herein with a clear classification of initiation signals using by all genes for each
genome, it can facilitate exploring the microevolution of
translation initiation signals among closely related bacteria. The genome-level distribution of leaderless genes
shows that phylogenetically close species tend to be the
same behavior of having or having not leaderless genes
together. For example, leaderless genes are present in
nearly all of the Actinobacterial genomes, although they
show great variety in their size and habitat. This suggests
that the presence of leaderless genes is inheritable and
genome-level gains and losses of leaderless genes are nontrivial events in the evolutionary history. To this end, 50
Actinobacterial genomes (see our webpage [16] for a list)
were compared with the S. coelicolor A3(2) genome. For
each genome and S. coelicolor, orthologous genes are
extracted by best reciprocal match. A distance characterizing the substitution of translation initiation signals is then
calculated based on Markov model as described in the
Methods section. It is extremely notable that the distance
shows a roughly linear correlation along with the evolution
distance of 16S rRNA with a ratio of 1.61 (Figure 5), which
corresponds to the substitution rate between SD-like signal and TA-like signal along with the substitution rate of
16S rRNA as species distance for these bacteria. Accordingly in the bacterial genome-level, it implies that the
change of translation initiation mechanisms (meanwhile
with the change of using translation apparatus), which
happens between the genes deriving from a common

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00
0.121 0.136 0.143 0.148 0.151 0.155 0.158 0.161 0.164 0.167 0.171 0.175 0.181 0.192 0.228

Average distance to root

Figure 6 Trend in the evolution of leaderless genes. 903
bacterial genomes are put into 15 bins according to their distances
to the root (between bacteria and archaea) on 16S rRNA tree.
Average proportion of leaderless genes in each bin is calculated.
The proportion of leaderless gene shows a rapid decrease followed
by fluctuation at a low level.

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

1.0
0.9

Operon distal gene in genome

shortest branches use more SD-led genes [12]. Thus the
proportion of leaderless genes in the LUCA might be
estimated as between the average level of leaderless
genes in short-branch bacteria (about 15%) and the
average level of leaderless genes in archaea (about 30%).
There is a further question of concern, why leaderless
genes were lost in many bacterial genomes while SD-led
genes became dominant? One main driving force might
be the coevolution of translation initiation signals and
the operon structure [24]. Note that in a polycistronic
transcript, only the proximal gene could be leaderless
while the distal genes usually need SD signals to facilitate translation initiation. If there are a lot of operon
distal genes in a genome, there are likely more SD-led
genes. For example in E. coli, 2704 genes formed 883
operons [29], and the proportion of operon distal genes
is (2704-883)/4149 = 43.8%. While in S. coelicolor which
has more leaderless genes and less SD-led genes, 4416
genes formed 1575 operons [29], and the proportion of
operon distal genes is (4416-1575)/7769 = 36.6%, lower
than that in E. coli. To test this hypothesis, we estimated
the proportion of operon distal genes in a genome using
gene direction information [30]. The proportion of
operon distal genes shows strong positive correlation
with the proportion of SD-led genes in both archaea ad
bacteria (Figure 7). This suggests that usage of operon
structure have strong effect on the evolution of translation initiation mechanism, including the trend of
decreasing leaderless genes along with phylogenetic relationship shown in Figure 6. Then why leaderless genes
still retain in some genomes? One explanation is that
they experienced slower evolution and kept the ancestral
features as suggested in archaea [24]. What is more, leaderless initiation also has some possible evolution
advantages. One is that it may be used for strict control
of some genes so that they would not be translated on
spurious transcription of the cognate genes by leakage
from upstream operons [31]. Another advantage of leaderless initiation is that it is not affected by some antibiotics that fully inhibit SD initiation [32].
One limitation of the current study should be noticed
that only leaderless genes with transcriptional promoters
resembling the Pribnow box are identified. This may
cause an underestimation for the number of leaderless
genes, especially in genomes with a large amount of atypical genes, such as Mycoplasma, Bacteroidetes, and
Cyanobacteria. However, s70 is the most widely used s
factor in bacterial genomes, and its s2 domain is highly
conserved with binding to the Pribnow box [33]. It is
unlikely that there exist high percentages of leaderless
genes not identified by our method. Therefore, despite
this limitation, the analysis did suggest the general evolutionary trend of translation initiation mechanisms in
bacteria.

Page 8 of 13

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

TA in bacteria
SD in bacteria
TA in archaea
SD in archaea

0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

Ratio in genome

Figure 7 Coevolution of translation initiation signals and
operons. Each bacterial genome is denoted by two points in the
figure (black and red), while each archaeal genome is denoted by a
green point and a blue point. The proportion of operon distal
genes is positively correlated to SD-led genes while negatively
correlated to TA-led genes in both bacteria and archaea. Linear
regressions are y = 0.61-0.40x (black, R = -0.26), y = 0.48+0.22x (red,
R = 0.51), y = 0.57-0.30x (green, R = -0.73) and y = 0.36+0.25x (blue,
R = 0.76), all p-value < 0.0001.

Discussion
Although leaderless genes have been studied extensively
in archaea, they have long been regarded as rare events
in bacteria [2,24]. Recent works reported the possibility
of high occurrence of leaderless genes in some bacterial
genomes [2,15], but their propositions are just based on
lack of SD sequences in those genomes, and not direct
evidence of leaderless genes. In this study, we have
clearly shown that leaderless genes are totally widespread, although not dominant, in a variety of groups in
bacteria. Two of these groups, Deinococcus-Thermus
and Actinobacteria, deserve serious attention. As the
algorithm detects, Deinococcus-Thermus is the phylum
that has the most leaderless genes, averaged over 30%. It
is interesting that most organisms in this group live in
extreme environments. For example, D. radiodurans is
capable of withstanding an acute dose of 5,000 Gy of
ionizing radiation with almost no loss of viability [34],
while Thermus are of the most thermophilic bacteria
and can grow at 85°c [35]. These environments may
reflect the traits of ancient earth. Thus this suggests an
important role of leaderless initiation mechanism playing for the ancestral organisms in the original habitat.
The later group Actinobacteria is the major antibiotics
producer in both nature and industry [22]. It is known
that most antibiotics attack the translation system. Specifically speaking, antibiotics such as kasugamycin and
pactamycin inhibit translation initiation on leadered
transcripts but have no effect on leaderless transcripts

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

[36]. Therefore, the high occurrence of leaderless genes
in Actinobacteria may suggest the correlation to their
antibiotics production.
In our method, all weight matrices and position distributions are learned automatically from the genome
sequences. It’s worth noting that there are several additional predefined parameters for the model, such as the
length of region upstream to TIS in which signals are
searched (denoted as L in the section Materials and
methods). Generally, increasing the length could
improve the sensitivity of motif finding. However, this
would cost more computation time and the algorithm
may find too many unexpected motifs unrelated to
translation initiation. Therefore we limited the region to
a proper range which is enough for finding signals. In
both bacteria and archaea, SD sequences are usually 4-7
bp in length and located at 5-13 bp upstream to the TIS
[37], therefore the region of 20 bp upstream TIS is
enough to cover the signals. For leaderless genes in bacteria, the -10 box is 6-9 bp in length (TATAAT or with
the extended TG) and the distance between the -10 box
and the transcription start site varies between -14 and
-8 bases (the distance is calculated from the “A” at the
second position of the TATAAT box as in the current
study [17]). Therefore the -10 box is also covered by the
20 bp region in bacteria. For leaderless genes in archaea,
the TATA box is located about 25-37 bp from the transcription start [12] and TIS upstream region of 50 bp is
enough to cover it. When longer regions (50 bp
upstream to TIS e.g.) are used for searching signals,
TA-like signals are found in some new species. However, the position of these TA-like signals are not aggregated and mostly located far from the -10 region of the
TIS, and thus these signals are more likely transcription
promoters of leadered genes.
According to current evidences, SD-led initiation and
leaderless initiation are probably both used by the LUCA.
Evidence for the usage of SD-led initiation by the LUCA
includes broad usage of SD sequence and the high conservation of anti-SD sequence in both bacteria and
archaea [2], and meanwhile leaderless initiation is also
proposed to be used by the LUCA considering its usage
in all three kingdoms [2,9,24]. However, it is also possible
that leaderless initiation originated only in archaea if leaderless gene is a marginal effect in bacteria as long
regarded. Our results have shown the broad occurrence
of leaderless genes in bacteria, especially in Actinobacteria, where around 20% genes are leaderless (Table 2).
This indicates that leaderless genes were used by the
LUCA, because it is unlikely that the leaderless initiation
mechanism originated independently in bacteria and
archaea and both become so important. In conclusion,
our results provide further support for the proposition
that leaderless initiation was used by the LUCA.

Page 9 of 13

Conclusions
In this paper, we have studied the translation initiation signals in 1025 sequenced prokaryotic genomes and demonstrated the distribution of translation initiation
mechanisms used in these genomes. The most surprising
finding is that, though not as common as in archaea, there
are substantial numbers of leaderless genes in bacteria.
Most genomes with high percentage of leaderless genes
are located near the root on the 16S rRNA tree and have
relatively small number of operon distal genes. These facts
show that current leaderless genes in bacteria are likely to
be remnants of the ancestor and are retained because
those genomes have low demand of organizing genes into
operons for highly efficient and specialized gene
expression.
Methods
Data

953 bacterial and 72 archaeal genomes and their coding
gene annotations in this study were downloaded from
RefSeq in 2010 [38]. List of the genomes is available at our
webpage [16]. To perform analyses of TIS upstream
regions, annotations of TISs were collected from the database ProTISA [39] or predicted by TriTISA [40]. ProTISA
collects TIS confirmed through a variety of available evidences for prokaryotic genomes, including Swiss-Prot
experiments record, literature (IPT), conserved domain
hits (CDC) and sequence alignment between orthologous
genes (HSC). ProTISA also includes TIS annotations from
RefSeq and predicted by TriTISA (MED) [40]. The latest
update of ProTISA was released in Oct 2008, corresponding to RefSeq 30. For each gene, we use its TIS in a priority order IPT, CDC, HSC, and MED [39]. Since ProTISA
covered only 709 of the 1025 organisms, TISs of the
remaining 316 genomes were predicted with TriTISA,
which is a TIS predictor with high accuracy [40]. Then for
each genome, all TIS upstream sequences were extracted
for further analysis. For bacteria 20 bp sequences were
extracted, while for archaea 50 bp sequences were
extracted since transcription promoters are farther away.
The multi-signal model and the signal detection
algorithm

For the purpose of studying the translational initiation
mechanism of prokaryotes, a straight way is to find the
sequence patterns in the TIS upstream regions for each
genome. With the sequence patterns, an algorithm can
then build one or more positional weight matrices
(PWMs) to describe the aligned positional frequency corresponding to potential signals. Such a relation has been
used in many computational studies of translation initiation mechanism [41-45]. In the current study, based on
the similarly motivated strategy we developed a multi-signal model upstream of TIS, and used the Expectation-

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

Maximization (EM) algorithm to estimate the parameters
of the model. With the model, we then computationally
identified the leaderless genes for each genome.
To detect a signal associated with leaderless genes, the
algorithm first selects the search region for each genome
and the reference signal consensus. In archaea, leaderless genes can be detected by scanning the reference
consensus of TA-rich transcription promoters at about
30 bp upstream to the TISs. Since the promoter mostly
occurs at 30 bp upstream to the TSSs, thus for a leaderless gene the TIS and TSS should coincide [10]. In bacteria, the mostly used promoter sequence is the socalled Pribnow box corresponding to the s70 factor with
a T82A89T52A59A49T89 (subscript means the frequency
of the nucleotide at that position) pattern and occurs at
about 10 bp upstream to the TSS [46]. Thus in this
paper, we search the signals in -10 bp regions by using
this reference consensus.
The multi-signal model of translation initiation signals

Usually the translation initiation signals are conserved in
both content and position. For example, in E. coli, SD
sequences are mostly AGGA, GGAG and GAGG and
are within [-10, -5] region to the TIS. Our previous
works used a positional weight matrix to characterize
the signal content and a discrete distribution to characterize the position [43]. In the current study, motivated
by the knowledge of that there may exist three categories of signals, SD sequence, TA-rich transcription
promoters and other possible signals in the TIS
upstream region for a genome, we generalize the model
to describe multiple signals to explore the complexity of
the translation initiation mechanism.
Let S be the set of N sequences of length L upstream
to TISs. In these sequences, a signal with length W can
be characterized by a W × 4 weight matrix w, and each
element wib of w means the probability of base b (A, C,
G or T) to occur at position i in a set of aligned signal
representatives. In addition, the signal may occur at any
position upstream to the TIS with different probabilities
pj by the distance starting from the j-th position of the
TIS upstream sequence.
To describe multiple signals, herein we assume that
there are M signals in the sequence set, but only one in
each sequence. We use w m and p m to denote their
weight matrices and positional distributions. For the
regions of the sequences not covered by signals, we
further build a uniform background model with nucleotide frequency b. There is also a probability p 0 to
describe the case that a sequence does not contain any
signal and is entirely from the background model.
Denote Ω as all the parameters described above, then
for each sequence Sk from the set S, the probability that
it is generated from the model is thus defined by

Page 10 of 13

W

M L−W+1

L

P(Sk | ) = p0

pm
j

bSk [l] +
m=1

l=1

l∈[j,j+W−1]
/

j=1

wmk [i+j−1] .
iS

bSk [l]

(1)

i=1

The likelihood function for the whole set S is then
written as
N

L( |S) =

N

P(Sk | ) =
k=1

k=1

⎛
⎝p0

W

M L−W+1

L

pm
j

bSk [l] +
m=1

l=1

j=1

bSk [l]
l∈[j,j+W−1]
/

⎞
wmk [i+j−1] ⎠.
iS

(2)

i=1

We then use the EM algorithm to obtain the maximum-likelihood estimation, details of which are
described in Additional File 2: Text S1. As a result for
each genome, the EM algorithm based on the multi-signal model is designed to obtain four PWMs as potential
signals detected in the genome. It is clear that the more
PWMs were searched, the more detailed structures of
TIS upstream sequences would be found, but the algorithm will cost much more time and be easier to fall
into local maximums. Therefore we select four signals
for balance in the algorithm. Other predefined parameters include the sequence length L, which is set as 50
for archaea and 20 for bacteria.
Classification of translation initiation signals

We then build the links between the four PWMs for
each genome and the translation initiation way, which
may be used to classify a PWM as which category of
signals. A one-by-one manual examining would certainly
carry this point. However it is impracticable for largescale analysis over thousands of PWMs and more than
thousand genomes in current study. Therefore, a classifier is designed to computationally calculate each PWM
against those widely-known initiation signals as well as
the “Atypical” signals [39] for further study.
The first category of signal is the SD sequence widely
used in prokaryotes. On 16S rRNA, the sequence
UCACCUCCUU near 3’-end is conserved across species
[2]. In practice, the motifs AAGG, AGGA, GGAG and
GAGG are often used in bacteria, while AGGTG,
GGTGA used in archaea [12]. Therefore we use AAGGAGGTGA as a common reference sequence for the
SD-like signals, denoted by R. For each PWM, let a 5-bp
window slide along it meanwhile another along the
reference consensus R. The distance between the PWM
and R is calculated as the minimum of the negative log
probability that the reference sequence is generated by
the PWM, i.e.
5

SD dis = min − log
j,k

wj+i−1,R[k+i−1] .

(3)

i=1

Our analysis of the distribution of all distances shows
that it displays a bimodal distribution separated at
approximately 4.0. Then we classify all the PWMs with
SD_dis <4.0 as SD-like signals.

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

Page 11 of 13

The second category of signals to be examined is TA
signals, which are known to usually appear upstream to
the leaderless genes as our main concern in the current
study. Since bacteria and archaea use different transcription signals, TA-signals have to be identified separately
in two kingdoms. For bacteria, the Pribnow box weight
matrix (6 × 4) is calculated by our algorithm from E.
coli promoter data in PromEC [46] and denoted as wr.
For archaea, the reference weight matrix for TATA-box
is calculated from the Archeoglobus fulgidus genome
(chosen because of its medium GC content). A 6 bp
window slides along each PWM and the distance
between it and wr is calculated as the minimum Euclidian distance as
6

(wj+i−1,v − wr )2 .
j,v

TA dis = min
i

(4)

j=1 v=A,C,G,T

All the distances also follow a bimodal distribution
and the threshold is selected to be 0.8. Therefore the
PWMs with TA_dis < 0.8 are regarded as TA-like
signals.
In summary, for each PWM from a genome, it is first
judged whether can be classified as SD-like signal, then
TA-like signal. If neither can be decided, the PWM is
regarded as the so-called atypical signal.
Classification of genes

Our basic working hypothesis for the model is that each
sequence upstream to TIS of a gene has only one or
none signal of translation initiation. So it is important
to find out which signal each sequence has, this leads to
that the gene downstream to the signal is regarded as a
leaderless gene or not. As we described in the supportm
ing text, when the model parameters converge, λkj
means the posterior probability that signal m appears at
m
the j-th position of sequence k. When λkj on all the
positions are added together, the posterior probability of
signal m appearing on sequence k can be defined as
L−W+1
j=1

λm =
k

L

pm
j

W
l∈[j,j+W−1]
/

M L−W+1

bSk [l] +
m=1

l=1

j=1

pm
j

bSk [l]
i=1

wmk [i+j−1]
iS
W

l∈[j,j+W−1]
/

bSk [l]
i=1

, k = 1 . . . N, m = 1 . . . M ,
wmk [i+j−1]
iS

(5)

meanwhile the probability that sequence k does not
have a signal is

the sequence has no signal. As we already classified the
signals as SD-like, TA-like and atypical, all the genes are
also labeled as SD-led, TA-led and atypical.
Strategy for validation of the signal detection algorithm

To test the statistical significance of the signals, we use
simulated data that retain dinucleotide frequencies of
the original sequences. For each 20 bp TIS upstream
sequence in a given genome, a corresponding sequence
with exactly the same dinucleotide frequency are generated using uShuffle [47]. These simulated sequences
form another sequence set and we then apply our
gene-classification procedure on it with the real
sequence model. The simulation is run 1000 times. If
the maximum number of “leaderless genes” identified
in shuffled samples is less than the number of “leaderless genes” identified in real data, this means the signal
we found is statistically significant with P-value <
0.001.
Estimation of TIS signal evolution distance

16S rRNA sequences were extracted from RefSeq annotation. After discarding those sequences that are longer
than 1600 bp or are shorter than 1400 bp or have too
much divergence with other sequences, 967 sequences
were left, with 903 bacterial and 64 archaeal genomes. A
list of the 967 genomes can be found at our webpage
[16]. The sequences were aligned with ClustalW v2.0
[48]. Then a Neighbor-Joining tree was build with Mega
3.1 [49] with Kimura 2-parameter distance model. The
tree was rerooted between bacteria and archaea, and distance from each bacterial organism to the root was calculated according to the tree.
For two genomes A and B, orthologous genes were
extracted by finding best reciprocal match of their protein sequences. Denote Nll as the number of genes that
are leaderless in both genomes, N ls as the number of
genes that are leaderless in genome A but their orthlogs
are SD-led in genome B, N sl as the number of genes
that are leaderless in genome B but their orthlogs are
SD-led in genome A, and N ss as the number of genes
that are SD-led in both genomes. Then the distance can
be calculated with the logDet distance formula as [50]
1
(Nss × Nll − Nsl × Nls )2
DAB = − log
.
4
(Nss + Nsl )(Nss + Nls )(Nsl + Nll )(Nls + Nll )

(7)

L

bSk [l]
λ0 =
k

l=1
L

M L−W+1

bSk [l] +
l=1

m=1

j=1

pm
j

W
l∈[j,j+W−1]
/

bSk [l]

For each sequence k, denote
among

λ0
k

and all

λm ,
k

i=1

˜
λm
k

, k = 1...N.

(6)

wmk [i+j−1]
iS

as the maximum one

then the sequence may be pre-

dicted to have the signal m ; if λ0 is the maximum, then
˜
k

Additional material
Additional file 1: All Latin names mentioned in the manuscript and
their taxonomic relations. This additional file is a table listing all Latin
names mentioned in the manuscript and their taxonomic relations.

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

Additional file 2: Details of the EM algorithm to find signals. This
additional file is to describe details of the EM algorithm used in finding
translation initiation signals.

Abbreviations
(UTR): Un-translated region; (TIS): translation initiation site; (TSS): transcription
start site; (SD): Shine-Dalgarno; (LUCA): Last Universal Common Ancestor;
(COG): Clusters of Orthologous Groups.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jiao Qu, Yongchu Liu, Hong Kang, Jiangtao Guo, Binbin Lai, Feifei
He and others for beneficial discussions and helps to the work. We are
grateful to Dr. Iain C Bruce of Zhejiang University School of Medicine for his
linguistic help. The work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation (30970667, 30770499 and 10721403) of China and the National
Basic Research Program of China (2011CB707500).
Author details
State Key Laboratory for Turbulence and Complex Systems and Department
of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing
100871, China. 2Center for Theoretical Biology, Peking University, Beijing
100871, China. 3Center for Protein Science, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
China. 4Current address: Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
XBZ, GQH and HQZ conceived the study, XBZ and GQH designed the data
analysis, XBZ and HQZ draft the manuscript, ZSS and HQZ cosupervised the
progress of the work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 1 March 2011 Accepted: 12 July 2011 Published: 12 July 2011
References
1. Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, Mering Cv, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
Automatic Reconstruction of a Highly Resolved Tree of Life. Science 2006,
311(5765):1283-1287.
2. Nakagawa S, Niimura Y, Miura K, Gojobori T: Dynamic evolution of
translation initiation mechanisms in prokaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2010, 107(14):6382-6387.
3. Shine J, Dalgarno L: The 3’-terminal sequence of Escherichia coli 16S
ribosomal RNA: complementarity to nonsense triplets and ribosome
binding sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1974, 71(4):1342-1346.
4. Ptashne M, Backman K, Humayun MZ, Jeffrey A, Maurer R, Meyer B,
Sauer RT: Autoregulation and function of a repressor in bacteriophage
lambda. Science 1976, 194(4261):156-161.
5. Moll I, Grill S, Gualerzi CO, Blasi U: Leaderless mRNAs in bacteria: surprises
in ribosomal recruitment and translational control. Mol Microbiol 2002,
43(1):239-246.
6. Udagawa T, Shimizu Y, Ueda T: Evidence for the translation initiation of
leaderless mRNAs by the intact 70 S ribosome without its dissociation
into subunits in eubacteria. J Biol Chem 2004, 279(10):8539-8546.
7. Grill S, Gualerzi CO, Londei P, Blasi U: Selective stimulation of translation
of leaderless mRNA by initiation factor 2: evolutionary implications for
translation. Embo J 2000, 19(15):4101-4110.
8. Andreev DE, Terenin IM, Dunaevsky YE, Dmitriev SE, Shatsky IN: A
leaderless mRNA can bind to mammalian 80S ribosomes and direct
polypeptide synthesis in the absence of translation initiation factors. Mol
Cell Biol 2006, 26(8):3164-3169.
9. Benelli D, Londei P: Begin at the beginning: evolution of translational
initiation. Res Microbiol 2009, 160(7):493-501.
10. Tolstrup N, Sensen CW, Garrett RA, Clausen IG: Two different and highly
organized mechanisms of translation initiation in the archaeon
Sulfolobus solfataricus. Extremophiles 2000, 4(3):175-179.

Page 12 of 13

11. Slupska MM, King AG, Fitz-Gibbon S, Besemer J, Borodovsky M, Miller JH:
Leaderless transcripts of the crenarchaeal hyperthermophile
Pyrobaculum aerophilum. J Mol Biol 2001, 309(2):347-360.
12. Torarinsson E, Klenk HP, Garrett RA: Divergent transcriptional and
translational signals in Archaea. Environ Microbiol 2005, 7(1):47-54.
13. Brenneis M, Hering O, Lange C, Soppa J: Experimental characterization of
Cis-acting elements important for translation and transcription in
halophilic archaea. Plos Genet 2007, 3(12):2450-2467.
14. Ma J, Campbell A, Karlin S: Correlations between Shine-Dalgarno
sequences and gene features such as predicted expression levels and
operon structures. J Bacteriol 2002, 184(20):5733-5745.
15. Chang B, Halgamuge S, Tang SL: Analysis of SD sequences in completed
microbial genomes: Non-SD-led genes are as common as SD-led genes.
Gene 2006, 373:90-99.
16. The Translation initiation Signal Database. [http://mech.ctb.pku.edu.cn/
leaderless/].
17. Shultzaberger RK, Chen Z, Lewis KA, Schneider TD: Anatomy of Escherichia
coli sigma70 promoters. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35(3):771-788.
18. Wu CJ, Janssen GR: Translation of vph mRNA in Streptomyces lividans
and Escherichia coli after removal of the 5’ untranslated leader. Mol
Microbiol 1996, 22(2):339-355.
19. Ryding NJ, Kelemen GH, Whatling CA, Flardh K, Buttner MJ, Chater KF: A
developmentally regulated gene encoding a repressor-like protein is
essential for sporulation in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). Mol Microbiol
1998, 29(1):343-357.
20. Nothaft H, Parche S, Kamionka A, Titgemeyer F: In vivo analysis of HPr
reveals a fructose-specific phosphotransferase system that confers highaffinity uptake in Streptomyces coelicolor. J Bacteriol 2003, 185(3):929-937.
21. Mazurakova V, Sevcikova B, Rezuchova B, Kormanec J: Cascade of sigma
factors in streptomycetes: identification of a new extracytoplasmic
function sigma factor sigmaJ that is under the control of the stressresponse sigma factor sigmaH in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). Arch
Microbiol 2006, 186(6):435-446.
22. Ventura M, Canchaya C, Tauch A, Chandra G, Fitzgerald GF, Chater KF, van
Sinderen D: Genomics of Actinobacteria: tracing the evolutionary history
of an ancient phylum. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2007, 71(3):495-548.
23. Janssen GR: Eubacterial, archaebacterial, and eukaryotic genes that
encode leaderless mRNA. In Industrial Microorganisms: Basic and Applied
Molecular Genetics. Edited by: Baltz RH, Hegeman GD, Skatrud PL.
Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology Press; 1993:59-67.
24. Londei P: Evolution of translational initiation: new insights from the
archaea. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2005, 29(2):185-200.
25. Tatusov RL, Fedorova ND, Jackson JD, Jacobs AR, Kiryutin B, Koonin EV,
Krylov DM, Mazumder R, Mekhedov SL, Nikolskaya AN, et al: The COG
database: an updated version includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics
2003, 4:41.
26. Hering O, Brenneis M, Beer J, Suess B, Soppa J: A novel mechanism for
translation initiation operates in haloarchaea. Mol Microbiol 2009,
71(6):1451-1463.
27. Sazuka T, Ohara O: Sequence features surrounding the translation
initiation sites assigned on the genome sequence of Synechocystis sp.
strain PCC6803 by amino-terminal protein sequencing. DNA Res 1996,
3(4):225-232.
28. Kozak M: Regulation of translation via mRNA structure in prokaryotes
and eukaryotes. Gene 2005, 361:13-37.
29. Dam P, Olman V, Harris K, Su Z, Xu Y: Operon prediction using both
genome-specific and general genomic information. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, 35(1):288-298.
30. Price MN, Huang KH, Alm EJ, Arkin AP: A novel method for accurate
operon predictions in all sequenced prokaryotes. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33(3):880-892.
31. Bolotin A, Wincker P, Mauger S, Jaillon O, Malarme K, Weissenbach J,
Ehrlich SD, Sorokin A: The Complete Genome Sequence of the Lactic
Acid Bacterium Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis IL1403. Genome Res 2001,
11(5):731-753.
32. Kaberdina AC, Szaflarski W, Nierhaus KH, Moll I: An unexpected type of
ribosomes induced by kasugamycin: a look into ancestral times of
protein synthesis? Mol Cell 2009, 33(2):227-236.
33. Paget MS, Helmann JD: The sigma70 family of sigma factors. Genome Biol
2003, 4(1):203.

Zheng et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:361
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/361

34. Moseley BE, Mattingly A: Repair of irradiation transforming
deoxyribonucleic acid in wild type and a radiation-sensitive mutant of
Micrococcus radiodurans. J Bacteriol 1971, 105(3):976-983.
35. Henne A, Bruggemann H, Raasch C, Wiezer A, Hartsch T, Liesegang H,
Johann A, Lienard T, Gohl O, Martinez-Arias R, et al: The genome sequence
of the extreme thermophile Thermus thermophilus. Nat Biotechnol 2004,
22(5):547-553.
36. Chin K, Shean CS, Gottesman ME: Resistance of Lambda-Ci Translation to
Antibiotics That Inhibit Translation Initiation. J Bacteriol 1993,
175(22):7471-7473.
37. Chen H, Bjerknes M, Kumar R, Jay E: Determination of the optimal aligned
spacing between the Shine-Dalgarno sequence and the translation
initiation codon of Escherichia coli mRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 1994,
22(23):4953-4957.
38. Pruitt KD, Tatusova T, Maglott DR: NCBI reference sequences (RefSeq): a
curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and
proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, , 35 Database: D61-65.
39. Hu GQ, Zheng XB, Yang YF, Ortet P, She ZS, Zhu HQ: ProTISA: a
comprehensive resource for translation initiation site annotation in
prokaryotic genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36 Database: D114-D119.
40. Hu GQ, Zheng X, Zhu HQ, She ZS: Prediction of translation initiation site
for microbial genomes with TriTISA. Bioinformatics 2009, 25(1):123-125.
41. Zhu HQ, Hu GQ, Yang YF, Wang J, She ZS: MED: a new non-supervised
gene prediction algorithm for bacterial and archaeal genomes. BMC
Bioinformatics 2007, 8:97.
42. Hu GQ, Zheng X, Ju LN, Zhu H, She ZS: Computational evaluation of TIS
annotation for prokaryotic genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:160.
43. Zhu HQ, Hu GQ, Ouyang ZQ, Wang J, She ZS: Accuracy improvement for
identifying translation initiation sites in microbial genomes.
Bioinformatics 2004, 20(18):3308-3317.
44. Besemer J, Lomsadze A, Borodovsky M: GeneMarkS: a self-training method
for prediction of gene starts in microbial genomes. Implications for
finding sequence motifs in regulatory regions. Nucleic Acids Res 2001,
29(12):2607-2618.
45. Delcher AL, Bratke KA, Powers EC, Salzberg SL: Identifying bacterial genes
and endosymbiont DNA with Glimmer. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(6):673-679.
46. Hershberg R, Bejerano G, Santos-Zavaleta A, Margalit H: PromEC: An
updated database of Escherichia coli mRNA promoters with
experimentally identified transcriptional start sites. Nucleic Acids Res 2001,
29(1):277.
47. Jiang M, Anderson J, Gillespie J, Mayne M: uShuffle: a useful tool for
shuffling biological sequences while preserving the k-let counts. BMC
Bioinformatics 2008, 9:192.
48. Larkin MA, B G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA, McWilliam H*,
Valentin F*, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R*, Thompson JD, Gibson TJ,
Higgins DG: ClustalW and ClustalX version 2. Bioinformatics 2007,
23(21):2947-2948.
49. Kumar S, Nei M, Dudley J, Tamura K: MEGA: A biologist-centric software
for evolutionary analysis of DNA and protein sequences. Brief Bioinform
2008, 9(4):299-306.
50. Lake JA: Reconstructing evolutionary trees from DNA and protein
sequences: paralinear distances. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994,
91(4):1455-1459.
51. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome Res 2004, 14(6):1188-1190.
52. Anderson TB, Brian P, Champness WC: Genetic and transcriptional analysis
of absA, an antibiotic gene cluster-linked two-component system that
regulates multiple antibiotics in Streptomyces coelicolor. Mol Microbiol
2001, 39(3):553-566.
53. Hoskisson PA, Rigali S, Fowler K, Findlay KC, Buttner MJ: DevA, a GntR-like
transcriptional regulator required for development in Streptomyces
coelicolor. J Bacteriol 2006, 188(14):5014-5023.
54. Revill WP, Bibb MJ, Scheu AK, Kieser HJ, Hopwood DA: Beta-ketoacyl acyl
carrier protein synthase III (FabH) is essential for fatty acid biosynthesis
in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). J Bacteriol 2001, 183(11):3526-3530.
55. Hahn JS, Oh SY, Roe JH: Regulation of the furA and catC operon,
encoding a ferric uptake regulator homologue and catalase-peroxidase,
respectively, in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2). J Bacteriol 2000,
182(13):3767-3774.

Page 13 of 13

56. Umeyama T, Horinouchi S: Autophosphorylation of a bacterial serine/
threonine kinase, AfsK, is inhibited by KbpA, an AfsK-binding protein. J
Bacteriol 2001, 183(19):5506-5512.
57. van Wezel GP, White J, Young P, Postma PW, Bibb MJ: Substrate induction
and glucose repression of maltose utilization by Streptomyces coelicolor
A3(2) is controlled by malR, a member of the lacl-galR family of
regulatory genes. Mol Microbiol 1997, 23(3):537-549.
58. Sola-Landa A, Rodriguez-Garcia A, Franco-Dominguez E, Martin JF: Binding
of PhoP to promoters of phosphate-regulated genes in Streptomyces
coelicolor: identification of PHO boxes. Mol Microbiol 2005,
56(5):1373-1385.
59. Hong HJ, Hutchings MI, Neu JM, Wright GD, Paget MS, Buttner MJ:
Characterization of an inducible vancomycin resistance system in
Streptomyces coelicolor reveals a novel gene (vanK) required for drug
resistance. Mol Microbiol 2004, 52(4):1107-1121.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-361
Cite this article as: Zheng et al.: Leaderless genes in bacteria: clue to
the evolution of translation initiation mechanisms in prokaryotes. BMC
Genomics 2011 12:361.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
