<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Opportunities and challenges for digital morphology</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010, 5:45. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-45"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Alexander Ziegler, Malte Ogurreck, Thomas Steinke, Felix Beckmann, Steffen Prohaska, Andreas Ziegler"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ziegler et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45

Open Access

COMMENT

Opportunities and challenges for digital
morphology
Comment

Alexander Ziegler*1, Malte Ogurreck2, Thomas Steinke3, Felix Beckmann2, Steffen Prohaska3 and Andreas Ziegler1

Abstract
Advances in digital data acquisition, analysis, and storage have revolutionized the work in many biological disciplines
such as genomics, molecular phylogenetics, and structural biology, but have not yet found satisfactory acceptance in
morphology. Improvements in non-invasive imaging and three-dimensional visualization techniques, however, permit
high-throughput analyses also of whole biological specimens, including museum material. These developments pave
the way towards a digital era in morphology. Using sea urchins (Echinodermata: Echinoidea), we provide examples
illustrating the power of these techniques. However, remote visualization, the creation of a specialized database, and
the implementation of standardized, world-wide accepted data deposition practices prior to publication are essential
to cope with the foreseeable exponential increase in digital morphological data.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Marc D. Sutton (nominated by Stephan Beck), Gonzalo Giribet (nominated by
Lutz Walter), and Lennart Olsson (nominated by Purificación López-García).
Introduction
The digital era, which has so successfully transformed
scientific work in various disciplines, has also begun to be
implemented in biology [1], but has not yet found satisfactory acceptance in morphology. Although this discipline is clearly at the heart of biological understanding, its
digital implementation today is still in its infancy. Almost
ten years ago, C. Godfray [2] already identified a number
of problems associated with comparative morphology, in
particular the virtual absence of web-based taxonomic
information. A further problem was emphasized by E.
Pennisi [3], who pointed out that by using traditional
morphological techniques "a complete tree of life is centuries away". However, it is now foreseeable that noninvasive imaging techniques, in particular because they
offer the opportunity to conduct high-throughput studies
and the suitability to analyze whole specimens in a nondestructive manner, together with the broader availability
of the respective instruments, will change the way by
which morphological data will be acquired and analyzed
in the future. Based on these technical advances, many
morphologists do in fact believe that a golden age of morphology has begun [4-6]. As we show here, the advent of
* Correspondence: alexander.ziegler@charite.de
1

Institut für Immungenetik, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität Berlin, Thielallee 73, 14195 Berlin, Germany

non-invasive, digital imaging techniques offers a multitude of opportunities, but presents also numerous challenges which need to be discussed within the life sciences
and bioinformatics communities.

Discussion
Non-invasive, high-throughput imaging of whole
specimens

Within the last ten years, resolution and suitability of
modern imaging techniques, among them confocal laser
scanning microscopy (CLSM), synchrotron radiation
micro-computed tomography (SRμCT), micro-computed
tomography (μCT), and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), have led to a considerable increase in morphological studies that generate entirely digital raw data [e.g. [710]]. Conventional histological or ultrastructural methods typically take days or weeks before they yield first
results, and the necessary preparations alter or may even
destroy the specimen under study. However, by applying
fast digital scanning protocols, it has now become possible to implement a high-throughput approach using
whole, intact specimens [11,12]. Although CLSM as well
as SRμCT yield excellent image data at high resolutions,
we will focus here on μCT and MRI because of (i) the
broad availability of the respective instruments, (ii) the
possibility to scan specimens within the size range of sev-

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Ziegler et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ziegler et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45

Page 2 of 9

eral centimeters in a standardized manner, and (iii) the
feasibility of high-throughput studies involving dozens or
even hundreds of specimens.
Whereas μCT is primarily used to display hard tissue,
MRI is particularly suited for soft tissue studies. Furthermore, MRI can be used for longer three-dimensional (3D)
as well as for much shorter two-dimensional (2D) scanning protocols. The latter permit a considerable reduction in scan time: ~10 min as opposed to ~12 h or even
more [10], although this is accompanied by a reduction of
resolution in the third dimension [see e.g. reference [13]
for protocols]. Using this approach, the 2D scanning of
over 50 species of sea urchins (Echinodermata: Echinoidea) at 79 μm in-plane resolution in just two days, for
example, has allowed us to discover the presence of previously unrecognized specialized muscles within the feeding apparatus of selected taxa (Fig. 1). When μCT is
applied, the times necessary for scanning whole specimens in 3D can be shortened considerably (to about 15
min for low- or about 2 h for high-resolution scans) and
in general much higher resolutions can be achieved as
compared to MRI [14]. Using this approach, we have
scanned almost 80 selected sea urchin species in less than
three weeks at isotropic resolutions ranging from 9 to 24
μm. Among other previously unknown characters, these
analyses reveal the presence of asymmetrical teeth in a
taxon of deep-sea echinoids, the Aspidodiadematidae
(Fig. 2).
A number of recent technological advances demonstrate that the full potential of current non-invasive imag-

A

B

ing techniques has presumably not even remotely been
exploited [15-17]. μCT and MRI in particular will profit
from research carried out in the near future because of
the wide-spread use of non-invasive imaging techniques
in human diagnostics. Apart from instrument-dependent
improvements in image acquisition, the use of inexpensive contrast agents, e.g. iodine or manganese, for staining of soft tissues will further increase the applicability of
μCT and SRμCT [18] as well as MRI [19]. Although some
contrast agents need to be applied in vivo (e.g. manganese), others have successfully been used in vitro (e.g.
gadolinium, iodine), both on freshly fixed as well as on
century-old museum specimens. Ideally, museum material should be scanned without the use of any contrast
agent, and the feasibility of this approach has already
been demonstrated for studies using μCT [20] as well as
MRI [10].
The potential, especially of μCT, to visualize complex
structures or features that could not be analyzed using
conventional techniques has been utilized successfully in
a number of morphological studies over the last years.
This is particularly obvious in palaeontological studies,
including analyses of specimens embedded in amber [21]
as well as studies on fossilized specimens [22-24]. However, it should not be forgotten that μCT and MRI in particular currently cannot compete with light and electron
microscopy in terms of resolution. Differential stainings
for histological sections are a further bonus of the latter
techniques and it is principally possible to generate digital tomographic data from consecutive histological or

C

D

0.5 cm

0.5 cm

Figure 1 Virtual horizontal sections of 2D MRI scans of whole sea urchins (A, C) reveal distinct shapes of protractor muscles in Paracentrotus lividus (B) and Echinometra mathaei (D) (arrows). Magnetic resonance imaging was carried out in Berlin, Germany using a high-field MRI scanner with a 7 T super-conducting electromagnet (Bruker Biospin GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany). Image processing of the ~10 MB large raw image datasets
was carried out using ImageJ 1.42q (NIH, Bethesda, USA) and its Volume Viewer plug-in on a standard office PC. The sea urchin (Echinodermata: Echinoidea) species shown here were collected in the wild (Paracentrotus lividus) or taken from a museum collection (Echinometra mathaei, NHM
1969.5.1.61-75).

Ziegler et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45

Page 3 of 9

Ctenocidaris nutrix
(NHM 1956.10.5.1)

Eucidaris metularia
(NHM 1969.5.1.15-40)

Calveriosoma gracile
(NHM 1881.11.22.21)

Caenopedina mirabilis
(USNM 31182)

Centrostephanus longispinus
(NHM 1952.3.26.64-8)

Plesiodiadema indicum
(ZMB 7232)

Salenia goesiana
(USNM 14581)

Arbacia lixula
(NHM 1952.3.26.31-36)

Glyptocidaris crenularis
(ZSM 20011444)

Parasalenia gratiosa
(NHM 1983.2.15.7)

Psammechinus miliaris
(ZMB 2011)

Echinus esculentus
(ZMB 3826)

Echinometra mathaei
(NHM 1969.5.1.61-75)

Strongylocentrotus purpuratus Sphaerechinus granularis
(CASIZ 5724)
(ZMB 2366)

Mespilia globulus
(ZMB 5620)

Figure 2 Virtual horizontal μCT sections through Aristotle's lantern, the sea urchin feeding apparatus - phylogenetically representative selection of 16 out of almost 80 sea urchin species scanned by us using μCT (individual isotropic dataset resolutions ranging from 9 - 24 μm).
The arrow depicts an asymmetrical tooth in Plesiodiadema indicum (Aspidodiadematidae). μCT was carried out at the GKSS outstation on the DESY site
in Hamburg, Germany using an X-ray tube tomography system (GE Sensing & Inspection Technologies, Wunstorf, Germany). Image processing was
carried out using Amira 5.2 (Visage Imaging GmbH, Berlin, Germany). The ~20-25 GB large raw image datasets were analyzed on a standard office PC
using a remote visualization software environment (HP Remote Graphics Receiver 5.3.0: Hewlett-Packard Development Company, Palo Alto, USA). The
office PC was connected via Internet (100 Mbit/s) to an HP XC/SVA visualization cluster (1× HP ProLiant DL785 with 32 AMD cores/256 GB RAM, and
8× HP xw8600 workstations, all equipped with dual NVIDIA Quadro FX5600 GPUs) at the Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany. Not to scale.

Ziegler et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45

ultrastructural sections [25]. Nevertheless, the nondestructive and high-throughput analyses that are the
most prominent features of MRI and μCT must be
regarded as so advantageous that conventional procedures and modern scanning techniques should be seen as
complementing and not as competing approaches. The
combined use of various imaging procedures, termed
'multimodality', has recently been implemented in a number of studies on vertebrate [26], arthropod [27], and
echinoderm [28] taxa.
Accelerated raw image data acquisition and increased
taxon sampling

Drastically shortened scan times allow an increased number of specimens to be studied, thereby providing morphologists with the possibility to accomplish a broad
taxon sampling for phylogenetic or comparative morphological analyses. This more exploratory modus operandi
(in contrast to a focused, hypothesis-driven approach) is
likely to yield novel insights into form as well as function
and, as shown in an exemplary fashion in case of our
research on sea urchin morphology, will result in many
new questions and hypotheses (Figs. 1, 2). The data
emerging from such studies can then be used to fine-tune
further research using classical preparative techniques.
On the other hand, the time that can be devoted to the
analysis of a single species will increase by omitting the
lengthy, conventional preparative procedures that have
dominated morphological studies for hundreds of years.
Apart from freshly collected specimens, μCT and MRI
have successfully been applied to the study of museum
specimens, incl. type material [29,30]. Although largescale comparative morphological analyses based on
advanced digital imaging modalities have so far been
exploited only in a handful of studies [10,14,28], the predicted increase in digital data necessitates advances primarily in two areas: the remote visualization of complex
data and the creation of a universally accepted morphological database.
Remote visualization of morphological data

Since a linear increase in the resolution of image data
entails a cubic increase in data size, it is mandatory to
devote considerable attention to adequate archiving and
computation systems as well as to advanced software for
the purpose of 3D visualization and interactive viewing.
MRI raw datasets of whole specimens [conventionally in
the megabyte (MB, 106 bytes) range] can usually still be
handled with current office PCs, but μCT or SR μCT
datasets [usually in the gigabyte (GB, 109 bytes) range]
cannot.
We therefore propose the analysis and visualization of
morphological image data to be carried out using a data

Page 4 of 9

center setup that encompasses large storage resources
and data processing capabilities with suitable large memory and powerful graphics cards [31]. This facility could
be accessed, for instance, by remote visualization software environments, so that the manipulation of raw morphological data becomes possible on virtually any PC
with Internet access (please refer to the legend of Fig. 2
for a more detailed explanation of our setup). In contrast
to local visualization, i.e. using solely the resources of the
user's computer, remote visualization will facilitate keeping abreast with the constant technical advances in computation and visualization by focusing investments in
infrastructure on a limited number of facilities. Recent
developments in other scientific disciplines have shown
that only the larger institutions can afford to maintain the
human as well as the technical resources that are necessary for the complex computation, archiving, and visualization processes involving large amounts of data.
Certainly, such a setup would find acceptance only if the
data deposited would be managed professionally, assuring their constant availability both for download and
remote visualization. For example, several scientific funding organizations (such as the Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft
in Germany) demand that raw data should be accessible
for a minimum of ten years, in turn requiring backup systems that simply cannot be maintained at smaller institutions.
The urgent need for a standardized morphological
database

Specialized databases serving other biological disciplines
are universally accepted as indispensable tools for obtaining a better understanding of biological facts (e.g. NCBI
GenBank [32] or RCSB Protein Data Bank [33]). According to Foster [34], a community's shared understanding
will no longer exclusively be found in the literature, but in
the future also in databases. Unfortunately, the few publicly available digital morphological data are currently
scattered throughout a number of independent databases
(e.g. BIRN [35], DigiMorph [36], EOL [37], Morphbank
[38], MorphDBase [39], MorphoBank [40]) that are
funded by different institutions with diverging interests
as well as financial capabilities. Although a considerable
number of non-invasively acquired datasets have already
been deposited online [e.g. [35,36,39]], the currently
available morphological databases suffer either from limited input or from a restricted focus. For example, we
have deposited parts of our raw image data on DigiMorph (μCT data) as well as on MorphDBase (MRI data),
which makes a direct comparison of different datasets
obtained from the same specimen unnecessarily complicated. Moreover, in the case of all morphological databases, the interactive visualization, i.e. the real-time

Ziegler et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45

manipulation of raw image datasets, as well as the download of these datasets are currently not available.
The creation and management of a universally
accepted, morphologically oriented database is, however,
not trivial. This is primarily a consequence of two independent factors: the datasets to be deposited require substantially more data storage capacity than, for example,
sequence data, while, on the other hand, morphological
data per se suffer from the current lack of a standardized
ontology - this has been referred to as the "linguistic
problem of morphology" [41]. Since raw image datasets
nowadays may easily reach the GB range, it is of the
utmost importance to solve the problem of their storage,
archiving, and management. To further illustrate this
point, our analyses of almost 80 sea urchin species by
μCT have so far resulted in gathering of ~3 terabytes (TB,
1012 bytes) of raw image data. It is principally possible to
deal successfully with such amounts of data as shown by
the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, Geneva, which has
been designed to produce several petabytes (PB, 1015
bytes) of raw data per year, but provides also the facilities
that are essential for their adequate storage and analysis.
It is obvious that distinct imaging techniques produce
different types of raw image data and that the implementation of data and metadata standards will be of critical
importance for the success of a morphological database.
However, an agreement on data standards could still be
years away, and we therefore believe that by initially
restricting the datasets to be deposited to MRI and μCT
datasets, the repository could get starting right away, in
turn leading to the standardization of all future datasets
to be deposited by setting a strong standard.
Whether a centralized (e.g. NCBI GenBank [32], RCSB
Protein Data Bank [33]) or a federated repository [42]
that unites the already existing individual morphological
databases would better serve the needs of the morphological community cannot currently be decided and is a
matter that should be discussed within the life sciences
and bioinformatics communities.
Necessity for enforced data deposition

In addition, for a morphological repository to be successful - desirably with the possibility to remotely visualize
raw image data on virtually any imaging device connected
to the Internet, non-invasive imaging techniques and the
drastic increase in digital morphological data acquisition
furthermore necessitate the implementation of mandatory data deposition prior to publication. Enforced data
deposition has long been accepted, for example, by structural biologists [33]. Although the preparation of morphological data for deposition in the context of a
publication may take several days and is initially likely to
lack popularity among the morphological community, its
numerous advantages, in particular the general accessi-

Page 5 of 9

bility of the data and the resulting data transparency,
clearly justify the effort.
As in other scientific fields that have already implemented digital data management procedures and raw
data repositories, new areas of study will emerge in morphology as well, such as data mining or systematic combination of multimodally acquired raw image datasets. In
other disciplines (e.g. astronomy or genomics), such
novel approaches have led to a considerable increase in
knowledge. Furthermore, the public database which we
envisage here will also permit genotype/phenotype correlations, thereby serving as a reference for studies in all of
the life sciences. In addition, digitally acquired data permit novel ways to communicate results, e.g. in the form of
publication-embedded multimedia content (Fig. 3)
[10,43-46].
Apart from these purely scientific considerations, a
morphological database should additionally serve as a
single point of contact for the interested layman as well as
for students. We therefore believe that the advent of the
digital era in morphology promises to lead to an
improved visibility of this fundamental biological discipline on the whole. Furthermore, we are convinced that
enforced data deposition is of crucial importance for the
success of a morphological database. The morphological
community should therefore rapidly seek the combined
advice from database experts and leading journals in the
field to implement this desirable feature.

Conclusions
Critically, the future availability of all digital data deposited in a morphological repository should be guaranteed
by a long-term (decades, not years) financial commitment by national or international scientific funding organizations. The benefits of this novel facility would by far
outweigh the costs, since a standardized repository for
digital morphological data will boost intra- and interdisciplinary investigations. We fully agree with Budd & Olsson [4] that "there has never been a better time to study
morphology", but the morphological community must
act now in order to catch up with disciplines that benefit
already greatly from deposited digital data.
Reviewers' comments
Reviewer's report 1

Mark D. Sutton, Dept. Earth Science & Engineering, South
Kensington Campus, Imperial College, London, United
Kingdom (nominated by Stephan Beck, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, UK)
The authors of this contribution make a case for the
importance of digital morphology as a tool for biologists;
this case is not novel, although its reiteration here is to be
welcomed. It might perhaps be strengthened through the
provision of more examples beyond the authors' own

Ziegler et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45

Page 6 of 9

C

A

E

Click
for 3D

1 cm

B

D

F

Figure 3 Various traditional and digital morphological visualization techniques, shown in an exemplary fashion using cidaroid sea urchins
(Echinoidea: Cidaroida). A Habitus of a museum specimen of Eucidaris metularia (NHM 1969.5.1.15-40), aboral view. B Historical drawing of the internal anatomy of Cidaris cidaris, a closely related species - modified after Stewart [47]. C Volume rendering of the external anatomy of the specimen
shown in A, based on a ~25 GB large μCT dataset with 13.91 μm isotropic resolution. D Virtual horizontal section of the μCT dataset at the level of
Aristotle's lantern (see also Fig. 2). E Surface rendering of the external and internal anatomy of the specimen shown in A based on a ~100 MB large 3D
MRI dataset with 81 μm isotropic resolution. F Virtual horizontal section of the MRI dataset at the level of Aristotle's lantern, digestive tract, and gonads.
By clicking anywhere onto this figure, an interactive, partially labeled 3D model of the analyzed species will open (requires Adobe Acrobat Reader 8.0
or higher, see [10,43,44,46] for detailed information regarding 3D modeling and labeling). The museum specimen of Eucidaris metularia was photographed using a digital camera with 7.2 megapixel resolution (Exilim: Casio Computer Co., Tokyo, Japan). 3D visualization was carried out using volume
rendering in VG Studio Max 2.0 (C) and threshold-based as well as manual segmentation followed by surface rendering in Amira 5.2 (E).

research. The manuscript might be also profitably deal
more explicitly with the importance of tomographic
methods in a palaeontological context. Tomographic
techniques provide not simply a faster and more convenient means of extracting morphological data, but for
certain fossils the only feasible means of imaging morphology at all. They thus enable the extraction of previously unavailable data; this is doubly important in a field
where genetic and other non-morphological information
is essentially absent.
Author's response

In the revised version of our manuscript, we now cite a
number of review articles that may serve as valuable
starting points for the general reader (e.g. refs. [7-12]). Furthermore, we refer to the particular usefulness of noninvasive imaging techniques in palaeontology and have
expanded this section in our manuscript.
The three-fold call for (a) a centralised repository for
digital morphology data, (b) enforced data-deposition,
and (c) remote visualisation tools are also to be wel-

comed. However I would stress that all three of these 'pillars' would need to rest on the foundation of standardised
data and metadata formats for morphological information. Morphological datasets come in many forms, from
the isotropic CT tomographic stacks, through colour
optically-captured grinding/sawing/microtomy stacks, to
point-cloud laser-scanning data and photogrammetrygenerated textured polygons. Interpretative layers in
many cases are complex, requiring a flexible mark-up system to capture all desired information. Developing data
standards and visualisation software to cover all possibilities is not a trivial task; software tools to aid workers in
translating existing datasets into a new standardised format would also likely be required. The authors suggest
that a centralised database would in itself act as a driver
towards a resolution of these sorts of problems; I suspect
that this would only be the case if the data standards and
relevant software were of a high enough initial quality to
overcome the reticence of the community. None of these
problems are insurmountable or in any way detract from
the desirability of a remotely-accessible comprehensive

Ziegler et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45

database of virtual morphology, but I feel they have been
glossed over in the manuscript.
Author's response

In the revised version of the manuscript we discuss the
problems that the morphological community faces with
regard to data and metadata standardization. However,
we would like to stress that in our eyes these issues will
probably take years until they can be successfully dealt
with. Because of the foreseeable exponential increase in
digital morphological data in the years to come we nonetheless advocate the fast implementation of a morphological repository, suggesting that initially only datasets that
can easily be standardized (e.g. MRI- or μCT-based)
should be uploaded, which in turn would force other techniques to adapt to these standards.
A more minor point related to the authors' enthusiasm
for remote visualisation; while there are logistical benefits
to this approach, there are also practical benefits to local
visualisation, which can be accomplished with ease on
relatively modest systems with sufficiently well optimised
models and visualisation software, does not require highbandwidth connections, and provides other practical
benefits besides. These approaches are not of course
mutually exclusive, and an ideal system would provide for
both remote visualisation and the standardised packaging
of morphological information for local visualisation and
mark-up.
Author's response

We agree with the reviewer that a combined approach
would be desirable. Therefore, raw image datasets should
be available both for remote visualization as well as
download. The constant advance in computer technology
will sooner or later permit local visualization of datasets
that currently can only be visualized on a standard PC by
accessing remote visualization environments.
Reviewer's report 2

Gonzalo Giribet, Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
USA (nominated by Lutz Walter, Deutsches Primatenzentrum, Göttingen, Germany)
This article shows how some of the newest techniques
in obtaining morphological data suffer from the challenge
of dealing with large amounts of digital information. It
comes in at the right time since, as illustrated by the several examples provided, there are large data sets of digital
images being generated in many disciplines of biology
and other sciences. The article is therefore of general
interest for many scientists. I don't see any important
issues with it and can be published with just taking into
account a few minor comments/suggestions.
In page 6 the authors rank the problem of storing data
above what has been called the "linguistic problem of

Page 7 of 9

morphology" but I do not see why these two problems
need to be compared or ranked. Both may be equally
important and in fact they are independent. Or maybe I
did not understand what this paragraph really meant?
Author's response

We consider both problems to be independent from each
other as well and have amended this section of the manuscript for clarity. We believe that, similar to the problem of
data and metadata standardization, the creation of a
morphological data repository should not be postponed by
trying to achieve the ultimate goal of solving the problems
associated with the creation of a standardized ontology.
Page 5: Where it says "the predicted increase in digital
data..." it may be better to say "the predicted increase in
acquisition of digital data..."
NHM is the acronym for "The Natural History
Museum", not simply "Natural History Museum"
Acknowledgements. "For generous supply with..."
should be "for generously supplying..."
Author's response

We have changed the manuscript accordingly.
Reviewer's report 3

Lennart Olsson, Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie mit Phyletischem Museum, Jena, Germany
(nominated by Purificación López-García, Université
Paris Sud, Paris, France)
In this paper Alexander Ziegler and his co-authors
point out that technical advances in non-destructive
methods to document the internal morphology of organisms, such as X-ray computer tomography and MRI, in
combination with 3D-reconstruction and visualizaton
techniques, are ushering in a revolution in fields like
anatomy, comparative morphology and palaeontology.
They use examples from their own research on sea urchin
morphology to show some of the advantages of these
techniques. The authors discuss the problem of data storage and accessibility, and suggest that a specialized database be created, analogous to data banks for molecular
sequence data. The paper will be of interest to researchers using, or planning to start to use, these techniques.
The main problem with the paper is the lack of originality. I would like to see more emphasis on what the
authors feel is the unique contribution of their paper in
the revised version. It could be argued that other authors
have already made the same points in other papers, and
why then publish another one?
Author's response

Our contribution is not intended to be a research paper,
but a comment and to stimulate an ongoing discussion.
The unique contribution of this manuscript is, however,
that we introduce the demand for enforced data deposi-

Ziegler et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45

tion practices in morphology and provide examples of how
this could be achieved. The current lack of a widely
accepted and universally accessible morphological repository shows that although in the past articles might have
raised similar ideas, their implementation has clearly not
been successful. However, the advent of high-throughput
techniques necessitates action now in order to cope with
the foreseeable drastic increase in digital morphological
data.
Other than this criticism, I have few complaints about
the paper. One is that the authors mention in passing that
tissues can be stained using "inexpensive contrast agents,
e.g. iodine" (page 4). Staining and staining agents is an
important topic and should be eleborated in some detail
in the paper. Brian Metscher has shown that the choice of
contrast agent can be important for visualizing soft tissues in vertebrates. His papers are mentioned (number 15
and 16 in the list of references) but this aspect is not discussed.
Author's response

In the revised version of the manuscript we now discuss
staining techniques in greater detail.
Details that need to be fixed include to explain what
"GB domain" is (page 6), and to write "AlexanderZ" and
"AndreasZ" as Alexander Z and Andreas Z on page 8.
Author's response

We have changed the manuscript accordingly.
Abbreviations
CASIZ: California Academy of Sciences Invertebrate Zoology, San Francisco,
USA; CLSM: confocal laser scanning microscopy; MRI: magnetic resonance
imaging; μCT: micro-computed tomography; SRμCT: synchrotron radiation
micro-computed tomography; NHM: The Natural History Museum, London,
UK; USNM: The National Museum of Natural History, Washington D.C., USA;
ZMB: Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin, Germany; ZSM: Zoologische Staatssammlung München, Germany.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
AlZ conducted the scanning experiments, accomplished 3D visualization, and
wrote the article. MO and FB developed and tested the protocols for μCT scanning of whole sea urchin specimens. TS and SP implemented and set up the
remote visualization environment and provided support with the 3D visualization of large raw image datasets. AnZ wrote the article. All authors read and
approved the final version of the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Susanne Mueller (Berlin, Germany) for continued MRI support. We would also like to thank Andrew Cabrinovic (London, UK), Carsten
Lüter (Berlin, Germany), Rich Mooi (San Francisco, USA), David Pawson (Washington D.C., USA), and Bernhard Ruthensteiner (München, Germany) for generously supplying us with sea urchin museum material. Barbara UchanskaZiegler (Berlin, Germany) is acknowledged for her helpful comments on this
manuscript. We are indebted to the reviewers whose constructive comments
have led to an improvement of the manuscript. This work was supported in
part by the VolkswagenStiftung (I/79 983).

Page 8 of 9

Author Details
1Institut für Immungenetik, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Freie Universität Berlin, Thielallee 73, 14195 Berlin, Germany,
2GKSS-Forschungszentrum Geesthacht, Institut für Werkstoffforschung, MaxPlanck-Strasse 1, 21502 Geesthacht, Germany and 3Zuse Institute Berlin,
Takustrasse 7, 14195 Berlin, Germany
Received: 25 June 2010 Accepted: 6 July 2010
Published: 6 July 2010
© 2010 Direct 2010, 5:45
This article is available from: http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45
Biology Ziegler et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
is an Open Access article distributed under the

References
1. Buetow KH: Cyberinfrastructure: empowering a "third way" in
biomedical research. Science 2005, 308:821-824.
2. Godfray HCJ: Challenges for taxonomy. Nature 2002, 417:17-19.
3. Pennisi E: Modernizing the tree of life. Science 2003, 300:1692-1697.
4. Budd G, Olsson L: A renaissance for evolutionary morphology. Acta Zool
(Stockholm) 2007, 88:1.
5. Schmidt-Rhaesa A: Morphology and deep metazoan phylogeny.
Zoomorphology 2009, 128:199-200.
6. Giribet G: A new dimension in combining data? The use of morphology
and phylogenomic data in metazoan systematics. Acta Zool
(Stockholm) 2010, 91:11-19.
7. Klaus AV, Schawaroch V: Novel methodology utilizing confocal laser
scanning microscopy for systematic analysis in arthropods (Insecta).
Integr Comp Biol 2006, 46:207-214.
8. Betz O, Wegst U, Weide D, Heethoff M, Helfen L, Lee WK, Cloetens P:
Imaging applications of synchrotron X-ray phase-contrast
microtomography in biological morphology and biomaterials science.
I. General aspects of the technique and its advantages in the analysis
of millimetre-sized arthropod structure. J Microsc 2007, 227:51-71.
9. Friedrich F, Beutel RG: Micro-computer tomography and a renaissance
of insect morphology. Developments in X-ray tomography VI. Proc SPIE
2008:7078.
10. Ziegler A, Faber C, Mueller S, Bartolomaeus T: Systematic comparison
and reconstruction of sea urchin (Echinoidea) internal anatomy: a
novel approach using magnetic resonance imaging. BMC Biol 2008,
6:33.
11. Baker M: The whole picture. Nature 2010, 463:977-980.
12. Walter T, Shattuck DW, Baldock R, Bastin ME, Carpenter AE, Duce S,
Ellenberg J, Fraser A, Hamilton N, Pieper S, Ragan MA, Schneider JE,
Tomancak P, Hériche JK: Visualization of image data from cells to
organisms. Nat Methods 2010, 7:S26-S41.
13. Ziegler A, Mueller S: Analysis of freshly fixed and museum invertebrate
specimens using high-resolution, high-throughput MRI. In In vivo NMR
imaging: Methods and Protocols Edited by: Faber C, Schröder L. Humana
Press in press.
14. Rieppel O, Gauthier J, Maisano J: Comparative morphology of the
dermal palate in squamate reptiles, with comments on phylogenetic
implications. Zool J Linn Soc 2008, 152:131-152.
15. Mamin HJ, Poggio M, Degen CL, Rugar D: Nuclear magnetic resonance
imaging with 90-nm resolution. Nat Nanotechnol 2007, 2:301-306.
16. Pfeiffer F, Bech M, Bunk O, Kraft P, Eikenberry EF, Brönnimann C,
Grünzweig C, David C: Hard-X-ray dark-field imaging using a grating
interferometer. Nat Mater 2008, 7:134-137.
17. Brunner DO, De Zanche N, Fröhlich J, Paska J, Pruessmann KP: Travellingwave nuclear magnetic resonance. Nature 2009, 457:994-998.
18. Metscher BD: MicroCT for comparative morphology: simple staining
methods allow high contrast 3D imaging of diverse non-mineralized
animal tissues. BMC Phys 2009, 9:11.
19. Weinmann HJ, Ebert W, Misselwitz B, Schmitt-Willich H: Tissue-specific
MR contrast agents. Eur J Radiol 2003, 46:33-44.
20. Dinley J, Hawkins L, Paterson G, Ball AD, Sinclair I, Sinnett-Jones P, Lanham
S: Micro-computed X-ray tomography: a new non-destructive method
of assessing sectional, fly-through and 3D imaging of a soft-bodied
marine worm. J Microsc 2010, 238:123-133.
21. Dierick M, Cnudde V, Masschaele B, Vlassenbroeck J, Van Hoorebeke L,
Jacobs P: Micro-CT of fossils preserved in amber. Nuclear Instrum
Methods 2007, 580:641-643.
22. Tafforeau P, Boistel R, Boller E, Bravin A, Brunet M, Chaimanee Y, Cloetens
P, Feist M, Hoszowska J, Jaeger JJ, Kay RF, Lazzari V, Marivaux L, Nel A,
Nemoz C, Thibault X, Vignaud P, Zabler S: Applications of X-ray

Ziegler et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:45
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/45

23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

42.

43.
44.

45.
46.
47.

synchrotron microtomography for non-destructive 3D studies of
paleontological specimens. Appl Phys A 2006, 83:195-202.
Mietchen D, Aberhan M, Manz B, Hampe O, Mohr B, Neumann C, Volke F:
Three-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging of fossils across taxa.
Biogeosciences 2008, 5:25-41.
Sutton MD: Tomographic techniques for the study of exceptionally
preserved fossils. Proc R Soc London B 2008, 275:1587-1593.
Ruthensteiner B: Soft part 3D visualization by serial sectioning and
computer reconstruction. Zoosymposia 2008, 1:63-100.
Forbes JG, Morris HD, Wang K: Multimodal imaging of the sonic organ of
Porichthys notatus, the singing midshipman fish. Magn Reson Imaging
2006, 24:321-331.
Hörnschemeyer T, Goebbels J, Weidemann G, Faber C, Haase A: The head
morphology of Ascioplaga mimeta (Coleoptera: Archostemata) and the
phylogeny of Archostemata. Eur J Entomol 2006, 103:409-423.
Ziegler A, Faber C, Bartolomaeus T: Comparative morphology of the
axial complex and interdependence of internal organ systems in sea
urchins (Echinodermata: Echinoidea). Front Zool 2009, 6:10.
Chhem RK, Woo JKH, Pakkiri P, Stewart E, Romagnoli C, Garcia B: CT
imaging of wet specimens from a pathology museum: how to build a
"virtual museum" for radiopathological correlation teaching. HOMO
2006, 57:201-208.
Corfield JR, Wild JM, Cowan BR, Parsons S, Kubke MF: MRI of postmortem
specimens of endangered species for comparative brain anatomy. Nat
Prot 2008, 3:597-605.
Brodlie KW, Duce DA, Gallop JR, Walton JPRB, Wood D: Distributed and
collaborative visualization. Comput Graphics Forum 2004, 23:223-253.
NCBI GenBank [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/]
RCSB Protein Data Bank [http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do]
Foster I: Service-oriented science. Science 2005, 308:814-817.
BIRN - Biomedical Informatics Research Network [http://
www.birncommunity.org/]
DigiMorph - The Digital Morphology Library [http://
www.digimorph.org]
EOL - Encyclopedia of Life [http://www.eol.org/]
Morphbank: Biological Imaging [http://www.morphbank.net]
MorphDBase [http://www.morphdbase.de]
MorphoBank: homology of phenotypes over the web [http://
www.morphobank.org]
Vogt L, Bartolomaeus T, Giribet G: The linguistic problem of
morphology: structure versus homology and the standardization of
morphological data. Cladistics 2009, 25:1-25.
Androulakis S, Schmidberger J, Bate MA, DeGori R, Beitz A, Keong C,
Cameron B, McGowan S, Porter CJ, Harrison A, Hunter J, Martin JL, Kobe B,
Dobson RCJ, Parker MW, Whisstock JC, Gray J, Treloar A, Groenewegen D,
Dickson N, Buckle AM: Federated repositories of X-ray diffraction
images. Acta Crystallogr D 2008, 64:810-814.
Ruthensteiner B, Hess M: Embedding 3D models of biological
specimens in PDF publications. Microsc Res Tech 2008, 71:778-786.
Kumar P, Ziegler A, Ziegler J, UchaÅ„ska-Ziegler B, Ziegler A: Grasping
molecular structures through publication-integrated 3D models.
Trends Biochem Sci 2008, 33:408-412.
Ziegler A, Müller CA, Böckmann RA, Uchanska-Ziegler B: Low-affinity
peptides and T-cell selection. Trends Immunol 2009, 30:53-60.
Kumar P, Ziegler A, Grahn A, Hee CS, Ziegler A: Leaving the structural
ivory tower, assisted by 3D PDF. Trends Biochem Sci 2010 in press.
Stewart C: On certain organs of the Cidaridae. Trans Linn Soc - Lond
1877, 1:569-572.

doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-45
Cite this article as: Ziegler et al., Opportunities and challenges for digital
morphology Biology Direct 2010, 5:45

Page 9 of 9

</pre>
</body>
</html>
