<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The backbone of the post-synaptic density originated in a unicellular ancestor of choanoflagellates and metazoans</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:34. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-34"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Alexandre Alié"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The backbone of the post-synaptic density
originated in a unicellular ancestor of
choanoflagellates and metazoans
Alexandre Alié, Michaël Manuel*

Abstract
Background: Comparative genomics of the early diverging metazoan lineages and of their unicellular sister-groups
opens new window to reconstructing the genetic changes which preceded or accompanied the evolution of
multicellular body plans. A recent analysis found that the genome of the nerve-less sponges encodes the
homologues of most vertebrate post-synaptic proteins. In vertebrate excitatory synapses, these proteins assemble
to form the post-synaptic density, a complex molecular platform linking membrane receptors, components of their
signalling pathways, and the cytoskeleton. Newly available genomes from Monosiga brevicollis (a member of
Choanoflagellata, the closest unicellular relatives of animals) and Trichoplax adhaerens (a member of Placozoa:
besides sponges, the only nerve-less metazoans) offer an opportunity to refine our understanding of post-synaptic
protein evolution.
Results: Searches for orthologous proteins and reconstruction of gene gains/losses based on the taxon phylogeny
indicate that post-synaptic proteins originated in two main steps. The backbone scaffold proteins (Shank, Homer,
DLG) and some of their partners were acquired in a unicellular ancestor of choanoflagellates and metazoans. A
substantial additional set appeared in an exclusive ancestor of the Metazoa. The placozoan genome contains most
post-synaptic genes but lacks some of them. Notably, the master-scaffold protein Shank might have been lost
secondarily in the placozoan lineage.
Conclusions: The time of origination of most post-synaptic proteins was not concomitant with the acquisition of
synapses or neural-like cells. The backbone of the scaffold emerged in a unicellular context and was probably not
involved in cell-cell communication. Based on the reconstructed protein composition and potential interactions, its
ancestral function could have been to link calcium signalling and cytoskeleton regulation. The complex later
became integrated into the evolving synapse through the addition of novel functionalities.

Background
Many of the complex traits that distinguish the organisation and biology of multicellular animals originated
during the early phase of their evolutionary history.
Among these, the emergence of the neuro-sensory system represents a particularly fascinating conundrum,
because the biological support of animal perception and
behaviour is extraordinarily complex at the molecular,
cellular and anatomical scales, and without equivalent in
the living world. A promising path to understanding the
* Correspondence: Michael.Manuel@snv.jussieu.fr
UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7138 Systématique, Adaptation, Evolution CNRS
IRD MNHN, Bâtiment A, 4ème étage, Case 05, Université Pierre et Marie
Curie, 7 quai St Bernard, 75 005 Paris, France

genetic changes that shaped the body plan of multicellular animals has been recently opened by comparative
analyses of genomes from the early-diverging animal
lineages and the closest unicellular relatives of metazoans (e.g. [1-10])
The recent characterisation of a nearly complete set of
post-synaptic protein orthologues in the genome of the
sponge Amphimedon queenslandica [2] represents a successful illustration of this approach. Excitatory synapses
in the vertebrate central nervous system are characterised by an electron-dense structure called the postsynaptic density (PSD) below the post-synaptic membrane. Proteomic investigations have identified about
one thousand proteins in this complex [11-14]. Some of

© 2010 Alié and Manuel; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

these proteins (e.g. Shank, DLG, Homer, GRIP) have
pivotal roles in building a scaffold for the anchorage of
the other PSD components, for instance membrane
receptors for neurotransmitters, cation channels, members of intracellular signalling pathways, and cytoskeleton or cytoskeleton regulation proteins [15-18]. This
complex sub-membrane plateform thereby connects cell
surface receptors with components of signal transduction pathways and with the cytoskeleton machinery. The
PSD is also involved in synaptogenesis, dendritic spine
formation and synaptic plasticity [17,19,20]. The threedimensional architecture of the PSD is determined by
multiple protein-protein interactions through binding
domains (e.g. [17,18,21]). For example, the vertebrate
Shank protein, the master scaffold protein of the PSD
[18], contains five interacting domains (from N-ter to
C-ter: ankyrin repeats, SH3 domain, PDZ domain, proline-rich region, SAM domain) involved in a huge variety of homomeric and heteromeric interactions. Among
PSD scaffold proteins, PDZ (for Post-synaptic density
protein 95/Drosophila disc large tumor suppressor/Zo1) is the most common type of binding domain, with
many proteins containing multiple PDZ domains (e.g.
three in the DLG protein; seven in GRIP).
Not only were most PSD proteins identified in the
sponge genome (whereas most are absent in fungal or
plant genomes), but moreover these proteins essentially
contain the same interacting domains arranged into the
same architectures as in their vertebrate counterparts
[2]. Intriguingly, several of the sponge PSD-like genes
(DLG, GKAP, GRIP, HOMER, CRIPT) were found coexpressed in a particular non-ciliated epidermal cell type
of the Amphimedon larva, the globular cell (erroneously
called “flask cells” in [2], see [22]). These observations
are consistent with the existence in sponges of an
assembled structure similar to the vertebrate PSD,
despite absence of recognisable nerve cells and synapses.
The PSD protein complex would therefore have originated before the acquisition of synapses in a nerve-less
ancestor, at least under the conventional view that
sponges branched off earlier than animals with a nervous system in the phylogeny (e.g. [23-27]). Moreover,
since the sponge globular cells express Notch/Delta
homologues and a proneural-like bHLH transcription
factor [22] in addition to PSD genes, they might represent putative sensory “proto-neural” cells responding to
environmental stimuli [22] and a possible “starting
point” for the evolution of neural cells [2]. Some recent
molecular phylogenies [28-31] have pointed to more
complicated evolutionary scenarios (e.g. secondary loss
of nerve cells and synapses in sponges) by challenging
the monophyly of animals with a nervous system (Cnidaria, Ctenophora and Bilateria, classically grouped
under the Eumetazoa) and the early divergence of

Page 2 of 10

sponges (discussed in [32,33]). However, a recent phylogenomic study with increased species sampling of nonbilaterian lineages and sophisticated model of sequence
evolution [34] lent support to the conventional phylogeny and thereby to a single acquisition of nerve cells
and synapses in a eumetazoan ancestor.
Since the publication of [2], additional annotated complete genomes have become available. The present study
aims at improving our understanding of the emergence
of the PSD protein complex by focusing on sequence
data from Monosiga brevicollis and Trichoplax adhaerens, two organisms of particular interest with respect to
early metazoan evolution. Monosiga is a member of
choanoflagellates, the unicellular sister-group of the
Metazoa [1,8]. Previous studies have suggested (without
rigorous analyses) the existence of some PSD protein
orthologues in the Monosiga genome [2], but these have
been considered “very few”[10], supporting the idea that
the PSD scaffold is essentially an innovation of the
metazoan lineage. However, this remains to be tested
rigorously through systematic analyses of choanoflagellate orthologues of the post-synaptic genes. Trichoplax
(phylum Placozoa) is a nerve-less animal whose flat and
asymmetric body comprises two epithelial cell layers
enclosing a loose formation of interconnected fibre cells
sandwiched in between [35]. The phylogenetic placement of placozoans remains highly contentious (e.g.
[28,34,36]). Analyses of the Trichoplax genome have
revealed a degree of genetic complexity that was totally
unexpected given its morpho-anatomical simplicity [36].
As the only non-sponge animal lacking a nervous system, Trichoplax is clearly of pivotal importance for
understanding the origin of neural cells and synapses.
The gene set investigated in the present study comprises the main scaffold proteins of the PSD, and their
more significant interacting partners as recognised in
the recent literature (e.g. [15-18]). It is essentially the
gene set analysed in [2]. Similarity searches for PSD proteins were conducted against the genomes of M. brevicollis, T. adhaerens, several non-metazoan eukaryotes
(as outgroups) and a represensative sampling of
metazoan species. Our analyses provide evidence for the
presence of a substantial subset of functionally important scaffold PSD proteins in the common ancestor of
choanoflagellates and metazoans, and for secondary loss
of the master scaffold protein Shank in placozoans.

Methods
Data collection

The protein set examined in this study is listed in Fig. 1
and Additional file 1. It is the same as in ref [2], except
that we discarded GABA-B receptor, Tamalin and LIM
kinase (because we were unable to find evidence from
the literature for physical interaction of these proteins

Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

with the PSD scaffold), as well as Kir and Mint (the latter is a presynaptic adaptor protein [37] ; the former is
a large family of inwardly rectifying potassium channels
which is not particularly associated with the PSD, see
[38]). In addition to the full protein alignments, we built
a separate alignment for PDZ domains (as in ref [2] but
with an extended gene sampling) and constructed specific alignments for the SAM and SH3 domains of Shank.
The starting data set [2] comprised sequences from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Ascomycota, Fungi), plants (Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa), Dictyostelium
discoideum (Ameobozoa), Amphimedon queenslandica
(Demospongiae, Porifera), Nematostella vectensis
(Anthozoa, Cnidaria), Drosophila melanogaster (Hexapoda, Arthropoda) and Homo sapiens. These files were
updated by TBLASTN searches (using proteins from
Drosophila melanogaster as input sequences) on the
most up-to-date collections of predicted transcripts
from plants (Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa),
Dictyostelium discoideum (Ameobozoa), fungi (Batrachochytridium dendrobatidis, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
Neurospora crassa, Ustilago maydis, Rhizopus oryzae),
Monosiga brevicolis (Choanoflagellata), Trichoplax
adhaerens (Placozoa), cnidarians (Hydra magnipapillata,
Hydrozoa, and Nematostella vectensis, Anthozoa), and
Capitella sp. (Lophotrochozoa, Annelida). An E-value
threshold was determined empirically for each protein
family by using the E-value associated with the closest
paralogue retrieved from Blast of the fly protein against
the fly genome (see Additional file 2: E-values used for
each family, with names and accession numbers of the
closest fly paralogues).
Alignments and phylogenetic analyses

Sequences retrieved from Blast searches were automatically integrated into the corresponding alignments and
aligned using CLUSTALW, implemented in our inhouse automated Blast and alignment pipeline. Alignments were slightly corrected manually for elimination
of major mistakes. Ambiguous regions were identified
by visual inspection and removed manually and positions containing more than 80% of missing data were
deleted. When several non-overlapping partial sequences
were present in the same alignment, the alignment was
split into several partitions to avoid artificial grouping in
the trees of non-overlapping sequences (observed in preliminary Maximum Likelihood analyses). These partitions, labelled “A, B, C, ...” (see Additional file 1), were
analysed separately. The alignments are given in Additional file 3.
Maximum-Likelihood (ML) analyses were performed
using the PhyML program [39], with the WAG model
of amino-acid substitution and a BioNJ tree as the input
tree. A gamma distribution with four discrete categories
was used in these ML analyses. The gamma shape

Page 3 of 10

parameter and the proportion of invariant sites were
optimised during the searches. Branch support was
tested with bootstrapping (100 replicates). Bayesian analyses were done with Mr Bayes under the WAG model
(prset=invgamma). For each data set, two searches were
run in parallel for 500,000 generations, representing 20
times the number of generations discarded as burn in
(first 25,000 trees, determined by stabilisation of the
likelihoods). We estimated convergence by checking the
“average standard deviation in partition frequency values
across independent analyses”, using a threshold value of
0.05. Since for most alignments the number of phylogenetically informative positions is low with respect to
the number of sequences, trees contain a high number
of unstable nodes and therefore it was not possible to
constrain searches for convergence with a lower threshold value. In some cases, this threshold of 0.05 was not
reached after 500,000 generations (and concomitantly
stationarity of the likelihoods was not reached after
25,000 generations). Then, burn-in was expanded and
search was prolonged until the index had dropped
below 0.05. Posterior probabilities were estimated by
constructing a majority-rule consensus of trees sampled
every 100 generations. Trees were rooted as in ref [2].
After preliminary (not shown) phylogenetic analyses,
all (protein/species) absences were further tested by
additional Blast searches on the full (when possible,
assembled) nucleotide genome sequences of the corresponding species, with a very relaxed E-value (10) to
ensure that these genes have not been missed due to
limitations of the initial Blast searches (i.e. the use of
predicted transcript data sets, or too strict E-values). In
several cases, these genomic searches detected protein
orthologues that had been missed during initial searches
on predicted transcripts (e.g. IP3R in Hydra magnipapillata; PMCA in Capitella sp.). In these cases, protein
alignments were updated using the procedure described
above, prior to final phylogenetic analyses (trees shown
in Additional file 4).
Orthology assignments

An orthology group is here defined as the clade containing all sequences that are more closely related to the fly
and/or human sequence(s) of reference than to any
paralogue of ancient origin (i.e. resulting from duplication before the last common ancestor of bilaterians).
Our orthology assessments therefore rely primarily on
gene tree topologies, and the yellow fields in Fig. 1 indicate the presence of an orthologue, based on the corresponding gene tree. Three additional criteria were taken
into account to estimate confidence for these orthology
assignments: (i) support values (ML bootstrap support
>= 70% and/or Bayesian posterior probability >= 0.95)
("b” in Fig. 1), (ii) congruence between separate analyses
of partitions of the same protein alignment (labelled A,

Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

Page 4 of 10

Figure 1 Summary of the occurrence of post-synaptic proteins in the investigated genomes. Yellow fields indicate presence of an
orthologue as determined from the corresponding gene tree topology. Letters correspond to the three additional confidence criteria for
orthology assignments defined in the Methods section: b, ML bootstrap value >= 70% and/or Bayesian posterior probability >= 0.95; c,
congruence between at least two partitions of the same protein or between different domains; d, conservation of domain architecture. Note
that Homo and Drosophila have been used as reference taxa for defining the orthology groups.

B, ...: see above) or between different domains of the
same protein ("c” in Fig. 1), (iii) comparison of domain
architectures reconstructed using Smart http://smart.
embl-heidelberg.de/ and Pfam http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/
search. Domain architecture was considered as conserved ("d” in Fig. 1) if the main functional domain(s)
existing in the human and fly proteins were present and
showed similar arrangement. These domain reconstructions are shown in Additional file 5. They were systematically done for the Monosiga and Trichoplax putative
orthologues of human PSD proteins. In addition, we
compared the five C-ter residues of PDZ-binding proteins in search of PDZ ligand conservation (Additional
file 6), but the extent of sequence variability observed
among PDZ ligands across taxa and proteins is so high
that in practice it is generally impossible to conclude
either for or against presence of a PDZ ligand. In addition, intron positions and frames were determined for
the Shank proteins using NCBI sequence viewer (human
and fly proteins) or JGI browse tool (proteins from
Capitella, Nematostella and Monosiga) and the alignment procedure described above.
Reconstruction of protein acquisitions and losses onto
the taxon phylogeny

Presence/absence of the PSD proteins across our species
sampling was formalised into a taxon/character matrix.
These characters were mapped onto the taxon

phylogeny under parsimony and a Dollo model of gene
gain/loss (each protein has been acquired only once no convergence - and proteins can be lost but not reacquired - no reversion). We used the taxon phylogeny
of [34], as it is the most comprehensive phylogenomic
study of basal metazoan relationships to date. This
means in particular that our interpretation of the data
relies upon a hypothesis of eumetazoan monophyly
(here represented by Cnidaria + Bilateria). However,
basal metazoan relationships remain controversial (see
alternative views in [28,29,31]), and the reconstruction
may differ under alternative topologies. Since the relationships between sponges, Trichoplax and eumetazoans
(here represented by cnidarians and bilaterians) were
unsupported in ref [34], the reconstruction was done
under the three possible tree topologies.

Results and Discussion
Reconstructing evolutionary acquisitions and losses of the
major PSD components

Starting from the PSD protein and domain alignments
of ref [2] we have extended the taxonomic coverage by
adding genes retrieved from the complete genomes of
several additional fungal species, the choanoflagellate
Monosiga brevicolis, the placozoan Trichoplax adhaerens, the cnidarian Hydra magnipapillata and the annelid Capitella sp. Protein/domain orthology was

Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

determined based on gene trees (Additional file 4) and
comparison of domain structures (Additional file 5).
Results are summarised in Fig. 1, with a more detailed
overview in Additional file 1. The most parsimonious
reconstruction of protein acquisitions and losses is
shown in Fig. 2 (see less parsimonious reconstructions
obtained for alternative placements of Trichoplax, in
Additional file 7). The inferred order of emergence of
the genes is indicated by a colour code in Fig. 2 and Fig.
3. In Fig. 2, gene gains/losses are labelled in bold when
orthology is supported by at least two criteria of confidence (in addition to gene tree topology; see Fig. 1 and
Methods); otherwise they are labelled in normal font.
PSD components originated in two main steps

Protein acquisitions are concentrated in the two
branches preceding and following the divergence of
choanoflagellates in the opisthokont phylogeny (Fig. 2).
A significant protein set originated in an exclusive
ancestor of choanoflagellates and metazoans. This
includes the scaffold proteins Shank, Homer and DLG,
and the other PSD components CamKII, Citron, Cortactin, Ephrin R, IP3R, PKCabg and Shaker K+ channels.

Page 5 of 10

Another set, including the scaffold proteins CASK,
GKAP and S-SCAM (= Magi), and the other PSD components a and δ-catenin, classical Cadherins, NOS,
LIN-7, PICK1 and SPAR, is synapomorphic for the
Metazoa. Very few proteins are of more ancient origin:
PMCA (present in all investigated eukaryotes), b-catenin
(present in plants and fungi) and CRIPT (present in
plants).
A significant implication is that several core components of the mammalian PSD (red colour in Fig. 3) originated not only before the acquisition of synapses and
nerve cells (absent in sponges and placozoan), but even
before the acquisition of multicellularity, given that the
choanoflagellate-metazoan ancestor was unequivocally
unicellular [1,8]. Notably, the scaffold proteins Shank,
Homer and DLG/PSD95, known in mammalians to
structure the post-synaptic density by linking a huge
variety of target proteins (e.g. membrane receptors,
components of signal transduction pathways, cytoskeleton-interacting proteins, etc.), originated before the
divergence of the choanoflagellates. In our analyses, the
orthology of Homer and DLG between choanoflagellates

Figure 2 Gains (coloured dashes) and losses (ellipses) of post-synaptic proteins reconstructed onto the taxon phylogeny under the
parsimony criterion. Placozoans are here placed as the sister-group to other metazoans. The total number of gains + losses is 45 (see less
parsimonious reconstructions obtained for alternative placements of placozoans in Additional file 6). Events are labelled in bold when the
corresponding gene orthology is supported by at least two confidence criteria in addition to gene tree topology (see explanations in Methods);
otherwise they are labelled in normal font.

Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

Page 6 of 10

Figure 3 Graphic representation of the mammalian post-synaptic density, with the origination period of the genes indicated by the
same colours as in Fig. 2. Domain structures are represented only for scaffold proteins. For most PDZ-binding proteins, the PDZ ligand has
been labelled in grey, because the extent of sequence variability observed among PDZ ligands across taxa and proteins is so high that it is
generally impossible to conclude either for or against the presence of a PDZ ligand (except for CRIPT and δ-cat; see Additional file 4). A darker
red colour has been used for the Shank SAM domain, as it might not have been present in the Shank protein of the common choanoflagellatemetazoan ancestor (see text). Note that the general configuration of the post-synaptic scaffold has been completely re-drawn with respect to [2]
(their Fig. 1), to account for data available in the recent literature (e.g. [17,18]).

and metazoans is well supported by the corresponding
gene trees, the conservation of their domain structure,
high bootstrap support (for Homer) and the congruence
between the evolutionary histories of the domains (for
DLG) (see Fig. 1).
Shank emerged before the divergence of
choanoflagellates

The Shank protein is considered as the “master-scaffolding” molecule of the PSD [17,18]. Our PDZ tree identifies a putative choanoflagellate orthologue of metazoan
Shank PDZs (PDZ tree in Additional file 4). This orthology assignment is not supported by statistical indices,
but several additional lines of evidence argue in favour
of orthology. The Monosiga protein that contains the
putative Shank PDZ shows the combination of proteininteracting domains typical of vertebrate Shanks (N-ter
ankyrin repeats, a SH3 domain, a PDZ domain, and a
SAM C-ter domain), a domain structure that is unique
among vertebrate proteins. Reciprocal Blast searches
support orthology between the ankyrin repeats present
in this Monosiga protein and those of metazoan Shanks
(not shown - note that phylogenetic analyses of ankyrin
repeats are not feasible). In addition, the putative Monosiga Shank protein shares with metazoan Shanks the
presence of a conserved N-terminal 126-amino-acids
region (upstream of the Ankyrin repeats) with no

similarity to any other protein sequence (not shown
result of Blast search against NCBI referenced proteins)
(see alignment of this N-terminal region in Additional
file 8). Within this region, there are two introns with
position conserved down to the phase and present in
metazoan Shanks as well as in the Monosiga protein
(red boxes in the alignment, Additional file 8). Finally,
we analysed SH3 domains and found that the SH3
domain of the Monosiga putative Shank falls in a clade
that contains all metazoan Shank SH3s (and two nonShank SH3s, from Drosophila and Hydra) (see SH3 tree
in Additional file 4).
These observations indicate that Monosiga has a bona
fide orthologue of Shank. Although there is no experimental evidence that in the choanoflagellate cell Shank
acts like its mammalian orthologues, the conserved
domain combination suggests comparable scaffold properties. In addition, some of the proteins known in mammalians to interact directly with Shank (including
Homer, the IP3 receptor, and Cortactin) are also present
in Monosiga.
The history of Shank has been slightly more complex
in the details. Our phylogenetic analyses suggest that
the SAM C-ter domain of Monosiga Shank might not be
orthologous to the SAM domains present in some (but
not all) metazoan Shanks (see SAM tree in Additional

Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

file 4). A SAM domain might thus have been added
independently in choanoflagellate and metazoan Shanks.
This convergence event could have occurred by chance,
or it may have been favoured by similar functional constraints acting on the Shank protein. A second peculiarity of choanoflagellate Shank is that its SH3 domain is
located between PDZ and SAM, whereas in metazoans
it is placed between the Ank repeats and the PDZ
domain, indicating that a domain inversion took place
in one of these two lineages. We compared intron positions along the Shank proteins of metazoans and Monosiga without finding evidence for or against this
hypothesis of domain inversion (Additional file 8).
Evolution of the PSD protein repertoire within the
Metazoa

Compared to the gene complement present in eumetazoan genomes, different gene subsets happen to be
absent in the two nerve-less species Amphimedon queenslandica (sponge) and Trichoplax adhaerens (placozoan).
This makes the reconstruction of acquisition/losses in
this region of the tree highly sensitive to the phylogenetic
placement of placozoans with respect to sponges and
eumetazoans. Trichoplax lacks orthologues of Shank
(present in Monosiga, sponges and eumetazoans), GRIP,
ErbB R, mGluR and SynGAP (present in sponges and at
least some eumetazoans). If Trichoplax is the sistergroup to other metazoans (Fig. 2), then GRIP, ErbB R,
mGluR, and SynGAP were absent in the metazoan ancestor and are synapomorphic for sponges + eumetazoans
(brown colour in Fig. 2 and 3). The same taxon phylogeny implies secondary loss of a-catenin and CASK (present in Trichoplax and in eumetazoans) in the sponge
lineage. Alternative taxon phylogenies (e.g. Trichoplax
sister-group to eumetazoans as in [34]) imply secondary
losses of GRIP, ErbB R, mGluR and SynGAP in placozoans (Additional file 7). Whatever the position of placozoans, the parsimony optimisation suggests secondary loss
of Shank in Trichoplax adhaerens.
The apparent loss of Shank in placozoans is particularly puzzling as Shank is the main protein responsible
for the higher-order structure of the PSD in mammals
[18]. However, alternative scenarios cannot be ruled
out at this stage, e.g., Shank could have been overlooked due to incomplete coverage of the T. adhaerens
genome (currently 8×), or the gene might have
diverged in the placozoan lineage to the extent that it
is no longer recognisable, or it might have been lost in
Trichoplax adhaerens but not in other placozoan species. If confirmed by future studies, loss of Shank in
placozoans would imply disruption or at least considerable alteration of the macromolecular architecture of
the PSD-like protein complex. In addition, the Trichoplax situation is somewhat difficult to understand

Page 7 of 10

when it is realised that Homer and Cortactin, known
as direct Shank partners in mammals and present in
the Monosiga genome, are still present in Trichoplax
despite apparent absence of Shank. As an alternative
possibility, Shank could have been replaced by another
protein. Functional work is certainly needed in Trichoplax to determine the molecular interactions and cellular functions of these proteins. Whether these genes
are expressed in the fibre cells, proposed by some [40]
to represent a placozan neural-like cell type, will be
important to assess. However, placozoans are not likely
to teach us much about the ancestral properties and
functions of PSD proteins prior to the emergence of a
nervous system, because the absence of Shank (if confirmed) makes their PSD-like complex totally
idiosyncratic.
Whereas the emergence of nerve cells and synapses in a
eumetazoan ancestor was seemingly not accompanied by a
significant expansion of the PSD complex in terms of protein number, the few proteins acquired in this branch are
significant with respect to neural function. They include
the ionotropic glutamate receptors NMDAR (involved in
synaptic transmission) and the Neuroligins (involved in
synaptic adhesion and signalling in synaptogenesis,
through interaction with their ligands the Neurexins
[41,42]). Within eumetazoans, we inferred a few protein
losses: ErbB receptor and GRIP (a scaffold protein) in cnidarians, a-catenin and Neuroligin in Hydra, SPAR in protostomians, Erbin in Drosophila and ErbB receptor in the
annelid Capitella. Curiously enough, there is no concomitant loss of proteins known to interact with each other (e.
g. losses of Erbin are not associated with losses of the
ErbB receptor), suggesting that proteome and interactome
evolved to a large extent independently, or that protein
interactions in non-model organisms differ substantially
from what happens in the mammalian synapse.
What were the ancestral functions of the PSD protein
complex?

Comparative genomics contributes to our understanding
of hierarchy in biological systems, by sorting ancient
components from more recent additions, a basis for
making predictions about ancestral interactions and
functions. In bilaterian animals, the PSD is tightly linked
functionally to intercellular signalling at the synapse.
However, the proto-PSD of the choanoflagellate/
metazoan ancestor (red + violet colours in Fig. 3) was
probably not involved in intercellular signalling, since all
post-synaptic membrane receptors linked to the mammalian PSD (the different kinds of glutamate receptors,
Neuroligin, ErbB receptor, receptor domain of the
Ephrin receptor) are of more recent origin. In addition,
the global structure of the ancestral proto-PSD, which
lacks several important scaffold proteins (GRIP, S-

Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

SCAM, CASK), was certainly much simpler than that of
the mammalian PSD.
Shank and its conserved direct or indirect partners
appear to form the ancestral core of the post-synaptic
protein complex (Fig. 3). The associated functions are
actin cytoskeleton regulation (Homer links actin to
Shank; the actin-regulating protein Cortactin binds to
Shank) and Ca2+ signalling (Homer links the IP3 receptor to Shank; CaMKII and PKCabg, also involved in Ca2
+
signalling, are present in the choanoflagellate genome).
It is thereby proposed here that the main function of
the ancestral Shank interactome was to provide a link
between intracellular Ca2+ signalling and actin cytoskeleton regulation.
The DLG scaffold protein might have ancestrally
formed the centre of an additional interactome, possibly
independent from the Shank module (GKAP, the physical link between DLG and Shank in mammals, is absent
in Monosiga). We identified three DLG partners with
clear orthologues in the choanoflagellate genome:
CRIPT (a microtubule-interacting protein [43]), the K+
channel Shaker, and the Ca2+ plasma membrane channel
PMCA. The choanoflagellate orthologue of Citron (a
Rho target) is not likely to interact with DLG as in
mammalians because only the most N-ter part of the
protein shows homology with mammalian Citron (Fig.
3). These observations suggest ancestral functions of the
DLG interactome in concentrating cation channels on
particular plasma membrane areas, and in providing a
link between these channels and the regulation of
microtubule polymerisation.
From a morphological point of view, the choanoflagellate + metazoan clade is characterised by a unique synapomorphy: acquisition of an apical cell complex with a
central flagellum surrounded by a collar of microvilli.
This is suggested by the close resemblance between apical cell complexes of choanoflagellates and of sponge
choanocytes [44]. According to some [45], this flagellum-collar structure would be homologous with the apical complex of eumetazoan sensory cells. Because
choanoflagellate collar microvilli are contractile and
labile structures (suggesting highly dynamic regulation),
and because their cytoskeleton is principally made of Factin, it is tempting to speculate about a possible functional link between the emergence of the proto-PSD and
the acquisition of the flagellum-collar apical complex.
This hypothesis can be tested by determining the subcellular localisation and function of the key proteins
Shank, Homer and DLG in Monosiga. Another stimulating path for future investigation on the ancestral functions of core PSD components will involve the
characterisation of physical interactions between the
various choanoflagellate PSD-like proteins.

Page 8 of 10

Conclusion
The backbone of the post-synaptic density, notably featuring the scaffold proteins Shank, Homer and DLG,
was acquired in a common ancestor of choanoflagellates
and metazoans, in a unicellular context. It was probably
not involved in cell-cell communication, but rather in
linking transmembrane cation currents, calcium signalling, and cytoskeleton regulation. Future investigations
on complete genome sequences of unicellular opisthokonts that are more closely related to the choanoflagellate + metazoan clade than to Fungi (ichthyosporids and
Capsaspora) [1] might happen to push even earlier the
period of origination of these proteins.
After the addition of several novel components
(among which GKAP, the link between DLG and Shank,
and the CASK/S-SCAM/classical cadherin interactome),
metazoan ancestors became endowed with a nearly
complete set of PSD proteins (violet + red + blue colours in Fig. 3). Proteins that are specifically involved in
synaptic transmission (i.e. AMPAR, NMDAR and
mGluR) or adhesion (neuroligin) in eumetazoans were
nevertheless absent from this ancestral animal repertoire
(except possibly for mGluRs, present in the metazoan
ancestor if Trichoplax is not the basal-most lineage, see
Additional file 7). This suggests that PSD proteins
ancestrally acted in a non-synaptic context, in consistence with the probable monophyly of Eumetazoa [34]
and its corollary, that the last common ancestor of all
metazoan animals was nerve-less. In this ancestor, the
PSD-like complex was probably a sub-membrane platform for bringing together molecules involved in cation
currents, Ca2+ and other signalling pathways, and cytoskeleton regulation, possibly (but not necessarily) in relation to cell sensitivity to external stimuli. The complex
later became integrated into the evolving synapse, in a
eumetazan ancestor, through the addition of novel proteins and functionalities.
Additional file 1: Detailed overview of the results from the
phylogenetic analyses. Grey lines: presence or absence of orthologue(s)
for each protein group in each species. White lines: number of
orthologues (if any) identified for each alignment or alignment partition.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1034-S1.XLS ]
Additional file 2: Table indicating the threshold E-values used for
Blast searches for each family of investigated genes, and the
closest paralogue retrieved from the fly genome.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1034-S2.XLS ]
Additional file 3: Protein sequence alignments used for
phylogenetic analyses. The alignments are in Phylip format.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1034-S3.RAR ]

Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

Additional file 4: Maximum Likelihood phylogenetic trees of the
post-synaptic proteins and of the PDZ, SAM and SH3 domains
(arranged in alphabetic order). Maximum likelihood boostraps (ML bs)
and Bayesian posterior probabilities (Bay pp) are indicated only for the
main orthology groups. Abbreviations for taxon names: Aqu =
Amphimedon queenslandica, Ath = Arabidopsis thaliana, Bde =
Batrachochytridium dendrobatidis, Cca = Capitellasp., Ddi = Dictyostelium
discoideum, Dme = Drosophila melanogaster, Hma = Hydra
magnipapillata, Hsa = Homo sapiens, Mbr = Monosiga brevicolis, Ncr =
Neurospora crassa, Nve = Nematostella vectensis, Osa = Oryza sativa, Ror =
Rhizopus oryzae, Sce = Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Tad = Trichoplax
adhaerens, Uma = Ustilago maydis. Except for plant, yeast, slime mold,
sponge, fly and human sequences, genes are named by using a neutral
code consisting in the taxon abbreviation followed by a letter (different
for each protein family) and a number. Thanks to this label, a given gene
can be identified across different partitions of the same alignment or
different domains of the same protein (e.g. for Shank in the PDZ, SAM
and SH3 trees).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1034-S4.PDF ]
Additional file 5: Domain architectures of selected members of the
post-synaptic gene families (in alphabetic order). Abbreviations used
in displays for taxon names are as in Additional file 2.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1034-S5.PDF ]
Additional file 6: The C-ter five residues of the PDZ-binding postsynaptic proteins, for metazoan species and Monosiga.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1034-S6.XLS ]
Additional file 7: Gains (coloured dashes) and losses (ellipses) of
post-synaptic proteins reconstructed with placozoans as the sistergroup to sponges, and with placozoans as the sister-group to
eumetazoans. The number of gains + losses is indicated for each tree.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1034-S7.PDF ]
Additional file 8: Comparison of intron positions in the Shank
proteins of metazoans and Monosiga. Overview of intron distribution
along the whole protein sequences (A) and detailed view of intron
position on the alignment of the N-terminal region upstream of the
Ankyrin repeats (B).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1034-S8.DOC ]

Page 9 of 10

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.
10.
11.

12.
13.

14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

23.
Acknowledgements
We thank Sylvie Retaux and Hervé Le Guyader for insightful advice. We are
grateful to Philippe Lopez for help with the phylogenetic analyses. This work
was supported by a grant from the GIS “Institut de la Génomique Marine” ANR “programme blanc” NT_NV_52 Genocnidaire.

24.

25.

Authors’ contributions
AA and MM conceived and designed the analyses. AA performed the data
collection and the analyses. MM drew the figures. AA and MM wrote the
paper. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.

26.

Received: 13 July 2009
Accepted: 3 February 2010 Published: 3 February 2010

28.

References
1. Ruiz-Trillo I, Roger AJ, Burger G, Gray MW, Lang BF: A phylogenomic
investigation into the origin of metazoa. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:664-72.
2. Sakarya O, Armstrong KA, Adamska M, et al: A post-synaptic scaffold at
the origin of the animal kingdom. PLoS ONE 2007, 2:e506.

27.

29.

Putnam NH, Srivastava M, Hellsten U, et al: Sea anemone genome reveals
ancestral eumetazoan gene repertoire and genomic organization.
Science 2007, 317:86-94.
Grimson A, Srivastava M, Fahey B, et al: Early origins and evolution of
microRNAs and Piwi-interacting RNAs in animals. Nature 2008,
455:1193-1197.
Exposito J, Larroux C, Cluzel C, et al: Demosponge and sea anemone
fibrillar collagen diversity reveals the early emergence of A/C clades and
the maintenance of the modular structure of type V/XI collagens from
sponge to human. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:28226-28235.
Manning G, Young SL, Miller WT, Zhai Y: From the Cover: The protist,
Monosiga brevicollis, has a tyrosine kinase signaling network more
elaborate and diverse than found in any known metazoan. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:9674-9679.
Larroux C, Luke GN, Koopman P, et al: Genesis and expansion of
metazoan transcription factor gene classes. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:980-96.
King N, Westbrook MJ, Young SL, et al: The genome of the
choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis and the origin of metazoans.
Nature 2008, 451:783-8.
Rokas A: The origins of multicellularity and the early history of the
genetic toolkit for animal development. Annu Rev Genet 2008, 42:235-251.
Kosik KS: Exploring the early origins of the synapse by comparative
genomics. Biol Lett 2009, 5:108-111.
Collins MO, Husi H, Yu L, et al: Molecular characterization and comparison
of the components and multiprotein complexes in the postsynaptic
proteome. J Neurochem 2006, 97(1):16-23.
Grant SGN: The synapse proteome and phosphoproteome: a new
paradigm for synapse biology. Biochem Soc Trans 2006, 34:59-63.
Pocklington AJ, Armstrong JD, Grant SGN: Organization of brain
complexity–synapse proteome form and function. Brief Funct Genomic
Proteomic 2006, 5:66-73.
Klemmer P, Smit AB, Li KW: Proteomics analysis of immuno-precipitated
synaptic protein complexes. J Proteomics 2009, 72:82-90.
Yamauchi T: Molecular constituents and phosphorylation-dependent
regulation of the post-synaptic density. Mass Spectrom Rev 2002,
21:266-286.
Nishimura W, Yao I, Iida J, Tanaka N, Hata Y: Interaction of synaptic
scaffolding molecule and Beta-catenin. J Neurosci 2002, 22:757-765.
Boeckers TM: The postsynaptic density. Cell Tissue Res 2006, 326:409-422.
Kreienkamp H: Scaffolding proteins at the postsynaptic density: shank as
the architectural framework. Handb Exp Pharmacol 2008, 365-380.
Ehlers MD: Molecular morphogens for dendritic spines. Trends Neurosci
2002, 25:64-67.
Vessey JP, Karra D: More than just synaptic building blocks: scaffolding
proteins of the post-synaptic density regulate dendritic patterning. J
Neurochem 2007, 102:324-332.
Shiraishi-Yamaguchi Y, Furuichi T: The Homer family proteins. Genome Biol
2007, 8:206.
Richards GS, Simionato E, Perron M, et al: Sponge genes provide new
insight into the evolutionary origin of the neurogenic circuit. Curr Biol
2008, 18:1156-61.
Nielsen C: Six major steps in animal evolution: are we derived sponge
larvae?. Evol Dev 2008, 10:241-257.
Medina M, Collins AG, Silberman JD, Sogin ML: Evaluating hypotheses of
basal animal phylogeny using complete sequences of large and small
subunit rRNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:9707-9712.
Manuel M, Borchiellini C, Alivon E, et al: Phylogeny and evolution of
calcareous sponges: monophyly of calcinea and calcaronea, high level
of morphological homoplasy, and the primitive nature of axial
symmetry. Syst Biol 2003, 52:311-333.
Nielsen C: Animal evolution: interrelationships of the living phyla. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2 2001.
Brusca RC, Brusca GJ: Invertebrates Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 2
2003.
Schierwater B, Eitel M, Jakob W, et al: Concatenated analysis sheds light
on early metazoan evolution and fuels a modern “urmetazoon”
hypothesis. PLoS Biol 2009, 7:e20.
Dunn CW, Hejnol A, Matus DQ, et al: Broad phylogenomic sampling
improves resolution of the animal tree of life. Nature 2008, 452:745-9.

Alié and Manuel BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:34
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/34

Page 10 of 10

30. Dellaporta SL, Xu A, Sagasser S, et al: Mitochondrial genome of Trichoplax
adhaerens supports placozoa as the basal lower metazoan phylum. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:8751-8756.
31. Hejnol A, Obst M, Stamatakis A, et al: Assessing the root of bilaterian
animals with scalable phylogenomic methods. Proc Biol Sci 2009,
276(1677):4261-70.
32. Miller DJ, Ball EE: Animal evolution: Trichoplax, trees, and taxonomic
turmoil. Curr Biol 2008, 18:R1003-1005.
33. Telford MJ: Animal evolution: once upon a time. Curr Biol 2009, 19:
R339-341.
34. Philippe H, Derelle R, Lopez P, et al: Phylogenomics revives traditional
views on deep animal relationships. Curr Biol 2009, 19:706-712.
35. Schierwater B, de Jong D, Desalle R: Placozoa and the evolution of
Metazoa and intrasomatic cell differentiation. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009,
41:370-379.
36. Srivastava M, Begovic E, Chapman J, et al: The Trichoplax genome and the
nature of placozoans. Nature 2008, 454:955-60.
37. Zamponi GW: Regulation of presynaptic calcium channels by synaptic
proteins. J Pharmacol Sci 2003, 92:79-83.
38. Neusch C, Weishaupt JH, Bähr M: Kir channels in the CNS: emerging new
roles and implications for neurological diseases. Cell and Tissue Research
2003, 311:131-138.
39. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
40. Hadrys T, DeSalle R, Sagasser S, Fischer N, Schierwater B: The Trichoplax
PaxB gene: a putative Proto-PaxA/B/C gene predating the origin of
nerve and sensory cells. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:1569-1578.
41. Gerrow K, El-Husseini A: Cell adhesion molecules at the synapse. Front
Biosci 2006, 11:2400-2419.
42. Dalva MB, McClelland AC, Kayser MS: Cell adhesion molecules: signalling
functions at the synapse. Nat Rev Neurosci 2007, 8:206-220.
43. Passafaro M, Sala C, Niethammer M, Sheng M: Microtubule binding by
CRIPT and its potential role in the synaptic clustering of PSD-95. Nat
Neurosci 1999, 2:1063-1069.
44. Maldonado M: Choanoflagellates, choanocytes, and animal
multicellularity. Invert Biol 2004, 123:1-22.
45. Jacobs DK, Nakanishi N, Yuan D, Camara A, Nichols SA, Hartenstein V:
Evolution of sensory structures in basal metazoa. Integr Comp Biol 2007,
47:712-723.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-34
Cite this article as: Alié and Manuel: The backbone of the post-synaptic
density originated in a unicellular ancestor of choanoflagellates and
metazoans. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:34.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
