<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The model marine diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana likely descended from a freshwater ancestor in the genus Cyclotella</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:125. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-125"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content="Cyclotella nana; diatom; freshwater; marine; model species; Thalassiosira pseudonana"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Andrew J Alverson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Alverson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:125
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/125

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The model marine diatom Thalassiosira
pseudonana likely descended from a freshwater
ancestor in the genus Cyclotella
Andrew J Alverson1*, Bánk Beszteri2, Matthew L Julius3 and Edward C Theriot4

Abstract
Background: Publication of the first diatom genome, that of Thalassiosira pseudonana, established it as a model
species for experimental and genomic studies of diatoms. Virtually every ensuing study has treated T. pseudonana
as a marine diatom, with genomic and experimental data valued for their insights into the ecology and evolution
of diatoms in the world’s oceans.
Results: The natural distribution of T. pseudonana spans both marine and fresh waters, and phylogenetic analyses
of morphological and molecular datasets show that, 1) T. pseudonana marks an early divergence in a major
freshwater radiation by diatoms, and 2) as a species, T. pseudonana is likely ancestrally freshwater. Marine strains
therefore represent recent recolonizations of higher salinity habitats. In addition, the combination of a relatively
nondescript form and a convoluted taxonomic history has introduced some confusion about the identity of T.
pseudonana and, by extension, its phylogeny and ecology. We resolve these issues and use phylogenetic criteria to
show that T. pseudonana is more appropriately classified by its original name, Cyclotella nana. Cyclotella contains a
mix of marine and freshwater species and so more accurately conveys the complexities of the phylogenetic and
natural histories of T. pseudonana.
Conclusions: The multitude of physical barriers that likely must be overcome for diatoms to successfully colonize
freshwaters suggests that the physiological traits of T. pseudonana, and the genes underlying those traits, might
differ from those of strictly marine diatoms. The freshwater ancestry of T. pseudonana might therefore confound
generalizations about the physiological and metabolic properties of marine diatoms. The freshwater component of
T. pseudonana’s history merits careful consideration in the interpretation of experimental data collected for this
important model species.
Keywords: Cyclotella nana, diatom, freshwater, marine, model species, Thalassiosira pseudonana

Background
Diatoms are unicellular photosynthetic algae with secondary, red-algal-derived plastids [1]. With total diversity estimates in the tens to hundreds of thousands of species,
diatoms are one of the most diverse lineages of eukaryotes
[2] and are critically important to the ecology of both marine and fresh waters. Marine diatoms alone account for
roughly one-fifth of global net primary production [3].
Efforts to understand the ecology and evolution of diatoms
* Correspondence: alversoa@indiana.edu
1
Indiana University, Department of Biology, 1001 East Third Street,
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

were catapulted forward when the first diatom genome,
from a marine strain of Thalassiosira pseudonana (Hustedt) Hasle et Heimdal, was published in 2004 [4]. The
genome revealed unanticipated metabolic pathways and
gave a first glimpse into the mosaic nature of diatom
nuclear genomes, which contain a mix of genetic material
from the stramenopile host cell, diverse bacterial donors,
and a succession of green and red algal endosymbionts
[4-6].
In addition to its small (32 Mb) genome size, T. pseudonana was chosen for genome sequencing because it is generally considered representative of the large, widespread
and predominantly marine genus Thalassiosira [4,7].

© 2011 Alverson et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Alverson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:125
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/125

Although T. pseudonana has long been used in experimental studies [8-10], its genome sequence established it as the
premier model for genome-enabled diatom research
[11,12] on topics ranging from nutrient storage and metabolism [13-15] to silica biomineralization [16-19]. Data
from these studies are often valued for their insights into
the ecology and evolution of marine diatoms and, in turn,
their determinant roles in the biogeochemical cycling of
nutrients in the world’s oceans [12]. Many of these inferences rest on the important assumption that T. pseudonana
is a representative model for marine diatoms [20]. We
summarize the phylogenetic and natural histories of
T. pseudonana and show that it most likely descended
from a freshwater ancestor. This portion of its history may
have shaped several important physiological traits and the
genes underlying those traits, confounding extrapolations
to the biology of strictly marine diatoms. Finally, its relatively nondescript form and convoluted taxonomic history
have introduced some confusion about the identity of
T. pseudonana and, by extension, its phylogenetic and ecological histories. We resolve these issues and use phylogenetic criteria to show that T. pseudonana is more
appropriately classified by its original name, Cyclotella
nana Hustedt.

Page 2 of 8

*
*

*

T. pseudonana
T. pseudonana
*
*
*

*

*
*
*

*

*

*

A combined phylogenetic analysis of two chloroplast
(psbC and rbcL) and two nuclear (SSU and partial LSU
rDNA) genes strongly and unambiguously resolved the
phylogenetic position of T. pseudonana as sister to a
clade of marine and freshwater species in the genus
Cyclotella (Figure 1). This clade includes C. meneghiniana, which has been cited as an exemplar cosmopolitan
freshwater diatom [21], and C. tecta, which is the
nomenclatural type of the genus Cyclotella (Figure 1).
The phylogeny also shows that members of the genus
Thalassiosira are distributed across 10 different lineages
within the Thalassiosirales (Figure 1). Among these, the
lineages that include T. pseudonana and T. nordenskioeldii (the nomenclatural type of the genus Thalassiosira)
are only distantly related (Figure 1).
We extended a previous morphologically based phylogenetic analysis of Thalassiosirales [22] to include T. pseudonana, C. meneghiniana, and two recently described genera,
Conticribra and Spicaticribra [23,24], both of which have
morphological features that suggest a close relationship to
the T. pseudonana+C. meneghiniana clade. The full morphological tree is shown in Additional File 1. Like the molecular phylogeny, morphological data also resolve T.
pseudonana into a clade with C. meneghiniana (Figure 2).
Conticribra tricircularis, which is known only from freshwaters [24], is sister to this clade (Figure 2).

*
*

*

*

*

M

*

*

*

M

*
*

*

*

*
*

Results
The phylogeny and evolutionary ecology of Thalassiosira
pseudonana

*

P. pseudodenticulata
P. glacialis
L. annulata
T. gessneri
T. guillardii
T. weissflogii
Thalassiosira sp.

*

*

*
*
*

M

*

*

*

M

*

*
*

*
*

freshwater

*
*

*

marine

*

*
*
*

*

*

C. tecta (type)
C. striata
C. stylorum
C. atomus
Cyclotella sp.
Cyclotella sp.
C. cf. cryptica
C. cf. cryptica
C. gamma
C. meneghiniana
C. meneghiniana
C. meneghiniana
C. meneghiniana
T. oceanica
S. subsalsum
S. menzelii
S. japonicum
S. pseudocostatum
S. grethae
T. nodulolineata
T. anguste-lineata
T. mediterranea
T. angulata
T. minuscula
T. antarctica
T. rotula
T. eccentrica
T. punctigera
T. tumida
Sh. oestrupii
Sh. ritscheri
D. pumila
T. aestivalis
M. trioculatus
T. minima
T. nordenskioeldii (type)
Thalassiosira sp.
Bacterosira sp.
B. bathyomphala
Di. pseudostelligera
Di. apseudostelligera
Di. stelligera
C. bodanica
C. ocellata
Cs. tholiformis
Cs. invisitatus
Cyclostephanos sp.
St. yellowstonensis
St. agassizensis
St. parvus
St. minutulus

*
Figure 1 Phylogeny of the diatom order Thalassiosirales based
on a Bayesian analysis of four concatenated genes. Pie graphs
at internal nodes show the relative maximum likelihood support for
the inferred ancestral habitat type, and asterisks show that the more
strongly supported ancestral habitat type is significantly better than
the alternative. Arrows represent inferred marine-to-freshwater (blue)
and freshwater-to-marine (white) colonization events. Dashed lines
identify nodes with <0.95 Bayesian posterior probability support,
and lineages containing potentially strong candidates for alternative
model marine diatoms are marked with “M.” Cyclotella tecta and
Thalassiosira nordenskioeldii are the nomenclatural types ("type”) for
their respective genera. Genus abbreviations are: Bacterosira (B),
Cyclotella (C), Cyclostephanos (Cs), Detonula (D), Discostella (Di),
Lauderia (L), Minidiscus (M), Porosira (P), Shionodiscus (Sh),
Skeletonema (S), Stephanodiscus (St), and Thalassiosira (T). The figure
is modified from ref. [25].

Alverson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:125
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/125

Thalassiosira sp.
T. gessneri
T. lacustris
T. weissflogii

marine
freshwater
both/ambiguous

Conticribra

T. pseudonana
Spicaticribra
Cyclotella meneghiniana

Figure 2 Phylogenetic analysis of morphological characters
places the model marine diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana
within a clade of freshwater diatoms. Ancestral states were
reconstructed using parsimony. The full tree is shown in Additional
File 1.

Molecular phylogenetic analyses included both marine
and freshwater strains of T. pseudonana, and these
always formed a strongly supported clade [25]. The
close relationship of these strains to T. pseudonana
strain CCMP1335, which had its genome sequenced [4],
is supported by their near-identical chloroplast psbC
and rbcL genes and nuclear SSU and partial LSU rDNA
genes (Additional file 2). Maximum likelihood reconstructions show that the common ancestor of the clade
that includes T. pseudonana, C. meneghiniana, and
C. tecta was most likely a freshwater diatom (Figure 1).
Although the proportional likelihood strongly supports
this conclusion (0.76 vs. 0.24), the difference is not statistically significant (Figure 1). However, morphological
data place the monotypic freshwater genus Conticribra
as sister to the T. pseudonana+C. meneghiniana clade,
which unambiguously optimizes the common ancestor
of the T. pseudonana+C. meneghiniana clade as freshwater in this analysis (Figure 2). Finally, the common
ancestor of the two T. pseudonana strains was likely
freshwater as well (Figure 1).
The identity of Thalassiosira pseudonana

The combination of a relatively nondescript morphology
and a series of three name changes over the years [26-29]
has led to some uncertainty about the identity of T. pseudonana (Additional file 3). Several species are frequently
confused with T. pseudonana, and two of these, T. guillardii and T. oceanica, were initially included under a broader
concept of T. pseudonana (Additional file 4; ref. [30]).
Resolution of these taxonomic and nomenclatural uncertainties required observation of the original sample (the
“type material”) from which T. pseudonana—originally
named Cyclotella nana—was described (Additional file 5;
ref. [29]).
Several small Thalassiosirales were found in the C. nana
type material (Additional file 6), but the most common
small diatom encountered matches both the original

Page 3 of 8

description of C. nana [29] and the traditional concept of
T. pseudonana (Figure 3; refs. [28-34]). All of these diatoms, and those used for phylogenetic reconstruction
(Figure 1) and genome sequencing [4], are small (less than
10 μm diameter), circular, radially symmetric diatoms with
0-3 central-area strutted processes, numerous marginalarea strutted processes with three satellite pores each, and
a labiate process situated between two marginal-area
strutted processes (Figure 3 and Additional file 7). Ultrastructural features of the strutted processes are phylogenetically informative [25], and the strutted processes of all
these diatoms have prominent, raised cowlings around the
satellite pores and a more-or-less prominent siliceous
ridge (opercle) on the central strutted process tube,
situated directly above the corresponding satellite pore
(Figure 3 and Additional file 7).
Taken together, molecular and morphological evidence
lead us to conclude that the model T. pseudonana strain
CCMP1335 [4] and the culture strains used in molecular
phylogenetic analyses (Figure 1) are all conspecific with
specimens originally described as Cyclotella nana (Additional file 4).

Discussion
Robustness of phylogenetic results and ancestral
reconstructions

Our conclusions about the ancestry of T. pseudonana
rest primarily on the assumption that our analyses have
accurately resolved its position within the broader Thalassiosirales phylogeny. As suggested by the numerous
taxonomic and nomenclatural uncertainties (Additional
files 3 and 4), T. pseudonana has gross morphological
similarities to species of Thalassiosira, Cyclotella, and
Discostella. In fact, T. pseudonana is commonly confused
with several species of Discostella and Thalassiosira (viz.,
the purely freshwater species D. pseudostelligera and the
purely marine species T. guillardii and T. oceanica). We
included each of these species in our molecular dataset,
and they all resolved well away from T. pseudonana
(Figure 1). Cyclotella and Thalassiosira are especially
large and morphologically diverse genera, though years of
monographic research have led to numerous informally
recognized morphological groups within each of them
[34-43]. Our molecular dataset includes at least one
representative from each of the informally designated
groups within both Thalassiosira and Cyclotella. By sampling much of the known range of morphological diversity within these two genera, we have included many of
the lineages within the Thalassiosirales phylogeny where
one might predict T. pseudonana to fall.
The molecular dataset ultimately resolved T. pseudonana as sister to a clade that includes the C. meneghiniana species complex and the nomenclatural type of the
genus Cyclotella, C. tecta. Comparing phylogenies

Alverson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:125
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/125

Page 4 of 8

Figure 3 Scanning electron micrographs of three ecologically diverse representatives of Thalassiosira pseudonana. (A-C) Marine culture
strain CCMP1335 whose genome was sequenced; (D-F) freshwater specimens from the original type collection for the species from the River
Wümme, Germany; (G-I) freshwater culture strain ETC1 from Lake Erie, Michigan, used in molecular phylogenetic analyses (Figure 1). The first and
second rows show the cell exterior and interior, respectively (scale bar = 1 μm), and the third row shows the interior ultrastructure of the
strutted process (scale bar = 200 nm).

derived from morphological and molecular datasets is a
powerful way to detect phylogenetic incongruence, or
likewise, to strengthen an existing phylogenetic hypothesis based on just one of the two data types [44].
Despite their different and largely non-overlapping
taxon sampling schemes, the molecular and morphological datasets were congruent in their placement of
T. pseudonana as sister to Cyclotella (Figures 1 and 2).
Moreover, there was also congruence between morphology and molecules for the larger set of taxa common to
both datasets, viz: (T. gessneri, (T. weissflogii, (T. pseudonana, C. meneghiniana))).
Our habitat codings were based on the habitat from
which each culture originally was isolated. Although an
individual culture strain might not capture the full range
of genetic and phenotypic variability of its species, coding
a culture strain by its natural habitat is conceptually similar to the common practice of representing a species in
phylogenetic analyses with gene sequences from a single
individual. Thalassiosira pseudonana can tolerate a wide
range of salinities [30], so we could have coded each of
the strains in our analyses as simply “euryhaline.” For our

purposes, however, individually coding each strain
according to its natural habitat should have been more
conservative, in that it allowed for a marine ancestral
state reconstruction for both T. pseudonana and the
nodes immediately surrounding it.
Although future data might show that some of the
T. pseudonana strains considered here represent different
biological species, it is not clear that those species would
necessarily resolve along marine-freshwater lines. The
finding by Guillard and Ryther [30] that three different
T. pseudonana clones (3H, 5A and e.p.) maintained high
growth rates from 0.5-37‰ salinity supports the hypothesis that T. pseudonana is, in fact, a single species that tolerates a wide range of salinities. Finally, the reconstruction
of a freshwater ancestor for T. pseudonana (Figure 1)
applies regardless of whether marine and freshwater
strains are considered the same, or different, species.
To summarize, phylogenetic analyses place T. pseudonana as sister to a predominately freshwater clade of diatoms in the genus Cyclotella. The congruence between
the molecular and morphological datasets provides especially strong support for this result [44]. Ancestral state

Alverson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:125
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/125

reconstructions showed that the common ancestor of this
clade was either unequivocally freshwater (morphological
data, parsimony analysis) or likely freshwater (molecular
data, likelihood analysis). Like any hypothesis, the results
are potentially subject to change as new data become
available or different character codings are used, but with
respect to T. pseudonana, phylogenetic results and ancestral state reconstructions appear to be at least moderately
robust to taxon sampling, data type, and optimality
criterion.
Is Thalassiosira pseudonana a good model for marine
diatoms?

The tremendous importance of marine diatoms in global
carbon fixation and marine food webs understandably
compelled Armbrust et al. [4] to choose a marine diatom
as the first for whole-genome sequencing [7]. Thalassiosira pseudonana belongs to the large and predominantly
marine genus Thalassiosira and so was reasonably considered representative of that genus and of marine diatoms
more broadly [7]. Subsequent phylogenetic analyses
showed, however, that members of the genus Thalassiosira are spread across some 10 distinct evolutionary
lineages (Figure 1). The extent of independent, unshared
evolutionary history distinguishing these 10 lineages from
one another is such that no single model species can possibly capture all of the diverse ecological, metabolic, and
genomic properties of “Thalassiosira”—a prediction
increasingly borne out by experimental and genomic data
[45-47]. Of course, no one would expect uniformity across
such a broad range of species diversity, but their shared
classification in the genus Thalassiosira falsely suggests
that the taxa in these 10 lineages constitute a more biologically coherent group than the phylogeny reveals them to
be (Figure 1). The persistence of this, or any, misinformative classification represents a failure by systematists—ourselves included—to provide a phylogenetically based, and
therefore biologically informative, alternative. Such an
alternative would facilitate, for example, ecologically based
selection of model species.
Salinity preference provides a glaring example of a trait
that varies considerably across the 10 lineages of Thalassiosira, and Thalassiosirales as a whole (Figure 1). With a
distribution that spans both marine and freshwater habitats, T. pseudonana embodies this variation. The evolutionary history of Thalassiosirales includes just a few
major freshwater diversifications [25], and T. pseudonana
marks an early divergence in one of them (Figure 1). In
fact, phylogenetic analyses and formal mapping of habitat
preference onto phylogenetic trees show that, 1) T. pseudonana is part of a large clade that is likely ancestrally
freshwater (Figures 1 and 2), and 2) as a species, T. pseudonana is likely ancestrally freshwater as well (Figure 1). If
so, these data suggest that marine strains of T. pseudonana

Page 5 of 8

represent recent recolonizations of higher salinity habitats
by a derived freshwater ancestor (Figures 1 and 2).
Parker et al. [20] keenly raised the question as to how
well our current selection of model microalgae represent
their corresponding dominant forms in the marine
environment. The data presented here suggest that the
substantial freshwater component of T. pseudonana’s
phylogenetic history might confound its use of as a
model for marine diatoms. For example, there is great
interest in understanding how diatoms sequester, store,
and use iron because it limits their growth over vast offshore regions of the world’s oceans [14,15,46,47]. By
contrast, iron generally does not limit diatom growth in
freshwater [48] and coastal ecosystems [49]. Experimental data show that coastal marine strains of T. pseudonana and T. weissflogii require more iron to maintain a
maximal growth rate than a marine strain of the
pennate diatom, Phaeodactylum tricornutum, and the
oceanic diatom, T. oceanica, respectively [14,47]. As currently understood, these differences reflect either vastly
different iron uptake [14] and storage [15] architectures
between entirely different classes of diatoms (pennates
vs. non-pennates), or slight modifications of shared iron
uptake [46] or photosynthetic [47] architectures between
closely related species. Some of these differences might,
at least in part, reflect that T. pseudonana descended
from a freshwater ancestor that experienced different
(perhaps relaxed) constraints on its iron uptake and utilization machinery. Extending studies like that of Kustka
et al. [14] to include strictly freshwater pennate and
non-pennate diatoms along with strictly marine pennate
and non-pennates might help tease apart the relative
importance of shared history versus shared ecology in
the evolution of iron metabolism in diatoms. In this
context, “strictly” refers to diatoms that occur exclusively in either marine or freshwaters and whose
immediate ancestor shared a similar distribution (e.g.,
Figure 1, “M”).
Among the several hundred species of Thalassiosirales,
which might provide a more representative model for
marine diatoms? The phylogeny provides a powerful,
predictive guide for selecting candidates. In this case,
one might first consider the five strictly marine clades
(Figure 1, “M”) and then winnow down the candidate
pool based on practical (e.g., genome size and amenability to cell culture) and ecological (e.g., oceanic vs. offshore) criteria.
What is Thalassiosira pseudonana?

The diatom originally described as Cyclotella nana from
the River Wümme has also gone by the names T. pseudonana [28], C. pseudonana [27], and most recently,
Discostella nana [26] (Additional file 3). Like grammar,
common usage tends to prevail, and this diatom became

Alverson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:125
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/125

universally known as T. pseudonana. Importantly, none
of the name changes was based on direct observations
of the type material, and none either had [27,28] or
took advantage of [26] the insights of a strongly supported phylogenetic hypothesis for the Thalassiosirales
[25]. A combination of evidence (Figure 3, Additional
files 3 and 4) shows that the diatom originally described
by Hustedt [29] as C. nana corresponds to the traditional concept of T. pseudonana [29-34]. Furthermore,
phylogenetic analyses show that T. pseudonana is part
of a strongly supported clade that includes C. tecta,
which is the nomenclatural type of the genus Cyclotella
(Figure 1). By contrast—short of creating a genus that
includes nearly the whole of Thalassiosirales—a genus
that would include both T. pseudonana and T. nordenskioeldii (the type species of Thalassiosira) cannot be
reconciled with the phylogeny (Figure 1). We are therefore compelled to resurrect the original name of
T. pseudonana, Cyclotella nana [29], and deprecate
T. pseudonana [28], C. pseudonana [27], and D. nana
[26] as synonyms.

Conclusions
Publication of the T. pseudonana genome established this
species as a model for experimental and genomic studies
of diatoms [4], virtually all of which treat T. pseudonana
as a marine diatom. Given the central roles of marine
diatoms in global primary production, marine food webs,
and the biogeochemical cycling of important nutrients,
there is much to gain in understanding how marine diatoms interact with their environment. This understanding will come in large part from the development and
study of model organisms [20] whose traits invariably
have been shaped by their phylogeny. Phylogenetic analyses of both morphological and molecular data show
that T. pseudonana likely descended from a freshwater
ancestor. In some cases, this unusual history might confound extrapolations to strictly marine diatoms. Interestingly, the other diatom with a fully sequenced genome,
P. tricornutum, also occurs in freshwater, brackish and
marine habitats [50] and so might not be an ideal ecological model for marine diatoms either [20]. Additional
genomes from ecologically diverse diatoms will bear
these issues out and show, for example, whether the
peculiar evolutionary histories of T. pseudonana and
P. tricornutum account for some portion of the unusually
large genomic divergence between the two species [6].
With few exceptions, diatoms are generally classified
into genera that are uniformly marine or freshwater in
distribution [51]. Although originally described from a
predominantly freshwater river and classified in what is
traditionally considered a freshwater genus (Cyclotella),
an unfortunate series of nomenclatural changes ultimately landed T. pseudonana in a predominantly marine

Page 6 of 8

genus. Although the full extent to which T. pseudonana’s name overshadowed the nuances of its ecology is a
matter of speculation, T. pseudonana highlights the continued importance of taxonomy and systematics in the
post-genomic era and echoes a view espoused by Linnaeus some 260 years ago in his landmark botanical
text, Philosophia Botanica: “If you do not know the
names of things, the knowledge of them is lost too.”
Beyond its name, a better appreciation of the complex
phylogenetic and natural histories of T. pseudonana has
the potential to shape and improve our understanding
of diatom ecology and evolution more generally.

Methods
We examined isolectotype material for C. nana (=
T. pseudonana) to resolve several taxonomic and
nomenclatural uncertainties (Additional files 3, 4 and 5).
The sample is sediment collected by Friedrich Hustedt
[29] from the River Wümme near Bremen, Germany,
and corresponds to lectotype slide BRM 380/36 from
the diatom collection at the Alfred Wegener Institute
(Additional file 5).
All diatom samples were soaked in 30% hydrogen peroxide overnight to dissolve organic matter, then rinsed
with distilled water several times and concentrated onto
filter pads. Dried filter pads were affixed to scanning electron microscope (SEM) stubs with double-sided adhesive
carbon discs, and coated with 15 nm of Iridium using a
Cressington 208 Bench Top Sputter Coater. SEM observations were made with a Zeiss Supra 40 VP.
Alverson et al. [25] used two chloroplast (psbC and
rbcL) and two nuclear genes (SSU and partial LSU
rDNA) to reconstruct the phylogeny of Thalassiosirales.
The 82-taxon matrix was nearly complete, with one of
the four genes missing for just three taxa [25]. The final
tree (Figure 1) was based on a Bayesian analysis of all
four concatenated genes (5,102 characters total). The
protein-coding psbC and rbcL genes were treated as a
single marker, with first and second codon positions
(GTR + G + I) modeled separately from third codon
positions (GTR + G + I) [52]. Separate GTR + G + I
models were applied to the LSU rDNA gene and SSU
rDNA loops, and the Doublet + G + I model was applied
to the SSU rDNA stems [25]. Additional information
about the data matrix, partitions, and exact model specifications can be found in the publicly available data file
(identifier doi:10.5061/dryad.8661 at http://datadryad.
org/). We performed four independent Bayesian runs,
each of which used four Markov chains and was run for a
total 40 million generations. The slide and cump analyses
in the AWTY diagnostic software tool [53] were used to
assess the stationarity of each run, and the AWTY compare analysis was used to determine whether the stationary phases of the four independent runs had sampled

Alverson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:125
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/125

from the same posterior distribution. The latter analysis
showed that that one of the four runs sampled a slightly
different posterior distribution than the other three runs,
so the final consensus tree (Figure 1) was based on the
combined posterior distributions of the three similar
runs.
Habitat (marine or freshwater) was scored based the
natural provenance of the culture. The collection site
for each culture is listed in Alverson et al. [25]. We
scored strains collected from brackish and other lowsalinity habitats as marine, thus biasing towards marine
rather than freshwater ancestral reconstructions (all
other things been equal). Maximum likelihood reconstructions used the Asymmetrical Markov k-state
2-parameter model as implemented in the Mesquite
software package.
Several new freshwater species with gross morphological similarity to T. pseudonana and relatives have been
described [23,24] since the publication of Alverson et al.
[25]. We added these taxa to the morphological data
matrix of Julius and Tanimura [22], and used the branch
and bound search algorithm in PAUP* to find the most
parsimonious trees for this matrix. Character descriptions are available in Julius and Tanimura [22]. All data
matrices are available from Dryad (http://datadryad.org/)
using identifiers doi:10.5061/dryad.8661 and doi:10.5061/
dryad.8663.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Strict consensus of eight most parsimonious trees
from a phylogenetic analysis of 32 morphological characters for
select Thalassiosirales.
Additional file 2: Pairwise differences among Thalassiosira
pseudonana culture strains at four loci.
Additional file 3: The nomenclatural history of Thalassiosira
pseudonana.
Additional file 4: The identity of Thalassiosira pseudonana.
Additional file 5: Hustedt’s observations on the type locality of
Cyclotella nana (= T. pseudonana).
Additional file 6: Scanning electron micrographs of thalassiosiroid
diatoms in the type material (Additional file 4) of Cyclotella nana (=
Thalassiosira pseudonana): Stephanodiscus hantzschii Grunow (A, B),
Stephanodiscus minutulus (Kützing) Cleve & Möller (C, D), Discostella
pseudostelligera (Hustedt) Houk & Klee (E-H), Cyclotella striata
(Kützing) Grunow in Cleve & Grunow (I), Cyclotella atomus Hustedt
(J), Cyclotella meneghiniana Kützing (K,L), Cyclostephanos invisitatus
(Hohn & Hellerman) Theriot, Stoermer & Håkansson (M),
Shionodiscus sp. (N), Thalassiosira sp. 1 (O), Thalassiosira sp. 2 (P).
Scale bar = 2 μM.
Additional file 7: Scanning electron micrographs showing exterior
(A, B) and interior (C, D) views of Thalassiosira pseudonana (marine
strain NEPC709) from Alverson et al. [25]. Scale bar = 2 μM.

Acknowledgements
We thank Alex Wolfe, Klaus Valentin, Davide Pisani, and two anonymous
reviewers for critical comments. AJA was supported by an NIH Ruth L.

Page 7 of 8

Kirschstein NRSA Postdoctoral Fellowship (1F32GM080079-01A1). MLJ was
partially supported by NSF grant DEB-0628554. ECT was supported by the
Jane and Roland Blumberg Centennial Professorship in Molecular Evolution
and NSF EF-0629410.
Author details
Indiana University, Department of Biology, 1001 East Third Street,
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. 2Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine
Research, Am Handelshafen 12, 27570 Bremerhaven, Germany. 3St. Cloud
State University, Department of Biological Sciences, 720 Fourth Avenue
South, St. Cloud, MN 56301, USA. 4The University of Texas at Austin, Texas
Natural Science Center, 2400 Trinity Street, Austin, TX 78705, USA.
1

Authors’ contributions
AJA conceived the study, performed phylogenetic analyses, captured and
analyzed SEM images, and drafted the manuscript. BB gathered, translated,
and interpreted historical data on Cyclotella nana and helped in the
interpretation of all results. MLJ gathered the morphological data used for
phylogenetic analyses and helped in the interpretation of all results. ECT
participated in study design and coordination, helped capture and analyze
SEM images, and helped in the interpretation of all results. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 20 December 2010 Accepted: 14 May 2011
Published: 14 May 2011
References
1. Archibald JM: The puzzle of plastid evolution. Curr Biol 2009, 19(2):
R81-R88.
2. Mann DG, Droop SJM: Biodiversity, biogeography and conservation of
diatoms. Hydrobiologia 1996, 336(1-3):19-32.
3. Nelson DM, Treguer P, Brzezinski MA, Leynaert A, Queguiner B: Production
and dissolution of biogenic silica in the ocean: revised global estimates,
comparison with regional data and relationship to biogenic
sedimentation. Global Biogeochem Cy 1995, 9(3):359-372.
4. Armbrust EV, Berges JA, Bowler C, Green BR, Martinez D, Putnam NH,
Zhou S, Allen AE, Apt KE, Bechner M, et al: The genome of the diatom
Thalassiosira pseudonana: Ecology, evolution, and metabolism. Science
2004, 306(5693):79-86.
5. Moustafa A, Beszteri B, Maier UG, Bowler C, Valentin K, Bhattacharya D:
Genomic footprints of a cryptic plastid endosymbiosis in diatoms.
Science 2009, 324(5935):1724-1726.
6. Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP, et al: The Phaeodactylum genome reveals
the evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature 2008,
456(7219):239-244.
7. Armbrust EV, Rynearson TA, Jenkins BD: Genomic insights into diatom
evolution and metabolism. In Genomics and Evolution of Microbial
Eukaryotes. Edited by: Katz LA, Bhattacharya D. Oxford: Oxford Univeristy
Press; 2006:201-213.
8. Guillard RRL, Kilham P, Jackson TA: Kinetics of silicon-limited growth in
the marine diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana Hasle and Heimdal
(Cyclotella nana Hustedt). J Phycol 1973, 9:233-237.
9. Nelson DM, Goering JJ, Kilham SS, Guillard RRL: Kinetics of silicic-acid
uptake and rates of silica dissolution in marine diatom Thalassiosira
pseudonana. J Phycol 1976, 12(2):246-252.
10. Paasche E: Silicon and the ecology of marine plankton diatoms. I
Thalassiosira pseudonana (Cyclotella nana) grown in a chemostat with
silicate as limiting nutrient. Mar Biol (Berl) 1973, 19:117-126.
11. Poulsen N, Chesley PM, Kroger N: Molecular genetic manipulation of the
diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana (Bacillariophyceae). J Phycol 2006,
42(5):1059-1065.
12. Bowler C, Vardi A, Allen AE: Oceanographic and biogeochemical insights
from diatom genomes. Annu Rev Mar Sci 2010, 2:333-365.
13. Parker MS, Armbrust EV: Synergistic effects of light, temperature, and
nitrogen source on transcription of genes for carbon and nitrogen
metabolism in the centric diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana
(Bacillariophyceae). J Phycol 2005, 41(6):1142-1153.
14. Kustka AB, Allen AE, Morel FMM: Sequence analysis and transcriptional
regulation of iron acquisition genes in two marine diatoms. J Phycol
2007, 43(4):715-729.

Alverson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:125
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/125

15. Marchetti A, Parker MS, Moccia LP, Lin EO, Arrieta AL, Ribalet F,
Murphy MEP, Maldonado MT, Armbrust EV: Ferritin is used for iron storage
in bloom-forming marine pennate diatoms. Nature 2009,
457(7228):467-470.
16. Sumper M, Brunner E: Silica biomineralisation in diatoms: The model
organism Thalassiosira pseudonana. ChemBioChem 2008, 9(8):1187-1194.
17. Frigeri LG, Radabaugh TR, Haynes PA, Hildebrand M: Identification of
proteins from a cell wall fraction of the diatom Thalassiosira
pseudonana: Insights into silica structure formation. Mol Cell Proteomics
2005, 5:182-193.
18. Mock T, Samanta MP, Iverson V, Berthiaume C, Robison M, Holtermann K,
Durkin C, BonDurant SS, Richmond K, Rodesch M, et al: Whole-genome
expression profiling of the marine diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana
identifies genes involved in silicon bioprocesses. P Natl Acad Sci USA
2008, 105(5):1579-1584.
19. Thamatrakoln K, Hildebrand M: Analysis of Thalassiosira pseudonana
silicon transporters indicates distinct regulatory levels and transport
activity through the cell cycle. Eukaryot Cell 2007, 6(2):271-279.
20. Parker MS, Mock T, Armbrust EV: Genomic insights into marine
microalgae. Annu Rev Genet 2008, 42:619-645.
21. Finlay BJ, Monaghan EB, Maberly SC: Hypothesis: The rate and scale of
dispersal of freshwater diatom species is a function of their global
abundance. Protist 2002, 153(3):261-273.
22. Julius ML, Tanimura Y: Cladistic analysis of plicated Thalassiosira
(Bacillariophyceae). Phycologia 2001, 40(2):111-122.
23. Johansen J, Kociolek P, Lowe R: Spicaticribra kingstonii, gen. nov. et sp.
nov. (Thalassiosiraceae, Bacillariophyta) from Great Smoky Mountains
National Park, USA. Diatom Res 2008, 23(2):367-375.
24. Stachura-Suchoples K, Williams DM: Description of Conticribra tricircularis,
a new genus and species of Thalassiosirales, with a discussion on its
relationship to other continuous cribra species of Thalassiosira Cleve
(Bacillariophyta) and its freshwater origin. Eur J Phycol 2009,
44(4):477-486.
25. Alverson AJ, Jansen RK, Theriot EC: Bridging the Rubicon: Phylogenetic
analysis reveals repeated colonizations of marine and fresh waters by
thalassiosiroid diatoms. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2007, 45(1):193-210.
26. Chang TP, Chang-Scheider H: Zentrische kieselalgen in Kemptener seen
[Centric diatoms in lakes of Kempten]. Ber Deut Bot Ges 2008, 78:5-15.
27. Chang TP, Steinberg C: Identifizierung von nanoplanktischen Kieselalgen
(Centrales, Bacillariophyceae) in der Rott und im Rott-Stausee (Bayern,
Bundesrepublik Deutschland) [Identification of nanoplanktonic diatoms
(Centrales, Bacillariophyceae) in River Rott and Rott Reservoir (Bavaria, F.
R.G.)]. Arch Protistenkd 1989, 137(2):111-129.
28. Hasle GR, Heimdal BR: Some species of the centric diatom genus
Thalassiosira studied in the light and electron microscopes. Beihefte zur
Nova Hedwigia 1970, 31:543-581.
29. Hustedt F: Die Diatomeenflora des Flußsystems der Weser im Gebiet der
Hansestadt Bremen [Diatom flora of the tributaries of the Weser near
the city of Bremen]. Abh Naturw Ver Bremen 1957, 34:181-440.
30. Guillard RRL, Ryther JH: Studies of marine planktonic diatoms. I Cyclotella
nana Hustedt and Detonula confervacea (Cleve) Gran. Can J Microbiol
1962, 8:229-239.
31. Belcher JH, Swale EMF: Species of Thalassiosira (Diatoms,
Bacillariophyceae) in the plankton of English rivers. Br Phycol J 1977,
12(3):291-297.
32. Hasle GR: The marine, planktonic diatoms Thalassiosira oceanica sp. nov.
and T. partheneia. J Phycol 1983, 19(2):220-229.
33. Hustedt F: Die Diatomeenflora der Unterweser von der Lesummündung
bis Bremerhaven mit Berücksichtigung des Unterlaufs der Hunte und
Geeste [Diatom flora of the lower Weser from the Lesum estuary to
Bremerhaven, with consideration of the lower Hunte and Geeste]. Veröff
Inst Meeresforsch 1959, 6:13-176.
34. Lowe RL: Comparative ultrastructure of the valves of some Cyclotella
species (Bacillariophyceae). J Phycol 1975, 11(4):415-424.
35. Fryxell GA, Hasle GR: Thalassiosira eccentrica (Ehrenb.) Cleve, T.
symmetrica sp. nov., and some related centric diatoms. J Phycol 1972,
8:297-317.
36. Fryxell GA, Hasle GR: The genus Thalassiosira: some species with a
modified ring of central strutted processes. Beiheft zur Nova Hedwigia
1977, 54:67-98.

Page 8 of 8

37. Fryxell GA, Hasle GR: The genus Thalassiosira: species with internal
extensions of the strutted processes. Phycologia 1979, 18(4):378-393.
38. Hasle GR: Some Thalassiosira species with one central process. Norwegian
Journal of Botany 1978, 25:77-110.
39. Hasle GR, Fryxell GA: The genus Thalassiosira: some species with a linear
areola array. Nova Hedwigia Beih 1977, 54:14-60.
40. Hasle GR, Lange CB: Freshwater and brackish water Thalassiosira
(Bacillariophyceae) taxa with tangentially undulated valves. Phycologia
1989, 28(1):120-135.
41. Håkansson H: A compilation and evaluation of species in the general
Stephanodiscus, Cyclostephanos and Cyclotella with a new genus in the
family Stephanodiscaceae. Diatom Res 2002, 17(1):1-139.
42. Loginova LP: Classification of the diatom genus Cyclotella. In Proceedings
of the 10th International Symposium on Recent and Fossil Diatoms. Edited by:
Simola H. Koenigstein: Otto Koeltz Science Publishers; 1990:37-46.
43. Serieyssol KK: Cyclotella species of late Miocene age from St. Bauzile,
France. In Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Recent and Fossil Diatoms.
Edited by: Ross R. Koenigstein: Otto Koeltz Science Publishers; 1980:27-42.
44. Pisani D, Benton MJ, Wilkinson M: Congruence of morphological and
molecular phylogenies. Acta Biotheor 2007, 55(3):269-281.
45. von Dassow P, Petersen TW, Chepurnov VA, Armbrust EV: Inter- and
intraspecific relationships between nuclear DNA content and cell size in
selected members of the centric diatom genus Thalassiosira
(Bacillariophyceae). J Phycol 2008, 44(2):335-349.
46. Maldonado MT, Allen AE, Chong JS, Lin K, Leus D, Karpenko N, Harris SL:
Copper-dependent iron transport in coastal and oceanic diatoms. Limnol
Oceanogr 2006, 51(4):1729-1743.
47. Strzepek RF, Harrison PJ: Photosynthetic architecture differs in coastal and
oceanic diatoms. Nature 2004, 431(7009):689-692.
48. Wetzel RG: Iron, sulfur, and silica cycles. Limnology: Lake and River
Ecosystems. Third edition. San Diego: Academic Press; 2001, 289-331.
49. Sunda WG, Huntsman SA: Iron uptake and growth limitation in oceanic
and coastal phytoplankton. Mar Chem 1995, 50(1-4):189-206.
50. De Martino A, Meichenin A, Shi J, Pan KH, Bowler C: Genetic and
phenotypic characterization of Phaeodactylum tricornutum
(Bacillariophyceae) accessions. J Phycol 2007, 43(5):992-1009.
51. Round FE, Sims PA: The distribution of diatom genera in marine and
freshwater environments and some evolutionary considerations. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Recent and Fossil Diatoms. Edited by:
Ross R. Hirschberg: Otto Koeltz Science Publishers; 1980:301-320.
52. Shapiro B, Rambaut A, Drummond AJ: Choosing appropriate substitution
models for the phylogenetic analysis of protein-coding sequences. Mol
Biol Evol 2006, 23(1):7-9.
53. Wilgenbusch JC, Warren DL, Swofford DL: AWTY: A system for graphical
exploration of MCMC convergence in Bayesian phylogenetic inference.
2004.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-125
Cite this article as: Alverson et al.: The model marine diatom
Thalassiosira pseudonana likely descended from a freshwater ancestor
in the genus Cyclotella. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:125.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
