<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Biased gene transfer and its implications for the concept of lineage</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:47. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-47"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Cheryl P Andam"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

RESEARCH

Open Access

Biased gene transfer and its implications for the
concept of lineage
Cheryl P Andam* and J Peter Gogarten*

Abstract
Background: In the presence of horizontal gene transfer (HGT), the concepts of lineage and genealogy in the
microbial world become more ambiguous because chimeric genomes trace their ancestry from a myriad of
sources, both living and extinct.
Results: We present the evolutionary histories of three aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) to illustrate that the
concept of organismal lineage in the prokaryotic world is defined by both vertical inheritance and reticulations due
to HGT. The acquisition of a novel gene from a distantly related taxon can be considered as a shared derived
character that demarcates a group of organisms, as in the case of the spirochaete Phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase
(PheRS). On the other hand, when organisms transfer genetic material with their close kin, the similarity and
therefore relatedness observed among them is essentially shaped by gene transfer. Studying the distribution
patterns of divergent genes with identical functions, referred to as homeoalleles, can reveal preferences for transfer
partners. We describe the very ancient origin and the distribution of the archaeal homeoalleles for Threonyl-tRNA
synthetases (ThrRS) and Seryl-tRNA synthetases (SerRS).
Conclusions: Patterns created through biased HGT can be undistinguishable from those created through shared
organismal ancestry. A re-evaluation of the definition of lineage is necessary to reflect genetic relatedness due to
both HGT and vertical inheritance. In most instances, HGT bias will maintain and strengthen similarity within
groups. Only in cases where HGT bias is due to other factors, such as shared ecological niche, do patterns emerge
from gene phylogenies that are in conflict with those reflecting shared organismal ancestry.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by W. Ford Doolittle, François-Joseph Lapointe, and Frederic Bouchard.

Background
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) has had a tremendous
impact on how evolution has shaped life’s history,
which, since Darwin, is generally described as the Tree
of Life. Instead of a strictly furcating tree representing
vertical inheritance, numerous horizontal transfers have
resulted in a reticulated evolutionary history. Hence, the
genealogical history of a genome cannot be portrayed
simply as a lineal descent from a common ancestor that
existed in some distant past because a lineage can trace
its ancestry from a myriad of sources, both living and
extinct.
By introducing novel genetic material into a genome,
the process of HGT can accomplish massive leaps
through character space, endowing organisms with
* Correspondence: cheryl.andam@gmail.com; jpgogarten@gmail.com
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, 91
North Eagleville Road, Storrs, CT 06269-3125 USA

novel metabolic processes and physiological capacities
that would have otherwise taken millions of years for
lineages to acquire through mutations [1]. For example,
a recent study reported that the genes involved in the
degradation of an algal polysaccharide were transferred
via seaweed consumption from marine bacteria to the
gut bacterium Bacteroides isolated from Japanese individuals [2]. The massive gene exchange observed in Shewanella baltica isolates includes many genes involved in
anaerobic metabolism, thus allowing them to successfully adapt to the deeper, anoxic waters of the Baltic Sea
[3]. Adaptation of Prochlorococcus to phosphate limitation was made possible through horizontal transfer of
phosphate acquisition genes [4]. Gene transfer, and not
gene duplications, appears to be the primary driving
force in the expansion of gene families in prokaryotes
[5,6]. HGT can therefore be exploited as an adaptive
strategy by many organisms, allowing them to take

© 2011 Andam and Gogarten; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

advantage of new environments and/or metabolic compounds that may provide them a competitive benefit
over others. Although HGTs contribute to bacterial
adaptation by bringing in novel genes into the genome,
the majority of transfers may be nearly neutral to the
recipient, thus impacting the gene content without
conferring any immediate benefits to the recipient
organisms [7]. Some of these horizontally acquired
genes, however, can be considered as a pre-adaptation,
which the recipient can potentially use.
Horizontal transfer events are generally a result of the
proximity of donor and recipient lineages inhabiting the
same ecological niche, with genetic material being transferred over short physical distances [8] without regard to
domain boundaries. High frequency of HGT has been
observed in marine microbial populations, providing
flexibility in their genetic composition and allowing them
to easily adapt to changing environmental conditions [9].
The close proximity of a diverse array of microbes in
the gut provides an ideal hot spot for HGT, as in the case
of the transfer of sulphonamide reisistance genes between
strains of Escherichia coli residing in the human intestine
[10]. Prokaryotes that inhabit high-temperature environments – an ecological niche shared by divergent organisms – provide an example of highways of gene sharing
[11] that dominate the phylogenetic information content
present in a genome [12,13]. Microbial consortia in mixed
biofilms also facilitate horizontal acquisition of chromosomal DNA and can lead to the spread of antibiotic resistance genes among the microbial inhabitants [14].
In this article, we explore the role of HGT in defining
and shaping prokaryotic lineages. Gene transfer is often
viewed as creating conflicting relationships in microbial
phylogeny, resulting to topological discrepancy between
the gene trees and the species tree or organismal tree [15].
In the case of horizontal acquisitions from distant relatives, the gene of the recipient taxon would exhibit high
similarity to the donor group, despite the evolutionary
distance that separates them. On the other hand, when
closely related partners in a group exhibit preferences for
exchanging genes with one another, such sharing may
eventually lead to cohesion of the group [16]. In view of
the dominating role of HGT in prokaryotic evolution, we
propose a re-evaluation of the concept of lineage in the
microbial world.

Results and Discussion
Horizontally transferred PheRS as a shared derived
character

Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) catalyze the attachment of tRNA with its cognate amino acid, crucial in
maintaining the fidelity of the genetic code and the translation process. Unlike the majority of aaRS, PheRS exhibits a multidomain a 2 b 2 heterotetrameric structure.

Page 2 of 16

Phylogenetic reconstruction of the PheRS sequences
across the three domains of life reveal an archaeal origin
of the PheRS harbored by the spirochaete genera Spirochaeta, Borrelia and Treponema, distinct from those
found in other closely-related taxa, Leptospira and Brachyspira, which have the typical bacterial form (Figure
1A, B). The phylum Spirochaetes consists of three recognized families-Brachyspiraceae, Leptospiraceae and Spirochaeataceae, the latter group consisting of the genera
Borrelia, Spirochaeta and Treponema (based on NCBI
taxonomy). Spirochaetes are helically-shaped, gram-negative, motile bacteria classified in 13 genera. They represent one of the deeply branching clades in the bacterial
domain. The phylogenies of each PheRS subunit present
the same evolutionary picture of the spirochaete PheRS,
suggesting that both subunits were horizontally acquired
from Archaea to the common ancestor of Spirochaeta,
Borrelia and Treponema. Both subunits of the archaeal
form of the spirochaete PheRS show close affinities with
Thermococcus and Pyrococcus, both members of the
order Thermococcales in the phylum Euryarchaeota
(Figure 1C, D). The b subunit also exhibits a close relationship with Nanoarchaeum, although this relationship
has low bootstrap support (Figure 1D). This suggests that
the two PheRS subunits were transferred together in a
single event from the same Archaeal donor to the ancestor of these spirochaetes.
The archaeal and bacterial form of PheRS found in Spirochaetes show high divergence (26-29% identity for the a
subunit, and 21-26% for the b subunit). The a subunit of
Spirochaeta, Borrelia and Treponema range from 513-528
amino acids and the b subunit from 514-573 amino acids,
which are in the range to those found in Thermococcales
species (a subunit with 499-503 amino acids and b subunit with 556-574 amino acids). Leptospira and Brachyspira, on the other hand, possess an a subunit with a size
of 339-342 amino acids and a b subunit with 807-808
amino acids, similar to those found in other Bacteria.
A previous study has reported the archaeal origin of
PheRS in Borrelia and Treponema [17], many of which
are pathogenic to humans. The major clinical diseases
caused by these two genera include Lyme disease, relapsing fever and syphilis [18]. Thus, it initially came as a
surprise that these human-associated pathogens have
acquired their PheRS from extremely thermophilic
organisms. The key to this remarkable inter-domain
genetic connection is the genus Spirochaeta. This genus
represents a group of saccharolytic, facultatively anaerobic or obligately anaerobic free-living spirochetes that
thrive in a variety of aquatic environments. A number of
species inhabit extreme environments, including S. halophila isolated from a high-salinity pond on the Sinai
shore [19], S. thermophila from brackish and marine hot
springs in New Zealand and Russia [20], S. caldaria from

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

Page 3 of 16

Figure 1 Phylogenetic analyses of Phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetases (PheRS). Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of the (A) a subunit and
(B) b subunit of PheRS across the three domains of life. A detailed look at the Spirochaete (C) PheRS- a and (D) PheRS-b subunits shows close
relationships with the Archaea. Numbers on the nodes indicate bootstrap support under maximum likelihood (left) and distance (middle), and
posterior probabilities (right) [59].

freshwater [21], S. smaragdinae from an African oil field
[22], S. americana from alkaline, hypersaline Mono Lake
[23], and S. dissipatitropha from anaerobic sediments of
the alkaline, hypersaline Owens Lake in California [24].
Based on 16S rRNA relationships, Spirochaeta shows closest affinities with the host-associated genera Treponema
and Borrelia [18]. In the PheRS phylogenies (Figure 1C,
D), Spirochaeta is found at the base of the tree, with Borrelia and Treponema diverging later on. Hence, the most
parsimonious hypothesis to explain the evolutionary
trajectory of PheRS in spirochaetes is that the most
recent common ancestor of Spirochaeta, Borrelia and

Treponema was most physiologically similar to that of
Spirochaeta in terms of its thermophilic requirement.
This spirochaete ancestor most likely inhabited environments in which Pyrococcus and Thermococcus thrived
as well, resulting to the replacement of the bacterial
PheRS that this ancient spirochaete originally possessed
with an archaeal form. The archaeal PheRS was maintained in this lineage until its divergence into the three
extant spirochaete genera. A species of Spirochaeta,
S. coccoides, has recently been isolated from the hindgut
of the termite Neotermes castaneus and it was suggested
that they play an important role in the synergistic

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

degradation of the main polymeric wood compounds,
cellulose and hemicellulose [25]. Currently, most spirochaetes that are known to be symbiotically associated
with termites are members of the genus Treponema.
Hence, it is likely that the most recent ancestor of these
three spirochaete lineages started out as a thermophile
and eventually branched out into different ecological
niches, including eukaryotic host organisms, where
many now dwell either as mutualistic or pathogenic
inhabitants.
Phenylalanine, along with tryptophan and tyrosine, are
the only amino acids from the standard 20 that contain
an aromatic ring. The possession of an archaeal PheRS
in thermophilic organisms, including a spirochaete
ancestor, can confer an advantage in organisms that
inhabit extreme environments. Previous studies have
reported that aromatic proteins and their interaction are
known to influence structural stabilization of proteins
[26], particularly important for thermophilic enzymes to
maintain full activity at elevated temperatures [27] and
prevent thermal denaturation [28]. Moreover, additional
aromatic clusters were found to be present in many different thermophilic protein families, which were lacking
in their mesophilic homologs [28]. Hence, thermophilic
spirochaetes may have achieved increased viability during the course of their evolution by making use of an
efficient PheRS acquired from thermophilic Archaea
that could satisfy the increased demand for Phe incorporation into proteins to provide additional stability to
their proteins.
Gene transfer has tremendously affected the formation
of groups of organisms. Although horizontal transmission can be a challenge in defining phylogenetic relationships, the presence of a transferred gene can constitute a
shared derived character (or synapomorphy) useful in
classification and in the identification of monophyletic
clades. A shared derived character is an evolutionary
novelty unique to a particular clade and the acquisition
of exogenous genetic material through HGT establishes
the recipient and its descendants as a monophyletic
group [29]. For example, the monophyly of the opisthokonts (which include animals and fungi) was confirmed
through the horizontal transfer of Tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (TyrRS) from the archaeal group Halobacteria to the
opisthokont ancestor [30]. In the case of the spirochaetes,
the transfer of PheRS to this ancient helical-shaped
organism unites the members of the family Spirochaetaceae, distinct from the other two spirochaete families.
The presence of a laterally acquired gene constitutes a
shared characteristic that can be used to identify a particular group, including all the descendants that emerge
from the taxon that initially carried the foreign gene
[30,31]. Hence, the transferred gene can be used as a
unique feature that may reflect the monophyletic nature

Page 4 of 16

of the group [30,31], provided the transferred gene is
passed on to successive generations either through vertical inheritance or biased HGT.
Biased gene transfer and the ancient origins of archaeal
homeoalleles

Lineages in the living world often are deemed to have
arisen solely through a parent-to-offspring genetic transmission, as implied in strictly bifurcating phylogenetic
trees that have been largely used in representing evolutionary histories. This concept is mostly applicable to
eukaryotic organisms where recombination is linked to
procreation through meiosis and sexual reproduction;
however, in prokaryotic organisms and even in singlecelled eukaryotes, evolution through genetic exchange
appears to be more the rule than the exception [32]. In
organisms that do not exhibit such reproductive capacities,
the tree-like representation may be inaccurate and incomplete because prokaryotes do in fact acquire genetic material through other non-vertical means, such as HGT. The
default assumption continues to rest on vertical inheritance as an architect of genealogies. However, some
lineages may in fact have been shaped by HGT.
When organisms transfer genetic material with their
close kin, the similarity and therefore relatedness
observed among them are essentially shaped by gene
transfer. We refer to this kind of HGT as biased gene
transfer, which involves the acquisition of genetic material from preferred partners based on closer species phylogenetic relationship (i.e. close relatives). This bias is
relative to random transfer between any species. HGT
bias may also reflect shared ecological niches, susceptibility to similar transfer agents, or symbiotic relationships.
In this paper, we limit our discussion to bias between
close relatives; however, we note that our definition of
HGT biased towards close relatives may lead to circular
reinforcement. Organisms that frequently exchange
genes become more similar, and transfers between these
groups may then be categorized as HGTs with a bias
reflecting overall relatedness, even though the initial
transfers may have been biased by other factors. We have
previously shown that biased gene transfer can create
and maintain phylogenetic patterns that resemble the signal created through vertical inheritance [16]. Puigbò
et al. [33] performed simulations of gene transfer and
vertical inheritance that confirmed the possibility of
biased gene transfer creating patterns similar to vertical
inheritance; although, given their exploration of parameter space, they exclude the possibility that the deep
split between Archaea and Bacteria could solely be due
to biased gene transfer without any contribution due to
vertical inheritance. Unlike transfers that traverse domain
boundaries as in the case of the spirochaete PheRS, transfers that occur between close relatives do not exhibit

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

major topological conflicts over large evolutionary distances and this may in fact be initially perceived as a consequence of shared ancestry. However, the occurrence of
non-random HGT is evident only at lower taxonomic
levels (e.g. genus, family), while higher level taxonomic
groups (e.g. class, phylum) remain cohesive and recognizable [16]. Hence, it may be difficult to ascertain whether
the homogeneity of the members of a higher-level group
may indeed be a consequence of vertical inheritance or
biased gene transfer. In most instances, the two processes
will tend to reinforce each other: organisms similar due
to recent shared ancestry will remain and become more
similar due to biased HGT. Only if HGT is not biased in
favor of similarity, as is the case for some extreme thermophilic bacteria [12,13], do shared ancestry and biased
HGT create opposing signals.
Studying the distribution patterns of divergent genes
with identical functions, referred to as homeoalleles, can
reveal preferences for transfer partners [16,34]. Homeoalleles, which are transferred in exchange groups that
contains organisms belonging to different higher-level
taxa, have been previously shown in phylogenetic analyses of TyrRS wherein two forms of this enzyme exist
in Bacteria [16]. Simulations and phylogenetic analyses
suggest that biased gene transfer can create and maintain patterns that are indistinguishable from those found
in the 16S rRNA phylogeny [16].
Homeoalleles are also found to exist in the domain
Archaea. We generated a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree based on aligned ThrRS sequences sampled to
include representatives from all domains of life. Similar
to previous analyses and to the phylogenetic pattern
observed in bacterial TyrRS [16,35,36], we detect two
types of this enzyme, each forming a well-supported distinct clade (Figure 2A). The more common form of
ThrRS, which we refer to as ThrRS-C, is represented in
all three domains of life while the rare ThrRS (ThrRS-R)
exists only in some archaeal lineages (Figure 2A). Protein
sequences show only ~29% identity between the two
ThrRS types and it is therefore unlikely that they will
undergo homologous recombination. Two pathways for
gene replacement are possible. First, HGT can lead to the
addition of the novel gene into a genome already possessing a gene of identical function through insertion in
another part of the chromosome. Following a period of
co-existence, one of the two may eventually be lost. A
second mechanism is through homologous recombination of neighboring genes in a syntenic context [16]. Both
homeoalleles coexist in higher-level groups (i.e., phylum,
order), whereas in individual species usually only one of
the homeoalleles has been detected. For example, while
most members of the Halobacteriales possess ThrRS-C,
only Halorhabdus utahensis carries ThrRS-R.

Page 5 of 16

The two major archaeal phyla (Euryarchaeota and Crenarchaeota) are represented in both clades, although no
single genome carries both forms of the enzyme (Figure
2B). For each clade of archaeal ThrRS, the members of
each phyla group together and each phylum remains separate from the other. This is similar to the phylogenetic pattern derived from the 16S-23S rRNA sequences showing
the two major archaeal phyla as monophyletic (Figure 2C).
For taxonomic categories lower than the phylum level, the
orders Methanomicrobiales, Halobacteriales and Desulfurococcales, are found to be represented in both ThrRS
clades and consist of members that carry one or the other
type of ThrRS.
We previously found that two forms of SerRS that
behave as homeoalleles exist in Euryarchaeota [34]. Similar to the patterns in archaeal ThrRS, we also observed
two divergent forms of SerRS in Archaea, with one form
present in the three domains of life (SerRS-C) and a rare
form present only in a few members of Archaea (SerRSR). The rare form has only been found in 18 genera and
5 orders belonging to the phylum Euryarchaeota. In even
rarer cases we find a genome carrying both SerRS forms,
as in Methanosarcina barkeri, and this occurrence may
reflect a period of transition in which one SerRS is in the
process of replacing the other. This implies that individual lineages can acquire different versions of a homeoallele through HGT, and they can also be lost from the
lineage and replaced by another version.
To assess the agreement in phylogeny for each form of
ThrRS and SerRS with the rRNA, we plotted the pairwise
distances in ThrRS sequences against their corresponding
distances in 16S-23S rRNA for each pair of taxa (Figure
3A). These types of plots have been previously used to
detect gene transfers [36,37]. However, in this study, we did
not use this approach to show HGT but to illustrate the
correlation between each of the two aaRS clades and the
rRNA tree. Each ThrRS clade exhibits a phylogenetic
pattern similar to the rRNA phylogeny represented by the
strong correlation in the distances between each pair of
organisms, indicating similarity between the phylogenies
of each ThrRS clade with the expected ribosomal tree
(Figure 3A). We show that a positive correlation exists for
each clade, despite the occurrence of gene transfer, and
that there is no obvious phylogenetic trace of HGT that can
be detected by phylogenetic conflict within each clade,
because the transfers occur between taxa with close phylogenetic affinity. Within each ThrRS type, the distances
between pairs of ThrRS homologs and the corresponding
rRNA gene pairs show a strong correlation (Figure 3A)
[For pairwise distances between rRNA and (A) ThrRS-R
R2 = 0.90, P < 2.2 × 10-16, ThrRS-C R2 = 0.98, P < 2.2 ×
10-16. R2 is the square of the correlation coefficient]. These
results indicate that within each of the two ThrRS clades,

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

Page 6 of 16

Figure 2 Phylogenetic analyses of Threonyl-tRNA synthetases (ThrRS). (A) Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree showing the distribution
of the two forms of ThrRS across the three domains of life. Branches are color-coded based on the domain. (B) Maximum likelihood
phylogenetic tree showing the distribution of the two forms of ThrRS in Archaea, labeled ThrRS-R and ThrRS-C. Taxa names in blue are from the
phylum Euryarchaeota and in red are Crenarchaeota. Members of other archaeal phyla are represented in black text. Orders common to both
clades are shown in colored boxes. (C) Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of Archaea based on concatenated 16S and 23S rRNA sequences.
The tree was rooted using bacterial homologs from Thermotoga maritima and Aquifex aeolicae.

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

Page 7 of 16

Figure 3 Scatterplots of pairwise evolutionary distances between the combined 16S-23S rRNA (x-axis) and (A) ThrRS and (B) SerRS
sequences on y-axis from a diverse sampling of bacteria. In (A), distances between taxa within the ThrRS-R clade (plotted in red) show a
strong correlation with the rRNA distances (R2 = 0.90, P < 2.2 × 10-16), as do the distances within the ThrRS-C plotted in green (R2 = 0.98, P < 2.2
× 10-16). Pairwise distances for Aeropyrum pernix and Ignicoccus hospitalis were not included in the scatterplot because of the high rate of
sequence divergence (long branches in Figure 2B). A strong correlation between the pairwise distances is expected for two trees with similar
topologies. In (B), the distances for each clade show a strong correlation with the rRNA distances. Distances with the SerRS-R are plotted in red
(R2 = 0.94, P < 2.2 × 10-16) and SerRS-C in green (R2 = 0.95, P < 2.2 × 10-16). Pairwise distances between each clade are shown in blue.

evolution is similar to the expected ribosomal phylogeny,
but if we consider the ThrRS phylogeny as a whole, we
observe a conflicting signal. The distances between the two
ThrRS types do not correlate to the corresponding 16S-23S
rRNA distances (in blue), but rather reflect the ancient
divergence between the two ThrRS types. We obtained
similar results for the SerRS data, with the distances
between pairs of SerRS homologs and the corresponding
rRNA gene pairs showing a strong correlation (Figure 3B)
[SerRS-R R2 = 0.94, P < 2.2 × 10-16, and SerRS-C R2 = 0.95,
P < 2.2 × 10-16].
Two distinct, unrelated classes of aaRS exist (I and II),
with each class defined by unique domain structures
and sequence homologies. Both ThrRS and SerRS are
members of the Class II aaRS [38,39]. To account for
the rare occurrence and dispersed distribution of the
rare forms of SerRS and ThrRS, we propose that the
rare forms of these two enzymes diverged early from the
common forms, with subsequent horizontal transfer
from an unknown ancient lineage that probably has
gone extinct or is yet to be discovered. Phylogenetic
reconstruction based on representatives from several
Class II aaRS shows that an ancient divergence gave rise
to the common and rare forms of both ThrRS and
SerRS (Figure 4). Indeed, this divergence event appears

to have occurred prior to the Last Universal Common
Ancestor (LUCA) node of SerRS-C and ThrRS-C
(defined as the common ancestor of Bacteria and
Archaea homologs; Figure 4). This implies that many
other lineages may have co-existed with LUCA and have
contributed to the genetic composition of LUCA’s descendants [40]. The early branching lineages may have
also acquired these ancient genes and have persisted in
present-day genomes. One example is pyrrolysyl-tRNA
synthetase (PylRS) that emerged in the pre-LUCA era
and is now only found in a few members of Bacteria
and Archaea [41]. The phylogenetic distribution of this
enzyme suggests that these extant taxa acquired PylRS
through several HGT episodes from an ancient, most
likely extinct, lineage [41]. Indeed, this finding provides
evidence that the most recent common organismal
ancestor and the molecular most recent common ancestors (i.e. ancestors of a particular gene) may not have
coincided in time and space [40] and ancient genes
from long-extinct organisms may continue to survive in
modern-day organisms through HGT.
The archaeal homeoalleles provide additional evidence,
in addition to bacterial TyrRS [16], that biased gene
transfer can indeed re-create phylogenetic patterns that
resemble those generated through common ancestry.

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

Page 8 of 16

Figure 4 Phylogenetic analyses of representative Class II aaRS showing the divergence of the two forms of ThrRS and SerRS. Taxa that
contain the rare form of the enzymes ThrRS and SerRS are represented in dark blue and red, respectively. Those that possess the common form
(i.e. they are found across the three domains of life) are represented in light blue and pink.

Hence, the organismal lineages of Archaea and Bacteria
reflect a combination of vertical inheritance and biased
HGT, and may be best represented by a line of descent
that has access to a gene pool containing genetic material, including homeoalleles, from various sources. This
gene pool, or mobilome [42], is not limited to the genome of a particular organism; genomes of closely related
taxa, as well as mobile genetic elements (phages, transposons, plasmids) [42], also act as sources for DNA that an
organism can exploit. What we see are lineages that exhibit continuity from beginning to end as a consequence of
vertical inheritance and biased gene transfer, with genes
moving in and out of the lineage through time. In some

instances, as in the case of the inter-domain transfer of
PheRS, or the extreme thermophilic bacteria, horizontally
acquired genes may come from more evolutionary distant
sources, more as a consequence of shared ecological
niches [13] and may indeed create highways of gene
transfer between distant relatives [11].
The more genes that two lineages transfer between
each other, the more similar that the lineages become
and the more frequently that they will continue to
exchange genes [16]. If genes are mainly transferred
between close kin, then gene transfer reinforces similarity, regardless if it is because of shared ancestry or biased
HGT [16]. More frequently, biased gene transfer will

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

reinforce similarity due to recent shared ancestry. Thus,
instead of eroding the phylogenetic signal retained in a
genome, HGT may act to reinforce groups created
through vertical descent [16,43]. The challenge remains
on how to clearly distinguish between patterns created
through vertical inheritance and through biased transfer.
In the case of homeoalleles, one can infer gene transfer
from the distribution of the different homeoalleles, provided one cans use a reference tree that approximates
shared ancestry, such as a tree based on all the components of the ribosome. The LGT3State approach [44] was
successfully used in [16] and [45] to estimate the transition probabilities of two divergent enzymes under either
gene loss only or HGT/loss scenario using maximum
likelihood. For both TyrRS and SerRS the analyses
showed that its distribution in extant lineages can be better explained through the HGT and loss model than
through gene loss alone [16]. However, to differentiate
clearly patterns created by vertical inheritance and biased
HGT in the absence of homeoalleles will require further
data and analyses.
As a result of biased transfer, we expect to observe
similar distribution patterns between a specific gene tree
and the ribosomal tree. While biased HGT can give rise
to phylogenetic patterns similar to those created through
shared ancestry, both processes occur simultaneously in
nature. Through biased transfers, a group then may be
defined by the multiple transfers of the same gene among
different closely related taxa, generating cohesion among
the recipient organisms in terms of genetic similarity.

Conclusions
Graham Cairns-Smith introduced the metaphor of a rope
to illustrate a line of decent, with the long overlapping
fibers representing individual gene histories [46]. To
illustrate the continuity of a lineage during a genetic
takeover, he considered a rope consisting of hemp fibers
at one end that is gradually transformed into a rope with
only sisal fibers present, with hemp fibers gradually fading out and sisal fibers fading in. Gary Olsen (University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign) used this metaphor to
argue for the continuity of a lineage in prokaryotic evolution even in the presence of rampant HGT [31]. The
image of a rope has a long history to illustrate continuity
in the presence of turnover and change (e.g., [47]). The
rope (i.e. lineage) itself is continuous and not reticulated,
but the lineage is embedded in a reticulated genome phylogeny and composed of a mèlange of genetic materials
that have come and gone over time [31]. In a similar
fashion, the Tree of Cell Devisions (ToCD) based on the
genealogy of cells has recently been proposed as a treelike process representing an important aspect of the history of life ([48-50], see Ford Doolittle’s review in [51]).
The concept of the ToCD may reflect an important

Page 9 of 16

aspect of organismal evolution, and most genes and cellular functions remain vertically inherited over short time
spans of only a few generations. Thus, the ToCD may be
well-defined for some groups of organisms, just as the
rope metaphor allows an organismal lineage to be
defined even in the presence of rampant HGT; however,
the reconstruction of the ToCD has to be based on inherited characters, and for these it remains uncertain
whether they were acquired through biased HGT or vertical inheritance.
The evolutionary history of prokaryotes is convoluted
largely as a result of microorganismal abilities to accept
foreign genes and incorporate them into their genomes.
For ancient transfers, it becomes more problematic to
trace the history of the transferred gene in part because
the donor organism’s lineage might have gone extinct
since the transfer took place. Relationships and lineages in
the microbial world are shaped by both HGT and shared
ancestry that, over long periods of time, will exhibit a continuous genealogy. In most instances, transfer bias will
maintain and strengthen similarity within groups. Only in
cases where HGT bias is due to other factors, such as
shared ecological niche [12,13], do patterns emerge from
gene phylogenies that are different from the ToCD.

Methods
Protein sequences of PheRS, ThrRS, SerRS and ProRS
from Archaea, Bacteria and Eukarya were retrieved by
BLASTP searches of the non-redundant protein database
and BLAST microbial genome database from the National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) website
[52]. Sequences were aligned using the MUSCLE algorithm [53] with default parameters. Maximum likelihood
phylogenetic reconstruction of the aaRS sequences was
performed using PhyML v3.0 [54] with 100 bootstrap
replicates, WAG [55] substitution model, estimated portions of invariable sites, four substitution-rate categories,
estimated Γ distribution parameter, estimated amino acid
frequencies, and 20 random starting tree. Distances
between sequences were calculated using the programs
PUZZLEBOOT v1.03 [56] and TREE-PUZZLE [57] using
the WAG [55] +Γ+I model to calculate pairwise maximum
likelihood distances and NEIGHBOR [58] for tree reconstruction. Posterior probability values were generated
using MrBayes v. 3.1.2 [59], with a fixed WAG [55] amino
acid substitution model using four rate categories approximating a Γ distribution, four chains, a swap frequency of
1, and a random starting tree. We used a specified number
of generations for each aaRS analyses (200,000 for the
small PheRS a subunit, 130,000 for small PheRS b subunit,
650,000 for archaeal ThrRS and 800,000 for archaeal
SerRS, sampling every 100th generation. The first 25% of
the sampled generations were removed from the analysis
as burn-in. Nucleotide sequences for the 16S rRNA and

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

23S rRNA were obtained by BLASTN searches and their
alignments were concatenated. For the 16S-23S rRNA
phylogeny, tree reconstruction and bootstrapping were
performed using PhyML v3.0 [54] with estimated portions
of invariable sites, four substitution-rate categories, estimated ts/tv ratio, estimated Γ distribution parameter, estimated amino acid frequencies, BioNJ starting tree, 100
bootstrap replicates and GTR [60] nucleotide substitution
model. Branch lengths and topologies of all phylograms
were calculated with PhyML v3.0 [54]. The substitution
models used for each approach were determined using
ProtTest [61] and jModelTest [62]. Pairwise distances
between sequences were calculated using TREE-PUZZLE
[57] using the WAG [55] +Γ+I model.

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer 1

W. Ford Doolittle, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University.
In this interesting and eclectic paper, Cheryl Andam
and Peter Gogarten present a phylogenetic analysis of
several aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, drawing some general conclusions about LGT which, if not altogether new,
remain important.
First, they show quite convincingly that the PheRS of
three spirochaete genera represent a single transfer from
archaea, prior to their divergence, and that both donor
and recipient were likely to have been thermophiles. Less
convincingly they propose that a more heat-stable PheRS
would have helped the recipient “satisfy the increased
demand for Phe incorporation into proteins to provide
additional stability to their proteins.” Maybe, but some
actual thermostability measurements on the existing
enzymes and better still on their reconstructed common
ancestor are clearly called for-as well as some idea of just
how much the Phe content of the thermoadapting lineage
would have had to increase. More convincingly, Andam
and Gogarten point out just how nicely such rare transfers serve as synapomorphies.
Authors’ response: We thank the reviewer for his comments and suggestions, and we agree that measuring the
thermostability of existing enzymes and the reconstructed
ancestor is an essential next step. However, we think that
this would be more appropriate for a separate study in
the future.
WF Doolittle’s review continued: Second, the authors
expand evidence in support of an idea I first heard Prof.
Gogarten articulate maybe 15 years go at a meeting in
Banff, and have liked ever since. This is that we expect,
for a great many reasons, that (1) lateral transfers will
decrease in likelihood (of happening and of being fixed)
the greater the phylogenetic distance between donor and
recipient, and thus (2) LGT is more likely to preserve
than destroy any Tree of Life. LGT will to be sure create

Page 10 of 16

a certain degree of fuzziness, but at a distance one won’t
see it.
This has always been a bit difficult to prove, though,
because the closer the donor and recipient the harder it
will be to detect transfers, just from the sequences of
their genes. So what Andam and Gogarten do here, in an
extension of their recent PNAS paper, is address an interesting situation, in which there appear to be two distinct
homeoallelic versions of a synthetase, each giving a close
approximation to the expected (rRNA) tree but mixed in
together, so that sometimes it will be one and sometimes
the other that places a species where it “belongs”. There
are two ways to explain this. First, supposing that all genomes have had both alleles until very recently and then
they in some sort of mysterious genomic equivalent of
quantum entanglement have lost one or the other, more
or less at random. Or second, that both forms have been
“kicking around”, like alleles but at a higher than species
level, and are being substituted for each other by LGT
("non-orthologous replacement”) at a goodly rate, but
only over short evolutionary distance. This would make
the Tree of Life look fuzzy up close but not change it at a
distance (just as incomplete sorting of alleles shortly after
speciation or a limited amount of within-genus hybridization will not confuse relationships between major groups
of animals, say).
Authors’ response: We agree with the reviewer that, at
the larger scheme of life’s history, biased gene transfer
does make the branches of ToL appear fuzzy but its overall structure or pattern remains the same, i.e. major prokaryotic groups remain recognizable. Also, it may be
worth reiterating that the biased gene transfer we describe
is not necessarily rampant, and that vertical inheritance
does make a contribution to the similarity of phylogenies
calculated for different molecules.
WF Doolittle’s review continued: These authors’
recently published PNAS paper applied this reasoning to
bacterial TyrRS: here they have focused on archaeal
ThrRS and SerRS, each of which has a common and a
rare form. With the former they show that a “positive
correlation [with rRNA phylogeny] exists for each clade,
despite the occurrence of gene transfer, and that there is
no obvious phylogenetic trace of HGT that can be
detected by phylogenetic conflict within each clade,
because the transfers occur between taxa with close
phylogenetic identity.”
It’s hard to think up a reasonable alternative explanation, though these results do make one wonder, first why
it is that the probable intermediate state (two synthetases
in the same genome) is so seldom observed, and second
what it is that biases LGT so strongly. If it is co-evolved
fits between the tRNAs and the synthetases, there is
some obvious old-fashioned mix-and-match biochemistry
that could easily be done.

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

Authors’ response: The rare co-existence of divergent
enzymes with identical function remains puzzling. Some
duplicate aaRS in bacteria confer differential antibiotic
resistance against natural competitors [63]. And this
might be true as well for the Archaea (archaeal antibiotics halocins and sulfolobicins, collectively called archaeocins; [64]). One possible explanation is that there is a
relatively quick transition/switch between the two types
as a result of a stochastic loss of one or the other. This
could be due to the antibiotics targeting one of the homeoalleles being present only for short periods of time, and
in the absence the duplicate aaRS, becomes redundant.
Another finding that may contribute to the rare cooccurrence of the two homeoalleles is that the replacement might not always occur via the intermediate state
of the two different homeoalleles coexisting [16]. Rather,
the switch can be accomplished through homologous
recombination in the flanking regions. In agreement with
the latter scenario, the two different tyrRS homeoalleles
in Gamma- and Deltaproteobacteria are found in the
same syntenic context in different genomes.
At present we do not have a strong opinion on which
of the many possible factors biases the transfer in favor
of close relatives. However, we do not think that the coevolution with tRNAs makes a major contribution,
because for some tRNAs different types are found in bacteria and archaea, but the distribution of these types
does not correspond neither to the ribosomal phylogeny
or to the distribution of aaRS homeoalleles, suggesting
that both, tRNA and aaRS are transferred independently
(Andam, Papke, Gogarten, manuscript in preparation).
A more heretical explanation for the prevalence of gene
transfer between organisms that we consider related is
that we find this bias, because it is the main driving
force in creating similarity between organisms, and for
creating shared ancestry in the genes of organism that
we consider related. If biased transfer is the main force
in defining groups at higher taxonomic level, then it is
not surprising that most of the transfers are within this
group. The power of biased gene transfer to create overwhelming phylogenetic signal is illustrated by the genomes of the Thermotogae and Aquificae [12,13]: If their
ribosomes reflect vertical inheritance, then these organisms have traded nearly all their other genes with Clostridia, Archaea and Epsilonproteobacteria, respectively,
to the extent that one may consider them as Clostridia
(in case of Thermotogae) and Epsilonproteobacteria (in
case of Aquificae) that picked up their ribosomes from a
deep branching bacterial lineage.
WF Doolittle’s review continued: Andam and Gogarten
also propose that the common and rare forms of Thr
and SerRS diverged prior to the time of LUCA. If I
understand the reasoning here, it is formally related to
that used by Gogarten and colleagues 22 years ago to

Page 11 of 16

root the universal tree. Then, paralogous gene families
represented in all three domains were used to root the
universal tree on the assumption that the duplication
producing them was pre-LUCAn. This assumption
looked at that time almost unchallengeable because each
of the paralogs produced the same tree (rooted by the
duplication). It would have seemed perverse in 1989 to
suppose the actually what had happened was (1) “horizontal transfer from an unknown ancient lineage that
probably has gone extinct or is undiscovered” followed
by (2) frequent but biased HGT, so that the same “correct” three-domain tree is recreated. But this is exactly
what is proposed here to explain aminoacyl RS phylogenies. So it seems to me that the notion of biased gene
transfer, true though it may be, deconstructs much of
what has gone before. I am looking forward to Andam
and Gogarten explaining to me how I have got this
wrong.
Authors’ response: We agree with the reviewer that
gene transfer makes rooting the tree or net of life more
difficult. With the recognition that gene transfer occurs
frequently, we can no longer assume that the rooting of
the ATPsynthase or elongation factor phylogenies also
pertains to the ribosomal phylogeny. However, the rooting
between the bacterial and archaeal domains is recovered
for many molecular systems (most, if one only considers
the ones with sufficient phylogenetic information, and if
one allows for occasional transfers between the domains).
The same placement of the root is also recovered for the
ribosomal proteins, when one uses the echo from the
assembly of the genetic code to determine the most
ancient branch [65]. Thus we regard the split between
Bacteria and Archaea as a fundamental divergence,
reflected in many molecular phylogenies. While this split
is fundamental, we do not think that all genes trace
their lineage back to a single organism that harbored all
the most recent common ancestors (molecular LUCAs).
Rather a population distributed in space and time carried the molecular LUCAs. (We are still fond of the analogy to the human population [40]-there was a
mitochondrial Eve and a Y chromosome Adam, but
about 10,000 other humans also contributed genes to
modern humans.)
Gene transfer makes the discussion of LUCA more complicated, but in our opinion the situation is not hopeless.
In case of SerRS, sensu strictu the molecular LUCA has to
be placed at the divergence of the rare and common form
of the enzyme. However, in contrast to the ATPsynthases
and elongation factors, one of the genes that evolved from
the ancestral divergence does not have universal distribution. The disjunctive distribution of the rare SerRS from
suggests its transfer between methanogens after it was first
acquired from the deep branching lineage. Nevertheless,
the reviewer is correct in suggesting that one could use the

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

rare forms as an outgroup for a phylogeny of the common
form. Given the possibility of long branch attraction, and
the limited amount of phylogenetic information retained
in a single molecule, the results have to be interpreted
with caution; however, the rare form of SerRS places the
root on the bacterial branch of the phylogeny of the common form.
WF Doolittle’s review continued: Indeed it seems to me
that once one (1) accepts as a logically unassailable
necessity that many and perhaps all of the last common
ancestral organism’s genes have been replaced by genes
whose ancestors were at that time present in the genomes of contemporaneous organismal lineages that (by
definition) have since gone extinct, and (2) admits as a
reasonable possibility that biased transfer can replace
vertical descent as the force which maintains-but may
sometimes rearrange-the branches of the universal tree,
then all bets are off on making any firm conclusions
about really deep phylogeny, conclusions of the sort
Andam and Gogarten wish to make here.
Authors’ response: We think the reviewer is overly pessimistic. Most transfers are between close relatives, thus
the overall shape of molecular phylogenies still resembles
organismal history. Yes, given any genome, every single
gene over billions of years has likely been replaced by a
transferred gene. But most of the genes were acquired
from close relatives, thus the overall shape of the tree
remains the same. In addition, many cases of gene transfer between domains and between phyla can be detected
from comparisons between different gene phylogenies.
There are cases where it may be difficult or impossible to
decide between different alternative explanation, such as
the distinction between ancient divergence followed by
differential gene loss and gene transfer. The identification
of the organismal lines of descent in the tangle of gene
phylogenies is difficult, not entirely accurate, and for
some organisms may even be impossible; however, we
remain optimistic that molecular phylogenies hold the
key to determining the often reticulated phylogenies of
extant groups of organisms. Furthermore, because of gene
divergences that occurred before the organismal LUCA,
molecular phylogenies also shed light on the pre-LUCA
evolution of information processing and metabolism.
Reviewer’s report 2

François-Joseph Lapointe, Département de Sciences biologiques, Université de Montréal.
I read with great interest this paper and found it
acceptable for publication in Biology Direct. I agree with
the conclusion of the authors about biased HGT and its
effect on sequence similarity. However, I believe that
using the same terminology for different processes can
be misleading. Sequence similarity is not the same as
genealogy. The processes of vertical inheritance and

Page 12 of 16

biased horizontal gene transfer are quite different things,
regardless of the outcome. It is of interest to detect
similarities in patterns, but also to detect discrepancies
in processes. I would like to see the authors focus not
only on biased HGT, which mimics genealogy, but on
proposing ways to discriminate both types of gene
transfer.
Authors’ response: We agree with the reviewer that
these two processes are undeniably different, however, as
we have discussed elsewhere [16], the patterns generated
by each process may be indistinguishable. Unfortunately,
at present our conclusion is that to some extent phylogenomics may result in a phenetic classification [66], but
the extent of this problem is at present unknown.
FJ Lapointe’s review continued: Here are some specific
comments:
1) A formal definition of “biased HGT” is not provided, and can mean a lot of different things. I can
think of four (at least) possible interpretation of the
term.
i) A directional bias (A-> B is not as likely as B-> A).
ii)A functional bias (genes with the same function
are more likely to be transferred)
iii) A taxonomical bias (some taxa-related or not-are
more prone to HGT)
iv) An environmental bias (taxa living in the same
environment are more likely to exchange genes with
one another)
The authors need to be precise about what they mean
by “biased HGT”. Depending on their use, different processes are involved and detection of biased HGT may be
more or less difficult.
Authors’ response: We apologize for the oversight and
have included a definition of the term “biased gene
transfer” in the manuscript.
FJ Lapointe’s review continued: 2) It is not clear to me
how biased HGT can be easily detected, and not mistaken for ancient gene duplication. Of course, one can
detect gene duplication when multiple copies of a gene
are still occurring in a given taxon, but this is not always
the case. In such situations, how can one distinguish
duplication from HGT? In Figure 4, divergence can
either mean HGT or gene duplication.
Authors’ response: We would like to make two distinct
sets of comments: The first concerns the difficulty of distinguishing between ancient gene duplication followed by
differential gene loss and recent gene transfer. In principle, any molecular phylogeny that disagrees with the
organismal or reference phylogeny can be explained by
either process [7]. The decision about which explanation
to favor depends on the frequency of convergent gene-loss
events. In case of the distribution of homeoalleles, we

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

used the LGT3State model [44]to ascertain that scenarios with gene transfer are more probable than a gene-loss
only model, given the data [16,34].
Second, what traditionally is considered a gene duplication event, in many instances upon closer inspection
will reveal itself to be the result of divergence followed by
gene transfer and non-homologous recombination of the
divergent copy [66,67]. Given that autochthonous gene
duplication in a lineage is a rare occurrence, we prefer
the use of the term divergence, to cover both HGT and
duplication. Analysis of the deep divergences between the
aaRSs with different amino acid specificity may inform
us on the expansion of the genetic code, but this is
beyond the scope of the current manuscript.
FJ Lapointe’s review continued: 3) The authors have a
long series of papers, using both empirical data and simulations, which show the similarities between monophyletic clades as a result of vertical inheritance, and the
clades as a result of biased HGT. I am not disputing the
fact that shared derived characters can emerge in both
cases. Still, one can argue that these so-called “synapomorphies” are not produced by the same processes; thus,
they should not be called the same. It is important to
define a new vocabulary to characterize these groups, not
simply to co-opt cladistic terminology. Otherwise, the
same old words (monophyly, synapomorphy, clade) pertaining to tree-like evolution will still be used to describe
totally different processes (and we know that some of
these processes cannot be represented by a tree). This
can be quite confusing.
Authors’ response: Again, we would like to give a twopart answer: First, if a gene acquired through HGT is
inherited through vertical descent by all descendants of the
recipient, then the presence of the transferred gene is indeed
a synapomorphy in the cladistic sense [68,69]. There is no
reason to invent a new term for this case. In reality things
can be complicated through lineage sorting and gene loss
[29], but in principle the cladistic approach appears valid.
Second, the case of biased gene transfer distributing a gene
within a group is different, as exemplified in the rare form
of SerRS. So far, this homeoallele has only been found in
methanogens, but its distribution within the methanogenic
archaea suggests spread not only by vertical inheritance,
but also through biased HGT. The frequent occurrence of
gene transfer suggests caution in interpreting the presence
of a transferred gene as a synapomorphy. The interpretation of an atypical gene as a synapomorphy has to be
regarded as a hypothesis, and especially in case of limited
taxon sampling may be falsified by future findings. Cladistic and phenetic similarities can indeed be difficult to differentiate, and if apparent synapomorphies are frequently
revealed to be the consequence of biased transfer, then a
new terminology for the latter might be useful to describe
the phenetic group defined by gene transfer bias.

Page 13 of 16

FJ Lapointe’s review continued: 4) In Figure 3, pairwise
evolutionary distances are compared, but details of the
computations are not provided. Are these pairwise distances among sequences, corrected distances or pathlength distances in the corresponding trees?
Authors’ response: We apologize for the oversight and
we now included a statement on how the pairwise distances were calculated.
Reviewer’s report 3

Frédéric Bouchard, Département de philosophie, Université de Montréal and Centre interuniversitaire de
recherche sur la science et la technologie.
I will focus my comments on some of the broad theoretical dividends of the paper. Because of this, I may be
overreaching in my interpretation of the findings of this
paper. Regardless, the paper is highly stimulating and
deserves broad readership. It deserves publication with
minor precisions.
The paper highlights two results.
1- that vertical processes and horizontal processes
may lead to similar patterns
2- that horizontal processes may in fact reinforce the
appearance of verticality because of biased HGT
The second point is not as explicit but in my mind is
the most novel point. Some claim that horizontal transfer
may seem invisible because: a) HGT is infrequent in
some/most lineages; b) it occurred too far in the past; c)
it ‘merely’ replaced something that was similar or closely
related. This could explain why vertical patterns and vertical+horizontal patterns would be similar. As the authors
point out, the three aforementioned explanations are not
as compelling as previously thought because of the now
recognized pervasiveness of HGT. This makes their second proposition that biased HGT may reinforce similarity between closely related organisms all the more
intriguing. If they are correct, then there would be a virtuous circle between vertical processes and horizontal
processes in that organisms that are closely related by
vertical inheritance would exchange genes more readily
thereby increasing their genetic and functional (?) similarity. This may mean ironically that HGT could explain
why vertical patterns seem so cohesive and exhaustive! It
would be BECAUSE of biased HGT that vertical processes appear sufficient to explain the patterns we
observe.
If that is correct, then the author may want to go for a
bolder claim (maybe in future research projects): the
patterns would be similar (undistinguishable) only if
biased HGT is weak. In case of strong biased HGT, we
should expect patterns created by vertical processes
alone to be “looser” (less defined) than ones created by

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

horizontal and vertical processes i.e. the patterns would
not be undistinguishable.
Authors’ response: We thank the reviewer for his comments and the suggestion. One way to identify if biased
transfer led to the cohesion of a prokaryotic group is that
within-group phylogenetic patterns should reveal conflicts
[15], whereas between-group transfer do not. In case of
homeoalleles the transfer is inferred from the distribution
of the divergent homeoallele types, and for each clade of
homeoalleles the phylogenetic patterns indeed do not
match the ribosomal phylogeny perfectly [16]. However,
these conflicts provide only corroborating evidence,
because it often is difficult to distinguish conflicts due to a
lack of phylogenetic information from conflicts due to
within-group transfer. The reviewer is correct that in case
a group is created and held together through biased gene
transfer, the transferred genes should result in tighter,
more recent divergence of the group than genes that were
vertically inherited. Two problems in translating this idea
into a testable hypotheses are as follows: First, it is difficult a priori to decide which genes are vertically inherited
and which were transferred. Homeoalleles provide a
unique opportunity to identify reliably within-group
transfer from the distribution of the allele types. It seems
reasonable to assume that the transfer rates in case of
other genes are as high; however, in the absence of homeoalleles the detection of these transfers can only be based
on within-group conflicts of molecular phylogenies, thus
the identification of transfers is less decisive. Second, the
tightness of the group would be reflected in more recent
apparent shared ancestry; however, molecular phylogenies
are usually scaled with respect to substitutions and the
inference of substitution rates is often problematic. Only if
large sets of genes are analyzed in a comparative study
could one hope to detect the tighter grouping that results
from frequent biased transfer.
F Bouchard’s review continued: Maybe I misunderstood
the goal of the paper or the strength of the evidence
because of the relative lack of definition of the key concept of “biased HGT”. I wasn’t certain what the authors
meant by that expression. The usage of the expression in
the paper clearly refers to HGT between closely genealogical organisms, but the mention of shared ecological
niches suggests that it may be between similarly functioning organisms (in addition or sometimes independently of their shared history). The word “species” is
often jettisoned in these discussions because of the theoretical baggage, but here it seems we are coming back to
the same issues. Lineage is usually a historical concept
(i.e. a multi-generational succession of related organisms,
or something similar), which matches many intuitions we
have concerning species. But in the debate about the definition of species, some have adopted a purely ahistorical
functional concept of species, such as Van Valen’s

Page 14 of 16

Ecological Species Concept. This text seems to adopt a
hybrid notion of lineage one that comprises organisms
that are genealogically related AND operating in similar/
shared niches. Could biased HGT occur between genealogically related organisms that operate in distinct
niches? Would that count as biased HGT or just HGT?
A more detailed definition of biased HGT would help
answer this question and would provide a better idea of
how they wish to redefine the notion of lineage. But
maybe this is for future research projects.
Authors’ response: We apologize for not being specific
about our definition of biased HGT. We added a discussion
of the definition of biased gene transfer and the type of bias
we discuss in the manuscript. We focus our analyses on
transfers between closely related organisms. Transfer bias
can be created through different processes, such as shared
ecological niches, symbiotic relationships, susceptibility to
transfer agents, similar genome organizational signals,
nucleotide and codon usage biases, similarity in regulatory
sequences, etc.. Many of these factors will bias transfer in
favor of close relatives, but highways of gene sharing were
described between unrelated organisms [11,70]. However,
in this manuscript we limit our discussion to bias in favor
of transfer between close relatives.
F Bouchard’s review continued: In addition to a more
explicit definition of biased HGT, let me add a minor
point where I think the argument could be better
presented
“When organisms transfer genetic material with their
close kin, the similarity and therefore relatedness
observed among them are essentially shaped by gene
transfer” (p.6) The bold (not pejorative here!) claims this
section makes hinge on references [16] and [33], yet the
authors claim that [16] shows the possibility of pattern
similarity. Possibility is different from reality... and therefore a broader discussion of [16] would help bolster the
claims made in this section. The whole section aims to
do this, but I would offer a longer discussion/analysis of
[16] in this paper.
More generally I would have liked a slightly longer discussion of how to distinguish patterns that could have
emerged purely via vertical inheritance and patterns that
could have emerged via vertical inheritance and biased
HGT. Since the argument here is that it is possible for
vertical patterns to have emerged via vertical+HGT processes, it would be desirable to make more explicit why
the latter more complicated story is to be favoured contra
a more parsimonious (but wrong) story of simple trees
with simple branches. The argument aims to do this, but
by repeating that the patterns are undistinguishable, the
authors rely too strongly on parsimony alone, I think.
But parsimony is a double edged sword: the “opponents”
of HGT invoke parsimony as well. The authors need to
explain why their parsimony is more parsimonious...

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

Authors’ response: We agree, there is a big difference
between possibility and showing that things actually
happened. Our hypothesis that biased HGT may create
patterns usually mistaken as due to shared ancestry
began with a thought experiment [71], i.e., showing the
possibility, but not that this actually had happened in
nature. As discussed above, corroborating this hypothesis
was difficult, because the predictions from this hypothesis
with respect to molecular phylogenies relied on phylogenetic conflicts that often were too small to be convincing.
This situation changed with the discovery of homeoalleles
in bacteria and archaea [16,34]. As is true for all gene
transfer events, the replacement of one homeoallele with
another can in principle be explained by an ancient gene
duplication followed by convergent gene loss events. However, the likelihood for the loss-only model was found to
be significantly smaller (see the discussion of the
LGT3State model above). Furthermore, the finding that
some of the replacements between divergent homeoalleles
occurred though recombination in the more conserved
flanking regions, maintaining a syntenic gene neighbourhood for the divergent homeoallele types [16], shows that
at least in these cases the two homeoalleles did not previously coexist in the same genome.

Page 15 of 16

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.
Abbreviations
aaRS: aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases; HGT: horizontal gene transfer; LUCA: Last
Universal Common Ancestor, PheRS: Phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase, PylRS:
pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase, SerRS: Seryl-tRNA synthetases, ThrRS: ThreonyltRNA synthetases; ToCD: Tree of Cell Divisions
Acknowledgements
The authors thank David Williams, Timothy Harlow, Pascal Lapierre, and the
Biotechnology Bioservices Center of the University of Connecticut for
technical support, and Eric Bapteste, Greg Fournier, Maureen O’Malley, R.
Thane Papke, and Kristen Swithers for helpful discussions. The Leverhulme
Trust provided funding for the open access publication charges. This work
was supported by the National Science Foundation Grant DEB 0830024.
Authors’ contributions
JPG conceived of the study. JPG and CPA participated in its design, data
analyses and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

15.
16.

17.

18.
19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

Received: 3 February 2011 Accepted: 23 September 2011
Published: 23 September 2011
24.
References
1. Jain R, Rivera MC, Moore JE, Lake JA: Horizontal gene transfer accelerates
genome innovation and evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2003, 20(10):1598-1602.
2. Hehemann JH, Correc G, Barbeyron T, Helbert W, Czjzek M, Michel G:
Transfer of carbohydrate-active enzymes from marine bacteria to
Japanese gut microbiota. Nature 2010, 464(7290):908-912.
3. Caro-Quintero A, Deng J, Auchtung J, Brettar I, Hofle MG, Klappenbach J,
Konstantinidis KT: Unprecedented levels of horizontal gene transfer
among spatially co-occurring Shewanella bacteria from the Baltic Sea.
ISME J 2010.

25.

26.
27.

Martiny AC, Huang Y, Li W: Occurrence of phosphate acquisition genes in
Prochlorococcus cells from different ocean regions. Environ Microbiol
2009, 11(6):1340-1347.
Treangen TJ, Rocha EPC: Horizontal Transfer, Not Duplication, Drives the
Expansion of Protein Families in Prokaryotes. PLoS Genet 2011, 7(1):
e1001284.
Williams D, Andam CP, Gogarten JP: Horizontal Gene Transfer and the
Formation of Groups of Microorganisms. In Molecular Phylogeny of
Microorganisms. Edited by: Oren A, Papke RT. Caister Academic Press; 2010:
[http://gogarten.uconn.edu/articles/WilliamsAndamGogarten_HGT_and_the_
Formation_of_Groups_of_Microorganisms.pdf].
Gogarten JP, Townsend JP: Horizontal gene transfer, genome innovation
and evolution. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3(9):679-687.
Kloesges T, Papa O, Martin W, Dagan T: Networks of gene sharing among
329 proteobacterial genomes reveal differences in lateral gene transfer
frequency at different phylogenetic depths. Mol Biol Evol 2011,
28:1057-1074.
McDaniel LD, Young E, Delaney J, Ruhnau F, Ritchie KB, Paul JH: High
frequency of horizontal gene transfer in the oceans. Science 2010, 330:50.
Trobos M, Lester CH, Olsen JE, Frimodt-Moller N, Hammerum AM: Natural
transfer of sulphonamide and ampicillin resistance between Escherichia
coli residing in the human intestine. J Antimicrob Chemother 2009,
63:80-86.
Beiko RG, Harlow TJ, Ragan MA: Highways of gene sharing in prokaryotes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:14332-14337.
Boussau B, Gueguen L, Gouy M: Accounting for horizontal gene transfers
explains conflicting hypotheses regarding the position of aquificales in
the phylogeny of Bacteria. BMC evolutionary biology 2008, 8:272.
Zhaxybayeva O, Swithers KS, Lapierre P, Fournier GP, Bickhart DM,
DeBoy RT, Nelson KE, Nesbo CL, Doolittle WF, Gogarten JP, et al: On the
chimeric nature, thermophilic origin, and phylogenetic placement of the
Thermotogales. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(14):5865-5870.
Roberts AP, Mullany P: Oral biofilms: a reservoir of transferable, bacterial,
antimicrobial resistance. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2010, 8:1441-1450.
Gogarten JP, Doolittle WF, Lawrence JG: Prokaryotic evolution in light of
gene transfer. Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19(12):2226-2238.
Andam CP, Williams D, Gogarten JP: Biased gene transfer mimics patterns
created through shared ancestry. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010,
107:10679-10684.
Woese CR, Olsen GJ, Ibba M, Soll D: Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, the
genetic code, and the evolutionary process. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2000,
64:202-236.
Paster BJ, Dewhirst FE: Phylogenetic foundation of spirochetes. J Mol
Microbiol Biotechnol 2000, 2:341-344.
Greenberg EP, Canale-Parola E: Spirochaeta halophila sp. n., a facultative
anaerobe from a high-salinity pond. Arch Microbiol 1976, 110:185-194.
Aksenova H, Rainey F, Janssen P, Zavarzin G, Morgan H: Spirochaeta
thermophila sp. nov., an obligately anaerobic, polysaccharolytic,
extremely thermophilic bacterium. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1992, 42:175-177.
Pohlschroeder M, Leschine S, Canale-Parola E: Spirochaeta caldaria sp.
nov., a thermophilic bacterium that enhances cellulose degradation by
Clostridium thermocellum. Archives Microbiol 1994, 161:17-24.
Magot M, Fardeau ML, Arnauld O, Lanau C, Ollivier B, Thomas P, Patel BK:
Spirochaeta smaragdinae sp. nov., a new mesophilic strictly anaerobic
spirochete from an oil field. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1997, 155:185-191.
Hoover RB, Pikuta EV, Bej AK, Marsic D, Whitman WB, Tang J, Krader P:
Spirochaeta americana sp. nov., a new haloalkaliphilic, obligately
anaerobic spirochaete isolated from soda Mono Lake in California. Int J
Syst Evol Microbiol 2003, 53:815-821.
Pikuta EV, Hoover RB, Bej AK, Marsic D, Whitman WB, Krader P: Spirochaeta
dissipatitropha sp. nov., an alkaliphilic, obligately anaerobic bacterium,
and emended description of the genus Spirochaeta Ehrenberg 1835. Int
J Syst Evol Microbiol 2009, 59:1798-1804.
Droge S, Frohlich J, Radek R, Konig H: Spirochaeta coccoides sp. nov., a
novel coccoid spirochete from the hindgut of the termite Neotermes
castaneus. Appl Environ Microbiol 2006, 72:392-397.
Burley SK, Petsko GA: Aromatic-aromatic interaction: a mechanism of
protein structure stabilization. Science 1985, 229:23-28.
Anderson DE, Hurley JH, Nicholson H, Baase WA, Matthews BW:
Hydrophobic core repacking and aromatic-aromatic interaction in the

Andam and Gogarten Biology Direct 2011, 6:47
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/47

28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.
40.

41.

42.
43.

44.

45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.

52.
53.
54.

thermostable mutant of T4 lysozyme Ser 117– > Phe. Protein Sci 1993,
2:1285-1290.
Kannan N, Vishveshwara S: Aromatic clusters: a determinant of thermal
stability of thermophilic proteins. Protein Eng 2000, 13:753-761.
Huang J, Gogarten JP: Ancient gene transfer as a tool in phylogenetic
reconstruction. Methods in molecular biology 2009, 532:127-139.
Huang J, Xu Y, Gogarten JP: The presence of a haloarchaeal type tyrosyltRNA synthetase marks the opisthokonts as monophyletic. Mol Biol Evol
2005, 22:2142-2146.
Zhaxybayeva O, Lapierre P, Gogarten JP: Genome mosaicism and
organismal lineages. Trends Genet 2004, 20(5):254-260.
Arnold M: Evolution through genetic exchange Oxford, Great Britain: Oxford
University Press; 2006.
Puigbo P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The tree and net components of prokaryote
evolution. Genome Biol Evol 2010, 2:745-756.
Andam CP, Gogarten JP: Biased gene transfer in microbial evolution. Nat
Rev Microbiol 2011, 9(7):543-555.
Wolf YI, Aravind L, Grishin NV, Koonin EV: Evolution of aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases–analysis of unique domain architectures and phylogenetic
trees reveals a complex history of horizontal gene transfer events.
Genome Res 1999, 9(8):689-710.
Farahi K, Pusch GD, Overbeek R, Whitman WB: Detection of lateral gene
transfer events in the prokaryotic tRNA synthetases by the ratios of
evolutionary distances method. Journal of molecular evolution 2004,
58(5):615-631.
Novichkov PS, Omelchenko MV, Gelfand MS, Mironov AA, Wolf YI,
Koonin EV: Genome-wide molecular clock and horizontal gene transfer
in bacterial evolution. J Bacteriol 2004, 186(19):6575-6585.
Eriani G, Delarue M, Poch O, Gangloff J, Moras D: Partition of tRNA
synthetases into two classes based on mutually exclusive sets of
sequence motifs. Nature 1990, 347(6289):203-206.
Burbaum JJ, Schimmel P: Structural relationships and the classification of
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. J Biol Chem 1991, 266(26):16965-16968.
Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP: Cladogenesis, coalescence and the
evolution of the three domains of life. Trends in Genetics 2004,
20(4):182-187.
Fournier GP, Huang J, Gogarten JP: Horizontal gene transfer from extinct
and extant lineages: biological innovation and the coral of life.
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London 2009,
364:2229-2239.
Frost LS, Leplae R, Summers AO, Toussaint A: Mobile genetic elements:
the agents of open source evolution. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3(9):722-732.
Olendzenski L, Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP: What’s in a Tree?: Does
Horizontal Gene Transfer Determine Microbial Taxonomy? In Cellular
Origin and Life in Extreme Habitats Vol 4: Symbiosis. Volume 4. Edited by:
Seckbach J. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2001:67-78.
Stern A, Mayrose I, Penn O, Shaul S, Gophna U, Pupko T: An evolutionary
analysis of lateral gene transfer in thymidylate synthase enzymes. Syst
Biol 2010, 59(2):212-225.
Andam CP, Gogarten JP: Biased gene transfer in microbial evolution. Nat
Rev Micro 2011, 9(7):543-555.
Cairns-Smith AG: Seven clues to the origin of life Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press; 1985.
William J: Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, Lecture
IV: The One and the Many New York: Longmans, Green and Co; 1907.
Gribaldo S, Brochier C: Phylogeny of prokaryotes: does it exist and why
should we care? Res Microbiol 2009, 160:513-521.
Valas R, Bourne P: Save the tree of life or get lost in the woods. Biol Direct
2010, , 5: 44.
Franklin-Hall L: Trashing life’s tree. Biology and Philosophy 2010,
25(4):689-709.
Bapteste E, O’Malley MA, Beiko RG, Ereshefsky M, Gogarten JP, FranklinHall L, Lapointe FJ, Dupre J, Dagan T, Boucher Y, et al: Prokaryotic
evolution and the tree of life are two different things. Biol Direct 2009,
4:34.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucl Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.

Page 16 of 16

55. Whelan S, Goldman N: A general empirical model of protein evolution
derived from multiple protein families using a maximum-likelihood
approach. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18(5):691-699.
56. Holder ME, Roger A: PUZZLEBOOT Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods
Hole, MA; 1999.
57. Schmidt HA, Strimmer K, Vingron M, von Haeseler A: TREE-PUZZLE:
maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis using quartets and parallel
computing. Bioinformatics 2002, 18:502-504.
58. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP Manual v1.03 Berkeley, CA: University Herbarium,
University of California; 1993.
59. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
60. Lanave C, Preparata G, Saccone C, Serio G: A new method for calculating
evolutionary substitution rates. Journal of molecular evolution 1984,
20(1):86-93.
61. Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:2104-2105.
62. Posada D: jModelTest: phylogenetic model averaging. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25:1253-1256.
63. Andam C, Fournier G, Gogarten J: Multilevel populations and the
evolution of antibiotic resistance through horizontal gene transfer. FEMS
Microbiology Reviews 2011, Epub May 2011.
64. O’Connor E, Shand R: Halocins and sulfolobicins: the emerging story of
archaeal protein and peptide antibiotics. J Ind Microbiol Biotech 2001,
28:23-31.
65. Fournier GP, Gogarten JP: Rooting the Ribosomal Tree of Life. Mol Biol
Evol 2010, 27(8):1792-1801.
66. Andam CP, Williams D, Gogarten JP: Natural taxonomy in light of
horizontal gene transfer. Biol Philos 2010, 25:589-602.
67. Treangen T, Rocha E: Horizontal transfer, not duplication, drives the
expansion of protein families in prokaryotes. PLoS Genetics 2011, 7:
e1001284.
68. Huang J, Gogarten JP: Ancient horizontal gene transfer can benefit
phylogenetic reconstruction. Trends Genet 2006, 22(7):361-366.
69. Huang J, Gogarten P: Did an ancient chlamydial endosymbiosis facilitate
the establishment of primary plastids? Genome Biol 2007, 8(6):R99.
70. Frickey T, Lupas AN: PhyloGenie: automated phylome generation and
analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(17):5231-5238.
71. Olendzenski L, Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP: Horizontal gene transfer: A
new taxonomic principle? In Horizontal Gene Transfer.. 2 edition. Edited by:
Syvanen M, Kado CI. New York: Academic Press; 2002:427-435.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-47
Cite this article as: Andam and Gogarten: Biased gene transfer and its
implications for the concept of lineage. Biology Direct 2011 6:47.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
