<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Molecular evidence for increased regulatory conservation during metamorphosis, and against deleterious cascading effects of hybrid breakdown in Drosophila</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010 8:26. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-26"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Carlo G Artieri"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Molecular evidence for increased regulatory
conservation during metamorphosis, and against
deleterious cascading effects of hybrid
breakdown in Drosophila
Carlo G Artieri1,2, Rama S Singh1*

Abstract
Background: Speculation regarding the importance of changes in gene regulation in determining major
phylogenetic patterns continues to accrue, despite a lack of broad-scale comparative studies examining how
patterns of gene expression vary during development. Comparative transcriptional profiling of adult interspecific
hybrids and their parental species has uncovered widespread divergence of the mechanisms controlling gene
regulation, revealing incompatibilities that are masked in comparisons between the pure species. However, this has
prompted the suggestion that misexpression in adult hybrids results from the downstream cascading effects of a
subset of genes improperly regulated in early development.
Results: We sought to determine how gene expression diverges over development, as well as test the cascade
hypothesis, by profiling expression in males of Drosophila melanogaster, D. sechellia, and D. simulans, as well as the
D. simulans (♀) × D. sechellia (♂) male F1 hybrids, at four different developmental time points (3rd instar larval,
early pupal, late pupal, and newly-emerged adult). Contrary to the cascade model of misexpression, we find that
there is considerable stage-specific autonomy of regulatory breakdown in hybrids, with the larval and adult stages
showing significantly more hybrid misexpression as compared to the pupal stage. However, comparisons between
pure species indicate that genes expressed during earlier stages of development tend to be more conserved in
terms of their level of expression than those expressed during later stages, suggesting that while Von Baer’s
famous law applies at both the level of nucleotide sequence and expression, it may not apply necessarily to the
underlying overall regulatory network, which appears to diverge over the course of ontogeny and which can only
be ascertained by combining divergent genomes in species hybrids.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that complex integration of regulatory circuits during morphogenesis may lead to
it being more refractory to divergence of underlying gene regulatory mechanisms - more than that suggested by
the conservation of gene expression levels between species during earlier stages. This provides support for a
‘developmental hourglass’ model of divergence of gene expression in Drosophila resulting in a highly conserved
pupal stage.

Background
Studies in the field of evolutionary developmental biology have highlighted an important role for the divergence in patterns of gene regulation in shaping speciesspecific developmental outcomes. However, they have
* Correspondence: singh@mcmaster.ca
1
Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, L8S4K1,
Canada

generally focused on a few loci, with the intent of mapping the precise changes in cis regulatory sites that are
responsible for altered phenotypes [1,2]. Conversely,
large-scale interspecific comparative gene regulation studies in the context of development are lacking, despite a
growing body of speculation about the importance of
divergence in regulatory networks in determining broad
evolutionary patterns [3,4]. Such comparative studies are
crucial to a more complete synthesis of evolution and

© 2010 Artieri and Singh; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

development, as theoretical models of evolutionary processes are ultimately derived from the attempt to explain
general patterns, rather than from case studies [5]. A
number of researchers have used interspecific hybrids in
order to study patterns of gene expression divergence at
the level of the transcriptome, typically with the intent
of elucidating the incompatible divergence of regulatory
factors responsible for post-zygotic reproductive isolation leading to speciation (reviewed in [6]). Such hybrids
offer us the chance to reveal incompatible divergence
between regulatory elements that are masked by stabilizing selection acting to maintain similar expression levels
in the parental species [7]. These studies have found a
wide quantitative divergence of gene expression levels
between hybrids and (same sex) members of their parental species, manifested as an improper expression of
genes within hybrids relative to both parental species.
The majority of these misexpressed genes are underexpressed relative to the parents, which is thought to
result from a loss-of-function phenotype in hybrids
caused by the incompatible divergence of gene regulatory elements, either in cis or trans. A potential caveat
to expression studies employing interspecific hybrids is
that they have generally examined only a single developmental stage, typically the adult. Hybrids are often characterized by the breakdown of various developmental
systems, such as atrophied or absent germlines or heterosis of particular tissues/organs [8,9]. Such observations have led to the suggestion that widespread
misexpression of genes in adults may not reflect the
equally widespread incompatible divergence of regulatory elements during this stage. Rather, they may result
from incompatibilities occurring among a smaller number of genes upstream in ontogenic hierarchies that
have complex cascading effects that manifest themselves
as an increasing proportion of misexpressed genes as
ontogeny progresses [6]. This increase in the proportion
of misexpressed genes may result from two nonmutually exclusive mechanisms: (1) improper regulation
of genes occurring early in development may lead to
improper development of particular tissues creating allometric differences in mRNA abundance relative to the
parental species. (2) Improper regulation of early genes
may lead to improper regulation of their downstream
targets, which propagates throughout the developmental
regulatory network. Irrespective its ultimate cause, we
shall refer to this hypothesis as the ‘cascade model’ of
hybrid misexpression.
The notion that changes occurring early in development are likely to lead to deleterious cascading effects
in later stages is the most popular explanation for the
observation that species are generally more similar to
one another morphologically in earlier developmental
stages compared to later developmental stages (known

Page 2 of 15

as Von Baer’s [10] ‘third law of development’ [11,12]).
Generally termed ‘developmental constraint’ [12], this
hypothesis invokes the notion that purifying selection
will be stronger when acting on early-expressed, developmentally integrated genes [13]. Evidence for the
developmental constraint hypothesis has come from the
observation that genes expressed early in development
tend to be more conserved at the sequence level than
those expressed later [14-16]. More recently, it has been
suggested that, while constraint may explain conservation of sequence and structure in early development, a
greater opportunity for selection in later stages, engendered by such features as greater organismal mobility,
complexity of behavior and sexual reproduction, may
also contribute to the greater level of divergence seen
among species’ adults [16] - a theory originally proposed
by Darwin [17]. It should also be noted that, while Von
Baer’s third law holds generally, it has been established
that interspecific divergence does not increase monotonically over the entire course of development; rather,
the earliest stages of ontogeny in vertebrates, for example, can vary substantially between species [12]. This has
led to the proposal of a ‘developmental hourglass’ model
of ontogenic divergence, wherein certain stages of development are more highly conserved as a result of a
greater integration of complex regulatory interactions
compared to those occurring either earlier or later typically those stages during which organogenesis begins
[12,18] (see also [19] for criticism of this model).
In order to test the predictions of the cascade model
of hybrid misexpression, as well as to address whether
Von Baer’s law holds at the level of gene expression, we
conducted Drosophila melanogaster cDNA microarraybased expression profiling of males of D. melanogaster,
D. sechellia and D. simulans, at four synchronized developmental time points [3rd instar larval (larval), early
pupal, late pupal and newly-emerged adult (adult)]. D.
simulans and D. sechellia shared a most recent common
ancestor (MRCA) ~0.5 - 1.0 million years ago (MYA)
and form a clade that shared an MRCA with D. melanogaster approximately 5.4 MYA [20,21]. In addition, we
also performed the same analysis on the male interspecific F1 hybrids of the D. simulans (♀) × D. sechellia (♂)
cross (hereafter simply called ‘hybrids’). We sought to
test two specific hypotheses:
1. Does interspecific divergence in gene expression
level increase over development (as has been
observed for coding sequence divergence) or is
expression more conserved during a particular developmental stage, indicating greater regulatory integration during a particular part of the life cycle?
2. Is such divergence also manifested in interspecific
hybrids via an increasing proportion of misexpressed

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

Page 3 of 15

We find evidence that gene expression levels, when
compared between pure species, follow a pattern of
greater conservation in the earlier stages, as has been
previously observed at the level of gene sequence and
morphology. However, our results in hybrids do not
support the developmental cascade model of misexpression: rather, we find ontogenic stage-specific breakdown
of expression with the fewest misexpressed genes
observed during the late pupal time point. Our data provide important insights for research exploring both the
evolution of gene regulation in the context of development and the genetics of speciation, as it appears that
phenotypic patterns of divergence observed in interspecific comparisons may mask more complex divergence
occurring at the molecular level [22].

microarrays, thus improving our statistical power to
detect significant differences. An inspection of the distributions of between replicate variances in our array data
revealed that, indeed, D. sechellia showed significantly
reduced between replicate variance compared to the
other two species and the hybrids during the three earliest sampled times in our ontogenic interval (KruskalWallis rank sum test, P < 2.2 × 10-16; Additional File 4).
Therefore, we generated a set of random array values
for these time points, retaining the means of D. sechellia
while scaling their variance to that estimated from
D. simulans (see Methods). We found that the number
of genes that vary significantly in expression level over
development in D. sechellia remained significantly
higher than in both D. simulans and the hybrids but it
was no longer significantly greater than D. melanogaster
(c 2 test, 1 df, P = 0.02996, 0.0001467, and 0.1891,
respectively).

Results

Between species divergence in the context of ontogeny

Within-species expression patterns over ontogeny

Focusing only on the pure species, we compared the
number of genes that were differentially expressed at
each of the four sampled time points in pairwise comparisons among those genes detectibly expressed at all
stages in all three species (2,253 genes; Figure 1). We
find that in those pairwise comparisons between species
in which the number of differentially expressed genes
varied significantly over our sampled developmental
interval (D. simulans versus D. melanogaster, and D.
simulans versus D. sechellia) fewer genes were differentially expressed at the earlier stages (the larval stage in
both pairwise comparisons and the early pupal stage in
the latter; c2 test, 1 df, P < 0.001). In no case were there
significantly fewer genes differentially expressed at a
later developmental time in comparison to an earlier
one (P > 0.05). As D. simulans and D. sechellia form a
clade excluding D. melanogaster [20], we expected that
they would show fewer differentially expressed genes
than the other two possible pairwise comparisons. This
was the case in all situations in which the difference
between comparisons was statistically significant for the
larval, late pupal and adult time points (Figure 1). However, there are significantly more genes differentially
expressed between D. sechellia and D. simulans than in
the comparison between D. melanogaster and D. simulans during the early pupal point (P < 0.001 in all
cases). We also found significant asymmetry in the
number of genes differentially expressed in comparisons
between D. melanogaster and D. simulans or D. sechellia
during the larval and early pupal time points, where
fewer genes are differentially expressed in the former as
compared to the latter (P < 0.001), suggesting that
D. simulans and D. sechellia have experienced different
evolutionary pressures in earlier developmental stages.

genes over subsequent stages of development,
directly revealing regulatory divergence?

We first sought to compare how patterns of gene
expression varied within species over the course of our
four sampled developmental time points. Restricting our
comparison to the 2,006 genes that were detectibly
expressed at all four time points in the three species
and the hybrids, we found that 64.2% (1,287), 82.2%
(1,649), 62.2% (1,247) and 57.9% (1,162) of genes varied
significantly in the expression level over the course of
the sampled developmental interval in D. melanogaster,
D. sechellia, D. simulans and the hybrids, respectively
(Additional File 1 contains supplementary methods and
analysis, and tables containing raw data and the results
of statistical analyses are found in Additional File 2).
The proportion of genes that varied significantly during
development in D. sechellia was significantly greater
than that of the other two species and the hybrids (c2
test, 1 degree of freedom [df], P = 3.709214 × 10 -6 ,
1.179722 × 10-7, and 1.642797 × 10-11 for the comparison with D. melanogaster, D. simulans, and the hybrids,
respectively; Bonferroni correction was applied to all
pairwise tests). However, no other pairwise comparisons
were statistically significant (P > 0.05). The relationships
among genes varying among the three pure species or
the parental species and the hybrids are shown in Venn
diagram form in Additional File 3. Numerous lines of
evidence suggest that D. sechellia arose from a relatively
recent island colonization event, perhaps having gone
through a severe bottleneck, and have since maintained
low effective population sizes [20,23], leading to a
reduced level of intraspecific polymorphism relative to
the other two pure species. A reduced level of intraspecific polymorphism in expression level could lead to
reduced estimates of between-replicate variability on the

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 Number of genes significantly differentially expressed in pairwise comparisons between each of the three pure Drosophila
species at each of the four sampled stages (out of 2,253 genes). There are fewer genes differentially expressed in the larval as compared to
the late pupal stage in the comparison between Drosphila melanogaster and D. simulans (P < 0.001) as indicated by the dashed line. Similarly,
there are fewer genes differentially expressed in the early pupal stage of the same comparison than the late pupal or the adult as indicated by
the solid line (P < 0.001). In the comparison between D. simulans and D. sechellia there are fewer genes differentially expressed during the larval
stage than any other stage as indicated by the three asterisks (***) (P < 0.001). All other between stage comparisons within the pairwise
comparisons were not statistically significant. There were fewer genes that were differentially expressed between D. simulans and D. sechellia
during the larval stage than the other two more phylogenetically distant comparisons (indicated by the dagger [†]). The number of genes that
were significantly differentially expressed differed in all three comparisons between the early pupal stage; however, the D. simulans versus D.
sechellia comparison was not the lowest (indicated by the double-dagger [‡]).

Hybrid expression patterns over development

In order to further probe the divergence among regulatory factors between species, we compared patterns
of gene expression among the three pure species as
well as the male D. sechellia and D. simulans sterile F1
interspecific hybrids during the four sampled developmental time points. We performed hierarchical clustering analysis using a conservative set of 2,006 genes
detectibly expressed on all replicate array spots during
all four developmental time points in the three pure
species and the hybrids (Figure 2; see Methods). Bootstrapping the dendrogram indicates that all clusters
except one are supported at the 95% level (indicated
by the dagger [†]). Patterns of expression within individual stages, rather than species, clustered together,
indicating that stage-specific expression levels are significantly conserved between species. Furthermore, the
larval and early pupal time points formed a cluster, as

did the late pupal and adult points, which supports
previous observations that suggest that substantial
expression turnover occurs during the active organogenesis taking place during the pupal stage [24]. With
the exception of the early pupal point, the clustering
pattern matched phylogenetic expectations - D. sechellia and D. simulans cluster to the exclusion of the
more distantly related D. melanogaster (see also
below). The relationship of the hybrids relative to their
parental species varied over the sampled developmental
interval: in the case of the larval and adult stages,
D. simulans and D. sechellia clustered together to the
exclusion of the hybrids, indicating substantial nonadditivity of expression levels in the hybrids (note that
the clustering of the hybrids with D. melanogaster during the larval stage is not supported at the 95% level).
In the case of the two pupal time points, however, the
hybrids clustered with D. sechellia, suggesting that this

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Hierarchically clustered heatmap indicating relationship between species and stage specific expression patterns for the 2,006
genes detectibly expressed in all three pure species and the hybrids. (M) Drosphila melanogaster; (H) Hybrids; (Se) D. sechellia; (Si) D.
simulans. Clustering relationships were bootstrapped, and all clusters are supported at the 95% level with the exception of the M-H pair
indicated by the dagger (†). Genes indicated in red are expressed at a lower level than the reference sample whereas those in green are
expressed at a higher level than the reference. All log2 transformed expression ratios are scaled between -3 and 3 by the software.

parent’s allelic contribution acts in a manner dominant
to that of D. simulans.
We also compared the number of genes that were differentially expressed in pairwise comparisons between
the hybrids and their parental species at each stage
among those genes detectibly expressed in all three
(2,052 genes; Additional File 5). Contrary to the

expectations of the hypothesis that misexpression of
genes in the adult stage of hybrids results from a cascade
caused by the initial misexpression of a smaller number
of genes at an earlier developmental stage [6], the larval
stage showed the highest proportion of significantly misexpressed genes (either over- or under-expressed in the
hybrid relative to both parents)- 303 - while the fewest

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

(24) were observed during the late pupal time point (the
same 2,052 genes are being compared at each time
point). Thus, the ontogenic pattern of the proportion of
misexpressed genes, from fewest to most, was: late pupal
< early pupal < adult < larval (the difference in the proportion of genes that are misexpressed is statistically significant among all pairwise comparisons between stages;
c2 test, 1 df, P < 0.001; Figure 3; Table 1). In total, 491
genes were misexpressed during at least one sampled
developmental time point, of which 389 (79.2%) were
misexpressed only at a single time point. This indicates
that misexpression during the larval stage, for instance, is
not a good predictor of continued misexpression in subsequent stages as could be predicted by the cascade
model, assuming that not only does the proportion of
genes misexpressed over time increase but also that
genes misexpressed during a particular developmental
stage continue to be misexpressed during subsequent
stages. Only two genes (FBgn0052652 and FBgn0031920)
are misexpressed during all the four time points. Both of
these genes are expressed in the testes of D. melanogaster
[25]. However, their function(s) are unknown, and
BLAST searches of the predicted coding sequences from
D. melanogaster of both genes against the genomes of
the three pure species failed to find significant similarity
to any genes of known function. Thus, it appears that
there is substantial stage-specific autonomy of regulatory

Page 6 of 15

Table 1 Number of genes classified into categories based
on their patterns of expression in hybrids relative to the
parental species.
Stage
Pattern

Larval

E. pupal

L. pupal

Adult

1216

1455

1479

1203

Intermediate expression

0

9

24

8

Drosphila simulans dominance

60

13

24

146

D. sechellia dominance
Underexpressed

27
206

146
76

174
14

83
149

Not differentially expressed

Overexpressed

97

23

10

53

Other

446

330

327

410

E pupal, early pupal; L pupal, late pupal.
Patterns are as follows: not differentially expressed, not significantly
differentially expressed in any pairwise comparison among parental species or
hybrids; intermediate expression, expressed at an intermediate level between
parental expression levels; Drosphila simulans dominance, significantly
differentially expressed between parental species and for which hybrids are
only significantly different in expression level from D. sechellia; D. sechellia
dominance, opposite of previous pattern; Underexpressed, genes that are
significantly underexpressed in the hybrids relative to both parents;
Overexpressed, genes that are significantly overexpressed in the hybrids
relative to both parents; Other, genes whose expression patterns did not fit
into any of the above classes.

breakdown. Interestingly, however, there appears to be
an over-representation of male-biased genes (MBGs), or
genes with elevated expression in pure species males
compared to females, as well as an under-representation
of female-biased genes FBGs) among misexpressed genes

Figure 3 Scatterplots comparing the log2(sample/reference) expression values between each of the parental species (Drosphila
sechellia, top; D. simulans, bottom) versus the F1 hybrids at the (A) larval, (B) early pupal, (C) late pupal and (D) adult stages. Green:
genes overexpressed in the hybrid relative to both parents. Red: genes underexpressed in the hybrid relative to both parents. Orange: genes
significantly differentially expressed between parental species and expressed at D. sechellia levels in the hybrid. Blue: genes significantly
differentially expressed between parental species and expressed at D. simulans levels in the hybrid. Grey: all other genes. The number of genes
represented in each category is shown in Table 1.

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

that are underexpressed in the parents relative to the
hybrids during the larval, early pupal and adult time
points (c2 test, 1 df, P < 0.001 in all cases). This suggests
that, despite such autonomy, there exist predictable commonalities among misexpressed genes [26].
In order to further dissect the relationship between
expression in the hybrid and each of its parents, we
compared hybrid expression profiles at each time point
to each of the parents individually. We observed no significant differences among time points in the number of
genes differentially expressed between D. simulans and
the hybrid (c2 test, 3 df, P = 0.1322). However, when
comparing the D. sechellia and the hybrid, both the
early and late time points of pupal stage showed significantly fewer differentially expressed genes than either
the larval or adult stages, supporting the results of the
clustering analysis, which indicates that the hybrids and
D. sechellia have similar expression profiles during both
sampled pupal time points (c2 test, 1 df, P < 2.2 × 1016
). The number of genes differing significantly in
expression level between the hybrids and either of their
parental species’ males was significantly different
between the two parents (D. simulans versus the hybrids
compared to D. sechellia versus the hybrids; P < 0.001):
the larval and adult stages showed a greater number of
differentially expressed genes in comparison with the
hybrids and D. sechellia, whereas the early- and late
pupal time points showed the opposite pattern. In order
to compare the patterns of expression in hybrids relative
to their parents in the context of the entire developmental interval, we used fuzzy c-means soft clustering on the
same 2,052 genes described above [27], which allowed
us to define six clusters which represented major patterns of expression variability over the sampled ontogenic interval (Figure 4). While the majority of
clustering patterns are conserved between the parental
species, there were several patterns that appeared to be
altered in the hybrids (for example, clusters 1, 2 and 3).
Of particular interest is cluster 1, which shows an
apparent bias towards under-expression during the adult
stage in the hybrids and over-representation of MBGs as
well as under-representation of FBGs in both parents
and the hybrid. In the hybrids, both clusters 1 and 2
also showed a significant paucity of genes known to
have lethal mutant phenotypes, which suggests that a
bias exists towards greater interspecific conservation of
gene regulation among essential genes (see Methods;
Additional File 2, sheet E) [26,28].
Another way to assess the similarity between hybrids
and their parental species is to determine how the
hybrids resemble either parent in terms of the degree to
which genes change in expression level between each of
our three sampled sequential developmental transitions
(larval to early pupal [L to EP], early to late pupal [EP to

Page 7 of 15

LP] and late pupal to adult [LP to A]). Thus, we
restricted our analysis to those genes that varied significantly in expression level in both parental species and the
hybrids at each developmental transition. We then performed linear regressions followed by ANCOVA in order
to determine if the hybrids were more similar to one parental species than the other (Additional File 6). Hybrids
were significantly more correlated with one of the two
parents during the EP to LP and LP to A transitions
(F1298, F1436, and F1244 = 3.1602, 19.007, and 112.72, P =
0.07647, 1.626 × 10-5, < 2.2 × 10-16, for the L to EP, EP to
LP, and LP to A transitions, respectively). In the case of
the EP to LP transition, the degree to which genes change
in expression level in the hybrid is more significantly correlated with D. sechellia (slope [m] = 0.8963, r2 = 0.9219)
than D. simulans (m = 1.531, r2 = 0.8381). However, during the LP to A transition, the hybrid switches to being
more significantly correlated to the D. simulans parent
(m = 1.157, r2 = 0.6417) as compared to the D. sechellia
parent (m = 0.6630, r2 = 0.8011).

Discussion
Consideration of microarray methodology

Previous studies have shown that using single-species
microarrays in order to measure the expression levels of
the mRNA of multiple species can produce biased estimates due to sequence divergence between the probe
and hybridized mRNA if appropriate statistical thresholds
are not employed [29]. With this caveat in mind, we
sought to minimize the effect of binding bias on our analysis by: (a) employing a minimum 1.5-fold change,
expression threshold for expression differences to be
considered significant; and (b) analysing only genes with
expression information on all available replicate spots.
Gilad et al. [29] noted that a 1.5-fold threshold difference
in the expression level provided near 100% specificity
(albeit at a cost in sensitivity) to accurately measuring
significant expression differences between human and
orangutan mRNA samples hybridized on human microarrays, which differ in nucleotide sequence by approximately 3% (D. melanogaster and D. simulans/D. sechellia
differ ~3% [30]). While this has led to a reduction in the
size of our dataset which is available for analysis, as well
as a reduced sensitivity to significant changes in expression level, the increased specificity is necessary in order
to minimize the possibility of spurious inferences. We
further validated the results of our expression analysis by
testing for a potential correlation between pairwise
expression and sequence divergence among the three
pure species and found no significant correlation (Spearman rank correlation test, P > 0.05) suggesting that our
methods were appropriately conservative (see Methods).
However, it should be noted that the use of such conservative methods does impose a cost on the general

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

Page 8 of 15

Figure 4 Fuzzy c-means soft clustering of four sampled stages in hybrids and parental species. Lines from green through blue to red
indicate genes that are closer to the cluster centroids. The six clusters are arranged such that they are horizontally adjacent to the cluster
with the largest proportion of shared genes between the species and hybrid. In the case of Drosphila simulans two clusters share the majority of
their genes with the same cluster in the other two, and are indicated in the order of which shows the highest shared proportion of genes
as clusters 2 and 2b. In the case of cluster six, there is no analogous D. simulans cluster that shares the majority of its genes with either the
D. sechellia or hybrid clusters. L, larval; EP, early pupal; LP, late pupal; A, adult.

applicability of the overall analysis, as our final dataset
involves the analysis of ~20% of the genes spotted on
the D. melanogaster 12Kv2 cDNA microarray. In order
to ascertain the possibility that our final dataset was not
representative of the genomic fraction probed by the
array, we tested whether those genes analysed showed

enrichment, or a paucity, of certain gene ontology (GO)
terms as compared to the overall array using the
FATIGO web tool [31]. The distribution of GO terms
among the genes analysed was not significantly different
from that represented on the entire array (data not
shown). We also tested for the possibility that genes

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

used in the analysis were more conserved than the
array-wide average, as would be expected if the reason
that a significant portion of the genes were being
rejected was due to binding artifacts generated by
probe-sequence divergence. However, we found a statistically significant bias in favour of greater divergence
among genes used in the analysis, when compared to
those that were not used for all three species (see Methods). While this may suggest that the genes employed in
the analysis are, on average, more rapidly diverging than
the genes that were excluded from analysis, it does not
suggest that our analysis is biased towards genes that
show greater sequence conservation because of artifacts
resulting from probe/RNA divergence.
Despite this, a certain degree of bias may be expected
in our dataset given the limitation of our analysis to
genes that were detectibly expressed in all stages among
the species being compared. Applying such a restriction
avoided the possibility that a gene would be considered
not expressed at a particular developmental time-point
simply because of technical errors associated with
probe/RNA binding on the microarrays. However, it
also carries the negative consequence of ignoring genes
that are legitimately expressed at very low levels during
certain periods of ontogeny. It is unlikely that much
useful information was lost during such stages as microarrays are known to have low power to detect significant
differences in comparisons between samples with very
low absolute expression levels [32]. Conversely, if genes
that were excluded from our analysis due to their very
low expression levels during particular stages showed
significant between-species/hybrid differences in expression levels during other stages, such differences would
be missed in our analysis. It is not clear if the value of
inclusion of such genes would offset the potential biases
introduced by including false-negatives (see above).
Such considerations will be resolved as newer, more
sensitive, techniques are employed to answer such questions (for example, RNA-seq). In addition, these techniques will also give us the capability of inferring
meaningful evolutionary change in expression level
among changes below the 1.5-fold expression threshold
employed in this study. Nevertheless, a note of caution
is warranted in studies that seek to compare loci with
minute expression differences: substantial inter-strain
variation has been observed in Drosophila [33] and,
thus, it will be important to determine whether such differences are strain-specific or species-wide.
Within-species variation in expression levels over
ontogeny

Our estimates of the percentage of genes that vary significantly in expression level over the course of ontogeny (~60%-80%) are similar to those reported in a

Page 9 of 15

previous analysis of gene expression over the entire
course of ontogeny in D. melanogaster (~86%) [24]. The
reduction in the proportion of genes varying significantly in expression level between stages in our study is
most likely a result of our having sampled only the latter
portion of development. The significant increase in the
proportion of developmentally modulated genes in D.
sechellia is striking. However, we noted a systematic
bias towards low between-replicate variance in D. sechellia compared to the other samples. Correcting for this
bias in D. sechellia caused much of the elevated signal
of developmental modulation to disappear. Despite this,
the general pattern of an elevated number of developmentally modulated genes in D. sechellia remained significant in comparison with D. simulans which, again,
suggests that D. sechellia may have undergone lineage
specific divergence in terms of its developmental expression profiles. It is also interesting to note that the
observed reduction in between replicate variance in D.
sechellia is consistent with previous population genetics
studies of nucleotide diversity in this species, which
have found a significantly reduced level of within species
polymorphism relative to D. simulans or D. melanogaster [20,23] (see below).
Regulatory divergence in the context of ontogeny

When comparisons between stages were statistically significant, as was the case in the comparisons between D.
melanogaster and D. simulans as well as D. simulans
and D. sechellia, we found that expression level is more
conserved between the pure species during earlier as
compared to later stages (Figure 1). Thus, Von Baer’s
[10] classic observation that earlier stages of ontogeny
are more conserved than later stages may apply at both
the level of nucleotide sequence [14-16] and transcript
abundance (see also Additional File 1 for an analysis of
nucleotide divergence in the context of ontogeny using
the expression data from the present study). Expression
levels are not significantly more conserved during earlier
developmental stages in our comparison between D.
melanogaster and D. sechellia, which may be the result
of two possibilities (Figure 1). First, our analysis may
not have provided the sensitivity required to detect differences in the divergence patterns of expression over
development in this comparison. Our observation of a
reduced level of inter-replicate variability in D. sechellia
may have led to our observation of a relatively uniform
signal of significant divergence in expression level over
ontogeny relative to D. melanogaster. Alternatively, it is
possible that D. sechellia has been subject to substantial
divergence in expression levels in early developmental
stages, more of which are shared with its closer relative
D. simulans, as compared to D. melanogaster. It is possible that, while we are able to detect significant

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

difference among stages in comparisons with D. simulans, similar comparisons with D. melanogaster show a
more uniform distribution of divergence over
development.
Von Baer’s pattern is not represented in comparisons
among the hybrids and either of their parental species
(Additional File 5). In the case of the comparison with
D. simulans there is no significant difference in the proportion of genes differentially expressed among the four
sampled developmental time-points, whereas, in the case
of the comparison with D. sechellia, the intermediate
time points show less divergence. Such an observation
may indicate that the hybrids neither represent an intermediate phenotype between their parental species, nor
are they more closely allied with one over the entire
course of development. Rather, the hybrids may express
phenotypic traits more consonant with one parent as
compared to the other, which varies over the course of
ontogeny (see below). This lack of a Von Baerian trajectory in expression level is also apparent among misexpressed genes in the hybrids, where the larval stage
shows the highest proportion of misexpressed genes and
the two sampled pupal time points the least (note that a
gene is only considered ‘misexpressed’ if it is either
under- or over-expressed in the male hybrids relative to
both male parents). While this seems to contradict the
evidence for a greater conservation of expression levels
during earlier stages observed in comparisons of parental species, it is possible that comparisons of expression
level among pure species and pure species and their
hybrids are measuring two different aspects of regulatory divergence. Whereas interspecific comparisons
reveal only the ultimate outcome or regulatory divergence (expression level), comparisons between hybrids
and their parents allow us to observe the result of divergence at all levels of gene regulation, from cis-regulatory
elements to the feedback/forward regulation occurring
in the overall hybrid regulatory network. During the larval stage, we may be observing what True and Haag
[22] have termed ‘developmental systems drift’: stabilizing selection appears to be the primary evolutionary
force acting upon expression levels for the majority of
genes [34], and while the underlying regulatory machinery may have diverged between D. sechellia and D.
simulans, this divergence may be compensatory such
that it does not manifest itself in terms of expression
level differences between the parental species [35] (Figure 1). Rather it reveals itself only as improper regulation in the case of the hybrids (see below). The larval
stage is characterized by a high rate of growth, which is
associated with a rapid increase in transcription of total
mRNA and translation of proteins [36], which may generate selective pressure in order to maintain uniformly
high expression levels despite substantial divergence

Page 10 of 15

among underlying regulatory machinery. Such nonadaptive divergence of complex regulatory systems is
facilitated in species with reduced effective population
sizes, due to the increased probability of fixation of neutral or slightly deleterious mutations [37], which, as
noted above, is known to be the case in D. sechellia. On
the other hand, the complex organogenesis occurring
during metamorphosis may involve greater integration
among the regulatory circuits (transcription factors or
cis-regulatory elements) than other stages, leading to its
underlying machinery being more refractive to divergence causing misexpression in hybrids. Nevertheless,
assuming that an organism’s ultimate phenotype determined by gene expression levels (and subsequent posttranscriptional regulation), the conserved expression
levels among parental species during earlier developmental stages is probably a compelling validation of Von
Baer’s third law.
Both our clustering analysis (Figure 2), as well as our
analysis of the number of genes differentially expressed
in pairwise comparisons, support phylogenetic expectations of between-species divergence in the case of the
larval, late pupal, and adult stages (D. sechellia and D.
simulans are more similar to one another). However,
this is not the case during the early pupal stage, where
D. melanogaster and D. simulans cluster together and
show the fewest significantly differentially expressed
genes (Figure 1). This may suggest that, as part of its
adaptation to its host plant (Morinda citrifolia), D.
sechellia may have been exposed to unique selective
pressures that have altered particular aspects of its larval
or early pupal development. This hypothesis is supported by previous studies that have examined developmental phenotypes in the D. melanogaster group [38-40]
and have found evidence of altered developmental phenotypes in D. sechellia relative to other species, where
the opportunity for selection may have been responsible
for altering aspects of its ontogeny. An alternative explanation for our observation of D. sechellia’s status as an
outlier is that ‘typical’ gene expression levels in this species would most probably be observed when it is living
on its native host, M. citrifolia [41]. By raising our species/hybrids on standard cormeal/molasses/agar medium, we may have induced stress in D. sechellia, leading
to a pronounced difference in expression patterns relative to the other species. We tested to see if genes that
were uniquely differentially expressed at each stage in D.
sechellia were over-represented in terms of certain GO
categories relative to our entire dataset, although no differences were statistically significant (data not shown).
The possibility does remain, however, that some proportion of D. sechellia’s unique expression patterns results
from stress (though these flies have been kept on standard cornmeal medium since the mid-1980s; W. Haerty

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

personal communication), but the present analysis of the
hybrids in particular would have been complicated were
D. sechellia raised on medium containing M. citrifolia
while D. simulans was not.
The developmental basis of hybrid misregulation

A number of studies involving genome-scale transcriptional profiling have revealed that a substantial proportion of the transcriptome (> 10%) is misexpressed in
interspecific hybrids relative to their parental species [6].
Work in the field of speciation has been quite equivocal
about the relative number of genes involved in producing the sterile phenotype observed in hybrids. However,
recent evidence has supported the notion that sterility in
hybrids between closely related species such as those
used in the present study is primarily the result of a
small number of genes of relatively large effect (≥ 6)
[42]. Thus, it appears unlikely that the misexpression
observed in our study stems from the incompatible
divergence of cis-regulatory factors at such a large number of loci. More plausible is the hypothesis that the
large scale-patterns of misexpression observed in interspecific hybrids result from divergence of a smaller
number of loci having widespread effects in trans - perhaps corresponding to some of the loci of large effect
revealed through introgression studies [43,44]. However,
our study does not support the suggestion that these
trans acting factors are derived from the cascading
effects of a smaller number of genes that are significantly misexpressed at earlier stages of development [6].
In contrast, it would appear that there is considerable
stage-specific autonomy of regulatory breakdown, with
no obvious pattern of an increasing proportion of genes
misexpressed during subsequent stages. MBGs are overrepresented among under-expressed, misexpressed genes
during three of the sampled developmental stages, indicating that common regulatory factors or selection pressures (for example, sexual selection on MBGs in the
adult) may nevertheless underlie misexpression at multiple stages.
The highest proportion of genes is significantly misexpressed during the larval stage (Figure 3; Table 1). Two
non-mutually exclusive hypotheses may account for an
elevated degree of misexpression during this early stage.
First, as mentioned above, the larval stage is characterized by a rapid increase in transcription of total mRNA
and translation of proteins [36]. Slight heterochronic
changes in hybrid development (for example, later activation of transcriptional machinery) may manifest themselves as widespread under-expression or even overexpression of larval genes. Some evidence for this
hypothesis is provided by previous observations which
suggested that spermatogenesis may be delayed in third
instar larval hybrids between D. simulans and D.

Page 11 of 15

mauritiana, which could lead to qualitative differences
in expression pattern of genes involved in this process
[44]. Secondly, previous studies have suggested that D.
sechellia has been subject to divergence in embryonic
and larval ontogeny [38,39]. As stabilizing selection
appears to be the primary evolutionary force acting
upon expression levels for the majority of genes [34],
this divergence may not manifest itself in terms of
expression level differences in the parental species (Figure 1). Rather, the underlying regulatory machinery may
have diverged revealing itself as an elevated proportion
of incompatibilities in hybrids (see above).
If we restrict our analysis to genes expressed in the
hybrids that are significantly differentially expressed
between males of D. simulans and D. sechellia, they are
significantly more likely to be expressed at the D. simulans level in the hybrids during the larval and adult
stages, whereas they are more likely to be expressed at
D. sechellia levels during the two pupal stages (Figure 3,
Table 1). One may assume that expression levels would
generally show an overall dominance in hybrid males in
the direction of the parent from which it inherits its X
chromosome (in this case D. simulans), assuming, of
course, that a significant number of regulatory loci are
harboured on the X. Our results suggest that this is not
the case during all stages and, while the ability of regulatory factors to interact is more conserved during the
pupal time points, significant divergence has occurred
between the two parental species that manifests itself
dominantly with regards to D. sechellia. This hypothesis
is supported by our observation that the degree to
which genes vary in expression level between developmental transitions in hybrids is significantly more similar to the D. sechellia parent during the EP to LP
transition (Additional File 6).
A classic study, testing the vulnerability of various
stages of Drosophila ontogeny to induced mortality
when exposed to X-rays, found that susceptibility is
highest during pupation, which suggests that this stage
is particularly sensitive to deleterious perturbation [45].
Such an observation is particularly intriguing in the context of Raff’s [12] ‘developmental hourglass’ hypothesis,
which argues that stages involved in organogenesis may
be more resistant to evolutionary divergence than preceding or subsequent stages. The original hypothesis
focused on embryogenesis. However, our observation of
a significantly reduced number of misexpressed genes
during the two sampled pupal time points suggests that
the mechanisms underlying gene regulation during this
stage may be more conserved (Table 1). Holometabolous insects such as Drosophila, undergo two rounds of
extensive organogenesis (for example, embryogenesis
and metamorphosis), and may have two periods of
increased regulatory conservation. Interestingly,

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

however, the decreased proportion of genes significantly
misexpressed in the hybrids during the pupal stage does
not coincide with a decreased proportion of genes significantly differentially expressed between the two parental species (Figure 1).

Conclusions
In summary, our comparative analysis of transcriptional
patterns over the course of ontogeny among species and
hybrids of the D. melanogaster group has revealed the
following major results: (1) in comparisons between the
pure species, gene expression levels are more conserved
during earlier stages of development as compared to later
stages. (2) However, this is not the case in comparisons
between parental species and their interspecific hybrids
where the mechanisms underlying gene expression
appear to be more conserved during the pupal stage suggesting that the underlying regulatory systems are diverging despite the maintenance of expression levels among
pure species. (3) There is considerable stage-specific
autonomy of regulatory breakdown in hybrids and no
obvious pattern of increasing proportion of genes misexpressed over the course of ontogeny, which does not support a cascade model explaining hybrid misexpression.
Finally, (4) the number of genes differentially expressed
between stages support phylogenetic expectations (that
is, are fewer in comparisons between D. simulans and D.
sechellia) for all stages except the early pupal stage. Our
findings have implications for the fields of both evo-devo
and speciation. First, they support the extension of Von
Baer’s [10] ‘third law’, or the more modern developmental hourglass hypothesis, to the level of the transcriptome,
lending support to previous observations which suggested that similar forces may act to limit both gene
expression levels and coding sequence divergence
[27,28]. Secondly, while it has already been remarked that
the widespread misexpression of genes observed in interspecific hybrids is unlikely to be the result of equally
widespread divergence of cis regulatory elements [6], our
results suggest that regulatory factors (for example, proteins, mRNAs) experience stage-specific, autonomous
incompatibilities, leading to similarly stage-specific patterns of misexpression. Several of the so-called ‘speciation’ genes (loci that contribute to hybrid dysfunctions
such as sterility or inviability) that have been identified
are predicted to have transcription factor activity and
regulate expression of downstream genes in trans [6].
The findings presented here suggest that a more complete understanding of stage-specific gene regulatory networks, which would enable us to identify those nodes
that may ultimately control the suite of genes identified
as misexpressed in hybrids, may be a fruitful approach to
identifying new loci underlying both developmental evolution, reproductive isolation, and ultimately speciation.

Page 12 of 15

Methods
Collection of Drosophila and microarray hybridization

Time synchronized, stage-specific collection of D. melanogaster (14021-0231.00), D. sechellia (Cousin Island,
Jean R. David, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Gif sur Yvette, France), D. simulans (14021-0251.2)
and the D. simulans (♀) × D. sechellia (♂) F1 hybrid
individuals was performed according to the protocol
described in Additional File 1 at the following timepoints: 3rd instar larva (96 h post larval eclosion), early
pupal (2 h post-puparium formation [ppf]), late pupal
(72 h ppf), and adult (1.5 h post adult eclosion). mRNA
was extracted from 25 males from each stage and species/hybrid using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany). Given that it was impractical to collect sufficient mRNA from hybrids for direct use in microarray
hybridizations, all mRNA samples were then amplified
twice using the MessageAmp II aRNA kit (Ambion,
Texas, USA). A much larger amount of D. melanogaster
mRNA was extracted from each stage in order to use as
an equal concentration mixed-stage (unamplified) reference on the cDNA microarrays. All samples, as well as
the reference, were sent to the Canadian Drosophila
Microarray Centre (CDMC, http://www.flyarrays.com)
for hybridization on D. melanogaster 12Kv2 cDNA
microarrays spotted with ~12,000 elements representing
approximately 10,000 unique genes. In the case of D.
melanogaster, D. sechellia, and D. simulans, the amplified mRNA from a single pool of 25 male flies was
hybridized on three technical replicate microarrays and
analysed according to the protocols provided in Additional File 1. However, in the case of the hybrids,
mRNA from three separately extracted and amplified
pools of 25 males were each used for hybridization to a
single microarray, such that the replicates were also biological as well as technical, in order to determine
whether there was a significant effect of between-extraction/amplification variability on our estimates of expression differences. We found no significant increase in
variability among biological replicates indicating that
pools of 25 individuals captured the majority of biological variability (Additional File 1). Both raw and normalized expression values for all arrays are deposited in the
Gene Expression Omnibus http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
geo/ under accession number GSE17535.
Clustering analyses

The average log 2 (sample/reference) ratios among all
replicate spots within a stage were collected for the
2,006 genes detectibly expressed in all species/hybrids at
all stages and used in order to draw a heatmap showing
a hierarchical clustering among stages using the ‘Heatplus’ package in Bioconductor [46]. The pairwise dissimilarity matrix used in the clustering was generated using

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

the Spearman coefficients of correlation of the log2(sample/reference) ratios between stages, under the hclust()
function using the ‘complete’ method. The clustered
dendrogram was then bootstrapped using the ‘pvclust’
package in R [47] with 2,000 bootstrap replicates. Timecourse clustering was performed using the 2,053 genes
detectibly expressed at all four stages in the hybrids and
their two parental species using the ‘Mfuzz’ package in
Bioconductor [26]. The cselection() function was used
to determine that 6 clusters and an m value of 2.5 produced both distinct clustering patterns and no empty
clusters in any of the pure species or hybrids.
Analysis of sex-biased and ‘essential’ genes

In order to determine patterns sex-bias in expression,
we obtained the D. melanogaster based data from the
Sebida database [48]http://141.61.102.16:8080/sebida/
content/download/sebida_melanogaster.txt of which
2,037 of the 2,052 genes detectably expressed in D.
sechellia, D. simulans and the hybrids (Additional File 2,
Sheet A) were represented. The direction of sex-bias, if
any, was obtained from the ‘MetaClass’ column of the
dataset, which represents a concatenated list of sexbiased genes derived from multiple previous datasets.
The number of genes falling into each class of bias,
male-biased (MBG), female-biased (FBG), and unbiased
(UBG), in each category (for example, in a cluster from
Figure 4, or misexpressed in the hybrids, see Results)
was compared against the distribution represented in all
genes being analysed using Bonferroni corrected c2 tests
in order to determine if a particular class was over/
under-represented in a category of genes (Additional
File 2, Sheet E). ‘Essential’ genes were determined by
pooling all D. melanogaster genes with known lethal
mutant phenotypes as determined from FlyBase release
2009_6 (7 July 2009), representing 894 genes in
our total dataset (Additional File 2, Sheet A). As above,
the number of genes falling into the essential and
non-essential classes in each category were compared
to the total distribution represented among all genes
being analysed using Bonferroni corrected c 2 tests in
order to determine if a particular class was over/underrepresented in a category of genes (Additional File 2,
Sheet E).
Testing for bias in expression level estimates due to
sequence divergence

As previous studies have indicated that sequence divergence between the spotted microarray probes and the
mRNA being used for hybridization can lead to biased
expression estimates in the absence of appropriately
conservative statistical thresholds [29], we tested for a
correlation between sequence divergence between the D.
melanogaster expressed sequence tags (ESTs) spotted on

Page 13 of 15

the microarray and D. simulans/D. sechellia and absolute fold difference in between species expression difference estimates. We obtained the full-length EST
sequences of the clones spotted on the CDMC Drosophila 12K version 2 cDNA microarray from FlyBase for
all of the genes in our dataset that were represented in
the Drosophila 12 Genome Consortium D. melanogaster
group data, representing 1,311 genes [49]. Furthermore,
we obtained the longest predicted coding sequence from
each of these genes for D. melanogaster, D. sechellia,
and D. simulans from the same dataset [49] and performed pairwise alignments between the ESTs and each
of the pure species for each gene using Dialign-TX version 1.0.2 [50]. We then calculated proportional-integrated derivative (PID) according to method No. 4 in
Raghava and Barton [51], where PID is calculated as the
number of identical residues among aligned residues
and internal gaps of the shortest aligned sequence: by
ignoring gaps outside of the shortest sequence, we also
ignore sequence that would not be bound to the probe.
As the EST sequence was not always 100% identical to
the D. melanogaster sequence, for the purposes of calculating between species identity, PID was calculated as
the absolute difference between D. melanogaster versus
EST sequence PID and D. sechellia or D. simulans versus EST sequence PID (PIDs are reported in Supporting
Information File 2A). The absolute fold difference in
expression level between D. melanogaster and the other
two species was obtained as the absolute fold expression
difference of the average Log2 ratio among all six replicates of the gene in each species at each stage. If
sequence divergence led to exaggerated estimates of
expression divergence due to differences in array binding kinetics, we would expect to see a negative correlation between absolute fold expression difference
between D. melanogaster and either of the other two
pure species’ percent identity. No significant correlation
was observed in either pairwise comparison at any of
the four sampled developmental time points (Spearman’s rank correlation test, P > 0.05).
GO analysis was conducted by comparing the subsets of
interest (for example, genes uniquely differentially
expressed in D. echolalia) against the total dataset of
analysed genes (for example, genes in common among the
three pure species) using FATIGO [31] http://babelomics.
bioinfo.cipf.es/ using two-tailed tests, multiple test correction, and retaining any duplicates between lists.
Comparison of the between replicate variance among
expression level estimates

The variance (s2) was estimated for the distribution of
replicates spots (within or between arrays) within each
stage and for each species/hybrid and the distribution of
variances were compared to one another using pair

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

wise, permuted Kruskal-Wallis tests (Additional File 4).
In no case was the mean s2 of the D. simulans (♀) × D.
sechellia (♂) F1 hybrids, which were generated using
biological replicate arrays, significantly higher than all
pure species (it was always significantly lower than D.
melanogaster). This confirmed that the majority of biological variability in expression levels was captured in
our pools of 25 males. s2 estimates in D. sechellia were
significantly lower than all other species/hybrids in the
case of the larval, early pupal and late pupal stages
(Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test, P < 2.2 × 10 -16 in all
cases). We therefore simulated D. sechellia expression
data such that D. sechellia means would be maintained,
but variances would be scaled to D. simulans levels
using a custom PERL script. The mean log 2 (sample/
reference) expression value in D. sechellia ( x D.sec ), as
well the D. simulans s2 (s2D. sim) for each gene among
the 2,006 genes detectibly expressed in all stages in the
three species and the hybrids was obtained. Three random numbers, y 1 , y 2 , and y 3 , were then chosen such
that they summed to (n-1)/2 × s 2 D. sim (where n = 6
replicate spots). The new distribution of D. sechellia
values was generated by creating three pairs of values,
one for each of the random numbers, each equal to
x D. sec  y x and x D. sec  y x . The six simulated replicate array values were then used in order to reanalyze
the D. sechellia data.
Statistical analysis

All statistical analyses were performed using the R statistical package version 2.7.2 [52]. Permuted KruskalWallis rank sum tests were performed with 10,000 permutations of the data using the ‘coin’ package. Permuted
95% confidence estimates were generated using the
‘boot’ package on 10,000 permutations of the data.
Data deposition

All array data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus under study accession number GSE17535
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?
acc=GSE17535.
Additional file 1: Supplementary methods and analysis. This
supplementary document contains additional analyses and detailed
methods that were beyond the scope of the primary manuscript.
Additional file 2: Raw data and results of statistical analyses. This
supplementary document contains tables of all raw data and detailed
results of statistical analyses described in the manuscript and
supplementary methods and analysis.
Additional file 3: Supplementary figure 1. Venn diagrams indicating
the number of genes varying significantly in expression level over the
four sampled developmental stages that are shared among the three
pure species and the two parental species and the hybrids.
Additional file 4: Supplementary Figure 2. Boxplots comparing the
distribution of between microarray spot replicate variances for each
stage within the three pure species and the Drosphila simulans (male) ×
D. sechellia (female) F1 hybrids.

Page 14 of 15

Additional file 5: Supplementary Figure 3. Number of genes
significantly differentially expressed in pairwise comparisons between
Drosphila simulans, D. sechellia, and the D. simulans (male) × D. sechellia
(female) F1 hybrids (D. sim male × D. sec femalw) at each of the four
sampled stages (out of 2052 genes).
Additional file 6: Supplementary Figure 4. Scatter plots comparing
the fold change in expression level between the hybrids and the two
parental species for each of the three consecutive developmental
transitions.

Abbreviations
CDMC: Canadian Drosophila Microarray Centre; df: degree of freedom; EP:
early pupal stage; EST: expressed sequence tag; FBG: female-biased gene;
GO: gene ontology; L: larval stage; LP: late pupal stage; MBG: male-biased
gene; MRCA: most recent common ancestor; MYA: million years ago; PID:
percent identity; ppf: post-puparium formation; UBG: unbiased gene.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Mariša Melas who helped with collection and
sexing of flies, as well as Wilfried Haerty, Mohamed Noor, and three
anonymous reviewers for comments raised on an earlier version of the
manuscript. We also thank the Canadian Drosophila Microarray Center for
performing the microarray hybridizations. This work was supported by a
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)
Post-Graduate Doctoral Scholarship to CGA and an NSERC grant to RSS
(grant No. RGPIN235-07).
Author details
1
Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, L8S4K1,
Canada. 2Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes
of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland,
20892, USA.
Authors’ contributions
CGA and RSS conceived of the study and drafted the manuscript. CGA
collected tissues for analysis, extracted and amplified RNA and carried out
the data analysis and interpretation.
Received: 10 November 2009 Accepted: 31 March 2010
Published: 31 March 2010
References
1. Prud’homme B, Gompel N, Carroll SB: Emerging principles of regulatory
evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:8605-8612.
2. Carroll SB: Evo-Devo and an expanding evolutionary synthesis: a genetic
theory of morphological evolution. Cell 2008, 134:25-36.
3. Davidson EH, Erwin DH: Gene regulatory networks and the evolution of
animal body plans. Science 2006, 311:796-800.
4. Hoekstra HE, Coyne JA: The locus of evolution: evo devo and the
genetics of adaptation. Evolution 2007, 61:995-1016.
5. Gould SJ: The Structure of Evolutionary Theory. Cambridge: Belknap Press
2002.
6. Ortíz-Barrientos D, Counterman BA, Noor MAF: Gene expression
divergence and the origin of hybrid dysfunctions. Genetica 2007,
129:71-81, 9.
7. Ranz JM, Namgyal K, Gibson G, Hartl DL: Anomalies in the expression
profile of interspecific hybrids of Drosophila simulans and Drosophila
melanogaster. Gen Res 2004, 14:373-379.
8. Parker HR, Philipp DP, Whitt GS: Gene regulatory divergence among
species estimated by altered developmental patterns in interspecific
hybrids. Mol Biol Evol 1985, 2:217-250.
9. Voss SR, Shaffer HB: What insights into the developmental traits of
urodeles does the study of interspecific hybrids provide?. Int J Dev Biol
1996, 40:885-893.
10. Von Baer KE: Entwicklungsgeschichte der Tiere: Beobachtung und
Relexion. Königsberg: Bornträger 1828.

Artieri and Singh BMC Biology 2010, 8:26
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/26

11. Gould SJ: Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
1977.
12. Raff RA: The Shape of Life: Genes, Development and the Evolution of
Animal Form. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press 1996.
13. Riedl RA: Order in Living Organisms: A Systems Analysis of Evolution.
New York: Wiley 1978.
14. Cutter AD, Ward SA: Sexual and temporal dynamics of molecular
evolution in C. elegans development. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22:178-188.
15. Davis JC, Brandman O, Petrov DA: Protein evolution in the context of
Drosophila development. J Mol Evol 2005, 60:774-785.
16. Artieri CG, Haerty W, Singh RS: Ontogeny and phylogeny: molecular
signatures of selection, constraint, and temporal pleiotropy in the
development of Drosophila. BMC Biol 2009, 7:42.
17. Darwin C: The Origin of Species. New York: The Modern Library 1872.
18. Galis F, Metz JAJ: Testing the vulnerability of the phylotypic stage: on
modularity and evolutionary conservation. J Exp Zool B 2001, 291:195-204.
19. Richardson MK, Hanken J, Gooneratne ML, Pieau C, Raynaud A, Selwood L,
Wright GM: There is no highly conserved embryonic stage in the
vertebrates: implications for current theories of evolution and
development. Anat Embryol (Berl) 1997, 196:91-106.
20. Kliman RM, Andolfatto P, Coyne JA, Depaulis F, Kreitman M, Berry AJ,
McCarter J, Wakeley J, Hey J: The population genetics of the origin and
divergence of the Drosophila simulans complex species. Genetics 2000,
156:1913-1931.
21. Tamura K, Subramanian S, Kumar S: Temporal patterns of fruit fly
(Drosophila) evolution revealed by mutation clocks. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21:36-44.
22. True JR, Haag ES: Developmental system drift and flexibility in
evolutionary trajectories. Evol Dev 2001, 3:109-119.
23. Hey J, Kliman RM: Population genetics and phylogenetics of DNA
sequence variation at multiple loci within the Drosophila melanogaster
species complex. Mol Biol Evol 1993, 10:804-822.
24. Arbeitman MN, Furlong EEM, Imam F, Johnson E, Null BH, Baker BS,
Krasnow MA, Scott MP, Davis RW, White KP: Gene expression during the
life cycle of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 2002, 297:2270-2275.
25. Andrews J, Bouffard GG, Cheadle C, Lü J, Becker KG, Oliver B: Gene
discovery using computational and microarray analysis of transcription
in the Drosophila melanogaster testis. Gen Res 2000, 10:2030-2043.
26. Artieri CG, Haerty W, Singh RS: Association between coding sequence
divergence and gene misregulation in Drosophila male hybrids. J Mol
Evol 2007, 65:697-704.
27. Futschik ME, Carlisle B: Noise-robust soft clustering of gene expression
time-course data. J Bioinform Comput Biol 2005, 3:965-988.
28. Nuzhdin SV, Wayne ML, Harmon KL, McIntyre LM: Common pattern of
evolution of gene expression level and protein sequence in Drosophila.
Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:1308-1317.
29. Gilad Y, Rifkin SA, Bertone P, Gerstein M, White KP: Multi-species
microarrays reveal the effect of sequence divergence on gene
expression profiles. Gen Res 2005, 15:674-680.
30. Heger A, Ponting CP: Evolutionary rate analyses of orthologs and
paralogs from 12 Drosophila genomes. Gen Res 2007, 17:1837-1849.
31. Al-Shahrour F, Minguez P, Tárraga J, Medina I, Alloza E, Montaner D,
Dopazo J: FatiGO +: a functional profiling tool for genomic data.
Integration of functional annotation, regulatory motifs and interaction
data with microarray experiments. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, , 35 Web
Server: W91-96.
32. Quackenbush J: Microarray data normalization and transformation. Nat
Genet 2002, 32(Suppl):496-501.
33. Meiklejohn CD, Parsch J, Ranz JM, Hartl DL: Rapid evolution of malebiased gene expression in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:9894-9899.
34. Rifkin SA, Kim J, White KP: Evolution of gene expression in the Drosophila
melanogaster subgroup. Nature Genet 2003, 33:138-144.
35. Tsong AE, Tuch BB, Li H, Johnson AD: Evolution of alternative
transcriptional circuits with identical logic. Nature 2006, 443:415-420.
36. Vicario S, Mason CE, White KP, Powell JR: Developmental stage and level
of codon usage bias in Drosophila. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:2269-2277.
37. Lynch M: The Origins of Genome Architecture. Sunderland: Sinauer 2007.
38. Sucena É, Stern DL: Divergence of larval morphology between Drosophila
sechellia and its sibling species caused by cis-regulatory evolution of
ovo/shaven-baby. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:4530-4534.

Page 15 of 15

39. Lott SE, Kreitman M, Palsson A, Alekseeva E, Ludwig MZ: Canalization of
segmentation and its evolution in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104:10926-10931.
40. Markow TA, Beall S, Matzkin LM: Egg size, embryonic development time
and ovoviviparity in Drosophila species. J Evol Biol 2008, 22:430-434.
41. Dworkin I, Jones CD: Genetic changes accompanying the evolution of
host specialization in Drosophila sechellia. Genetics 2009, 181:721-736.
42. Coyne JA, Orr HA: Speciation. Sunderland: Sinauer 2004.
43. Hollocher H, Wu CI: The genetics of reproductive isolation in the
Drosophila simulans clade: X vs. autosomal effects and male vs. female
effects. Genetics 1996, 143:1243-1255.
44. Maside XR, Barral JP, Naveira HF: Hidden effects of X chromosome
introgressions on spermatogenesis in Drosophila simulans × D.
mauritiana hybrids unveiled by interactions among minor genetic
factors. Genetics 1998, 150:745-754.
45. Wosskressensky NM: Über die wirkung der röntgenbestrahlung auf das
embryonale wachstum. Arch Entw Mech 1928, 113:447-461.
46. Gentleman RC, Carey VJ, Bates DM, Bolstad B, Dettling M, Dudoit S, Ellis B,
Gautier L, Ge Y, Gentry J, Hornik K, Hothorn T, Huber W, Iacus S, Irizarry R,
Leisch F, Li C, Maechler M, Rossini AJ, Sawitzki G, Smith C, Smyth G,
Tierney L, Yang JY, Zhang J: Bioconductor: open software development
for computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R80.
47. Suzuki R, Shimodaira H: pvclust: an R package for assessing the
uncertainty in hierarchical clustering. Bioinformatics 2006, 22:1540-1542.
48. Gnad F, Parsch J: Sebida: a database for the functional and evolutionary
analysis of genes with sex-biased expression. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(20):2577-2579.
49. Drosophila 12 Genomes Consortium: Evolution of genes and genomes on
the Drosophila phylogeny. Nature 2007, 450:203-221.
50. Subramanian AR, Kaufmann M, Morgenstern B: DIALIGN-TX: greedy and
progressive approaches for segment-based multiple sequence
alignment. Algorithms Mol Biol 2008, 3:6.
51. Raghava GP, Barton GJ: Quantification of the variation in percentage
identity for protein sequence alignments. BMC Bioinfomatics 2006, 7:415.
52. R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing 2004,
ISBN 3-900051-00-3.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-26
Cite this article as: Artieri and Singh: Molecular evidence for increased
regulatory conservation during metamorphosis, and against deleterious
cascading effects of hybrid breakdown in Drosophila. BMC Biology 2010
8:26.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
