<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Detection of squirrel poxvirus by nested and real-time PCR from red (Sciurus vulgaris) and grey (Sciurus carolinensis) squirrels</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-6-33"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Janus W Atkin, Alan D Radford, Karen P Coyne, Jenny Stavisky, Julian Chantrey"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Atkin et al. BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Detection of squirrel poxvirus by nested and
real-time PCR from red (Sciurus vulgaris) and grey
(Sciurus carolinensis) squirrels
Research article

Janus W Atkin†1, Alan D Radford†2, Karen P Coyne1, Jenny Stavisky2 and Julian Chantrey*1

Abstract
Background: Squirrel poxvirus (SQPV) is highly pathogenic to red squirrels (Sciurus vulgaris), and is a significant
contributing factor to the local extinction of the species in most parts of England and Wales, where infection is
endemic in Eastern grey squirrel (Sciurus carolinensis) populations. Although a nested PCR assay has been used
successfully to study the epidemiology of SQPV, samples have a long processing time and the assay is not quantifiable.
Results: This project describes the design and optimization of a real-time PCR for SQPV. Comparison with the nested
PCR showed the real-time assay to be more sensitive by one log and able to detect approximately 144 genome copies
per mg of tissue.
Conclusions: The real-time PCR has been used to quantify viral genome load in tissues from diseased and apparently
healthy red and grey squirrels, and suggests that the titre of virus in tissues from diseased red squirrels is considerably
higher than that found even in a grey squirrel with cutaneous lesions.
Background
Squirrelpox is a disease caused by a virus of the family
Poxviridae. Although originally described as a parapoxvirus, it is now considered to belong to a previously undescribed genus of the Chordopoxvirinae subfamily [1,2]. In
the UK, squirrelpox virus (SQPV) is known to infect two
species of squirrel: the native red squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris) and the introduced Eastern grey squirrel (Sciurus
carolinensis) [3]. In red squirrels, the disease is characterized by a severe multifocal ulcerative and exudative dermatitis with hemorrhagic scabs which is predominantly
fatal if untreated. Such lesions appear primarily on the
eyelids, nose and lips, with later spread to the digits,
inguinal area and ventral skin of the body [4-7]. Affected
animals develop widespread epidermal necrosis, resulting
in dehydration, a loss of body condition and ultimately
death, although in experimental controlled conditions,
one of four red squirrels were able to recover [8]. In contrast to red squirrels, grey squirrels generally do not show
* Correspondence: chantrey@liv.ac.uk
1

Department of Veterinary Pathology, University of Liverpool, Leahurst
Campus, Neston, Cheshire, CH64 7TE, UK
† Contributed equally
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

any clinical signs of infection [8]. Only one exceptional
case of disease has been described in a grey squirrel with
proliferative oral lesions from which poxviruses were
demonstrated by electron microscopy [9].
The first recorded epidemics of pox-like disease in red
squirrels occurred in the 1900 s [10] and continue to the
present day [4,7,11]. The origins of SQPV are poorly
understood, but it is suggested that the virus was introduced to Britain along with some groups of grey squirrels
from North America, as outbreaks of squirrelpox were
not reported until after their introduction [6]. In support
of this theory a large proportion of grey squirrels are
seropositive in different studies; 100% (7 of 7) of grey
squirrels from Wisconsin USA [2], and 61% (136 of 223)
of grey squirrels in the UK [3] were seropositive to SQPV
suggesting that this species could be the reservoir host. In
contrast, all other woodland rodent species tested in Britain (wood mice, Apodemus sylvaticus, and bank voles,
Clethrionomys glareolus) were serologically negative [2].
Squirrelpox virus is now considered by many to be the
main driving force behind the decline of the red squirrel
in the UK, although competition with grey squirrels is
also a factor [12]. Red squirrel populations have been
shown to decline 17-25 times faster where they co-exist

© 2010 Atkin et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Atkin et al. BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33

with grey squirrels with serological evidence of exposure
to SQPV compared to where the grey squirrels are free of
infection [13]. Currently, squirrelpox is advancing north
into Scotland with grey squirrels moving from areas with
endemic poxvirus [10] and therefore, there is an urgent
need to develop tools to assist in understanding the epidemiology and pathogenesis of this poxvirus.
Although the presence of gross or histological lesions
can help form a putative diagnosis of SQPV infections in
red squirrels, other diagnostic tools are needed to confirm this, especially in early cases or those necropsy cases
which are autolysed. Electron microscopy has been used
previously to confirm infection in red squirrels [6,11,14]
but is of limited use in grey squirrels where lesions are
generally absent [3] and correspondingly virus production may be minimal. To diagnose squirrelpox in these
animals, serological or molecular methods must be used.
Despite ELISA being a useful diagnostic tool, it has limitations: assays can suffer from poor specificity or sensitivity, they identify past exposure rather than present
infection, and they cannot detect the presence of SQPV
in the environment, or in vectors. Assays based on the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can overcome most of
these problems and we have been using a nested PCR to
monitor the epidemiology of squirrelpox in both red and
grey squirrel populations (not published). This work aims
to compare the sensitivity of this previously used nested
PCR with a new real-time PCR and describes how the
distribution and level of virus load in the tissues tested
can be used to elucidate pathogenesis and potential transmission routes.

Results
Gross and histopathological findings

All four red squirrels, with gross lesions, showed multifocal moderate to severe chronic periorbital, nasal, perioral
or buccal ulcerative and exudative dermatitis. Often submandibular lymph nodes were enlarged or reddened. Red
squirrels showed less severe but similar multifocal cutaneous ulcerative lesions on the digits of the forepaws and
other cutaneous sites. Histologically, skin lesions showed
widespread severe ballooning degeneration of keratinocytes of the epidermis and hair follicles with multifocal
ulceration, a serocellular crust and a perivascular dermal
infiltrate of neutrophils and lymphocytes. Two cases (red
squirrels 1 and 3) showed eosinophilic intracytoplasmic
inclusion bodies in degenerating keratinocytes. Lesions
were similar to those from previously described red
squirrelpox cases [4,6,7]
Grey squirrel 1, with a gross buccal lesion, showed a
focal mild chronic ulcerative cheilitis with a neutrophil
rich serocellular crust and superficial bacteria. Red squirrel 5 and grey squirrels 2-4, which all lacked cutaneous
gross lesions, were unremarkable histologically.

Page 2 of 9

Nested PCR results

For the five nested amplicons from three red and two
grey squirrels that were sequenced, all were 100% identical to the published target sequence for the SQPV RNA
polymerase subunit RPO147 gene (AY340975) (data not
presented).
Real-time PCR primer development

Examples of the typical results of the real-time PCR
efficiency plot and melt curve analysis are shown in
figures 1 and 2 respectively. Taken as a whole, using the
manufactured molecule template, the assay had a final
sensitivity of approximately 36 synthetic genome copies per reaction, which equates to 144 genome copies
per mg of tissue. SQPV amplicons gave a specific melt
temperature of 87-88°C. Negative samples did occasionally show a product with a lower melting temperature suggestive of primer dimers. However, this was
generally not apparent in samples that also tested positive for SQPV, and so was unlikely to significantly
affect the estimated titre. The only other poxvirus to
give a melt curve was orf virus, however this was at a
clearly lower temperature from SQPV. The other three
poxviruses failed to amplify, (myxoma, cowpox and
bovine papular stomatitis viruses) all giving non-specific signals equivalent to negative controls (data not
presented). These data suggest that although sensitive,
the assay could benefit from further optimisation to
reduce primer-dimer formation in negative controls
and to increase efficiency.
Comparison of real-time and nested PCR sensitivity

Using the 10-fold dilution series of DNA from red-squirrel tissue with lesions, the nested PCR was able to detect
SQPV DNA serially diluted by 5 logs. In comparison, the
real-time PCR showed a positive result at dilutions of 6

Figure 1 Efficiency plot for the real-time PCR assay generated using the manufactured template control. Log copy number is plotted against cycle threshold (Ct) value.

Atkin et al. BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33

Page 3 of 9

Lesions present

Animal ID

Red 1 Red 2 Red 3

LS

1E+09

LS

LS

Genome equivalents / mg Ɵssue

1E+08
1E+07

A

1E+06

F
A
LN

1E+05
1E+04

Grossly normal

Red 4 Grey 1 Grey 2 Grey 3 Grey 4 Red 5

SU
F

A
Lu
LN
B

A
Lu
LN LuIT
B

1E+03

Li
A
B
LS

logs, suggesting that the real-time PCR is approximately
10-times more sensitive than the nested assay.
The ability of the two assays to detect SQPV DNA in
grey squirrel tissues expected to have low SQPV titres are
summarised in table 1. When the equivocal real-time
PCR results are ignored (4), the agreement between the
results from the two assays is 80% (28/35). However, for
the discordant results, 9% (3/35) of the samples tested
real-time positive/nested PCR negative whereas 11% (4/
35) of the samples tested real-time negative/nested PCR
positive.
Virus distribution and quantification

The SQPV tissue distribution in the necropsy samples
from five red and four grey squirrels (with and without
gross squirrelpox lesions) is shown in figure 3. Almost all
tissues from red squirrels with SQPV lesions were found
to be unequivocally positive by the real-time PCR, with

B
LN
(C)

(S)

1
NegaƟves

B

B

Lu

A
B, Li LN
Li, N Lu, LN A, Li

all tissues testing positive showing relatively high titres.
The highest viral DNA concentrations were generally
found in the lip, with lower viral concentrations found in
other tissues, such as submandibular lymph node, lung
and blood. The average DNA load in the positive tissues
from the grossly affected red squirrels was very high (2 ×
108 copies/mg tissue (figure 3). The average DNA concentration in the positive tissues from the grey squirrel with
lesions (grey 1) was 1 × 104 lower than in the red squirrels
with lesions. The average DNA load in the positive tissues

Nested PCR results
Positive

Negative

Positivea

13

3

Negativeb

4

15

Equivocalc
a 3/3

1

3

or 2/3 of the triplicates positive Ct and appropriate melt curve.
positive Ct and no melt curve.
c 1/3 positive Ct and melt curve.
b 0/3

A, LN

Figure 3 Real-time PCR results showing titre in copies/mg from
tissue or flea samples of five red and four grey squirrels. Squirrel
tissues tested were as follows: A (antebrachial skin), B (blood), C
(cheek), IT (intestinal tract), Li (lip), LS (lip scab or ulcer), LN (submandibular lymph node), Lu (lung), N (nasal skin), SU (eyelid skin ulcer), S (facial
skin) and additionally fleas (F) when present. Tissues are without gross
lesions unless indicated. Positive samples are indicated in the figure,
and are expressed as the average of three reactions. Those samples still
testing equivocal on repeat are indicated by brackets. Samples testing
negative are shown below the figure.

Table 1: Comparison of nested and real-time PCR results from 39 grey skin samples

Real-time PCR results

(S)
Li

1E+02
1E+01

Figure 2 Melt curve analysis (derivative - rate of change of fluorescence against temperature) for positive and negative amplicons from the real-time assay. Amplicons from squirrel poxvirus
gave a specific melt at approximately 88°C. Negative control samples
gave distinguishably lower melt curves and are seen below between
76°C and 85°C.

F

B

Atkin et al. BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33

from grossly normal animals (grey squirrels 2, 3, 4 and
red squirrel 5) was 2 × 106 lower than in the red squirrels
with lesions. All three groups of fleas from two red (red
squirrels 1 and 4) and one grey squirrel (grey squirrel 4)
showed evidence of viral DNA at comparatively high concentrations for those squirrel species.

Discussion
Squirrel poxvirus is one of the major threats to the red
squirrel in the UK [14]. Here we describe a nested and
real-time PCR assay, both of which were able to detect
poxviral DNA from tissues from red and grey squirrels
naturally infected with squirrel pox virus. The real-time
PCR could identify SQPV DNA in a wider range of tissues as compared to the nested PCR, including blood
from grey squirrels. It could also detect lower concentrations of DNA from the diluted red squirrel tissue with
lesions making it a more sensitive diagnostic test. Realtime PCR quantification suggests detection is sensitive to
approximately 144 genome equivalents per mg tissue
which is comparable with other real-time poxviral assays
[15].
Overall, the concordance between real-time PCR and
nested PCR assays results, for grey skin samples, was
approximately 80%, excluding the four borderline realtime PCR cases that still produced equivocal results
despite retesting. Probably these cases represent those
with very low viral DNA loads but this was a more stringent comparison than conducting the test using red
squirrel tissue with lesions. Given there is currently no
definitive way to identify viral infection in grey squirrels
(no gold standard), it is not possible to know which test
gives the more accurate indication of the true infection
status. The three samples which tested real-time PCR
positive and nested PCR negative are likely due to
increased test sensitivity using the real time assay. The
four samples which tested real-time PCR negative and
nested PCR positive could be due to either degradation of
DNA samples from successive free-thaw cycles or possibly contamination, a known problem of such nested
assays, and one of the main drivers for us to develop the
real-time assay. Periodically during testing, nested PCR
negative controls occasionally would show positive
results, in which case, the entire experiment was
repeated. However, contamination between individual
test samples is a possible but unlikely scenario. Selective
inhibition of the real-time PCR compared to the nested
PCR is similarly improbable. An endogenous amplification control was not included in the assay due to the
diverse nature of tissue samples being tested, since any
internal control based on the squirrel genome would have
to be individually optimised for each tissue type. Therefore our interpretation of the data is based upon a pattern
of infection across several animals and several tissues

Page 4 of 9

rather than relying on any one individual result. Correspondingly, false negative results are a possibility.
The results from the four red squirrels with lesions suggest that SQPV undergoes systemic spread in this species,
with a large majority of samples testing positive and viral
DNA being found in all tissue types tested. Systemic
spread is a common feature of some poxviruses including
ectromelia in mice [16], cowpox virus in certain
felines[17,18], and myxoma virus in the European rabbit
(Oryctolagus cuniculus)[19]. All these poxviruses are
benign or show limited infections in their natural host yet
produce severe disease in a novel host. In the red squirrel,
poxviral damage to the skin produces ballooning degeneration of keratinocytes, epithelial necrosis and then central ulceration [6,7]. Therefore, these cutaneous sites are
highly productive sites for viral replication. Unsurprisingly, these tissues with the gross and histological lesions
have the most abundant viral DNA using this real-time
PCR. As with ectromelia, viraemia probably allows the
virus to disperse to multifocal skin sites where the most
productive replication takes place and transmission
occurs [16]. In contrast, tissues without gross lesions, for
example lung, contain less viral DNA.
For red squirrels, the consistently high copy numbers in
ulcerated lip and skin samples support evidence from
nested PCR studies, gross and histopathology, that tissue
from these sites are the most reliable for use in squirrelpox diagnosis in red squirrels[6,7,14]. Lesser amounts of
viral DNA are present in the grossly normal skin (antebrachium), submandibular lymph nodes and other
organs. Blood was variably positive and at a lower concentration compared with other red squirrel tissues. This
may reflect the stage of infection with relatively low levels
of viraemia coinciding with peak clinical disease [20].
However, other factors such as PCR inhibitors in blood
cannot be excluded[21].
Finding grey squirrels with SQPV induced lesions
appears extremely rare. Indeed, in the authors' experience, only one such animal has been identified out of 138
screened at necropsy (data not presented). Qualitatively,
SQPV-infection in samples from this grey squirrel with
lesions appeared similar to those for positive red squirrels, with five out of six samples testing positive. However, quantitatively, the amount of viral DNA detected in
this grey squirrel was on average 1 × 104 lower than in the
red squirrels with lesions, with blood and then lip having
the highest titres (compared to lip samples from SQPV
positive red squirrels). This suggests that even in the rare
cases where SQPV is associated with disease in grey
squirrels, viral replication is limited by as yet unknown
mechanisms. The real-time PCR results from samples
taken from grossly normal grey squirrel 3 strongly suggest that this animal is negative for SQPV. However,
results from grey squirrels 2 (also positive by nested PCR

Atkin et al. BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33

for SQPV) and 4, (previously not tested by nested PCR)
suggest that these are both weakly positive for SQPV as
two samples were consistently positive for each animal on
repeated testing. The precise significance of these results
needs further clarification. Possibilities include that these
animals are undergoing current sub-clinical infection and
so acting as asymptomatic reservoirs, or that these PCR
results represent non-infectious genome remnants persisting beyond the presence of infectious virus particles.
In addition to amplifying SQPV viral DNA from grossly
normal grey squirrels, SQPV was also amplified from the
lip of a grossly normal red squirrel 5 (two other skin samples tested equivocally positive). This animal had been
accidentally killed on the road and had no gross nor histological lesions indicative of SQPV infection, and may
represent a very early case of infection which was killed
before significant lesions could develop. Alternatively,
though less likely, it could be that this is a recovering red
squirrel harbouring a limited degree of viral DNA during
the healing process. In experimental SQPV infection of
four red squirrels, one animal recovered from the disease
[8] and seropositive red squirrel carcases have been occasionally recovered from the wild [14] so there is a remote
possibility of a small number of immune individuals surviving however the overwhelming epidemiological picture is of rapid local and regional extinction of the red
squirrel population [4,11]. Clearly, these low-titre positive samples from grossly normal animals are very close
to the limit of detection for this assay and may need further validation in the context of larger sample numbers.
There is the possibility that there may be less virulent
squirrel poxvirus strains circulating in the population
though there is very limited epidemiological evidence to
support this [14].
An interesting point to note is that all three group flea
samples tested (from red squirrels 1 and 4 with lesions,
grossly normal grey squirrel 4) had relatively high concentrations of viral DNA. This could suggest that the flea
may have the capability to act as a vector of squirrel poxvirus, as has already been shown for the related myxoma
virus in rabbits [22,23]. In addition, swine poxvirus can
be spread by invertebrate vectors [24] which reinforces
this possibility of a flea poxvirus vector. Further work is
needed to characterise the precise relationship between
the squirrel flea and SQPV, and the role of the flea in the
epidemiology of this disease. Clearly, a flea could test
PCR positive as a result of viral mechanical contamination of the flea's ectoskeleton. However, it could also be as
a result of ingesting a blood meal containing virus (transport host), or by the virus replicating in the ectoparasite's
tissue (intermediate host). Unfortunately, many fleas had
abandoned the carcasses before body recovery was possible so data was incomplete and more testing is necessary.
In the UK, both the red squirrel flea (Monopsyllus sciuro-

Page 5 of 9

rum sciurorum) and the grey squirrel flea (Orchopeas
howardi howardi) can be found on either species of squirrel [25,26].
In addition to a possible role for fleas in transmission,
the presence of widespread viral DNA in many tissues
from red squirrels suggests several potential routes of
transmission are possible including superficial contamination of feeding sites, territorial marking sites, aerosols,
faecal-oral routes and direct contact. Red squirrels with
skin ulcers appear to be strongly positive for poxviral
DNA and any contact with these ulcerated cutaneous
sites could potentially lead to virus transmission.
In grey squirrels, the lip and antebrachial skin were primarily the main positive tissues in the grey squirrel with
lesions and other cutaneous sites were largely negative
(data not shown) whereas blood would appear to be the
most consistent tissue to use by this method for detection
of SQPV in grossly normal grey squirrels. In grey squirrels, viraemia occurred at relatively low concentrations
and viral DNA was also present in lymph nodes and fleas
which indicated systemic involvement although no clinical disease nor gross pathological lesions were apparent.
Methods of viral spread in this species may be primarily
ectoparasite driven or require a brief period of localised
cutaneous infection with limited or no gross lesions. The
duration of infection remains open to speculation but to
have this relatively high percentage of grey squirrels testing positive suggests low level states of prolonged infection [27] or possibly sustained exposure to infection in
the same individual, especially during periods of epidemic disease in red squirrels. This study also suggest
that current grey squirrel culling regimes should consider
sampling lip, antebrachial skin, blood and fleas to screen
for SQPV infection status. When screening live grey
squirrels, oral swabs may be sufficient but issues with
lower sensitivity potentially could be problematic even by
nested PCR.
A selection of amplicons from both assays were
sequenced and shown to be identical for both red and
grey squirrels although, occasional low concentration
amplicons from tissues of both species failed to produce a
product which could be sequenced. Although each amplicon was short and poxviruses tend to be genetically conserved in these regions [28], this further supports the
hypothesis that this is the same poxvirus circulating
between red and grey squirrels.

Conclusions
We have designed a sensitive and specific real-time assay
that is capable of giving quantitative data in SQPV infections. This assay will allow us to better understand the
epidemiology and pathogenesis of this important disease.
The main difference between SQPV positive red squirrel
tissues and positive grey squirrel tissue is that grey squir-

Atkin et al. BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33

Page 6 of 9

rel samples contain considerably less viral DNA than the
corresponding red squirrel samples (by several orders of
magnitude). Another major difference is that, in red
squirrels with lesions, the majority of tissue samples (and
fleas) analysed will be positive, whereas even in a positive
grey squirrel, most tissue samples are likely to be negative, with only a few sites being positive. There are, however, some similarities between the virus distribution in
red and grey squirrels. From the results is seems that in
both species, SQPV can infect the oral skin and lip and
from there possibly spread to the submandibular lymph
nodes and into the blood, and fleas from both species can
carry the virus (possibly acting as vectors). The real time
assay described here will allow us to further characterise
the pathogenesis and epidemiology of this important disease.

Due to prior experience with the nested PCR (unpublished data) showing only a very limited number of grey
squirrel positive tissues having any evidence of viral DNA
(exclusively skin sites and no other organs) and given the
predominance of cutaneous lesions in red squirrels, skin
and submandibular lymph nodes were preferentially
selected for real-time PCR investigation. In addition,
because of the potential for transmission of the virus by
ectoparasites, as is the case for myxoma virus [29], prior
to post-mortem examination, bodies were routinely
combed and all fleas identified were harvested (up to a
maximum of 10). Fleas were only available for three of the
squirrels sampled and no other ectoparasite species were
identified. Occasionally other internal tissues were sampled such as lung or intestinal tract when fleas, blood or
lymph nodes were absent.

Methods

Extraction of DNA

Source material

During 2008, red squirrel bodies were recovered from the
Formby National Trust reserve (UK grid reference
SD281082) and grey squirrels were culled from controlled
sites within a 10 km radius of the reserve. Grey squirrels
culls occur routinely in the UK in areas with mixed squirrel populations, hence there was no need for a licence nor
special ethical approval. Both carcases from red squirrels
which had died naturally and culled grey squirrels were
freely donated for scientific investigation by the Formby
National Trust reserve. Bodies were either submitted
fresh (having been refrigerated at 4°C until necropsy) or
frozen at -20°C on collection and stored frozen until
defrosting before post mortem examinations were performed. Given the relatively low number of squirrels
involved in this study, it was possible to select those individuals with minimal levels of autolysis. At necropsy, all
major organs including haemolysed blood were examined
and sampled with tissues including multiple cutaneous
sites such as the antebrachium and the lip. Tissue sections
in 10% formal saline were prepared, embedded in paraffin
wax for histopathological examination and stained with
haematoxylin and eosin (H+E).

All DNA templates were extracted from 25 mg of squirrel
tissue samples, or 100 ul of blood, or from crushed whole
flea bodies, following the manufacturer's standard protocol (QIAGEN DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit). During the
final stage of preparation, the extracted DNA was eluted
into 100 μL of elution buffer to increase final DNA concentration (as recommended by the standard protocol).
DNA-extraction, negative-controls were included in all
experiments (approximately one negative control per five
samples). In the rare cases where negative controls tested
positive, the entire experiment was repeated.
Nested PCR

The primers used in the nested PCR target a section of a
SQPV gene encoding the highly conserved RNA polymerase subunit RPO147 (accession number AY340975)
(Table 2) [28]. The reaction conditions used in both
rounds of the nested PCR consisted of the following: 20.5
μL 2× PCR Master Mix (1.5 mM MgCl2) (Thermo Scientific), 900 nM of each primer and 1.5 μL DNA template,
giving a total of 25 μL per sample. The product from the
1st round was diluted 1:20 with molecular grade water

Table 2: Primers used in the nested and real-time squirrelpox virus PCRs.
Stage

Primer orientation

Sequence (5' - 3')

1st round nested PCR

SqP1 - forward
SqP2 - reverse

GCGGCCGCGCTGACCGCCATCG
CCAGCACGACTTCTTCCTGGAG

2nd round nested PCR

SqP3 - forward
SqP4 - reverse

CGCTCGCGTGTCCTACAGCCTG
GCAGTCCGCAGCGCGCGCAGAT

Real-time PCR primers

SP7 - forward
SP8 - reverse

GGGCGATCGTGCCGCTCAG
CGCCTCGAGGTCCGGCTC

Atkin et al. BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33

and the resulting mixture used as the 2nd round DNA
template.
Both rounds of the PCR were carried out under the
same cycling conditions: an initial denaturation stage at
95°C for 2 minutes; 35 cycles consisting of a denaturation
stage at 95°C for 20 seconds, an annealing stage at 65°C
for 20 seconds and an extension stage at 72°C for 1 minute; and a final extension stage at 72°C for 5 minutes. The
products were electrophoretically resolved on 1% (w/v)
agarose gels, then visualised under UV light after staining
with ethidium bromide. The final amplicon of 275 base
pairs from red squirrels 1, 2, and 3, and grey squirrrels 1
and 2, was sequenced to confirm the assay specificity.
Amplicons were purified (Qiagen, QIAquick PCR purification kit) and their concentration standardised (Labtech
nanodrop ND1000), before sequencing in both directions
with the PCR primers (Macrogen).
Real-time PCR

The target for the real-time PCR was a putative late gene
transcription factor homologous to G8R in Vaccinia
virus. The sequence of the SQPV G8R homologue was
identified as part of an on-going effort to sequence the
full SQPV genome [30]. The G8R homologue was chosen
as it is pox specific, whilst providing several potential
primer binding sites that are relatively conserved within
several pox viruses. This minimised the chances of
primer mismatch within SQPV whilst allowing for meltcurve differentiation of other poxviruses. The SQPV gene
was compared to the analogous Orf virus gene
(AY386264), and only regions that were highly conserved
between the two species were chosen as primer candidates. Oligocalc was used to check primer candidates for
self-complementarity and to ensure that pairs of primers
had similar melting temperatures (Oligo Calculator version 3.23).
To optimise the assay, four pairs of primers were evaluated in early experiments and the best pair (SP7 5'GGGCGATCGTGCCGCTCAG-3'/SP8
5'-CGCCTCGAGGTCCGGCTC-3') selected based on observed cycle
threshold (Ct) value for signal fluorescence to exceed
those of background controls, using a SQPV-positive
control sample. Subsequent optimisation of the SP7/8
assay consisted of an annealing temperature gradient
(55°C-70°C), and a primer gradient (50 nM, 100 nM, 200
nM and 300 nM). The final optimised PCR consisted of:
12.5 μL Absolute QPCR SYBR Green Mix (2×), 100 nM
final concentration of each primer, 10.5 μL molecular
grade water, and 1 μL DNA template. Reactions were run
on an Applied Biosystems 7300 real-time cycler, with the
following cycling conditions: an initial enzyme activation
at 95°C for 15 minutes; 40 cycles consisting of denature
(95°C for 30 seconds), anneal (68°C for 30 seconds), and
extension (72°C for 1 minute); and a final extension of

Page 7 of 9

72°C for 5 minutes. A melt curve was performed on all
samples immediately after the final extension stage using
the standard AB7300 melt curve. All samples were run in
triplicate, and one non-template negative control was
included for each sample. Positive reactions were those
that had both a detectable Ct value and a melt curve in
the range 87 to 88 degrees C. The reproducibility and
interpretation of this assay was determined by running a
selection of samples that were variably positive i.e. 3 of 3
reactions positive, 2 of 3 reactions positive, 1 of 3 reactions positive and all reactions negative. Based on these
repeats, assay samples were subsequently indicated as
positive when all three samples tested positive on a single
assay, and negative when all samples were negative on a
single assay. Samples where one or two samples tested
positive were repeated. These samples were called positive if all three of the repeats tested positive, negative if all
three tested negative and equivocal if one or two tested
positive. Only three of the 46 samples tested fell into this
latter category; rather than reporting these as negative
these values have been included for completeness and are
indicated as equivocal.
To confirm assay specificity, the strongest signal amplicons from selected reactions were sequenced. Those were
taken from the skin lesions of red squirrels 1, 2, 3 and
grey squirrel 1 and blood from grey squirrels 2 and 4. In
addition, poxvirus lesion samples from cases of myxomatosis, bovine popular stomatitis, orf and cowpox were
also tested by the real-time assay. These viruses are those
that are closest phylogenetically to SQPV [2], and were
derived from lesion material from a European rabbit
(Oryctolagus cuniculus) with a swollen eyelid (myxoma
virus) and a cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) with a cutaneous
scab (cowpox virus). Other poxvirus source material
came from oral scabs from a sheep (containing orf virus)
and a cow (containing bovine papular stomatitis virus)
(both from D. Everest, VLA Weybridge).
Comparison of nested and real-time PCR assays

Two approaches with different templates were used to
compare the sensitivity of these two assays. Firstly, using
a 10-fold dilution series of DNA from a highly-positive
red squirrel lesion prepared in PCR-negative grey squirrel
DNA. Secondly, using 39 DNA samples from culled grey
squirrels' skin that had previously been assayed by nested
PCR as having either low-range positive or negative viral
titres.
Virus distribution and quantification

To investigate virus distribution, necropsies were performed on nine squirrel carcasses, with five or six samples taken from varying sites on each squirrel according
to lesion distribution and tissue availability. The nine
squirrels included four red squirrels with lesions, one

Atkin et al. BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33

grey squirrel with lesions, three grossly normal grey
squirrels, and one grossly normal red squirrel. All were
taken from the Formby National Trust reserve, an area
known to have endemic SQPV disease in 2008. From
each sample, DNA was extracted and run on the realtime PCR assay.
In order to allow the estimation of genomic equivalents
in these samples, a 143base artificial target sequence
identical to the SQPV genome was manufactured for the
real time assay (Bioneer). (5'-GGGCGATCGTGCCGCT
CAGCGCCAGCGTCTGCTTCGACGGCGACACCAA
CTGCGTGTTCAACCTCCCGGTGCTCAAGGTCAAGAACTG CCTCTGCAGCTTCCACAGCGACGCCATGATCTCCATCGAGCCGGACCTCGAGGCG-3').
Serial 10-fold dilutions of this molecule were initially prepared in both negative squirrel DNA and water. However,
since these two approaches gave identical results (data
not presented), only water dilutions were used for subsequent experiments. The artificial target sequence was
included as a dilution series ranging from 108 - 104 molecules per assay on each real-time PCR plate run. Applied
Biosystems 7300 System SDS Software was used to construct a standard curve which was used to determine the
approximate number of molecules of the target sequence
in each pathological squirrel samples. Where the Ct value
fell outside the standard curve, these relatively low titres
were estimated by extrapolation, and therefore their
reported titres are likely to be a less precise reflection of
the actual concentration of viral DNA in the tissues. All
results were adjusted for differences in initial sample
weights, and displayed in estimated number of copies
(genome equivalents) per mg of tissue.
Authors' contributions
JWA carried out the real-time PCRs and molecular lab work, collated the results
and helped to draft the manuscript. JS and KPC participated in supervison of
JWA on a daily basis, with interpretation of the results. ADR helped conceive
the study, supervised JWA, designed the primers and many of the experiments,
and helped write the manuscript. JC designed and coordinated the study and
wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank: David Jones for assistance with the nested
PCR samples; The Wildlife Ark Trust for their funding of the development of the
PCR diagnostics as part of an overall strategy to develop control measures for
the disease; The National Trust and the Lancashire Wildlife Trust staff and local
volunteers at Formby, who submitted dead squirrels for post-mortem examination; and to David Everest from VLA Weybridge for the orf and bovine papular stomatitis viruses.
Author Details
1Department of Veterinary Pathology, University of Liverpool, Leahurst
Campus, Neston, Cheshire, CH64 7TE, UK and 2Department of Veterinary
Clinical Sciences, University of Liverpool, Leahurst Campus, Neston, Cheshire,
CH64 7TE, UK
Received: 7 October 2009 Accepted: 8 June 2010
Published: 8 June 2010
© 2010 Atkin available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33
This is an Open Research 2010,distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC article is et Access article 6:33 Central Ltd.
Veterinary al; licensee BioMed

Page 8 of 9

References
1. Thomas K, Tompkins DM, Sainsbury AW, Wood AR, Dalziel R, Nettleton PF,
McInnes CJ: A novel poxvirus lethal to red squirrels (Sciurus vulgaris).
Journal of General Virology 2003, 84:3337-3341.
2. McInnes CJ, Wood AR, Thomas K, Sainsbury AW, Gurnell J, Dein J,
Nettleton PF: Genomic characterization of a novel poxvirus
contributing to the decline of the red squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris) in the
UK. Journal of General Virology 2006, 87:2115-2125.
3. Sainsbury AW, Nettleton P, Gilray J, Gurnell J: Grey squirrels have high
seroprevalence to a parapox virus associated with red squirrels. Animal
Conservation 2000:5-8.
4. Edwards FB: Red squirrel disease. Vet Rec 1962, 74:739-741.
5. Scott AC, Keymer IF, Labram J: Parapoxvirus infection of the red squirrel
(Sciurus vulgaris). Vet Rec 1981, 109(10):202.
6. Sainsbury AW, Gurnell J: An investigation into the health and welfare of
red squirrels, Sciurus vulgaris, involved in reintroduction studies. Vet
Rec 1995, 137(15):367-370.
7. McInnes CJ, Coulter L, Dagleish MP, Fiegna C, Gilray J, Willoughby K, Cole
M, Milne E, Meredith A, Everest DJ, et al.: First cases of squirrelpox in red
squirrels (Sciurus vulgaris) in Scotland. Vet Rec 2009, 164(17):528-531.
8. Tompkins DM, Sainsbury AW, Nettleton P, Buxton D, Gurnell J:
Parapoxvirus causes a deleterious disease in red squirrels associated
with UK population declines. Proc Biol Sci 2002, 269(1490):529-533.
9. Duff JP, Scott A, Keymer IF: Parapox virus infection of the grey squirrel.
Vet Rec 1996, 138(21):527.
10. Middleton AD: The ecology of the American grey squirrel (Sciurus
carolinensis) in the British Isles. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of
London 1930, 2:809-843.
11. Sainsbury AW, Deaville R, Lawson B, Cooley WA, Farelly SS, Stack MJ, Duff P,
McInnes CJ, Gurnell J, Russell PH, et al.: Poxviral disease in red squirrels
Sciurus vulgaris in the UK: spatial and temporal trends of an emerging
threat. Ecohealth 2008, 5(3):305-316.
12. Kenward RE, Holm JL: On the replacement of the red squirrel in Britain: a
phytotoxic explanation. Proc Biol Sci 1993, 251(1332):187-194.
13. Rushton SP, Lurz PW, Gurnell J, Nettleton P, Bruemmer C, Shirley MD,
Sainsbury AW: Disease threats posed by alien species: the role of a
poxvirus in the decline of the native red squirrel in Britain. Epidemiol
Infect 2006, 134(3):521-533.
14. Carroll B, Russell P, Gurnell J, Nettleton P, Sainsbury AW: Epidemics of
squirrelpox virus disease in red squirrels (Sciurus vulgaris): temporal
and serological findings. Epidemiol Infect 2009, 137(2):257-265.
15. Scaramozzino N, Ferrier-Rembert A, Favier AL, Rothlisberger C, Richard S,
Crance JM, Meyer H, Garin D: Real-time PCR to identify variola virus or
other human pathogenic orthopox viruses. Clin Chem 2007,
53(4):606-613.
16. Fenner F: Mouse-pox; infectious ectromelia of mice; a review. J
Immunol 1949, 63(4):341-373.
17. Baxby D, Ashton DG, Jones DM, Thomsett LR: An outbreak of cowpox in
captive cheetahs: virological and epidemiological studies. J Hyg (Lond)
1982, 89(3):365-372.
18. Bennett M, Gaskell RM, Gaskell CJ, Baxby D, Kelly DF: Studies on poxvirus
infection in cats. Arch Virol 1989, 104(1-2):19-33.
19. Marshall ID, Fenner F: Studies in the epidemiology of infectious
myxomatosis of rabbits. VII. The virulence of strains of myxoma virus
recovered from Australian wild rabbits between 1951 and 1959. J Hyg
(Lond) 1960, 58:485-488.
20. Buller RM, Palumbo GJ: Poxvirus pathogenesis. Microbiol Rev 1991,
55(1):80-122.
21. Kermekchiev MB, Kirilova LI, Vail EE, Barnes WM: Mutants of Taq DNA
polymerase resistant to PCR inhibitors allow DNA amplification from
whole blood and crude soil samples. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37(5):e40.
22. Merchant JC, Kerr PJ, Simms NG, Hood GM, Pech RP, Robinson AJ:
Monitoring the spread of myxoma virus in rabbit Oryctolagus cuniculus
populations on the southern tablelands of New South Wales, Australia.
III. Release, persistence and rate of spread of an identifiable strain of
myxoma virus. Epidemiol Infect 2003, 130(1):135-147.
23. Trout RC, Ross J, Fox AP: Does myxomatosis still regulate numbers of
rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus Linnaeus, 1758) in the United Kingdom?
Rev Sci Tech 1993, 12(1):35-38.
24. McFadden G: Poxviruses. 1st edition. London: Academic Press; 1994.
25. Burnell J: Squirrels. Third edition. London: Blackwell Scientific Ltd; 1991.

Atkin et al. BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1746-6148/6/33

26. Smit FGM: Siphonaptera. Volume 1. London: Royal Entomological Society
of London; 1957.
27. Yeruham I, Abraham A, Nyska A: Clinical and pathological description of
a chronic form of bovine papular stomatitis. J Comp Pathol 1994,
111(3):279-286.
28. McLysaght A, Baldi PF, Gaut BS: Extensive gene gain associated with
adaptive evolution of poxviruses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100(26):15655-15660.
29. Merchant JC, Kerr PJ, Simms NG, Robinson AJ: Monitoring the spread of
myxoma virus in rabbit Oryctolagus cuniculus populations on the
southern tablelands of New South Wales, Australia. I. Natural
occurrence of myxomatosis. Epidemiol Infect 2003, 130(1):113-121.
30. Radford A, McInnes C, Darby A, Hall N, J C: The genome sequence of
squirrel poxvirus. 8th International Congress of Veterinary Virology: 2009;
Budapest 2009.
doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-6-33
Cite this article as: Atkin et al., Detection of squirrel poxvirus by nested and
real-time PCR from red (Sciurus vulgaris) and grey (Sciurus carolinensis) squirrels BMC Veterinary Research 2010, 6:33

Page 9 of 9

</pre>
</body>
</html>
