<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>An ancient family of SelB elongation factor-like proteins with a broad but disjunct distribution across archaea</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-22"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Gemma C Atkinson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

An ancient family of SelB elongation factor-like
proteins with a broad but disjunct distribution
across archaea
Gemma C Atkinson*, Vasili Hauryliuk, Tanel Tenson

Abstract
Background: SelB is the dedicated elongation factor for delivery of selenocysteinyl-tRNA to the ribosome. In
archaea, only a subset of methanogens utilizes selenocysteine and encodes archaeal SelB (aSelB). A SelB-like
(aSelBL) homolog has previously been identified in an archaeon that does not encode selenosysteine, and has
been proposed to be a pyrrolysyl-tRNA-specific elongation factor (EF-Pyl). However, elongation factor EF-Tu is
capable of binding archaeal Pyl-tRNA in bacteria, suggesting the archaeal ortholog EF1A may also be capable of
delivering Pyl-tRNA to the ribosome without the need of a specialized factor.
Results: We have phylogenetically characterized the aSelB and aSelBL families in archaea. We find the distribution
of aSelBL to be wider than both selenocysteine and pyrrolysine usage. The aSelBLs also lack the carboxy terminal
domain usually involved in recognition of the selenocysteine insertion sequence in the target mRNA. While most
aSelBL-encoding archaea are methanogenic Euryarchaea, we also find aSelBL representatives in Sulfolobales and
Thermoproteales of Crenarchaea, and in the recently identified phylum Thaumarchaea, suggesting that aSelBL
evolution has involved horizontal gene transfer and/or parallel loss. Severe disruption of the GTPase domain
suggests that some family members may employ a hitherto unknown mechanism of nucleotide hydrolysis, or have
lost their GTPase ability altogether. However, patterns of sequence conservation indicate that aSelBL is still capable
of binding the ribosome and aminoacyl-tRNA.
Conclusions: Although it is closely related to SelB, aSelBL appears unlikely to either bind selenocysteinyl-tRNA or
function as a classical GTP hydrolyzing elongation factor. We propose that following duplication of aSelB, the
resultant aSelBL was recruited for binding another aminoacyl-tRNA. In bacteria, aminoacylation with selenocysteine
is essential for efficient thermodynamic coupling of SelB binding to tRNA and GTP. Therefore, change in tRNA
specificity of aSelBL could have disrupted its GTPase cycle, leading to relaxation of selective pressure on the
GTPase domain and explaining its apparent degradation. While the specific role of aSelBL is yet to be
experimentally tested, its broad phylogenetic distribution, surpassing that of aSelB, indicates its importance.

Background
Elongation factors EF-Tu in bacteria and EF1A in
archaea and eukaryotes bind and deliver aminoacyltRNA (aa-tRNA) to the ribosome. These are the universal components of the EF1 family, which also contains a
number of paralogous subfamilies with more restricted
taxonomic distributions. EF1 family members all share a
common domain structure, of a GTPase (G) domain
and two beta barrel domains II and III, which interact
* Correspondence: gemma.atkinson@ut.ee
University of Tartu, Institute of Technology, Tartu, Estonia

with aa-tRNA. Some EF1 subfamilies also have additional N terminal or C terminal domains, responsible
for lineage-specific intermolecular interactions. A number of specialized subfamilies recognize and deliver specific tRNAs to the ribosome. Initiator tRNA is
specifically recognized by the EF1 family member e/
aIF2g in eukaryotes and archaea [1]. In nematodes, two
mitochondrial EF-Tus are specialized for aa-tRNAs that
differ from the canonical cloverleaf tRNA structure
comprised of a D arm, T arm, anticodon arm and
accepter loop. Nematode mtEFTu1 specifically binds T
armless tRNAs that are commonly found in metazoan

© 2011 Atkinson et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

mitochondria [2], while mtEFTu2 is specialized for D
armless Seryl-tRNA, specifically recognizing serine
amino acid as well as the tRNA body [3]. Members of
the SelB subfamily, close relatives of e/aIF2g [4] are
responsible for binding and delivering selenocysteinyltRNA to the ribosome in selenocysteine-utilizing bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes. At least in the case of
bacterial SelB, interaction is specific both to the nature
of the tRNA itself and the attached amino acid [5].
The amino acid selenocysteine is structurally similar
to cysteine, but contains selenium instead of sulfur,
which forms a selenol instead of thiol group. It is chemically more reactive than cysteine [6], and is found in
several enzymes (selenoproteins). Selenocysteine has its
own tRNA (tRNASec), but it lacks a dedicated codon in
the standard genetic code. Instead, cells employ a specialized mechanism for its integration at a recoded UGA
stop codon. Sec-tRNASec forms a complex with the selenocysteine-specific elongation factor SelB and GTP,
which in turn binds a structural element in the mRNA
(the selenocysteine insertion element, or SECIS). This
binding is direct in bacteria, via a C terminal extension
in SelB [7]. In eukaryotic and archaeal SelB (eSelB or
EF-Sec), the C terminal extension is shorter and in
eukaryotes interacts with the SECIS element via a separate protein, the SECIS binding protein (SBP) [8]. An
SBP ortholog is not present in archaea, and a functionally equivalent factor has not been identified, the closest
homolog being ribosomal protein S30 [9]. Selenoproteins and the selenocysteine incorporation machinery
have a patchy distribution across the tree of life [10].
However, as they are found in eukaryotes, archaea and
bacteria, this suggests they were present in the last common ancestor of all life, and were subsequently lost in
various lineages [11].
Pyrrolysine is another unusual naturally occurring
amino acid [12]. It is a lysine derivative, with a pyrroline
ring linked to the lysine side chain. Like selenocysteine,
it has a specialized tRNA and is incorporated in
response to a termination codon, in this case the
‘amber’ stop codon UAG [13]. Pyrrolysine has a narrower distribution than selenocysteine, being utilized
only in Methanosarcineae archaea and one bacterium,
Desulfitobacterium hafniense [13].
In archaea, only some methanogenic archaea are known
to utilize selenocysteine, and as such, the synthesis and
incorporation machinery (selenophosphate synthetase
(SelD), tRNASec (SelC) and SelB) are only found in these
organisms [10]. A paralog of archaeal SelB (aSelB) has
been identified in Methanosarcinales, and proposed to be
a hitherto unidentified pyrrolysine-specific elongation factor (EF-Pyl) [14]. A structure of the putative EF-Pyl was
determined and deposited in the protein data bank in
2007 (PDB ID 2ELF[15]). However, bacterial EF-Tu has

Page 2 of 10

been found to be capable of binding archaeal Pyl-tRNA,
suggesting that the archaeal ortholog of EF-Tu, aEF1A,
may also be capable of delivering Pyl-tRNA to the ribosome without the need of a specialized factor [16].
We have identified EF-Pyl/aSelB-like homologs (herein
referred to as aSelBL) in a range of archaea that is
broader than the distribution of selenocysteine and pyrrolysine. We have carried out comparative phylogenetic
and sequence analysis of the aSelBL subfamily. Strong
structural similarity with aSelB and conservation of
tRNA and ribosomal RNA interaction sites suggests that
in some archaea, aSelBL may be a functional translation
elongation factor. However, disrupted G domains in
subgroups of aSelBL raise the possibility that the aSelB
proteins are not typical molecular switches like classical
translational GTPase elongation factors. Their taxonomic distribution, while non-continuous, is broad, and
generally (although not exclusively) associated with
methanogenic high-cysteine archaea. We discuss possible roles for these unusual proteins.

Results
Phylogenetic analysis

Sequence searching revealed the presence of homologs of
archaeal SelB in the genomes of many Euryarchaea, the
recently designated phylum Thaumarchaeota [17], and
Sulfolobales and Thermoproteales within Crenarcheatoa
(Figure 1, Table 1, Additional files 1 and 2). Thus, aSelB
homologs are present, although with a disjunct distribution, in all three major lineages of archaea [17]. ML and
BI phylogenetic analysis of bacterial SelB, aSelB, EF-Tu
and aIF2g shows that the aSelB homologs form a monophyletic group with full support (BIPP 1.0, MLBP 100%,
Additional file 1). ‘True’ aSelB (i.e. the previously identified and characterized aSelB selenocysteine elongation
factor) from Methanopyrus kandleri represents a sister
group to a clade that comprises ‘true’ aSelB from Methanococcales, plus a divergent clade henceforth referred to
as aSelB-like (aSelBL). The monophyly of Methanococcale aSelB+aSelBL to the exclusion of M. kandleri aSelB
is not strongly supported (0.88 BIPP, 68 MLBP). However, aSelBL is fully supported as monophyletic and is
also supported by a 15 amino acid deletion in the GTPase
domain, relative to “true” aSelB (alignment positions 3457, Figure 2). Species of Methanococcus and Methanocaldococcus have both aSelB and aSelBL. Thus it appears
that aSelBLs are not orthologs of aSelB, but are paralogs
or xenologs, originating via gene duplication or lateral
transfer, rather than speciation. Only M. kandleri has
aSelB without a copy of aSelBL.
Phylogenetic analysis of aSelB/aSelBL alone was carried
out to reveal the internal branching structure of
the subfamily, using more universally alignable
homologous amino acid positions (Figure 1). Candidatus

Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

Page 3 of 10

Figure 1 Bayesian inference tree of aSelB and aSelBL from 311 aligned amino acid positions. Bayesian inference posterior probability
(BIPP) and maximum likelihood bootstrap percentage (MLBP) support are indicated on branches. Only branches with >.70 BIPP support are
labelled with BIPP and MLPP values. The scale bar below the tree shows the evolutionary distance expressed as substitutions per site. The SDSF
at the end of the MrBayes run was 0.005. Numbers in taxon names are NCBI GI numbers, and underlined names indicate those taxa included in
the illustrative alignment (Figure 2). Archaea labelled ARMAN are those from the clade of “Archaeal Richmond Mine Acidophilic Nanoorganisms”
[18]. Symbols following taxa names indicate aSelB/aSelBLs with conserved genomic context (Additional file 3). The key for genomic context
symbols is in the inset box, showing the location of genes in relation to aSelBL or SelB. Gene names are abbreviated as follows: MVK,
mevalonate kinase family protein; RNase P, Ribonuclease P; TatD, TatD-related deoxyribonuclease; RNase Z, Ribonuclease Z/Lactamase B family
protein; hemH, Protoheme ferrolyase (ferrochelatase); alaRS, alanyl-tRNA synthetase; metRS, methionyl-tRNA synthetase.

Parvarchaeum acidiphilum ARMAN-4 and -5 form a sister group to the remaining aSelBLs, which have strong BI
and moderate ML support for monophyly (1.0 BIPP, 85%
MLBP, Figure 1). The ARMAN (Archaeal Richmond Mine
Acidophilic Nanoorganisms) bacteria are proposed to
branch near the root of the Euryarchaeota [18]. This suggests that aSelBL may have originated within or before the
lineage leading to Euryarchaeaota. However, one of the

ARMAN bacteria, Candidatus Microarchaeum acidiphilum ARMAN-2 is nested deeply within aSelBL, grouping
with the Crenarcheaota clade with moderate support (0.96
BIPP, 74% MLBP, Figure 1). Both the Thaumarchaeota
and Crenarchaeota + M. acidiphilum clades are nested
strongly within Euryarchaeota (1.0 BIPP, 96% MLBP,
Figure 1). This does not agree with currently accepted
deep archaeal phylogeny [17,19]. Thus, the aSelBLs of

Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

Page 4 of 10

Table 1 Distribution of aSelBL, aSelB, SelD and pylS across archaeal full genomes
Taxonomic groupings*

Proteins identified*

Thaumarchaeota

Nitrosopumilus_maritimus SCM1

aSelBL

Crenarchaeota

Desulfurococcales

-

Sulfolobales
Metallosphaera sedula DSM 5348

aSelBL

Sulfolobus acidocaldarius DSM 639

aSelBL

Sulfolobus islandicus

aSelBL

Sulfolobus solfataricus

aSelBL

Sulfolobus tokodaii str. 7
Thermoproteales
Caldivirga maquilingensis IC-167

aSelBL
aSelBL

Pyrobaculum (multiple species)
Thermofilum pendens Hrk 5
Thermoproteus neutrophilus V24Sta
Vulcanisaeta distributa DSM 14429
Euryarchaeota

aSelBL

Archaeoglobales

-

Halobacteriales
Methanobacteriales

-

[SelD]**

Methanococcales
Methanocaldococcus fervens AG86

aSelBL

aSelB

SelD

Methanocaldococcus infernus ME

aSelBL

aSelB

SelD

Methanocaldococcus jannaschii DSM 2661

aSelBL

aSelB

SelD

Methanocaldococcus sp. FS406-22

aSelBL

aSelB

SelD

Methanocaldococcus vulcanius M7

aSelBL

aSelB

SelD

Methanococcus aeolicus Nankai-3
Methanococcus maripaludis

aSelBL
aSelBL

aSelB
aSelB

SelD
SelD

Methanococcus vannielii SB

aSelBL

aSelB

SelD

aSelBL

aSelB

SelD

aSelB

SelD

Methanococcus voltae A3
Methanomicrobiales
Candidatus Methanoregula boonei 6A8

aSelBL

Methanocorpusculum labreanum Z

aSelBL

Methanoculleus marisnigri JR1

aSelBL

Methanosphaerula palustris E1-9c
Methanospirillum hungatei JF-1

aSelBL
aSelBL

Methanopyrales
Methanopyrus kandleri AV19
Methanosarcinales
Methanococcoides burtonii DSM 6242

aSelBL

pylS

Methanohalobium evestigatum Z-7303

aSelBL

pylS

Methanohalophilus mahii DSM 5219

aSelBL

pylS

Methanosaeta thermophila PT
Methanosarcina acetivorans C2A

aSelBL
aSelBL

[pylS]**
pylS

Methanosarcina barkeri str. Fusaro

aSelBL

pylS

aSelBL
-

pylS

Methanosarcina mazei Go1
Thermococcales
Thermoplasmales
Ferroplasma acidarmanus fer1

aSelBL

Thermoplasma acidophilum DSM 1728
Thermoplasma volcanium GSS1
Nanoarchaeota

aSelBL

Picrophilus torridus DSM 9790

aSelBL
aSelBL

Nanoarchaeum equitans Kin4-M

-

*Orders that carry either aSelB or aSelBL are expanded to show species and strain (full data in Additional file 2).
**Square brackets indicate divergent or partial sequences (details in text).

Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

Page 5 of 10

Figure 2 Multiple sequence alignment of representative taxa across the aSelB/aSelBL tree. Red boxes show the location of the GTP
binding loops (G1-5). Green boxes show the location of 16S rRNA interaction sites in EF-Tu [28]. Residues in the core of the aminoacyl-binding
pocket of aSelB are boxed in orange [27]. Symbols immediately beneath EF-Tu show sites that make contact with aminoacyl group (open
squares), the acceptor stem (grey circles) and the T stem (filled squares) in the structure of tRNACys-EF-Tu [26]. The colored ruler shows the
domains (red: GTPase, blue: domain II, green: domain III). The C terminal extension of aSelB is not shown. Symbols beneath the alignment show
secondary structure based on aSelBL (PDB ID 2ELF). ‘>’ is sheet and ‘)’ is helix. Asterisked taxa names are those with a crystal structure (Figure 3).

Thaumarchaeota, Crenarchaeota and M. acidiphilum
appear to have arisen as a result of duplication and loss, or
horizontal gene transfer (HGT) from Euryarchaea.
Another possible case of HGT may have occurred in the
lineage to Methanosaeta thermophila, which branches
within the Methanomicrobiales with full BIPP and MLBP
support, instead of its home clade of Methanosarcinales
[17,19], which is otherwise fully supported as a monophyletic group (Figure 1).
BLASTP searches with pyrrolysine synthetase (PylS)
confirmed that pyrrolysine synthesis is limited to the
Methanosarcinales (Table 1). In one Methanosarcinale,
Mathenosaeta thermophila, only a partial PylS sequence
was identified from a short sequence read, as previously
noted [20]. The presence of selenophosphate synthetase
(SelD) in a genome is a signature for selenium utilization [10]. BLASTP searches with SelD confirmed that
selenium utilization is limited to Methanococcales and
Methanopyrus (Table 1). However one divergent SelDlike homolog was also found in Haloarcula marismortui,
as previously identified [21].
Sequence and structure of aSelBL

The most striking feature of the aSelBL subfamily alignment is a GTPase domain that deviates from the classical architecture, characterized by the presence of

GTP-binding motifs (G1-G5) [22]. In particular, G1
(within the phosphate binding (P) loop), which binds
the a- and b-phosphates of both GDP and GTP has
experienced a 4-5 amino acid deletion in some aSelBLs
relative to other EF1 family members (alignment positions 21-25, Figure 2).
The extent of the G domain disruption follows the
phylogeny, with distinct clades in the tree having specific sequence patterns. The most conservative aSelBLs
are the clades of Candidatus Parvarchaeum acidiphilum
ARMAN-4 and -5, and Methanocellales + Methanosarcinales ("conservative aSelBL”, Figure 1). These taxa retain
some conserved residues of the G1 and G4 motifs,
although with less overall sequence conservation in the
motifs than SelB and aSelB (Figure 2). The monophyly
of the more divergent aSelBLs ("divergent aSelBL”,
Figure 1) is well supported in the tree (1.0 BIPP, 96%
MLBP, Figure 1), and independently supported by a
10-14 amino acid indel (alignment positions 140-149,
Figure 2). This region is conserved in conservative
aSelBL, aSelB and other EF1 family members, but
deleted in divergent aSelBLs (Figures 1, 2). Similarly, the
G1 (P loop) region contains a large deletion in the
divergent aSelBLs (alignment positions 20-25, Figure 2),
with the exception of the Crenarchaeota. The latter do
not have the deletion, however sequence homology

Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

between Crenarchaeota and the other aSelBLs is ambiguous in this region, and it is possible that the lack of
the deletion may actually correspond to a secondary
insertion.
Despite the large deletions, regions within the G domain,
specifically sequence motifs G2 and G3, are conserved in
aSelBL, however often with different residues relative to
aSelB (Figure 2). In P-loop GTPases, the threonine of the
G2 “RGITI” motif (within the switch I or the effector
loop) and the glycine of G3 “DXPGH” motif (within
switch II) bind the g-phosphate of GTP, thus discriminating the nature of the bound nucleotide. Switches I and II
are at the core of GTPase function, undergoing conformational changes between GTP and GDP binding states [23].
The “RGITI” G2 motif common to trGTPases is conserved
at the 60% level in aSelBL as “KGTXX” (where X is any
unconserved amino acid). Similarly, “DXPGH” of G3 has a
60% consensus of “E/DPXXX” in aSelBL. The histidine of
G3 (position 86, Figure 2) is unconserved in aSelBL,
although it is critical for GTP hydrolysis, and therefore
universally conserved in other translational GTPases [24].
In EF-Tu, it is the positioning of His84 between Val20 of
the P loop and Ile60 of Switch I by the sarcin/ricin loop
(SRL) of the ribosome that activates the GTPase [24]. The
differential conservation between aSelBL and other translational GTPases suggests that aSelBL has diverged in
GTPase function, both in terms of GTP/GDP discrimination and GTP hydrolysis, but that the divergence is not
due to a general degradation of the GTPase domain. The
switch I and II regions are also involved in binding the
tRNA acceptor stem, providing a physical link between
tRNA and GTP binding to EF-Tu (Figure 2, [25,26]). Thus
the functional divergence in aSelBL in switches I and II
may have involved modification or refinement of tRNAbinding capabilities.
One of the most conservative aSelBLs, M. mazei
aSelBL has been subjected to X-ray analysis. Diffraction
data were collected in 2004, and the aSelBL structure
was determined and deposited in the protein databank
in 2007 (PDB ID 2ELF) [15]. Structural alignment with
aSelB [27] shows that the overall structures are remarkably similar (Figure 3). Indeed, even in the GTPase
domain, the structures are completely superimposable,
with the exception of the switch I region, which is disordered in aSelB [27]. The aSelBLs do not, however, carry
the C terminal extension that is present in all other
SelBs and is required for SECIS or SECIS-binding protein recognition (Figure 3). Thus, aSelBLs are unlikely to
be able to respond to SECIS, or similar elements in the
mRNA.
Domains II and III are much more conserved than the
G domain across aSelB/aSelBL (Figure 2). Structural and
mutational anlaysis shows that in M. maripaludis aSelB,
the core of the aminoacyl-binding pocket is formed by

Page 6 of 10

G5

G4

G1
G domain
GDP

Mg2+

G3

G2

domain 3

domain 2
aSelB C terminal domain

Figure 3 Structural alignment of aSelBL and aSelB. aSelBL ("EFPyl”) from Methanosarcina mazei (PDB ID 2ELF) is shown in bronze,
and aSelB from Methanococcus maripaludis in complex with GDP
(PDB 1WB1) is shown in silver. Blue colouring indicates the location
of the nucleotide binding motifs in aSelB. GDP and the magnesium
ion bound to aSelB are shown as red sticks and a green sphere
respectively. The inset box shows a more detailed view of the G
domain, with the G1 and G3-5 motifs from aSelB labelled. As G2 is
disordered in aSelB, the equivalent region in aSelBL is indicated.

residues Asp191, His192 and Arg247 [27] (orange boxes,
Figure 2). In aSelBL, Asp191 and His192 (positions
226-227, Figure 2) are universally conserved, with the
exception of the longest branched aSelBLs in the tree
(Sulfolobales + M. acidiphilum), which lack His192.
Arg247 (position 285, Figure 2) is universally conserved.
Similarly, sites that make contact with aminoacyl group,
the acceptor stem and (to a lesser extent) the T stem in
the structure of tRNACys-EF-Tu [26] are often well
conserved between aSelB and aSelBL (Figure 2). The
structure of aSelBL can be superposed on that of the
EF-Tu-Cys-tRNACys ternary complex [26], showing that
the aminoacyl binding pocket is also structurally well
conserved (Figure 4). Thus, aminoacyl-tRNA binding
capabilities appear to be retained in aSelBL.
A particularly interesting feature of the aSelB structure
is Phe51 (position 67, Figure 2), which protrudes into
the aminoacyl binding pocket [27]. This phenylalanine,
which can be replaced by tyrosine in some SelBs, is proposed to form a hydrophobic “lid” that protects selenocysteine from oxidation [27]. Such a lid may also be a
feature of aSelBLs, which all carry a Phe or Tyr at position 67 and/or position 68 (Figure 2). Although Tyr33
(at position 68 in Figure 2) is facing away from the
aminoacyl-binding pocket in the aSelBL structure (Figure 4), this residue is proposed to be flexible in aSelB [27]
and its orientation could change upon aa-tRNA-binding.
The structure of aa-tRNA-EF-Tu on the ribosome
reveals specific interactions between the elongation

Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

Tyr33(68)

Page 7 of 10

encode a methionyl-tRNA synthetase upstream of aSelB,
and Methanocella paludicola carries an upstream alanyltRNA synthetase. Additionally, Methanocaldococus Jannaschii and Methanocaldococcus sp. FS406-22 aSelBs are
upstream of the ribosomal protein S10 and elongation factor 1A.

domain 2

Met32(67)
His222(273)
Arg234(281)

Val189(237)

His179(227)
Asp178(226)

Discussion
Origin of aSelBL
G domain
domain 3

tRNACys

Figure 4 Structural alignment of aSelBL and EF-Tu-CystRNACys. aSelBL ("EF-Pyl”, PDB ID 2ELF) is shown in bronze and EFTu-Cys-tRNACys (PDB 1B23) is shown in pale blue and green, for EFTu and tRNA respectively. The inset box shows a more detailed
view of the aminoacyl-binding pocket. Residues lining the pocket
are shown in red for aSelBL, with equivalent EF-Tu sites in blue.
Residue labels use M. mazei numbering, with Figure 2 alignment
numbers in parentheses.

factor and ribosomal RNA [28]. Two patches in particular in domain II of EF-Tu associate with the shoulder
domain of 16S rRNA [28]. Both of these patches are
well conserved in aSelBL (green boxes, Figure 2), suggesting ribosome binding may also have been retained
in aSelBL evolution.
Genomic context

The genomic context of a gene of interest can provide
clues about function, as functionally related genes are
often co-located and co-transcribed in archaea as well as
bacteria [29]. Pyrrolysine biosynthesis and utilisation genes
cluster together [30], as do ribosomal RNA genes [31] and
elongation factors in some archaea [32]. Genes flanking
the aSelBL gene are mostly unconserved in context (Additional file 3). However there are some co-localizing genes
that are transcribed in the same direction as aSelBL with
no intervening gene on the complementary strand and are
conserved in multiple species (Figure 1 Additional file 3).
These encode genes with various functions, and in general,
the significance (if any) of their colocalization with aSelBL
is uncertain. Methanosarcinales carry an ATP-dependent
DNA ligase upstream of aSelB, often following a CBS
(Cystathionine Beta Synthase) domain-containing protein.
The aSelBs of Picrophilus torridus and Ferroplasma acidarmanus are immediately downstream of ferrochelatase
hemH, and downstream of two ribonucleases in Candidatus Parvarchaeum acidiphilum ARMAN-4 and -5 (Figure 1,
Additional file 3). Other conserved flanking genes are
translation-associated. Three of the four Thaumarchaea
(Nitrosopumilus maritimus, Cenarchaeum symbiosum and
uncultured marine crenarchaeote HF4000 APKG7F19)

Given the wide distribution of aSelBL in methanogens,
and its presence in all currently known species of Thaumarchaeaota, the original duplication of the ancestral
aSelB appears to be very ancient, occurring very early in
archaeal evolution, possibly before the archaeal last
common ancestor (aLCA). However, the well supported
nesting of Thaumarchaeote aSelBL within methanogens
appears to suggest HGT. This is a surprising association,
as it would require that the transfer occurred before the
divergence of all currently sampled genera within the
Thaumarchaeaota phylum. The presence of aSelBL in
only Sulfolobales and two Thermoproteales of Crenarchaeota may be due to one or more horizontal transfers
into Crenarchaeota. Alternatively, as there are only
branches with weak to moderate support (0.94-0.96
BIPP, 56-74% MLBP) separating Crenarchaeota and
Thaumarcaheota, aSelBL may have been inherited vertically from the ancestor of Crenarchaeota and Thaumarcaheota. In this case, loss of aSelBL must have occurred
in the Desulforococcale lineage, and at least once more
to account for its absense in Pyrobaculum, Thermofilum
and Thermoproteus genera. Within Euryarchaeota,
aSelBL was also lost or was never present in Halobacteriales, Archaeoglobus, Methanobacteriales, Methanopyrus
(Table 1, Additional file 2). At present, it is impossible
to retrace the origin of aSelBL in all archaea, but it is
likely that both differential loss and HGT have been
involved.
Assuming SelB was present in the LCA of archaea as
previously suggested [11], classical aSelB must also have
been lost in multiple lineages, as it is only found in
Methanococcales and Methanopyrus. As aSelB has
experienced more loss than aSelBL, the function of the
latter seems more critical than the former in a number
of archaea. Indeed, aSelBL is found in some of the smallest genomes of archaea, for example Picrophilus torridus (1.5 megabases) and Methanocaldococcus infernus
(1.3 megabases), and also the largest (M. acetovorans,
5.8 megabases). This suggests that loss of aSelBL has
not been due to general genome size reduction.
Possible functions of aSelBL

Genomic context that includes genes for aminoacyltRNA synthetases, ribosomal protein S10 and EF1A suggests that at least in some cases, aSelBL may still be

Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

involved in some aspect of translation. Indeed the structure of conservative aSelBL is strikingly similar to aSelB
and patterns of sequence conservation suggest that all
aSelBLs are capable of binding the ribosome and aminoacyl-tRNAs. However, the major disruptions in the
GTPase domain raise the question of whether aSelBL
can function as a classical GTPase. Additional differences in the G domains within the aSelBL group also
suggest that its function has diverged to some extent
between conservative and divergent aSelBLs.
Although the aSelBLs arose from a selenocysteinespecific elongation factor, they are unlikely to have
retained this role. Firstly, there is no C terminal extension with which to recognize the SECIS or SECIS-binding proteins. Secondly and more importantly, other
components of the incorporation machinery are not present in most of the aSelBL-containing taxa (Table 1,
[10]), and neither are selenoproteins [33]. aSelBL has
previously been proposed to be a pyrrolysine-specific
elongation factor in Methanosarcinales [14]. However,
in archaea, only Methanosarcinales utilise pyrrolysine
and encode the pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase gene (pylS,
Table 1). Thus, as with the selenocysteine usage distribution, the pyrrolysine distribution is only a subset of
the full aSelBL distribution.
Despite the weight of evidence suggesting that aSelBL
is not a selenocysteine-tRNA elongation factor, the
amino acids responsible for selenocystine specificity are
well conserved in aSelBL. This suggests that aSelBL is
still specific for a single amino acid, with the most likely
candidate being cysteine, given its structural similarity
to selenocysteine. The conserved, positively charged
residues that line the aminoacyl binding pocket of
aSelBL could potentially accommodate the negative thiol
group of cysteine, just as they accommodate the negative selenol group in classical SelBs. Indeed, bacterial
SelB cannot entirely distinguish sulfur from selenium,
and is able to bind Cys-tRNASec tightly enough to
allow for Cys-tRNASec delivery to the ribosome [34].
This raises the possibility that after duplication of the
ancestral aSelB/aSelBL protein, aSelBL was recruited for
a process requiring Cys-tRNA recognition, losing its
SECIS or SBP-binding domain in the process. Following
loss of selenium utilization, aSelB was lost from many
archaea, but aSelBL was maintained in many lineages,
and horizontally transferred to others.
This raises the question of what cysteine-associated
mechanisms(s) aSelBL may be involved with. Cysteine is
overrepresented in methanogenic archaea, which contain
many iron sulfur cluster proteins, coordinating iron via
cysteine-rich motifs [35]. Some methanogenic archaea lack
the canonical class I cysteine-tRNA synthetase (CysRS). In
these archaea, Cysteine is synthesized via a recently discovered tRNA-dependent pathway. O-phosphoseryl-tRNA

Page 8 of 10

synthetase (SepRS) ligates O-phosphoserine to tRNACys,
which is converted to Cys-tRNACys by Sep-tRNA:CystRNA synthase (SepCysC) [36,37]. It has been suggested
that the tRNA-dependent cysteine biosynthesis pathway is
a strategy to protect cysteine from thermal degradation, by
limiting the amount of free cysteine [38]. Indeed, there is a
correlation between the presence of SepRS and high
cysteine content proteomes [39]. Potentially any cysteinyltRNA binding protein may aid in this protective function.
Therefore the role of aSelBL may be primarily to bind and
protect the highly labile cysteine from degredation. Consistent with this, the protective hydrophobic “lid” of the
aminoacyl-binding pocket of aSelB that could protect selenocysteine/cysteine from oxidation also appears to be present in aSelBL. There is an association of aSelBL with high
cysteine methanogens (Additional files 2 and 4). However,
this clustering may simply be due to the common ancestry
of methanogens, as the non-methanogens (Thermoplasmatales, Sulfolobales and Thaumarchaeota) that also
encode aSelBL do not show a similar enrichment in
cysteine (Additional file 4).
With its conservation of ribosome, tRNA and aminoacyl-binding sites, aSelBL may be a specialized elongation
factor for incorporation of cysteine or another amino
acid. Classical EF1 family elongation and initiation factors bind to the ribosome in complex with aa-tRNA and
GTP, with complex formation between the GTPase and
aa-tRNA strongly promoted in the presence of GTP
[40-42]. In accordance with this paradigm, formation of
the bacterial SelB*Sec-tRNASec*GTP ternary complex is
strongly promoted by GTP [5]. However, when tRNASec
is charged with an amino acid other than selenocysteine,
i.e. serine, which acts as a precursor in selenocysteine
biosynthesis [43], the interaction becomes insensitive to
G nucleotides, effectively decoupling the GTPase function from the tRNA binding function [5].
This behaviour of bacterial SelB invites us to speculate
on possible scenarios for the functional evolution of
aSelBL. Following duplication of aSelB, the redundant
aSelBL may have acquired a new aa-tRNA partner. This
would have led to loss of the GTP-dependence of ternary complex formation, due to the absolute selenocysteine specificity of the parental SelB [5]. Loss of the
functionality of the GTPase cycle would have led to a
relaxation of selective pressure on the G domain in
terms of GTP/GDP discrimination, but continued selection for aa-tRNA-binding capabilities, resulting in an
aSelBL that retains the classical GTPase fold (Figure 3).
The conserved motifs G1-5 of the G domain are poorly
conserved in aSelBL, including the histidine of switch II
that is critical for GTP hydrolysis [24]. Thus aSelBL
appears unlikely to hydrolyse GTP on the ribosome via
the same mechanism as other proteins of the translational GTPase superfamily. However, the functionality

Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

of the aSelBL G domain needs to be addressed experimentally, as these proteins may still hydrolyse GTP or
another nucleotide via a hitherto unknown mechanism.
Alternatively, they may be non-enzymatically delivering
aa-tRNA to the ribosome. This would not be without
precedent, as a eukaryotic factor has recently been discovered that delivers aa-tRNA to the ribosome independently of GTP [44]. We also can not exclude the
possibility that aSelBL may be involved in an aspect of
tRNA biochemistry not directly related to protein synthesis. There is a wide variety of tRNA processing
mechanisms in archaea [45]. For example, tRNA splicing, reassembly of split tRNA genes, the addition of a
G-1 residue in tRNAHis and adding the 3’ CCA end, the
three bases required for aminoacylation.

Conclusions
Although the function of aSelBL remains obscure, the
wide distribution of these proteins among diverse archaea
suggests that they have functions of some significance.
This important enzyme has so far been overlooked experimentally, but future characterization may reveal important
mechanisms of translational control in archaea.
Methods
Sequences were retrieved by BLASTP searches against
archaeal genomes in NCBI genomes (Additional file 2).
Methanosarcina Mazei ("EF-Pyl”), Methanospirillum hungatei and Vulcanisaeta distributa aSelBLs were used as
queries, with an E value cut-off of 1e-8. Additional BLASTP
searches were carried out against the NCBI nr database to
retrieve any additional archaeal SelB (aSelB) -like sequences
from incomplete genome projects. This also confirmed that
aSelB-like sequences are only found within archaea. The
identity of homologs as close relatives of SelB, rather than
other paralogs within the translational GTPase (trGTPase)
superfamily was verified by scanning against the translational GTPase database [46]. The resulting “aSelB” data set
contained 60 sequences from 47 archaea. To root the aSelB
phylogeny, 30 additional sequences from bacterial SelB,
elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) and archaeal initiation factor
2g (aIF2g) were retrieved from the translational GTPase
database [46] and added to the data set.
Sequences were aligned using MAFFT v6.234b with
strategy L-INS-I [47] for use in phylogenetic analyses.
Poorly aligned and gap-rich regions of the alignment were
identified by eye and excluded from the analyses. The 60
sequence aSelB and 90 sequence aSelB plus outgroup datasets consisted of 311 and 298 aligned amino acid columns,
respectively. Maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic analysis was carried out with RAxML v 7.0.4 [48] on the
CIPRES portal v2.2 http://www.phylo.org/sub_sections/
portal/. The program was run with the PROTCATWAG
model, with 100 bootstrap replicates. MrBayes v3.1.2 [49],

Page 9 of 10

also on the CIPRES portal v2.2, was run for 2 million generations, sampling every 100 generations, with 2 parallel
runs of 8 chains each, using a gamma rate distribution
with a mixed model that converged on WAG with a posterior probability of 0.99 for both data sets. A consensus
tree was generated after discarding the first 200,000 generations from each run as a burn in. The standard deviation of split frequencies (SDSF) is shown in figure legends.
Genomic context was retrieved from the Entrez gene
database [50], where records were available or via the
CDS records within the NCBI genome entry. Protein
structures were visualized and aligned with MacPyMOL.
Cysteine content was determined for archaeal predicted proteomes downloaded in Fasta format from the
NCBI genome page http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/lproks.cgi. The percentage of cysteine in each proteome was calculated using a Python script.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Baysian inference tree of aSelB and aSelBL with
aIF2g, bacterial SelB and EF-Tu as the outgroup. The tree was
generated from 298 aligned amino acid positions. The SDSF at the end
of the run was 0.02 Branch and tip labels are as per the Figure 1 legend.
Additional file 2: Table showing distribution of aSelBL, aSelB, SelD
and pylS across complete archaeal genomes. Square brackets indicate
divergent or partial sequences (details in text). The percentage cysteine
content of each proteome is indicated.
Additional file 3: Table of upstream and downstream genes from
aSelBL and aSelB. Arrows “>“ show the direction of gene relative aSelBL
or aSelB. The “X” at position 0 indicates the aSelBL or aSelB gene. HP
stands for hypothetical protein, and is followed by additional details if it
shares homology with a particular protein or domain. Genes with names
in bold are transcribed in the same direction as aSelBL. Colours show
homologous conserved flanking genes.
Additional file 4: Analysis of SelBL distribution corellation with
cysteine content in archaeal proteomes. Colored circles represent data
points for individual genomes (see Additional file 2), and the colour code
for taxonomic groups is given in the inset box.

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Andrey Konevega and Alena Paleskava for helpful discussion
of the manuscript. This work was supported by Estonian Science Foundation
grants (codes MJD99 to GCA, and 7616 to VH) and European Regional
Development Fund through the Center of Excellence in Chemical Biology to
VH and TT.
Authors’ contributions
GCA conceived of the study, carried out sequence searching and
phylogenetic analyses, and drafted the manuscript. VH participated in
drafting the manuscript and in the analysis of cysteine content distribution.
TT helped draft the manuscript and participated in the coordination of the
study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 8 November 2010 Accepted: 21 January 2011
Published: 21 January 2011
References
1. Yatime L, Schmitt E, Blanquet S, Mechulam Y: Functional molecular
mapping of archaeal translation initiation factor 2. J Biol Chem 2004,
279:15984-15993.

Atkinson et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:22
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/22

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

Ohtsuki T, Watanabe Y: T-armless tRNAs and elongated elongation factor
Tu. IUBMB Life 2007, 59:68-75.
Ohtsuki T, Sato A, Watanabe Y, Watanabe K: A unique serine-specific
elongation factor Tu found in nematode mitochondria. Nat Struct Biol
2002, 9:669-673.
Keeling P, Fast N, McFadden G: Evolutionary relationship between
translation initiation factor eIF-2gamma and selenocysteine-specific
elongation factor SELB: change of function in translation factors. J Mol
Evol 1998, 47:649-655.
Paleskava A, Konevega AL, Rodnina MV: Thermodynamic and kinetic
framework of selenocysteyl-tRNASec recognition by elongation factor
SelB. J Biol Chem 2009, 285:3014-3020.
Nauser T, Steinmann D, Koppenol WH: Why do proteins use
selenocysteine instead of cysteine? Amino acids .
Kromayer M, Wilting R, Tormay P, Bock A: Domain structure of the
prokaryotic selenocysteine-specific elongation factor SelB. J Mol Biol
1996, 262:413-420.
Copeland PR, Fletcher JE, Carlson BA, Hatfield DL, Driscoll DM: A novel RNA
binding protein, SBP2, is required for the translation of mammalian
selenoprotein mRNAs. EMBO J 2000, 19:306-314.
Donovan J, Copeland PR: Evolutionary history of selenocysteine
incorporation from the perspective of SECIS binding proteins. BMC Evol
Biol 2009, 9:229.
Romero H, Zhang Y, Gladyshev VN, Salinas G: Evolution of selenium
utilization traits. Genome Biol 2005, 6:R66.
Leipe D, Wolf Y, Koonin E, Aravind L: Classification and evolution of
P-loop GTPases and related ATPases. J Mol Biol 2002, 317:41-72.
Atkins JF, Gesteland R: Biochemistry. The 22nd amino acid. Science 2002,
296:1409-1410.
Srinivasan G, James CM, Krzycki JA: Pyrrolysine encoded by UAG in
Archaea: charging of a UAG-decoding specialized tRNA. Science 2002,
296:1459-1462.
Ibba M, Soll D: Aminoacyl-tRNAs: setting the limits of the genetic code.
Genes Dev 2004, 18:731-738.
Crystal Structure Of The Selb-Like Elongation Factor Ef-Pyl From
Methanosarcina Mazei. [http://www.pdb.org/pdb/explore/explore.do?
structureId=2ELF].
Theobald-Dietrich A, Frugier M, Giege R, Rudinger-Thirion J: Atypical
archaeal tRNA pyrrolysine transcript behaves towards EF-Tu as a typical
elongator tRNA. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1091-1096.
Brochier-Armanet C, Boussau B, Gribaldo S, Forterre P: Mesophilic
crenarchaeota: proposal for a third archaeal phylum, the
Thaumarchaeota. Nature reviews Microbiology 2008, 6:245-252.
Baker BJ, Comolli LR, Dick GJ, Hauser LJ, Hyatt D, Dill BD, Land ML,
Verberkmoes NC, Hettich RL, Banfield JF: Enigmatic, ultrasmall,
uncultivated Archaea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:8806-8811.
Gribaldo S, Brochier C: Phylogeny of prokaryotes: does it exist and why
should we care? Research in Microbiology 2009, 160:513-521.
Yuan J, O’Donoghue P, Ambrogelly A, Gundllapalli S, Sherrer RL, Palioura S,
Simonovic M, Soll D: Distinct genetic code expansion strategies for
selenocysteine and pyrrolysine are reflected in different aminoacyl-tRNA
formation systems. FEBS Lett 2010, 584:342-349.
Haft DH, Self WT: Orphan SelD proteins and selenium-dependent
molybdenum hydroxylases. Biol Direct 2008, 3:4.
Bourne H, Sanders D, McCormick F: The GTPase superfamily: conserved
structure and molecular mechanism. Nature 1991, 349:117-127.
Sprang SR: G protein mechanisms: insights from structural analysis. Annu
Rev Biochem 1997, 66:639-678.
Voorhees RM, Schmeing TM, Kelley AC, Ramakrishnan V: The mechanism
for activation of GTP hydrolysis on the ribosome. Science 2010,
330:835-838.
Nissen P, Kjeldgaard M, Thirup S, Polekhina G, Reshetnikova L, Clark BF,
Nyborg J: Crystal structure of the ternary complex of Phe-tRNAPhe, EFTu, and a GTP analog. Science 1995, 270:1464-1472.
Nissen P, Thirup S, Kjeldgaard M, Nyborg J: The crystal structure of CystRNACys-EF-Tu-GDPNP reveals general and specific features in the
ternary complex and in tRNA. Structure 1999, 7:143-156.
Leibundgut M, Frick C, Thanbichler M, Böck A, Ban N: Selenocysteine tRNAspecific elongation factor SelB is a structural chimaera of elongation and
initiation factors. EMBO J 2005, 24:11-22.

Page 10 of 10

28. Schmeing TM, Voorhees RM, Kelley AC, Gao YG, Murphy FVt, Weir JR,
Ramakrishnan V: The crystal structure of the ribosome bound to EF-Tu
and aminoacyl-tRNA. Science 2009, 326:688-694.
29. Price M, Arkin A, Alm E: The life-cycle of operons. PLoS Genet 2006, 2:e96.
30. Zhang Y, Baranov PV, Atkins JF, Gladyshev VN: Pyrrolysine and
selenocysteine use dissimilar decoding strategies. J Biol Chem 2005,
280:20740-20751.
31. Garrett RA, Dalgaard J, Larsen N, Kjems J, Mankin AS: Archaeal rRNA
operons. Trends Biochem Sci 1991, 16:22-26.
32. Lechner K, Heller G, Bock A: Organization and nucleotide sequence of a
transcriptional unit of Methanococcus vannielii comprising genes for
protein synthesis elongation factors and ribosomal proteins. J Mol Evol
1989, 29:20-27.
33. Stock T, Rother M: Selenoproteins in Archaea and Gram-positive bacteria.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2009, 1790:1520-1532.
34. Yuan J, Hohn MJ, Sherrer RL, Palioura S, Su D, Soll D: A tRNA-dependent
cysteine biosynthesis enzyme recognizes the selenocysteine-specific
tRNA in Escherichia coli. FEBS Lett 2010, 584:2857-2861.
35. Major TA, Burd H, Whitman WB: Abundance of 4Fe-4S motifs in the
genomes of methanogens and other prokaryotes. FEMS Microbiol Lett
2004, 239:117-123.
36. Sauerwald A, Zhu W, Major TA, Roy H, Palioura S, Jahn D, Whitman WB,
Yates JR, Ibba M, Soll D: RNA-dependent cysteine biosynthesis in archaea.
Science 2005, 307:1969-1972.
37. O’Donoghue P, Sethi A, Woese CR, Luthey-Schulten ZA: The evolutionary
history of Cys-tRNACys formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:19003-19008.
38. Qu G, Wang W, Chen LL, Qian SS, Zhang HY: tRNA-dependent cysteine
biosynthetic pathway represents a strategy to increase cysteine
contents by preventing it from thermal degradation: thermal adaptation
of methanogenic archaea ancestor. J Biomol Struct Dyn 2009, 27:111-114.
39. Klipcan L, Frenkel-Morgenstern M, Safro MG: Presence of tRNA-dependent
pathways correlates with high cysteine content in methanogenic
Archaea. Trends Genet 2008, 24:59-63.
40. Dell VA, Miller DL, Johnson AE: Effects of nucleotide- and aurodoxinduced changes in elongation factor Tu conformation upon its
interactions with aminoacyl transfer RNA. A fluorescence study.
Biochemistry 1990, 29:1757-1763.
41. Kapp LD, Lorsch JR: GTP-dependent recognition of the methionine
moiety on initiator tRNA by translation factor eIF2. J Mol Biol 2004,
335:923-936.
42. Gromadski KB, Schummer T, Stromgaard A, Knudsen CR, Kinzy TG,
Rodnina MV: Kinetics of the interactions between yeast elongation
factors 1A and 1Balpha, guanine nucleotides, and aminoacyl-tRNA. J Biol
Chem 2007, 282:35629-35637.
43. Leinfelder W, Zehelein E, Mandrand-Berthelot MA, Bock A: Gene for a novel
tRNA species that accepts L-serine and cotranslationally inserts
selenocysteine. Nature 1988, 331:723-725.
44. Dmitriev SE, Terenin IM, Andreev DE, Ivanov PA, Dunaevsky JE, Merrick WC,
Shatsky IN: GTP-independent tRNA delivery to the ribosomal P-site by a
novel eukaryotic translation factor. J Biol Chem 2010, 285:26779-26787.
45. Heinemann IU, Soll D, Randau L: Transfer RNA processing in archaea:
Unusual pathways and enzymes. FEBS letters 2010, 584:303-309.
46. Atkinson G, Baldauf S: Evolution of the Translational GTPase Superfamily.
J Biomolecular Structure & Dynamics 2009, 26:841-842.
47. Katoh K, Kuma K, Toh H, Miyata T: MAFFT version 5: improvement in
accuracy of multiple sequence alignment. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:511-518.
48. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
49. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F: MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic
trees. Bioinformatics 2001, 17:754-755.
50. Maglott D, Ostell J, Pruitt K, Tatusova T: Entrez Gene: gene-centered
information at NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D26-31.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-22
Cite this article as: Atkinson et al.: An ancient family of SelB elongation
factor-like proteins with a broad but disjunct distribution across
archaea. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:22.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
