<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>An arthropod cis-regulatory element functioning in sensory organ precursor development dates back to the Cambrian</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010 8:127. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-127"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Savita Ayyar"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

An arthropod cis-regulatory element functioning
in sensory organ precursor development dates
back to the Cambrian
Savita Ayyar1, Barbara Negre1, Pat Simpson1, Angelika Stollewerk2*

Abstract
Background: An increasing number of publications demonstrate conservation of function of cis-regulatory
elements without sequence similarity. In invertebrates such functional conservation has only been shown for
closely related species. Here we demonstrate the existence of an ancient arthropod regulatory element that
functions during the selection of neural precursors. The activity of genes of the achaete-scute (ac-sc) family endows
cells with neural potential. An essential, conserved characteristic of proneural genes is their ability to restrict their
own activity to single or a small number of progenitor cells from their initially broad domains of expression. This is
achieved through a process called lateral inhibition. A regulatory element, the sensory organ precursor enhancer
(SOPE), is required for this process. First identified in Drosophila, the SOPE contains discrete binding sites for four
regulatory factors. The SOPE of the Drosophila asense gene is situated in the 5’ UTR.
Results: Through a manual comparison of consensus binding site sequences we have been able to identify a
SOPE in UTR sequences of asense-like genes in species belonging to all four arthropod groups (Crustacea,
Myriapoda, Chelicerata and Insecta). The SOPEs of the spider Cupiennius salei and the insect Tribolium castaneum
are shown to be functional in transgenic Drosophila. This would place the origin of this regulatory sequence as far
back as the last common ancestor of the Arthropoda, that is, in the Cambrian, 550 million years ago.
Conclusions: The SOPE is not detectable by inter-specific sequence comparison, raising the possibility that other
ancient regulatory modules in invertebrates might have escaped detection.

Background
The initiation of development of the nervous system in
vertebrates and higher invertebrates involves the activity
of proneural genes that encode transcription factors of
the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) class [1]. Their
expression in the neuroectoderm endows cells with
neural potential and also contributes to the specification
of neuronal identity. Proneural genes are conserved
throughout the animal kingdom and fall into two main
classes: the achaete-scute (ac-sc) and atonal (ato) gene
families. They are initially expressed during development
in groups/domains of equivalent neuroectodermal cells.
An essential, conserved characteristic of proneural genes
is their ability to restrict their own activity to single or a
* Correspondence: a.stollewerk@qmul.ac.uk
2
School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of
London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

small number of progenitor cells within these domains
[1]. This is achieved through a process called lateral
inhibition, mediated by Notch signaling [2]. The Notch
ligand Delta is up-regulated by proneural proteins in
future neural precursors and activates the Notch signaling cascade in neighboring cells, resulting in down-regulation of proneural gene expression [3,4]. Repression of
proneural genes is mediated by the products of the
Notch target genes Hairy/Enhancer of split. This ancient
regulatory network was probably inherited from the earliest Metazoa [5].
Regulatory sequences involved in the restriction of
proneural gene expression from proneural domains to
selected neural precursors have mostly been studied in
Drosophila melanogaster, in particular with respect to
the ac-sc genes and their role in the development of
sensory bristles of the adult peripheral nervous system.
The D. melanogaster ac-sc gene complex (AS-C)

© 2010 Ayyar et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

comprises four genes, three of which are required for
bristle development. ac and sc are expressed in discrete
proneural clusters through the activity of a number of
independently acting cis-regulatory modules that are
scattered throughout the approximately 150 kb of the
AS-C and respond to positional cues [6-9]. Subsequently, the expression of ac and sc refines to single
sensory organ precursors (SOPs) where high levels of
Ac/Sc activate the third gene, asense (ase), whose
expression is limited to SOPs [10-13]. Lateral inhibition
and SOP expression is mediated by a specific cis-regulatory element, the SOP enhancer (SOPE) [14]. The SOPE
contains binding sites for a number of transcription factors. Auto-regulation in the SOP relies on E boxes,
binding sites for Ac, Sc and Ase, which activate their
own transcription [15]. The E boxes also mediate
repression in cells not selected to be SOPs: products of
the Enhancer of split (E(spl)) genes activated by Notch
signaling associate with Ac-Sc, leading to transcriptional
repression [16]. Binding sites for NF-B proteins, a
boxes, are present and also mediate both activation and
repression [14,17]. It is likely that low levels of NF-B
and high levels of Ac-Sc activate, whereas high levels of
NF-B and low levels of Ac-Sc repress, the neural program [18]. In addition, the SOPEs contain AT-rich
sequences, b boxes, of unknown function and N boxes
that, in the case of the ac-SOPE, have been shown to
bind the transcriptional repressor Hairy [14,15,19,20].
All three genes bear their own SOPE. That of ac is in
the promoter close to the transcription start site and
differs from the others in being devoid of a boxes
(unpublished observations, P. Simpson) [15,19]. It drives
expression of reporter genes first in proneural domains
and then in SOPs [15,19]. The SOPE of sc, positioned 3
kb upstream of the transcriptional start site, and that of
ase, positioned in the 5’ UTR, drive expression of reporter genes exclusively in the SOP [13,14]. The SOPEs are
strongly conserved in other Drosophilidae.
Proneural genes of both the ac-sc and ato classes have
undergone independent duplication events in different
taxa. The ato gene family is much expanded in vertebrates whereas duplication of ac-sc genes has taken
place in different groups of arthropods [21-24]. Previous
data from available insect genomes have shown that
while ac-sc genes have undergone a number of duplication events, all species analyzed bear a single ase gene.
Conservation of both specific amino acid sequences and
the SOPE in the 5’ UTR suggest that the insect ase
genes are derived from a common ancestor [22]. Here
we show that achaete-scute homologue (ASH) and aselike genes are present in arthropods other than insects.
We present evidence that gene duplications separating
proneural from precursor-specific (ase-like) functions
possibly occurred independently in different arthropod

Page 2 of 12

groups and that a SOPE in UTR sequences in ase-like
genes of all groups has been inherited from an ancestral
ASH/ase precursor gene in the last common ancestor of
the Arthropoda.

Results
Conservation of coding sequences suggest duplication
and subfunctionalization of an ancestral arthropod gene
into proneural and ase-like functions

A highly conserved bHLH domain characterizes proteins encoded by the ac-sc gene family, but outside this
domain conservation is very low. Recently, two conserved domains were identified that, in insects, enable a
distinction to be made between ASH genes that are
expressed in proneural domains, called henceforth proneural ASH genes, and the sensory organ precursorspecific ase genes [22]. Firstly, proteins encoded by ASH
genes contain a 16 amino acid carboxy-terminal domain
(PDDEELLDYISWWQQQ) that is characteristic of all
insect ASH proteins but is less well conserved in Ase
proteins (50% identity or less). Secondly, Ase proteins
have a characteristic five amino acid motif (hydrophobic-Lys-polar-Glu-hydrophobic) that is absent in all
proneural ASH proteins outside the Diptera. These
motifs allowed a clear subdivision of the ASH and ase
genes in different orders of insects, which is upheld by
phylogenetic analysis [22,25]. A single ase gene (but a
variable number of ASH genes) is present in each species analyzed.
In order to classify proneural and precursor-specific
genes in other arthropod groups, we applied the above
criteria to recently published sequences. Two ASH genes
were described in the crustacean Triops longicaudatus
[24]. The authors show that the deduced amino acid
sequence of Tl-ASH1 bears the ASH carboxy-terminal
domain, while this sequence is not conserved in TlASH2. We identified the Ase motif in Tl-ASH2, confirming that this gene is in fact an asense orthologue
(Figure 1). Furthermore, we detected single ASH and ase
orthologues, Dpu-ASH and Dpu-ase, in the Daphnia
pulex genome (Daphnia Genome Consortium), which
can clearly be distinguished by the presence of the
respective domains (Figure 1). The spider Cupiennius
salei (chelicerate) displays two ASH orthologues [23] but
sequence analysis does not unambiguously distinguish a
bona fide ase gene in this species. The carboxy-terminal
domain of CsASH1 displays a greater similarity to that
of insect and crustacean ASH proteins (56% amino acid
identity) than does that of CsASH2 (30%). However,
neither CsASH1 nor CsASH2 contain the five amino
acid motif characteristic of Ase (Figure 1). A single
orthologue has been identified in each of the myriapods
Glomeris marginata [26] and Strigamia maritima (Strigamia Genome Project, Human Genome Sequencing

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

Page 3 of 12

Figure 1 Conserved domains of the arthropod ASH and Ase proteins. Alignment of the bHLH domain, Ase motif and carboxy-terminal
motif of ASH and Ase. Am, Apis mellifera; Cs, Cupiennius salei; Dm, Drosophila melanogasster; Dp, Daphnia pulex; Gm, Glomeris marginata; Sm,
Strigamia maritima; Tc, Tribolium castaneum.

Consortium, Baylor College). We are confident that
there is only a single copy present in the S. maritima
genome (see Materials and methods). They show 50%
and 62% identity with the insect ASH carboxy-terminal
domain, respectively, and 78% identity with the carboxyterminal domain of CsASH1. They lack the Ase-specific
motif and would appear to be ASH genes.
Earlier analyses suggested that the two ASH genes of
T. longicaudatus and of C. salei arose from duplication
events that are independent from those of insects and
from each other [23,24]. We have performed a new phylogenetic analysis that includes the D. pulex sequences
that were not previously available. All ASH and ase
genes from the insects D. melanogaster and Tribolium
castaneum, the crustaceans T. longicaudatus and
D. pulex, the chelicerate C. salei and the myriapods
G. marginata and S. maritima were included. The phylogenetic tree shows that the ASH and Ase proteins of
insects group together, as do those of crustaceans, while
the ASH proteins of myriapods and of chelicerates are
arranged in a single group (Figure 2). Both the insect
and the crustacean proteins are clearly subdivided into
the ASH and Ase groups, that is, T. castaneum Ase
groups with D. melanogaster Ase and T. castaneum
ASH is arranged in a group with D. melanogaster Ac, Sc
and the proneural protein Lethal of Scute (L’sc).
Similarly, the D. pulex Dpu-Ase protein groups with
T. longicaudatus Tl-ASH2, and Tl-ASH1 groups with
Dpu-ASH, rather than with the insect orthologues (Figure 2). The spider CsASH1 and CsASH2 are arranged
in a group with the single myriapod homologues (Figure
2). The analysis suggests independent duplication events
in insects, crustaceans and chelicerates. However, two
features confound the phylogenetic inference. First, the
ASH and ase genes in the individual arthropod groups

might have evolved at different rates - for example, a
faster evolution of insect ASH and ase genes would prevent them from grouping with their crustacean orthologues. Second, the myriapod and the chelicerate ASH
genes might group together because they have retained
many ancestral homologies.
To gain further insight into patterns of gene duplication, we have directly tested three different tree topologies in support of: a single ancestral duplication giving
an ASH-like and an ase-like gene at the base of the
arthropods; independent duplications at the base of
the insect-crustacean lineage and of the cheliceratemyriapod branch; and independent duplications at the
base of each of the insect, crustacean and chelicerate
lineages. The Shinodaira-Hasegawa test discards the
first possibility. It supports a single duplication in the
chelicerate-myriapod branch. However, it cannot distinguish whether a duplication took place in the last common ancestor of insects and crustaceans or whether it
occurred independently in each of these groups. The
presence of the Ase-specific domain (which was not
used for construction of the phylogenetic tree), together
with the position of the ase-SOPE (see below), favors a
single duplication common to insects and crustaceans.
Thus, within the limits of this analysis, which employs
only very short sequences (66 amino acids), the data
suggest an independent ASH/ase-like duplication in
insects/crustaceans and chelicerates.
C. salei CsASH2 rescues ase-specific defects in D.
melanogaster

Insect AS-C genes are also distinguishable by their
expression patterns: ASH genes are expressed in proneural domains prior to the segregation of neural precursors, in contrast to the ase genes, which are only

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

Page 4 of 12

Figure 2 Phylogenetic analysis of the arthropod ASH and Ase-like proteins. ASH and Ase of insects group together, as do those of
crustaceans, while the ASH proteins of myriapods and of chelicerates are arranged in a single group. Both the insect and the crustacean
proteins are clearly subdivided into ASH and Ase groups. The spider proteins CsASH1 and CsASH2 are arranged in a group with the single
myriapod orthologues. Cs, Cupiennius salei; Dm, Drosophila melanogaster; Dp, Daphnia pulex; Gm, Glomeris marginata; Sm, Strigamia maritima; Tc,
Tribolium castaneum.

expressed in neural precursors after they have been
singled out [7,8,11,12,27,28]. In a similar fashion, the
crustacean proneural gene Tl-ASH1 was shown to be
expressed in clusters of cells, whereas Tl-ASH2 is
expressed later in only a subset of the Tl-ASH-expressing cells [24], providing further evidence that Tl-ASH2
is likely to be an ase orthologue. Interestingly, in the
spider, CsAHS1 is expressed in proneural domains
whereas expression of CsASH2 is restricted to neural
precursors (groups of precursors, instead of single
cells, are formed in this species [23]). This suggests
that CsASH2 might carry out an ase-like function. We
therefore investigated whether CsASH2 can rescue the
specific defects caused by a loss of ase activity in
D. melanogaster.

Flies lacking ase function exhibit only a mild phenotype because activity of ac, sc and senseless compensates
for most of the defects [11,13,29,30]. However, one
defect is specific to ase: differentiation of the stout
mechanosensory bristles of the triple row of bristles on
the anterior wing margin is impaired [11,13]. In ase 1
mutant flies these bristles show variable defects that
include a split shaft, two to three shafts arising from a
single socket, an empty socket or a complete duplication
(Figure 3H-K). When over-expressed, Dm-ase, but
neither Dm-ac nor Dm-sc, has been shown to rescue
these defects [11,13]. We found that CsASH2, as well as
Tc-ase, display a rescuing activity comparable to that of
Dm-ase (Figure 3A-G). The number of defective bristles
in ase1 flies is reduced from an average of 9.7 to 2.5, 4.9

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

Page 5 of 12

Figure 3 C. salei CsASH2 and T. castaneum ase can both rescue the bristle phenotype in D. melanogaster ase1 mutants. (A) Bar chart
showing the extent to which Dm-ase, Tc-ase and CsASH2 can rescue the phenotype when ectopically expressed (hsp70Gal4 > UAS Dm-sc/Dmase/Tc-ase/CsASH2). In contrast, Dm-sc enhances the ase1 phenotype (hsp70Gal4 > UAS Dm-sc). The number of bristles affected is given on the
x-axis. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean (see Additional file 1 for details). (B-G) Abnormally differentiated bristles (asterisks) on
the anterior wing margin are shown for the genotypes indicated (genotypes as in (A)). The number of abnormal bristles is enhanced in (D) and
reduced in (F, E, G). (H-K) Detail of the abnormalities at higher magnification.

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

and 3.9 in flies expressing Dm-ase, Tc-ase and CsASH2,
respectively (Figure 3A-G; Additional file 1). CsASH2
can therefore substitute for functions specific to Dmase, which suggests that it might carry out precursorspecific ase-like functions in the spider.
ase-like genes of insects, crustaceans and chelicerates
and the ASH genes of myriapods bear a conserved
regulatory sequence in the UTR

The ase gene of D. melanogaster bears a cis-regulatory
sequence in the 5’ UTR, the SOPE, that drives expression of a reporter gene in the SOP [13]. Although
equivalent enhancer elements drive expression of sc and
ac in SOPs, they are located upstream of the transcription start site [14,15,19]. Genome analysis indicates that
the ase SOPE is conserved in the 5’ UTR of the ase
gene of other insects whereas no such sequence is
found in the transcribed regions of insect proneural
ASH genes [22]. The presence of a SOPE in the UTR
therefore provides another feature with which to distinguish between ASH and ase-like genes.
The SOPE bears binding sites for four specific transcription factors. Interestingly, we identified clusters of
the relevant binding sites in the UTR of D. pulex ase
and in CsASH2 of C. salei. The putative SOPE is located
in the 5’ UTR of Dpu-ase and in the 3’ UTR of CsASH2.
No such sequence is found in the UTR of CsASH1. Individual binding sites were identified by manual comparison of consensus sequences (Figure 4; Additional file 2).
The Dm-ase SOPE, located 144 bp upstream of the start
codon, contains four E boxes, two a boxes, one b box
and one N box. We identified a putative SOPE in an
additional insect, T. castaneum, which covers 1,145 bp
of the 5’ UTR starting 95 bp upstream of the ase open
reading frame (ORF). It contains three E boxes, two a,

Page 6 of 12

five b and one N box (Figure 4; Additional file 2). In
D. pulex the putative SOPE is located 1,048 bp upstream
of the ase ORF and extends over 882 bp in the presumptive 5’ UTR. One E box, one a box, two b boxes
and one N box are present in this region (Figure 4;
Additional file 2). The putative SOPE of C. salei
CsASH2 is also close to the ORF but is located in the 3’
UTR, between 3 bp and 249 bp downstream of the stop
codon. It contains three E boxes, one a box, and one
b box. No N box can be identified in this species
(Figure 4; Additional file 2).
Remarkably, we also detected a putative SOPE in the
5’ UTR of the single S. maritima ASH gene (Strigamia
Genome Project, Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, Baylor College). It covers the region between 36
and 601 bp upstream of the ORF and contains four E
boxes, three a boxes, five b boxes and one N box (Figure 4; Additional file 2). These data suggest that a cisregulatory element located in the UTR, the SOPE, is
conserved in the ase-like genes of insects, crustaceans
and chelicerates and in the ASH gene of myriapods.
In order to identify conserved motifs and demonstrate
the level of conservation, we generated sequence ‘logos’
[31] based on the aligned sequences of the individual
arthropod SOPE boxes (Additional file 3). The a box
shows the most degenerate consensus sequence, with
conservation limited to the central part of the NF-B
binding site. However, a clear motif is recovered for the
E, b and N boxes. We could not detect a significant
conservation of nucleotides surrounding the motifs of
the boxes (Additional file 3). In line with previous publications, we identified the E box ‘logo’ as CAGCTG. This
consensus sequence binds strongly to daughterless-AS-C
heterodimers. Moreover, unlike ASC homodimers,
the binding of Ase-Ase homodimers to this site was

Figure 4 Arrangement of transcription factor binding sites in the UTR of the arthropod ase-like genes. Note that the SOPE covers a
larger area in D. pulex (882 bp) and in S. maritima (1,052 bp) compared to D. melanogaster (297 bp), T. castaneum (247 bp) and C. salei (246 bp).
See text for details. Yellow, E box; green, b box; pink, a box; blue, N box. Dm, D. melanogaster; Tc, T. castaneum; Dp, D. pulex; Cs, C. salei; Sm, S.
maritima.

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

observed [13]. It is interesting to note that E boxes with
the CAGCTG logo are present once in each arthropod
species, although, overall, the motif is present in only 5
of the 17 E boxes identified.
The SOPE of C. salei CsAHS2 and T. castaneum ase are
functional in D. melanogaster

The Dm-ase SOPE had been shown to display enhancer
activity when placed upstream of an hsp70 promoter
and a reporter gene [13]. To test its effects when positioned in the UTR, we generated transgenic lines carrying UAS constructs containing either the entire
transcribed region (including the UTR sequences) or
merely the ORF. Since reporter gene fusion constructs
that cover different regions upstream of the ORF only
restrict expression to single SOPs if the 560-bp UTR
containing the SOPE is present [13], the ORF+SOPE
constructs should reduce the number of bristles. Three
independent lines of each construct were crossed to
four different Gal4 lines, each of which drives expression in all or part of the D. melanogaster notum. As
expected, both transgenes caused the development of
ectopic bristles but their number was significantly
reduced in the construct containing the entire UTR.
Flies expressing the UAS-Dm-ase ORF displayed, in
total, an average of 10.9 ectopic bristles, compared with
7.3 in flies expressing the UAS-Dm-ase ORF+SOPE
(Figure 5A-C; Additional file 4). We therefore conclude
that the SOPE regulates gene activity from its position
in the UTR and that, when transcription is initiated
from exogenous UAS sequences, it functions to dampen
transcription. This is consistent with its proposed function to restrict proneural gene activity from broad
expression domains to single neural progenitors.
To see whether the strong conservation of binding
sites in the UTR of other arthropod ase-like genes is
meaningful, we tested the putative SOPEs of T. castaneum and C. salei for function in transgenic flies. Transgenic lines were made containing UAS sequences and
the entire transcribed regions or just the ORFs of Tc-ase
and CsASH2. Three independent lines of each construct
were crossed to the same four Gal4 lines as above. The
number of ectopic bristles was used to measure activity.
Flies expressing the UAS-Tc-ase ORF displayed an average of 6.0 ectopic bristles, and those expressing UASTc-ase ORF+SOPE an average of 4.4 (Figure 5A, D, E;
Additional file 4). Flies expressing the UAS-CsASH2
ORF displayed an average of 14.3 ectopic bristles, and
those expressing UAS-CsASH2 ORF+SOPE an average
of 3.4 (Figure 5A, F, G; Additional file 4, misexpression
experiment). These data indicate that the SOPEs of
T. castaneum and C. salei function in a similar fashion
to that of D. melanogaster, consistent with the conservation of binding sites in these sequences.

Page 7 of 12

Discussion
Subfunctionalization and divergence of ASH and
ase-like genes

Most new genes are thought to arise through gene
duplication because of the need to evolve simultaneously
signals for regulation and transcript processing. Our
data suggest that gene duplications in individual arthropod lineages have led to the segregation of proneural
(ASH) and precursor-specific (ase-like) functions of a
single ancestral gene. We show here that bona fide ase
genes are present in crustaceans. Phylogenetic analysis
was unable to resolve whether the ase and ASH genes of
insects and crustaceans are derived from the duplication
of an ancestral gene in the last common ancestor of
both groups or rather from independent duplications in
the individual lineages. However, the presence of the
Ase motif in both insect and crustacean ase genes
would support a common origin. This is consistent with
the Tetraconata hypothesis, which suggests a sister
group relationship of insects and crustaceans [32]. We
are confident that the myriapod S. maritima has a single
ASH gene. This gene would therefore need to perform
both proneural (ASH) and precursor-specific (ase) functions. This is likely to reflect the ancestral state. Myriapod and chelicerate ASH genes group together in our
phylogenetic analysis. We think this might simply reflect
the retention in both groups of many ancestral homologies. Although the phylogenetic position of myriapods is
still under debate, most phylogenies are consistent with
the Mandibulata hypothesis, which proposes a sister
group relationship of Myriapoda and Tetraconata
(insects and crustaceans) [33]. The chelicerate lineage
represents a basal branch of the arthropods. An independent duplication in chelicerates resulting in two acsc orthologues is supported by our phylogenetic analysis.
Sequence comparison based on the conserved domains
of the insect and crustacean genes does not distinguish
a proneural ASH and a precursor-specific ase gene.
However, CsASH2 is expressed exclusively in neural precursors and contains an SOPE in the transcript. This,
together with its ability to rescue the ase mutant phenotype in D. melanogaster, strongly suggests that CsASH2
carries out an ase-like function. Together, the data support the hypothesis of subfunctionalization and gradual
divergence of arthropod ASH and ase-like functions.
In D. melangaster, the SOPE has been shown to mediate the process of refining transcription from a field of
cells to single, spaced precursors [14]. The ability to
restrict their own transcription to subsets of progenitors
is the most highly conserved process associated with
proneural genes throughout the animal kingdom [1].
Our data suggest that, at least in arthropods, this process is linked to the presence of the SOPE. It has been
shown recently that upstream fragments outside of the

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

Page 8 of 12

Figure 5 Comparison of the number of ectopic bristles (macrochaetes) displayed by transgenic flies after ectopic expression. UAS
constructs containing D. melanogaster ase, T. castenum ase and C. salei CsASH2 (ORF alone or the entire transcribed region (ORF+SOPE) of ase or
CsASH2) were each crossed to four different Gal4 drivers allowing expression in different parts of the thorax (see Materials and methods). (A) The
number of ectopic bristles was counted in the respective Gal4 expression domains of each of the driver lines. Columns give the number of
ectopic bristles and data from all four crosses have been pooled for each UAS construct (UAS-ORF+SOPE or UAS-ORF). The number of ectopic
bristles is significantly reduced in flies carrying the UAS-ORF+SOPE constructs (see Additional file 4 for details). The error bars give the standard
error of the mean. (B-G) Thoraces illustrating the phenotypes obtained: (B, C) ptc-Gal4 > UAS Dm-ase; (D, E) sca-Gal4 > UAS Tc-ase; (F, G) MD806Gal4 > UAS CsASH2.

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

SOPE do not drive reporter gene expression in single
cells. Furthermore, mutations of the E boxes abolish the
activity of the SOPE enhancer [13]. Thus, we are confident that the reduction of ectopic bristles in our transgenic flies containing the ORF+SOPE results from the
activity of the SOPE enhancer. In view of the high level
of conservation of the specific binding sites, it is likely
that it requires not only auto-regulation and Notchmediated lateral inhibition but also an important contribution from NF-B signaling [14,18]. A unique feature
of the ase-like genes is the location of the SOPE in the
UTR of the transcript. The single ASH gene of S. maritima has retained the SOPE in the transcript. If S. maritima does indeed reflect the ancestral condition, it
would indicate that the SOPE was present in the UTR
of the ancestral ASH/ase precursor gene. This would
place the origin of this regulatory sequence as far back
as the last common ancestor of the Arthropoda, that is,
in the Cambrian, 550 million years ago.
Position of the SOPE and evolution of proneural gene
expression

It appears that in both chelicerates and Tetraconata, the
SOPE has been retained in the transcript of the ase-like
gene after duplication. In D. melanogaster we know that
the ASH duplicates are also regulated by a SOPE but
that it has been dislocated from the transcription unit.
Like those of Diptera, expression of the ASH genes of
crustaceans and spiders is refined from initially broad
domains to neural precursors, suggesting that they too
are subject to lateral inhibition and the activity of a
SOPE [23,24,34]. Therefore, in these species also, a
SOPE might reside amongst regulatory sequences outside the transcription unit of the ASH genes.
The fact that the SOPE is found in the UTR of all aselike genes, including the single myriapod orthologue,
whether 5’ or 3’, suggests that this location is important.
One possible reason is that it is protected here and is
less likely to become separated from the gene since rearrangement would more often lead to mutations and
loss of gene activity. Moreover, if the gene comes under
the influence of any other regulatory sequences (outside
the transcription unit) the SOPE would still be active.
Analysis of the activity of the transgenes whose transcription is initiated by Gal4 > UAS sequences indicates
that the presence of the SOPE in the UTR dampens
activity. Perhaps the protected location is a failsafe
mechanism to ensure refinement of expression to single
progenitors. In this context it is interesting to note that
we identified a putative SOPE enhancer in the 5’ UTR
of senseless, another gene whose expression becomes
restricted to SOPs [29,35] (Additional file 5). Alternatively, the SOPE might have been retained in the UTR
because it covers an area that contains additional

Page 9 of 12

elements for controlling post-transcriptional regulation
such as RNA folding. The predicted secondary structure
(using the RNAfold WebServer [36]) of the UTRs shows
characteristic structures such as stem-loops and pseudoknots (Additional file 6). However, whether these
arrangements exert influence on the regulation of the
ase-like genes remains to be shown.
Separation of the SOPE from the transcription unit in
ASH genes presumably occurred during (or after) duplication of the ancestral ASH/ase precursor gene. In
D. melanogastser, the Dm-sc SOPE is 3 kb upstream of
the transcription unit and, furthermore, another cis-regulatory element is situated between the SOPE and the
transcription start site [14,37]. Dm-sc is subject to regulatory input from an array of independently acting
enhancer elements, in addition to the SOPE, each of
which has to be brought into close proximity to the
basal promoter to drive expression in distinct regions
[9,38,39]. One consequence of this is that the SOPE is
probably only active at certain times. In contrast, the
Dm-ase SOPE would continuously modulate the rate of
transcription after initiation from the basal promoter by
virtue of its position in the UTR.
After duplication of the ancestral ASH/ase gene, the
SOPE appears to have been disconnected from the
transcript of the duplicate that becomes the proneural
ASH. This event is likely to have occurred before the
divergence of insects and crustaceans. A similar occurrence might have taken place convergently in chelicerates. We suggest that disconnection of the SOPE from
the transcript has facilitated the greater complexity
of spatial and temporal regulation that underlies the
diversity of patterning of the nervous system in arthropods. This could have unfolded during evolution as
follows. The common ancestor of the Arthropoda
probably had a single ASH/ase-like gene, similar to
that of the extant myriapods. It would have been
expressed ubiquitously over the neuro-epithelium and
subsequently restricted to single precursors. This
ancestral expression pattern can be observed today in
Onychophora, the closest relative of the arthropods
(B. J. Erkisson and A Stollewerk, unpublished). Transcriptional modulation would have been mediated by
the SOPE, located in a protected position in UTR
sequences. Gene duplication followed by subfunctionalization resulted in proneural ASH and precursor-specific ase-like genes independently in Tetraconata and
chelicerates. Retention of the SOPE in the transcript of
ase-like genes ensures its expression in SOPs. Loss of
the SOPE from the transcript allowed ASH expression
to be spatially regulated by other (non-transcribed) cisregulatory sequences. An independent transcriptional
regulation would not be effective in the ase-like genes
because of the presence of the SOPE in the UTR.

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

Cis-regulatory elements for spatial expression might
have been acquired more recently. Indeed, the most
complex regulation of ASH genes is seen in cyclorraphous flies, where expression in small clusters of cells
at precise positions prefigures the development of
large sensory bristles, macrochaetes. Macrochaetes are
an evolutionary novelty of higher flies and are found
in species-specific patterns. In D. melanogaster the
patterns rely on an array of independently acting cisregulatory elements [9] that are likely to have arisen in
the Cyclorrapha along with the additional duplication
events of the ancestral ASH gene [25,40].

Conclusions
An increasing number of publications demonstrate
conservation of function of cis-regulatory elements
without sequence similarity (reviewed by [41]). In vertebrates the functional conservation even spans the
evolutionary distance between humans and zebrafish
[42]. In invertebrates such functional conservation has
only been shown for closely related species that
diverged from their common ancestor not longer than
25 to 60 million years ago (for example, [43,44]). Our
results demonstrate for the first time the existence of
an ancient arthropod regulatory element dating back
to the Cambrian (about 500 million years ago). The
element shows a conserved function but without sufficient sequence conservation to be detected on the
basis of sequence alignment, opening the possibility
that other ancient invertebrate regulatory elements
remain to be discovered.
Materials and methods
Drosophila culture and stocks

Flies were maintained on standard cornmeal-agar medium at 18°C and Oregon-R was used as a control. Strains
used were: ase 1 (formerly known as sc 2 [10]), toll-8
[MD806] Gal4 [18], ptc-Gal4, sca[537.4] Gal4, achaete
[SBM] Gal4 [45], UAS-sc (FlyBase [46]). UAS-constructs
for ectopic expression of D. melanogaster and T. castaneum ase and C. salei CsASH2 were generated by standard techniques. P-element-mediated transformation was
performed by standard techniques.
Rescue experiment

ase 1 flies were crossed to hsp70Gal4 > UAS Dm-ase,
hsp70Gal4 > UAS Tc-ase and hsp70Gal4 > UAS CsASH2
flies, respectively, and allowed to lay eggs in culture bottles for 3 days. Heat shocks were preformed between 16
hours and 8 hours before puparium formation. Heat
shock expression was driven by three 1-hour heat shocks
at 37°C, separated by 2 hour intervals at 25°C. Wings
were mounted in glycerol and analyzed under a compound microscope (Leica).

Page 10 of 12

Bristle scoring

Three independent lines were generated for each UAS
construct (ORF only and ORF+SOPE) and crossed to
four different Gal4 lines that activated the constructs in
the expression domains of toll-8, patched, scabrous and
ac. Flies of the appropriate genotype were selected,
mounted and the bristles were counted under the dissecting microscope (Leica). Statistical analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel.
Identification of ASH and ase genes

The sequenced genomes of D. pulex (Daphnia_pulex
2006-09 JGI) and S. maritima (Strigamia maritima
Genome Project by Baylor College of Medicine, NCBI
Project ID 20501) were searched using tblastn with the
ASH and Ase proteins of D. melanogaster, T. castaneum and C. salei as queries. Hits with relevant
homology to the bHLH domain were further characterized. Three genes were identified in the D. pulex genome: an ASH homologue (JGI_V11_254034), an ase
homologue (JGI_V11_254038) and a truncated copy of
ase (JGI_V11_232740). In the S. maritima genome
only one ASH homologue was identified; a second
gene analyzed was too divergent in the basic region of
the bHLH domain to be classified as an ASH gene.
Phylogenetic analysis

Phylogenetic trees were constructed using all ASH and
ase genes from the insects D. melanogaster and T. castaneum, the crustaceans T. longicaudatus and D. pulex,
the chelicerate C. salei and the myriapods G. marginata
and S. maritima. Amino acid sequences have been
aligned with ClustalW2 [47], manually improved and
conserved regions selected with Gblocks (using permissive parameters) [48]. The resulting alignment is only 66
amino acids long and corresponds roughly to the basic
region and helixes of the bHLH domain and to the carboxy-terminal domain. Trees have been constructed by
maximum likelihood methods and tree topologies compared with the Shinodaira-Hasegawa test as implemented in the Phylip package [49].

Additional material
Additional file 1: asense rescue experiment. Comparison of the
number of stout bristles exhibiting differentiation defects in ase1 flies
(first column) and ase1 flies carrying hsp70Gal4 > UAS Dm-sc, hsp70Gal4 >
UAS Dm-ase, hsp70Gal4 > UAS Tc-ase and hsp70-Gal > UAS-CsASH2
transgenes
Additional file 2: Alignment of the SOP enhancer elements.
Nucleotide sequence alignments of the individual transcription factor
binding sites of Drosophila, Tribolium, Daphnia, Strigamia and Cupiennius.
Additional file 3: Sequence logos of the SOPE boxes. Graphic
representation of the aligned sequences of the SOPE binding sites of
Drosophila melanogaster, Tribolium castaneum, Daphnia pulex, Strigamia
maritima and Cupiennius salei.

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

Additional file 4: Misexpression experiment. Comparison of the
number of ectopic bristles in flies carrying the UAS-ase/ASH2 ORF only
and ORF+SOPE constructs.
Additional file 5: SOP enhancer in the senseless 5’ UTR. Arrangement
of the SOPE boxes in the 5’ UTR of the senseless transcript.
Additional file 6: Secondary structure of the ase-like UTRs. Graphic
representation of the secondary structure of the UTRs of the Drosophila
melanogaster, Tribolium castaneum and Daphnia pulex asense genes and
the UTRs of Strigamia maritima ASH and Cupiennius salei CsASH2.

Abbreviations
AC: achaete; AS-C: Achaete-Scute complex; ASE: asense; ASH: achaete-scute
homologue; ATO: atonal; BHLH: basic helix-loop-helix; BP: base pair; NF:
nuclear factor; SC: scute; ORF: open reading frame; SOP: sensory organ
precursor; SOPE: sensory organ precursor enhancer; UTR: untranslated region.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Michael Akam for giving us access to the unpublished S.
maritima genome data. We thank Andrew Jarman and Aziz Aboobaker for
helpful discussions and Sung Ly for technical assistance. This work was
supported by grants 29156 (Wellcome Trust) to PS and STO 361/2-1, STO
361/6-2 (German Research Foundation) and BB/F021909/1 (Biotechnology
and Biological Sciences Research Council) to AS.
Author details
1
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Downing Street,
Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK. 2School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen
Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK.
Authors’ contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: SA, PS, AS. Performed the
experiments and analyzed the data: SA, BN, AS. Wrote the manuscript: AS,
PS. Contributed to writing and editing: BN.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 5 July 2010 Accepted: 24 September 2010
Published: 24 September 2010
References
1. Bertrand N, Castro D, Guillemot F: Proneural genes and the specification
of neural subtypes. Nat Rev Neuro 2002, 3:517-530.
2. Heitzler P, Simpson P: The choice of cell fate in the epidermis of
Drosophila. Cell 1991, 64:1083-1092.
3. Heitzler P, Bourouis M, Ruel L, Carteret C, Simpson P: Genes of the
Enhancer of split and Achaete-Scute complexes are required for a
regulatory loop between Notch and Delta during lateral signalling in
Drosophila. Development 1996, 122:161-171.
4. Künisch M, Haenlin M, Campos-Ortega J: Lateral inhibition mediated by
the Drosophila neurogenic gene Delta is enhanced by proneural
proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994, 91:10139-10143.
5. Richards G, Simionato E, Perron M, Adamska M, Vervoort M, Degnan B:
Sponge genes provide new insight into the evolutionary origin of the
neurogenic circuit. Curr Biol 2008, 18:1156-1161.
6. Ghysen A, Dambly-Chaudière C: From DNA to form: the Achaete-Scute
conmplex. Genes Dev 1988, 2:495-501.
7. Cubas P, de Celis J, Campuzano S: Proneural clusters of achaete-scute
expression and the generation of sensory organs in the Drosophila
imaginal wing disc. Genes Dev 1991, 5:996-1008.
8. Skeath J, Carroll S: Regulation of achaete-scute gene expression and
sensory pattern formation in the Drosophila wing. Genes Dev 1991,
5:984-995.
9. Gomez-Skarmeta J, Rodriguez I, Martinez C, Culi J, Ferres-Marco D,
Beamonte D, Modolell J: Cis-regulation of achaete and scute: Shared
enhancer-like elements drive their coexpression in proneural clusters of
the imaginal disc. Genes Dev 1995, 9:1869-1882.

Page 11 of 12

10. Gonzalez F, Romani S, Cubas P, Modolell J, Campuzano S: Molecular
analysis of the asense gene, a member of the Achaete-Scute complex of
Drosophila melanogaster and its novel role in optic lobe development.
EMBO J 1989, 8:3553-3562.
11. Dominguez M, Campuzano S: asense, a member of the Drosophila
Achaete-Scute complex, is a proneural and neural differentiation gene.
EMBO J 1993, 12:2049-2060.
12. Brand M, Jarman A, Jan L, Jan Y: asense is a Drosophila neural precursor
gene and is capable of initiating sense organ formation. Development
1993, 119:1-17.
13. Jarman A, Brand M, Jan L, Jan Y: The regulation and function of the helixloop-helix gene, asense, in Drosophila neural precursors. Development
1993, 119:19-29.
14. Culi J, Modolell J: Proneural gene self-stimulation in neural precursors:
An essential mechanism for sense organ development that is regulated
by Notch signaling. Genes Dev 1998, 12:2036-2047.
15. Ohsako S, Hyer J, Panganiban G, Oliver I, Caudy M: Hairy functions as a
DNA-binding helix-loop-helix repressor of Drosophila sensory organ
formation. Genes Dev 1994, 8:2743-2755.
16. Giagtzoglou N, Alifragis P, Koumbanakis K, Delidakis C: Two modes of
recruitment of E(spl) repressors onto target genes. Development 2003,
130:259-270.
17. Lenardo M, Baltimore D: NF-kappa B: a pleiotropic mediator of inducible
and tissue-specific gene control. Cell 1989, 58:227-279.
18. Ayyar S, Pistillo D, Calleja M, Brookfield A, Gittins K, Goldstone C, Simpson P:
NF-κB/Rel-mediated regulation of the neural fate in Drosophila. PLoS ONE
2007, 2:e1178.
19. Van Doren M, Ellis H, Posakony J: Negative regulation of proneural gene
activity: Hairy is a direct transcriptional repressor of achaete.
Development 1994, 113:245-255.
20. Rebeiz M, Stone T, Posakony J: An ancient transcriptional regulatory
linkage. Dev Biol 2005, 281:299-308.
21. Hassan B, Bellen H: Doing the MATH: is the mouse a good model for fly
development? Genes Dev 2000, 14:1852-1865.
22. Negre B, Simpson P: Evolution of the achaete-scute complex in insects:
convergent duplication of proneural genes. Trends Genet 2009,
25:147-152.
23. Stollewerk A, Weller M, Tautz D: Neurogenesis in the spider Cupiennius
salei. Development 2001, 128:2673-2688.
24. Wheeler S, Skeath J: The identification and expression of achaete-scute
genes in the branchiopod crustacean Triops longicaudatus. Gene
Expression Patterns 2005, 5:695-700.
25. Skaer N, Pistillo D, Gibert J, Lio P, Wülbeck C, Simpson P: Gene duplication
at the achaete-scute complex and morphological complexity of the
peripheral nervous system in Diptera. Trends Genet 2002, 18:399-405.
26. Dove H, Stollewerk A: Comparative analysis of neurogenesis in the
myriapod Glomeris marginata (Diplopoda) suggests more similarities to
chelicerates than to insects. Development 2003, 130:2161-2171.
27. Wheeler S, Carrico M, Wilson B, Brown S, Skeath J: The expression and
function of the achaete-scute genes in Tribolium castaneum reveals
conservation and variation in neural pattern formation and cell fate
specification. Development 2003, 130:4373-4381.
28. Pistillo D, Skaer N, Simpson P: scute expression in Calliphora vicina reveals
an ancestral pattern of longitudinal stripes on the thorax of higher
Diptera. Development 2002, 129:563-572.
29. Jafar-Nejad H, Acar M, Nolo R, Lacin H, Pan H, Parkhurst S, Bellen H:
Senseless acts as a binary switch during sensory organ precursor
selection. Genes Dev 2003, 17:2966-2978.
30. Nolo R, Abott L, Bellen H: Senseless, a Zinc finger transcription factor, is
necessary and sufficient for sensory organ development in Drosophila.
Cell 2000, 102:349-362.
31. WebLogo. [http://weblogo.threeplusone.com/create.cgi].
32. Scholtz G: Baupläne versus ground patterns, phyla versus monophyla:
aspects of patterns and processes in evolutionary developmental
biology. In Evolutionary Developmental Biology of Crustacea. Edited by:
Scholtz G. Lisse: Balkema; 2004:3-16.
33. Regier J, Shultz J, Zwick A, Hussey A, Ball B, Wetzer R, Martin J,
Cunningham C: Arthropod relationships revealed by phylogenomic
analysis of nuclear protein-coding sequence. Nature 2010, 463:1079-1084.
34. Stollewerk A: Recruitment of cell groups through Delta/Notch signalling
during spider neurogenesis. Development 2002, 129:5339-5348.

Ayyar et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:127
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/127

Page 12 of 12

35. Gibert JM, Simpson P: Evolution of cis-regulation of the proneural genes.
Int J Dev Biol 2003, 47:643-651.
36. RNAfold WebServer. [http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAfold.cgi].
37. Wrischnik L, Timmer J, Megna L, Cline T: Recruitment of the proneurall
gene scute to the Drosophila sex-determination pathway. Genetics 2003,
165:2007-2027.
38. Garcia-Garcia M, Ramain P, Simpson P, Modolell J: Different contributions
of pannier and wingless to the patterning of the dorsal mesothorax of
Drosophila. Development 1999, 126:3523-3532.
39. Ramain P, Khechumian R, Khechumian K, Arbogast N, Ackermann C,
Heitzler P: Interactions between Chip and the Achaete/ScuteDaughterless heterodimers are required for pannier-driven proneural
patterning. Mol Cell 2000, 6:781-790.
40. Simpson P, Marcellini S: The origin and evolution of stereotyped patterns
of macrochaetes on the nota of cyclorraphous Diptera. Heridity 2006,
97:148-156.
41. Weirauch MT, Hughes TR: Conserved expression without conserved
regulatory sequence: the more things change, the more they stay the
same. Trends Genetics 2010, 26:66-74.
42. Fisher S, Grice EA, Vinton RM, Bessling SL, McCallion AS: Conservation of
RET regulatory function from human to zebrafish without sequence
similarity. Science 2006, 312:276-279.
43. Romano LA, Wray GA: Conservation of Endo16 expression in sea urchins
despite evolutionary divergence in both cis and trans-acting
components of transcriptional regulation. Development 2003,
130:4187-4199.
44. Ludwig MZ, Bergman C, Patel NH, Kreitman M: Evidence for stabilizing
selection in a eukaryotic enhancer element. Nature 2000, 403:564-567.
45. Marcellini S, Gibert JM, Simpson P: achaete, but not scute is dispensable
for the peripheral nervous system of Drosophila. Dev Biol 2005,
285:545-533.
46. FlyBase. [http://flybase.org/].
47. Thompson J, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity
of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence
weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix chocies.
Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
48. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17:540-552.
49. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version 3.6. [http://
evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip.html].
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-127
Cite this article as: Ayyar et al.: An arthropod cis-regulatory element
functioning in sensory organ precursor development dates back to the
Cambrian. BMC Biology 2010 8:127.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
