<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Comparative genomics reveals selective distribution and domain organization of FYVE and PX domain proteins across eukaryotic lineages</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:83. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-83"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Sumana Banerjee"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Comparative genomics reveals selective
distribution and domain organization of FYVE
and PX domain proteins across eukaryotic
lineages
Sumana Banerjee1, Soumalee Basu2*, Srimonti Sarkar1*

Abstract
Background: Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate is involved in regulation of several key cellular processes, mainly
endocytosis, signaling, nuclear processes, cytoskeletal remodelling, cell survival, membrane trafficking, phagosome
maturation and autophagy. In most cases effector proteins bind to this lipid, using either FYVE or PX domain.
These two domains are distributed amongst varied life forms such as virus, protists, fungi, viridiplantae and
metazoa. As the binding ligand is identical for both domains, the goal of this study was to understand if there is
any selectivity for either of these domains in different taxa. Further, to understand the different cellular functions
that these domains may be involved in, we analyzed the taxonomic distribution of additional domains that
associate with FYVE and PX.
Results: There is selectivity for either FYVE or PX in individual genomes where both domains are present. Fungi
and metazoa encode more PX, whereas streptophytes in viridiplantae encode more FYVE. Excess of FYVE in
streptophytes results from proteins containing RCC1and DZC domains and FYVE domains in these proteins have a
non-canonical ligand-binding site. Within a taxonomic group the selected domain associates with a higher number
of other domains and is thus expected to discharge a larger number of cellular functions. Also, while certain
associated domains are present in all taxonomic groups, most of them are unique to a specific group indicating
that while certain common functions are discharged by these domains in all taxonomic groups, some functions
appear to be group specific.
Conclusions: Although both FYVE and PX bind to PtdIns(3)P, genomes of different taxa show distinct selectivity of
encoding either of the two. Higher numbers of taxonomic group specific domains co-occur with the more
abundant domain (FYVE/PX) indicating that group-specific rare domain architectures might have emerged to
accomplish certain group-specific functions.

Background
Phospholipids, far from being mere structural units of various bio-membranes, play important roles in several physiological processes [1-3]. For example, phosphoinositides
(PIs), which are the phosphorylated derivatives of phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns), are components of different cellular membranes. There is selective enrichment of
* Correspondence: soumalee@gmail.com; srimontisarkar@iiserkol.ac.in
1
Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Kolkata, Mohanpur, Nadia 741252, West Bengal, India
2
Department of Biotechnology, School of Biotechnology, West Bengal
University of Technology, BF 142, Salt Lake, Kolkata 700064, India

particular PIs on the surface of specific organelles [1,2]. At
these locations they function as spatial signals for the targeting of specific effector proteins from a cytosolic location to the membrane periphery. The targeting of these
effectors to specific membranes is mediated by their lipidbinding domains that are capable of recognising a specific
PI [4]. Once at the intended cellular locations, the effectors
participate in multiple cellular functions such as signaling,
nuclear processes, endocytosis, cytoskeletal remodelling,
cell survival, membrane trafficking, phagosome maturation
and autophagy [4-6]. Thus PIs play a central role in many
crucial cellular events.

© 2010 Banerjee et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

Seven different varieties of PIs are formed when
PtdIns undergoes differential phosphorylation at the 3-,
4- and 5- hydroxyl groups of its myo-inositol moiety [1].
Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate {PtdIns(3)P} is one of
these seven. PtdIns(3)P localizes mainly to endosomal
membranes [7], but has also been detected within the
nucleus [8]. This lipid regulator plays a central role in
endocytosis and has also been implicated in signaling
events as well.
In most cases PtdIns(3)P-interacting proteins bind to
this lipid by using either of two domains, FYVE or PX
[9-11]. However there are reports of C2 and PH
domains that are also capable of binding to this lipid
[12,13]. The FYVE domain is a specific type of zinc-finger motif and is named after the four proteins in which
it was initially identified (Fab1p, YOTB, Vac1 and
EEA1) [14]. It is 60-70 amino acids long and is rich in
cysteines. Three conserved stretches of amino acids are
the hallmark of this domain: the WxxD motif at the Nterminal end, followed by the R(R/K)HHCR and finally
RVC towards the C-terminus [15-17]. These three
motifs, along with other cysteines form the PtdIns(3)P
binding pocket. Additional non-specific electrostatic
interactions as well as hydrophobic interactions, via a
membrane-insertion loop that penetrates the membrane,
stabilize the binding of this domain to PtdIns(3)P containing membranes [10]. In addition, multimerization of
FYVE domain has been reported to augment membrane
binding [18,19]. In contrast to FYVE domains, there is
very little sequence similarity between the different PX
domains, which are ~130 amino acids in length [11].
However, these diverse sequences fold to adopt a common three dimensional structure with two conserved
elements: (i) the PxxP motif capable of interacting with
SH3 domain; (ii) the basic residues that constitute the
PI binding pocket [10]. Similar to the FYVE domain,
additional hydrophobic (also via membrane insertion
loop) and electrostatic interactions stabilize the binding
of PX domains with membranes. Several PX domaincontaining proteins also contain dimerization domains,
such as the coiled-coil domain in case of sorting nexins
[20,21]. Thus oligomerization is also likely to play a role
in increasing the affinity of PX domain for the membrane. Therefore, although FYVE and PX domains have
very different structures, they bind to the same ligand
PtdIns(3)P, and this protein-ligand binding is stabilized
by similar electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions
[10]. In addition, in both cases oligomerization contributes to ligand affinity.
Although a majority of PX domains bind to PtdIns(3)P
[11,22], there are reports of PX domains binding to
PtdIns(3,4)P2 [23], PtdIns(4)P [24], PtdIns(4,5)P2 [25],
PtdIns(3,5)P 2 [26] and PtdIns(3,4,5)P 3 [27]. Similarly
even though FYVE is considered to be very specific for

Page 2 of 12

PtdIns(3)P, the FYVE of EEA1 has been shown to be
capable of binding to PtdIns(5)P [28] and a variant of
this domain is reported to bind to PtdIns(3,4,5)P 3 in
vitro [29].
Although these domains are present in multiple
organisms where they are involved in various cellular
functions, their distribution across different species has
not been studied. Most studies undertaken till date have
been devoted towards understanding the function(s) of
the individual proteins that contain these domains. Only
a small number of studies have addressed the distribution of these proteins in a single species [30]. As these
two domains are capable of binding to the same ligand
we were curious to know if there was any selectivity for
one over the other in different genomes. Towards this
end we adopted a comparative genomics approach to
study the distribution pattern of proteins containing
these two domains across various eukaryotic lineages.
Furthermore, to gain an understanding of the different
cellular functions accomplished by such proteins, in different taxonomic groups, we analyzed the taxonomic
distribution pattern of the additional domains that
associate with these two domains. Our results reveal
that although both FYVE and PX domains bind to the
same ligand, PtdIns(3)P, there is a distinct selectivity for
either of these two domains in individual genomes
where both are present. Analysis of the domain architecture of these proteins indicates that while FYVE and PX
domain proteins are involved in certain universal cellular functions, they have also been customized to accomplish group-specific functions by associating with certain
group-specific domains.

Results
Distribution of FYVE and PX proteins in different
taxonomic groups

FYVE and PX domains bind to a common ligand, PtdIns
(3)P [11]. In addition to PtdIns(3)P [22], PX also binds
to PtdIns(3,4)P2 [23], PtdIns(4)P [24], PtdIns(4,5)P2 [25],
PtdIns (3,5)P 2 [26] and PtdIns(3,4,5)P 3 [27] and the
ligand-binding specificity of this domain is known to be
dictated by the identity of residues at the ligand-binding
site. By virtue of the greater versatility of its ligand-binding capability, it is expected that PX domain-containing
proteins will perform many more functions than FYVE
domain-containing proteins and there will be a greater
number of the former in genomes compared to the latter. To test this hypothesis we have collected all the
reported FYVE and PX domain containing sequences
from NCBI protein database and have eliminated redundancy (see Methods). We analyzed the taxonomic classification of all these curated proteins. FYVE and PX
domain proteins were found to be distributed amongst
all four taxonomic groups of eukaryotes namely fungi,

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

metazoa, viridiplantae and protist (Figure 1). Consistent
with our hypothesis, higher occurrence of the PX
domain compared to FYVE was observed in metazoa,
fungi and protist. However, viridiplantae stands out as
an exception as there is a higher occurrence of FYVE.
In virus there is report of only one FYVE domain containing protein but no report of any PX domain protein
as yet. The observed predominance of PX over FYVE
proteins, in most taxonomic groups, may result from
either all species, within a taxonomic group, having
more PX than FYVE or if only a handful of species
within the group encode an extremely large number of
PX proteins in their genomes. To ascertain which of
these two possibilities is correct we looked at the number of FYVE and PX proteins in genomes that are completely sequenced.
Distribution of FYVE and PX proteins in individual
genomes

To test if there is any distinct selectivity for either FYVE
or PX at the individual genome level within a particular
taxonomic group, we analyzed the abundance of FYVE
and PX domain containing proteins of only those species
(see Additional File 1) whose genomes have been completely sequenced (Figure 2). The observation that there
are more PX than FYVE proteins in fungi (Figure 1) is
also reflected at the species level as all of the seventeen
completely-sequenced fungal genomes have more PX
proteins than FYVE (Figure 2a). A similar trend, with a
few exceptions, is discernible in completely sequenced

Figure 1 Distribution of FYVE and PX domain proteins across
different taxonomic groups.

Page 3 of 12

metazoans as well (Figure 2b). The metazoan exceptions
include Caenorhabditis elegans, Caenorhabditis briggsae
and Ciona intestinalis. Like fungi and metazoa, in viridiplantae the relative abundance trend of the two domains
observed for all available protein sequences is also maintained at the individual genome level, except in this case
there appears to be a clear division in selectivity (for
FYVE or PX) depending on whether the species belongs
to the subphylum chlorophyta (green algae) or streptophyta (land plants and their relatives) (Figure 2c). The
chlorophytes Chlamydomonus reinhardtii and Volvox
carteri have more PX than FYVE proteins, while the
chlorophytes Ostreococcus lucimarinus and Ostreococcus
tauri do not encode any FYVE protein at all. Species
belonging to streptophyta (Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza
sativa, Vitis vinifera, Populus trichocarpa and Physcomitrella patens patens) have more FYVE than PX proteins.
In case of protist, there does not appear to be any overall
selectivity for either FYVE or PX (Figure 2d) at the taxonomic level; some protist species have larger number of
PX proteins than those with FYVE (viz. Giardia lamblia,
Paramecium tetraurelia, Tetrahymena thermophila,
Monosiga brevicollis, and Plasmodium falciparum) while
a comparable number of species have more FYVE proteins than PX (viz. Leishmania major, Leishmania infantum, Trypanosoma brucei, Trypanosoma cruzi,
Entamoeba histolytica, and Dictyostelium discoideum).
Interestingly in Plasmodium yoelii the two types of proteins are present in equal number. Thus the protist taxonomic group contains an almost equal number of species
with either an excess of FYVE or an excess of PX. Prior
phylogenetic studies reveal that unlike the fungi, metazoa
and viridiplantae taxonomic groups, the lineage of the
protist group is unclear as there is ambiguity regarding
when the main branches of the present day protist species diverged from each other [31]. In fact protists as a
group are paraphyletic as some members of this group
are closer to non-protists than to other protists and this
may explain the observed heterogeneity in the distribution pattern of FYVE and PX in this group. The lack of
predominance of species with more PX than FYVE in
their genomes, within the protist taxonomic group, is in
contradiction of the observed overall excess of PX proteins in protists (Figure 1). However this may be because
of a small number of genomes encoding an unusually
large number of PX proteins. In concurrence with this,
significantly higher number of PX domain has been
detected in at least two species, Paramecium tetraurelia
and Tetrahymena thermophila, (Figure 2d- broken bars).
Therefore, with the exception of protists, by and large
the trend observed for all available protein sequences is
also maintained at the individual genome level and is
indicative of selectivity for either FYVE (in streptophyta
of viridiplantae) or PX (fungi and metazoa) domain.

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

Page 4 of 12

Figure 2 Distribution of FYVE and PX domain proteins in completely sequenced genomes in different taxonomic groups. Number of
FYVE and PX proteins encoded by the genomes of (a) fungi, (b) metazoa, (c) viridiplantae and (d) protist.

Distribution of associated domains

There appears to be selectivity for either FYVE or PX
domain in most taxonomic groups. Given that both
domains have the potential to bind the same ligand,
PtdIns(3)P [4,11], the domain specifically selected in a
given taxonomic group is expected to be involved in
more PtdIns(3)P dependent cellular functions and thus
will be associated with a greater variety of other
domains to discharge these functions. Therefore, while
PX proteins are expected to have greater diversity in
terms of domain architecture in metazoa and fungi,
FYVE proteins are expected to associate with a greater
variety of domains in viridiplantae. To test this hypothesis we have analyzed the domains that associate with
FYVE and PX. Our result shows that 63% of FYVE
domain-containing proteins and 52% of PX domaincontaining proteins associate with at least one other

domain listed in Pfam-A database (data not shown). Of
the 10340 domains listed in Pfam-A database, 58 and
85 domains were assigned to be extant in proteins
with FYVE and PX domains respectively. Figure 3
summarizes the number of domains associating with
FYVE and PX proteins in the different taxonomic
groups. Once again a direct correlation is evident
between the relative abundance trend of FYVE vs. PX
in a given taxonomic group and the number of
domains that associate with them. For example, in
fungi and metazoa, which have higher abundance of
PX compared to FYVE, there are more domains associating with the former compared to the latter. The
same correlation is observed in the case of viridiplantae; more domains are associated with FYVE, which is
more abundant compared to PX in this taxonomic
group. In all three cases the number of domains

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

Figure 3 Number of associated domains of FYVE and PX in
different lineages.

associating with the more abundant domain is almost
twice the number of domains that associate with the
less abundant one (Figure 3, see Fungi, Metazoa and
Viridiplantae). In case of protist, a taxonomic group
with no apparent selectivity for either FYVE or PX,
although a greater number of domains are found to
associate with PX, the number of domains associating
with FYVE is also significant (29 for FYVE as opposed
to 38 for PX) (Figure 3). Once again the slightly larger
number of domains associating with PX could be
because of the plethora of such proteins in Paramecium tetraurelia and Tetrahymena thermophila genomes (Figure 2d). Thus higher number of domains is
found to associate with the PtdIns(3)P-binding domain
that is more abundant in a given taxonomic group
indicating that a greater number of PtdIns(3)P-dependent functions are discharged using that particular
domain.
Analysis of the taxonomic distribution of the domains
associating with FYVE and PX (Figure 4a and 4b) shows
that five domains are found to associate with FYVE in
all taxonomic groups (Ank, WD40, Beach, PH and
PIP5K) while three domains are common amongst all
taxonomic groups with respect to PX (Nexin_C, Vps5
and PXA). Most domains appear to be taxonomic group
specific as 78% of FYVE and 74% of PX associated
domains are present exclusively in a unique taxonomic
group (Figure 4a &4b). The taxonomic distribution of
domains shows an interesting trend. Depending on
whether FYVE or PX is more abundant in a given taxonomic group, the number of domains exclusively associating with it (FYVE/PX) is larger. For example in

Page 5 of 12

metazoa, whose genome encodes more PX proteins, 22
domains that are found to co-occur do not associate
with PX in any other taxonomic group. On the other
hand, only 9 domains associate exclusively with
metazoan FYVE proteins. In fungi, another group with
selectivity for PX, the corresponding numbers are 16
and 4 for PX and FYVE domain proteins respectively.
The reverse is observed for viridiplantae, a taxonomic
group with more FYVE compared to PX. While 13
domains associate exclusively with FYVE proteins, only
4 domains associate exclusively with viridiplantae PX
proteins. Consistent with a lack of selectivity for either
FYVE or PX in protist, almost equal number of domains
associate exclusively with these two domains in this
taxonomic group (19 for FYVE and 21 for PX). The
results indicate that while some associating domains are
distributed across multiple taxonomic groups, most are
group specific.
The associated domains that are found in multiple
taxonomic groups are expected to be more prevalent
in the FYVE and PX protein repertoire compared to
those that are group specific. To test this hypothesis
we have calculated the association score of all the
domains (see Methods and tables in Additional File 2
&3) and plotted them for both FYVE and PX (Figure
5). In both cases domains such as PH in case of FYVE
and Vps5 in case of PX, that are extant in all taxonomic groups have the highest association score in
their respective dataset and these domains are at least
3.5 times more prevalent compared to the highest
scoring domain that exclusively occurs in only one
taxonomic group (Myotub_related for FYVE and Sorting_nexin in PX) (Figure 5). In fact the five domains
in each set that have the highest association score are
present in at least three out of four taxonomic groups
(Figure 4 and 5). The graph also reveals that most
group-specific domains have low association frequencies (also see Additional File 4). These observations
indicate that certain FYVE and PX domain-dependent
functions are likely to have emerged early in the evolutionary process as selective domain combinations are
present in all taxonomic groups and also the high
association frequencies of these combinations suggest
that they have been retained even through prolonged
evolutionary changes of eukaryotic lineages. Also, the
group specific rare domain architectures might have
emerged to accomplish certain group-specific functions. It is worth noting that some domains are found
to associate with both FYVE and PX and these are
marked with asterix in Figure 5. Of these most have a
higher propensity of co-occurring with FYVE (PH,
RhoGEF, WD40, RUN, Myotub-related, Ank, and
UIM), while some show selectivity for PX (Pkinase,
PI3_PI4_kinase and LRR_1).

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

Page 6 of 12

Figure 4 Distribution of associated domains across different taxonomic groups. Venn diagram of the domains associated with (a) FYVE
and (b) PX proteins.

Functional categorization of associated domains

The large variety of domains associating with FYVE and
PX indicates that diverse cellular functions are discharged by proteins containing these lipid-binding modules. In this study we have functionally categorized the
associating domains following the functional annotations
of Pfam (Table 1). Although the associated domains are
involved in assorted cellular activities, there is a distinct
selectivity for utilizing the FYVE and PX proteins in
only a small subset of these functions. The 10 most
abundant domains associating with FYVE are involved
in cellular processes such as signal transduction, intracellular trafficking, cell division and chaperone activity,

while the comparable domains co-occurring with PX
show involvement in signal transduction, intracellular
trafficking and cytoskeletal regulation. Involvement of
these proteins in cellular processes such as inorganic
ion transport, defence mechanisms, transcriptional and
translational regulation is minimal. For example Ribosomal_L1 and Zn_clus domains that are involved in translation and transcription respectively, have a very low
association score with FYVE. Therefore, there appears
to be selectivity for utilizing the FYVE and PX domaincontaining proteins for certain types of cellular functions and involvement of such proteins in other functions is not very significant.

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

Page 7 of 12

Figure 5 Association score distribution graph of FYVE and PX associated domains. The associated domains of FYVE and PX proteins are
plotted according to their association score. The upper horizontal axis shows the associated domains of PX and its corresponding graph is
drawn in red. The lower horizontal axis is for the associated domains of FYVE and the corresponding graph is drawn in green. Domain names in
black font are present in more than one taxonomic group whereas domains that are found only in a particular taxonomic group are coloured
according to the colour code given in the figure. Associated domains which have just a single representative have not been included in this
graph. They are included in the graph given in Additional File 4. Domains marked with * are associated with both FYVE and PX. Although LRR_1,
TPR_2, Pkinase_Tyr in the PX axis and Myotub-related in the FYVE axis are marked with *, they are absent in one of the axes as they are
represented only once in the corresponding dataset.

Specialization of FYVE domain in viridiplantae

We have already shown that most of the members of
the taxonomic group viridiplantae exhibit the selective
use of FYVE proteins (Figure 1 and Figure 2c). We analyzed the domain architecture of FYVE proteins specifically in this taxonomic group. While a great variety of
domains do associate with FYVE, DZC is the most
abundant viridiplantae-specific domain (Figure 5). Proteins that contain FYVE and DZC domain also always
contain the RCC1 domain. In fact the association of
RCC1 with FYVE can be considered plant-specific, as
there is only a single instance of a RCC1 co-occurring
with FYVE outside the viridiplantae taxonomic group,
namely in the metazoa N. vectensis. Figure 6 shows that
there is a direct correlation between the number of proteins of this specific architecture (with FYVE, RCC1 and
DZC) and the prevalence of FYVE proteins in individual
streptophyte genomes. The high prevalence of proteins
with this architecture and their direct correlation with
number of FYVE proteins indicates that this unique
domain combination is likely to have emerged to
accomplish plant-specific function(s). We were curious
to know if the FYVE domains present in these plantspecific proteins had evolved together to display any
novel characteristics. Towards this end we reconstructed

a phylogenetic tree on the basis of entire FYVE domain
from all FYVE protein sequences from viridiplantae and
observed clustering of domains with signature ligandbinding site consensus patterns (Figure 7). While one of
the clusters has the canonical ligand-binding site consensus sequence of R-R-H-H-C-R, two clusters display
deviation. The first of the two deviant clusters has
FYVE-RCC1-DZC architecture with a ligand-binding
site sequence of K-R/K-H-N-C-Y. Such a non-canonical
FYVE domain from A. thaliana, has been shown to
bind to PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 with better affinity than PtdIns
(3)P in vitro [29]. However, given that there is a general
consensus regarding the lack of PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 in plants
[32], the functional significance of such an in vitro binding remains debatable [33]. The second non-canonical
FYVE domain, with a ligand-binding site sequence of G/
S-R-H-H-C-R, associates with the plant-specific domain
DUF500 (Figure 4a). Therefore there appears to be a
correlation between ligand-binding site sequence of
FYVE domains and the domain architecture of these
proteins. Also the deviants actually constitute a larger
number of plant FYVE proteins rather than those with
canonical ligand-binding sites. The above observations
indicate that in course of evolution, the lipid signaling
system of higher plants have not only selectively

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

Page 8 of 12

Table 1 Functional classification of domains associated with FYVE and PX
Functional categories

FYVE-associated domains

PX-associated domains

Signal transduction
mechanisms

PH, RhoGEF, PIP5K, RUN, DEP, PDEase_I, Arm, Arrestin_N,
SH2, Arrestin_C, Miro, NB-ARC, Ras, TIR, zf-TRAF

PH, RhoGEF, RUN, Ras, RGS, PB1, C2, PI3K_C2, RA, FHA, PDZ,
Pkinase_C, RhoGAP, IQ, CH

Intracellular trafficking,
secretion, and vesicular
transport

VHS, EMP24_GP25L, Rab5-bind, Zf-RanBP, Rabaptin

Vps5, Nexin_C, Sorting_nexin, MIT, PI3Ka, SNARE, Kinesin, VPS9,
BAR, SRPRB, TBC

Chaperone

Cpn60_TCP1

AAA

Cell cycle control, cell
division, chromosome
partitioning

RCC1, DZC, Septin

PI3K_rbd

Cytoskeleton

PH, WH2

PH, WH2, SH3_1, SH3_2, SH3_3, FERM_M, CAP_GLY, CH

Transcription

Zn_clus

Translation

Ribosomal_L1

L15, Ribosomal_L15, tRNA_anti

Defence mechanisms

p47_phox_C, GBP

Inorganic ion transport

Sulfate_transp

Protein-protein
interaction

WD40, UIM, Ank, zf-C3HC4, BTB, TPR_1, LRR_1, LRR_3,
PAN_1, WW, zf_AN1

WD40, UIM, Ank, LRR_1

Catalytic

Pkinase, Glyco_transf_28, PI3_PI4_kinase, Abhydrolase_3,
Glyco_tran_28_C, Lipase_GDSL, Orn_Arg_deC_N,
Pkinase_Tyr, Myotub-related

Pkinase, PI3_PI4_kinase, Pkinase_Tyr, PLDc, 4HBT, ADH_N,
ADH_zinc_N, AhpC-TSA, rve, glutaminase, Glyco_hydro_18,
Myotub-related, Proteasome, Radical_SAM, RmlD_sub_bind,
RNA_pol_Rpb4

Metabolism

FAD_binding_2, FAD_binding_4, Succ_DH_flav_C

Replication,
recombination & repair

Retrotrans_gag

General function
prediction only

GRAM, LysM

cNMP_binding, DDE, FLYWCH, Methyltransf_4, Peptidase_A17,
Zf-B_box

Function unclear

Beach, DUF500, MORN, MtN3_slv, Cupin_2, NIF, TPR_2,
zf-DHHC

TPR_2, PXA, DUF399, CNH, DUF1388, DUF1879, Kelch_1,
Kelch_2, LIM, M, Met_10, Pinin_SDK_memA, SAM_1, STAS,
UPF0047

The functional categories of the associated domains were adopted from the COG classification of proteins. Functions were assigned to the domains following
Pfam annotations.

favoured the use of FYVE, rather than PX in their cellular processes; but have also adopted unique domain
architectures supported by special modification around
lipid binding site in order to better accomplish these
processes.

Discussion
We have adopted a comparative genomics approach in
order to extend our understanding of PtdIns(3)Pmediated cellular functions. PtdIns(3)P is recognized
mainly by two cellular domains, FYVE and PX [4]. We
have analyzed the number of FYVE and PX proteins in
different taxonomic groups as well as in individual completely sequenced genomes. Our study has revealed that
most taxonomic groups show selectivity for either of the
two. We have also observed a correlation between the
selectively utilized domain and the diversity of domains
associating with it, indicating that the more abundant
domain is used to accomplish a greater variety of groupspecific functions (Figure 3 and Figure 5). Interestingly,
some domains are extant in both FYVE and PX proteins
(Figure 5). However in such cases there is a clear selectivity of co-occurrence with either FYVE or PX. For

example while RhoGEF and UIM have high association
frequencies in the FYVE dataset, they rarely co-occur
with PX. The reverse is true for Pkinase and PI3_PI4_kinase which selectively associate with PX. The only
exception is the PH domain, which has high association
frequencies in both the datasets. This is not surprising
because the PH domain is found to be highly prevalent
in genomes and is termed as ‘promiscuous’ for its ability
to associate with a very large number of other domains
[34].
Our results show that most genomes have a higher
number of PX proteins. This may be indicative of this
domain being selectively utilized for PtdIns(3)P specific
functions. However, given that PX domain is documented to bind ligands other than PtdIns(3)P [22-27], it
could also indicate that PX functions that are independent of PtdIns(3)P may play more significant roles in
these organisms. Interestingly, there are two completely
sequenced genomes which do not encode any FYVE
protein (O. lucimarinus and O. tauri in Figure 2c) but
of the 58 fully-sequenced genomes that have been analyzed (Additional File 1) there is not a single instance of
any genome that does not encode PX proteins,

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

Figure 6 Correlation between number of proteins with FYVERCC1-DZC and number of FYVE proteins in viridiplantae
genomes. The number of FYVE proteins that associate with RCC1
and DZC are plotted against the total number of FYVE proteins in
genomes of streptophytes that encode higher number of FYVE
proteins compared to PX.

Page 9 of 12

indicating that the latter domain may be indispensible
for cellular functions.
PtdIns(3)P is a minor constituent of cellular membranes [35] and most of it is confined to endosomal surface [7]. Thus if all the FYVE and PX domains in a
given genome do bind to PtdIns(3)P, then organisms
whose genomes encode a high number of such proteins
may have higher amounts of PtdIns(3)P compared to
those which encode fewer PtdIns(3)P binding proteins.
Alternatively it is possible that the expression of such
proteins are spatially and/or temporally separated, with
only a subset of them being expressed simultaneously
within a given cell type at a certain time. The latter scenario is more plausible because in most cases the combined number of FYVE and PX proteins increases with
the increase in organismal complexity. For example
while S. cerevisiae and S. pombe, both unicellular eukaryotes, have around 20 proteins capable of binding
PtdIns(3)P, the number of such proteins is well over 100
for highly evolved multicellular species such as H.
sapiens, P. troglodytes, M. musculus etc.

Figure 7 Unrooted phylogenetic tree of viridiplantae FYVE domains. Tree was reconstructed using protein parsimony method of PHYLIP
program using the amino acid sequence of the entire FYVE domain. The coloured zones of the tree show clustering on the basis of variation in
the consensus sequence at the PI-binding site. FYVE domains in the green cluster have the canonical ligand-binding site with the consensus of
R-R-H-H-C-R. The red cluster shows a non-canonical consensus of K-R/K-H-N-C-Y and these FYVE proteins associate with RCC1 and DZC domains,
while the blue cluster has the non-canonical consensus of G/S-R-H-H-C-R and associates with DUF500.

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

One of the intriguing observations of our study is that
streptohytes have higher number of FYVE proteins compared to PX. This excess of FYVE may be attributed to
the presence of FYVE protein(s) that are involved only
in plant-specific functions. One such plant-specific activity is the formation of cell plate during cytokinesis in
which vesicular trafficking plays an important role.
Therefore, cell division in plants may require proteins
that can function in vesicular trafficking as well as chromosome segregation. Our results show that higher number of FYVE proteins in streptophytes is most likely due
to amplification of genes encoding proteins that contain
RCC1, DZC and FYVE domains (Figure 6). Interestingly,
RCC1 is found to associate with chromosomes and has
a well documented role in cell division [36]. Thus this
family of proteins has the potential to function both in
chromosome segregation (RCC1) as well as vesicular
trafficking (FYVE). Proteins with this particular domain
architecture is completely absent in chlorophytes (green
algae), which is an early diverging class within the green
plant lineage [31]. While higher order green algae such
as Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and Volvox carteri, do
encode FYVE proteins, the number of such proteins is
lower than that of PX proteins encoded by these genomes. In addition none of these FYVE domains cooccur with either RCC1 or DZC. In fact lower order
green algae such as Ostreococcus tauri and Ostreococcus
lucimarinus do not encode any FYVE proteins at all.
This complete absence of FYVE proteins in the genomes
of Ostreococcus sp. is not unusual as these are characterized by minimal cellular organization with a well documented absence of several proteins that are present in
higher plants [37]. Therefore the greater abundance of
FYVE proteins in higher plants may be resulting from a
divergence event between chlorophytes (green algae)
and streptophytes (land plants). In metazoa a similar
deviation from the trend displayed by a majority is
observed in nematodes (C. elegans and C. briggsae) and
ascidia (C. intestinalis) as these have more FYVE proteins compared to PX. However, further studies are
necessary to ascertain the reason for this deviation.

Conclusions
In this study we have analysed the distribution of FYVE
and PX proteins in different taxonomic groups. There is
a distinct selectivity for either FYVE or PX in individual
genomes where both are present. While fungi and metazoa have higher number of PX, streptophyta of viridiplantae have a higher number of FYVE. Presence of
proteins with FYVE, RCC1 and DZC domain combination, in the genomes of streptophytes, may be the likely
explanation for more FYVE proteins in these viridiplantae species. We have also analyzed the taxonomic distribution of domains co-occurring with FYVE or PX and

Page 10 of 12

observed that depending on whether FYVE or PX is
more abundant in a given taxonomic group, the number
of domains exclusively associating with it (FYVE/PX) in
that particular taxonomic group is larger. This result
indicates that the more abundant domain may be
involved in a greater number of cellular functions. Thus,
our study of the taxonomic distribution of FYVE and
PX domains, as well as the domains co-occurring with
these, provides insights into the architectural and functional diversity of these proteins. This study demonstrates the importance of comparative genomics
approach for gaining a holistic understanding of protein
families.

Methods
Data collection

Protein sequences containing FYVE and PX domains
were collected separately from NCBI protein database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) [38] using keyword search
facility of Entrez. Redundancy from both the sequence
sets was removed by clustering the sequences at 95%
identity level, using the CD-HIT program [39-41] version 2007-0103. The clusters were next screened to prevent the elimination of inter-species identical proteins.
For a list of completely sequenced organisms that were
used in this analysis please see Additional file 1.
Domain architecture and taxonomic classification of the
sequences

Domains were assigned to the protein sequences based
on the domains stored in Pfam-A section of the Pfam
database release 22.0 (having 9318 families) [42], using
the HMMER-2.3.2 program [43] with an E-value cut-off
of 0.1. Based on NCBI taxonomy database [38,44], the
FYVE and PX protein sequences were classified into 5
major taxonomic groups namely metazoa, fungi, viridiplantae, protist and virus.
Functional classification of the associated domains

The functional categories of the associated domains
that were adopted from the COG classification of proteins ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/COG/COG/fun.txt[45]
include: (i) signal transduction mechanisms (ii) intracellular trafficking, secretion, and vesicular transport
(iii) chaperones (iv) cell cycle control, cell division,
chromosome partitioning (v) cytoskeleton (vi) transcription (vii) translation (viii) defence mechanisms (ix)
inorganic ion transport (x) metabolism (xi) replication,
recombination and repair (xii) general function prediction only and (xiii) function unknown. Two more categories namely (xiv) protein-protein interaction and (xv)
catalytic were further incorporated in the list. Functions were assigned to the domains following Pfam
annotations.

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

Calculation of association score of domains

Association score of each domain type, r, associating
with FYVE/PX proteins was calculated as per the following formula
Association score =

Ar
× 100
N

where Ar is the number of FYVE/PX proteins containing the associated domain type r and N is the summation of the total number of each associated domain type
found in FYVE/PX proteins.
Phylogenetic analysis

Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was carried out
with the amino acid sequences of the entire FYVE
domains belonging to the viridiplantae taxonomic group
using ClustalW [46]. The MSA was then used for
unweighted maximum-parsimony phylogenetic reconstruction using the Protpars program of PHYLIP v. 3.67
[47]. The resultant unrooted tree was drawn using
Drawtree of PHYLIP.
Additional file 1: List of completely sequenced organisms used in
this analysis. This file enlists the names of the completely sequenced
organisms that are included in the current analysis.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1183-S1.PDF ]
Additional file 2: Domains associating with FYVE proteins. List of all
the domains that are found to associate with the downloaded FYVE
proteins. Their distribution in various taxonomic groups is also included.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1183-S2.PDF ]
Additional file 3: Domains associating with PX proteins. List of all the
domains that are found to associate with the downloaded PX proteins.
Their distribution in various taxonomic groups is also included.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1183-S3.PDF ]
Additional file 4: Association score distribution graph of all FYVE
and PX associated domains. The associated domains of FYVE and PX
proteins are plotted according to their association score. The upper
horizontal axis shows the associated domains of PX and its
corresponding graph is drawn in red. The lower horizontal axis is for the
associated domains of FYVE and the corresponding graph is drawn in
green. Domain names in black font are present in more than one
taxonomic group whereas domains that are found only in a particular
taxonomic group are coloured according to the colour code given in the
figure.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1183-S4.PDF ]

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Dr. Alok K. Sil for critical review and suggestions
that improved the presentation of the manuscript. Also thanks to Abhishek
Sinha and Rajbir Kaur for their valuable scientific input and comments
regarding the manuscript, and Sambit Bikas Pal for his technical support. SB1

Page 11 of 12

is supported by a Ph.D. fellowship from Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Kolkata.
Author details
1
Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education
and Research, Kolkata, Mohanpur, Nadia 741252, West Bengal, India.
2
Department of Biotechnology, School of Biotechnology, West Bengal
University of Technology, BF 142, Salt Lake, Kolkata 700064, India.
Authors’ contributions
SB1 acquired the data, designed and performed the experiments, analyzed
and interpreted the results, prepared the figures and tables, and helped in
drafting the manuscript. SB2 supervised data acquisition and processing,
designed the experiments, analyzed and interpreted the results and helped
in drafting the manuscript. SS conceived of the study, designed the
experiments, analyzed and interpreted the results and drafted the
manuscript. All the authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 22 September 2009
Accepted: 2 February 2010 Published: 2 February 2010
References
1. De Matteis MA, Godi A: PI-loting membrane traffic. Nat Cell Biol 2004,
6(6):487-492.
2. Roth MG: Phosphoinositides in constitutive membrane traffic. Physiol Rev
2004, 84(3):699-730.
3. Sasaki T, Takasuga S, Sasaki J, Kofuji S, Eguchi S, Yamazaki M, Suzuki A:
Mammalian phosphoinositide kinases and phosphatases. Prog Lipid Res
2009, 48(6):307-43.
4. Cullen PJ, Cozier GE, Banting G, Mellor H: Modular phosphoinositidebinding domains–their role in signalling and membrane trafficking. Curr
Biol 2001, 11(21):R882-893.
5. Kölsch V, Charest PG, Firtel RA: The regulation of cell motility and
chemotaxis by phospholipid signaling. J Cell Sci 2008, 121(Pt 5):551-559.
6. Divecha N, Banfic H, Irvine RF: Inositides and the nucleus and inositides in
the nucleus. Cell 1993, 74(3):405-407.
7. Gillooly DJ, Morrow IC, Lindsay M, Gould R, Bryant NJ, Gaullier JM,
Parton RG, Stenmark H: Localization of phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate
in yeast and mammalian cells. EMBO J 2000, 19(17):4577-4588.
8. Drøbak BK, Heras B: Nuclear phosphoinositides could bring FYVE alive.
Trends Plant Sci 2002, 7(3):132-138.
9. Kutateladze T: Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate recognition and
membrane docking by the FYVE domain. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006,
1761(8):868-877.
10. Kutateladze TG: Mechanistic similarities in docking of the FYVE and PX
domains to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate containing membranes.
Prog Lipid Res 2007, 46(6):315-327.
11. Lemmon MA: Phosphoinositide recognition domains. Traffic 2003,
4(4):201-213.
12. Li T, Hu J, Li L: Characterization of Tollip protein upon
Lipopolysaccharide challenge. Mol Immunol 2004, 41(1):85-92.
13. Dowler S, Currie RA, Campbell DG, Deak M, Kular G, Downes CP, Alessi DR:
Identification of pleckstrin-homology-domain-containing proteins with
novel phosphoinositide-binding specificities. Biochem J 2000, 351(Pt
1):19-31.
14. Stenmark H, Aasland R, Toh BH, D’Arrigo A: Endosomal localization of the
autoantigen EEA1 is mediated by a zinc-binding FYVE finger. J Biol Chem
1996, 271(39):24048-24054.
15. Burd CG, Emr SD: Phosphatidylinositol(3)-phosphate signaling mediated
by specific binding to RING FYVE domains. Mol Cell 1998, 2(1):157-162.
16. Gaullier JM, Simonsen A, D’Arrigo A, Bremnes B, Stenmark H, Aasland R:
FYVE fingers bind PtdIns(3)P. Nature 1998, 394(6692):432-433.
17. Patki V, Lawe DC, Corvera S, Virbasius JV, Chawla A: A functional PtdIns(3)
P-binding motif. Nature 1998, 394(6692):433-434.
18. Dumas JJ, Merithew E, Sudharshan E, Rajamani D, Hayes S, Lawe D,
Corvera S, Lambright DJ: Multivalent endosome targeting by
homodimeric EEA1. Mol Cell 2001, 8(5):947-958.

Banerjee et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:83
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/83

19. Driscoll PC: Solving the FYVE domain–PtdIns(3)P puzzle. Nat Struct Biol
2001, 8(4):287-290.
20. Kurten RC, Eddington AD, Chowdhury P, Smith RD, Davidson AD, Shank BB:
Self-assembly and binding of a sorting nexin to sorting endosomes. J
Cell Sci 2001, 114(Pt 9):1743-1756.
21. Zhong Q, Lazar CS, Tronchère H, Sato T, Meerloo T, Yeo M, Songyang Z,
Emr SD, Gill GN: Endosomal localization and function of sorting nexin 1.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(10):6767-6772.
22. Bravo J, Karathanassis D, Pacold CM, Pacold ME, Ellson CD, Anderson KE,
Butler PJ, Lavenir I, Perisic O, Hawkins PT, et al: The crystal structure of the
PX domain from p40(phox) bound to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate.
Mol Cell 2001, 8(4):829-839.
23. Karathanassis D, Stahelin RV, Bravo J, Perisic O, Pacold CD, Cho W,
Williams RL: Binding of the PX domain of p47(phox) to
phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate and phosphatidic acid is masked
by an intramolecular interaction. EMBO J 2002, 21(19):5057-5068.
24. Stahelin RV, Karathanassis D, Murray D, Williams RL, Cho W: Structural and
membrane binding analysis of the Phox homology domain of Bem1p:
basis of phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate specificity. J Biol Chem 2007,
282(35):25737-25747.
25. Stahelin RV, Karathanassis D, Bruzik KS, Waterfield MD, Bravo J, Williams RL,
Cho W: Structural and membrane binding analysis of the Phox
homology domain of phosphoinositide 3-kinase-C2alpha. J Biol Chem
2006, 281(51):39396-39406.
26. Cheng G, Lambeth JD: NOXO1, regulation of lipid binding, localization,
and activation of Nox1 by the Phox homology (PX) domain. J Biol Chem
2004, 279(6):4737-4742.
27. Stahelin RV, Ananthanarayanan B, Blatner NR, Singh S, Bruzik KS, Murray D,
Cho W: Mechanism of membrane binding of the phospholipase D1 PX
domain. J Biol Chem 2004, 279(52):54918-54926.
28. Sankaran VG, Klein DE, Sachdeva MM, Lemmon MA: High-affinity binding
of a FYVE domain to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate requires intact
phospholipid but not FYVE domain oligomerization. Biochemistry 2001,
40(29):8581-8587.
29. Jensen RB, La Cour T, Albrethsen J, Nielsen M, Skriver K: FYVE zinc-finger
proteins in the plant model Arabidopsis thaliana: identification of
PtdIns3P-binding residues by comparison of classic and variant FYVE
domains. Biochem J 2001, 359(Pt 1):165-173.
30. Yu JW, Lemmon MA: All phox homology (PX) domains from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae specifically recognize phosphatidylinositol 3phosphate. J Biol Chem 2001, 276(47):44179-44184.
31. Hedges SB: The origin and evolution of model organisms. Nat Rev Genet
2002, 3(11):838-849.
32. Murphy DJ: PLANT LIPIDS Biology, Utilization and Manipulation Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. Oxford 2005.
33. Heras B, Drøbak BK: PARF-1: an Arabidopsis thaliana FYVE-domain protein
displaying a novel eukaryotic domain structure and phosphoinositide
affinity. J Exp Bot 2002, 53(368):565-567.
34. Basu MK, Carmel L, Rogozin IB, Koonin EV: Evolution of protein domain
promiscuity in eukaryotes. Genome Res 2008, 18(3):449-461.
35. Majumdar AL, Biswas BB: Biology of Inositols and Phosphoinositides Springer,
US 2006.
36. Dasso M: RCC1 in the cell cycle: the regulator of chromosome
condensation takes on new roles. Trends Biochem Sci 1993, 18(3):96-101.
37. Derelle E, Ferraz C, Rombauts S, Rouzé P, Worden AZ, Robbens S,
Partensky F, Degroeve S, Echeynié S, Cooke R, et al: Genome analysis of
the smallest free-living eukaryote Ostreococcus tauri unveils many
unique features. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(31):11647-52.
38. Wheeler DL, Chappey C, Lash AE, Leipe DD, Madden TL, Schuler GD,
Tatusova TA, Rapp BA: Database resources of the National Center for
Biotechnology Information. Nucleic Acids Res 2000, 28(1):10-14.
39. Li W, Godzik A: Cd-hit: a fast program for clustering and comparing large
sets of protein or nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(13):1658-1659.
40. Li W, Jaroszewski L, Godzik A: Clustering of highly homologous sequences
to reduce the size of large protein databases. Bioinformatics 2001,
17(3):282-283.
41. Li W, Jaroszewski L, Godzik A: Tolerating some redundancy significantly
speeds up clustering of large protein databases. Bioinformatics 2002,
18(1):77-82.

Page 12 of 12

42. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G,
Forslund K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer EL, et al: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36 Database: D281-288.
43. Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998, 14(9):755-763.
44. Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Rapp BA, Wheeler DL:
GenBank. Nucleic Acids Research 2000, 28(1):15-18.
45. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 1997, 278(5338):631-637.
46. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22(22):4673-4680.
47. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP (Phylogeny Interference Package) version 3.6.
Distributed by author: Department of Genome Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle .
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-83
Cite this article as: Banerjee et al.: Comparative genomics reveals
selective distribution and domain organization of FYVE and PX domain
proteins across eukaryotic lineages. BMC Genomics 2010 11:83.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
