<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Of woods and webs: Possible alternatives to the tree of life for studying genomic fluidity in E. coli</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:39. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-39"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Julie Beauregard-Racine"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

RESEARCH

Open Access

Of woods and webs: Possible alternatives to the
tree of life for studying genomic fluidity in E. coli
Julie Beauregard-Racine1, Cédric Bicep2, Klaus Schliep2, Philippe Lopez2, François-Joseph Lapointe1 and
Eric Bapteste2*

Abstract
Background: We introduce several forest-based and network-based methods for exploring microbial evolution,
and apply them to the study of thousands of genes from 30 strains of E. coli. This case study illustrates how
additional analyses could offer fast heuristic alternatives to standard tree of life (TOL) approaches.
Results: We use gene networks to identify genes with atypical modes of evolution, and genome networks to
characterize the evolution of genetic partnerships between E. coli and mobile genetic elements. We develop a
novel polychromatic quartet method to capture patterns of recombination within E. coli, to update the clanistic
toolkit, and to search for the impact of lateral gene transfer and of pathogenicity on gene evolution in two large
forests of trees bearing E. coli. We unravel high rates of lateral gene transfer involving E. coli (about 40% of the
trees under study), and show that both core genes and shell genes of E. coli are affected by non-tree-like
evolutionary processes. We show that pathogenic lifestyle impacted the structure of 30% of the gene trees, and
that pathogenic strains are more likely to transfer genes with one another than with non-pathogenic strains. In
addition, we propose five groups of genes as candidate mobile modules of pathogenicity. We also present strong
evidence for recent lateral gene transfer between E. coli and mobile genetic elements.
Conclusions: Depending on which evolutionary questions biologists want to address (i.e. the identification of
modules, genetic partnerships, recombination, lateral gene transfer, or genes with atypical evolutionary modes,
etc.), forest-based and network-based methods are preferable to the reconstruction of a single tree, because they
provide insights and produce hypotheses about the dynamics of genome evolution, rather than the relative
branching order of species and lineages. Such a methodological pluralism - the use of woods and webs - is to be
encouraged to analyse the evolutionary processes at play in microbial evolution.
This manuscript was reviewed by: Ford Doolittle, Tal Pupko, Richard Burian, James McInerney, Didier Raoult, and Yan
Boucher
Keywords: E. coli, trees, networks, quartets, lateral gene transfer, methodological pluralism

Background
For a long time, the reconstruction of the tree of life
(TOL) was an important goal of evolutionary science
[1]. This inclusive hierarchical classification, through its
genealogical structure, was expected to reflect the relative branching order of all biological lineages, as they
diverged from a last common ancestor. This unique,
universal, natural, and genealogical pattern was therefore
* Correspondence: eric.bapteste@snv.jussieu.fr
2
UMR CNRS 7138 Systématique, Adaptation, Evolution, Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

invested with important practical and heuristic powers
[2,3]. The TOL became central in attempts to make
sense of the huge diversity of forms and adaptations
produced during evolution. It was in particular considered to be the most important of all phylogenetic
objects, since it provided the best backbone to map the
origins of lineages, biological features and their subsequent modifications.
In order to successfully reconstruct the TOL, homologous characters, comparable among all life forms, were
needed. Genes and proteins appeared to be ideal materials for retracing evolution at both large and small

© 2011 Beauregard-Racine et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

evolutionary scales, since the vast majority of evolving
entities harbour these materials, and they can therefore
be compared widely. However, due to the limited size of
individual genes and the importance of horizontal transfer of DNA, the strength of the phylogenetic signal in
single molecules was often too low to resolve the entire
TOL. Multiple phylogenetic markers, in fact multiple
genes, were therefore used to propose a well resolved
TOL, either by the concatenation of markers, by averaging their phylogenetic signal, or by a corroboration of
their individual phylogenetic signals in congruence analyses that sought a hierarchical pattern shared by most
of these genes [2,4,5].
Yet, doubts were legitimately raised about the relevance (meaning and feasibility) of these various multigene approaches. First, if there are several major evolutionary transitions (e.g., from a pre-DNA to a DNAbased genetic system, etc.), homology in the genes
might not be a sufficient guideline to describe early evolution. Second, doubts were raised because these
approaches were clearly designed to subsume the history
of the multiple markers under one overarching (or an
average) phylogenetic history [1,6,7]. The recognition
that individual genes - even from a given genome often had uncoupled evolutionary histories, at the very
least for prokaryotes and for mobile elements, prompted
questioning about whether a single (dominant/average
or most corroborated) tree-like phylogenetic pattern was
the most suitable representation of evolution [8-21].
Rather than producing a satisfactory TOL, phylogenomic analyses based on multiple genes generated a
massive phylogenetic forest of gene trees [4,22,23].
Many of these gene trees displayed different topologies,
not only due to tree reconstruction artefacts, but also
due to lateral gene transfer (LGT), gene losses and gene
duplications [5,24-30].
Simply put, it became clear that independent processes had impacted the evolutionary history of genes
and genomes, and therefore of the lineages under study
in prokaryotes and mobile elements, and that evolution
had followed a more complex pattern than anticipated
by Darwin and subsequent evolutionists. Indeed, prokaryotes and mobile elements represent and have always
represented the vast majority of life [31-33]. This realization had some impact on phylogenetics, which had
historically considered evolution through the lens of systematics rather than ecology. Core genes, often assumed
to be vertically inherited, were typically expected to produce a fundamental vertical framework, against which
the evolution of traits and lineages was to be interpreted. Such core genes appeared suited to think about
“groups within groups”, which is a logic consistent with
systematics. However, the distribution of shell genes was
clearly explained by additional evolutionary processes,

Page 2 of 21

involving in particular gene transfers between partners
with overlapping lifestyles or environments. Most of
gene evolution (that of shell genes) appeared therefore
better interpreted in light of an ecological vision. Some
evolutionists were reluctant to consider a different
model than the TOL to study the multiple processes
and the distinct outcomes of evolution in more details,
but many acknowledged by changing their practices that
phylogenetic research required some adjustment
[22,23,28,34-37].
In particular, some researchers proposed reconstructing phylogenetic networks, rhizomes or syntheses of life
instead of a strict tree, making it possible to distinguish
the vertical backbone (tracking the lineage of dividing
cells) from horizontal transfers, which were represented
by additional lateral branches. These new methods produced a more complex representation that could
account for both genealogy and horizontal transfer
[13,34,36-39].
The decision to pursue this novel objective testifies
that the ultimate phylogenetic object of evolutionary
analysis, traditionally a common bifurcating tree, can
change. Yet, it is worth debating whether the particular
solution of a “banyan tree” based on multiple markers is
the only valuable result of evolutionary analyses
[12,16,21,40]. This kind of phylogenetic networks
emphasized the fact that evolutionary patterns are
caused by independent processes impacting the evolutionary histories of genes, i.e. that there is often more
than one process at play. From a pluralistic perspective,
methods specifically designed to reveal the multiple processes behind the pattern are necessary, as they challenge attempts to explain all patterns by a single process
(e.g. all evolution by a tree-like process of descent). A
tree alone is not going to help establish much of this
evolutionary complexity.
It is striking that today’s primary material for evolutionary studies is itself a new phylogenetic object: a
large forest of life (FOL) [4,22]. This observation opens
the doors to pluralistic and pragmatic developments in
the research program of phylogenetics (or, as some
might say, to post-phylogenetic evolutionary research
programs). Depending on what evolutionary questions
are to be addressed, many possible approaches can be
used to harvest the FOL [22,23,41,42], without giving an
absolute priority to the reconstruction of the TOL (perceived as a statistical trend or as the real genealogy of
evolving entities). Moreover, other representations than
the FOL, for instance those based on networks
[18-21,41,43,44], can be used to address distinct evolutionary questions, at different biological scales.
In this work, we use 141,493 genes of 30 strains of E.
coli, 300,841 genes from 119 prokaryotic genomes (54
archaea, 65 bacteria) and 228,131 genes from mobile

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

elements to illustrate that interesting questions about
evolution can be tackled, and new knowledge can be
produced, with new methods/tools that go beyond the
TOL. More precisely, we illustrate the genetic mosaicism of E. coli [25,45] and some of its causes with two
methods of shared sequence network analysis (the genome network [21] and the gene network [43]) and with
two methods for harvesting the FOL (clanistic analysis
[41,42], and a novel approach based on polychromatic
quartets: PQ). These methods of evolutionary analyses
unravel a bit more how E. coli adapted to their
environments.

Results and Discussion
A few lessons from networks
Using genome networks to detect recent LGT in the E. coli
pangenome

Genome networks are shared sequence networks that
display the overlap in genetic content between genomes
[13,18,21]. Nodes of genome networks correspond to
genomes, connected by weighted edges that are inversely
proportional to the number of homologous families

A.
A

Page 3 of 21

these genomes share. Such networks are excellent tools
to unravel patterns of gene sharing caused by conjugation and transduction events that result in shared DNA
material between chromosomes and the genomes of
plasmids, and between chromosomes and the genomes
of phages, respectively. In our genome network, we
focused on the genetic interactions between E. coli and
the mobile elements, and their evolution over time.
Indeed, such connections suggest which gene families and how many - may have been introduced in the chromosomes of E. coli by mobile elements, or may have
moved from these chromosomes to the genomes of
mobile elements.
In order to find such candidate gene families “recently
moved”, we divided the genome network into slices and
focused on shared gene families displaying 100%
sequence identity between E. coli and the mobile elements (Figure 1A). We observed that 170 plasmids and
29 viruses harboured sequences from 416 gene families
100% identical with E. coli. Such a similarity is unlikely
to be the result of a very strong purifying selection that
has been constantly exerted on these sequences. Rather,

B.

Figure 1 Genome network of E. coli at 100% identity. (A) Each node corresponds to a genome (blue for E. coli, purple for plasmid, orange
for viruses, brown for E. histolytica, green for A. laidlawii and S. putrefaciens). Edges connect pairs of genomes sharing at least one gene with
100% identical sequence. The display is a spring-embedded layout. (B) Same dataset and same colour code for the nodes. The display was a
group attributes layout, with three groups: viruses, plasmids and E. coli. Edges are coloured based on the dominant function of the shared
genes: red for the replication and repair category, cyan for all the other COG categories and black for genes without known functions. Cytoscape
[66] was used for both displays.

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

Page 4 of 21

it may correspond to recent exchanges between E. coli
and the mobile elements. Therefore, in our gene network, E. coli appears at the center of a cloud of mobile
DNA, as these cellular genomes are surrounded by
mobile genetic elements with which they interact. The
interaction presented in this type of evolutionary representation demonstrates beyond doubt that E. coli and
mobile genetic elements mutually affect each other’s
recent evolution. They are partners, consistent with previous findings [46] that highlight the role of huge viral
populations in providing adaptive genes to their cellular
hosts in the digestive tract.
Interestingly, 42% of these 4361 sequences belonged to
the L functional categories (Replication and repair)
(Table 1). These particular sequences were thus likely to

be involved in the lateral transfer itself, and as such may
be considered as strong evidence for these recent LGTs.
Through this analysis, not only the vectors can be identified but also the genes that played a role in the insertion of exogenous DNA material (Figure 1B).
Interestingly, when particular plasmids and viruses
shared such sequences for replication and repair with E.
coli, they also often shared additional sequences, from
other functional categories. Replication and repair
sequences may have helped to move these other
sequences around. Moreover, while both viruses and
plasmids transferred such replication and repair
sequences, most of the genes shared between viruses
and E. coli were - remarkably - of unknown function
(Figure 1B). Another 42% of the “recently” transferred

Table 1 Number of sequences and gene families in the genome networks, classified by functional categories
COG

100%-seq

90-99%-seq

100%-fam

90-99%-fam

RNA processing and modification

A

0

0

0

0

Chromatin structure and dynamics

B

0

0

0

0

Information, storage, processing

Translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis

J

28

120

2

4

Transcription

K

131

255

18

27

Replication, recombination and repair

L

1838

3670

68

94

Cellular Processes and Signalling
Cell cycle control, cell division, chromosome partitioning

D

12

15

1

1

Signal transduction mechanisms

T

82

294

11

24

Defense mechanisms

V

22

148

3

9

Nuclear structure

Y

0

0

0

0

Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis

M

56

295

5

13

Cell motility

N

3

69

1

5

Extracellular structures

W

0

0

0

0

Cytoskeleton

Z

0

0

0

0

Posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones

O

0

50

0

4

Intracellular trafficking, secretion, and vesicular transport

U

5

94

2

13

Energy production and conversion

C

0

56

0

5

Amino acid transport and metabolism

E

6

40

2

6

Nucleotide transport and metabolism

F

0

28

0

1

Carbohydrate transport and metabolism

G

23

159

6

8

Coenzyme transport and metabolism

H

49

3

2

1

Metabolism

Lipid transport and metabolism

I

0

13

0

1

Inorganic ion transport and metabolism

P

67

371

4

21

Secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism

Q

16

56

2

4

General function prediction only

R

120

806

19

52

Function unknown

S

138

885

20

45

Unknown by RPS-Blast

X

1832

4589

260

356

Poorly characterized

The functional categories are the COG categories, assigned by RPS-BLAST. The two first left columns of data indicate the number of sequences, and the
remaining two columns indicate the number of gene families, in the 100% identity genome network (first), and in the 90-99% identity genome network (second).

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

sequences had unknown functions. The results were less
dramatic but similar when expressed in number of
families shared between E. coli and mobile elements:
61% had unknown functions, and 16% belonged to the
replication and repair category.
This important co-evolutionary interaction between E.
coli and mobile elements concerns not only “recent” periods of time. The analyses of other slices of the genome
network (when the identity threshold between homologs
in E. coli and mobile genetic elements was relaxed, i.e.
when families shared between E. coli and mobile elements with 90-99% identity were investigated), we
obtained a similar picture. In that slightly more “ancient”
genome network, E. coli shared genetic material with 249
plasmids and 40 viruses from 673 gene families.
Sequences involved in replication and repair were still
very detectable (30.5% of the sequences and 13.5% of the
gene families), and the proportion of sequences without
known function, although still dominant, slightly
decreased in these 11,805 sequences (38.2% of the
sequences, 51.3% of the gene families) (Table 1). Overall
these results show the important cumulative effect that
LGT can have on microbial genomes.
In addition, these genome networks highlighted that E.
coli shared some sequences that were 90-100% identical
with two pathogenic bacterial genomes (one IS-10 transposase with Acholeplasma laidlawii, and nine genes
with Shewanella putrefaciens: namely a heavy metal
translocating P-type ATPase, a 30S ribosomal protein
S12, a hypothetical protein Sputcn32_0263, a copper/silver efflux system membrane fusion protein CusB, a
transposase, IS4 family protein, the IS630 ORF, a peptidase M23B, a DNA-binding transcriptional activator
CusR, a sensor kinase CusS, a CzcA family heavy metal
efflux protein, an insertion element protein, and a periplasmic copper-binding protein), and with one intestinal
eukaryote (an aminoglycoside 3’-phosphotransferase
with Entamoeba histolytica). Whether these cases are
real lateral transfer between these organisms, or contamination, may be worth investigating in future studies.
E. coli gene networks: a brief look at the diverse
evolutionary modes affecting gene families

We also used gene networks to rapidly investigate the
evolution of genetic diversity of homologous families
within pathogens and non-pathogens, with a focus on E.
coli. Unlike the genome network, a gene network [43]
has gene sequences at its nodes, instead of genomes.
Sequences are connected by weighted edges when they
share a relationship of homology/identity, as assessed by
a BLAST search. Each gene family is therefore easily
characterized because it falls separately into a connected
component. The topological (and mathematical) properties of such individual component can be analysed, compared and classified using centrality measures [47].

Page 5 of 21

Specifically, we exploited the notions of cliques, communities, clustering coefficient, betweenness, articulation
points, and diameter. Cliques correspond to a portion of
the graph in which all the nodes are connected with one
another. Communities are regions of the graphs in
which all the nodes show a significantly greater proportion of connections with other nodes of the community
than with any other node in the graph. The clustering
coefficient of a component estimates the ratio of connections in the component over the total number of
possible connections. The shortest path between any
two nodes is the path of minimal length in terms of
numbers of edges. The betweenness of a node quantifies
how frequently this node lies on the shortest path
between all pairs of nodes in the graph. Nodes with significantly high betweenness are more frequently found
on these paths, and they therefore structure the network
and often act like bridges. In particular, some of them
are articulation points, which are single nodes that disconnect the graph into subgraphs when they are
removed. Articulation points represent obligate bridges.
Finally, the diameter estimates the component size: it
corresponds to the largest of all shortest paths between
two nodes in the component.
Massive tinkering in the evolution of restrictionmodification endonucleases

For instance, we displayed the gene network (for 30%
and more identity, false BBH, BLAST-score 1e-20) (Figure 2) to show that such a graph can help demonstrate
that gene families under study evolved very differently.
Typically, putative homoserine kinase type II, translation
initiation factor I (TiF1), or predicted permeases produced very densely connected components (cliques or
quasi-cliques in terms of graph theory), while restriction
endonuclease S subunits genes presented a very distinct
pattern of evolution, with remarkable communities (e.g.
clusters of sequences) and bridges within sequences of
that family. Proteins from the type V secretory pathways
(adhesins, outer membrane proteins and periplasmic
proteins), displayed an intermediate structure with three
visible communities and showed divergent evolution as
this family expanded in E. coli. While TiF1 and similar
genes had a small diameter, typical of conserved gene
families with very conserved sequences and little diversity, restriction endonuclease S subunits genes had a
very large diameter that reflected a significant genetic
divergence within this gene family. Likewise, the clustering coefficient (or transitivity) of these two types of
families strongly differed. TiF1 genes and the like have a
high clustering coefficient (close to 1), type V secretory
pathways proteins have an intermediate clustering coefficient, and the restriction endonuclease S subunit family
presents a much lower clustering coefficient (closer to
0). Moreover, the restriction endonuclease S subunit

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

Page 6 of 21

E.

B.

A.
C.

D.

Figure 2 Selected connected components of the E. coli gene network. Nodes correspond to gene sequences (blue for E. coli, green for all
other bacteria, orange for archaea, and pink for mobile genetic elements). Edges were drawn when sequences showed an homology with a
BLAST score < 1e-20, > 30% identity, option false BBH. Cytoscape was used for the display. (A) Putative homoserine kinase type II. (B) Translation
Initiation Factor I. (C) Predicted permeases. (D) Type V secretory pathway proteins. (E) restriction endonuclease S subunit.

family presents a number of nodes with high betweenness and some local articulation points. These nodes
bridge various regions of the subgraph corresponding to
that family. In particular, when local articulation points
are removed from a graph, the connected component is
split locally into disconnected subgraphs, defining sets
of rather distinct sequences within the family. Gene
fusion, or domain sharing between sequences within
this gene family, as well as high evolutionary rates in the
family outside these central sequences, would typically
result in such local articulation points [44]. Many of
these nodes were sequences of mobile elements. Both
nodes with high betweenness and articulation points are
by contrast totally absent in the TiF1 family and similar
genes, which suggests that restriction endonuclease S
subunit has undergone a much more complex (nontree-like) evolutionary history, with possibly occasional
events of genetic merging or periods of strong divergence from some ancestral versions of the gene. These
results are consistent with the literature [48].
Since the topological (and mathematical) properties of
each individual component in such graphs can be analysed, future analyses of gene networks could therefore

rely on these topological estimates to classify quickly
thousands of gene families based on the topology of
their subgraphs, and to automate the identification of
sets of connected components (hence of gene families)
with average or atypical topologies and possibly average/
atypical evolutionary histories, within the framework of
a gene network. This approach is particularly relevant
for inferences about complex evolutionary processes.
Although gene tree analyses currently benefit from a
rich body of tools, which have still to be developed for
gene network analyses, gene networks are more inclusive than gene trees. They are helpful not only to study
LGT, but also to study the more general phenomena of
transfer and recombination of genetic material. These
two sources of evolutionary novelties do not always
respect the boundaries of genes, when parts of genes, e.
g. domains or genes fused with promoters, or when segments of DNA recombine. Such complexity is easily
captured by gene networks, which allow the study of
mixed evolutionary processes, which include vertical
descent as well as recombination, domain fusion, etc.
Moreover, the huge advantage of the gene network
approach is that producing these powerfully inclusive

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

graphs is much faster than reconstructing individual
gene trees.
A few lessons from forests

While networks are very useful and fast tools to unravel
some patterns and processes of genetic diversity, they
are incomparably more powerful when coupled with
analyses of phylogenetic forests. The phylogenetic
toolkit helps identify gene trees compatible with vertical
evolution, and it allows tests of the direction of lateral
gene transfer. Therefore phylogenetic analyses help
determine which groups of genes were co-inherited and
which were introduced by horizontal transfer before
being inherited vertically. To further this objective, we
present some methods for analysing patterns of genetic
diversity in trees of phylogenetic forests as a valuable
complement to genome and gene network analyses.
Clanistic analysis of the wild forest reports numerous LGTs
within E. coli

Clanistics is a straightforward approach to analyse the
evolutionary signal in a phylogenetic forest, when labels
are associated to sequences under study. Sequences are
first assigned to complementary categories defined a
priori (i.e. taxonomical categories such as “E. coli“ and
“non-E. coli“, or lifestyle categories, such as “pathogens”
and “non-pathogens”). Then, clanistics proceeds by cutting trees into pieces to highlight remarkable groupings
of members of these categories in the trees and in the
forest. Consequently, clanistics allows the study of the
dispersal of types of OTUs in the trees by partitions
[42]. We used two simple partitions, clans [49] and
slices to look for trees with neat groupings of E. coli.
Clans correspond to bipartitions created by a single cut,
whereas slices are obtained by two cuts of the tree
[41,42]. When it is impossible to define a clean clan or
a clean slice that separates E. coli from other OTUs, it
means that sequences of E. coli and other OTUs are
intertwined in the tree. In that latter case (mélange),
non-E. coli sequences branch within E. coli sequences,
either because E. coli transferred these genes to non-E.
coli, or the opposite, or both if multiple exchanges of
sequences belonging to this gene family occurred
between E. coli and other OTUs. Two indices, the E*
and the p-score, were used to quantify the extent of the
mixing of sequences from two categories in the trees
(and clans). The E* is an equitability index measuring
the evenness of the distribution of sequences from a
given category (e.g. all E. coli sequences) along the tree
branches. Frequent lateral exchanges result in a positive
value of the E* index (because the sequences involved in
many distinct LGTs will be very mixed with that of
their donor and hosts in the trees). By contrast, vertically inherited sequences will not be evenly distributed,
but will all be located in the same region of the tree:

Page 7 of 21

perfectly grouped sequences from a given category have
a null E*. The same is true for the p-scores [41]; the
higher the E* index and p-scores the more frequent the
mixes between E. coli and non-E. coli in the tree.
High rates of LGT in E. coli

We studied two forests: one centred on a particular E.
coli, UTI89 (NC007946) (later called the wild genome
forest), and another based on the genes of all E. coli
(called the pangenome forest). These two forests differed in their bacterial taxonomical sampling, the former
being richer in bacteria closely related to E. coli than the
latter (see Methods). Clanistic analyses of these two forests indicated contrasting yet consistent results. The
pangenome forest provided information about potential
LGT above the order and class levels, and about mobile
genetic elements, while the wild forest offered additional
insights by accounting for both short and long distance
LGTs in terms of taxonomy. Both forests indicated that
mobile genetic elements seem to play a role in E. coli
evolution. Mobile genetic elements were present in
10.3% of the wild forest (302+52+66/4065), and in
13.6% of the pangenome forest (474+184+174/6129),
respectively. These slight differences reveal that a small
fraction of gene families is present in the pangenome
due to the impact of mobile elements, yet does not
include homologues in the particular genome of E. coli
UTI89 (NC007946). Of these mobile gene families, 28%
(in the wild forest) and 43% (in the pangenome forest)
had been transferred more than once between E. coli
and the mobile genetic elements. These estimates
depend on the sample of mobile elements included in
the analysis, and therefore are very likely to underrepresent the extent to which sequences derived from
mobile elements are present in this forest, since the
diversity of mobile elements is currently undersampled.
Phylogenetic proximity affected the frequency of lateral gene transfers in E. coli: these organisms mainly
exchange genes with closely related taxa (Additional file
1A). First, analyses of the two forests showed that E. coli
exchanged almost no genes with Archaea. These organisms may be phylogenetically too distant for successful
LGT. Alternatively, the Archaea of that particular dataset may seldom share the same environments with the
E. coli investigated here, and therefore they may not rely
on the same shell genes to adapt to the environment.
This interpretation would explain this low proportion of
exchanges.
The pangenome forest (with no closer bacterial taxa
below the order and class levels) and the wild forest
(including all bacterial taxa sequenced) logically show
very different estimates of LGT, due to the inclusion of
closely related bacteria. The pangenome forest suggests
long distance LGT (above the class level) with heavy
mixing of non-E. coli and E. coli sequences in 176 trees

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

(E*mélange = 0.7207), and perfect slices of E. coli, surrounded by non-E. coli in 186 trees. It suggests therefore
that long-distance LGT affects about 5.9% (186+176/
6129) of the E. coli pangenome. By contrast, the analysis
of the wild forest, including short distance LGT (above
and below the class level) returns 3174 trees (out of
4065) that exhibit heavy mixing of E. coli and non-E.
coli sequences (E*mélange = 0.7362), and 343 trees with
a perfect slice of E. coli. Thus, in the wild forest, no less
than 88.9% of the trees (3174+343/4065) may have been
involved in LGT events, while only 11% trees (140 +
308/4065) show no sign of LGT. These results, however,
change dramatically when Shigella is considered as a
bona fide E. coli. There are 1089 trees with slices and
606 trees with mélange (E*mélange = 0.55). In other
words, a total of 1695 trees suggest LGT events involving E. coli. Still, these many trees represented a significant fraction of E. coli pangenome (41.7%) that seems to
have been affected by LGT, and no less than 14.9% of
the trees show evidence of multiple LGTs (Additional
file 1A). Such a high rate of LGT is consistent with the
literature [25,45].
Pathogenic lifestyle affects the evolution of 30% of the E.
coli pangenome

We also used the pangenome forest to perform two clanistic analyses embracing a phenotypic perspective,
focusing on the pathogenicity of E. coli, rather than on
their taxonomy (Additional file 1B). This shift in perspective is justified, because gene exchange is very
dependent on bacterial lifestyles, and because the evolution of a gene caught up in a genetic partnership will, in
general, differ from that of a gene that experiences only
vertical inheritance. The various strains were distinguished as pathogenic and non-pathogenic, and were
sometimes associated with a specific disease (GAS, URI
and HEM) (see Methods). The first clanistic analysis
was achieved for all bootstrap supports, the second
enforced a requirement of at least 50% of bootstrap support to resolve the strains into groups, else the non-supported branches were automatically collapsed before the
analysis. This distinction based on bootstrap support
had no impact on our estimates of the relative distribution of pathogenic and non-pathogenic E. coli in the
trees. While the vast majority (70%) of the trees very
strongly mixed pathogens and non-pathogens (e.g. 4291/
6129 trees presented an average E* mélange of 0.9451),
there was nonetheless a significant fraction of the pangenome forest that was well structured with respect to
pathogenicity. 546 trees were comprised only of pathogenic OTUs, 735 trees nicely grouped all pathogenic
OTUs in a perfect clan, and 547 in a perfect slice. Thus,
pathogenic lifestyle affected the evolution of no less
than 1828 gene families, about 30% of the E. coli
pangenome.

Page 8 of 21

When focusing on specific types of diseases, represented by smaller numbers of OTUs for three categories
(URI, GAS and HEM), bootstrap support impacted the
results. Therefore, we considered the clanistic results for
robust phylogenies (Additional file 1B). The results
regarding these diseases only yielded a limited structure
in the trees of pangenome forest: 67 to 77 gene trees
only cleanly grouped the taxa involved in each of these
specific diseases in a perfect clan, and 367 to 680
grouped them in a perfect slice. Thus 7.2% to 12.2% of
the trees showed some structure that could be related to
a particular disease.
Detection of candidate mobile modules of pathogenicity

To further illustrate that clanistic analyses can be used
to foster hypotheses about E. coli evolution, we also
automatically identified groups of gene trees that contained mobile genetic elements (> 0 #natives when MGE
are the natives), that were exclusively found in pathogenic hosts (p-score = 0 for when PATH are natives),
and that presented absolutely identical taxonomical distributions in E. coli strains within each group. These
sets of genes were likely co-inherited by lateral transfer
effected by a mobile genetic element, and may be associated to pathogenicity since they are not known in any
non-pathogenic organism. We obtained five groups that
may correspond to five such candidate transferrable
modules of pathogenicity. These candidates encoded
respectively for: (i) DNA replication protein 32 and
transposase and inactivated derivatives, (ii) two uncharacterized proteins conserved in bacteria and hemolysincoregulated protein, (iii) response regulators consisting
of a CheY-like receiver domain and a winged-helix
DNA-binding domain, sulfite oxidase and related
enzymes, and transposase and inactivated derivatives
sulfite oxidase and related enzymes, (iv) signal transduction histidine kinase regulating phosphoglycerate transport system, ABC-type Fe3+ transport system
periplasmic component, sugar phosphate permease,
response regulator containing cheY-like receiver, AAAtype ATPase, and DNA-binding domains, and (v) predicted P-loop ATPase and predicted PP-loop ATPase.
Overall, our results indicate that an alternative
approach to the TOL such as clanistics can easily sort
out a forest of trees and make predictions regarding the
possible implication of some gene families in pathogenicity and even specific diseases.
Polychromatic quartets reveal high recombination/LGT rates
in core and shell genes within E. coli

We developed a new approach, PQ, that allows the dissection of each tree of the phylogenetic forest using
quartets, by focusing on the relationships among the different strains in each and every gene tree. In a first series of analyses, all trees in the pangenome forest
representing at least four different strains of E. coli were

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

considered. Then, the core genes (i.e., those represented
in all strains), and the shell genes (i.e., those represented
in some strains only) were analysed separately to detect
differences among them, if any. Finally, all trees bearing
replicate (or transferred) copies of a gene in one strain
were ignored to define a reduced forest of single-copy
genes, which was analysed using the same PQ protocol.
In short, there exist 435 (i.e., 30*29/2) pairwise comparisons among the 30 strains, and the relative frequencies
of each clan appearing in PQs were tabulated in a 30 ×
30 matrix. The one-complement of this matrix (e.g. a
matrix with values scored as 1 - relative frequencies of
each clans in PQs) was taken as an estimate of LGTs,
and a splits-graph representation [50] was used to visualise any conflicts in the phylogenetic forest.
Figure 3 presents the split networks of the core (n =
2317) and the shell (n = 3511) sets of genes after a PQ
analysis for the pangenome forest, constructed using the
Neighbor-Net algorithm [51,52]. Neighbor-Net produces
circular collections of splits depicted by a planar graph
with boxes. The intricate appearance of such representations thus revealed incompatible phylogenetic signals
among gene trees [53], which can be used to locate
putative recombination/LGT events. If all trees had
been entirely compatible, the corresponding splitsgraph
would also be a tree. Figure 3 also showed that the core
and shell gene sets are equally subject to recombination.
A significance test (t = -36.831, p < 0.0001) indicated
however that pairwise distances among strains for core
genes (0.6541) are on average shorter than those for
shell genes (0.8746), as also highlighted by the smaller
numbers of “reticulate” cells in the corresponding networks. This observation suggests that core genes are less
likely to be transferred than shell genes, in regard to the
pangenome forest we have analysed.
Preferential exchanges of DNA material between
pathogenic E. coli

To assess the effect of pathogenicity on recombination/
LGT frequencies, the different strains of E. coli were
tagged as PATH (n = 20) and NON-PATH (n = 10) (e.
g., Figure 3, red and blue nodes). A Mantel test [54]
comparing the distances among the different strains
with respect to pathogenicity was used to assess whether
distances among groups (PATH vs NON-PATH) were
significantly larger than those within groups (PATH vs.
PATH and NON-PATH vs. NON-PATH). The results
revealed that a pathogenic strain is more likely to
exchange genes with another pathogenic strain than
with any other non-pathogenic strain, for the whole set
of genes (r = 0.1511, p = 0.024), the single-copy genes (r
= 0.1380, p = 0.035), and the shell genes (r = 0.1815, p
= 0.015), but not for the core genes (r = 1215, p = 0.1),
which barely miss the significance level for multiple
tests. This result can be explained due to the ability of

Page 9 of 21

pathological species to meet in the gut, which would
enhance their rate of LGT. It confirms that the LGT of
shell genes is likely to have adaptive effects, i.e. related
to ecological/lifestyle phenotypes, and that the LGTs are
possibly selected for, since we observed here an
increased rate of LGT/recombination for shell genes
between pathogens, distinct from the background rate
of LGT/recombination of core genes that cannot make
an ecological/lifestyle difference in E. coli hosts.
All computations were performed with a cutoff level
of 50% bootstrap for including a polychromatic quartet
in the analysis, but qualitatively similar results were
obtained for other bootstrap values, and even without
taking bootstrap support into consideration (results not
shown). There were not enough data available for PQ to
detect any preferential LGTs among strains of E. coli
causing the same types of diseases (URI, GAS or HEM).
Overall, application of the PQ approach revealed complex and intricate phylogenetic patterns among the different strains of E. coli, and the importance of
pathogenicity for LGTs. Whereas the clanistic methodology can help define homogeneous groups of OTUs
(clans and slices) by focusing on bipartitions and tripartitions, PQ looks for significant patterns at a different
scale, by dissecting trees in quartets of leaves. Consequently, this is the locus of the statistical power of this
approach, which allows specific evolutionary hypotheses
to be tested by colouring the leaves using diverse categories (i.e., the different strains, pathogenicity, diseases,
etc.), while clanistics methods, accounting for two categories (X vs. non-X) are still restricted to statistics on
bicolour trees.

Conclusions
Our present goal was certainly not to offer a new
detailed picture of E. coli evolution, even though we
could confirm many well known facts about the prevalence of recombination and LGT in E. coli [25,45], and
support some new hypotheses (e.g. suggesting gene
families and gene modules involved in pathogenicity,
pointing out strong evidence for recent LGT as exemplified by large numbers of transferred genes involved in
replication and repair, etc.). The set of analyses deployed
here had only one purpose: to illustrate that there exist
alternative ways to study evolution beyond the TOL
research program. The diversity of processes and elements that can be included in evolutionary scenarios
(genes, genomes, functions, mobile genetic elements,
cellular organisms, pangenomes, genetic partners, etc.)
strongly suggests that no single approach could provide
an exhaustive description of microbial evolution. Therefore, depicting a unique picture of evolution (whether a
web or a tree) may not be the only future option for
evolutionists. Rather, the use of multiple distinct tree-

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

Page 10 of 21

A.

B.

Figure 3 Split decomposition graph of the E. coli strains. Visual representation of the conflict in the phylogenetic signals among 30 strains
of E. coli, for (A) the core genes (n = 2317) and (B) the shell genes (n = 3511). The strains are tagged for pathogenicity with red nodes for PATH
and blue nodes for NON-PATH E. coli. Splitstree4 http://www.splitstree.org/ was used for both display, with the Neighbor-Net algorithm [51].

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

based, forest-based and network-based approaches may
be a more powerful way to characterize the evolutionary
processes and mechanisms that sustain diversity, even
within a well-defined microbial group.
The TOL is one of these many possible approaches to
decipher evolution; therefore it is one of many possible
heuristic ways to deal with understanding natural diversity and its history. If our simple case studies motivate
more evolutionists to explore a wider range of methods
beyond the TOL, i.e. to explore woods and webs, for
which conceptual and methodological developments are
still in their infancy, rather than defaulting to a single
practice, this paper will have achieved its goal. Many
open questions, not addressed by the TOL, will indeed
require the focus of evolutionists. For example, as suggested by Richard Burian, it might be timely (i) to
explore the variation in the rates of lateral transfer in
different gene families, and (ii) to devise ways to determine whether there are differences in selection regimes
when genes from a given family are embedded in viral
or plasmidial genomes on the one hand, or in cellular
genomes on the other hand. If indeed genes that
undergo LGT experience independent evolutionary processes (e.g. different selection regimes) when they reside
in mobile elements than while they reside in cellular
genomes, novel models of molecular evolution, beyond
the TOL, will be required. More generally, the necessity
of including mobile elements in the evolutionary picture
along with the cellular chromosomes is now raised.
Similarly, as pointed by Didier Raoult, (iii) future work
will need to make room for ORFans. These sequences
will pose additional methodological and conceptual challenges for evolutionary studies, since comparative
approaches are not designed to handle unique sequences
that cannot be compared to any other sequences. Such
efforts to go beyond the TOL indeed support the recognition of the extraordinary complexity of evolution:
methodological pluralism is an important step toward
its understanding.

Methods
Reconstruction of the dataset

We downloaded all chromosomally-encoded proteins
(141,493 sequences) for 30 strains of E. coli from the
NCBI ftp site, carefully excluding protein sequences
encoded by plasmids. The list of strains and their lifestyles are detailed in Additional file 2. These proteins
were added to a pre-existing database of 300,841 proteins from 119 cellular genomes and 22,131 sequences
of phages and plasmids, obtained from the NCBI.
Gene families were reconstructed as follows, consistent
with procedures in [21,43]. First, each sequence of this
extended dataset was compared against one another by
reciprocal BLASTs (1e-5 cutoff). Second, gene families

Page 11 of 21

were defined by clustering homologous sequences
using a single-linkage algorithm. This method grouped
sequences if they shared a reciprocal best-BLAST hit
relationship with at least one of the sequences of the
cluster (option “true BBH”), or simply if sequences
presented a minimal homology score of 1e-20 (option
“false BBH”). Third, for phylogenetic analyses of the
pangenome forest (see below), an additional criterion
was enforced: sequences were clustered in a same
family by the single-linkage algorithm (false BBH) if
reciprocal BLAST hit pairs shared a minimum
sequence identity of 70%. For network analyses, various
identity thresholds were used in the analysis: [41], [9099%], and [100%] were used to obtain distinct gene
and genome networks.
Sequences annotations

Each sequence of the dataset was functionally annotated
using RPS-BLAST [55] with a COG profile database.
Each of the sequences investigated was also labeled
according (i) to its host type (MGE for mobile genetic
element, e.g. Virus + Plasmid; EUK for Eukaryote; ARC
for Archaea; BAC for Bacteria; and EC1 to EC30 for the
different strains of E. coli), and (ii) with respect to the
available information on its host pathogenicity (NONPATH for non-pathogenic hosts, PATH for pathogenic
hosts, OTH when this information was unknown),
through a careful inspection of the organismal annotation of the GOLD table [56]. Sequences from pathogenic
E. coli only were then further tagged according to the
type of disease they were causing: URI for urinary infection and cystitis, HEM for hemorrhagic colitis, GAS for
gastroenteritis, OTH for other diseases. These annotations were further used in network and forest analyses.
Phylogenetic analyses

We used the entire genome of E. coli UTI89
(NC007946) as a seed, and BLASTed all its 5021 genes
against the nr database (from the NCBI) to produce a
phylogenetic forest centred on E. coli UTI89. Each gene
was aligned with all its homologues with a BLAST score
> 1e-5 using MUSCLE [57]. Ambiguously aligned
regions were excluded using GBlocks [58], which let us
with 4065 unambigously aligned families with over 3
OTUs, for which phylogenetic trees were inferred by
ML using Phyml [59] (WAG model, empirical character
frequencies, estimated invariant proportion). The
sequences in these trees were also automatically annotated as MGE for mobile genetic element (e.g. Virus +
Plasmid), EUK for Eukaryote, ARC for Archaea, BAC
for Bacteria, and EC1 to EC30 for the different strains
of E. coli. This first forest, referred to as E. coli UTI89
wild forest, was used to investigate the amount of LGT
between E. coli and all sorts of relatives (i.e. from closely

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

related bacterial species and genera to OTUs of other
Orders and Families, Domains).
We also constructed a second forest, the E. coli pangenome forest, sampling a greater number of E. coli
genes but for a different diversity of prokaryotic
lineages, as described above. Since only three OTUs
belonged to the same order as E. coli in this pangenome
dataset (Coxiella burnetii RSA 493, Psychrobacter arcticus 273-4, Shewanella putrefaciens CN-32), this second
forest can only investigate the evolution of the E. coli
pangenome at two levels: the recombination/LGT
between E. coli strains and the LGT between E. coli and
distantly related OTUs (e.g. LGT above the order and
class levels). Gene families (false BBH, > 70% identity)
without any E. coli sequences were excluded from the
analyses: 7726 gene families with at least one E. coli
were selected to reconstruct E. coli phylogenetic forest
at > 70% identity. Each family was aligned with MUSCLE and GBlocks as indicated before, and trees inferred
by Phyml v3.0 (same options as above). For each gene
tree in the pangenome forest, 100 bootstrap replicates
were performed with the same parameters. This analysis
resulted in 6129 individual trees with at least one E. coli.
Network analysis

Gene and genome networks were reconstructed as in
[21,43], respectively, for the gene families defined above.
We used pre-implemented centralities of Igraph R package (betweenness, diameter, degree, articulation points),
and in-house Perl scripts (available upon request from
CB and PL) to analyse E. coli gene and genome
networks.
Clanistic analysis of the forest

E. coli wild and pangenome phylogenetic forests were
analysed with an updated version of the getDiversity
function of the Phangorn R package [41] to identify perfect (trivial and non-trivial): clans, slices, and to compute intruder indices. Scripts achieving these analyses
are available upon request from KS. Candidate mobile
modules of pathogenicity genes were obtained through a
critical selection of gene sets based on two covariables:
MGE, and PATH. Namely, trees with similar distributions of taxa with a number of MGE > 0 and a p-score
= 0 for PATH = natives were sorted out with an automated R script, identifying groups of mobile genes with
identical yet odd taxonomical distributions of pathogens.
Implementation of the polychromatic quartet (PQ)
approach

The polychromatic quartet approach was applied to
detect a mélange among some E. coli strains at a finer
scale than the tree, using a new function implemented
in R. To do so, each tree of the forest was analysed by

Page 12 of 21

(1) sampling at random a quartet of E. coli, and (2) coloring the leaves with respect to the four different
strains; e.g. blue (B), red (R), yellow (Y), green (G). Out
of the three possible unrooted topologies for four
OTUs, (3) the bipartition supported by the data was
selected (e.g., BR|YG). (4) The corresponding clans (e.g.,
BR and YG) on both sides of the bipartition were tallied.
(5) This process was repeated for 1000 quartets to compute occurrences of all clans in the polychromatic quartets. (6) A 30 × 30 pairwise matrix was assembled by
combining the results for all gene trees, and (7) further
analysed with the Neighbor-Net [51,52] algorithm in
Splitstree4 [50,60] to depict the relationships among the
different strains and reveal any conflicting signals in the
forest. The PQ approach was performed on the entire
set of gene trees (5828 trees with at least four OTUs),
as well as for a set of core genes (2317 trees bearing the
30 strains), a set of shell genes (3511 trees bearing less
than 30 strains), and a set of single-copy genes (5018
trees bearing no more than one copy of the gene for all
strains). The analyses were performed while taking into
account boostrap support (> 50%) to obtain robust
results. Host pathogenicity (and diseases) were then
used to test whether some strains, or some sets of
genes, were more likely to be subject to LGTs among
particular categories (core genes vs. shell genes, pathogens vs. non-pathogens).

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer report 1 by W. Ford Doolittle (Dalhousie
University, Canada)

I have nothing useful to say about the individual methods presented by Beauregard-Racine and colleagues, but
one extended comment on the pluralistic approach they
together embody. It is worth reminding ourselves that
there is very little difference between the various sides
in the TOL debate in terms of understanding of the
genetic and ecological processes that determine the
structures of individual genomes or the evolution of
individual genes. There is not even much disagreement
about the relative extents of verifiable vertical descent
and LGT. What we are arguing about are relative
importances and appropriate representations, matters of
generalization about which there may be no facts. All
that’s really out there in the world are these genetic and
ecological processes affecting and having affected one
gene or one organism at a time over four billion years.
So the pluralism endorsed in this contribution may not
only be more useful (in suggesting new ways to look for
new things), but more true, in that it discourages us
from seeking generalizations and thinking of them as
laws.
Authors’ response: We fully agree with Ford Doolittle,
and thank him very much for his major role in extending

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

the research field of evolutionary biology beyond the
TOL.
Reviewer report 2 by Tal Pupko (Tel-Aviv University,
Israel)

In bacterial evolution, the hypothesis of “one tree to rule
them all” is now widely rejected. In other words, there is
not a single species tree topology that describes the evolution of all the genes - different gene trees have different topologies. Those different topologies cannot be
explained by stochastic noise or phylogenetic artifacts.
The lack of one true tree immediately calls for networks
as a visualization and analysis tool to study bacterial
evolution, be it either a genome network or gene network. In this paper, Eric Bapteste and colleagues clearly
explain the need for networks to study bacterial evolution; they survey some network methodologies and
apply them to study the genome evolution of E. coli.
The paper provides easy exposition to these network
tools, and how they can quickly be used to visualize
evolutionary dynamics. Given the ever increasing number of bacterial species for which dozens of isolates have
their genomic sequences fully determined, the utility of
such methods is expected to increase significantly.
Since this is more of a review paper than a research
paper, I would have liked to see more discussion about
the open questions in the field (computational and biological challenges in the field of network analysis).
Furthermore, many of these network analyses provide
results that can also be obtained by other methods. I
think it is important to mention other methodologies
that aim to answer the same questions as those provided
by network-based analyses. As a case in point, maximum-likelihood analyses of gene family presence and
absence (phyletic pattern analyses) have provided many
insights into genomic fluidity within and among bacterial species.
To summarize, this nicely written work clearly
demonstrates the need for novel methodologies to analyse bacterial genome dynamics, methods that differ
from those used to analyse the TOL. I expect that as
more data accumulate, Bayesian and likelihood based
inference tools will be used to capture better the peculiar evolutionary processes that cause genome fluidity in
bacteria. This paper and others also seem to indicate
that the involvement of phages in bacterial fluidity is
underestimated and that bacterial genomics is tightly
linked to molecular biology and evolution of phages.
Authors’ response: We thank the referee very much for
his comments. He is absolutely right on all grounds.
There are indeed many open questions in the field of
network analyses, but this particular issue would certainly deserve to be the focus of a separate paper. In this
revised version, we mention some biological open

Page 13 of 21

questions associated with network approaches. However,
we fully share the referee’s interest, and we would like to
encourage motivated colleagues to elaborate reviews on
the computational and biological challenges in the field
of evolutionary network analysis. Some good leads for
this useful and timely work could for a start be found in
the excellent special issue of 2009: [12,61]. As methodological pluralists, we can only welcome the development of
novel methods (based on maximum likelihood, Bayesian
analyses, and specifically accounting for gene family presence and absence).
Reviewer report 3 by Richard M. Burian (Virginia Tech,
USA)

During the last half-dozen years of so, Eric Bapteste and
numerous colleagues have developed a long-term program of research aimed at providing a pluralistic framework for interpreting (mainly prokaryotic) processes of
genomic change and evolutionary patterns in terms of
networks of exchanges among genetic units of various
sorts. The present manuscript explores lessons that can
be gleaned from applying four different methods, two of
them network methods, two of them methods for analysing the “forest of life” (FOL), i.e., the forest of (divergent) gene trees, employed on genomic and genetic data
for E. coli and various archaea, bacteria, and mobile elements (plasmids and phages). A major purpose of the
submission is to show how the application of different
methods to large datasets can handle a diverse range of
questions by following a variety of evolutionary units
that evolve on different scales and in different patterns.
In particular, real data in the highly fluid pangenome of
E. coli serve as a model for application of this set of
tools and methods to capture different sorts of units
and different rates and kinds of exchanges that are more
helpfully analysed via network and FOL tools than with
standard tree-based analyses. The methods applied to
the FOL utilize the concepts of clans (created by bipartition of trees of operational taxonomic units, often
unrooted,) and slices (segments between two cuts in
such unrooted trees). These methods provide evidence
of lateral gene transfer into and/or out of clans or a
slices; analysis of such transfers proves to be of considerable importance. In addition, a novel method analysing “polychromatic quartets” (involving pairwise
comparison of gene trees that contain at least four distinct strains, here, with data for 30 strains of E. coli)
allows a finer-grained analysis of lateral transfer. In the
E. coli data, this tool was able to demonstrate, for example the (possibly surprising) result that (except perhaps
for genes in the E. coli core) lateral exchange among
pathogenic strains of E. coli has occurred more frequently than between pathogenic and non-pathogenic,
or among non-pathogenic strains.

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

As a philosopher of biology who is not equipped to
evaluate the methods as such, I concentrate on the
results rather than the methods. The results of greatest
interest concern the evidence for the extraordinary
degree of genetic mosaicism both in recently evolved
taxa and in the long-term evolution (and co-evolution)
of a wide range of bacteria, archaea, and mobile
elements.
To my eye, what is most striking is the fine tuning of
adaptation achieved by lateral transfer, which, for
archaea, bacteria, and mobile elements, serves something
like the role of recombination in eukaryotes. Of particular interest is what this sort of work suggests regarding
debates over the units of evolution. The perspective of
the authors is firmly pluralist: they view their tools as
exploratory, pragmatically accepting as units whatever
entities the data show to have relative autonomy over a
relevant range of variation within or among a relevant
range of genomes. In short, they claim to utilize the
data to identify, locate, and pursue different units of
evolution, operating on different scales and in different
contexts without strong advance commitments about
the full-fledged autonomy of the units or the topology
of the trees or networks within which they are found. In
general, their findings, as I understand them, suggest
that both the structure and the selective values of all
units of evolution depend on context, including the
other units of evolution with which they interact and
(for genes and other embedded sequences of DNA)
which sorts of entities they are embedded in. Given
LGT, there is both intergenic and intragenic recombination across (larger) evolutionary units. The recombination does not respect the standard phylogenetic
boundaries; exchanges take place among archaea, bacteria, and mobile elements, though, of course, at widely
different rates. Such findings provide empirical support
for a pluralist position, according to which the status of
units as (locally and functionally) fundamental depends
on the contexts considered and the scale of investigation
(e.g., the genomic contexts of the units, the processes by
which exchange occurs, the relative stabilities of the
units among which there is evolutionary competition,
and the extent of the environmental and organismal
interactions under investigation).
The conceptual issues of greatest interest concern the
extent of the effects of “genetic partnerships” between,
e.g., mobile elements and cellular genomes, or across
cellular genomes. Such entities as “mobile modules of
pathogenicity” can be uncovered by the investigative
methods developed by the authors (and others) and
appear unlikely to be well understood without understanding the lateral transfers that are involved. More
generally, the ways in which the units uncovered depend
on the questions investigated, the scale of changes

Page 14 of 21

examined, and the investigative tools employed, strongly
suggest that a pragmatic and pluralist understanding of
the units of evolution and of genetic function is appropriate to the ongoing stream of investigations of evolutionary patterns and processes.
This general characterization provides the interpretative framework that I understand (from the present submission and from some previous publications) the
authors to employ. I find little to criticize in the general
framework, but have some questions at a finer grain. I
address these questions directly to the authors.
Authors’ response: We thank the referee: he described
with very much insight the logic of our (past and present)
contributions. It is a real honour from such a great specialist of history and philosophy of biology.
In the abstract, you mention genetic partnerships
twice, but that concept never appears directly in the text
of the article. It might help to revisit it in some fashion
later in this paper, for the evolution of a gene caught up
in a genetic partnership will, in general, differ from that
of a gene that experiences only vertical inheritance and/
or no effects from a symbiotic relationship.
Authors’ response: We agree and have added this
claim into the revised MS: “the evolution of a gene
caught up in a genetic partnership will, in general, differ
from that of a gene that experiences only vertical
inheritance”
Similarly, although you are clear that methodological
pluralism is called for in dealing with different (evolutionary) questions, it is not clear whether you wish to
take a strong position about the extent to which the
boundaries of evolutionary units drawn or accepted by
investigators depend on the questions they are pursuing
and the investigative tools that they use. This may not
be the appropriate place to address that issue, but it is
one that needs to be addressed carefully at some point
in following up the lines you have opened up here and
elsewhere. Does it deserve a comment in the present
context?
Authors’ response: Indeed, we wish to take that strong
position: the boundaries of evolutionary units we draw
depend on our questions and tools. There are so many
connections in an evolutionary network, so many interactions and types of interactions, that results of scientific
inquiries looking for some structure in this evolutionary
web will always stress some privileged connections, for
pragmatic and instrumental reasons. However we (evolutionary biologists) will particularly value the boundaries
(and relationships) grounded in a biological process: our
tools and questions can also be designed to try to unravel
evolutionary groups based on evolutionary processes. By
analogy, these groups can be seen as the consequences of
“questions” asked not only by investigators, but also
“asked” to the evolving entities by their biotic and abiotic

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

environments (i.e. how to survive in a hypersaline environment with reduced organismal diversity, how to survive in an arms race with a predator, etc), defining some
boundaries (e.g. in the sharing of some traits) and introducing some structure to the evolutionary web. When the
investigators’ questions can be framed in terms of “natural selection” for example, the units identified are easier
to interpret and explain in an evolutionary framework,
even without a TOL. Some researchers may therefore be
willing to attribute a stronger ontological reality to these
remarkable units (and their remarkable connections)
than to consider them merely as conventional (pragmatically-defined) objects (which of course they are as well).
Such units would be in some respect “hard” conventional
objects (as opposed to “soft” conventional objects, purely
stemming from the focus and interest of human minds):
such units would still impact and emerge from the ecological and genetic processes mentioned by Ford Doolittle,
even if no human investigators was around to study
them. They would constitute aspects of biological reality
with their own local causal effects. We would be interested to hear whether this intuitive (likely naïve) philosophy on units seems sound to the referee, and how it
could be improved (or replaced).
You claim in the second paragraph of the Background
that homologous characters comparable across all life
forms are needed in order to reconstruct the TOL. I’m
not convinced that this is correct. If there are several
major evolutionary transitions (e.g., from a pre-DNA to
a DNA-based genetic system, etc.), there may be no reason to expect ANY character to be identical by descent
with a sufficiently distant ancestral character. If homology means something approximating identity by descent,
your claim seems to require too much of those who
seek to reconstruct a single TOL.
Authors’ response: The referee is right. If there are several major evolutionary transitions, homology might not
be a sufficient guideline to describe early evolution. For
such a difficult task, this central notion must be complemented (or replaced) by additional evolutionary concepts. We edited the text accordingly.
In the fourth paragraph of this section, you might
want to make a clearer (or stronger?) claim about the
difficulty affecting inferences from pattern to process
caused by the independent processes impacting the evolutionary histories of genes. This seems crucial both for
the support of your pluralism and for your emphasis on
the need to work on the impact of multiple processes
on pattern in evaluating inferences from pattern to
process.
Authors’ response: This is a crucial point that certainly
justifies pluralism in evolution. Evolutionary patterns
(most obviously the most complex ones, i.e. phylogenetic
networks) are indeed caused by independent processes

Page 15 of 21

impacting the evolutionary histories of genes. From a
pluralistic perspective, methods specifically designed to
tackle this issue (e.g. that there is often more than one
process behind a pattern) must be encouraged, as
opposed to attempts to explain all patterns by a single
process (e.g. all evolution by a tree-like process of descent). We clarified this in the revised version of the
manuscript, see the section “This kind of phylogenetic
networks put forward [...] A tree alone is not going to
help establish much of this evolutionary complexity.”
In the second paragraph of the Results and Discussion,
you claim to divide gene networks into temporal slices.
Strictly speaking, this seems to be incorrect. As you
indicate in a parenthetical comment, 100% identity of
certain sequences in the data for the genome of an E.
coli strain and a mobile element might be caused by
recent exchange or by very strong purifying selection. It
is plausible that the data for the 199 mobile elements
and the various E. coli strains you examined do not
result from purifying selection, but the claim that the
data provide temporal slices is the conclusion of an
argument, not appropriate as an initial characterization
of the slices themselves.
Authors’ response: We agree. We removed “temporal”
before slices, and only concluded afterwards that the
slices we studied at 100% identity treshold were likely to
correspond to recent events of sharing.
Minor query: In the next paragraph, you report that
Table 1 shows 41% of the 4361 100%-similarity
sequences belong to the L functional category another
41% belong to the unknown function category. In working through the table to be sure that I understood your
results, I found that (1838/4361) = 42.2% and (1832/
4361) = 42.0%. So either I misunderstood the calculation
or the numbers should read 42%.
Authors’ response: Sorry, we fixed that number to 42%.
In paragraph 4, it might be worth adding a sentence
or two (if it is correct) to the effect that your analysis
suggests that gene networks are more helpful than gene
trees in producing plausible inferences from evolutionary patterns to evolutionary processes - at least where
lateral transfer is involved and leaves traces that have
not yet been erased.
Authors’ response: It is to some extent correct, although
currently phylogenetics benefits from its history of use
and from a rich body of tools to study gene trees, all of
which would still need to be developed for gene networks.
Yet, gene networks can be seen as more helpful than gene
trees for inferences on complex evolutionary processes,
since they are more inclusive than gene trees, and allow
the investigation of mixed evolutionary processes that
included vertical descent as well as recombination,
domain fusion, etc. However, gene networks are not
polarized like gene trees are, and they harbour no nodes

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

corresponding to hypothetical ancestors. Future developments are likely to produce some improvements on these
fronts. We have added a quick sentence in the text to
introduce these claims.
In the section on lessons from networks, as part of the
discussion of the results, it might be useful (if you think
it correct) to suggest that the genes that exhibit LGT
(including the ones that hitchhike with replication and
repair genes) may well experience independent evolutionary processes (e.g. different selection regimes) while
they reside in mobile elements than while they reside in
cellular genomes. This exemplifies, as I understand it, a
key reason for which direct inference from pattern (in
trees) to process is fragile. If you agree, perhaps this
would fit best into the last paragraph of this subsection.
Authors’ response: We agree entirely. This may very
well be an important distinction, worth modeling, that is
currently missing in methods trying to reconstruct the
TOL, as these mobile elements, or the trajectory of genes
in and out these elements coupled to possible changes in
selection regimes, is not modeled in TOL-based
approaches. This issue calls for the inclusion of the
mobile elements, and their selection regimes, in models
of molecular evolution. We have briefly discussed this
topic in the revised manuscript.
In the Lessons from the Forest, first paragraph of the
section on Clanistic analysis, it would help if the E*
index is explained. I have only a first approximation
understanding of this index, but it seems unlikely to me
that it can serve as a wholly general way of distinguishing intruders from natives in the intended sense. It is, or
should be, an empirical question whether sequence partitions into clans and slices present so extensive a mélange that (in some cases) no clear answer derived
simply from the sequence data as to what should count
as a native is available. Abstractly, at least, insofar as the
E* index is concerned, this seems to be an open question, though one that (I suspect) the data will resolve
favorably for most of the familiar sorts of cases that
have been examined. But as more esoteric sorts of
genetic units and more difficult sorts of genetic partnerships are explored, there may be some surprises on this
front. In any case, some sort of explanation, if feasible
in brief compass, of the E* index would be of use.
Authors’ response: The referee is right. It is indeed an
empirical question whether the partition in clans or
slices will show extensive mélanges of two categories of
OTUs. The E* quantifies the extent of this mixing
between entities belonging to two categories defined a
priori. These categories are for now arbitrarily defined,
rather than inferred from the data. Although they are
currently called “natives” and “intruders” but they could
very well have been called “cat1” and “non-cat1”. We

Page 16 of 21

have added a brief explanation of the E* in the revised
version of the MS.
In the next paragraph, what exactly do you mean by
the claim that “Mobile genetic elements were present in
10.3% of the wild forest"? My assumption is that in
10.3% of the gene trees in the database, sequences
matching some sequence in the sample of mobile elements included in the analysis were present. If that is
correct, this result is likely to underrepresent the extent
to which sequences derived from mobile elements are
present in this set of trees. If it is incorrect, you need to
clarify what your claim means. The importance of the
sample in determining the fraction of gene families that
have been impacted by mobile elements is unclear, but
one might suspect that the number of gene families
showing such impact might increase as we explore other
wise of identifying sequences that have been impacted
by LGT.
Authors’ response: The referee’s first interpretation is
correct: the 10.3% depends on the sample of mobile elements included in the analysis, and therefore are very
likely to underrepresent the extent to which sequences
derived from mobile elements are present in this set of
trees, since the diversity of mobile elements is currently
undersampled. We have made this point clearer in the
revised MS.
The conclusions do a nice job of summarizing important aspects of the findings of this paper and putting
them into perspective. They might perhaps be expanded
with a sentence or two about further steps suggested by
the material reported on in this paper and/or by the
general approach of the group that have contributed to
this line of research. For example, two general directions
that stand out for me are (1) exploring the variation in
the rates of lateral transfer in different gene families
(and, perhaps, the need to devise methods to detect lateral transfer in those gene families where such transfers
are very rare) and (2) devising ways to determine
whether there are differences in selection pressures or
the direction of evolution (e.g., in GC content) when
genes from a given family are embedded in viral or plasmidial genomes on the one hand, or in cellular genomes
on the other hand.
Authors’ response: These open questions are indeed
important ones; we have introduced them in the revised
MS.
Reviewer report 4 by James McInerney (Maynooth
University, Ireland)

This manuscript deals with a few different issues relating to how prokaryotic genomes evolve. Of significant
interest to many scientists are the methodological developments and the Polychromatic Quartets approach to

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

the analysis of genome fluidity is indeed quite interesting. I have very few issues that I wish to raise and I
think this is a useful addition to the literature in this
area.
Authors’ response: We thank the referee for his
comments.
On page 6 in the last paragraph, you say that “[...]
these genome networks highlighted that E. coli shared
90-100% identical genes with two pathogenic genomes
[...]”. Does this mean that it shares -some- sequences
that are 90-100% similar? I think this is what it means,
but I think this could be clarified a little.
Authors’ response: Yes, we clarified this.
Of interest in the group of genes listed as being common to E. coli and Acholeplasma laidlawii is a 30S ribosomal protein S12. This is a slowly evolving gene and so
perhaps it is shared through vertical rather than horizontal transfer. Are there any phylogenetic trees suggesting that there is a specific sister-group relationship
between E. coli and A. laidlawii?
Authors’ response: In fact, it is E. coli and S. putrefaciens that share the 30S ribosomal protein S12. They are
both gamma-proteobacteria. In our dataset, if this sharing was only due to vertical descent, two other taxa, also
closely related to E. coli (Coxiella burnetii RSA 493 and
Psychrobacter arcticus 273-4) may have shared this
rps12. We can certainly not rule out that this particular
connection for rps12 reflects vertical descent however.
Concerning E. coli and Acholeplasma laidlawii: they
are not closely related. Acholeplasma laidlawii is a mollicute. Interestingly, it is known to produce extracellular
vesicles packaging genetic material [62]. As this process
of vesiculation, generally captures random DNA found in
a host cell, the shared transposase could very well have
been transferred by this mechanisms.
Page 8: “The phylogenetic framework helps identifying
gene trees compatible with a vertical evolution [...]”
needs to be changed
Authors’ response: We changed the sentence.
Page 8: “Either some non-E. coli branch within E. coli:
[...]” You probably need to say “Either some non-E. coli
-sequences- branch within E. coli [...]”
Authors’ response: Yes, we edited the text accordingly.
Page 8: This sentence needs to be clarified: “First, analyses of the two forests showed that E. coli exchanged
almost no genes with Archaea that appeared too distantly related.”
Authors’ response: We clarified the sentence. The
revised version reads: “First, analyses of the two forests
showed that E. coli exchanged almost no genes with
Archaea. These organisms may be phylogenetically too
distant for successful LGT. Alternatively, the Archaea of
that particular dataset may seldom share the same
environments with the E. coli investigated here, and

Page 17 of 21

therefore they may not rely on the same shell genes to
adapt to the environment. This interpretation would
explain this low proportion of exchanges.”
Page 10: “The one-complement [...]”. Could you say
briefly what the one-complement is?
Authors’ response: The one-complement corresponds to
matrices in which values comprised between 0 and 1
(relative frequencies of each clans appearing in PQs)
have been substracted from 1.
There are quite a few typographical errors and these
should be sorted-out before publication - I don’t wish to
go through each of them one by one.
Authors’ response: We edited the article carefully.
Reviewer report 5 by Didier Raoult (La Timone, France)

Thank you for giving the opportunity to review this
paper which emerges at the time when the theory of the
TOL becomes increasingly unstable, and does not
appear likely any more to be really defended. This analysis of the pangenome stimulates some reflections. I
think that the integration of these elements could bring
to have a more ecological vision which could enrich the
discussion.
Authors’ response: We thank the referee very much. We
agree with his views: a more ecological vision could
enrich evolutionary studies beyond the TOL. To
strengthen this claim, we now explain in the revised
manuscript that: “This realization had some impact on
phylogenetics, which had historically considered evolution
through the lens of systematics rather than ecology. Core
genes, often assumed to be vertically inherited, were typically expected to produce a fundamental vertical framework, against which the evolution of traits and lineages
was to be interpreted. Such core genes appeared suited to
think about “groups within groups”, which is a logic consistent with systematics. However, the distribution of
shell genes was clearly explained by additional evolutionary processes, involving in particular gene transfers
between partners with overlapping lifestyles or environments. Most of gene evolution (that of shell genes)
appeared therefore better interpreted in light of an ecological vision.”
1. Regarding the exchange of genes, this is very dependent on the lifestyle of the bacteria. Bacteria exchange
genes when they live together, and when the species are
sympatric. We recently proposed the use of this definition to differentiate the bacteria which live isolated in
an ecosystem (allopatric) to those which live in complex
systems comprising many species (sympatric) by transfer
of the concept of Mayr. Concerning human Escherichia
coli, which has been much studied, they live in complex
communities in the digestive tract; a very recent paper
[46] shows that the bacteriophage population in the
digestive tract is huge, explaining why in this ecosystem

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

the bacterial species exchange many genes because a
very significant number of phages and generalized transduction. This basic finding appears very important to
me to explain these major genomic repertoire changes
[63,64].
Authors’ response: We agree. We now stress more
strongly that gene exchange is very dependent on bacterial lifestyles, and we have included in the manuscript
the reference to bacteriophage populations in the gut
[46], since we now report that our results are “consistent
with previous findings [46], highlighting the role of huge
viral populations to provide adaptive genes to their cellular hosts in the digestive tract”.
2. A second point that could be developed is the
impossibility in a certain number of cases of making
trees of genes because of the importance of recombination. A recent work published on Legionella shows that
sympatric bacteria recombination reaches a huge level
that appears more related to genetic and ecological
proximity than to any other factor [65]. This reinforces
the idea that sympatric bacteria are all recent mosaics of
gene sequences. In addition the recombination introduces the idea that term LGT is inappropriate and
should be replaced by LST for Lateral Sequence Transfer. The idea of LGT is a functionalist idea which does
not have any meaning, since it is only selective purification that is functionalist. The transfer is mechanical and
does not have a goal (Court Jester theory). However this
confirms well that the phylogenic proximity is one of
the elements allowing easy recombination and the lateral
transfer of sequence.
Authors’ response: Two really good points. It is absolutely true that in certain cases gene trees do not reflect
gene evolution (i.e. due to recombination, domains
fusions, unequal evolutionary rates affecting homology
detection and excluding fast evolving sequences from
phylogenetic alignments). For those very likely common
cases, other representations than trees may be better suited to study evolution. It is precisely for that reason that
we have started developing gene networks.
It is also absolutely true that what transfers is genetic
material (DNA or RNA sequences). Thus LGT is a particular case of LST, when the DNA fragment that was
transferred functions as a gene. Some sequences functios
as genes in multiple genomic contexts, whereas others
don’t. Gene networks are thus really good tools to study
both recombination and LST. We have discussed and
clarified these two points in the main text.
A point which appears to me to be an object for
future work is to integrate the most pathogenic Escherichia coli: that is, Shigella. Shigella are among Escherichia
coli phylogenetically but they present an extremely
reduced genome because of their strict dependence on
the host in contrast to Escherichia coli. Pathogenic E.

Page 18 of 21

coli do not have a degree of evolution in the pathogenicity, comparable at those of Shigella [63].
Escherichia coli remains a very large pangenome but
we have a bias of selection because non human Escherichia coli are not yet sequenced at the same level. It
appears that the most important source of Escherichia
coli is animal (poultry, pigs, etc). The level of exchange
between pathological species is probably also related to
the fact that they have the capacity to meet in the gut,
which is more important than with the non-pathogenic
species. Finally beside the core genes of shell genes the
authors do not analysed the ORFans, which represent
the creativity of bacteria. It would be interesting to have
at least an idea of the proportion of ORFans in each isolate from the pangenome, in order to have an idea of
their proportion.
Authors’ response: We have added the notion that
pathological species may be able to meet in the gut,
which would enhance their rate of LGT. The referee is
also absolutely correct thatfuture works, beyond the TOL,
will need to make real room for ORFans. These
sequences pose a great methodological and conceptual
challenge for evolutionary studies since comparative
approaches are not in the first instance designed to deal
with unique sequences that cannot be compared to any
other sequences. We have briefly introduced this problem
in the perspective of the manuscript.
Rewiever report 6 by Yan Boucher (University of Alberta,
Canada)

The manuscript presents an ambitious attempt at using
novel approaches to investigate large genomic datasets.
The methods presented by the authors are able to produce results in agreement with previous findings on the
evolution of E. coli genomes: that they are involved in
frequent LGT and recombination. They also address
more specific questions, such as rates of gene transfer
for core and shell genes, mobile elements and genes
from pathogens versus non-pathogens. What is unique
about the approaches used is that they do not assume a
single phylogeny, but can tell a story including multiple
phylogenies. It is also easy to isolate specific types of
genes or organisms from a more complex dataset, allowing the user to answer specific questions. What is difficult about the approaches used here is that they use
novel concepts that can be difficult to understand (those
linked to clanistics especially) and make the conclusions
hard evaluate for most biologists.
Authors’ response: We thank the referee for his
comments.
Specific issues to address:
Abstract:
Problems with the grammatical structure in the results
section. This needs to be reviewed by a native English

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

speaker. Language is a bit cavalier, using colloquial
terms such as “smoking guns”, which are not appropriate for an international audience and only understandable by those with a certain cultural background.
Authors’ response: A native english speaker kindly
reviewed the manuscript (Thanks very much Dick!). We
replaced “smoking guns” with “strong evidence”.
Casual language: “(but the RNA viruses, maybe)”, “In
this paper, we use”, “whose main interest is not so
much in defining the relative branching order of species”. This should be avoided.
We removed these sentences/words.
Main text: How were genes determined to be “mobile
elements” in their comparison to E. coli genomes? The
criteria need to be explained.
Authors’ response: We downloaded the genes from plasmids and viruses from the NCBI. Genes from these
mobile elements were considered to belong to mobilized
or mobilizable gene families.
The authors should include a legend describing specific network terms such as “betweenness” and “articulation points” or “mélange” or “natives”
Authors’ response: We have described these terms in
the main text, where required.
The authors need to define terms such as “wild genome forest”. I would limit the use of new terms to when
they are absolutely required
Authors’ response: Wild genome forest is only the name
of one of the two forests we studied, reconstructed using
all the genes from E. coli UTI89 (NC007946) as indicated in M&M. It is not a technical term. We have clarified this issue in the main text.
A better description of clanistics has to be provided,
as it is a new practice. Perhaps some of the materials
and method can be included in the main text.
Authors’ response: We have introduced clanistics with
some more details in the main text. Readers should also
refer to the publications, quoted in the MS.
The authors should use subtitles to clarify results and
highlight interesting findings, such as “ similar recombination levels between core and shell genes’
Authors’ response: We have added or edited subtitles
accordingly. New sections are now called: Using genome
networks to detect recent LGT in the E. coli pangenome;
Massive tinkering in the evolution of restriction-modification endonucleases; High rates of LGT in E. coli; Pathogenic lifestyle affects the evolution of 30% of the E. coli
pangenome; Detection of candidate mobile modules of
pathogenicity; Polychromatic quartets reveal high recombination/LGT rates in core and shell genes within E. coli;
Preferential exchanges of DNA material between pathogenic E. coli

Page 19 of 21

Table 2 contains too much information and should be
presented as graphs or included as supplementary
materials
Authors’ response: We have included Table 2 as supplementary materials.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Clanistic analyses of E. coli pangenome. Statistics
on lateral gene transfer (A) and phenotypic properties (B) inferred from
gene trees.
Additional file 2: Organismal information. Taxonomy and lifestyles of
the 30 E. coli strains under study.

Abbreviations
ARC: Archaea; BAC: Bacteria; BBH: Bidirectional Best Hit; BLAST: Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool; COG: Cluster of Orthologous Genes; DNA:
Deoxyribonucleic Acid; EC: E. coli; EUK: Eukaryote; FOL: Forest of Life; GAS:
Gastroenteritis; HEM: hemorrhagic colitis; LGT: Lateral Gene Transfer; MGE:
Mobile Genetic Element; ML: Maximum Likelihood; NCBI: National Center for
Biotechnology Information; NON-PATH: Non-Pathogenic; OTH: Other; OTU:
Operational Taxonomic Unit; PATH: Pathogenic; PQ: Polychromatic Quartet;
RNA: Ribonucleic Acid; TOL: Tree of Life; URI: Urinary infection.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NSERC grant OGP0155251 to FJL. We thank
Maureen O’Malley and The Leverhulme Trust for motivating us to contribute
an article to this special issue.
Author details
1
Département de sciences biologiques, Université de Montréal, Montréal
(Québec), Canada. 2UMR CNRS 7138 Systématique, Adaptation, Evolution,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France.
Authors’ contributions
EB and FJL conceived the study and wrote the manuscript. All authors
participated in data analyses, and read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 19 April 2011 Accepted: 20 July 2011 Published: 20 July 2011
References
1. Doolittle WF, Bapteste E: Pattern pluralism and the Tree of Life
hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:2043-2049.
2. Galtier N, Daubin V: Dealing with incongruence in phylogenomic
analyses. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008, 363:4023-4029.
3. O’Malley MA, Koonin EV: How stands the Tree of Life a century and a half
after The Origin ? Biology Direct 2011.
4. Lopez P, Bapteste E: Molecular phylogeny: reconstructing the forest. C R
Biol 2009, 332:171-182.
5. Shi T, Falkowski PG: Genome evolution in cyanobacteria: the stable core
and the variable shell. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105:2510-2515.
6. Bapteste E, O’Malley MA, Beiko RG, Ereshefsky M, Gogarten JP, FranklinHall L, Lapointe FJ, Dupre J, Dagan T, Boucher Y, Martin W: Prokaryotic
evolution and the tree of life are two different things. Biol Direct 2009,
4:34.
7. Raoult D: The post-Darwinist rhizome of life. Lancet 2010, 375:104-105.
8. McInerney JO, Cotton JA, Pisani D: The prokaryotic tree of life: past,
present... and future? Trends Ecol Evol 2008, 23:276-281.
9. Ragan MA: Thinking laterally about genomes. Genome Inform 2009,
23:221-222.

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

10. Ragan MA: Trees and networks before and after Darwin. Biol Direct 2009,
4:43; discussion 43.
11. Ragan MA, Beiko RG: Lateral genetic transfer: open issues. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009, 364:2241-2251.
12. Ragan MA, McInerney JO, Lake JA: The network of life: genome
beginnings and evolution. Introduction. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
2009, 364:2169-2175.
13. Dagan T, Artzy-Randrup Y, Martin W: Modular networks and cumulative
impact of lateral transfer in prokaryote genome evolution. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2008, 105:10039-10044.
14. Dagan T, Martin W: The tree of one percent. Genome Biol 2006, 7:118.
15. Dagan T, Martin W: Ancestral genome sizes specify the minimum rate of
lateral gene transfer during prokaryote evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104:870-875.
16. Dagan T, Martin W: Getting a better picture of microbial evolution en
route to a network of genomes. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009,
364:2187-2196.
17. Kloesges T, Popa O, Martin W, Dagan T: Networks of gene sharing among
329 proteobacterial genomes reveal differences in lateral gene transfer
frequency at different phylogenetic depths. Mol Biol Evol 2011,
28:1057-1074.
18. Popa O, Hazkani-Covo E, Landan G, Martin W, Dagan T: Directed networks
reveal genomic barriers and DNA repair bypasses to lateral gene
transfer among prokaryotes. Genome Res 2011.
19. Brilli M, Mengoni A, Fondi M, Bazzicalupo M, Lio P, Fani R: Analysis of
plasmid genes by phylogenetic profiling and visualization of homology
relationships using Blast2Network. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9:551.
20. Lima-Mendez G, Van Helden J, Toussaint A, Leplae R: Reticulate
representation of evolutionary and functional relationships between
phage genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:762-777.
21. Halary S, Leigh JW, Cheaib B, Lopez P, Bapteste E: Network analyses
structure genetic diversity in independent genetic worlds. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2010, 107:127-132.
22. Puigbò P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Search for a ‘Tree of Life’ in the thicket of
the phylogenetic forest. J Biol 2009, 8:59.
23. Puigbo P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The tree and net components of prokaryote
evolution. Genome Biol Evol 2010, 2:745-756.
24. Nogueira T, Rankin DJ, Touchon M, Taddei F, Brown SP, Rocha EP:
Horizontal gene transfer of the secretome drives the evolution of
bacterial cooperation and virulence. Curr Biol 2009, 19:1683-1691.
25. Touchon M, Hoede C, Tenaillon O, Barbe V, Baeriswyl S, Bidet P, Bingen E,
Bonacorsi S, Bouchier C, Bouvet O, et al: Organised genome dynamics in
the Escherichia coli species results in highly diverse adaptive paths. PLoS
Genet 2009, 5:e1000344.
26. Mongodin EF, Nelson KE, Daugherty S, Deboy RT, Wister J, Khouri H,
Weidman J, Walsh DA, Papke RT, Sanchez Perez G, et al: The genome of
Salinibacter ruber: convergence and gene exchange among
hyperhalophilic bacteria and archaea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102:18147-18152.
27. Nesbo CL, Bapteste E, Curtis B, Dahle H, Lopez P, Macleod D, Dlutek M,
Bowman S, Zhaxybayeva O, Birkeland NK, Doolittle WF: The genome of
Thermosipho africanus TCF52B: lateral genetic connections to the
Firmicutes and Archaea. J Bacteriol 2009, 191:1974-1978.
28. David LA, Alm EJ: Rapid evolutionary innovation during an Archaean
genetic expansion. Nature 2011, 469:93-96.
29. Zhaxybayeva O, Doolittle WF, Papke RT, Gogarten JP: Intertwined
evolutionary histories of marine Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus
marinus. Genome Biol Evol 2009, 1:325-339.
30. Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP, Charlebois RL, Doolittle WF, Papke RT:
Phylogenetic analyses of cyanobacterial genomes: quantification of
horizontal gene transfer events. Genome Res 2006, 16:1099-1108.
31. Whitman WB: The modern concept of the procaryote. J Bacteriol 2009,
191:2000-2005, discussion 2006-2007.
32. Hendrix RW, Smith MC, Burns RN, Ford ME, Hatfull GF: Evolutionary
relationships among diverse bacteriophages and prophages: all the
world’s a phage. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:2192-2197.
33. Breitbart M, Rohwer F: Here a virus, there a virus, everywhere the same
virus? Trends Microbiol 2005, 13:278-284.
34. Beiko RG, Harlow TJ, Ragan MA: Highways of gene sharing in prokaryotes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:14332-14337.

Page 20 of 21

35. Beiko RG, Ragan MA: Untangling hybrid phylogenetic signals: horizontal
gene transfer and artifacts of phylogenetic reconstruction. Methods Mol
Biol 2009, 532:241-256.
36. Williams D, Fournier GP, Lapierre P, Swithers KS, Green AG, Gogarten JP: A
Rooted Net of Life. Biology Direct 2011.
37. Merhej V, Notredame C, Royer-Carenzi M, Pontarotti P, Raoult D: The
rhizome of life: the sympatric Rickettsia felis paradigm demonstrates the
random transfer of DNA sequences. Mol Biol Evol 2011.
38. Bapteste E, Boucher Y, Leigh J, Doolittle WF: Phylogenetic reconstruction
and lateral gene transfer. Trends Microbiol 2004, 12:406-411.
39. Susko E, Leigh J, Doolittle WF, Bapteste E: Visualizing and assessing
phylogenetic congruence of core gene sets: a case study of the gammaproteobacteria. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:1019-1030.
40. Bapteste E, Burian RM: On the need for integrative phylogenomics, and
some steps toward its creation. Biology and Philosophy 2010, 24:711-736.
41. Schliep K, Lopez P, Lapointe FJ, Bapteste E: Harvesting evolutionary signals
in a forest of prokaryotic gene trees. Mol Biol Evol 2011, 28:1393-1405.
42. Lapointe FJ, Lopez P, Boucher Y, Koenig J, Bapteste E: Clanistics: a multilevel perspective for harvesting unrooted gene trees. Trends Microbiol
2010, 18:341-347.
43. Bittner L, Halary S, Payri C, Cruaud C, de Reviers B, Lopez P, Bapteste E:
Some considerations for analyzing biodiversity using integrative
metagenomics and gene networks. Biol Direct 2010, 5:47.
44. Uchiyama I: Hierarchical clustering algorithm for comprehensive
orthologous-domain classification in multiple genomes. Nucleic Acids
Research 2006, 34:647-658.
45. Lukjancenko O, Wassenaar TM, Ussery DW: Comparison of 61 sequenced
Escherichia coli genomes. Microb Ecol 2010, 60:708-720.
46. Reyes A, Haynes M, Hanson N, Angly FE, Heath AC, Rohwer F, Gordon JI:
Viruses in the faecal microbiota of monozygotic twins and their
mothers. Nature 2010, 466:334-338.
47. Fortunato S: Community detection in graphs. arXiv:09060612v2 2010.
48. Andres S, Skoglund A, Nilsson C, Krabbe M, Bjorkholm B, Engstrand L: Type
I restriction-modification loci reveal high allelic diversity in clinical
Helicobacter pylori isolates. Helicobacter 2010, 15:114-125.
49. Wilkinson M, McInerney JO, Hirt RP, Foster PG, Embley TM: Of clades and
clans: terms for phylogenetic relationships in unrooted trees. Trends Ecol
Evol 2007, 22:114-115.
50. Huson DH, Bryant D: Application of phylogenetic networks in
evolutionary studies. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:254-267.
51. Bryant D, Moulton V: Neighbor-net: an agglomerative method for the
construction of phylogenetic networks. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:255-265.
52. Bryant D, Moulton V, Spillner A: Consistency of the neighbor-net
algorithm. Algorithms Mol Biol 2007, 2:8.
53. Dopazo J, Dress A, von Haeseler A: Split decomposition: a technique to
analyze viral evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993, 90:10320-10324.
54. Mantel N: The detection of disease clustering and a generalized
regression approach. Cancer Res 1967, 27:209-220.
55. Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Cherukuri PF, DeWeese-Scott C, Geer LY,
Gwadz M, He S, Hurwitz DI, Jackson JD, Ke Z, et al: CDD: a Conserved
Domain Database for protein classification. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:
D192-196.
56. Liolios K, Chen IM, Mavromatis K, Tavernarakis N, Hugenholtz P,
Markowitz VM, Kyrpides NC: The Genomes On Line Database (GOLD) in
2009: status of genomic and metagenomic projects and their associated
metadata. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D346-354.
57. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1792-1797.
58. Talavera G, Castresana J: Improvement of phylogenies after removing
divergent and ambiguously aligned blocks from protein sequence
alignments. Syst Biol 2007, 56:564-577.
59. Guindon S, Delsuc F, Dufayard JF, Gascuel O: Estimating maximum
likelihood phylogenies with PhyML. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 537:113-137.
60. Huson DH: SplitsTree: analyzing and visualizing evolutionary data.
Bioinformatics 1998, 14:68-73.
61. Huson DH, Rupp R, Scornavacca C: Phylogenetic Networks: concepts,
algorithms and applications Cambridge University Press; 2010.
62. Chernov VM, Chernova OA, Mouzykantov AA, Efimova IR,
Shaymardanova GF, Medvedeva ES, Trushin MV: Extracellular Vesicles
Derived from Acholeplasma laidlawii PG8. Scientific World Journal 2011,
11:1120-1130.

Beauregard-Racine et al. Biology Direct 2011, 6:39
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/39

Page 21 of 21

63. Georgiades K, Raoult D: Defining pathogenic bacterial species in the
genomic era. Frontiers in Evol and Genomic Microbiol 2010, 1:1-13.
64. Moliner C, Fournier PE, Raoult D: Genome analysis of microorganisms
living in amoebae reveals a melting pot of evolution. FEMS Microbiol Rev
2010.
65. Coscolla M, Comas I, Gonzalez-Candelas F: Quantifying nonvertical
inheritance in the evolution of Legionella pneumophila. Mol Biol Evol
2011, 28:985-1001.
66. Killcoyne S, Carter GW, Smith J, Boyle J: Cytoscape: a community-based
framework for network modeling. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 563:219-239.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-39
Cite this article as: Beauregard-Racine et al.: Of woods and webs:
Possible alternatives to the tree of life for studying genomic fluidity in
E. coli. Biology Direct 2011 6:39.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
