<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Mobile genetic element proliferation and gene inactivation impact over the genome structure and metabolic capabilities of Sodalis glossinidius, the secondary endosymbiont of tsetse flies</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:449. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-449"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Eugeni Belda"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Mobile genetic element proliferation and gene
inactivation impact over the genome structure
and metabolic capabilities of Sodalis glossinidius,
the secondary endosymbiont of tsetse flies
Eugeni Belda1, Andrés Moya1,2,3, Stephen Bentley4, Francisco J Silva1,2,3*

Abstract
Background: Genome reduction is a common evolutionary process in symbiotic and pathogenic bacteria. This
process has been extensively characterized in bacterial endosymbionts of insects, where primary mutualistic
bacteria represent the most extreme cases of genome reduction consequence of a massive process of gene
inactivation and loss during their evolution from free-living ancestors. Sodalis glossinidius, the secondary
endosymbiont of tsetse flies, contains one of the few complete genomes of bacteria at the very beginning of the
symbiotic association, allowing to evaluate the relative impact of mobile genetic element proliferation and gene
inactivation over the structure and functional capabilities of this bacterial endosymbiont during the transition to a
host dependent lifestyle.
Results: A detailed characterization of mobile genetic elements and pseudogenes reveals a massive presence of
different types of prophage elements together with five different families of IS elements that have proliferated
across the genome of Sodalis glossinidius at different levels. In addition, a detailed survey of intergenic regions
allowed the characterization of 1501 pseudogenes, a much higher number than the 972 pseudogenes described in
the original annotation. Pseudogene structure reveals a minor impact of mobile genetic element proliferation in
the process of gene inactivation, with most of pseudogenes originated by multiple frameshift mutations and
premature stop codons. The comparison of metabolic profiles of Sodalis glossinidius and tsetse fly primary
endosymbiont Wiglesworthia glossinidia based on their whole gene and pseudogene repertoires revealed a novel
case of pathway inactivation, the arginine biosynthesis, in Sodalis glossinidius together with a possible case of
metabolic complementation with Wigglesworthia glossinidia for thiamine biosynthesis.
Conclusions: The complete re-analysis of the genome sequence of Sodalis glossinidius reveals novel insights in the
evolutionary transition from a free-living ancestor to a host-dependent lifestyle, with a massive proliferation of
mobile genetic elements mainly of phage origin although with minor impact in the process of gene inactivation
that is taking place in this bacterial genome. The metabolic analysis of the whole endosymbiotic consortia of tsetse
flies have revealed a possible phenomenon of metabolic complementation between primary and secondary
endosymbionts that can contribute to explain the co-existence of both bacterial endosymbionts in the context of
the tsetse host.

* Correspondence: francisco.silva@uv.es
1
Institut Cavanilles de Biodiversitat i Biologia Evolutiva, Universitat de
València. Apartat 22085, València E-46071, Spain
© 2010 Belda et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

Background
Symbiotic associations between bacteria and insects are
widespread in nature, being postulated as one of the
key factors of their evolutionary success. Bacterial endosymbionts allow insects to colonize novel ecological
niches characterized by unbalanced nutritional sources
which would be unavailable without their assistance
[1,2]. Based on the evolutionary age of the symbiotic
association and the extent of codependence between
both symbiotic partners, bacterial endosymbionts are
classified into primary and secondary. The former are
generally essential for their hosts, reside exclusively
inside specialized host cells called bacteriocytes, are
transmitted by strict vertical transmission from mother
to descendents and the associations with their insect
hosts are usually ancient. On the other hand, secondary
endosymbionts have been more recently acquired by
their insect hosts, they are not strictly necessary for
host survival, possess a wider tissue tropism, being
found both intracellularly and extracellularly in different
host tissues and, although mainly transmitted by vertical
inheritance, may occasionally be transmitted horizontally, even between species [3-5]. Evolutionary symbiotic
associations between bacteria and insects, especially
when they become obligate intracellular mutualists,
have led to several common genomic features [3]. Many
nonessential genes are inactivated and their DNA is lost
in a stepwise process including many small and some
large indel mutations [6-9]. The gradual process leads
to very small genome sizes, such as those of the aphid
endosymbiont Buchnera aphidicola [4-8], the ant endosymbiont Blochmannia [9,10], or the psyllid endosymbiont Carsonella rudii [11,12]. Drastically reduced
genomes contain gene repertoires with very few, if any,
presence of mobile genetic elements and encode highly
streamlined metabolisms. Sequence evolution is especially distinctive with fast nucleotide substitution rates,
specially for nonsynonymous substitutions [13], a strong
nucleotide compositional bias toward the increase in
A+T, a drastic change in the amino acid composition of
proteins and an almost complete loss of the bias of
codon usage, which may discriminate between high and
low expressing genes [14,15]. Gene order stability is
another important characteristic of many of these endosymbionts, because almost none genome rearrangement
or horizontal gene transfer event is detected
[5,10,16,17]. The absence of genome flux from other
sources may be due to both the restricted intracellular
environment and the inability to incorporate foreign
DNA by recombination [18]. The strict vertical transmission from mothers to descendents leads to the coevolution between the bacterial endosymbionts and their
hosts [19-21].

Page 2 of 17

By contrast, the genomes of facultative secondary
endosymbionts that have established recent associations
with their hosts show heterogeneous genomic features.
In some cases, such as sequence evolution, they show
intermediate characteristics between free living and obligate endosymbionts [22,23], while in other cases they
already maintain some typical characteristics of free-living species. In recent associations, genome sizes are
similar to those of free-living relatives, with very few, if
any, compositional bias, higher loads of mobile genetic
elements (insertion sequences, transposons, prophages),
and an increased amount of non-functional DNA, allowing to study the main evolutionary forces acting during
this initial stages of the genome reduction process.
Sodalis glossinidius is the facultative secondary endosymbiont of the tsetse fly (Diptera: Glossinidae), where
it is harboured both intracellularly and extracellularly in
different tissues including the midgut, haemolymph, fat
body, or milk-gland [24-26]. Tsetse flies harbour other
two bacterial endosymbionts, the obligatory mutualist
Wigglesworthia glossinidia, that resides intracellularly
inside bacteriocytes, cells that forms the bacteriome
organ in the anterior midgut [27,28], and the parasitic
Wolbachia, that is localized in ovarian tissues [29].
The genome of W. glossinidia was sequenced in 2002
[30], and shows the typical features of an ancient obligatory primary endosymbiont, with a highly streamlined
chromosome (698 kb) with 22% GC content and 621 protein coding genes (CDSs). It has retained most genes for
cofactor biosynthesis, which is claimed as the main reason for this symbiotic association since endosymbionts
may supply the tsetse host with vitamins, which are
absent in the vertebrate blood. By contrast, the genome
sequence of S. glossinidius [31] revealed genomic features
closer to free-living g-proteobacteria like Escherichia coli
than to obligatory mutualists, with a genome size of 4.17
Mb and 54.7% GC content. Its main feature was the
detection that close to one fourth of CDSs were inactive
(972 pseudogenes), indicative of a massive process of
gene inactivation, which has also been described in other
bacterial association, such as the one of the pathogenic
bacteria Mycobacterium leprae [32,33]. The absence of
coevolution between S. glossinidius and tsetse flies and
the fact that S. glossinidius is the only bacterial endosymbiont that is able to be cultured in vitro reveals a very
recent symbiotic association with the tsetse host [34-36],
providing an ideal system to study the initial steps of the
transition from free-living to a host-dependent lifestyle.
We present a complete re-annotation and re-analysis
of the genome of S. glossinidius str. morsitans centered
in three main aspects. First, the detailed characterization
of pseudogenes at both nucleotide and amino acid
levels, second, characterization of the different types of

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

insertion sequence (IS) and prophage elements present
in the genome and the assessment of their role in the
gene inactivation process, and third, the detailed analysis
of the metabolic system comprised by S. glossinidius and
W. glossinidia in order to evaluate the impact of gene
inactivation over metabolic capabilities of S. glossinidius
and the extent of metabolic complementation between
both symbionts in the context of the symbiotic association with the tsetse flies.

Methods
Pseudogene annotation

The genome and coding sequences of S. glossinidius
(strain Morsitans) were extracted from GenBank [GenBank: NC_007712]. Pseudogene boundaries were characterized by a two-step approach. In a first step, intergenic
regions between non-overlapping genes with a minimum
length of 50 base pairs (2215 intergenic regions) were
used as query sequences against Escherichia coli strain
K12 substrain MG1655 proteome [GenBank:
NC_000913] using BLASTX [37] with a maximum evalue cutoff of 10-5, extracting the segments covering
each BLASTX hit in S. glossinidius genome. Potential
pseudogenes covering at least 25% of encoded protein
length were retained, rendering a preliminary set of 845
potential pseudogenes. In a second step, new intergenic
regions were extracted this time considering originally
annotated genes and previously identified pseudogenes
and those with a minimum length of 50 base pairs
(2378 intergenic regions) were used as query sequences
against proteomes of all completely sequenced bacterial
genomes in KEGG database [38] at December of 2007
using BLASTX with a maximum e-value cutoff of 10-5.
This analysis produced a second preliminary set of 879
potential pseudogenes. Finally, Genewise program [39]
was used to predict the open reading frames of each
potential pseudogene based on the protein sequence of
their best BLASTX hit, and this information was integrated with Artemis software release 10 [40] joining
open reading frames of the same pseudogene.
Insertion sequence element characterization

To characterize the major types of IS elements of S.
glossinidius, its genome sequence was self-compared
using NUCMER program from MUMMER package [41]
with default conditions. Four main blocks of highly conserved repeated sequences with a minimum sequence
length of 500 bp were identified. They included 28 out
of 29 originally annotated transposase genes. In order to
cover the complete IS length, repeated sequences of
each type (named ISSgl1, ISSgl2, ISSgl3 and ISSgl4) plus
100 bp flanking regions were extracted (16, 6, 2 and 4,
respectively). Sequences were aligned with ClustalW
program [42]. Inverted repeats were identified with the

Page 3 of 17

programs Palindrome and Etandem included in the
EMBOSS package [43]. Direct repeats flanking each IS
element were identified by visual inspection of nucleotide sequences. Consensus sequences for each alignment
were extracted with Consense program included in the
EMBOSS package. More divergent or partial copies of
each IS element were identified using the consensus
sequences as queries in BLASTN searches against S.
glossinidius genome. Finally, in order to characterize
minor IS elements not detected by the previous
approach, the remaining genome sequences were used
as query sequence against IS finder database [44] using
BLASTX with an e-value cutoff of 10-5, detecting a fifth
group of IS elements (named ISSgl5) that was characterized by the same procedure described above.
Genes disrupted by IS element insertion events were
identified by BLASTX using the two sequences flanking
each IS element as queries against non-redundant protein database subdivision of GenBank [45] with an evalue cutoff of 10-5.
For each type of IS element, complete and partial IS
copies were aligned with ClustalW. The p-distance
between copies of the same type of element (number of
differences/alignment length) were estimated with the
pairwise deletion option in MEGA4 software package
[46], and the segment of the multiple alignment corresponding to each transposase gene was extracted and
translated. Elements with stop codons or frameshifts in
the region corresponding to the transposase gene were
considered as defective, whereas, in absence of any
further information, substitutions rendering amino acid
changes or small indels multiples of three nucleotides
were considered to yield functional products.
Whole genome functional reannotation

Manual re-annotation of all originally annotated protein
coding genes and potential pseudogenes was carried out
integrating different sources of information. Hierarchical
functional classification scheme adopted from the Sanger Institute, that is derived from the more general Multifun classification scheme of gene products [47], was
used to assign a “class” qualifier to each CDS reflecting
their cellular function. The annotation of E. coli K12
genome was adopted as reference given its close evolutionary relationship with S. glossinidius and the precision of its annotation, recently updated by an
international consortium [48]. Orthology between S.
glossinidius and E. coli K12 protein coding genes was
proposed based on reciprocal-best-match FASTA
searches [49] with cutoffs of 80% of alignment length
and 30% of amino acid identity. The annotation from E.
coli K12 was transferred to the putative S. glossinidius
ortholog including qualifiers “product”, “EC number”,
“class”, “gene” “function” and “note”. Reciprocal-bestmatch FASTA searches were also carried out between S.

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

glossinidius genome and HAMAP database of manually
annotated microbial proteomes [50] with the same cutoffs. Annotations from HAMAP hits were transferred to
S. glossinidius CDSs including qualifiers “primary_name”, “product” and “EC_number” when they were
available. The same approach was followed in FASTA
searches against internal database of 24 bacterial genomes annotated by the same procedure. Finally, individual BLASTP and FASTA searches were carried out
with all S. glossinidius CDSs against bacterial subdivision
of Uniprot database [51] and additional functional data
were provided by individual searches of each S. glossinidius CDS against protein domain databases such as
PFAM and Prosite [52]. TMHMM [53], SIGNALP [54]
and PSORT [55] programs were used to predict transmembrane domains, signal peptides, and cellular localization of gene products, respectively. The results of all
these analyses were integrated together using Artemis
software release 10 and were manually curated at both
functional and physical level. The re-annotated genome
sequence of S. glossinidius is shown as supplemental
material (see Additional File 1).
Metabolic reconstruction

KEGG pathway maps were generated with KEGG Automatic Annotation Server [56] from amino acid sequences
of genes and pseudogenes. Predicted EC numbers were
compared to those transferred during functional re-annotation process in order to ensure a correct assignment of
enzymatic functions. BLAST2GO program [57] and specific BLASTP searches of dubious enzymatic activities
against specific entries of non-redundant protein database subdivision of GenBank, to avoid functional overassignments, were used to complement KAAS pathway
reconstruction in order to predict mutifunctional
enzymes associated with more than one EC number that
were not identified with KAAS. Extensive literature
searches and specialized metabolic databases like ECOCYC [58] and METACYC [59] were also used during the
analysis of the reconstructed metabolic pathways.
Whole genome comparisons

TBLASTX genome comparisons were generated
between S. glossinidius and E. coli K12 genomes to help
the reannotation process and metabolic reconstruction.
TBLASTX comparisons were also generated between
the genome of S. glossinidius and the complete phage
genome subdivision of GenBank in order to characterize
complete or partial prophage insertions. Whole genome
comparisons were analyzed with Artemis Comparison
Tool software version 7 [40].

Results
Pseudogene number adjustment

It was previously described that the genome of S. glossinidius harboured 972 pseudogenes [31]. However, their

Page 4 of 17

coordinates and the function of the active genes from
which they derived were not annotated either in the
manuscript or in the GenBank file. We performed a
complete pseudogene re-annotation identifying and
characterizing 1501 pseudogenes (Additional File 1).
First, we performed a BLASTX search over S. glossinidius intergenic regions, which allowed us to identify
1724 potential pseudogenes. Second, individual inspection of FASTA and BLASTP results for each CDS
allowed us the detection of adjacent pseudogenes that
were different frames of a same original functional gene.
We merged these adjacent pseudogenes in single CDSs.
Third, IS element characterization allowed the detection
of ancestral genes that were inactivated by their insertions, with the two parts of the ancestral gene flanked
by the annotated IS element. The two segments of each
disrupted gene were merged in a single CDS. Fourth,
during the re-annotation process we detected 142 situations in which a putative functional gene had been split
in an ORF included in the primary annotation as a functional gene and a pseudogene detected in our FASTA
and BLASTP searches. These pseudogenes were eliminated from the final re-annotation file and a “misc_feature” qualifier were added to the corresponding
functional genes specifying the proportion of the ancestral gene represented by the originally annotated gene
and the characterized pseudogene (see Additional File
2). Finally, potential pseudogenes with no significant
homology on BLASTP and FASTA searches and no possible functional inference by domain analysis (PFAM or
Prosite) or cellular location (TMHMM or PSORT analysis) were eliminated. Despite the reduction over the
initial estimations, the final set of 1501 pseudogenes
overcame the 972 pseudogenes described in the original
annotation [31].
Whole genome functional re-annotation

A systematic re-annotation of all CDSs was performed
based on information derived from similarity searches
(BLASTP, FASTA), protein motif searches (PFAM,
PROSITE, TMHMM and SIGNALP), and protein localization prediction (PSORT). Using the functional classification scheme of the Sanger Institute (Additional File
3), we classified CDSs in functional categories (Figure
1). The highest gene proportion was assigned to surface
protein (770 CDSs) and mobile genetic element (831
CDSs) functional classes. These numbers correspond to
19.6% and 21.1% of the total number of CDSs, respectively. Surface protein functional class includes all integral membrane proteins (inner and outer membrane
proteins), secreted proteins, and membrane transporters
(ABC transporters, PTS system components, etc), but
also all genes encoding for enzymatic activities involved
in peptidoglycan and bacterial lipopolysaccharide

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

Page 5 of 17

Figure 1 Results of the re-annotation process. The functional categories correspond to the “colour” qualifier in Additional File 1. Red bars
show the number of CDSs (genes and pseudogenes) in each functional category. Green bars show the number of genes in each functional
category. Blue bars show the number of pseudogenes in each functional category.

biosynthesis. Mobile genetic element class contains all
transposase coding genes and all genes encoding proteins with homology with prophage elements, including
integrases, reverse transcriptases, phage tail proteins and
hypothetical phage proteins. In addition, these two functional classes harbour the highest number of pseudogenes with 345 and 447 pseudogenes respectively, being
also the functional classes most affected by pseudogenization, with pseudogenes representing 44.8% and 53.8%
of the CDSs assigned to surface and mobile genetic elements classes, respectively.
The original annotation described 787 genes encoding
hypothetical proteins. After the re-annotation process
190 remained annotated as conserved hypothetical proteins, which means that the corresponding proteins are
conserved in several bacteria but have an unknown
function, and 115 as unknown proteins, representing
orphan genes with the corresponding protein having no
significant homology with any entry of public databases.
This latter result contrasts with the 221 genes described

in the original S. glossinidius genome paper with no
homology with any entry from public databases [31].
This is a consequence of the exponential growth in the
number of complete bacterial genomes due to the new
generation of sequencing technologies (454, Solexa, and
SOLID sequencing techniques), with more than 1,000
complete bacterial and archaeal genomes available since
the publication of the genome of S. glossinidius in January, 2006 (http://www.genomesonline.org). In addition,
the use of different sources of information out of
BLASTP and FASTA searches allowed to make functional inferences for proteins with no clear functional
assignment based only on sequence similarity searches.
A detailed survey of functional reassignments of the 787
protein coding genes originally annotated as hypothetical proteins indicates that most functional reassignments
were done to mobile DNA (245 genes) and to surface
protein (117 genes) functional classes (Figure 2).
The classes with the fewest number of CDSs are those
corresponding to enzymes for degradation of large (91

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

Figure 2 Functional re-assignments of genes originally
annotated as “hypothetical proteins”. Functional categories
correspond to the “colour” qualifier in the final re-annotation file.
There is a single gene re-assigned to “energy metabolism” category.

CDSs) and small (106 CDSs) molecules, representing
2.3% and 2.7% of the total number of CDSs, respectively
(Figure 1). It agrees with the previous observation that
S. glossinidius has mainly retained biosynthetic pathways
[31].
Due to the massive presence of phage-related CDSs
(698), a more detailed analysis was done. They represent
a 17.8% of the total CDSs of the genome, being strongly
affected by gene inactivation with 353 pseudogenes.
These CDSs were confirmed as phage-related genes by
BLASTP searches against ACLAME database of mobile
genetic elements (http://aclame.ulb.ac.be/), with only 41
genes and 62 pseudogenes having no-significant homology with any phage-related gene from the database (Evalue cutoff = 10-6) but showing significant homology
with hypothetical phage proteins from non-redundant
databases on BLASTX searches. TBLASTX analysis of S.
glossinidius complete genome against all completely
sequenced phage genomes in GenBank allowed the
detection of two genome regions with homology with
two completely sequenced bacteriophage genomes
belonging to the Mu-family of double-stranded DNA
bacteriophages. The first region, named SGLp1, is
located between pseudogenes ps_SGL0195c and
ps_SGL0213 and shows strong colinearity with enterobacterial phage Mu [Genbank: NC_000929.1] at whole
genome level. Gene inactivation has affected to 19 of
the 28 CDSs included in the prophage region including
the genes c and ner, involved in the regulation of lysogeny and lytic development, A and B involved in phage
integration and transposition, I encoding a protease and
scaffolding protein, and the majority of phage tail
assembly genes, indicating the inactivity of this prophage
element [60]. In addition, there are 5 orphan genes with

Page 6 of 17

no homology with any protein coding gene from
ACLAME database or non-redundant databases reflecting the modularity associated with phage evolution, with
regions of significant homology interdispersed with
unrelated segments [61,62]. The second region, named
SGLp2, includes 47 CDSs comprised between SG0816
gene and pseudogene ps_SGL0453, and shows strong
colinearity at whole genome level with Burkholderia
phage BcepMu [GenBank: NC_005882], a Mu-like bacteriophage isolated from Burkholderia cenocepacia strain
J2315 that has closely related homologs in prophage elements from several g-proteobacterial genomes, sharing a
high degree of colinearity, with much less of the mosaicism detected in other bacteriophages, including a common inversion of the entire left end region of their
genomes compared with other Mu-like prophages [63]
also present in the prophage region of SGLp2 (Figure
3). In contrast with SGLp1, where gene inactivation has
affected the majority of CDSs of the prophage region, in
SGLp2 only 5 out of 47 CDSs are pseudogenes, retaining a completely functional lysis gene cassette for cell
adhesion and invasion together with functional genes
for capside formation and DNA packaging, and genes
involved in the biosynthesis of the contractile phage tail
[64]. However, there is no homology at the level of
phage control region, that is also absent in the homologous prophage regions of S. typhi CT18 and S. typhi
Ty2, indicating that these prophages are uninducible
cryptic prophages [64]. In addition to this two complete
prophage elements, there are 11 genome regions that
show significant homology with different domains of

Figure 3 Complete prophages characterized during the reannotation process. Comparisons were generated with ACT based
on TBLASTX comparisons of whole genome sequences: (a) S.
glossinidius complete prophage region SGLp1 (top) vs.
enterobacteria phage Mu (NC_000929.1) (bottom) (b) S. glossinidius
complete prophage region SGLp2 (top) vs. Burkholderia phage
BcepMu (NC_005882) (bottom).

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

Page 7 of 17

completely sequenced phage genomes including 2
domains with homology with phage epsilon 15 [GenBank: NC_004775.1], that is one of the precursors of S.
glossinidius str. Morsitans extrachromosomal bacteriophage-like element pSOG3 [65] (Additional File 4).
Insertion sequence characterization

Due to the massive presence of CDSs belonging to
mobile genetic element functional class and the proposed role of IS element proliferation in the first steps
of genome reduction of bacterial endosymbionts
[66-68], a complete characterization of the different
types of IS elements was carried out. Five different
types of IS elements were identified in the genome of S.
glossinidius representing 2.52% of the overall genome
sequence, all of which showed clear homology with
known g-proteobacterial IS families, with their main
structural characteristics described in Table 1. There
are clear differences between IS types in terms of functionality and sequence divergence, which are indicative
of different stages of IS degeneration. Among the five
types of IS elements, only ISSgl1 and ISSgl2 can be considered as functional IS elements by the presence of
functional transposase genes clearly conserved at whole
sequence level between IS copies and with homology
with complete PFAM domains corresponding to transposases. The most abundant IS element is ISSgl1, that
belongs to IS5 family of IS sequences, with a functional

transposase gene that encodes for a protein of 307
amino acids with a functional DDE domain common to
most transposase genes responsible for co-ordinate divalent metal ions, mainly Mg+2, needed during the course
of the transposition reaction [69]. Among the 16 genes
originally annotated as transposase genes belonging to
ISSgl1 type, only 6 contained a complete DDE domain
and can be considered as functional IS elements. The
other IS type with functional transposase is ISSgl2, that
belongs to IS110 family of IS elements, a group characterized by the absence of inverted repeats in most of its
members as well as the absence of direct repeats flanking the IS element after transposition, also observed in
complete ISSgl2 elements [70]. However, inverted
repeats of 11 bp are detected internally of consensus
ISSgl2 sequence, with right inverted repeat located
inside the transposase gene (See Additional File 5). The
6 transposase gene copies included in this IS type presented the same profile on PFAM searches, being all
potentially functional transposases except in one case
where we detected a premature stop codon in one of
the transposase genes belonging to a truncated ISSgl2,
probably reflecting an ongoing process of IS degradation. For the rest of IS types (ISSgl3, ISSgl4, ISSgl5), it
was no possible the identification of a functional transposase gene common to all components of the IS type,
despite each IS type included originally annotated transposase genes.

Table 1 Structural and evolutionary characteristics of the 5 main groups of IS elements characterized in the genome
of S. glossinidius
ISSgl1 ISSgl2 ISSgl3 ISSgl4 ISSgl5
IS family

IS5

IS110

IS256

IS110

ISNCY

Consensus sequence length (bp)

1052

1175

1247

1210

939

GC content (%)

49.8

49.7

51

48.7

52.7

Structural features

Number of open reading frames

1

1

1

1

1

Inverted repeats (bp)

17

11

34

10

n.d.

(c)

n.d.

(d)

Direct repeats derived from transposition (bp)

(d)

(d)

9

n.d.

9

n.d.

47

9

7

7

4

16

9

12

2

9

IS with functional transposase genes

10

4

0

0

0

Pseudogenes by IS insertion

10

2

2

3

0

Complete copies
Partial copies

(a)

(b)

p-distance (number of nucleotide differences/total length)
Minimum

a

0.0024 0.0062 0.0048 0.1097

0.066

0.0268 0.0756 0.0240 0.3935

Mean
Total length (nt)

0.0

Maximum

0.02

0.0162 0.0287 0.0131 0.2388

(e)

Complete copies are those that present inverted repeats at both ends of the transposase gene.
b
Partial copies correspond to fragments of the putative IS element.
c
No inverted repeats were detected in ISSgl5.
d
No direct repeats were detected in ISSgl2, ISSgl4, and ISSgl5 (n.d.).
e
Sum of the length of all corresponding complete and partial IS elements.

52130

15328

16915

9375

11411

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

In addition, 3 complete and 5 partial IS elements
presents in single copy were characterized during the
re-annotation process. This raises the fraction of S. glossinidius genome represented by IS elements to 2.72%.
Of the 1501 characterized pseudogenes, only 18 were
originated by the insertion of an IS element indicating
that IS transposition has not been a major force in the
process of psudogenization in S. glossinidius.
Metabolic reconstruction

A detailed analysis of the metabolic map of S. glossinidius was carried out based on the combined results of
KEGG Automated Annotation Server and Blast2GO
with the complete set of genes and pseudogenes (3932
CDSs) together with extensive literature searches and
specialized metabolic databases like ECOCYC or
METACYC that allowed to detect several features do
not described in the original annotation. The most
important was the inactivation of the pathway for Larginine biosynthesis from L-glutamate (Figure 4). This
pathway proceeds through eight enzymatic steps, with
five steps involved in L-ornithine production from Lglutamate and three steps for the production of L-arginine from L-ornithine and carbamoyl phosphate, an
essential intermediate of pyrimidine biosynthesis [71].
Two main patterns for L-arginine biosynthesis differing
in the strategy followed to remove acetyl group from
the intermediate N-acetyl ornithine have been described.
One is a linear pathway found in members of the Enterobacteriaceae and Bacilleae in which N-acetyl ornithine
is deacetylated by the hydrolytic enzyme acetylornithine
deacetylase encoded by the gene argE producing Lornithine and acetate. The other is a cyclic pathway,
energetically more efficient and found in most prokaryote and eukaryote microbes, which involves a transacylation of N-acetyl ornithine using glutamate as acetate
acceptor yielding L-ornithine and N-acetyl-L-glutamate,
the first intermediate of the pathway, through a reaction
catalyzed by ornithine acetyltransferase encoded by the
gene argJ [71]. In addition, a third mechanism has been
identified in Xanthomonadales in which N-acetylornithine is directly transcarbamylated to N-acetyl
citrulline by a specific N-acetyl ornithine transcarbamylase and then deacetylated by the common acetylornithine deacetylase (ArgE) to the L-arginine precursor
citrulline [72]. The ancestor of S. glossinidius, as other
members of enterobacteriaceae, presented a complete
linear pathway for L-arginine biosynthesis from L-glutamate, however, in S. glossinidius, gene inactivation has
affected the first (argA), third (argC), fourth (argD) and
seventh (argG) steps of the pathway (Figure 4) indicating
a complete inability for L-arginine biosynthesis by none
of the above described pathways given the inactivation
of three of the four enzymatic activities involved in the

Page 8 of 17

biosynthesis of the common intermediate N-acetyl
ornithine. The inactivation of the arginine biosynthetic
pathway indicates that S. glossinidius needs L-arginine
supply from the tse-tse host, which will be accomplished
by a functional arginine ABC transport system encoded
by the genes artM, artQ, artI and artP [73] despite the
inactivation of the major Lysine/Arginine/Ornithie
(LAO) ABC transport system (hisM (ps_SGL0977c) and
hisQ (ps_SGL0978)). The inactivation of the major LAO
ABC transport system has also consequences in other
biosynthetic pathways like putrescine biosynthesis, a
polyamine involved in cell development that can be
synthesized by two alternate pathways from L-arginine
or L-ornithine. In concordance with the inactivation of
L-ornithine biosynthesis from L-glutamate and Lornithine transport through LAO ABC transport system,
S. glossinidius has retained functional speA (encoding
arginine decarboxylase) and speB (encoding agmatinase)
genes for putrescine biosynthesis from L-arginine, but
has inactivated speC gene (encoding ornithine decarboxylase) required for putrescine biosynthesis from
L-ornithine.
The argD gene has also been postulated to additionally encode a succinyldiaminopimelate aminotransferase
activity, required for the sixth step of L-Lysine and
Mesodiaminopimelate biosynthetic pathway that produces L-Lysine and their precursor Mesodiaminopimelate, that constitutes an essential cross-linking moiety of
the peptidoglycan component of bacterial cell walls [74].
However, this evidence comes from in-vitro assays of
purified ArgD protein with different substrates, and
shows that the affinity for acetylornithine is higher than
for succinyldiaminopimelate. In addition, other studies
have determined that there is a specific succinyldiaminopimelate activity in Escherichia coli additional to argD
encoded aminotransferase [75], in concordance with the
presence of PLP-dependent aminotransferases of
unknown function in the genome of Escherichia coli
like b2290, that encodes a predicted PLP-dependent
aminotransferase. It has a functional ortholog in the
genome of Sodalis glossinidius (SG1602) not assigned to
any pathway, so probably this uncharacterized PLPdependent aminotransferases are responsible for succinyldiaminopimelate aminotransferase activity in L-lysine
biosynthetic pathway. Alternatively, it has been also
described the replacement of mesodiaminopimelate by
the methionine biosynthesis intermediate cistathionine
in E. coli [76], so another possible explanation is that
cystathionine replaces mesodiaminopimelate in peptidoglycan biosynthesis, leading to the dependence of extracellular L-lysine through a functional APC transporter
encoded by the gene lysP (SG0955).
Another important feature of the S. glossinidius metabolism refers to the different pathways for cofactor

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

Page 9 of 17

Figure 4 Metabolic profile of L-arginine biosynthesis from L-glutamate in S. glossinidius and its implication in spermidine, L-lysine and
peptidoglycan biosynthesis. Red coloured enzymatic reactions represent gene inactivation events, whereas blue coloured ones are those
encoded by functional genes.

biosynthesis, which have been postulated as the driving
force in the maintenance of the symbiotic association
between tse-tse flies and their primary endosymbiont
W. glossinidia [25,77]. A detailed analysis of the metabolic maps of S. glossinidius based on KEGG Automated
Annotation Server and BLAST2GO results revealed that
S. glossinidius does not contain a complete thiamine
phosphate biosynthetic pathway. This suggested that not
only tsetse flies but S. glossinidius were dependent of

W. glossinidia for its synthesis. However, the analysis of
the thiamine biosynthetic pathway in W. glossinidia,
although leads to the detection of some previously non
annotated genes, also revealed that the pathway was
incomplete lacking the essential thiI gene and showing
thiF as a pseudogene. The synthesis of the biologically
active cofactor thiamine diphosphate in bacteria [78-81]
takes place by several pathways (Figure 5). The de novo
pathway requires the synthesis of two intermediates, a

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

Page 10 of 17

Figure 5 Metabolic profile of thiamine biosynthesis pathway in S. glossinidius and W. glossinidia. (A) Schematic diagram of thiamine
biosynthesis pathway. Reactions coloured in blue represents the functional profile of thiamine biosynthesis in W. glossinidia, whereas reactions
coloured in green represents the functional profile of thiamine biosynthesis in S. glossinidius; Pseudogenized activities are represented by dashed
lines. Functional thiamine ABC transport system, thiamine kinase (thiK) and thiamine phosphate kinase (thiL) allow thiamine diphosphate
biosynthesis from exogenous thiamine. (B) Structure of the thiamine biosynthesis operon in S. glossinidius, E. coli K12, and W. glossinidia.
Functional genes (blue), pseudogenes (red), and the thiS gene of W. glossinidia characterized in this study (green). The thiH gene in S. glossinidius
corresponds to an originally annotated gene (SG0136) with a premature stop codon detected during the reannotation process (*1).

pyrimidine phosphate moiety and a thiazole phosphate
moiety. Both are combined by the action of a thiamine
phosphate synthase (ThiE) and a thiamine phosphate
kinase (ThiL) to produce the active cofactor.
The analysis of this metabolism in S. glossinidius (see
genes in Table 2) showed that the ancestor of this

bacterium probably contained the complete set of genes
for its synthesis. However, a process of degeneration,
recently started, completely avoids its de novo biosynthesis yet. Remnants of this situation are 4 pseudogenes
(thiS, thiF, thiG and thiE) together with an originally
annotated gene (thiH) that presents a premature stop

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

Page 11 of 17

Table 2 Functional status of genes involved in thiamine diphosphate biosynthesis in S. glossinidius and W. glossinidia
S. glossinidius
Gene
name

Enzyme

W. glossinidia

Gene Pseudog. Absent Gene Pseudog. Absent

thiI

Sufur-carrier protein ThiI

+

thiF

Thiamin (thiazole moiety) biosynthesis protein ThiF

+

iscS

Cysteine desulfurase

+

+

+
+

thiS

Sulfur-carrier protein ThiS

dxs

1-deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate synthase

+

+(**)

thiG

ThiG subunit of thiamin biosynthesis complex ThiGH

+

+

thiH

ThiH subunit of thiamin biosynthesis complex ThiGH

+(*)

+

thiC

Thiamin (pyrimidine moety) biosynthesis protein ThiC

+

thiD

Bifunctional hydroxymethylpyrimidine kinase/phosphohydroxymethylpyrimidine
kinase

+

+

+
+

thiE

Thiamin phosphate synthase

ybjQ

Conserved protein with activity thiamin phosphate synthase

+
+

thiL

Thiamin-monophosphate kinase

+

+
+
+
+

thiM

Hydroxyethylthiazole kinase

+

+

thiK

Thiamin kinase

+

+

tenA2

Thiaminase

+

+

thiP

Thiamin ABC transport system; fused membrane components

+

+

thiQ

Thiamin ABC transport system; ATP-binding protein

+

+

tbpA

Thiamin ABC transport system; substrate-binding protein

+

+

(*)

Originally annotated gene with premature stop codon
(**)
Gene absent in W. glossinidia in original annotation but detected in the present study by TBLASTN against E. coli K12 genome

codon probably reflecting an ongoing gene inactivation
event. Thus, the most plausible explanation for the presence of the cofactor in S. glossinidius is a salvage pathway through the presence of a functional thiamine ABC
transport system encoded by the genes thiP, thiQ and
tbpA together with a functional thiamine kinase (ThiK)
and thiamine phosphate kinase (ThiL) (Figure 5A).
However, it implies that sufficient amounts of thiamine
should be available from the host, something improbable. In addition, the S. glossinidius proteome contains
remnants activities and proteins related with the pathway, including the ability to synthesize thiazole phosphate carboxylate (THZ-P) through a salvage pathway.
The analysis of the metabolism in W. glossinidia
(genes in Table 2) revealed that it retains functional
thiH, thiG, thiE, and thiC genes, with no signal of thiI
gene, and with thiS and thiF genes non annotated but
present in the intergenic region between thiG and thiE
(Figure 5B). TBLASTN analyses with ThiF and ThiS
from E. coli against the complete genome of W. glossinidia confirmed the presence of non annotated thiS and
thiF genes immediately downstream thiG gene. However, whereas thiS has no stops nor frameshifts, the
putative thiF gene of W. glossinidia contains an internal
stop codon that disrupts the translation of the putative
ThiF protein at amino acid 165, before the essential

cysteine residue at position 184 that is responsible for
the disulfide linkage between ThiS and ThiF that acts as
sulfur donor in thiazole phosphate moiety biosynthesis
[82]. The absence of these two genes limits the metabolic capability of W. glossinidia to the synthesis of the
thiazole moiety (4-methyl-5-(b-hydroxyethyl)thiazolephosphate, THZ-P).
Because the metabolic pathways of both symbionts
were incomplete we searched for evidences of complementation. This was revealed through the identification
of yjbQ gene in S. glossinidius (SG2130). The YjbQ protein has been recently demonstrated to contain a thiamine phosphate synthase activity able to rescue
thiamine auxotrophy in a mutant thiE strain [83]. This
leads to a scenario in which W. glossinidia synthesizes
HMP-PP, and S. glossinidius THZ-P. Both intermediates
may be shared by the endosymbionts with W. glossinidia
synthesizing the active cofactor after the action of ThiE
and ThiL and S. glossinidius after the action of YjbQ
and ThiL (Figure 6).
In addition, detailed analysis of cofactor metabolism in
W. glossinidia indicated that folate and Coenzyme A
biosynthesis pathways are severely impaired due to the
absence of pab genes (pabA, pabB, pabC) for the biosynthesis of the folate precursor p-aminobenzoate from
chorismate, whose biosynthetic pathway from pentose

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

Figure 6 Pontetial metabolic complementation between W.
glossinidia and S. glossinidius at thiamine biosynthesis level.
Thiazole phosphate carboxylate (THZ-P) is synthesized by S.
glossinidius from exogenous thiamin through salvage pathway
(tenA2, thiM), whereas hydroxymethyl pyrimidine pyrophosphate
(HMP-PP) is synthesized by W. glossinidia from 5-aminoimidazole
ribonucleotide (AIR) (thiC, thiD). THZ-P and HMP-PP are shared
between both bacteria to produce the functional thiamine
diphosphate that is provided to the tsetse host.

phosphate pathway intermediate erythrose 4 phosphate
is also absent, and the absence of ilv genes for the biosynthesis of Coenzyme A precursor 2,3-ketoisovalerate,
a common precursor for L-valine and Coenzyme A biosynthesis. All this biosynthetic pathways are completely
functional in S. glossinidius.

Discussion
Bacterial endosymbionts of insects are characterized by
highly reduced genomes compared to their free-living
counterparts due to a massive process of gene inactivation consequence of relaxed purifying selection over
high proportion of protein coding genes that are nonessential in the intracellular host-rich medium and the
effect of genetic drift that allows slightly deleterious
mutations to be fixed in the population due to successive population bottlenecks in the transmission of bacterial endosymbionts from mother to their descendents
in a process known as Muller’s ratchet [13,16,84]. This
process leads to the massive accumulation of pseudogenes during initial stages of the transition from free-living to host-dependent lifestyle that will be subsequently
eliminated from the genome due to the deletional bias
associated to bacterial chromosomes [20,85,86]. In primary bacterial endosymbionts with long-term associations with their hosts like Buchnera aphidicola,
Blochmannia floridanus, or Wigglesworthia glossinidia
their highly reduced genomes show few, if any, pseudogenes. However, it is possible to infer pseudogene

Page 12 of 17

remnants in the intergenic regions between orthologous
genes in comparisons with their free living relatives
[87,88]. In contrast, facultative endosymbionts and
pathogens that recently establish intracellular associations with their hosts have bigger genomes in which the
presence of pseudogenes is more evident, like the 149
pseudogenes of Y. pestis CO92 [89] or 254 pseudogenes
of S. flexneri 2a str. 301 [90], with the most extreme
situation being that of Mycobacterium leprae with more
than 1000 pseudogenes [32,33,91]. S. glossinidius is one
of the few secondary facultative endosymbionts for
which their genome has been completely sequenced,
revealing an ongoing process of massive genome reduction with an unprecedented number of pseudogenes
indicatives of a very recent symbiotic association with
their tse-tse host, also confirmed by previous phylogenetic studies that show no-coevolution between tse-tse
host and S. glossinidius phylogenetic trees [92]. A
detailed survey of S. glossinidius intergenic regions
based on BLASTX searches allowed to increase the
number of pseudogenes from 972 in the original annotation [31] to 1501. This can be explained by the different
methodologies used for pseudogene identification. In the
original genome paper, pseudogenes were identified
based on the results of different gene-prediction programs, considering pseudogenes all CDSs with less than
half the lenght of its functional homologs in BLASTP
searches [31], limiting pseudogene identification to
recent inactivation events that conserve start/end positions along open reading frame. By contrast, pseudogene
identification based on BLASTX searches of raw nucleotide sequences against protein databases allows to identify highly degraded pseudogenes whose open reading
frames are not predicted by ab-initio gene prediction
methods or pseudogenes originated by insertion of IS
elements. Similar approaches for pseudogene identification identified at least 100 additional pseudogenes in the
genomes of E. coli/Shigella clade [93], 188 additional
pseudogenes in Y. pestis CO92 genome [94] or 6895
potential pseudogenes over 64 prokaryotic genomes
[95]. In addition, 142 originally annotated genes are susceptible to be considered as potential pseudogenes
because are situations of CDSs shorter than their database homologs, detecting the absent part of the gene as
a flanking pseudogene.
The results of the functional re-annotation indicates a
massive presence of genes related to mobile genetic elements, being also the functional class most affected by
gene inactivation (447 out of 831 CDSs). Mobile genetic
element expansion has been traditionally associated to
initial stages of bacterial adaptation to host-dependent
lifestyle associated to a relaxed selection over non-essential genes under nutrient-rich conditions allowing
expansion of mobile genetic elements without

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

detrimental effects to the host [20,96,97]. The characterization of the complete set of IS elements presents in
the S. glossinidius genome revealed that IS elements
represent only 2.72% of the genome with an estimated
IS load of 0.031 elements per kilobase, similar to other
recently host-dependent bacteria [98] although much
lower than the estimate loads of IS elements for the
genomes of Sitophilus oryzae and Sitohilus zeamays primary endosymbionts (SOPE and SZPE respectively), the
closest relatives of S. glossinidius within g-proteobacteria
with a divergence time estimated in some 50-100 million years ago but with an obligaroty intracellular association in bacteriocyte cells [99,100]. BLASTN
comparisons with the consensus sequence of the 5 different IS elements characterized in S. glossinidius against
the recently described sequence of four IS elements
from SOPE [67] indicate a common origin of ISSgl1 and
ISsope1 (82% of identities at nucleotide level) whereas
there is no similarity between the rest of IS elements,
possibly reflecting independent acquisitions posterior to
the divergence of both lineages. A detailed analysis of
the IS flanking regions revealed that only 18 out of 1501
identified pseudogenes were originated by IS insertion,
reflecting that IS transposition has not been a major
force in the gene inactivation profile of S. glossinidius.
The majority of pseudogenes are produced by frameshift
mutations or premature stop codons, indicating that
gene inactivation has been produced by multiple single
gene inactivation events generating a lot of non-functional DNA that will be eliminated gradually due to the
inherent mutational deletional bias associated to bacterial genomes and the lack of selective pressures for the
maintenance of these non-functional regions [86,88,101].
The high amount of mobile genetic elements are consequence of a massive presence of phage related CDSs
(17.7% of the total CDSs number), including 2 complete
and 11 partial elements with homology with complete
bacteriophage genomes. In bacterial endosymbionts,
bacteriophage elements have been identified in recent
symbiotic associations like bacteriophages APSE-1 and
APSE-2 in the secondary endosymbiont of aphids ca.
Hamiltonella defensa associated to the protection activity of this secondary endosymbiont killing parasitoid
wasp larvae [102-104] or bacteriophage WO of parasitic
Wolbachia, originally associated to promote cytoplasmic
incompatibility on invertebrate host but recently proposed to be beneficial for the host allowing to control
their bacterial loads through lytic development of WO
prophage [105,106]. Two of the prophage domains are
homologous to phage element epsilon 15
(NC_004775.1), which has been postulated as one of the
precursors of the extrachromosomally replicating element of phage origin pSG3 from S. glossinidius str. Morsitans [65], possibly reflecting a common origin of

Page 13 of 17

extrachromosomal pSG3 and this 2 prophage regions of
S. glossinidius genome in the tse-tse host Glossina morsitans morsitans. In addition, transposases from IS5
family have 75% of identity at amino acidic level with a
transposase encoded by pSG3, also indicative of a flux
of genetic material between extrachromosomal element
pSG3 and the bacterial chromosome. It is important to
consider that the structure and presence of bacteriophage-like element pSG3 is highly variable among S. glossinidius isolates from different tsetse species [65,107], so
it would be expected to observe considerable differences
in structure and content of prophage elements associated with S. glossinidius strains from different tse-tse
species.
Finally, the analysis of S. glossinidius metabolism
revealed a metabolic profile closer to free-living bacteria
than to obligate mutualists, both in terms of energy production from different carbon sources and in terms of
biosynthetic capabilities for most essential metabolites
and macromolecules with the unique exception of Larginine and thiamine. Our analyses disagree with those
previously reported for amino acid biosynthesis that
indicated that S. glossinidius was able to synthesize all
amino acids except L-alanine [31], and showed that Larginine was the only amino acid lacking a complete
biosynthetic pathway.
We have also observed a putative metabolic complementation between S. glossinidius and W. glossinidia to
produce the active cofactor thiamine pyrophosphate
based on the gene repertoire of both bacteria. S. glossinidius was unable to produce thiamine [31], while W. glossinidia genome was described as having the potential to
synthesize it [30]. The screening for the complete set of
genes required for thiamine biosynthesis in W. glossinidia showed lack of two essential components (thiI and
thiF) which would avoid the de novo biosynthesis of
thiamine. However, a detailed revision of the proteins
encoded by both endosymbiotic species revealed that
each endosymbiont was able to synthesize one of the
two moieties that the enzyme thiamine phosphate
synthase combines in the pathway for the synthesis of
the active cofactor [81]. While W. glossinidia has the
capability of synthesizing the pyrimidine moiety (HMPPP), S. glossinidius has that of the thiazole moiety
(THZ-P). Considering that both bacterial symbionts
were able to acquire the missing metabolite from outside, they would be able to synthesize the cofactor thiamine after the action of thiamine phosphate synthase
and thiamine kinase. The genes encoding these enzymes
(thiE and thiL, respectively) are present in the W. glossinidia genome, but only the second in that of S. glossinidius. We have found that S. glossinidius contains the
gene yjbQ described recently as a thiamine phosphate
synthase gene homolog, having an alanine in position 89

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

of the protein that has been demonstrated experimentally in E. coli that increases enzyme activity [83]. However, it is important to consider that this hypothesis is
based on the unique two available genomes sequences
of both tsetse endosymbionts, that unfortunately come
from different tsetse host species, and as a consequence
may not reflect the real metabolic scenario in each
tsetse host. In addition, W. glossinidia is essential for
host reproduction and fitness, whereas S. glossinidius
have less detrimental effects upon their specific removal
from tsetse host due to their more recent association,
although it produces a marked decrease in tsetse longevity, so although this potential complementation could be
possible in light of genome sequences, it appears not to
play a major role in tsetse physiology [108]. In addition,
whereas W. glossinidia is detected in all tsetse species, S.
glossinidius is not ubiquitous and appears undetected in
some Glossina species or in different individuals of a
particular population. However, the particular lineage of
Glossina morsitans morsitans shows high density of S.
glossinidius in comparison with other Glossina species
[109], with similar profiles of symbiont density variation
of both S. glossinidius and W. glossinidia through its
development that suggests some degree of adaptative
regulation of density of both tsetse symbionts by means
of Glossina morsitans morsitans host [110]. In order to
better define the adaptative value of the possible metabolic complementation, not only at thiamine but also at
folate and coenzyme A biosynthesis level, both severely
impaired in W. glossinidia, it would be necessary to
obtain additional genome sequences from both tsetse
endosymbionts (like S. glossinidius from Glossina brevipalpis and W. glossinidia from Glossina morsitans morsitans) to determine if the metabolic profile observed is
conserved when the complete symbiotic systems of different tsetse host are compared. Recently, an experimental assessment of the thiamine requirements of S.
glossinidius has been carried out, demonstrating experimentally the necessity of an external source of thiamine,
specially in the form of thiamine monophosphate, for S.
glossinidius survival on cell cultures, and pointing out to
their supply to both S. glossinidius and the tsetse host
by W. glossinidia, although no direct experimental evidence about this last assumption is provided [111].
Just a few cases of complementation between the
metabolisms of two insect endosymbionts for mutual
benefit have been described. Two types of complementation may be distinguished. In one case, both endosymbionts produce different end products of the
metabolism (i.e. amino acids). In the other case, each
endosymbiont controls part of the biosynthetic pathway,
and the combined effort of both is required in order to
produce the final product. The case of Sulcia muelleri

Page 14 of 17

and Baumannia cicadellinicola, endosymbionts of the
sharpshooter Homalodisca coagulata, illustrates very
well both types of complementations [112,113]. Thus,
many amino acids are synthesized by S. muelleri and
provided to B. cicadellinicola and to the host, except
methionine and histidine, which are synthesized by B.
cicadellinicola and provided to the co-endosymbiont
and the host. The biosynthesis of one of these amino
acids, methionine, is shared between both endosymbionts with S. muelleri providing the intermediate
homoserine to B. cicadellinicola.
Another case of by biosynthetic pathway sharing is the
tryptophan biosynthesis by the two endosymbionts of
the aphid Cinara cedri [114]. Buchnera aphidicola performs the first enzyme step producing anthranilic acid.
It is uptaken by the co-endosymbiont Serratia symbiotica which has the genes that encode the remnant steps
of the pathway. Then, the produced tryptophan may be
supplied to the co-endosymbiont and to the insect host.

Conclusions
A complete re-analysis of the genome sequence of S.
glossinidius has revealed novel insights in the initial
stages of the transition from free-living to a host dependent lifestyle in this bacterial genome. The relaxed selective pressures over non-essential genome regions in the
more stable environment of the tsetse host have lead to
a massive proliferation of mobile genetic elements in the
form of prophages and IS elements, although their
impact in the process of gene inactivation is minimal,
with most of the pseudogenes generated by frameshift
mutations or premature stop codons. A detailed survey
of intergenic regions led to the characterization a higher
number of pseudogenes than in the original annotation,
pointing out to the importance of sequence analysis in
the characterization of highly degraded pseudogenes
that is not possible to identify by “ab-initio” gene prediction methods. A detailed survey of the metabolic capabilities of genes and pseudogenes together with a
comparison with the metabolic profile of tsetse fly primary endosymbiont W. glossinidia based on the gene
repertoire of their available genome sequences revealed
novel inactive pathways consequence of the gene inactivation process previously undescribed in S. glossinidius,
like arginine biosynthesis pathway, together with a possible phenomenon of metabolic complementation
between both tsetse endosymbionts at thiamine biosynthesis level. This possible metabolic complementation together with the incomplete pathways for
Coenzyme A and Folate cofactors in W. glossinidia,
both completely functional in S. glossinidius, shed some
light about the co-existence of both bacterial endosymbionts in the context of the tsetse host.

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

Additional material
Additional file 1: Results of the functional re-annotation process in
EMBL format. “locus_tag” qualifier were assigned differentially for genes
(original annotation) and pseudogenes (ps_SGL0001-ps_SGL1501).
Additional qualifiers incorporated to each CDS to improve functional
assignment were “EC_number”, “GO”, “class” and “colour” following
functional classification scheme of Additional File 2 and Figure 1
respectively, “db_xref” (interpro/UniProt/TrEMBL domains), “note”,
“orthologs” (based on FASTA searches), “primary_name”, “product”,
“pseudo” (assigned to the 1501 pseudogenes) and “status”. The file can
be directly viewed with Artemis software release 10 (Carver et-al 2008).
Homology with PFAM domains for each CDS (genes and pseudogenes)
are also incorporated as additional “misc_feature” key. “repeat_unit” key
represents the coordinates of the different families of IS elements
characterized.
Additional file 2: Putative CDSs including an originally annotated
gene and a re-annotated pseudogene. The coordinates corresponds
to the combined limits of the gene and pseudogene corresponding to
each putative CDS. “Coverage” columns show the percentage of the
putative CDS represented by the originally annotated gene and the
adjacent pseudogene together with the name of the originally
annotated gene. “Relative position” columns represents the relative
position of gene and pseudogene in the putative CDS (5P representing
the 5’ end of the putative CDS and 3P representing the 3’ end of the
putative CDS). Putative CDS with coordinates 2812192-2814586 includes
one gene and two pseudogenes.
Additional file 3: Functional classification outline: Scheme of the
functional classification used during the re-annotation process
represented by the “class” qualifier in the Additional File 1.
Additional file 4: S. glossinidius genome regions corresponding to
domains of completely sequenced phage genomes. The coordinates
are extracted from whole genome TBLASTX comparisons between S.
glossinidius and completely sequenced phage genomes presents in
GenBank at May 2008. Length, GC content, total number of CDS, genes
and pseudogenes, and the best homologous phage in TBLASTX searches
are represented.
Additional file 5: Schematic representation of the 5 main types of
IS elements of S. glossinidius. The position of the putative transposase
gene is indicated in those IS types for which a functional transposase
gene has been confirmed (ISSgl1 and ISSgl2). For ISSgl2 type, the relative
position of internal inverted repeats is also indicated.

Abbreviations
S. glossinidius: Sodalis glossinidius; W. glossinidia: Wigglesworthia glossinidia; IS:
Insertion Sequences.
Acknowledgements
EB is a recipient of a FPU fellowship from “Ministerio de Educación”, Spain.
This work was supported by grants BFU2006/06003/BMC and BFU200912895-C02-01 from the Ministerio de Ciencia y Innovación (Spain).
Author details
Institut Cavanilles de Biodiversitat i Biologia Evolutiva, Universitat de
València. Apartat 22085, València E-46071, Spain. 2CIBER en Epidemiología y
Salud Pública (CIBEResp), Barcelona, Spain. 3Unidad Mixta de Investigación
de Genómica y Salud (Centro Superior de Investigación en Salud Pública,
CSISP/Institut Cavanilles, Universitat de València, Spain. 4Pathogen
Sequencing Unit, Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.

1

Authors’ contributions
FS and AM carried out the design of the study. EB and FS carried out
pseudogene annotation, characterization of IS elements and prophages,
functional re-annotation and metabolic reconstructions. SB participated in
pseudogene characterization and functional re-annotation. EB and FS write
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Page 15 of 17

Received: 11 February 2010 Accepted: 22 July 2010
Published: 22 July 2010
References
1. Buchner P: Symbiosis in animals with suck plant juices. Endosymbiosis of
animals with plant microorganisms New York: Interscience 1965, 210-432.
2. Baumann P: Biology bacteriocyte-associated endosymbionts of plant sapsucking insects. Annu Rev Microbiol 2005, 59:155-189.
3. Silva FJ, Latorre A, Gomez-Valero L, Moya A: Genomic changes in bacteria:
From free-living to endosymbiotic life. Structural approaches to sequence
evolution SpringelinkBastolla U, Porto M, Roman E, Vendruscolo M 2007,
149-165.
4. Shigenobu S, Watanabe H, Hattori M, Sakaki Y, Ishikawa H: Genome
sequence of the endocellular bacterial symbiont of aphids Buchnera sp.
APS. Nature 2000, 407:81-86.
5. Tamas I, Klasson L, Canback B, Naslund AK, Eriksson AS, Wernegreen JJ,
Sandstrom JP, Moran NA, Andersson SG: 50 million years of genomic
stasis in endosymbiotic bacteria. Science 2002, 296:2376-2379.
6. van Ham RC, Kamerbeek J, Palacios C, Rausell C, Abascal F, Bastolla U,
Fernandez JM, Jimenez L, Postigo M, Silva FJ, et al: Reductive genome
evolution in Buchnera aphidicola. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100:581-586.
7. Perez-Brocal V, Gil R, Ramos S, Lamelas A, Postigo M, Michelena JM, Silva FJ,
Moya A, Latorre A: A small microbial genome: the end of a long
symbiotic relationship? Science 2006, 314:312-313.
8. Moran NA, McLaughlin HJ, Sorek R: The dynamics and time scale of
ongoing genomic erosion in symbiotic bacteria. Science 2009,
323:379-382.
9. Gil R, Silva FJ, Zientz E, Delmotte F, Gonzalez-Candelas F, Latorre A,
Rausell C, Kamerbeek J, Gadau J, Holldobler B, et al: The genome sequence
of Blochmannia floridanus: comparative analysis of reduced genomes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:9388-9393.
10. Degnan PH, Lazarus AB, Wernegreen JJ: Genome sequence of
Blochmannia pennsylvanicus indicates parallel evolutionary trends
among bacterial mutualists of insects. Genome Res 2005, 15:1023-1033.
11. Nakabachi A, Yamashita A, Toh H, Ishikawa H, Dunbar HE, Moran NA,
Hattori M: The 160-kilobase genome of the bacterial endosymbiont
Carsonella. Science 2006, 314:267.
12. Tamames J, Gil R, Latorre A, Pereto J, Silva FJ, Moya A: The frontier
between cell and organelle: genome analysis of Candidatus Carsonella
ruddii. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:181.
13. Moran NA: Accelerated evolution and Muller’s rachet in endosymbiotic
bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:2873-2878.
14. Herbeck JT, Wall DP, Wernegreen JJ: Gene expression level influences
amino acid usage, but not codon usage, in the tsetse fly endosymbiont
Wigglesworthia. Microbiology 2003, 149:2585-2596.
15. Schaber J, Rispe C, Wernegreen J, Buness A, Delmotte F, Silva FJ, Moya A:
Gene expression levels influence amino acid usage and evolutionary
rates in endosymbiotic bacteria. Gene 2005, 352:109-117.
16. Silva FJ, Latorre A, Moya A: Why are the genomes of endosymbiotic
bacteria so stable? Trends Genet 2003, 19:176-180.
17. Belda E, Moya A, Silva FJ: Genome rearrangement distances and gene
order phylogeny in gamma-Proteobacteria. Mol Biol Evol 2005,
22:1456-1467.
18. Sharples GJ: For absent friends: life without recombination in mutualistic
gamma-proteobacteria. Trends Microbiol 2009, 17:233-242.
19. Moran NA, Munson MA, Baumann P, Ishikawa H: A molecular clock in
endosymbiotic bacteia is calibrated using the insect hosts. Proc R Soc
Lond B 1993, 253:167-171.
20. Andersson JO, Andersson SG: Insights into the evolutionary process of
genome degradation. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1999, 9:664-671.
21. Funk DJ, Helbling L, Wernegreen JJ, Moran NA: Intraspecific phylogenetic
congruence among multiple symbiont genomes. Proc Biol Sci 2000,
267:2517-2521.
22. Moya A, Latorre A, Sabater-Munoz B, Silva FJ: Comparative molecular
evolution of primary (Buchnera) and secondary symbionts of aphids
based on two protein-coding genes. J Mol Evol 2002, 55:127-137.
23. Moya A, Pereto J, Gil R, Latorre A: Learning how to live together: genomic
insights into prokaryote-animal symbioses. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:218-229.

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

24. Dale C, Maudlin I: Sodalis gen. nov. and Sodalis glossinidius sp. nov., a
microaerophilic secondary endosymbiont of the tsetse fly Glossina
morsitans morsitans. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1999, 49(Pt 1):267-275.
25. Rio RV, Hu Y, Aksoy S: Strategies of the home-team: symbioses exploited
for vector-borne disease control. Trends Microbiol 2004, 12:325-336.
26. Attardo GM, Lohs C, Heddi A, Alam UH, Yildirim S, Aksoy S: Analysis of milk
gland structure and function in Glossina morsitans: milk protein
production, symbiont populations and fecundity. J Insect Physiol 2008,
54:1236-1242.
27. Aksoy S: Wigglesworthia gen. nov. and Wigglesworthia glossinidia sp.
nov., taxa consisting of the mycetocyte-associated, primary
endosymbionts of tsetse flies. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1995, 45:848-851.
28. Aksoy S, Pourhosseini AA, Chow A: Mycetome endosymbionts of tsetse
flies constitute a distinct lineage related to Enterobacteriaceae. Insect
Mol Biol 1995, 4:15-22.
29. Cheng Q, Ruel TD, Zhou W, Moloo SK, Majiwa P, O’Neill SL, Aksoy S: Tissue
distribution and prevalence of Wolbachia infections in tsetse flies,
Glossina spp. Med Vet Entomol 2000, 14:44-50.
30. Akman L, Yamashita A, Watanabe H, Oshima K, Shiba T, Hattori M, Aksoy S:
Genome sequence of the endocellular obligate symbiont of tsetse flies,
Wigglesworthia glossinidia. Nat Genet 2002, 32:402-407.
31. Toh H, Weiss BL, Perkin SA, Yamashita A, Oshima K, Hattori M, Aksoy S:
Massive genome erosion and functional adaptations provide insights
into the symbiotic lifestyle of Sodalis glossinidius in the tsetse host.
Genome Res 2006, 16:149-156.
32. Cole ST, Eiglmeier K, Parkhill J, James KD, Thomson NR, Wheeler PR,
Honore N, Garnier T, Churcher C, Harris D, et al: Massive gene decay in the
leprosy bacillus. Nature 2001, 409:1007-1011.
33. Gomez-Valero L, Rocha EP, Latorre A, Silva FJ: Reconstructing the ancestor
of Mycobacterium leprae: the dynamics of gene loss and genome
reduction. Genome Res 2007, 17:1178-1185.
34. Welburn SC, Maudlin I, Ellis DS: In vitro cultivation of rickettsia-likeorganisms from Glossina spp. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 1987, 81:331-335.
35. Beard CB, O’Neill SL, Tesh RB, Richards FF, Aksoy S: Modification of
arthropod vector competence via symbiotic bacteria. Parasitol Today
1993, 9:179-183.
36. Chen X, Li S, Aksoy S: Concordant evolution of a symbiont with its host
insect species: molecular phylogeny of genus Glossina and its
bacteriome-associated endosymbiont, Wigglesworthia glossinidia. J Mol
Evol 1999, 48:49-58.
37. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
38. Kanehisa M, Goto S, Kawashima S, Okuno Y, Hattori M: The KEGG resource
for deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D277-D280.
39. Birney E, Clamp M, Durbin R: GeneWise and Genomewise. Genome Res
2004, 14:988-995.
40. Carver T, Berriman M, Tivey A, Patel C, Bohme U, Barrell BG, Parkhill J,
Rajandream MA: Artemis and ACT: viewing, annotating and comparing
sequences stored in a relational database. Bioinformatics 2008,
24:2672-2676.
41. Kurtz S, Phillippy A, Delcher AL, Smoot M, Shumway M, Antonescu C,
Salzberg SL: Versatile and open software for comparing large genomes.
Genome Biol 2004, 5:R12.
42. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, et al: Clustal W and
Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2947-2948.
43. Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A: EMBOSS: the European Molecular Biology
Open Software Suite. Trends Genet 2000, 16:276-277.
44. Siguier P, Perochon J, Lestrade L, Mahillon J, Chandler M: ISfinder: the
reference centre for bacterial insertion sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 2006,
34:D32-D36.
45. Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman DJ, Ostell J, Sayers EW: GenBank.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009.
46. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
47. Serres MH, Riley M: MultiFun, a multifunctional classification scheme for
Escherichia coli K-12 gene products. Microb Comp Genomics 2000,
5:205-222.

Page 16 of 17

48. Riley M, Abe T, Arnaud MB, Berlyn MK, Blattner FR, Chaudhuri RR,
Glasner JD, Horiuchi T, Keseler IM, Kosuge T, et al: Escherichia coli K-12: a
cooperatively developed annotation snapshot–2005. Nucleic Acids Res
2006, 34:1-9.
49. Pearson WR: Rapid and sensitive sequence comparison with FASTP and
FASTA. Methods Enzymol 1990, 183:63-98.
50. Lima T, Auchincloss AH, Coudert E, Keller G, Michoud K, Rivoire C, Bulliard V,
de CE, Lachaize C, Baratin D, et al: HAMAP: a database of completely
sequenced microbial proteome sets and manually curated microbial
protein families in UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:
D471-D478.
51. The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) 2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37:D169-D174.
52. Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, et al: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2009.
53. Chen Y, Yu P, Luo J, Jiang Y: Secreted protein prediction system
combining CJ-SPHMM, TMHMM, and PSORT. Mamm Genome 2003,
14:859-865.
54. Emanuelsson O, Brunak S, von HG, Nielsen H: Locating proteins in the cell
using TargetP, SignalP and related tools. Nat Protoc 2007, 2:953-971.
55. Gardy JL, Spencer C, Wang K, Ester M, Tusnady GE, Simon I, Hua S,
deFays K, Lambert C, Nakai K, et al: PSORT-B: Improving protein
subcellular localization prediction for Gram-negative bacteria. Nucleic
Acids Res 2003, 31:3613-3617.
56. Moriya Y, Itoh M, Okuda S, Yoshizawa AC, Kanehisa M: KAAS: an automatic
genome annotation and pathway reconstruction server. Nucleic Acids Res
2007, 35:W182-W185.
57. Gotz S, Garcia-Gomez JM, Terol J, Williams TD, Nagaraj SH, Nueda MJ,
Robles M, Talon M, Dopazo J, Conesa A: High-throughput functional
annotation and data mining with the Blast2GO suite. Nucleic Acids Res
2008, 36:3420-3435.
58. Keseler IM, Bonavides-Martinez C, Collado-Vides J, Gama-Castro S,
Gunsalus RP, Johnson DA, Krummenacker M, Nolan LM, Paley S, Paulsen IT,
et al: EcoCyc: a comprehensive view of Escherichia coli biology. Nucleic
Acids Res 2009, 37:D464-D470.
59. Caspi R, Altman T, Dale JM, Dreher K, Fulcher CA, Gilham F, Kaipa P,
Karthikeyan AS, Kothari A, Krummenacker M, et al: The MetaCyc database
of metabolic pathways and enzymes and the BioCyc collection of
pathway/genome databases. Nucleic Acids Res 2009.
60. Morgan GJ, Hatfull GF, Casjens S, Hendrix RW: Bacteriophage Mu genome
sequence: analysis and comparison with Mu-like prophages in
Haemophilus, Neisseria and Deinococcus. J Mol Biol 2002, 317:337-359.
61. Casjens S: Prophages and bacterial genomics: what have we learned so
far? Mol Microbiol 2003, 49:277-300.
62. Canchaya C, Proux C, Fournous G, Bruttin A, Brussow H: Prophage
genomics. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2003, 67:238-76, table.
63. Summer EJ, Gonzalez CF, Carlisle T, Mebane LM, Cass AM, Savva CG,
LiPuma J, Young R: Burkholderia cenocepacia phage BcepMu and a
family of Mu-like phages encoding potential pathogenesis factors. J Mol
Biol 2004, 340:49-65.
64. Xu M, Struck DK, Deaton J, Wang IN, Young R: A signal-arrest-release
sequence mediates export and control of the phage P1 endolysin. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:6415-6420.
65. Clark AJ, Pontes M, Jones T, Dale C: A possible heterodimeric prophagelike element in the genome of the insect endosymbiont Sodalis
glossinidius. J Bacteriol 2007, 189:2949-2951.
66. Touchon M, Rocha EP: Causes of insertion sequences abundance in
prokaryotic genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24:969-981.
67. Gil R, Belda E, Gosalbes MJ, Delaye L, Vallier A, Vincent-Monegat C, Heddi A,
Silva FJ, Moya A, Latorre A: Massive presence of insertion sequences in
the genome of SOPE, the primary endosymbiont of the rice weevil
Sitophilus oryzae. Int Microbiol 2008, 11:41-48.
68. Plague GR, Dunbar HE, Tran PL, Moran NA: Extensive proliferation of
transposable elements in heritable bacterial symbionts. J Bacteriol 2008,
190:777-779.
69. Mahillon J, Leonard C, Chandler M: IS elements as constituents of
bacterial genomes. Res Microbiol 1999, 150:675-687.
70. Siguier P, Filee J, Chandler M: Insertion sequences in prokaryotic
genomes. Curr Opin Microbiol 2006, 9:526-531.

Belda et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:449
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/449

71. Cunin R, Glansdorff N, Pierard A, Stalon V: Biosynthesis and metabolism of
arginine in bacteria. Microbiol Rev 1986, 50:314-352.
72. Morizono H, Cabrera-Luque J, Shi D, Gallegos R, Yamaguchi S, Yu X,
Allewell NM, Malamy MH, Tuchman M: Acetylornithine transcarbamylase:
a novel enzyme in arginine biosynthesis. J Bacteriol 2006, 188:2974-2982.
73. Wissenbach U, Six S, Bongaerts J, Ternes D, Steinwachs S, Unden G: A third
periplasmic transport system for L-arginine in Escherichia coli: molecular
characterization of the artPIQMJ genes, arginine binding and transport.
Mol Microbiol 1995, 17:675-686.
74. Ledwidge R, Blanchard JS: The dual biosynthetic capability of Nacetylornithine aminotransferase in arginine and lysine biosynthesis.
Biochemistry 1999, 38:3019-3024.
75. Cox RJ, Wang PS: Is N-acetylornithine aminotransferase the real Nsuccinyl-ll-diaminopimelate aminotransferase in E. coli and M.
smegmatis? J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 2001, 1:2006-2008.
76. Mengin-Lecreulx D, Blanot D, van HJ: Replacement of diaminopimelic acid
by cystathionine or lanthionine in the peptidoglycan of Escherichia coli.
J Bacteriol 1994, 176:4321-4327.
77. Aksoy S, Rio RV: Interactions among multiple genomes: tsetse, its
symbionts and trypanosomes. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2005, 35:691-698.
78. Vander Horn PB, Backstrom AD, Stewart V, Begley TP: Structural genes for
thiamine biosynthetic enzymes (thiCEFGH) in Escherichia coli K-12. J
Bacteriol 1993, 175:982-992.
79. Begley TP, Downs DM, Ealick SE, McLafferty FW, Van Loon AP, Taylor S,
Campobasso N, Chiu HJ, Kinsland C, Reddick JJ, et al: Thiamin biosynthesis
in prokaryotes. Arch Microbiol 1999, 171:293-300.
80. Leonardi R, Fairhurst SA, Kriek M, Lowe DJ, Roach PL: Thiamine
biosynthesis in Escherichia coli: isolation and initial characterisation of
the ThiGH complex. FEBS Lett 2003, 539:95-99.
81. Jurgenson CT, Begley TP, Ealick SE: The structural and biochemical
foundations of thiamin biosynthesis. Annu Rev Biochem 2009, 78:569-603.
82. Xi J, Ge Y, Kinsland C, McLafferty FW, Begley TP: Biosynthesis of the
thiazole moiety of thiamin in Escherichia coli: identification of an
acyldisulfide-linked protein–protein conjugate that is functionally
analogous to the ubiquitin/E1 complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001,
98:8513-8518.
83. Morett E, Saab-Rincon G, Olvera L, Olvera M, Flores H, Grande R: Sensitive
genome-wide screen for low secondary enzymatic activities: the YjbQ
family shows thiamin phosphate synthase activity. J Mol Biol 2008,
376:839-853.
84. Andersson SG, Kurland CG: Reductive evolution of resident genomes.
Trends Microbiol 1998, 6:263-268.
85. Lawrence JG, Hendrix RW, Casjens S: Where are the pseudogenes in
bacterial genomes? Trends Microbiol 2001, 9:535-540.
86. Mira A, Ochman H, Moran NA: Deletional bias and the evolution of
bacterial genomes. Trends Genet 2001, 17:589-596.
87. Moran NA, Mira A: The process of genome shrinkage in the obligate
symbiont Buchnera aphidicola. Genome Biol 2001, 2:RESEARCH0054.
88. Silva FJ, Latorre A, Moya A: Genome size reduction through multiple
events of gene disintegration in Buchnera APS. Trends Genet 2001,
17:615-618.
89. Parkhill J, Wren BW, Thomson NR, Titball RW, Holden MT, Prentice MB,
Sebaihia M, James KD, Churcher C, Mungall KL, et al: Genome sequence of
Yersinia pestis, the causative agent of plague. Nature 2001, 413:523-527.
90. Jin Q, Yuan Z, Xu J, Wang Y, Shen Y, Lu W, Wang J, Liu H, Yang J, Yang F,
et al: Genome sequence of Shigella flexneri 2a: insights into
pathogenicity through comparison with genomes of Escherichia coli K12
and O157. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:4432-4441.
91. Cole ST: Comparative mycobacterial genomics. Curr Opin Microbiol 1998,
1:567-571.
92. Aksoy S, Chen X, Hypsa V: Phylogeny and potential transmission routes of
midgut-associated endosymbionts of tsetse (Diptera:Glossinidae). Insect
Mol Biol 1997, 6:183-190.
93. Lerat E, Ochman H: Psi-Phi: exploring the outer limits of bacterial
pseudogenes. Genome Res 2004, 14:2273-2278.
94. Lerat E, Ochman H: Recognizing the pseudogenes in bacterial genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:3125-3132.
95. Liu Y, Harrison PM, Kunin V, Gerstein M: Comprehensive analysis of
pseudogenes in prokaryotes: widespread gene decay and failure of
putative horizontally transferred genes. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R64.

Page 17 of 17

96. Bordenstein SR, Reznikoff WS: Mobile DNA in obligate intracellular
bacteria. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005, 3:688-699.
97. Dale C, Moran NA: Molecular interactions between bacterial symbionts
and their hosts. Cell 2006, 126:453-465.
98. Moran NA, Plague GR: Genomic changes following host restriction in
bacteria. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2004, 14:627-633.
99. Heddi A, Charles H, Khatchadourian C, Bonnot G, Nardon P: Molecular
characterization of the principal symbiotic bacteria of the weevil
Sitophilus oryzae: a peculiar G + C content of an endocytobiotic DNA. J
Mol Evol 1998, 47:52-61.
100. Dale C, Plague GR, Wang B, Ochman H, Moran NA: Type III secretion
systems and the evolution of mutualistic endosymbiosis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2002, 99:12397-12402.
101. Andersson JO, Andersson SG: Genome degradation is an ongoing process
in Rickettsia. Mol Biol Evol 1999, 16:1178-1191.
102. Degnan PH, Moran NA: Diverse phage-encoded toxins in a protective
insect endosymbiont. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74:6782-6791.
103. Moran NA, Degnan PH, Santos SR, Dunbar HE, Ochman H: The players in a
mutualistic symbiosis: insects, bacteria, viruses, and virulence genes. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:16919-16926.
104. Oliver KM, Russell JA, Moran NA, Hunter MS: Facultative bacterial
symbionts in aphids confer resistance to parasitic wasps. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2003, 100:1803-1807.
105. Bordenstein SR, Wernegreen JJ: Bacteriophage flux in endosymbionts
(Wolbachia): infection frequency, lateral transfer, and recombination
rates. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:1981-1991.
106. Bordenstein SR, Marshall ML, Fry AJ, Kim U, Wernegreen JJ: The tripartite
associations between bacteriophage, Wolbachia, and arthropods. PLoS
Pathog 2006, 2:e43.
107. Darby AC, Lagnel J, Matthew CZ, Bourtzis K, Maudlin I, Welburn SC:
Extrachromosomal DNA of the symbiont Sodalis glossinidius. J Bacteriol
2005, 187:5003-5007.
108. Dale C, Welburn SC: The endosymbionts of tsetse flies: manipulating
host-parasite interactions. Int J Parasitol 2001, 31:628-631.
109. Cheng Q, Aksoy S: Tissue tropism, transmission and expression of foreign
genes in vivo in midgut symbionts of tsetse flies. Insect Mol Biol 1999,
8:125-132.
110. Rio RV, Wu YN, Filardo G, Aksoy S: Dynamics of multiple symbiont density
regulation during host development: tsetse fly and its microbial flora.
Proc Biol Sci 2006, 273:805-814.
111. Snyder AK, Deberry JW, Runyen-Janecky L, Rio RV: Nutrient provisioning
facilitates homeostasis between tsetse fly (Diptera: Glossinidae)
symbionts. Proc Biol Sci 2010, 277:2389-2397.
112. Wu D, Daugherty SC, Van Aken SE, Pai GH, Watkins KL, Khouri H, Tallon LJ,
Zaborsky JM, Dunbar HE, Tran PL, et al: Metabolic complementarity and
genomics of the dual bacterial symbiosis of sharpshooters. PLoS Biol
2006, 4:e188.
113. McCutcheon JP, Moran NA: Parallel genomic evolution and metabolic
interdependence in an ancient symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:19392-19397.
114. Gosalbes MJ, Lamelas A, Moya A, Latorre A: The striking case of
tryptophan provision in the cedar aphid Cinara cedri. J Bacteriol 2008,
190:6026-6029.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-449
Cite this article as: Belda et al.: Mobile genetic element proliferation
and gene inactivation impact over the genome structure and metabolic
capabilities of Sodalis glossinidius, the secondary endosymbiont of
tsetse flies. BMC Genomics 2010 11:449.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
