<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Bringing order to protein disorder through comparative genomics and genetic interactions</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14. doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-2-r14"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jeremy Bellay"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

RESEARCH

Open Access

Bringing order to protein disorder through
comparative genomics and genetic interactions
Jeremy Bellay1†, Sangjo Han2,3†, Magali Michaut2,3†, TaeHyung Kim2,3, Michael Costanzo2,3, Brenda J Andrews2,3,4,
Charles Boone2,3,4, Gary D Bader2,3,4,5, Chad L Myers1* and Philip M Kim2,3,4,5*

Abstract
Background: Intrinsically disordered regions are widespread, especially in proteomes of higher eukaryotes.
Recently, protein disorder has been associated with a wide variety of cellular processes and has been implicated in
several human diseases. Despite its apparent functional importance, the sheer range of different roles played by
protein disorder often makes its exact contribution difficult to interpret.
Results: We attempt to better understand the different roles of disorder using a novel analysis that leverages both
comparative genomics and genetic interactions. Strikingly, we find that disorder can be partitioned into three
biologically distinct phenomena: regions where disorder is conserved but with quickly evolving amino acid
sequences (flexible disorder); regions of conserved disorder with also highly conserved amino acid sequences
(constrained disorder); and, lastly, non-conserved disorder. Flexible disorder bears many of the characteristics
commonly attributed to disorder and is associated with signaling pathways and multi-functionality. Conversely,
constrained disorder has markedly different functional attributes and is involved in RNA binding and protein
chaperones. Finally, non-conserved disorder lacks clear functional hallmarks based on our analysis.
Conclusions: Our new perspective on protein disorder clarifies a variety of previous results by putting them into a
systematic framework. Moreover, the clear and distinct functional association of flexible and constrained disorder
will allow for new approaches and more specific algorithms for disorder detection in a functional context. Finally,
in flexible disordered regions, we demonstrate clear evolutionary selection of protein disorder with little selection
on primary structure, which has important implications for sequence-based studies of protein structure and
evolution.

Background
Many proteins include extended regions that do not fold
into a native fixed conformation. These are referred to
as being intrinsically unstructured or disordered. A possible utility of such regions was first suggested over 70
years ago by Linus Pauling, who speculated that their
flexibility aids in antibody creation [1]. Recent advances
in computational prediction of disordered regions in
amino acid sequences have greatly expanded our awareness of the widespread occurrence of disordered regions
and the number of proteins whose structure is
* Correspondence: cmyers@cs.umn.edu; pm.kim@utoronto.ca
† Contributed equally
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota,
200 Union Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
2
The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto, ON
M5S 3E1, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

dominated by such regions (intrinsically disordered proteins or IDPs). Interestingly, protein disorder is more
prevalent in complex organisms, accounting for 33% of
the residues in the human proteome, but only a few percent of residues in Escherichia coli, suggesting it may
play a major role in the evolution of complexity [2].
Protein disorder is a diverse and complex phenomenon. On a biophysical level, there exists a continuum
of structure and disorder in the proteome. At one
extreme, there are proteins that are almost entirely
unstructured and natively form a coil; some may fold
upon binding a ligand, and thereby undergoing a disorder to structure transition. Other proteins that are
structurally more constrained, but still considered disordered, adopt a molten globule conformation [3]. Highly
structured proteins, which conform to the classical
model of protein structure, occupy the other extreme

© 2011 Bellay et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

on this spectrum, but even they often possess locally disordered regions [3]. On a functional level, there are
numerous and varied roles with which IDPs have been
associated, including signaling, cellular regulation,
nuclear localization, chaperone activity, RNA and DNA
binding, protein binding and dosage sensitivity [4,5], antibody creation [6], and splicing [7]. Also, IDPs have been
implicated in a variety of diseases, including cancer [8],
and neurodegenerative and cardiovascular diseases [6].
While the importance and widespread occurrence of
IDPs is undisputed, a mechanistic understanding of the
specific structural and functional roles of disorder is still
lacking. Here, we systematically analyze and structure
the different functions of disorder through the use of
genetic interactions (GIs) and comparative genomics.
We use two different, but related, concepts to partition
disordered regions into three categories. Our analysis
partitions what is currently only generally characterized
as ‘disorder’ into several fundamentally different phenomena with distinct properties and functions.

Results
Genetic interaction hubs tend to have more disordered
residues

Despite the apparent importance of disorder in mediating important protein functions [4], our knowledge is
still limited in terms of its specific functional roles. The
yeast GI network offers a new opportunity for global
insights into the role of disorder in protein function [9].
Briefly, GIs are defined as pairs of genes whose combined mutation or deletion leads to an unexpected double mutant phenotype. Here we limit our attention to
negative interactions; these are interactions in which the
double mutant is significantly less fit than would be predicted by the fitnesses of the single mutants. Interestingly, it has been observed that the number of GIs of a
gene (GI degree) is correlated with the percentage of
disordered regions in the gene product [9] (Figure 1a).
GI degree is also correlated with different measures of
multi-functionality (number of gene ontology (GO)
annotations, phenotypic capacitance [10] and chemicalgenetic sensitivity [11]), suggesting that the presence of
disordered regions may underlie the highly pleiotropic
roles of some proteins.
The relationship between disorder and multi-functionality appears to depend on whether a gene is a hub in
the GI network (that is, the gene is associated with a
large number of GIs). Specifically, within the set of the
GI hubs (> 90 percentile in GI degree), disorder of the
gene product is a strong predictor of multi-functionality
(r = 0.22, P < 10-12; Figure 1b), suggesting it is able to
distinguish highly functionally versatile GI hubs from
genes with more limited functional roles that simply
exhibit a large number of GIs. However, this trend is

Page 2 of 15

absent on the set of non-GI hubs (< 50 percentile in GI
degree) where there is no significant correlation between
the amount of disorder and the number of annotated
functions (r = -0.02, P > 0.3). This stark difference suggests that disorder plays a highly functional role on the
set of proteins that have many GIs while disorder outside these genes is either less functional or simply of a
markedly different nature. A similar distinction can be
observed for protein-protein interactions: disorder is significantly correlated with protein-protein interaction
degree on GI hubs (r = 0.16, P < 3 × 10-3; Figure S1 in
Additional file 1) while no such correlation holds on
non-GI hubs (r = -0.01, P > 0.5). Thus, the GI network
appears to provide a clear means of defining a set of
proteins where the disorder plays a key functional role.
Despite their seeming functional importance, disordered regions of proteins have previously been associated with swiftly evolving, less conserved sequences,
presumably because of lower structural constraint [12].
We were intrigued by this property because, in general,
GI hubs exhibit significantly lower rates of evolution
(for example, measured by the dN/dS ratio) and tend to
be conserved more broadly across species [9]. Indeed,
we found that even among GI hubs, disordered proteins
have significantly elevated rates of evolution. This trend
is consistent outside the hubs as well (Figure 1c). However, disordered GI hubs are just as conserved phylogenetically as measured by their appearance across the yeast
clade (Figure 1d). Thus, while the amino acid sequences
tend to evolve faster for disordered GI hubs, they appear
to be as phylogenetically constrained at the gene level as
other GI hubs. Interestingly, outside of GI hubs, this is
not true: non-GI hubs that are disordered tend to be
less conserved across the yeast clade compared to their
structured counterparts (Figure 1d). These observations
relating disordered proteins to the GI network raise an
interesting paradox. While the presence of disordered
regions appears to be directly connected to their importance in the genetic network, there appears to be little
evolutionary sequence constraint on these regions.
Many disordered residues are conserved across species

The counter-intuitive evolutionary pressure on disordered proteins motivated us to undertake a comparative
analysis of disordered regions across the yeast clade. We
hypothesized that functionally important disordered
regions, such as those present in GI hubs, would be
conserved as disorder across species (that is, also disordered, even if the underlying amino acid sequence was
different) independent of rate of evolution. We therefore
assessed the conservation of disorder on the residue
level, which was also recently addressed by Chen et al.
[13,14]. Specifically, we predicted which residues were
disordered for all Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes and

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

Page 3 of 15

-3
p<10

(b)
0.4

4

0.35

Mean mult i-funct ionalit y

Mean proportion of disordered residues

(a)

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

3
p>.2
2

1

0.05
0

0-49

0

50-99 100-149 150-199 200-250
Genetic interaction degree

Non-hubs

Hubs

Structured proteins
Disordered proteins

(c)
0.18

p<10

(d)

-30

p>.4
0.16

Mean dN/dS

0.14

-3
p<10

0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

Mean phylogenetic persistence

22
21
20
p<10
19
18
17
16
Non-hubs

Hubs

Structured proteins
Disordered proteins

-4

Non-hubs

Hubs

Structured proteins
Disordered proteins

Figure 1 Genetic interactions distinguish different roles of disorder. (a) Percentage of disordered residues of yeast proteins by their
number of GIs. (b) Multi-functionality (see Materials and methods) for disordered and structured GI hubs and non-hubs. Hubs are genes in the
top 90th percentile (above 90 interactions) of GIs while non-hubs are in the bottom 50th percentile (below 15 interactions). (c) Evolutionary
constraint on sequence (dN/dS ratio) on hubs and non-hubs. In both cases disordered proteins have a significantly higher dN/dS than structured
proteins. (d) Evolutionary constraint measured by the presence of orthologs in other yeast species (phylogenetic persistence). While disordered
non-hubs are less conserved than structured non-hubs, the disordered hubs are as conserved as structured hubs. P-values were computed with
a Wilcoxon test, and error bars represent boot-strapped 95% confidence intervals.

their orthologs in the 23 species of the yeast clade using
DISOPRED2 [2], an algorithm that has been shown to
predict disordered regions reliably [15]. For each disordered residue, we defined a measure of conserved disorder as the percentage of orthologs in which that residue

is disordered as well (Figure 2). We operationally define
conserved disordered residues as those with greater than
50% of disorder conservation.
Consistent with the general observations by Chen and
co-workers [13,14], we found that there is a surprisingly

Page 4 of 15

A-score

Orth seq 1

}

...
Orth seq 10

...

Conservation in AA (A)

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

Orth seq 23
non conserved

flexible

D-score

Orth seq 1

}

...
Orth seq 10

...

Conservation in disorder (D)

constrained

Orthologous
AA Sequence
alignment

Disorder residues
(*) overlaid on

the above alignment

Orth seq 23
Define three distinct types of disorder residues across species

High ( 5 )
D-scored residue

High ( 5 )
A-scored residue

Co nstraine d disorder (residu e)

Low ( < 5 )
A-scored residue

Flexible disorder (residu e)

Low ( > 0 & < 5 )
D-scored residue

Non -conserved disorder (residu e)

Figure 2 Two forms of conservation on disorder. Schematic of computing disorder conservation and amino acid (AA) sequence conservation.
After alignment, the percentage of sequences in which a residue is disordered is computed. Similarly, we compute the percentage of sequences
in which the amino acid itself is conserved. A residue is considered to be conserved disorder if the property of disorder is conserved in ≥ 50%
of species and sequentially conserved if the amino acid is conserved in ≥ 50% of species. Disordered residues in which both sequence and
disorder are conserved are referred to as constrained disorder. Disordered residues in which disorder is conserved but not the amino acid
sequence are referred to as flexible disorder. Residues which are disordered in S. Cerevisiae but not cases of conserved disorder are referred to as
non-conserved disorder.

high rate of conservation of disordered regions: over
50% of disordered regions are conserved through 90% of
the orthologs considered. Notably, disorder is conserved
in many regions even where the specific amino acids are
not conserved in the same regions, which explains the
elevated dN/dS that has been previously associated with
disorder [12] (Figure 2). However, consistent with the
stability of disorder across the yeast clade, we find that
changes of amino acids in disordered regions are biased
towards hydrophilic residues associated with disordered
regions and away from hydrophobic residues (Figure S2
in Additional file 1). This result suggests that, despite a

high evolutionary rate at the sequence level, there is
substantial evolutionary pressure to keep these regions
disordered.
Disorder can be systematically classified

Regions in which disorder is highly conserved across the
yeast clade exhibit a wide range of amino acid conservation rates (Figure 3). We reasoned that the degree of
constraint on the precise underlying sequence (as
opposed to the more general property of disorder)
might highlight distinct subclasses of functional disorder. To test this hypothesis, we divided conserved

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

Page 5 of 15

(a)

0.00

Residue density
0.05 0.10 0.15

0.20

AA Conservation

Disorder conservation score

(c)

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

(b)

AA and disorder conservation
9

>0.03

8

0.02

7

0.01

6
0

5
4
3
2
1

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

1

Disorder Conservation

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0.0

0.1

0.2
0.3
0.4
Residue density

0.5

AA conservation score
Figure 3 Densities of disorder- and amino acid-conserved residues by their scores. Densities of disorder and amino acid conservation
scores across all alignments of approximately 5,000 orthologous groups from 23 yeast species. (a) Histogram of the amino acid (AA)
conservation scores. (b) Histogram of disorder conservation scores. (c) Two-dimensional histogram of both amino acid and disorder conservation
scores.

disordered regions into those where the underlying
amino acid sequence is also conserved (’constrained disorder’), and the regions where there appears to be selection on the structural property of disorder itself rather
than the specific sequence (’flexible disorder’; Materials
and methods; Figure 2). Disordered residues that were
not conserved across the yeast clade were considered as
a separate, third class (’non-conserved disorder’; Figure
S3 in Additional file 1). It is important to note that
these results do not depend on the disorder predictor
algorithm and core results were qualitatively replicated
using DisEMBL [16] instead of DISOPRED2 (Figure S4

in Additional file 1). Furthermore, the three classes also
appear to be robust to various perturbations of the particular parameter choices of the method (Figures S5, S6,
S7, and S8 in Additional file 1). In addition, flexible disorder was more robust to random simulated mutations
(Figure S9 in Additional file 1), which is notable given
the general fragility of disorder to mutation reported by
[17].
The three classes of disorder exhibit widely different
properties (Figure 2b). First, while disorder is generally
thought to be important in proteins with regulatory and
signaling functions, we find that this is true only for

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

Page 6 of 15

flexible disorder. For instance, proteins enriched in flexible
disorder have high phenotypic capacitance and are multifunctional. Moreover, they exhibit low-expression coherence, that is, are connectors in the cellular network,
consistent with a regulatory role [18]. Finally, flexible disorder is highly correlated with occurrence of linear motifs
and GI degree, also consistent with signaling or regulatory
roles. The respective associations for all the above properties with either constrained or non-conserved disorder are
much weaker and, in most cases, not significant, suggesting that the regulatory properties of disorder are best captured by flexible disorder. Secondly, disordered proteins
have recently been found to be expressed at a low level
and have tightly controlled expression [4]. We find this
only true for proteins enriched in flexible disorder: flexible
disorder is negatively correlated with gene expression
level, while constrained disorder shows either a positive or
no correlation depending on the inclusion of ribosomal
proteins (Figure 4; Figure S7 in Additional file 1). Also,
while genes enriched in non-conserved disorder appear to
be expressed at a low level, there appears no evidence for
tighter expression control as measured by half-life.
Thirdly, a recent study found disordered proteins to exhibit high dosage sensitivity [5]. We again find that this is a
hallmark of flexible disorder (Figure 4), whereas constrained disorder is only weakly associated with this property. Non-conserved disorder shows little or much weaker
association with most of these features, suggesting that the
functional hallmarks of this class are less obvious. Indeed,
we find that proteins enriched for non-conserved disorder
have less confident disorder as scored by DISOPRED2

(Figure S10 in Additional file 1). However, our inability to
identify functional roles for non-conserved disorder does
not preclude the possibility of its functionality.
Because of their recognized importance for signaling
pathways, we next turned our attention towards phosphosites and linear motifs. It has been noted previously
that phosphosites and other recognized linear motifs
often appear in disordered regions of proteins [19]. As
these motifs are crucial for signaling pathways, their
occurrence in these regions certainly has strong functional consequences. In a detailed analysis at the residue
level, we find that disorder conservation is strongly correlated with the placement of phosphosites (Figure 5a).
In particular, we find that the relative density of phosphosites increases dramatically for residues with higher
disorder conservation (Figure 5b). Conversely, the correlation of phosphosite density with amino acid conservation is weak (Figure 5c). Likewise, we find similar results
for linear motif placement (Figure S11 in Additional
file 1). In both cases, the partial correlation with conserved disorder, when controlling for amino acid conservation, remains strong, while the partial correlation
between amino acid conservation and phosphosite or
linear motif density disappears when controlling for
conserved disorder. Conversely, neither linear motifs
nor phosphosites show enrichment in residues that exhibit non-conserved disorder, which suggests that nonconserved disorder may not be functionally relevant in
this context.
Given our comparative genome-based classification of
disorder, we revisited our earlier observation regarding

Constrained disorder

0.3

Correlation coefficient

Multifunctionality

0.2
Phenotypic
capacitance
0.1

Expression
level

Flexible disorder
Non conserved disorder

GI degree

Expression
coherence
Half-life

0
Linear motifs

Dosage
sensitivity

0.1

0.2
Figure 4 Properties associated with types of disorder. Correlation coefficients of different genomic features with percent constrained
disorder, percent flexible disorder and percent non-conserved disorder. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

Relative phosphosite density

8

Conservation in disorder

High

3.5

9

3.0

7
6

2.5

5

Phosphosite density

(a)

Page 7 of 15

2.0

4

1.5

3
2

1.0

1

0.5

0
0.0

1

0

1

2

0

2

4

Residuals of disorder conservation score
controlled by AA conservation score

1

Partial correlation of AA conservation

0

P-value < 6E-45

(c)

1

2

Pearson s rho: 0.83

4

Low

9

Pearson s rho: 0.03
2

3 4 5 6 7 8
Conservation in AA

Partial correlation of disorder conservation

controlled by AA conservation score

Residuals of phosphosite density

(b)

2

Residuals of phosphosite density
controlled by disorder conservation score

1

P-value = 0.75

4

2

0

2

4

Residuals of AA conservation score
controlled by disorder conservation score

Figure 5 Properties associated with types of disorder. (a) Heatmap of enrichment (density over background) of phosphosites in terms of
disorder and amino acid conservation. (b) Partial correlation of phosphosite density and disorder conservation with respect to amino acid
conservation (see Materials and methods). (c) Partial correlation of phosphosite density and conserved amino acid sequence with respect to
disorder conservation.

the correlation between protein disorder and multifunctionality on GI hubs. As described earlier, we
observed that within the set of the GI hubs (> 90 percentile in GI degree), disorder of the gene product is a
strong predictor of multi-functionality (r = 0.22, P < 1012
; Figure 1b) while this trend does not hold on the set
non-GI hubs (< 50 percentile in GI degree). Thus, we
reasoned that the disorder present in GI hubs may exhibit different abundances across our classes. Indeed, we
did find evidence that disordered regions tend to be significantly more conserved among GI hubs than nonhubs (P < 10-6; Figure S12 and Table S1 in Additional
file 1). Furthermore, flexible disorder appears to account

for the correlation between disorder and multi-functionality observed among the GI hubs since controlling for
flexible disorder destroys the correlation (P > 0.5), while
a strong correlation is maintained when controlling for
the level of constrained disorder (r = 0.15, P < 0.01).
Interestingly, the set of highly disordered GI hubs is
also significantly enriched for protein interaction hubs
that bind temporally disparate partners (singlish interface hubs as defined in [20]) when compared with disordered non-hubs or non-disordered hubs (P < 10 -5 ;
Figure S13 in Additional file 1). In fact, the distinction
between flexible and constrained disorder can be used
to differentiate between singlish-interface hubs and the

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

Page 8 of 15

so-called multi-interface hubs, which typically bind their
partners simultaneously (as defined in [20]): singlish
hubs have more flexible disorder than multi-interface
hubs (P < 10-13), while there is no significant difference
in terms of constrained-disorder (P > 0.1; Figure 6).
Flexible and constrained disorder show different
functional associations

Mean proportion of disorder type

The above results indicate that flexible disorder and
constrained disorder are markedly different phenomena
based on a variety of physiological and phenotypic data.
On the one hand, flexible disorder corresponds to what
we refer to as ‘classic disorder’: these are intrinsically
unstructured regions, which evolve rapidly and present
short linear motifs to signaling domains or protein
kinases. Flexible disorder is thus a central player in signaling, which is confirmed by a GO enrichment analysis
- all top enriched terms are related to regulation, including transcription factors, chromatin modifiers, and signaling pathways and DNA binding proteins (Figure 7;
Table S2 in Additional file 2).
In contrast, proteins with a high level of constrained
disorder exhibit dramatically different functional characteristics. Constrained disordered proteins are enriched
in genes involved in ribosome biogenesis or function,
RNA binding and protein chaperone activity (Figure 7;
Table S2 in Additional file 2). Some of these functions
have been previously associated with conserved disorder
[14], but our analysis suggests they are even more specifically associated with regions that are under tight
sequence constraint, which is not generally true of

0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06

Singlish
interface
hubs

Singlish Multi
interface interface
hubs
hubs

0.04
0.02

Multi
interface
hubs

0

Flexible

Constrained

Figure 6 Singlish and multi-interface hubs have different
proportions of flexible and constrained disorder. The mean
proportion of flexible disorder and constrained disorder in singlishinterface and multi-interface protein interaction hubs. While both
have a similar level of constrained disorder, singlish hubs are heavily
enriched for flexible disorder. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.

regions that have properties characteristic of ‘classic’
disorder.
Given the dichotomy in functions arising from the
presence or lack of sequence constraint, we explored the
positions of these regions with respect to predicted
domains. We find that flexible disordered residues rarely
reside inside structured domains, consistent with the
idea that they would localize to loops to present highly
flexible linear motifs to their signaling partners. Conversely, constrained disordered residues lie within domains
significantly more frequently than flexible residues,
though occurring well below the level of the genomic
background (Figures S14 and S15 in Additional file 1).
The particular domains in which constrained disorder
residues are enriched confirmed the location of these
regions within RNA-binding ribosomal proteins and
protein chaperones (GroEL-like chaperone, ATPase,
Translation protein SH3-like, AAA ATPase, core; Table
S3 in Additional file 2).
The highly distinct functional and positional characteristics associated with these two classes of disorder
suggest that they are very different phenomena. On the
one hand, flexible disorder is closest to what is canonically understood as protein disorder, that is, these are
structurally flexible, fast evolving sequences with involvement in signaling. A good example of flexible disorder
is found in the serine-arginine protein kinase Sky1
(YMR216C), similar to human SRPK1, which regulates
proteins involved in mRNA metabolism and cation
homeostasis. The region containing residues 712-737,
conserved for disorder across orthologs but not
sequence, is located at the end of the kinase (Figure S16
in Additional file 1). This carboxy-terminal disordered
loop interacts with the activation loop of the kinase [21]
and is likely involved in the regulation of kinase activity.
Likewise, the corresponding region exhibits flexible disorder in many of the related cyclin-dependent kinases
[22]. For example, in Bur1, this region contains flexible
disorder and also harbors multiple phosphosites and linear motifs, underlining its importance in signaling (Figure S17 in Additional file 1).
On the other hand, our results suggest that constrained disorder can often adopt fixed conformation.
As has been previously suggested, some disordered proteins are likely to undergo disorder-to-order transitions
upon binding of their targets [3], and we speculate this
is a hallmark of the constrained disorder class. In the
case of ribosomal biogenesis and RNA-binding structural proteins, they become structured upon binding
RNA. This imposes a high degree of local structural
constraint on them, which results in elevated constraint
on the actual amino acid sequence. For instance, in Rpl5
a region of constrained disorder can be observed immediately before an alpha helix that forms the carboxy-

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

Page 9 of 15

Flexible disorder

Constrained disorder

Cell cycle

Ribosome
Macromolecular
complex assembly

Regulation of
kinase activity

Mitosis
Cell cycle phase

Regulation
of cell cycle
Cell cycle process

rRNA processing

rRNA metabolic process

DNA repair
DNA replication
DNA repair

Conservation in disorder

Response to DNA damage

Lipidation

DNA metabolic process

Translation
Establishment of
organelle localization

Signal transduction

Protein amino acid
lipidation

Protein amino acid
phosphorylation

Protein folding Glycolysis
Glycosylation

Regulation of
signal transduction

Protein amino acid
glycosylation

Cellular aromatic compound
metabolic process

Non conserved
disorder

Conservation in AA sequence
Figure 7 Disorder splits into three distinct phenomena. Functional enrichment maps of proteins enriched in flexible disorder versus
constrained disorder. The area of each rectangle is proportional to the representation of that type of disorder in the alignments. Related GO
terms are grouped based on gene overlap (see Materials and methods; Figures S20, S21 and S22 in Additional file 1).

terminal end of the amino acid sequence (Figure S18 in
Additional file 1). The role of this region was specifically
investigated in [23], and they report strong evidence for
a disorder-to-order transition of this region upon the
binding of Rpl5 to 5S rRNA. We also found an enrichment for constrained disorder among protein chaperones, where disordered regions appear to be involved in
the binding of client proteins. For example, the HSP90
heat shock protein (HSC82/HSP82) contains long

regions of constrained disorder (Figure S19 in Additional file 1). In particular, the constrained disordered
region from 590-600 is conserved throughout the bacterial kingdom, is localized at the inner surface of the
barrel-shaped protein and has been directly implicated
in the chaperone activity of this protein. It has been previously speculated that this disordered region may play a
role in entropy transfer and the refolding of clients
through a disorder-to-order transition [24]. However,

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

there is little direct experimental evidence about the
precise role of disorder in chaperone function. We
hypothesize that, in general, the tight sequence conservation of constrained disorder is required in regions that
assume a structured conformation, even if this conformation is only assumed in a transient fashion as in the
case of HSP90 or more permanently as in the case of
Rpl5.

Discussion
In this work, we show that protein disorder can be partitioned into three biophysically and biologically distinct
phenomena. The first two, flexible and constrained disorder, capture different functional characteristics: flexible
disorder appears to be strongly associated with signaling
and regulation while constrained disorder is associated
with chaperones and ribosomal proteins. Flexible disorder appears to be largely responsible for many of the
characteristics traditionally associated with disordered
regions. On the other hand, non-conserved disorder does
not seem to have obvious functional hallmarks by our
analysis. While we discovered these categories using a
comparative genomics approach that exploits evolutionary signatures, they ultimately are likely to correspond to
biophysically different phenomena. In a similar fashion,
modern secondary prediction methods make use of evolutionary information in the form of sequence profiles,
while they discover biophysical properties.
Several classification schemes for protein disorder
have been described in previous studies, including categorizations based on structural descriptions [3,25],
molecular function [26], or data-driven unsupervised
partitions [27]. In particular, the functional characterization put forth in [26] (Figure S24 in Additional file 1)
has an interesting overlap with the flexible and constrained categories defined here. Tompa [26] first makes
a distinction between proteins whose disordered regions
perform a purely mechanical function (for example,
entropic chains) from those that have the capacity to
bind other proteins or small molecules (recognition). A
similar division is made by [25] between disordered
regions that can at least transiently fold (’folders’) from
regions that never fold (’unfolders’). There the authors
claim that entropic chains are necessarily unfolders,
while recognition regions are necessarily folding regions.
The yeast nucleoporin NUP2, a canonical example of
entropic chains, appears to contain long regions of flexible disorder. In fact, 22% of its residues are cases of
flexible disorder (the background rate is 9%) while only
12% is constrained disorder (the background rate is 7%).
This is consistent with the fact that the role of such
regions does not require strict residue conservation and
it is tempting to speculate that other entropic chains are
also cases of flexible disorder.

Page 10 of 15

Despite some evidence that flexible disordered regions
as defined here may correspond to entropic chains, the
previously defined category of recognition proteins
(folders) appears to contain clear cases of both flexible
and constrained disorder. In particular, the subcategory
of ‘display sites’ seems to correspond to our notion of
flexible disorder, given its enrichment for linear motifs
and association with signaling proteins. These appear to
be cases of a relatively short recognition motif contained
in a longer disordered region [28], and it has been previously observed that, while functional recognition
motifs are well conserved, the surrounding disordered
region may evolve quickly [29]. Thus, these regions
appear to consist primarily of flexible disorder since
only the motif is conserved while the surrounding disordered region is under less selective constraint and is
presumably important in facilitating the promiscuous
binding required for signaling proteins.
Another class of proteins associated with promiscuous
protein binding, chaperone proteins, is clearly enriched for
constrained disorder. While the importance of disordered
regions in the functioning of chaperones is well established
(for example, [30,31]), the role played by disordered
regions in chaperones is still the subject of active investigation [32]. There are a number of hypotheses regarding
the roles of disorder in protein chaperones, including the
idea that disordered chaperones may directly or indirectly
stabilize client proteins due to their high hydrophilicity, or
the notion that disordered chaperones may help in shielding unfolded proteins from interactions with other molecules, and the aforementioned entropy transfer hypothesis
(see [32] for a comprehensive review). Our study suggests
that, regardless of the precise function of the disordered
regions in chaperones, it differs from the role that disorder
plays in signaling proteins.
Finally, the other major category of recognition proteins, ‘permanent binding’, appears to, at least in part, be
populated by regions of constrained disorder. This is supported by the enrichment for ribosomal proteins that are
known to fold upon binding other ribosomal proteins
and rRNA. Again, we suspect that cases where disordered
regions fold permanently upon binding other molecules
will be enriched for constrained disorder due to increased
selective pressure required to maintain a stable bond.
Another classification scheme for disordered regions was
put forth in [27] based on an unsupervised, data-driven
partitioning of 145 disordered proteins, which identified
three ‘flavors’ of disorder. The group of proteins described
as ‘flavor V’ is highly enriched for ribosomal proteins and
resembles the enrichments of constrained disorder defined
here, while ‘flavor S’ was highly enriched for protein binding functions similar to regions of flexible disorder. However, these categories only weakly resemble the flexible and
constrained disorder defined here as evidenced by their

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

apparently distinct amino acid distributions (compare Figure 1 of [27] and Figure S25 in Additional file 1). These differences may stem from the fact that the previous
classification scheme used an unsupervised algorithm and
a limited set of proteins, and, most importantly, trained on
whole proteins. In other words, it assumed that all disorder
in one protein is of the same category, an assumption we
are not making.

Conclusions
In this work, we show that protein disorder can be partitioned into three biophysically and biologically distinct
phenomena. The first two, flexible (’classic’) and constrained disorder, capture different functional characteristics. On the other hand, non-conserved disorder does
not seem to have functional roles. Our results have wideranging consequences for the prediction of disordered
regions and for the functional interpretation of disordered regions in cellular networks. Future experimental
work may confirm the distinct biophysical properties of
constrained and flexible disorder we are predicting here.
Importantly, our analysis framework allows for much
more detailed functional interpretations of disordered
regions. Finally, our new categories of disorder will help
in the refinement of disorder prediction algorithms.

Page 11 of 15

each array gene has, where negative interactions are
defined as those that have a score ε < -0.08 and P < 0.05.
Protein disorder

Protein disorder was derived using the software Disopred2 [2]. We define structured proteins to be those
with less than 10% disorder and disordered proteins to
be those with greater than 30% disorder, following [4].
dN/dS Ratio

We computed the average dN/dS ratio for S. cerevisiae
in comparison to the yeast species (Saccharomyces paradoxus, Saccharomyces bayanus and Saccharomyces
mikatae). Sequences were subsequently aligned using
MUSCLE [34] and dN/dS ratios were computed using
PAML [35].
Expression level

The expression level of a gene as measured by the average number of mRNA copies of each transcript per cell
were taken from [36].
Half-life

The half-life of a gene was the half-life of its mRNA
measured in minutes and reported in [37].
Phenotypic capacitance

The phenotypic capacitance reflects the variability in a
panel of phenotypes induced by deletion of non-essential genes and was used directly from the Levy and Siegal study [38].

Materials and methods

Multi-functionality

Description of gene/protein level features and correlation
analysis

This is simply the number of GO process annotations
for each gene restricting to the functionally distinct set
of GO terms described in [39].

Throughout this paper, correlations were done using
Pearson’s correlation coefficient [33] and calculated
using Matlab’s corrcoef function. Error bounds are the
95% confidence interval.
In the following section, we describe the data sets
used throughout to characterize aspects of disorder. Several of these features were previously described in [9].
Genetic interaction degree

This was the same measure as the negative GI degree in
[9]. Specifically, it is the number of negative interactions
Table 1 Description of the structural and disordered
classes of amino acids
Structural amino acids

Disordered amino acids

Cysteine

Aspartic acid

Tryptophan

Methionine

Tyrosine
Isoleucine

Lysine
Arginine

Phenylalanine

Serine

Valine

Glutamine

Leucine

Proline

Histidine

Glutamic acid

Threonine

Alanine

Asparagine

Glycine

Expression coherence score

This is the clustering coefficient calculated on the
MEFIT [40] combined network where edges are genes
with a score higher than 2 (approximately 95th percentile). Let E(Ni ,N j) be 1 if there is an edge between N i
and Nj and zero otherwise. The clustering coefficient for
a gene G with n neighbors {Ni} is:
E(Ni , Nj )
1≤i<j≤n

n(n − 1)
2
Linear motifs

Linear motifs were found using Scansite [41] on the
most stringent setting.

Conserved disorder
Defining conservation of disorder and sequence residues
from the yeast clade

Each of 5,025 orthologous groups across 23 species in
the yeast clade [42] was multiple-aligned by MAFF [43]
with default parameters. Amino acid conservation scores

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

(A) of each position in each alignment was calculated
and binned as follows:
⎧
⎫
⎨ ai (k) ⎬
k
A∗ = max
⎩ N ⎭
where a i represents one of 20 different amino acid
symbol indicator functions in an alignment position in
kth protein sequence, and N stands for total number of
protein sequences aligned.
⎧
⎪ 1 ⇔ 0 ≤ A∗ ≤ 0.1
⎪
⎪. .
⎨. .
.
.
.
A= . .
⎪ 8 ⇔ 0.7 < A∗ ≤ 0.8
⎪
⎪
⎩
9 ⇔ 0.8 < A∗ ≤ 1
For disorder conservation score (D), each alignment
position was overlaid with the disorder symbol predicted
by Dispred2 [2] with default parameters and its conservation was calculated and binned as follows:
D∗ =

d(k)
N

k

where d represents the disorder indicator function in
an alignment position in kth protein sequence.
⎧
D∗ = 0
⎪0 ⇔
⎪
⎪
⎨ 1 ⇔ 0 < D∗ ≤ 0.1
D= . .
.
.
⎪. .
.
⎪. .
⎪
⎩
9 ⇔ 0.8 < D∗ ≤ 1
We only considered proteins for which at least ten
orthologs were available, and residue positions where at
least five of those orthologs were aligned. All orthologous sequence- and disorder-overlaid alignments are
displayed with the Jalview applet [44] and available at
[45].
Structural conservation of disorder calculation

To calculate how disorder is structurally conserved
despite changes at the amino acid level, we divided
amino acids into a group associated with disorder and a
group associated with structure (Table 1). This list was
compiled based on [6] where disordered amino acids are
charged and hydrophilic while structural amino acids
are neutral and therefore hydrophobic. We considered
all positions of orthologs of S. cerevisiae genes after
alignment. If the amino acid was changed from S. cerevisiae to an ortholog, we recorded if it was changed
towards the disordered set of amino acids or the structured set of amino acids. Then we compared the amino
acids in regions of conserved disorder, regions of nonconserved disorder and the background (all positions).

Page 12 of 15

A systematic classification of disorder
Definitions of constrained and flexible disorder

Conserved disorder: aligned positions that have D ≥ 5,
that is, are disordered in more than 50% of aligned
residues.
Flexible disorder: aligned positions that have D ≥ 5
and A < 5, that is, are disordered in greater than or
equal to 50% of aligned residues but are conserved in
less than 50% of aligned residues.
Constrained disorder: aligned positions that have D ≥
5 and A ≥ 5, that is, are disordered in greater than or
equal to 50% of aligned residues and conserved in
greater than or equal to 50% of aligned residues.
Non-conserved disorder: aligned positions that have D
< 5, that is, are disordered in S. cerevisiae but are disordered in less than 50% of aligned residues.
Distribution of residues in two conservation spaces:
phosphorylation and linear motifs

Phosphorylation sites of S. cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Candida albicans were obtained from
[46] and a compilation of phosphosite datasets [46-51].
Linear motif sites are predicted by ScansSite2.0 on the
S. cerevisiae data. Each distribution of feature-residueodds-ratio (O feature , termed as relative density in the
main text and Figure 5a) is calculated in a similar way
as the hub-odds-ratio:
feature

Oij

=

Fij TN
FN Tij

where Fij represents the number of feature residues
(that is, phosphorylation site) with ith amino acid conservation score (A) and jth disorder conservation score
(D) in whole proteins of S. cerevisiae, S. pombe, and C.
albicans in case of phosphorylation sites or S. cerevisiae
in case of linear motifs.
Each distribution of phosphorylation-site-odds-ratio
(P) and linear-motif-odds-ratio (M) is displayed with
levelplot function in lattice R package [52]. Partial correlations of Ofeature and A (or Ofeature and D) are statistically tested by pcor.test function [53], and plotted with
residuals after controlling each other by linear
regression.
Distribution of two conserved residues in hubs: GI, proteinprotein interaction and structural interaction network

The 50th or 90th percentile hubs of GI and protein-protein interaction networks were defined as proteins with
the degree greater than 50th or 90th percentile degree
in the respective degree distributions. Singlish- and
multi-interface hubs were defined as described in [20]
with the structural interaction network recently updated
with iPfam corresponding to Pfam release 21.0 [54],
2,295 yeast Protein Data Bank files [55] and 82,650 physical interactions in Biogrid 2.06 [56].

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

Function of flexible versus constrained disorder
GO enrichments

We found GO term enrichments for disorder type (flexible, constrained and non-conserved disorder) using the
following method. The distribution of disorder type for
each GO term was tested against the background distribution of that disorder type using the Wilcoxon rank
sum test for P-value < 0.05, where the P-value was
adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery correction. Terms
enriched for either flexible or constrained disorder were
only considered enriched if the distribution of ratios
(Flexible/(Flexible + Constrained) or Constrained/(Flexible + Constrained), respectively) was significantly higher
than the background for the term using a Rank sum test
with P < 0.01. Thus, a term that was reported as
enriched for flexible disorder was not also enriched for
constrained disorder. Similarly, terms that initially were
enriched for non-conserved disorder were tested to see
if the ratio (Non-conserved disorder)/(Total disorder)
was above the background of the term using a Rank
sum test with P < 0.01. Enrichments for flexible and
constrained disorder are contained in Additional file 2.
Domain analysis

To define domains, we used the domains.tab file downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database on 4
April 2010, which contains the results of an InterProScan
using each S. cerevisiae protein sequence to query for
domains/motifs from several databases. The file consists
of 40,737 domains mapped onto the yeast proteome. To
restrict our analysis to structural domains, we only considered 11,801 domains mapped using three methods:
superfamily (SCOP database, 4,943 domains), HMMPfam
(Pfam database, 4,422 domains) and Gene3D (CATH
database, 2,336 domains). For each of the 3,680 genes
with mapped domains and alignments, every position in
the sequence was associated with two conservation
scores: conservation in disorder (D) and conservation in
amino acids (A) obtained from the sequence alignments
of the yeast clade (see above). For a given point in the
conservation grid (A, D), we counted the residues that
overlap with at least one domain and the residues that
did not overlap with any domain. We then computed the
log odds ratio of these counts.
Family analysis

For each domain, we computed the percentage of residues falling in each of the three categories: flexible disorder, constrained disorder, non-conserved disorder. We
then compared the distributions of these percentages for
all domains. We extracted the domains enriched in constrained disorder as opposed to flexible disorder by
examining the ratio constrained/flexible (false discover
rate (FDR)-adjusted Wilcoxon P-value < 0.05). The tests
were performed with the function wilcox.test and the P-

Page 13 of 15

values were corrected for multiple testing with the function p.adjust(method = ‘FDR’) from the statistical programming environment R [52]. The results of these
enrichments are contained in Additional file 2.
Enrichment map

Enrichment maps were created using Cytoscape [57]
and the Enrichment Map plugin [58]. The edges represent the value of the overlap coefficient (size of the
intersection of both GO terms/size of the small GO
term) with a cutoff at 0.3.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplemental figures and tables. This text file
contains Figures S1 to S25 and Table S1 with their associated legends.
Additional file 2: Functional enrichment. This file contains three tables:
a table of GO terms (function, process and component) that are enriched
for flexible and constrained disorder, a table of enrichments for domains
in regions of constrained disorder and a table of enrichments for
domains in regions of non-conserved disorder.

Abbreviations
GI: genetic interaction; GO: gene ontology; IDP: intrinsically disordered
proteins.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr Yu Brandon Xia, Dr Ben Turk, Joshua
Baller and Elizabeth Koch for their valuable insights and comments
regarding this work. This project was in part supported by a grant from the
Natural Science and Engineering Research Council (386671)(PMK), and a
grant from the National Research Foundation of Korea (KRF-2009-352C00140)(SH). JB and CLM are partially supported by funding from the
University of Minnesota Biomedical Informatics and Computational Biology
program, a seed grant from the Minnesota Supercomputing Institute, the
National Institutes of Health (1R01HG005084-01A1) and the National Science
Foundation (DBI 0953881). The funders had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Author details
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota,
200 Union Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. 2The Donnelly Centre,
University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada.
3
Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto,
160 College Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada. 4Department of Molecular
Genetics, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1,
Canada. 5Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, 160
College Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada.
1

Authors’ contributions
JB, CM and PK conceived the project. JB, SH, MM and TK designed and
implemented the analysis. JB, SH, MM, MC, BA, CB, GB, CM and PK wrote the
paper. CM and PK helped to develop the approach and supervised the
research. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 29 September 2010 Revised: 1 February 2011
Accepted: 16 February 2011 Published: 16 February 2011
References
1. Pauling L: A theory of the structure and process of formation of
antibodies. J Am Chem Soc 1940, 62:2643-2657.
2. Ward JJ, Sodhi JS, McGuffin LJ, Buxton BF, Jones DT: Prediction and
functional analysis of native disorder in proteins from the three
kingdoms of life. J Mol Biol 2004, 337:635-645.
3. Dyson HJ, Wright PE: Intrinsically unstructured proteins and their
functions. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005, 6:197-208.

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

Gsponer J, Futschik ME, Teichmann SA, Babu MM: Tight regulation of
unstructured proteins: from transcript synthesis to protein degradation.
Science 2008, 322:1365-1368.
Vavouri T, Semple JI, Garcia-Verdugo R, Lehner B: Intrinsic protein disorder
and interaction promiscuity are widely associated with dosage
sensitivity. Cell 2009, 138:198-208.
Dunker AK, Oldfield C, Meng J, Romero P, Yang J, Chen J, Vacic V,
Obradovic Z, Uversky V: The unfoldomics decade: an update on
intrinsically disordered proteins. BMC Genomics 2008, 9(Suppl 2):S1.
Romero PR, Zaidi S, Fang YY, Uversky VN, Radivojac P, Oldfield CJ,
Cortese MS, Sickmeier M, LeGall T, Obradovic Z, Dunker AK: Alternative
splicing in concert with protein intrinsic disorder enables increased
functional diversity in multicellular organisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2006, 103:8390-8395.
Radivojac P, Iakoucheva LM, Oldfield CJ, Obradovic Z, Uversky VN,
Dunker AK: Intrinsic disorder and functional proteomics. Biophys J 2007,
92:1439-1456.
Costanzo M, Baryshnikova A, Bellay J, Kim Y, Spear ED, Sevier CS, Ding H,
Koh JL, Toufighi K, Mostafavi S, Prinz J, St Onge RP, VanderSluis B,
Makhnevych T, Vizeacoumar FJ, Alizadeh S, Bahr S, Brost RL, Chen Y,
Cokol M, Deshpande R, Li Z, Lin Z, Liang W, Marback M, Paw J, San Luis B,
Shuteriqi E, Tong AHY, van Dyk N, et al: The genetic landscape of a cell.
Science 2010, 327:425-431.
Levy SF, Siegal ML: Network hubs buffer environmental variation in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS Biol 2008, 6:e264.
Hillenmeyer ME, Fung E, Wildenhain J, Pierce SE, Hoon S, Lee W, Proctor M,
St Onge RP, Tyers M, Koller D, Altman RB, Davis RW, Nislow C, Giaever G:
The chemical genomic portrait of yeast: uncovering a phenotype for all
genes. Science 2008, 320:362-365.
Xia Y, Franzosa EA, Gerstein MB: Integrated assessment of genomic
correlates of protein evolutionary rate. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:
e1000413.
Chen JW, Romero P, Uversky VN, Dunker AK: Conservation of intrinsic
disorder in protein domains and families: I. A database of conserved
predicted disordered regions. J Proteome Res 2006, 5:879-887.
Chen JW, Romero P, Uversky VN, Dunker AK: Conservation of intrinsic
disorder in protein domains and families: II. Functions of conserved
disorder. J Proteome Res 2006, 5:888-898.
Noivirt-Brik O, Prilusky J, Sussman JL: Assessment of disorder predictions
in CASP8. Proteins 2009, 77:210-216.
Linding R, Jensen LJ, Diella F, Bork P, Gibson TJ, Russell RB: Protein disorder
prediction: implications for structural proteomics. Structure 2003,
11:1453-1459.
Schaefer C, Schlessinger A, Rost B: Protein secondary structure appears to
be robust under in silico evolution while protein disorder appears not to
be. Bioinformatics 2010, 26:625-631.
Han JJ, Bertin N, Hao T, Goldberg DS, Berriz GF, Zhang LV, Dupuy D,
Walhout AJM, Cusick ME, Roth FP, Vidal M: Evidence for dynamically
organized modularity in the yeast protein-protein interaction network.
Nature 2004, 430:88-93.
Iakoucheva LM, Radivojac P, Brown CJ, O’Connor TR, Sikes JG, Obradovic Z,
Dunker AK: The importance of intrinsic disorder for protein
phosphorylation. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:1037-1049.
Kim PM, Lu LJ, Xia Y, Gerstein MB: Relating three-dimensional structures to
protein networks provides evolutionary insights. Science 2006, 314:1938-1941.
Ngo JCK, Giang K, Chakrabarti S, Ma C, Huynh N, Hagopian JC,
Dorrestein PC, Fu X, Adams JA, Ghosh G: A sliding docking interaction is
essential for sequential and processive phosphorylation of an SR protein
by SRPK1. Mol Cell 2008, 29:563-576.
Yao S, Prelich G: Activation of the Bur1-Bur2 cyclin-dependent kinase
complex by Cak1. Mol Cell Biol 2002, 22:6750-6758.
DiNitto JP, Huber PW: Mutual induced fit binding of Xenopus ribosomal
protein L5 to 5S rRNA. J Mol Biol 2003, 330:979-992.
Tompa P, Csermely P: The role of structural disorder in the function of
RNA and protein chaperones. FASEB J 2004, 18:1169-1175.
Rauscher S, Pomès R: Molecular simulations of protein disorder. Biochem
Cell Biol 2010, 88:269-290.
Tompa P: The interplay between structure and function in intrinsically
unstructured proteins. FEBS Lett 2005, 579:3346-3354.
Vucetic S, Brown CJ, Dunker AK, Obradovic Z: Flavors of protein disorder.
Proteins 2003, 52:573-584.

Page 14 of 15

28. Wright PE, Dyson HJ: Linking folding and binding. Curr Opin Struct Biol
2009, 19:31-38.
29. Nguyen Ba AN, Moses AM: Evolution of characterized phosphorylation
sites in budding yeast. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27:2027-2037.
30. Hessling M, Richter K, Buchner J: Dissection of the ATP-induced
conformational cycle of the molecular chaperone Hsp90. Nat Struct Mol
Biol 2009, 16:287-293.
31. Machida K, Kono-Okada A, Hongo K, Mizobata T, Kawata Y: Hydrophilic
residues 526 KNDAAD 531 in the flexible C-terminal region of the
chaperonin GroEL are critical for substrate protein folding within the
central cavity. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:6886-6896.
32. Tompa P, Kovacs D: Intrinsically disordered chaperones in plants and
animals. Biochem Cell Biol 2010, 88:167-174.
33. Casella G, Berger RL: Statistical Inference Thomson Learning; 2002.
34. Edgar R: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced
time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
35. Yang Z: PAML 4: Phylogenetic Analysis by Maximum Likelihood. Mol Biol
Evol 2007, 24:1586-1591.
36. Holstege FC, Jennings EG, Wyrick JJ, Lee TI, Hengartner CJ, Green MR,
Golub TR, Lander ES, Young RA: Dissecting the regulatory circuitry of a
eukaryotic genome. Cell 1998, 95:717-728.
37. Wang Y, Liu CL, Storey JD, Tibshirani RJ, Herschlag D, Brown PO: Precision
and functional specificity in mRNA decay. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99:5860-5865.
38. Levy SF, Siegal ML: Network hubs buffer environmental variation in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS Biol 2008, 6:e264.
39. Myers C, Barrett D, Hibbs M, Huttenhower C, Troyanskaya O: Finding
function: evaluation methods for functional genomic data. BMC
Genomics 2006, 7:187.
40. Huttenhower C, Hibbs M, Myers C, Troyanskaya OG: A scalable method for
integration and functional analysis of multiple microarray datasets.
Bioinformatics 2006, 22:2890-2897.
41. Obenauer JC, Cantley LC, Yaffe MB: Scansite 2.0: Proteome-wide
prediction of cell signaling interactions using short sequence motifs.
Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:3635-3641.
42. Orthogroup Repository Documentation: The Synergy Algorithm. [http://
www.broadinstitute.org/regev/orthogroups/documentation.html#synergy].
43. Katoh K, Kuma K, Toh H, Miyata T: MAFFT version 5: improvement in
accuracy of multiple sequence alignment. Nucleic Acids Res 2005,
33:511-518.
44. Waterhouse AM, Procter JB, Martin DMA, Clamp M, Barton GJ: Jalview
Version 2 - a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis
workbench. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1189-1191.
45. Alignments of an ortholog group overlaid with Disopred2 prediction.
[http://kimlab1.ccbr.utoronto.ca/cgi-bin/disoQuery.pl].
46. Beltrao P, Trinidad JC, Fiedler D, Roguev A, Lim WA, Shokat KM,
Burlingame AL, Krogan NJ: Evolution of phosphoregulation: comparison
of phosphorylation patterns across yeast species. PLoS Biol 2009, 7:
e1000134.
47. Gruhler A, Olsen JV, Mohammed S, Mortensen P, Færgeman NJ, Mann M,
Jensen ON: Quantitative phosphoproteomics applied to the yeast
pheromone signaling pathway. Mol Cell Proteomics 2005, 4:310-327.
48. Li X, Gerber SA, Rudner AD, Beausoleil SA, Haas W, Villén J, Elias JE, Gygi SP:
Large-scale phosphorylation analysis of α-Factor-arrested Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J Proteome Res 2007, 6:1190-1197.
49. Chi A, Huttenhower C, Geer LY, Coon JJ, Syka JEP, Bai DL, Shabanowitz J,
Burke DJ, Troyanskaya OG, Hunt DF: Analysis of phosphorylation sites on
proteins from Saccharomyces cerevisiae by electron transfer dissociation
(ETD) mass spectrometry. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:2193-2198.
50. Albuquerque CP, Smolka MB, Payne SH, Bafna V, Eng J, Zhou H: A
multidimensional chromatography technology for in-depth
phosphoproteome analysis. Mol Cell Proteomics 2008, 7:1389-1396.
51. Ficarro SB, McCleland ML, Stukenberg PT, Burke DJ, Ross MM,
Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF, White FM: Phosphoproteome analysis by mass
spectrometry and its application to Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nat
Biotechnol 2002, 20:301-305.
52. Team RDC: R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
[http://www.r-project.org/].
53. Partial Correlation. [http://www.yilab.gatech.edu/pcor.html].
54. iPfam: the Protein Domain Interactions Database. [http://ipfam.sanger.ac.
uk/].

Bellay et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R14
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/2/R14

Page 15 of 15

55. Protein Data Bank. [http://www.pdb.org].
56. BioGRID. [http://www.thebiogrid.org].
57. Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res
2003, 13:2498-2504.
58. Isserlin R, Merico D, Alikhani-Koupaei R, Gramolini A, Bader GD, Emili A:
Pathway analysis of dilated cardiomyopathy using global proteomic
profiling and enrichment maps. Proteomics 2010, 10:1316-1327.
59. Gavin A, Aloy P, Grandi P, Krause R, Boesche M, Marzioch M, Rau C,
Jensen LJ, Bastuck S, Dumpelfeld B, Edelmann A, Heurtier M, Hoffman V,
Hoefert C, Klein K, Hudak M, Michon A, Schelder M, Schirle M, Remor M,
Rudi T, Hooper S, Bauer A, Bouwmeester T, Casari G, Drewes G,
Neubauer G, Rick JM, Kuster B, Bork P, et al: Proteome survey reveals
modularity of the yeast cell machinery. Nature 2006, 440:631-636.
60. Krogan NJ, Cagney G, Yu H, Zhong G, Guo X, Ignatchenko A, Li J, Pu S,
Datta N, Tikuisis AP, Punna T, Peregrín-Alvarez JM, Shales M, Zhang X,
Davey M, Robinson MD, Paccanaro A, Bray JE, Sheung A, Beattie B,
Richards DP, Canadien V, Lalev A, Mena F, Wong P, Starostine A,
Canete MM, Vlasblom J, Wu S, Orsi C, et al: Global landscape of protein
complexes in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 2006,
440:637-643.
61. Yu H, Braun P, Yildirim MA, Lemmens I, Venkatesan K, Sahalie J, HirozaneKishikawa T, Gebreab F, Li N, Simonis N, Hao T, Rual J, Dricot A, Vazquez A,
Murray RR, Simon C, Tardivo L, Tam S, Svrzikapa N, Fan C, de Smet A,
Motyl A, Hudson ME, Park J, Xin X, Cusick ME, Moore T, Boone C, Snyder M,
Roth FP, et al: High-quality binary protein interaction map of the yeast
interactome network. Science 2008, 322:104-110.
62. Kim PM, Sboner A, Xia Y, Gerstein M: The role of disorder in interaction
networks: a structural analysis. Mol Syst Biol 2008, 4:179.
doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-2-r14
Cite this article as: Bellay et al.: Bringing order to protein disorder
through comparative genomics and genetic interactions. Genome
Biology 2011 12:R14.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
