<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evidence for a high mutation rate at rapidly evolving yeast centromeres</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-211"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Douda Bensasson"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evidence for a high mutation rate at rapidly
evolving yeast centromeres
Douda Bensasson

Abstract
Background: Although their role in cell division is essential, centromeres evolve rapidly in animals, plants and
yeasts. Unlike the complex centromeres of plants and aminals, the point centromeres of Saccharomcyes yeasts can
be readily sequenced to distinguish amongst the possible explanations for fast centromere evolution.
Results: Using DNA sequences of all 16 centromeres from 34 strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and population
genomic data from Saccharomyces paradoxus, I show that centromeres in both species evolve 3 times more rapidly
even than selectively unconstrained DNA. Exceptionally high levels of polymorphism seen in multiple yeast
populations suggest that rapid centromere evolution does not result from the repeated selective sweeps expected
under meiotic drive. I further show that there is little evidence for crossing-over or gene conversion within
centromeres, although there is clear evidence for recombination in their immediate vicinity. Finally I show that the
mutation spectrum at centromeres is consistent with the pattern of spontaneous mutation elsewhere in the
genome.
Conclusions: These results indicate that rapid centromere evolution is a common phenomenon in yeast species.
Furthermore, these results suggest that rapid centromere evolution does not result from the mutagenic effect of
gene conversion, but from a generalised increase in the mutation rate, perhaps arising from the unusual chromatin
structure at centromeres in yeast and other eukaryotes.

Background
Centromeres form the points at which the spindle attaches
to DNA to ensure its proper segregation during cell division. This function is conserved from yeast to humans,
and yet centromeres evolve rapidly [1-8]. Indeed, some
have proposed that rapid centromere evolution could
drive speciation [1,6,8]. More specifically, Henikoff et al
[1] propose that because centromeres and the genes
encoding their associated proteins are essential and more
rapidly evolving than other DNA, their divergence is more
likely than other DNA to result in genetic incompatibilities
in hybrids following reproductive isolation.
Why would centromere sequences that are essential to
proper chromosome segregation be evolving so fast?
Most types of centromere are not defined by their DNA
sequence [8], so a trivial explanation is that their rapid
evolution is simply a consequence of low levels of selective constraint. However, there is growing evidence that
centromeres evolve more rapidly even than selectively
Correspondence: douda.bensasson@manchester.ac.uk
Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

unconstrained parts of the genome [5,6], requiring more
complex scenarios to explain this paradox of centromere
evolution.
Several hypotheses have been put forth to explain fast
centromere evolution. First, centromere sequences may
act as selfish elements in the asymmetric meioses of
female plants and animals [1,8]. Under this model of
meiotic drive (“centromere drive”), centromere sequences
have the potential to mutate in such a way that new
alleles could bias their own segregation into an egg, and
so centromeres evolve rapidly as a result of repeated
selective sweeps as such alleles drive to fixation [1,8].
Alternatively, gene conversion could lead to the diversification of repeats [9] and thus facilitate rapid centromere
evolution since most centromeres are repetitive [10,11].
Thirdly, centromeres may simply suffer a higher rate of
mutation than other parts of the genome [5].
While rapid centromere evolution is observed in a diversity of species [3-8], alternative theories cannot explain
rapid centromere evolution equally well in all eukaryotes.
For example, yeasts have symmetric meioses, and thus

© 2011 Bensasson; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

Page 2 of 11

there is no obvious advantage to meiotic drive [2,12]. Likewise, the point centromeres of Saccharomyces yeasts are
short, with their rapidly evolving core (CDEII) spanning a
non-repetitive region of only 80-90 bp (Figure 1). Thus,
gene conversion involving repetitive DNA cannot directly
explain rapid centromere divergence in yeasts. However,
gene conversion is mutagenic in yeast [13], and so a high
rate of gene conversion induced mutation may explain
rapid evolution even in yeast centromeres. Saccharomyces
yeasts therefore offer a powerful system with which to
resolve the different forces governing fast centromere
evolution.
In this study I address the causes of rapid centromere
evolution in yeast by resequencing all point centromeres
from 32 strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and studying
published genomic data [14] for these strains and a further
34 strains of Saccharomyces paradoxus, to show that centromere evolution is rapid in both species. Using the
population genetic data for S. cerevisiae, I test for the signatures of natural selection or recombination expected
under meiotic drive or gene conversion models of rapid
centromere evolution. I also estimate the mutation spectrum at centromeres and compare it with the spectra
expected under spontaneous mutation [15] or mutagenic
gene conversion [13]. Evidence presented here suggests
that rapid centromere evolution in S. cerevisiae is due to a
generalised increase in the mutation rate and not due to
recombination or meiotic drive.

273614Nm
322134Sm
378604Xm
BC187m
DBVPG1106m
DBVPG1373m
DBVPG1788m
DBVPG1853m
DBVPG6044m
DBVPG6765m
K11m
L1374m
L1528m
NCYC110m
NCYC361m
RM11
S288cRef
S288cm
SK1m
UWOPS03_4614m
UWOPS05_2173m
UWOPS05_2272m
UWOPS83_7873m
UWOPS87_2421m
W303m
Y12m
Y55m
Y9m
YII
YJM789
YJM975m
YJM978m
YJM981m
YPS128m
YPS606m

Results
Rapid centromere evolution in Saccharomyces yeasts

The point centromeres of Saccharomyces yeasts are
made up of three Centromere DNA Elements (CDEI,
CDEII and CDEIII). CDEI (8 bp) and CDEIII (25 bp)
are protein-binding sites whose DNA sequence is highly
conserved to preserve their function [16,17]. These are
separated by CDEII, which is an AT-rich region of conserved length and base composition, but not primary
sequence [17] (Figure 1). Consistent with a lack of any
constraint on primary sequence, targeted resequencing
of five CDEII sequences in S. paradoxus, the closest
relative of S. cerevisiae, showed that these evolve more
rapidly than other parts of the genome [5]. The limited
sample of centromeres used leaves open the question of
whether fast centromere evolution is a genome-wide
phenomenon.
Here I show through analysis of whole-genome shotgun data from Liti et al (2009) [14] that rapid CDEII
sequence evolution extends to at least 15 of 16 S. paradoxus centromeres (Table 1). S. paradoxus exist in
diverged populations from Europe, Far East and America
(formerly S. cariocanus) with little or no gene flow [5]
and some reproductive isolation between them [18].
Levels of sequence divergence in CDEII are similar (e.g.
Europe vs Far-East 8.4%, Table 1) to past estimates from
five centromeres (12.9%) and much higher than past
chromosome-wide estimates of divergence (1.5%), or

GTCACATGCTATGTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATAAAATAATTTATTCATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCT-TATAATCAATTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTAATTTTTAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAATCATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAAGTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAAGTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTT-AAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAAGTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAGTTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTCATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAAGTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCT-TATAATCAATTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTAATTTTTAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTGAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCT-TATAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTA-------TTTTTAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCT-TATAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTA-------TTTTTAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCT-TATAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTCATTTTTAAACATAAATGATATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCT-TATAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTCATTTTTAAACATAAATAATATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCT-TATAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTCATTTTTAAACATAAATAATATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCT-TATAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTA-------TTTTTAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATGTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTCATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATGTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTCATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATGTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATAAAATAATTTATTCATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATGTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAATTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTCATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAAGTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAAGTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATAAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATATTTATTTTCAAACATAAATGAAATAAGTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTTAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA
GTCACATGCTATTTAATCAACTTTTTTAAAAACTTAAAATACTTTTTTATTTTTTAATTTTTATTTTTAAACATAAATGAAATAATTTATTTATTGTTTATGATTACCGAAACATAA

CDEI

CDEII

CDEIII

Figure 1 Alignment of CEN4 for all strains analysed. Centromeres are made up of two binding sites (CDEI and CDEIII) that are separated by
an 87 bp CDEII. This CDEII region shows levels of polymorphism (θW = 0.04) that are typical of CDEII in general, and many more point
substitutions (N = 16) than would be expected for a transposable element fragment of the same length (N = 3). This alignment is unambiguous
and so shows that the high rates of mutation at centromeres are not the result of alignment error or slippage mutations.

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

Page 3 of 11

Table 1 Levels of polymorphism and divergence in S. paradoxus are lower for transposable elements than for CDEII
CDEII loci

Median π or d

95% C.I.

TE loci

Median π or d

95% C.I.

CDEII:TE

Europe π

15

0.0066

0.0021-0.013

396

0.0017

0.0013-0.002

3.9

Europe- Far East d

15

0.084

0.059-0.10

339

0.028

0.026-0.030

3

Europe-American d

13

0.22

0.2-0.27

196

0.084

0.078-0.092

2.6

Table showing nucleotide diversity (π) within the European population or pairwise distance (d) between populations. 95% confidence intervals (C.I.) of each
median are based on 10,000 bootstrap replicates. DNA sequence data are those published in Liti et al [14] and only 13-15 loci were available for S. paradoxus
because PALAS alignment data were missing for all strains of S. paradoxus for CEN8 and because of low coverage of the American strains for CEN7, CEN8 and
CEN12.

even of unconstrained synonymous sites (4.7%) or transposable element (TE) fragments (4.6%) [5]. TE fragments
have no obvious function and so are expected to evolve
under no selective constraint, and in S. paradoxus TEs
do evolve at the rate expected from synonymous sites in
the absence of codon usage bias [5]. Direct comparison
between CDEII and TE sequences in this study also
shows that CDEII sequences diverge more rapidly and
show higher polymorphism than these unconstrained
TEs (Table 1), confirming previous results [5].
Fast centromere evolution may transcend species
boundaries, since the rate of divergence between S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus appears so high at centromeres
that centromeres and their immediate flanks do not
align (see Additional file 1, Figure S1), although most of
the genome is readily aligned between the two species
[19]. This is also the case when S. cerevisiae centromere
loci are aligned with the outgroup species, Saccharomyces mikatae (see Additional file 1, Figure S2) [19],
implying that rapid centromere divergence is not
restricted to the S. paradoxus lineage.
Consistent with rapid centromere evolution, CDEII also
has exceptionally high levels of variation in S. cerevisiae,
resulting from point mutations scattered throughout the
CDEII region (Figure 1). Mean nucleotide diversity in
CDEII estimated from a global sample of strains (π = 0.04,
95% confidence interval from 10,000 bootstrap replicates:
0.034-0.046) is much higher than past genome-wide estimates of unconstrained nucleotide diversity in S. cerevisiae
[20]. Indeed CDEII nucleotide diversity is higher than that
for unconstrained non-coding sites (0.004, estimated from
[20]) or for synonymous sites (0.007, estimated from [20])

(Wilcoxon signed rank tests, P = 3 × 10-5). Even the lowest
estimate of nucleotide diversity observed across 16 centromeres (0.022) is 3-fold higher than these prior estimates
for variation in unconstrained sequences. The higher
variability in CDEII could be a consequence of a broader
global population sample in the strains used here compared to those used by Doniger et al. [20]. When controlling for differences in sampling by comparing nucleotide
diversity for CDEII to that estimated from TEs in the
same strains using TE data from [14], I still see much
higher nucleotide diversity in CDEII (Table 2 Figure 1).
The intergenic DNA flanking centromeres also has
higher levels of variation (mean π = 0.01) than average
unconstrained non-coding sites (0.004, Wilcoxon signed
rank test, P = 9 × 10-10) [20]. This result is consistent
with the finding that the intergenic DNA flanking centromeres shows more rapid evolutionary divergence
than other intergenic regions in S. paradoxus [5], and
the observation that centromere flanking DNA also fails
to align between Saccharomyces species (see Additional
file 1, Figures S1 and S2). This suggests that the phenomenon of rapid centromere evolution extends beyond
the centromere core itself into the DNA immediately
flanking centromeres. However, since CDEI and CDEIII
are subject to selective constraint, and the intergenic
regions flanking centromeres varying in length and constraint have been sampled to different extents, analyses
presented here focus on CDEII. Furthermore, since
more is known about the mutation process in S. cerevisiae, and since I have full coverage of centromere DNA
sequences in S. cerevisiae, the analyses below are of S.
cerevisiae data.

Table 2 Mean nucleotide diversity (π) is higher at S. cerevisiae centromeres (in CDEII) than in selectively unconstrained
sequences (TEs)
Population

Strains

CDEII S

CDEII π

TE S

TE π

P value

CDEII:TE

-11

3.6
4.8
2.6

Global

34

222

0.04

1715

0.01

9 × 10

European
Sake

11
3

29
27

0.006
0.01

133
32

0.001
0.005

2 × 10-10
6 × 10-6

Malaysian

3

1

0.0005

0

0

0.02

n/a

Oak

2

0

0

0

0

n/a

n/a

West African

2

0

0

0

0

n/a

n/a

Nucleotide diversity of CDEII (π) was estimated across the CDEII component of all 16 centromeres and π for TEs was estimated for the 210 loci at which TEs
appeared fixed. P values are the result of Wilcoxon tests comparing 16 estimates of π of CDEII to 210 estimates of π of TEs for each population.

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

A high mutation rate at S. cerevisiae centromeres

If centromeres evolve rapidly because repeated selective
sweeps drive new centromere alleles to fixation, then we
expect levels of polymorphism to be low at centromeres,
even if overall centromere divergence is high. In contrast,
if centromere evolution is rapid because of higher rates
of mutation at centromeres, then we expect centromeres
to be highly polymorphic within species as well as
diverged between species. The high levels of polymorphism observed in S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus are therefore more consistent with a high mutation rate
underlying rapid centromere evolution.
The large number base pair substitutions causing high
nucleotide diversity does not appear to result from the ATrichness of centromeres. Although yeast centromeres are a
target for slippage mutations, insertions and deletions are
not included in measures of polymorphism in this study
(see Methods), and so these do not explain the high mutation rate at centromeres. While diversity is higher than
expected compared to other regions it does not present a
problem for DNA sequence alignment, and nucleotide substitutions are unambiguously scored (Figure 1). Furthermore, similarly AT-rich genomic regions away from the
centromere do not show higher levels of divergence and
polymorphism in S. paradoxus [5].
A drawback with using a global population sample of S.
cerevisiae to assay levels of polymorphism, is that population structure exists within this global sample [14]. If new
centromere alleles are driven to fixation by meiotic drive
within subpopulations, divergence between subpopulations
may lead to the inference of high levels of global polymorphism. To control for population structure, I examine
levels of polymorphism within the populations defined by
Liti et al [14]. In all three S. cerevisiae subpopulations
where there are sufficient data, centromeres show significantly more nucleotide diversity than unconstrained TE
sequences (Table 2). Likewise, analysis of S. paradoxus
DNA sequence data also reveals high levels of polymorphism within populations (Table 1). This suggests that the
rapid fixation of alleles within subpopulations expected
from meiotic drive is not responsible for rapid centromere
evolution in yeast. Indeed the rate of CDEII evolution is
approximately 3 or 4 times higher than TEs whether this
is estimated from diverged S. paradoxus lineages, or various S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus populations (Tables 1
and 2). The constancy of this CDEII:TE ratio in both
divergence and polymorphism comparisons is consistent
with a neutral evolutionary force like mutation.
Recombination does not explain rapid centromere
evolution directly

Recent work suggests that recombination in the form of
gene conversion may be an alternative mechanism to
explain rapid centromere evolution [10]. Therefore, I

Page 4 of 11

tested for evidence of recombination in centromeres
using a likelihood method [21] and the classic fourgamete test for recombination [22]. Given the high density of polymorphic sites within centromeres and the
number of strains studied, some identical polymorphisms
will have arisen on different haplotype backgrounds by
chance. Under most tests of recombination these cases of
homoplasy will be mistaken for recombination. The tests
of recombination used here estimate the probability of
recombination, given the likelihood of homoplasy [21]
(see Methods, Supp Table 2 and Supp Table 3).
Overall, I find no evidence for recombination in S. cerevisiae centromeres, with only one possible exception
(Table 3 Supp Table 2). In the one centromere that shows
potential evidence for recombination, CEN1, the P-value is
only marginally significant, and depends on only two segregating sites with evidence of either recombination or
homoplasy. The removal of only one site is sufficient to
remove the signal of recombination. In contrast, there is
much stronger evidence for recombination in the regions
flanking three out of sixteen centromeres (Table 3 Additional file 1, Table S3), and some of these events appear to
occur very close to the centromere (Table 3).
The mutation spectrum at centromeres is similar to
genome-wide spontaneous mutation

To further resolve whether high levels of variation in
centromeres result from the action of gene conversion
or spontaneous mutation, I investigated the mutation
spectrum in centromere sequences. The data presented
here are of sufficient quality for this purpose, since I
expect few or no sequencing errors in the S. cerevisiae
centromere data (estimated error rate: < 3 sequencing
errors total, see Additional file 1, Supplementary text).
In order to distinguish insertions from deletions and to
infer the direction of change of base pair substitutions
from polymorphism data, we need to know the ancestral
state at each site. This inference is complicated by the
fact that no useful outgroup is known for S. cerevisiae
centromeres since S. paradoxus is too diverged at centromeres to align CDEII (Additional file1). Therefore I
Table 3 Summary of possible recombination events in or
near the centromere
Locus

Rmin

No. of Sites

Distance from centromere (bp)

CEN1

2

2

0 (within CDEII)

CEN2

4

7

< 10, 10-13, 229-281, 281-353

CEN11

2

5

< 51, 157-281

CEN14

1

3

14-1208

The recombination events listed here show statistically significant evidence (P
< 0.05) for recombination using 1 or more test implemented in LDhat, as well
as with the 4-gamete test followed by simulation to test the likelihood of
multiple mutations. Rmin is the minimum number of recombination events
estimated at each locus [22], and No. of Sites is the number of sites showing
evidence for recombination.

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

Page 5 of 11

examined the mutation spectrum of 114 base pair substitutions, and 22 indels that are each unique to one
haplotype and therefore assumed to exist in the derived
state. Approaches that use gene genealogies or phylogenetic trees to infer the polarity of mutations include
unique as well as other alleles as derived, and thus this
method is conservative in terms of identifying unambiguously polarisable mutations.
In CDEII, transitions are as common as transversions,
given the fact that there are two times as many possible
transversions as transitions (46:68, Table 4, Binomial
exact test, P = 0.11). A lack of transition bias is also the
case for genome-wide estimates (12:19, Table 4, Binomial exact test, P = 0.57) [15], and when all data on
wild-type patterns of spontaneous mutation are pooled
(142:252, Table 4, Binomial exact test, P = 0.26)
[13,15,23]. Moreover the transition:transversion ratio in
CDEII is not significantly different from that seen from
pooled counts of spontaneous mutations in wild-type
cells in S. cerevisiae (Fisher’s exact test, P = 0.4). In contrast, transitions are more common than transversions
when levels of gene conversion are high (32:24, Table 4,
[13]) but this transition bias is not observed in centromeres (Fisher’s exact test, P = 0.049). Thus, the ratio of
transitions to transversions observed in CDEII is like
those generally observed for spontaneous mutation
and not like that of gene conversion in S. cerevisiae
(Table 4).
There is also no significant difference in the mutation
spectrum seen at centromeres compared to that seen
genome-wide [15] (GLM, d.f. = 5, P = 0.09, Figure 2).
There is however a significant bias for C-> T or G-> A
transitions (C:G-> T:A, in Figure 2, GLM, d.f. = 1, P = 9
× 10-6), suggesting that cytosine deamination is a common source of mutation at centromeres. High levels of
C:G-> T:A were also noticed and discussed in the genome-wide study of mutation, along with levels of C:G->
A:T transversion that may possibly be elevated due to
the conversion of guanine to 8-oxo-guanine [15]. CDEII

is too AT-rich for an accurate assessment of the levels
of C:G-> A:T transversion (Figure 2).
Apart from an unusually high transition bias, another
signature of gene conversion associated mutation is a
high level of single nucleotide deletions relative to base
pair substitutions [13], and so here I also examine deletions within CDEII. An important consideration when
studying insertions or deletions (indels) in CDEII is its
unusual homopolymer run content. Runs of As and Ts
are of functional importance within CDEII [17], and
such runs are known to lead to a much higher frequency of indels than in other sequence [15,24]. Thus
there may be significant differences in the frequency of
indels between CDEII and spontaneous or gene conversion mutation spectra, simply because of differences in
the homopolymer run content in the types of sequence
studied. There are indeed many more homopolymer
runs of 5 bases or more in CDEII sequences (72 in 1371
bp) compared with the URA3 sequence of Kluyveromyces lactis, which was used by Hicks et al. [13] to
characterise the mutation spectrum under gene conversion (0 in 804 bp), (Poisson test, P = 5 × 10-15). To control for this fundamental difference in sequence
composition, indels occurring inside homopolymer runs
of 5 bp or longer are considered separately (Table 4).
Although the frequency of single nucleotide deletions
in centromeres is not significantly different from that
seen under gene conversion, it does appear more similar
to that seen in surveys of spontaneous mutation in wildtype cells (Table 4). Deletions within CDEII are slightly
higher than other estimates, but this may result from
the prevalence of short homopolymer runs in CDEII.
After exclusion of homopolymer runs of 5 nucleotides
or more, more homopolymer runs that are 4 bp long
remain in the CDEII data (N = 38), compared with
URA3 (N = 12) (Poisson test, P = 0.003), and such runs
may still attract a higher frequency of deletion. Overall,
both the point and deletion mutation spectrum at centromeres is more like that expected under wild-type

Table 4 Mutation spectrum at centromeres is unlike that of gene conversion
Study

Ts: Tv

Ts:Tv freq

1 bp deletions

Del:BPS freq

1 bp insertions

Other

CDEII

46: 68

0.68

4

0.047

0

18a

Genome-wide (WT)

12: 19

0.63

1

0.032

0

1

URA3 Lang (WT)
CAN1 Lang (WT)

46: 121 *
65: 85

0.38
0.76

22
56

0.017
0.034

3
8

15
13

URA3 Hicks (WT)

19: 27

0.70

5

0.014

1

9

URA3 Hicks (GC)

32: 24 *

1.33

32

0.074

1

14

The mutation spectrum of CDEII is compared to the wild type spontaneous mutation (WT) inferred from various studies (Genome-wide, [15]; Lang, [23]; Hicks,
[13]), and the mutation spectrum expected under gene conversion (GC, [13]). “Other” indicates indels that are -> 1 bp long, and in the case of CDEII also includes
indels occurring in homopolymer runs that were 5 bp or longer (N = 14), other mutations described as “Other” for the WT and GC datasets are described in [13].
The deletion: base pair subsitution frequency (Del:BPS) corrects for the difference in target length at which deletions could be observed compared to the target
length for base pair substitutions ([23], e.g. for URA3, indel target size = 804 bp, and BPS target size = 104 bp). For CDEII the number of deletions (N = 4) was
compared to the number of base pair substitutions (N = 84) outside homopolymer runs. * Significantly different from CDEII (Fisher’s exact test, P < 0.05). Poisson
tests showed that none of the Del:BPS frequencies were significantly different from that of CDEII.

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

Figure 2 The point substitution spectrum in CDEII. Relative rates
of each point substitution (ri-> j) are counts of substitutions from i
to j (ni-> j) given the total number of substitutions (∑ ni-> j),
normalised for the base composition (pi, pAT = 0.95 in CDEII) and
then rescaled so that totals add up to one: ri-> j = ((ni-> j/∑ ni-> j)/pi)/
∑((ni-> j/∑ ni-> j)/pi). Error bars are 95% confidence intervals
estimated from 1000 bootstrap replicates in which samples of 16
centromeres were sampled at random with replacement for each
replicate using R. Open circles show the relative rates of
spontaneous mutations observed genome-wide [15]. The genomewide estimates are from a total of 31 point substitutions, and the
errors associated with these are therefore too large to show here.
Total counts of each point substitution type (ni-> j) observed in
CDEII are shown in the lower margin.

spontaneous mutation than that expected if the higher
mutation rate at centromeres resulted from high levels
of gene conversion (Table 4).

Discussion
This study extends the past finding that S. paradoxus
shows rapid evolution in five centromeres [5] to all centromeres of this species and to a second species with
point centromeres, S. cerevisiae (Figure 1, Tables 1 and
2, Figures S1 and S2). S. cerevisiae is an especially useful
species in which to study the cause of rapid centromere
evolution because its point centromeres are easy to
sequence and patterns of recombination and mutation
within its genome are exceptionally well characterised
[13,15,23,25,26]. The population and comparative analyses of centromere DNA sequences presented here lead
to the conclusion that rapid centromere evolution is
caused by a generalised increase in the mutation rate
and not by meiotic drive or recombination.
Under the meiotic drive theory of rapid centromere evolution, we expect low polymorphism within centromeres.
Point centromeres, the one type of centromere where this

Page 6 of 11

is easily and accurately assayed, show the opposite pattern;
high diversity within species or populations (Table 1,
Table 2). This is the case for at least three populations of
S. cerevisiae (Table 2) and one population of S. paradoxus
(Table 1, [5]). Whether levels of divergence or polymorphism are measured, CDEII seems to evolve 3 or 4 times faster than selectively unconstrained DNA (Tables 1 and 2).
High levels of polymorphism suggest that rapid centromere evolution is not the result of the sweeps of natural
selection predicted by meiotic drive. The exceptionally
high levels of polymorphism seen here, and the constant
level at which centromere polymorphism or divergence is
increased relative to other parts of the genome, are
expected if high mutation at centromeres causes their
rapid evolution.
The proteins that bind to animal and plant centromeres
also contain rapidly evolving regions, and this could be
because of positive selection for mutations that suppress
meiotic drive of centromeres during female meiosis [1,27].
In contrast, there is no such evidence of positive selection
in the centromere binding proteins of yeast [27], and this
is consistent with a high mutation rate as a mechanism for
rapid centromere evolution in yeast. If there is no evidence
for compensatory mutations in yeast centromere binding
proteins, then perhaps this implies that the rapid divergence of CDEII sequences has no functional consequences. Experimental replacement of CDEII sequences
with random sequence of the same length and base composition does however appear to increase rates of segregation distortion in S. cerevisiae [17]. Therefore it is possible
that the high mutation rate at yeast centromeres has functional consequences, but these could only contribute to
yeast speciation under a simple Dobzhansky-Muller model
[28]: centromeres diverge so that they are no longer
bound by their associated binding proteins, as opposed to
a meiotic drive model for speciation [1,27] in which meiotic drive at centromeres and its suppression by centromere
binding proteins leads to post-zygotic reproductive
isolation.
Recent evidence suggests that gene conversion at centromeres could contribute to rapid centromere evolution in
maize [10], leading to the proposal that this force could
generally explain rapid centromere evolution in eukaryotes
[10,11]. The findings of the study in maize came as a surprise, since it has long been thought that recombination is
suppressed at centromeres [29], and this has been confirmed in yeast [30] and other species [11,31,32]). Using
population data in yeast and some of the same approaches
used for maize [10], I find evidence for recombination very
close to centromeres though not within them (Table 3, see
Additional file 1, Table S2, Table S3). A number of recombination events may have occurred close to CEN2 (Table
3), where a double-stranded break hotspot is also predicted
[25]. High-resolution genome-wide mapping of the

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

crossover and non-crossover events from a large number
of meioses in S. cerevisiae also shows that crossovers sometimes occur close to centromeres, but not within them, and
that gene conversion does not occur close to centromeres
at all [26]. The absence of a detectable signature of recombination events within centromeres, together with the lack
of an obvious mechanism by which gene conversion would
increase diversity in non-repetitive point centromeres, suggests that gene conversion does not lead to rapid centromere evolution, at least in the way proposed in maize.
Gene conversion is mutagenic [13], so even if the signatures of gene conversion have been obscured in yeast
centromeres, perhaps their high mutation rate does
result from high rates of gene conversion as a result of
this mutagenicity, if not as a result of the products of
recombination. Analysis of the mutation spectrum at
S. cerevisiae centromeres, suggests this too is not the
case. The mutation spectrum in CDEII is more like that
seen genome-wide and in wild-type strains in studies of
spontaneous mutation than it is like the spectrum
expected specifically under gene conversion (Table 4).
Thus the rapid evolution of yeast centromeres may not
rely on the action of a specific DNA repair system like
that involved in gene conversion.
In summary, it appears that a generalised increase in
the mutation rate is responsible for the rapid evolution
seen at point centromeres, and this is not the result of
gene conversion as recently proposed [10]. Given that
rapid centromere evolution occurs in a broad range of
eukaryotes [3-8], it is possible that high mutation rates
could also contribute to the rapid evolution of other
eukaryotic centromeres.
Apart from rapid evolution, another general characteristic of centromeres is that their DNA is wound round a histone specific to centromeres, CENH3 [8]. This leads to a
nucleosome structure that is fundamentally different at
centromeres compared to other parts of the genome
[8,33,34]. There is evidence in yeast, human and fish that
rates of evolution are higher in DNA that is bound in
canonical nucleosomes than in flanking linker regions
[35-38]. In addition, experimental studies on S. cerevisiae
and human show increased mutation rates at nucleosomes
because DNA repair proteins have reduced access to DNA
once DNA is packaged on histones [39,40], so this may
explain the elevated evolutionary rates observed for DNA
in nucleosomes [36,37]. It may be especially difficult to
unwind DNA from a relatively rare histone variant, such
as CENH3, with an unusual nucleosome structure, and
this could lead to inefficient DNA repair at centromeres.
Similarly, the subtelomeres of S. cerevisiae show accelerated base-pair substitution and also have a non-canonical
chromatin structure [41]. The alternative conformation of
chromatin at centromeres may be necessary for centromere inheritance in the case of regional centromeres or

Page 7 of 11

more generally for centromere function [33], but may also
expose centromere DNA to higher rates of mutation and
sequence evolution.

Conclusions
In this work I present a complete dataset of sequences for
all 16 centromeres in 34 strains of the model yeast species,
Saccharomyces cerevisae, including more than 400,000
nucleotides of centromeric DNA sequence. Using population genetics theory and methods to test for the past
effects of natural selection and recombination at centromeres, I rule these forces out as major contributors to
rapid centromere evolution in yeast. Moreover, as S. cerevisiae is also a model for the study of mutation, I compare
the mutation spectrum at centromeres to those expected
under different modes of DNA repair. These analyses collectively support a model of high mutation rate, rather
than meiotic drive or gene conversion, as being the principal force driving rapid centromere evolution in yeast.
Yeast centromeres are simpler than those of plants or animals and yet they have several characteristics in common
with them, such as rapid centromere evolution and an
unusual chromatin structure. The results from this study
imply that other eukaryotes, such as animals and plants,
probably also suffer a high rate of spontaneous mutation
at their centromeres.
Methods
DNA sequencing of centromeres of S. cerevisiae

The DNA sequence data available from the Saccharomyces Genome Resequencing Project (SGRP) are only
available at low genome coverage for most strains
(between 1x and 3x). As a consequence, DNA sequence
is only available at approximately 40% of centromere
sites. This would yield too few data for a full analysis of
recombination and mutation spectrum at centromeres.
The S. cerevisiae strains used by the SGRP were therefore fully resequenced at centromeres for this study and
the SGRP data were used to test DNA sequence quality
(see Additional file 1).
Set 1 of SGRP strains were ordered from the National
Collection of Yeast Cultures (NCYC, http://www.ncyc.co.
uk/sgrp.html). All 36 strains provided by NCYC are the
monosporic derivatives of the original parental strains
sequenced as part of the SGRP. Thus they are expected
to exist as fully homozygous diploids, with no ambiguous
sequence resulting from heterozygosity, except perhaps
at the MAT locus. These monosporic derivatives of their
parents are described here using the name of the parental
strain followed by an “m” (e.g. YS2m). During the course
of this study, I found that four SGRP strains (YS2m,
YS4m, YS9m and DBVPG6040m) show signs of heterozygosity at many sites even though they are monosporic
derivatives. This suggests that they exist as polyploids or

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

aneuploids and so they were excluded from all analyses
presented here.
DNA was extracted for the 36 strains of S. cerevisiae
in this set using the Wizard Genomic DNA purification
kit from Promega, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions for yeast. DNA was diluted for each strain
and the equivalent of 0.05 μl of extract (approximately
1 ng DNA) for each strain was used to amplify each of
16 centromere loci in 15 μl volumes by PCR: 1.5 mM
MgCl s , 1 × Buffer, 0.2 mM each dNTP, 0.3 μM each
primer, 1 unit BioTaq™ DNA polymerase (Bioline);
Cycling conditions: 94°C 4 mins; 35 cycles: 94°C 40 secs,
55°C 1 min, 72°C 1 min 20 secs; 72°C 7 mins. PCR products were visualised on a 1% agarose gel and 5 μl from
each was treated with ExoSAP-IT™ according to manufacturer’s instructions (GE Healthcare) to degrade leftover dNTPs and single-stranded primers. Each PCR
product was sequenced using at least two primers, one
from each strand, on an ABI Prism 3100 Genetic Analyser. Primers were designed using primer3 (version 1.1.4,
http://primer3.sourceforge.net), and a full list of the primers used for PCRs and sequencing is in Additional file
1, Table S1. Staden version 1.7.0 http://sourceforge.net/
projects/staden/ was used to assign Phred (version:
0.020425.c) quality scores to reads, and to assemble a
single consensus sequence for each centromere using
the Gap4 assembler. A consensus quality threshold of
Q40 was used throughout this work, and each consensus showed bases as ambiguous ("N”) if their quality
score was below this threshold. DNA sequences were
aligned in SeaView 4.0 http://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/software/
seaview.html [42] against the reference strain sequence
of S288c included with the SGRP data. The 509 DNA
sequences generated, aligned and annotated as part of
this study are available from NCBI [GenBank:
HQ339369-HQ339877]. A comparison of these centromere DNA sequence data, to the SGRP data generated
using a whole-genome shotgun sequencing approach
showed no detectable errors due to Taq polymerase,
DNA sequencing or base-calling errors (see Additional
file 1 Supplementary Text).
Whole-genome shotgun data for centromere and
transposable element sequences in S. cerevisiae and S.
paradoxus

The SGRP data were downloaded from ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.
uk/pub/dmc/yeast/latest/ on 4th February 2009. Only
actual (no imputed) data were used. The centromere for
the reference strains of S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus used
in Liti et al. [14], and its component conserved DNA elements (CDEI, CDEII and CDEIII) were annotated using
the consensus sequence motifs for CDEI and CDEIII
described in Baker and Rogers [17], and a perl script CENannotate.pl (available on request).

Page 8 of 11

The SGRP PALAS alignments analysed in Liti et al
[14] for the 16 centromere loci of 32 strains of S. cerevisiae (for estimation of error rates) and all 35 strains of
S. paradoxus were extracted using alicat.pl (a perl script
provided with the SGRP data). A quality threshold of
Q40 was used for the SGRP data, and sites with a lower
quality score were represented with an “N”.
Apart from the 32 S. cerevisiae strains that show no evidence of heterozygosity (see above), the publicly available
genome sequences for two more strains, RM11.1a http://
www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/genome/saccharomyces_cerevisiae/Home.html and YJM789 [43], were
included in this and all subsequent analyses of S. cerevisiae. According to Liti et al. [14], six of the 36 S. cerevisiae
SGRP strains may be identical clonemates of others in the
data and they exclude these from their genome-wide analysis of nucleotide diversity. The centromere data presented here only supports this conclusion for 2 strains
(NCYC110 and UWOPS05-217.3), and these are not
excluded from the analysis. The Hawaiian strain of S.
paradoxus (UWOPS91-917.1) does not belong to European, Far Eastern or American populations of S. paradoxus and so this strain is excluded, bringing the total
number of S. paradoxus strains included in the analysis to
34.
Annotations of transposable elements (TEs) in the version of the S. cerevisiae (S288c) and S. paradoxus reference
genomes against which all SGRP PALAS sequences are
aligned, were produced using RepeatMasker and REANNOTATE [44] http://www.bioinformatics.org/reannotate.
The size distribution of the resultant S. cerevisiae 483
transposable element fragment annotations, were approximately as expected. Most fragments were less than 400 bp
long (solo-LTR fragments) and there were a few TEs that
were longer and are probably full-length elements or
degenerated versions of them. There are 572 annotated
transposable elements for S. paradoxus, and more than
200 of these are 300-400 bp in length, and so are probably
recent single solo-LTR insertions. There are few fragments
that are the expected size of full-length transposable elements, but this is most likely because the reference
sequence used represents an incomplete genomic assembly and full-length transposable elements are where gaps
in the assembly are most likely to arise.
SGRP PALAS alignments were extracted for each TE
locus using alicat.pl (with a Q40 threshold), together with
alignment corresponding to 100 bp of flanking reference
sequence on either side of the TE. All alignments were
inspected and each transposable element alignment was
manually assigned as fixed, polymorphic or complex.
Complex alignments are those in which fixed elements
contain additional polymorphic transposable element
insertions, or those in which the alignment does not
extend unambiguously into the regions flanking the

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

transposable element region. Fixed elements containing a
polymorphic solo-LTR insertion that is present in only
one strain are still included in the analysis because estimates of sequence divergence will not be affected by
such events. In the case of S. paradoxus, if a polymorphic
element occurs inside a fixed element, and the polymorphism is not present in European strains, then this
fixed element is still included, since estimates of divergence between populations and European nucleotide
diversity will not be affected by the polymorphism. In
this way, 210 and 396 fixed TE fragments were identified
in S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus, respectively, for comparison to centromeres in their levels of polymorphism
and divergence.
Estimating levels of divergence and polymorphism

Population divergence, numbers of segregating sites and
other measures of polymorphism for both S. cerevisiae and
S. paradoxus were estimated for each fixed TE, CDEII and
centromere flanking region, using Variscan 2.0 (http://
www.ub.es/softevol/variscan/) [45]. Variscan is able to
handle the large amount of missing data seen for the
SGRP data, in estimating levels of polymorphism. Polymorphism levels were estimated from all sites where at
least two valid DNA sequences were available (Variscan
parameters: CompleteDeletion = 0, FixNum = 0, NumNuc
= 2, see Variscan documentation for details). Insertions
and deletions were treated as missing or ambiguous data
and so estimates of polymorphism are not affected by the
placement of these in the alignment or by slippage as a
result of the prevalence of homopolymer runs within
CDEII (Figure 1). Levels of polymorphism were estimated
as both nucleotide diversity (average pairwise distance, π)
and Watterson’s theta (θW) [46], but results were the same
regardless of whether π or θW were used to compare levels
of polymorphism between centromeres and other regions.
Subsequent statistical analyses were in R 2.9.0.
Testing for recombination at centromere loci

Two approaches were used to test for recombination in
the presence of potentially high rates of mutation. Firstly,
the likelihood method based on coalescent theory developed by McVean et al. [21] was used together with their
likelihood permutation tests that test for statistical significance. This is implemented by McVean et al. in LDhat,
and was applied to each locus using the LDhat modules
convert, pairwise, and lkgen. As in McVean et al. [21],
sites with minor allele frequencies less than 0.1 were
excluded. To account for the significantly higher levels of
polymorphism within centromeres compared to their
flanking regions, which are probably under some selective
constraint, centromeres and flanking regions were analysed separately, with θ = 0.1 within centromeres and θ =
0.01 in flanking regions. LDhat was run under a crossing-

Page 9 of 11

over model, and then again using a gene conversion
model (with the conversion tract length set to 100 bp).
The two models gave similar results and the results under
the gene conversion model are shown in Additional file 1,
Supplementary Tables 2 and 3. Secondly, the four-gamete
test was applied to every site in each locus to identify sites
that can only be explained by a recombination event or
homoplasy using a custom perl script fourgamete.pl (available on request). I then estimated the minimum number
of sites showing homoplasy needed to explain the data,
and tested the likelihood of the observed number of
homoplasious sites with 1000 simulated replicates in R,
given the length of the sequence and the number of segregating sites (homoplasysim.pl, available on request). This
second approach was also applied separately for centromeres and flanking regions, since the random simulation
used to test significance also assumes a uniform mutation
rate. To test whether all evidence for recombination is
successfully explained by the minimum set of homoplasious sites identified in this way, these sites were removed
from each full alignment (centromeres with flanks), and
the four gamete analysis was repeated on the resultant full
alignments. There was no significant evidence for recombination after removal of the minimum set of sites with
homoplasy. LDhat and the four-gamete test with significance tests gave consistent results. This double approach
leads to a large number of statistical tests (see Additional
file 1, Table S2 and Table S3), and so some significant
results are expected by chance, in addition LDhat appears
to be very sensitive to heterogeneity in the mutation rate
leading to several false positives (Additional file 1, Table
S2, highlighted in pink). Recombination was therefore only
assumed for a locus when there was some evidence for
this using both approaches.
Characterising the mutation spectrum

In order to polarise point substitutions, I consider mutations that are unique to one haplotype to represent the
derived allele. In each alignment I therefore count the
number of each unique substitution type (e.g. A-> C, C->
G) denoted as ni-> j (e.g. nA-> C, nC-> G). Base composition
is likely to differ among loci and CDEII is more AT rich
than the genome-wide average, I therefore also consider
the number of bases available for each type of change,
denoted as ai (e.g. aA, aC). ai in turn is estimated as the
sum of nucleotide (i) in all strains sequenced for that
locus. Using the program unique.pl, each alignment was
reduced to an alignment where each haplotype was only
represented once by the strain with the longest unambiguous sequence belonging to that haplotype, ni-> j and ai
were then estimated from the resultant DNA sequence
alignment of each locus. To test for significant differences
among CDEII loci in the point substitution spectrum or
for significant point substitution biases in the total dataset,

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

a generalised linear model (GLM) was fit to the data in R
with Poisson errors. The number of point substitutions
(ni-> j) was set as the response variable, with locus (CEN1
to CEN16), and unique substitution type as explanatory
variables and with ai as offsets. The fit of each model to
its assumptions was checked and simplified according to
the recommendations in Crawley [47]. The centromere
data were also compared to the spectrum of the 31 point
substitutions identified in the genome-wide analysis using
a GLM with Poisson errors.
Unique indels and the length of sequence in which
they occur were also summarised using the program
unique.pl. Alignments were first reduced by unique.pl so
that each haplotype is only represented once and unique
changes are again assumed to represent the derived
state. Indels occurring inside homopolymer runs of 5 bp
or longer are considered separately (Table 4).

Page 10 of 11

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1: BensassonSI.pdf contains all the
supplementary information for this study: Supplementary Text: Low
error rate in Sanger Genome Resequencing Project and this study;
Table S1: Primers used to amplify each centromere locus and for
DNA sequencing; Table S2: Testing for evidence of recombination
using LDhat and four-gamete analysis of centromeres in S.
cerevisiae; Table S3: LDhat and four-gamete analysis of centromeres
regions, but excluding centromeres themselves; Figure S1.
Centromeres and their immediate flanking DNA are too diverged to
align S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus; Figure S2. Centromeres and their
immediate flanking DNA are highly diverged between S. cerevisiae and S.
mikatae.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

Acknowledgements
I thank Casey Bergman, Justin Fay, Catherine Millar and Alan Moses, and six
anonymous reviewers for helpful discussion, and comments on the
manuscript. I am also grateful to Casey Bergman for providing the TE
annotation used in this study. Sandra Taylor and Viranga Tilakaratna
performed DNA extractions and PCRs used in generating the S. cerevisiae
centromere data. This work was supported by the Natural Environment
Research Council through a NERC Fellowship [grant number NE/D008824/1]
(http://www.nerc.ac.uk). The funders had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The author declares that they have no competing interests.
Received: 11 April 2011 Accepted: 18 July 2011 Published: 18 July 2011
References
1. Henikoff S, Ahmad K, Malik H: The centromere paradox: stable inheritance
with rapidly evolving DNA. Science 2001, 293:1098-1102.
2. Copenhaver GP: Who’s driving the centromere? J Biol 2004, 3(4):17.
3. Lee HR, Zhang W, Langdon T, Jin W, Yan H, Cheng Z, Jiang J: Chromatin
immunoprecipitation cloning reveals rapid evolutionary patterns of
centromeric DNA in Oryza species. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102(33):11793-11798.
4. Roizes G: Human centromeric alphoid domains are periodically
homogenized so that they vary substantially between homologues.
Mechanism and implications for centromere functioning. Nucleic Acids
Res 2006, 34(6):1912-1924.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.
28.
29.
30.

Bensasson D, Zarowiecki M, Burt A, Koufopanou V: Rapid evolution of
yeast centromeres in the absence of drive. Genetics 2008,
178(4):2161-2167.
Padmanabhan S, Thakur J, Siddharthan R, Sanyal K: Rapid evolution of
Cse4p-rich centromeric DNA sequences in closely related pathogenic
yeasts, Candida albicans and Candida dubliniensis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 2008, 105(50):19797-19802.
Pertile MD, Graham AN, Choo KH, Kalitsis P: Rapid evolution of mouse Y
centromere repeat DNA belies recent sequence stability. Genome Res
2009, 19(12):2202-2213.
Malik HS, Henikoff S: Major Evolutionary Transitions in Centromere
Complexity. Cell 2009, 138(6):1067-1082.
Li W-H: Molecular Evolution. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, Inc.; 1997.
Shi J, Wolf SE, Burke JM, Presting GG, Ross-Ibarra J, Dawe RK: Widespread
Gene Conversion in Centromere Cores. PLoS Biol 2010, 8(3):e1000327.
Talbert PB, Henikoff S: Centromeres Convert but Don’t Cross. PLoS Biol
2010, 8(3):e1000326.
Malik HS, Henikoff S: Conflict begets complexity: the evolution of
centromeres. Curr Opin Genet Develop 2002, 12(6):711-718.
Hicks WM, Kim M, Haber JE: Increased Mutagenesis and Unique Mutation
Signature Associated with Mitotic Gene Conversion. Science 2010,
329(5987):82-85.
Liti G, Carter DM, Moses AM, Warringer J, Parts L, James SA, Davey RP,
Roberts IN, Burt A, Koufopanou V, Tsai IJ, Bergman CM, Bensasson D,
O’Kelly MJT, van Oudenaarden A, Barton DBH, Bailes E, Nguyen AN,
Jones M, Quail MA, Goodhead I, Sims S, Smith F, Blomberg A, Durbin R,
Louis EJ: Population genomics of domestic and wild yeasts. Nature 2009,
458(7236):337-341.
Lynch M, Sung W, Morris K, Coffey N, Landry CR, Dopman EB, Dickinson WJ,
Okamoto K, Kulkarni S, Hartl DL, Thomas WK: A genome-wide view of the
spectrum of spontaneous mutations in yeast. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 2008, 105(27):9272-9277.
Clarke L: Centromeres: proteins, protein complexes, and repeated
domains at centromeres of simple eukaryotes. Current Opinion in Genetics
& Development 1998, 8(2):212-218.
Baker RE, Rogers K: Genetic and genomic analysis of the AT-Rich
centromere DNA element II of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 2005,
171(4):1463-1475.
Liti G, Barton DBH, Louis EJ: Sequence Diversity, Reproductive Isolation
and Species Concepts in Saccharomyces. Genetics 2006, 174(2):839-850.
Kellis M, Patterson N, Endrizzi M, Birren B, Lander ES: Sequencing and
comparison of yeast species to identify genes and regulatory elements.
Nature 2003, 423(6937):241-254.
Doniger S, Kim H, Swain D, Corcuera D, Williams M, Yang S, Fay J: A
Catalog of Neutral and Deleterious Polymorphism in Yeast. PLoS Genet
2008, 4(8):e1000183..
McVean G, Awadalla P, Fearnhead P: A Coalescent-Based Method for
Detecting and Estimating Recombination From Gene Sequences.
Genetics 2002, 160(3):1231-1241.
Hudson RR, Kaplan NL: Statistical properties of the number of
recombination events in the history of a sample of DNA sequences.
Genetics 1985, 111(1):147-164.
Lang GI, Murray AW: Estimating the Per-Base-Pair Mutation Rate in the
Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 2008, 178(1):67-82.
Levinson G, Gutman GA: Slipped-Strand Mispairing: A Major Mechanism
for DNA Sequence Evolution. Molecular Biology and Evolution 1987,
4(3):203-221.
Blitzblau HG, Bell GW, Rodriguez J, Bell SP, Hochwagen A: Mapping of
Meiotic Single-Stranded DNA Reveals Double-Strand-Break Hotspots
near Centromeres and Telomeres. Current Biology 2007, 17(23):2003-2012.
Mancera E, Bourgon R, Brozzi A, Huber W, Steinmetz LM: High-resolution
mapping of meiotic crossovers and non-crossovers in yeast. Nature 2008,
454(7203):479-485.
Talbert P, Bryson T, Henikoff S: Adaptive evolution of centromere proteins
in plants and animals. Journal of Biology 2004, 3(4):18.
Coyne J, Orr H: Speciation. Sunderland: Sinauer; 2004.
Beadle GW: A Possible Influence of the Spindle Fibre on Crossing-Over in
Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1932, 18(2):160-165.
Lambie EJ, Roeder GS: Repression of meiotic crossing over by a
centromere (CEN3) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 1986,
114(3):769-789.

Bensasson BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:211
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/211

Page 11 of 11

31. Mahtani MM, Willard HF: Physical and genetic mapping of the human ×
chromosome centromere: repression of recombination. Genome Res 1998,
8(2):100-110.
32. Copenhaver GP, Nickel K, Kuromori T, Benito MI, Kaul S, Lin X, Bevan M,
Murphy G, Harris B, Parnell LD, McCombie WR, Martienssen RA, Marra M,
Preuss D: Genetic definition and sequence analysis of Arabidopsis
centromeres. Science 1999, 286(5449):2468-2474.
33. Furuyama T, Henikoff S: Centromeric Nucleosomes Induce Positive DNA
Supercoils. Cell 2009, 138(1):104-113.
34. Sekulic N, Bassett EA, Rogers DJ, Black BE: The structure of (CENP-A-H4)(2)
reveals physical features that mark centromeres. Nature .
35. Warnecke T, Batada NN, Hurst LD: The impact of the nucleosome code on
protein-coding sequence evolution in yeast. PLoS Genet 2008, 4(11):
e1000250.
36. Washietl S, Machne R, Goldman N: Evolutionary footprints of nucleosome
positions in yeast. Trends Genet 2008, 24(12):583-587.
37. Ying H, Epps J, Williams R, Huttley G: Evidence that localized variation in
primate sequence divergence arises from an influence of nucleosome
placement on DNA repair. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27(3):637-649.
38. Sasaki S, Mello CC, Shimada A, Nakatani Y, Hashimoto S, Ogawa M,
Matsushima K, Gu SG, Kasahara M, Ahsan B, et al: Chromatin-associated
periodicity in genetic variation downstream of transcriptional start sites.
Science 2009, 323(5912):401-404.
39. Suter B, Thoma F: DNA-repair by photolyase reveals dynamic properties
of nucleosome positioning in vivo. J Mol Biol 2002, 319(2):395-406.
40. Beard BC, Wilson SH, Smerdon MJ: Suppressed catalytic activity of base
excision repair enzymes on rotationally positioned uracil in
nucleosomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100(13):7465-7470.
41. Teytelman L, Eisen MB, Rine J: Silent but not static: accelerated base-pair
substitution in silenced chromatin of budding yeasts. PLoS Genet 2008,
4(11):e1000247.
42. Gouy M, Guindon S, Gascuel O: SeaView Version 4: A Multiplatform
Graphical User Interface for Sequence Alignment and Phylogenetic Tree
Building. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2010, 27(2):221-224.
43. Wei W, McCusker JH, Hyman RW, Jones T, Ning Y, Cao Z, Gu Z, Bruno D,
Miranda M, Nguyen M, Wilhelmy J, Komp C, Tamse R, Wang X, Jia P,
Luedi P, Oefner PJ, David L, Dietrich FS, Li Y, Davis RW, Steinmetz LM:
Genome sequencing and comparative analysis of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae strain YJM789. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104(31):12825-12830.
44. Pereira V: Automated paleontology of repetitive DNA with REANNOTATE.
BMC Genomics 2008, 9(1):614.
45. Vilella AJ, Blanco-Garcia A, Hutter S, Rozas J: VariScan: Analysis of
evolutionary patterns from large-scale DNA sequence polymorphism
data. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(11):2791-2793.
46. Hartl DL, Clark AG: Principles of Population Genetics. Sunderland, MA:
Sinauer;, 3 1997.
47. Crawley MJ: The R Book. Wiley; 2007.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-211
Cite this article as: Bensasson: Evidence for a high mutation rate at
rapidly evolving yeast centromeres. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:211.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
