<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Next-generation sequencing technologies and applications for human genetic history and forensics</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23. doi:10.1186/2041-2223-2-23"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Eva C Berglund"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

REVIEW

Open Access

Next-generation sequencing technologies and
applications for human genetic history and
forensics
Eva C Berglund, Anna Kiialainen and Ann-Christine Syvänen*

Abstract
Rapid advances in the development of sequencing technologies in recent years have enabled an increasing
number of applications in biology and medicine. Here, we review key technical aspects of the preparation of DNA
templates for sequencing, the biochemical reaction principles and assay formats underlying next-generation
sequencing systems, methods for imaging and base calling, quality control, and bioinformatic approaches for
sequence alignment, variant calling and assembly. We also discuss some of the most important advances that the
new sequencing technologies have brought to the fields of human population genetics, human genetic history
and forensic genetics.
Background
Determining the DNA sequence is the most comprehensive way of obtaining information about the genome of
any living organism. For decades, Sanger sequencing [1]
using fluorescently labeled terminating nucleotides and
electrophoresis has been the gold standard sequencing
technology. Sanger sequencing made an early impact in
the field of microbial genomics, with the first complete
bacterial genome, Haemophilus influenzae, sequenced in
1995 [2]. Multicenter collaborations using numerous
sequencing instruments and automated sample preparation also made it possible to use Sanger sequencing in
the human genome project, which took more than 10
years and US$2.7 billion to complete [3,4].
In recent years, we have witnessed a rapid development of a new generation of DNA sequencing systems
followed by a multitude of novel applications in biology
and medicine. The major advantage of the new ‘secondgeneration’ or ‘massively parallel’ sequencing technologies, compared to Sanger sequencing, is their considerably higher throughput and thereby lower cost per
sequenced base. On a second-generation sequencing
(SGS) machine several human genomes can be
sequenced in a single run in a matter of days. Here, we
* Correspondence: ann-christine.syvanen@medsci.uu.se
Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular Medicine and Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden

review recent technological advances of SGS technologies and discuss the bioinformatic and computational
implications of the sequencing revolution. Finally we
highlight some applications of SGS technology with a
focus on human population genetics and genetic history,
and genetic forensics.
Second-generation sequencing technologies

There are three major SGS systems that are routinely
used in many laboratories today. The first system to
become commercially available was the Genome
Sequencer from 454 Life Sciences (Branford, CT, USA)
(later acquired by Roche [5]) in 2005, which was also
the first SGS technology to sequence a complete human
genome, that of Dr. James D. Watson [6]. The Genome
Analyzer, first conceived by Solexa and later further
developed by Illumina (San Diego, CA, USA) [7] was
launched in 2006, and the SOLiD system from Applied
Biosystems [8] (now part of Life Technologies (Carlsbad,
CA, USA)) in 2007. The key steps of a sequencing project are the same for all of these technologies: preparation and amplification of template DNA, distribution of
templates on a solid support, sequencing and imaging,
base calling, quality control and data analysis (Figure 1).
In terms of applications, there are two major types of
projects, de novo sequencing and resequencing. In a de
novo sequencing project, the genome of an organism is
sequenced for the first time. In contrast, in resequencing

© 2011 Berglund et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

Page 2 of 15

Figure 1 Steps of a sequencing experiment. Black arrows indicate steps that are common for all second-generation sequencing (SGS)
technologies, white arrows refer to the Illumina systems, and grey arrows refer to the Roche 454 and SOLiD systems.

applications, the genome or parts of it are sequenced of
a species where a reference sequence is already available.
This difference affects both the selection of sequencing
strategy and the data analysis (further discussed below).

In human forensics and population genetics the resequencing approach is used, but in microbial forensics
both de novo sequencing and resequencing of microbial
genomes may be required.

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

Two common measures of the amount of sequence
data generated in a project are the sequencing depth
and breadth. Sequencing depth, or coverage, is the average number of times each base in the genome is
sequenced. For example, to sequence a 3 Gb human
genome to 30 × coverage, 90 Gb of sequence data is
needed. The coverage will be uneven over the genome
however, and sequencing breadth, sometimes also
referred to as genome coverage, is the percentage of the
genome that is covered by sequence reads.
DNA samples for sequencing

High-quality DNA in sufficient quantity is the basis for
any successful sequencing experiment. For most sequencing applications, 1 to 5 μg of purified DNA is needed,
an amount that may not always be available. Whole genome amplification (WGA) has frequently been used to
increase the amount of DNA for genotyping [9] and can
be applied also in combination with SGS. Several microbial genomes have been sequenced using SGS after
WGA (for example, the genome of uncultured bacterial
symbionts of termites isolated from a single host cell
[10]). WGA was also recently used to amplify DNA
from single cells from primary breast tumors, and
although sequence data was retrieved from only 6% of
the genome of each cell, this genomic representation
was enough to identify subpopulations of cancer cells by
copy number variations [11].
SGS can also be used to detect rare and unknown variants in genomic regions of interest in a cost-efficient
way, and in a larger number of samples than by whole
genome sequencing. Another advantage of targeted
sequencing is the reduced issue of sequence reads aligning to multiple locations in the genome. The most commonly used methods for enrichment of genomic regions
for sequencing are either based on hybridization to biotinylated probes in solution or probes immobilized on
microarrays, or on multiplexed amplification by PCR
(reviewed in [12]). The recently developed selector probe
technology, which is based on rolling circle amplification,
provides efficient and highly multiplexed enrichment of
small regions totaling up to 1 Mb in size is particularly
useful for ultra-deep sequencing at low cost and high
specificity [13]. Sequencing of human exomes enriched
by hybridization-based capture in solution is becoming
widely used, and has proven to be particularly successful
for identification of mutated genes underlying monogenic
disorders (see, for example, [14-17]). The methods for
hybridization-based capture are also applicable to custom-selected genomic regions of interest [18].
Preparation of sequencing libraries

The DNA samples to be sequenced are first converted
into one of two main types of sequencing libraries,

Page 3 of 15

fragment libraries or mate-pair libraries. The first step
in the preparation of a sequencing library is to fragment
the DNA sample, usually using sonication or nebulization. For preparation of fragment libraries, sequencing
adapters are ligated to both ends of the DNA fragments,
followed by PCR amplification using primers complementary to the adapters.
In the Illumina SGS technology, adapter-ligated DNA
fragments are amplified directly in the flow cell subsequently used for sequencing. Each flow cell has eight
channels (lanes) coated with oligonucleotides that are
complementary to the adapters. The adapter-ligated
DNA fragments are hybridized to the flow cell, in which
they are distributed randomly and amplified by a process called bridge amplification. After amplification,
DNA molecules are linearized to form clusters, each of
which consists of about 1,000 copies of the original
DNA molecule at that position.
In the 454 and SOLiD technologies, adapter-ligated
fragments are hybridized to beads coated with an oligonucleotide that is complementary to one of the adapters
for amplification in a water-in-oil emulsion PCR. Each
water droplet constitutes a microreactor containing the
PCR reagents and optimally a single bead with a single
immobilized DNA fragment. Thus, multiple PCRs can
be performed in parallel in a single tube. After breaking
the emulsion, the beads, which are now coated with
thousands or millions of copies of the original DNA
molecule, are loaded onto the solid support for sequencing. In the 454 system, the solid support is called PicoTiterPlate and consists of wells that can fit a single
DNA-coated bead each. SOLiD uses a glass slide to
which the beads are distributed randomly.
The amplified fragments are then sequenced either
from one end (single-end) or from both ends (pairedend). Paired reads allow more accurate alignment to a
reference genome, and are also very useful to resolve
repeats and improve assembly in de novo sequencing
projects. The Illumina system generates sequence reads
of the same length from both ends, whereas the second
read from SOLiD is shorter (Table 1). The 454 system
currently does not support paired-end sequencing of
fragment libraries.
Mate-pair libraries are constructed by circularizing
fragmented DNA, thereby bringing the two ends of the
original DNA fragment adjacent to each other (Figure
2). After fragmentation of the circular DNA, the fragment containing the ends of the original linear DNA is
selected using biotin capture. Sequencing both ends of
the selected fragment will yield reads that are separated
by the distance of the original fragment. In order to
avoid chimeric sequence reads that span over both original fragment ends, the 454 and SOLiD systems include
an internal adapter. In the Illumina mate-pair

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

Page 4 of 15

Table 1 Characteristics of second-generation and third-generation sequencing instruments
Instrument

Read length
(nucleotides)

No. of
readsa

Output
(Gb)a

No. of
samplesa,

Roche 454 GS FLX+

700c

1 × 106

0.7

192d

Illumina HiSeq2000

100e

3 × 109

600

384

Life Technologies
SOLiD 5500xl

75g

1.5 × 109

180

1,152

Roche 454 GS Junior

400c

1 × 105

0.035

132

9h

Long reads

Homopolymer errors,
expensive

Illumina MiSeq

150

5 × 106

1.5

96

27 h

Short run time, ease of
use

Expensive per base

Ion Torrent PGM Ion
316 chip

> 100h

1 × 106

0.1

16

2h

Short run time, low
reagent cost

Not well evaluated

Helicos BioSciences
HeliScope

35h

1 × 109

35

4,800

8 days

SMS, sequences RNA

Short reads, high error
rate

Pacific Biosciences
PacBio RS

> 1,000h

1 × 105

0.1

1

90 min

SMS, long reads, short
run time

High error rate, low
yield

b

Runtime Advantages
23 h

Long reads, short run
time

Disadvantages
Homopolymer errors,
expensive

11 daysf High yield

No. of index tags
limiting

14 daysf Inherent error
correction

Short readsg

Most of this information is subject to rapid change, and the aim of this table is not to present absolute numbers but to provide a general comparison between
different sequencing systems.
a
Numbers calculated for two flow cells on HiSeq2000 and SOLiD 5500xl.
b
Calculated as no. of index tags (provided by the sequencing company) × no. of divisions on solid support.
c
Average for single-end sequencing, paired-end reads are shorter.
d
No. of reads decreases when the PicoTiterPlate is divided.
e
36 nucleotides for mate-pair reads.
f
Run time depends on the read length, and on whether one or two flow cells are used.
g
Second read in paired-end sequencing is limited to 35 nucleotides, and mate pair reads to 60 nucleotides.
h
Average.
SMS = single molecule sequencing.

preparation, no internal adapter is used, and to minimize the risk of sequencing over the original junction
the recommended read length is limited to 36 nucleotides. Mate-pair libraries allow larger insert sizes (2 to
20 kb) than paired-end sequencing of fragment libraries.
Drawbacks of mate-pair sequencing are that the laboratory protocols are more complicated and that a substantially larger amount of DNA (5 to 120 μg) is required.
In contrast to paired-end reads, which are oriented
towards each other, mate-pair reads are either both
oriented outwards from the original fragment or both
have the same orientation (Figure 2), which needs to be
accounted for in the data analysis. Large inserts are
especially valuable in de novo sequencing projects,
where they can substantially improve scaffolding(ordering of assembled contigs). Mate-pair sequencing is not
used as frequently in resequencing projects, where DNA
resources are often limited and the analysis is mainly
based on alignment to a reference genome.
Introducing an additional index tag (barcoding) to
each DNA fragment makes it possible to sequence
pooled samples that can be distinguished in silico after
sequencing. Multiplexing is useful in applications where
a relatively small amount of data is needed from each
sample, such as sequencing of small genomes or
enriched regions of large genomes (see, for example,

[19,20]). As the capacity of the sequencing instruments
has increased, multiplex sequencing of indexed samples
has become more and more important to minimize
sequencing costs. Indexing also decreases the risk of
sample mix-ups and contaminations during library preparation. Currently, Illumina provides 24 different index
tags, Life Technologies 96 and Roche 12 (Table 1).
Additional index tags for Illumina (48 tags in total) and
454 (120 additional tags) can be purchased from other
companies. It is also possible to use custom-designed
index tags [21,22].
Sequencing and imaging principles
Sequencing-by-synthesis

The Illumina and 454 technologies are based on sequencing-by-synthesis. A DNA polymerase is used to extend
a sequencing primer by incorporating nucleotides that
form a growing sequence complementary to the template DNA. In the Illumina system, fluorescent reversibly terminating nucleotides are used. All four
nucleotides are added at the same time, each with a
unique fluorescent label, which allows incorporation of
one base per cycle into each template molecule [23]
(Figure 3a). After incorporation and fluorescence registration at four wavelengths, the terminating and fluorescent moieties are removed from the nucleotides to allow

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 Principles for construction of mate-pair sequencing libraries. (a) Preparation of Illumina mate-pair libraries. Fragments are endrepaired using biotinylated nucleotides (1). After circularization, the two fragment ends (green and red) become located adjacent to each other
(2). The circularized DNA is fragmented, and biotinylated fragments are purified by affinity capture. Sequencing adapters (A1 and A2) are ligated
to the ends of the captured fragments (3), and the fragments are hybridized to a flow cell, in which they are bridge amplified. The first
sequence read is obtained with adapter A2 bound to the flow cell (4). The complementary strand is synthesized and linearized with adapter A1
bound to the flow cell, and the second sequence read is obtained (5). The two sequence reads (arrows) will be directed outwards from the
original fragment (6). (b) Preparation of Roche 454 paired-end libraries (these are called paired-end, but are based on the same principles as the
mate-pair libraries in the other technologies). Original fragments (1) are end-repaired with unlabeled nucleotides, and biotin-labeled
circularization adapters (CA) are ligated to the fragment ends (2). After circularization (3), fragmentation and affinity purification, library adaptors
(LA1 and LA2) are ligated to the new fragment ends (4) and the fragments are amplified on beads by emulsion PCR. One single sequence read
that covers the two original ends and the internal adapter is generated (5). Adapter sequence is removed in silico, and the sequence is split into
two reads, which both have the same orientation (6). (c) Preparation of SOLiD mate-pair libraries. Steps 1 to 4 are analogous with preparation of
Roche 454 paired-end libraries, with a biotin-labeled internal adapter (IA) and two sequencing adapters (P1 and P2). Sequencing is performed
with two different primers, complementary to the P1 adapter and internal adapter, respectively (5). The resulting reads will have the same
orientation (6).

the next sequencing cycle. In 2010, Illumina released the
HiSeq2000 instrument, which uses the same chemistry
as the original Genome Analyzer instrument, but has
improved imaging optics and can process two flow cells
in parallel. The HiSeq2000 system has the highest
throughput of all currently available SGS instruments,
with around 600 Gb sequence produced per run (Table
1). Examples of what can be achieved with the current
capacity of HiSeq2000 are shown in Table 2. Sequencing
errors are primarily substitution errors and occur more
frequently in the distal bases of a read.
In the 454 sequencing-by-synthesis reaction, natural
non-terminating deoxynucleotides are added to the system sequentially (Figure 3b). In homopolymeric regions
several bases will thus become incorporated in the same
step. The 454 technology is based on the pyrosequencing principle [24], where pyrophosphate is released as a

consequence of nucleotide incorporation and converted
into ATP by sulfurylase. ATP is then used as a substrate
for the production of light by luciferase, and the emission of light is registered by a charge-coupled device
(CCD) camera. The major advantage of the 454 technology is the long read length. The misincorporation rate
for the natural deoxynucleotides is low, resulting in low
levels of nucleotide substitution errors. Insertion-deletion errors are frequent in homopolymeric regions, however, due to the non-linear light response when several
nucleotides are incorporated simultaneously to the same
molecule. Compared to the Illumina and SOLiD systems, the 454 technology is more expensive per base
due to the lower capacity and the higher reagent cost
associated with the multiple enzymes required. Thus,
the 454 technology is mainly used in applications where
long reads are desired, such as de novo sequencing

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Principles for sequencing and imaging. (a) Illumina sequencing of three template molecules. All four nucleotides, carrying
terminating moieties and unique fluorescent labels, and DNA polymerase are added, and one complementary nucleotide becomes incorporated
at each template molecule (1). After washing, fluorescence is registered at four wavelengths (2). Fluorescent dyes and terminating groups are
cleaved off. A new set of nucleotides is added (3), and imaged (4). Sequence reads of equal length are obtained (5). (b) 454 sequencing of three
template molecules. One type of natural non-terminating deoxynucleotides and DNA polymerase are added and a pyrophosphate molecule is
released at each nucleotide incorporation (1). Pyrophosphate is converted into light using sulfurylase and luciferase, and the light intensity is
measured in each well (2). Free deoxynucleotides are destroyed with apyrase before adding the next type of deoxynucleotide (3) and imaging
(4). Light signals are converted to flowgrams with higher signal intensity bars in homopolymer regions (5). Sequence reads that may differ in
length are obtained (6). (c) SOLiD sequencing of one template molecule. A sequencing primer, DNA ligase and 1,024 unique probes, which are
fluorescently labeled according to their first two bases, are added, and the complementary probe is ligated to the template (1). After washing,
fluorescence is registered at four wavelengths. The three universal bases and the fluorophor are cleaved off (2). Addition of a new probe set is
repeated for the desired number of cycles (3,4). The newly built strand is melted off. A new sequencing primer is added, which anneals one
base off from the first primer and therefore interrogates different positions (5). Sequencing is repeated for the desired number of cycles (6).
Additional primers are added, until each base is sequenced twice. The colors from all sequencing rounds are merged and can be converted to
nucleotides (7).

Table 2 Capacity of the HiSeq2000 instrument from
Illumina
Target region

Coverage

Samples per run

Human genome (3 Gb)

40 ×

5

Human exome (30 Mb)

100 ×

200

Escherichia coli genome (6 Mb)

200 ×

500

Ten large genes (1 Mb)

100 ×

6,000

projects, where the read length is the most important
factor determining the quality of the assembly, and in
metagenomics, where the sample contains a mix of different organisms.
Sequencing-by-ligation

The SOLiD technology is based on sequencing-by-ligation, where a DNA ligase is used to add probes to a
growing oligonucleotide chain [25] (Figure 3c). The

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

probes consist of eight bases, five that are specific and
complementary to the template and three that are universal and support hybridization to the DNA template.
In the sequencing reaction, probes containing all possible combinations of the first five nucleotides are added.
The probe that matches the template perfectly becomes
hybridized and ligated to the sequencing primer or previous probe. The probes are fluorescently labeled
according to the first two bases using a scheme for twobase encoding with four fluorophores. After imaging,
the fluorescent label and the three universal bases are
cleaved off, and a new set of probes is added. After the
first round of sequencing, the newly built DNA strand is
melted off, a new sequencing primer which starts one
base off from the first primer binding site is hybridized,
and the sequencing reaction is repeated now interrogating different positions. This process is repeated several
times with different primers, so that all bases in the
template become sequenced twice. Since each base is
sequenced twice in the SOLiD system, most sequencing
errors can be corrected during alignment, resulting in a
low error rate of mapped data. It is possible to use different chemistries and read lengths in different lanes.
The current read length is 75 nucleotides for fragment
libraries, and the total yield per run (two glass slides) is
around 180 Gb. Data analysis has traditionally been performed in color space, however, with the recent upgrade
to the 5500xl system, it is now also possible to get error
corrected reads in base space.
Sequencing-by-ligation is also used by Complete
Genomics (Mountain View, CA, USA) [26], a company
that sequences human genomes as a service. In their
technology, the template DNA is first inserted into a
single-stranded DNA circle, which is then copied several
times to make up DNA nanoballs. The nanoballs are
attached to arrays and sequenced by ligation reactions,
which use multiple priming sites [27]. The current capacity of Complete Genomics is more than 600 genomes
per month, and they are driving down the price of
whole-genome sequencing.
Base calling and quality control

Intensities of light signals from the sequencing reactions
are converted to bases (Illumina and 454 systems) or
colors (SOLiD system). In addition to sequence data,
base calling produces quality scores for each base, which
are estimates of the probability of the call being erroneous. After base calling, reads with indications of
mixed signals or other errors are filtered out. To facilitate troubleshooting and discrimination between problems caused by instrument/reagent factors and sample
factors, the Illumina and 454 platforms include standardized control DNA in each run.
In the Illumina system, the clusters are identified during the first four cycles of sequencing. Intensities are

Page 7 of 15

registered for each cluster in every cycle and converted
to nucleotide sequence. If the initial recognition of clusters was not perfect, some clusters may contain more
than one original template molecule. It is also possible
that some clusters contain many molecules that have
incorporated fewer (phasing) or more (prephasing)
nucleotides than the number of cycles. Such clusters are
filtered out by a so-called chastity filter, which is based
on the ratio of signal intensities of the bases with the
strongest and the second strongest intensity. Control
DNA from the phage phiX is sequenced in each flow cell.
In the analysis pipeline, phiX reads are identified by comparison to the phiX genome and the error rate is determined and used as a measure of the quality of the run.
During QC filtering of data from the 454 system, possible polyclonal beads and beads with no template are
identified based on the number of positive and negative
flows. In addition, reads that do not start with a specific
key sequence, which is part of the adapter, and reads
that have a high number of off-peak signal intensities
(indicative of homopolymer errors) are filtered out.
Sequence reads are also trimmed from the 3’ end to
remove adapter sequence and bases of low quality, arising from phasing/prephasing issues and loss of signal
intensity. Beads with control DNA, labeled with a different key sequence, are included in each run. With the
aid of the key sequence, these sequence reads are identified and aligned to a reference sequence, and the percentage of reads that match with 95, 98 and 100%
similarity is reported.
After color calling in the SOLiD system, possible polyclonal reads and reads with color combinations that do
not make sense according to the two-base encoding
scheme are filtered out. No control DNA is used, but
the quality of a run is assessed from the color intensity
distribution.
Despite the standard QC steps, not all obtained data
will be of high quality. To recognize potential problems
and biases it is useful to apply additional quality control
measures. A good resource for assessing the quality of
sequence data is the FastQC software [28], which
reports, for example, distributions of base qualities, GC
content, redundancy and over-representation of adapter
or primer sequence.
Trends and upcoming technologies
Low-capacity sequencing systems

While the sequencing companies compete to increase
throughput, they have also launched systems with lower
capacity. The reason for this trend is that the high capacity of the original systems is not always required, and
the current multiplexing possibilities do not match their
throughput, which results in a much higher coverage
(and cost) than needed for many applications.

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

Page 8 of 15

Roche 454 Technologies was first to launch the Genome Sequencer Junior system in 2010 and Illumina
launched the MiSeq system in 2011. The capacity of
these systems is 35 Mb and 1.5 Gb per run, respectively.
Life Technologies recently acquired the company Ion
Torrent, whose technology has a concept similar to that
of the 454 system. However, detection is based on pH
changes caused by release of electrons upon nucleotide
incorporation rather than pyrophosphate release. Since
no enzymes are used for detection, the reagent cost for
this instrument is low.
Compared to the high-capacity instruments, the cost
per base is high for the smaller machines, but they are
suitable for sequencing small genomes, amplicons or
DNA enriched by targeted capture. Since the run time
for these systems is short, they are also useful for technology development runs and to optimize reaction conditions for a larger run. These machines have been
referred to as ‘personal sequencers’, meaning that they
are easily obtainable also by laboratories with smaller
resources that want to have rapid access to a sequencing
instrument, but need relatively small amounts of data.

arrays [33]. The incorporation of the fluorescently
labeled nucleotides is monitored in real time, which
results in very short run times. This system has read
lengths over a thousand bases, but error rates are high
and throughput is currently limited to 0.1 Gb per run
(Table 1). The Pacific Biosciences system was successfully used for rapid analysis of the Cholera strains in the
outbreak in Haiti in 2010 [34].
Several new technologies for single molecule sequencing are under development. Nanopore sequencing technologies (Oxford Nanopore (Oxford, UK) [35], NABsys
(Providence, RI, USA) [36]) are based on detecting natural electric or chemical differences between nucleotides, and do not require labeling of DNA. The Starlight
system (Life Technologies) is a real-time technology that
uses a quantum-dot-labeled polymerase and distinctly
labeled fluorescent nucleotides. The reaction and detection principles underlying the third-generation sequencing systems are demanding, and today it is not obvious
which of these systems that will reach the capacity and
accuracy required for practical ‘real life’ applications.

Single molecule sequencing

Bioinformatic analysis of sequence data
Alignment

In single molecule sequencing, sometimes also referred
to as third-generation sequencing, no amplification of
the template molecules is performed prior to sequencing. These technologies provide improved quantitative
accuracy by eliminating the risk of biases introduced
during preparation of sequencing libraries. Single molecule sequencing also allows direct sequencing of RNA
molecules, detection of chemically modified bases such
as DNA methylation, and increased read lengths. Longer
reads will be useful in de novo sequencing projects and
open up perspectives for experimental phasing (determination of which variant alleles are on the same chromosome), in contrast to statistical phasing that is used
today.
In the Heliscope Single Molecule Sequencer system
from Helicos Biosciences (Cambridge, MA, USA) [29]
single stranded poly(dA)-tailed templates are attached to
poly(dT) oligonucleotide primers that are anchored on a
flow cell. In each sequencing cycle one type of reversibly
terminating fluorescently labeled nucleotides are added
and incorporated by a polymerase, the slide is washed
and imaged, and the dye labels are cleaved off [30,31].
This technology generates around 35 Gb per run, and
the read length is 35 nucleotides on average (Table 1).
Pacific Biosciences (Menlo Park, CA, USA) [32] has
developed a system called single molecule real time
(SMRT) sequencing, which uses a DNA polymerase
anchored on a glass surface and nucleotides with phospholinked fluorescent labels that are cleaved off when
the nucleotides are incorporated. The sequencing reaction takes place on zero-mode waveguide nanostructure

For resequencing applications, where a reference sequence
is already available, the first step of the analysis is usually
to align the sequence reads to the reference genome (Figure 4a). In recent years, several novel alignment programs
have been developed that are adapted to the shorter read
lengths, different error distributions and larger data
amounts obtained by SGS technologies (reviewed in [37]).
These programs have different properties in terms of, for
example, their ability to perform gapped alignment, how
base qualities are used during alignment and how reads
aligning to repeated regions are treated. Some aligners can
handle data from any sequencing platform, whereas others
are specific to one platform.
To save computational time, the alignment is usually
performed in two steps: (1) a limited number of candidate positions are identified by fast heuristic approaches,
and (2) candidate positions are evaluated by more accurate methods, such as the Smith-Waterman algorithm
[37]. The first step of the alignment is typically based
either on hash tables or on the FM index (named for its
creators, Paolo Ferragina and Giovanni Manzini).
Usually, the algorithms do not map the entire read at
once, but start with a seed sequence consisting of the
first 20 to 40 bases. The seed is made up of consecutive
bases, or allows for mismatches at certain positions
(spaced seeds). To improve sensitivity, several different
spaced seeds can be used. To improve speed, some programs discard reads with too many candidate positions.
Regardless of which aligner is selected, there is always
a trade off between speed and sensitivity. As the amount

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

Page 9 of 15

Figure 4 Principles of reference alignment and de novo assembly. (a) Alignment of paired-end reads to two chromosomes of a reference
genome. Arrows with the same color indicate reads that belong to the same pair. Red arrows illustrate a normal pair, aligning with the
expected orientation and distance. Green arrows illustrate a pair that aligns at a larger distance than expected due to a potential deletion in the
sequenced genome. Orange arrows illustrate a pair that aligns to different chromosomes indicating a potential rearrangement in the sequenced
genome. Blue arrows illustrate how paired-end reads can guide alignment if one of the reads aligns in a repeated (grey) region. (b) De novo
assembly of paired-end reads without the guidance of a reference. Overlapping reads (arrows) are assembled into clusters, and the consensus
sequence of each cluster is called a contig. Reads of the same pair that belong to different contigs (red arrows) can help to order contigs into
scaffolds. Because the average size of the original fragments is known, the size of the gap between the contigs can be estimated.

of data has increased, algorithms based on the FM index
(for example, Bowtie [38] and Burrows-Wheeler Aligner
(BWA) [39]) have become increasingly popular. This
index is based on the Burrows Wheeler transform,
which was originally used in algorithms for data compression and is efficient for large amounts of data. The
expected divergence between the reference sequence
and the reads also influences the efficiency of alignment
programs. While the BWA loses rapidly in speed when

the difference between the reads and the reference is
more than 4%, the use of several spaced seeds in BFAST
[40] makes it highly tolerant to divergent reads.
Variant calling

There are multiple programs for identifying single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), copy number variations (CNVs) and structural variants between sequence
reads and a reference genome (reviewed in [41]). These
programs aim to distinguish authentic variants from

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

sequencing errors and incorrect alignments by evaluating different parameters, such as base qualities, coverage
and the number of reads supporting the variant. Different combinations of aligners and variant callers typically
yield different results, and there is no consensus in the
scientific community on which algorithms are most
appropriate to use. An approach that was used in the
1000 Genomes Project is to run several variant callers,
and report the variants detected by at least two different
methods.
Many variant callers tend to overcall, and it is often
necessary to filter the detected variants. It is also possible to improve the results by local realignment around
candidate variants and recalibration of quality scores
before variant calling, using the software suite GATK
[42]. During realignment, all reads around potential
indels (insertions and deletions) are extracted and subsequently aligned again in a multiple alignment with exact
methods. This can remove many false positive variants,
since alignments are especially error prone around
indels. During recalibration, different types of information, such as base quality scores, position in the read
and dinucleotide content at positions present in dbSNP
is used to improve the base quality scores.
De novo assembly

In a de novo sequencing project, sequence reads are
aligned to each other without the guidance of a reference sequence, with the aim to assemble as long contiguous sequences (contigs) as possible (Figure 4b). This
process is computationally much more challenging than
alignment to a reference sequence. For example, running an assembly of a human genome requires around
150 GB of RAM using SOAPdenovo [43] and around
512 GB of RAM using Allpaths-LG [44]. In contrast,
aligning paired-end sequences to a reference using
BWA only requires 3.5 GB of RAM, and can be done
on a standard desktop computer for a limited number
of samples. Long reads and paired-end or mate-pair
data help to resolve repeated regions, and will greatly
improve the assembly. Since throughput, read length
and error distributions differ between the platforms, a
combination of data can often be useful for de novo
sequencing, such as 454 data to obtain long reads and
Illumina data to increase the coverage and correct
homopolymer errors. As of October 2011, the number
of published genomes sequenced with SGS is approximately the same as those sequenced with Sanger
sequencing according to the Genomes OnLine Database
(GOLD) [45]. However, among approximately 1,000
listed ongoing projects, Sanger sequencing is only used
in 10%, with most of the genomes being sequenced with
Illumina (49%) or 454 (40%). 454 sequencing is more
frequently used for bacterial and archaeal genomes than
for eukaryotes.

Page 10 of 15

Algorithms developed for de novo assembly of short
reads are based on the de Bruijn graph rather than the
overlap graph, which is used in most assemblers of Sanger sequencing data. In the de Bruijn graph, reads are
decomposed into shorter pieces of length k (k-mers),
and overlaps between the k-mers are identified [46].
Memory and time requirements increase rapidly with
the number of unique k-mers, which in turn is heavily
influenced by sequencing errors. Therefore, some programs attempt to correct sequencing errors by substituting k-mers with very low incidence with the most
similar high-incidence k-mer. Despite novel algorithms,
de novo assembly of large genomes remains very difficult, and it is also hard to evaluate the quality of an
assembly. As an attempt to advance this field, the Genome Center at University of California Davis and
researchers at University of California Santa Cruz
recently launched a genome assembly competition called
The Assemblathon, based on both real and simulated
data [47].
Computer resources

The increasing output of the new sequencing technologies continually raises the requirements for computer
resources and bioinformatic competence to handle the
data [48]. Furthermore, the rate of generation of
sequence data increases much faster than the capacity of
storing data, suggesting that storage might become a
major bottleneck. To circumvent this, there are ongoing
efforts to develop a more efficient file format, the
CRAM format, which is based on storing the differences
compared to a reference rather than the reads themselves [49]. The CRAM format requires five times less
storage space than the BAM format, which is the standard today. In lack of sufficient computer power for
data analysis, it is possible to analyze data using internet-based so-called cloud computing and pay for the
service by the hour. Several public data sets are already
available on clouds; it is for example possible to analyze
the data from the 1000 Genomes Project on the Amazon Web Services Cloud [50]. The use of hardware
acceleration solutions such as graphics processing units
to decrease computational time is not widely employed
in bioinformatics yet, but may increase in the future. An
example of a program that uses this approach is Barracuda [51], a sequence aligner based on the BWA algorithm, which uses the Nvidia CUDA architecture.
A useful resource for information regarding software
and analysis is SEQanswers [52], a community for discussion on new sequencing technologies. SEQanswers
also lists many of the programs available for data analysis [53]. In addition to open-source software, there are
also commercial software suites, like CLCbio [54], which
may be more accessible for users without programming
experience.

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

Page 11 of 15

Population genetics

Human genetic history

Genetic information provides valuable insights on
human origin and migration, and genotyping studies
have revealed a distinct geographic substructure of
human populations [55,56]. SGS technologies, including
sequencing of complete genomes of many individuals,
will allow population genetic studies at substantially
increased resolution and improve detection of variation
at the rare end of the scale. However, they will at the
same time increase the complexity of interpretation.
The 1000 Genomes Project, which was launched in
2007 as a collaborative effort between three sequencing
centers in the USA, the Sanger Institute in the UK and
the Beijing Genomics Institute in China, was the first
attempt to apply SGS in population genetics [57]. Analysis of the first set of data from three pilot projects
revealed that each person carries an estimated 250 to
300 loss-of-function variants in annotated genes, and
the de novo germline substitution rate was estimated to
10-8 per base and generation [58]. Additionally, several
hundred thousand SNPs with allele frequencies that differ between populations were identified. The enrichment
of non-synonymous changes at these sites suggested an
action of local adaptation [58]. Most variable sites have
a low minor allele frequency, and are not shared among
diverged populations [59]. The complete 1000 Genomes
Project will include low-coverage genome sequencing,
exome sequencing and genotyping of 2,500 individuals
from 27 populations in Europe, Africa, Asia and the
Americas, and will be an invaluable resource for studies
of human population genetics.
Two recent studies developed new statistical methods
for population genetic analysis of whole genome
sequence data, to infer human demographic parameters
[60-62]. The results showed that European and Chinese
populations have similar population size histories, and
both populations experienced a more severe bottleneck
than African populations 10,000 to 60,000 years ago
[60]. It was also found that the Eurasians diverged from
the Africans 38,000 to 64,000 years ago and that the
southern African San population diverged from other
human populations even earlier, 108,000 to 157,000
years ago [61]. High-throughput sequencing of enriched
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) of 109 randomly selected
samples from three Filipino groups suggested that previous estimates of population size history of these populations, obtained from a biased sampling and Sanger
sequencing of the hypervariable region 1, were erroneous, thus demonstrating the advantage of SGS methods [63]. As more and more genome sequences from
diverse populations become available, it will be possible
to decipher human history in much more detail than
ever before.

Although population genetic studies have been powerful
for studying human history, the studies have mostly
concentrated on extant populations. Yet, humans have
always been fascinated by extinct cultures and species.
Where did they come from? What did they look like?
How are they related to contemporary species? Why did
they become extinct? With recent progress in retrieving
and analyzing DNA from ancient archeological findings
[64], the answers to these questions are now emerging.
Ancient DNA has been isolated and sequenced from
several extinct animals, including mammoth, cave bear,
ground sloth and moas, and has provided insights into
the lifestyle of these species [65-70]. The first ancient,
although relatively recent, human genome to be
sequenced was from a 4,000 years old permafrost-preserved hair tuft from a Palaeo-Eskimo from Qeqertasussuk in western Greenland [71]. The sample belonged to
a male of the Saqqaq culture, the first known inhabitants of Greenland. The genome was sequenced to a
coverage of 20 × with 79% of the genome represented.
The analysis revealed that the Saqqaq man was more
closely related to populations from far eastern Siberia
than to the current inhabitants of Greenland [71], suggesting that the Saqqaq culture arose from an independent migration from Siberia about 5,500 years ago.
Several phenotypic characteristics of the Saqqaq man
were deduced from the genome sequence, including
dark and thick hair and a metabolism and body mass
index adapted to a cold climate [71].
The complete mitochondrial DNA of the Neanderthals, who are the closest known relatives of presentday humans and lived in Europe and western Asia circa
400,000 to 30,000 years ago [72,73], has been sequenced
from bones found in Spain, Germany, Croatia and Russia [74,75]. A draft sequence at 1.3 × coverage of the
complete Neanderthal genome was generated from
DNA isolated from three approximately 40,000-year-old
bones found in Vindija Cave in Croatia [76]. The analysis suggested a 1% to 4% genetic contribution from
Neanderthals to all present-day non-African human
populations [76].
The mtDNA [77] and complete genome at 1.9 × coverage [78] of a 30,000 to 50,000 years old finger bone
from an unknown hominid group, found in Denisova
Cave in southern Siberia has also been sequenced. The
analysis suggested that this population, called Denisovans, was a sister group to the Neanderthals. It was estimated that Denisovans contributed to approximately 5%
of the genomes of the present-day population of Melanesia, the island region north and northeast of Australia.
Working with ancient DNA requires special consideration, since DNA degrades into shorter fragments

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

with time, cytosines deaminate to uracils, and there is a
high risk of contamination with modern DNA [64]. The
age and preservation of the sample affects the quantity
and quality of the extracted DNA. As much as 84% of
the sequence reads from the permafrost-preserved Saqqaq hair were ancient, in comparison to only 1% to 5%
from the ten times older Neanderthal bones, which were
colonized by microbes. However, the Deninsova sample
contained almost as high fraction of ancient DNA as the
Saqqaq sample, with less degraded DNA than the Neanderthal sample, suggesting that many other environmental factors than age influence DNA conservation.
Analysis of sequence data from 61 non-coding autosomal regions in three historically isolated African populations indicated that admixture between modern humans
and archaic hominid forms occurred also before the exit
from Africa [79]. Whole genome sequence data would
provide further resolution to this kind of studies.
Forensic genetics

DNA profiling by typing short tandem repeats (STRs) is
today the standard method for forensic analysis, and
DNA sequencing has until now mostly been employed
to the hypervariable region of mtDNA to establish the
origin of and relationship between DNA samples available in low quantities. A spectacular example of forensic
analysis of human mtDNA was the identification of the
remains of the Russian royal family that was executed in
1918 [80]. While Sanger sequencing of the complete 16
kb mtDNA in a large amount of samples is labor intensive, sequencing of mtDNA is easily performed with the
high capacity of SGS technologies. In a recent study,
sequencing to very high coverage (16,700 × on average)
was used to identify heteroplasmic nucleotide positions
both in normal mtDNA and somatic variations in
mtDNA of cancer cells [81]. The analysis also revealed
differences in the mtDNA from different organs from
the same individual, a finding which may have implications for forensic analysis, since an evidence sample and
a reference sample can originate from different tissues
[81]. It has, however, been argued that the error rate in
this study was too high to meet the standards required
for forensic casework [82]. The criticism was based on a
comparison of the identified mutations to the mtDNA
phylogeny compiled in the PhyloTree project, which
suggested that on average five germline mutations per
sample were missed in the SGS analysis [82]. The error
rate per base is higher in SGS data than in Sanger
sequencing, but this can be compensated for by increasing the sequencing depth per base as demonstrated by a
recent study where mtDNA was sequenced from 109
individuals and five discrepancies were found between
Sanger sequencing and SGS data [63]. All of the discrepancies were due to problems with the base-calling

Page 12 of 15

software for Sanger sequencing [63]. Additional quality
filtering of the SGS data can also be performed.
Although standard STR typing provides sufficient discrimination power for most applications, the use of
large-scale sequencing provides multiple improvements
to forensic analyses. For example, sequencing can identify SNPs within and around STRs, which can increase
power in kinship analysis. An interesting option for the
future would be to replace the STRs with more informative markers derived from large-scale sequencing. The
major problem with such a replacement would be that
the existing forensic databases are based on STR profiles, and in many cases forensic samples have not been
stored for reanalysis. Unfortunately, the current SGS
technologies are relatively poor at resolving STRs, and
thus replacement of STR genotyping with SGS would
require an immense amount of sequencing work to
update the databases as well as collection of redundant
genotype information during a transition phase. The
benefits of analyzing degraded samples present in small
quantities, simplified laboratory procedures, larger
amount of data and accurate variant calling using SGS
speak in favor of replacement of STRs with SGS in forensic analyses.
In a recent study, two Y chromosomes separated by
13 generations were sequenced using SGS technology
[83,84]. Approximately one mutation per generation was
identified, suggesting that every individual Y chromosome can be discriminated by sequencing. This holds
promise for use in forensic applications since the YSTRs used to identify male criminals in mixed samples,
despite recent advances in identifying a set of rapidly
evolving markers [85], have limited resolution in distinguishing between closely related men.
In recent years, genome-wide association studies have
identified SNPs that can help predict ethnic background
and appearance traits. This has a great interest for forensics, since such information can help identifying a
criminal without the need of a reference sample. Several
phenotypic traits, including eye, hair and skin color, can
be relatively accurately (80% to 90%) predicted, while
predicting body height is currently less accurate [86].
Also in this case, whole genome sequencing can
improve resolution, by providing information on markers that are not present on genotyping chips.
The systems for single molecule sequencing with long
read lengths that are now under development may turn
out to be particularly advantageous for forensic genetics.
The long read lengths would allow direct determination
of mitochondrial haplogroups when several variants are
present in the same read. Single molecule sequencing
will also facilitate identification of multiple donors in a
mixed sample. Another attractive possibility for handling
of contaminated samples is to enrich for human or

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

mtDNA material by target capture, similar to how
Neanderthal DNA was enriched from contaminated
samples using primer extension capture [74] and arraybased capture [87].
In comparison with human samples, where a limited
set of predesigned DNA markers is usually enough for
forensic analysis, microbial samples provide an additional challenge since the markers are unknown and
specific for each case. Microbial forensics has previously
benefited from Sanger sequencing, for example for
determination of the origin of the bacteria used in the
well known 2001 anthrax attack in the USA [88,89]. To
resolve this case, thousands of colonies were inspected
manually, and a number of colonies with slightly different morphology were selected for whole genome
sequencing [88,89]. Based on the identified polymorphisms, four tests were designed and used to screen more
than 1,000 isolates from different laboratories. The cost
of each anthrax genome in 2001 was estimated to US
$140,000 [90]. In comparison, four Bacillus anthracis
strains were recently sequenced on the SOLiD system
with a reagent cost per genome of less than US$1,000
[91]. According to the current specifications of Illumina’s HiSeq2000 instrument, approximately 300 × coverage of 384 B. anthracis isolates can be obtained from a
single run at a reagent cost of less than US$50 per
genome.

Conclusions
The impressive advances of sequencing technologies in
recent years have enabled a range of new applications,
including population genetics based on the complete
genomic sequences of a large number of individuals and
sequencing of the complete genomes of highly contaminated samples of ancient DNA from humans and other
species. The technical development of current SGS systems shows no sign of halting, with major upgrades
from both the Illumina and SOLiD platforms in 2011.
In forensic genetics, SGS is not yet widely employed,
although a number of studies have highlighted emerging
possibilities. With further decreased sequencing cost
and miniaturized equipment, it will become possible for
in principle any experimental research group to perform
whole genome sequencing of both large and small genomes on a bench-top DNA sequencer. While the
resources for data storage and analysis will initially be
limiting, new simplified solutions for data storage and
analysis are also underway. Before long, DNA sequencing is likely to become an easily accessible routine
method, like the PCR technique is today.
Acknowledgements
Our research group in Molecular Medicine is funded by the Swedish
Research Council (VT-NT and VR-MH contract numbers 90559401 and

Page 13 of 15

A0280001), the Foundation for Strategic Research in Sweden (RBc08-0008),
the Swedish Foundations for Cancer Research and Pediatric Cancer Research
and the European Commission (FP7 projects ENGAGE no 201413, gEUvadis
no 261123, ESGI 262055). We thank Olof Karlberg, Kristina Larsson and Ulrika
Liljedahl for input to the manuscript and Magnus Lundgren for assistance
with graphical work.
Authors’ contributions
ECB, AK and ACS wrote the manuscript. ECB performed graphical work. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
AK is currently employed by F. Hoffman-La Roche Ltd.
Received: 8 June 2011 Accepted: 24 November 2011
Published: 24 November 2011
References
1. Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR: DNA sequencing with chain-terminating
inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977, 74:5463-5467.
2. Fleischmann RD, Adams MD, White O, Clayton RA, Kirkness EF,
Kerlavage AR, Bult CJ, Tomb JF, Dougherty BA, Merrick JM, McKenney K,
Sutton G, FitzHugh W, Fields C, Gocayne JD, Scott J, Shirley R, Liu LI,
Glodek A, Kelley JM, Weidman JF, Phillips CA, Spriggs T, Hedblom E,
Cotton MD, Utterback TR, Hanna MC, Nguyen DT, Saudek DM, Brandon RC,
et al: Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of Haemophilus
influenzae Rd. Science 1995, 269:496-512.
3. Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K,
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, Funke R, Gage D, Harris K, Heaford A,
Howland J, Kann L, Lehoczky J, LeVine R, McEwan P, McKernan K,
Meldrim J, Mesirov JP, Miranda C, Morris W, Naylor J, Raymond C, Rosetti M,
Santos R, Sheridan A, Sougnez C, et al: Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 2001, 409:860-921.
4. Venter JC, Adams MD, Myers EW, Li PW, Mural RJ, Sutton GG, Smith HO,
Yandell M, Evans CA, Holt RA, Gocayne JD, Amanatides P, Ballew RM,
Huson DH, Wortman JR, Zhang Q, Kodira CD, Zheng XH, Chen L, Skupski M,
Subramanian G, Thomas PD, Zhang J, Gabor Miklos GL, Nelson C, Broder S,
Clark AG, Nadeau J, McKusick VA, Zinder N, et al: The sequence of the
human genome. Science 2001, 291:1304-1351.
5. Roche: Roche 454.[http://www.my454.com].
6. Wheeler DA, Srinivasan M, Egholm M, Shen Y, Chen L, McGuire A, He W,
Chen YJ, Makhijani V, Roth GT, Gomes X, Tartaro K, Niazi F, Turcotte CL,
Irzyk GP, Lupski JR, Chinault C, Song XZ, Liu Y, Yuan Y, Nazareth L, Qin X,
Muzny DM, Margulies M, Weinstock GM, Gibbs RA, Rothberg JM: The
complete genome of an individual by massively parallel DNA
sequencing. Nature 2008, 452:872-876.
7. Illumina: Illumina homepage.[http://www.illumina.com].
8. Applied Biosystems: Applied Biosystems homepage.[http://www.
appliedbiosystems.com].
9. Lovmar L, Syvanen AC: Multiple displacement amplification to create a
long-lasting source of DNA for genetic studies. Hum Mutat 2006,
27:603-614.
10. Hongoh Y, Sharma VK, Prakash T, Noda S, Taylor TD, Kudo T, Sakaki Y,
Toyoda A, Hattori M, Ohkuma M: Complete genome of the uncultured
Termite Group 1 bacteria in a single host protist cell. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2008, 105:5555-5560.
11. Navin N, Kendall J, Troge J, Andrews P, Rodgers L, McIndoo J, Cook K,
Stepansky A, Levy D, Esposito D, Muthuswamy L, Krasnitz A, McCombie WR,
Hicks J, Wigler M: Tumour evolution inferred by single-cell sequencing.
Nature 2011, 472:90-94.
12. Turner EH, Ng SB, Nickerson DA, Shendure J: Methods for genomic
partitioning. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2009, 10:263-284.
13. Johansson H, Isaksson M, Sorqvist EF, Roos F, Stenberg J, Sjoblom T,
Botling J, Micke P, Edlund K, Fredriksson S, Kultima HG, Ericsson O,
Nilsson M: Targeted resequencing of candidate genes using selector
probes. Nucleic Acids Res 2011, 39:e8.
14. Pierce SB, Walsh T, Chisholm KM, Lee MK, Thornton AM, Fiumara A,
Opitz JM, Levy-Lahad E, Klevit RE, King MC: Mutations in the DBPdeficiency protein HSD17B4 cause ovarian dysgenesis, hearing loss, and
ataxia of Perrault Syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 2010, 87:282-288.

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

15. Wang JL, Yang X, Xia K, Hu ZM, Weng L, Jin X, Jiang H, Zhang P, Shen L,
Guo JF, Li N, Li YR, Lei LF, Zhou J, Du J, Zhou YF, Pan Q, Wang J, Wang J,
Li RQ, Tang BS: TGM6 identified as a novel causative gene of
spinocerebellar ataxias using exome sequencing. Brain 2010,
133:3510-3518.
16. Klein CJ, Botuyan MV, Wu Y, Ward CJ, Nicholson GA, Hammans S, Hojo K,
Yamanishi H, Karpf AR, Wallace DC, Simon M, Lander C, Boardman LA,
Cunningham JM, Smith GE, Litchy WJ, Boes B, Atkinson EJ, Middha S, PJ BD,
Parisi JE, Mer G, Smith DI, Dyck PJ: Mutations in DNMT1 cause hereditary
sensory neuropathy with dementia and hearing loss. Nat Genet 2011,
43:595-600.
17. Glazov EA, Zankl A, Donskoi M, Kenna TJ, Thomas GP, Clark GR, Duncan EL,
Brown MA: Whole-exome re-sequencing in a family quartet identifies
POP1 mutations as the cause of a novel skeletal dysplasia. PLoS Genet
2011, 7:e1002027.
18. Kiialainen A, Karlberg O, Ahlford A, Sigurdsson S, Lindblad-Toh K,
Syvanen AC: Performance of microarray and liquid based capture
methods for target enrichment for massively parallel sequencing and
SNP discovery. PLoS One 2011, 6:e16486.
19. Kenny EM, Cormican P, Gilks WP, Gates AS, O’Dushlaine CT, Pinto C,
Corvin AP, Gill M, Morris DW: Multiplex target enrichment using DNA
indexing for ultra-high throughput SNP detection. DNA Res 2011,
18:31-38.
20. Wesolowska A, Dalgaard MD, Borst L, Gautier L, Bak M, Weinhold N,
Nielsen BF, Helt LR, Audouze K, Nersting J, Tommerup N, Brunak S,
Sicheritz-Ponten T, Leffers H, Schmiegelow K, Gupta R: Cost-effective
multiplexing before capture allows screening of 25 000 clinically
relevant SNPs in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia
2011, 25:1001-1006.
21. Kozarewa I, Turner DJ: 96-plex molecular barcoding for the illumina
genome analyzer. Methods Mol Biol 2011, 733:279-298.
22. Craig DW, Pearson JV, Szelinger S, Sekar A, Redman M, Corneveaux JJ,
Pawlowski TL, Laub T, Nunn G, Stephan DA, Homer N, Huentelman MJ:
Identification of genetic variants using bar-coded multiplexed
sequencing. Nat Methods 2008, 5:887-893.
23. Bentley DR, Balasubramanian S, Swerdlow HP, Smith GP, Milton J,
Brown CG, Hall KP, Evers DJ, Barnes CL, Bignell HR, Boutell JM, Bryant J,
Carter RJ, Keira Cheetham R, Cox AJ, Ellis DJ, Flatbush MR, Gormley NA,
Humphray SJ, Irving LJ, Karbelashvili MS, Kirk SM, Li H, Liu X, Maisinger KS,
Murray LJ, Obradovic B, Ost T, Parkinson ML, Pratt MR, et al: Accurate
whole human genome sequencing using reversible terminator
chemistry. Nature 2008, 456:53-59.
24. Ronaghi M, Karamohamed S, Pettersson B, Uhlen M, Nyren P: Real-time
DNA sequencing using detection of pyrophosphate release. Anal
Biochem 1996, 242:84-89.
25. McKernan KJ, Peckham HE, Costa GL, McLaughlin SF, Fu Y, Tsung EF,
Clouser CR, Duncan C, Ichikawa JK, Lee CC, Zhang Z, Ranade SS,
Dimalanta ET, Hyland FC, Sokolsky TD, Zhang L, Sheridan A, Fu H,
Hendrickson CL, Li B, Kotler L, Stuart JR, Malek JA, Manning JM,
Antipova AA, Perez DS, Moore MP, Hayashibara KC, Lyons MR, Beaudoin RE,
et al: Sequence and structural variation in a human genome uncovered
by short-read, massively parallel ligation sequencing using two-base
encoding. Genome Res 2009, 19:1527-1541.
26. Complete Genomics: Complete Genomics homepage.[http://www.
completegenomics.com].
27. Drmanac R, Sparks AB, Callow MJ, Halpern AL, Burns NL, Kermani BG,
Carnevali P, Nazarenko I, Nilsen GB, Yeung G, Dahl F, Fernandez A, Staker B,
Pant KP, Baccash J, Borcherding AP, Brownley A, Cedeno R, Chen L,
Chernikoff D, Cheung A, Chirita R, Curson B, Ebert JC, Hacker CR, Hartlage R,
Hauser B, Huang S, Jiang Y, Karpinchyk V, et al: Human genome
sequencing using unchained base reads on self-assembling DNA
nanoarrays. Science 2010, 327:78-81.
28. Babraham Bioinformatics: FastQC.[http://www.bioinformatics.bbsrc.ac.uk/
projects/fastqc].
29. Helicos Biosciences: Helicos Biosciences homepage.[http://www.helicosbio.
com].
30. Harris TD, Buzby PR, Babcock H, Beer E, Bowers J, Braslavsky I, Causey M,
Colonell J, Dimeo J, Efcavitch JW, Giladi E, Gill J, Healy J, Jarosz M, Lapen D,
Moulton K, Quake SR, Steinmann K, Thayer E, Tyurina A, Ward R, Weiss H,
Xie Z: Single-molecule DNA sequencing of a viral genome. Science 2008,
320:106-109.

Page 14 of 15

31. Pushkarev D, Neff NF, Quake SR: Single-molecule sequencing of an
individual human genome. Nat Biotechnol 2009, 27:847-852.
32. Pacific Biosciences: Pacific Biosciences homepage.[http://www.
pacificbiosciences.com].
33. Eid J, Fehr A, Gray J, Luong K, Lyle J, Otto G, Peluso P, Rank D, Baybayan P,
Bettman B, Bibillo A, Bjornson K, Chaudhuri B, Christians F, Cicero R, Clark S,
Dalal R, Dewinter A, Dixon J, Foquet M, Gaertner A, Hardenbol P, Heiner C,
Hester K, Holden D, Kearns G, Kong X, Kuse R, Lacroix Y, Lin S, et al: Realtime DNA sequencing from single polymerase molecules. Science 2009,
323:133-138.
34. Chin CS, Sorenson J, Harris JB, Robins WP, Charles RC, Jean-Charles RR,
Bullard J, Webster DR, Kasarskis A, Peluso P, Paxinos EE, Yamaichi Y,
Calderwood SB, Mekalanos JJ, Schadt EE, Waldor MK: The origin of the
Haitian cholera outbreak strain. N Engl J Med 2011, 364:33-42.
35. Oxford Nanopore: Oxford Nanopore homepage.[http://www.nanoporetech.
com].
36. NABsys: NABsys homepage.[http://nabsys.com].
37. Li H, Homer N: A survey of sequence alignment algorithms for nextgeneration sequencing. Brief Bioinform 2010, 11:473-483.
38. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL: Ultrafast and memoryefficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome.
Genome Biol 2009, 10:R25.
39. Li H, Durbin R: Fast and accurate short read alignment with BurrowsWheeler transform. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1754-1760.
40. Homer N, Merriman B, Nelson SF: BFAST: an alignment tool for large scale
genome resequencing. PLoS One 2009, 4:e7767.
41. Nielsen R, Paul JS, Albrechtsen A, Song YS: Genotype and SNP calling
from next-generation sequencing data. Nat Rev Genet 2011, 12:443-451.
42. DePristo MA, Banks E, Poplin R, Garimella KV, Maguire JR, Hartl C,
Philippakis AA, del Angel G, Rivas MA, Hanna M, McKenna A, Fennell TJ,
Kernytsky AM, Sivachenko AY, Cibulskis K, Gabriel SB, Altshuler D, Daly MJ: A
framework for variation discovery and genotyping using nextgeneration DNA sequencing data. Nat Genet 2011, 43:491-498.
43. Li R, Zhu H, Ruan J, Qian W, Fang X, Shi Z, Li Y, Li S, Shan G, Kristiansen K,
Yang H, Wang J: De novo assembly of human genomes with massively
parallel short read sequencing. Genome Res 2010, 20:265-272.
44. Gnerre S, Maccallum I, Przybylski D, Ribeiro FJ, Burton JN, Walker BJ,
Sharpe T, Hall G, Shea TP, Sykes S, Berlin AM, Aird D, Costello M, Daza R,
Williams L, Nicol R, Gnirke A, Nusbaum C, Lander ES, Jaffe DB: High-quality
draft assemblies of mammalian genomes from massively parallel
sequence data. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011, 108:1513-1518.
45. Genomes OnLine: Genomes OnLine database.[http://genomesonline.org].
46. Schatz MC, Delcher AL, Salzberg SL: Assembly of large genomes using
second-generation sequencing. Genome Res 2010, 20:1165-1173.
47. The Assemblathon: Assemblathon homepage.[http://assemblathon.org].
48. Mardis ER: The $1,000 genome, the $100,000 analysis? Genome Med 2010,
2:84.
49. Hsi-Yang Fritz M, Leinonen R, Cochrane G, Birney E: Efficient storage of
high throughput DNA sequencing data using reference-based
compression. Genome Res 2011, 21:734-740.
50. Amazon: Amazon Web Services Cloud.[http://aws.amazon.com/ec2].
51. Barracuda: Barracuda homepage.[http://sourceforge.net/projects/
seqbarracuda].
52. SEQanswers: SEQanswers homepage.[http://seqanswers.com].
53. SEQanswers: SEQanswers software list.[http://seqanswers.com/wiki/
Software/list].
54. CLC bio: CLC bio homepage.[http://www.clcbio.com].
55. Li JZ, Absher DM, Tang H, Southwick AM, Casto AM, Ramachandran S,
Cann HM, Barsh GS, Feldman M, Cavalli-Sforza LL, Myers RM: Worldwide
human relationships inferred from genome-wide patterns of variation.
Science 2008, 319:1100-1104.
56. Heath SC, Gut IG, Brennan P, McKay JD, Bencko V, Fabianova E, Foretova L,
Georges M, Janout V, Kabesch M, Krokan HE, Elvestad MB, Lissowska J,
Mates D, Rudnai P, Skorpen F, Schreiber S, Soria JM, Syvanen AC,
Meneton P, Hercberg S, Galan P, Szeszenia-Dabrowska N, Zaridze D,
Genin E, Cardon LR, Lathrop M: Investigation of the fine structure of
European populations with applications to disease association studies.
Eur J Hum Genet 2008, 16:1413-1429.
57. Kaiser J: DNA sequencing. A plan to capture human diversity in 1000
genomes. Science 2008, 319:395.

Berglund et al. Investigative Genetics 2011, 2:23
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/2/1/23

58. Durbin RM, Abecasis GR, Altshuler DL, Auton A, Brooks LD, Durbin RM,
Gibbs RA, Hurles ME, McVean GA: A map of human genome variation
from population-scale sequencing. Nature 2010, 467:1061-1073.
59. Gravel S, Henn BM, Gutenkunst RN, Indap AR, Marth GT, Clark AG, Yu F,
Gibbs RA, Bustamante CD: Demographic history and rare allele sharing
among human populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011, 108:11983-11988.
60. Li H, Durbin R: Inference of human population history from individual
whole-genome sequences. Nature 2011, 475:493-496.
61. Gronau I, Hubisz MJ, Gulko B, Danko CG, Siepel A: Bayesian inference of
ancient human demography from individual genome sequences. Nat
Genet 2011, 43:1031-1034.
62. Pritchard JK: Whole-genome sequencing data offer insights into human
demography. Nat Genet 2011, 43:923-925.
63. Gunnarsdottir ED, Li M, Bauchet M, Finstermeier K, Stoneking M: Highthroughput sequencing of complete human mtDNA genomes from the
Philippines. Genome Res 2011, 21:1-11.
64. Paabo S, Poinar H, Serre D, Jaenicke-Despres V, Hebler J, Rohland N,
Kuch M, Krause J, Vigilant L, Hofreiter M: Genetic analyses from ancient
DNA. Annu Rev Genet 2004, 38:645-679.
65. Miller W, Drautz DI, Ratan A, Pusey B, Qi J, Lesk AM, Tomsho LP,
Packard MD, Zhao F, Sher A, Tikhonov A, Raney B, Patterson N, LindbladToh K, Lander ES, Knight JR, Irzyk GP, Fredrikson KM, Harkins TT, Sheridan S,
Pringle T, Schuster SC: Sequencing the nuclear genome of the extinct
woolly mammoth. Nature 2008, 456:387-390.
66. Noonan JP, Hofreiter M, Smith D, Priest JR, Rohland N, Rabeder G, Krause J,
Detter JC, Paabo S, Rubin EM: Genomic sequencing of Pleistocene cave
bears. Science 2005, 309:597-599.
67. Cooper A, Lalueza-Fox C, Anderson S, Rambaut A, Austin J, Ward R:
Complete mitochondrial genome sequences of two extinct moas clarify
ratite evolution. Nature 2001, 409:704-707.
68. Hoss M, Dilling A, Currant A, Paabo S: Molecular phylogeny of the extinct
ground sloth Mylodon darwinii. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93:181-185.
69. Krajewski C, Buckley L, Westerman M: DNA phylogeny of the marsupial
wolf resolved. Proc Biol Sci 1997, 264:911-917.
70. Huynen L, Gill BJ, Millar CD, Lambert DM: Ancient DNA reveals extreme
egg morphology and nesting behavior in New Zealand’s extinct moa.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:16201-16206.
71. Rasmussen M, Li Y, Lindgreen S, Pedersen JS, Albrechtsen A, Moltke I,
Metspalu M, Metspalu E, Kivisild T, Gupta R, Bertalan M, Nielsen K,
Gilbert MT, Wang Y, Raghavan M, Campos PF, Kamp HM, Wilson AS,
Gledhill A, Tridico S, Bunce M, Lorenzen ED, Binladen J, Guo X, Zhao J,
Zhang X, Zhang H, Li Z, Chen M, Orlando L, et al: Ancient human genome
sequence of an extinct Palaeo-Eskimo. Nature 2010, 463:757-762.
72. Hublin JJ: Out of Africa: modern human origins special feature: the
origin of Neandertals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:16022-16027.
73. Finlayson C, Pacheco FG, Rodriguez-Vidal J, Fa DA, Gutierrez Lopez JM,
Santiago Perez A, Finlayson G, Allue E, Baena Preysler J, Caceres I,
Carrion JS, Fernandez Jalvo Y, Gleed-Owen CP, Jimenez Espejo FJ, Lopez P,
Lopez Saez JA, Riquelme Cantal JA, Sanchez Marco A, Guzman FG, Brown K,
Fuentes N, Valarino CA, Villalpando A, Stringer CB, Martinez Ruiz F,
Sakamoto T: Late survival of Neanderthals at the southernmost extreme
of Europe. Nature 2006, 443:850-853.
74. Briggs AW, Good JM, Green RE, Krause J, Maricic T, Stenzel U, Lalueza-Fox C,
Rudan P, Brajkovic D, Kucan Z, Gusic I, Schmitz R, Doronichev VB,
Golovanova LV, de la Rasilla M, Fortea J, Rosas A, Paabo S: Targeted
retrieval and analysis of five Neandertal mtDNA genomes. Science 2009,
325:318-321.
75. Green RE, Malaspinas AS, Krause J, Briggs AW, Johnson PL, Uhler C,
Meyer M, Good JM, Maricic T, Stenzel U, Prufer K, Siebauer M, Burbano HA,
Ronan M, Rothberg JM, Egholm M, Rudan P, Brajkovic D, Kucan Z, Gusic I,
Wikstrom M, Laakkonen L, Kelso J, Slatkin M, Paabo S: A complete
Neandertal mitochondrial genome sequence determined by highthroughput sequencing. Cell 2008, 134:416-426.
76. Green RE, Krause J, Briggs AW, Maricic T, Stenzel U, Kircher M, Patterson N,
Li H, Zhai W, Fritz MH, Hansen NF, Durand EY, Malaspinas AS, Jensen JD,
Marques-Bonet T, Alkan C, Prufer K, Meyer M, Burbano HA, Good JM,
Schultz R, Aximu-Petri A, Butthof A, Hober B, Hoffner B, Siegemund M,
Weihmann A, Nusbaum C, Lander ES, Russ C, et al: A draft sequence of
the Neandertal genome. Science 2010, 328:710-722.

Page 15 of 15

77. Krause J, Fu Q, Good JM, Viola B, Shunkov MV, Derevianko AP, Paabo S: The
complete mitochondrial DNA genome of an unknown hominin from
southern Siberia. Nature 2010, 464:894-897.
78. Reich D, Green RE, Kircher M, Krause J, Patterson N, Durand EY, Viola B,
Briggs AW, Stenzel U, Johnson PL, Maricic T, Good JM, Marques-Bonet T,
Alkan C, Fu Q, Mallick S, Li H, Meyer M, Eichler EE, Stoneking M, Richards M,
Talamo S, Shunkov MV, Derevianko AP, Hublin JJ, Kelso J, Slatkin M,
Paabo S: Genetic history of an archaic hominin group from Denisova
Cave in Siberia. Nature 2010, 468:1053-1060.
79. Hammer MF, Woerner AE, Mendez FL, Watkins JC, Wall JD: Genetic
evidence for archaic admixture in Africa. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011,
108:15123-15128.
80. Gill P, Ivanov PL, Kimpton C, Piercy R, Benson N, Tully G, Evett I,
Hagelberg E, Sullivan K: Identification of the remains of the Romanov
family by DNA analysis. Nat Genet 1994, 6:130-135.
81. He Y, Wu J, Dressman DC, Iacobuzio-Donahue C, Markowitz SD,
Velculescu VE, Diaz LA Jr, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N:
Heteroplasmic mitochondrial DNA mutations in normal and tumour
cells. Nature 2010, 464:610-614.
82. Bandelt HJ, Salas A: Current next generation sequencing technology may
not meet forensic standards. Forensic Sci Int Genet 2011.
83. Xue Y, Tyler-Smith C: The hare and the tortoise: one small step for four
SNPs, one giant leap for SNP-kind. Forensic Sci Int Genet 2010, 4:59-61.
84. Xue Y, Wang Q, Long Q, Ng BL, Swerdlow H, Burton J, Skuce C, Taylor R,
Abdellah Z, Zhao Y, MacArthur DG, Quail MA, Carter NP, Yang H, TylerSmith C: Human Y chromosome base-substitution mutation rate
measured by direct sequencing in a deep-rooting pedigree. Curr Biol
2009, 19:1453-1457.
85. Ballantyne KN, Goedbloed M, Fang R, Schaap O, Lao O, Wollstein A, Choi Y,
van Duijn K, Vermeulen M, Brauer S, Decorte R, Poetsch M, von WurmbSchwark N, de Knijff P, Labuda D, Vezina H, Knoblauch H, Lessig R,
Roewer L, Ploski R, Dobosz T, Henke L, Henke J, Furtado MR, Kayser M:
Mutability of Y-chromosomal microsatellites: rates, characteristics,
molecular bases, and forensic implications. Am J Hum Genet 2010,
87:341-353.
86. Kayser M, de Knijff P: Improving human forensics through advances in
genetics, genomics and molecular biology. Nat Rev Genet 2011,
12:179-192.
87. Burbano HA, Hodges E, Green RE, Briggs AW, Krause J, Meyer M, Good JM,
Maricic T, Johnson PL, Xuan Z, Rooks M, Bhattacharjee A, Brizuela L,
Albert FW, de la Rasilla M, Fortea J, Rosas A, Lachmann M, Hannon GJ,
Paabo S: Targeted investigation of the Neandertal genome by arraybased sequence capture. Science 2010, 328:723-725.
88. Read TD, Salzberg SL, Pop M, Shumway M, Umayam L, Jiang L,
Holtzapple E, Busch JD, Smith KL, Schupp JM, Solomon D, Keim P,
Fraser CM: Comparative genome sequencing for discovery of novel
polymorphisms in Bacillus anthracis. Science 2002, 296:2028-2033.
89. Enserink M: Anthrax investigation. Full-genome sequencing paved the
way from spores to a suspect. Science 2008, 321:898-899.
90. Cummings CA, Relman DA: Genomics and microbiology. Microbial
forensics–"cross-examining pathogens”. Science 2002, 296:1976-1979.
91. Cummings CA, Bormann Chung CA, Fang R, Barker M, Brzoska P,
Williamson PC, Beaudry J, Matthews M, Schupp J, Wagner DM, Birdsell D,
Vogler AJ, Furtado MR, Keim P, Budowle B: Accurate, rapid and highthroughput detection of strain-specific polymorphisms in Bacillus
anthracis and Yersinia pestis by next-generation sequencing. Investig
Genet 2010, 1:5.
doi:10.1186/2041-2223-2-23
Cite this article as: Berglund et al.: Next-generation sequencing
technologies and applications for human genetic history and forensics.
Investigative Genetics 2011 2:23.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
