<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The serine protease inhibitor serpinE2 is a novel target of ERK signaling involved in human colorectal tumorigenesis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271. doi:10.1186/1476-4598-9-271"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Sébastien Bergeron"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

RESEARCH

Open Access

The serine protease inhibitor serpinE2 is a novel
target of ERK signaling involved in human
colorectal tumorigenesis
Sébastien Bergeron1, Etienne Lemieux1, Véronique Durand1, Sébastien Cagnol1, Julie C Carrier2, Jacques G Lussier3,
Marie-Josée Boucher2, Nathalie Rivard1*

Abstract
Background: Among the most harmful of all genetic abnormalities that appear in colorectal cancer (CRC)
development are mutations of KRAS and its downstream effector BRAF as they result in abnormal extracellular
signal-related kinase (ERK) signaling. In a previous report, we had shown that expression of a constitutive
active mutant of MEK1 (caMEK) in normal rat intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) induced morphological
transformation associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition, growth in soft agar, invasion and
metastases in nude mice. Results from microarrays comparing control to caMEK-expressing IECs
identified the gene encoding for serpinE2, a serine protease inhibitor, as a potential target of activated
MEK1.
Results: 1- RT-PCR and western blot analyses confirmed the strong up-regulation of serpinE2 expression and
secretion by IECs expressing oncogenic MEK, Ras or BRAF. 2- Interestingly, serpinE2 mRNA and protein were also
markedly enhanced in human CRC cells exhibiting mutation in KRAS and BRAF. 3- RNAi directed against serpinE2 in
caMEK-transformed rat IECs or in human CRC cell lines HCT116 and LoVo markedly decreased foci formation,
anchorage-independent growth in soft agarose, cell migration and tumor formation in nude mice. 4- Treatment of
CRC cell lines with U0126 markedly reduced serpinE2 mRNA levels, indicating that expression of serpinE2 is likely
dependent of ERK activity. 5- Finally, Q-PCR analyses demonstrated that mRNA levels of serpinE2 were markedly
increased in human adenomas in comparison to healthy adjacent tissues and in colorectal tumors, regardless of
tumor stage and grade.
Conclusions: Our data indicate that serpinE2 is up-regulated by oncogenic activation of Ras, BRAF and MEK1 and
contributes to pro-neoplastic actions of ERK signaling in intestinal epithelial cells. Hence, serpinE2 may be a
potential therapeutic target for colorectal cancer treatment.

Background
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in North America. Number of
genetic and epigenetic alterations has been reported to be
involved in colorectal tumorigenesis, such as chromosome
instability, DNA methylation, gene amplification and
mutation. APC is the most frequently mutated gene
(53.8%), followed by TP53 (37.2%) and the two members
* Correspondence: Nathalie.Rivard@USherbrooke.ca
1
Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, CIHR Team on Digestive
Epithelium, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

of the MAPK pathway, KRAS (35.1%) and BRAF (10%)
[1]. In this regard, aberrant activation of the Ras/Raf/
MEK/ERK pathway leads to the downstream activation of
MEK1/2 and ERK1/2 kinases, which may control many
features of tumorigenesis [2]. In keeping with this observation, we and others have recently shown that expression of
constitutively active MEK1 in non-transformed rodent
intestinal epithelial crypt cell lines is sufficient to induce
growth factor relaxation for DNA synthesis and to promote morphological transformation and growth in soft
agar [3,4]. Accordingly, it has been demonstrated that
MEK is phosphorylated and activated in 30-40% of adenomas and in 76% of colorectal tumors [5,6]. CRCs also

© 2010 Bergeron et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

exhibit particularly high frequencies of ERK activation [7]
and some studies have reported that ERK1/2 activities are
indeed elevated in intestinal tumors [8,9]. Therefore,
much emphasis has been placed on treatment strategies
that target this protein kinase cascade [10]. In particular,
potent and selective inhibitors of MEK1 and MEK2 have
been developed and have been tested in phase I/II clinical
trials (AZD6244, XL51, and ARRY-162) [11,12]. Interestingly, an early study reported that the enzymatic activity of
ERK1/ERK2 is markedly up-regulated during late progression of carcinogen-induced colon carcinomas [13]. In this
respect, activation of MEK1 and MEK2 in intestinal
epithelial cells is sufficient to induce invasive and metastatic tumors in nude mice [14,15]. Together, these observations strengthen the notion that ERK1/2 MAP kinase
signaling may play a critical role in CRC progression [16].
However, in spite of the obvious role of MEK/ERK kinases
in the induction and regulation of intestinal epithelial cell
transformation, tumorigenesis and metastasis, little is
known regarding the molecular mechanism by which
MEK/ERK signaling achieves such functions.
In order to further understand the mechanisms by
which activated MEK1 induces tumorigenesis in intestinal epithelial cells, we have analyzed by microarray the
pattern of gene expression in intestinal epithelial (IEC6) cells overexpressing activated MEK1. Importantly,
Serpin clade E member 2 (SerpinE2), emerges as the
highest up-regulated gene induced by activated MEK1.
Serpins are SERine Protease INhibitors targeting proteases prostatin [17-19], matriptase [20], T cell proteinase-1 [21], trypsin, thrombin, plasmin and plasminogen
activator [22,23]. Through their ability to reduce proteolysis, serpins are predicted to impair extracellular matrix
degradation and consequently cancer cell invasion and
metastasis. However, serpinE1 (or plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1, PAI-1) has been reported to promote angiogenesis and to induce tumor cell migration [24-26]
while serpinE2 (or protease nexin-1, PN-1) appears to
enhance the invasive potential of pancreatic [27], breast
[28] and lung cancer cells [29]. Furthermore, serpinE1 is
overexpressed in highly aggressive human breast tumors
while serpinE2 levels are elevated in pancreatic tumors
[27], breast tumors [28], oral squamous carcinomas [30],
liposarcomas [31] and more recently CRCs [32].
In the present study, we show that RNA interference
(RNAi) targeting serpinE2 in MEK1-transformed rat
IECs or in human colorectal cancer cells decreased
anchorage independent growth, migration and tumor
formation in nude mice. Furthermore, serpinE2 is overexpressed in human adenomas and colorectal tumors
compared to the adjacent healthy tissues. Therefore, our
results demonstrate an important role for serpinE2 in
colorectal tumorigenesis.

Page 2 of 15

Results
SerpinE2 is overexpressed in intestinal epithelial cells
transformed by activated MEK1 and oncogenic RAS
and BRAF

Among the most harmful of all genetic abnormalities
that appear in CRC development are mutations of
KRAS and its downstream effector BRAF as they result
in abnormal ERK signaling. In a previous report, we had
shown that expression of a constitutive active mutant of
MEK1 (caMEK) in the intestinal epithelial cell line IEC6 induced morphological transformation and growth in
soft agar; in marked contrast, wtMEK overexpression
had no effect on IEC-6 phenotype [3]. In order to
understand the mechanisms by which activated MEK1
induces intestinal cell tumorigenesis, the pattern of gene
expression was analyzed by microarray in IEC-6 cells
overexpressing activated MEK1. Results from microarrays comparing control (wtMEK) to caMEK-expressing
IEC-6 cells identified the Serpin clade E member 2 (serpinE2 or PN-1) gene as a potential target of activated
MEK1. Indeed, serpinE2 expression was significantly
induced by more that 28-fold (p < 0.05) in cells overexpressing activated MEK1 in comparison to cells expressing wtMEK (data not shown). Overexpression of
serpinE2 in caMEK-expressing IECs was furthermore
confirmed following RT-PCR analysis as shown in
Figure 1A. SerpinE2 expression was also markedly
enhanced in IEC-6 cells transformed by oncogenic RAS
(26-fold) or BRAF (12-fold after 12 h of 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) (Figure 1B and 1C). Of note, the
induction of serpinE2 was induced within 1 h following
ERK activation as observed in cells expressing the inducible BRAF:ER fusion protein stimulated with 4-OHT
(Figure 1C). Treatment with the MEK-inhibitor U0126
completely abrogated serpinE2 gene expression induced
by oncogenic MEK1 (Figure 1A) and BRAF (Figure 1C),
indicating that induction of serpinE2 is an early and
direct event occurring following the activation of ERK
signaling.
Since serpinE2 protein is known to be secreted
[22,33], we easily confirmed its presence in conditioned
culture medium of caMEK-expressing IECs whereas no
serpinE2 protein was detected in the culture medium of
wtMEK-expressing or parental IECs (Figure 1D). Again,
treatment with the MEK-inhibitor U0126 completely
abrogated serpinE2 secretion (Figure 1D). Interestingly,
serpinE2 protein was difficult to detect in total cell
lysates (Figure 1E, lane 2). However, serpinE2 was easily
observed in lysates prepared from foci of post-confluent
caMEK-expressing cells (Figure 1E, lane 4), while it was
not detectable in the surrounding monolayer (Figure 1E,
lane 3). This indicates a stronger expression of serpinE2
protein by the transformed IECs forming the foci.

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 SerpinE2 is overexpressed in intestinal epithelial cells transformed by oncogenic MEK1, RAS and BRAF. A- wtMEK- and caMEKexpressing IECs were treated or not with U0126 (20 μM) during 24 h. Thereafter, cells were lysed and RNA isolated for serpinE2 or b-actin gene
expression by RT-PCR. B- IEC-6 expressing oncogenic RAS or wtMEK or caMEK were lysed and RNA isolated for serpinE2 or b-actin gene
expression by RT-PCR. C- BRAF:ER cells were stimulated with 250 nM 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4-OTH) for the indicated time periods. Thereafter, cells
were lysed and RNA isolated for serpinE2 or TATA-binding protein (TBP) gene expression by RT-PCR. For the 12 h time point, cells were also
treated with 20 μM U0126. ERK1/2 phosphorylation levels and total ERK1/2 were monitored by Western blot. D- wtMEK- and caMEK-expressing
cells were treated or not with U0126 (20 μM) during 24 h. Thereafter, equal amounts of concentrated culture medium from wtMEK- and caMEKexpressing cells were analyzed by Western blotting with specific antibodies against serpinE2 as described in Material and Methods. Bovine
follicular fluid was used as a positive control (CTL). E- caMEK-expressing IECs were cultured at post-confluence, lysed in Laemmli buffer and
analyzed by Western blotting with specific antibodies against serpinE2 (lane 2). The culture medium was concentrated and also analyzed by
Western blotting for serpinE2 expression (lane 1). In some experiments, foci were harvested by aspiration with a pipet, lysed in Laemmli buffer
(lane 4) and analyzed by Western blotting for the expression of serpinE2. The surrounding cells (monolayer, lane 3) were also lysed in Laemmli
buffer for Western blotting with specific antibodies against serpinE2.

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

Gene silencing of serpinE2 decreases foci formation,
growth in soft agarose and migration induced by
activated MEK

In order to determine the contribution of serpinE2
in intestinal transformation induced by activated MEK,
foci from post-confluent caMEK-expressing IECs were
retrieved by aspiration with a pipette and pooled as one
caMEK-expressing cell population. All further experiments were performed with this previously characterized
caMEK-expressing IEC population [14] and compared
with wtMEK-expressing cell populations. Recombinant
lentiviruses encoding anti-serpinE2 short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) were therefore developed to stably suppress
serpinE2 levels in these cells. Several lentiviral constructs were generated and tested for their ability to
knock down serpinE2 protein. One of these viral
shRNAs was selected and designated as shSerpinE2.
caMEK-expressing cells were henceforth infected
with shSerpinE2 lentiviruses or with lentiviruses expressing a control shRNA (shScrambled). Secretion of serpinE2 protein was analyzed 14 days after selection with
blasticidin S in these populations. As shown in Figure
2A, secreted serpinE2 levels were markedly reduced
(>60%) in cells-expressing shSerpinE2; in contrast,
shScrambled had no effect on the secretion of serpinE2
(data not shown).
To determine the functional role of serpinE2 in
caMEK-expressing cells, the proliferation rate of these
cell populations was assessed when cultured on plastic.
No difference was observed in the proliferation rate of
subconfluent caMEK-expressing cells when serpinE2
expression was downregulated (Figure 2B). In a previous
study, we had shown that expression of activated MEK
in intestinal epithelial cells resulted in loss of cell-cell
contact growth inhibition and produced colonies or
multilayered domes which grew to increased saturation
density and formed tumors when transplanted into nude
mice [14]. Of note, focus formation assays performed
herein revealed that initially, there was little difference
in the number of foci obtained between control cells
and serpinE2-depleted cells (data not shown). However,
serpinE2 silencing markedly reduced the size of foci
(Figure 2C) suggesting a reduced capacity of these foci
to grow. Indeed, phase-contrast microscopy revealed
that the colonies were smaller when serpinE2 was
downregulated (Figure 2D). Finally, expression of shSerpinE2 led to a significant decrease in the ability of
caMEK-expressing cells to grow under anchorage-independent conditions in soft agarose (Figure 2E).
Cell migration is an important process of tumorigenesis and metastasis. Moreover, we recently reported that
intestinal epithelial cells expressing activated MEK1
clearly acquire an increased capacity to migrate as compared to wtMEK-expressing cells [14]. Herein, in an in

Page 4 of 15

vitro transwell migration assay, serpinE2 deficiency significantly reduced caMEK-expressing IEC migration to
the undersurface of the polycarbonate membrane of
Boyden chambers coated with fibronectin or vitronectin
(Figure 2F), two extracellular matrix proteins which can
interact with serpinE2 [34,35]. Taken together, these
results support a role of serpinE2 in MEK1-induced
transformation whereby serpinE2 activates anchorageindependent growth and cell migration.
Expression of serpinE2 in colorectal cancer cells is
dependent on MEK/ERK activity

To assess the contribution of serpinE2 in human colorectal cancer, serpinE2 expression was first examined in
various CRC cell lines including Caco-2/15 as well as
others exhibiting mutation in KRAS (HCT-116, DLD-1,
LoVo, SW480, T84) or BRAF (Colo-205, HT-29) [36].
As shown in Figure 3A, serpinE2 mRNA levels were
barely detectable in the Caco-2/15 cell line while being
markedly expressed in all other CRC cell lines tested.
Two human CRC cell lines, namely HCT116 and LoVo,
which have an activating mutation in the KRAS gene
resulting in elevated MEK/ERK activities [37], were
thereby chosen to further analyze the regulation and
role of serpinE2 expression in human colorectal cancer
cells. In addition, the impact of U0126 treatment was
also investigated to evaluate the contribution of endogenous MEK/ERK activities in serpinE2 expression in
human cell models. Forty-eight-hour treatment of
HCT116 and LoVo cell lines with U0126 efficiently
blocked endogenous MEK activity as confirmed by the
marked inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphorylation (data not
shown) [14]. As shown in Figure 3B, treatment of these
CRC cell lines with U0126 markedly and significantly
reduced serpinE2 mRNA levels, indicating that expression of serpinE2 is likely dependent of ERK activity in
these cell lines.
Down-regulation of serpinE2 expression in human
colorectal cancer cells inhibits soft agarose colony
formation, migration and tumor growth in nude mice

We next investigated the effect of serpinE2 knockdown
on anchorage independent growth and cell migration
after downregulation of serpinE2 gene expression by
RNA interference in HCT116 and LoVo cells. As shown
in Figure 4A, serpinE2 mRNA were significantly reduced
by respectively 37% and 88% in LoVo cells expressing
shSerpinE2(#15) or shSerpinE2(#16) and by 77% and
92% in HCT116 expressing shSerpinE2(#15) or shSerpinE2(#16); conversely, expression of the control shRNA
(shTGFP) had no effect on endogenous serpinE2 expression (data not shown). Again, the proliferation rate of
these cell populations was assessed when cultured on
plastic. No difference was observed in the proliferation

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 SerpinE2 silencing in caMEK-expressing IECs decreases foci formation, growth in soft agar and migration. A- caMEK-expressing
IECs were stably infected with lentiviruses encoding for a control shRNA (scrambled sequence) or encoding a serpinE2-specific shRNA. These
stable cell populations were thereafter lysed at confluence and equal amounts of concentrated culture medium were analyzed by Western
blotting with specific antibodies against serpinE2. The graph illustrates densitometric analysis performed with the western blot data shown on
the left to determine the % of serpinE2 downregulation. The level of serpinE2 observed in shScrambled cells was set at 100%. A representative
experiment of three independent experiments is shown. B- wtMEK/IEC-6 or caMEK/IEC-6 cells expressing either shScrambled or shSerpinE2 were
seeded in a 6-well plate at 100 000 cells per well. Cells were harvested and counted. Values are means of 4 experiments ± SE. C and D- caMEKtransformed cells expressing or not shSerpinE2 were seeded on parental IEC-6 cell monolayer during 15 days. Thereafter, the cells were stained
with crystal violet and images of colonies were acquired under light microscopy. The size of the foci was calculated using Image J software and
expressed as % of shScrambled cells (control) which was set at 100%. E- Cells were cultured in soft agarose for 3 weeks before MTT. The
number of colonies was determined using Image J software and expressed as % of shSrcambled cells (control) set at 100%. F- Cell migration to
the undersurface of the polycarbonate membrane of Boyden chambers coated with fibronectin (FN) or vitronectin (VN) was evaluated 24 h after
seeding, in presence of 20 mM hydroxyurea. Values were expressed as a % of shScrambled cells migrating on fibronectin. *, significantly different
from shScrambled cells at p < 0.05 (Student’s t test).

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Expression of serpinE2 in colorectal cancer cells is dependent on MEK/ERK activation. A- Total RNA was isolated from CRC cell
lines and processed for Q-PCR to analyze serpinE2 gene expression as described in Material and Methods. The relative level of each RNA was
calculated using the standard curve method and normalized to the corresponding b2MIC RNA level. *, significantly different from Caco-2/15 (set
at 1) at p < 0.01 (Student’s t test). B- HCT116 and LoVo cells were treated daily with U0126. After two days, cells were lysed and total RNA was
isolated for Q-PCR for serpinE2 gene expression. The relative level of each RNA was calculated using the standard curve method and normalized
to the corresponding b2MIC RNA level. *, significantly different from control (DMSO) at p < 0.05 (Student’s t test).

rate of subconfluent cells when serpinE2 expression was
downregulated (Figure 4B). We then verified whether
the reduction in serpinE2 expression alters the ability of
colon cancer cells to form colonies in soft agarose. As
shown in Figure 4C, expression of both shRNA against
SerpinE2 (#15 and #16) decreased the ability of HCT116
and LoVo cells to form colonies in soft agarose. Of
note, shSerpinE2(#15) which was less efficient than the
shRNA (#16) to reduce serpinE2 gene expression (Figure
4A) was also less efficient to reduce colony formation.
This indicates that serpinE2 controls anchorageindependent growth of human colon carcinoma cells.

Additionally, as observed in caMEK-expressing IECs, the
size of foci formed at post-confluency was significantly
decreased in serpinE2-depleted LoVo cells (Figure 4D).
The tumorigenicity of colorectal cell lines was next
assessed after subcutaneous (s.c.) injection into the flank
of nude mice. As shown in Figure 5A and 5B, HCT116
and LoVo cell lines induced palpable tumors with a
short latency period of respectively 15 and 10 days after
their injection. More importantly, downregulation of
serpinE2 expression with shSerpinE2(#16) in these cell
lines severely impaired their capacity to grow as tumors
in nude mice.

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

Page 7 of 15

Figure 4 Down-regulation of serpinE2 expression in human colorectal cancer cells inhibits colony formation. A- HCT116 and LoVo cells
were stably infected with lentiviruses encoding for a control shRNA (against TGFP) or encoding serpinE2-specific shRNAs (shSerpinE2#15 or
shSerpinE2#16). Stable cell populations were thereafter lysed and RNA isolated to determine serpinE2 or b2MIC gene expression by Q-PCR. The
relative level of each mRNA was calculated using the standard curve method and normalized to the corresponding b2MIC mRNA level. B- LoVo
or HCT116 cells expressing either shTGFP or shSerpinE2 (#16) were seeded in a 6-well plate at 200 000 cells per well. Cells were harvested,
clumps disrupted using a syringe and counted. Values are means of 4 experiments ± SE. C- Cell populations were cultured in soft agarose for
2-3 weeks before MTT staining. The number of colonies was determined using Image J software. The number of shTGFP-expressing cells
(control) was set at 100%. Results are the mean ± SE of at least 3 independent experiments. D- Phase-contrast microscopy of foci from twoweek post-confluent shTGFP and shSerpinE2(#16)-expressing LoVo cells stained with crystal violet. *, significantly different from shTGFP cell
populations (set at 1) at p < 0.05 (Student’s t test); **, significantly different from control at p < 0.002 (Student t test).

Finally, in vitro transwell migration assays were performed to verify the importance of serpinE2 in colon
carcinoma cell migration. As illustrated in Figure 6A,
serpinE2 deficiency significantly reduced HCT116 (not
shown) and LoVo cell migration to the undersurface of

the membrane coated or not with fibronectin or vitronectin (data not shown). The net effect of serpinE2
knockdown was also determined on invasion by using
BD Biocoat Matrigel invasion chambers, in presence of
hydroxyurea. As shown in Figure 6B, the capacity of

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

Figure 5 Down-regulation of serpinE2 expression in human
colorectal cancer cells inhibits tumor growth in nude mice. A
and B- The growth of tumors (mm3) over time was measured after
s.c. injection of 1 × 106 cells (HCT116: left panel; LoVo: right panel).
The results represent the mean tumor volume obtained from two
independent experiments in which at least five mice were injected
for each cell line. Tumor volumes were determined by external
measurement (V = (d2 × D)/2). Data are the means ± SE of five
mice. *, significantly different from HCT116- or LoVo-shSerpinE2
(#16) cells at *p < 0.05.

LoVo cells to invade Matrigel was also altered by serpinE2 silencing
To test the hypothesis that this altered migration and
invasion capacity could result from a defect in cell adhesion, adhesion strength to the substrate was examined
for control and shSerpinE2(#16)-expressing LoVo cells.
Using a trypsin-mediated de-adhesion assay, downregulation of serpinE2 significantly delayed LoVo cell detachment after trypsinization (Figure 6C), suggesting that
serpinE2 expression decreases adhesion of colorectal
carcinoma cells to the substrate.

Page 8 of 15

Figure 6 SerpinE2 silencing modulates migration, invasion and
adhesion of colorectal cancer cells. A- Migration of shTGFP- and
shSerpinE2(#15 or #16)-expressing LoVo cells to the undersurface of
the polycarbonate membrane of Boyden chambers coated with
fibronectin (FN) or vitronectin (data not shown) was evaluated 24 h
after seeding, in presence of 20 mM hydroxyurea. The number of
cells was counted in five fields and the experiments were
performed in triplicate. The number of shTGFP cells that had
migrated was set at 100%. B- Invasion of shTGFP- and shSerpinE2
(#15 or #16)-expressing LoVo cells was studied using Matrigelcoated Transwells during 48 h. Thereafter, cells were fixed and
stained with DAPI solution. The number of cells was counted in five
fields and the experiments performed in duplicate. The number of
shTGFP cells which had migrated was set at 100%. C- Time required
for complete de-adhesion of shTGFP- and shSerpinE2(#16)expressing LoVo cells after addition of trypsin while rocking at 100
rpm. *, significantly different from shTGFP at p < 0.05 (Student’s
t test). ***, significantly different from control at p < 0.0001 (Student
t test).

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

SerpinE2 gene expression is up-regulated in human
colorectal cancers

We next analyzed serpinE2 gene expression in a series
of human paired specimens (resection margins and primary tumors) by Q-PCR analysis. As shown in Figure 7,
mRNA levels of serpinE2 were markedly increased in
human adenomas in comparison to healthy adjacent tissues. Furthermore, serpinE2 expression was also significantly enhanced in colorectal tumors, regardless of
tumor stage and grade.

Discussion
We and others have recently reported that expression of
a constitutively active mutant of MEK1 in normal intestinal epithelial cells is sufficient to induce growth factor
relaxation for DNA synthesis, morphological transformation, growth in soft agar, epithelial to mesenchymal
transition and to promote tumor invasion and metastasis [3,4,14,15]. Thus, these data argue that a key role of
sustained MEK activity resulting from the constitutive
activation of KRAS or BRAF in colorectal carcinoma
cells may be to provide signals inducing not only proliferation, but also transformation and tumorigenesis.
However, in spite of the obvious role of MEK/ERK
kinases in the induction and regulation of intestinal
epithelial cell tumorigenesis, little is known as to the
molecular mechanisms by which this signaling achieves
such functions. In the present study, we show that serpinE2 gene is a MEK1 target in intestinal epithelial cells
and that serpinE2 expression and secretion correlate
with both MEK1 activity and intestinal epithelial cell
transformation. Moreover, targeting of serpinE2 by
mRNAi in human colorectal cancer cell lines decreased
anchorage independent growth, migration, invasion as
well as tumor formation in nude mice. Accordingly, we
found an upregulation of serpinE2 mRNA levels in

Figure 7 SerpinE2 gene expression is up-regulated in human
colorectal tumors. Relative serpinE2 mRNA levels were determined
by Q-PCR of human advanced adenomas and cancers compared to
the adjacent healthy tissue (set at 1). mRNA levels were normalized
to b2MIC mRNA levels. Data presented in are means ± SE of 5 to 19
biopsies per stage. *, significantly different from adjacent healthy
tissue at p < 0.05 (Student’s t test).

Page 9 of 15

human adenomas and colorectal cancer tissues as compared to corresponding normal tissues.
Oncogenic mutations in KRAS or BRAF occur
frequently in colorectal cancer and aberrant signaling
through the ERK pathway has been correlated with
both initiation [38] and progression [13] of CRC. Interestingly, KRAS and BRAF mutations seem to be
mutually exclusive [39,40], suggesting that they may
have similar functions. These oncogenes primarily signal
through the MEK/ERK pathway [41,42]. Upon phosphorylation by MEK1/2, ERK1/2 translocate to the
nucleus and phosphorylate various transcription factors
regulating gene expression [43]. Therefore, in order to
define the genetic changes induced by persistent MEK
activation, we and others [4,15] have utilized oligonucleotide microarrays to determine which genes are regulated following the constitutive activation of MEK in
normal intestinal epithelial cells. Our results revealed
that serpinE2 gene was the gene mostly induced by activated MEK in intestinal epithelial cells. This observed
altered level of expression of serpinE2 transcript was
also noted in microarray analyses performed by Voisin
and colleagues [15]. In the present study, we were able
to confirm that RAS-, BRAF- and caMEK-transformed
intestinal epithelial cells express and secrete serpinE2.
Furthermore, serpinE2 expression was rapidly enhanced
(in 1 h) upon induction of oncogenic BRAF in normal
intestinal epithelial cells, suggesting an early involvement of this protein in cell transformation. Of note,
expression of serpinE2 in human colorectal cancer cell
lines was shown to be dependent, at least in part, of
endogenous activities of MEK/ERK. Other oncogenic
pathways have been previously associated with induction
of serpinE2 expression. Indeed, the very oncogenic
receptor tyrosine kinase MET was also shown to promote serpinE2 gene expression in a xenograft colon
tumor model [44]. Additionally, PTEN deletion has been
reported to up-regulate serpinE2 expression in MEF
cells [45] and serpinE2 was shown to be overexpressed
in cells transformed by adenovirus type 12 [46]. Taken
together, these results indicate that serpinE2 gene
expression could be induced by different oncogenic
pathways, emphasizing that this protein may be important in tumorigenesis.
Our results also led to the demonstration that serpinE2 contributes to transformation induced by activated MEK1 and to human colorectal carcinoma cell
growth and migration. In agreement with the present
study, data on serpinE2 expression in human cancer
indicate that serpinE2 levels are elevated in pancreatic
tumors [27], breast tumors [28], liposarcomas [31] and
oral squamous carcinomas [30]. Accordingly, we found
a significantly higher level of serpinE2 mRNA when
comparing affected tissues from advanced adenomas

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

and carcinomas to adjacent healthy tissues. These
results are in agreement with the study of Selzer-Plon et
al. who recently reported that serpinE2 mRNA levels
increase both at the transition between normal tissue
and adenomas with mild/moderate dysplasia and again
at the transition between severe dysplasia and colorectal
cancer [32]. In addition, no significant difference was
observed when comparing serpinE2 mRNA levels in primary cancers classified into different TNM stages.
Taken together, the above results suggest that enhanced
serpinE2 expression may be implicated in tumor progression in colorectal tissue.
Although there is some evidence in the literature suggesting that serpinE2 may play a role in carcinogenesis,
the precise function of this serpin in cancer still remains
elusive. Through its ability to reduce proteolysis, this
serine protease inhibitor is predicted to impair extracellular matrix degradation and consequently cancer cell
invasion and metastasis. However, overexpression of serpinE2 appears to enhance the invasive potential of pancreatic tumors in xenograft models [27]. Recently, using
mammary tumor models, it has been reported that serpinE2 stimulates metastatic spread of mammary tumors
[47]. In addition, an analysis of 126 breast cancer
patients revealed that patients with breast tumors showing elevated serpinE2 levels also had a significantly
higher probability of developing lung metastasis [47].
Finally, serpinE2 has recently been shown to promote
lymph node metastasis in a testicular cancer model [48].
Thus, increased function of serpinE2 appears to be associated with enhanced migration and metastasis. However, the biological roles of serpinE2 in colorectal
carcinoma have never been studied. Herein, the present
results show that endogenous expression of serpinE2 in
rodent transformed intestinal epithelial cells and human
CRC cells is correlated with enhanced cell migration
and invasion abilities. The molecular mechanism by
which serpinE2 modulates motility remains unknown. It
is possible that serpinE2 may enhance signaling cascades
mediating motility. In this regard, serpinE2 has recently
been reported to stimulate ERK signaling by binding
LRP-1 [47] or syndecan-1 [49]. However, preliminary
results (data not shown) indicate that the phosphorylated levels of Akt and ERK1/2 were not affected following serpinE2 depletion in colon carcinoma cells.
Alternatively, shSerpinE2-expressing cells may have a
reduced migratory capacity which could result from a
defect in cell adhesion. Indeed, typical cell movement
across a two-dimensional substrate can be divided into
three concerted steps: membrane protrusion, cell traction, deadhesion and tail retraction. Adhesion at the
leading edge and deadhesion at the rear portion of cells
are required for protrusion and tail retraction, respectively [50]. As cellular migration and cellular adhesion

Page 10 of 15

are intimately related, changes in one could be expected
to result in changes in the other. Binding of type-1 plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1), the phylogenetically
closest relative of serpinE2, to cell surface uPA promotes inactivation and internalization of adhesion
receptors (e.g. urokinase receptor and integrins)
and leads to cell detachment from a variety of extracellular matrixes [51]. Recently, serpinE2 has been
shown to also induce cell detachment from a variety of
extracellular matrix proteins such as vitronectin, fibronectin and type-1 collagen in an uPA/uPAR-dependent
manner [52]. Interestingly, serpinE2 has been reported
to co-localize with fibronectin [34] and to interact with
vitronectin [35]. Accordingly, we observed herein that
the downregulation of serpinE2 significantly delayed colorectal carcinoma cell detachment after trypsinization,
suggesting that serpinE2 expression does decrease adhesion and promote detachment of colorectal carcinoma
cells. Moreover, we have recently demonstrated that
uPA expression levels are enhanced in MEK1-transformed intestinal epithelial cells [14]. Further experiments are hence necessary to clearly identify the
molecular mechanisms involved in the deadhesive
effects of serpinE2.

Conclusion
Our study identifies the serine protease inhibitor serpinE2 as a novel target of ERK signaling involved in
human colorectal tumorigenesis. The strong expression
of serpinE2 in human adenomas suggests that this
secreted protein might be a potential blood biomarker
for early diagnosis of tumors in the colon and the rectum. While further studies are needed to pinpoint the
molecular mechanisms by which serpinE2 regulates
tumor cell growth and migration, the present study provides novel fundamental insights into the function of
serpinE2 in colorectal cancer progression. Hence, serpinE2 may also be a potential therapeutic target for cancer treatment.
Methods
Materials

The anti-bovine serpinE2 antibody was previously characterized [53]. The antibody recognizing b-actin was
obtained from Chemicon International (Billerica, MA).
Antibodies recognizing phospho-ERK1/2 (Thr202/
Tyr204) #9101 and total ERK were from Cell Signaling
Technology (Danvers, MA). The MEK inhibitor U0126
was from Calbiochem-Novabiochem Corp. (San Diego,
CA). Human plasma-derived fibronectin and vitronectin
were from R&D systems (Minneapolis, MN). MTT was
purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). Other materials were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich unless stated
otherwise.

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

Cell culture

The rat intestinal epithelial crypt cell line IEC-6 stably
overexpressing pLXIN-wtMEK or -caMEK were previously characterized [3] and cultured as described [14].
These cell populations were generated after viral infection of wtMEK and caMEK cloned in the retroviral vector pLXIN. The caMEK-expressing cells formed foci at
post-confluency, in contrast to pLXIN- and wtMEKexpressing epithelioid cells which formed a monolayer of
contact-inhibited cells. Foci from post-confluent caMEKexpressing cells were therefore retrieved by aspiration
with a pipette and pooled as one caMEK-expressing cell
population. The majority of experiments described herein
was performed with this caMEK-expressing cell population and compared to pLXIN and wtMEK-expressing cell
populations unless otherwise stated. This strategy was
repeated independently three times with other IEC-6 cell
cultures and similar results were obtained with all
caMEK-expressing cell populations. The IEC6 wtMEK
and caMEK were cultured in DMEM containing 5% FCS.
The IEC-6-BRAF:ER population was obtained by retroviral infection of IEC-6 cells as previously described [14]
with the plasmid encoding the fusion protein consisting
of full-length human BRAFV600E linked to the T1 form
of the human estrogen receptor hormone-binding
domain and selection of cells resistant to blasticidin S (5
mg/ml). The population displayed strong stimulation of
ERK1/2 activity upon b-estradiol or tamoxifen addition
as previously reported [54]. IEC6 BRAFV600E cells were
cultured in DMEM without phenol red, supplemented
with 5% charcoal stripped FCS (Valley Biomedical,
Winchester, VA, USA). The transformed cell line HarasIEC-6, previously characterized [55], was cultured in
DMEM containing 5% FCS. The cell line Caco-2/15 was
obtained from Dr A. Quaroni (Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY) and cultured in DMEM containing 10% FCS, as
described previously [56]. The colon carcinoma cell lines
HCT116 and HT29 were obtained from ATCC (CCL247 and HTB-38) and cultured in McCoy’s medium
(Wisent) containing 10% FCS. The colon adenocarcinoma cell lines Lovo (CCL 229, ATCC) and SW480
(CCL 228, ATCC) were respectively cultured in Ham’s
F12 medium containing 10% FCS and in DMEM containing 10% FBS. The colon adenocarcinoma cell lines DLD1 (CCL-21) (kindly obtained from Dr F. Boudreau, Université de Sherbrooke, QC, Canada) and Colo205 (CCL222, ATCC) were cultured in RPMI medium containing
10% FCS. The colorectal carcinoma cell line T84 (CCL248) was cultured in DMEM-Ham’s F-12 (50:50) containing 10% FBS.
Microarray analysis

Total RNAs were extracted from newly confluent IEC-6
cells stably expressing wtMEK or caMEK with the

Page 11 of 15

RNeasy kit (Qiagen inc., Mississauga, ON, Canada). For
microarray analysis, 10 μg of RNA were used for cDNA
synthesis, followed by in vitro transcription to generate
biotin-labeled cDNAs with a T7 promoter primer having
a poly(T) tail for subsequent hybridization. The resulting
product was hybridized and processed with the Rat Genome RAE230 2.0 Array GeneChip system (Affymetrix).
Three independent experiments were carried out for
each condition. Data analysis, normalization, average difference and expression for each feature on the chip were
performed using Affymetrix Microarray Suite 5.0 (MAS5)
with default parameters (Microarray platform, McGill
University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre).
Gene classification according to cellular processes was
performed with the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) http://apps1.
niaid.nih.gov/david.
Animals

CD1 nu/nu mice were purchased from Charles River
Laboratory (Montréal, Canada). All experiments were
approved by the animal research committee of the
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences of the Université de Sherbrooke.
Human biopsies

Samples of colon tumors and paired normal colon tissues (at least 10 cm from the tumor) were obtained
from patients undergoing surgical resection. Patients did
not receive neoadjuvant therapy. Tissues were obtained
after patient’s written informed consent, according to
the protocol approved by the Institutional Human Subject Review Board of the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke. Paired tissues were frozen in liquid
nitrogen within 15 minutes from resection as recommended by the Canadian Tumor Repository Network
http://www.ctrnet.ca and stored in liquid nitrogen until
total RNA extraction. Clinical and pathological informations were obtained from medical records. Adenoma
samples were endoscopically unresectable and defined as
advanced because of their size larger than 1 cm or by
the presence of high-grade dysplasia or villous component. Patient’s cancers were histologically classified and
graded according to overall TNM staging criteria (based
on Tumor-, lymph Node- and Metastatic- status).
Reverse transcription PCR

Total RNA was extracted from cultured cell lines or
human colorectal adenoma or tumors and their respective adjacent healthy mucosa using the RNeasy mini kit
(Qiagen, Canada) using gDNA Eliminator spin columns
or an on-column DNAse I digestion step (human samples). Reverse transcription and PCR were performed
using AMV-RT (Roche Diagnostics, Canada) and Taq

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

DNA polymerase (Qiagen, Canada) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Real-time PCR analysis
(QPCR) was performed using a Light-Cycler apparatus
(Roche Diagnostic, Canada) as previously described [14].
Target expression was quantified relatively to b-actin or
TBP (rat) or b-2-microglobulin (b2MIC) (human) [57]
expression. Primers rSerpinE2 forward: CCCTACCATG
GTGTGAGAGCAT; rSerpinE2 backward: GCCTTTG
ACGGTTCAAACAT; Primers: mSerpinE2 forward:
CCCTACCATGGTGAGAGCAT; mSerpinE2 backward:
GCCTTTGATGGCTCAAACAT; hSerpinE2 forward:
AATGAAACCAGGGATATGATTGAC; hSerpinE2
backward: TTGCAAGATATGAGAAACATGGAG;
b-actin forward: ACCACAGCTGACAGGAAATCG;
b-actin backward: AGAGGTCTTTACGCATGTCAA
CG; TBP forward: TTCAGTTCTGGGAAAATGGTG;
TBP backward: GGAGAACAATTCTGGGTTTGA;
GAPDH forward: ATGGCCTTCCGTGTTCCTAC;
b2MIC backward: TCGCGCTACTCTCTGTTTCTG.
Immunoblotting

SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analyses were performed as
previously described [3]. For culture medium analysis,
subconfluent cells cultured in a 100 mm dish were incubated overnight with a fresh 8 mL of serum free medium after which the medium collected and cells
harvested in a lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1
mM EDTA, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 1% NP-40 supplemented with protease inhibitors (0.1 mM PMSF, 10
μg/ml leupeptin, 1 μg/ml pepstatin, 10 μg/ml aprotinin).
A volume of medium proportional to the total amount
of protein in the cell lysate was passed through an Amicon(r) Ultra-4 centrifugal filter unit (10,000 NMWL;
Millipore). Laemmli buffer was added to the retentate
and boiled for 5 min. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce)
with bovine serum albumin as standard.

Page 12 of 15

(shSerpinE2#16) and CCGGCGTGATCTTCACCGACA
AGATCTCGAGATCTTGTCGGTGAAGATCACGTT
TTT (control: TurboGFP(tm) (shTGFP)). All lentiviruses
were produced and used for cell infection according to
Invitrogen recommendations (ViraPower Lentiviral
Expression System, instructions manual). In each experiment involving lentiviruses, OAS1 gene expression was
analyzed by Q-PCR analysis. OAS1 (2’5’-oligoadenylate
synthetase) is a classic interferon target gene and has
been recommended as a key test for interferon induction before attributing a particular response to the gene
that is targeted [58]. No induction of OAS1 expression
was detected in the experiments involving lentiviruses
infection (data not shown).
Cell proliferation assays

All experiments were performed starting with cell populations after at least 14 days post-selection and subsequently plated for growth assay in 6-well plates at a
concentration of 100 000 cells/well for IEC-6 and 200
000 cells/well for HCT116 and LoVo. Cell growth was
measured during 7-8 days using a Cell particle counter.
Focus formation assays

Parental IEC-6 cells were seeded into 30-mm dishes in
triplicate. Cells were grown to confluence and confluent
monolayers were adapted over a week-long period to
DMEM/5%FBS before seeding of caMEK-expressing
cells at high density (5000cells/well). These cells were
then grown by forming foci and maintained in culture
for 14-20 days. Thereafter, cells were washed twice with
1× PBS and fixed with methanol for 1 min. Methanol
was removed and 1% crystal violet solution was added
for 2 min. Excess dye was carefully removed with water
and plates were dried at room temperature. Analysis
was performed by counting the number and size of the
foci using Image J software. Resulting data were analyzed by Student’s t test.

RNA interference

Rat IEC6 cells: shRNA oligonucleotides were designed
according to Ambion guidelines (technical bulletin no.
506), annealed and cloned into pLenti6-U6 expression
vector [14] between BamHI and XhoI sites. siRNA
sequences were AGGAACCATGAATTGGCAT (SerpinE2) or GGCAGTTCAGACAGATTAA (Scrambled)
and TTCAAGAGA as loop sequence. Human LoVo and
HCT116 cells: To downregulate serpinE2 expression,
mission(r) shRNA Bacterial Glycerol Stock were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (NM_006216). Sequences
used were CCGGCCTCGTCAACGCAGTGTATTTCT
CGAGAAATACACTGCGTTGACGAGGTTTTTG
(shSerpinE2#15), CCGGGAACACAAAGAAACGCACT
TTCTCGAGAAAGTGCGTTTCTTTGTGTTCTTTTTG

Soft agarose

Concentrated DMEM-2X without phenol red was prepared from powder (Wisent, Qc Canada) according to
manufacturer’s instructions, except for using half of the
recommended volume of water. The medium was sterilized by 0.22 μm filtration and complemented with 10%
(IEC6) or 20% (LoVo and HCT116) FBS. Pre-warmed
DMEM-2X was mixed 1:1 with autoclaved 1.4% agarose
type VII kept at ≈42°C and 6-well dishes were precoated with 1 ml/well. Cells were added to the DMEMagarose mix at 10000 cells/mL (IEC6) or 5000 cells/mL
(LoVo and HCT116) and seeded at 2 mL/well. Plates
were allowed to solidify under the hood and then placed
at 37°C and 5% CO2. Fresh DMEM without phenol red

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

supplemented with 5% (IEC6) - 10% (LoVo and
HCT116) FBS was added on the surface of the agarose
every 2-3 days. After 2-3 weeks, colonies were stained
by adding 500 μL of PBS containing 0.5 mg/mL MTT
on the surface of the agarose and incubated 2 hours at
37°C and 5% CO 2 . Images were acquired using an
AlphaImager camera (Alpha Innotech Corporation) and
colonies counted using ImageJ software.
Migration and invasion assays

Cell migration was assessed using Transwell(r)-24 well
permeable support (8.0-μm pored polycarbonate membranes (Corning)). The bottom face of membranes was
coated or not with 10 μg/μL fibronectin or vitronectin for
1 hour at 37°C and then rinsed with PBS. Thereafter,
3000cells in 200 μL of serum-free medium were seeded
into the upper chamber and culture medium containing
5% FBS was placed into the lower chamber as chemoattractant agent. Cells were allowed to migrate for the next
24 h (IEC-6) or 48 h (LoVo) in the presence of 2 mM
hydroxyurea in both chambers to prevent cell proliferation.
Non-migrating cells were removed with 2 cotton swabs,
while migrating cells were fixed for 2 min with methanol
and stained with DAPI for manual counting under the
microscope. Invasion assays were conducted using BD
Matrigel(tm) Invasion Chamber 24-well plate 8.0 micron
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, plates
were thawed at room temperature for 30 min and then
Matrigel humidified with HAM’S F12 culture medium for
at least 1 hour at 37°C and 5% CO2. Thereafter, 6000cells
in 200 μL of serum-free medium were seeded into the
upper chamber and culture medium containing 5% FBS
was placed into the lower chamber as chemoattractant
agent. Cells were allowed to migrate for the next 48 h in
the presence of 2 mM hydroxyurea in both chambers to
prevent cell proliferation [59]. Cells were then processed
as described above for migration assays.

Page 13 of 15

Data Presentation and Statistical Analysis

Densitometric analyses were performed using Image J
software and were carried out in RT-PCR analyses
shown in Figure 1. Results shown in the graphs were
analyzed by the Student’s t test. Differences were considered significantly different at p < 0.05, unless otherwise stated. Results shown are the mean of at least three
independent experiments.
Acknowledgements
We thank Anne Vézina and Gérald Bernatchez for technical assistance. The
biobank of colorectal cancer specimens was supported by a Team grant on
digestive epithelium from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. This
research was supported by a grant from the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research Grant to Nathalie Rivard (MT-14405). Sébastien Bergeron is a
recipient of a post-doctoral fellowship from the Canadian Association of
Gastroenterology/CIHR/CCFC. Étienne Lemieux is student scholar from the
Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du Québec (FRSQ). Nathalie Rivard, MarieJosée Boucher and Julie C Carrier are members of the FRSQ-Funded Centre
de Recherche Clinique Étienne Le-Bel. Marie-Josée Boucher and Julie C
Carrier are recipient of a scholar from FRSQ. Nathalie Rivard is a recipient of
a Canadian Research Chair in Signaling and Digestive Physiopathology.
Author details
1
Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, CIHR Team on Digestive
Epithelium, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada. 2Service of Gastroenterology,
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université
de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada. 3Faculté de Médecine
Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada.
Authors’ contributions
MJB performed the microarray analysis. SB performed the molecular genetic
studies, generated shRNA against serpinE2. SB and EL characterized the
phenotype of all shSerpinE2-expressing cell populations (Figure 2, 4 and 6).
SB also analyzed serpinE2 mRNA levels in human colorectal tumors and cell
lines (Figure 3A and 6). Finally, SB drafted the manuscript. VD performed the
first RT-PCR and Western blot analyses demonstrating the induction of
serpinE2 by oncogenic MEK1 and Ras (Figure 1A, B, D and 1E). SC generated
cells expressing the inducible BRAF:ER fusion protein stimulated with 4hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) (Figure 1C). EL participated in the design of the
study and performed Q-PCR analyses (Figure 3B and 4A). NR conceived the
study, and participated in its design and coordination and helped draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Xenografts into nude mice

A total of 1 × 10 6 cells suspended in 0.1 ml DMEM
were injected into the dorsal subcutaneous (s.c.) tissue
of 5-week-old female nude mice CD1 nu/nu (Charles
River, Canada). Both control and experimental cell lines
were contralaterally injected into each individual animal.
Tumor volume was determined by external measurement according to published methods (d2 x D)/2 [60].
De-adhesion assays

Subconfluent cells were rinsed twice with PBS before
addition of 500 μL of 0.25% trypsin/0.1 mM EDTA
(Wisent, Qc, Canada) per well of a 6-well dish. Plates
were rocked at 100 RPM at room temperature until
cells were completely detached.

Received: 30 April 2010 Accepted: 13 October 2010
Published: 13 October 2010
References
1. Nishimura T: Total number of genome alterations in sporadic
gastrointestinal cancer inferred from pooled analyses in the literature.
Tumour Biol 2008, 29:343-350.
2. Reddy KB, Nabha SM, Atanaskova N: Role of MAP kinase in tumor
progression and invasion. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2003, 22:395-403.
3. Boucher MJ, Jean D, Vezina A, Rivard N: Dual role of MEK/ERK signaling in
senescence and transformation of intestinal epithelial cells. Am J Physiol
Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2004, 286:G736-G746.
4. Komatsu K, Buchanan FG, Katkuri S, Morrow JD, Inoue H, Otaka M, et al:
Oncogenic potential of MEK1 in rat intestinal epithelial cells is mediated
via cyclooxygenase-2. Gastroenterology 2005, 129:577-590.
5. Eggstein S, Franke M, Kutschka I, Manthey G, von Specht BU, Ruf G, et al:
Expression and activity of mitogen activated protein kinases in human
colorectal carcinoma. Gut 1999, 44:834-838.

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Lee SH, Lee JW, Soung YH, Kim SY, Nam SW, Park WS, et al: Colorectal
tumors frequently express phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein
kinase. APMIS 2004, 112:233-238.
Hoshino R, Chatani Y, Yamori T, Tsuruo T, Oka H, Yoshida O, et al:
Constitutive activation of the 41-/43-kDa mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling pathway in human tumors. Oncogene 1999, 18:813-822.
Kuno Y, Kondo K, Iwata H, Senga T, Akiyama S, Ito K, et al: Tumor-specific
activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase in human colorectal and
gastric carcinoma tissues. Jpn J Cancer Res 1998, 89:903-909.
Licato LL, Brenner DA: Analysis of signaling protein kinases in human
colon or colorectal carcinomas. Dig Dis Sci 1998, 43:1454-1464.
Roberts PJ, Der CJ: Targeting the Raf-MEK-ERK mitogen-activated protein
kinase cascade for the treatment of cancer. Oncogene 2007, 26:3291-3310.
Adjei AA, Cohen RB, Franklin W, Morris C, Wilson D, Molina JR, et al: Phase I
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of the oral, smallmolecule mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1/2 inhibitor AZD6244
(ARRY-142886) in patients with advanced cancers. J Clin Oncol 2008,
26:2139-2146.
Wang JY, Wilcoxen KM, Nomoto K, Wu S: Recent advances of MEK
inhibitors and their clinical progress. Curr Top Med Chem 2007,
7:1364-1378.
Licato LL, Keku TO, Wurzelmann JI, Murray SC, Woosley JT, Sandler RS, et al:
In vivo activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases in rat intestinal
neoplasia. Gastroenterology 1997, 113:1589-1598.
Lemieux E, Bergeron S, Durand V, Asselin C, Saucier C, Rivard N:
Constitutively active MEK1 is sufficient to induce epithelial-tomesenchymal transition in intestinal epithelial cells and to promote
tumor invasion and metastasis. Int J Cancer 2009, 125:1575-1586.
Voisin L, Julien C, Duhamel S, Gopalbhai K, Claveau I, Saba-El-Leil MK, et al:
Activation of MEK1 or MEK2 isoform is sufficient to fully transform
intestinal epithelial cells and induce the formation of metastatic tumors.
BMC Cancer 2008, 8:337.
Fang JY, Richardson BC: The MAPK signalling pathways and colorectal
cancer. Lancet Oncol 2005, 6:322-327.
Silverman GA, Bird PI, Carrell RW, Church FC, Coughlin PB, Gettins PG, et al:
The serpins are an expanding superfamily of structurally similar but
functionally diverse proteins. Evolution, mechanism of inhibition, novel
functions, and a revised nomenclature. J Biol Chem 2001,
276:33293-33296.
Vassalli JD, Huarte J, Bosco D, Sappino AP, Sappino N, Velardi A, et al:
Protease-nexin I as an androgen-dependent secretory product of the
murine seminal vesicle. EMBO J 1993, 12:1871-1878.
Chen LM, Zhang X, Chai KX: Regulation of prostasin expression and
function in the prostate. Prostate 2004, 59:1-12.
Myerburg MM, McKenna EE, Luke CJ, Frizzell RA, Kleyman TR, Pilewski JM:
Prostasin expression is regulated by airway surface liquid volume and is
increased in cystic fibrosis. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2008, 294:
L932-L941.
Gurwitz D, Simon MM, Fruth U, Cunningham DD: Protease nexin-1
complexes and inhibits T cell serine proteinase-1. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1989, 161:300-304.
Baker JB, Low DA, Simmer RL, Cunningham DD: Protease-nexin: a cellular
component that links thrombin and plasminogen activator and
mediates their binding to cells. Cell 1980, 21:37-45.
Scott RW, Bergman BL, Bajpai A, Hersh RT, Rodriguez H, Jones BN, et al:
Protease nexin. Properties and a modified purification procedure. J Biol
Chem 1985, 260:7029-7034.
Bajou K, Noel A, Gerard RD, Masson V, Brunner N, Holst-Hansen C, et al:
Absence of host plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 prevents cancer
invasion and vascularization. Nat Med 1998, 4:923-928.
Liu G, Shuman MA, Cohen RL: Co-expression of urokinase, urokinase
receptor and PAI-1 is necessary for optimum invasiveness of cultured
lung cancer cells. Int J Cancer 1995, 60:501-506.
Bajou K, Peng H, Laug WE, Maillard C, Noel A, Foidart JM, et al:
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 protects endothelial cells from FasLmediated apoptosis. Cancer Cell 2008, 14:324-334.
Buchholz M, Biebl A, Neesse A, Wagner M, Iwamura T, Leder G, et al:
SERPINE2 (protease nexin I) promotes extracellular matrix production
and local invasion of pancreatic tumors in vivo. Cancer Res 2003,
63:4945-4951.

Page 14 of 15

28. Candia BJ, Hines WC, Heaphy CM, Griffith JK, Orlando RA: Protease nexin-1
expression is altered in human breast cancer. Cancer Cell Int 2006, 6:
16.
29. Yang S, Dong Q, Yao M, Shi M, Ye J, Zhao L, et al: Establishment of an
experimental human lung adenocarcinoma cell line SPC-A-1BM with
high bone metastases potency by (99m)Tc-MDP bone scintigraphy. Nucl
Med Biol 2009, 36:313-321.
30. Gao S, Krogdahl A, Sorensen JA, Kousted TM, Dabelsteen E, Andreasen PA:
Overexpression of protease nexin-1 mRNA and protein in oral squamous
cell carcinomas. Oral Oncol 2008, 44:309-313.
31. Thelin-Jarnum S, Lassen C, Panagopoulos I, Mandahl N, Aman P:
Identification of genes differentially expressed in TLS-CHOP carrying
myxoid liposarcomas. Int J Cancer 1999, 83:30-33.
32. Selzer-Plon J, Bornholdt J, Friis S, Bisgaard HC, Lothe IM, Tveit KM, et al:
Expression of prostasin and its inhibitors during colorectal cancer
carcinogenesis. BMC Cancer 2009, 9:201.
33. Low DA, Baker JB, Koonce WC, Cunningham DD: Released protease-nexin
regulates cellular binding, internalization, and degradation of serine
proteases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1981, 78:2340-2344.
34. Farrell DH, Wagner SL, Yuan RH, Cunningham DD: Localization of protease
nexin-1 on the fibroblast extracellular matrix. J Cell Physiol 1988,
134:179-188.
35. Rovelli G, Stone SR, Preissner KT, Monard D: Specific interaction of
vitronectin with the cell-secreted protease inhibitor glia-derived nexin
and its thrombin complex. Eur J Biochem 1990, 192:797-803.
36. Wang Z, Li Y, Liu ET, Yu Q: Susceptibility to cell death induced by
blockade of MAPK pathway in human colorectal cancer cells carrying
Ras mutations is dependent on p53 status. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2004, 322:609-613.
37. Trainer DL, Kline T, McCabe FL, Faucette LF, Feild J, Chaikin M, et al:
Biological characterization and oncogene expression in human
colorectal carcinoma cell lines. Int J Cancer 1988, 41:287-296.
38. Calcagno SR, Li S, Colon M, Kreinest PA, Thompson EA, Fields AP, et al:
Oncogenic K-ras promotes early carcinogenesis in the mouse proximal
colon. Int J Cancer 2008, 122:2462-2470.
39. Yuen ST, Davies H, Chan TL, Ho JW, Bignell GR, Cox C, et al: Similarity of
the phenotypic patterns associated with BRAF and KRAS mutations in
colorectal neoplasia. Cancer Res 2002, 62:6451-6455.
40. Li WQ, Kawakami K, Ruszkiewicz A, Bennett G, Moore J, Iacopetta B: BRAF
mutations are associated with distinctive clinical, pathological and
molecular features of colorectal cancer independently of microsatellite
instability status. Mol Cancer 2006, 5:2.
41. Niault T, Baccarini M: Targets of Raf in tumorigenesis. Carcinogenesis 2010.
42. Wong KK: Recent developments in anti-cancer agents targeting the Ras/
Raf/MEK/ERK pathway. Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov 2009, 4:28-35.
43. Treisman R: Regulation of transcription by MAP kinase cascades. Curr
Opin Cell Biol 1996, 8:205-215.
44. van der Horst EH, Chinn L, Wang M, Velilla T, Tran H, Madrona Y, et al:
Discovery of fully human anti-MET monoclonal antibodies with
antitumor activity against colon cancer tumor models in vivo. Neoplasia
2009, 11:355-364.
45. Li G, Hu Y, Huo Y, Liu M, Freeman D, Gao J, et al: PTEN deletion leads to
up-regulation of a secreted growth factor pleiotrophin. J Biol Chem 2006,
281:10663-10668.
46. Guan H, Smirnov DA, Ricciardi RP: Identification of genes associated with
adenovirus 12 tumorigenesis by microarray. Virology 2003, 309:114-124.
47. Fayard B, Bianchi F, Dey J, Moreno E, Djaffer S, Hynes NE, et al: The serine
protease inhibitor protease nexin-1 controls mammary cancer
metastasis through LRP-1-mediated MMP-9 expression. Cancer Res 2009,
69:5690-5698.
48. Nagahara A, Nakayama M, Oka D, Tsuchiya M, Kawashima A, Mukai M, et al:
SERPINE2 is a possible candidate promotor for lymph node metastasis
in testicular cancer. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2010, 391:1641-1646.
49. Li X, Herz J, Monard D: Activation of ERK signaling upon alternative
protease nexin-1 internalization mediated by syndecan-1. J Cell Biochem
2006, 99:936-951.
50. Le Clainche C, Carlier MF: Regulation of actin assembly associated with
protrusion and adhesion in cell migration. Physiol Rev 2008, 88:489-513.
51. Czekay RP, Loskutoff DJ: Unexpected role of plasminogen activator
inhibitor 1 in cell adhesion and detachment. Exp Biol Med (Maywood)
2004, 229:1090-1096.

Bergeron et al. Molecular Cancer 2010, 9:271
http://www.molecular-cancer.com/content/9/1/271

Page 15 of 15

52. Czekay RP, Loskutoff DJ: Plasminogen activator inhibitors regulate cell
adhesion through a uPAR-dependent mechanism. J Cell Physiol 2009,
220:655-663.
53. Bedard J, Brule S, Price CA, Silversides DW, Lussier JG: Serine protease
inhibitor-E2 (SERPINE2) is differentially expressed in granulosa cells of
dominant follicle in cattle. Mol Reprod Dev 2003, 64:152-165.
54. Liu J, Suresh Kumar KG, Yu D, Molton SA, McMahon M, Herlyn M, ThomasTikhonenko A, Fuchs SY: Oncogenic BRAF regulates beta-Trcp expression
and NF-kappaB activity in human melanoma cells. Oncogene 2007,
26:1954-1958.
55. Boudreau F, Zannoni S, Pelletier N, Bardati T, Yu SJ, Asselin C: Negative
regulation of glucocorticoid-dependent induction of c-fos by ras in
intestinal epithelial cells. Mol Cell Biochem 1999, 195:99-111.
56. Deschenes C, Vezina A, Beaulieu JF, Rivard N: Role of p27(Kip1) in human
intestinal cell differentiation. Gastroenterology 2001, 120:423-438.
57. Dydensborg AB, Herring E, Auclair J, Tremblay E, Beaulieu JF: Normalizing
genes for quantitative RT-PCR in differentiating human intestinal
epithelial cells and adenocarcinomas of the colon. Am J Physiol
Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2006, 290:G1067-G1074.
58. Bridge AJ, Pebernard S, Ducraux A, Nicoulaz AL, Iggo R: Induction of an
interferon response by RNAi vectors in mammalian cells. Nat Genet 2003,
34:263-264.
59. Calzado MA, Macho A, Lucena C, Munoz E: Hydroxyurea inhibits the
transactivation of the HIV-long-terminal repeat (LTR) promoter. Clin Exp
Immunol 2000, 120:317-323.
60. Wang J, Sun L, Myeroff L, Wang X, Gentry LE, Yang J, et al: Demonstration
that mutation of the type II transforming growth factor beta receptor
inactivates its tumor suppressor activity in replication error-positive
colon carcinoma cells. J Biol Chem 1995, 270:22044-22049.
doi:10.1186/1476-4598-9-271
Cite this article as: Bergeron et al.: The serine protease inhibitor
serpinE2 is a novel target of ERK signaling involved in human colorectal
tumorigenesis. Molecular Cancer 2010 9:271.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
