<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title></title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Adobe InDesign CS4 (6.0.3)"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Adobe PDF Library 9.0"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bibi and Vrba BMC Biology 2010, 8:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/50

CO M M E N TA R Y 	

Open Access

Unraveling bovin phylogeny: accomplishments
and challenges
Faysal Bibi1* and Elisabeth S Vrba2
See Research article http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/10/177

Abstract
The phylogenetic systematics of bovin species forms
a common basis for studies at multiple scales, from
the level of domestication in populations to major
cladogenesis. The main big-picture accomplishments of
this productive field, including two recent works, one in
BMC Genomics, are reviewed with an eye for some of the
limitations and challenges impeding progress.

Recent years have seen a flurry of interest and inquiry
into the evolutionary history of Bovini, the clade com­
prising living oxen (genus Bos) and the living buffaloes
(genera Syncerus and Bubalus). A disproportionate
interest in the phylogenetics of Bovini, relative to other
bovid or ruminant clades, no doubt stems from the
importance of bovins as a prime source of human susten­
ance since at least the Pleistocene. In addition, bovins are
widespread (naturally occurring on four conti­ ents),
n
ecologically differentiated with wide habitat toler­ nces
a
(Figure 1), taxonomically diverse (around a dozen living
species and over 50 fossil), and, given their large size and
affinity for wet habitats, possess a high potential for
preser­ ation in the fossil record. For these reasons, the
v
evolutionary record of Bovini provides an exemplary
resource for studies on evolutionary patterns and processes.
One avenue of research that has been continuously
providing new information, from Miocene higher clade
origins to Holocene population dynamics, has been the
analysis of bovin genomes. Deeper and more extensive
mining of the genomes of bovin species has seen a
consistently improving phylogeny for this clade. A recent
*Correspondence: faysal.bibi@univ-poitiers.fr
1
Institut de Paléoprimatologie et Paléontologie humaine: Evolution et
Paléoenvironnements CNRS UMR 6046, Université de Poitiers, 40 av. du Recteur
Pineau, 86022, Poitiers, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

study by MacEachern et al. [1] used 84 autosomal gene
sequences from 15 different genes to examine phylo­
genetic relationships among bovin species and popula­
tions, recon­ tructing geographic divergences and intri­
s
cate histories of genetic introgression and geographic
diver­ ence. Similarly, Decker et al. [2] used a much
g
expanded genomic data set to investigate phylogenetic
relationships from the level of Ruminantia (ruminants,
including cattle, antelope, deer, giraffe, and chevrotains) to
that of domesticated cattle breeds, including DNA from
the extinct Bison priscus. Advances in DNA sequenc­ng
i
techniques have even pro­ uced a complete mitochondrial
d
genome from the aurochs (Bos primigenius) [3], the
progenitor of domestic cattle (Bos taurus).
Studies such as these highlight the current focus on
unraveling the history of bovin evolution by way of the
bovin genome, and the present interest in tracing the
history and geography of domestication events. However,
two aspects that have seen little progress in the last few
years are the phylogenetic assembly of the total bovin
clade and the dating of major cladogenetic events within
Bovini. Even in the cutting edge studies cited above, little
advance is made at the level of major bovin cladogenesis
over previous work almost a decade older. From this
perspective, the literature of the last years has provided
mostly incomplete phylogenies of Bovini dated with
inadequate molecular clock estimates. This stems from
several factors. First has been the dearth of phylogenetic
work on fossil bovin taxa. Second is the regular omission
of certain crucial bovin taxa from phylogenetic work.
Third is a lack of precision in the phylogenetic termi­
nology used to communicate between paleontological
and molecular studies, resulting in the choice of poor
references for molecular clock calibration.
We here present our views to highlight some significant
gaps and challenges that remain in the field of bovin
phylo­ enetics. Our recommendations also aim to increase
g
the utility of studies for workers of different methodo­
logical backgrounds.

© 2010 Bibi and Vrba; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bibi and Vrba BMC Biology 2010, 8:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/50

Page 2 of 4

Figure 1. Bovins stand apart from other antelopes (Bovidae) in the wide range of environments they inhabit, from high montane to wet
tropical. Bovini today comprises 12 species found on four continents. (Yak: iStockphoto.com/kodda; African buffaloes: iStockphoto.com/dawnn).

Stability in bovin systematics: mission accomplished?
A key achievement of the past two decades of molecular
phylogenetic analyses has been recurrent and consistent
support for a systematic classification of Bovidae (Figure 2;
and see [4]). All living bovids may be divided among either
Bovinae or Antilopinae. Bovinae is the clade uniting Bovini
(buffaloes and oxen), Tragelaphini (spiral-horned
antelopes, including kudu), and Boselaphini (nilgai and
chousinga). This classification requires that members of
Bovinae be referred to as bovines, while members of
Bovini are bovins, though most of the literature still uses
the term bovine in reference to the Bovini. Living bovins
are further divided among the Bovina (genus Bos,
including Bison) and the Bubalina (Syncerus and Bubalus).
A certain amount of confusion surrounding the taxonomy
of domestic derivates of wild bovin species has also been
addressed by a ruling by the International Commission on
Zoological Nomenclature (see [5]).
One major remaining phylogenetic conundrum
concerns the saola (Pseudoryx nghetinhensis), a littleunderstood forest ante­ope from Vietnam and Laos only
l
made known to science since 1993. This species is
challenging the definition, composition, and diagnosis of
parts of the bovin phylogenetic tree. The saola’s small
size, simple non-divergent horns, large preorbital fossa
(bony depression anterior to the orbital cavity), and
simple-shaped teeth make it a very primitive-looking
bovid, especially with respect to the large and derived
Bovini. It is therefore puzzling that molecular
phylogenetic analyses consis­ ently place the saola within
t
Bovini [6,7]. The exact position and relationship of the
saola to the other bovin species is in need of further
confirmatory work. Knowing the relationship of this
goat-like ungulate to the remainder of Bovini is
important, not just to appease curiosity about an
enigmatic forest antelope, but because the phylogenetic

position of this creature may in fact upset some of the
‘stabilized’ topology shown in Figure 2 (see also below).

Dating phylogenies: putting the cow before the
cart
Phylogenetic studies of fossil Bovini are a crucially
missing basis for bovin molecular clock calibrations.
Molecular phylogenies are being calibrated using fossil
data that are wrong or, at best, highly speculative. For
example, reference calibration nodes used in the litera­
ture include: the first appearance of Bovidae, the diver­
gence of Bison and Bos, the divergence of Bovina from
Bubalina, and the divergence of Bovini from Tragelaphini.
However, the reality is that none of the ages of these
divergence events is at all well established (Geraads’s
1992 work [8] might be the only extensive phylogenetic
analysis of fossil and living bovins to date). The phylo­
genetic relationships of many fossil Bovini, and, as a
result, the evolutionary history of many living Bovini,
await more thorough analysis of fossil bovin taxa.
A related issue concerning the use of fossils to calibrate
molecular phylogenies stems from an inattention to the
distinction between dating crown clades and total clades
[9]. A crown clade is one defined on the basis of extant
taxa, while a total clade includes the crown plus any
extinct taxa located on the ancestral ‘stem’ of the crown
clade (Figure 3). Despite much progress towards stability
in clade names, there is still a certain fog of confusion,
much of it gone unnoticed, about clade definitions and
compositions. For example, a late Miocene fossil is
assigned to ‘Bovini’ in the paleontological literature
without determining whether it actually belongs to the
stem group or the crown clade. In a later study, this same
taxon is then simply assumed to belong in the crown
clade, and is used to date the node of origination of
crown Bovini in a molecular phylogeny. The fact that the

Bibi and Vrba BMC Biology 2010, 8:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/50

Page 3 of 4

Boselaphus
tragocamelus

Boselaphini

Miocene

Tetracerus
quadricornis

2

Bos spp.

Pleistocene Today

1

Bovin stem group

Bovina

Bovinae

Pliocene

Bovini
stem bovins

Bos taurus

Crown Bovini
Bubalus
bubalis

Pseudoryx
nghetinhensis
Syncerus spp.
Bubalina

Crown Tragelaphini

Bubalus spp.

Bovidae
Tragelaphini

Tragelaphus spp.

Antilopinae
(all other living
Bovidae)

Figure 2. Phylogeny showing the position of Bovini in
Bovidae and Bovinae, the division of Bovini into Bovina and
Bubalina, and the uncertain placement of the saola (Pseudoryx
nghetinhensis).

referenced fossil taxon is just as likely to be a stem bovin
means the clade origination estimate might actually be
off by millions of years, a wide margin when considering
Neogene taxa (Figure 3). The use of poorly-placed fossils
to date a molecular phylogeny can only be expected to
produce spurious results. Studies seeking to assess the
timing of evolutionary events with respect to environ­
mental changes, for example, cannot rely on such results,
nor could phylogeographic reconstructions.
Until better paleontological studies are available,
caution and wide margins of error are advised when
referring to the ages and phylogenetic placement of fossil
bovins for molecular clock calibration. Though com­ en­
m
dable efforts have been made in this regard, dates
produced from molecular clock estimates will remain
very imprecise so long as the fossils used to calibrate
these rates are themselves poorly understood phylo­
genetically. The fossil record of Bovini is already very
large and holds great promise for dating the major
cladogenetic events within Bovini, so there is every
reason for rapid progress in this regard.

From genes to genera: reconciling scales of analysis
The phylogeny of Bovini is being approached from the
scale of genes to genera. Studies of genomes and studies

Figure 3. Fossil taxa relied upon for molecular clock calibrations
may produce highly spurious dates if their phylogenetic
position is not precisely known. In this example, an early fossil
taxon attributed simply to ‘Bovini’ might be assumed to be close to
the most recent common ancestor of the living bovins (point 1, node
of origin of crown Bovini as defined by the most recent common
ancestor of Bos taurus and Bubalus bubalis) when in fact it may be a
stem bovin of much older age (point 2).

of the fossil record proceed from different methodo­ogies
l
and at different scales, fossils providing a relatively coarse
but deep temporal perspective, and molecular work
providing a narrow but very highly resolved picture of
the modern. Both fields share a common goal, but too
often the results of each approach are difficult to
reconcile with the other. One limitation to the synthesis
of results is the use of limited taxonomic sampling in a
phylogenetic analysis. Limited taxonomic representation
decreases the reliability and precision of a phylogeny, in
turn limiting interpretations on dating, biogeography,
and cladogenesis.
Paleontological studies should consider living taxa to
the greatest extent they can. This is important con­
sidering that workers seeking to calibrate molecular
phylogenies are ploughing the literature for information
on the timing of origination of crown (that is, extant)
clades. Likewise, phylogenetic studies treating living taxa
are most informative when they too consider the largest
available sample of species. For example, paleontologists
investigating the split of Bovina and Bubalina will want to
refer to phylogenies that include the entirety of living
Bovini to be sure that the node defining the crown clade
has been defined to the finest degree possible.
Additionally, taxa that are rare or poorly understood have
the greatest potential to disrupt ‘stable’ topologies and
alter previous notions, and yet such ‘enigmatic’ taxa are
regularly missing from analyses. An investigation seeking
to unravel the relationships among the different clades of
Ruminantia cannot afford to omit the Moschidae (musk
deer, small ruminants lacking antlers and today restricted

Bibi and Vrba BMC Biology 2010, 8:50
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/50

to central and northeastern Asia). Any analysis of the
Bovini cannot now afford to exclude the saola. It is
precisely the fact that such taxa are so disparate in form
and restricted in distribution that makes them most
interesting for evolutionary reconstruction.
Great progress has been made towards stable system­
atic classifications in recent years by workers in different
fields utilizing different approaches. Continued progress
requires an effort to better integrate the different results
of the geneticists, ecologists, archaeologists, and paleon­
tologists working on the origins of bovins. Improved
communication among workers in different fields will
greatly promote the output, precision, and accuracy of
results in studies to come.
Acknowledgements
FB is supported by a National Science Foundation International Research
Fellowship Award (#0852975). This work was also supported by the Agence
Nationale de la Recherche ANR-09-BLAN-0238.
Author details
1
Institut de Paléoprimatologie et Paléontologie humaine: Evolution et
Paléoenvironnements CNRS UMR 6046, Université de Poitiers, 40 av. du
Recteur Pineau, 86022, Poitiers, France. 2Department of Geology & Geophysics,
PO Box 208109, Yale University, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Page 4 of 4

2.	

3.	

4.	
5.	
6.	
7.	

8.	
9.	

Decker JE, Pires JC, Conant GC, McKay SD, Heaton MP, Chen K, Cooper A,
Vilkki J, Seabury CM, Caetano AR, Johnson GS, Brenneman RA, Hanotte O,
Eggert LS, Wiener P, Kim JJ, Kim KS, Sonstegard TS, Van Tassell CP, Neibergs HL,
McEwan JC, Brauning R, Coutinho LL, Babar ME, Wilson GA, McClure MC, Rolf
MM, Kim J, Schnabel RD, Taylor JF: Resolving the evolution of extant and
extinct ruminants with high-throughput phylogenomics. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2009, 106:18644-18649.
Edwards CJ, Magee DA, Park SD, McGettigan PA, Lohan AJ, Murphy A, Finlay
EK, Shapiro B, Chamberlain AT, Richards MB, Bradley DG, Loftus BJ, Machugh
DE: A complete mitochondrial genome sequence from a mesolithic wild
aurochs (Bos primigenius). Plos One 2010, 5:e9255.
Hassanin A, Ropiquet A: Molecular phylogeny of the tribe Bovini (Bovidae,
Bovinae) and the taxonomic status of the Kouprey, Bos sauveli Urbain
1937. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2004, 33:896-907.
Gentry A, Clutton-Brock J, Groves CP: The naming of wild species and their
domestic derivatives. J Archaeol Sci 2004, 31:645-651.
Hassanin A, Douzery EJP: Evolutionary affinities of the enigmatic saola
(Pseudoryx nghetinhensis) in the context of the molecular phylogeny of
Bovidae. Proc Biol Sci 1999, 266:893-900.
Gatesy J, Arctander P: Hidden morphological support for the phylogenetic
placement of Pseudoryx nghetinhensis with bovine bovids: A combined
analysis of gross anatomical evidence and DNA sequences from five
genes. Syst Biol 2000, 49:515-538.
Geraads D: Phylogenetic analysis of the tribe Bovini. Zool J Linn Soc 1992,
104:193-207.
Gauthier J, de Queiroz K: Feathered dinosaurs, flying dinosaurs, crown
dinosaurs, and the name “Aves”. In New Perspectives on the Origin and Early
Evolution of Birds: Proceedings of the International Symposium in Honor of John
H Ostrom. Edited by Gauthier J, Gall LF. New Haven, CT: Peabody Museum of
Natural History, Yale University; 2001:7-41.

Published: 29 April 2010
References
1.	 MacEachern S, McEwan J, Goddard M: Phylogenetic reconstruction and the
identification of ancient polymorphism in the Bovini tribe (Bovidae,
Bovinae). BMC Genomics 2009, 10:177.

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-50
Cite this article as: Bibi F, Vrba E: Unraveling bovin phylogeny:
accomplishments and challenges. BMC Biology 2010, 8:50.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
