<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Low endemism, continued deep-shallow interchanges, and evidence for cosmopolitan distributions in free-living marine nematodes (order Enoplida)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-389"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Holly M Bik"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Low endemism, continued deep-shallow
interchanges, and evidence for cosmopolitan
distributions in free-living marine nematodes
(order Enoplida)
Holly M Bik1,2,4*, W Kelley Thomas2, David H Lunt3, P John D Lambshead4

Abstract
Background: Nematodes represent the most abundant benthic metazoa in one of the largest habitats on earth,
the deep sea. Characterizing major patterns of biodiversity within this dominant group is a critical step towards
understanding evolutionary patterns across this vast ecosystem. The present study has aimed to place deep-sea
nematode species into a phylogenetic framework, investigate relationships between shallow water and deep-sea
taxa, and elucidate phylogeographic patterns amongst the deep-sea fauna.
Results: Molecular data (18 S and 28 S rRNA) confirms a high diversity amongst deep-sea Enoplids. There is no
evidence for endemic deep-sea lineages in Maximum Likelihood or Bayesian phylogenies, and Enoplids do not
cluster according to depth or geographic location. Tree topologies suggest frequent interchanges between deepsea and shallow water habitats, as well as a mixture of early radiations and more recently derived lineages
amongst deep-sea taxa. This study also provides convincing evidence of cosmopolitan marine species, recovering a
subset of Oncholaimid nematodes with identical gene sequences (18 S, 28 S and cox1) at trans-Atlantic sample
sites.
Conclusions: The complex clade structures recovered within the Enoplida support a high global species richness
for marine nematodes, with phylogeographic patterns suggesting the existence of closely related, globally
distributed species complexes in the deep sea. True cosmopolitan species may additionally exist within this group,
potentially driven by specific life history traits of Enoplids. Although this investigation aimed to intensively sample
nematodes from the order Enoplida, specimens were only identified down to genus (at best) and our sampling
regime focused on an infinitesimal small fraction of the deep-sea floor. Future nematode studies should
incorporate an extended sample set covering a wide depth range (shelf, bathyal, and abyssal sites), utilize
additional genetic loci (e.g. mtDNA) that are informative at the species level, and apply high-throughput
sequencing methods to fully assay community diversity. Finally, further molecular studies are needed to determine
whether phylogeographic patterns observed in Enoplids are common across other ubiquitous marine groups (e.g.
Chromadorida, Monhysterida).

Background
The marine environment encompasses nearly 71% of the
earth’s surface, with deep-sea habitats (> 400 m depth)
representing 91% of the total bottom surface area of the
world ocean [1]. Given the vastness of this ecosystem, it
* Correspondence: h.bik@unh.edu
1
Nematode Research Group, Department of Zoology, The Natural History
Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7 5BD, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

is likely that deep-sea fauna constitute a substantial proportion of the Earth’s biodiversity; understanding the
diversity, abundance, and ecological roles of deep-sea
taxa is crucial for quantifying biological contributions to
global nutrient cycles such as carbon flux [2]. Assessing
the scale of this role is largely dependant on accurately
characterizing the abundance and diversity of deep-sea
biota, as decreasing biodiversity has been linked to
exponential reductions in ecosystem functioning [3].

© 2010 Bik et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

Nematodes represent the most abundant metazoan
phylum in deep-sea sediments, comprising 85-96% of all
benthic meiofauna [4]. We lack an accurate characterization of species diversity and phylogeographic patterns
in this dominant benthic group–a situation hindered by
logistical difficulties in sampling the deep-sea and a persistent shortage of nematode taxonomists. Currently, we
do not understand what proportion of the deep-sea
nematode fauna represents unique taxa (novel species,
endemic lineages) and what fraction instead represents a
subset of shallow water biodiversity. Fossil evidence
[5,6] proposes that deep-sea species originally represented invasions from nearby shallow-water habitats, but
‘endemic’ lineages developed over time as taxa retreated
from shallow water habitats altogether and became
strictly deep-sea groups. Evidence from isopods suggests
that deep-sea taxa represent a mix of older endemic
lineages and fauna derived more recently from shallow
water forms. Within the Janiroidea, there is evidence
supporting the radiation of shallow-water isopods into
deeper habitats through isothermal water columns [7],
reinvasions of shallow habitats by deep-sea taxa [7,8],
and multiple independent colonizations of the deep-sea
[9]–thus, deep-sea taxa within this group probably
represent ancient evolutionary lineages that split off
early from other taxa [10]. On the other hand, the Flabellifera contains no endemic deep-sea isopod families
(in contrast to the Janiroidea which contains seven), and
exhibits low diversity in deep habitats [10]; this group is
thought to have arisen relatively recently, with shallowwater taxa invading deep-sea habitats subsequent to
anoxic oceanic conditions that prompted mass deepwater extinctions in the Palaeocene.
It is unknown whether extant deep-sea nematode species represent relatively recent radiations or older
lineages. For small immobile animals such as nematodes,
historical expansions and contractions of anoxic zones
may have played a large role in shaping phylogeographic
patterns amongst taxa [11]. Although nematodes are
able to survive low oxygen conditions and short-term
anoxia [12,13], they appear unable to survive in permanently anoxic sediments [14]. The scale of past anoxic
events is largely unknown, and it is possible that some
oxygen minimum zones were patchy and localized
rather than globally encompassing the entire deep-sea
[11,15]; thus, different depths (e.g. abyssal versus bathyal) may have acted variably as source or sink habitats
at different timepoints. Many deep-sea genera are cosmopolitan in their occurrence [1], but there is little
information on species distributions within this habitat.
Limited data from shallow water nematodes indicates
that some nematode species have large ranges [16,17],
but it is unknown whether or not deep-sea taxa possess
similar dispersal capabilities.

Page 2 of 10

Our investigation of deep-sea nematodes has focused
on the order Enoplida, a diverse group of species
(encompassing many predacious taxa) commonly found
in marine sediments. Using up to three gene sequences
from individual specimens (18 S rRNA, 28 S rRNA, and
cox1), our narrow taxonomic focus has allowed for an
intensive assessment of evolutionary relationships
between shallow-water and deep-sea taxa representing
multiple ocean basins and a range of collection depths.
More concentrated sampling within certain genera has
allowed further assessment of geographic patterns
within specific deep-sea lineages. By clarifying the phylogenetic placement of deep-sea species, our investigation
represents another important step towards a comprehensive molecular framework of the Nematoda. In addition, this study is elucidating biogeographic and
bathymetric patterns for the first time using molecular
data from deep-sea nematode species; characterizing
genetic diversity within this extensive habitat is crucial
for quantifying global nematode diversity.

Results
SSU tree topologies provide substantial insight regarding
the evolution of deep-sea species. Phylogenetic relationships amongst Enoplid taxa were overwhelmingly congruent in both Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian tree
topologies. Deep-sea nematodes represent a wide taxonomic and phylogenetic breadth within the Enoplida.
Deep-sea species were recovered in most marine
families–the absence of representatives within some
clades may be due to limited sampling. Within genera,
phylogenies recovered deep-sea species and shallow
water species as sister taxa, as clearly seen for Syringolaimus, Bathylaimus, Oxystomina, Halalaimus, and
Chaetonema species (Figure 1); deep-sea taxa do not
form an independent lineage within the Enoplida.
Within more intensively sampled clades (Figure 2), there
does not appear to be any observed clustering pattern
according to sample depth or geographic location.
High pairwise sequence identities were observed
between many deep-sea and shallow water species,
implying a recent divergence between taxa in these habitats. Phylogenetic structures further suggest both frequent and recent interchanges between habitats–there
appear to be multiple, independent evolutionary origins
for both shallow water and deep-sea taxa. Within the
well-sampled genus Halalaimus (Clade IIIa, Figure 1),
shallow water lineages appear to have arisen independently at least three times from deep-sea lineages, and
there is further evidence for at least three independent
invasions of the deep sea. Extant shallow water lineages
in Clades IIIb and IIIc (Figure 1) also seem to represent
additional derivations from deep-water taxa. Habitat
transitions in the opposite direction (shallow to deep)

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

Page 3 of 10

Figure 1 Bayesian phylogeny based on SSU data displaying the habitats of marine nematodes within the Enoplida. Red clades indicate
deep-sea species, blue clades represent shallow water species, and yellow clades contain species from both environments.

are instead implied by the structure outlined in Clades I
and II (Figure 1); here, deep-sea taxa are recovered as
recent splits within primarily shallow clades. The presence of highly divergent, early branching deep-sea
lineages within some clades (Clades IIa, IIIa and IIIb,

Figure 1) also suggests a more ancient origin for some
groups of deep-sea nematodes.
Sequence data from multiple genes provides some evidence for widespread (and potentially cosmopolitan) distributions in a small fraction of nematode species.

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2 Bayesian phylogeny built using SSU sequences, showing the collection depths of deep-sea specimens within the genus
Halalaimus (A) and family Phanodermatidae (B). Colors equate to collection location of samples: Black = intertidal, Blue = deep-sea Pacific,
Red = deep-sea Southern Indian Ocean, Yellow = Antarctic shelf.

Pairwise sequence identity comparisons within SSU, LSU,
and cox1 datasets revealed a subset of specimens possessing identical gene sequences. Identical gene sequences
were, unsurprisingly, most often observed amongst specimens collected at the same sample site. However, a number of specimens shared identical 18 S and 28 S
ribosomal sequences (and additionally cox1 haplotypes)
despite being collected from disparate geographic locations (Additional file 1, Table S1). The highest number of
identical gene copies were recovered from nematodes
belonging to the Oncholaimidae (genera Oncholaimus
and Viscosia) collected from intertidal sediments; the distance between sample sites varied from tens to thousands
of kilometres (Additional file 1, Table S1). One set of Viscosia specimens were isolated from Devon, England, the
Clyde Estuary in Scotland and New Hampshire, USA.
Another set of Oncholaimus specimens were collected
from at two sites in Massachusetts, USA as well as at two
South African beaches. Where available, analysis of

mitochondrial sequences showed that nematodes within
these two groups additionally shared mitochondrial haplotypes. One group of Oncholaimus specimens with identical ribosomal sequences exhibited two primary mt
haplotypes (denoted as B and C in Additional file 1,
Table S1); these haplotype sequences only differed by 2
substitutions. Little mitochondrial data was obtained
from deep-sea nematodes (due to a low success rate of
cox1 primers), but identical ribosomal sequences were
isolated from the Antarctic shelf (Syringolaimus and Oxystomina, Additional file 1, Table S1), bathyal sediments
(Thoracostomopsidae and Phanodermatidae, Additional
file 1, Table S1), and abyssal habitats (Halalaimus and
Chaetonema, Additional file 1, Table S1). Our data
further recovered identical gene sequences from Trefusia
specimens in the Clyde estuary and Antarctic shelf
(Additional file 1, Table S1). Unfortunately, only one specimen was recovered from the Antarcitic shelf site, but
this result was surprising given the large distance

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

(~15,000 km) and depth gradient (670 m) between the
two sites.

Discussion
No endemic deep-sea lineages and frequent deep/shallow
interchanges

Prior to this investigation, there were no public data
available for reconstructing the evolutionary history of
deep-sea nematode taxa. Morphological evidence
previously indicated that most deep-sea genera are ubiquitous and benthic community assemblages are similar
worldwide [18], although a number of novel deep-sea
genera had been identified [19-21]. Within our dataset,
deep-sea specimens comprised a taxonomically diverse
group of genera representing every major phylogenetic
lineage in the Enoplida (Figure 1). Certain genera
were particularly abundant in deep-sea sediments (e.g.
Halalaimus) and isolated from most geographic locations, supporting previous conclusions from taxonomic
studies.
Clade structures (Figure 1) do not reveal any concrete
evidence for endemic deep-sea lineages, and deep-sea
nematodes do not represent a separate, independent
clade within the Nematoda. Instead, specimens are
recovered as close relatives of shallow-water species.
Our data suggest repeated and recent interchanges
between the deep-sea and intertidal zone, supporting
ideas that habitat transitions are frequent and common
amongst nematodes [22]. A recent study by Van Gaever
et al. [23] reported similar findings, observing low shallow-deep molecular divergences in Halomonhystera and
Terschellingia specimens inhabiting bathyal shelf sediments. In the present study, topologies of more densely
sampled genera provide evidence for multiple, independent invasions of both deep-sea and shallow water
habitats. Within the genus Halalaimus (Clade IIIa, Figure 1),
there appear to be at least 3 separate invasions of shallow
habitats, and evidence for at least 3 independent colonizations
of the deep-sea; two deep-sea lineages also appear to show
reinvasions from shallow water. Clades I and II (Figure 1)
instead support movement from shallow to deep habitats;
deep-sea specimens in these clades appear to be recently
derived from shallow water fauna.
This complex structure suggests multiple evolutionary
origins for deep-sea nematode taxa, similar to patterns
observed in isopods [10]. Although we can never
unequivocally confirm an exact evolutionary history
from phylogenetic topologies, the most parsimonious
interpretation of our data supports both deep-sea and
shallow water origins for extant Enoplid taxa. In some
clades (Clades IIIa and IIIb, Figure 1), extant intertidal
taxa may be originally derived from historical source
populations in the deep-sea. In other taxa (Clades I and
II, Figure 1) deep-sea taxa are instead nested amongst

Page 5 of 10

intertidal species, implying recent shallow water ancestry
within these clades. Deep-sea clades additionally represent a mixture of early-branching lineages and recently
derived taxa (e.g. Clade IIIa, Figure 1), supporting an
evolutionary history defined by multiple invasion events.
Additional data will continue to add further insight to
these emerging patterns; although we aimed for intensive sampling within the Enoplida, our investigation was
not an exhaustive inventory of global marine habitats
and did not recover all known genera within this group.
Although we cannot label any marine lineage as ‘endemic’, species distributions of extant nematodes indicate
that at least some taxa are not found outside the deepsea. The genus Acantholaimus is rarely found in shallow
water, with only one species described from intertidal
sediments [24]. Morphological evidence suggests that
species within this typical deep-sea group have migrated
up to shallower shelf habitats in the Weddell Sea [25]; it
is possible that the overall absence of Acantholaimus in
shallow habitats could represent a secondary reduction
of species in these habitats, following radiation events
and speciation in the deep-sea. Although there are currently no molecular studies of Acantholaimus species,
the present study has included representatives of
another purely deep-sea genus, Bathyeurystomina [26].
This genus does not appear to have any recent shallowwater relatives in molecular phylogenies and appears to
have split off early from other genera within the Enchelidiidae (Clade IIa, Figure 1); more extensive sampling is
needed to further elucidate generic relationships within
this family. Similarly, the genus Cricohalalaimus (Clade
IIIc, Figure 1) has only been described from deep-sea
sediments [19]– molecular evidence indicates that this
taxon represents a divergent lineage that is most closely
related to genera Thalassoalaimus and Litinium (SSU
and LSU support values >98%), even though the distinct
morphology of Cricohalalaimus does not intuitively suggest a relationship with either group.
Widely distributed, closely related species
assemblages in the deep-sea

Regional isolation in the deep-sea has previously been
implied in taxonomic studies, which typically record a
high number of distinct, geographically restricted
morphospecies and only rare descriptions of the same
species from distant locales [1,21]. In our dataset, gene
sequences from well-sampled Enoplid clades do not suggest any obvious clustering pattern according to ocean
basin or collection depth (Figure 2)–phylogenetic topologies instead indicate widely distributed, closely related
species assemblages (with potential conspecific status) in
the deep-sea. Many genera contained specimens from
distant sample sites that exhibited pairwise sequence
identities >97%. Although such pairwise values are not a

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

definitive indicator of a species, these high sequence
identities suggest recent vicariance or dispersal between
remote deep-sea locations. One set of Phanodermatidae
specimens displayed high pairwise identities (99%) in
18 S sequences but showed signs of mitochondrial
divergence; ‘TCR 75’ and ‘Cr 72b’ (Figure 2b) were collected from deep-sea sites 11,000 miles apart and exhibit
sequence identities of 99% (18S), 94% (28S) and 85%
(cox1). This pairwise identity in cox1 sequences exceeds
interspecific divergence values reported in other nematode genera [ranging from 4.6-13.7%; 17, [27-29]], suggesting that these two nematodes represent closely
related species. Five additional deep-sea Enoplids within
the Phanodermatidae exhibited >99% SSU sequence
identities, but our efforts failed to amplify cox1 from
most of these specimens.
Close phylogenetic relationships were additionally
observed amongst specimens from Antarctic shelf habitats (670-1406 m) and abyssal sediments in the Southern
Indian Ocean (~4200 m). Within the Phanodermatidae
(Figure 2b), the deep-sea sub-Antarctic specimen ‘Cr
72b’ exhibits a 99% (SSU) and 93% (LSU) pairwise
sequence identity with Antarctic shelf specimen ‘BCA
37’, despite a difference of ~2800 metres in vertical
depths; similar relationships were observed within the
genus Halalaimus (Figure 2a). While LSU divergence
points towards separate species, high ribosomal
sequence identities nonetheless suggest a relatively
recent common ancestor between these species.
Although we did not sample intermediate depths outside the Southern Ocean, low genetic divergence across
vertical depth may be specific to Antarctic shelf habitats;
such patterns may reflect historical cycles of shelf ice
formation and retreat, where periodic extinctions of
shelf fauna were followed by upward migrations of
deep-sea taxa [30]. (Apart from identical 18S/28 S
sequences observed in Trefusia specimens from the
Clyde estuary and the Antarctic shelf, there were no
identical sequences representing both deep-sea and shallow water specimens outside the Antarctic.)
A number of benthic species are known to maintain
wide geographic distributions in the deep-sea [31,32],
although most of these taxa produce dispersive propagule stages or pelagic larvae that facilitate gene flow
over these large distances. Marine nematodes lack any
obvious propagative phases, and thus little research has
been conducted on dispersal mechanisms for deep-sea
species. The present study presents compelling evidence
for cosmopolitan Oncholaimid species, supporting previous evidence for long-distance dispersal and broad
geographic ranges in shallow-water nematodes [16,17].
Given the close evolutionary relationships between deep
and shallow marine species, it seems plausible that
deep-sea species retain behaviours that promote

Page 6 of 10

similarly broad distributions in the deep sea. Future
investigations will need to sample nematodes from other
continental shelf sites in order to assess whether species’
large depth ranges are specific to Antarctic habitats.
High nematode diversity in the deep-sea

Free-living marine nematodes appear to exhibit a high
species diversity–a complex branching structure containing a number of divergent clades was observed
within the most densely sampled nematode clades,
(Clades IIIa and IIIb, Figure 1). Community assemblages
in the deep-sea appear to comprise a diverse group of
species; specimens representing multiple phylogenetic
lineages within the same genus (presumably different
species) were often present within the same geographic
region, and even within the same sample site. For example, nematodes representing 3 distinct Halalaimus
lineages were found within a single sediment core in the
Southern Indian Ocean (site 15775#37, black squares in
Figure 2a); at least 8 unique Halalaimus lineages seem
to be present across all sites in the Southern Indian
Ocean, despite sample areas being no more than ~500
km apart (sample codes prefaced with ‘Cr’ in Figure 2a).
Similar patterns were observed in other well-sampled
clades such as the Phanodermatidae (Figure 2b) and
Oxystomina (Additional file 2, Figure S1).
Although this study aimed to intensively sample Enoplid
taxa from each deep-sea site, our overall sampling regime
only examined a limited number of sediment cores representing a very small area of the seabed (a total of
785 cm2). Our investigation suggests a huge diversity of
species, despite this small total surface area. Furthermore,
our restricted focus on the order Enoplida analysed only a
specific fraction of the diverse nematode assemblages present in deep-sea sediments. Given the diversity uncovered
within the Enoplida alone, the global species richness of
deep-sea nematode fauna is likely to be very high.
Cosmopolitan species in intertidal habitats

When added to other evidence of broad species ranges in
nematodes [16,17], our results strongly support the existence of cosmopolitan Oncholaimid species. Although
several mitochondrial haplotypes were found amongst
Oncholaimid specimens possessing identical ribosomal
sequences (Additional file 1, Table S1), cox1 variants only
differed at 1-3 nucleotide positions, equating to a genetic
divergence <1%. This low divergence is comparable to
intraspecific variation observed in other nematode species [27]; furthermore, the same haplotype was often
recovered from transatlantic locations. Potential mechanisms that may help maintain cosmopolitan distributions
in Oncholaimids include water-column processes, natural
rafts (vegetation masses, sea ice, marine snow) or anthropogenic transport. Hydrodynamic forces have been

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

shown to place an important role in the transport of shallow-water meiofauna; heavy storms are known to erode
sediments at depths up to 25 m and carry sediments up
to 50 km away [33], while more typical tidal actions can
transport meiofauna at a rate of 10 km per day as a result
of erosion and passive drift [34]. Previous studies have
reported an abundance of nematodes in floating mangrove detritus [35], drifting algae [36], and Phaeocystis
’seafoam’ [37], promoting the role of raft attachment as a
dispersal method. Meiofauna have also been observed to
aggregate in clumps of ‘marine snow’ [38], and transport
via these small organic parcels would presumably provide
nutritional sustenance during pelagic journeys. Some
authors have additionally suggested that meiofauna can
be transported via sea ice [33], floating pieces of rubbish
[39], or even attached to birds’ feet [40]. In terms of
anthropogenic transport, ballast water (and its associated
sediment) and fouling on vessels are known to carry
meiofaunal populations across oceans during shipping
operations [33]. The nematode Pellioditis marina is one
nematode species that apparently maintains transatlantic
populations, and specimens have been found floating in
macroalgae rafts in the North Sea [17]; however, the frequency of long-distance dispersal events is unknown.
Behavioural evidence also suggests that Oncholaimids
may be particularly adept at long-distance dispersal. Viscosia viscosa often inhabits the surface layers of sediment and is apparently capable of floating [41,42],
increasing the probability that this species will be resuspended in the water column and passively transported.
In addition, there is evidence to suggest that Oncholaimid nematodes can actively and rapidly transport themselves to suitable new habitats [41,43,44], supplementary
to passive mechanisms. Our investigation was focused
on a single nematode order that may be unique amongst
free-living marine species; many Enoplids are large, predatory nematodes and may thus be more motile than
smaller bacterial or fungal feeding nematode species.
This motility may enable continued gene flow across
geographically disparate sites and prevent allopatric
speciation. The unique lifestyles of Enoplid nematodes
may also help to explain the closely related species
assemblages observed across deep-sea sites. Additional
molecular studies are needed in order to assess the distribution of species (and potential for cosmopolitan
ranges) in other nematode orders.
Similar patterns may additionally exist within the Trefusiidae; the observation of identical Trefusia species in
a Scottish estuary and Antarctic shelf habitats may
provide another plausible example of long-distance dispersal as well as eurybathic species distribution,
although, only one specimen was recovered from the
Antarctic site. Lab contamination can be ruled out, and
video capture images of morphology confirm the

Page 7 of 10

taxonomic identity of these specimens–regardless, additional data is needed to validate this preliminary insight.

Conclusions
This study has provided the first insight into the evolution and phylogeography of deep-sea nematode fauna,
but much further work is needed. Our data suggest high
species richness for marine nematodes, frequent interchanges between deep and shallow habitats, and closely
related species complexes in deep-sea habitats, but data
from other nematode groups (e.g. Chromadorida, Monhysterida) is needed to assess whether these patterns are
broadly applicable to all nematode taxa. Despite the
intensive sampling effort of this investigation, deep-sea
nematodes were only isolated from a small number of
sites representing a minute fraction of the seafloor. In
addition, our efforts focused on relationships at the
genus level, and the scope of this study was not aimed
at delineating species. Future molecular investigations
should be expanded to include a wider range of marine
sites (shelf, bathyal, and abyssal depths), include a heavy
focus on mitochondrial genes (to provide finer resolution at the species level), and represent the full taxonomic spectrum of deep-sea nematode communities.
Methods
Sample collection

Samples were collected from several intertidal locations as
well as deep-sea sediments (Figure 3); a full list of sampling locations and collection depth is outlined in Additional file 1, Table S2. All marine sediments were
immediately fixed in DESS preservative [45] using an
equal ratio of preservative to sediment. The meiofauna
fraction of all samples was extracted via decantation and

Figure 3 Map outlining sampling locations utilised in this
study. Blue dots indicate intertidal sites and red dots indicate deepsea or shelf sites.

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

floatation in Ludox using a 45 μm sieve according to the
methods of Somerfield et al. [46]. Individual nematodes
(representing the order Enoplida) were picked out of the
meiofauna fraction using a fine wire instrument, mounted
on slides, and identified to genus level; video capture
images were recorded for all specimens in order to retain
a voucher of morphology before specimens were destroyed
for molecular analysis. Voucher images were deposited in
the NemaTOL database http://nematol.unh.edu/ and are
freely available in digital format.
Isolation and sequencing of 18 S rRNA genes

Gene sequences were obtained for a total of 254 individual nematode specimens, representing 18 S rRNA
(Accession numbers HM564399-HM564654), 28 S
rRNA (Accession numbers HM564655-HM564910), and
cox1 (Accession numbers HM564911-HM565012) gene
sequences from a variety of Enoplid genera; Morphological IDs and corresponding accession numbers for each
nematode specimen are outlined in Additional file 1,
Table S3. Genomic DNA was extracted using a proteinase K digestion [47]; individual specimens were picked
into microcentrifuge tubes containing 25 μl distilled
water, followed by the addition of 25 μl lysis buffer
(containing 0.2 M NaCl, 0.2 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1%
b-mercaptoethanol and 800 μg/ml proteinase K). Tubes
were incubated for 2 h at 65°C and 750 rpm in an
Eppendorf Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), followed by a final 5 min at 100°C and 750 rpm.
Final lysates were stored at -20°C. All PCR reactions
were conducted using a DyNAzyme EXT PCR kit (New
England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA), with a final reaction volume of 25.75 μl. Each reaction contained 2 μl of
nematode genomic DNA, 18.25 μl sterile water, 0.4 mM
of each primer (Integrated DNA technologies, Coralville,
IA, USA) 2.5 μl 10X DyNAzyme EXT Buffer containing
MgCl 2 (final reaction volume 1.5 mM MgCl2), 0.5 μl
dNTP mix containing 10 μM each nucleotide, and 0.5
μl DyNAzyme EXT DNA polymerase (0.5 enzyme units
in final reaction volume). Nearly full-length 18 S rRNA
gene sequences (~1600 bp) were amplified from all
nematodes using primer sets SSU_F_04 and SSU_R_26,
SSU_F_22 and SSU_R_13, and SSU_F_24_1 and
SSU_R_81 [48,49] (primer sequences available at http://
www.nematodes.org/research/barcoding/sourhope/
nemoprimers.html). The D2/D3 expansion segment of
the 28 S rRNA gene (~600 bp) was additionally
amplified from all specimens using primers D2Ab and
D3B [50]. Primers JB3 and JB5 [27] were used to
amplify a fragment of the mitochondrial cox1 gene
(393 bp) from a subset of 99 specimens. The following
PCR profile was used to amplify all primer sets: 94°C
for 5 min followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94°
C for 30 seconds, annealing at 54°C for 45 seconds,

Page 8 of 10

extension at 72°C for 2 minutes, with a final extension
of 72°C for 10 min. All PCR products were visualized
on a 1.5% agarose gel containing Ethidium Bromide.
Successful PCR reactions were purified using a QIAquick PCR purification kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA,
USA). Sequencing reactions were carried out using a
BigDye Terminator v3.1 cycle sequencing kit (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), with individual
sequencing reactions having a final volume of 10 μl; all
PCR products were sequenced in both directions. Each
reaction contained 3 μl 5X ABI sequencing buffer, 2 μl
of 2 μM forward or reverse primer, 1 μl BigDye Terminator v1.1, and either 2 μl or 4 μl of purified PCR product. Sequencing reactions were carried out using the
following thermal profile: 96°C for 1 minute followed by
25 cycles of 96°C for 10 seconds, 50°C for 5 seconds,
and 60°C for 4 minutes. Cycle-sequence products were
purified via ethanol precipitation and sequenced using
an ABI 3130 genetic analyzer.
Sequence Alignment and Phylogenetic Analysis

Pre-aligned structural alignments of 18 S and 28 S rRNA
genes were downloaded from release 98 of the SILVA
rRNA database [51] and imported into the ARB software
suite [52]. Enoplid sequences generated during this investigation were incorporated into nematode secondary
structure alignments via the Positional Tree (PT) Server
function in the ARB software suite. Alignment quality
was assessed by first constructing Neighbour-Joining
trees in ARB; some manual editing was necessary to
ensure that all secondary structure motifs were properly
aligned. Short sequences (< 1000 bp) and sequences
of dubious quality were removed from the alignment.
A subset of Dorylaimid nematodes were chosen and
aligned as outgroup taxa in ribosomal phylogenies, representing close relatives of the subclass Enoplia [53]. Final
18 S gene alignments contained contained 354 unique
sequences representing 37 genera from the order
Enoplida; final LSU datasets contained 280 Enoplid
sequences. Sequence from the Rhabditid nematode
Pellioditis marina were utilised as outgroup taxa in cox1
datasets; final mitochondrial alignments contained 105
taxa and were aligned using ClustalW in MEGA 4.0 [54].
Gene alignments were used to construct Maximum
Likelihood trees using Randomized Axelerated Maximum Likelihood (RAxML) version 7.04 [55,56], hosted
at the Vital-IT unit of the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics http://phylobench.vital-it.ch/raxml-bb/. Support
values were generated from RAxML runs using 100
bootstrap replicates. Bayesian inference was used to
supplement topological inferences. Datasets were run
for up to 4,000,000 generations using the GTR+I+G
model of nucleotide substitution, 4 MCMC chains, and
a heating temperature of 0.06; in all runs, the first 25%

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

of sampled trees were discarded as burn-in. Data was
submitted to the CIPRES project cluster hosted at the
University of California, San Diego and analysed using
MrBayes3.2 http://www.phylo.org/sub_sections/portal/.
In both methods, ribosomal data was analysed using
partitions according to secondary structure (Stems/
Loops), while mitochondrial data was run using codon
partitions.
Analysis of sequence divergence

Evolutionary relationships were further investigated by
computing pairwise sequence comparisons and analysis
of isolation by distance within certain genera. Distance
matrices were computed in MEGA v4.0 [54] using
p-distances, and pairwise sequence identities were subsequently compared to observed phylogenetic topologies.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary tables listing groups of nematodes
with identical gene sequences, sample sites utilized in this study,
and accession numbers of all gene sequences obtained. Table S1 Groups of Enoplid nematodes exhibiting identical ribosomal sequences.
All specimens within each box possess identical copies of both SSU and
LSU gene sequences; maximum distance between specimens’ collection
sites is listed per group. Mitochondrial sequences were additionally
isolated from taxa in bold, with letters in brackets representing different
cox1 haploypes. Table S2 - Geographic data and collection depth of all
sample sites used in this study. Short location codes were used to
identify nematodes from different geographic locations after individual
specimens were digested for molecular work. Table S3 - Genbank
Accession numbers of all 18 S, 28 S and cox1 sequences amplified during
this investigation
Additional file 2: Expanded Bayesian 18 S Phylogeny of the
Enoplida. Figure S1 - Bayesian phylogeny based on SSU data displaying
the habitats of marine nematodes within the Enoplida, expanded to
show all taxa. Black taxa = shallow-water, red taxa = deep-sea Southern
Indian Ocean, blue taxa = deep-sea Pacific, and yellow taxa = Antarctic
shelf. Collection depths listed after all deep-sea specimens, and sample
codes correspond to sample sites outlined in Table 1.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank David Thistle (NSF grant OCE-0727243),
Veerle Huvenne, and Adrian Glover for providing deep-sea sediment cores,
Alan Hughes and Lawrence Hawkins for advice and support during this
investigation, and Margaret Packer for assisting with sample collection and
processing. This work was supported by a Systematics Research Fund Grant
(Systematics Association/Linnean Society) to HB and a National Science
Foundation award DEB 0228692 to WKT.
Author details
Nematode Research Group, Department of Zoology, The Natural History
Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7 5BD, UK. 2Hubbard Center for
Genome Studies, University of New Hampshire, 35 Colovos Road, Durham,
NH 03824, USA. 3Department of Biological Sciences, University of Hull,
Cottingham Road, Hull HU6 7RX, UK. 4School of Ocean and Earth Science,
National Oceanography Centre, European Way, Southampton SO14 3ZH, UK.

1

Authors’ contributions
HMB carried out nematode extraction and sequencing, sequence alignment,
tree building, and drafted the manuscript. DHL participated in sequence

Page 9 of 10

alignment and tree building. WKT participated in nematode sequencing and
aided in designing the study. PJDL conceived the study and participated in
its design and coordination. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 23 July 2010 Accepted: 18 December 2010
Published: 18 December 2010
References
1. Miljutin DM, Gad G, Miljutina MM, Mokievsky VO, Fonseca-Genevois V,
Esteves AM: The state of knowledge on deep-sea nematode
taxonomy: how many valid species are known down there? Marine
Biodiversity 2010.
2. Lebrato M, Iglesias-Rodriguez D, Feely RA, Greeley D, Jones DOB, SuarezBosche N, Lampitt RS, Cartes JE, Green DRH, Alker B: Global contribution of
echinoderms to the marine carbon cycle: a re-assessment of the oceanic
CaCO3 budget and the benthic compartments. Ecological Monographs
2010.
3. Danovaro R, Gambi C, Dell’Anno A, Corinaldesi C, Fraschetti S, Vanreusel A,
Vincx M, Gooday AJ: Exponential decline of deep-sea ecosystem
functioning linked to benthic biodiversity loss. Current Biology 2008,
18:1-18.
4. Gage JD, Tyler PA: Deep-Sea Biology: A natural history of the organisms at
the deep-sea floor Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1991.
5. Jablonski D, Bottjer DJ: Onshore-offshore evolutionary patterns in postPaleozoic echinoderms. In Echinoderm Biology, Proceedings of the 6th
International Echinoderm Conference. Edited by: Burke RD. Rotterdam:
Balkema; 1988:81-90.
6. Sepkoski JJ Jr: A Model of Onshore-Offshore Change in Faunal Diversity.
Paleobiology 1991, 17:58-77.
7. Hessler RR, Thistle D: On the place of origin of deep-sea isopods. Marine
Biology 1975, 32:155-165.
8. Hessler RR, Wilson GD, Thistle D: The deep-sea isopods: a biogeographic
and phylogenetic overview. Sarsia 1979, 64:67-75.
9. Brandt A, De Broyer C, De Mesel I, Ellingsen KE, Gooday AJ, Hilbig B,
Linse K, Thomson MRA, Tyler PA: The biodiversity of the deep Southern
Ocean benthos. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 2007,
362:39-66.
10. Wilson GDF: Historical influences on deep-sea isopod diversity in the
Atlantic Ocean. Deep-sea Research II 1998, 45:279-301.
11. Rogers AD: The role of the oceanic oxygen minima in generating
biodiversity in the deep sea. Deep-Sea Research II 2000, 47:119-148.
12. Cook AA, Lambshead PJD, Hawkins LE, Mitchell N, Levin LA: Nematode
abundance at the oxygen minimum zone in the Arabian Sea. Deep-Sea
Research II 2000, 47:75-85.
13. Levin LA, Huggett CL, Wishner KF: Controls of deep-sea benthic
community structure by oxygen and organic-matter gradients in
the eastern Pacific Ocean. Journal of Marine Research 1991,
49:763-800.
14. Danovaro R, Dell’Anno A, Pusceddu A, Gambi C, Heiner I, Mobjerg
Kristensen R: The first metazoa living in permanently anoxic conditions.
BMC Biology 2010, 8:30.
15. Jacobs DK, Lindbergh DR: Oxygen and evolutionary patterns in the sea:
Onshore/offshore trends and recent recruitment of deep-sea faunas.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 1998, 95:9396-9401.
16. Bhadury P, Austen MC, Bilton DT, Lambshead PJD, Rogers AD, Smerdon GR:
Evaluation of combined morphological and molecular techniques for
marine nematode (Terschellingia spp.) identification. Marine Biology 2008,
154:509-518.
17. Derycke S, Remerie T, Backeljau T, Vierstraete A, Vanfleteren J, Vincx M,
Moens T: Phylogeography of the Rhabditis (Pellioditis) marina species
complex: evidence for long-distance dispersal, and for range expansions
and restricted gene flow in the northeast Atlantic. Molecular Ecology
2008, 17:3306-3322.
18. Vanhove S, Arntz W, Vincx M: Comparative study of the nematode
communities on the southeastern Weddel Sea shelf and slope
(Antarctica). Marine Ecology Progress Series 1999, 181:237-256.
19. Bussau C: Taxonomische und ökologische untersuchungen an
Nematoden des Peru-Beckens. Christian-Albrechts-Universität,
Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftlichen Fakultät; 1993.

Bik et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:389
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/389

20. Muthumbi A, Soetaert K, Vincx M: Deep-sea nematodes from the Indian
Ocean: new and known species of the family Comesomatidae.
Hydrobiologia 1997, 346:25-57.
21. Fonseca G, Decraemer W, Vanreusel A: Taxonomy and species distribution
of the genus Manganonema Bussau, 1993 (Nematoda: Monhysterida).
Cahiers de Biologie Marine 2006, 47:189-203.
22. Holterman M, Holovachov O, Van den Elsen S, van Megen H, Bongers T,
Bakker J, Helder J: Small subunit ribosomal DNA-based phylogeny of
basal Chromadoria (Nematoda) suggests that transitions from marine to
terrestrial habitats (and vice versa) require relatively simple adaptations.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2008, 48:758-763.
23. Van Gaever S, Olu K, Derycke S, Vanreusel A: Metazoan meiofaunal
communities at cold seeps along the Norweigan margin: Influence of
habitat heterogeneity and evidence for connection with shallow water
habitats. Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers 2009,
56:772-785.
24. Platt HM, Zhang ZN: New species of marine nematodes from Loch Ewe,
Scotland. Bulletin of the British Museum of Natural History (Zoology) 1982,
42:227-246.
25. De Mesel I, Lee HJ, Vanhove S, Vincx M, Vanreusel A: Species diversity and
distribution within the deep-sea nematode genus Acantholaimus on the
continental shelf and slope in Antarctica. Polar Biology 2006, 29:860-871.
26. Lambshead PJD, Platt HM: Bathyeurystomina, a new genus of free-living
marine nematodes (Enchelidiidae) from the Rockall Trough. Cahiers de
Biologie Marine 1979, 20:371-380.
27. Derycke S, Remerie T, Vierstraete A, Backeljau T, Vanfleteren J, Vincx M,
Moens T: Mitochondrial DNA variation and cryptic speciation within the
free-living marine nematode Pellioditis marina. Marine Ecology Progress
Series 2005, 300:91-103.
28. De Gruijter JM, Polderman AM, Zhu XQ, Gasser RB: Screening for
haplotypic variability within Oesophagostomum bifurcum (Nematoda)
employing a single-strand conformation polymorphism approach.
Molecular and Cellular Probes 2002, 16:185-190.
29. Hu M, Chilton NB, Zhu XQ, Gasser RB: Single-strand conformation
polymorphism-based analysis of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase
subunit 1 reveals significant substructuring in hookworm populations.
Electrophoresis 2002, 22:27-34.
30. Brey T, Dahm C, Gorny M, Klages M, Stiller M, Arntz WE: Do Antartic
benthic invertebrtes show an extended level of eurybathy? Antarctic
Science 1996, 8:3-6.
31. Pawlowski J, Fahrni J, Lecroq B, Longet D, Cornelius N, Excoffier L,
Cedhagen T, Gooday AJ: Bipolar gene flow in deep-sea benthic
foraminifera. Molecular Ecology 2007, 16:4089-4096.
32. Zardus JD, Etter RJ, Chase MR, Rex MA, Boyle EE: Bathymetric and
geographic population structure in the pan-Atlantic deep-sea bivalve
Deminucula atacellana (Schenck, 1939). Molecular Ecology 2006,
15:639-651.
33. Giere O: Meiobenthology: The microscopic motile fauna of aquataic
sediments. 2 edition. Berlin: Springer; 2008.
34. Hagerman GM, Rieger RM: Dispersal of benthic meiofauna by wave and
current action in Bogue Sound, North Carolina, USA. Marine Ecology 1981,
2:245-270.
35. Faust MA, Gulledge RA: Associations of microalgae and meiofauna in
floating detritus at a mangrove island, Twin Cays, Belize. Journal of
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 1996, 197:159-175.
36. Arroyo NL, Aarnio K, Bonsdorff E: Drifting algae as a means of recolonizing defaunated sediments in the Baltic Sea. A short-term
microcosm study. Hydrobiologia 2006, 554:83-95.
37. Armonies W: Occurrence of meiofauna in Phaeocystis seafoam. Marine
Ecology Progress Series 1989, 53:305-309.
38. Shanks AL, Edmondson EW: The vertical flux of metazoans (holoplankton,
meiofauana, and larval invertebrates) due to their association with
marine snow. Limnology and Oceanography 1990, 35:455-463.
39. Barnes DKA, Milner P: Drifting plastic and its consequences for sessile
organism dispersal in the Atlantic Ocean. Marine Biology 2005, 146:815-825.
40. Schlichting HE, Speziale BJ, Zink RM: Dispersal of algae and protozoa by
Antarctic flying birds. Antarctic Journal of the United States of America 1978,
13:147-149.
41. Da Fonsêca-Genevois V, Somerfield PJ, Baeta Neves MH, Coutinho R,
Moens T: Colonization and early succession on artificial hard substrata
by meiofauna. Marine Biology 2006, 148:1039-1050.

Page 10 of 10

42. Moens T, Van Gansbeke D, Vincx M: Linking Estuarine nematodes to their
suspected food. A case study from the Westerschelde Estuary (southwest Netherlands). Journal of the Marine Biologial Association of the UK
1999, 79:1017-1027.
43. Lorenzen S, Prein M, Valentin C: Mass aggregations of the free-living
marine nematode Pontonema vulgare (Oncholaimidae) in organically
polluted fjords. Marine Ecology Progress Series 1987, 37:27-34.
44. Prein M: Evidence for a scavenging lifestyle in the free-living nematode
Pontonema vulgare. Kieler Meeresforsch 1988, 6:389-394.
45. Yoder M, Tandingan De Ley I, King IW, Mundo-Ocampo M, Mann J,
Blaxter M, Poiras L, De Ley P: DESS: a versitile solution for preserving
morphology and extractable DNA of nematodes. Nematology 2006,
8:367-376.
46. Somerfield PJ, Warwick RM, Moens M: Meiofauna Techniques. In Methods
for the Study of Marine Benthos. 3 edition. Edited by: Eleftheriou A, McIntyre
A. Oxford: Blackwell Science; 2005:229-272.
47. Holterman M, van der Wurff A, van den Elsen S, van Megen H, Bongers T,
Holovachov O, Bakker J, Helder J: Phylum-wide analysis of SSU rDNA
reveals deep phylogenetic relationships among nematodes and
accelerated evolution toward crown clades. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 2006, 23:1792-1800.
48. Blaxter ML, De Ley P, Garey JR, Liu LX, Scheldeman P, Vierstraete A,
Vanfleteren JR, Mackey L, Dorris M, Frisse LM, Vida JT, Thomas WK: A
molecular evolutionary framework for the phylum Nematoda. Nature
1998, 392:71-75.
49. Meldal BHM, Debenham NJ, De Ley P, Tandingan De Ley I, Vanfleteren JR,
Vierstraete AR, Bert W, Borgonie G, Moens T, Tyler P, Austen MC, Blaxter M,
Rogers AD, Lambshead PJD: An improved molecular phylogeny of the
Nematoda with special emphasis on marine taxa. Molecular Phylogentics
and Evolution 2007, 42:622-636.
50. De Ley P, Félix MA, Frisse LM, Nadler SA, Sternberg PW, Thomas WK:
Molecular and morphological characterisation of two reproductively
isolated species with mirror-image anatomy (Nematoda: Cephalobidae).
Nematology 1999, 1:591-612.
51. Pruesse E, Quast C, Knittel K, Fuchs BM, Ludwig W, Peplies J, Glöckner FO:
SILVA: a comprehensive online resource for quality checked and aligned
ribosomal RNA sequence data compatible with ARB. Nucleic Acids
Research 2007, 35:7188-7196.
52. Ludwig W, Strunk O, Westram R, Richter L, Meier H, Kumar Y, Buchner A,
Lai T, Steppi S, Jobb G, Förster W, Brettske I, Gerber S, Ginhart AW, Gross O,
Grumann S, Hermann S, Jost R, König A, Liss T, Lüßmann R, May M,
Nonhoff B, Reichel B, Strehlow R, Stamatakis A, Stuckmann N, Vilbig A,
Lenke M, Ludwig T, et al: ARB: a software environment for sequence
data. Nucleic Acids Research 2004, 32:1363-1371.
53. Van Megen H, Van den Elsen S, Holterman M, Karssen G, Mooyman P,
Bongers T, Holovachov O, Bakker J, Helder J: A phylogenetic tree of
nematodes based on about 1200 full-length small subunit ribosomal
DNA sequences. Nematology 2009, 11:927-950.
54. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 2007, 24:1596-1599.
55. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: Maximum Likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22:2688-2690.
56. Stamatakis A, Hoover P, Rougemont J: A rapid bootstrapping algorithm
for the RAxML web-servers. Systematic Biology 2008, 75:758-771.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-389
Cite this article as: Bik et al.: Low endemism, continued deep-shallow
interchanges, and evidence for cosmopolitan distributions in free-living
marine nematodes (order Enoplida). BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010
10:389.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
