<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Variation in global codon usage bias among prokaryotic organisms is associated with their lifestyles</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109. doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-10-r109"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Maya Botzman"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

RESEARCH

Open Access

Variation in global codon usage bias among
prokaryotic organisms is associated with their
lifestyles
Maya Botzman and Hanah Margalit*

Abstract
Background: It is widely acknowledged that synonymous codons are used unevenly among genes in a genome.
In organisms under translational selection, genes encoding highly expressed proteins are enriched with specific
codons. This phenomenon, termed codon usage bias, is common to many organisms and has been recognized as
influencing cellular fitness. This suggests that the global extent of codon usage bias of an organism might be
associated with its phenotypic traits.
Results: To test this hypothesis we used a simple measure for assessing the extent of codon bias of an organism,
and applied it to hundreds of sequenced prokaryotes. Our analysis revealed a large variability in this measure: there
are organisms showing very high degrees of codon usage bias and organisms exhibiting almost no differential use
of synonymous codons among different genes. Remarkably, we found that the extent of codon usage bias
corresponds to the lifestyle of the organism. Especially, organisms able to live in a wide range of habitats exhibit
high extents of codon usage bias, consistent with their need to adapt efficiently to different environments.
Pathogenic prokaryotes also demonstrate higher extents of codon usage bias than non-pathogenic prokaryotes, in
accord with the multiple environments that many pathogens occupy. Our results show that the previously
observed correlation between growth rate and metabolic variability is attributed to their individual associations
with codon usage bias.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that the extent of codon usage bias of an organism plays a role in the
adaptation of prokaryotes to their environments.

Background
The genetic code is composed of triplets of four nucleotide types for 20 amino acids. This redundancy implies
the use of synonymous codons - different codons encoding the same amino acid. Synonymous codons may differ in their frequency of occurrence among different
genes within an organism, a phenomenon known as
‘codon usage bias’ [1]. It was demonstrated that many
bacteria and yeast undergo translational selection, with
highly expressed genes preferentially using codons
assumed to be translated faster and/or more accurately
by the ribosome [2,3]. Previous works suggested that
these codons are the ones matching abundant tRNAs,
* Correspondence: hanahm@ekmd.huji.ac.il
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Medical
Research Israel-Canada, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, POB 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel

which are organism-specific [3-7]. Other works demonstrated additional factors affecting the frequencies of the
synonymous codons in an organism, such as the genome GC content [8,9]. Thus, the preferred codons per
amino acid may vary between different organisms, based
on their tRNA repertoire and other factors.
While it was claimed that most prokaryotes undergo
translational selection [10], it is conceivable that various
organisms may differ in the extent of codon usage bias
across their genes and in the forces determining it. For
several organisms, such as Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a positive correlation between codon
bias of genes and their protein levels was demonstrated
(for example, [11,12]), suggesting that in those organisms translational selection is predominant. Other
organisms, such as Helicobacter pylori [13], show almost
no differential use of synonymous codons among

© 2011 Botzman and Margalit; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

different genes. While in the former organisms a mixture of mutation bias and natural selection underlies
codon usage bias, in the latter organisms codon usage
bias is mostly explained by mutation and very weak, if
any, translational selection [14]. It was suggested by
Andersson and Kurland [15] and recently substantiated
by Kudla et al. [16] that selection towards highly
adapted codons in highly expressed proteins has a global
effect on the cell. By this convention, high expression of
certain genes is mainly achieved by various mechanisms,
such as regulation of transcription and/or translation
initiation, and the use of well adapted codons in these
genes guarantees efficient recycling of the ribosomes,
resulting in an increase in cellular fitness. This might be
reflected in a relatively enhanced translation of the
whole proteome. It is thus intriguing to examine the
association between the extent of codon usage bias of
various organisms and their phenotypic traits towards
understanding the environmental conditions where high
extent of codon usage bias is advantageous. Of note, difference in the usage of synonymous codons that is uniform across all genes in a genome and probably arises
from non-selective processes is not addressed here, but
the different usage of codons among genes in a genome.
We regard an organism as ‘biased’ or ‘unbiased’ in
association with its codon usage if the distribution of
synonymous codons in its highly expressed genes differs
from that in other genes in the genome. Several measures were proposed to estimate the extent of codon
usage bias at an organism scale, enabling the classification of an organism as biased or unbiased [14,17-19].
Here we present such a measure based on the Codon
Adaptation Index (CAI) [20] of individual genes. The
CAI of a gene ranges between 0 and 1, with higher
values indicating the use of more preferred codons. The
extent of preference of each codon is determined by its
frequency among the codons in genes encoding ribosomal proteins, using the latter as proxy for highly
expressed genes. An organism-scale measure is obtained
by computing CAIave, the average of the CAI values of
all genes in a genome [17]. Since per definition highly
expressed genes are assigned high CAI values, low or
high CAIave values indicate whether there is a difference
in codon usage between highly expressed genes and the
rest of the genes in a genome. A low CAI ave of an
organism implies that there are many genes with low
CAI values, and therefore preferred codons are assigned
only to a small group of highly expressed genes. Accordingly, low CAIave values are indicative of biased organisms. A high CAI ave of an organism implies that the
CAI values of most genes are similar to those of genes
encoding the ribosomal proteins, and therefore there is
no differential use of synonymous codons among the
genes encoded in that organism. Such organisms are

Page 2 of 11

unbiased in regard to their codon usage. Another measure for the extent of codon usage bias of an organism
is based on another measure of gene codon usage bias,
the Nc (the effective number of codons) [21]. This gene
measure ranges between 20 and 61, with lower values
indicating the use of less codon types per amino acid
along a protein-coding gene, which most often are the
more preferred codons. To evaluate the extent of codon
usage bias of an organism, a measure based on the difference between the average Nc values of the ribosomal
genes and the average Nc values of the rest of the genes
in the genome, Ncdiff, is computed [17]. Organisms with
high values of Ncdiff exhibit large extents of codon usage
bias, and vice versa. The two genomic measures, CAIave
and Ncdiff, are highly correlated (Figure S1 in Additional
file 1; Pearson r = -0.91, P ≈ 0, n = 1,169).
Here we used these measures to characterize the
extent of codon usage bias in 773 prokaryotic species
representing 1,169 sequenced genomes. We demonstrate
a wide range in the extent of codon usage bias among
the various organisms, and trace the possible sources of
this variation. Our results indicate that similarity in the
extents of codon usage bias of different organisms
reflects a similar ecological strategy they share.

Results
Organisms differ in their extent of codon usage bias

We analyzed the extent of codon usage bias in 773
organisms: 699 bacteria and 74 archaea, representing
1,169 genomes (Materials and methods). Since the
results for CAIave and NCdiff are highly correlated, we
present here the results for the first measure and in
Additional file 1 the results for the second measure (Figures S2, S4, S5 and S6 in Additional file 1).
We first examined the association between the genomic values of CAI ave and GC content (Figure 1), and
observed that prokaryotes with extreme GC contents
exhibit a narrower range of CAIave values than the other
prokaryotes. Such organisms cannot achieve low CAIave
values because their extreme GC content defines a limited repertoire of codons that are shared by both ribosomal genes and the rest of the genes, thus resulting in
unbiased genomes (high CAIave). To avoid bias in our
conclusions due to the inclusion of organisms with
extreme GC content, these organisms were excluded
from further analyses. The next analyses were carried
out for prokaryotes with GC contents between 35% and
65%, a total of 518 organisms.
As shown in Figure 2a, there is a wide distribution of
CAIave values across the genomes, ranging between 0.35
(most biased organisms) and 0.82 (least biased organisms), with an average value of 0.59, median of 0.59 and
standard deviation of 0.097. Another informative genomic measure is the standard deviation of CAI values of

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

Average CAI

Page 3 of 11

GC content
Figure 1 Prokaryotes showing extreme GC content have relatively high CAIave values spanning a narrower range. Scatter plot of GC
content (x-axis) and CAIave (y-axis) of 773 organisms. Here and in all other figures CAIave is indicated as ‘Average CAI’. CAI: Codon Adaptation
Index; GC: genome content.

genes in a genome, which indicates the breadth of
values used in calculating the genomic CAIave measures.
To get an impression of this property across genomes
we computed for each genome the coefficient of variation of CAI values of genes (standard deviation divided
CAIave). As expected, we find a strong inverse correlation between the CAIave values and their coefficients of
variation (Figure 2b; Pearson r = -0.81, P = 4.186E-122,
n = 518), indicating that the distribution of CAI values
of genes in biased organisms (low CAI ave ) is broader
than that of CAI values of genes in unbiased organisms.
To substantiate this result we investigated in each
genome the difference in the usage of each codon
between highly expressed genes and the rest of the
genes encoded in the genome. For each organism we
calculated the frequency of each codon out of the total
codons encoding the corresponding amino acid, once in
the ribosomal genes and once in the rest of the genes.
We then calculated the average difference between
codon frequencies in the ribosomal genes and in the

rest of the genes. Comparison of these average differences and CAI ave values across genomes revealed a
strong negative correlation (Pearson r = -0.8593, P =
2.2639E-152, n = 518). This result reinforces our view
that organisms with low CAI ave are under stronger
translational selection, resulting in differences between
the codons in the highly expressed genes and the
codons in the rest of the genes, while in organisms with
high CAIave there is almost no differential use of codons
between highly and weakly expressed genes. The latter
unbiased organisms can be of two types: either the
synonymous codons of both ribosomal and other genes
are determined based on the GC content of the genome,
or most genes use the preferred codons (that fit the
abundant tRNAs or follow other rules that determine
codon preference). To this end we looked at the association between CAIave and the average Nc of a genome in
all 1,169 organisms. Low average Nc values imply that
all genes in the genome use a specific set of codons and
high average Nc values represent genomes where all

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

(a)

(b)

Fraction of prokaryotes

CAI coefficient of variation

Page 4 of 11

Average CAI

(c)

r = -0.8108
p = 4.186e-122

Average CAI

Fraction of genes

Fraction of genes

(d)

CAI

CAI

Figure 2 Wide variation in the extents of codon usage bias among various organisms. (a) Distribution of CAIave values among 518
prokaryotes with GC content between 35% and 65%. CAIave is indicated as ‘Average CAI’. (b) Negative correlation between organisms’ CAIave
values and their coefficients of variation. (c) Distribution of CAI values among the genes of Syntrophothermus lipocalidus (high CAIave, indicating
low extent of codon usage bias). (d) Distribution of CAI values among the genes of Vibrio vulnificus (low CAIave, indicating high extent of codon
usage bias). CAI: Codon Adaptation Index; GC: genome content.

genes use a mixture of codons. Indeed, we find among
genomes with high CAI ave these two types of trends
(Figure S3a in Additional file 1). As to the biased genomes (with CAIave below the average of 0.59), most of
them use relatively many codons across their genes
(average Nc values above 40), but apparently they use
specific codons in their highly expressed genes, represented by the ribosomal genes. In general, it seems that
the average values of Nc are strongly determined by the
GC content of the genome (Figure S3b in Additional file
1). Especially, as we noted above, in genomes with
extreme GC content, where the possibilities of codon
variation are severely restricted by the specific nucleotide repertoire, the average Nc values are low.
Organisms at the right tail of the CAIave distribution
are the least biased. The prokaryote with the smallest
extent of codon usage bias (highest CAIave value, 0.82)

is Syntrophothermus lipocalidus, a thermophilic, syntrophic, fatty-acid-oxidizing anaerobe that belongs to
the Clostridia class [22] (Figure 2c). Other prokaryotes
with almost as high CAIave values are quite diverse: Geobacter metallireducens (CAIave value of 0.79) is an anaerobic bacterium that uses iron oxides as the electron
acceptor in the oxidation of organic compounds to carbon dioxide [23], Nitrosococcus watsoni (CAIave value of
0.78) is an aerobic marine bacterium, and Coxiella burnetti (CAIave value of 0.78) is a facultative, intracellular
pathogenic bacterium that causes the Q fever.
Organisms at the left tail of the distribution are the
most biased. The prokaryote that exhibited the greatest
extent of codon usage bias (lowest CAIave value, 0.35) is
Vibrio vulnificus, a human pathogen of the Gammaproteobacteria class (Figure 2d). Interestingly, other organisms that have such large extents of codon usage bias

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

Page 5 of 11

are also pathogenic: Streptococcus suis is a swine pathogen, Vibrio cholera causes cholera in humans and Corynebacterium diphtheria causes diphtheria, an upper
respiratory tract illness (CAIave values of 0.36, 0.37, and
0.38, respectively). This finding led us to examine the
distribution of CAIave values among pathogenic versus
non-pathogenic prokaryotes (Figure 3a). As shown in
Figure 3a, the distribution among pathogenic bacteria is
biased to the left compared to non-pathogenic bacteria,
with pathogenic prokaryotes having statistically significant lower CAIave values (P = 1.26E-15 by Mann-Whitney test), indicating they are more biased.
Biased organisms can be classified by their phenotypic
traits

We annotated each genome with its CAIave, NCdiff and
several phenotypic traits, such as its oxygen requirement
and range of growth temperatures (Additional file 2).
This annotation system (Table 1) has enabled us to
compare the distributions of the CAI ave values of

(a)

different groups of organisms, tagged according to a
particular phenotypic trait.
This analysis (Figure 3) indicated that groups of prokaryotes classified by their oxygen requirement differ statistically significantly in the distributions of CAIave values
(P = 1.99E-23 by Kruskal-Wallis test). Facultative organisms exhibited the largest extent of codon usage bias
and anaerobic organisms showed the smallest values (P
= 2.92E-12, Mann-Whitney test between facultative and
aerobic; P = ~0 between facultative and anaerobic; P =
3.14E-6 between aerobic and anaerobic). Examining
groups of prokaryotes that live in environments that differ in their salinity levels demonstrated statistically significant differences among them (P = 2.13E-5 by MannWhitney test). Organisms that live in different temperature ranges showed statistically significant differences in
their CAI ave values (P = 5.52E-21 by Mann-Whitney
test): thermophiles demonstrated statistically significantly higher CAI ave values than mesophiles. Intriguingly, we found that organisms living in multiple

(b)
Non pathogenic

Aerobic

Pathogenic

Facultative

Prokaryotes frequency

Anaerobic

(c)

(d)
Non halophilic

Mesophilic

Halophilic

Thermophilic

Average CAI
Figure 3 Prokaryotes exhibiting different environmental characteristics show different extents of codon usage bias. The 518
prokaryotes were classified according to various properties, and the distributions of CAIave values of the different classes were compared. (a)
Pathogenic prokaryotes show larger extents of codon usage bias than non-pathogenic prokaryotes. CAIave is indicated as ‘Average CAI’. (b)
Facultative prokaryotes show the largest extent of codon usage bias and anaerobic prokaryotes show the smallest extent. (c) Prokaryotes that
live in different salinity environments show a statistically significant difference in CAIave values. (d) Thermophilic and hyperthermophilic
prokaryotes show a smaller extent of codon usage bias than mesophilic prokaryotes. CAI: Codon Adaptation Index; GC: genome content.

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

Table 1 Classification of organisms by phenotypic traits
Environmental property

Number of prokaryotes

Pathogenicity
Pathogenic

138

Non-pathogenic

263

Total

401

Oxygen requirement
Aerobic

142

Anaerobic

135

Facultative
Microaerophilic

150
12

Total

439

Salinity
Extreme halophilic

7

Mesophilic

19

Moderate halophilic

20

Non-halophilic
Total
Temperature range

58
104

Hyperthermophilic

35

Mesophilic

361

Psychrophilic

12

Thermophilic

51

Total

459

Habitat
Multiple
Specialized

127
81

Total

208

habitats have statistically significantly lower CAI ave
values than organisms living in specialized habitats (Figure 4; P = 6.3E-10 by Mann-Whitney test). This result
is consistent with the results presented above for the
other phenotypic traits and generalizes them. Pathogenic
bacteria often live in multiple environments outside and
within their host, and facultative organisms live in environments with and without oxygen. On the other hand,
thermophiles (found above to be less biased than mesophiles) are usually restricted to a specific environment
with a specific temperature. The consistency between
these results is also implied by the interdependence
between these different phenotypic traits (as shown by
c2 test; Table S2 in Additional file 1).
Phenotypic traits rather than phylogenetic relatedness
underlie the similarities in codon usage bias between
organisms

It is possible that biased organisms are evolutionarily
related and their similar values of CAI ave stem from
their phylogenetic relatedness. To test this, we computed the correlation coefficient between the phylogenetic distance (Materials and methods) and difference in
CAI ave values of pairs of organisms. The pairwise

Page 6 of 11

measures were computed for pairs of prokaryotes and
pairs of archaea, and the correlation analysis was carried
out for all pairs together (Figure 5). No correlation was
found between the phylogenetic distances and the differences in CAIave (Pearson r = 0.078), implying no noticeable influence of the phylogeny on the extent of codon
usage bias. As shown in Figure 5, organisms with very
small differences in their CAIave values can be distantly
separated on the evolutionary tree. Of note, organisms
that are extremely close on the phylogenetic tree do not
exhibit differences in CAIave that are larger than 0.15.
Thus, in these cases the similarity in CAIave values may
stem from the close phylogenetic relatedness. However,
beyond a certain (low) threshold, there is no dependence between the phylogenetic distance and extent of
codon usage bias. These results strengthen our previous
conclusion that the extent of codon usage bias is associated with the phenotypic traits of the organism.
The empirical association between growth rate and
metabolic variability is attributed to their individual
associations with codon usage bias

Previous studies showed that there is an association
between codon bias and growth rate [17,24] and
between growth rate and metabolic variability [25]. To
verify that our result is not indirectly inferred from
these two associations, we computed the correlation
coefficient between pairs of properties (CAIave, growth
rate, and type of habitat (multiple or specific)). This
analysis included 82 organisms for which we had information on their growth rate and habitat type. We
repeated this analysis twice. Once we simply computed
the correlation coefficient of two variables, and in the
second analysis we performed partial correlation, controlling for the third variable (Table 2a). This analysis
demonstrates that our conclusion about an association
between CAIave and the type of habitat is independent
of the correlations with the growth rate, as the two correlation coefficients obtained in the two computations,
with and without taking into account the growth rate,
were very similar (r = 0.46, P = 1.25E-5 and r = 0.43, P
= 6.9E-5, respectively). Intriguingly, the correlation
between growth rate and habitat type was shown to be
highly dependent on CAI ave . While the correlation
between these two variables was found to be approximately 0.2 and nearly statistically significant (P = 0.07),
the partial correlation, controlling for CAIave, dropped
substantially to 0.04 (P = 0.6). Our results suggest that
the empirical association observed between growth rate
and metabolic variability can be attributed to their individual associations with codon usage bias. Of note, the
correlation between CAI ave and habitat type was the
highest obtained and it is highly statistically significant.
To verify that our conclusions are not affected by

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

Page 7 of 11

Prokaryotes frequency

Multiple
Specialized

Average CAI
Figure 4 The ability of an organism to live in multiple habitats is the feature most correlated with the extent of codon usage bias.
The 518 prokaryotes were divided into two groups - organisms who each live in a specialized environment and organisms who each live in
multiple habitats - and the CAIave values of the different groups were compared. CAIave is indicated as ‘Average CAI’. CAI: Codon Adaptation
Index; GC: genome content.

inclusion of closely related organisms, which might
introduce redundancy in the data, we repeated the analysis with a subset of the 82 organisms, including 24
organisms that are phylogenetically remote (Materials
and methods; Table 2, Analysis B). Using this dataset,
the correlations between growth rate and both habitat
type and codon bias were not statistically significant.
The correlation and partial correlation between CAIave
and habitat type were consistent with the results for the
whole dataset.

Discussion
It is widely acknowledged that synonymous codons are
used unevenly among genes in a genome, with genes
encoding highly expressed proteins being enriched with
specific codons. It is still under debate whether the biased
use of certain codons in highly expressed genes is one of
the causes or the result of the high expression level. On

the one hand, it was shown that the use of certain codons
affects directly the speed of translation [26] and its accuracy [27], and codon optimization is even used to elevate
the levels of proteins expressed outside their original
context [28,29]. On the other hand, Kudla et al. [16]
showed that the variation in the levels of proteins translated from synthetic green fluorescent protein constructs,
varying only at synonymous sites, was not correlated with
the codon usage. They found that high expression was
not associated with specific codons but with avoidance of
secondary structure at the translation initiation site. This
supports the proposition [15] that selection for well
adapted codons in highly expressed genes does not affect
directly the level of individual proteins, but provides a
global benefit to the cell, as it assures efficient recycling
of the ribosomes, which leads to an increase in cellular
fitness. It should be noted that avoidance of secondary
structure at the 5’ end of the mRNA is only one

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

Evolutionary distance bewteen two genomes

Page 8 of 11

Difference between average CAI values of two genomes
Figure 5 No correlation between pairwise evolutionary distances across the phylogenetic tree and difference in CAIave values of pairs
of organisms. Scatter plot of the difference in CAIave values between each pair of two organisms in our data (x-axis) and their phylogenetic
distances (y-axis). CAIave is indicated as ‘Average CAI’. The pairwise distances across the phylogenetic tree were based on the tree generated in
[38] and computed as the path length between two organisms through the most recent common ancestor. CAI, Codon Adaptation Index.

premise by which translation selection for preferred
codons in highly expressed genes has a global effect motivated us to investigate its association with the phenotypic
traits of a wide range of organisms. It should be noted
that our conclusions are not affected by whether or not
the suggested global effect is accompanied by local effects
on the translation efficiency.
There have been various attempts to explain what
makes certain codons preferred over others in highly

mechanistic strategy that may lead to high levels of gene
expression [30], and other mechanisms could underlie
high levels of expression as well. These include high transcription level from strong promoters, high stability of
the mRNA and/or efficient translation initiation by optimal Shine-Dalgarno sequences. Thus, different highly
expressed genes might use well adopted codons to
improve cellular fitness, independent of the molecular
mechanism underlying their high expression. The

Table 2 Correlations and partial correlations between growth rate, habitat type and global codon usage bias
Growth rate and habitat type
r

Growth rate and codon usage bias

P

r

P

Habitat type and codon usage bias
r

P

Analysis A
Correlation

0.1995

0.0723

0.3451

0.0015

0.4619

1.2538E-5

Partial correlation

0.0482a

0.6693a

0.291b

0.0084b

0.4274c

6.919E-5c

0.0368

0.8645

0.2971

0.1586

0.4692

0.0207

NA

NA

NA

NA

0.4802c

0.0204c

Analysis B
Correlation
Partial correlation

Analysis A was based on 82 organisms; analysis B was based on a subset of 24 organisms, which are phylogentically remote from each other. Pearson correlation
coefficients were computed. aControlling for codon usage bias; bcontrolling for habitat type; ccontrolling for growth rate. NA, when the Pearson correlation
coefficient was not statistically significant, partial correlation was not computed.

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

expressed genes, from correspondence to abundant
tRNAs to physical considerations regarding the optimal
stability of codon-anticodon interaction (summarized in
[17]). Here we have not dealt with these various possible
types of preferred codons but regarded them as the
codons used by highly expressed genes in a genome,
based on the premise that selection favored the most
adapted codons in highly expressed genes. Hence, our
analysis was based on measures that compare the codon
usage of all genes to the codon usage of highly
expressed genes, represented by the set of ribosomal
genes in each genome (CAIave and Ncdiff). Such a comparative measure should provide us information on the
selection forces that act on individual genes and on the
whole genome. Indeed, we find a wide variation in these
measures across genomes (Figure 2a; Figure S2 in Additional file 1), where some organisms are highly biased
and others show only very slight, if any, difference
between the codon usage in ribosomal genes and other
genes. It is possible that the lack of selection implied for
some of the unbiased genomes actually reflects their
small population size [31], but in the absence of a reliable measure of effective population size in bacteria, we
are unable to assess this further. In biased genomes
selection acts only on genes that are highly expressed,
to assure the overall translation mechanism to operate
efficiently. Thus, our analysis is in line with previous
observations [17] that there are organisms where translational selection is operational (biased genomes) and
others where it is not (unbiased). In our study we used
the set of ribosomal genes as a representative set of
highly expressed genes. When data of gene expression
in many prokaryotes become available it should be possible to extend our study by using sets of highly
expressed genes based on their measured expression
levels. It would be possible then to divide the organisms
into those with high and low variation in gene expression, and to examine how the level of variation in gene
expression is reflected in CAIave values.
We found that pathogenic prokaryotes have statistically significantly lower CAI ave than non-pathogenic
prokaryotes, but with a substantial overlap between the
histograms of those two groups. This result might be
surprising in view of previous studies that found that
pathogenic lifestyle is linked to relaxation of selection
[32-34], which should be linked to reduced codon bias.
It is possible to reconcile the discrepancy by dividing
the pathogenic and the non-pathogenic prokaryotes into
two subtypes: some are capable of living in multiple
environments and some stay mainly host-associated.
When we compared pathogenic and non-pathogenic
groups of host-associated prokaryotes there was no statistically significant difference in their CAIave values (P =
0.06 by Mann-Whitney test), but when we compared

Page 9 of 11

pathogenic and non-pathogenic groups of prokaryotes
living in multiple habitats, the pathogenic prokaryotes
showed statistically significantly lower CAIave values (P
= 5.624E-7 by Mann-Whitney test). Therefore, it seems
that pathogenic host-associated microbes like C. burnetti, which is an intracellular pathogen with an extremely high CAI ave value of 0.78, are not exposed to
strong selection, while other pathogens that are able to
live in multiple habitats are still under stronger selection
than non-pathogenic prokaryotes living in multiple habitats when it comes to selection on codon usage.
Previous studies discussed the correspondence
between ecology preferences and codon adaptation
[35,36]. Our results suggest that organisms may adjust
to metabolic variability by maintaining a high extent of
codon usage bias (reflected by their low CAIave values).
Previous studies analyzed the association between codon
adaptation and growth rate and between growth rate
and metabolic variability [14,17,24,25]. One study
showed that most bacterial organisms choose one of
two alternative ecological strategies: living in multiple
habitats with a large extent of co-habitation or living in
a specialized niche in which the co-habitation is limited.
It was shown that growth rate is statistically significantly
correlated with metabolic variability encountered by an
organism, suggesting a universal principle by which
metabolic flexibility is associated with a need to grow
fast, perhaps because of the greater extent of competition [25]. Independently, Rocha demonstrated an association between bacteria with large extents of codon
usage bias and fast growth, and also an association with
the number of tRNA genes [17,24]. It was demonstrated
that fast growing bacteria have more tRNA genes of
fewer types, and suggested that the translation in those
organisms depends on fast tRNA diffusion to the ribosome. That study proposed that co-evolution of the
tRNA pool and the codon usage bias allows more efficient translation of highly expressed genes, and that the
codon usage bias in highly expressed genes relative to
the rest of the genome is predicted to be under stronger
selection in fast growing organisms. Our results tie
these two results together and suggest that translational
selection towards most adapted codons in highly
expressed genes is operational in organisms that live in
variable environments, enabling them to efficiently
address the metabolic variability and the competition.

Conclusions
Codon usage bias in highly expressed genes was suggested to have a global effect on the cell, increasing cellular fitness. Here we perform the first large-scale study
that examines the relationship between codon usage
bias and the phenotypic traits of prokaryotic organisms.
Our analysis revealed a large variation in the global

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

extent of codon bias among prokaryotic genomes, which
is associated with their lifestyles. Especially, we discovered that organisms living in multiple habitats, including
facultative organisms, mesophiles and pathogenic bacteria, exhibit high extents of codon usage bias, consistent with their need to adapt efficiently to different
environments.

Materials and methods
Data organization

We retrieved 1,169 genome sequences from the NCBI
Entrez Genome Project database [37]. For species that had
sequenced genomes for more than one subspecies, we
maintained one representative subspecies, which was chosen randomly. This resulted in a data set of 773 prokaryotes. From this list, only prokaryotes with GC content
larger than 35% and smaller than 65% were included for
further analyses, resulting in a data set of 518 prokaryotes.
Computation of codon bias measures at an organism
scale

Genome CAI ave : for each organism we computed the
average of CAI values over all genes in the genome [17].
The CAI of a gene was computed as described in [20].
NCdiff: for each organism we calculated the Nc value
for each gene in the genome, as described in [21]. We
next computed the average Nc value of the genes
encoding ribosomal proteins (Nc (rib)) and the average
Nc value of the rest of the genome (Nc (all)) [17]. NCdiff
was obtained by:
Nc (all) − Nc (rib)
Nc (all)
Comparison between groups of organisms

The prokaryotes were classified according to their environmental characteristics (oxygen requirement, salinity,
temperature range and habitat) and also whether they
are pathogenic, based on the documentation in the
NCBI Entrez Genome Project database (detailed in
Additional file 2). The number of organisms annotated
with each property is detailed in Table 1. Comparisons
between the value distributions of organism measures
(CAIave or NCdiff) were performed by Mann-Whitney or
Kruskal-Wallis tests.
Phylogenetic distances between organisms

The pairwise distances across the phylogenetic tree were
based on the tree generated in [38] and computed as
the path length between two organisms through the
most recent common ancestor. We used 2,016 possible
pairs of 64 bacteria and 78 possible pairs of 13 archaea
in this analysis.

Page 10 of 11

Correlations and partial correlations between growth
rate, habitat type and codon usage bias

This analysis included 82 prokaryotes, for which we had
information for both their growth rates and habitat
types. The growth rates were obtained from [24]. The
prokaryotes’ environmental annotations were obtained
from the NCBI Entrez Genome Project database (multiple habitat-living organisms were annotated as 0, and
specialized organisms were annotated as 1). The extents
of codon usage bias were represented as CAIave values.
We repeated the analysis using a subset of 24 organisms, which are all phylogentically remote from each
other, based on the phylgenetic tree used above [38].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Additional figures and tables.
Additional file 2: Table S1 - features and characteristics of the
prokaryotes included in this study. This file contains data and
annotations of the organisms included in the analysis (nam, tax ID,
CAIave, median CAI, coefficient of variation (of CAI), Ncdiff, average Nc,
environmental properties, if it is the representative subspecies of the
species, super kingdom, GC content).

Abbreviations
CAI: Codon Adaptation Index.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Israel Science Foundation administered by
the Israeli Academy for Sciences and Humanities. We thank Ruth Hershberg
for her critical comments on the manuscript. We are grateful to all our lab
members for fruitful discussions.
Authors’ contributions
MB carried out all analyses, conceived the work, analyzed the data and
wrote the paper. HM conceived the work, analyzed the data and wrote the
paper. All authors have read and approved the manuscript for publication.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 13 April 2011 Revised: 16 June 2011
Accepted: 27 October 2011 Published: 27 October 2011
References
1. Grantham R, Gautier C, Gouy M, Mercier R, Pave A: Codon catalog usage
and the genome hypothesis. Nucleic Acids Res 1980, 8:r49-r62.
2. Gouy M, Gautier C: Codon usage in bacteria: correlation with gene
expressivity. Nucleic Acids Res 1982, 10:7055-7074.
3. Bennetzen JL, Hall BD: Codon selection in yeast. J Biol Chem 1982,
257:3026-3031.
4. Post LE, Nomura M: DNA sequences from the str operon of Escherichia
coli. J Biol Chem 1980, 255:4660-4666.
5. Ikemura T: Correlation between the abundance of Escherichia coli
transfer RNAs and the occurrence of the respective codons in its protein
genes: a proposal for a synonymous codon choice that is optimal for
the E. coli translational system. J Mol Biol 1981, 151:389-409.
6. Ikemura T: Codon usage and tRNA content in unicellular and
multicellular organisms. Mol Biol Evol 1985, 2:13-34.
7. Dong H, Nilsson L, Kurland CG: Co-variation of tRNA abundance and
codon usage in Escherichia coli at different growth rates. J Mol Biol 1996,
260:649-663.

Botzman and Margalit Genome Biology 2011, 12:R109
http://genomebiology.com/2011/12/10/R109

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.
22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

27.
28.

29.
30.

31.
32.

33.
34.

Chen SL, Lee W, Hottes AK, Shapiro L, McAdams HH: Codon usage
between genomes is constrained by genome-wide mutational
processes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:3480-3485.
Hershberg R, Petrov DA: General rules for optimal codon choice. PLoS
Genet 2009, 5:e1000556.
Supek F, Skunca N, Repar J, Vlahovicek K, Smuc T: Translational selection is
ubiquitous in prokaryotes. PLoS Genet 2010, 6:e1001004.
Lithwick G, Margalit H: Hierarchy of sequence-dependent features
associated with prokaryotic translation. Genome Res 2003, 13:2665-2673.
Ghaemmaghami S, Huh WK, Bower K, Howson RW, Belle A, Dephoure N,
O’Shea EK, Weissman JS: Global analysis of protein expression in yeast.
Nature 2003, 425:737-741.
Lafay B, Atherton JC, Sharp PM: Absence of translationally selected
synonymous codon usage bias in Helicobacter pylori. Microbiology 2000,
146:851-860.
Sharp PM, Bailes E, Grocock RJ, Peden JF, Sockett RE: Variation in the
strength of selected codon usage bias among bacteria. Nucleic Acids Res
2005, 33:1141-1153.
Andersson SG, Kurland CG: Codon preferences in free-living
microorganisms. Microbiol Rev 1990, 54:198-210.
Kudla G, Murray AW, Tollervey D, Plotkin JB: Coding-sequence
determinants of gene expression in Escherichia coli. Science 2009,
324:255-258.
Rocha EP: Codon usage bias from tRNA’s point of view: redundancy,
specialization, and efficient decoding for translation optimization.
Genome Res 2004, 14:2279-2286.
dos Reis M, Savva R, Wernisch L: Solving the riddle of codon usage
preferences: a test for translational selection. Nucleic Acids Res 2004,
32:5036-5044.
Suzuki H, Saito R, Tomita M: Measure of synonymous codon usage
diversity among genes in bacteria. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:167.
Sharp PM, Li WH: The codon Adaptation Index–a measure of directional
synonymous codon usage bias, and its potential applications. Nucleic
Acids Res 1987, 15:1281-1295.
Wright F: The ‘effective number of codons’ used in a gene. Gene 1990,
87:23-29.
Sekiguchi Y, Kamagata Y, Nakamura K, Ohashi A, Harada H:
Syntrophothermus lipocalidus gen. nov., sp. nov., a novel thermophilic,
syntrophic, fatty-acid-oxidizing anaerobe which utilizes isobutyrate. Int J
Syst Evol Microbiol 2000, 50:771-779.
Lovley DR, Phillips EJ: Novel mode of microbial energy metabolism:
organic carbon oxidation coupled to dissimilatory reduction of iron or
manganese. Appl Environ Microbiol 1988, 54:1472-1480.
Vieira-Silva S, Rocha EP: The systemic imprint of growth and its uses in
ecological (meta)genomics. PLoS Genet 2010, 6:e1000808.
Freilich S, Kreimer A, Borenstein E, Yosef N, Sharan R, Gophna U, Ruppin E:
Metabolic-network-driven analysis of bacterial ecological strategies.
Genome Biol 2009, 10:R61.
Tuller T, Carmi A, Vestsigian K, Navon S, Dorfan Y, Zaborske J, Pan T,
Dahan O, Furman I, Pilpel Y: An evolutionarily conserved mechanism for
controlling the efficiency of protein translation. Cell 2010, 141:344-354.
Akashi H: Synonymous codon usage in Drosophila melanogaster: natural
selection and translational accuracy. Genetics 1994, 136:927-935.
Deng T: Bacterial expression and purification of biologically active
mouse c-Fos proteins by selective codon optimization. FEBS Lett 1997,
409:269-272.
Gustafsson C, Govindarajan S, Minshull J: Codon bias and heterologous
protein expression. Trends Biotechnol 2004, 22:346-353.
Gu W, Zhou T, Wilke CO: A universal trend of reduced mRNA stability
near the translation-initiation site in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. PLoS
Comput Biol 2010, 6:e1000664.
dos Reis M, Wernisch L: Estimating translational selection in eukaryotic
genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26:451-461.
Hershberg R, Lipatov M, Small PM, Sheffer H, Niemann S, Homolka S,
Roach JC, Kremer K, Petrov DA, Feldman MW, Gagneux S: High functional
diversity in Mycobacterium tuberculosis driven by genetic drift and
human demography. PLoS Biol 2008, 6:e311.
Hershberg R, Tang H, Petrov DA: Reduced selection leads to accelerated
gene loss in Shigella. Genome Biol 2007, 8:R164.
Ochman H, Moran NA: Genes lost and genes found: evolution of
bacterial pathogenesis and symbiosis. Science 2001, 292:1096-1099.

Page 11 of 11

35. Man O, Pilpel Y: Differential translation efficiency of orthologous genes is
involved in phenotypic divergence of yeast species. Nat Genet 2007,
39:415-421.
36. Jiang H, Guan W, Pinney D, Wang W, Gu Z: Relaxation of yeast
mitochondrial functions after whole-genome duplication. Genome Res
2008, 18:1466-1471.
37. Maglott D, Ostell J, Pruitt KD, Tatusova T: Entrez Gene: gene-centered
information at NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D26-31.
38. Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.
doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-10-r109
Cite this article as: Botzman and Margalit: Variation in global codon
usage bias among prokaryotic organisms is associated with their
lifestyles. Genome Biology 2011 12:R109.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
