<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>DPI-ELISA: a fast and versatile method to specify the binding of plant transcription factors to DNA in vitro</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Plant Methods 2010, 6:25. doi:10.1186/1746-4811-6-25"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Luise H Brand"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

PLANT METHODS

METHODOLOGY

Open Access

DPI-ELISA: a fast and versatile method to specify
the binding of plant transcription factors to DNA
in vitro
Luise H Brand, Tobias Kirchler, Sabine Hummel, Christina Chaban, Dierk Wanke*

Abstract
Background: About 10% of all genes in eukaryote genomes are predicted to encode transcription factors. The
specific binding of transcription factors to short DNA-motifs influences the expression of neighbouring genes.
However, little is known about the DNA-protein interaction itself. To date there are only a few suitable methods to
characterise DNA-protein-interactions, among which the EMSA is the method most frequently used in laboratories.
Besides EMSA, several protocols describe the effective use of an ELISA-based transcription factor binding assay e.g.
for the analysis of human NFB binding to specific DNA sequences.
Results: We provide a unified protocol for this type of ELISA analysis, termed DNA-Protein-Interaction (DPI)-ELISA.
Qualitative analyses with His-epitope tagged plant transcription factors expressed in E. coli revealed that EMSA and
DPI-ELISA result in comparable and reproducible data. The binding of AtbZIP63 to the C-box and AtWRKY11 to the
W2-box could be reproduced and validated by both methods. We next examined the physical binding of the Cterminal DNA-binding domains of AtWRKY33, AtWRKY50 and AtWRKY75 to the W2-box. Although the DNA-binding
domain is highly conserved among the WRKY proteins tested, the use of the DPI-ELISA discloses differences in W2box binding properties between these proteins. In addition to these well-studied transcription factor families, we
applied our protocol to AtBPC2, a member of the so far uncharacterised plant specific Basic Pentacysteine
transcription factor family. We could demonstrate binding to GA/TC-dinucleotide repeat motifs by our DPI-ELISA
protocol. Different buffers and reaction conditions were examined.
Conclusions: We successfully applied our DPI-ELISA protocol to investigate the DNA-binding specificities of three
different classes of transcription factors from Arabidopsis thaliana. However, the analysis of the binding affinity of
any DNA-binding protein to any given DNA sequence can be performed via this method. The DPI-ELISA is cost
efficient, less time-consuming than other methods and provides a qualitative and quantitative readout. The
presented DPI-ELISA protocol is accompanied by advice on trouble-shooting, which will enable scientists to rapidly
establish this versatile and easy to use method in their laboratories.

Background
The developmental processes and specific cellular
responses of organisms are governed by differential gene
expression. The transcriptional regulation of genes is
directly dependent on the presence or absence of transcription factors, which are able to bind to specific short
promoter elements. It is of major interest to unravel the
interaction between eukaryote transcription factors and
their DNA-motif companions. This question needs to be
* Correspondence: dierk.wanke@zmbp.uni-tuebingen.de
ZMBP Pflanzenphysiologie, Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

addressed from both, the protein and the DNA perspective. Several standard methods are routinely applied to
identify DNA-binding proteins for an already known
DNA sequence consensus [1,2]. One frequently used
method is the yeast-one-hybrid screening approach:
Hybrid-gene products bind specifically to the DNA
sequence under investigation and thereby mediate
reporter activation [2]. Subsequently, a detailed analysis
of the binding specificity is essentially needed for proper
characterisation of the transcription factor. Here, the
most successful laboratory approach has been the
in vitro electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) [3].

© 2010 Brand et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

If the tested protein binds to radioactively labelled
DNA-probes, a shifted band signal corresponding to the
molecular weight of the DNA-protein complex is
detected [3,4]. Because EMSA is based on gel electrophoresis technology, the amount and length of the
DNA-probes to be analysed is limited. Although some
other methods exist that assist in the elucidation of
DNA-protein interactions, a routine method to address
this question from the protein perspective is so far lacking [3,5]. The solution to this problem could be the
DNA-protein-interaction enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (DPI-ELISA). The basic design of the method was
established for the first time about 15 years ago [6].
Since then, similar ELISA-based transcription factor
assays to study DNA-protein interactions have been
published [7-11]. While all kinds of transcription factors
can potentially be studied by the DPI-ELISA, it has
mainly been applied to investigate inflammatory
responses triggered by NFB in human [7,9,10]. Surprisingly, DPI-ELISA was not substituted for traditional
EMSA in other research fields, although it was clear
that the DPI-ELISA has some advantages over the traditional EMSA [6-10]: it does not rely on radioactive
detection, displays a 10-fold increased sensitivity and
provides a qualitative and quantitative readout. For
example, there are only two publications in plant
sciences that utilise DPI-ELISA to study bZIP proteins
according to a protocol by Renard et al. [9,12,13].
Here, we evaluated different ELISA-based transcription factor assays from human research (Additional file
1) [6-10] to provide a unified laboratory scale DPIELISA protocol for plant transcription factors. For the
first time we show that recombinant plant transcription
factors yield comparable results with EMSA and with
our DPI-ELISA protocol. Initially, we applied our protocol to verify results already published on AtbZIP63 and
AtWRKY11 binding to the C-box and the W2-box,
respectively. We demonstrate the versatile use of the
DPI-ELISA by analysing the binding specificities of so
far uncharacterised plant transcription factors
(AtWRKY33, AtWRKY50 and AtWRKY75, AtBPC2).
Finally, we provide a step-by-step overview on notes and
advice on trouble-shooting.

Materials and methods
Plasmid construction

The cDNA of the desired transcription factor was amplified by PCR without a stop codon for subsequent cloning
into pENTR/D-TOPO (Invitrogen). After sequencing, the
specific insert was recombined via Gateway (Invitrogen)
LR-reaction into appropriate destination vectors pETDEST42 (Invitrogen) (AtbZIP63, AtWRKYs) or pET32bGW (vector database MPI, Cologne, [14]) (AtBPC2). As
negative controls, untransformed BL21/RIL cells and cells

Page 2 of 11

transformed with empty vectors, that lack the Gateway
cassette (Invitrogen), were included. The expressed fusion
proteins used in this study were as follows: AtbZIP63 amino acids 1-314 of AT5G28770, C-terminal V5:His;
AtWRKY11DBD - amino acids 229-325 of AT4G31550,
C-terminal V5:His; AtWRKY33cDBD - amino acids 346449 of AT2G38470, C-terminal V5:His; AtWRKY50DBD amino acids 99-173 of AT5G26170, C-terminal V5:His;
AtWRKY75DBD - amino acids 58-145 of AT5G13080, Cterminal V5:His; AtBPC2 - amino acids 1-279 of
AT1G14685, N-terminal His.
Protein expression and protein extraction for DPI-ELISA

Different expression systems and protein extraction
methods are compatible with the described DPI-ELISA.
We used the E. coli strain BL21/RIL for protein expression. The cells were grown over night in selective liquid
media and diluted 1:20 in LB-medium without antibiotics the next day. At 2 hours after dilution protein
expression was induced by the addition of 1 mM of
IPTG. The cells were collected by centrifugation (2500
g, 20 min, 4°C) at an optical density E 600 = 1 (4-6
hours) and washed (10 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5-8, 100 mM
NaCl). The cell sediment was resuspended in protein
extraction buffer (4 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl,
8% (v/v) glycerol, 0.2% biotin-free BSA, 5 mM dithiothreithol (DTT), 1× complete proteinase inhibitor without EDTA (Roche)). NOTE: DTT and BSA need to be
added after measuring the total protein amount of the
extracts via Bradford Assay. Native protein extraction
was performed by sonication (AtWRKYs, AtBPC2) [6,8].
The total protein amount of the extracts was measured
via Bradford Assay (BioRad). The protein extracts were
kept either at 4°C ready to use or at -20°C. If stored at
-80°C, glycerol is added to a final concentration of 20%
(v/v). The presence of proteins was verified by SDSPAGE and western blotting [15].
Electrophoretic mobility Shift Assay

EMSAs were performed essentially according to previous
publications [13,14,16]. The recombinant proteins (AtbZIP63, AtWRKY11DBD) were expressed in E. coli BL21/
RIL cells and extracted under denaturing conditions.
Renaturing and refolding were performed by dialysis over
night in either native buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8;
100 mM NaCl) or directly in protein extraction buffer.
Binding reaction was performed with different concentrations of protein, 1 μg poly(dI-dC) and 2 ng of 33P-radioactively labelled DNA probe. DNA-protein complexes
were separated from unbound probes on native 6% polyacrylamide gels, or 3% polyacrylamide gels supplemented
with 0.6% agarose, in TBE buffer at 200 V for 2.5 hours.
After electrophoresis, the gels were dried and subjected
to autoradiography at -70°C with an intensifying screen.

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

Page 3 of 11

Recommended buffers and equipment for DPI-ELISA
Ds-bio DNA probe

for short sequences biotinylated (sense) and nonbiotinylated (antisense) oligonucleotides were ordered
from companies (Metabion, Biozym); for long sequences
PCR with one 5’ biotinylated primer can be used [9]
Annealing buffer

40 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5-8, 20 mM MgCl 2 , 50 mM
NaCl
Protein dilution buffer (is equivalent to protein
extraction buffer without proteinase inhibitors)
4 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 8% (v/v) glycerol,
0.2% biotin-free BSA, 5 mM dithiothreithol (DTT)

WASH

TBS-T

20 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 180 mM NaCl, 0.1% (v/v)
Tween20

WASH [optional]

PBS

10 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 pH7.5, 140 mM NaCl
PBS-T

10 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 pH7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 0.1%
(v/v) Tween20

WASH

Blocking reagent

5% non-fat dry milk (Roth) in TBS-T or antibody specific blocking reagent according to the manufacturers’
instructions (-His:HRP antibody specific from Qiagen)
Antibody

WASH

a-epitope specific antibody conjugated with horseradish
peroxidase (a-His:HRP from Qiagen 1:1’000 in PBS-T)
or a-protein specific primary antibody and secondary
antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase [9]
OPD-solution

4 mg ortho-phenylenediamine (OPD-tablets from
Sigma), 3 μl 30% H2O2 in 6 ml CP-buffer
CP-buffer

10 mM Na2HPO4, 100 mM citric acid, pH 5 with NaOH
Stopping solution

2N HCl
ELISA micro well plates

streptavidin-coated (5 pmol/well), pre-blocked, clear 96well plates (Reacti-Bind™streptavidin coated clear 96well plates with SuperBlock blocking buffer from Pierce,
Thermo Fisher Scientific)
ELISA-reader

Tecan Safire plate reader

Figure 1 Schematic workflow of the DPI-ELISA. Double stranded
biotinylated (ds-bio) DNA-probes (I) are immobilised on a
streptavidin-coated microtiter plate (II). After blocking the plate with
an appropriate reagent (III), incubation with a crude protein extract
from E. coli containing the epitope tagged protein under
investigation is performed (IV). The epitope tagged protein is
retained inside the well by physical binding to the immobilized
DNA and, thus, can be detected with appropriate antibodies which are conjugated with horseradish peroxidase in our
experiments (V). Finally, peroxidase substrate (OPD) is added for the
colorimetric quantification of specifically bound transcription factors
to dsDNA-probes (VI). Between each of the workflow steps, at least
three washing steps of the microtiter plate are performed; washing
between steps III and IV is optional. Incubation times and
approximate duration of the photometric detection step (peroxidase
reaction) are given at the right hand side.

Detailed protocol of the DPI-ELISA

The overview of the entire protocol is displayed in
Figure 1. All steps are carried out at room temperature,
except step II (37°C). Careful washing between each step
is recommended.
I Preparation of ds-bio DNA probe {3 hours}:
Short single stranded DNA (25-30 nucleotides) can be
ordered from various companies; we ordered non-modified oligonucleotides (Metabion) and 5’ biotinylated

complementary oligonucleotides (Biozym) independently. The sense and antisense oligonucleotides were
diluted in annealing buffer (2 μM each) and heated in a
water bath for 3 min at 95°C and left to cool down
slowly to room temperature to construct the ds-bio
DNA probe (2 μM). If longer ds-bio DNA fragments are
desired, PCR with one 5’ biotinylated primer is recommended [9]. The ds-bio DNA probe was stored at -20°C.

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

Data analysis

The absorbance values displayed are the mean of two
independent samples and standard deviation (Figure 2A
and 2B, 3B).
The relative absorbance data provides the mean of
two independent samples and standard deviation, relative (in percentage) to the AtWRKY11 DBD - W2 Bio probe mean (Figure 2C).
The relative units data was calculated by normalisation of the mean of two independent samples and standard deviation to the BL21 negative control (Figure 4A).
The fold differences of the negative interaction (AtBPC2
- GAm-probe) to positive interaction (AtBPC2 - GAprobe) were calculated after subtraction of the BL21
negative control (1 rel. unit) (Figure 4B).
In cases in which data of two ELISA-plates was joined
(Figure 5B), the mean of two independent samples was
divided by the plate specific mean of the BL21 negative

A

C-motif
AATTCTCCCTTATCTGACGT AGCATCCGG
Cm-motif
AATTCTCCCTTATCTGCAGT AGCATCCGG
C

Cm

absorbance

2
1,5
1
0,5
0
CBio

CmBio

bZIP63

B W2-motif
aaaTTATTCAGCCATCAAAAGTT

CCAATAAT

W2m-motif
aaaTTATTCAGCCATCAAAAGTT

CCAATAAT

W2 W2m

3
absorbance

2,5
2
1,5
1
0,5
0
W2Bio W2mBio
WRKY11CTD

C
relative absorbance [%]

II DNA-binding to the streptavidin-coated plates {1
hour}:
The most informative results were gained with 2 pmol
of ds-bio DNA in TBS-T added to each well and incubated at 37°C (60 μl per well).
Wash: 3 × 150 μl TBS-T
III Blocking of residual binding spots of the micro well
plate {30 min.}:
Blocking was performed with either 5% non-fat dry
milk (Roth) in TBS-T or a-His:HRP antibody specific
blocking reagent (Qiagen) (100 μl per well).
Wash: 3 × 150 μl TBS-T (optional, but recommended)
IV Protein binding to immobilised ds-bio DNA {1 hour}:
Up to five different amounts of total protein extract in
protein dilution buffer should be tested (e.g. 0.5 μg,
5 μg, 25 μg, 50 μg, 100 μg in 60 μl per well).
Wash: 3 × 150 μl PBS-T
V Antibody binding of protein bound to DNA {1 hour}
We recommend using an antibody that is directly conjugated with horseradish peroxidase for the immunological detection of the a-epitope. We used a-His-HRP
antibody conjugate (Qiagen) diluted 1:1’000 in PBS-T
(60 μl per well).
Wash: 2 × 150 μl PBS-T, 2 × 150 μl PBS.
VI Photometric detection (peroxidase reaction) via
ELISA-reader {< 45 min.}: Plates were incubated with
OPD-solution (60 μl per well) in the dark for max. 30
minutes. After adding an equal volume of stopping solution, the plate was kept for further 10 minutes in the
dark under mild agitation (150 rpm). The extinction was
measured at 492 nm using 650 nm (plate background)
as a reference wavelength in the ELISA-reader. In the
case of kinetic measurements no stopping solution was
added and the absorbance was measured at 450 nm for
1 hour with an interval of 5 min.

Page 4 of 11

100
75
50
25
0

2

10 50

W2Bio
W2Bio + W2

2 10 50
W2mBio
W2Bio + W2m

WRKY11CTD

BL21

Figure 2 Comparison of the classical EMSA and the DPI-ELISA.
The specific binding to DNA is investigated with plant transcription
factors of two classes: AtbZIP63 (A.) and AtWRKY11DBD (B.). Specific
binding of the recombinant proteins to double stranded (ds) DNAprobes by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA; left panel) or
DPI-ELISA (right panel) is displayed. The sequences (top panel) of
the dsDNA-probes are given in 5’-3’-orientation for the sense strand;
changes of bases within the known binding consensi (bold face) are
highlighted (red) in the mutated oligonucleotide versions [13,14].
For EMSA, specific retardation bands are highlighted by red boxes;
for the DPI-ELISA a picture of the respective plate-wells is displayed
below each column of the histogram graph. A. Renatured AtbZIP63
is tested with double stranded C- and Cm-probes. B. AtWRKY11DBD
contained in crude protein extract from E. coli is tested with double
stranded W2- and W2m-probes. Both experiments (A. + B.) confirm
results from previous publications [13,14]. C. Competition
experiment: The specific binding of AtWRKY11DBD to W2-probes is
competed with non-biotinylated dsDNA. Different amounts of W2or W2m-probe (0, 2, 10, 50 pmol) were added to AtWRKY11DBD
crude extract immediately prior the plate incubation. ELISA-plates
are coated with 2 pmol of double stranded biotinylated W2Bioprobe. The biotinylated dsDNA W2mBio-probe incubated with
AtWRKY11DBD extract or the W2Bio-probe incubated with BL21/RIL
cells (transformed with an empty vector construct) serve as negative
control.

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

control, leading to relative units. Next, the respective
means and standard deviations of both ELISA-plate data
sets were calculated. Finally, the unified relative units
data is given relative (in percentage) to the AtBPC2 GABio-probe mean.

Results and Discussion
Comparison of EMSA and DPI-ELISA to elucidate DNAprotein interaction

Initially, we asked whether the results obtained by our
DPI-ELISA protocol (Figure 1) are qualitatively comparable to those from well-established methods like EMSA.
We chose to study AtbZIP63, as two previous publications utilised a similar ELISA-based transcription factor
assays for the analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana bZIP
transcription factors but did not show a comparison to
EMSA data [12,13]. We analysed the DNA-binding specificities of the same protein extract of AtbZIP63 to the
C-box by both, EMSA and DPI-ELISA (Figure 2A). Both
methods resulted in the same assertion, that AtbZIP63
is capable of binding to the C-box containing probe
[13], but not to its mutated version (Cm-probe).
We next used the DPI-ELISA on a selected member
of the WRKY transcription factor family from Arabidopsis. Ciolkowski et al. [14] already investigated the binding sequence of some AtWRKY proteins by EMSA,
which they found to be the W2-box for all tested
WRKY family members. We decided to verify the binding specificity of the DNA-binding domain of
AtWRKY11 (AtWRKY11DBD) by EMSA and DPI-ELISA
(Figure 2B). For this EMSA crude E. coli extracts were
used, which were extracted under denaturing conditions
and subjected to renaturation and refolding steps; for
the DPI-ELISA proteins were extracted under native
conditions. Indeed, both methods revealed that AtWRKY11DBD specifically bound to the W2-box but not to
its mutated version (W2m-probe) (Figure 2B). To define
the specificity of the DNA-protein interaction by DPIELISA, we competed the AtWRKY11DBD - W2Bio-probe
interaction by adding varying amounts of non-biotinylated W2-probe to the protein binding reaction (Figure
2C). We could show that an equal amount of biotinylated versus non-biotinylated W2-probe already
decreased the absorbance by 25%. Additionally, increasing amounts of non-biotinylated W2-probes successfully
competed with the binding of AtWRKY11 DBD to the
immobilized biotinylated W2-probe in a concentration
dependent manner. Finally, the addition of 50 pmol
W2-probe almost abolished the DNA-protein interaction. In contrast, the interaction between AtWRKY11 DBD and the W2-probe could not be competed
with varying amounts of non-biotinylated W2m-probe,
which verified the sequence specific AtWRKY11DBD W2-box interaction (Figure 2C). These results clearly

Page 5 of 11

demonstrate that the DPI-ELISA is a valuable method
for the analysis of DNA-protein interactions and that
the results were comparable to those of the classical
EMSA. Additionally, we could show that the DNA-binding domain of a transcription factor is sufficient for the
study of DNA-binding specificities by DPI-ELISA, which
is especially important in cases of cellular lethality
caused by full-length proteins [14,17].
Application of the DPI-ELISA to other WRKY-proteins from
Arabidopsis thaliana

The plant specific WRKY transcription factors constitute a very large subgroup of the WRKY-GCM1-superfamily of zinc-finger DNA-binding proteins that are
variable in length and can be composed of diverse
domains. Common to all family members is the highly
conserved WRKY-domain, which mediates DNAbinding and, hence, confers the specificity of the DNAprotein interaction [18,19]. The analysis of the domain
composition and phylogenetic investigations of the conserved WRKY-domain sequence led to the sorting of
the proteins into several (sub-) groups. The high
sequence similarity of the WRKY-domain and the
results of previous experiments led to the speculation
that all WRKY-proteins might possibly recognise the
same consensus, which would be the W-box (5’TTGACC/T-3’) [14,18,20,21].
For further studies we chose three WRKY-transcription factors from different groups: AtWRKY33 constitutes a group I member and is the Arabidopsis thaliana
ortholog of the well-studied PcWRKY1 of parsley
[22-24]. Proteins from this WRKY-group have two
WRKY-domains, of which only the C-terminal DNAbinding domain (cDBD) has been shown to mediate
DNA-binding [14,18]. AtWRKY50 and AtWRKY75
belong to subgroup IIc, which forms an independent
phylogenetic clade in WRKY-domain analyses, that has
not been in the focus of research so far [18,20,21]. The
conserved WRKY-domains of both proteins are only a
little shorter in size than the full-length proteins [18]
and disclose several changes at otherwise conserved
amino acid positions (Figure 3A). Interestingly,
AtWRKY50 possesses an aberrant WRKYGKK peptidemotif and, thus, lacks the almost invariant WRKYGQK
consensus, which possibly confers the specific binding
to the 5’-TGAC-3’ W-box core. However, there are only
subtle amino acid differences between the WRKY-DNAbinding domains (DBDs) of AtWRKY11, AtWRKY33,
AtWRKY50 and AtWRKY75 in general (Figure 3A).
As we were interested in whether the chosen WRKYproteins do all bind to the W2-box, we tested these
interactions by DPI-ELISA. Indeed, AtWRKY33cDBD and
AtWRKY50 DBD bound to the W2-probe (Figure 3B).
The absorbance of AtWRKY50 DBD - W2-probe was

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

Page 6 of 11

Figure 3 DNA-binding capacity of Arabidopsis thaliana WRKY33cDBD, WRKY50DBD and WRKY75DBD to the W2-probe. A. Amino acid
alignment of WRKY11, WRKY33, WRKY50 and WRKY75 DNA-binding domain (DBD) sequences. The highly conserved WRKY-consensus and the
zinc-finger are highlighted (white on black); conserved amino acid residues are displayed in bold face. Non-conserved residues that might
contribute to differences in WRKY-domain function by altering the binding specificities are highlighted in red. B. DPI-ELISA results for
AtWRKY33cDBD, AtWRKY50DBD and AtWRKY75DBD binding to the W2- or W2m-probes. Different amounts of extracts (0.5, 5, 25 μg total protein per
well) were examined with W2Bio- and W2mBio-probes. Representative wells of the microtiter plate are shown below the graph for visual
inspection. C. Detection of the immobilized His-epitope tagged proteins with anti-His-antibodies in the crude extract by western blotting using
(left). Asterisks indicate the appropriate bands (AtWRKY33cDBD - 20 kDa, AtWRKY50DBD - 17 kDa, AtWRKY75DBD - 15 kDa). Coomassie-stained SDSPAGE (right) is shown for equal loading of the gel.

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

more than 2-fold higher than AtWRKY33 cDBD - W2probe. This can be partially explained by different concentrations of the epitope tagged WRKY-protein within
the crude protein extract, which could be supported by
the western transfer (Figure 3C). Another reason for the
differences in the absorbance of AtWRKY50DBD - W2probe and AtWRKY33cDBD - W2-probe could be a promiscuous binding to a more degenerate DNA-sequence
consensus. Interestingly, AtWRKY50DBD also exhibited a
weak affinity to the mutated W2m-probe, which was
not observed for AtWRKY11 DBD or AtWRKY33 cDBD ,
even when higher protein amounts were added (data
not shown). We assume that these differences in binding
specificity directly translate to altered residues in the
DNA-binding domain (Figure 3A). The most apparent
difference is the glutamine to lysine exchange within the
WRKYGQK consensus of AtWRKY50 (WRKYGKK), in
which the positively charged lysine might be responsible
for the increased affinity to the W2m-probe.
In contrast to our findings on AtWRKY50DBD, AtWRKY33cDBD or AtWRKY11DBD, we could not detect any
binding of AtWRKY75 DBD to the W2- or the W2mprobe, even when 100 μg of crude protein extract were
loaded (data not shown). As AtWRKY75DBD was present
at the expected size on the SDS-PADE with subsequent
western analysis and in equivalent amounts compared to
the other tested WRKY-proteins, we assume that AtWRKY75DBD did not recognise any binding motif inside the
respective DNA-probe sequences.
Application and adjustment of DPI-ELISA to another
Arabidopsis thaliana transcription factor - Basic
Pentacysteine 2

To elucidate the applicability of the DPI-ELISA, we
applied the method to Arabidopsis Basic Pentacysteine 2
(AtBPC2), a zinc finger-like transcription factor, which
had not been studied so far. AtBPC2 constitutes a putative GA/TC-repeat binding protein and is a close homolog of AtBPC1, that has already been shown to bind a
DNA-consensus of the GA-probe [25,26]. During first
experiments we could indeed show that AtBPC2 is capable of binding to the GA-probe but not to the GAmprobe, where the specific GA/TC-repeat binding sites
were mutated (Figure 4). To test the binding specificity
of the AtBPC2 - GA-probe interaction, the binding was
competed with increasing amounts of non-biotinylated
double stranded GA- or GAm-probe (Figure 4B). The
addition of the GA-probe to the protein binding of
AtBPC2 specifically prevents positive interaction with
the immobilised biotinylated GA-probes in a concentration dependent manner, while this binding could not be
competed with the GAm-probe (see also trouble shooting). The addition of 1000 pmol DNA generally reduced
the protein binding specificity irrespective of the DNA-

Page 7 of 11

GA-probe
TAA G AGAAAGAAAGA

AAGA

GTTTC

GAm-probe
TAA G AGCAAGTAAGA

ACGA

GTTTC

Figure 4 Employing the DPI-ELISA to other transcription factors.
A. The DNA-sequences of the double stranded GA-probe and the
mutated oligonucleotide version (GAm-probe) are given in 5’ to 3’orientation for the sense strand; mutated bases are highlighted (red)
[25]. The specific binding of AtBPC2 to the GABio-probe was shown
by a competition experiment with non-biotinylated dsDNA (B.).
Different amounts of GA- or GAm-probes (0, 100, 1000 pmol) were
added to AtBCP2 crude extract and incubated on an ELISA-plate
coated with 2 pmol of biotinylated GABio-probe. The biotinylated
double stranded GAmBio-probe incubated with AtBPC2 extract served
as negative control. Representative wells of the microtiter plate are
shown below the graph for visual inspection. The grey background
indicates the negative control (untransformed BL21/RIL cells)
reference values in percent.

sequences, which may be the result of a concentration
dependent sterical hindrance of the protein-DNA
interaction.
A crucial variable of the protocol, which could significantly interfere with specific DNA-protein interaction, is
the blocking of the wells after the DNA immobilisation.
To provide insight into the possible outcomes, the effect
of four frequently used blocking reagents was tested on
the AtBPC2 interaction with the GA- or GAm-probe
(Figure 5). The highest fold differences of the signal
over the background were achieved with the His-specific
blocking reagent (His-block from Qiagen) and with 5%
non-fat dried milk (milk). In contrast, the fold difference
and the normalised absorbance were lowest with the
DIG-specific blocking reagent (DIG-block, Roche) or

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

Page 8 of 11

with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA). This might be
due to unspecific protein-protein interaction or an elevated biotin amount, which is capable of competing
with the ds-bio DNA-probes for the streptavidin coated
sites within the wells. We tested the effect of increasing
amounts of biotin and found a concentration dependent
decrease of the positive interaction signal (data not
shown). Although milk - like BSA-contains an unknown
amount of naturally occurring biotin, the highest fold
differences were gained with 5% non-fat dried milk
(milk). In conclusion, we recommend both the Hisspecific blocking reagent and milk for blocking.
Assessing the linear absorbance range for quantitative
measurements
1% BSA

5% milk

Figure 5 The absorbance of positive DNA-protein-interaction is
affected by blocking reagents. Changes in binding affinity and
fold differences between positive and negative DNA-protein
interaction for different blocking reagents are analysed with AtBPC2
and GA- or GAm-probes (A. + B.): a-DIG blocking reagent (DIGblock), a-His blocking reagent (His-block), 1% bovine serum albumin
(BSA) in TBS-T and 5% non-fat dried milk in TBS-T (milk). A. The
average OPD-turnover is measured in an experiment over 60 min.
B. The normalised values and standard deviations at 50 minutes
incubation time are graphed as histograms for the four different
blocking reagents. The background-normalised fold-differences are
given above the respective columns. Representative wells of the
microtiter plate are shown below the graph for visual inspection.
The grey background indicates the negative control (untransformed
BL21/RIL cells) reference values.

One advantage of the DPI-ELISA is the opportunity to
quantify the results by photometry. However, the absorbance spectrum of the OPD-reaction product is pH
dependent (Figure 6A). The absorbance maximum of
the OPD-reaction product in CP-buffer (pH 5) lies at
about 450 nm, whereas after addition of stopping solution (HCl) the pH decreases, which results in a shift of
the absorbance spectrum to an absorbance maximum
close to 490 nm [27]. Qualitative measurements should
be performed always within the absorbance maximum,
but for quantitative measurements it is necessary to
obtain absorbance data within the linear absorbance
range of the photometer. This range is dependent on
the sensitivity of the detector within the ELISA-reader.
To define the linear absorbance range of the ELISAreader, we performed a dilution experiment with the
OPD-reaction product (Figure 6B). The absorbance of
the dilution series was analysed before and after the
addition of stopping solution at both 450 nm and 490
nm, which measures either in the border region of the
two spectra or at their absorbance maxima, respectively.
Subsequently, the relative difference can be calculated
by division of the absorbance in the boarder region by
the absorbance at the maximum (Figure 6C). This finally
leads to the definition of the linear absorbance range of
the ELISA-reader: Before acidification the limit of the
linear absorbance range can be assigned by the relative
difference of A 490 /A 450 . In our experiments all values
above 0.36 have the constant relative difference of 46%.
After acidification the values for the higher and the
lower limits of the linear absorbance range lay between
0.38 and 3.0 with the constant relative difference of 40%
(A450/A490). This analysis (Figure 6B + 6C) also allows
the correction of data obtained outside the linear range
for qualitative measurements.

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

Page 9 of 11

In conclusion, it is necessary to define the linear
absorbance range of each ELISA-reader to obtain quantitative data. Therefore, all absorbance data between
0.36 and 3.0 allows the quantitative readout with our
ELISA-reader. For quantitative experiment we recommend measurements at both, the absorbance maximum
and the border region of the spectrum.
Trouble-shooting

Figure 6 Influence of measurement wavelength on absorbance
values. A. The OPD-solution at pH 5 shows the highest maximum
absorbance at 450 nm (purple curve). The peroxidase reaction is
stopped for end-point measurements by acidification (addition of
stopping solution), which leads to a shift in the absorbance
spectrum with an absorbance maximum at 490 nm (green curve). B.
+ C. Dilution series of OPD-reaction product in CP-buffer is
displayed along the x-axis [log scale]. Concentration dependent
differences in the absorbance values measured at 450 nm and 490
nm before (purple lines) and after the addition of stopping solution
(green lines). B. Range of linear relationship between the
measurements at the two wavelengths is highlighted by coloured
backgrounds. C. The relative difference between the measurements
of the stopped solution [A450/A490] is ~40%, while it is ~46% for the
non-stopped reaction [A490/A450].

Although the DPI-ELISA is fast and simple compared to
other methods, there are some aspects that need to be
noted for trouble-shooting (Figure 7):
I Annealing buffer for the ds-bio DNA-probes:
It is of general importance to balance reasons for
using EDTA or EGTA to neutralise DNases by forming
complexes with Mg2+ versus an unwanted counteraction
of the DNA-protein interaction. We recommend using
chelate-free buffers.
II Strep-coated plate:
Most standard capacity streptavidin-coated plates were
coated with 5 pmol streptavidin per well. We recommend using pre-blocked plates, as the data variation was
smaller. Pre-blocked plates exhibited a lower background compared to non-pre-blocked ones. Nevertheless, additional blocking after the ds-bio DNA
immobilisation is still advisable and could further
decrease background signals. We ascertained that
2 pmol of ds-bio DNA-probes are sufficient to obtain
optimal signals, as described before [9]. It is also possible to coat the plates with streptavidin (5 pmol) in one’s
own lab, which extends the protocol duration by one
day.
Wash: Our experience showed that it is important to
take particular care during the wash procedures in general. In some cases, e.g. with AtbZIP proteins it is better
to use only PBS-T for washing, as the absorbance values
were significantly higher than those after washing with
TBS-T.
III Blocking solution:
We recommend using an antibody specific blocking
reagent if available. For the majority of the experiments
blocking with non-fat dried milk is recommendable.
Wash [optional]: We found that this washing step can
be omitted in most of the experiments, as no changes in
signal intensities were observed.
IV Protein dilution buffer:
We recommend using the protein extraction buffer
without additional proteinase inhibitors. The proteins
are stable and soluble within this buffer; as suitable
alternatives one could use TBS-T or PBS-T. The decision for or against a certain buffer for protein dilution
or extraction is critical as these are variable and account
for the specific needs attributed to the biochemical characteristics of the DNA-binding proteins. For example:

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

WASH

WASH [optional]

WASH

WASH

Figure 7 Notes for trouble-shooting. The figure provides an
overview of crucial points of the DPI-ELISA and notes for troubleshooting. At the bottom of the panel the effects of different OPDsolution buffers are shown: A carbonate buffer will lead to the
precipitation of the coloured OPD-reaction product, if it
accumulates to high amounts. Interestingly the sediment dissolves
slowly after stopping the reaction with hydrochloric acid (data not
shown). In contrast, a transparent solution is obtained with the CPbuffer before and after addition of stopping solution.

the redox-state of disulfide bonds, ion chelate formation
in zinc finger transcription factors or the phosphorylation state of the protein needs to be considered for buffer composition and, hence, might affect DNA-binding.

Page 10 of 11

We recommend using a HEPES-buffer for extraction, as
this is the most commonly used one (Additional file 1).
NOTE: When expressing epitope-tagged proteins in
E. coli, the formation of inclusion bodies can take place
resulting in lesser amount of native protein. In general it
is recommended to add proteinase inhibitors to the
extraction buffer to slow down protein degradation and
to consume protein extracts quickly.
NOTE: A successful competition experiment is performed
best at a protein concentration that yields half-maximal
signal intensities. Therefore, different amounts of crude
E. coli protein extract (e.g. 0.5 - 100 μg) need to be tested.
The subsequent addition of 2 pmol, 10 pmol and 50 pmol
non-biotinylated DNA-probes should then be sufficient to
fully compete with the positive DNA-protein interaction.
V Age of peroxidase:
It is important to notice, that protein degradation of
antibody conjugated horseradish peroxidase occurs and,
moreover, that the enzyme activity of the horseradish
peroxidase is reduced over time respective to the buffer
conditions [27].
Wash: Incomplete washing before the enzymatic reaction leads to an increased background signal and, thus,
complete discharging of the plate (e.g. by firm up-side
down shaking) is recommended after washing to remove
as much of the residual liquid as possible. Cautious
pipetting is needed, especially at this step, to avoid bubbles that disturb the subsequent measurements.
VI OPD-solution and notes for measurement:
We experienced a dependency of the solubility of the
coloured OPD-reaction product on the buffer system
(see Figure 7 bottom). We obtained the best results
using a phosphate-citrate buffer with 10 mM phosphate,
as higher phosphate concentrations inhibit the peroxidase irreversibly [27]. In contrast, the use of a carbonate
buffer caused precipitation of the product that lead to a
reduced absorbance.
To obtain qualitative results, we recommend measurements at the absorbance maximum. Quantitative evaluations can be conducted within the linear absorbance
range of the ELISA-reader (see Figure 6).
NOTE: The quality of the solutions, antibodies and
plates can be monitored by the use of appropriate controls (e.g. without immobilised ds-bio DNA, without the
addition of protein extracts, etc.).
NOTE: Another appropriate stopping solution is 2N
H2SO4.

Conclusions
The DPI-ELISA comprises a fast, non-radioactive, easy
to use and cost-efficient method to study the interaction
between plant transcription factors and DNA-probes.
We could show that this method yields results comparable to EMSA with both the full-length proteins and the

Brand et al. Plant Methods 2010, 6:25
http://www.plantmethods.com/content/6/1/25

DNA-binding domains of plant transcription factors,
only. Previous results with DPI-ELISA on human NFB
demonstrated its high sensitivity and robustness [7,9,10].
Our data on plant transcription factors were fully in
accord with these previous findings and, hence, it can
be concluded that DPI-ELISA with plant DNA-binding
proteins should be 10-times more sensitive than the traditional EMSA [8,9]. In contrast to EMSA, DPI-ELISA
offers the opportunity to investigate the binding specificities of proteins to DNA of any length and, thus, long
promoter sequences and short DNA-binding sequences
can easily be studied side-by-side on one plate.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Comparison of five previously published DPI-ELISA
protocols. Table summarising the main points of each publication
corresponding to research focus, protein expression and extraction, DNA
preparation, DPI-ELISA procedure and conclusive results. Selected were
the five research publications that report the respective protocol for
the first time - all of which contributed to human inflammatory research
[6-10].

Page 11 of 11

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.
Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Klaus Harter, Kenneth W. Berendzen and all the members of
the ZMBP Plant Physiology Department for their constant support, advice
and critical discussion on the manuscript. We thank Felicity de-Courcy for
proofreading the manuscript.
Authors’ contributions
LHB and DW conceived and designed the experiments. LHB TK SH CC DW
performed the experiments and analysed the data. LHB CC DW wrote the
manuscript.
All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

19.

20.

21.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

22.

Received: 1 September 2010 Accepted: 25 November 2010
Published: 25 November 2010

23.

References
1. Berendzen KW, Harter K, Wanke D: Analysis of plant regulatory DNA
sequences by transient protoplast assays and computer aided sequence
evaluation. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 479:311-335.
2. Wanke D, Harter K: Analysis of plant regulatory DNA sequences by the
yeast-one-hybrid assay. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 479:291-309.
3. Chorley BN, Wang X, Campbell MR, Pittman GS, Noureddine MA, Bell DA:
Discovery and verification of functional single nucleotide
polymorphisms in regulatory genomic regions: Current and developing
technologies. Mutat Res-Rev Mutat 2008, 659:147-157.
4. Cann JR: Theoretical studies on the mobility-shift assay of protein-DNA
complexes. Electrophoresis 1998, 19:127-141.
5. Hudson ME, Snyder M: High-throughput methods of regulatory element
discovery. Biotechniques 2006, 41:673, 675, 677 passim.
6. Hibma MH, Ely SJ, Crawford L: A non-radioactive assay for the detection
and quantitation of a DNA binding protein. Nucleic Acids Res 1994,
22:3806-3807.
7. Gubler ML, Abarzua P: Nonradioactive assay for sequence-specific DNA
binding proteins. Biotechniques 1995, 18:1008, 1011-1004.
8. Benotmane AM, Hoylaerts MF, Collen D, Belayew A: Nonisotopic
quantitative analysis of protein-DNA interactions at equilibrium. Anal
Biochem 1997, 250:181-185.

24.

25.

26.

27.

Renard P, Ernest I, Houbion A, Art M, Le Calvez H, Raes M, Remacle J:
Development of a sensitive multi-well colorimetric assay for active
NFkappaB. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:E21.
Jagelska E, Brazda V, Pospisilova S, Vojtesek B, Palecek E: New ELISA
technique for analysis of p53 protein/DNA binding properties. J Immunol
Methods 2002, 267:227-235.
Rosenau C, Emery D, Kaboord B, Qoronfleh MW: Development of a highthroughput plate-based chemiluminescent transcription factor assay. J
Biomol Screen 2004, 9:334-342.
Alonso R, Onate-Sanchez L, Weltmeier F, Ehlert A, Diaz I, Dietrich K, VicenteCarbajosa J, Droge-Laser W: A pivotal role of the basic leucine zipper
transcription factor bZIP53 in the regulation of Arabidopsis seed
maturation gene expression based on heterodimerization and protein
complex formation. Plant Cell 2009, 21:1747-1761.
Kirchler T, Briesemeister S, Singer M, Schutze K, Keinath M, Kohlbacher O,
Vicente-Carbajosa J, Teige M, Harter K, Chaban C: The role of
phosphorylatable serine residues in the DNA-binding domain of
Arabidopsis bZIP transcription factors. Eur J Cell Biol 2010, 89:175-183.
Ciolkowski I, Wanke D, Birkenbihl RP, Somssich IE: Studies on DNA-binding
selectivity of WRKY transcription factors lend structural clues into WRKYdomain function. Plant Mol Biol 2008, 68:92.
Sambrook J, Russell DW: Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. 3 edition.
Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2001.
Harter K, Kircher S, Frohnmeyer H, Krenz M, Nagy F, Schafer E: Lightregulated modification and nuclear translocation of cytosolic G-box
binding factors in parsley. Plant Cell 1994, 6:545-559.
Martin-de-Lara F, Sanchez-Aparicio P, de la Fuente CA, Rey-Campos J:
Biological effects of FoxJ2 over-expression. Transgenic Res 2008,
17:1131-1141.
Eulgem T, Rushton PJ, Robatzek S, Somssich IE: The WRKY superfamily of
plant transcription factors. Trends Plant Sci 2000, 5:206.
Rushton PJ, Reinstadler A, Lipka V, Lippok B, Somssich IE: Synthetic plant
promoters containing defined regulatory elements provide novel
insights into pathogen- and wound-induced signaling. Plant Cell 2002,
14:749-762.
Babu MM, Iyer LM, Balaji S, Aravind L: The natural history of the WRKYGCM1 zinc fingers and the relationship between transcription factors
and transposons. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, 34:20.
Mangelsen E, Kilian J, Berendzen KW, Kolukisaoglu UH, Harter K, Jansson C,
Wanke D: Phylogenetic and comparative gene expression analysis of
barley (Hordeum vulgare) WRKY transcription factor family reveals
putatively retained functions between monocots and dicots. BMC
Genomics 2008, 9:194.
Eulgem T, Rushton PJ, Schmelzer E, Hahlbrock K, Somssich IE: Early nuclear
events in plant defence signalling: rapid gene activation by WRKY
transcription factors. EMBO J 1999, 18:99.
Turck F, Zhou A, Somssich IE: Stimulus-dependent, promoter-specific
binding of transcription factor WRKY1 to Its native promoter and the
defense-related gene PcPR1-1 in Parsley. Plant Cell 2004, 16:85.
Lippok B, Birkenbihl RP, Rivory G, Brummer J, Schmelzer E, Logemann E,
Somssich IE: Expression of AtWRKY33 encoding a pathogen- or PAMPresponsive WRKY transcription factor is regulated by a composite DNA
motif containing W box elements. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2007,
20:420-429.
Kooiker M, Airoldi CA, Losa A, Manzotti PS, Finzi L, Kater MM, Colombo L:
BASIC PENTACYSTEINE1, a GA binding protein that induces
conformational changes in the regulatory region of the homeotic
Arabidopsis gene SEEDSTICK. Plant Cell 2005, 17:9.
Santi L, Wang Y, Stile MR, Berendzen K, Wanke D, Roig C, Pozzi C, Muller K,
Muller J, Rohde W, Salamini F: The GA octodinucleotide repeat binding
factor BBR participates in the transcriptional regulation of the
homeobox gene Bkn3. Plant J 2003, 34:813-826.
Bovaird JH, Ngo TT, Lenhoff HM: Optimizing the o-phenylenediamine
assay for horseradish peroxidase: effects of phosphate and pH, substrate
and enzyme concentrations, and stopping reagents. Clin Chem 1982,
28:6.

doi:10.1186/1746-4811-6-25
Cite this article as: Brand et al.: DPI-ELISA: a fast and versatile method
to specify the binding of plant transcription factors to DNA in vitro.
Plant Methods 2010 6:25.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
