<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Distinct evolutionary histories of the DNA-A and DNA-B components of bipartite begomoviruses</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:97. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-97"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Rob W Briddon"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Distinct evolutionary histories of the DNA-A and
DNA-B components of bipartite begomoviruses
Rob W Briddon1, Basavaprabhu L Patil2, Basavaraj Bagewadi2, Muhammad Shah Nawaz-ul-Rehman3,
Claude M Fauquet2*

Abstract
Background: Viruses of the genus Begomovirus (family Geminiviridae) have genomes consisting of either one or
two genomic components. The component of bipartite begomoviruses known as DNA-A is homologous to the
genomes of all geminiviruses and encodes proteins required for replication, control of gene expression,
overcoming host defenses, encapsidation and insect transmission. The second component, referred to as DNA-B,
encodes two proteins with functions in intra- and intercellular movement in host plants. The origin of the DNA-B
component remains unclear. The study described here was initiated to investigate the relationship between the
DNA-A and DNA-B components of bipartite begomoviruses with a view to unraveling their evolutionary histories
and providing information on the possible origin of the DNA-B component.
Results: Comparative phylogenetic and exhaustive pairwise sequence comparison of all DNA-A and DNA-B
components of begomoviruses demonstrates that the two molecules have very distinct molecular evolutionary
histories and likely are under very different evolutionary pressures. The analysis highlights that component
exchange has played a far greater role in diversification of begomoviruses than previously suspected, although
there are distinct differences in the apparent ability of different groups of viruses to utilize this “sexual” mechanism
of genetic exchange. Additionally we explore the hypothesis that DNA-B originated as a satellite that was captured
by the monopartite progenitor of all extant bipartite begomoviruses and subsequently evolved to become the
integral (essential) genome component that we recognize today. The situation with present-day satellites
associated with begomoviruses provides some clues to the processes and selection pressures that may have led to
the “domestication” of a wild progenitor of the DNA-B component.
Conclusions: The analysis has highlighted the greater genetic variation of DNA-B components, in comparison to
the DNA-A components, and that component exchange is more widespread than previously demonstrated and
confined to viruses from the Old World. Although the vast majority of New World and some Old World
begomoviruses show near perfect co-evolution of the DNA-A and DNA-B components, this is not the case for the
majority of Old World viruses. Genetic differences between Old and New World begomoviruses and the cultivation
of exotic crops in the Old World are likely factors that have led to this dichotomy.

Background
The family Geminiviridae consists of phytopathogenic
viruses with characteristic twinned, quasi-isometric virions encapsidating genomes of circular single-stranded
(ss)DNA. Taxonomically the geminiviruses are divided
into four genera, three of which (Mastrevirus, Curtovirus
and Topocuvirus) consist of viruses with monopartite
genomes only. In contrast, the genus Begomovirus
* Correspondence: iltab@danforthcenter.org
2
ILTAB, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, 975 North Warson Road, St
Louis, MO, USA

consists of viruses with either monopartite or bipartite
genomes [1]. Prior to 1990 all begomoviruses for which
Koch’s Postulates had been satisfied using cloned genomes were bipartite. Demonstration of the infectivity of
a single component for two begomoviruses causing yellow leaf curl disease of tomato (now known as Tomato
yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) and Tomato yellow leaf
curl Sardinia virus (TYLCSV)) convinced the geminivirus community of the fact that begomoviruses with a
single genomic component existed [2,3]. Since then
more than 133 begomovirus species having monopartite

© 2010 Briddon et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

genomes have been identified and all originate from the
Old World (OW). Remarkably, no monopartite begomoviruses native to the New World (NW) have been identified, although recently TYLCV was inadvertently
introduced [4].
Within the last few years the vast majority of monopartite begomoviruses have been shown to associate
with ssDNA satellites known as betasatellites. Betasatellites are sequence unrelated to their helper begomoviruses and depend on the helper viruses for replication,
movement and encapsidation in plants and transmission
between plants [5]. In addition, the majority of begomovirus-betasatellite complexes associate with a further
class of ssDNA components for which the name alphasatellites has been proposed (formerly referred to as
DNA 1; Briddon et al., manuscript in preparation).
These are described as satellite-like (due to the fact that
they are capable of autonomous replication in plant
cells and by definition satellites require a helper virus
for replication) and are sequence unrelated to their
helper begomoviruses, which they require for movement
in plants and transmission between plants [5]. Surprisingly alphasatellites are believed to have originated with
another family of ssDNA containing viruses, the nanoviruses [6].
The two components of bipartite begomoviruses are
referred to as DNA-A and DNA-B. DNA-A encompasses all virus-encoded functions required for DNA
replication, control of gene expression, overcoming host
defenses and encapsidation, whereas DNA-B encodes
two proteins involved in intra- and intercellular movement [7]. The two components share little sequence
identity with the exception of a ~200 nucleotide
sequence with typically greater than 85% identity known
as the common region (CR). The CR encompasses an
absolutely conserved (among geminiviruses) hairpin
structure containing, within the loop, the nonanucleotide sequence (TAATATTAC) that marks the origin of
virion-strand DNA replication, and repeated sequences
(known as “iterons”) that are the recognition sequences
for binding of the DNA-A-encoded replication-associated protein (Rep: a rolling-circle replication initiator
protein that is the only virus-encoded product required
for viral DNA replication) [8,9]. The CR thus functions
to maintain the integrity of the divided genome, ensuring that replication of both components can be initiated
by the DNA-A-encoded Rep [10-12].
Despite having a mechanism to maintain the integrity
of their split genomes, component exchange, referred to
as pseudo-recombination for begomoviruses, does occur
[13-16]. In most cases the mechanism of capture is by a
process known as “regulon grafting” wherein the DNAA component donates its CR, by recombination, to the
DNA-B being captured, resulting in a new dependent

Page 2 of 17

interaction between two components [17]. Similar origin
of replication donation has also been shown to occur
for the begomovirus-associated betasatellites although,
for reasons that remain unclear, such pseudo-betasatellite molecules are at a selective disadvantage with
respect to the parental betasatellite and appear not to be
maintained [18].
Although the two components of the majority of
bipartite begomoviruses have an obligate relationship,
this is not true of all. Both Tomato yellow leaf curl
Thailand virus (TYLCTHV) and Sri Lankan cassava
mosaic virus(SLCMV) DNA-A components are able to
induce symptomatic infections of the experimental host
Nicotiana benthamiana in the absence of their cognate
DNA-Bs [17,19]. These viruses likely represent evolutionary intermediates between monopartite and bipartite
begomoviruses. The fact that TYLCTHV occurs in the
field associated with either a DNA-B or a betasatellite is
consistent with this hypothesis [20,21]. Although all isolates of SLCMV so far characterised are associated with
a DNA-B, the potential for this virus to productively
interact with a betasatellite has been demonstrated
experimentally [17].
Many geminivirus infections are associated with smaller than unit length virus components that are deletion
mutants, as reviewed by Patil and Dasguta [22]. These
molecules are known as defective interfering (di) DNAs
due to their capacity to interfere with virus infection,
reducing virus DNA levels and symptom severity [23].
Surprisingly the diDNAs associated with bipartite begomoviruses are derived almost exclusively from the
DNA-B component. It is unclear at this time whether
this represents a preferential production of diDNAs
from DNA-B or that diDNAs are produced equally from
both components, but those derived from the DNA-B
component are selectively maintained. Sunter et al. [24]
showed that the super-coiled form of Tomato golden
mosaic virus (TGMV) DNA-B is more sensitive to S1
nuclease digestion, indicative of a difference in the
structure of the DNA-A and DNA-B components,
which might partly explain the differential generation of
diDNAs. The accumulation of three times the amount
of DNA-B over DNA-A in a typical TGMV infected
plant is a factor in the phenomenon [25]. It is possible
that DNA-A derived sub-genomic molecules interfere
excessively with virus replication and are thus selected
against, although there is no evidence to support this
hypothesis. There is however an example found in nature, where East African cassava mosaic virus (EACMV)
accumulates DNA-A defective molecules and expressing
milder symptoms, the accumulation of the diDNA-A is
done at the expense of the DNA-B accumulation [26].
The ability of the DNA-A components of bipartite
begomoviruses to spread in plants in the absence of

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

DNA-B without inducing symptoms led to the hypothesis that symptoms are a feature of virus movement in
plant tissues rather than replication [27]. Consistent
with this hypothesis the MP or NSP proteins (but not
both for a single species) have been shown to be symptom determinants [27-29].
Mutagenesis studies with the monopartite begomovirus TYLCV have shown that the CP, V2 and C4 proteins mediate nuclear shuttling (CP) and cell-to-cell
movement (V2, C4), respectively, the functions carried
out by the DNA-B-encoded NSP and MP of bipartite
viruses [30]. A major difference, however, was that these
were unable to mediate movement through mesophyll
and epidermal cells, with the consequence that TYLCV
is essentially phloem restricted, in contrast to some
bipartite begomoviruses. It is tempting to speculate that
the lack of monopartite begomoviruses in the NW is
due/related to the absence of the V2 gene.
Using pairwise sequence comparisons and phylogenetic studies we have compared the molecular diversity
of the DNA-A and DNA-B components of bipartite
begomoviruses. We show that there are distinct differences in the sequence distribution of the DNA-Bs of
begomoviruses originating from the Old and New
Worlds. Although the viruses from the NW behave in a
uniform manner, the begomoviruses from the OW show
a group/host specific distribution in pairwise sequence
comparisons. The significance of these findings is discussed and the hypothesis that present-day begomovirus
DNA-B components originated as satellites is explored.

Results
Phylogenetic analysis of geminivirus genome
(or DNA-A component) sequences

A phylogenetic tree constructed from an alignment of
the complete genome (or DNA-A component)
sequences of 212 geminiviruses (one sequence representing each geminivirus species) is shown in Figure 1.
This shows the grouping of begomoviruses according to
either geographical origin or the host from which the
viruses were isolated, as noted previously [31,32]. The
begomoviruses from the OW segregate into clusters originating from Africa, India, Asia, and Japan. However,
there is some overlap of the Asian and Indian clusters,
likely due to the geographic continuity of these regions
and consequent lack of barriers to spread the viruses
and their vectors. In addition there are a growing number of viruses that do not fit neatly into these geographic or host based groupings that we shall
henceforth refer to as “outsiders”. These viruses originate from Indo-China, Indonesia and Australia.
The begomoviruses originating from the NW form a
separate cluster from the OW viruses and group according to origin as either from Latin America or Meso

Page 3 of 17

America. Closely related to the NW begomoviruses are
two species originating from Vietnam isolated from
Corchorus (hereafter referred to as “Corchovirus”)
[33,34]. Two further groups of viruses, those infecting a
range of legumes originating from India and Southeast
Asia (hereafter called “Legumovirus”), and a set of
viruses isolated from Ipomoea spp. (particularly sweetpotato) originating from America, Asia and Europe
(hereafter called “Sweepovirus”) are distinct from, and
basal to all other begomoviruses. This apparently anomalous position in the phylogenetic tree of these otherwise typical begomoviruses likely reflects a distinct
evolutionary history. For the legumoviruses this has
been suggested to be due to genetic isolation in their
host species [15].
PASC analysis of geminivirus genome
(or DNA-A component) sequences

The molecular diversity of virus sequences is conveniently
analysed by pairwise sequence comparison (PASC)
[35-39]. As of December 2006, there were 672 complete
genome (or DNA-A component) sequences of geminiviruses available in the databases. Based on the presently
applicable species demarcation criteria these belong to 212
geminivirus species [37]. A PASC analysis of the sequences
reveals a multimodal distribution with six major peaks
scattered between 19 and 100% identity (Figure 2).
Phylogenetic analysis of the DNA-A and DNA-B
components of bipartite begomoviruses

Of the 672 genome (or DNA-A component) sequences,
182 are of virus isolates of bipartite begomoviruses,
belonging to 66 species, for which the cognate DNA-A
and DNA-B (isolated from the same plant) sequences
are available. Figure 3 is a comparison of the phylogenetic trees resulting from separate multiple alignments
of the DNA-A and DNA-B sequences of selected single
representatives of each of the 66 species.
The tree based on DNA-A component sequences
shows the separation of viruses from the NW (with the
corchoviruses) and the OW (Figure 3, left panel. For
complete representation of the results summarized in
Figure 3, see Panel A, Additional file 1 Figure S1: Phylogenetic trees constructed from an alignment of DNA-A
(A) and DNA-B (B) component sequences of 182 bipartite begomoviruses). As in the earlier tree, the OW
viruses cluster according to geographic origin or the
host from which they were isolated. Two species of the
“outsider” group segregate between, and are roughly
equidistant to, the OW viruses and the legumoviruses.
The two corchoviruses segregate with the NW viruses
even though they originate from the OW (Vietnam).
The tree based on DNA-B component sequences is
similar to that obtained from DNA-A component

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

Page 4 of 17

Figure 1 Phylogenetic tree constructed from an alignment of 212 DNA-A component sequences of geminiviruses. The sequences used
are representative of the 212 geminivirus species recognized as of December 2006. The scale at the basis of the diagram is the pairwise
distance expressed as percentage dissimilarity.

sequences, and shows the separation of viruses from the
NW (with corchoviruses) from the OW viruses (Figure
3, right panel). However, the members of the “outsiders”
species that are distinct based on DNA-A sequences
cluster with the viruses from Southeast Asia. Significantly, the ACMV DNA-B segregates with, and is basal
to, the legumoviruses rather than associating with the
DNA-Bs of the other viruses originating from Africa.

A phylogenetic tree based on all DNA-B components
of begomoviruses for which a cognate DNA-A is available (182 DNA-B sequences) (see Panel B of Additional
file 1 Figure S1: Phylogenetic trees constructed from an
alignment of DNA-A (A) and DNA-B (B) component
sequences of 182 bipartite begomoviruses) highlights the
propensity of these viruses to exchange DNA-B components. For example, most MYMV and MYMIV isolates

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

Page 5 of 17

Figure 2 PASC analysis of 672 sequences of the complete genomes (or DNA-A components) of geminiviruses. Species comparisons are
plotted on the left axis (blue bars) whereas isolate comparisons are plotted separately on the right axis (green bars). The out-group used is the
sequence of Chicken anemia virus (#M55918)(red bars).

Figure 3 Phylogenetic trees derived from alignments of the components of bipartite begomoviruses. The tree based on the DNA-A
sequences is shown on the left whereas that derived from the DNA-B sequences is shown on the right. Colours are used to highlight groups of
sequences with distinct geographical origins. Branches having bootstrap values lower than 50% have been collapsed. The scale at the base of
the diagram is the pairwise distance expressed as percentage dissimilarity.

trans-replicate a similar DNA-B component with the
exception of five isolates of MYMV that have a distinct
DNA-B, indicative of component exchange between
these two species, as noted previously [15,16,40]. Similarly, all isolates of EACMV, EACMZV and SACMV
have similar DNA-B components [14]: ToLCGV-[IN:
Var:01] (AY190291) shares a DNA-B with ToLCNDV,

PuYVMV (AY184488) and SLCCNV-[VN:B]; and
SLCMV and ICMV share a DNA-B [17]. Despite the
fact that there are over twice the numbers of sequences
available for bipartite begomoviruses originating from
the NW, few examples [41] of component exchange
have been detected in NW viruses. Thus, at least for
bipartite begomoviruses originating from the OW, were

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

species demarcation based upon DNA-B sequences, the
range of species would look somewhat different than it
does under the present classification system entirely
based upon DNA-A sequences.
PASC analysis of DNA-A component sequences of
bipartite begomoviruses

A PASC analysis reveals that the DNA-A component
sequences of 182 bipartite begomoviruses are distributed
in the range 50 to 100% nucleotide sequence identity
(Figure 4). The pairs between 50 and 89% represent
comparisons between members of species, while the
pairs between 89 and 100% represent comparisons
between isolates of the same species [37]. The OW virus
species cluster into two major peaks between 55 and
70% and between 70 and 89%, representing independent
species and recombinant species respectively. It is noteworthy that the legumoviruses cluster in the lower
values of the first peak (55-60%). The NW viruses also
cluster into two peaks at 51 to 67% and 67 to 89%, with
the OW-originating corchoviruses clustering in the

Page 6 of 17

lower range of the first peak (45-60%). These two clusters represent different groups of viruses in each part of
the world.
PASC analysis of DNA-B component sequences of
bipartite begomoviruses

A PASC analysis reveals that the DNA-B component
sequences of OW- begomoviruses are scattered over a
wide area of the diversity spectrum (Figure 4 lower
panel). The members of species of the OW begomoviruses cluster between 24 and 41% while the recombinants cluster between 45 and 73%. The isolate
comparisons cluster between 75 and 100%. The NW
(with corchoviruses) DNA-B components form two
peaks. A peak at 44 to 70% corresponds to comparisons
between members of species whereas the second, at 73
to 100%, consists of comparisons between isolates. It is
noteworthy that most of the species members from the
OW do not cluster at the same identity percentage
range as the members of the NW species. However, for
both OW and NW viruses, the isolate comparisons fall

Figure 4 Distribution of identity percentages of PASCs for the components of bipartite begomoviruses. The percentage identity
distribution of DNA-A components (top) or DNA-B components (bottom) of bipartite begomoviruses are shown. The diagrams on the left
(green bars) represent comparisons for viruses from the OW, and the diagrams on the right (blue bars) are comparisons for viruses from the NW
(with the corchoviruses). In addition, the black curves represent the position of the comparisons with CAV, an unrelated out-group.

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

between 75 and 100%. For simplicity, we considered the
DNA-B “species” members as those associated with
their cognate DNA-A species members according to the
list of species recently defined [32]. Geminivirus species
demarcation is based on both biological characteristics
and sequence relatedness [1,32]. No separate classification system for DNA-B components is used, these being
defined by their cognate DNA-A. This can lead to some
confusion for the viruses that have exchanged DNA-B
components.
Comparison of the DNA-A and DNA-B component
PASC distributions

A comparison of the range of sequence distributions for
the DNA-A and DNA-B components, as well as a comparison of the change in distributions (between the
components) for the NW (with the corchoviruses) and
OW begomoviruses is shown in Table 1. The DNA-A
component PASC distribution occupies a smaller range
of sequence identities (40-100%) than the DNA-B distribution (24 to 100%). The NW and OW species occupy
roughly the same range of sequence identities (54-89%).
The values between 75 and 89% mostly represent
recombinants that fill the gap between species and
strains. The “isolate” peak for the DNA-A components
divides into the “strains” at 87-93% and the “variants”
between 94 and 100%.
The DNA-B component pairwise distribution occupies
a much larger range of sequence identities (24 to 100%),
which is about 16% greater than that of the DNA-A
components. The species comparisons occupy a space
between 24 and 73%, which is comparable to the one
occupied by species comparisons for the DNA-A component (49%), except that it is much lower in sequence
identity (about 16% lower). The viruses of the species
from the OW cluster in two distinct peaks, the first one
from 24 to 42% and the second one from 53 to 73%.
The species from the NW, in contrast, form a single
peak which is skewed and covers a wider range of
sequence identities (44 to 73%). In comparison to the
isolates of component DNA-A, the isolates for component DNA-B also cover a greater range (up to 12%).
A comparison of the shift values between the DNA-A
and DNA-B component pairwise distributions (Table 1)
shows an increasing shift from the high percentages

Page 7 of 17

(90-100%) down to the low percentages (24-40%) with
an increasing change from 3% to ~16%. However,
for one of the two OW species, the shift is considerably
larger (31 to 47%).
Co-evolution of the DNA-A and DNA-B components

A total of 16,471 pairwise identity percentage values for
comparisons of cognate DNA-A and DNA-B components of the 182 viruses considered were plotted on a
scatter diagram (Figure 5). For the sake of clarity all
comparisons (>10,000) of OW with NW viruses have
been omitted. These all fall in the low percentage range
and are not informative for this analysis.
If the DNA-A and DNA-B components had been
under the same evolutionary pressure, all the points on
the graph (Figure 5) would align along the diagonal.
However the analysis shows a difference between the
distributions of species and isolates. The isolates are
scattered along the diagonal (green oval, Figure 5),
whereas the species points fall well below the diagonal
(blue oval) indicating a greater diversity of the DNA-B
components. Furthermore the majority of OW viruses
cluster tightly at very low DNA-B percentage values (left
red oval), as is also evident in Figure 6. This indicates
that, although OW DNA-B components are more
diverse (covering a greater range of percentage identities) the majority of OW comparisons group within a
smaller range of both DNA-A and DNA-B percentage
identity values. This, and the apparent shift in DNA-B
diversity away from the diagonal between isolate and
species comparisons (indicated by the white arrow, Figure 5), indicates a differential evolution between the
DNA-A and DNA-B components.
Co-evolution of the DNA-A and DNA-B components of
the NW viruses

Figure 6 (upper panel) shows a co-evolution analysis of
the DNA-A and DNA-B components of NW viruses.
There is great homogeneity in the shift of all the DNAB points relative to the DNA-A points, and the general
trend is a change roughly parallel to the diagonal (indicated by the white arrows). Furthermore, it is interesting
to note that there is a rough correlation between the
phylogenetic tree organization and the percentage identity values for DNA-A and DNA-B component

Table 1 Comparison of DNA-A and DNA-B component PASC distributions.
Species

OW
species

NW
species

Isolates

Strains

Variants

DNA-A components

40-89%

57-89%

54-85%

87-100%

87-93%

94-100%

DNA-B components

24-75%

24-73%

39-75%

75-100%

75-90%

91-100%

Change in identity percentage range between the DNA-A and DNA -B
components

16-14%

33-16%

15-10%

12-0%

12-3%

3-0%

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

Page 8 of 17

Figure 5 Scatter plot analysis of the pairwise percentage identity values for the components of bipartite begomoviruses. Scatter plots
for cognate DNA-A (X axis) and DNA-B (Y axis) component sequences of bipartite begomoviruses are shown. For this analysis comparisons
between NW and OW viruses were not included. The green oval (right) highlights isolate comparisons. The blue and red ovals highlight species
representative’s comparisons with most of the OW comparisons grouping at lower percentage identities (red oval). The white arrow is discussed
in the text.

comparisons. The viruses belonging to the Chino del
tomate virus cluster have the highest percentage identity
values, while those belonging to the Squash leaf curl
virus cluster have the lowest values of the NW viruses
(data not shown) with only the corchoviruses having
lower values (Figure 7, lower panel), mirroring their
positions in the phylogenetic analysis relative to the NW
viruses (Figure 1).
Co-evolution of the DNA-A and DNA-B components of
the OW viruses

Figure 6 (lower panel) shows a co-evolution analysis of
the DNA-A and DNA-B components of OW viruses. In
contrast to the NW virus comparisons, the OW viruses
show a dramatic shift of the species points (relative to
the isolate points) to very low percentages (indicated by
the curved arrow), where most of the data points occur
in a very small DNA-B percentage range (24-40%).
There is also a change away from the diagonal for isolate and species comparisons and a vertical shift (indicated by the straight white arrows) for some of the
DNA-B isolate data points, showing that the corresponding DNA-B components are simply exchanged
between members of different species; thus with some
DNA-A species having distinct DNA-B species as cognate DNA-B.
Co-evolution of the DNA-A and DNA-B components of
the OW legumoviruses

Figure 7 (upper panel) shows a co-evolution analysis for
the components of legumoviruses. These viruses behave

like typical OW viruses with the percentage identity
shifts parallel to the diagonal (white arrow parallel to
the diagonal). However, this group shows extensive evidence of pseudo-recombination (vertical white arrows).
Co-evolution of the DNA-A and DNA-B component
pairwise comparisons of the OW Indo-China viruses

Figure 7 (lower panel) shows the co-evolution of the
DNA-A and DNA-B components of viruses isolated
from Vietnam, Thailand and Indonesia that behave unusually in the phylogenetic analyses (“outsiders” in Figure
3). The Vietnamese viruses belonging to the NW cluster
(CYVV and CoGMV) have a position typical of NW
viruses, meaning a parallel shift to the diagonal, but very
modest of about 10%. Kudzu mosaic virus (KuMV), the
legumovirus isolated from Vietnam, also has a typical
legumovirus position but with a larger shift of 20%,
while the “outsiders”, Pepper yellow leaf curl Indonesia
virus (PepYLCIDV), Luffa yellow mosaic virus (LYMV)
and Tomato yellow leaf curl Karnataka virus
(TYLCKaV), behave like most of the OW viruses with a
35% shift.
Taxonomy based on DNA-B component sequences

Until 1990, the point at which the first monopartite
begomovirus sequences were published, the classification of begomoviruses was based on both genomic components. At this point it was self-evident that the
classification of begomoviruses could only be based on
the DNA-A (or homolog thereof for monopartite
viruses) component. The analysis presented here allows

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

Page 9 of 17

Figure 6 Scatter plot analysis of the pairwise percentage identity values for begomoviruses from OW and NW. Scatter plots for cognate
DNA-A (X axis) and DNA-B (Y axis) component sequences of bipartite NW (with corchoviruses)(upper panel) and OW (lower panel)
begomoviruses are shown. The green oval (right) highlights isolate comparisons. The blue and red ovals highlight species representative’s
comparisons with most of the OW comparisons grouping at lower percentage identities (red oval). The white arrows are discussed in the text.

us to examine, out of academic interest, what the classification of bipartite begomoviruses would be if it were
based solely on the DNA-B component (Table 2). For
55 of the 65 species (based on DNA-A) represented, the
classification would remain unchanged. Ten (DNA-A
based) species would be downgraded to strains whereas
one isolate would be upgraded to a new species. Thus
the DNA-A-based classification system would remain
~85% unchanged, providing good support for the present classification based solely on the sequences of the
DNA-A components.
The analysis highlights the propensity of bipartite
begomoviruses to exchange their DNA-B components

(pseudo-recombination). One in six of the DNA-B components shows evidence of having been exchanged. For
example, there are only seven begomovirus species in
Africa and two in India that have been shown to cause
cassava mosaic disease [42]. Based on DNA-B sequences
there would be only four species. All the EACMV-like
viruses (EACMV, EACMKV, EACMZV, EACMMV and
SACMV), with the exception of EACMCV, would be
considered a single species with four distinct strains. For
the Asian viruses causing cassava mosaic disease,
SLCMV and ICMV, there would be a single species
with two strains. In addition there is not a simple correlation between what is a species based on DNA-A

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

Page 10 of 17

Figure 7 Scatter plot analysis of the pairwise percentage identity values for legumoviruses and begomoviruses from Indo-China. The
pairwise percentage identity values for cognate DNA-A (X axis) and DNA-B (Y axis) component sequences of legumoviruses (upper panel) and
bipartite begomoviruses originating from Indo-China (lower panel) are shown. The green oval (right) highlights isolate comparisons. The blue
and red ovals highlight species representative’s comparisons with most of the OW comparisons grouping at lower percentage identities (red
oval). The white arrows are discussed in the text.

component sequence and what would be a strain based
on DNA-B component sequence, due to component
exchanges between species/strains. However, it is interesting to note that, apart from the example of Tomato
chlorotic mottle virus (ToCMoV) from South America,
all the strains within a species with the DNA-A-based
classification remain in the same species with the DNAB component-based classification, indicating that
exchanges occurred prior to diversification to the strain
level. Thus component exchange possibly drives diversification of species into strains, which is not surprising
since DNA-B components play a major role in host
range determination [43].

Discussion
The geminiviruses as a whole have a very small range of
genome (or genomic component) sizes; from 2550 nt
for Cotton leaf crumple virus (Begomovirus) DNA-B to
3080 nt for the genome of Horseradish curly top virus
(Curtovirus). This likely indicates that the capsid structure, consisting of 110 copies of a single protein (the
CP) arranged into a quasi-icosahedral (geminate) structure as 22 capsomeres [44,45], has a finite capacity for
ssDNA. Monomeric (icosahedral) capsids are reported
for most purified virus preparations and likely encapsidate half unit length ssDNA molecules [46]. Multimeric
particles (mainly trimers and tetramers) occur only

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

Table 2 Taxon changes for a taxonomy based on DNA-B.
DNA-A Component

DNA-B component

65 species

55 species + 1 New species = 85%

Old World

28% changes

EACMV

SACMV
EACMKV
EACMZV

SLCCNV

SLCPHV

SLCMV

ICMV

ToLCNDV

ToLCGV

New World

12% changes

CabLCuV

CabLCuJV

SiMoV

ToYSV

ToCMoMGV

ToCMoV-[MG].Bseq.AY090556

PYMV

PYMTV
PYMPV

List of species that would be downgraded to strains and strains that would be
upgraded to species for a classification based on DNA-B component
sequences.

infrequently, suggesting that they are not stable. In view
of the congested nature of geminivirus genomes, with
little if any scope for gaining additional functions
(genes), the only option open to the monopartite progenitor of modern day bipartite begomoviruses was thus
to expand genome size by adding an independently
encapsidated DNA; either an additional genomic component or a satellite DNA.
The concept that geminiviruses have a modular
arrangement is now well documented [47]. Thus certain
elements of the genome are well adapted to work
together, such as the MP and CP genes of mastreviruses
[48] and the N-terminus of Rep (which interacts with
the iterons that form part of the origin of replication
[9,49-51]) and the origin of replication [47], and are
thus less likely to be separated by recombination than
distinct modules. It is clear here that DNA-B represents
one such module, as evidenced by the relatively frequent
exchange of this component for at least some of the
groups of begomoviruses. Clearly maintaining this module as a separate unit in some circumstances facilitates
its sexual exchange between distinct virus species and
may represent an adaptation for diversification.
Why NW begomoviruses appear not to exchange
DNA-B components with the high frequency demonstrated for their OW cousins is unclear. For this
pseudo-recombination to occur, a single plant host cell
would need to be infected by two viruses. It could also
be conceivable that this could occur in the insect vector,
assuming that the exchanged DNA-B can be transreplicated by its new DNA-A helper, since the two components of bipartite begomoviruses are encapsidated in
separate geminate particles and there is no viral

Page 11 of 17

replication in vectors (precluding the recombination
required for regulon grafting). The apparent absence of
extensive component exchange in the NW could thus
indicate that co-infections are (or at least were) not as
frequent as in the OW. This, in turn, would suggest that
the density of viruses in the NW is (or was) lower than
in the OW. If, as has been suggested, begomoviruses
were introduced into the NW only fairly recently, then a
period of explosive speciation, following a limited introduction, could explain a low density of viruses. Alternatively, the low level of component exchange could be
due to some mechanism (such as genetic isolation in a
particular host due either to host specificity of the virus
or the vector) that has prevented (or reduced) the frequency of co-infections. Experimentally NW begomoviruses appear to have few constraints to supporting
pseudo-recombination, at least for related viruses
[52,53]. However, there appear to be genetic differences
between the (DNA-B-encoded) movement proteins of
NW and OW begomoviruses. Frischmuth et al. [54]
demonstrated that although the OW begomoviruses will
mediate the systemic movement of the DNA-A components of NW viruses, the NW viruses cannot support
the movement of the DNA-A components of OW begomoviruses - highlighting a further divergence between
the NW and OW begomoviruses [55]. It is tempting to
speculate that this difference is due to the absence of
the V2 gene in NW viruses, as discussed later.
The similarities between the corchoviruses and begomoviruses occurring in the NW include the absence of
the DNA-A-encoded V2 gene, the presence of a specific
amino acid sequence motif in the CP, as well as the cosegregation of both components in phylogenetic analyses
[33,34]. In the analyses conducted here the corchoviruses, originating from Vietnam, behave in all respects
like the NW begomoviruses and this is consistent with
the earlier reports. Ha et al. [33] suggested that the
most likely explanation for this apparent presence of a
NW-like virus in the OW was that all NW begomoviruses originated from a fairly recent introduction of
begomoviruses into the NW, possibly by Chinese traders
or much earlier by the Asian ancestors of the AmeroIndians. Certainly the relatively low level of diversity of
the NW viruses is consistent with this hypothesis. However, the introduction would have needed to have been
very limited, thus not include the monopartite and
monopartite betasatellite-associated begomovirues. If
this is the case, then it is possible that, at the time of
the introduction, the NW-like begomoviruses were
more widespread than at present (we note that recently
CoGMV has been shown to occur in Corchorus in India
[56]), or that the monopartite and monopartite betasatellite-associated begomoviruses evolved after the introduction - which seems unlikely - or were very limited in

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

their geographic distribution at least until recently. It is
clear that many questions about the origin of NW begomoviruses and their relationship to the OW viruses
remain to be answered.
It has previously been argued that legumoviruses are
(or at least were) genetically isolated in their legume
hosts [15], as evidenced by the absence of recombination with other, non-leguminous begomoviruses. Possibly the corchoviruses have similarly been genetically
isolated, preventing interaction with the more diverse
begomoviruses infecting other plant species and shielding their unique NW-like characters from change. Why
the corchoviruses and NW begomoviruses should show
such a constrained and uniform pattern of genetic variation is a more vexing question. The possibility that the
absence of the V2 gene is somehow responsible for this
phenomenon should be investigated experimentally. The
precise function of the V2 protein remains unclear
although various investigations have shown it to have
possible virus movement and suppression of gene silencing activity [30,57,58]. It is thus possible that the
absence of these (or other as yet unknown) functions
constrain variability. An investigation of the host-range
of the corchoviruses might provide some answers since,
if these viruses are genetically isolated (presumably in
their natural host jute [Corchorus capsularis]), the
absence of V2 may be an adaptation to this host.
From the comparisons of the pairwise distributions of
the DNA-A and DNA-B component sequences of begomoviruses, it is evident that they have followed different
evolutionary paths and have experienced different evolutionary pressures, or have responded differently to the
evolutionary pressures. The DNA-B components show a
much wider range of molecular diversity than the DNAA components [59]. The reasons for this are unclear.
Possibly the DNA-B component, by virtue of it not
encoding overlapping genes, has a greater capacity for
variation. The ranges of interactions this component’s
gene products undergo may be fewer or may be less
constraining. The highly specialized nature of the DNAB component gene products, which interact with plasmodesmata and nuclear pores to mediate cell-to-cell
and long distance movement, may allow for a greater
range of variation than is possible with the DNA-A
component which is more modular and has more
cis- (including transactivation, Rep-iteron recognition,
Rep-REn interaction) and trans-interactions (including
transactivation, Rep-iteron recognition, CP-vector interaction) to maintain. Alternatively, the differences may
indicate that the genomes of the majority of OW bipartite begomoviruses result from component exchange. It
is noticeable that there are relatively few bipartite begomoviruses in the OW, or at least only few have been
identified, and the majority of the ones with unusual

Page 12 of 17

behaviour in the PASC analyses are isolated from introduced crops (including cassava, tomato and peppers)
whereas those that might be considered as being isolated
from native species (such as Corchorus and the legumeinfecting viruses), and thus might be considered more
ancient, have a behaviour more in line with those from
the NW and more in-line with what would be expected
were the two components under similar evolutionary
pressures. What the PASC analysis may be showing
could thus be the result of relatively young DNA-ADNA-B interactions, for which the DNA B component
has yet to be fully shaped by the relationship.
The analyses of bipartite begomovirus component
sequences indicate that our present classification system,
based entirely on their DNA-A components, holds for
the majority of viruses were the system instead to be
based on DNA-B components; the exceptions to this
being the cases where pseudo-recombination has
occurred. There would thus be little to gain from including DNA-B sequences at the species level. Possibly this
character should be relegated to the strain level; thus two
isolates of a species with distinct DNA-Bs might be designated distinct strains. In view of the fact that DNA-B
components play a significant role in host range determination, this may be a desirable option. However, although
this might be useful in some cases, it would require a
separate classification system for the DNA-B components
which might prove too cumbersome.
This overall very good similarity shows that most of
the DNA-As and DNA-Bs of bipartite geminiviruses of
the same species have been associated for a very long
time and had the same type of evolutionary pressure.
Nevertheless, a significant number of viruses show evidence of component exchange by a mechanism known
as regulon grafting. The fact that geminiviruses have the
possibility to recombine easily [17,18,60-65] increases
the chances of a DNA-A component CR introgression
in a non-related DNA-B component, to make that
DNA-B component dependent on the replication of the
cognate DNA-A component. There is evidence of the
natural occurrence of the recombination between the
helper begomovirus genomes and their betasatellite
molecules that supports this hypothesis [18,66]. There is
also the sequence analysis evidence for PYMV isolates
(from Panama, Venezuela and Trinidad) where the same
CR has been introgressed simultaneously in DNA-A and
DNA-B components having over all very different
sequences (C. Fauquet, unpublished results). In this latter case a dual recombination had to occur at the same
time to recreate a viable strict bipartite geminivirus, and
this happened at least two times, once with the PYMV
isolate from Trinidad and Tobago, and once with the
PYMPV isolate from Panama. It is conceivable that the
synergism between two molecules such as a geminivirus

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

and a betasatellite molecule based on mutual biological
gain, can be maintained over very long periods of time
[67], but it is also more intuitively acceptable that the
physical interdependence of replication between two
molecules be a more stringent level of interdependence
in virus evolution. It is interesting to note that geminivirus satellites have so far been found almost exclusively
with monopartite begomoviruses. The exceptions are
TYLCTHV, which is an unusual virus with a DNA-A
which is infectious to plants (experimentally in the
absence of DNA-B) but occurs in the field with either a
DNA-B or a DNA-b [19,68], ToLCNDV and MYMIV
[69]; the nature of the interaction of the latter two
viruses with betasatellites has not been investigated. Possibly this indicates that the presence of a DNA-B component prevents/interferes with the interaction of the
DNA-A component with a satellite.
Comparisons of the PASC distributions of DNA-A
and DNA-B components show a fundamentally different
behaviour between the NW and OW viruses. NW
viruses show a very homogenous shift of their DNA-B
component sequences towards a lower percentage of
identity, paralleling the diagonal that represents a quasiperfect co-evolution. In contrast, the OW viruses fall
into two groups with distinct behaviours. For most OW
viruses there is a dramatic shift (30 to 47%) in the
PASC percentage identity values between DNA-A and
DNA-B components, bringing the values close to comparison with a random sequence. For a small number of
OW viruses the change is more modest (± 10%), similar
to that seen with the NW viruses. This may indicate
that some of the OW viruses have been under entirely
different selection pressures. The most obvious difference between OW and NW begomoviruses is the
absence of the AV2 gene in the latter. The AV2 protein
has been shown to play a role in the movement of begomoviruses [57] and possibly also, either directly or indirectly, in the expression of the CP [70], which is itself
involved in movement. It is thus possible that OW
begomoviruses, having an AV2, have more flexibility
with regard to movement in planta. As well as allowing
them to, in some cases, spread and cause disease in the
absence of a DNA-B, it may allow them to additionally
interact with other molecules, such as betasatellites and,
more readily than for the NW viruses, the DNA-B components of other species. However, it is difficult to see,
knowing what we do about the functions encoded by
AV2, how this gene might predispose a virus to component exchange.
Satellites are a common feature of a number of RNA
viruses and also begomoviruses [5,71]. These molecules
are classically defined as viruses or nucleic acids that
depend on a helper virus for replication, are dispensable
for the replication of the helper virus, and lack any

Page 13 of 17

appreciable sequence similarity to the helper virus’ genome [72]. With the exception of the CR, begomovirus
DNA-B components are essentially sequence unrelated
to their cognate DNA-A components. Thus DNA-B
components satisfy all except one of the criteria of satellites. The presently accepted hypothesis for the origin of
DNA-B contends that it originated by component duplication of the DNA-A, followed by gain of a new gene
(the movement protein encoded in the complementarysense) from an unknown source and possible divergence
of the CP to become the nuclear shuttle protein (NSP;
encoded in the virion-sense). Although Kikuno et al.
[73] reported some similarity between the amino acid
sequences of the CP and NSP sequences for ACMV,
this has not been borne-out by modern sequence analysis software applied to either ACMV or the much larger
sample set of bipartite begomovirus sequences now
available (C.M. Fauquet, unpublished results). However,
an equally plausible hypothesis is that the begomovirus
DNA-B component originated as a satellite captured by
the monopartite progenitor of all bipartite begomoviruses in the same way that betasatellites and alphasatellites were. Although the origins of the betasatellites
remain uncertain, the alphasatellites almost certainly
originated with the nanoviruses, which themselves are
helper viruses of a related class of alphasatellites [6].
The satellite progenitor of modern DNA-B components
would have needed to provide its helper begomoviruses
with some selective advantage for it to be maintained.
In most cases the betasatellites allow their helper begomoviruses to productively infect hosts to which they are
otherwise only poorly infectious [74,75], either by overcoming host defenses [76] or possibly by providing additional movement functions [77]. It is thus possible that
the selective advantage provided by the early DNA-B
was more efficient movement in plants, possibly in the
form of the MP. The satellite would then have been
domesticated into a bona fide genome component by
regulon grafting from DNA-A (for which there is extensive evidence in both the DNA-Bs and betasatellites, as
detailed earlier) and possible gene duplication (of the
CP to yield the NSP) leading to the DNA-B component
we recognize today.
For the bipartite begomoviruses the genes encoded by
DNA-B have been shown to play a major part in controlling genome size. Unit length (~2800 nt) viral DNA
is moved cell-to-cell more effectively than larger molecules and larger DNA molecules undergo deletion to
restore approximately unit size length [78]. This size
selection is mediated by MP which has evolved to usurp
the non-cell autonomous RNA trafficking pathway
through plasmodesmata. The mechanism for maintaining genome size of monopartite viruses is less clear.
Frischmuth et al. [46] have shown, for the bipartite

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

begomovirus ACMV, that genome size is a determining
factor in particle multiplicity; thus half unit length molecules (such as diDNAs and probably betasatellites and
alphasatellites) are encapsidated in monomeric (icosahedral) particles whereas unit length molecules are encapsidated in geminate particles and larger molecules in
multimeric particles. The relative rarity with which multimeric particles are encountered possibly suggests that
these are unstable. Thus packaging constraints may be
an important control of geminivirus genome size, particularly for the monopartite viruses. For the begomovirus-associated beta- and alphasatellites there is some
circumstantial evidence of a need to satisfy a size constraint. The presence in both of an adenine (A)-rich
stretch of sequence has been taken to signify an increase
in size over the progenitor component (the only real
evidence for this being the lack of a similar A-rich
sequence in the smaller nanovirus components, the closest relatives of the alphasatellites [65,79], although this
does not explain why the sequence needs to be rich in
adenine). The evolutionary maintenance by DNA-B
components of a size close to that of their DNA-A
“helper”, when it is clear that a half unit length size can
be accommodated, may indicate either that there are
coding constraints to having the MP and NSP in overlapping reading frames (which would be required were
they to be encoded by a half unit length molecule), or
more likely that there is a need for strict spatial and
temporal control of the genes during infection, which is
possible when they are under the control of distinct promoters (the NSP gene being inducible by TrAP [80]).
Little is known about the control of expression of the
bC1 gene encoded by betasatellites. Available evidence
suggests it is controlled by a strong promoter which is
constitutive and phloem specific [81,82].

Conclusion
The analysis shows that the DNA-B components of
bipartite begomoviruses are far more diverse than their
DNA-A partners. This may be due to the DNA-B component being less congested (encoding fewer functions
and thus being more permissive of variation), the DNAB component evolving exclusively in response to the
host (whereas the DNA-A has to additionally maintain
interaction with the arthropod vector) or, as we propose
for the first time, that DNA-B has an origin that is distinct from DNA-A (possibly originating as a captured
and domesticated satellite). The most likely explanation
for the difference is that a combination of these factors
is responsible. Pseudorecombination is shown to have
occurred much more frequently than previously recognized and to be a property almost exclusively exhibited
by OW begomoviruses. Although the evidence is only
circumstantial, the presence in OW begomoviruses of

Page 14 of 17

an additional movement function (the V2 gene) may be
the factor facilitating this phenomenon. The co-evolution study for the components of the genomes of bipartite begomoviruses highlights distinct differences
between the majority of OW viruses and a group that
includes all the NW begomoviruses and a small number
of OW viruses. The latter group shows near perfect coevolution of their DNA-A and DNA-B components
whereas for the majority of the OW viruses this is not
the case. This indicates that for the majority of OW
bipartite begomoviruses the DNA-A and DNA-B components have been under distinct evolutionary pressures
or have responded differently to the pressure. Since the
majority of OW begomoviruses with uniform DNA-A/
DNA-B behaviour occur in native plant species, whereas
the ones with unusual behaviour (thus most of the OW
viruses) occur in introduced species, it is possible that
this dichotomy is due to the host and due to pesudorecombination, suggesting a recent and immature DNAA/DNA-B interaction.

Methods
Sequences analysed

The sequences of the genomes (or DNA-A components)
of 389 geminiviruses were downloaded from GenBank.
The dataset contains the full-length sequences of the
cognate DNA-A and DNA-B components of 182 bipartite begomoviruses. For several sequences corrections
have been made as indicated previously [31]. For brevity
only the standardised virus acronyms will be used [1,32].
Pairwise sequence comparison and phylogenetic analysis

All possible pairwise sequence comparison (PASC) percentage identities were plotted as frequency distributions
to examine the distributions within and between taxa/
subgroups [83].
Sequences were aligned using the Clustal V method of
aligning multiple sequences using MegAlign (v. 3.11)
available in the Lasergene sequence analysis package
(v.1.02 for the Apple Computer; DNASTAR Inc.). A
random sequence of equal length and composition was
included in all alignments to show pairwise percent
identities that are not significantly different from random identity. For phylogenetic studies, the sequence of
Chicken anemia virus (CAV; accession number
M55918), a member of the genus Circovirus in the
family Circoviridae, was used as an out-group.
Phylogenetic analyses were conducted using the cladistic parsimony method and the program PAUP (version 3.1.1 [84]). Optimum trees were obtained with the
heuristic method using the tree-bisection-reconnection
branch-swapping option. One hundred bootstrap replications were performed to place confidence estimates
on groups contained in the most parsimonious tree.

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

Phylogenetic analyses were also conducted using the
UPGMA distance matrix and neighborhood joining
method available with the MegAlign program. In this
case a preliminary phylogeny is derived from the distance between pairs of input sequences and the application of the UPGMA algorithm that guides the alignment
of ancestral sequences [85]. The final phylogeny was
obtained by applying the neighborhood joining method
to the distance and alignment data [86]. The trees generated by both PAUP and MegAlign were nearly identical, and the tree presented here was generated using the
MegAlign program.
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Phylogenetic trees constructed from an
alignment of DNA-A (A) and DNAB (B) component sequences of 182
bipartite begomoviruses. The trees were constructed from 2947
informative sites for the DNA-A alignment and 3223 informative sites for
the DNA-B alignment. For brevity only the standardised virus acronyms
are used [1,32] complemented by the database accession numbers.
Sequences were aligned using the Clustal V method of aligning multiple
sequences using MegAlign (v. 3.11) available in the Lasergene sequence
analysis package (v.1.02 for the Apple Computer; DNASTAR Inc.).
Phylogenetic analyses were conducted using the UPGMA distance matrix
and neighborhood joining method available with the MegAlign program.
The dashed branches indicate a bootstrap value below 50% and the
scale below the tree indicates the distance between sequences.

Page 15 of 17

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
Acknowledgements
R.W.B. is supported by the Higher Education Commission (HEC) of the
Government of Pakistan under the “Foreign Faculty Hiring Program”. This
work was supported by the National Academy of Sciences’ Pakistan-US
Science and Technology Cooperative Program, Contract PGA-7251-05-007 (S.
M. N.) and by the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center for the other
authors.

14.

15.
16.

Author details
1
National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE),
Faisalabad, Pakistan. 2ILTAB, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, 975
North Warson Road, St Louis, MO, USA. 3Department of Plant Pathology,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
Authors’ contributions
RB wrote the paper and contributed to the Discussion. BP contributed to
the Introduction, Discussion and Results. BB contributed to the elaboration
of the paper. MSN downloaded sequences, made their phylogenies,
calculated similarity percentages of different DNA-B components and
contributed to the elaboration of the paper. CMF conceived of the study,
performed the sequence and phylogenetic analyses, created the figures,
wrote the paper and contributed to the Discussion. All authors have read
and approved the final manuscript.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
22.
Received: 18 June 2009 Accepted: 8 April 2010 Published: 8 April 2010
23.
References
1. Stanley J, Bisaro DM, Briddon RW, Brown JK, Fauquet CM, Harrison BD,
Rybicki EP, Stenger DC: Geminiviridae. Virus Taxonomy. VIIIth Report of the
International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses London: Elsevier/Academic
PressFauquet C, Mayo M, Maniloff J, Desselberger U, Ball L 2005, 301-326.
2. Navot N, Pichersky E, Zeidan M, Zamir D, Czosnek H: Tomato yellow leaf
curl virus: a whitefly-transmitted geminivirus with a single genomic
component. Virology 1991, 185:151-161.

24.

Kheyr-Pour A, Bendahmane M, Matzeit V, Accotto GP, Crespi S,
Gronenborn B: Tomato yellow leaf curl virus from Sardinia is a whiteflytransmitted monopartite geminivirus. Nucleic Acids Res 1991,
19:6763-6769.
Polston J, McGovern R, Brown L: Introduction of tomato yellow leaf curl
virus in Florida and implications for the spread of this and other
geminiviruses of tomato. Plant Dis 1999, 83:984-988.
Briddon RW, Stanley J: Sub-viral agents associated with plant-infecting
single-stranded DNA viruses. Virology 2006, 344:198-210.
Gronenborn B: Nanoviruses: genome organisation and protein function.
Vet Microbiol 2004, 98:103-109.
Sanderfoot AA, Lazarowitz SG: Getting it together in plant virus
movement: cooperative interactions between bipartite geminivirus
movement proteins. Trends Cell Biol 1996, 6:353-358.
Hanley-Bowdoin L, Settlage SB, Orozco BM, Nagar S, Robertson D:
Geminviruses: models for plant DNA replication, transcription, and cell
cycle regulation. Crit Rev Plant Sci 1999, 18:71-106.
Argüello-Astorga GR, Ruiz-Medrano R: An iteron-related domain is
associated to motif 1 in the replication proteins of geminiviruses:
identification of potential interacting amino acid-base pairs by a
comparative approach. Arch Virol 2001, 146:1465-1485.
Elmer JS, Brand L, Sunter G, Gardiner WE, Bisaro DM, Rogers SG: Genetic
analysis of the tomato golden mosaic virus. II. The product of the AL1
coding sequence is required for replication. Nucleic Acids Res 1988,
16:7043-7060.
Argüello-Astorga GR, Guevara-González RG, Herrera-Estrella LR, RiveraBustamante RF: Geminivirus replication origins have a group-specific
organization of iterative elements: a model for replication. Virology 1994,
203:90-100.
Fontes EP, Eagle PA, Sipe PS, Luckow VA, Hanley-Bowdoin L: Interaction
between a geminivirus replication protein and origin DNA is essential
for viral replication. J Biol Chem 1994, 269:8459-8465.
Pita JS, Fondong VN, Sangare A, Otim-Nape GW, Ogwal S, Fauquet CM:
Recombination, pseudorecombination and synergism of geminiviruses
are determinant keys to the epidemic of severe cassava mosaic disease
in Uganda. J Gen Virol 2001, 82:655-665.
Bull SE, Briddon RW, Sserubombwe WS, Ngugi K, Markham PG, Stanley J:
Genetic diversity and phylogeography of cassava mosaic viruses in
Kenya. J Gen Virol 2006, 87:3053-3065.
Qazi J, Ilyas M, Mansoor S, Briddon R: Legume yellow mosaic viruses:
genetically isolated begomoviruses. Mol Plant Pathol 2007, 8:343-348.
John P, Sivalingam PN, Haq QM, Kumar N, Mishra A, Briddon RW,
Malathi VG: Cowpea golden mosaic disease in Gujarat is caused by a
Mungbean yellow mosaic India virus isolate with a DNA B variant. Arch
Virol 2008, 153:1359-1365.
Saunders K, Salim N, Mali VR, Malathi VG, Briddon RW, Markham PG,
Stanley J: Characterisation of Sri Lankan cassava mosaic virus and Indian
cassava mosaic virus: evidence for acquisition of a DNA B component
by a monopartite begomovirus. Virology 2002, 293:63-74.
Saunders K, Bedford ID, Stanley J: Pathogenicity of a natural recombinant
associated with ageratum yellow vein disease: implications for
geminivirus evolution and disease aetiology. Virology 2001, 282:38-47.
Rochester DE, Kositratana W, Beachy RN: Systemic movement and
symptom production following agroinoculation with a single DNA of
tomato yellow leaf curl geminivirus (Thailand). Virology 1990, 178:520-526.
Li ZH, Zhou XP, Zhang X, Xie Y: Molecular characterization of tomatoinfecting begomoviruses in Yunnan, China. Arch Virol 2004, 149:1721-1732.
Sawangjit S, Chatchawankanphanich O, Chiemsombat P, Attathom T, Dale J,
Attathom S: Molecular characterization of tomato-infecting
begomoviruses in Thailand. Virus Res 2005, 109:1-8.
Patil BL, Dasgupta I: Defective Interfering DNAs of Plant Viruses. Crit Rev
Plant Sci 2006, 25:47-64.
Patil BL, Dutt N, Briddon RW, Bull SE, Rothenstein D, Borah BK, Dasgupta I,
Stanley J, Jeske H: Deletion and recombination events between the DNAA and DNA-B components of Indian cassava-infecting geminiviruses
generate defective molecules in Nicotiana benthamiana. Virus Res 2007,
124:59-67.
Sunter G, Buck KW, Coutts RH: S1-sensitive sites in the supercoiled
double-stranded form of tomato golden mosaic virus DNA component
B: identification of regions of potential alternative secondary structure
and regulatory function. Nucleic Acids Res 1985, 13:4645-4659.

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

25. Orozco BM, Gladfelter HJ, Settlage SB, Eagle PA, Gentry RN, HanleyBowdoin L: Multiple cis elements contribute to geminivirus origin
function. Virology 1998, 242:346-356.
26. Ndunguru J, Legg JP, Fofana IBF, Aveling TAS, Thompson G, Fauquet CM:
Identification of a defective molecule derived from DNA-A of the
bipartite begomovirus of East African cassava mosaic virus. Plant Pathol
2006, 55:2-10.
27. Arnim Av, Stanley J: Determinants of tomato golden mosaic virus
symptom development located on DNA B. Virology 1992, 186:286-293.
28. Hou YM, Sanders R, Ursin VM, Gilbertson RL: Transgenic plants expressing
geminivirus movement proteins: abnormal phenotypes and delayed
infection by Tomato mottle virus in transgenic tomatoes expressing the
Bean dwarf mosaic virus BV1 or BC1 proteins. Mol Plant Microbe Interact
2000, 13:297-308.
29. Hussain M, Mansoor S, Iram S, Fatima AN, Zafar Y: The nuclear shuttle
protein of Tomato leaf curl New Delhi virus is a pathogenicity
determinant. J Virol 2005, 79:4434-4439.
30. Rojas MR, Jiang H, Salati R, Xoconostle-Cazares B, Sudarshana MR, Lucas WJ,
Gilbertson RL: Functional analysis of proteins involved in movement of
the monopartite begomovirus, Tomato yellow leaf curl virus. Virology
2001, 291:110-125.
31. Padidam M, Beachy RN, Fauquet CM: Classification and identification of
geminiviruses using sequence comparisons. J Gen Virol 1995, 76:249-263.
32. Fauquet CM, Briddon RW, Brown JK, Moriones E, Stanley J, Zerbini M,
Zhou X: Geminivirus strain demarcation and nomenclature. Arch Virol
2008, 153:783-821.
33. Ha C, Coombs S, Revill P, Harding R, Vu M, Dale J: Corchorus yellow vein
virus, a New World geminivirus from the Old World. J Gen Virol 2006,
87:997-1003.
34. Ha C, Coombs S, Revill P, Harding R, Vu M, Dale J: Molecular
characterization of begomoviruses and DNA satellites from Vietnam:
additional evidence that the New World geminiviruses were present in
the Old World prior to continental separation. J Gen Virol 2008,
89:312-326.
35. Oberste MS, Maher K, Kilpatrick DR, Flemister MR, Brown BA, Pallansch MA:
Typing of human enteroviruses by partial sequencing of VP1. J Clin
Microbiol 1999, 37:1288-1293.
36. Adams MJ, Antoniw JF, Fauquet CM: Molecular criteria for genus and
species discrimination within the family Potyviridae. Arch Virol 2004,
150:459-479.
37. Fauquet CM, Bisaro DM, Briddon RW, Brown JK, Harrison BD, Rybicki EP,
Stenger DC, Stanley J: Revision of taxonomic criteria for species
demarcation in the family Geminiviridae, and an updated list of
begomovirus species. Arch Virol 2003, 148:405-421.
38. Oberste MS, Maher K, Kilpatrick DR, Pallansch MA: Molecular evolution
of the human enteroviruses: correlation of serotype with VP1
sequence and application to picornavirus classification. J Virol 1999,
73:1941-1948.
39. de Villiers EM, Fauquet CM, Broker TR, Bernard HU, zur Hausen H:
Classification of papillomaviruses. Virology 2004, 324:17-27.
40. Karthikeyan AS, Vanitharani R, Balaji V, Anuradha S, Thillaichidambaram P,
Shivaprasad PV, Parameswari C, Balamani V, Saminathan M, Veluthambi K:
Analysis of an isolate of Mungbean yellow mosaic virus (MYMV) with a
highly variable DNA B component. Arch Virol 2004, 149:1643-1652.
41. Brown JK, Idris AM, Ostrow KM, Goldberg N, French R, Stenger DC: Genetic
and Phenotypic Variation of the Pepper golden mosaic virus Complex.
Phytopathology 2005, 95:1217-1224.
42. Patil BL, Fauquet CM: Cassava mosaic geminiviruses: actual knowledge
and perspectives. Mol Plant Pathol 2009, 10:685-701.
43. Ingham DJ, Pascal E, Lazarowitz SG: Both bipartite geminivirus movement
proteins define viral host range, but only BL1 determines viral
pathogenicity. Virology 1995, 207:191-204.
44. Hatta T, Francki RI: The fine structure of chloris striate mosaic virus.
Virology 1979, 92:428-435.
45. Zhang W, Olson NH, Baker TS, Faulkner L, Agbandje-McKenna M,
Boulton MI, Davies JW, McKenna R: Structure of the Maize streak virus
geminate particle. Virology 2001, 279:471-477.
46. Frischmuth T, Ringel M, Kocher C: The size of encapsidated singlestranded DNA determines the multiplicity of African cassava mosaic
virus particles. J Gen Virol 2001, 82:673-676.

Page 16 of 17

47. Martin DP, Walt van der E, Posada D, Rybicki EP: The evolutionary value of
recombination is constrained by genome modularity. PLoS Genet 2005, 1:
e51.
48. Walt Evd, Palmer KE, Martin DP, Rybicki EP: Viable chimaeric viruses
confirm the biological importance of sequence specific maize streak
virus movement protein and coat protein interactions. Virol J 2008,
5:61-72.
49. Gladfelter HJ, Eagle PA, Fontes EP, Batts L, Hanley-Bowdoin L: Two domains
of the AL1 protein mediate geminivirus origin recognition. Virology 1997,
239:186-197.
50. Chatterji A, Chatterji U, Beachy RN, Fauquet CM: Sequence parameters that
determine specificity of binding of the replication-associated protein to
its cognate in two strains of Tomato leaf curl virus-New Delhi. Virology
2000, 273:341-350.
51. Chatterji A, Padidam M, Beachy RN, Fauquet CM: Identification of
replication specificity determinance in tomato leaf curl virus from New
Delhi. J Virol 1999, 73:5481-5489.
52. Garrido-Ramirez ER, Sudarshana MR, Gilbertson RL: Bean golden yellow
mosaic virus from Chiapas, Mexico: Characterization,
Pseudorecombination with Other Bean-Infecting Geminiviruses and
Germ Plasm Screening. Phytopathology 2000, 90:1224-1232.
53. Idris AM, Mills-Lujan K, Martin K, Brown JK: Melon chlorotic leaf curl virus:
characterization and differential reassortment with closest relatives
reveal adaptive virulence in the squash leaf curl virus clade and host
shifting by the host-restricted bean calico mosaic virus. J Virol 2008,
82:1959-1967.
54. Frischmuth T, Roberts S, von Arnim A, Stanley J: Specificity of bipartite
geminivirus movement proteins. Virology 1993, 196:666-673.
55. Harrison B, Robinson D: Natural Genomic and Antigenic Variation in
Whitefly-Transmitted Geminiviruses (Begomoviruses). Annu Rev
Phytopathol 1999, 37:369-398.
56. Ghosh R, Paul S, Das S, Palit P, Acharyya S, Das A, Mir JI, Ghosh SK, Roy A:
Molecular evidence for existence of a New World begomovirus
associated with yellow mosaic disease of Corchorus capsularis in India.
Australasian Plant Dis Notes 2008, 3:59-62.
57. Padidam M, Beachy RN, Fauquet CM: The role of AV2 (“precoat”) and coat
protein in viral replication and movement in tomato leaf curl
geminivirus. Virology 1996, 224:390-404.
58. Glick E, Zrachya A, Levy Y, Mett A, Gidoni D, Belausov E, Citovsky V, Gafni Y:
Interaction with host SGS3 is required for suppression of RNA silencing
by tomato yellow leaf curl virus V2 protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:157-161.
59. Harrison B: Advances in Geminivirus Research. Annu Rev Phytopathol 1985,
23:55-82.
60. Briddon RW, Bedford ID, Tsai JH, Markham PG: Analysis of the nucleotide
sequence of the treehopper-transmitted geminivirus, tomato pseudocurly top virus, suggests a recombinant origin. Virology 1996, 219:387-394.
61. Etessami P, Watts J, Stanley J: Size reversion of African cassava mosaic
virus coat protein gene deletion mutants during infection of Nicotiana
benthamiana. J Gen Virol 1989, 70:277-289.
62. Padidam M, Sawyer S, Fauquet CM: Possible emergence of new
geminiviruses by frequent recombination. Virology 1999, 265:218-225.
63. Roberts S, Stanley J: Lethal mutations within the conserved stem-loop of
African cassava mosaic virus DNA are rapidly corrected by genomic
recombination. J Gen Virol 1994, 75:3203-3209.
64. Stanley J, Markham PG, Callis RJ, Pinner MS: The nucleotide sequence of
an infectious clone of the geminivirus beet curly top virus. EMBO J 1986,
5:1761-1767.
65. Saunders K, Stanley J: A nanovirus-like DNA component associated with
yellow vein disease of Ageratum conyzoides: evidence for interfamilial
recombination between plant DNA viruses. Virology 1999, 264:142-152.
66. Tao X, Zhou X: Pathogenicity of a naturally occurring recombinant DNA
satellite associated with tomato yellow leaf curl China virus. J Gen Virol
2008, 89:306-311.
67. Zhou X, Xie Y, Tao X, Zhang Z, Li Z, Fauquet CM: Characterization of
DNAbeta associated with begomoviruses in China and evidence for coevolution with their cognate viral DNA-A. J Gen Virol 2003, 84:237-247.
68. Li Z, Xie Y, Zhou X: Tobacco curly shoot virus DNAbeta Is Not Necessary
for Infection but Intensifies Symptoms in a Host-Dependent Manner.
Phytopathology 2005, 95:902-908.

Briddon et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:97
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/97

Page 17 of 17

69. Rouhibakhsh A, Malathi VG: Severe leaf curl disease of cowpea - a new
disease of cowpea in northern India caused by Mungbean yellow
mosaic India virus and a satellite DNA b. Plant Pathol 2004, 54:259.
70. Bull SE, Briddon RW, Sserubombwe WS, Ngugi K, Markham PG, Stanley J:
Infectivity, pseudorecombination and mutagenesis of Kenyan cassava
mosaic begomoviruses. J Gen Virol 2007, 88:1624-1633.
71. Dry IB, Krake LR, Rigden JE, Rezaian MA: A novel subviral agent associated
with a geminivirus: the first report of a DNA satellite. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1997, 94:7088-7093.
72. Murant AF, Mayo MA: Satellites of plant viruses. Ann Rev Phytopathol 1982,
20:49-70.
73. Kikuno R, Toh H, Hayashida H, Miyata T: Sequence similarity between
putative gene products of geminiviral DNAs. Nature 1984, 308:562.
74. Saunders K, Bedford ID, Briddon RW, Markham PG, Wong SM, Stanley J: A
unique virus complex causes Ageratum yellow vein disease. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:6890-6895.
75. Briddon RW, Mansoor S, Bedford ID, Pinner MS, Saunders K, Stanley J,
Zafar Y, Malik KA, Markham PG: Identification of DNA components
required for induction of cotton leaf curl disease. Virology 2001,
285:234-243.
76. Cui X, Li G, Wang D, Hu D, Zhou X: A begomovirus DNA b-encoded
protein binds DNA, functions as a suppressor of RNA silencing, and
targets the cell nucleus. J Virol 2005, 79:10764-10775.
77. Saeed M, Zafar Y, Randles JW, Rezaian MA: A monopartite begomovirusassociated DNA beta satellite substitutes for the DNA B of a bipartite
begomovirus to permit systemic infection. J Gen Virol 2007, 88:2881-2889.
78. Gilbertson RL, Sudarshana M, Jiang H, Rojas MR, Lucas WJ: Limitations on
geminivirus genome size imposed by plasmodesmata and virusencoded movement protein: insights into DNA trafficking. Plant Cell
2003, 15:2578-2591.
79. Mansoor S, Khan SH, Bashir A, Saeed M, Zafar Y, Malik KA, Briddon RW,
Stanley J, Markham PG: Identification of a novel circular single-stranded
DNA associated with cotton leaf curl disease in Pakistan. Virology 1999,
259:190-199.
80. Sunter G, Bisaro DM: Transactivation of geminivirus AR1 and BR1 gene
expression by the viral AL2 gene product occurs at the level of
transcription. Plant Cell 1992, 4:1321-1331.
81. Guan C, Zhou X: Phloem specific promoter from a satellite associated
with a DNA virus. Virus Res 2006, 115:150-157.
82. Eini O, Behjatnia SAA, Dogra S, Dry IB, Randles JW, Rezaian MA:
Identification of sequence elements regulating promoter activity and
replication of a monopartite begomovirus-associated DNA b satellite. J
Gen Virol 2009, 90:253-260.
83. Bao Y, Federhen S, Leipe D, Pham V, Resenchuk S, Rozanov M, Tatusov R,
Tatusova T: National center for biotechnology information viral genomes
project. J Virol 2004, 78:7291-7298.
84. Swofford D: PAUP User’s Manual. Champaign: Illinois Natural History
Survey 1991.
85. Sneath PH, Sokal RR: Numerical Taxonomy. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman
1973.
86. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4:406-425.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-97
Cite this article as: Briddon et al.: Distinct evolutionary histories of the
DNA-A and DNA-B components of bipartite begomoviruses. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:97.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
