<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-5-96.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Software

Base-By-Base: Single nucleotide-level analysis of whole viral
genome alignments
Ryan Brodie1, Alex J Smith1, Rachel L Roper2, Vasily Tcherepanov1 and
Chris Upton*1
Address: 1Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, B.C., V8W 3P6 Canada and 2East Carolina University, Brody School of
Medicine, Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Greenville, NC 27858-4354, USA
Email: Ryan Brodie - ryan@ryanbrodie.com; Alex J Smith - ajsmith@uvic.ca; Rachel L Roper - roperr@mail.ecu.edu;
Vasily Tcherepanov - vasilyt@uvic.ca; Chris Upton* - cupton@uvic.ca
* Corresponding author

Published: 14 July 2004
BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-5-96

Received: 05 May 2004
Accepted: 14 July 2004

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/96
© 2004 Brodie et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: With ever increasing numbers of closely related virus genomes being sequenced, it
has become desirable to be able to compare two genomes at a level more detailed than gene
content because two strains of an organism may share the same set of predicted genes but still
differ in their pathogenicity profiles. For example, detailed comparison of multiple isolates of the
smallpox virus genome (each approximately 200 kb, with 200 genes) is not feasible without new
bioinformatics tools.
Results: A software package, Base-By-Base, has been developed that provides visualization tools
to enable researchers to 1) rapidly identify and correct alignment errors in large, multiple genome
alignments; and 2) generate tabular and graphical output of differences between the genomes at the
nucleotide level. Base-By-Base uses detailed annotation information about the aligned genomes and
can list each predicted gene with nucleotide differences, display whether variations occur within
promoter regions or coding regions and whether these changes result in amino acid substitutions.
Base-By-Base can connect to our mySQL database (Virus Orthologous Clusters; VOCs) to retrieve
detailed annotation information about the aligned genomes or use information from text files.
Conclusion: Base-By-Base enables users to quickly and easily compare large viral genomes; it
highlights small differences that may be responsible for important phenotypic differences such as
virulence. It is available via the Internet using Java Web Start and runs on Macintosh, PC and Linux
operating systems with the Java 1.4 virtual machine.

Background
The recent advances in large-scale DNA sequencing technologies has significantly reduced the cost of this work,
and it has become feasible to determine the sequence of
multiple isolates of a number of viruses and examine
smaller and smaller differences between them. The availability of this type of data permits novel hypotheses to be
tested, but it requires new bioinformatics tools. For a

number of years, our laboratory has been designing software specifically to manage and analyze large numbers of
the bigger virus genomes such as those of poxviruses. Poxvirus genomes range in size from 150–380 kb and encode
several hundred proteins [1]; there are now more than 30
completely sequenced poxvirus genomes available from
GenBank. Coronaviruses provide another important
example, with the largest genome (~30 kb) of all RNA

Page 1 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96

viruses and 99 isolates of the SARS virus completely
sequenced. This wealth of sequence data provides excellent opportunities to study new aspects of virus virulence
and evolution. The Poxvirus Orthologous Clusters (POCs;
[2]) mySQL database and query tools, now expanded to
Virus Orthologous Clusters (VOCs), was constructed to
organize all the genomes of one virus family into a single
database and to group orthologous genes into families. A
variety of tools are integrated into the database for rapid
comparison of not only individual genes and proteins but
also entire gene families if required. These tools include
BLAST [3,4], CLUSTALW [5,6], T-coffee [7], hydrophobicity plots (using Kyte-Doolittle, Hopp-Woods and ParkerGuo-Hodges scales of hydrophobicity), DNA/protein dotplots and NAP [8] to align protein to DNA sequences.
Gene maps of complete virus genomes are also generated
automatically in VOCs. Continuing on the theme of
working with gene families and complete genomes, the
Viral Genome Organizer (VGO; [9]) was designed to display multiple whole genomes in a single working window
with zooming capabilities and showing a variety of information such as ORFs, start/stop codons and AT%. VGO
acts as a graphical portal to a variety of data that is stored
in VOCs (amino acid composition, nucleotide composition, presence of orthologs in other genomes and preprocessed BLAST searches) or generated on-the-fly; for
example clicking on gene X in one genome will cause the
orthologous gene to be highlighted in a related genome.
This software has the ability to easily and quickly answer
a database query such as display genes present in variola virus
that are absent from vaccinia virus. However, no software
existed that could display all nucleotide differences between
variola virus strain 1 and variola virus strain 2 and provide a
summary of implications of these base changes; therefore the
development of Base-By-Base (BBB) was initiated. This
level of detail is required by current sequencing projects
that aim to identify the genetic determinants responsible
for phenotypes such as mortality rate/virulence, host tropism or tissue tropism displayed by different isolates of a
single virus species. BBB allows the user to quickly display
all nucleotide differences between genomes, and provides
a detailed summary of the effect that each change produces in the relevant genes.
A second problem associated with the alignment of
closely related, large virus genomes, is that the available
software such as Dialign2 [10], used to produce acceptably fast, global alignments of complete genomes, invariably makes occasional small errors, often around the
positioning of multiple small gaps. These small alignment
errors pose a serious problem with fine analysis of
genomes because the insertion of erroneous gaps results
in an increase in the number of apparent, but not real,
nucleotide substitutions. BBB provides a visual display to
help the molecular biologist recognize these errors and

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/96

quickly correct them using the built in sequence editor.
Accurate large-scale alignments are essential for determining the evolutionary relationship of closely related viruses
(such as isolates of a single strain), and in such alignments
insertions and deletions themselves are very useful indicators of evolutionary lineage. Thus BBB will be very useful
for phenotype/genotype analysis and for epidemiology.

Implementation
Design rationale
BBB was coded in Java to simplify support for multiple
platforms including Mac OS X, MS Windows and LINUX.
A user initially accesses the application (client) from a
web page using Java Web Start, which also automatically
downloads the application from the host server computer
whenever a new version is available. This approach greatly
simplifies the distribution of updates and ensures users
are taking advantage of the latest version of the software;
it has worked very well for the distribution of VOCs and
VGO.

Although BBB was primarily designed to be used as an
editor for large DNA sequences, the software also works
with protein sequences and is used as the multiple alignment interface in VOCs. Both FASTA and ClustalW (.aln)
formatted text files can be loaded into the program; multiple sequences may be placed in a single file and additional sequences can also be added at any time. Similarly,
alignments may be exported in either of these formats.
The native file format of BBB is, however, based on the
Bioinformatics Sequence Markup Language (BSML) [11]
standard that is itself an Extensible Markup Language
(XML) dedicated to the needs of bioinformatics; it aims to
provide an open language definition for distributing
sequence data. The BBB file format stores the sequence
alignment, gene features and other user-defined annotations for the sequences; because of the highly modular
nature of XML, it is easy to incorporate new information
in the alignment while maintaining compatibility with
previous versions. XML is also highly interoperable since
it has as its root a plain text file, allowing BBB and BSML
files to be easily integrated with other software packages.
Since BBB provides access to ClustalW [5,6] and T-coffee
[7] software, specific regions or entire genome sequences
can be selected and aligned within the program itself, but
in normal operation it is expected that the user would
import large sequences that had already been aligned by a
more appropriate program such as DIALIGN2 [10]. ClustalW and T-coffee are not distributed in the BBB jar file
and are run instead on the remote BBB server. The user
selects regions of the sequences to be re-aligned, and these
are formatted by BBB, submitted to the server and subsequently received back in a new BBB window.

Page 2 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/96

FigureBBB to identify and correct small mis-aligned regions within alignments of large virus genomes
Use of 1
Use of BBB to identify and correct small mis-aligned regions within alignments of large virus genomes. (a)
Region of vaccinia virus (strain WR) and cowpox virus (strain Brighton Red) genomes aligned by DIALIGN2 (b) Manually corrected version of region shown in (a). Gaps and mismatched nucleotides are shown as red and navy blue boxes or bars in
between the 2 sequences, respectively.

The annotations for viral genomes in a BBB alignment are
read into BBB from a GenBank file or from a VOCs database. Currently, poxviruses [12] and coronaviruses [13]
are available in our VOCs databases although herpesviruses, baculoviruses and adenoviruses will be available in
the near future [14]. The gene annotations are required by
BBB to generate the tabular summary of the differences
between genomes that details the effect of nucleotide
changes on the genes and predicted proteins. These annotations are not required to produce a visual summary of
sequence alignments, although we find it useful to have

the genes displayed for one of the genomes in a large
alignment.

Results and Discussion
Editing and display of sequence differences in real-time
BBB is primarily intended to be a sequence analysis tool
focused on genome sequence comparisons, but the
program also provides similar functionality to other alignment viewers and editors such as GeneDoc [15] and
BioEdit [16]. BBB gives users the ability to load, correct
and save alignments. Alignments loaded into BBB are easily edited by dragging sequences across the screen to insert

Page 3 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96

and remove gaps; multiple sequences may be selected and
edited as one. One of many unique features of BBB is that
the main window displays the DNA or protein sequences
together with flags that show all the nucleotide or amino
acid differences that are present between the sequences
shown in the window. This information provides very
important visual cues as to the position of major and
minor differences between the sequences in an alignment
and is updated in real-time as the user makes edits to the
alignments (Figure 1). BBB provides a button to allow the
user to skip through a sequence from one flagged nucleotide difference to the next, alleviating the need to scroll
through an entire genome and detect the differences by
eye. The sequence substitutions, insertions and deletions
are flagged and color-coded in a single row between the
pairs of sequences (Figure 1). The program preferences
can be set so that the difference data represents differences
between each adjacent pair of sequences or to a consensus
sequence calculated by BBB. In pairwise comparison
mode, the first sequence is compared to the second, second to the third and so on, making BBB especially useful
for visualizing evolution of sequences. When comparing
to the consensus, the sequence differences indicated on
the screen are those differences between each sequence
and the consensus sequence, this allows for a global view
of the alignment and easily identifies conserved/variable
regions in genomes which is useful information in drug
design and vaccine development. The consensus sequence
generated from an alignment can also be saved to a file
(FASTA format) for analysis with other software.
During development, it was discovered that it was important to have the flags that highlight nucleotide differences
updated in real-time as the user manually modifies the
alignment. These flags are created for the displayed area
only, and are then updated and augmented when needed,
such as when the user changes the alignment, by inserting
or deleting gaps, or changes the view, by scrolling or setting the display area. This enables BBB to work with multiple large genome sequences and keep an acceptable
refresh rate for displayed data. A Block Glue option facilitates the movement of long sequence blocks that are bigger than the editing window by permitting the dragging of
complete blocks without introduction of new gaps within
the alignment. Often alignment errors are obvious to an
experienced molecular biologist and the alignment can be
manually corrected, simply by dragging the appropriate
nucleotides into new positions. However, if there are
doubts about the DIALIGN2 alignment or if there are a
large number of sequences in the alignment, the user may
choose to perform a local re-alignment of selected regions
of the sequences using the ClustalW or T-coffee module of
BBB. After the server completes an alignment, a new BBB
window displays the new local alignment and the user is
offered the option to import this new local alignment

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/96

back into the original complete genome alignment. If
required, forward and backward 3-frame translations of
the DNA sequences can be displayed in the main
sequence alignment window to help with alignment decisions. Methionines (green) and stop codons (red) are
highlighted on the 3-frame translations, as are the genes
that are associated with individual sequences through
annotations in the BBB file. Figure 1 shows an example of
a correction of a small mismatched region of two poxvirus
genomes; breaking the single gap and moving the two
resulting gaps reduces the number of mismatched nucleotides (not including those opposite a gap) from 10 to 3.
Sequence filtering and display customization
Since Base-By-Base has been designed for users to manipulate alignments of complete poxvirus genomes (150–
300 kb), features to simplify and enhance the user-interface and to speed up the program's manipulation of the
sequences have been incorporated where possible. However, some speed has been sacrificed by using Java, which
was chosen to provide cross-platform functionality. BBB
allows users to filter their view of the data in two ways, 1)
complete genome sequences can be sorted and reordered
in the main window or placed in the background, completely hidden from view to make analysis of dozens of
sequences possible; 2) long genome alignments can be
masked from the 5' and/or 3' ends to allow a user to focus
on any particular region within the genome; this is especially useful for visually tracking the differences between
individual orthologous genes in several different
genomes. These user selected viewing options also apply
to the functions for generating visual or tabular reports;
only the genomes shown in the main window and the
unmasked regions are evaluated by these report routines.
From the preferences window, users can also toggle on/off
the display of the sequence difference flags, sequencenumbering scales, user annotations, and there is a button
in the main window to toggle on/off the display of 3frame translation of DNA sequences (Figure 1). These features are especially useful for alignments of 30 sequences
or more, where screen real estate precludes the display of
all sequences or all features associated with the sequences.

Since individual researchers frequently are interested in
different genome features that may not be annotated in
GenBank files, a tool was created in BBB that allows the
user to add comments to different regions of one or more
sequences in an alignment. These comments can be color
coded, labeled with text and hidden or viewed in the main
window as required; they are saved within the native .bbb
alignment file. Again, since the aligned sequences are frequently very long, BBB provides a button to skip through
the sequences from one comment to the next.

Page 4 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/96

Figure 2
Section of a gene feature report comparing SARS coronavirus strains BJ03 and BJ04
Section of a gene feature report comparing SARS coronavirus strains BJ03 and BJ04. The Base-By-Base table
header describes the listed data. Since the non-structural proteins (NSP) that we have annotated in VOCs are fragments of the
ORF1a and ORF1ab polyproteins, the length differences appear as negative numbers

To provide the user with additional information about the
sequence alignments, BBB provides several different
coloring styles for viewing the alignments in the main
window. These include the default character-identity based
scheme in which each nucleotide or amino acid is colored
based on which nucleotide or amino acid it represents
and a simple percent identity style which uses shades to
indicate the frequency of each nucleotide or amino acid at
each position in the alignment. Protein sequence alignments may also be viewed with similarity-matrix based
(BLOSUM62 or PAM250) shading for which residues
"similar" to the most frequently occurring amino acid are
also colored. Lastly, a hydrophobicity coloring scheme
shades amino acids based on the hydrophobicity score of
each residue.
Reporting sequence differences and effects of nucleotide
changes
Another of the unique and primary features of BBB is its
ability to summarize the differences between two large
closely related virus genomes; without such bioinformatics tools, this type of large-scale analysis is not feasible.
Using the genome annotation information imported
from a GenBank file, or from our own VOCs database,
BBB is able to determine which pairs of genes have nucleotide differences and what, if any, effect these nucleotide
substitutions have on the predicted proteins from each
gene. Basic gene information is listed in a table, including
start/stop positions, strand and length, followed by: 1) the
number of nucleotide differences counted and categorized as substitutions, deletions and insertions; 2) calculation of the percent difference; 3) changes in promoter
regions; 4) nucleotide substitutions categorized as silent,
or listed with amino acid change (Figure 2). In addition,
BBB displays the size of deletions and insertions to guide
the user in comparison of percent differences since a single deletion event removing 12 nucleotides creates larger
effect in the percent difference table than 6 single substitution events that could affect 6 different amino acids. The

summary table, which can be very large for the poxviruses,
can be sorted using the data in any column by simply
clicking on any column header.
The percent difference between genes is useful for spotting
regions that may be mis-aligned by highlighting unusually large differences between particular genes. A region of
200 nucleotides upstream of each gene is also analyzed
for differences; in poxviruses, promoters are small and
almost all are within 200 nucleotides of the initiating ATG
[17,18]. Thus, with very similar genomes it is very simple
to determine which few genes have differences in the promoter regions and select these for further analysis. This
type of analysis of promoter regions is very important
when looking at different isolates of a single virus strain
since modulation of gene expression may occur rapidly.
Changes of one or two nucleotides in the small promoters
of poxviruses can have a drastic effect on transcription rate
and ultimately on protein expression [17,18]. This type of
adaptation of a virus to a particular environment/host
occurs at a much higher frequency than the acquisition of
novel genes/promoters derived from the host or other
viruses. These differences can easily be identified and
viewed in BBB.
Comparison of very closely related genomes is the primary purpose for which BBB was designed and there is
usually a simple one-to-one correspondence of complete
genes between such genomes. However, BBB also handles
situations where fragmented genes may exist in one
genome; it chooses counterpart genes in the other genome
by determining the greatest portion of overlap between
the gene on the first genome and the gene on the second
genome. The tabular report includes raw information on
the genes, such as the position and length of the genes
(Figure 2).

Page 5 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/96

Figure 3
Scored similarity visual summary of an alignment of coronavirus spike glycoproteins
Scored similarity visual summary of an alignment of coronavirus spike glycoproteins. PAM250 substitution matrix
was used to shade the figure; a grey scale indicates similarity (black-perfect match; white-low) and gaps are shown as dashes.

The Visual Overview Summary creates a pictorial representation of the differences (default) or similarities between
each sequence in the main alignment window and the
consensus sequence. This summary window is not a static
picture, but rather it communicates with the alignment
window (Figure 3). Examples of this communication
activity are: 1) information showing the length of the
sequence displayed in the alignment window is superimposed on the summary picture, and clicking in another
area of the summary window causes that new region to be
displayed in the main window; this feature also provides
a very rapid way for navigating through large genomes; 2)
when edits are made to the underlying sequences in the
main sequence window, the consensus is automatically
recalculated and the summary display is updated.
Changes to the main window are polled approximately
once per second, so that the system is not inundated with
consensus refresh requests that can, in some cases, be
quite time consuming. The default color scheme used in
this window is identical to that of the main alignment display and nucleotide differences (or regions of mostly substitutions) are displayed as blue ticks or bars, and
insertions and deletions are displayed in green and red,
respectively. Similarity shading styles, scored with
BLOSUM62 and PAM250 matrices, are available for analyzing protein sequences that might not be similar enough
for the default parameters (Figure 3) and has proven to be
very useful for the analysis of gene orthologs and protein
families.
As discussed above, BBB stores the sequence alignment,
gene features and user annotation in its own XML format.
It can, however, export the alignment text in FASTA and
ClustalW (.aln) formats for convenient transfer to other
programs. To capture a graphical view of the main
window alignment, the user may choose to export either
a full alignment or a particular sequence range to an
image file in JPEG or PNG file formats. This permits the
user to view and print a full alignment by wrapping the
single row, at a user-specified width, which is normally

displayed on the screen. All graphics, showing sequence
differences, nucleotide translations and user-added annotations are preserved in the picture. For publication purposes, however, features such as user comments can be
easily hidden from view by changing BBB preferences (Edit
menu).
Other methods of summarizing the information from a
multiple sequence alignment in BBB are by using the Phylogeny tools or the Alignment Info tool. Trees are calculated
from the alignment and drawn by routines from the Phylogenetic Analysis Library (PAL) [19]. The Alignment Info
tool generates a tabular report of the percent identity
between all the pairs of sequences in the alignment; this
data can be exported as a tab-delimited file for convenient
importing into a spreadsheet or table in a word processor.
Since the percent identity is only calculated on the region
of the alignment set in Display area, this provides a useful
tool to calculate conservation in different regions of an
alignment.
Regular expression and fuzzy motif searches
It is frequently necessary to search through viral genome
sequences for restriction sites, primer sequences and other
patterns. For most restriction sites a regular expression
search suffices, however, to look for less well-defined
motifs such as promoters or other regulatory sequences,
allowance for a significant element of degeneracy is desirable. This is a tedious process using regular expressions;
therefore, a fuzzy motif search capability was also implemented in BBB that allows a user-selected number of mismatches and ignores gaps in sequence alignments. The
search results are returned in two formats (Figure 4); they
are presented in table format in a new window together
with information indicating the percent match to the
query motif and are also indicated directly on the main
sequence alignment window. To facilitate searches of long
sequences or those that return a large number of matches,
the search results table can be sorted by location of the
match within the genome or by percent match (Figure 4).

Page 6 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/96

Figure 4
Results of a fuzzy search
Results of a fuzzy search. The query sequence was 'TGCACGG', allowing 2 mismatches (user option), in 2 SARS coronavirus genomes. Upper panel, search results window with hits sorted by confidence (percent match) and the location of the hit
within the genome; lower panel, hits displayed as black arrows in sequence alignment window.

Users can also rapidly move from hit to hit along each of
the sequences searched by simply clicking on the icon representing the search hit in the search results table. Fuzzy
search expressions follow a simple grammar that is
explained in the user documentation http://www.virol
ogy.ca/pbr/bbb/manual, and the regular expression
searching capability is provided by the Jakarta-ORO text-

processing package. BBB uses the Perl 5 regular expressions from the ORO package with case insensitive searching; this function searches both strands of the nucleotide
sequence.

Page 7 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/96

Figure 5
Web interface of a Base-By-Base summary
Web interface of a Base-By-Base summary. Display of 11 SARS coronavirus genomes. Pink boxes at the top of the figure
represent genes; annotations are derived from the VOCs database. After comparison to the consensus, nucleotide differences
are displayed as vertical blue ticks or bars, and insertions and deletions are displayed in green and red, respectively.

Data connectivity
BBB has been designed to accommodate large virus
genomes and therefore works with sequences in the order
of 300 kb. Initially, alignments are read into BBB from
FASTA or ClustalW format alignment files which are then
converted to the native BBB file format. By their XML
nature, BBB files are simple text files that research labs can
easily post on their websites, which are then accessible
from inside the program. Users of the program have
found it convenient to maintain a series of BBB alignment
files, each containing a multiple alignment of one group
of closely related virus genomes, which serve as founder
alignments for users; for example, a large alignment of all
SARS
genomes
is
maintained
at
http://ath
ena.bioc.uvic.ca/sars/bbb. These files may then be edited
by users who can delete the genome sequences they are
not interested in and save the new files to their local computer. If, by deleting a series of genomes from the multiple
alignment, there are then some positions that have gaps in
all remaining genomes, BBB asks the user if these empty
columns should be removed from the alignment.

Once a genome sequence alignment has been corrected,
one of the most frequent requests is to view the visual
summary of the alignment. Therefore an interface to generate and view these BBB summary files directly from a
WWW page has been developed. Figure 5 shows a visual
summary of 11 SARS genomes with an ORF map and substitutions, insertions and deletions color-coded. The
WWW package allows the user to select an alignment file
and view either the entire sequence alignment or a
selected region of the genome sequences. If the BBB
alignment file contains gene feature information, the
position of genes will be superimposed on the alignment

summary. Since the views are produced on-the-fly, the site
maintainer only has to save the BBB file to the appropriate
WWW directory and the users can be sure that they have
access to the latest information. This feature also provides
access to the summary display without the need to download BBB or learn how to run the software.

Conclusions
The goal of this project was to produce a tool to facilitate
the comparison of closely related large viral genomes such
as isolates of a single virus strain. To this end, a new software package called Base-By-Base has been developed; it
uses a graphical interface to highlight differences between
genomes and includes a multiple alignment editor so that
the user can manually correct the errors made by programs making global alignments of complete genomes.
When combined with our gene feature database, the Viral
Orthologous Clusters system, or a GenBank file BBB is
able to map gene features onto whole genome alignments, thereby giving users the ability to manipulate their
alignment within the context of the annotated genes.
Graphical summaries of multiple genome alignments are
available from BBB in several formats. Furthermore, by
using genome annotations, BBB is able to create tables
that summarize all of the nucleotide differences between
genomes and the implication of these changes on proteins
encoded by the viral genes. Both coding and intergenic
(e.g. promoter) sequences are analyzed. We believe that
BBB will significantly enhance the analysis of a growing
set of sequence data, namely the accumulation of
multiple closely related virus genomes. Correlations
between sequence and phenotype can be analyzed and
hypotheses developed for testing. Conserved and variable
regions can be viewed for phylogenetic relationships or

Page 8 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96

vaccine or drug development. BBB is written in Java and
has been tested on Linux, Mac OS X, and Windows. It is
freely available for use under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) at http://www.virology.ca/pbr/
bbb/.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/96

5.

6.

Availability and requirements
Project name: Base-By-Base

7.

Project home page: http://www.virology.ca/pbr/bbb/

8.

Operating system(s): Platform independent

9.

Programming language: Java

10.

Other requirements: Java 1.4 or higher, this requires at
least system 10.2.8 on the Macintosh.

11.

License: GNU General Public License
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: Contact
authors

Authors' contributions
RB and AJS were principle programmers of the BBB software. RLR, VT and CU contributed ideas for features and
display requirements, and tested the program.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997,
25:3389-3402.
Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving
the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment
through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties
and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools.
Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:4876-4882.
Notredame C, Higgins DG, Heringa J: T-Coffee: A novel method
for fast and accurate multiple sequence alignment. J Mol Biol
2000, 302:205-217.
Huang X, Zhang J: Methods for comparing a DNA sequence
with a protein sequence. Comput Appl Biosci 1996, 12:497-506.
Upton C, Hogg D, Perrin D, Boone M, Harris NL: Viral genome
organizer: a system for analyzing complete viral genomes.
Virus Res 2000, 70:55-64.
Morgenstern B: DIALIGN 2: improvement of the segment-tosegment approach to multiple sequence alignment. Bioinformatics 1999, 15:211-218.
Bioinformatics Sequence Markup Language
[http://
www.bsml.org]
Poxvirus Bioinformatics Resource [http://www.poxvirus.org]
Coronavirus Bioinformatics Resource
[http://www.sarsre
search.ca]
The Virus Bioinformatics Resource [http://www.virology.ca]
GeneDoc [http://www.psc.edu/biomed/genedoc]
BioEdit [http://www.mbio.ncsu.edu/BioEdit/bioedit.html]
Davison AJ, Moss B: Structure of vaccinia virus late promoters.
J Mol Biol 1989, 210:771-784.
Davison AJ, Moss B: Structure of vaccinia virus early
promoters. JMolBiol 1989, 210:749-769.
PAL: Phylogenetic Analysis Library [http://www.cebl.auck
land.ac.nz/pal-project]

Additional material
Additional File 1
This file contains 3 SARS coronavirus genomes, aligned with annotations,
in Base-By-Base format. After downloading this file, the alignment can be
opened from 1) the BBB file menu; open alignment.... From your local
file; 2) Load sequences icon (open folder) after selecting the BBB file
format from the menu.
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/14712105-5-96-S1.bbb]

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by NIAID/DARPA grant U01 AI48653-02 and Canadian NSERC Strategic Grant STPGP 269665-03. We would like to thank:
Angelika Ehlers for systems administration and Melissa Da Silva for betatesting and critical review of the manuscript.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

Moss B: Poxviruses. Fields Virology Volume 2. Edited by: Knipe DM
and Howley P M. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2001:2849-2884.
Ehlers A, Osborne J, Slack S, Roper RL, Upton C: Poxvirus Orthologous Clusters (POCs). Bioinformatics 2002, 18:1544-1545.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local
alignment search tool. JMolBiol 1990, 215:403-410.
Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 9 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
