<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Observing copepods through a genomic lens</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22. doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-22"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content="genome organization; ecogenomics; parasitism and symbiosis; biological invasion; diapause; response to environmental change"/>
<meta name="Author" content="James E Bron"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

DEBATE

Open Access

Observing copepods through a genomic lens
James E Bron1*, Dagmar Frisch2, Erica Goetze3, Stewart C Johnson4, Carol Eunmi Lee5 and Grace A Wyngaard6

Abstract
Background: Copepods outnumber every other multicellular animal group. They are critical components of the
world’s freshwater and marine ecosystems, sensitive indicators of local and global climate change, key ecosystem
service providers, parasites and predators of economically important aquatic animals and potential vectors of
waterborne disease. Copepods sustain the world fisheries that nourish and support human populations. Although
genomic tools have transformed many areas of biological and biomedical research, their power to elucidate
aspects of the biology, behavior and ecology of copepods has only recently begun to be exploited.
Discussion: The extraordinary biological and ecological diversity of the subclass Copepoda provides both unique
advantages for addressing key problems in aquatic systems and formidable challenges for developing a focused
genomics strategy. This article provides an overview of genomic studies of copepods and discusses strategies for
using genomics tools to address key questions at levels extending from individuals to ecosystems. Genomics can,
for instance, help to decipher patterns of genome evolution such as those that occur during transitions from free
living to symbiotic and parasitic lifestyles and can assist in the identification of genetic mechanisms and
accompanying physiological changes associated with adaptation to new or physiologically challenging
environments. The adaptive significance of the diversity in genome size and unique mechanisms of genome
reorganization during development could similarly be explored. Genome-wide and EST studies of parasitic
copepods of salmon and large EST studies of selected free-living copepods have demonstrated the potential utility
of modern genomics approaches for the study of copepods and have generated resources such as EST libraries,
shotgun genome sequences, BAC libraries, genome maps and inbred lines that will be invaluable in assisting
further efforts to provide genomics tools for copepods.
Summary: Genomics research on copepods is needed to extend our exploration and characterization of their
fundamental biological traits, so that we can better understand how copepods function and interact in diverse
environments. Availability of large scale genomics resources will also open doors to a wide range of systems
biology type studies that view the organism as the fundamental system in which to address key questions in
ecology and evolution.
Keywords: genome organization, ecogenomics, parasitism and symbiosis, biological invasion, diapause, response
to environmental change

Background
The copepods are an extremely ancient group, likely
having diverged from other arthropod taxa between
388-522 million years ago [1]. They are also an extraordinarily diverse group with respect to their morphologies, physiologies, life-strategies and habitat preferences,
with adult sizes ranging from < 0.1 mm-23 cm. Genomics, defined as the study of genome structure and
composition as well as the study of gene expression and
* Correspondence: jeb1@stir.ac.uk
1
Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

function (transcriptomics), has been underutilized in
studies of copepods. Although over 12000 validated species of copepods have been recognised to date, there are
only modest sequence resources for copepods in public
databases. To date, sequencing efforts and the application of genomic techniques have been limited to a small
number of species in the orders: Harpacticoida, Calanoida, Cyclopoida, and Siphonostomatoida with estimated species numbers of 7288, 4937, 3241 and 3348,
respectively [2]. In this article we discuss why new
investments in copepod genomic research are warranted
and illustrate how the development of genomics

© 2011 Bron et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

resources for copepods will enable researchers to
address key questions related to environmental and ecosystem health, the sustainability of fisheries, evolution,
symbiosis and parasitism, biological invasion, and
speciation.
The global importance of copepods

Copepods are more abundant than any other group of
multicellular animals, including the hyper-abundant
insects and nematodes [3]. They pervade the majority of
natural and man-made aquatic systems, inhabiting a
domain that extends from the nutrient-rich black oozes
of abyssal ocean depths to the nutrient-poor waters of
the highest mountain tarns. Swarms of copepods can
reach densities of up to 92,000 individuals L-1[4]. Some
species have escaped traditional aquatic habitats, and
live in rain forest canopies, leaf-litter, hot springs,
between sand grains, in hyper-saline waters (~200 ppt)
and in caves, as well as in symbiotic associations with
other animal and plant species. Deeply divergent
morphologies are found in relation to free-living or
parasitic lifestyles, with some groups appearing classically “arthropodan”, and others unrecognizable as such
(Figure 1).
As the dominant secondary producers of the sea,
copepods are the linchpin of aquatic food-webs. They
consume microorganisms and are preyed upon by
higher trophic levels, including fish and whales. In
particular, they serve as primary prey for early life history stages of many fish species of economic importance [5], such as cod, herring, anchovy, flounder, and
salmon. Copepods contribute significantly to many
marine and freshwater ecosystem services, which have
an estimated value of 22.6 trillion USD per annum [6].
For example, fish provide more than 2.9 billion people
with more than 15% of their daily animal protein, and
fisheries generate a net export value of $24.6 billion
per annum for developing countries [FAO Newsroom
(2006) http://www.fao.org/Newsroom/en/news/2006/
1000301/index.html]. Copepods critically support this
marine fish production, and therefore play an important role in the nutrition, health and well-being of
people who have little access to other sources of animal protein. Through their vertical migrations
between surface and deeper waters, copepods also play
a major role in carbon transfer into the deep sea and
thus to the global carbon budget (reviewed in [7]).
Copepods are sensitive indicators of climate change,
with warming ocean temperatures affecting copepod
community structure, abundance, distribution and seasonal timing (e.g., [8]). In turn, changing copepod distributions have resulted in reduced recruitment and
productivity of regional fisheries, such as the North
Sea cod stocks (e.g. [5]).

Page 2 of 15

Copepods harbor a wide range of human and fish
pathogens. Pathogenic bacteria, such as Salmonella spp.,
Enterococcus faecalis, Aeromonas spp., and Arcobacter
spp., as well as several pathogenic species of Vibrio,
including Vibrio cholerae have been isolated from copepods [9-12], however, their role as vectors of waterborne
bacterial pathogens of humans remains poorly understood.. Copepods are intermediate hosts for the Guinea
worm, Dracunculus mediensis, which causes the debilitating disease dracunculiasis [13], as well as fish tapeworms (e.g. Diphyllobothrium latum) and anisakid
nematodes that can also infect humans [14]. In addition
to the status of copepods as carriers of pathogens, many
parasitic and predatory copepods are in themselves
pathogenic and have considerable impacts upon global
freshwater and marine fisheries, with major economic
consequences recognized primarily in aquaculture
[15-17].
Copepods: a resource for investigating fundamental
biological processes

The extraordinary diversity of forms and life-strategies
of copepods makes them very suitable for studies of a
variety of fundamental biological processes that are of
broad interest to the scientific community. As yet, however, little has been elucidated concerning the genomic
architectures, transcriptional profiles or mechanisms
controlling transcription that drive and underpin this
diversity. Copepods could be used to examine questions
of how genomic architecture differs among taxa and
whether this limits or drives the observed morphological
and ecological divergence, thereby influencing speciation
events [18]. A related question is whether apparent
change or simplification of form or function is reflected
in the genome. For example, what is the driving force in
the adaptation of copepods to a parasitic mode? Do
copepod parasites necessarily possess “degenerate” genomes or are transitions in lifestyle accomplished by both
gene losses and gains, or more simply by changing patterns of transcription?
Similarly, genomic data can provide answers as to
what phenotypic and genomic characteristics have
enabled major habitat transitions in free-living species,
such as the move from the benthos to the pelagic environment, or from marine to freshwater biomes. There
are a wide range of examples in both free-living and
symbiotic copepods of closely related species that show
distinct niche breadths in both their distribution and
tolerance to environmental conditions. What then, can
genomic and transcriptional data tell us about organismal and population responses to the environment in
these cases? Since tolerance of environmental change, or
lack of it, is ultimately genome-driven, one might ask
whether genomic studies on the physiological responses

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

Page 3 of 15

1.
2.

4.

3.

8.
7.

6.

11.

5.

9.

10.

16.
13.
14.

12.

15.

17.

18.
20.

21.

19.

Figure 1 Illustration showing diversity of copepod forms. 1. Philichthys xiphiae 2. Sarcotaces sp. 3. Calocalanus pavo 4. Farranula rostrata 5.
Copilia vitrea 6. Paracalanus parvus 7. Clavella adunca 8. Copilia quadrata 9. Chondracanthus zei 10. Phyllothyreus cornutus 11. Acanthocyclops
vernalis 12. Sapphirina ovatolanceolata 13. Chondracanthus ornatus 14. Corycaeus obtusus 15. Euaugaptilus filigerus 16. Monstrilla longispinosa 17.
Sphyrion lumpi 18. Caligus elongatus 19. Lernaeocera branchialis 20. Oithona nana 21. Sapphirina auronitens. Sources: 1: [104]; 3, 15: [105]; 4, 5, 6, 8,
12, 14, 16, 20, 21: [106]; 7, 9, 10, 13, 17, 19: [107]; 11: [108] 2 & 18 original images, 2 drawn from photo taken by Jonathan Martin, Simon Fraser
University.

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

to stress, could also provide tools for monitoring or predicting organismal or population responses to climate
change in terms of genome structure.
The broad size range of eukaryotic genomes has been
long recognized, but its causes and biological significance are still debated [19]. Some copepod species possess a large range in genome size within individuals as a
result of excision of large amounts of DNA from the
presomatic cell lineage during development [20]. The
streamlined somatic genomes and dramatically augmented germline genomes observed in such species may
provide a useful study system for understanding genome
organization and mechanisms for altering genome size.
The monophyly of some orders is doubted, and the
number of orders is defined to be between eight and eleven [21]. Thus, it is difficult to confidently choose orders
whose phylogenetic position is near the root of the copepod lineage when constructing phylogenetic hypotheses
across the major arthropodan lineages. Phylogenetic studies are increasingly employing large data sets of nuclear
protein or transcript sequences [22,23], to resolve relationships among major arthropodan and ecdysozoan
lineages, but to date have not elucidated the phylogenetic
position of copepods [22]. Improved resolution of relationships in the future may require the use of phylogenomic approaches that compare large portions of
genome or transcriptome sequences. For these reasons it
seems necessary to make investments in the provision of
large scale genomic resources for several taxa, and the
choice of these taxa should be informed by their phylogenetic position relative to other copepods.
Genomic studies of copepods are relevant to many
areas of fundamental and applied research. In particular,
knowledge of the mechanisms underlying host-parasite
relationships and features such as drug resistance can
help to increase the sustainability of wild and cultured
fisheries through development of improved chemotherapeutants, vaccines, and integrated pest management
strategies. Historically, much of the fundamental
research on plankton composition, population dynamics
and response to environmental factors was driven largely by the need to characterize the impact of plankton
on fisheries. Until recently such work was undertaken in
the absence of molecular tools, however, genomic technologies are now providing new kinds of information as
well as substantially decreasing the time interval
between sample collection and analysis.
Aspects of symbiosis and parasitism, biological invasion, diapause, and genome size and reorganization
deserve special mention in the context of copepod genomics. We discuss these topics below, and provide examples of how genomic tools might be harnessed to study
these problems.

Page 4 of 15

Discussion
Genomic insights into symbiosis and parasitism

One of the most extraordinary aspects of copepods,
and one of the features that makes them so interesting
for a range of genomic, functional genetic and transcriptomic studies, is their astounding capacity to form
associations with other organisms. Nearly half of all
known copepod species live in such associations [24].
Boxshall [pers. comm.] estimated that ~4152 species
from 109 families are symbiotic or parasitic and suggested that there have been 11 or more independent
origins for symbiosis/parasitism within and across the
various orders, with a minimum of seven independent
colonization events in fish. These associations range
from so-called micro-predation, where species opportunistically snatch meals from their associates, to fully
endoparasitic relationships in which the parasite is
completely enclosed within the host and intimately
associated with it. These features make copepods particularly suitable for studies of the changes in genome
structure, such as gene loss and gain, that accompany
the transition to a parasitic lifestyle, especially in situations where the free-living ancestral forms and newly
parasitic forms retain similar morphologies and still
live within a constrained habitat e.g. Eucyclops bathanalicola inhabiting Lake Tanganyika, the only parasitic
member of an otherwise free-living copepod clade [25].
The availability of free-living and closely related parasitic forms for genomic study may allow answering of
questions on the need for pre-adaptations to facilitate
the transition to symbiotic modes of existence and also
questions of the existence of key stepping stone hosts/
associates in the multiple independent transitions to
parasitism. Such questions are already being tackled in
nematodes using genomic resources [26]. Development
of novel functions, such as the ability to immuno-modulate or to stimulate hosts to directly support their
survival, is also associated with the move to parasitism,
as are the concomitant processes of speciation and
adaptive radiation. Comparative genomic analysis and
transcriptomic studies would allow a fuller exploration
of the strategies by which copepod genomes evolve
specializations to particular host-associations, as well
as contribute to advancing our broader knowledge of
parasite evolution. These types of studies have been
conducted for other parasites, such as the causative
agents of leishmaniasis (Leishmania spp.) and malaria
(Plasmodium spp.) and have greatly contributed to
understanding of their biology [27,28]. In another
ecdysozoan, the filarial nematode Brugia malayi, genomic studies have indicated that up to 20% of predicted
gene models are specific to the species and this has led
to the suggestion that such genes may represent a pool

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

of genes associated with defense/interaction with insect
and human hosts [29].
Parasites have often been portrayed as degenerate versions of free-living forms, due to commonly observed
features, such as morphological simplification. However,
it has been suggested with respect to parasite genomes,
that rather than being degenerate, they represent “...not
the dustbins of history but the jewels of evolution” [30].
For example, while their ability to obtain a variety of
resources from the host(s) may make some genomic features redundant, the relationship with the host is rarely
one of passive nutrition, even for apparently morphologically simplified endoparasitic species such as Sarcotaces sp. (Figure 1 species 2). Kurland and colleagues
[31] (pg 1013) suggest that “genome reduction and cellular simplification are hallmarks of parasites and symbionts”, however, this may apply more to prokaryote
and eukaryote intracellular parasites (e.g. see review by
[32]) than to eukaryote ectoparasites and non-intracellular endoparasites. Copepod genome resources are thus
far insufficiently developed to examine such questions,
while genomic studies on ticks, which can similarly have
longer term associations with hosts rather than taking
quick meals, shows evidence for gene duplication and
hence genome expansion. Like ticks, many copepod
parasites are able to actively direct host physiology and
have been shown, for example, to directly immunomodulate fish hosts [33] or cause associates to build
costly structures that favor the parasite [34]. Such abilities require genomic and transcriptional adaptations
that will be understood only when genomic resources to
conduct inter- and intra-species comparisons are available. In ticks, duplication of genes within a given gene
family may perform a number of functions including
increasing expression levels of anti-host products, allowing targeting of multiple related host defensins or the
same host molecule in multiple hosts, and providing
antigenic variation to avoid host attack while affecting
the same host target [35]. Gene duplication may also
provide for differential function between parasite stages
or states [35].
Many symbiotic/parasitic copepod groups have
switched host phylum in the course of their evolutionary
history [36], and the question of how such switches
occur remains an important one, as it also informs
wider questions of adaptive radiation and the nature of
speciation. Monstrilloids (Figure 1 species 16) for
instance, whose ancestral adult forms are considered to
have been ectoparasites of fishes, are now known to display a free-living adult and a fully endoparasitic invertebrate-associated larval stage. In addition to the radical
host switch, the group has also undergone major
changes in functional morphology and life-history strategy, such that Huys et al. [36] (page 376) consider this

Page 5 of 15

combination of adaptations to be “probably unique in
metazoan parasites”. Because of their many and taxonomically varied associations, copepods lend themselves to
the study of horizontal gene transfer between microbial
host-associates and the copepod, as occurs in plant, fungal and animal nematodes [37] and between hosts and
copepod symbionts, a relatively little explored area.
Complete copepod genome sequences would provide a
key resource for such studies, enabling the inference of
gene trees to employ phylogenetic incongruence as a
criterion for detecting horizontal gene transfer (e.g.
[38]).
One of the most interesting correlates with the transition to a wholly parasitic state is the change in body
morphology. While some ectoparasitic adult stages closely resemble their free-living counterparts, many mesoparasitic/endoparasitic groups undergo an extravagant
metamorphosis from the juvenile to the adult stage that
renders them almost unrecognizable as arthropods (e.g.
Figure 1 species 2). Genomic analysis could help us
understand these changes by uncovering patterns of
gene expression and regulation that occur at individual
stages during development and metamorphosis and that
result in these radically different adult morphologies.
Parasitic copepods also have major impacts on wild
and cultured fisheries. As an example, caligid copepods
(sea lice) are responsible for disease-related economic
losses to marine salmoniculture that exceed $430 million worldwide per annum [17]. Sea lice have also been
suggested to be directly or indirectly responsible for
declines in wild salmonids. The control of parasitic
copepods in aquaculture can involve the use of chemotherapeutants and as a result, some populations have
developed resistance to treatment, a situation mirroring
that observed in insect pests and perhaps unique among
aquatic arthropods. Functional genetic studies are
already providing insights into the basis for drug resistance in copepods (e.g. [39]) and into the mechanisms
that copepods employ to avoid host immune responses
(e.g. [33]). These observations increase the prospect of
improved control of parasites in finfish culture systems.
Gene knock-down studies in Lepeophtheirus using RNAi
provide a powerful tool [40] to understand the function
of individual genes, with attendant prospects for novel
control strategies including development of vaccines or
new chemotherapeutants. Functional genetic and transcriptomic studies also offer tools for monitoring the
development of drug resistance in treated populations
that are more sensitive and consistent than existing
bioassays. Instead of measuring death or debilitation as
outcomes of treatment, such tools allow measurement
of direct or indirect response markers with a continuous
distribution. New high throughput sequencing technologies which allow rapid simultaneous sequencing of

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

millions of transcript or genome fragments per run [41]
can similarly offer opportunities for detecting genomic
markers for important traits such as drug resistance,
which may then be used to develop parasite control
strategies. Furthermore, genomics offers a powerful and
innovative way to support the development of new therapeutants, as well as to identify novel compounds, such
as immunomodulators, produced by parasitic copepods
that are of scientific and/or medical importance. Identification of parasitic copepod orthologues of genes that
are targets of therapeutants in other animals, especially
those that are sufficiently different from that of their
hosts, will help to identify and prioritize alternative
therapeutants.
Genetic mechanisms underlying biological invasions

Invasive species pose major threats to biodiversity, ecosystem integrity, agriculture, fisheries, and public health,
with economic costs of nearly $120 billion per year in
the US alone [42]. Understanding factors that allow
some species to invade is crucial for mitigating and
managing environmental impacts. Recent studies show
that many invaders are crossing biogeographical boundaries into new habitats, and that evolutionary responses
are often critical for these successful invasions [43-45].
Copepod invasions are a common and global phenomenon, the implications of which are poorly understood.
Copepods generally comprise the most abundant and
diverse taxonomic group within ship ballast water, and
are thus transported worldwide in extremely large numbers [46]. Given the high number of pathogenic species
found associated with copepods [9-14], copepod invasions could have important implications for dissemination and transmission of pathogens.
Invasive copepods provide particularly valuable models
for exploring fundamental mechanisms of niche evolution. Frequent habitat shifts and short generation times
make copepods amenable for analyzing the evolutionary
and physiological mechanisms that underlie radical habitat transitions. As copepods are small and many species
could be reared in the laboratory for several generations,
they could be used for quantitative genetics and selection experiments, as well as association studies, to
understand patterns of trait evolution and association
between genes and traits. For example, within the past
century the copepod Eurytemora affinis has invaded
freshwater habitats from saline sources multiple times
independently throughout the Northern Hemisphere
[47]. Common-garden experiments have shown that
these invasions have been accompanied by evolutionary
changes in physiological tolerance, performance, and
plasticity [48-50]. Most notably, freshwater populations
have experienced evolutionary shifts in ion transport
mechanisms, including increased activity and expression

Page 6 of 15

of the ion uptake enzyme V-type H+ ATPase [50]. Modifying salinity alone during laboratory selection experiments recapitulated the evolutionary shifts in V-type H+
ATPase activity observed in nature, providing strong
support that salinity is a factor imposing selection in the
wild [50]. Moreover, parallel evolutionary shifts were
found in ion-motive enzyme activity and expression (Vtype H+ ATPase, Na+/K+-ATPase) across independent
invasions [50]. In addition, a study using cDNA microarrays revealed parallel evolutionary shifts in expression
of multiple genes and gene classes, including cuticle
proteins, chaperones, cytoskeletal proteins, and ribosomal proteins, during independent invasions into freshwater habitats [50]. The parallel shifts suggest that
shared genetic mechanisms might be implicated during
these repeated evolutionary events.
As certain copepod species can be crossed in the
laboratory, hybrid crosses between inbred lines, in conjunction with high-throughput sequencing, could be
used to help determine whether evolutionary shifts in
gene expression are the result of cis- or trans-regulatory
changes in expression [51,52]. Such insights could provide invaluable information on the specific targets of
selection and the causal mutations underlying evolutionary shifts in gene expression during independent invasion events. The latter would provide insights into the
degree to which evolutionary pathways are labile or constrained during invasions. Moreover, as selection acts
most strongly on genes underlying functionally important traits, identifying the genomic targets of natural
selection during habitat invasions could reveal the traits
that are critical for habitat shifts and address core questions regarding mechanisms of niche evolution. This
general approach could also be profitably applied to
understand other major habitat transitions within the
Copepoda.
Resurrection ecology and genetic regulation of diapause

Diapause is a life history trait common to many marine
and freshwater free-living copepod species and is shared
with many other arthropod groups. Duration of diapause
varies from only a few months in juveniles of cyclopoid
species to centuries in calanoid eggs. The biological significance of long-lived diapause eggs (> 300 yrs in some
species; [53]), however, remains to be established. The
deposition of diapause eggs in lacustrine and coastal
marine sediments provides unique access to genetic
archives of past populations representative of historic
genotypes. The field of resurrection ecology, which has
focused, to date, on the water flea Daphnia (e.g. [54])
has the potential to significantly advance our understanding of evolutionary responses to local conditions,
through the study of genetic adaptations to environmental change. These eggs are an important resource from

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

which we can directly observe fitness traits of animals
adapted to past environmental conditions [55,56].
Although seasonal and environmental diapause patterns have been described for numerous copepod species [57], the suites of genes that are involved in
diapause remain largely unexplored. In a number of
arthropods, genes from the family of heat shock proteins
are upregulated during diapause, acting as chaperone
molecules against environmental stressors, e.g. temperature and anoxic conditions occurring during diapause
[58-61]. In copepods, however, only one attempt has
been made to employ genomic-related techniques to
study diapause. Tarrant et al. [62] applied suppression
subtractive hybridization gene libraries (SSH) and quantitative PCR (qPCR) to characterize gene expression in
active and diapausing populations of Calanus finmarchicus, in order to describe the physiological regulation of
dormancy. Using these techniques the authors were able
to identify genes that were differentially expressed in
these populations, including several that are involved in
lipid synthesis leading up to dormancy and the chelation
of metals during diapause. Identification of such genes is
an important first step in the understanding of regulation and timing of diapause. The diapause trait itself is
strongly dependent upon environmental cues such as
temperature and/or photoperiod [57] and thus could be
especially impacted by climate change. The significance
of the genomic regulation and timing of diapause to a
key group of organisms in the aquatic food web, is
indisputable. This is particularly the case given the possible dramatic consequences of shifts in the timing of
copepod diapause. Such shifts affect fish prey availability
and recruitment (match-mismatch hypothesis [63]), and
have critical downstream impacts on major coastal fisheries in marine systems.
Genome size, reorganization, and co-adaptation

The dynamic nature of genomes is becoming increasingly evident in copepods and other eukaryotes and is
challenging established views of how genomes evolve
[64]. Large differences in genome content over the
course of the organismal life cycle, reshuffled gene
arrangements in the mitochondria, and the role of coadaptation between nuclear and mitochondrial genomes
during speciation events are areas where the molecular
details of genome processes could be informed using
genomic tools.
Embryonic chromatin diminution, the selective excision of large amounts of heterochromatic DNA from
presomatic cell lineages, provides a dramatic example of
augmentation of the germline genome and raises questions regarding the source of the increased amount of
DNA and its relevance to the biology of the organism.
For example, in Mesocyclops edax the somatic and

Page 7 of 15

germline nuclear DNA contents are ~ 3 and 30 Gb,
respectively, while in Cyclops kolensis the DNA contents
are ~1 and 75 pg, respectively [20,65]. The first studies
to characterize the sequence identity of these streamlined somatic and “obese” germline genomes suggested
preferential elimination of some microsatellite sequences
and the DNA fragments located between microsatellites
(e.g. [66,67]). Wyngaard and colleagues [20] posed two
alternative mechanisms to account for the augmented
germline genomes: (1) repetitive endocycles (repeated
cycles of endonuclear DNA replication without intervening mitoses), and (2) proliferation of genetic elements in
the germline genome. Data supporting the endocycle
hypothesis are gleaned from thymidine labelling studies
that reveal synthesis of DNA without intervening
mitoses in M. edax germline nuclei containing ~ 9-30
Gb [65,68]. The alternative explanation hypothesizes the
proliferation of genetic elements, which is plausible
based on the population biology of genetic elements and
their influence on genome architecture [69] and the
contribution of transposable elements to variation in
genome size among closely related taxa [70]. Chromatin
diminution may serve to remove selfish genetic elements
that have proliferated in the germline genome before
their deleterious effects can impact the somatic genome.
Such a scenario has been posed for ciliates that possess
a similar form of chromatin elimination [71]. Ciliates,
some parasitic nematodes, and Japanese hagfish all possess chromatin diminution, although certainly not of the
same type and origin as described in copepods [72]. Of
the taxa possessing chromatin diminution, the population biology and ecology are well known only for the
copepods, enhancing the likelihood that any fitness consequences of chromatin diminution are more likely to
be elucidated in this group. These genomic modifications are only one of a large array of models of genome
size augmentation prevalent in other eukaryotes, can
have far-reaching consequences on genome architecture
and evolution, and warrant attention [64]
Another example of genome reorganization among
copepods concerns the variable order of genes in the
mitochondrial genome, a trait that is often conserved
among vertebrate groups. Although complete mitochondrial DNA sequences are only available from five copepod genera, existing data show that copepod
mitochondrial genomes have large-scale gene rearrangements relative to each other as well as to the “typical”
arthropod mitochondrial genome [73-75]. For example,
in Tigriopus all genes are encoded on the same DNA
strand. In four other studied species, however, two for
which the full mitochondrial genome sequence is known
(Lepeophtheirus salmonis and Calanus sinicus) and two
for which only partial mitochondrial sequences are available (Eucalanus bungii and Neocalanus cristatus), both

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

DNA strands contain coding regions [74,76]. Since these
rearrangements result in the need for multiple promoter
sites, studies of mtDNA gene expression in these different groups may provide new insights into how gene
arrangements impact mitochondrial function.
Copepods have also served as model systems for
understanding genomic co-adaptation. When gene flow
among populations is restricted, natural selection can
result in adaptation to local environments. Selection
also acts within the genome to retain sets of alleles that
interact well and produce the fittest individuals (regardless of external environment), a process known as genomic co-adaptation [77]. When divergent populations are
hybridized, breakdown of co-adaptation is manifest in
poor hybrid fitness, often viewed as a first step in the
formation of new species. The tidepool copepod Tigriopus californicus has become a model system for studies
of co-adaptation and hybrid breakdown. Ellison and
Burton [78] found that hybridization leads to altered
transcription and replication of T. californicus mtDNA,
a consequence of disrupted co-adaptation between
nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. Edmands et al.
[79] found evidence for maladaptive combinations of
alleles within natural T. californicus populations, presumably due to fixation of deleterious mutations by
genetic drift in small populations. Most recently, protein-coding regions (the transcriptome) of two divergent
populations of T. californicus, obtained using 454 pryosequencing, revealed evidence of positive selection that
potentially plays a role during the early stages of reproductive isolation [18]. Genome-level studies of hybrid
individuals promise to elucidate the genetic interactions
that underlie hybrid breakdown and may provide clues
to the process of speciation. Similar conclusions about
the role of selection in the formation of hybrids were
gleaned from the first nearly complete map of a copepod genome derived from hybrids between two T. californicus populations [80].
Using genomic tools to detect responses to the
environment

Understanding responses of copepods to environmental
conditions is one important research focus that has
been limited by available techniques. To date, relatively
few research groups have used genomics-related technologies to study zooplankton responses to their environment. However, recent insights from the genome of
the freshwater cladoceran Daphnia pulex suggest that
gene duplication and differential expression can be an
important avenue enabling flexible phenotypic responses
to ecological challenges [81]. Despite possessing a
diminutive genome of about 200 MB, the estimated
number of genes of this zooplankter is over 30,000,
about 10,000 more than that found in humans. More

Page 8 of 15

than a third of these genes have no known homolog.
The elevated gene count in D. pulex has been attributed
to gene duplication and retention, which have allowed
distinct expression patterns to evolve across paralogs.
Known for its morphological and physiological plasticity
in responding to environmental insults (e.g. heavy
metals) and ecological conditions (e.g. predation), Daphnia has been used as a model for both toxicological and
ecological studies (e.g., for the Environmental Protection
Agency; [82]). The eco-responsive genome of Daphnia
provides a vision of the nature and extent of the insights
that might be obtained from comparable studies of
copepod genomes. Because copepods have greater taxonomic, life history, and habitat diversity, it may be possible to obtain insights into how genome architecture and
expression patterns facilitate biological response across a
wider range of environmental conditions. In addition,
copepods lack parthenogenesis and thus may provide a
more appropriate model for other obligate sexually
reproducing organisms.
Within copepods, the majority of studies conducted
using genetic and genomic technologies to study
responses to environmental conditions have been in toxicology. The ability to detect copepod responses to
environmental pollutants has been limited by a lack of
specific assays for most traits of interest, and has necessarily focused on responses at the individual or population level. The use of genomics-related technologies has
several advantages over traditional methods, which often
rely on whole-animal assays and endpoint measurements
such as time to death, and allows for the identification
of molecular pathways involved in any given response
and enables monitoring of sub-lethal effects at the
genetic level. Recent examples of work in this area
include candidate gene studies on the effects of trace
metals in Tigriopus japonicus [83], and the effect of oil
exposure on gene expression in Calanus finmarchicus
[84]. Hansen et al.’s [84] work on C. finmarchicus is particularly timely in light of the large volumes of crude oil
spilled in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010. This study
demonstrated that levels of glutathione S-transferase
(GST) and cytochrome P-450 330A1 (CYP330A1) changed significantly in response to the presence of dispersed petrogenic oil in seawater, with differential
responses being observed in copepod lipid levels/reproductive state. Recently there has been a transition in
copepod studies, from the use of single genes to investigate traits of interest to the use of large-scale transcriptional profiling. Large-scale transcriptional profiling
provides the capability to simultaneously assess the
involvement of thousands of genes in a particular biological process, allowing new pathways, mechanisms of
control, and relationships between different genes to be
discovered. Examples of such an approach are the use of

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

Page 9 of 15

microarrays in trace metal risk assessment using T.
japonicus [85] and the use of subtractive hybridization
(SSH) to investigate effects of oil pollution on C. finmarchicus [86].
In marine ecology, genomics-related technologies
could facilitate research to detect copepod responses to
environmental change at the levels of genes, whole
organisms and populations. One important contribution
of genomics could be the development of molecular
markers for physiological stressors, such as starvation,
infection (parasitic, bacterial, viral), senescence, and
thermal stress (climatic change), which could provide
insight into how these processes influence growth and
mortality in natural populations. Studies that document
the frequency, extent, and sensitivities of copepods to
stress from a variety of sources would provide important
insights into the proximate causes of seasonal changes
in population abundance and the factors that limit biogeographic range, and could also prove useful in predicting population responses to climate change (e.g.,
population forcing through thermal stress). Recently,
several laboratories have started to develop techniques
to investigate copepod gene expression in order to better understand stress in response to environmental conditions. Voznesensky et al. [87] used a qPCR approach
to quantify expression levels of hsp70 in response to
thermal stress in the abundant North Atlantic copepod,
C. finmarchicus, and found that increases in gene
expression due to migration or transport across natural
thermal gradients should be detectable in assays of field

populations. More recently, Tarrant et al. [62], among
others, have used gene expression studies to begin identifying genes that are regulated seasonally. Finally, Christie et al. [88] have generated approximately 10,000
expressed sequence tags (ESTs: Table 1) and developed
a 1000-probe microarray for Calanus finmarchicus that
is being used to study gene expression patterns associated with season and location under natural as well as
experimental conditions.
Genomics-related technologies could also be used to
assess shifts in copepod community composition or biogeographic range in response to environmental conditions. Determination of the composition of bulk
zooplankton samples using traditional methods is a time
consuming process that requires broad expertise in taxonomy to ensure correct species identification. Community metagenetics and DNA barcoding provide a high
throughput alternative to visual assessment of the diversity of plankton assemblages, with more conventional
genetic approaches typically used to identify eggs and
larval stages, to detect cryptic species, and to study species distributions (e.g. [89-91]). Although metagenomic
approaches (see [92] for a lucid commentary) are now
being used to assess diversity of aquatic microbial communities (e.g. [93]), their application to copepods and
other metazoans may be limited due to the larger genome size and complexity of eukaryotes. However, the
metagenetic approach of high throughput sequencing of
biodiversity tags (e.g., hypervariable regions of ribosomal
genes) to assess diversity of protistan assemblages (e.g.,

Table 1 Publicly available sequence data for copepods
Core
Expressed
nucleotide sequence
tags

Mitochondrial
genome
sequence

Nuclear genomic sequence
(chromosome/whole
genome)

Scientific relevance of species

Hexapoda
(insects)

3,076,212

4,496,444

235

51/20

Copepoda
(Total)

15,316

207,282

8

0/0

Lepeophtheirus
salmonis

4,345

129,250

2

0/0

Parasite of wild and farmed marine fish,
economically and ecologically important

Caligus
rogercresseyi

1,610

32,037

0

0/0

Parasite of wild and farmed marine fish,
economically important

Caligus
clemensi

1,227

14,806

0

0/0

Parasite of wild and farmed marine fish

Lernaeocera
branchialis

1

14,927

0

0/0

Parasite of wild marine fish

Calanus
finmarchicus

48

11,461

0

0/0

Key marine zooplankton species

Tigriopus
californicus

920

4,801

3

0/0

Tidepool copepod used as a model system in
evolutionary genetics and ecotoxicological
research

Publicly available sequence data for copepods and for insects, the other hyper-abundant arthropod taxon, which have received far more attention in genomics
studies (source: Taxonomy Browser, GenBank release 184.0, accessed July 22nd, 2011). Data include only those copepod species for which there are greater than
1000 core nucleotide or EST sequences. While data resulting from shotgun genome sequencing exist for L. salmonis (475,815 sequences) no complete genome
assembly has thus far been conducted.

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

[94]) is promising, and a similar approach could be
developed for metazoan zooplankton based on the DNA
barcoding gene mtCOI (mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I). Use of high-throughput sequencing technologies
could revolutionize plankton identification and the
assessment of ecosystem health by allowing comprehensive and rapid surveys of plankton community
composition.
Resources and strategies
Existing copepod sequence resources

Currently no assembled genomes exist for the Copepoda, although some limited shotgun sequencing of the
genome of the salmon parasite Lepeophtheirus salmonis
has been undertaken recently. Thus, with the exception
of 8 mitochondrial genome sequences, the publicly
available genomics resources for copepods consist primarily of expressed sequence tags (EST’s) that have
been obtained from normalized, non-normalized or subtracted libraries. Of these, the largest numbers have
been obtained for the parasitic species L. salmonis and
Caligus rogercresseyi. These species have received attention due to their economic importance to salmon farming. Although many of these data were initially
generated to support specific projects related to their
control and treatment, they have enabled a wide range
of studies on ecology [95], development [96], drug resistance [39] host-pathogen interactions [33] and the characterization of gene families of interest [97]. The second
largest number of sequences belongs to the key free-living planktonic calanoid species C. finmarchicus. These
genomic resources have facilitated the development of
cDNA and oligo-based microarrays for L. salmonis and
C. finmarchicus that are being utilized to investigate a
variety of aspects of their biology, such as their hostinteractions [96], and responses of planktonic species to
environmental changes associated with season or depth
[88]. These resources have also provided the building
blocks for techniques that are fundamental to deeper
understanding of gene function, such as individual gene
knock-out through RNA interference [40].
When compared to other arthropod groups such as
the insects, available genomics resources for copepods
are extremely limited, especially given the dominance
and importance of this group in aquatic ecosystems
(Table 1). Currently, the most extensive arthropod genomic resources are those developed for the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster and other Drosophila spp. Genome
sequencing and assembly and consequent downstream
genomic studies have revolutionized genomic studies in
this species and have, moreover, proven highly informative with respect to other metazoans including humans.
A précis of the enormous advantages that genome
resources have provided for the Drosophila research

Page 10 of 15

community is provided by Ashburner et al. [98] and
current work seeks, among other tasks, to expand on
this knowledge by providing a comprehensive identification of the sequence-based functional elements within
the D. melanogaster genome as part of the model organism Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (modENCODE)
project [99]. Recent sequencing of other arthropods,
including mosquito disease vectors (e.g. [100]) and other
insects with high economic/environmental importance,
e.g., honey bees [101], have also advanced genomic and
biological studies in these species. Genomes of aquatic
arthropods are limited to those of Daphnia spp. [81],
which like copepods, bring to the table an extensive history of biological, behavioral and ecological research
that considerably widens the benefits, in terms of relating genome structure to environmental forces and biological function, that may be obtained from provision of
genomics resources.
Why adopt copepods as genomic models?

It is clear from the above discussions that copepods can
be used to address many fundamental and applied biological problems. While this might be true of many
groups, the ubiquity, importance, and diversity of copepods, allied with their suitability for laboratory studies,
makes them potentially highly informative as model
organisms across a wide range of research disciplines.
Their utility, however, is dependent upon the generation
and availability of suitable genomics resources.
The two dominant invertebrate genetic model organisms, the nematode C. elegans and fruit fly Drosophila,
are members of other hyper-abundant and hyper-diverse
clades, leaving the copepods as the only hyper-diverse
ecdysozoan group, for which a full or draft genome
assembly does not exist. Furthermore, the only crustacean genomes sequenced and assembled to date are
those of the branchiopods Daphnia pulex and D. magna
so that the diverse crustacean clade itself is highly
under-represented in terms of genome models (Figure
2). Daphnia was listed as the 13th official model organism for biomedical research by the National Institutes of
Health, and the diverse Copepoda harbor many species
that will similarly prove highly informative to biomedical
research.
Criteria for candidates for large-scale resources

Selection of candidate species for whole-genome
sequencing is complicated by the considerable genetic
diversity among orders, as well as within single species
or species complexes (e.g., [102]). Such high divergence
emphasizes the need to target several copepod species
in parallel for the development of genomics resources.
Still, for many taxa, the key criteria typically used for
choosing such candidate species [58] are lacking. The
haploid genome size of copepods http://www.genomesize.com covers a broad range, from 0.14 pg -12.46 pg

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

Page 11 of 15

Insecta

insects

Hexapoda

collembolids,
diplurans, proturans

Entognatha

remipedes,
cephalocarids

Xenocarida
Thecostraca
Malacostraca
Copepoda
Phyllopoda
Branchiopoda

Mandibulata

crabs, lobsters
shrimps

copepods
daphnids,
tadpole shrimps
brine shrimps

Anostraca
Ichthyostraca
Mystacocarida

Oligostraca

Ostracoda
Myriapoda

Arthropoda
Euchelicerata

barnacles

Arachnida

pentastomids,
branchiurans
mystacocarids
ostracods
centipedes,
millipedes
spiders, mites,
scorpions
horseshoe crabs

Xiphosura

Chelicerata

sea spiders

Pycnogonida
Figure 2 Simplified phylogram showing the position of the copepods with respect to the other major arthropod taxa. This topology is
based on the largest data set available, 41 Kb of single-copy nuclear protein coding genes, and is modified after [1].

(compared to a human = 3.5 pg) and clearly, with other
factors being equal, the smaller the genome, the more
rapid and inexpensive the sequencing and assembly.
Choosing species that possess a conventional genetic
system will also increase the likelihood that sequencing
and assembly of the genome is straight-forward. Widely

distributed species ease access to local populations for
researchers who collectively bring a broad array of interests and expertise to the field. Many species are already
routinely cultured (e.g. Temora longicornis, Eurytemora
affinis, Centropages hamatus, Tigriopus californicus, T.
japonicus, Tisbe biminiensis, Acartia tonsa, Mesocyclops

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

longisetus, Lepeophtheirus salmonis) although the parasitic species still require live hosts for culture. A number
of inbred lines of copepods already exist (e.g. E. affinis,
L. salmonis and T. californicus), which should be helpful
in assisting genome assembly, promoting experimental
consistency and helping dissection of particular traits
such as chemotherapeutant resistance or salinity tolerance. Although molecular and computational techniques
have allowed considerable progress to be made in the
resolution of phylogenetic relationships among major
ecdysozoan lineages (e.g. [22]), the complete absence of
higher-order molecular phylogenies for the Copepoda
impedes the choice of candidate species based on phylogenetic position. Perhaps, therefore, the choice of candidate species is best determined by the relative merits of
the particular biological problems these candidates
would address.
Genomic resources exist for species in the Harpacticoida, Siphonostomatoida, and Calanoida (see Table 1).
Affordable and efficient comparative genomics, utilizing
several copepod taxa and a combination of whole genome and EST analysis, is now feasible due to recent
advances in sequencing technology. The concomitant
decline in sequencing costs will likely alter the relative
amounts of genomic data available to design efficient
and successful sequencing projects for a particular species. Thus, any priority list of candidate species for large
scale genomics studies is a moving target. If the goal is
to understand the diversity of form and function in
copepods, the evolutionary mechanisms responsible for
them, and how this diversity is related to other major
arthropod groups, it is clear that forms representing the
diverse orders will require study. Similarly, if the goal is
to understand symbiosis and parasitism, pairs of sister
taxa that include free-living and parasitic forms will
have to be compared. Alternatively, if the goal is to the
reveal the genetic mechanisms involved in population
differentiation and speciation, a single species such as T.
californicus or E. affinis may suffice. It is more likely
that suites of copepod species will be required for robust
tests of most problems of general interest, whether the
questions are fundamental or applied or whether they
are ecological or evolutionary. The principal goal in the
ongoing development of genomic resources for copepods should be the targeting of a diversity of species
such that genomic resources facilitate research on
diverse problems of global importance.
Sequencing Goals

In considering a whole genome sequencing project the
advantages of a high coverage sequencing effort with
subsequent assembly over low coverage/transcriptome
sequencing effort need to be assessed. Assembly of the
millions of short sequences provided by low cost
sequencing is facilitated by availability of a pre-existing

Page 12 of 15

reference genome. In copepods, we do not yet know
which species might be representative (ancestral), nor
do we know the extent of differences in genomic structure, gene order, repeats and other features of the genome, which might be relevant to sequence assembly.
The current pace of technological change precludes a
discussion of sequencing strategy in this paper. However, a number of questions regarding sequencing of
copepods might still be constructively addressed.
A genome does not need to be sequenced in depth
and assembled to be useful (even the human genome
remains incomplete). The level of coverage and contiguity required depends in part upon whether the objective
is to examine a single species, a number of closely
related species or an array of diverse forms. Furthermore, whether the purpose of the study is structural or
functional genomics will have a bearing on the sequencing approach. Although whole genome sequencing has
been the most rigorous method of choice for identifying
SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) when dissecting
the origin and population structuring of traits of interest, the low cost RAD-Seq method (restriction-site-associated DNA sequencing) may prove to be just as
informative [103]. Whole genome sequencing may still
be the method of choice, however, for identifying other
structures such as repeats and indels.
The power of a highly assembled genome is that it can
potentially provide a framework for the rapid assembly
of genomes from the same or closely related species and
more importantly, a reference for subsequent studies
involving high throughput sequencing that provide high
numbers of short reads. It is extremely likely that the
divergence among copepod lineages is so great that a
full genome sequence of one copepod species will not
suffice as a scaffold for assembly of others, save for
quite closely related species.

Summary
Copepods comprise an extremely abundant, diverse and
ecologically significant group, for which few studies have
fully exploited the power of genomic technologies. Provision of multiple genomes or large-scale resources for a
number of species could provide unparalleled insights
into biodiversity and evolution. This single taxon has
evolved into a diverse group with multiple convergent
instances of the evolution of parasitic associations, a
transition from benthic to pelagic life-styles, and invasions into extreme habitats (deep ocean, caverns, polar
regions). Even the sequencing of a single copepod genome would provide a basis for evolutionary comparisons, such as resolving relationships among major pancrustacean taxa. Availability of large scale genomic
resources also opens the door to a wide range of other
“omics” studies. In addition, such resources will: 1)

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

allow research groups that have limited resources to
begin applying molecular methods in their research, 2)
greatly extend the number of traits we can study to better understand copepod biology and interactions with
their environment, 3) enable researchers to develop
tools to address many questions where more traditional
methods have limitations, 4) enable development of
standardized molecular techniques, providing a measure
of uniformity and consistency to the measurement of
biological properties of copepods, and 5) attract new
researchers from diverse disciplines into the field. Development of copepod genomics resources must be supported by the education of present and future
generations of scientists in genomics and bioinformatics,
in order to ensure successful exploitation of these tools
and resources. Current strategies must anticipate stepchanges in approach, as well as providing resources to
carry out further types of ‘omics’ studies on copepods.
Acknowledgements
The ideas in this article were generated, in part, through discussions among
participants at the Copepod Genomics Workshop (see http://www.
monoculus.org/ for white paper) held during the World Association of
Copepodologists Conference in Pattaya, Thailand, July 2008. We thank the
numerous others who offered ideas and/or made improvements on the
manuscript, especially Jeffrey Boore, Geoff Boxshall, Ronald Burton, Rita
Colwell, Joana Carneiro Da Silva, Björn Hansen and Petra Lenz. The
workshop was funded by the World Association of Copepodologists and
NSF grant DEB 0820866 to GAW.
Author details
1
Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK.
2
University of Oklahoma Biological Station, Kingston, OK 73439, USA.
3
Department of Oceanography, School of Ocean and Earth Science and
Technology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822, USA.
4
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, BC, V9T
6N7, Canada. 5Center of Rapid Evolution (CORE), University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI, USA. 6Department of Biology, James Madison University,
Harrisonburg, VA, 22807, USA.
Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed ideas during the Copepod Genomics Workshop held
during the World Association of Copepodologists conference in Thailand
2008. JEB, DF, SCJ and GAW drafted the manuscript. JEB prepared the table
and figures. All authors intensively revised subsequent drafts of the
manuscript and read and approved its final version.
Authors’ information
James Bron is a marine biologist working in the area of cultured fish health
and welfare and has particular expertise in host-parasite interactions
between salmonid fish and their copepod parasites. He also has longstanding experience in the application of genomic methods, particularly
transcriptomic analysis. He is currently a senior lecturer in the Parasitology
Research Laboratory, Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Scotland.
Dagmar Frisch is an aquatic ecologist with special interest in the ecological
genetics and the evolutionary ecology of crustacean zooplankton. She is a
postdoctoral researcher at the University of Oklahoma Biological Station,
USA.
Erica Goetze’s areas of expertise cover the evolution and ecology of marine
calanoid copepods, with her current research focused on understanding
dispersal and gene flow in marine zooplankton populations. She is an
assistant professor at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, Hawaii.
Stewart Johnson’s research areas include aquaculture, aquatic animal health
and biotechnology/genomics with special interest in the development of

Page 13 of 15

genomics resources for key aquaculture species. He is Head of Aquatic
Animal Health at Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Pacific Biological Station,
Nanaimo, British Columbia.
Carol Lee is an evolutionary geneticist focusing on the quantitative genetics,
population genetics, and genomics of invasive populations, including
copepods. She is a professor in the Center of Rapid Evolution (CORE) and
the Department of Zoology at University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Grace Wyngaard’s research focuses on copepod evolution, genome size,
chromatin diminution and the phylogenetic relationship of copepods based
on molecular and morphological characters. She is a professor in the
Department of Biology at James Madison University, Virginia.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 8 February 2011 Accepted: 20 September 2011
Published: 20 September 2011
References
1. Regier J, Shultz J, Kambic R: Pancrustacean phylogeny: hexapods are
terrestrial crustaceans and maxillopods are not monophyletic.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Biological Sciences 2005,
272:395-401.
2. Boxshall GIE: Neocopepoda. In World Copepoda database at Edited by:
Walter TC, Boxshall G 2011 [http://www.marinespecies.org/copepoda/aphia.
php?p=taxdetails&id=155876].
3. Humes A: How many copepods? In Ecology and Morphology of Copepods:
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Copepoda. Volume 292/
293. Edited by: Ferrari FD, Bradley BP. London: Springer; 1994:1-7,
Developments in Hydrobiology.
4. Buskey EJ, Peterson JO, Ambler JW: The swarming behavior of the
copepod Dioithona oculata: In situ and laboratory studies. Limnology and
Oceanography 1996, 41:513-521.
5. Beaugrand G, Brander K, Lindley J, Souissi S, Reid P: Plankton effect on cod
recruitment in the North Sea. Nature 2003, 426:661-664.
6. Costanza R, d’Arge R, de Groot R, Farber S, Grasso M, Hannon B, Limburg K,
Naeem S, O’Neill R, Paruelo J, et al: The Value of the World’s Ecosystem
Services and Natural Capital. Nature 1997, 387:253-260.
7. Frangoulis C, Christou E, Hecq J: Comparison of marine copepod
outfluxes: Nature, rate, fate and role in the carbon and nitrogen cycles.
Advances in Marine Biology 2005, 47:253-309.
8. Richardson A: In hot water: zooplankton and climate change. ICES Journal
of Marine Science and Technology 2008, 65:279-295.
9. Venkateswaran K, Takai T, Navarro I, Nakano H, Hashimoto H, Siebeling R:
Ecology of Vibrio cholerae non-O1 and Salmonella spp. and role of
zooplankton in their seasonal distribution in Fukuyama coastal waters,
Japan. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 1989, 55:1591-1598.
10. Asmat A, Usup G, Eds: The occurrence of aerolysin-positive Aeromonas
hydrophila strains in seawater and associated with marine copepods.
Resources 2002, 495-502, Proceedings of the Regional Symposium on
Environment and Natural Resources.
11. Heidelberg J, Heidelberg K, Colwell R: Bacteria of the γ-subclass
Proteobacteria associated with zooplankton in Chesapeake Bay. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology 2002, 68:5498-5507.
12. Signoretto C, Burlacchini G, del Mar Lleò M, Pruzzo C, Zampini M, Pane L,
Franzini G, Canepari P: Adhesion of Enterococcus faecalis in the
nonculturable state to plankton Is the main mechanism responsible for
persistence of this bacterium in both lake and seawater. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology 2004, 70:6892-6896.
13. Bimi L: Potential vector species of Guinea worm (Dracunculus medinensis)
in Northern Ghana. Vector Borne Zoonotic Diseases 2007, 7:324-329.
14. Dick T, Dixon B, Choudhury A: Diphyllobothrium, Anisakis and other fishborne parasitic zoonoses. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and
Public Health 1991, 22:150-152.
15. Johnson S, Treasurer J, S B, Nagasawa K, Kabata Z: A review of the impact
of parasitic copepods on marine aquaculture. Zoological Studies 2004,
43:229-243.
16. Piasecki W, Goodwin A, Eiras J, Nowak B: Importance of copepoda in
freshwater aquaculture. Zoological Studies 2004, 43:193-205.
17. Costello M: The global economic cost of sea lice to the salmonid
farming industry. Journal of Fish Diseases 2009, 32:115-118.

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

18. Barreto F, Moy G, Burton R: Interpopulation patterns of divergence and
selection across the transcriptome of the copepod Tigriopus californicus.
Molecular Ecology 2011, 20:560-572.
19. Gregory TR, Ed: The Evolution of the Genome. San Diego: Elsevier; 2005.
20. Wyngaard G, Rasch E, Connelly B: Extraordinary augmentation of germline
genome size in Cyclops kolensis (Crustacea, Copepoda): further evidence
in support of a revised model of chromatin diminution. Chromosome
Research 2011.
21. Boxshall G, Halsey S: An Introduction to Copepod Diversity London: Ray
Society; 2004.
22. Regier J, Shultz J, Zwick A, Hussey A, Ball B, Weter R, Martin J,
Cunningham C: Arthropod relationships revealed by phylogenomic
analysis of nuclear protein-coding sequences. Nature 2010,
463:1079-1083.
23. Andrew DR: A new view of insect-crustacean relationships II. Inferences
from expressed sequence tags and comparisons with neural cladistics.
Arthropod Structure & Development 2011, 40:289-302.
24. Ho J: Why do symbiotic copepods matter? In Copepoda: Developments in
Ecology, Biology and Systematics, Developments in Hydrobiology. Volume 156.
Edited by: Lopes RM, Reid JW, Rocha CEF. Springer Netherlands; 2001:1-7.
25. Boxshall GA, Strong EE: An extraordinary shift in life habit within a genus
of cyclopid copepods in Lake Tanganyika. Zoological Journal of the
Linnean Society 2006, 146:275-285.
26. Dieterich C, Sommer RJ: How to become a parasite-lessons from the
genomes of nematodes. Trends in Genetics 2009, 25:203-209.
27. Peacock CS, Seeger K, Harris D, Murphy L, Ruiz JC, Quail MA, Peters N,
Adlem E, Tivey A, Aslett M, et al: Comparative genomic analysis of three
Leishmania species that cause diverse human disease. Nature Genetics
2007, 39:839-847.
28. Tyagi S, Sharma M, Das A: Comparative genomic analysis of simple
sequence repeats in three Plasmodium species. Parasitology Research
2011, 108:451-458.
29. Ghedin E, Anton BP: Draft genome of the filarial nematode parasite
Brugia malayi, (vol 317, pg 1756, 2007). Science 2009, 323:38-38.
30. Zimmer C: Parasite Rex New York: Simon & Schuster; 2001.
31. Kurland CG, Collins LJ, Penny D: Genomics and the irreducible nature of
eukaryote cells. Science 2006, 312:1011-1014.
32. Moran NA: Microbial minimalism: Genome reduction in bacterial
pathogens. Cell 2002, 108:583-586.
33. Fast M, Johnson S, Eddy T, Pinto D, Ross N: Lepeophtheirus salmonis
secretory/excretory products and their effects on Atlantic salmon
immune gene regulation. Parasite Immunology 2007, 29:179-189.
34. Stock J: The Calvocheridae, a family of copepods inducing galls in seaurchin spines. Bijdragen tot de dierkunde 1968, 38:85-90.
35. Ribeiro JMC, Alarcon-Chaidez F, Francischetti IMB, Mans BJ, Mather TN,
Valenzuela JG, Wikel SK: An annotated catalog of salivary gland
transcripts from Ixodes scapularis ticks. Insect Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology 2006, 36:111-129.
36. Huys R, Llewellyn-Hughes J, Conroy-Dalton S, Olson P, Spinks J, Johnston D:
Extraordinary host switching in siphonostomatoid copepods and the
demise of the Monstrilloida: integrating molecular data, ontogeny and
antennulary morphology. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2007,
43:368-378.
37. Mayer WE, Schuster LN, Bartelmes G, Dieterich C, Sommer RJ: Horizontal
gene transfer of microbial cellulases into nematode genomes is
associated with functional assimilation and gene turnover. Bmc
Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11.
38. Tyler B, Tripathy S, Zhang X, Dehal P, Jiang R, Aerts A, Arredondo F,
Baxter L, Bensasson D, Beynon J, et al: Phytophthora genome sequences
uncover evolutionary origins and mechanisms of pathogenesis. Science
2006, 313:1261-1266.
39. Fallang A, Denholm I, Horsberg T, Williamson M: A novel point mutation
in the sodium channel gene of pyrethroid-resistant sea lice,
Lepeophtheirus salmonis, (Crustacea: Copepoda). Diseases of Aquatic
Organisms 2005, 65:129-136.
40. Campbell E, Pert C, Bowman A: RNA-interference methods for geneknockdown in the sea louse, Lepeophtheirus salmonis: studies on a
putative prostaglandin E synthase. Parasitology 2009, 136:867-874.
41. Kircher M, Kelso J: High-throughput DNA sequencing–concepts and
limitations. BioEssays news and reviews in molecular cellular and
developmental biology John Wiley & Son 2010, 32:524-536.

Page 14 of 15

42. Pimentel D, Zuniga R, Morrison D: Update on the environmental and
economic costs associated with alien-invasive species in the United
States. Ecological Economics 2005, 52:273-288.
43. Lee C: Evolutionary genetics of invasive species. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution 2002, 17:386-391.
44. Geller J, Darling J, Carlton J: Genetic perspectives on marine biologica
invasions. Annual Review of Marine Science 2010, 2:367-393.
45. Lee CE: Evolution of invasive populations. In The Encyclopedia of Biological
Invasions. Edited by: Simberloff D, Rejmánek M. University of California Press;
2010:.
46. Chu KH, Tam PF, Fung CH, Chen QC: A biological survey of ballast water
in container ships entering Hong Kong. Hydrobiologia 1997, 352:201-206.
47. Lee CE: Rapid and repeated invasions of freshwater by the saltwater
copepod Eurytemora affinis. Evolution 1999, 53:1423-1434.
48. Lee CE, Remfert JL, Gelembiuk GW: Evolution of physiological tolerance
and performance during freshwater invasions. Integrative and
Comparative Biology 2003, 43:439-449.
49. Lee CE, Remfert JL, Chang Y-M: Response to selection and evolvability of
invasive populations. Genetica 2007, 129:179-192.
50. Lee CE, Kiergaard M, Eads BD, Gelembiuk GW, Posavi M: Pumping ions:
Rapid parallel evolution of ionic regulation following habitat invasions.
Evolution 2011, 65:2229-2244.
51. Wang X, Sun Q, McGrath SD, Mardis ER, Soloway PD, Clark AG:
Transcriptome-Wide Identification of Novel Imprinted Genes in Neonatal
Mouse Brain. Plos One 2008, 3.
52. Wittkopp PJ, Haerum BK, Clark AG: Evolutionary changes in cis and trans
gene regulation. Nature 2004, 430:85-88.
53. Hairston N, Van Brunt R, Kearns C, Engstrom D: Age and survivorship of
diapausing eggs in a sediment egg bank. Ecology 1995, 76:1706-1711.
54. Kerfoot W, Weider L: Experimental paleoecology (resurrection ecology):
Chasing Van Valen’s red queen hypothesis. Limnology and Oceanography
2004, 49:1300-1316.
55. Weider L, Lampert W, Wessels M, Colbourne J, Limburg P: Long-term
genetic shifts in a microcrustacean egg bank associated with
anthropogenic changes in the Lake Constance ecosystem. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences 1997, 264:1613-1618.
56. Decaestecker E, Gaba S, Raeymaekers J, Stoks R, Van Kerckhoven L, Ebert D,
De Meester L: Host-parasite Red Queen dynamics archived in pond
sediment. Nature 2007, 450:870-873.
57. Williams-Howze J: Dormancy in the free-living copepod orders
Cyclopoida, Calanoida, Harpacticoida. Oceanography and Marine Biology:
an Annual Review 1997, 35:257-321.
58. Feder ME, Mitchell-Olds T: Evolutionary and ecological functional
genomics. Nature Reviews Genetics 2003, 4:651-657.
59. Chen T, Amons R, Clegg JS, Warner AH, MacRae TH: Molecular
characterization of artemin and ferritin from Artemia franciscana.
European Journal of Biochemistry 2003, 270:137-145.
60. Rinehart JP, Robich RM, Denlinger DL: Isolation of diapause-regulated
genes from the flesh fly, Sarcophaga crassipalpis by suppressive
subtractive hybridization. Journal of Insect Physiology 2010, 56:603-609.
61. Zhang Q, Denlinger DL: Molecular characterization of heat shock protein
90, 70 and 70 cognate cDNAs and their expression patterns during
thermal stress and pupal diapause in the corn earworm. Journal of Insect
Physiology 2010, 56:138-150.
62. Tarrant A, Baumgartner M, Verslycke T, Johnson C: Differential gene
expression in diapausing and active Calanus finmarchicus. Marine Ecology
Progress Series 2008, 355:193-207.
63. Cushing D: Plankton production and year-class strength in fish
populations: an update of the match/mismatch hypothesis. In Advances
in Marine Biology. Edited by: Blaxter JHS, Southward AJ. San Diego, CA;
1990:250-313.
64. Parfrey LW, Lahr DJG, Katz LA: The dynamic nature of eukaryotic
genomes. Molecular Biology and Evolution 2008, 25:787-794.
65. Rasch EM, Wyngaard GA, Connelly BA: Heterochromatin
endoreduplication prior to gametogenesis and chromatin diminution
during early embryogenesis in Mesocyclops edax (Copepoda: crustacea).
Journal of Morphology 2008, 269:387-397.
66. Drouin G: Chromatin diminution in the copepod Mesocylcops edax:
diminution of tandemly repeated DNA families from somatic cells.
Genome 2006, 49:657-665.

Bron et al. Frontiers in Zoology 2011, 8:22
http://www.frontiersinzoology.com/content/8/1/22

67. Zagoskin M, Grishanin A, Korolev A, Palenko M, Mukha D: Characterization
of Cyclops kolensis inter-simple sequence repeats in germline and
postdiminution somatic cells. Doklady Biochemistry and Biophysics 2008,
423:337-341.
68. Rasch EM, Wyngaard GA: Evidence for endoreduplication: Germ cell DNA
levels prior to chromatin diminution in Mesocyclops edax. Journal of
Histochemistry & Cytochemistry 2001, 49:795-796.
69. Lynch M: The Origins of Genome Architecture Massachussetts, Sunderland:
Sinauer Associates; 2007.
70. Burt A, Trivers T: Genes in Conflict: The Biology of Selfish Genetic Elements
Belknap Press; 2008.
71. Rautian MS: Molecular Genome Organization in Ciliates. Russian Journal of
Genetics 2010, 46:1058-1061.
72. Kloc M, Zagrodzinska B: Chromatin elimination-an oddity or a common
mechanism in differentiation and development? Differentiation 2001,
68:84-91.
73. Machida RJ, Miya MU, Nishida M, Nishida S: Complete mitochondrial DNA
sequence of Tigriopus japonicus (Crustacea: Copepoda). Marine
Biotechnology 2002, 4:406-417.
74. Ki J-S, Park HG, Lee J-S: The complete mitochondrial genome of the
cyclopoid copepod Paracyclopina nana: A highly divergent genome with
novel gene order and atypical gene numbers. Gene 2009, 435:13-22.
75. Minxiao W, Song S, Chaolun L, Xin S: Distinctive mitochondrial genome of
Calanoid copepod Calanus sinicus with multiple large non-coding
regions and reshuffled gene order: Useful molecular markers for
phylogenetic and population studies. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:20pp.
76. Burton R, Byrne R, PD R: Three divergent mitochondrial genomes from
California populations of the copepod Tigriopus californicus. Gene 2007,
402:53-59.
77. Rand DM, Haney RA, Fry AJ: Cytonuclear coevolution: the genomics of
cooperation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 2004, 19:645-653.
78. Ellison C, Burton R: Cytonuclear conflict in interpopulation hybrids: the
role of RNA polymerase in mtDNA transcription and replication. Journal
of Evolutionary Biology 2010, 23:528-538.
79. Edmands S, Northrup S, Hwang A: Maladapted gene complexes within
populations of the intertidal copepod Tigriopus californicus. Evolution
2009, 63:2184-2192.
80. Pritchard VL, Dimond L, Harrison JS, Velazquez CCS, Zieba JT, Burton RS,
Edmands S: Interpopulation hybridization results in widespread viability
selection across the genome in Tigriopus californicus. BMC Genetics 2011,
12.
81. Colbourne JK, Pfrender ME, Gilbert D, Thomas WK, Tucker A, Oakley TH,
Tokishita S, Aerts A, Arnold GJ, Basu MK, et al: The Ecoresponsive Genome
of Daphnia pulex. Science 2011, 331:555-561.
82. Lampert W: Daphnia: Development of a model organism in ecology and
evolution. In Excellence in Ecology. Volume 21. Edited by: Kinne O.
Oldendorf/Luhe: International Ecology Institute; 2011:250.
83. Rhee J, Raisuddin S, Lee K, Seo J, Ki J, Kim I, Park H, Lee J: Heat shock
protein (Hsp) gene responses of the intertidal copepod Tigriopus
japonicus to environmental toxicants. Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology Part C, Toxicology and Pharmacology 2009, 149:104-112.
84. Hansen B, Nordtug T, Altin D, Booth A, Hessen K, Olsen A: Gene expression
of GST and CYP330A1 in lipid-rich and lipid poor female Calanus
finmarchicus (Copepoda: Crustacea) exposed to dispersed oil. Journal of
Toxicology and Environmental Health 2009, 71:131-136.
85. Ki J, Raisuddin S, Lee K, Hwang D, Han J, Rhee J, Kim I, Park H, Ryu J, Lee J:
Gene expression profiling of copper-induced responses in the intertidal
copepod Tigriopus japonicus using a 6 K oligochip microarray. Aquatic
Toxicology 2009, 93:177-187.
86. Hansen B, Dag A, Booth A, Vang S-H, Frenzel M, Sorheim K, Brakstad O,
Størset T: Molecular effects of diethanolamine exposure on Calanus
finmarchicus (Crustacea: Copepoda). Aquatic Toxicology 2010.
87. Voznesensky M, Lenz P, Spanings-Pierrot C, Towle D: Genomic approaches
to detecting thermal stress in Calanus finmarchicus (Copepoda:
Calanoida). Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 2004,
311:37-46.
88. Christie A, Lenz P, Hassett R, Smith C, Batta LP, Ünal E, A B, Towle D:
Calanus finmarchicus cDNA library: a genomic tool for studies of
zooplankton physiological ecology. Mount Desert Island Biological Lab
Bulletin 2009, 48:112-113.

Page 15 of 15

89. Bucklin A, Hopcroft R, Kosobokova K, Nigro L, Ortman B, Jennings R,
Sweetman C: DNA barcoding of Arctic Ocean holozooplankton for
species identification and recognition. Deep-Sea Research Part II: Topical
Studies in Oceanography 2009, 57:40-48.
90. Burton R: Molecular markers, natural history, and conservation of marine
animals. Bioscience 2009, 59:831-840.
91. Machida R, Hashiguchi Y, Nishida M, Nishida S: Zooplankton diversity
analysis through single-gene sequencing of a community sample. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10:438.
92. Kirchman D: Mysteries of Metagenomics revealed. Limnology and
Oceanography Bulletin 2010, 18:2-6.
93. Hugenholtz P, Tyson G: The nuts and bolts of metagenomics. Nature
2008, 455:481-483.
94. Stoeck T, Bass D, Nebel M, Christen R, Jones M, Breiner H-W, Richards T:
Multiple marker parallel tag environmental DNA sequencing reveals a
highly complex eukaryotic community in marine anoxic water. Molecular
Ecology 2010, 19(Suppl. 1):21-31.
95. McBeath A, Penston M, Snow M, Cook P, Bricknell I, Cunningham C:
Development and application of real-time PCR for specific detection of
Lepeophtheirus salmonis and Caligus elongatus larvae in Scottish
plankton samples. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms 2006, 73:141-150.
96. Eichner C, Frost P, Dysvik B, Kristiansen B, Jonassen I, Nilsen F: Salmon
louse (Lepeophtheirus salmonis) transcriptomes during post molting
maturation and egg production, revealed using EST-sequencing and
microarray analysis. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:126.
97. Skern-Mauritzen R, Frost P, Dalvin SK, Sommerset I, Nilsen F: A trypsin-like
protease with apparent dual function in early Lepeophtheirus salmonis
(Kroyer) development. BMC Molecular Biology 2009, 10:44.
98. Ashburner M, Bergman CM: Drosophila melanogaster: A case study of a
model genomic sequence and its consequences. Genome Research 2005,
15:1661-1667.
99. Celniker SE, Dillon LAL, Gerstein MB, Gunsalus KC, Henikoff S, Karpen GH,
Kellis M, Lai EC, Lieb JD, MacAlpine DM, et al: Unlocking the secrets of the
genome. Nature 2009, 459:927-930.
100. Land KM: The mosquito genome: perspectives and possibilities. Trends in
Parasitology 2003, 19:103-105.
101. Robinson GE, Evans JD, Maleszka R, Robertson HM, Weaver DB, Worley K,
Gibbs RA, Weinstock GM: Sweetness and light: illuminating the honey
bee genome. Insect Molecular Biology 2006, 15:535-539.
102. Burton RS, Byrne RJ, Rawson PD: Three divergent mitochondrial genomes
from California populations of the copepod Tigriopus californicus. Gene
2007, 403:53-59.
103. Pennisi E: Using DNA to Reveal a Mosquito’s History. Science 2011,
331:1006-1007.
104. Bergsoe V: Philichthys xiphiae Stp. monographisk fremstillet Kjøbenhavn: W.
Prior; 1864.
105. Haeckel E: Kunstformen der Natur Leipzig and Vienna: Verlag des
Bibliographischen Instituts; 1899.
106. Giesbrecht W: Systematik und Faunistik der Pelagischen Copepoden des Golfes
von Neapel und der Angrenzenden Meeres-Abschnitte Berlin: Verlag Von R.
Friedlander & Sohn; 1892.
107. Scott T, Scott A: The British parasitic Copepoda London: Ray Society; 1913.
108. Jurine L: Histoire des monocles qui se trouvent aux environs de Genève Paris: J.
J. Paschoud; 1820.
doi:10.1186/1742-9994-8-22
Cite this article as: Bron et al.: Observing copepods through a genomic
lens. Frontiers in Zoology 2011 8:22.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
