<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Co-lethality studied as an asset against viral drug escape: the HIV protease case</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010, 5:40. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-40"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Sophie Brouillet, Thomas Valere, Emmanuelle Ollivier, Laurent Marsan, Anne Vanet"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

Open Access

RESEARCH

Co-lethality studied as an asset against viral drug
escape: the HIV protease case
Research

Sophie Brouillet1,3, Thomas Valere1, Emmanuelle Ollivier1,3, Laurent Marsan4 and Anne Vanet*1,2,5

Abstract
Background: Co-lethality, or synthetic lethality is the documented genetic situation where two, separately non-lethal
mutations, become lethal when combined in one genome. Each mutation is called a "synthetic lethal" (SL) or a colethal. Like invariant positions, SL sets (SL linked couples) are choice targets for drug design against fast-escaping RNA
viruses: mutational viral escape by loss of affinity to the drug may induce (synthetic) lethality.
Results: From an amino acid sequence alignment of the HIV protease, we detected the potential SL couples, potential
SL sets, and invariant positions. From the 3D structure of the same protein we focused on the ones that were close to
each other and accessible on the protein surface, to possibly bind putative drugs. We aligned 24,155 HIV protease
amino acid sequences and identified 290 potential SL couples and 25 invariant positions. After applying the distance
and accessibility filter, three candidate drug design targets of respectively 7 (under the flap), 4 (in the cantilever) and 5
(in the fulcrum) amino acid positions were found.
Conclusions: These three replication-critical targets, located outside of the active site, are key to our anti-escape
strategy. Indeed, biological evidence shows that 2/3 of those target positions perform essential biological functions.
Their mutational variations to escape antiviral medication could be lethal, thus limiting the apparition of drug-resistant
strains.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Arcady Mushegian, Shamil Sunyaev and Claus Wilke.
Background
RNA viruses alone include 350 different human pathogens. Most are the agents of newly emerging diseases.
Recent concerns for actual or feared pandemics (SARS,
avian flu, or swine flu viruses) all raised the challenge to
quickly come up with solutions. Worldwide, over 100
million influenza cases occur each year, 170 million people carry HCV, and 33 million HIV. RNA viruses generally have very high mutation rates as they use
polymerases which cannot find and fix mistakes, and are
therefore unable to conduct genomic repair of damaged
genetic material. Under selective pressure, this errorprone replication can confer drug resistance. Since AIDS
appeared, many new drugs have been created and used
against RNA viruses, which in turn readily evolved drugresistant strains, a now predictable process and an
unprecedented public health issue. HIV mutant strains
that escape antiviral compounds have been extensively
* Correspondence: anne.vanet@univ-paris-diderot.fr
1

Atelier de Bio Informatique, F-75005, Paris, France

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

documented [1], and one of influenza's main treatments,
tamiflu, was quickly escaped from by an influenza strain
which then spread surprisingly fast across the planet [2].
It now becomes clearer that future antiviral strategies
should address this issue from the outset, aggressively
striving to prevent viral escape. To deal with this, several
directions have been explored since a decade: the structures of resistant proteins [3], second generation drugs
that can bind resistant proteins [4], drug target polymorphism analysis in order to define "super drugs" [5], definition of new targets, such as protein backbones [6] or
dimeric proteins' monomers, in order to block them
before dimerisation [7]. Overall, although individual case
solutions were found, no general solution has emerged
yet.
It is now documented that drug resistance is due to at
least one mutated amino acid, so researchers have recommended, that invariant viral amino acids should be targeted by future new drugs [8]. The rationale is that
mutations in invariant positions always damage a critical
biological function, resulting in non-replicative viruses.

© 2010 Brouillet et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

For exemple, zanamivir is a broad inhibitor of neuraminidase, an influenza glycoprotein, probably because it interacts with invariant amino acids inside the enzyme active
site [9]. Ceccherini et al. [10-12] identified new conserved
residues for the HIV protease, reverse transcriptase and
integrase, and mapped them on the 3D protein structure
to help to design a new structure-based escape-resistant
inhibitor.
Unfortunately, sometimes, invariant positions are too
few to constitute a proper docking site for a drug. For
example, 63% of the HIV protease amino acids are variable [13]. In an effort to gather enough replicativity-critical amino acids for a possible docking site, we propose to
also target synthetic lethals (SL, or co-lethals). Synthetic
lethality is the lethality resulting when two, individually
survivable, mutations, are co-present [14]. Each mutation
is then called a synthetic lethal. Analysis of SLs is a powerful tool to understand genetic interactions and essential
metabolic pathways. Synthetic lethality has been extensively used to study gene products' interactions in the
secretion pathway in yeast [15], in bacteria [16] and even
to identify anticancer agents [17]. It was noticed that, in
many cases, the double mutants identified had their colethal mutations in 2 different genes. A few yeast studies
analyzed protein structure-function aspects, revealing
intragenic synthetic lethals [18], i.e. cases where the 2 colethal mutations occur in one same gene. Little SL
research has been undertaken on viruses. Researchers
were rather on a quest for the opposite situation, where
one crippling mutation is rescued by a second, intragenic,
suppressor mutation, the second restoring the function
lost due to the first mutation [19,20]. They also found few,
under-represented intragenic suppressors, which actually
turned out to be SLs.
In line with our patented model [21] we chose to focus
on intragenic synthetic lethals in the HIV protease. As
mentioned above, the number of replicativity-critical
amino acids available for drug docking should be maximized, invariant amino acids being not numerous
enough, and one single SL couple being possibly too little.
So we propose to add larger "SL sets" rather than one single SL couple. By "SL set", we mean a set of SL couples
that are connected to each other. We choose to add also
the invariant position being in the vicinity of the SL set.
Indeed, a set of positions containing invariant amino
acids plus an SL set may be large enough a target for putative antiviral drugs.
To test this anti-escape approach in practice, we study
the HIV-1 protease from the B sub-type. This protein is a
99 amino acids homodimeric aspartic protease and its
substrate-binding pocket includes the D25-T26-G27 catalytic triad and flap regions, which presumably open and
close to allow entry and binding of substrates or inhibitors [22,23]. This protein has more than 60% of variant

Page 2 of 13

positions. We first aligned 24,155 amino acid sequences
of the HIV protease. From this alignment, we determined
all the couples of positions that were statistically never
found mutated together, that we called SL and focused on
the SL set, which are accessible to the solvent, and not too
far apart spatially. We report here that our method has
yielded 3 targets of respectively 4, 5 and 7 amino acids.
Unlike currently documented drug targets, which mutate
and escape drug treatments, these targets should be conserved, otherwise viral replicativity would suffer, impairing viral pathogenicity. More generally, this process can
of course be used against other HIV proteins, other RNA
viruses, or any highly variable agents.

Results
Graph of the accessible and spatially close synthetic lethal
clusters

The first step is to define which couples of protease positions are synthetic lethal. To do so, we analyzed, from
patients, 24,155 protease amino acid sequences of HIV-1
subtype B. Some patients had been previously treated
with antiviral drugs, and some never, so the pool of
sequences more appropriately represents the actual viral
diversity. We kept all the sequences in one same set for
four different reasons. Firstly, an untreated patient can
get a viral sequence - possibly highly mutated - from a
treated patient. Secondly, treatment is a selection pressure but other pressures can select other mutations
appearing in both treated and untreated sets. Thirdly, our
dataset can be enriched with plenty of mutations from
unknown patients with unknown treatment histories.
Finally, we wanted to create a tool that is robust enough
to be used on other RNA virus databases that are less
documented than HIV. When sequences occurred in
multiple copies in the sequences collection, we kept all
these redundant copies, assuming redundancy may
reflect biological fitness (mostly identical copies from different patients, rather than multiple samples from the
same patient). We did not use clonal data because it is less
informative: not enough sequences, and not mutated
enough. These 24,155 sequences were aligned. From this
alignment, we found 25 positions that display changes in
less than 0,3% of the sequences. We called those positions
"invariants". Ceccherini-Silberstein et al. [10], who
defined invariant positions as displaying changes in less
than 1% of the sequences, found 46 of those positions. All
our 25 invariant positions were totally included in the
Ceccherini-Silberstein invariant set of protease inhibitor
(PI) treated patients. Stanford university HIV drug resistance database [13] described 36 positions represented in
less than 0.5% of the HIV subtype B sequences from PI
treated patients. Our 25 invariant positions are also all
included in this group. The invariants positions were then

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

set aside momentarily; and we compared the 74 variant
positions in pairs (2,701 couples).
To detect the SL couples in these 74, we first examined
the distribution of the p-values of the χ2 test associated to
each of these couples. Using a 0.5% False Discovery Rate
(FDR) threshold, we identified 290 synthetic lethal couples (10.7%). These 290 couples span 70 protease positions out of the 74. The 4 remaining positions are not
represented in these couples. We named "total SLs" the
graph made of 70 nodes representing the 70 protease
positions, and 290 edges representing the 290 relations "is
co-lethal with" linking the synthetic lethal positions (data
not shown).
Three other teams have used different methods (information theory [20], chi2 studies [19] Bayesian networks
[24]) to identify couples of HIV protease co-evolved positions. Amongst other results, they all found few synthetic
lethal couples, around 15. Although unlike other teams,
we did not discriminate the proteases from treated versus
non-treated patients when collecting our initial lot of
sequences, all these SL couples are included in our 290 SL
couples and none of them are included in our SL sets.
Our method therefore enables us to find the 15 couples
already described by other teams using other methods.
The distances between the two positions of each couple
were calculated using the 3D protease structure PDB
ID:1HSG[25]. The resulting distance graph was then
superimposed to the "total SLs" graph. To be accessible by
a putative drug, amino acids should fulfill two preconditions: to be spatially close enough to possibly form a
pocket structure, and to be solvent-accessible (on the outside of the protein). Thus we chose to retain only the clusters of close positions, by only keeping the edges that
indicate less than 10 Angström of distance between two
nodes. This resulted is a drastically reduced graph, of
"spatially close SLs", shown Figure 1, going from 290
nodes to 48.
From the "spatially close SLs" graph, we selected the
solvent accessible positions. (shown Figure 1 as the 20
shaded ovals). Visibly, only 4 clusters contained interlinked exposed positions, boxed in Figure 1, encompassing 11 nodes (shown as colored, orange red and yellow
ovals) and 7 edges (black continuous lines). These are 4
separate, intra-connected subgraphs (or SG). These 4 SL
sets are referred to as SG-flap (4 nodes, shown as orange
ovals), SG-canti (3 nodes, red), SG-fulc1 (2 nodes, yellow)
and SG-fulc2 (2 nodes, yellow). The combination of SGfulc1 plus SG-fulc2 is named SG-fulc. The names were
given retrospectively, as reminders of 3 specific regions of
the protease 3D structure [26,27]. Namely, SG-flap
includes 3 positions found in the protease flaps. SG-canti
includes positions found in the protease cantilever. And
all positions of SG-fulc are in the protease fulcrum. No
subgraph is part of the catalytic site [28]. The 4 clusters

Page 3 of 13

we identified can now be complemented by their neighboring, accessible, invariants.
Extending the SL sets: the flaps and cantilever

For an anti-protease drug to be active, its docking must
block a vital protease function. To compromise viral
escape, it should dock on an invariant position or on an
SL set. As described in Materials and Methods, we kept
the invariant positions aside, as obviously lethal, when
searching for synthetic lethals. But invariant positions are
of course prime target candidates for the docking of an
antiviral agent with limited escape possibilities. So we
added all the invariant positions (shown as green rectangles shaded in blue on Figure 2) that are accessible and
close, to the 4 locked sets (shown as ovals on Figure 2).
By the addition of invariants, we obtained 4 locked sets.
But how much less escape-prone, how much more
"locked? To quantify this, and rank graphs in terms of
how closer to a maximal clique they were brought, we
defined a connectivity coefficient, C, in Materials and
Methods. C varies between 0, for a graph with no edges,
and 1, for a graph where all the possible edges between
nodes are present, i.e. a maximal clique. The closer C is to
1, the least escape-prone the group is.
The full Figure 2 graph has 16 nodes and 72 edges (7 in
black plus 65 implicit edges) linking each invariant position to all the others. For the sake of clarity only the 15
implicit links within a 10 Angström distance are represented (as dotted green lines). SG-flap is now included in
a larger connected subgraph named SGI-flap (7 nodes/18
edges including 3 in black, 10 in dotted lines, and 5
implicit edges Figure 2.a). The connectivity coefficient is
increased from CSG-flap = 0.5 to C'SGI-flap = 0.71. SGI-flap
has 3 invariant amino acids, out of which 2 (G40, W42)
are within 10 Angström of each other, G40 is within 10
Angström of the whole SG-flap residues and W42 is
within 10 Angström of (P39, K41, D60) from SG-flap residues. The whole SGI-flap set is an interesting result since
its amino acids (N37, P39, G40, K41, W42, P44, D60) are
all accessible, can't all freely mutate without damaging
replicativity, and are close enough in space to imagine
designing a single drug to target several of them. Figure
3a shows these amino acids on the dimerized 3D structure, using the same color codes as Figure 1 and 2: four
orange SLs and three green invariants. It is important to
note here that each of these 7 positions does bear indispensable viral functions, namely:
- Mutation in position 40 provokes a total loss of the
protease activity [29].
- Mutation in either position 39 or 60 provokes a 50%
drop in the protease activity [29]
- Out of the 105 variants analyzed by Martinez et al.
[30], those with a mutation in position 37 display in
average a 50% drop in the protease activity vs. wild

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

Page 4 of 13

Figure 1 Spatially close SLs. The whole graph represents the "spatially close SLs". The blue-shaded ovals, represents only the "accessible, spatially
close SLs". Each oval contains the amino acid (one-letter codename) found in the HIV-1 protease ancestral sequence, followed by its position in this
sequence. The accessible residues are all shaded in blue. The black edges linking the nodes mean "is co-lethal with and is within 10 Angström from".
The four orange, boxed amino acids (N37, P39, K41, D60) are the locked targets jointly called SG flap. The three red, boxed amino acids (H69, K70, I72)
are the locked targets called SG canti. The two yellow, boxed amino acids (L10, T12) are the locked targets called SG fulc1 and the two yellow doubleboxed amino acids (K14, L19) are the locked targets called SG fulc2. SG fulc1 plus SG fulc2 are called all together SG fulc. The graph was built with
Graphviz software.

type. Double mutants in positions 37 and 39 show a
75% drop vs. wild type, consistent with the possibility
positions 37 and 39 might be SLs.
- Position 42 seems correlated to the flaps opening,
and positions 39, 40 and 44 are very flexible, and positively required for the flaps to open [31].
- Double mutants on K70E and R41T replicate poorly
[32]; an important piece of information for us since
we report these 2 positions are SL (cf next paragraph).
Extending the SL sets: the cantilever and fulcrum

A look at SG-fulc yields complementary target recommendations. On SG-fulc, amino acid L10 is interesting
because it is linked to the 3 other SLs (T12, K14, L19) as
well as to invariant E21. The latter is close to all SG-fulc
positions. T12 happens to be less than 10 Angström (not
shown) from the other 4. Furthermore, if distance is not
taken in account, the amino acids (L10, K14, L19) are a
maximal clique, so at most one may be found mutated.
Overall, we identify a cluster of 5 amino acids with a connectivity coefficient of C'SGI-fulc = 0.8, which are all close
and amongst which at most two may freely mutate. This
set, (L10, T12, K14, L19, E21), called SGI-fulc, is therefore a good target for a putative drug (Figure 3c). It is
interesting to note that position 10 can have a secondary

mutation conferring resistance [33] and that mutations in
position 12 occur more often in treated patients than in
drug-naive patients [34].
Are the locked targets we described actually druggable
pockets?

We studied this using Q-siteFinder, a software program
from the University of Leeds [35]. Q-siteFinder takes a 3D
structure input and outputs its top 10 ligand-binding
sites. Two out of the 10 ligand-binding sites in the protease overlap 2 of our locked targets (SGI-flap and SGIfulc). Five out of seven positions in SGI-flap (39, 40, 41,
42, 60) are in the pocket of one of the 10 sites defined by
Q-siteFinder (39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62). Three
out of five positions in SGI-fulc (12, 14, 19) are in the
pocket of one of the 10 sites defined by Q-siteFinder (12,
13, 14, 19, 65, 66, 67, 68).

Discussion
All the amino acids in the first locked target (subgraph
SGI-flap on Figure 3a) are part of the protease flaps'
external loop. The flaps being mobile structures [36] that
open out to let the substrate pass, one can imagine that a
molecule drug-designed to bind the external loop of the
protease flaps could block their mobility, therefore keep-

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

Figure 2 locked targets (accessible, spatially close locked sets). All
nodes shown here are accessible and spatially close amino acids The
nodes in ovals are the accessible synthetic lethals which were shaded
in blue on Figure 1, boxed with the same colour codes and linked by
black edges. Each black edge means "is co-lethal with, and within 10
Angström from". The corresponding p-value is shown above each
edge. Invariant amino acids are boxed in green, linked by dotted green
edges meaning "is within 10 Angström from". All the nodes are shaded
in blue because they are all accessible. Each invariant is also linked to
all the other nodes by implicit edges, not shown, for the sake of clarity.
The locked target represented subgraph "a" is called SGI flap (orange+green) The locked target represented subgraph "b" is called SGI
canti (red+green) The locked target represented subgraph "c" is called
SGI fulc (yellow+green) The graph was built using the Graphviz software.

ing the protease from processing its substrate. This idea
was also developed by Perryman et al. using molecular
dynamics [37]: they also proposed to affect the flaps'
mobility. Our approach is in agreement with theirs, and
we believe this group to be a very good candidate for
future drug targeting.
The method described in this manuscript enables us to
define which amino-acids would be the most adequate
drug targets to limit or avoid escape. But this method
does not tell us whether these amino-acids define an
actually druggable pocket. To check that, we used the QsiteFinder software [35], which takes the 3D structure of a
protein as input, and outputs its ligand-binding sites. Out
of the 3 SL locked targets we describe, 2 (SGI-flap and
SGI-fulc) closely overlap two sites revealed by QsiteFinder for the HIV protease, on respectively 5/7 and
3/5 positions. This result suggests our SL locked targets
SGI-flap and SGI-fulc actually are druggable pockets.
Since all our results use the "ancestral sequence" as a
starting point, a relevant methodology control would be
to check whether our above results stand if another
acceptable starting point sequence is used. So we used
the same method with the historical reference in medical
studies, the HIVLAICG sequence [38] (see methods),
instead of the "ancestral sequence". The results are a
smaller graph (not shown), equal to Figure 2 subgraphs
SG-canti and SG-fulc plus 2 amino acids, (E34, E35). We
believe both approaches are complementary and support

Page 5 of 13

each other, as mutual controls, since our recommendation to target SG-canti + SG-fulc is conserved to a great
extent.
From a general standpoint, it seems obvious that the
different branches of one same phylogenetic tree can
have their specific, own synthetic lethals. These synthetic
lethals should not be mixed, since they're only usable targets in their relevant phylogenetic branch. In the case of
HIV-1, they are three main branches are groups M, N and
O. The branch of sub-group M is further divided in 7 subgroups, including sub-group B. We choose to work on
sub-group B because it has the more published sequences
(over 20,000 for the protease) and mutations. Although
there is no simple algorithm today to build a tree from
tens of thousands of sequences, it would be interesting to
study the phylogenic tree of our pool of sequences in parallel with our synthetic lethality study. However from an
evolutionary point of view, we believe that the positive
co-evolution of two sites (both positions always mutate
together) is not the same issue as exclusive co-evolution
(both positions can mutate but never together) Indeed,
when examining the propagation of 2 mutated positions
in a tree, two situations can be distinguished: either they
are co-present in the majority of the sub-trees, which
tends to indicate noise (since there is no segregation); or
they are co-present only in the leaves of one part of the
tree, which tends to indicate true co-evolution. Inversely,
when studying a case of exclusive co-evolution, only one
of these two situations is possible. Indeed, by definition of
synthetic lethals, both mutations cannot be part of the
same sub-tree since their co-presence is lethal. So the tree
resulting from this situation is impossible to analyze,
since one should analyze all the sub-trees in order to find
the missing branches - which corresponds to the statistical study we conducted here.
Our method treats variation in all positions as bi-allelic
(mutated versus non-mutated genotype). Arguably, it
would seem more informative to take into account the
actual amino-acid changes. This would entail choosing a
score matrix - most score matrixes do take into account
the physico-chemical specificity of each amino-acid so as
to decide whether the mutated one is similar or not to the
initial one. But the mutations involved in the resistance to
anti-protease drugs do not follow the same rules. Therefore we do not think using an existing score matrix of the
Blosum or Pam type would be more informative.
Finally, the fact a synthetic lethal co-mutation is never
observed statistically does not mean such a co-mutation
is completely impossible, hence our use of the expression
"potential SLs" in cases with no experimental replication
data. Our results indeed include cases where synthetic
lethals were actually mutated (although this occurred in
less 0.02%- 0.5% of the sequences, data not shown). So if
these sequences truly represent replicative viruses, as

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

Page 6 of 13

a

b

c

d

Figure 3 3D view of the locked targets. 3D representation of the HIV-1 homodimer (1HSG) protease. Same colour codes as Figures 1 and 2. a: SGI
flap (4 orange SLs + 3 green invariants) b: SGI flap + SGI canti (2 red SLs + 1 green invariant) c: SGI fulc (2 yellow SLs + 1 green invariant) d: SGI fulc +
SGI canti (4 yellow SLs + 1 green invariant) The 3D molecules were built by pymol software.

opposed to unfiltered artifacts, then there is a risk that
blocking some synthetic lethal couple with a new drug
could create a selection bottleneck [39,40], forcing viral
evolution towards more resistant strains. If such new
escape mutants were to appear, they should carefully be
monitored by sequencing at least their synthetic lethal
positions, as a first step in further refining the antiviral
strategy.
In any case, our method has the advantage to indicate
the comprehensive list of all possible protease locked targets, the best targets to minimize or eliminate viral
escape. Even if locked-set-designed anti-viral drugs were
to somehow elicit escape mutants, the other (non-locked)
amino acids would remain wrong targets, since viral
escape seems nearly guaranteed with them: the corresponding multi-mutant HIVs are already in nature and
their sequences in worldwide databanks.

Conclusions
The constant rise of drug resistant RNA viruses is a reason to start looking for therapeutic strategies that mini-

mize or eliminate viral escape. We described here a
method to identify targets that may be involved in essential viral functions. These are what we call locked targets:
spatially close, accessible viral invariant positions and/or
potential synthetic lethals (SLs are groups of survivable
mutations which are lethal whenever any two co-occur).
Due to these two features, vital function and invariance,
these targets are unique in that they might minimize or
prevent viral escape. Our application to the HIV protease
yielded 3 locked targets that are accessible, compact
enough to possibly dock a drug, and are all outside of the
enzyme's active site; whereas to date, all 9 existing antiprotease drugs were competitive inhibitors that bind the
active site. The first locked target we closed in on is made
of 7 amino acids positioned between the protease flaps
and cantilever. The second locked target we detected is
made of 5 amino acids in the protease fulcrum. The third
locked target is composed of 4 amino acids located in the
protease cantilever region. These three locked targets
altogether contain 16 protease amino acid positions. Biological evidence regarding 10 positions out of these 16,

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

provided in the Results section supports that those 3
locked targets are strategic drug targets. This because it
seems a virus cannot easily mutate these targets to
escape, as our statistics significantly exclude free comutations within those targets. While our method made
no a priori assumptions on the positions or sequence sets,
it revealed locked targets that bear essential biologic
functions, which validates the starting hypothesis linking
SLs to essential biological functions.
We believe this method can be used against any variable protein, for identification of the best locked targets.
Obviously, the approach described here can be used for
the other HIV-1 [41] and HIV-2 genes, but also for other
viruses such as HCV [42], SARS-coV or influenza [43], or
indeed for any quickly variable protein sequence. The
large sequence banks needed for the statistics exist
already, or can expand quickly due to the speed improvements in mass sequencing technology.

Methods
Alignment of the sequences

The pol gene codes for three proteins: the protease, the
reverse transcriptase (RT) and the integrase, containing
respectively 99, 560 and 288 amino acids.
We pooled all of the amino acid sequences, whole or
partial, of subtype B HIV-1 Pol from three databases:
SwissProt, Los Alamos National Library [44] and Stanford University HIV Drug Resistance Database [13]. We
thus collected over 70,000 Pol sequences from patients
that are treated, non treated, or of unknown treatment
history.
Using a reference amino acid alignment of 438 HIV-1
protease downloaded from the Los Alamos National
Library [45], we built a profile with HMMER [46] package
using hmmbuild and hmmcalibrate function.
Out of these 70,000 sequences, we first only kept those
having at least 4 out of the 6 C-terminal protease motif
(PQVTLW), or at least 4 out of the 6 N-terminal protease
motif (GCTLNF), or both. This new set of over 20,000
sequences was then aligned on the abovementioned profile. The resulting alignment was used in order to create a
new accurate profile for the alignment of small
sequences. We then collected, from the initial 70,000 set,
the partial sequences of 10 amino acids or more that had
neither C-terminal nor N-terminal motif, but had at least
60% identity with the new profile. These partial
sequences were then aligned on the new accurate profile.
From this final alignment, we removed the 5 sequences
that showed insertions.
We obtained one set of 24,155 protease sequences.
Amongst the protease sequences, 11,206 sequences are
represented only once, and the most frequent sequence
was represented 257 times. 21,766 sequences are full
length (contain the 99 positions of the protease).

Page 7 of 13

Choice of a reference sequence

In order to label positions as "mutated" and "wild type",
we needed a reference sequence [47]. We first computed
the consensus of our 24,155 protease sequences. But
when we attempted to use it as our reference sequence, it
misleadingly labeled as wild type some extremely frequent mutations. So we discarded that choice for a reference. The historical reference in medical studies
HIVLAICG [GenBank:K02013] [38], was the first HIV-1
sequence ever published. HIVLAICG, though, is not the
root of the phylogenic tree representing all the HIV-1
sequences. That root is the "ancestral sequence" [48],
phylogenetically computed from subtype B sequences
[45] and often the reference in biocomputing studies.
We observed that the sets of mutations defined vis-àvis HIVLAICG or vis-à-vis the "ancestral sequence" were
nearly identical (data not shown). Additionally, only two
positions differ between these two sequences: positions
37 (N in the "ancestral sequence", versus S in HIVLAICG)
and 41 (K versus R respectively). Overall, these arguments made us opt for the choice of the "ancestral
sequence" as our reference. For control purposes, we also
tried to use HIVLAICG as our reference in a separate
experiment. It yielded very similar results.
Identification of the potential synthetic lethal couples

Our algorithm proceeded as follows on the alignment
obtained. For each of the 24,155 protein sequences, the
first position was compared to the first position of the
reference sequence, to determine whether it was
mutated. Each position mutated vis-à-vis the reference
was recoded as 0 and each conserved one as 1. The same
process was iterated for the second position, and so on
until the end of the sequence. Thus, each sequence was
recoded into a series of 0 and 1. Then we got a "24,155 ×
99" matrix which each box containing either a 0 or a 1.
To avoid mistaking "sequencing errors" for "mutations"
in actually invariant amino acid positions, we set aside all
the positions that display changes in less than 0.3% of the
sequences. This cutoff of 0.3% was chosen here because it
is the percentage of mutations we measured within three
amino acids around the active site throughout our database. Using this threshold, we found 25 positions that display changes in less than 0.3% of the sequences. We refer
to them as "invariants".
We focused on the 74 other positions, in a "24,155 × 74"
matrix. We chose a χ2 test to evaluate the mutual independence of positions in order to extract from this set the
couples of potential synthetic lethality. We compared in
pairs all these 74 positions (74 columns of the first
matrix), noting the result in 2,701 (74*73/2) "2 × 2"
matrixes. Each of these "2 × 2" matrixes (contingency
table) contained four elements: the number of (mutated
mutated) represented as (0 0) in the 2 columns that we

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

Page 8 of 13

are comparing in the first matrix, the number of the
(non-mutated non-mutated) as (1 1), the number of the
(mutated non-mutated) as (0 1) and the number of the
(non-mutated mutated) as (1 0). In the null hypothesis
that both positions are independent, using those 4 numbers, we performed 2,701 times, a one-degree-of-freedom χ2 test, and the associated p-values were calculated
for each of the couples of positions. Since we did multiple
tests, in order to compare these p-value results and
decide whether the results were significant or not, we
studied the distribution of the p-values. Then using Benjamini-Hochberg's [49] and Storey [50] methods, we
computed the false discovery rate (FDR) associated to the
different p-values.
For each of the 100 alpha risk classes varying between 0
and 1 (each alpha risk class representing 1%), we computed the counts of the associated p-values and then built
the associated histogram. Finally, the FDR associated to
an alpha risk of 0.05 was computed with the following
formula:
Fdr(a ) =

a *m
nb(a )

(1)

with
m = Card({i, 0 ≤ i ≤ n & p(i) ≥ 0.5}) * 2

(2)

where n is the total number of p-values calculated, nb
(α) the class count associated to a. Finally, we kept only
the couples for which the p-value had an FDR lower than
0.05. The positions of these couples are therefore all statistically dependent in pairs.
Out of all these statistically dependent couples, in order
to define synthetic lethals, we focused on the positions
where the observed number of mutated/non mutated and
non mutated/mutated couples was greater than the theoretically expected number if the two positions were
mutating independently. This singled out couples of positions that statistically mutate less often together than
what would be expected from a random behavior. This
statistical dependency between positions is referred to
below as the relation "seems synthetic lethal with", or,
indifferently, "seems co-lethal with". The couples will be
called SLs in the following, keeping in mind that formally
they should be called "potential SLs" until biological data
demonstrates actual co-lethality.
Identification of the accessible positions

In order to define the accessibility of the amino acids to
some putative external ligand - with a future drug in
mind, using the 3D protease structure PDB ID:1HSG[25],
we computed the surface accessible to the solvent, using

the ASA software [51] available at RPBS [52], and considered "accessible" all amino acids with an accessibility
threshold greater than 25%.
Identification of locked sets

A set of elements (e.g. amino acids) linked by relations
can be represented as a graph. The graph we designed for
this study has one node for each protease amino acid
position. The graph's edges bear the relation "is co-lethal
with".
Calling N the number of nodes in a graph, the minimal
number of edges is Amin = 0 and the maximal number of
edges is A max =

( N −1)*N
2

.

When a graph reaches the maximum number of edges,
i.e. when all its nodes are interlinked two by two, it is
called a maximal clique. This property is important when
screening SLs because within a maximal clique, at most
one amino acid may mutate freely, any second mutation
being lethal.
To determine the maximal cliques contained in our
graph, we used a program (Eric Coissac, personal communication).
Most SL sets are not maximal cliques, but some SL sets
are quite close to being maximal cliques. Then we wanted
to determine the degree of connectivity of a graph.
A

We defined C as C = A obs where Aobs is the observed
max
number of edges of the graph.
The closer C is to 1, the closer the graph is to a maximal
clique, the set being so locked only one mutation is possible without lethality. Inversely, a value close to 0 indicates
that all the positions considered may mutate without any
lethality, the set is not locked, nor even an SL set, but just
a plain set of amino acid positions.
Whenever a node is an invariant amino acid, it is by
definition linked to all the other nodes. We indeed add
invariants to SL sets in order to extend our targets into
"locked sets". By "a locked set" we mean "an SL set plus all
the invariant positions". Indeed, a set of positions containing invariant amino acids plus an SL set may be large
enough a target for putative antiviral drugs. We call all
these most conserved positions "locked" because they
"can't escape" by freely mutating. Invariants are totally
locked (no mutation is survivable), while SL sets are partially locked (some, but not all, mutation combinations
are survivable).
When n invariant nodes are added to a graph of m
nodes already linked by A obs edges, then the new connectivity coefficient C' is:
C’ =

A′obs
n*(n −1)
(n + m)*(n + m −1)
with A′obs = Aobs + (n * m) +
and A′max =
A′
2
2
max

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

The connectivity gained when invariants are added to
an SL set is quantified by the increase from C to C'.

Reviewers' comments

Page 9 of 13

this takes at least 20 sequences complying with the above
conditions. But the number of SL couples is of course initially unknown.

Reviewer's report 1

Reviewer's comment

Reviewer 1: A.Mushegian, Stowers Institute, Kansas City,
United States

Perhaps some simulations, and repetition of the experiment on the historic data on HIV (what was the year,
dataset, or sequencing strategy that for the first time
made the synthetic-lethal pairs visible using the method)
may provide some guidance?
I declare that I have no competing interests.

Reviewer's comment

The manuscript by Brouillet and co-authors presents a
simple, direct and, in my opinion, promising strategy
towards computational selection of druggable targets,
based on the inference of intramolecular synthetic lethal
pairs of amino acid substitutions. It is clearly written, and
I do not have any major concerns with the technical side
of the work. However, additional explanation of the following would be helpful.
The authors present their reasons for including all the
data, except for incomplete and suspected-erroneous
sequences. These reasons are compelling enough to me,
and yet I am wondering whether the data are biased in
some way. Does the assignment of synthetic lethals
change if the dataset is made non-redundant? If we sample from the total dataset repeatedly?
Authors' response

As a control, we indeed used a dataset of non-redundant
protease sequences, to determine the SL sets and their
deduced locked targets. The same three locked targets
were found, but with fewer positions. The corresponding
SGI-flap was constituted by the same SGI-flap positions
except position 37. SGI-canti was also constituted by the
same positions except position 69. And SGI-fulc lost 2
positions, 14 and 19. Since there was not much of a difference, we used the population more representative of biological fitness, as we explain in the manuscript.
Reviewer's comment

A related issue is the application of the method to other
molecules. The authors indicate that if there are not
enough sequences (from another virus) in the databases,
the new-generation sequencing methods may come to
the rescue. But what should be sequenced, how many
reads should be enough, and are there any properties of
the sample that might predict the success of the
approach?
Authors' response

We believe there is no formula to compute the minimum
number of sequences necessary to determine all the SL
couples of any given protein, because it depends of the
unknown count of such couples. On the other hand, the
Chi2 test imposes a theoretical count in each of the 4 cells
of the contingency table greater than 5. And this for each
pair of positions studied. So for each actual SL couple,

Reviewer's report 2

Reviewer 2: Shamil Sunyaev, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, United States
Reviewer's comment

This is an interesting manuscript on molecular evolution
and structural analysis of the HIV protease. The goal of
the study is to use co-evolution of amino acid pairs for
proposing drug binding sites immune to mutational
escape. Although the work is of interest, I have a few
comments listed below.
The approach based on the contingency table analysis
ignores phylogenetic structure of the dataset. This may
lead to false-positive predictions of co-evolved residues.
It is clear that the size of the dataset prevents any accurate phylogenetic analysis. However, it should be easier to
verify that selected clusters cannot be explained by phylogeny and represent a real signal of co-evolution. At
least, the manuscript would benefit from a detailed discussion of this point.
Authors' response

We read your suggestion with interest. However, it
appears impossible to execute the described experiments
due to the number of sequences in our dataset (24151
sequences), and the idea of limiting the phylogenetic
study to selected clusters is interesting. Still, from an evolutionary point of view, we believe that the positive coevolution of two sites (both positions always mutate
together) is not the same issue as exclusive co-evolution
(both positions can mutate but never together) Indeed,
when examining the propagation of 2 mutated positions
in a tree, two situations can be distinguished: either they
are co-present in the majority of the sub-trees, which
tends to indicate noise (since there is no segregation); or
they are co-present only in the leaves of one part of the
tree, which tends to indicate true co-evolution. Inversely,
when studying a case of exclusive co-evolution, only one
of these two situations is possible. Indeed, by definition of
synthetic lethals, both mutations cannot be part of the
same sub-tree since their co-presence is lethal. So the tree
resulting from this situation is impossible to analyze,
since one should analyze all the sub-trees in order to find

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

Page 10 of 13

the missing branches - which corresponds to the statistical study we conducted here.
We have included this paragraph in the discussion sections.

figure 2. Additionally, it is important to note that the pvalue of a locked set is always lower than or equal to the
p-values of its SL couples: p(A inter B) = p(A) + p(B) - p(A
union B). So the larger the cluster, the lower the fitness.

Reviewer's comment

Reviewer's comment

It is unclear why does the method treat variation in all
positions as bi-allelic (mutated or non-mutated genotype). It is possible that taking into account actual amino
acid types would be more informative. Again, this point
warrants at least a detailed discussion.

It is of interest that the majority of SL pairs are distant.
Possibly, this warrants an additional discussion as well.

Authors' response

Yes, we totally agree with you and we also thought about
this issue. Now to address it, we needed to choose a score
matrix. Most score matrixes do take into account the
physico-chemical specificity of each amino-acid so as to
decide whether the mutated one is similar or not to the
initial one. But the mutations involved in resistance to
anti-protease drugs do not follow the same rules. Indeed,
resistance can be due to the mutation of one amino-acid
into another one of very close physico-chemical characteristics. Therefore we do not think using a score matrix
of the blosum or Pam type would be more informative.
We have included this paragraph in the discussion sections.
Reviewer's comment

The manuscript would benefit from the clarification of
the main hypothesis. Why would a single mutation at the
SL cluster be always insufficient for an efficient escape?
Authors' response

We do not state that a single mutation at the SL cluster is
always insufficient for an efficient escape, then 2 mutations should be necessary for escape. But we state that if
several mutations appear in a cluster, this combination is
lethal. So, and this is our main hypothesis: increasing the
number of drug-docking points, while at the same time
decreasing their freedom to co-mutate, does diminish
escape possibilities.
Reviewer's comment

The authors observe co-evolution rather than synthetic
lethality. This result can be explained by a very moderate
fitness loss rather than lethality. This is a serious complication for the anti-escape strategy. It would be great to
discuss this issue.
Authors' response

To determine whether a situation is of « very moderate
fitness » or "lethality", one must examine the p-value
associated to the chi2 test: the lower the p-value, the
lower the fitness, the closer the situation is to lethality. So
to clarify this point, we added all the couples' p-values on

Authors' response

Indeed, out of a total 290 SL couples, 58 are close in
space. The co-evolution of positions generally demonstrates a structural or functional link between these positions. Inasmuch as these links appear obvious when two
sites are close in space, when the two sites are distant one
has to infer long-range interactions.
Reviewer's report 3

Reviewer 3: Claus Wilke, University of Texas, Center for
Computational Biology and Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology, Austin, Texas, United States.
Reviewer's commen

The authors suggest a novel approach to developing
drugs that HIV could not easily evolve resistance to:
drugs that target multiple sites, all of which cannot jointly
mutate. I think this is a valid concept in principle. The
authors then proceed to identify sets of mutations that
might be suitable drug targets, through an analysis of
covariation in a large alignment of HIV sequences.
By and large, I find the paper a bit thin. The proposed
sets of mutations are only candidates, there is no experimental verification showing that they truly cannot
mutate together. There is also no demonstration that a
drug could actually be made to act at the specific combination of sites proposed. On the upside, the authors are
very forthcoming with the weaknesses of the study. They
do not oversell their results.
Authors' response

Are the locked targets we described actually druggable
pockets? We studied this using q-site, a software program
from the University of Leeds. Q-site takes a 3D structure
as input, and outputs its top 10 ligand-binding sites. Out
of the top 10 ligand-binding sites thus spotted in the protease, 2 overlap our 3 locked targets (SGI-flap and SGIfulc). Five out of seven positions in SGI-flap (39, 40, 41,
42, 60) are in the pocket of one of the 10 sites defined by
q-site (39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62). Three out of
five positions in SGI-fulc (12, 14, 19) are in the pocket of
one of the 10 sites defined by q-site (12, 13, 14, 19, 65, 66,
67, 68).
We have included these results in the manuscript as a
new paragraph in the result and in the discussion sections.

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

Reviewer's comment

I have one major concern with the definition of synthetic
lethals, though. The authors identify them on the basis of
a test of association. The null hypothesis in this test is
that the frequency with which both sites are mutated is
the product of the frequencies with which individual sites
are mutated. Any deviation from this null hypothesis,
however small, can produce a significant result if the
number of observations is sufficiently large. Thus, if site B
is only slightly less likely to be mutated when site A has
been mutated, the authors' procedure would predict that
A and B are a synthetic lethal pair, even though the fitness
cost of mutating both A and B may be minute.
Authors' response

chi2 testing

The claim is that
on large samples detects the
smallest dependency. But since we check the False Discovery Rate and produce a table of p-values, we can
determine the validities of the chi2 tests. These p-values
appear on Figure 2.
Reviewer's comment

It seems to me that a better way to define synthetic lethals
is to search for pairs of sites that never mutate together,
i.e., where the frequency of (1 1) pairs is below the threshold for sequencing errors of (.3%)^2. I suspect, though,
that such pairs are exceedingly rare.
A second concern that I have with the method in the
present paper is that it does not consider the effect of
evolutionary history. It is well known that phylogenetic
relationships can produce apparent non-independence of
sites. Methods to control for this effect exist and could be
used in place of the authors' method, see e.g. Noivirt O,
Eisenstein M, Horovitz A. (2005) Detection and reduction of evolutionary noise in correlated mutation analysis.
Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 18, 247-253.
Authors' response

We read the above article with interest. Unfortunately, it
seems impossible to execute the experiments described,
the number of sequences in our dataset being too large
(24,151 sequences). Furthermore, from an evolutionary
point of view, we believe that the positive co-evolution of
two sites (both positions always mutate together) is not
the same issue as exclusive co-evolution (both positions
can mutate but never together) Indeed, when examining
the propagation of 2 mutated positions in a tree, two situations can be distinguished: either they are co-present in
the majority of the sub-trees, which tends to indicate
noise (since there is no segregation); or they are co-present only in the leaves of one part of the tree, which tends
to indicate true co-evolution. Inversely, when studying a
case of exclusive co-evolution, only one of these two situations is possible. Indeed, by definition of synthetic

Page 11 of 13

lethals, both mutations cannot be part of the same subtree since their co-presence is lethal. So the tree resulting
from this situation is impossible to analyze, since one
should analyze all the sub-trees in order to find the missing branches - which corresponds to the statistical study
we conducted here.
We have included this paragraph in the discussion sections.
Re-reviewer's report 3

Reviewer 3: Claus Wilke, University of Texas, Center for
Computational Biology and Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology, Austin, Texas, United States.
Reviewer's comment

The authors use the concept of co-lethality of mutations
to identify possible drug targets in HIV. I have two major
comments.
1. I am concerned about the definition of synthetic
lethals. The authors identify them on the basis of a test of
association. The null hypothesis in this test is that the frequency with which both sites are mutated is the product
of the frequencies with which individual sites are
mutated. Any deviation from this null hypothesis, however small, can produce a significant result if the number
of observations is sufficiently large. Thus, if site B is only
slightly less likely to be mutated when site A has been
mutated, the authors' procedure would predict that A and
B are a synthetic lethal pair, even though the fitness cost
of mutating both A and B may be minute.
2. The method in the present paper does not control for
the effect of evolutionary history. It is well known that
phylogenetic relationships can produce apparent nonindependence of sites. Methods to control for this effect
exist and could be used in place of the authors' method,
see e.g. Noivirt O, Eisenstein M, Horovitz A. (2005)
Detection and reduction of evolutionary noise in correlated mutation analysis. Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 18, 247253. The authors argue that their data set is too large to
control for phylogeny. That may be the case, but it doesn't
alter the fact that the data set is likely confounded by phylogeny.
Abbreviations
HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus; AIDS: acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; SL: Synthetic lethality; HVC: Hepatitis C virus; SARS: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome; SARS-coV: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome CoronaVirus;
FDR: False Discovery Rate; PI: Protease Inhibitor; RT: reverse transcriptase; PDB:
Protein Data Bank; SG: Sub-Graph; SGI: Sub-Graph + Invariant; Fulc: Fulcrum;
Canti: Cantilever; 3D: Tridimensional
Competing interests
The authors have a financial interest in patent application, which cover some
of the work described in the paper.
Authors' contributions
SB Carried out the sequence alignment, identified the synthetic lethal couples
and the locked sets, performed the statistical analysis, wrote the method sec-

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

tion and helped to draft the manuscript; TV helped with study design, provided comments and feedback on draft manuscript and translated it into
English; EO created the database and was involved in drafting the manuscript;
LM provided help in statistical and SL couples analysis; AV carried out conception, design and coordination, analysis and interpretation of the SL couples
and locked sets, wrote the draft manuscript and gave the final approval of the
version to be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank "L'atelier de bioinformatique" for being what it is, Eric Coissac for their
software, Karl Forner for his help in statistics, Isabelle Gonçalves, Joël Pothier,
Michaela Muller-Trutwin, Patrick Dechavanne and Reiner Veitia for critical reading of the manuscript and P. Le Chien for his encouragements since 1993. This
work was done for Lou, 5 years old, who died of AIDS in 1997.
Author Details
1Atelier de Bio Informatique, F-75005, Paris, France, 2Université Paris Diderot,
Paris 7, F-75013, Paris, France, 3Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR 7138, Paris
6, F-75005, Paris, France, 4Université de Versailles Saint Quentin, UMR 8144,
Équipe AOC, Laboratoire PRiSM, F-78035, Versailles, France and 5INSERM, U973,
F-75013, Paris, France
Received: 6 June 2010 Accepted: 17 June 2010
Published: 17 June 2010
© 2010 Directavailablelicenseedistributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open Access from: http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40
Biology Brouillet et al; article BioMed Central Ltd.
article is 2010, 5:40

References
1. Shafer RW, Schapiro JM: HIV-1 drug resistance mutations: an updated
framework for the second decade of HAART. AIDS Rev 2008,
10(2):67-84.
2. Enserink M: Drug resistance. A 'wimpy' flu strain mysteriously turns
scary. Science 2009, 323(5918):1162-3.
3. Ren J, Stammers DK: Structural basis for drug resistance mechanisms for
non-nucleoside inhibitors of HIV reverse transcriptase. Virus Res 2008,
134(1-2):157-70.
4. Noronha G, Cao J, Chow C, Dneprovskaia E, Hwang L, Lohse D, Ching Mak
C, McPherson A, Fine RM, Kang X, Klebansky B, Palanki MSS, Pathak VP,
Renick J, Soll R, Zeng B: Targeting drug resistant mutations using novel
binding interactions - Lessons learned from Abl-T315I and their
implications in drug design. Frontiers in drug design & discovery 2007,
3:121-144.
5. Maggio ET, Shenderovich M, Kagan R, Goddette D, Ramnarayan K:
Structural pharmacogenomics, drug resistance and the design of antiinfective super-drugs. Drug Discov Today 2002, 7(24):1214-20.
6. Ghosh AK, Chapsal BD, Weber IT, Mitsuya H: Design of HIV protease
inhibitors targeting protein backbone: an effective strategy for
combating drug resistance. Acc Chem Res 2008, 41(1):78-86.
7. Broglia RA, Tiana G, Sutto L, Provasi D, Simona F: Design of HIV-1-PR
inhibitors that do not create resistance: blocking the folding of single
monomers. Protein Sci 2005, 14(10):2668-81.
8. Foulkes JE, Prabu-Jeyabalan M, Cooper D, Henderson GJ, Harris J,
Swanstrom R, Schiffer CA: Role of invariant Thr80 in human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease structure, function, and viral
infectivity. J Virol 2006, 80(14):6906-16.
9. Colman PM: A novel approach to antiviral therapy for influenza. J
Antimicrob Chemother 1999, 44(Suppl B):17-22.
10. Ceccherini-Silberstein F, Erba F, Gago F, Bertoli A, Forbici F, Bellocchi MC,
Gori C, D'Arrigo R, Marcon L, Balotta C, Antinori A, Monforte AD, Perno CF:
Identification of the minimal conserved structure of HIV-1 protease in
the presence and absence of drug pressure. AIDS 2004, 18(12):F11-9.
11. Ceccherini-Silberstein F, Gago F, Santoro M, Gori C, Svicher V, RodríguezBarrios F, d'Arrigo R, Ciccozzi M, Bertoli A, d'Arminio Monforte A, Balzarini J,
Antinori A, Perno CF: High sequence conservation of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase under drug
pressure despite the continuous appearance of mutations. J Virol 2005,
79(16):10718-29.
12. Santoro MM, Bertoli A, Lorenzini P, Ceccherini-Silberstein F, Gianotti N,
Mussini C, Torti C, Di Perri G, Barbarini G, Bini T, Melzi S, Caramello P,
Maserati R, Narciso P, Micheli V, Antinori A, Perno CF, CARe Study Group:
Two Different Patterns of Mutations are Involved in the Genotypic
Resistance Score for Atazanavir Boosted Versus Unboosted by
Ritonavir in Multiple Failing Patients. Infection 2009, 37(3):233-43.

Page 12 of 13

13. Shafer RW: Rationale and uses of a public HIV drug-resistance database.
J Infect Dis 2006, 194(Suppl 1):S51-8.
14. Lucchesi JC: Synthetic lethality and semi-lethality among functionally
related mutants of Drosophila melanfgaster. Genetics 1968, 59(1):37-44.
15. Kaiser C, Gimeno R, Shaywitz D: The molecular and cellular biology of
the yeast Saccharomyces. Edited by: Pringle J, Broach J, Jones E. Cold
Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor laboratory press; 1997:91-227.
16. Butland G, Babu M, Díaz-Mejía JJ, Bohdana F, Phanse S, Gold B, Yang W, Li
J, Gagarinova AG, Pogoutse O, Mori H, Wanner BL, Lo H, Wasniewski J,
Christopolous C, Ali M, Venn P, Safavi-Naini A, Sourour N, Caron S, Choi JY,
Laigle L, Nazarians-Armavil A, Deshpande A, Joe S, Datsenko KA,
Yamamoto N, Andrews BJ, Boone C, Ding H, Sheikh B, Moreno-Hagelseib
G, Greenblatt JF, Emili A: eSGA: E. coli synthetic genetic array analysis.
Nat Methods 2008, 5(9):789-95.
17. Wang Y, Engels IH, Knee DA, Nasoff M, Deveraux QL, Quon KC: Synthetic
lethal targeting of MYC by activation of the DR5 death receptor
pathway. Cancer Cell 2004, 5(5):501-12.
18. Click ES, Stearns T, Botstein D: Systematic structure-function analysis of
the small GTPase Arf1 in yeast. Mol Biol Cell 2002, 13(5):1652-64.
19. Wu TD, Schiffer CA, Gonzales MJ, Taylor J, Kantor R, Chou S, Israelski D,
Zolopa AR, Fessel WJ, Shafer RW: Mutation patterns and structural
correlates in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease following
different protease inhibitor treatments. J Virol 2003, 77(8):4836-47.
20. Hoffman NG, Schiffer CA, Swanstrom R: Covariation of amino acid
positions in HIV-1 protease. Virology 2003, 314(2):536-48.
21. Vanet A, Valère T, Muller-Trutwin M: Methods for identifying motifs and/
or combinations of motifs having a boolean state of predetermined
mutation. C.N.R.S. France 2001.
22. Miller M, Jaskólski M, Rao JK, Leis J, Wlodawer A: Crystal structure of a
retroviral protease proves relationship to aspartic protease family.
Nature 1989, 337(6207):576-9.
23. Swain AL, Miller MM, Green J, Rich DH, Schneider J, Kent SB, Wlodawer A:
X-ray crystallographic structure of a complex between a synthetic
protease of human immunodeficiency virus 1 and a substrate-based
hydroxyethylamine inhibitor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 1990, 87(22):8805-9.
24. Deforche K, Camacho R, Grossman Z, Silander T, Soares MA, Moreau Y,
Shafer RW, Van Laethem K, Carvalho AP, Wynhoven B, Cane P, Snoeck J,
Clarke J, Sirivichayakul S, Ariyoshi K, Holguin A, Rudich H, Rodrigues R,
Bouzas MB, Cahn P, Brigido LF, Soriano V, Sugiura W, Phanuphak P, Morris
L, Weber J, Pillay D, Tanuri A, Harrigan PR, Shapiro JM, Katzenstein DA,
Kantor R, Vandamme AM: >Bayesian network analysis of resistance
pathways against HIV-1 protease inhibitors. Infect Genet Evol 2007,
7(3):382-90.
25. Chen Z, Li Y, Chen E, Hall DL, Darke PL, Culberson C, Shafer JA, Kuo LC:
Crystal structure at 1.9-A resolution of human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) II protease complexed with L-735,524, an orally bioavailable
inhibitor of the HIV proteases. J Biol Chem 1994, 269(42):26344-8.
26. Harte WE Jr, Swaminathan S, Mansuri MM, Martin JC, Rosenberg IE,
Beveridge DL: Domain communication in the dynamical structure of
human immunodeficiency virus 1 protease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 1990,
87(22):8864-8.
27. Piana S, Carloni P, Parrinello M: Role of conformational fluctuations in
the enzymatic reaction of HIV-1 protease. J Mol Biol 2002,
319(2):567-83.
28. Zoete V, Michielin O, Karplus M: Relation between sequence and
structure of HIV-1 protease inhibitor complexes: a model system for
the analysis of protein flexibility. J Mol Biol 2002, 315(1):21-52.
29. Loeb DD, Swanstrom R, Everitt L, Manchester M, Stamper SE, Hutchison
CA: Complete mutagenesis of the HIV-1 protease. Nature 1989,
340(6232):397-400.
30. Fernandez G, Clotet B, Martinez MA: Fitness landscape of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease quasispecies. J Virol 2007,
81(5):2485-96.
31. Ullrich B, Laberge M, Tölgyesi F, Szeltner Z, Polgár L, Fidy J: Trp42 rotamers
report reduced flexibility when the inhibitor acetyl-pepstatin is bound
to HIV-1 protease. Protein Sci 2000, 9(11):2232-45.
32. De Meyer S, Azijn H, Surleraux D, Jochmans D, Tahri A, Pauwels R,
Wigerinck P, de Béthune MP: TMC114, a novel human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease inhibitor active against
protease inhibitor-resistant viruses, including a broad range of clinical
isolatse. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005, 49(6):2314-21.

Brouillet et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:40
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/40

33. Ammaranond P, Cunningham P, Oelrichs R, Suzuki K, Harris C, Leas L,
Grulich A, Cooper DA, Kelleher AD: Rates of transmission of antiretroviral
drug resistant strains of HIV-1. J Clin Virol 2003, 26(2):153-61.
34. Svicher V, Ceccherini-Silberstein F, Erba F, Santoro M, Gori C, Bellocchi MC,
Giannella S, Trotta MP, Monforte A, Antinori A, Perno CF: Novel human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease mutations potentially
involved in resistance to protease inhibitors. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2005, 49(5):2015-25.
35. Laurie AT, Jackson RM: Q-SiteFinder: an energy-based method for the
prediction of protein-ligand binding sites. Bioinformatics 2005,
21(9):1908-16.
36. Hornak V, Okur A, Rizzo RC, Simmerling C: HIV-1 protease flaps
spontaneously open and reclose in molecular dynamics simulations.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 2006, 103(4):915-20.
37. Perryman AL, Lin JH, McCammon JA: Restrained molecular dynamics
simulations of HIV-1 protease: the first step in validating a new target
for drug design. Biopolymers 2006, 82(3):272-84.
38. Wain-Hobson S, Sonigo P, Danos O, Cole S, Alizon M: Nucleotide
sequence of the AIDS virus, LAV. Cell 1985, 40(1):9-17.
39. Ibanez A, Clotet B, Martinez MA: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1
population bottleneck during indinavir therapy causes a genetic drift
in the env quasispecies. J Gen Virol 2000, 81(Pt 1):85-95.
40. Kitrinos KM, Nelson JA, Resch W, Swanstrom R: Effect of a protease
inhibitor-induced genetic bottleneck on human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 env gene populations. J Virol 2005, 79(16):10627-37.
41. Rhee SY, Fessel WJ, Zolopa AR, Hurley L, Liu T, Taylor J, Nguyen DP, Slome
S, Klein D, Horberg M, Flamm J, Follansbee S, Schapiro JM, Shafer RW: HIV1 Protease and reverse-transcriptase mutations: correlations with
antiretroviral therapy in subtype B isolates and implications for drugresistance surveillance. J Infect Dis 2005, 192(3):456-65.
42. Combet C, Garnier N, Charavay C, Grando D, Crisan D, Lopez J, DehneGarcia A, Geourjon C, Bettler E, Hulo C, Le Mercier P, Bartenschlager R,
Diepolder H, Moradpour D, Pawlotsky JM, Rice CM, Trépo C, Penin F,
Deléage G: euHCVdb: the European hepatitis C virus database. Nucleic
Acids Res 2007:363-6.
43. Chang S, Zhang J, Liao X, Zhu X, Wang D, Zhu J, Feng T, Zhu B, Gao GF,
Wang J, Yang H, Yu J, Wang J: Influenza Virus Database (IVDB): an
integrated information resource and analysis platform for influenza
virus research. Nucleic Acids Res 2007:376-80.
44. Kuiken C, Korber B, Shafer RW: HIV sequence databases. AIDS Rev 2003,
5(1):52-61.
45. HIV Los Alamos National library [http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/]
46. Eddy SR: Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 1998,
14(9):755-63.
47. Nickle DC, Jensen MA, Gottlieb GS, Shriner D, Learn GH, Rodrigo AG,
Mullins JI: Consensus and ancestral state HIV vaccines. Science 2003,
299(5612):1515-8. author reply 1515-8
48. Korber B, Muldoon M, Theiler J, Gao F, Gupta R, Lapedes A, Hahn BH,
Wolinsky S, Bhattacharya T: Timing the ancestor of the HIV-1 pandemic
strains. Science 2000, 288(5472):1789-96.
49. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical
and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc Ser 1995,
57:289-300.
50. Storey JD, Tibshirani R: Statistical significance for genomewide studies.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 2003, 100(16):9440-5.
51. Richmond TJ: Solvent accessible surface area and excluded volume in
proteins. Analytical equations for overlapping spheres and
implications for the hydrophobic effect. J Mol Biol 1984, 178(1):63-89.
52. Alland C, Moreews F, Boens D, Carpentier M, Chiusa S, Lonquety M,
Renault N, Wong Y, Cantalloube H, Chomilier J, Hochez J, Pothier J,
Villoutreix BO, Zagury JF, Tufféry P: RPBS: a web resource for structural
bioinformatics. Nucleic Acids Res 2005:44-9.
doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-40
Cite this article as: Brouillet et al., Co-lethality studied as an asset against
viral drug escape: the HIV protease case Biology Direct 2010, 5:40

Page 13 of 13

</pre>
</body>
</html>
