<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>gb-2003-5-1-r6.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="petere"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Open Access

Volume
et al.
Brun
2003 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Method

Christine Brun*, François Chevenet¤†, David Martin¤*, Jérôme Wojcik‡,
Alain Guénoche§ and Bernard Jacq*

¤ These authors contributed equally to this work.

reviews

Addresses: *Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie du Développement, CNRS UMR6545, Parc Scientifique et Technologique de Luminy, Case
907, 13288 Marseille Cedex 9, France. †Centre d'Etude sur le Polymorphisme des Micro-organismes, CNRS/IRD UMR 9926, 911 avenue
Agropolis, BP 6450, 34394 Montpellier Cedex 5, France. ‡Hybrigenics SA, 3/5 impasse Reille, 75014 Paris, France. §Institut de Mathématiques
de Luminy, CNRS UPR9016, Parc Scientifique et Technologique de Luminy, Case 907, 13288 Marseille Cedex 9, France.

comment

Functional classification of proteins for the prediction of cellular
function from a protein-protein interaction network

Correspondence: Bernard Jacq. E-mail: jacq@lgpd.univ-mrs.fr

Published: 15 December 2003
Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6
The electronic version of this article is the complete one and can be
found online at http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

Abstract

Background

the function of certain proteins, they suffer from several limitations: they are more informative when applied to completely sequenced genomes; they are generally more
appropriate for prokaryotic genome organization; and the
principles underlying some of them are only valid for a small
number of proteins.

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

information

Molecular interactions are essential actors for all biological
processes. Large-scale studies of protein-protein interactions
have been carried out in several organisms to establish interaction maps and to decipher protein function [9-16]. These
large intricate networks now need to be analyzed in detail to
extract information related to protein function and to relationships linking cellular processes. Various methods of biological network analysis have been proposed so far. They may,
for instance, allow identification of functional modules after
network clustering [17], or the assignment of function to proteins of unknown function on the basis of the functional

interactions

Complete genome sequencing makes available a large
number of coding protein sequences for which we have little
or no functional information. In fact, the function of 30-35%
of encoded proteins per completely sequenced genome
remains unknown [1]. To decipher the functions of these proteins and, more broadly, to propose functional relationships
among proteins, new computational methods relying upon
genome organization have been developed. The Rosetta
Stone method proposes that two proteins in a given proteome
are functionally linked when they exist as a single fused
polypeptide in another proteome [2,3]. The chromosomal
proximity method suggests that genes repeatedly found as
neighbors on chromosomes in different organisms may
encode functionally related proteins [4-6]. Finally, the phylogenetic co-inheritance of proteins in several different proteomes may indicate their functional link [7]. Although these
methods and combinations thereof [8] successfully predict

refereed research

We here describe PRODISTIN, a new computational method allowing the functional clustering of
proteins on the basis of protein-protein interaction data. This method, assessed biologically and
statistically, enabled us to classify 11% of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome into several groups,
the majority of which contained proteins involved in the same biological process(es), and to predict
a cellular function for many otherwise uncharacterized proteins.

deposited research

© 2003 Brun et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all media
for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.
for manydescribeThis method, assessed biologically and statistically, enabledsameprotein-protein the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome
intohere otherwise uncharacterized for the prediction of cellular function from a biological process(es), and network ofcellular function
interaction classification of proteins proteins.
We severaldata. PRODISTIN, a of which contained proteins involved in the us to classify 11% of interaction to predict a protein-protein
Functional groups, the majority new computational method allowing the functional clustering of proteins on the basis

reports

Received: 25 June 2003
Revised: 6 October 2003
Accepted: 14 November 2003

R6.2 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Brun et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

criteria. The analysis of the results obtained demonstrated
that proteins are grouped according to their cellular rather
than molecular function; proteins involved in the same
molecular complex(es), pathway(s) or cellular process(es) are
clustered; a sound prediction of cellular function for the
uncharacterized proteins is possible. The biological relevance
of the obtained predictions is discussed with respect to recent
experimental results.

Binary protein-protein interaction list
a
Graph
b

Results
Principle of the PRODISTIN method and classification
of the yeast proteome

Matrix of functional distances
c
Classification tree
d
Analysis of class
robustness

e
Analysis of protein
classes

Figure 1
Flowchart of PRODISTIN
Flowchart of PRODISTIN. (a) A graph is constructed from a list of binary
protein-protein interactions. (b) A functional distance based on the
identity of the shared interactors is calculated among all proteins. (c) The
distance matrix obtained is used to build a classification tree, on which
functional classes are subsequently determined and analyzed by evaluating
(d) their statistical robustness and (e) their biological relevance.

annotation of their neighbors [18]. Another way to analyze
the interaction network is to compare proteins functionally at
the cellular level. This approach would represent a useful
complement to sequence-comparison methods, which
address function at the molecular level. With this in mind, we
propose a new bioinformatics method allowing a functional
classification of the proteins according to the identity of their
interacting partners.
The method, named PRODISTIN for protein distance based
on interactions, was applied to the yeast interactome and statistically evaluated for robustness using several independent

We previously suggested that comparing the sets of interactors for different proteins should allow detection of functional
similarity independently of the sequence information [19].
We therefore developed the PRODISTIN method based on
the principle that the more two proteins share common interactors, the more likely they are to be functionally related. In
practice, starting from a list of binary protein-protein interactions, the PRODISTIN method consists of three different and
successive bioinformatic steps (Figure 1, see Materials and
methods for details). First, a graph comprising all proteins
connected by a specific relation is constructed and a functional distance is calculated between all possible pairs of proteins in the graph with regard to the number of interactors
they share. Second, all distance values are clustered, leading
to a classification tree. Third, the tree is visualized and subdivided into formal classes. We thus define a PRODISTIN class
as the largest possible subtree composed of at least three proteins sharing the same functional annotation and representing at least 50% (the absolute majority) of the individual class
members for which a functional annotation is available.
Classes of proteins are then analyzed for their biological relevance and tested for their statistical robustness.
In the first experiment, we analyzed 2,946 yeast protein-protein interactions involving 2,139 proteins, that is, 38% of the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome [20,21]. The classification tree obtained contains 602 proteins (Figure 2).

PRODISTIN clustering depends neither on sequence
similarity nor on biochemical function
To understand the biological foundation of PRODISTIN clustering, we examined different possibilities that could explain
protein segregation in the tree. First, we tested whether
sequence similarity correlates with our clustering results,
given the abundance of proteins involved in related functions

Figure 2 (see following page) for 602 yeast proteins computed with the PRODISTIN method
A functional classification tree
A functional classification tree for 602 yeast proteins computed with the PRODISTIN method. (a) The foundation for protein clustering. PRODISTIN
classes are clustered according to the 'cellular role' of proteins only (pink), according to the 'functional category' of proteins only (blue), and according to
both criteria (yellow). (b) Functional classification. PRODISTIN classes on the circular classification tree have been colored according to their
corresponding 'cellular role'. Protein names have been omitted for clarity (see Additional data file 1 for details of the classes). Classes corresponding to
two different 'cellular roles' are colored according to the first annotation used in Additional data file 1.

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Brun et al. R6.3

(a)
comment

PRODISTIN classes clustered
by both types of functions

reviews

PRODISTIN classes clustered
according to the cellular function
of proteins
PRODISTIN classes clustered
according to the biochemical
function of proteins

reports
deposited research

(b)

refereed research
interactions

Aging
Amino-acid metabolism
Carbohydrate metabolism
Cell cycle control
Cell polarity
Cell stress
Cell structure
Chromatin/Chromosome structure
Cytokinesis
DNA synthesis
Lipid fatty acid and sterol metabolism
Mating response
Meiosis
Mitosis
Nuclear cytoplasmic transport
Polymerase I transcription
Polymerase II transcription
Polymerase III transcription
Protein degradation
Protein synthesis
RNA processing/modification
RNA splicing
Signal transduction
Vesicular transport
Unknown

information

Figure 2 (see legend on previous page)

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

R6.4 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Brun et al.

that exhibit similarity in their sequences. Pairwise alignments
between the sequences of the 602 yeast proteins classified by
PRODISTIN were computed using a global and a local alignment algorithm. Given that the obtained distances (expressed
as the percentage of similarity for global and the score for
local alignments, respectively) do not fit with tree distances,
the tree model is not appropriate to represent these huge
alignments [22]. We thus directly compared the distance values obtained with PRODISTIN, the global and the local alignments (as described above), by identifying for each distance
matrix the nonredundant pairs of proteins (x, y) for which y is
the closest neighbour of x or vice versa.
Among the 611 closest pairs of proteins identified with PRODISTIN, the 546 obtained with the global and the 527
obtained with the local alignment, 112 are shared between
both alignments (21.2%), 32 between PRODISTIN and the
global alignment (5.8%) and 38 between PRODISTIN and the
local alignment (7.2%). This result strongly suggests that
sequence alignments do not cluster the same proteins that
PRODISTIN does, leading to the conclusion that PRODISTIN
clustering is only moderately dependent on sequence
similarity.
As sequence similarity is not a key determinant of PRODISTIN clustering, we then investigated the capacity of PRODISTIN to cluster proteins with identical or related functions. To
do so, we separately analyzed PRODISTIN classes using two
types of protein functional annotations described in the Yeast
Proteome Database (YPD) [23]: the 'functional category' corresponding to the biochemical function(s) and the 'cellular
role' describing the cellular function(s) (see [19,24] for discussions about the notion of function). Both types of function
are known for 420 proteins in the tree. For comparison, PRODISTIN classes were separately constructed as defined above
according to either the cellular or the biochemical function of
proteins, using the 420/602 proteins annotated for both
types of function (Figure 2a). Among the total of 369 proteins
belonging to PRODISTIN classes, 212 (57%) are clustered
according to both types of function, and 157 (43%) according
to only one type of function. Strikingly, 69% of the latter (108/
157) are clustered according to the cellular function whereas
the remaining 31% (49/157) are grouped according to the biochemical function. Therefore, the PRODISTIN method clusters proteins more efficiently by their cellular function than
by their biochemical function. This result is further validated
by the following observations. First, when the subcellular
localization of the classified proteins is investigated, proteins
belonging to the same subcellular compartment are found
clustered in the tree, as would be expected from clustering
based on cellular function (data not shown). Second, when
the biochemical function of proteins is considered, proteins
with functions such as 'protein kinase' or 'hydrolase' are
found broadly scattered in the tree. Given that proteins with
such biochemical functions are likely to be involved in a large
number of different cellular processes, their scattering

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

throughout the tree is to be expected from clustering on the
basis of the cellular function. Third, sequence-similarity classification of proteins differs from PRODISTIN protein clustering, as described above. Consequently, from now on, we
will only consider PRODISTIN classes based on the cellular
function of proteins.

Classification of the S. cerevisiae proteome: integrated
analysis of cellular processes and their cross-talk
Using the 509 yeast proteins of the tree annotated in YPD for
'cellular role', 64 different PRODISTIN classes were constructed, containing 3 to 36 members each. They contain twothirds (408/602) of the tree proteins and cover 29 different
'cellular roles' out of 44 possible (Figure 2b; see also Additional data file 1). Whereas some 'cellular roles' are associated
with only one class in the tree (such as 'meiosis', which is class
27 (Figure 2b, see also Additional data file 1)), several classes
have the same cellular role. This generally corresponds to different aspects of a given cellular process: for instance, the six
classes accounting for 'vesicular transport' (Figure 2b) are
specifically devoted to autophagy (class 45), structural proteins related to actin (class 55), endoplasmic reticulum to
Golgi transport (classes 56, 57), endocytosis (class 58) and
exocytosis (class 59), respectively (see Additional data file 1).
A detailed analysis of the PRODISTIN classes shows that several types of classes are encountered when class functional
homogeneity is considered. In the simplest case, proteins are
associated with the same molecular complex or involved in a
particular cellular process. Nearly half of the classes fall into
this category; for instance, class 23 (Figure 3a) consists solely
of five members of the peroxisomal import complex [25], and
class 22 'DNA synthesis' (Figure 3d; see also Additional data
file 1) contains 9 out of 12 proteins involved in DNA replication (labelled with an asterisk on Figure 3d). The two other
characterized proteins belonging to this class are implicated
in related and/or overlapping processes such as 'cell cycle
control' and 'chromatin and chromosome structure' (Cdc23
and Spt2, respectively).
The second case corresponds to classes annotated with two
different cellular roles. These classes either cluster multifunctional proteins that are doubly annotated (all the peroxisomal
proteins forming class 23 are involved in 'lipid fatty acid and
sterol metabolism' as well as in 'protein translocation' (Table
1; see also Additional data file 1) or contain at least 50% of the
proteins annotated for a cellular role, at least 50% annotated
for another cellular function, and certain proteins annotated
for dual functions (Table 1). For instance, three out of six
proteins in class 17 'chromatin and chromosome structure/
mitosis' (Figure 3b) are associated with the kinetochore
(Dam1, Spc19 and Spc34, annotated 'chromatin and chromosome structure'), and five play a part in the maintenance of
the spindle-pole body (Dam1, Spc19, Dad2, Dad1 and Duo1,
annotated 'mitosis'), with two proteins involved in both processes (Dam1 and Spc19). Such situations illustrate cross-talk

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

Genome Biology 2003,

(a)
1.00

(b)
1.00
0.96

1.00
0.75

0.75
0.75
1.00
1.00

(c)

1.00

0.78

0.73
1.00
0.89

1.00
1.00

0.86

0.67
0.87

1.00

0.76
0.58
0.60

0.67
0.83

0.88

0.90

between superimposed or partially overlapping cellular processes, via the dual function of some proteins.

Interestingly enough, the PRODISTIN method also reveals
the existence of clusters containing only proteins of unknown
function. In one case, a cellular function can now be proposed
for the entire cluster: as class 62 (annotated 'unknown') is

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

information

Finally, a third case is encountered, in which small classes are
nested within larger classes (Table 1) representing another
example of cross-talk between cellular processes. The example given is for class 1 'amino acid metabolism' (Figure 3c; see
also Additional data file 1). The metabolism of amino acids is
related to cell-cycle control (class 3, Figure 3c) through the

For two proteins (5%), no cellular function has ever been proposed by any other method. For 27 proteins (64%), our prediction is in accordance with or related to previously
proposed ones, or the experimental results. For 13 proteins
(30%), our predictions disagree (Table 2; see also Additional
data file 2). When only the 19 experimentally determined
functions are considered, PRODISTIN predictions are in
accordance with 11/19 (58%) of them. Noticeably, when the
functional predictions obtained by the global optimization
method (GOM [18]) for the same proteins are considered,
only 4/13 (31%) predictions are in accordance with the experimentally determined functions. Taken together, these
observations strengthen the relevance of the PRODISTIN
predictions for the uncharacterized proteins.

interactions

Figure 3
Examples of PRODISTIN classes
Examples of PRODISTIN classes. (a) Class 21 'lipid and fatty acid
metabolism/protein translocation'. (b) Class 20 'DNA synthesis'. (c) Class
50 'RNA processing/modification'. Asterisks indicate founder proteins of
the class (that is, annotated in YPD with the 'cellular role' given to the
class). Computed class robustness indexes (CRIs) are shown in front of
nodes.

Among the 602 tree proteins, 93 had no defined 'cellular role'
in YPD when we retrieved annotations (see Materials and
methods). As 42 of them belong to a defined PRODISTIN
class, a cellular function could consequently be proposed. Our
predictions (Table 2; see also Additional data file 2) were
compared with predictions obtained by others using several
bioinformatics methods [8,18,28], the association of the protein to a complex of known functions [29] and recent experimental results described in the literature and reported in the
Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) [30].

refereed research

1.00

0.76

Functional predictions and their biological relevance

deposited research

1.00
0.67

The detailed analysis of the classes shows that the PRODISTIN method clusters proteins belonging to the same molecular complex, pathway or cellular process, and underlines
cross-talk between functions. Therefore, the method enables
the extraction of complex functional information from interaction networks by considerably reducing their complexity.

reports

1.00

0.76

RIS1
PET127*
MTR3*
MAK31
AIR2
NEO1
GDB1
SMD2*
LSM4*
LSM2*
LSM8*
LSM7*
LSM6*
PRP24*
LSM3*
LSM5*
PAT1
LSM1*
DHH1
CRM1
RPS28B
RPS28A
KEM1*
DCP1*
YEL015W
DCP2

ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis pathway mediated by the
ubiquitin protein ligase complex SCF (Skp1-Cdc53-F-box
protein). This complex contains two core proteins - Skp1 and
Cdc53 - and a F-box motif-containing protein required for the
specific targeting of certain proteins to the degradation pathway [26]. Consequently, a 'cell cycle control' class containing
Skp1, Cdc53 and the F-box protein Cdc4, which targets Sic1 to
degradation at the G1-S transition of the cell cycle, is nested
within an 'amino acid metabolism' class enclosing the F-box
protein Met30, which targets the transcription activator Met4
towards degradation during methionine biosynthesis. It is
interesting to note that these classes encompass the uncharacterized F-box-containing protein Flm1 which, on the basis
of its position in the classification tree (Figure 3c), is a candidate to target Csm3, a protein needed for chromosome segregation at meiosis [27], towards the ubiquitin-dependent
proteolysis pathway.

reviews

1.00

0.73

MCM2*
DBF4*
CDC7*
CDC47*
CDC46*
MCM6*
DNA43*
SPT2
CDC23
EST1*
CDC13*
YJL019W

Brun et al. R6.5

comment

1.00

PEX17*
1.00
PEX13*
PEX5*
PEX14*
PEX7*

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

R6.6 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Brun et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

Table 1
Cross-talk between cellular processes after PRODISTIN classification

Cellular processes

PRODISTIN classes

Superimposed cellular processes

PRODISTIN classes composed of doubly annotated proteins

Cell stress ⇔ other metabolism

10

Cell structure ⇔ protein folding

14

Lipid fatty acid metabolism ⇔ protein translocation

23

PolII transcription ⇔ protein degradation

34

RNA processing and modification ⇔ RNA splicing

50

Partially overlapping cellular processes

PRODISTIN classes composed of at least three proteins annotated for a
cellular role, three proteins annotated for another one, with some doubly
annotated

Cell polarity ⇔ cell structure

7

Cell polarity ⇔ mating response

9

Cell Structure ⇔ protein complex assembly

13

Chromosome and chromatin structure ⇔ mitosis

17

Mating response ⇔ differentiation

24

Protein degradation ⇔ vesicular transport

45

Nested cellular processes

Nested PRODISTIN classes

Aging ⊂ Signal transduction

0 ⊂ 54

Cell cycle control ⊂ Amino acid metabolism

3⊂1

Cytokinesis ⊂ Cell polarity

20 ⊂ 8, 21 ⊂ 8

Mating response ⊂ Cell polarity

25 ⊂ 8, 26 ⊂ 8

Cell polarity/Mating response ⊂ Signal transduction

9 ⊂ 54

Cell stress ⊂ Protein degradation/Vesicular transport

11 ⊂ 45

Cell stress ⊂ Signal transduction

12 ⊂ 54

Cell structure/Protein complex assembly ⊂ Mitosis

13 ⊂ 28

Chromatin/Chromosome structure ⊂ PolII transcription

16 ⊂ 35

Mating response/Differentiation ⊂ Signal transduction

24 ⊂ 54

PolIII transcription ⊂ PolII transcription

42 ⊂ 39

RNA processing and modification ⊂ Nucleus-cytoplasm transport

51 ⊂ 31

RNA splicing ⊂ RNA processing/modification

53 ⊂ 52

Vesicular transport ⊂ Cell polarity/cell structure

55 ⊂ 7

Vesicular transport ⊂ Cell polarity

59 ⊂ 8

Unknown ⊂ Cell structure/protein folding

60 ⊂ 14

Unknown ⊂ Vesicular transport

62 ⊂ 56

nested into class 56 (annotated 'vesicular transport'), all its
members can therefore be associated with 'vesicular
transport' and a posteriori recent experimental results
strengthen our predictions (Table 2) [31,32].
Finally, the putative involvement of proteins of already
known function in new cellular processes is also encountered.
Class 52 (Figure 3e) contains proteins involved in RNA
processing, including the members of the two LSM complexes
which play a part in mRNA decapping (Lsm1-7) and premRNA splicing (Lsm2-8) [33]. Given that two small subunit

ribosomal proteins Rps28A and B have been found to interact
with Lsm2, Lsm4, and Lsm8 in the two-hybrid screen from
Uetz et al. [15], these authors suggested either a possible
involvement of Lsm proteins in translation/ribosomal biogenesis or an unforeseen role of the ribosomal proteins in
RNA splicing. As both proteins share all their interactors with
Dcp1 (mRNA-decapping enzyme), PRODISTIN rather suggests a novel implication of Rps28A and B in mRNA decay.
Altogether, these results lend further support to the ability of
the PRODISTIN method to directly derive a cellular function

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Brun et al. R6.7

Table 2
Functional predictions and comparisons with predictions obtained by other means

Class

Predicted function (this study)

Prediction
after [8]

Prediction
after [18]

GO annotations, September 2003 [30] and
predictions after [29]

≈ (0)

Amino acid metabolism, cell cycle
control (0)

Prediction
after [28]

≠ (0)

comment

Protein name

Mitochondrion organization and biogenesis

FLM1

1, 3

VTS1

4

Cell cycle control (0)

YPR171W

7

Cell polarity (1)

YBR108W

7

Cell polarity

≈

Unknown

YGR268C

7, 55

Cell polarity, cell structure,
vesicular transport

≈

Unknown

DSE1

8, 25

≈ (0)
≈ (1)

Protein-vacuolar targeting
Cell polarity and structure, actin cytoskeleton
organization and biogenesis
reviews

Cell polarity, mating response (1)

Cell wall organization and biogenesis
≈

YKL082C

8

Cell polarity

YMR322C

10

Cell stress, other metabolism

VPS64

14,
60

Cell structure, protein folding (1)

≠ (1)

Protein-vacuolar targeting, cell cycle arrest in
response to pheromone

YFR008W

14,
60

Cell structure, protein folding (0)

≠ (1)

Cell cycle arrest in response to pheromone

YNL127W

14,
60

Cell structure, protein folding (0)

≈ (1)

Cell cycle arrest in response to pheromone

Mating response, differentiation,
signal transduction

YLL049W

29

Mitosis

YNR069C

29

≈ (1)

DNA synthesis (1)

≈ (1)

Mitosis

NIS1

30
30

Spindle pole duplication

≈

Unknown

≠

Unknown
Unknown

≠ (0)

Nucleus-cytoplasm transport (0)

YKL061W

≠

Unknown

Nucleus-cytoplasm transport

≠

Regulation of mitosis
Unknown

≠ (0)

Protein synthesis turnover, protein
deneddylation

35

PolII transcription (1)

≠ (0)

Protein synthesis turnover, protein
deneddylation

YJL058C

36

PolII transcription

SOH1

37

PolII transcription (1)

YJR083C

37

PolII transcription

≈

Unknown

YGL230C

38

PolII transcription

≠

Unknown

VAC14

43

Protein degradation (0)

AKL1

43

Protein degradation

YHR115C

43

Protein degradation

YPL105C

48

Protein synthesis

YLR424W

49

RNA processing and modification

≈

Unknown

YKR022C

49

RNA processing and modification

≈

Unknown

AIR2

52

RNA processing and modification
(1)

RNA metabolism, mRNA nucleus export

DHH1

52

RNA processing and modification
(1)

Deadenylation-dependent decapping, NOT
mRNA catabolism, nonsense mediated

YEL015W

52

RNA processing and modification
(1)

Nucleus-cytoplasm transport (0)
PolI transcription

YDR179C

35

YMR025W

Unknown

≠

Unknown
Transcription from polII promoter, DNA
repair

≠ (0)

≠

Unknown
≠
≠

≈ (1)

Intermediate and energy metabolism,
transcription, DNA maintenance, chromatin
structure, phospholipid metabolism, vacuole
inheritance

= (1)

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

Unknown
Unknown

≠ (0)

RNA metabolism

information

PolII transcription (1)

30
33

interactions

DNA-dependent DNA replication

YDR489W
YHL018W

refereed research

≠ (0)

deposited research

22
24,
54

≈

reports

YJL019W
PST2

Unknown
≈

R6.8 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Brun et al.

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

Table 2 (Continued)
Functional predictions and comparisons with predictions obtained by other means

≠

YOR285W

54

Signal transduction

YGL161C

56

Vesicular transport

≈

≈

Unknown
Unknown

YDR100W

56

Vesicular transport

≈

≈

Unknown

YDR425W

56

Vesicular transport (1)

YDR084C

56

Vesicular transport

≈

Unknown

Protein, transport

YGL198W

56

Vesicular transport

≈

Unknown

YPL246C

56

Vesicular transport

≈

Unknown

YLR285W

57

Vesicular transport (0)

≠ (0)

Chromatin silencing at ribosomal DNA,
nicotinamide metabolism

=, ≈, ≠, are used to indicate when prediction from other bioinformatic methods are the same, almost the same, or different from PRODISTIN
predictions. The number in parentheses indicates when the prediction is in accordance or related to (1), or different (0) from functions
demonstrated experimentally.

for proteins from the information contained within the interaction network, without using any additional sequence or
structure information.

Statistical evaluations of PRODISTIN clusters
To evaluate the quality of PRODISTIN classifications and
predictions on a more statistical basis, four different types of
control experiments have been performed in order to assess
the influence of various parameters.
First, given that annotations taken from databases may contain inconsistencies, our classification for the yeast proteome
(originally established with YPD annotations) was further
tested using the Gene Ontology (GO) annotations [34]. We
used the GO Term Finder tool from the SGD database to
search for significant shared GO terms (or their parents) used
to describe the genes of interest and to calculate a p value for
the occurrence of common terms (for details see Help in
[35]). Lists of genes constituting all PRODISTIN classes were
successively processed with the GO term finder for the
'biological process' ontology. On average, for 87.3% of the
PRODISTIN classes, the best hit, that is, the common GO
term with the lowest p value, is in accordance with the class
annotation proposed using YPD annotations. These terms are
highly statistically significant as a p value < 1e-6 is encountered for 83.63% of the classes. Moreover, these terms
applied to 77% of the class members on average. As GO terms
represent an independent source of functional annotation
from YPD, these congruent results confirm that PRODISTIN
efficiently clusters proteins having common or related cellular functions.
In a second control experiment, the overall accuracy of our
functional predictions was estimated on the basis of the ability of PRODISTIN to predict correctly the function of already
known proteins. For this, we first supposed that members of
a given PRODISTIN class all perform the function attributed

to the class (independently of their actual function) and then
compared these predictions to the known functions. We
defined the prediction success rate as the ratio between the
number of correctly predicted functions and the total number
of predictions. In this test, PRODISTIN performances were
compared with those of a 'majority rule' algorithm (MRA
[28]), which assigns to a given protein the function most
frequently found among its neighbors in the original proteinprotein network. As shown in Table 3, the highest success rate
for function predictions is attained with PRODISTIN. In fact,
67% of the predictions made with PRODISTIN are correct
against only 43% of the ones proposed by the MRA.
Third, we tested the robustness of PRODISTIN towards the
presence of both spurious and missing interactions in the
dataset because, despite the fact that it was carefully assembled (see Materials and methods), the actual accuracy of our
dataset is difficult to estimate. This prompted us to test PRODISTIN's reliability when the topology of the network is disturbed by false or missing edges. For this, we rewired the
network by randomly removing edges and putting them back
in between pairs of proteins not already connected. PRODISTIN and the MRA were applied to these rewired networks and
the pattern of change of the prediction rate was monitored
when the percentage of modified edges gradually increases
from 0 to 50%. Interestingly, the rate of correct predictions
stays remarkably even (between 64 to 67%) (Figure 4). The
number of proteins for which a prediction is possible
(because they belong to a PRODISTIN class of known function) also remains quite stable (from 389 for the initial network to 471 on average for 50% rewired networks), although
the actual number of proteins in the tree increases from 601
to 1,493 on average for 50% rewired networks. Comparison
with the MRA clearly shows that, although this algorithm is
able to offer a prediction for a larger number of proteins in the
network, its success rate is always two to three times lower
than that of PRODISTIN. In addition, it is also very sensitive

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

Table 3
Success rates for PRODISTIN vs majority rule

0.43

0.67

Totally in accordance

0.23

0.35

Partially in accordance

0.69

0.76

In disagreement

0.31

0.24

Number of proteins on which a prediction is
possible

520

346

Success rate
Predictions

20
30
Percent rewiring

40

50

Figure 4
Robustness of PRODISTIN towards false interactions
Robustness of PRODISTIN towards false interactions. The prediction rate
(number of correct predictions divided by number of predictions) was
measured for PRODISTIN (yellow curve) and for the majority rule
algorithm (green curve) on networks on which a certain percentage of
interactions were randomly 'rewired' (from 10 to 50%) (see text). The
number of proteins for which a prediction is possible is also reported as a
histogram (dark red, PRODISTIN; blue, majority rule). The values
correspond to an average of 50 experiments for each percentage of false
interactions introduced into the dataset.

and methods for details). As expected, this value decreases as
more interactions of lower biological significance occur in the
dataset (Figure 5). This correlation between PBS categories
and the average statistical robustness of the trees represents
a fourth and independent support for the reliability of the
PRODISTIN approach. In addition, the fact that the average
robustness value of the yeast tree is almost equivalent to that
of the H. pylori A tree reinforces the conclusion that the Saccharomyces tree is biologically meaningful.

Discussion
Protein-protein interactions as good indicators of
protein cellular function

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

information

Our method was based on the assumption that a distance formula (the Czekanovski-Dice distance) that uses information
on shared interactors could potentially mirror a functional
distance between proteins. The demonstration that the classification and the protein clustering resulting from PRODISTIN are essentially driven by the cellular function of proteins
gives strong support to our initial assumption. This also may
be explained by the fact that the chosen distance formula
makes it possible to take into account not only the functional
information carried by the nearest neighbors in the proteinprotein network, but also by proteins two edges away.

interactions

We present here a new bioinformatics method that is able to
compute a functional clustering of proteins on the basis of
protein-protein interaction data. When applied to the yeast
interactome, our method classified 602 proteins, representing a significant part of the proteome (11%), into 64 classes of
functionally related proteins.

refereed research

A final statistical assessment of PRODISTIN has been performed by measuring the robustness of the protein clusters
with another criterion based on tree topology (see Materials
and methods for details). For this, we applied PRODISTIN to
the protein-protein interaction network of the bacterium
Helicobacter pylori [14], for which information on putative
true/false positives is available. Using the PBS® algorithm,
these interactions had been ranked in five experimental categories of decreasing biological confidence (from A to E) [14].
A recent assessment has further confirmed the existence of a
positive correlation between this reliability score and the
true-positive rate [36]. Classification trees built with five
datasets corresponding to the interactions of categories A,
A+B, A+B+C, A+B+C+D, and A+B+C+D+E were computed
and tested for the robustness of their subtrees and the average
robustness value was calculated for each tree (see Materials

10

deposited research

We then tested PRODISTIN's performance on random networks of identical topologies in order to assess whether PRODISTIN clustering would have occurred by chance. For this,
all protein names were reshuffled and randomly assigned to
nodes in the network. The PRODISTIN analysis of such networks only allows the construction of a tiny number of classes
(15 on average, instead of 63), consequently leading to a very
low number of proteins for which a prediction is possible (51
on average instead of 389 in the current study). Finally, the
prediction rate drops to 60%. This clearly indicates that random interaction networks never lead to both a high number
of PRODISTIN classes and a correct prediction rate, as true
networks do.

0

reports

to the introduction of false interactions, as its success rate
drops dramatically from 43% for the initial network to 20%
on average with 50% rewired networks. In summary, it is possible to conclude that clustering proteins within classes
according to their cellular functions has a positive buffering
effect on the prediction rate and that PRODISTIN is thus very
robust against the presence of false interactions in the
dataset.

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

reviews

PRODISTIN

Brun et al. R6.9

comment

MR

1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Prediction rate

Genome Biology 2003,

Number of proteins predicted

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

R6.10 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Brun et al.

1

Average CRI

0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7

A

AB

ABC ABCD ABCDE
Trees

Yeast

Figure 5
interactome
Evaluation of PRODISTIN robustness by analysis of the H. pylori
Evaluation of PRODISTIN robustness by analysis of the H. pylori
interactome. Average class robustness index (CRI) value for the five H.
pylori trees obtained with interactions of decreasing PBS (blue histograms)
and for the yeast tree (orange histogram).

Therefore, the obtained distance values, once clustered, are
able to highlight subgraphs in the network, such as those
formed by proteins involved in the same pathway(s) or cellular process(es).
As we also showed that the PRODISTIN functional distance
clusters proteins independently of their sequence similarities
and their actual biochemical function, we now have the
opportunity to quantify functional relationships between proteins in the same way that sequence alignments make it possible to quantify protein-sequence similarity. PRODISTIN
thus represents a useful complement to sequence-comparison methods, which rather point towards proteins that have
the same molecular function. It is interesting to note that the
majority of proteins with the same biochemical function are
not clustered in the tree despite their sequence similarity.
This moderate dependence of cellular function on sequence
similarities clearly means that many functional similarities
are at present missed by sequence-based methods,
emphasizing the importance of using other types of data than
sequence and structure as a basis for function assessment.
Two major advantages result from the fact that PRODISTIN
computes all interactions constitutive to an interaction
network at once. First, it produces a large functional tree,
allowing direct comparison in terms of cellular function for
any pair or group of proteins. Second, it makes it possible to
visualize a large number of cellular processes and their main
actors in a single integrated view, thus offering the possibility
of examining the links between cellular functions, and more
broadly, the organization of cellular functions within the
interaction network. In doing so, PRODISTIN functional
trees can capture the essential part of the functional information buried in complex interaction networks, something
which is at present impossible to deduce from the intricate
graphical representations. Consequently, PRODISTIN can be

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

considered to be one of the first cellular bioinformatics tools
available that allows not only comparison of the function of
individual proteins but also the ability to study cell function
more globally. For instance, the dissection of given cellular
functions into sub-functions visible at network level or the
study of the functional relationships between known cellular
functions can be investigated. As discussed in Results, PRODISTIN has shown that the 'vesicular transport' general function can be separated into distinct subfunctions. An analytic
approach of this kind could be systematically undertaken for
all known yeast cellular functions, as they are statistically represented in the tree, and later on for those of other organisms.
As far as the second question of the relationships between
functions is concerned, PRODISTIN could represent a
valuable functional data-mining tool. It is, for instance, interesting to note that, although there exist 44 different YPD 'cellular roles' to describe the complete yeast proteome, of which
42 are represented by more than one protein in the tree, our
PRODISTIN classes at present cover only 29 of them. Despite
the existence of biases in the interaction dataset generally,
due to a deeper investigation of certain proteins and to methodological flaws, this observation could suggest a
predominant role for these 29 cellular functions in the organization of the network.

Comparison of the PRODISTIN method with recent
functional prediction methods
Comparison of the results of PRODISTIN with those of other
computational methods for assessing and comparing protein
functions is not straightforward. Because of the lack of common interaction sets, functional annotations, common evaluation tools and sometimes insufficient description of the
algorithms used, no simple benchmarking comparative analyses are yet possible. However, in an attempt to evaluate the
relative advantages and disadvantages of the different methods, we compared their results when available. For this purpose, we evaluated PRODISTIN against the MRA [28] and
two networks-based methods, the GOM [18] and the Rives
and Galitski method (RGM [17]). We measured their relative
behavior in terms of success rate in the prediction of the function of already known proteins (PRODISTIN vs MRA vs
GOM), functional assignment of unclassified proteins (PRODISTIN vs GOM), and ability to cope with false-positive and
false-negative interactions in the dataset (PRODISTIN vs
GOM vs MRA).
Our results (see Table 3) and those of the GOM (Table 1 in
[18]) both agree that the MRA has a lower success rate than
PRODISTIN or GOM in predicting the function of known proteins. When the ability of GOM and PRODISTIN to predict a
function for 42 otherwise uncharacterized proteins is compared to recently published experimental results as a reference, the latter performs better (Table 2). We found that 58%
of PRODISTIN predictions are in accordance with the literature, whereas only 31% of the predictions made by the GOM
are.

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Brun et al. R6.11

scriptional networks can also benefit from the application of
our general method. These new developments will allow
PRODISTIN to be applied to a large variety of biological questions, such as the evolutionary fate of duplicated genes, the
functional aspects of horizontal transfer of genes from one
species to another, the integration of signaling pathways and
the evolutionary comparison of gene networks.

Unlike GOM, PRODISTIN and RGM produce functional trees
as an output. But PRODISTIN goes one step further, by finding functional classes on the tree according to two parameters
(the minimal number of annotated proteins for the same
function in the class and their minimal representation in the
class - 3 and 50%, respectively, in this study). This considerably facilitates the process of function assessment, as it minimizes the ambiguity inherent in tree representation. This
class construction also has a positive buffering effect that limits the influence of false interactions on the classification and
makes it possible to maintain high prediction rates, as already
discussed. One may argue that constructing classes limits the
number of proteins for which a prediction is possible. It is
then important to note that PRODISTIN settings may be
changed easily at different levels. Depending on the goal of
the user (favoring class coverage of the tree, for instance), the
number of proteins per class can be increased by juggling with
the two parameters defining the PRODISTIN classes, but at
the unavoidable price of a slight decrease in the overall accuracy of the predictions. Switching from the YPD annotation
system to the GO system using GO slim categories also
increases the number of classified proteins in the tree and
consequently, of possible predictions (D.M., B.J. and C.B.,
unpublished data).

Materials and methods

deposited research
interactions

Only proteins involved in at least three binary interactions
were selected for further classification. Taking into account
that the existence of false-positive and false-negative interactions weights more for poorly connected proteins, and that
the estimated number of interactions per protein is close to
five [38,39], we chose to rule out proteins for which the contribution of such false interactions may blur the analysis. Proteins in our dataset have 2.6 interactors on average. We thus
chose to set the connectivity threshold to be classified to 3,
which means that proteins implicated in one or two interactions were not classified but taken into account for the computation. First, it is stated that a relation between two
proteins to be classified exists if either they interact with each
other and/or they share at least one common interactor. Subsequently, a graph in which vertices are proteins and edges
correspond to this relation, was computed. The connected
components are computed and the main one containing
almost all of the proteins was selected. Second, the
Czekanovski-Dice distance between all pairs of proteins of
this class was then calculated. This classical distance on
graphs corresponds to the formula

refereed research

D(i,j) = #(Int(i) ∆ Int(j))/ [#(Int(i) ∪ Int(j)) + #(Int(i) ∩
Int(j))]
in which i and j denote two proteins, Int(i) and Int(j) are the
lists of their interactors plus themselves (to decrease the distance between proteins interacting with each other) and ∆ is
the symmetrical difference between the two sets. This
distance was chosen because it increases the weight of the

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

information

Finally, PRODISTIN can be applied not only to the proteomes
of unicellular organisms (this study) but also to those of
metazoans. The classification trees recently obtained on the
Drosophila and the human proteome (C.B., S. Siret, P.
Mouren and B.J., unpublished data) show protein clusters
having a true biological significance. Furthermore, other
types of interaction networks such as genetic interaction
networks (A. Baudot, B.J., C.B., unpublished data) and tran-

Classification method

reports

As more interactions become available, the coverage of the
proteome and the mean number of interactions per protein
will increase, therefore improving the relevance of the protein
clusters found by the PRODISTIN method. Noticeably, it can
be anticipated that using interactions recently described in
the literature as well as new interactions produced by largescale approaches could rapidly lead to the classification of the
majority of the yeast proteome. As far as the PRODISTIN
method is concerned, work presently in progress in our laboratory will soon totally automate the tedious task of manually
constructing PRODISTIN classes on the tree.

Yeast protein-protein interactions were extracted from the
MIPS database [37]. Only direct binary interactions were
selected, based on the method used for their identification
(two-hybrid, excluding high-throughput experiments, in
vitro binding, far western, gel retardation and biochemical
experiments). For high-throughput two-hybrid experiments,
948 interactions were taken from Uetz et al. [15] and 839
from Ito's core data [12]. This yielded a total of 2,946 interactions involving 2,139 proteins (average connectivity 2.6 interactions per protein). The 1,517 protein-protein interactions
involving 730 proteins from Helicobacter pylori and their
corresponding PBS categories were taken from Rain et al.
[14].

reviews

Conclusions

Protein-protein interaction data sets

comment

Finally, when robustness towards the presence of false-positive and false negative interactions is assayed by changing the
topology of the network, the MRA again performs less efficiently than PRODISTIN (Figure 4). In addition, on random
networks of identical topology, both PRODISTIN and the
RGM (Table 1 in [17]) show that clustering of proteins in true
networks is always higher than clustering observed in random networks.

R6.12 Genome Biology 2003,

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

Brun et al.

shared interactors by giving more weight to the similarities
than to the differences; it is very close to an ultrametric distance because the vast majority of distance values between
protein pairs is at a maximum (for two proteins that do not
share any interactor, the distance value is 1, the highest value,
whereas for two proteins interacting with each other and
sharing exactly the same interactors, the distance value is 0,
the lowest value). Consequently, the advantage of choosing
this distance is that it authorizes the use of tree representation. With such distance values, only one tree structure fits
the initial distance values, independently of the chosen clustering algorithm. We have used the BioNJ algorithm [40] to
build a tree from our distance matrices. This is an improvement of the neighbor-joining algorithm [41], which takes into
account the variance of the distance between proteins to evaluate the length of the branches in the tree. A circular classification tree was then drawn using the TreeDyn package [42].

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

then loaded into Treedyn [42] for a direct class visualization
on the trees as displayed in Figure 2b.

Additional data files

The following additional data are available with the online
version of this article: details of all the proteins and protein
classes included in this analysis (Additional data file 1), and
details of the functional predictions and comparisons with
predictions obtained by other means (Additional data file 2).
tions 1 of
Click here
each obtained Annotation' indicate and with (?) first one a
of unknown2 functional class
the Fig. class proteinstwo robustness are assigned this for
class,class all indicate means question mark the marks proteins
(seesecondforof respectively. file
''Cellular Role'additional data Aannotatedcomparisons in to predicCompositionfunction. PRODISTIN classes. proteins with and/or
analysis 3 thethefile 1 Theand'Cellular classes includedin column
Details anddata the 63proteinsprotein Roles'Numbersfor each class
Additionallegend). Whenpredictionsfounderindex is indicatedsame
by other
2

Acknowledgements
We thank J.-C. Rain for providing the H. pylori data, A. Baudot, L. Fasano, S.
Gangloff, A. Kissenpfennig, D. Nesic, E. Remy, L. Röder, J. Smith and D.
Thieffry for carefully reading the manuscript and helpful discussions, and
Pierre Mouren for technical assistance. This project is supported by three
Action Bioinformatique inter-EPST grants to A.G., F.C. and B.J. respectively.
C.B. thanks Valigen SA and the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale for
financial support.

Sequence alignments and analysis
Pairwise sequence alignments have been performed on the
set of 602 protein sequences classified with the PRODISTIN
method. Both Needleman-Wunsch (global alignment) and
Smith-Waterman (local alignment) algorithms have been
applied. The programs used for the two algorithms are available at [43] and [44], respectively. The chosen alignment
matrix was BLOSUM50, and the gap-opening and gap-extension penalties were set to 12 and 2, respectively. The resulting
363,004 alignments have been processed to calculate the distance corresponding to the percentage of similarity for each
protein pair in the global alignment and for the score in the
local alignment.

5.

Subtree robustness measurement

6.

The robustness of each subtree was computed by measuring
its homogeneity using a criterion based on topology. Considering triples made of two elements within a given subtree and
one outside the subtree (possibly restricted to the sibling subtree), we evaluated the percentage of these triples for which
the two elements belonging to the same subtree are separated
by the smallest distance value. This allowed us to calculate a
class robustness index (CRI) for each inner branch, which
was computed by the Qualitree program [22] as a measurement of robustness/quality of the downward class. CRI may
be considered as functionally equivalent to the bootstrap
index usually used to assess the quality of phylogenetic subtrees. CRI values for PRODISTIN classes are available in
Additional data file 1. The average CRI per tree corresponds
to the sum of all triples for which the two elements belonging
to the same subtree are separated by the smallest distance
value divided by the sum of possible triples.

Annotation sources and functional tree visualization
We downloaded the 'cellular role', 'functional categories' and
'sub-cellular localization' annotation files for yeast proteins
from YPD [23] on 28 May 2002. The category labels were

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

7.

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.
13.
14.
15.

Galperin MY, Koonin EV: Who's your neighbor? New
computational approaches for functional genomics. Nat
Biotechnol 2000, 18:609-613.
Enright AJ, Iliopoulos I, Kyrpides NC, Ouzounis CA: Protein interaction maps for complete genomes based on gene fusion
events. Nature 1999, 402:86-90.
Marcotte EM, Pellegrini M, Ng HL, Rice DW, Yeates TO, Eisenberg
D: Detecting protein function and protein-protein interactions from genome sequences. Science 1999, 285:751-753.
Tamames J, Casari G, Ouzounis C, Valencia A: Conserved clusters
of functionally related genes in two bacterial genomes. J Mol
Evol 1997, 44:66-73.
Dandekar T, Snel B, Huynen M, Bork P: Conservation of gene
order: a fingerprint of proteins that physically interact. Trends
Biochem Sci 1998, 23:324-328.
Overbeek R, Fonstein M, D'Souza M, Pusch GD, Maltsev N: The use
of gene clusters to infer functional coupling. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1999, 96:2896-2901.
Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO:
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: protein phylogenetic profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999,
96:4285-4288.
Marcotte EM, Pellegrini M, Thompson MJ, Yeates TO, Eisenberg D: A
combined algorithm for genome-wide prediction of protein
function. Nature 1999, 402:83-86.
Bartel PL, Roecklein JA, SenGupta D, Fields S: A protein linkage
map of Escherichia coli bacteriophage T7. Nat Genet 1996,
12:72-77.
Flajolet M, Rotondo G, Daviet L, Bergametti F, Inchauspe G, Tiollais
P, Transy C, Legrain P: A genomic approach of the hepatitis C
virus generates a protein interaction map. Gene 2000,
242:369-379.
Fromont-Racine M, Mayes AE, Brunet-Simon A, Rain JC, Colley A,
Dix I, Decourty L, Joly N, Ricard F, Beggs JD, Legrain P: Genomewide protein interaction screens reveal functional networks
involving Sm-like proteins. Yeast 2000, 17:95-110.
Ito T, Chiba T, Ozawa R, Yoshida M, Hattori M, Sakaki Y: A comprehensive two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein
interactome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:4569-4574.
McCraith S, Holtzman T, Moss B, Fields S: Genome-wide analysis
of vaccinia virus protein-protein interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2000, 97:4879-4884.
Rain JC, Selig L, De Reuse H, Battaglia V, Reverdy C, Simon S, Lenzen
G, Petel F, Wojcik J, Schachter V et al.: The protein-protein interaction map of Helicobacter pylori. Nature 2001, 409:211-215.
Uetz P, Giot L, Cagney G, Mansfield TA, Judson RS, Knight JR, Lockshon D, Narayan V, Srinivasan M, Pochart P et al.: A comprehensive analysis of protein-protein interactions in Saccharomyces

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

http://genomebiology.com/2003/5/1/R6

16.

18.
19.
20.

22.
23.

25.

27.

28.
29.

31.
32.
33.

35.
36.
37.

39.
40.

Genome Biology 2003, 5:R6

information

38.

interactions

34.

refereed research

30.

44.

deposited research

26.

42.
43.

based on a simple model of sequence data. Mol Biol Evol 1997,
14:685-695.
Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method
for reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987,
4:406-425.
TreeDyn [http://viradium.mpl.ird.fr/treedyn]
Bioinformatics web site of Dr. Andrew C.R. Martin [http://
www.bioinf.org.uk/software]
The European Molecular Biology Open Software Suite [http:/
/www.emboss.org]

reports

24.

41.

Brun et al. R6.13

reviews

21.

cerevisiae. Nature 2000, 403:623-627.
Walhout AJ, Sordella R, Lu X, Hartley JL, Temple GF, Brasch MA, Thierry-Mieg N, Vidal M: Protein interaction mapping in C. elegans
using proteins involved in vulval development. Science 2000,
287:116-122.
Rives AW, Galitski T: Modular organization of cellular
networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:1128-1133.
Vazquez A, Flammini A, Maritan A, Vespignani A: Global protein
function prediction from protein-protein interaction
networks. Nat Biotechnol 2003, 21:697-700.
Jacq B: Protein function from the perspective of molecular
interactions and genetic networks. Brief Bioinform 2001, 2:38-50.
Wood V, Rutherford KM, Ivens A, Rajandream M-A, Barrell B: A reannotation of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Comp
Funct Genomics 2001, 2:143-154.
Malpertuy A, Tekaia F, Casaregola S, Aigle M, Artiguenave F, Blandin
G, Bolotin-Fukuhara M, Bon E, Brottier P, de Montigny J et al.:
Genomic exploration of the hemiascomycetous yeasts: 19.
Ascomycetes-specific genes. FEBS Lett 2000, 487:113-121.
Guénoche A, Garreta H: Can we have confidence in a tree
representation? Comput Biol 2001, 2066:45-56.
Costanzo MC, Crawford ME, Hirschman JE, Kranz JE, Olsen P, Robertson LS, Skrzypek MS, Braun BR, Hopkins KL, Kondu P et al.: YPD,
PombePD and WormPD: model organism volumes of the
BioKnowledge library, an integrated resource for protein
information. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:75-79.
Brun C, Baudot A, Guénoche A, Jacq B: The use of protein-protein interaction networks for genome wide protein function
comparisons and predictions. In Methods in Proteome and Protein
Analysis Edited by: Kamp RM, Calvete JJ, Choli-Papadopoulou T. Berlin
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag; 2004:103-124.
Huhse B, Rehling P, Albertini M, Blank L, Meller K, Kunau WH:
Pex17p of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a novel peroxin and
component of the peroxisomal protein translocation
machinery. J Cell Biol 1998, 140:49-60.
Patton EE, Willems AR, Tyers M: Combinatorial control in ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis: don't Skp the F-box hypothesis.
Trends Genet 1998, 14:236-243.
Rabitsch KP, Toth A, Galova M, Schleiffer A, Schaffner G, Aigner E,
Rupp C, Penkner AM, Moreno-Borchart AC, Primig M et al.: A
screen for genes required for meiosis and spore formation
based on whole-genome expression. Curr Biol 2001,
11:1001-1009.
Schwikowski B, Uetz P, Fields S: A network of protein-protein
interactions in yeast. Nat Biotechnol 2000, 18:1257-1261.
Gavin AC, Bosche M, Krause R, Grandi P, Marzioch M, Bauer A,
Schultz J, Rick JM, Michon AM, Cruciat CM et al.: Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes. Nature 2002, 415:141-147.
Saccharomyces Genome Database [http://genome-www.stan
ford.edu/Saccharomyces]
Calero M, Winand NJ, Collins RN: Identification of the novel proteins Yip4p and Yip5p as Rab GTPase interacting factors.
FEBS Lett 2002, 515:89-98.
Hettema EH, Lewis MJ, Black MW, Pelham HR: Retromer and the
sorting nexins Snx4/41/42 mediate distinct retrieval pathways from yeast endosomes. EMBO J 2003, 22:548-557.
He W, Parker R: Functions of Lsm proteins in mRNA degradation and splicing. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2000, 12:346-350.
Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM,
Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT et al.: Gene ontology:
tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nat Genet 2000, 25:25-29.
SGD Gene Ontology Term Fineder [http://genome-www4.stan
ford.edu/cgi-bin/SGD/GO/goTermFinder]
Wojcik J, Boneca IG, Legrain P: Prediction, assessment and validation of protein interaction maps in bacteria. J Mol Biol 2002,
323:763-770.
Mewes HW, Frishman D, Guldener U, Mannhaupt G, Mayer K,
Mokrejs M, Morgenstern B, Munsterkotter M, Rudd S, Weil B: MIPS:
a database for genomes and protein sequences. Nucleic Acids
Res 2002, 30:31-34.
Legrain P, Wojcik J, Gauthier JM: Protein-protein interaction
maps: a lead towards cellular functions. Trends Genet 2001,
17:346-352.
Grigoriev A: On the number of protein-protein interactions in
the yeast proteome. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:4157-4161.
Gascuel O: BIONJ: an improved version of the NJ algorithm

Volume 5, Issue 1, Article R6

comment

17.

Genome Biology 2003,

</pre>
</body>
</html>
