<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1477-7827-2-20.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Reproductive Biology and
Endocrinology

BioMed Central

Open Access

Research

Origin of germ cells and formation of new primary follicles in adult
human ovaries
Antonin Bukovsky*1,2, Michael R Caudle1,2, Marta Svetlikova1 and
Nirmala B Upadhyaya2
Address: 1Laboratory of Development, Differentiation and Cancer, The University of Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine, Knoxville, Tennessee
37920, USA and 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine, Knoxville, Tennessee
37920, USA
Email: Antonin Bukovsky* - buko@utk.edu; Michael R Caudle - MCaudle@mc.utmck.edu; Marta Svetlikova - marta.svetlikova@centrum.cz;
Nirmala B Upadhyaya - nbupadha@mc.utmck.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 28 April 2004
Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:20

Received: 03 March 2004
Accepted: 28 April 2004

This article is available from: http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20
© 2004 Bukovsky et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Recent reports indicate that functional mouse oocytes and sperm can be derived in vitro from
somatic cell lines. We hypothesize that in adult human ovaries, mesenchymal cells in the tunica
albuginea (TA) are bipotent progenitors with a commitment for both primitive granulosa and germ
cells. We investigated ovaries of twelve adult women (mean age 32.8 ± 4.1 SD, range 27–38 years)
by single, double, and triple color immunohistochemistry. We show that cytokeratin (CK)+
mesenchymal cells in ovarian TA differentiate into surface epithelium (SE) cells by a mesenchymalepithelial transition. Segments of SE directly associated with ovarian cortex are overgrown by TA,
forming solid epithelial cords, which fragment into small (20 micron) epithelial nests descending
into the lower ovarian cortex, before assembling with zona pellucida (ZP)+ oocytes. Germ cells
can originate from SE cells which cover the TA. Small (10 micron) germ-like cells showing PS1
meiotically expressed oocyte carbohydrate protein are derived from SE cells via asymmetric
division. They show nuclear MAPK immunoexpression, subsequently divide symmetrically, and
enter adjacent cortical vessels. During vascular transport, the putative germ cells increase to
oocyte size, and are picked-up by epithelial nests associated with the vessels. During follicle
formation, extensions of granulosa cells enter the oocyte cytoplasm, forming a single paranuclear
CK+ Balbiani body supplying all the mitochondria of the oocyte. In the ovarian medulla, occasional
vessels show an accumulation of ZP+ oocytes (25–30 microns) or their remnants, suggesting that
some oocytes degenerate. In contrast to males, adult human female gonads do not preserve
germline type stem cells. This study expands our previous observations on the formation of germ
cells in adult human ovaries. Differentiation of primitive granulosa and germ cells from the bipotent
mesenchymal cell precursors of TA in adult human ovaries represents a most sophisticated
adaptive mechanism created during the evolution of female reproduction. Our data indicate that
the pool of primary follicles in adult human ovaries does not represent a static but a dynamic
population of differentiating and regressing structures. An essential mission of such follicular
turnover might be elimination of spontaneous or environmentally induced genetic alterations of
oocytes in resting primary follicles.

Page 1 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

Background
The possible formation of new primary follicles in adult
human ovaries is a controversial issue. In order to give the
readers relevant information on prior observations and
current views, we are providing additional information on
this subject.
Follicular nomenclature
In this study, we use the term primary for ≤ 50 µm diameter follicles (resting, primordial, intermediary and primary follicle types), and secondary for >50 and ≤ 100 µm
(growing) follicles.
Origin of germ cells
The origin of oocytes (and primary follicles) in ovaries of
adult mammalian females has been a matter of dispute
since the proposal by Waldeyer in 1870 that germ cells
arise from the proliferation of somatic coelomic (germinal or surface) epithelium of the presumptive gonad [1].
A contrary view was Weissmann's theory of the continuity
of the germ plasm [2]. This theory assumes that during the
earliest stages of embryonic development, before embryonic cells become committed along specific pathways, a
set of germ cells is set aside, which are destined to give rise
to the gametes. During the 1960's and early 1970's, this
latter view was accepted for all animals, including mammals [3,4].

Utilization of newer techniques has shown that the Weissmann's theory may fit invertebrates (C. Elegans and Drosophila) and some lower vertebrates (zebrafish and frogs),
but not mice, and possibly mammals in general [5]. Studies of mouse embryos, in which genetically marked cells
were introduced at the 4- and 8-cell stage blastomere, have
shown that such cells can either become germ cells or
somatic cells [6]. This suggests that no specific germ cell
commitment exists prior to implantation. During the
postimplantation period, mouse germ cells are not identifiable before ~7 days after fertilization [7]. The germ cells
differentiate from somatic lineage [8]. It has also been
shown that cellular differentiation of grafted embryonic
cells does not depend on where the grafts were taken, but
where they have been placed [9]. Additional studies suggest an important role in the development of germ cells
for Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4 (BMP4), a member of
TGFβ superfamily, as null BMP4 mouse embryos failed to
develop primordial germ cells [10].
More recently, oogenesis has been demonstrated in cultured mouse embryonic stem cells. Such oogonia entered
meiosis, recruited adjacent cells to form follicle-like structures, and later developed into the blastocysts [11]. Cultured mouse embryonic stem cells have also been
reported to differentiate into haploid male gametes capable of fertilizing eggs and develop into blastocysts [12].

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

Presumptive germline stem cells have been recently
reported in ovaries of adult mice [13], resembling earlier
observations of dividing germ cells in ovaries of adult
prosimian primates [14-18].
Altogether, these studies indicate that somatic cells have
the potential to develop into germ cells, and some mammalian species posses mitotically active germ cells in adult
ovaries. Nevertheless, the paradigm that all primary follicles in adult mammalian females were formed during the
fetal period of life is still supported by a sizable number of
scientists, primarily because of the lack of direct evidence
on formation of new primary follicles in adult mammalian ovaries [18]. It also remains unclear whether mitotically active germ cells in adult prosimians and
presumptive germline stem cells in mice persist from the
fetal period of life or differentiate de novo from some type
of progenitor cells, if the number of dividing germ cells
determines the number of new primary follicles, what the
source of granulosa cells for newly formed follicles might
be, and if a preservation of germ cells in these two species
is an exception or the rule for other mammals, and human
females in particular. In this report we propose that in
adult human ovaries mesenchymal cells in the tunica
albuginea (TA) are bipotent progenitors with a commitment for both primitive granulosa and germ cells.
Tunica albuginea, surface epithelium, and derived
epithelial structures in human ovarian cortex
The human TA is a thick fibrous subepithelial layer of
loose connective-tissue cells. It does not begin to form
until the end of intrauterine life [19] or several months
after the birth [20]. Even then it is not a true membrane,
but merely a collection of loose connective-tissue cells
[20]. In contrast to the ovarian surface epithelium (SE),
supposedly the source of a variety of ovarian tumors, the
TA has not been well studied.

The ovarian cortex is usually covered by a layer of irregularly shaped special epithelial-like mesothelial cells [21],
commonly referred to as the ovarian "germinal", superficial, or surface epithelium. This layer is attached to the
basal lamina continuous with the subjacent TA by means
of collagenous fibrils. Except in the ovaries of newborn
animals, mitoses are essentially absent in ovarian SE [22].
In functional human ovaries the SE is found in certain
areas only, but in women with anovulatory cycles, or
patients with polycystic or sclerotic ovaries, the ovarian
surface is completely covered with SE [23]. This is despite
similar handling during surgical retrieval, suggested by
Gillett [24] to cause ovarian denudation.
In scanning electron microscopy and submicroscopic
studies of ovarian SE during ovulatory cycles, it has been
reported that the ovarian surface is frequently evaginated

Page 2 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

into a series of villous-like projections or papillae, which
may vary widely in the number, size, and distribution
(reviewed in [21]). The SE also invaginates into the ovarian cortex throughout the entire organ. This is true in all
mammalian species, including humans. Cortical invaginations appear as small elongated clefts, subsurface channel-like crypts, and solid cords of epithelial cells. Crypts
are hollow, tubular invaginations lined by cells possessing
the same general features as SE cells. However, the cord
cells are very similar to some of the granulosa cells. In
some areas of the ovary, cords fragment and appear as
small 'nests' of epithelial cells. Typically, these epithelial
nests (fragmented cords) lie in proximity to primary follicles [21,22]. In adult ovaries, the SE retains a relatively
embryonic structure [25]. The SE-derived cords are in contact or penetrated by nerve terminals, and fragmented
cords (nests) are suggested to contribute epithelial elements to ovarian follicles [22].
These data indicate that SE exhibits a high degree of variability, by forming evaginations extending from the ovarian surface and invaginations into the stroma. Also, the
crypt-like subsurface channels exist, which are lined by
epithelial cells and retain the relatively embryonic structure of SE cells. On the other hand, epithelial nests derived
from epithelial cords appear to contribute epithelial cells
to ovarian follicles.
Epithelio-mesenchymal transition in vitro
In culture, the ovarian SE cells undergo an epithelio-mesenchymal transition. The resulting mesenchymal type
cells can be stimulated to differentiate back into the epithelial phenotype [26,27]. Ovarian SE cells undergoing
this epithelio-mesenchymal conversion are initially cytokeratin (CK) positive, but lose CK expression with time and
passages in cultures [28]. Therefore, the diminution of CK
expression appears to indicate a resting stage for SEderived mesenchymal cells.
Expression of mitogen-activated protein kinases
Normal SE cells express mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPK) [29], a group of serine/threonine kinases. The
MAPK is used throughout evolution to control the cellular
responses to external signals such as growth factors, nutrient status, stress or inductive signals. Transcription factors
are substrates for MAPK [30]. In adult human ovaries, we
have reported prominent cytoplasmic MAPK expression
in oocytes of heathy primary follicles, a diminution of
oocyte MAPK expression during follicular atresia, and
translocation of cytoplasmic to nuclear MAPK expression
in growing secondary follicles [31]. Hence, cytoplasmic
MAPK expression appears to be characteristic for resting
healthy oocytes. Nuclear translocation signals oocyte
growth.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

Identification of germ cells in ovarian surface epithelium
Scanning and transmission electron microscopy have
revealed numerous germ cells (10 µm in diameter) within
the ovarian SE of human fetuses from 7 to 24 weeks of
intrauterine life. Germ cells are easily distinguished from
smaller coelomic epithelial cells by their rounded contour, smooth surface and, in some instances, large amoeboid evaginations [19]. Using differential interference
contrast (DIC) and immunohistochemistry, we previously reported the occurrence of similar putative germ
cells within the SE and cortex of adult human ovaries [32].
These data indicate that germ cells are present in the SE.
They may either invade SE from adjacent structures and be
extruded from the ovary [19], or originate in SE and
invade the ovarian cortex, or both [32].

Besides their characteristic morphology as outlined above,
the germ cells can also be identified by alkaline phosphatase activity [9]. However, nonspecific alkaline phosphatase activity has been described in various tissues [3336]. Zona pellucida (ZP) proteins are more specific markers for oocytes. In postnatal rat ovaries, zona pellucidae
first appear in primary follicles adjacent to keratin-positive granulosa cells [37]. However, some ZP proteins, such
as PS1, are also detected in the ovarian SE of rabbit, cat,
monkey, baboon and human, and in human ovarian cancers [38-41]. Hence, expression of ZP proteins in SE cells
suggests a relationship to the oocytes.
Intravascular transport of germ cells
Germ cells are capable of migration by amoeboid movements, but in large mammals they also utilize intravascular transport to reach distant destinations [4,42]. Why the
cell leaves the circulating blood at certain sites remains
unclear. It has been suggested that there is a trapdoor
mechanism that prevents the germ cell from continuing to
circulate, although adhesion of primordial germ cells
("cauliflower-like structures ") in the aortas of bovine
embryos have been observed [42]. Hence, in large mammals, germ cells may migrate to reach adjacent blood vessels, and then utilize vascular transport to reach distant
destinations.
Balbiani body
Oocytes in primary (resting) follicles show a single Balbiani body (named for the nineteenth century Dutch microscopist) in the cytoplasmic region near the nucleus where
the majority of oocyte organelles are concentrated
(reviewed in [43]). The Balbiani body contains aggregated
mitochondria and can be observed in primary follicles in
both fetal and adult ovaries [44-46]. In a study of turkey
hens, no Balbiani body was detected in stage I oocytes,
appeared in stage II oocytes, and diminished in the
oocytes of growing follicles, coinciding with the dispersion of mitochondria throughout the ooplasm [44].

Page 3 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

Similar observations were reported in human oocytes
[45]. Balbiani bodies show immunostaining for CK 8,18,
and 19 [32,47]. In primary follicles of fetal and adult
human ovaries, follicular (granulosa) cell extensions penetrate deep into the ooplasm, much like a sword in its
sheath. There may be as many as 3–5 "intraooplasmic
processes", even in one scanning microscopy plane. These
intraoocytic invaginations are closely associated with a
variety of organelles. They are close to the nuclear zone,
and may help activate growth of the oocyte [48].
In mouse fetal ovaries, germ cells are arranged in special
clusters (germline cysts) and dividing germ cells remain
connected by intercellular bridges called "ring canals."
The cysts may allow certain germ cells to specialize as
nurse cells [49]. One possibility is that such nurse cells in
germline cysts help provide oocytes with mitochondria
[50]. It has been proposed that mitochondria with functional and defective genomes would be actively transported into different germ cells, and the quality of each
cell's mitochondria might then determine whether it survived or entered apoptosis [49]. A recent study by Cox and
Spradling indicates that during Drosophila oogenesis, follicular cells are a source of mitochondria, which enter the
oocyte cytoplasm via the "ring canal" to form the Balbiani
body, thereby supplying virtually all of the mitochondria
of the oocyte [46].
It appears that the Balbiani body contributes to the resting
state of the oocyte, since oocyte mitochondria are not
released until the initiation of the follicular growth. In
addition, the contribution of granulosa cells to the formation of the Balbiani body in the oocyte cytoplasm is an
indicator of the use of these cells in ongoing oocyte
assembly.
Numbers of ovarian primary follicles
In adult mammalian ovaries, 70–95% of oocytes are in
various stages of degeneration [51,52]. Block's quantitative morphological investigations of follicles in women
[53] showed wide individual variation, but the numbers
in the right and left ovaries are similar, with a tendency to
decline with age. However, in the eighteen to thirty eight
year age range, a relationship between age and the
number of primary follicles could not be statistically
proven [53]. The number of primary follicles in both ovaries varied between 8100 and 290000. This lack of significant numerical change during the reproductive period
also has been reported in cattle [52]. Gougeon used the
data of Block and his own observations and concluded
that the depletion of the primary follicle pool is caused
mainly by atresia in younger women and by a decrease in
the growing pool in older women, with the changing
point at 38 ± 2.4 years of age [54]. These observations suggest that in human females new cohorts of primary folli-

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

cles may replace follicles undergoing atresia until about
the end of the third decade of life, and a lack of follicular
renewal after that period may cause a significant decrease
in the pool of resting primary follicles.
We used the immunohistochemical detection of the CK
marker of epithelial cells and DIC to study the mesenchymal-epithelial transition of TA mesenchymal cells in adult
human ovaries and the development and distribution of
epithelial aggregates in the cortex. We also investigated
the association of oocytes with cytokeratin positive epithelial nests in ovarian cortex by double color immunohistochemistry, and the expression of SE/oocyte shared ZP
proteins and mitogen activated protein kinases in putative
germ cells. In addition, triple color immunohistochemistry was employed on serial sections to study vascular
involvement in oocyte transportation. This study expands
our earlier and recent observations and views on the formation of germ cells in adult human ovaries
[31,32,55,56]. Our present data support further the concept of the formation of new ovarian primary follicles during the optimal reproductive period in human females.

Materials and methods
Tissues
Morphological and immunohistochemical observations
from human ovaries presented here come from the material collected over 12 years. Tissue samples from ovaries
and other reproductive tract tissues were obtained from
over 100 women undergoing hysterectomies. In the
present study we report the data obtained from ovarian
samples of women during the optimal reproductive
period of life. Hysterectomies are relatively uncommon in
these women (chronic pelvic pain, not responding to the
conservative treatment). We here report observations
from the ovaries of twelve patients (mean age 32.8 ± 4.1
SD, range 27–38 years; 41 tissue samples). All cases
showed functional or regressing CL in the ovaries and corresponding type of endometrial morphology, indicating
regular ovulatory cycles. The study was approved by the
Institutional Review Board, and a written consent was
obtained from each patient.
Peroxidase immunohistochemistry
Tissue processing began within 30 minutes of surgery. Up
to four 10 × 10 × 5 mm blocks of tissue were collected
from each ovary. Tissue blocks of ovarian samples were
frozen in optimal cutting temperature (O.C.T.) compound (Miles Inc., Elkhart, IN) and stored at -80°C until
use. Under these conditions, no differences in immunohistochemical staining were detected when the same tissue blocks were processed within one month after
embedding or ten years later. Twenty to sixty (and occasionally more) frozen sections (7 µm thickness) were
fixed in acetone and processed for detection of markers of

Page 4 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

interest by peroxidase immunohistochemistry as
described previously [32]. Immunohistochemical evaluation was performed by two investigators (A.B. and M.S.).
All chemicals, except where specified otherwise, were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA.
Double color immunohistochemistry
The slides were subjected to double color immunohistochemistry for CK and ZP immunoreactivity (CK/ZP). The
slides were first immunostained for CK of epithelial cells
and TA fibroblasts, but without hematoxylin counterstain
and dehydration. Briefly, specimens were washed with
phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and incubated 20 minutes with mouse-anti human CK 18, clone CY-90 (Sigma)
or CK 5, 6, 8, 17, clone MNF116 (Dako Corporation,
Carpinteria, CA, USA) (5 µg/ml in PBS). After extensive
washing in PBS, specimens were incubated 20 minutes
with swine anti-mouse IgG peroxidase conjugate (SwAM/
Px; SEVAPHARMA, Prague, Czech Republic – kindly provided by Dr. Jana Peknicova, Department of Biology and
Biochemistry of Fertilization, Institute of Molecular
Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Prague, Czech Republic) diluted 1:50 and preabsorbed
with rat kidney homogenate [57]. Antigen-antibody complexes were detected by a standard diaminobenzidine
technique (brown color).

After three washes in PBS, the slides were incubated for 20
minutes with rabbit antibody to heat-solubilized porcine
zona (HSPZ) [58,59], diluted 1:20, or sheep antibody to
heat-solubilized rabbit zona (HSRZ) protein [59] (1:20),
or PS1 monoclonal antibody to the meiotically expressed
porcine oocyte ZP carbohydrate antigen [38] (1:100). The
antibodies were kindly donated by Dr. Bonnie S. Dunbar,
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. Additional
rabbit anti-HSPZ antibodies [58] were kindly provided by
Dr. Satish K. Gupta, National Institute of Immunology,
New Delhi, India. The following monoclonal primary
antibodies were also utilized at IgG concentration 5 µg/
ml: CD31 of endothelial cells, clone JC/70A (Dako Corporation, Carpinteria, CA, USA), HLA-DR of endothelial
cells and activated tissue macrophages, clone MEM-12
[60] (Drs. Ivan Hilgert and Vaclav Horejsi, Institute of
Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic and Faculty of Sciences, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic), MAPK (pan-ERK), clone 16 (BD
Transduction Laboratories, San Diego, CA, USA), and
Thy-1 differentiation protein of fibroblasts and pericytes,
clone F15-42-01 [61] (Dr. Rosemarie Dalchau, Institute of
Child Health, University of London, London, UK).

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

noresearch, Burlingame, CA, USA) and AffiniPure Rabbit
Anti-Sheep IgG, Fc Fragment Specific – minimal crossreaction to Human Serum Proteins (Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA), or SwAM/Px
(SEVAPHARMA) as above. Antigen-antibody complexes
were detected by a Vector SG detection kit according to the
supplier's manual (Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame,
CA, USA), giving the substrate dark blue color. This contrasted with the brown color resulting from the first
sequence of immunoreagents (CK immunostaining). The
slides were dehydrated and mounted, without hematoxylin counterstain. A control procedure consisted of double
color immunohistochemistry as above, but both primary
antibodies were replaced with PBS. Additional controls
included replacement of primary antibodies with nonimmune hybridoma ascites, antibodies not reacting with
human tissues (mouse-anti rat Thy-1 differentiation protein, clone OX-7 – donated by Dr. Allan F. Williams, MRC
Cellular Immunology Unit, Sir William Dunn School of
Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK), and normal rabbit IgG.
Since the diaminobenzidine reaction product masks the
antigen and catalytic sites of the first sequence of immunoreagents, preventing interaction with the reagents of
the second sequence [62], a possibility of co-expression in
the same cell types was investigated. Therefore, another
set of slides was similarly processed, with the opposite
order of primary antibodies (ZP/CK). In addition, two sets
of slides were immunostained for CK or ZP expression
alone, followed by hematoxylin counterstain.
Triple color immunohistochemistry
Double color immunohistochemistry was performed as
above and complemented with the third primary antibody and corresponding secondary antibody incubation.
Antigen-antibody complexes were detected by a Vector
VIP detection kit according to the supplier's manual (Vector Laboratories), giving the substrate a purple color. Control staining consisted of the same procedure, but primary
antibodies were replaced as indicated above.

Differential interference contrast images were captured
with a DEI-470 CCD Video Camera System (Optronics
Engineering, Goleta, CA) with detail enhancement and
CG-7 color frame grabber (Scion Corporation, Frederick,
MD) supported by Scion Image public software developed
at the National Institutes of Health (Wayne Rasband,
NIH, Bethesda, MD). Captured images were compiled
using Microsoft® Power-Point® 97 SR-2 (Microsoft Corporation, Redmont, WA) and Microsoft Photo Editor 3.0
(Microsoft Corporation).

Primary antibodies were followed by a relevant peroxidase-coupled secondary antibody – AffiniPure Goat Fab'
Anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L), Abs. human serum (Protos Immu-

Page 5 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

Statistics
Statistical analysis of data on primary follicle numbers
from Block [53,63,64] and Gougeon et al. [54] was performed using GraphPad InStat version 3.01 for Windows
software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). The follicle
count values were transformed (Y = Log [Y]) and subjected
to One way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) followed by
Tukey-Kramer Multiple Comparisons Test. Probability
values of P < 0.05 were considered significant.

Results
Presentation of data does not necessarily follow the outline given in the background, but rather the development
of our approach and methodological analysis of the problem. Also, due to the complexity of views and approaches,
some subheadings include a short discussion and
conclusions.
It is important to note that the single color immunohistochemistry has an advantage in showing a marker distribution as it is. In double color immunostaining, the markers
of second sequence may not be visible if they are
expressed in cells also showing strong expression of the
first sequence marker. For instance, if the expression of CK
and ZP proteins is shared in some SE cells, the CK immunostaining used for the first sequence is visible and ZP
proteins are masked. Co-localization of ZP and CK immunostaining is also common in granulosa cells of primary
and secondary follicles (data not shown). This, however,
does not apply to germ cells and oocytes, which express
ZP but not CK markers. In each figure with double and triple color immunostaining the sequence of antibodies is
indicated. In this study, the blocking effect of the primary
antibody sequence in cells sharing both markers is in fact
an advantage of peroxidase immunohistochemistry, giving a clear distinction between CK+/ZP+ granulosa cells
and CK-/ZP+ oocytes. In addition, this technique shows
that during follicular growth some granulosa cells are
depleted of CK immunoexpression but ZP staining persists (see Fig. 11D).
Relationship of tunica albuginea, surface epithelium and
ovarian cortex (Fig. 1 and 2)
In most instances, the ovarian cortex was covered by TA,
with or without a surface epithelium cover. The TA
showed a variable thickness, ranging from almost undetectable to more than 50 µm. Cytokeratin expression of
various density was detected in mesenchymal cells of
some TA segments, particularly in segments showing an
appearance of SE cells. In contrast, no CK expression was
detected in mesenchymal cells of the ovarian cortex.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

the appearance of SE cells directly connected to the ovarian cortex (dotted box, Fig. 1A). The segments of SE cells
(arrow) are gradually overgrown by TA flap (arrowhead).
This results in the formation of SE channels with lumen
(se-ch, inset) and solid epithelial cords (white arrow).
Note a lack of ovarian SE above the TA (white arrowhead).
A high power view of the TA flap extending over the SE
(Fig. 1B, detail from 1A) revealed strong CK expression
(brown color) in mesenchymal cells exhibiting fibroblast
morphology (+fb). Such cells associate with the inner flap
surface covering the SE (arrowhead). At the angle between
the flap and SE, the cells show intermediate morphology
of fibroblasts and epithelial cells (fb/se), and appear to
contribute to the SE cover of the ovarian cortex (arched
arrow). Solid epithelial cords (Fig. 1C, detail from 1A)
show a CK+ bilaminar epithelial layer accompanied by a
diminution of CK immunostaining of adjacent TA fibroblasts (+/-fb).
Figure 1D, a panoramic view of the ovarian surface and
adjacent cortex from another case, shows a thick segment
of TA and CK expression in TA fibroblasts associated with
the differentiation of SE (left white arrow). No SE is apparent above TA lacking CK+ fibroblasts (right white arrow).
The upper ovarian cortex contains a row of longitudinally
(arrows) or perpendicularly viewed epithelial cords
(arrowheads), evidenced from serial sections.
Segments with TA hypertrophy and without an SE cover
showed strong CK expression in TA fibroblasts (fb, Fig.
2A). No CK expression was detected in the adjacent ovarian cortex (Fig. 2B). The CK+ fibroblasts migrate toward
the surface (Fig. 2C) and show the mesenchymal-epithelial transition (fb/se, Fig. 2D) similar to that observed in
the TA flap (Fig. 1B). The appearance of SE cells was associated with a gradual diminution of CK expression by TA
fibroblasts (Fig. 2E; arrowhead, Fig. 2F). Well differentiated SE was eventually underlined by an amorphous substance without cellular components (white arrowhead,
Fig. 2F). Such separation of the SE from cellular components of TA may cause a sequestration of the nonessential
SE out of the ovary.
Taken together, these observations indicate that TA
fibroblasts, which show a transient CK immunoexpression, differentiate into SE cells by a process of mesenchymal-epithelial transition. However, depending on
additional (unknown) factors, this process may result
either in the formation of SE channels and cords in the
ovarian cortex, or in the differentiation of SE cells covering the ovarian surface.

A panoramic view of events at the ovarian surface resulting in the development of cortical channels and epithelial
cords is presented in Fig. 1A. This process is initiated by

Page 6 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

taf

se

ta

ovc

se-ch
50 µm

taf
300 µm

F29#28

ovc

A

10 µm

ta
ta

C
+/-fb
+/-fb

+fb

B

fb/se

se-cord
se-cord
se
se

ta
ovc

10 µm

300 µm

ovc
ovc

F28#06

D
Figure 1
Formation of epithelial cords from ovarian TA mesenchymal precursors
Formation of epithelial cords from ovarian TA mesenchymal precursors - see also Ref [32]. A) Panoramic view of
ovarian surface and adjacent cortex. Dashed line indicates interface between TA and stroma of the ovarian cortex. Dotted box
indicates an early appearance of SE cells adjacent to the ovarian cortical stroma. Inset, epithelial channel (se-ch); se and arrow,
surface epithelium cells; taf and arrowhead, TA flap; white arrowhead – a lack of SE cells above the TA; white arrow -bilaminar
epithelial cord. B) Detail from (A) shows association of CK+ (brown color) fibroblasts (+fb,) with the TA flap surface (arrowhead), and transition from mesenchymal to epithelial morphology (fb/se) and surface epithelium cells (se, arched arrow). C)
Detail from (A) shows CK+ epithelial cord consisting of two layers of epithelial cells and lying between the ovarian cortex
(ovc) and TA. Note diminution of CK immunoexpression in TA fibroblasts (+/-fb). D) Parallel (black arrows) and perpendicular
(arrowheads) view of epithelial cords in the upper ovarian cortex (ovc). Dashed line indicates a segment of CK+ TA with flap
and differentiating SE cover (left white arrow). Dotted line indicates CK- segment lacking SE cower (right white arrowhead).
F29 indicates female age in years; #28 = case No. Bar in (C), for (B and C). Cytokeratin 18 immunostaining (brown color) and
hematoxylin counterstain.

Rows of ovarian epithelial cords in the upper cortex are
accompanied by rows of primary follicles in the lower
cortex (Fig. 3)
Figure 3 shows formation of epithelial channels (arrowhead), longitudinally (dashed arrowhead) and perpendicularly viewed solid epithelial cords (white arrowheads
and right inset), and follicle like structures containing
stromal elements (solid box, see left top inset for detail)

in the upper cortex (uc). These structures were arranged in
a surprisingly straight row (see also Fig. 1D). In some ovaries a similar orientation of primary follicles was observed
in the lower ovarian cortex (Ic).

Page 7 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

fb/s
e

A

D
ffb//s
b se
e

ta
ta
fb//s
fb se
e

fb

ta
ta

fb
fb

os
os
fb
fb

B
+fb
+fb

10 m

+fb
+fb

E

se
se

-fb
-fb

C

ta
ta
se
se

F28#06

50 m

ta
ta

F

Figure 2
Formation of ovarian SE from TA mesenchymal precursors
Formation of ovarian SE from TA mesenchymal precursors. A) Tunica albuginea (ta) fibroblasts (fb) showing strong
CK immunoexpression (brown color). One cell in mesenchymal-epithelial transition is apparent at the surface (fb/se). B) Ovarian stroma (os) shows no CK staining of fibroblasts (fb). C) Fibroblasts associated with the TA surface exhibit mesenchymalepithelial transitory forms (D). E) Appearance of SE cells (se) is associated with a diminution of CK immunoexpression (-fb). F)
Differentiation of the SE is associated with a diminution of cellularity in adjacent TA. Bar in (B), for (A-E). Cytokeratin 18
immunostaining, hematoxylin counterstain.

Epithelial nests assemble with oocytes to form new
primary follicles (Fig. 4 and 5)
As pointed out in the Background, studies of Motta et al.
[21,22] have shown that in some areas of the ovary epithelial cords fragment and appear as small nests of epithelial cells which lie in proximity to primary follicles [22]. In
order to study the possible formation of new follicles
from epithelial nests and oocytes, we used cytokeratin
staining to view the nest (primitive granulosa) cells and
DIC to study unstained oocytes. In the lower ovarian cortex, some epithelial nests were found associated with the
lumen of ovarian venules. Figure 4, panels A and B (copy

of A completed with symbols) shows a venule lumen (vl)
lined by endothelial cells (e) and a CK+ epithelial nest
wall (w). The nest shows an arm (a) associated with the
putative oocyte (o) and possibly migration of the oocyte
outside of the vascular lumen.
Ongoing assembly of the epithelial nest with an oocyte is
shown in Fig. 4, panels C and D. The nest exhibits closing
"gates" (g). A small portion of the oocyte (dashed line),
which still lies outside, is expected to join the complex
(arched arrow). Note that the nuclei of stromal cells are
visible through the oocyte tail, which may be less thick

Page 8 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

ta

10
300 µm

25

600

uc

F28#06

1200

10

900

lc

Figure 3 of epithelial cords and primary follicles in the ovarian cortex
Distribution
Distribution of epithelial cords and primary follicles in the ovarian cortex. Panoramic view composed of nine images
shows ovarian tunica albuginea filled with CK18+ mesenchymal cells, upper cortex (uc) with epithelial channels (black arrowhead), cords (dashed and white arrowheads – see right inset) and follicle-like structures (solid box, see upper left inset for
details). Lower cortex (Ic) shows isolated (dashed box – see lower left inset) and grouped primary follicles (dotted box). Bars
in insets indicate µm. Cytokeratin 18 immunostaining, hematoxylin counterstain.

than the 7 µm thickness of the cryostat section. Cytokeratin+ projections from the nest wall into the oocyte
cytoplasm (arrows) appear to contribute to the formation
of the Balbiani body (asterisk) adjacent to the oocyte
nucleus (dotted line). Perpendicularly-viewed CK+ projections of nest cells reaching the paranuclear space are
indicated by arrowheads.
Various stages of the oocyte-nest assembly are shown in
Fig. 5A [note adjacent dilated venule (v)], and magnifications 5B-D. Panel B (arrow, panel A) shows an oocyte at
the midpoint of the assembly with the nest. The nest gate
flaps (g) are inverted inside. No Balbiani body is apparent,
and CY+ extension from nest cells reaches the oocyte
nucleus (black arrowhead). Another CY+ extension is in
contact with the oocyte nucleolus (x), which shows traces
of circumferential CK staining (white arrowhead). A more

advanced stage of oocyte-nest assembly is shown in panel
C (white arrow, panel A). The oocyte nucleus adjacent to
the nest wall (w), just opposite the closing nest gate (cg),
is embraced by "intraooplasmic processes" (arrows) from
the nest cells. The Balbiani body (asterisk) appears to
reside within the oocyte nucleus. Completion of the
oocyte-nest assembly is shown in panel D (arrowhead,
panel A). The former nest gate ('g') is closed, and the Balbiani body lies within the oocyte cytoplasm, between the
oocyte nucleus and the nest wall. The oocyte nucleus is
free of CK staining. A thick intraooplasmic extension from
the nest cells is also apparent (arrow). Panel D also shows
the top of an adjacent follicle (ft).
Double color immunohistochemistry (Fig. 6 and 7)
In order to better visualize assembly of oocytes with epithelial
nests,
we
used
double
color

Page 9 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

A

C

B

D

w

o
vl

e
15 m

g
g

w

a

*

o

g

e

Association of epithelial nests with cortical vessels, oocyte-nest assembly and formation of CK18+ Balbiani body
Figure 4
Association of epithelial nests with cortical vessels, oocyte-nest assembly and formation of CK18+ Balbiani
body. A and B (copy of A with letters and dashed line) show the CK+ (brown color) nest body wall (w) inside of the cortical
venule, which extends an arm (a) to catch the oocyte (o, dashed line) and move it outside of the blood vessel. C and D show
the nest body and closing "gate" (g). A portion of the oocyte (dashed line) still lies outside of the complex, and is expected to
move inside (arched arrow). The oocyte contains intraooplasmic CK+ (brown color) material (arrowheads). Extensions from
the nest wall (arrows) contribute to the formation of CK+ paranuclear (Balbiani) body (asterisk). The oocyte nucleus is indicated by a dotted line. vl, vascular lumen; e, endothelial cells. CK18 immunostaining, hematoxylin counterstain.

immunohistochemistry for CK and ZP proteins. These
sections were not counterstained with hematoxylin, but
enhanced DIC has been used. Fig. 6A shows an association of the oocyte (blue ZP immunoexpression) with epithelial nest (brown CK immunoexpression) resembling
an occupied bird's nest. This phase of assembly is similar
to that shown in Fig. 5B. An earlier stage is shown in Fig.
6B, where the CK+ nest (brown color) shows octopus-like
shape with multiple CK+ trunks embracing the ZP+ (blue)
oocyte.

An association of the oocyte-nest assembly with cortical
vasculature is presented in Fig. 7, which shows four serial
sections (7 µm each) from the ovary of another woman.
In panel A (the bottom of the oocyte-nest assembly), CK+
(brown) ramifications of an epithelial nest lie inside the
vessel (v) showing focal ZP (blue) staining (arrowhead) in
the vascular wall. The next serial section (panel B) shows
a spot of ZP staining (arrowhead) among the nest ramifications associated with a "harboring" oocyte nucleus (n).
The insets show that putative tadpole-like germ cells (presumptive surface indicated by the dashed and nucleus by
the dotted lines), which have been found among dense

Page 10 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

A
v

B
g

w

w

C

‘g’

*

x
g

o

*
w

o
cg

ft
75 m

15 m

D

Figure 5
Sequential stages of the oocyte-nest assembly and Balbiani body formation
Sequential stages of the oocyte-nest assembly and Balbiani body formation. A) A group of primary follicles in various stages of formation. Note adjacent venule (v). B) Early stage (see arrow in A) shows the oocyte during entrance into the
CK+ (brown color) nest with nest wall (w) and inverted "gates" (g). Cytokeratin+ material appears to enter the nucleus (black
arrowhead) and traces (white arrowhead) are visible around the nucleolus (x). Note a lack of Balbiani body. C) More advanced
stage (white arrow in A) shows the oocyte nucleus (dotted line) adjacent to the nest wall (just opposite to the closing gate),
embraced by intraooplasmic extensions (arrows). The Balbiani body (asterisk) appears to reside within the nucleus (dotted
line), and small proportion of the ooplasm (dashed line) is still outside of the complex. D) Completed formation of primary follicle (arrowhead in A) shows closed gate ('g'), CK+ Balbiani body at the opposite side, adjacent to the nest wall, oocyte nucleus
free of CK staining, and a single CK+ intraooplasmic extension (arrow) from the nest side. A follicle top (ft) from an adjacent
follicle is also visible. CK18 immunostaining, hematoxylin counterstain.

fibroblasts in the upper ovarian's cortex [32], exhibit ZP
expression (blue) in the intermediate section of the cell
(arrowhead), between the heading nucleus and the tail.
The next serial section (panel C) shows CK+ sword-like
projections (yellow arrowheads) from the nest wall (w),
one of which penetrates the oocyte's intermediate section
(is) toward the oocyte tail (t). Note a CK+ "eye" (orange
arrowhead) in the oocyte's intermediate section (see also
insets in panel D). There are also anchor-like projections
from the oocyte (blue arrowhead) toward the vascular
wall, possibly contributing to the ZP staining in the adjacent stroma (arrow). The top of the complex (panel D)
shows a flap of the vascular pocket (vp) with anchor-like
CK+ and ZP+ projections (arrowheads). Segments of the
intermediate section of the oocyte and the tail are still visible. Insets show the putative tadpole-like germ cell
(dashed line) associated with the vasculature (v) in the
upper ovarian cortex. Note larger size compared to insets
in panel B, and appearance of CK+ "eye" (arrowhead) of
unknown significance in the center of the intermediate
section.

Triple color staining (Fig. 8)
To study the association of oocyte-nest assemblies with
cortical vessels, we used double color staining as above,
complemented with third color for the CD31 marker of
vascular endothelial cells. All panels in Fig. 8 are from the
same section subjected to the triple color immunohistochemistry. Strong CD31 immunoexpression (purple
color) of the luminal aspects of endothelial cells was
observed in ovarian medullary vessels (arrowhead, panel
A), but not cortical vessels, which showed less dense granular staining of endothelial cells (arrowhead, panel B).
Panel C shows the same vessel as in (B), and a derived
(arched arrow, as evidenced from serial sections) vascular
"pocket" (vp, see Fig. 7D) with endothelial cells (arrowheads) embracing CK+ (brown) nest walls (w) and a
ZP+(blue) segment of the oocyte (o). Panel E, copy of (D)
with symbols, shows the vascular lumen (vl) encircled by
endothelial cells (red arrowhead) and an adjacent follicle
top (ft, as evidenced by serial section). Also adjacent is a
nest wall (w) extending the CK+ arms (yellow arrowheads) to "catch" the oocyte from the vascular lumen. The
blue arrow indicates ZP+ oocyte extensions anchored to
the vascular wall.

Page 11 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

A

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

B

CK/ZP

15 m

Figure color immunohistochemistry of the oocyte-nest assembly
Double 6
Double color immunohistochemistry of the oocyte-nest assembly. A) Occupied "bird's" nest type indicates a half way
oocyte-nest assembly. B) An earlier stage of assembly shows the oocyte embraced by nest trunks, resembling an octopus.
Immunostaining with CK monoclonal antibody, clone MNF116 (recognizing CK5, 6, 8, 17) – first sequence visualized with
diaminobenzidine (brown color), and with HSPZ (zona pellucida) polyclonal antibody – second sequence visualized with SG
(blue color). No hematoxylin counterstain.

PS1 and MAPK immunoexpression during differentiation
and migration of germ-like cells (Fig. 9 and 10)
Most of the ovarian SE cells showed CK immunoexpression, but immunoexpression of ZP antigens (PS1, HSPZ
and HSRZ) was restricted to certain SE segments. While
HSPZ and HSRZ were also detected in the zona pellucida
of oocytes during and after assembly within epithelial
nests (including primary, secondary, preantral and antral
follicles), the PS1 expression was not detected in zona
pellucida of oocytes in human ovarian follicles. The PS1 is
a meiotically expressed porcine oocyte carbohydrate
antigen [40]. It is also found in some human ovarian cancers – unpublished data and [39].

Immunoexpression of PS1 in human SE cells was cytoplasmic. However, cells descending from the SE into TA

showed nuclear PS1 (brown) staining (arrows, Fig. 9A).
The dividing SE cell, indicated by a red arrow in panel A,
shows an asymmetric distribution of meiotically
expressed nuclear PS1, suggesting asymmetric division
and meiotic activity of the PS1 + daughter cell. Double
color immunostaining for PS1 (brown) and CK (blue)
also revealed an asymmetric distribution of PS1 in
putative germ cells descending from the SE (panels B and
C) – note CK+ (blue arrowheads) and PS1+ (brown
arrowheads) daughter cells. Larger germ-like cells with
nuclear PS1 staining were detected in TA (panel D). Such
cells divided (arrow, panel E) and entered the adjacent
ovarian cortex (white arrow). In the cortex, the putative
germ cells showed a translocation of nuclear PS1 immunoexpression to cytoplasmic staining, suggesting termination of the meiotic prophase, and an association with

Page 12 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

0 m

A

+14 m

C
t
is

v
w

v

CK/ZP

F35#76

+7 m

B

+21 m

D
t

vp

is

20 m
20 m

n
v
w
v

Figure 7
Serial sections through the intravascular oocyte-nest assembly
Serial sections through the intravascular oocyte-nest assembly. Serial sections (7 µm thick) through the oocyte-nest
assembly show bottom of the complex (A); oocyte nucleus (n) plane (B); intermediate section (is) and the tail (t) plane (C);
and top of the complex (D). v, vascular wall; vp, vascular pocket; blue arrowheads, ZP+ extensions from the oocyte intermediate section – anchors to the vascular wall; yellow arrowheads, nest extensions penetrating the ooplasm; blue arrows, ZP+
staining (oocyte signaling). Insets in panel B show putative germ cell with ZP+ intermediate section (arrowhead) migrating in
the upper ovarian cortex. Insets in panel D show an association of putative germ cell with a cortical vessel (v) wall – note ZP+
intermediate section containing a CK+ "eye" (arrowhead). Details in text. Immunostaining with CK18 (brown color) and HSPZ
(blue color). No hematoxylin counterstain.

cortical vasculature showing minute amounts of PS1
immunoexpression in adjacent endothelial cells (panel
F). In addition, PS1 immunoexpression (brown color)
was detected in germ-like cells descending from CK+
(blue) epithelial crypts into the ovarian cortex (arrow,
panel G). No accumulated germline type cells resembling
persistence of fetal oogenesis (germline cysts) have been
detected.

Staining for MAPK revealed dividing germ-like cells in TA
with prominent nuclear MAPK immunoexpression
(brown color, Fig. 10A), similar to those showing nuclear
staining for PS1 (see Fig. 9E). However, nuclear MAPK
immunoexpression persisted in putative germ cells in the
upper ovarian cortex (panel B). Intravascular germ-like
cells (panel C) showed an increase in size (20 µm) accompanied by an appearance of MAPK cytoplasmic clusters
(c) in addition to persisting nuclear MAPK immunoexpression (dotted line). During association of oocytes

Page 13 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

A

D

vl
vl

B

15 m

F28#06

C

E
ft
w
vl

vp
o

o
w

CK/ZP/EN

w

Triple color immunohistochemistry for vascular route of the oocyte-nest assembly
Figure 8
Triple color immunohistochemistry for vascular route of the oocyte-nest assembly. Immunostaining CK/ZP/EN
with CK18 (brown color), HSPZ (blue color), and endothelial CD31 – third sequence visualized with VIP(purple color). A)
Medullary vessels show strong CD31 immunostaining (arrowhead), contrasting weak immunoexpression in cortical vessels (B).
C) in the area adjacent to (B) (arched arrow) the vascular "pocket" (vp) shows adjacent endothelial cells, CK+ nest walls (w),
and a ZP+ intermediate segment of the oocyte (o). Panels D and E show vascular wall (red arrowhead) with a lumen (vl) containing ZP+ oocyte "caught" by CK+ extensions (yellow arrowheads) from the nest wall (w). ft, follicle top of an adjacent primary follicle. No hematoxylin counterstain.

(panel D) with CK+ nests (see serial section in panel E) in
the lower ovarian cortex, abundant MAPK immunoexpression was apparent in the oocyte nucleus and
cytoplasm. Fresh follicles with an established ring of granulosa cells in the adjacent ovarian cortex, showed strong
nuclear and cytoplasmic staining but poor MAPK immunoexpression in the paranuclear (Balbiani) body (dashed
line, panel F). Panel G shows a low power magnification
of follicles presented in panels D-F. The "s" arrow indicates orientation toward the ovarian surface.

Altogether, these observations indicate that germ cells
exhibiting nuclear meiotically expressed PS1 oocyte carbohydrate antigen differentiate by asymmetric division
from SE cells, divide symmetrically, and complete the first
meiotic prophase. These cells exhibit abundant nuclear
MAPK immunoexpression, indicating activation of signaling pathways resulting in lineage commitments into certain cell types [65] (see below). No accumulated germline
type cells (germline cysts), which are characteristic for
adult ovaries in invertebrates [46], lower vertebrates [66],

Page 14 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

A

E
+

15 m
15 m

se
uc
+
ta
ta

PS1

PS1

F

B

se
v
ta
PS1/CK

D

ta
PS1/CK

G

F28#06

C

PS1

ta
PS1

PS1/CK

Figure 9
cells
Association of PS1 meiotically expressed oocyte carbohydrateprotein with asymmetric division and migration of putative germ
Association of PS1 meiotically expressed oocyte carbohydrate protein with asymmetric division and migration
of putative germ cells. A) Segments of SE show cytoplasmic PS1 (brown color) expression (se). Dividing SE cells give rise to
cells exhibiting nuclear PS1 immunostaining (+ nuclei, asymmetric division) and descending from the SE (arrows) into tunica
albuginea (ta). This is particularly evident in the cell marked with a red arrow. B) Except asymmetrically divided SE cell – note
CK+ (blue color and arrowhead) and PS1+ (brown color and arrowhead) daughter cells, no PS1 or CK immunoexpression is
apparent in this SE segment or in the panel (C). D) In TA, the putative germ cells increase in size, but nuclear PS1 immunostaining persists. They show a symmetric division (arrow, E) and exhibit development of cytoplasmic PS1 immunoexpression
when entering the upper (uc) ovarian cortex (white arrow). In the cortex, the cells show diminution of nuclear and increase of
cytoplasmic PS1 staining (white arrow, panel F), particularly when attached to the cortical vessels (v). In such case, the PS1
immunoexpression appears to be extended toward endothelial cells (black arrow). In some instances, the asymmetric division
giving rise to the putative PS1+ (brown color) germ cells could be observed at the periphery of CK+ (blue color) cortical epithelial crypts (arrow, panel G). Single (PS1) or double color immunohistochemistry (PS1/CK) as indicated, no hematoxylin
counterstain.

Page 15 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

A

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

g

D

G
g
150 m

ta

lc

MAPK

E

15 m
F38#05

B

s

uc

C

CK
F

g

c
c

c
c

g

c
c

g
c
c
vw
vw
c
c
lc

F28#06

g

g

Figure 10
Mitogen-activated protein kinase immunoexpression (brown color) in dividing and differentiating germ cells
Mitogen-activated protein kinase immunoexpression (brown color) in dividing and differentiating germ cells.
Symmetrically dividing putative germ cells dashed line, panel A) in the TA (ta) showed strong nuclear MAPK immunostaining
dotted lines. The cells showed an increase in size in the upper cortex (uc, panel B). Further increase in size of putative germ
cells was detected during vascular transport, and accompanied by an appearance of focal cytoplasmic MAPK immunoexpression (c, panel C). D) During assembly with CK+epithelial nest (see brown color, serial section in panel E), the oocytes exhibited strong MAPK immunostaining of both the nuclear (dotted line) and cytoplasmic regions. In freshly formed primary follicles
(F, see panel G for low power magnification of D and F), the MAPK heavily stained cytoplasmic clusters (c) were apparent,
except an isolated paranuclear (Balbiani) body (dashed line). Strong nuclear staining (dotted line) persisted. MAPK (A-D, F and
G) and CK single color immunohistochemistry (G), with hematoxylin counterstain. "s" arrow in (G) points to the distant ovarian surface.

Page 16 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

A

F30#116

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

Ctr

C

CK/ZP/DR

CK/ZP

B

CK/ZP/EN

D

F28#06

~
F28#06

CK/ZP/DR

100 µm

Figure macrophages during follicular atresia
Influx of11
Influx of macrophages during follicular atresia. Double color CK (brown color)/ZP (blue) immunohistochemistry
revealed that cohorts of primary and secondary follicles in certain areas of the ovarian cortex showed degenerative changes,
characterized in particular by fragmentation of the oocyte structure and dispersion of ZP+ staining among poorly defined layer
of granulosa cells and adjacent stroma (arrowheads, panel A; see inset for control immunostaining). Inset in (B) shows normal
primary follicles in another case. Triple color staining (CK/ZP/DR, panel C) revealed numerous large DR+ (purple color) macrophages (red arrowheads) invading the area from adjacent vessels (yellow arrowhead). In contrast, a healthy growing and preantral follicle (panel D) shows an association of sporadic small DR+ macrophages with the developing theca (red arrowhead).
No hematoxylin counterstain.

and prosimian primates [14-17], and perhaps persist from
early periods of life, have been observed in adult human
ovaries.
Follicular atresia (Fig. 11)
Degeneration may affect groups of primary (and secondary) follicles, as shown in Fig. 11A,11B,11C. Follicles
undergoing atresia show release of ZP staining (blue
color) into the neighboring stroma (blue arrowheads,

panels A-C). This is associated with an altered oocyte morphology and disorganization of the follicular CK+
(brown) granulosa layer- see center, panel A (inset shows
control staining). In addition, there is a considerable
influx of large macrophages into the area from the vessels
accompanying follicles (purple color, red and yellow
arrowheads, panel C). Yet, some investigators have
claimed that characteristic morphological features of
primary follicle atresia is often difficult to determine

Page 17 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

(reviewed in [4]), while others are more confident [54]. In
this immunohistochemical study, the assembly of oocytes
with epithelial nests was also associated with some release
of ZP antigens. However, formation of new follicles was
characterized by well defined oocyte nucleus, intraooplasmic CK+ extensions from the nest cell wall, and formation
of the Balbiani body, i.e., structures and processes not
apparent during follicular regression. Resting normal primary follicles (inset, Fig. 11B) and growing secondary/
preantral follicles (panel D) show regular morphology, no
leakage of ZP antigens, and only occasional small tissue
macrophages associated with the developing theca
(arrowhead).
Epithelial crypts – an alternative for germ cell origin (Fig.
12)
Enhanced follicular atresia was accompanied by the
appearance of epithelial nests (fragmented epithelial
cords) in adjacent segments of the ovarian cortex. Three
serial sections show that these nests (left, Fig.
12A,12B,12C) are small CK+ (brown color) spheroidal
structures of 20–30 µm in diameter. Also shown is CK+
epithelial crypt (right), likely originating from a deep SE
invagination but not communicating with the ovarian
surface, as evidenced from serial sections. Arched arrows
in panel A indicate a longitudinal arrangement of two
stromal bundles, one containing epithelial nests and the
other a crypt. The bottoms of these stromal bundles are
adjacent (see border lines, panel B) and their migration
appears to be influenced by HLA-DR+ (activated [67])
tissue macrophages (purple color, black and white arrows,
panel C). An extension from the crypt toward the nest area
(yellow arrow) is associated with an accumulation of tissue macrophages (panel C). The red arrow in (B) indicates
a weakly CD31+ (purple) adjacent cortical blood vessel.

Panel D shows a more advanced stage of germ cell origin
from an epithelial crypt in the lower ovarian cortex of
another woman. Note ZP+ staining in the cortex extending from the crypt (blue color, arched arrows). Details are
shown in panels E-H, where CK- large round cells (yellow
arrowheads) emerge among CK+ (brown) epithelial cells
and divide (red arrowheads, panel H). Blue arrowheads
(panels E and F) indicate that unstained large round cells
are accompanied by ZP+ (blue color) segments, possibly
representing an early formation of the germ cell intermediate sections. The dashed line (panel H) indicates the
tadpole-shaped cell with the leading nucleus (n), ZP+
intermediate section (is), and a tail (t). The ovarian section from another female (panel I, immunostained as a
sample in panel D) shows a lower ovarian cortex with primary follicles in the proximity of an epithelial crypt. Note
that the distance between the crypt and follicles (100–150
µm) is similar to that between the crypt and nests in panels A-C. Dashed boxes indicate adjacent CK+ (brown) epi-

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

thelial nests in the upper ovarian cortex, "s" arrow points
toward the ovarian surface.
These observations indicate that adult ovaries exhibiting
enhanced atresia of primary (and secondary) follicles initiate formation of new epithelial nests with granulosa cell
features [22], one of the prerequisites for the formation of
new primary follicles (see Fig. 16 beneath). Cortical
crypts, consisting of epithelial cells retaining the relatively
embryonic structure of SE cells [22,25], appear to be an
alternate source for germ cells. Germ cells entering vasculature may reach epithelial nests at distant destinations,
although vascular proximity is not a requirement for follicular development.
An "ovary-within-the ovary" pattern of Thy-1
differentiation protein distribution (Fig. 13)
Why do primary follicles form in the lower ovarian cortex,
not just near the origin of their components, primitive
granulosa and germ cells? We have reported previously
that groups of follicles lie in isolated areas of the cortex,
exhibiting an oval arrangement of stromal elements [32].
In the present study, staining for Thy-1 differentiation
protein (Thy-1 dp) revealed that groups of primary follicles reside in the center of rounded areas, extending
~400–1200 µm from the ovarian surface, exhibiting virtually no stromal Thy-1 dp immunoexpression, and showing an ovary-within-the ovary pattern (ov-in-ov, Fig. 13).
In addition, growth of some follicles in a given cohort is
associated with Thy-1 dp+ vasculature (lower vs upper
inset). Hence, a lack of Thy-1 dp may be required to maintain primary follicles in the resting state, and the presence
of Thy-1 dp may stimulate follicular growth. Note strong
Thy-1 immunostaining of the TA fibroblasts (ta, Fig 13).
Oocyte remnants in medullary vessels (Fig. 14)
Another important question is if the number of newly
formed follicles is determined by the number of available
epithelial nests or the number of generated germ cells. In
the first instance, the isolated nests will either persist or
degenerate, in the second, the degenerating oocytes not
utilized for formation of new primary follicles might be
detected.

We utilized double color immunohistochemistry to
search for ZP+ (blue color) oocytes not assembled with
CK+ (brown) structures. Figure 14A shows a mass of
amorphous ZP+ material adjacent to the corpus albicans
(CAlb), ZP+ processes and the spread of ZP staining
extending into the adjacent stroma (arrow). There are no
CK+ structures. A serial section stained as above plus HLADR (purple color), a marker of human endothelial cells
and tissue macrophages, shows regressing vasculature in
the corpus albicans (open arrowhead, panel B). The next
serial section (panel C), stained by a control procedure

Page 18 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

CK/ZP

A

CK/ZP/EN

100 µm

CK/ZP/DR

B

+7 µm

C

+14 µm

E

F35#76

F

200 µm

D

F30#116

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

CK/ZP

G

20 µm

H

I

tt
is

F29#06
S

200 µm

n
n

Figure 12
Epithelial crypts – a source of germ cells for the alternative pathway of primary follicle formation
Epithelial crypts – a source of germ cells for the alternative pathway of primary follicle formation. In ovaries
showing atresia of follicular cohorts, association of epithelial nests with epithelial crypts has been observed. Panels (A-C) show
CK+ (brown color) small epithelial nests, as evidenced from serial sections (compare the content of solid and dashed squares
and oval areas on the left side). In panel (B), weakly CD31+ (purple) adjacent vessel is indicated by a red arrow, solid white
arrows in A-C indicate an extension from the crypt toward the nests, and open arrows in (C) – see also lines in (B), indicate
interface between stromal sprouts carrying epithelial nests and the crypt. Panel (C) also shows an accumulation of DR+(purple) macrophages around the stromal sprouts, and at their interface in particular. D) Remnant of an epithelial crypt (red
arrow) from another case shows migration of ZP+ (HSPZ, blue) particles and stromal staining from one side (arched arrow).
E-H) Details from panel D show an appearance of single (yellow arrowheads) and dividing germ-like cells (red arrowheads)
among regressing CK+ cells (brown color). Note ZP+ segments (blue color and arrowheads) associated with unstained round
cells. Dashed line in (H) indicates tadpole-like germ cell with leading nucleus (dotted line), ZP+ (blue color) intermediate section (is), and unstained tail (t). Panel (I) shows an association of primary follicles with the cortical epithelial crypt. Dashed boxes
indicate unassembled epithelial nests. Details in text. No hematoxylin counterstain.

(PBS instead of primary antibodies followed by three secondary antibodies and three color substrates plus hematoxylin counterstain of the nuclei), shows that a large
vessel is congested with amorphous material (asterisk).

Note a lack of staining in adjacent stroma (arrow) except
two distant cells (arrowheads) showing brown color, i.e.,
eosinophils with endogenous peroxidase [68].

Page 19 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

se

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

ta
300 µm

40 µm

lc

Thy-1 dp

1200

900

ov-in-ov

ov-in-ov

600

uc

Figure 13
Distribution of Thy-1 differentiation protein in the ovarian cortex – an "ovary within the ovary" pattern
Distribution of Thy-1 differentiation protein in the ovarian cortex – an "ovary within the ovary" pattern. Thy-1
dp was strongly expressed by TA fibroblasts (ta), and moderately in the upper (uc) and lower ovarian cortex (Ic) except areas
showing an "ovary within the ovary" pattern (ov-in-ov) with virtually no Thy-1 dp immunoexpression except vascular pericytes
and smooth muscle cells. These areas characteristically contained primary follicles (arrowhead and upper inset) some of which
showed an increase in size accompanied by Thy-1 dp+ pericytes (arrow and lower inset). Hematoxylin counterstain, details in
text.

Our observations in ovarian cortical vessels indicate that
the vascular pathway of oocytes to their destination
(epithelial nests) may be interrupted by vascular degeneration. Figure 14D also shows an accumulation of ZP+
material associated with one of the multiple vessels in the
ovarian medulla. Another section from the same ovary
(panel E) and another case (panel F) show multiple

oocytes accumulated in one of the medullary vessels. Note
a lack of CK+ structures, strong ZP cytoplasmic immunoexpression, anchors to the vascular wall and spread of
ZP immunostaining to the adjacent stroma (arrow), and a
lack of staining in the oocyte nuclei (arrowheads).

Page 20 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

A
A

F28#06

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

*
*

100 m

C
C

B
B

*

*
*
CAlb

CAlb
CK/ZP
D
D

E
E

CAlb

CK/ZP/DR
vl F
F

Ctr & Hx
F35#76

*
*

CK/ZP/DR

200 m

CK/ZP

CK/ZP

50 m

Figure 14
Accumulation of oocytes and their remnants in some medullary vessels
Accumulation of oocytes and their remnants in some medullary vessels. Some medullary vessels showed an embolus-like accumulation of ZP+ (HSPZ, blue color) material, either at the structures showing vascular regression, e.g., corpus albicans (CAlb, panels A-C), or without apparent vascular regression (panel D). In some instances, a higher magnification revealed
the presence of multiple unstained oocyte nuclei (arrowheads, panels E and F). No hematoxylin counterstain except control
staining in panel (C). vl, adjacent vascular lumen. Further details in text.

An accumulation of oocytes in some ovarian medullary
vessels was observed in four of twelve cases studied
(33%). This suggests that the differentiation of oocytes
during the reproductive period is a relatively frequent
event. These ovarian samples showed preparation or
ongoing formation of new primary follicles. When
detected, accumulation of oocytes in some medullary vessels was present in the samples from both ovaries. Yet,
there were eight cases showing no such activity. These
ovaries rarely showed primary follicles in the ovarian cortex. This agrees with observations of Block [53], who
observed a similarity between the numbers in the right
and left ovaries but wide individual variation between
cases during the optimal reproductive period. Our observations suggest that the formation of new primary follicles
is not a permanent but transient process, which may occur
during certain period of the ovarian cycle. This idea was
proposed by Edgar Allen [69] and Evans and Swezy [70].
Although we did not investigate a large number of
patients, our observations indicate that new primary follicles are likely to be formed during the late luteal phase, as
evidenced from the patient's history, ovarian (CL) immunohistochemistry, and endometrium morphology.

Follicle numbers in human ovaries (Fig. 15)
We performed statistical analysis (one way analysis of variance and post-hoc test) of the Block's (including ovaries
from neonatal, premenarcheal, and young-adult females)
[53,63,64] and Gougeon's (mostly premenopausal
females) data [54] on the variation of the number of
human ovarian primary follicles at different ages, between
the birth and 50 years of age. Figure 15A shows that, when
compared to neonatal ovaries, the first significant decline
occurs in the age group of 18–24 years. No significant
change is apparent during the 20 year optimal reproductive period, between 18 and 38 ± 4.1 SD years. However,
age groups 40–44 and 45–50 show significantly lower
numbers compared to other age groups. Details on
descriptive statistics are provided in Fig. 16B. Note that
the mean and maximum values (highlighted) show a plateau between 0–16, 18–38 and 40–50 years of age.

Discussion
We report that mesenchymal cells in human ovarian TA
are capable of expressing CK and differentiate into SE cells
by a mesenchymal-epithelial transition in vivo. Through
this transition, the bipotent mesenchymal cells in TA give

Page 21 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

Mean x 10

3

A

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

a
a

900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

a,b

a,b
a,b

a,b

b,c
b,c
c
c

c
c
d

d

d
Neonate

Age (years) Neonate

6^9

6-9

12^16

12-16

18^24

18-24

25^31

25-31

32^38

32-39

d

40^44

40-44

46^50

45-50

B
x 1000

Neonate

6-9 y

12-16 y

18-24 y

25-31 y

32-38 y

40-44 y

46-50 y

Mean

648.7

430.1

376.2

158.9

62.1

63.0

9.6

6.1

SD

245.4

205.5

195.5

83.7

55.1

49.3

9.9

8.0

Minimum

352.0

85.0

85.0

39.0

8.1

15.0

0.4

0.6

1126.0

755.0

591.0

290.0

228.0

208.0

28.3

39.3

6487.0

4301.0

1881.0

1271.0

807.3

945.7

153.2

140.3

10.0

10.0

5.0

8.0

13.0

15.0

16.0

23.0

175.5

147.0

242.7

70.0

33.3

27.3

5.3

3.5

Maximum
Sum
Count
Conf (95%)

Figure 15
Age-related changes in primary follicle numbers in both human ovaries (A) and descriptive statistics (B)
Age-related changes in primary follicle numbers in both human ovaries (A) and descriptive statistics (B). A)
Statistical analysis of transformed cumulative data [Y = Log(Y)] reported by Block [53,63,64] and Gougeon [54] shows P <
0.0001 for one-way ANOVA. Tukey-Kramer Multiple Comparison post-test revealed that compared to neonatal ovaries a significant difference in follicle number first appears in the age group of 18 to 24 years. However, no significant difference was
observed during the 20 years of optimal reproductive period, between females 18–38 years of age. Yet, the ovaries obtained
from 40–50 year old females showed a significantly lower number of primary follicles vs. all other age groups. B) Descriptive
statistics indicates plateau of the maximum follicle numbers (highlighted) during the 6–16, 18–38, and 40–50 age periods, associated with a lack of statistical significance between mean values ± SD – see panel (A).

rise to: (1) nests of primitive granulosa cells in the ovarian
cortex, and (2) primitive germ cells which differentiate
into oocytes and assemble with granulosa cell nests to
form new primary follicles. Hence, TA mesenchymal cells

represent a progenitor cell with a commitment to either of
two distinct terminally differentiated cell types.

Page 22 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

SE covers ov cortex

SE covers TA

ta

upper: ~300

m

2

ta

cords/channels

invaginations

4

1

5

6

3

4’

lower: ~900

crypts –
SE like

7

nests –
GC like

8

m

9
10
11

ov-in-ov

12

Working model of possible pathways for formation of primary follicles in adult human ovaries
Figure 16
Working model of possible pathways for formation of primary follicles in adult human ovaries (updated from Ref.
[32]). 1) Ovarian tunica albuginea (ta) stem cells (green color) differentiate into the CK+ fibroblasts (red color) and by mesenchymal-epithelial transition give rise to the SE cells directly covering the ovarian cortex (arched arrow). 2) Closing of TA flaps
(see Fig. 1) results in the formation of epithelial cords/channels in the upper ovarian cortex (see Fig. 3). Fragmented epithelial
cords give rise to the epithelial nests, which resemble primitive granulosa cells [22] and descend into the lower ovarian cortex.
4) Depending on certain in situ (stromal) influences, the TA progenitors differentiate into the SE cells covering TA, which may,
by asymmetric division, give rise to the ZP+ germ cells. 5) These putative germ cells may symmetrically divide, descend into the
ovarian cortex, and associate with adjacent cortical vessels (6). Intravascular transport (7) is associated with a substantial
increase of germ cell size and with development of ZP+ anchors (green lines), which may serve to slow down the transport
speed and signal the epithelial nests to associate with a particular vascular segment. 8) The intravascular germ cells differentiating into the oocytes are picked up by epithelial nests associated with the proper cortical vessels. Such oocyte-nest complexes
show an "octopus-like" (9) formations during the early stage of assembly, and a formation of the Balbiani body during the intermediate stage (yellow body, 10). The Balbiani body persists in resting primary follicles (11), but diminishes upon the growth
promoting signals, including Thy-1 dp signaling derived from the follicle-accompanying vessels (12, dashed line). An alternative
pathway for the germ cell origin from TA precursors (4') consists of a constitution of cortical crypts formed by SE-like embryonal type cells [22,25], possibly originating from, but not necessarily connected with, the deep SE invaginations, as evidenced
from serial sections. The "alternative" pathway of germ cell origin may supply the oocytes directly to the neighboring nests
(dashed arched arrows) and, via vascular transport (dotted arched arrow), saturate distant nests to form the primary follicles.

Page 23 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

Mesenchymal-epithelial and epithelial-mesenchymal
transitions
Multipotential progenitor cells exhibiting a mesenchymal
phenotype and capable of differentiation into distinct cell
types have been derived from various other adult tissues
[71-75]. Mesenchymal-epithelial and epithelial-mesenchymal transitions may reflect a plasticity of progenitor
cells in a particular microenvironment. They may occur
sequentially (mesenchymal-epithelial followed by epithelial-mesenchymal transitions) under the influence of the
extracellular matrix, cytokines (transforming growth factor β, fibroblast growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor,
epidermal growth factor, BMP2 and BMP4), adhesion
molecules (integrins, E-cadherins), membrane receptors,
intercellular junctions, signaling pathways (MAPK) or
transcription factors β-catenin) commonly produced in
the embryo and less frequently in adult organisms. Such
transitions are examples of manifestations of cell
plasticity and subsequent dramatic changes resulting in
lineage commitments into certain cell types (reviewed in
[65]).

Many cytokines and morphoregulatory molecules are produced by specific stromal elements – fibroblasts/pericytes,
macrophages and T lymphocytes, which are involved in
mesenchymal-epithelial transitions [76-82] and stimulate
differentiation of epithelial cells (reviewed in [83]). We
have earlier demonstrated that such cells accompany
appearance and migration of germ-like cells in adult
human ovaries, and suggested that age-induced
diminution of immune system function (immune senescence) may cause a diminution of follicular renewal [32].
Hypothesis
Having in mind these exciting findings, we speculate that
the development of TA in perinatal human ovaries
[19,20] is a result of an epithelial-mesenchymal transition
of coelomic ovarian SE cells. During adulthood, the
mesenchymal cells in TA undergo a mesenchymal-epithelial transition back into ovarian SE cells with an embryonic character [25]. These cells still have the ability to
become granulosa or germ cells, probably depending on
the influences of neighboring stromal cells (microenvironment). However, a differentiation of germ cells from
SE cells, which originate from TA mesenchymal precursors, appears to represent a novel three step transition, i.e.,
mesenchymal > epithelial > germ cell transition. When
the presumptive perinatal transition is included, the four
step transition can be determined: Epithelial (fetal SE) >
mesenchymal (perinatal development of TA) > epithelial
(adult SE and granulosa cells) > germ cells.

A schematic view of possible pathways for formation of
primary follicles from TA mesenchymal precursors in
adult human ovaries is shown in Fig. 16. The process is

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

initiated by the differentiation of CK- to CK+ mesenchymal cells in TA. These CK+ mesenchymal cells are associated with TA flaps and give rise to SE cells directly covering
the ovarian stroma (yellow arched arrow, step 1). The
closing of TA flaps results in the formation of bilaminar
epithelial channels and solid cords in the upper ovarian
cortex (2). These cords are fragmented into epithelial
nests (granulosa cell-like cells [22]), which descend by
stromal rearrangement into an area in the lower cortex
exhibiting lack of Thy-1 dp expression and having an
"ovary within the ovary" (ov-in-ov) pattern (3).
Mesenchymal cells expressing CK also differentiate into
SE cells covering the TA. These cells can be stimulated to
give rise to the ZP+ primitive germ cells (asymmetric division), which descend into the TA (4). Then they divide
symmetrically (5) and enter the upper ovarian cortex and
adjacent cortical vessels (6). During vascular transport
(7), the germ cells extend ZP+ projections (green lines) to
the vascular wall, which may delay their transport and
enable maturation into the oocytes. Intravascular oocytes
are picked up by epithelial nests (8), and this results in the
formation of new primary follicles (9). An "alternative"
pathway for germ cell origin (4'), which may exist along
with the "classical" pathway, consists of germ cell differentiation from epithelial crypts in the ovarian cortex (SElike cells [22]), which may originate from deep SE invaginations. This "alternative" pathway can supply germ cells
to the neighboring nests directly (dashed arched arrows),
or through the vascular transport (dotted arched arrow) to
nests at distant destinations.
During follicle formation, nest cells contribute to the
development of the Balbiani body (10), which contains
all the mitochondria of the oocytes and persists in resting
human primary follicles (11) [45]. Interestingly, the Balbiani body strongly expressed CK18, but was virtually
undetectable with the antibody against other cytokeratins
expressed by granulosa cells (CK 5, 6, 8, 17). This observation suggests that CK18 might be specific for granulosa
cell mitochondria supplied to oocytes in human ovaries.
Upon certain signals, such as Thy-1 dp secreted by vascular pericytes (dashed curve), the mitochondria are
released from the Balbiani body, and the oocyte and follicle enter a stage of progressive growth (12).
Mammalian female gametogenesis and evolution
From a phylogenetic viewpoint, it seems contradictory
that mammalian females, including humans, would
evolve a uniquely retrogressive reproductive mechanism,
whereby they are required to preserve their gametes from
the fetal period for up to several decades. Since mammalian female germ cells differentiate from somatic lineage,
why would human female gametes and primary follicles
differentiate during the fetal period, if they are not needed

Page 24 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

until puberty several years later? Development of the
immune tolerance toward self during fetal period of life
[67] might explain this early differentiation of germ cells
and primary ovarian follicles. We have earlier suggested
that germ cells and oocytes differentiate in fetal ovaries in
order to be recognized as self structures [55]. If this does
not occur, the oocytes and primary follicles may face the
fate of the corpus luteum, which is absent in fetal ovaries
and whose functional life in the adult ovary, except during
the immunologically unique situation of pregnancy, lasts
for only several days.
Germ cells and oocytes in the ovarian surface epithelium
Do female germ cells in fetal ovaries migrate from the
ovarian stroma to the SE and leave the ovary? This process
has been suggested to contribute to a reduction of the
germ cell and oocyte pool in fetal and neonatal ovaries
[19,84,85]. There are two critical issues to be discussed
regarding these views.

Firstly, the size of germ cells in the fetal SE (10 µm) is substantially smaller than that of germ cells and oogonia in
the adjacent cortex (15–20 µm). Secondly, like in tadpole
or sperm, the germ cell migration is always guided by a
bigger proportion of the cell (nuclear region) with the tail
segment being the last. Yet, some images presented in Ref.
[19,84] and our recent observations [56] indicate that
germ cells with amoeboid evaginations in the SE of fetal
ovaries show an orientation of the nucleus toward the
ovarian stroma. In addition, we show that in adult ovaries, the ZP+ germ cells originate from the SE and enter the
ovarian stroma. Yet, we have reported previously that
large cells resembling oocytes may be detected in the SE
and, like in term human fetuses [85], apparently are
extruded in women over 40 years of age [32].
It appears that 10 µm ZP+ germ cells originate via asymmetric division of SE cells (Fig. 9A,9B,9C). If needed –
such as in the second trimester of intrauterine life and the
optimal reproductive period, germ cells are stimulated to
descend into the ovarian stroma and contribute to the formation of new primary follicles (Fig. 10). Otherwise,
germ cells may be prevented from entering the ovarian
stroma, thereby left to differentiate within SE into oocytes,
and stimulated to leave the ovary. One may speculate that
since the Balbiani body (source of mitochondria) can not
be formed without the contribution of granulosa cells,
such oocytes have no chance to mature functionally, complete the first meiotic division, and be fertilized.
Presumptive germline stem cells were recently reported to
reside in the SE of mouse ovaries (63 ± 8 cells per juvenile
ovary, n = 4 mice) [13]. The ovoid cells demonstrated are
unusually large (~30–40 µm in diameter). In reality, however, such large presumptive germline stem cells, and their

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

protrusion from the ovarian surface toward bursal cavity,
as shown by Johnson et al. in Fig. 2a[13], closely resemble
those seen with an extrusion of large oocytes from the
ovary, which has been described in neonatal human ovaries [85], or in ovaries of premenopausal women [32] (see
also above).
Differentiation of germ cells and MAPK expression
The resting primary follicles have been shown to exhibit
strong cytoplasmic but no nuclear immunoexpression of
MAPK [31], an enzyme which stimulates the differentiation of somatic and germ cells [86,87]. We show that both
the cytoplasmic and nuclear MAPK staining is apparent
during oocyte assembly with epithelial nest cells, as well
as in actually formed (adjacent) primary follicles. Interestingly, the paranuclear Balbiani body in primary follicles
showed a low MAPK immunoexpression, suggesting a
lack of its activation after follicle formation. Translocation
of cytoplasmic to nuclear MAPK expression appeared with
an increase of follicle size (initiation of follicular growth),
but MAPK staining was virtually absent in oocytes of primary follicles undergoing atresia [31].

These data indicate that differentiation of germ cells,
oocyte assembly with nests of primitive granulosa cells,
and oocyte growth in secondary follicles requires the
nuclear expression of MAPK. A lack of nuclear MAPK
expression is associated with oocytes in resting primary
follicles. On the other hand, cytoplasmic MAPK
expression appears during the differentiation of germ cells
into oocytes. It persists in oocytes of resting follicles, and
is depleted in the oocytes undergoing atresia. This indicates that cytoplasmic MAPK expression in resting
(healthy) follicles may represent a readiness of oocytes for
the nuclear transfer required for resumption of oocyte
(follicular) growth. Also, characteristics of MAPK immunoexpression appear to be excellent indicators of the follicular condition – follicle formation, resting vs.
degenerating primary follicles, and resumption of follicular growth.
Alternative pathway for germ cell origin in adult human
ovaries
This study may contribute to a better understanding of the
mechanisms enabling mammalian females to maintain a
relatively constant number of primary follicles during the
optimal reproductive period, despite the continuous
depletion of primary follicles through atresia. In our previous report [32], we described the occurrence of putative
germ cells in the surface epithelium covering the tunica
albuginea – a "classical" pathway of germ cell origin suggested by Waldeyer [1]. The data presented here indicate
that an "alternative" pathway also exists, consisting of
germ cell development from epithelial crypts in the ovarian cortex.

Page 25 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

We show that in the ovarian cortex, the crypts lie in the
proximity of epithelial nests (fragmented cords), and the
same applies for some primary follicles. It is possible that
this "alternative" pathway occurs more regularly during
the reproductive period of life than the "classical" pathway characteristic for human fetal ovaries, because crypts
reaching the lower ovarian cortex can deliver germ cells to
the neighboring epithelial nests directly, without requiring vascular delivery. Furthermore, it appears that the
germ cells are capable of reaching epithelial nests by their
own movement, up to a distance of about 150 µm (Fig.
12). However, vascular transport of germ cells may still
occur for nests which are more distant.
The "ovary within the ovary" pattern
Primary follicles are typically located in isolated segments
of the ovarian cortex, which exhibit a lack of Thy-1 dp
expression by cortical fibroblasts. Production of Thy-1 dp,
a primitive member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily of molecules [88], by vascular pericytes is not only
associated with a progression of follicular growth [32,89],
but with differentiation of epithelial cells in general [83].
We show that growing follicles in the "ovary within the
ovary" segments are accompanied by Thy-1 dp secretion
from vascular pericytes, in contrast to the lack of vascular
activity associated with resting primary follicles (Fig. 13).
It has been suggested that the number of follicles entering
growth from a given cohort is under the control of Thy-1
dp secretion from vascular pericytes [32], possibly regulated by the autonomic ovarian innervation, which is
involved in the regulation of quantitative aspects of tissue
homeostasis [89,90]. Consequently, preservation of primary follicles in the resting state appears to require lack
Thy-1 dp stromal expression.
Vascular transport
To reach distant destinations during embryonal period of
life, germ cells in large mammals have been shown to utilize a vascular route [4,42], and a similar mechanism may
operate in adult human ovaries [32]. It remains unclear,
however, why cells leave the circulating blood at a certain
site. We show that germ cells can be detected within and
around the cortical vessels of adult human ovaries. During
vascular transport, germ cells increase in size and show
ZP+ projections toward the vascular wall. These ZP+
projections may be a signal for epithelial nests (primitive
granulosa cells) to associate with the particular vessel
involved in the oocyte transport. Blood transport is rapid,
so one may wonder that this can be done within few seconds or less.

We propose that the ZP+ projections from intravascular
germ cells/oocytes represent anchors to the vascular wall,
which may substantially prolong the time in which the
cells are transported toward their targets. Also, association

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

of epithelial nest with the vascular wall in the lower ovarian cortex appears to result in the formation of a pocket at
the vascular side (Fig. 7A,7B,7C,7D, 8C), enabling blood
flow to pass uninterrupted and bring the slowly mowing
oocyte. The association of epithelial nests with a particular
vascular segment may explain the often observed close
(side by side) association of primary follicles in adult
human ovaries (see Fig. 3,5,8 and ref. [48]). In addition,
epithelial nests are either in contact or penetrated by nerve
terminals [22]. Neural signaling may contribute to their
association with proper vessels. Local involvement of
tissue macrophages may play a role, at least in some
instances (see Fig. 12), and their function may decline
with age advancement [32,91-94]. Finally, in spite of their
effort, intravascular oocytes may not succeed in their
attempt to associate with epithelial nests. This may be due
to the limited number of nests produced in a given time
and the regression of the blood flow, e.g., through the corpus albicans (Fig. 14A,14B,14C). Unused oocytes leave
the medullary vessels (Fig. 14D) or anchor to the vascular
wall and degenerate (Fig. 14E,14F).
Oocyte remnants
We speculate that each germ cell emerging in adult ovaries
has a limited period of time during which it must assemble with epithelial nests and form the Balbiani body in
order to persist. Each primitive germ cell will differentiate
into the oocyte during a certain period of time, regardless
if it is utilized for primary follicle formation or not. An
exciting aspect of this report is the occurrence of accumulated oocytes and oocyte remnants in some medullary vessels. Their detection may document an ongoing
differentiation of new oocytes, since these oocyte remnants have been observed only in ovaries exhibiting the
formation of new primary follicles. It is believed that the
total number of oocytes produced within a given time in
adult ovaries exceeds by several fold the number of
oocytes successfully forming primary follicles. This indicates that the number of newly formed primary follicles is
determined by the number of available epithelial nests.
Since the nests of primitive granulosa cells are innervated
[22], and autonomic innervation determines quantitative
aspects of tissue homeostasis [32,89,90], the number of
newly formed primary follicles (adaptive folliculogenesis)
could be under the neural control. Our unpublished
observations indicate that there are no such oocyte remnants in women >40 years of age. This is in a good
agreement with the significant decline of the follicular
pool reported by others [53,54].
Follicular atresia
Atresia of primary follicles is common during the reproductive period of human females [51]. Our observations
suggest that it is a rapid process, assisted by the massive
influx of macrophages. The process resembles immune-

Page 26 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

system mediated corpus luteum regression [94]. Gougeon
suggested that depletion of the primary follicle pool is
caused mainly by atresia in younger women and by
entrance into the growing pool in older women, with the
change-over at 38 ± 2.4 years [54]. Since cyclic ovarian
function continues in "early premenopausal" women, we
speculate that ~10000 primary follicles detected during
the age period 40–44 years (Fig. 15B) is a sufficient depot
for continuation of ovulatory ovarian function. A 50000
difference compared to younger females fits well with the
observation that 70–95% of oocytes in primary follicles
show various stages of degeneration [51,52]. It appears
that Gougeon was right, and it is possible to conclude that
the pool of healthy primary follicles is at least 10000 during the reproductive years.
In younger females, an ongoing atresia of primary follicles
appears to be associated with preparation for a new wave
of follicular formation. We propose that during the optimal reproductive period in human females, ongoing
atresia affects groups of older primary follicles, and this is
compensated for by formation of new primary follicle
cohorts. Such follicular turnover may prevent an accumulation of spontaneous or environmentally induced
genetic alterations of oocytes in resting primary follicles.
Environmental hazards are increasing, and they include
pollutant emissions, radiation, nutrition containing
dangerous chemicals, synthetic fertilizers and toxic pesticides, and (retro)viral diseases. In addition, human population is also compromised by pharmaceutical and
addictive drugs, alcohol consumption and smoking, and
cytostatic and radiation therapy. Renewal of healthy
oocytes is apparent from former report of the Scientific
Committee of United Nations indicating that women,
which were subjected to the sterilizing dose of radiation
from atomic bombs in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, eventually resumed menstrual cycles, and some of them gave a
birth to healthy babies [95]. This indicates that human
females, and possibly some other mammalian species,
may have evolved a sophisticated mechanism for follicular renewal resisting environmental threats, contrasting a
persistence of (potentially vulnerable) germline stem cells
in adult ovaries of other species, e.g., Amphibia [66].
The atresia and renewal of the existing follicular pool may
gradually diminish by the end of the third decade of life,
and remaining primary follicles may persist without
replacement. Since some primary follicles can still be
detected in ovaries of females at the end of the fourth decade of life (blue columns, Fig. 15), and such follicular
pool in essence declines during the fourth decade of life
by transformation into the growing follicles [54], it is possible that in ovaries of human females, primary follicles
persist for up to 12–14 years.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

However, it is well documented that advanced maternal
age is often associated with compromised oocyte quality,
aneuploid embryos, and higher rate of Down syndrome,
anencephaly, and multiple fetal congenital anomalies
resulting from abnormal chromosomes 13, 16, 18, 21, 22,
X, and Y [96-112], mainly due to the non-disjunction during oocyte meiosis [97].
The frequency of abnormal fetal karyotypes in different
maternal age groups was found to increase from 1:20 at
38–40 years, to 1:16 at 41–43 years, and finally to 1:4.5 in
women of 44–46 years [96]. Similar data were reported in
another study, where 2 of 123 cases in 35- to 39-year-old
women showed an incidence of chromosomal anomalies
as high as 1.6%; 7 of 117 cases in 40- to 44-year-old mothers an incidence of 6.0%; and 4 of 16 mothers in the 45to 49-year-old age group an incidence of 25.0% [97]. Also,
the rate of all clinically significant chromosomal
abnormalities of cytogenetically abnormal fetuses considered together was about five per 1,000 at age 35 years, 15
per 1,000 at age 40 years, and 50 per 1,000 at age 45 years
[98].
These data indicate that the longer resting primary follicles persist within the ovary, the lower is the capacity of
oocytes to produce normal human progeny. Interestingly,
12–14 year life span of primary follicles also coincides
with the human female age at menarche, and one may
speculate that fetal primary follicles may persist (orange
columns, Fig 15) till the beginning of regular ovarian
function, when an initiation of folliculogenesis (formation of new primary follicles) resumes and lasts during the
optimal reproductive years (green columns, Fig 15).

Conclusion
This study expands our earlier and recent observations
and views on the formation of germ cells in adult human
ovaries [31,32,55,56]. Earlier and recent in vivo and in vitro
studies have shown that mouse embryonic germ cells differentiate from somatic lineage [7-9,11,12] and adult ovaries of prosimian primates and mice possess mitotically
active germ cells [13-17] of uncertain origin. We provide
direct evidence that in ovaries of adult human females, the
components for new human primary follicles, primitive
granulosa and germ cells, differentiate sequentially and de
novo from the CK+ mesenchymal progenitor cells residing
in the ovarian tunica albuginea, and new primary follicles
are formed by assembly of oocytes with nests of primitive
granulosa cells in the ovarian cortex. In contrast to males,
adult human female gonads do not possess germline stem
cells. This also contrasts with a continuous preservation of
the germline stem cells in ovaries of invertebrates, lower
vertebrates, birds, prosimian primates, and possibly mice.
The number of newly formed primary follicles in adult
human ovaries appears to be determined by the number

Page 27 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

of developing nests of primitive granulosa cells supplied
by a higher number of available oocytes. Formation of
new primary follicles throughout the reproductive period
may compensate for the well documented atresia of a significant proportion of the follicular pool. This may
contribute to the selection of the best possible oocytes and
ensure preservation of the relatively constant number of
primary follicles found in human females between 18 and
38 years of life. Differentiation of primitive granulosa and
germ cells from the bipotent mesenchymal cell precursors
of TA in adult human ovaries, and by extrapolation in
some other mammals with reproductive period distant
from fetal folliculogenesis, may represent a most sophisticated mechanism created during the evolution of female
reproduction. It appears that during the reproductive
period in human females, the pool of primary follicles
does not represent a static but a dynamic population of
differentiating and regressing structures. An essential mission of such follicular turnover might be elimination of
spontaneous or environmentally induced genetic alterations of oocytes in resting primary follicles.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.
21.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank anonymous reviewers for constructive criticism
and valuable comments. Kind donations of HSPZ, HSRZ and PS1 antibodies
by Dr. Bonnie S. Dunbar of the Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA; HSPZ antibody by
Dr. Satish K. Gupta of the National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi,
India; HLA-DR antibody by Drs. Ivan Hilgert and Vaclav Horejsi of the Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
and Faculty of Sciences, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic; human
Thy-1 dp antibody by Dr. Rosemarie Dalchau of the Institute of Child
Health, University of London, London, UK; and swine anti-mouse IgG peroxidase conjugate by Dr. Jana Peknicova of the Department of Biology and
Biochemistry of Fertilization, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic, are gratefully
acknowledged.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.

Waldeyer W: Eierstock und Ei. Leipzig: Engelmann 1870.
Weissmann A: Die Continuitat des Keimplasmasals Grundlage einer Theorie der Vererbung Jena: Fischer-Verlag; 1885.
Franchi LL, Mandl AM, Zuckerman S: The development of the
ovary and the process of oogenesis. In The Ovary Edited by: Zuckerman S. London: Academic Press; 1962:1-88.
Baker TG: Oogenesis and ovarian development. In Reproductive
Biology Edited by: Balin H, Glasser S. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica;
1972:398-437.
McLaren A: Signaling for germ cells. Genes Dev 1999, 13:373-376.
Kelly SJ: Studies of the developmental potential of 4- and 8cell stage mouse blastomeres. J Exp Zool 1977, 200:365-376.
Ginsburg M, Snow MH, McLaren A: Primordial germ cells in the
mouse embryo during gastrulation. Development 1990,
110:521-528.
Lawson KA, Hage WJ: Clonal analysis of the origin of primordial
germ cells in the mouse. Ciba Found Symp 1994, 182:68-84.
Tarn PP, Zhou SX: The allocation of epiblast cells to ectodermal and germ-line lineages is influenced by the position of
the cells in the gastrulating mouse embryo. Dev Biol 1996,
178:124-132.
Lawson KA, Dunn NR, Roelen BA, Zeinstra LM, Davis AM, Wright
CV, Korving JP, Hogan BL: Bmp4 is required for the generation
of primordial germ cells in the mouse embryo. Genes Dev 1999,
13:424-436.

22.

23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.

32.

33.

Hubner K, Fuhrmann G, Christenson LK, Kehler J, Reinbold R, De La
FR, Wood J, Strauss JF III, Boiani M, Scholer HR: Derivation of
oocytes from mouse embryonic stem cells. Science 2003,
300:1251-1256.
Geijsen N, Horoschak M, Kim K, Gribnau J, Eggan K, Daley GQ: Derivation of embryonic germ cells and male gametes from
embryonic stem cells. Nature 2004, 427:148-154.
Johnson J, Canning J, Kaneko T, Pru JK, Tilly JL: Germline stem cells
and follicular renewal in the postnatal mammalian ovary.
Nature 2004, 428:145-150.
Duke KL: Ovogenetic activity of the fetal-type in the ovary of
the adult slow loris, Nycticebus coucang. Folia Primatol (Basel)
1967, 7:150-154.
loannou JM: Oogenesis in adult prosimians. J Embryol Exp Morphol
1968, 17:139-145.
Butler H, Juma MB: Oogenesis in an adult prosimian. Nature
1970, 226:552-553.
David GF, Anand Kumar TC, Baker TG: Uptake of tritiated thymidine by primordial germinal cells in the ovaries of the
adult slender loris. J Reprod Fertil 1974, 41:447-451.
Telfer EE: Germline stem cells in the postnatal mammalian
ovary: A phenomenon of prosimian primates and mice?
Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2004, 2: 24.
Motta PM, Makabe S: Germ cells in the ovarian surface during
fetal development in humans. A three-dimensional microanatomical study by scanning and transmission electron
microscopy. J Submicrosc Cytol 1986, 18:271-290.
Simkins CS: Development of the human ovary from birth to
sexual maturity. J Anat 1932, 51:465-505.
Van Blerkom J, Motta PM: The Cellular Basis of Mammalian Reproduction. Baltimore-Munich: Urban & Schwarzenberg 1979.
Motta PM, Van Blerkom J, Makabe S: Changes in the surface morphology of ovarian 'germinal' epithelium during the reproductive cycle and in some pathological conditions. J Submicrosc
Cytol 1980, 12:407-425.
Makabe S, Iwaki A, Hafez ESE, Motta PM: Physiomorphology of
fertile and infertile human ovaries. In Biology of the Ovary Edited
by: Motta PM, Hafez ESE. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers;
1980:279-290.
Gillett WR: Artefactual loss of human ovarian surface epithelium: potential clinical significance. Reprod Fertil Dev 1991,
3:93-98.
Mossman HW, Duke KL: Some comparative aspects of the
mammalian ovary. In Handbook of Physiology, Sect. 7: Endocrinology
Edited by: Greep RO. Washington: Am. Physiol. Soc; 1973:389-402.
Dyck HG, Hamilton TC, Godwin AK, Lynch HT, Maines-Bandiera S,
Auersperg N: Autonomy of the epithelial phenotype in human
ovarian surface epithelium: changes with neoplastic progression and with a family history of ovarian cancer. Int J Cancer
1996, 69:429-436.
Auersperg N, Pan J, Grove BD, Peterson T, Fisher J, Maines-Bandiera
S, Somasiri A, Roskelley CD: E-cadherin induces mesenchymalto-epithelial transition in human ovarian surface epithelium.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999, 96:6249-6254.
Auersperg N, Wong AS, Choi KC, Kang SK, Leung PC: Ovarian surface epithelium: biology, endocrinology, and pathology.
Endocr Rev 2001, 22:255-288.
Choi KC, Auersperg N, Leung PC: Mitogen-activated protein
kinases in normal and (pre)neoplastic ovarian surface
epithelium. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2003, 1:71.
Treisman R: Regulation of transcription by MAP kinase
cascades. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1996, 8:205-215.
Bukovsky A, Caudle MR, Keenan JA: Regulation of ovarian function by immune system components: the tissue control system (TCS). In Microscopy of Reproduction and Development: A
Dynamic Approach Edited by: Motta PM. Roma: Antonio Delfino
Editore; 1997:79-89.
Bukovsky A, Keenan JA, Caudle MR, Wimalasena J, Upadhyaya NB,
Van Meter SE: Immunohistochemical studies of the adult
human ovary: possible contribution of immune and epithelial
factors to folliculogenesis. Am J Reprod Immunol 1995, 33:323-340.
Richer M, Burch LH, Hirsh AJ, Spychala J, Boucher RC: Ecto 5'nucleotidase and nonspecific alkaline phosphatase. Two
AMP-hydrolyzing ectoenzymes with distinct roles in human
airways. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:13468-13479.

Page 28 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

40.

41.

42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.

48.

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

55.
56.

57.

Ziomek CA, Lepire ML, Torres I: A highly fluorescent simultaneous azo dye technique for demonstration of nonspecific alkaline phosphatase activity. J Histochem Cytochem 1990, 38:437-442.
Quinones JA, van Bogaert LJ: Nonspecific alkaline phosphatase
activity in normal and diseased human breast. Acta Histochem
1979, 64:106-112.
Page-Roberts BA: Changes in nonspecific alkaline phosphatase
activity in the rat urinary bladder wall in response to experimental filling. Invest Urol 1972, 9:385-389.
Pan J, Auersperg N: Spatiotemporal changes in cytokeratin
expression in the neonatal rat ovary. Biochem Cell Biol 1998,
76:27-35.
Skinner SM, Dunbar BS: Localization of a carbohydrate antigen
associated with growing oocytes and ovarian surface
epithelium. J Histochem Cytochem 1992, 40:1031-1036.
Skinner SM, Lee VH, Kieback DG, Jones LA, Kaplan AL, Dunbar BS:
Identification of a meiotically expressed carbohydrate antigen in ovarian carcinoma: I. Immunohistochemical
localization. Anticancer Res 1997, 17:901-906.
Skinner SM, Kieback DG, Chunn J, Jones LA, Metzger DA, Malinak LR,
Dunbar BS: Identification of a meiotically expressed carbohydrate antigen in ovarian carcinoma: II. Association with proteins in tumors and peritoneal fluid. Anticancer Res 1997,
17:907-911.
Dunbar BS, Timmons TM, Skinner SM, Prasad SV: Molecular analysis of a carbohydrate antigen involved in the structure and
function of zona pellucida glycoproteins. Biol Reprod 2001,
65:951-960.
Wartenberg H: Germ cell migration induced and guided by
somatic cell interaction. Bibl Anat 1983, 24:67-76.
Zamboni L: Ultrastructure of mammalian oocytes and ova. Biol
Reprod Suppl 1970, 2:44-63.
Carlson JL, Bakst MR, Ottinger MA: Developmental stages of primary oocytes in turkeys. Poult Sci 1996, 75:1569-1578.
Motta PM, Nottola SA, Makabe S, Heyn R: Mitochondrial morphology in human fetal and adult female germ cells. Hum
Reprod 2000, 15 Suppl 2:129-147.
Cox RT, Spradling AC: A Balbiani body and the fusome mediate
mitochondrial inheritance during Drosophila oogenesis.
Development 2003, 130:1579-1590.
Santini D, Ceccarelli C, Mazzoleni G, Pasquinelli G, Jasonni VM, Martinelli GN: Demonstration of cytokeratin intermediate filaments in oocytes of the developing and adult human ovary.
Histochemistry 1993, 99:311-319.
Motta PM, Makabe S, Naguro T, Correr S: Oocyte follicle cells
association during development of human ovarian follicle. A
study by high resolution scanning and transmission electron
microscopy. Arch Histol Cytol 1994, 57:369-394.
Pepling ME, Spradling AC: Mouse ovarian germ cell cysts
undergo programmed breakdown to form primordial
follicles. Dev Biol 2001, 234:339-351.
Pepling ME, Spradling AC: Female mouse germ cells form synchronously dividing cysts. Development 1998, 125:3323-3328.
Ingram DL: Atresia. In The Ovary Edited by: Zuckerman S. London:
Academic Press; 1962:247-273.
Erickson BH: Development and senescence of the postnatal
bovine ovary. J Anim Sci 1966, 25:800-805.
Block E: Quantitative morphological investigations of the follicular system in women. Variations at different ages. Acta
Anat (Basel) 1952, 14:108-123.
Gougeon A, Echochard R, Thalabard JC: Age-related changes of
the population of human ovarian follicles: increase in the disappearance rate of non-growing and early- growing follicles
in aging women. Biol Reprod 1994, 50:653-663.
Bukovsky A, Presl J: Origin of "definitive" oocytes in the mammal ovary. Cesk Gynekol 1977, 42:285-294.
Bukovsky A, Caudle MR, Keenan JA, Elder RF: Immune system
involvement in the regulation of ovarian function: an immunohistochemical study of the developing and adult human
ovary and ovarian cancer. Microsc Res Tech 2004 in press.
Bukovsky A, Cekanova M, Caudle MR, Wimalasena J, Foster JS,
Henley DC, Elder RF: Expression and localization of estrogen
receptor-alpha protein in normal and abnormal term placentae and stimulation of trophoblast differentiation by
estradiol. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 2003, 1:13.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

58.
59.

60.

61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.

72.
73.
74.

75.

76.
77.
78.
79.

80.

Sehgal S, Gupta SK, Bhatnagar P: Long-term effects of immunization with porcine zona pellucida on rabbit ovaries. Pathology
1989, 21:105-110.
Miller CC, Fayrer-Hosken RA, Timmons TM, Lee VH, Caudle AB,
Dunbar BS: Characterization of equine zona pellucida glycoproteins by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and immunological techniques. J Reprod Fertil 1992, 96:815-825.
Horejsi V, Hilgert I, Kristofova H, Bazil V, Bukovsky A, Kulhankova J:
Monoclonal antibodies against human leucocyte antigens. I.
Antibodies against beta-2-microglobulin, immunoglobulin
kappa light chains, HLA-DR-like antigens, T8 antigen, T1
antigen, a monocyte antigen, and a pan-leucocyte antigen.
Folia Biol (Praha) 1986, 32:12-25.
McKenzie JL, Fabre JW: Human Thy-1: unusual localization and
possible functional significance in lymphoid tissues. J Immunol
1981, 126:843-850.
Sternberger LA, Joseph SA: The unlabelled antibody method.
Contrasting color staining of paired hormones without antibody removal. J Histochem Cytochem 1979, 27:1424-1429.
Block E: Quantitative morphological investigations of the follicular system in women. Methods of quantitative
determinations. Acta Anat (Basel) 1951, 12:267-285.
Block E: A quantitative morphological investigation of the follicular system in newborn female infants. Acta Anat (Basel) 1953,
17:201-206.
Prindull G, Zipori D: Environmental guidance of normal and
tumor cell plasticity: epithelial mesenchymal transitions as a
paradigm. Blood 2004, 103:2892-9.
Kloc M, Bilinski S, Dougherty MT, Brey EM, Etkin LD: Formation,
architecture and polarity of female germline cyst in
Xenopus. Dev Biol 2004, 266:43-61.
Klein J: Immunology: The Science of Self-Nonself Discrimination New
York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc; 1982.
Wang F, Riley JC, Behrman HR: Immunosuppressive levels of glucocorticoid block extra uterine luteolysins in the rat. Biol
Reprod 1993, 49:66-73.
Allen E: Ovogenesis during sexual maturity. Am J Anat 1923,
31:439-481.
Evans HM, Swezy O: Ovogenesis and the normal follicular cycle
in adult mammalia. Mem Univ Calif 1931, 9:119-224.
Jiang Y, Vaessen B, Lenvik T, Blackstad M, Reyes M, Verfaillie CM:
Multipotent progenitor cells can be isolated from postnatal
murine bone marrow, muscle, and brain. Exp Hematol 2002,
30:896-904.
Reyes M, Dudek A, Jahagirdar B, Koodie L, Marker PH, Verfaillie CM:
Origin of endothelial progenitors in human postnatal bone
marrow. J Clin Invest 2002, 109:337-346.
Van Damme A, Vanden DriesscheT, Collen D, Chuah MK: Bone
marrow stromal celIs as targets for gene therapy. Curr Gene
Ther 2002, 2:195-209.
Keene CD, Ortiz-Gonzalez XR, Jiang Y, Largaespada DA, Verfaillie
CM, Low WC: Neural differentiation and incorporation of
bone marrow-derived multipotent adult progenitor cells
after single cell transplantation into blastocyst stage mouse
embryos. Cell Transplant 2003, 12:201-213.
Muguruma Y, Reyes M, Nakamura Y, Sato T, Matsuzawa H, Miyatake
H, Akatsuka A, Itoh J, Yahata T, Ando K, Kato S, Hotta T: In vivo and
in vitro differentiation of myocytes from human bone marrow-derived multipotent progenitor cells. Exp Hematol 2003,
31:1323-1330.
Gohda E, Nakamura S, Yamamoto I, Minowada J: Hepatocyte
growth factor – pleiotropic cytokine produced by human
leukemia cells. Leuk Lymphoma 1995, 19:197-205.
Rubin JS, Bottaro DP, Chedid M, Miki T, Ron D, Cunha GR, Finch PW:
Keratinocyte growth factor as a cytokine that mediates mesenchymal-epithelial interaction. EXS 1995, 74:191-214.
Zarnegar R: Regulation of HGF and HGFR gene expression.
EXS 1995, 74:33-49.
Eshel I, Savion N, Shoham J: Analysis of thymic stromal cell subpopulations grown in vitro on extracellular matrix in defined
medium. II. Cytokine activities in murine thymic epithelial
and mesenchymal cell culture supernatants. J Immunol 1990,
144:1563-1570.
Okada H, Danoff TM, Kalluri R, Neilson EG: Early role of Fsp1 in
epithelial-mesenchymal transformation. Am J Physlol 1997,
273:F563-F574.

Page 29 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2

81.

Sakata M, Shiba H, Komatsuzawa H, Fujita T, Ohta K, Sugai M, Suginaka H, Kurihara H: Expression of osteoprotegerin (osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor) in cultures of human dental
mesenchymal cells and epithelial cells. J Bone Miner Res 1999,
14:1486-1492.
82. Kedinger M, Duluc I, Fritsch C, Lorentz O, Plateroti M, Freund JN:
Intestinal epithelial-mesenchymal cell interactions. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1998, 859:1-17.
83. Bukovsky A, Caudle MR, Keenan JA, Upadhyaya NB, Van Meter SE,
Wimalasena J, Elder RF: Association of mesenchymal cells and
immunoglobulins with differentiating epithelial cells. BMC
Dev Biol 2001, 1:11.
84. Motta PM, Makabe S: Development of the ovarian surface and
associated germ cells in the human fetus. Cell Tissue Res 1982,
226:493-510.
85. Motta PM, Makabe S: Elimination of germ cells during differentiation of the human ovary: an electron microscopic study.
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1986, 22:271-286.
86. Cowley S, Paterson H, Kemp P, Marshall CJ: Activation of MAP
kinase kinase is necessary and sufficient for PC12 differentiation and for transformation of NIH 3T3 cells. Cell 1994,
77:841-852.
87. Gotoh Y, Matsuda S, Takenaka K, Hattori S, Iwamatsu A, Ishikawa M,
Kosako H, Nishida E: Characterization of recombinant Xenopus MAP kinase kinases mutated at potential phosphorylation sites. Oncogene 1994, 9:1891-1898.
88. Williams AF, Barclay AN: The immunoglobulin superfamilydomains for cell surface recognition. Annu Rev Immunol 1988,
6:381-405.
89. Bukovsky A, Caudle MR, Keenan JA, Wimalasena J, Foster JS, Van
Meter SE: Quantitative evaluation of the cell cycle-related
retinoblastoma protein and localization of Thy-1 differentiation protein and macrophages during follicular development
and atresia, and in human corpora lutea. Biol Reprod 1995,
52:776-792.
90. Bukovsky A, Michael SD, Presl J: Cell-mediated and neural control of morphostasis. Meet Hypotheses 1991, 36:261-268.
91. Miller RA: Aging and immune function. Int Rev Cytol 1991,
124:187-215.
92. Weksler ME: Immune senescence. Ann Neurol 1994,
35(Suppl):S35-S37.
93. Sunderkotter C, Kalden H, Luger TA: Aging and the skin immune
system. Arch Dermatol 1997, 133:1256-1262.
94. Bukovsky A, Caudle MR, Keenan JA, Wimalasena J, Upadhyaya NB,
Van Meter SE: Is corpus luteum regression an immune-mediated event? Localization of immune system components,
and luteinizing hormone receptor in human corpora lutea.
Biol Reprod 1995, 53:1373-1384.
95. Report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the
effects of atomic radiation. In General Assembly Official Records:
17th Session, Suppl. No. 16 (A/5216) New York: United Nations;
1962:12.
96. Sachs ES, Jahoda MG, Niermeijer MF, Galjaard H: An unexpected
high frequency of trisomic fetuses in 229 pregnancies monitored for advanced maternal age. Hum Genet 1977, 36:43-46.
97. Tsuji K, Nakano R: Chromosome studies of embryos from
induced abortions in pregnant women age 35 and over. Obstet
Gynecol 1978, 52:542-544.
98. Hook EB, Cross PK, Schreinemachers DM: Chromosomal abnormality rates at amniocentesis and in live-born infants. JAMA
1983, 249:2034-2038.
99. Eichenlaub-Ritter U: Parental age-related aneuploidy in human
germ cells and offspring: a story of past and present. Environ
Mol Mutagen 1996, 28:211-236.
100. Sakurada K, Ishikawa H, Endo A: Cytogenetic effects of advanced
maternal age and delayed fertilization on first- cleavage
mouse embryos. Cytogenet Cell Genet 1996, 72:46-49.
101. Ginsburg C, Fokstuen S, Schinzel A: The contribution of uniparental disomy to congenital development defects in children
born to mothers at advanced childbearing age. Am J Med Genet
2000, 95:454-460.
102. Krey L, Liu H, Zhang J, Grifo J: Fertility and maternal age strategies to improve pregnancy outcome. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2001,
943:26-33.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/20

103. Gianaroli L, Magli MC, Ferraretti AP, Tabanelli C, Trombetta C,
Boudjema E: The role of preimplantation diagnosis for
aneuploidies. Reprod Biomed Online 2002, 4(Suppl 3):31-36.
104. Munne S: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis of numerical and
structural chromosome abnormalities. Reprod Biomed Online
2002, 4:183-196.
105. L'Hermine AC, Aboura A, Brisset S, Cuisset L, Castaigne V, Labrune
P, Frydman R, Tachdjian G: Fetal phenotype of Prader-Willi syndrome due to maternal disomy for chromosome 15. Prenat
Diagn 2003, 23:938-943.
106. Munne S: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis and human
implantation-a review. Placenta 2003, 24(Suppl B):S70-S76.
107. Parker MJ, Budd JL, Draper ES, Young ID: Trisomy 13 and trisomy
18 in a defined population: epidemiological, genetic and prenatal observations. Prenat Diagn 2003, 23:856-860.
108. Pehlivan T, Rubio C, Rodrigo L, Remohi J, Pellicer A, Simon C: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis by fluorescence in situ
hybridization: clinical possibilities and pitfalls. J Soc Gynecol
Investig 2003, 10:315-322.
109. Pujol A, Durban M, Benet J, Boiso I, Calafell JM, Egozcue J, Navarro J:
Multiple aneuploidies in the oocytes of balanced translocation carriers: a preimplantation genetic diagnosis study using
first polar body. Reproduction 2003, 126:701-711.
110. Eichenlaub-Ritter U, Vogt E, Yin H, Gosden R: Spindles, mitochondria and redox potential in ageing oocytes. Reprod Biomed
Online 2004, 8:45-58.
111. Kahraman S, Benkhalifa M, Donmez E, Biricik A, Sertyel S, Findikli N,
Berkil H: The results of aneuploidy screening in 276 couples
undergoing assisted reproductive techniques. Prenat Diagn
2004, 24:307-311.
112. Kotzot D: Advanced parental age in maternal uniparental disomy (UPD): implications for the mechanism of formation.
Eur J Hum Genet 2004, 12:343-346.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 30 of 30
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
