<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Expression divergence measured by transcriptome sequencing of four yeast species</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-635"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Michele A Busby"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Expression divergence measured by
transcriptome sequencing of four yeast species
Michele A Busby1, Jesse M Gray2,4, Allen M Costa2, Chip Stewart1,5, Michael P Stromberg1, Derek Barnett1,
Jeffrey H Chuang1, Michael Springer3 and Gabor T Marth1*

Abstract
Background: The evolution of gene expression is a challenging problem in evolutionary biology, for which
accurate, well-calibrated measurements and methods are crucial.
Results: We quantified gene expression with whole-transcriptome sequencing in four diploid, prototrophic strains
of Saccharomyces species grown under the same condition to investigate the evolution of gene expression. We
found that variation in expression is gene-dependent with large variations in each gene’s expression between
replicates of the same species. This confounds the identification of genes differentially expressed across species. To
address this, we developed a statistical approach to establish significance bounds for inter-species differential
expression in RNA-Seq data based on the variance measured across biological replicates. This metric estimates the
combined effects of technical and environmental variance, as well as Poisson sampling noise by isolating each
component. Despite a paucity of large expression changes, we found a strong correlation between the variance of
gene expression change and species divergence (R2 = 0.90).
Conclusion: We provide an improved methodology for measuring gene expression changes in evolutionary
diverged species using RNA Seq, where experimental artifacts can mimic evolutionary effects.
GEO Accession Number: GSE32679
Keywords: RNA-Seq, Comparative transcriptomics, S. cerevisiae, S. paradoxus, S. mikatae, S. bayanus

Background
Previous studies have found that gene expression
diverges as the distance between species increases, and
that this divergence is linearly related to the time since
divergence (Reviewed in [1]). This expression evolution
has been reported to be slow enough that orthologous
genes still have highly correlated expression, even in
species that diverged up to 400 million years ago [2,3].
Several studies have reported that genes with specific
attributes change expression more quickly [4-7], though
it is not known whether the expression of such subsets
of genes also diverges linearly with time.
RNA-Seq offers a methodological improvement over
microarrays for measuring expression divergence
because it does not suffer from the probe-based biases
* Correspondence: gabor.marth@bc.edu
1
Department of Biology, Boston College, 140 Commonwealth Avenue,
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3961, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

that confound cross-species microarray measurements
[8-11]. Technical replication studies, in which expression values are assayed more than once from the same
sample, have shown that RNA-Seq quantifies relative
gene expression accurately [12,13].
However, measuring gene expression by RNA-Seq is
complicated by alternate sources of variance [14]. The
gross inter-species measurement of gene expression by
RNA-Seq contains four components: (1) true inter-species gene expression difference; (2) expression differences caused by environmental variance; (3) variance
from technical measurement imprecision; and (4) Poisson sampling noise. Because of these alternate sources
of variance, it is possible for a gene without true interspecies gene expression changes to be measured with
different values in different species.
Therefore, we first developed methods to quantify biologically relevant expression differences between species that
are greater than the variance within each species by

© 2011 Busby et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

collecting expression data from biological replicates of the
well-characterized model organism S. cerevisiae and the
three related yeasts: S. paradoxus, S. mikatae, and S. bayanus [15]. In all cases we used diploid, prototrophic strains
of the yeast. This approach ensures that we are measuring
the expression change that can be attributed to evolution
rather than artificial expression changes that occur due to
the disruption of the auxotrophic pathways.
We applied our methods to identify differentially
expressed (DE) genes and examine the rate and properties of expression evolution in yeast.

Results
We grew two independent cultures of each the following
prototophic, diploid strains: S. cerevisiae (FY4 (MAT a) and
FY5 (MAT alpha) [16] which we mated to get a diploid, S.
paradoxus (Y-17217), S. mikatae (IFO1815), and S. bayanus (MCYC623) according to the protocols described in
Methods. RNA was isolated and sequenced using a strandspecific protocol. A total of over 292 million 35 base pair
reads were generated between two runs of an AB SOLID
sequencer [17]. A third sample of S. cerevisiae was also
grown and sequenced as a pair of technical replicates.
Over 156 million single end AB SOLiD reads aligned
to their respective genomes (54%) using the MOSAIK
alignment program (http://bioinformatics.bc.edu/marthlab/Mosaik) as described in Methods and Additional
File 1, Supplemental Methods 1. The reference genome
and annotations for S. cerevisiae were downloaded from
the Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://downloads.
yeastgenome.org/). Genome, annotations, and orthology
mappings for the other species were from Kellis et al.
[15] (Additional File 1, Supplemental Methods 1).
Of these aligned reads, ~ 113 million (69%) aligned
uniquely. The dominant source of unaligned reads was
sequencing errors (Additional File 1, Supplemental Methods
2). We examined the effect of reference quality and found
that alignment rates increased as reference genomes were
sequenced to higher depths (Additional File 1, Table S1).
Not all genes can be measured accurately using RNASeq, particularly in cross-species comparisons where the
length of genes and the percentage of genes that can be
uniquely aligned can vary between species. When comparing the expression in 1:1 orthologs across species, we
selected genes where we were confident that accurate
measurements could be found (Methods). Genes that
were annotated with measureable orthologs in all four
species were designated as “core” genes.
Environmental variance accounts for up to 60% of the
expression variance observed in inter-species
comparisons

We compared the differences in expression observed in
different species to the differences in expression observed

Page 2 of 15

in biological replicates of the same species to determine
what portion of the variance is due to genomic variation,
versus environmental and measurement variance. Expression is highly correlated between orthologous genes in S.
cerevisiae vs. S. paradoxus (Pearson correlation = 0.85).
Correlation between biological replicates of S. cerevisiae
(0.91) and S. paradoxus (0.96) suggest that up to 60% of
the observed variance between samples of two separate
species can be attributed to environmental response and
measurement imprecision (Figure 1a, b).
The distribution of the log2 fold changes observed
between species also shows a high level of overlap with
the distribution of fold changes between biological replicates, with the distribution widening as the comparison
species become more diverged (Figure 2). For example,
in the biological replicates of S. cerevisiae, 95% of the
genes show a log2 fold-change in the range of [-1.9,
1.9]. Even in the most distant interspecies comparison
(S. bayanus vs. S. cerevisiae), 84% of the fold changes
were still within this range.
Source of variance in expression measurements

We then examined the sources of variation in expression measurements by comparing technical and biological replicates. Technical replicates were prepared from
RNA isolated from a single culture of S. cerevisiae that
was divided into two samples that were separately processed through the entire library preparation and
sequencing protocol. Biological replicates were prepared
from two separate cultures of S. cerevisiae. Technical
replicates contain variance from measurement imprecision and Poisson counting noise but no environmental
variance. Biological replicates contain counting noise,
measurement imprecision, and environmental variance
but not true inter-species gene expression differences.
We compared the reproducibility of measurements of
the same gene in technical versus biological replicates of
S. cerevisiae using fold change as our metric (Additional
File 1, Table S2 and Figure S1A and S1B). Within the
technical replicates, we found that coding genes showed
better reproducibility than non-coding genes, which
were comprised mainly of snRNAs, snoRNAs, and
tRNAs (Additional File 1, Figure S1C). Non-coding
genes were therefore excluded from further analyses. To
isolate and quantify the effects of technical and biological variance, we excluded genes which were measured
with fewer than ten reads. At low counts, Poisson variance is high relative to the total read count, and Poisson fluctuations can cause large fold changes
(Additional File 1, Figure S2). Poisson error is lower in
genes measured with at least ten reads, which is true for
> 95% of our core genes, in all samples used for DE
calls. When we considered genes with at least ten reads
in each condition, ninety-five percent of gene expression

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

Page 3 of 15

1A

1C
6

Expression of Genes in Replicates of S. cerevisiae

10

5

6

Differential Expression of Orthologus Genes in S. cerevisiae vs S. paradoxus p<0.01

10
4

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

10
0
10

1

10

2

3

4

10
10
10
Read Count Per Gene Replicate 1

5

10

6

10

1B
6

Expression of Genes in Replicates of S. paradoxus

S. paradoxus (Read Count Per Gene, Rep1 & Rep2)

Read Count Per Gene Replicate 1

10

5

10

Genes Not DE
Genes DE
Expected Values

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

10

0

10
0
10

5

Read Count Per Gene Replicate 1

10

1

10

2

3

4

5

10
10
10
10
S. cerevisiae (Read Count Per Gene, Rep1 & Rep2)

6

10

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

10
0
10

1

10

2

3

4

10
10
10
Read Count Per Gene Replicate 1

5

10

6

10

Figure 1 Gene expression measurements in replicates of S. cerevisiae (1a) and S. paradoxus (1b), and the comparison between these
two species (1c). Plotted values are the number of reads uniquely aligning to the gene. Differentially expressed genes are indentified (blue) as
p < 0.01 based on our Χ2 metric.

measurements reproduced within a 1.8x fold-change
between the two technical replicates. In biological replicates, 95% of genes reproduced within 3.6x fold change,
but a small number of genes showed large expression
differences with fold changes as high as 25x. While
technical variance is low, it acts subsequent to biological
variance, and can therefore amplify or dampen the fold
changes that occur to due to environmental variance.
We note that fold changes measured with RNA-Seq are
expected be higher than comparable measurements
taken with microarrays due to the limited dynamic
range inherent in microarrays [18]. We show estimated
conversion factors in Additional File 1, Figure S3.
To demonstrate that the variance that we observed in
our biological replicates occurred due to responses to
normal laboratory conditions, rather than a poorly controlled environment or unusually imprecise RNA-Seq
measurements, we compared our results to the

correlation of S. cerevisiae replicates measured by RNASeq using Illumina technology in Nagalakshmi et al.
[13]. The R2 value of log2 expression values of our biological replicates ranged from 0.867 for the replicates of
S. cerevisiae to 0.900 for S. paradoxus. The corresponding values reported in Nagalakshmi et al. are nearly
identical (R 2 = 0.869 and R 2 = 0.904). We then compared the fold changes that occurred between repeated
measurements of the same gene in biological replicates
and found that, while differences exist between replicate
runs, our results were comparable to the results from
Nagalakshmi (Additional File 1, Figure S4).
Because samples were grown on different days, we
examined whether batch effects could introduce an
additional source of variability in gene expression measurements. We identified a set of 162 genes that
appeared to have higher expression in the second replicate of S. paradoxus versus the first. We found that the

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

Page 4 of 15

350
Biological Replicate
Paradoxus
Mikatae
Bayanus

Count of Genes With Log2 Fold Change

300

250

200

150

100

50

0
-15

-10

-5

0
Log 2 Fold Change

5

10

15

Figure 2 The distribution of log2 fold changes when the expression levels from each comparison sample are compared to
S. cerevisiae replicate 1, using the core genes. Biological replicates are S. cerevisiae replicate 2 versus S. cerevisiae replicate 1. Interspecies
comparisons are replicate 1 of the comparison species versus S. cerevisiae replicate 1.

orthologs of these genes were also disproportionately
up-regulated in the second replicate of S. cerevisiae
(90%), S. mikatae (62%), and S. bayanus (96%) (Additional File 1, Figure S5). These genes showed enrichment for involvement in RNA metabolic processes (p <
0.01). Therefore, in subsequent analyses comparisons
were only made between samples which were grown
within the same batch.
This reveals the difficulty of calling DE genes in comparisons of samples separated by evolutionary distances:
the signal (true differential expression due to genetic difference) to noise (environmental variance, technical variance, and Poisson noise) ratio is very low.
Fold change measurements obtained from RNA-Seq are
confirmed with qPCR

To demonstrate the accuracy of our gene expression
measurements, we compared FC measurements
obtained with RNA-Seq to those obtained using qPCR
(Additional File 1, Supplemental Methods 3). In order
to adequately quantify the effects of environmental variance, the qPCR was run on three additional biological
replicates that were not those used for RNA-Seq (Additional File 1, Figure S6 and Table S3). Additional File 1,

Figure S6A shows the results obtained in the comparison between S. cerevisiae and S. mikatae, which is representative of the results found in all six of the crossspecies comparisons. Due to the response of genes to
subtle environmental differences and measurement
imprecision in both technologies, the 2s (95%) confidence intervals around the FC measurements in each
test span multiple log2 fold-changes for both RNA-Seq
and qPCR. In this validation, 22 out of the 27 measurements (81%) of the qPCR measurements are within the
boundaries of the fold change intervals for both RNASeq fold change measurements. While this result is
somewhat below expectations, we note that measurements are not independent and single outlier measurements can cause validation failure for multiple tests.
Identifying differentially expressed genes using a Χ2 test

To identify genes that are differentially expressed to a
statistically significant degree, we developed a Χ2 test
that models the combination of environmental, technical, and Poisson variance as Poisson fluctuation with
over-dispersion (Methods).
To test the sensitivity of our method, we used simulations of RNA-Seq data based on distributions measured

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

in the actual data (Additional File 1, Supplemental
Methods 4). We tested our method against a paired ttest and DESeq [19] run with the default settings. While
there are many differences between the methods, all test
whether the difference in the measured expression
between the two species is greater than the variance.
The methods have fundamental differences in the value
that they use as the variance. A paired t-test uses the
measured variance, and thus provides an unbiased result
and p-values that closely match the false positive rate of
the dataset. However, because variance is poorly measured with only two replicates, the power of the t-test is
relatively low (Additional File 1, Figure S7A). The other
methods integrate additional information into the estimate of variance, which improve their power but can
bias the results. In our method, we assumed that the
variance for a given gene will be conserved across all
four species. Our main variance measurement is therefore the mean measured variance of the gene across the
four species, which is calculated as described in Methods. Additionally, we used the knowledge that the variance of some genes will be measured at values lower
than the true variance due to random fluctuations. We
corrected these measurements by replacing ones where
the measured variance is below the value of the variance
observed in technical replicates with that value. We did
this under the assumption that the true variance cannot
be lower than the resolution of the technology (Methods). DESeq estimates variance by sharing information
between different genes that are expressed at a similar
expression level. In simulations, we found that when differences in expression were modeled as random changes
of a consistent effect size, as defined by Cohen’s D, the
power of our method was comparable power to DESeq
(Additional File 1, Figure S7A). We found that the false
positives called by DESeq were more enriched for high
variance genes than those called by our method (Additional File 1, Figure S7B). Both DESeq and our method
showed small deviations between the p-value calculated
and the actual false positive rate (Additional File 1, Figure S7C). In the actual data, we found that DESeq identified a greater number of genes as differentially
expressed than our method (Additional File 1, Table
S4). In particular, our method was less likely to identify
genes with high measured variance as differentially
expressed (Supplementary Figure 7D). We believe that
our conservative approach is justified by the fact that
genes with high variance tended to also show deviations
from qPCR measurements in validation experiments
(Additional File 1, Figure S6). Additionally, we used the
mean expression and variance of biological replicates
that was reported by DESeq to test whether the variances used in the differential expression calls would
produce confidence interval boundaries consistent with

Page 5 of 15

the qPCR measurements. We found that qPCR measurements fell within the boundaries of the 95% DESeq
confidence intervals in 83% of the 162 tests. The comparable metric for our variance measurement was 91%
(Additional File 1, Supplemental Methods 3). We also
tested our metric against a Poisson exact test [20] and a
Fisher exact test, but were not able to obtain a false
positive rate lower than 10% with either test, even with
a p-value cutoff of 10-10.
A Χ2 test that uses the expected value as the denominator (see Methods) would call 4% of the measured
genes DE at p < 0.01 in the technical replicates of S. cerevisiae, 58% in the biological replicates of S. cerevisiae,
and 81% in the comparison between S. cerevisiae and S.
bayanus. These results indicate that even in technical
replicates the variance between samples is substantially
over-dispersed relative to Poisson.
Using our Χ2 metric, we found that the percentage of
measured genes that are called DE in cross-species comparisons ranged from 19-25%, at a p-value < 0.01 (Table
1, Additional File 2). At this p-value cutoff, the false discovery rate is low for all comparisons (3.9-5.1%). Figure
1C and Additional File 1, Figure S8 show that differentially expressed genes are far from the null model, even
at the highest level of expression.
Identifying the Lineage of Changes in Expression

Under a simple model where changes in expression offer
selective advantage to a given organism, one would
expect the changes in the genome that underlie these
adaptations to become fixed in a given lineage. For example, the gene RME1 (YGR044C) is expected to have
higher expression in this strain of S. cerevisiae relative to
the other three species because there is a known variation
in RME1’s transcription factor binding site that leads to
an increase in the gene’s expression [21]. This mutation
occurs only in the S. cerevisiae genome and is known in
one strain to cause an increase in S. cerevisiae’s sporulation efficiency. In our data, this gene had significantly
higher expression in S. cerevisiae versus each of the three
other species, with fold changes greater than 15X (Additional File 1, Figure S9A). By contrast, the gene TSC3/
YBR058C-A had higher expression in S. cerevisiae than
in S. bayanus (p < 0.01) or S. paradoxus (p < 0.05), but
was not significantly DE against S. mikatae (p > 0.05)
(Additional File 1, Figure S9B). Differences such as this
cannot be ascribed to an individual lineage. While these
changes could result from multiple selective events, they
are more consistent with a model of drift where changes
in expression occur randomly, and do not become fixed
in any lineage because they have neutral or nearly neutral
phenotypic effects.
Where possible, we identified the lineage where a
change in expression took place (Figure 3 and

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

Page 6 of 15

Table 1 Genes Differentially Expressed By Interspecies Comparison
Intergenic Substitution Rate

All Genes Measured

DE

%DE

Core Genes Measured

DE

S. cerevisiae vs. S. paradoxus

0.231

4,362

834

19%

2,688

498

%DE
19%

S. cerevisiae vs. S. mikatae

0.394

3,562

719

20%

2,688

555

21%

S. cerevisiae vs. S. bayanus

0.556

3,632

806

22%

2,688

609

23%

S. paradoxus vs. S. mikatae

0.359

3,508

787

22%

2,688

604

22%

S. paradoxus vs. S. bayanus

0.521

3,587

853

24%

2,688

643

24%

S. mikatae vs. S. bayanus

0.538

3,001

743

25%

2,688

652

24%

The intergenic substitution rate was reported in Kellis et al. (2003). Differential expression is measured at p < 0.01.

Additional File 1, Table S5A). We did this using a conservative approach that identified core genes where
there was a change in expression that showed a consistent, statistically significant relationship against all of the
other species in the lineage.
While a large number of genes were DE in individual
cross-species comparisons, only a small number of these
differences could be attributed to changes in an individual lineage. For example, 1051 of the core genes (39%)
are DE at p < 0.01 in at least one cross species comparison with S. cerevisiae, but only 13% of those (134) maintained the DE relationship versus each of the three other
branches of the phylogeny. Across the entire phylogeny
of these four species, 613 genes showed consistent

phylogenetic relationships at p < 0.01 (Additional File 1,
Table S5A), and the number of genes diverged at each
branch is shown in Figure 3. Overall, lineage-specific
changes were equally likely to increase or decrease a
gene’s expression. Within the individual branches, genes
that were differentially expressed in the S. bayanus
branch were more likely to have decreased expression
(p < 0.01 after Bonferroni correction). Ninety-five of the
total 613 genes (15%) showed statistically significant
changes in more than one lineage. For example, the gene
YDL124W showed significantly increased expression in
S. cerevisiae versus the 3 other species, and significantly
decreased expression in S. bayanus. Gene ontology analysis revealed no common themes uniting these 95 genes.

S. bayanus Rep 2

226
S. bayanus Rep 1
S. mikatae Rep 2

143
S. mikatae Rep 1
S. cerevisiae Rep 2

134
86

S. cerevisiae Rep 1
S. paradoxus Rep 2

122
S. paradoxus Rep 1

0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

Figure 3 Hierarchical clustering of the expression of the core genes for the eight samples. The distance between the samples is 1-the
Spearman correlation between the samples. Numbers on the branches represent the number of genes that were differentially expressed in each
lineage with evolutionarily consistent relationships, e.g. 226 genes were differentially expressed in the S. bayanus lineage vs. each other lineage.

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

Page 7 of 15

While this set of 613 genes showed statistically significant changes, there were few changes of as large a magnitude as the change observed in RME1. Only 10 genes
showed changes that were at least 10X versus each of
the other species (Additional File 1, Table S5B).
We performed a Gene Ontology enrichment analysis
on genes that showed evidence of lineage-specific differential expression to search for evidence of directional
selection using AmiGO through the Saccharomyces
Genome Database [22]. We used the entire set of core
genes as our background set. We found that genes that
had decreased expression in the branch separating S.
cerevisiae and S. paradoxus from S. mikatae and S.
bayanus were enriched for genes producing products
that localize to the mitochondria (p < 0.01). The genes
that had decreased expression in S. mikatae also showed
enrichment in the form of three genes that participate
in nucleobase-containing compound transmembrane
transporter activity in (p < .01). Overall, however, only
25 (4%) of the total 613 genes that had lineage-specific
differential expression were members of these enriched
GO categories (Additional File 1, Table 5A). No categories were enriched in the other branches.
Overall, these results are consistent with a model
where the primary driver of evolutionary changes in
expression is random drift, rather than functional
selection.

Expression levels recapitulate phylogeny

Gene expression evolves through changes in the recruitment of the polymerase by transcription factors, from
which it is reasonable to expect that expression evolves
multiplicatively. If this expression evolution were to follow clock-like behavior, then we would expect the s2 of
the log2 fold changes to scale linearly with divergence
time between species. To determine whether clock-like
divergence is a good model for our expression data, we
compared the s2 of the log2 fold changes to the intergenic substitution rate between species as measured in
[15]. We plotted the s2 of the log2 FCs for each biological replicate and each same-day species-to-species comparison versus the evolutionary distance between
samples. The results showed a close fit to a linear relationship with an R2 of 0.90 (Figure 4). We found similar
results using hierarchical clustering on the expression
data from each species using the core genes (Figure 3
and Additional File 1, Supplemental Methods 5).
Classes of genes evolve at different speeds

We examined the rate of evolution between specific
classes of genes, based on the variance of the log2 FC
distributions for the genes and found significant differences in the rate of evolution between groups of genes.
Genes with a TATA box in the promoter (n = 460,
p = 0.016) [23] and genes with a coding sequence

5
All Genes (R2=0.91, slope=2.4)
TATA-Containing (R2=0.79, slope=4.5)

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

0

0.1

0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Species Divergence (Intergenic Substitution Rate)

Par-Bay
Mik-Bay
Cer-Bay

Reps

0

Cer-Par

0.5

Cer-Mik

1

Par-Mik

Expression Divergence (Variance of Log2 Fold Change)

CDS>2000 bases (R2=0.66, slope=1.0)

0.6

0.7

Figure 4 Linear relationship between variance of distribution of log2 fold changes and intergenic substitution rate between species.
Dots represent the measurements of expression. Error bars are the standard error of the mean.

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

shorter than 2000 bases (n = 499, p < 0.001) have
diverged more quickly than TATA-less genes and genes
with a longer coding sequence. By controlling for each
of these factors we observed the increased expression
divergence observed in genes with TATA boxes and
genes with short coding sequences appear to be independent effects (Figure 4 and Additional File 1, Supplemental Methods 6). The finding that genes with a
TATA box diverge faster was previously reported in Tirosh et al. [4] using a dataset of microarray-based expression measurements in four yeast species. We used this
dataset to confirm the finding that genes with shorter
coding sequences diverge faster (p < 0.001), though the
correlation between length and expression divergence is
weak (-0.23).
Genes with more than 5 transcription factor binding
sites [24] and genes whose mRNA decays more slowly
than the median [25] also had significantly higher rates
of expression divergence (p < 0.01). However, both of
these properties are more common in genes with TATA
boxes, and we could not demonstrate that this effect is
independent of TATA status. When we controlled for
the number of transcription factor binding sites and
mRNA decay rates, genes with a TATA box still had an
increased rate of expression divergence, indicating that
neither of these factors is responsible for the behavior of
genes that contain a TATA box.
Potential confounding factors such as the expression
level of the gene (p = 0.99), the variance of the gene in
biological replicates (p = 0.85), and mean coding
sequence divergence (p = 0.60) were not significant
components of expression evolution in these species
(Additional File 1, Supplemental Methods 6).
While genes with TATA boxes and shorter coding
sequences diverged faster than non-TATA genes and
genes with longer coding sequences, the s 2 of these
classes still maintained a linear relationship with regards
to divergence time (R 2 of genes with TATA boxes =
0.80, R 2 genes with CDS > 2000 bases = 0.66, R 2 of
genes with CDS < 2000 bases = 0.86 Figure 4).
Gene duplication events often give rise to an heir
and a spare

We examined whether having duplicated copies of a
gene increased the total expression of the gene following
a gene duplication event. To do this, we tested whether
we could detect differential expression between the
copies of duplicated genes following what appeared to
be lineage-specific duplication in S. bayanus, the species
most diverged from S. cerevisiae. While there are many
S. cerevisiae genes annotated with non-unique S. bayanus orthologs [15], we used additional filtering to ensure
that the gene was a duplication that could be accurately
assessed with RNA-Seq. These criteria included ensuring

Page 8 of 15

that each copy of the gene in S. bayanus covered more
than 60% of the original the S. cerevisiae genes, which
excluded most potential duplication events (Additional
File 1, Supplemental Methods 7 and Table S6). Filtering
left us with a set of 14 stringent gene duplications.
For each pair of paralogs, we determined which gene
sequence was more diverged from the common ancestor
by creating a phylogenetic tree of the orthologous
sequences from all species. In 10 out of the 14 cases, the
less divergent copy maintained an expression level consistent with S. cerevisiae while the divergent copy dropped in
expression level (Figure 5). In 5 of these cases, the
diverged paralog had an expression significantly below the
level of expression observed in S. cerevisiae. There were
no examples where the less divergent copy dropped
expression to this degree. Additionally, there were no
examples where expression dropped substantially for both
duplicated genes. Overall, this suggests a predominant
model where one of the duplicates inherits the function of
the original gene while the other becomes obsolete.

Discussion
RNA-Seq offers a significant improvement in measuring
cross-species gene expression over microarrays because
it allows for orthologous genes from multiple species to
be measured and compared to one another without the
significant complications of species or strain-specific
probe biases. For this reason, it is likely that RNA-Seq
will replace microarrays in cross-species experiments.
However, many of the challenges that were present in
measuring gene expression using microarrays will continue to be present in RNA-Seq experiments because
they originate from biological rather than technical
sources. Overcoming these challenges in cross-species
experiments will be particularly difficult because measurement artifacts can both mimic and obscure the
effects of evolution. For example, we found that shorter
genes tended to have higher expression divergence
between species and are more likely to be differentially
expressed. This finding unlikely to be an artifact of
RNA-Seq measurements as it is consistent with a finding in a microarray-based study of drosophila [6], and
was observed in the microarray measurements of yeast
[4]. However, shorter genes that are truly DE are less
likely to be detected as such than longer genes with
expression changes of the same fold change because
their transcripts produce fewer nucleotide fragments,
and thus are measured relatively higher Poisson noise.
Normalizing read counts between samples can also be
problematic. Under a neutral model of gene expression
evolution, the number of genes with increased expression in one species versus another should equal the
number with decreased expression. Deviations from
symmetry can be viewed as evidence of selection [26].

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

Page 9 of 15

6

10

1:1 Ortholog
Non-Diverged Paralog
Diverged Paralog
5

S. bayanus (Uniquely Aligned Reads Per Gene)

10

4

10

YJL213W

YBR143C

YDR224C

3

10

YHR029C

YNR055C

YIL077C

YIL164C

YBR164C

2

10

YLR125W

YBL042C

YLL056C

YKL071W
YLL060C

YJL037W
1

10

0

10
0
10

1

10

2

3

4

10
10
10
S. cerevisiae (Uniquely Aligned Reads Per Gene)

5

10

6

10

Figure 5 Expression of paralogs following likely gene duplication events in S. bayanus. Both paralogs are plotted vs. the expression of the
single S. cerevisiae ortholog. Gray points show the expression of S. bayanus vs. S. cerevisiae 1:1 orthologs.

Most methods for normalizing RNA-Seq data assume
that the overall expression of the two species will be the
same, forcing some degree of symmetry. Because reference assemblies will usually differ in quality in crossspecies experiments, it is important to use normalization
strategies that are robust to the effects of missing
regions and errors in genomes. Missing regions will
have a limited effect on our normalization method
because only genes that are present in both species are
included in the normalization equations. The effect of
errors can be better ameliorated by using an alignment
strategy such as ours that allows for some mismatches
between the reads and the reference genome. In our
qPCR validation, our results did not show any systematic, directional differences compared to our RNA-Seq
results. Despite this strategy, we did see a tendency for
genes with consistent expression changes in S. bayanus
to have decreased expression. There was, however, no
evidence that these genes represented a functional class
of genes, and across the entire phylogeny genes with
changes in expression were equally likely to have
increased and decreased expression.
To confirm that our statistical approach adequately
accounted for both technical and environmental variance

in our experiment, we validated our DE calls using qPCR
with RNA isolated from biological replicates grown separately from the samples used for RNA-Seq. By contrast,
running qPCR on the same RNA used for RNA-Seq
would have only assessed whether the technical variance
was correctly assessed. RNA-Seq measurements are
already known to have a high level of technical reproducibility, in our study and others [12,13], and therefore
validations of technical reproducibility add little value.
Because our qPCR was run on independent samples, and
our results generally reproduced within our calculated
confidence, we are confident that significant p-values
correspond to the probability of consistent results if the
experiment were repeated.
The sensitivity of experiments to detect differentially
expressed genes is determined by the ability to distinguish true changes in gene expression from alternate
sources of variance. Sensitivity in RNA-Seq experiments
will be limited for genes that are measured with low
read counts and high Poisson counting noise. In this
experiment, our samples were sequenced deeply enough
that we could measure the expression of greater than
95% of genes with greater than 10 reads. This sequencing depth is much more difficult to achieve in

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

mammals and other species with large transcriptomes.
We found that for genes measured with fewer than 10
reads, the signals from biological and technical variance
were largely obscured by Poisson sampling noise, and
only large fold changes could be detected as significant.
While deeper sequencing will reduce this Poisson noise,
using the same number of reads to sequence an additional replicate will reduce both Poisson and non-Poisson variance, and should theoretically provide a greater
increase in sensitivity than deeper sequencing.
In a review of studies of gene expression evolution,
Clarke et al. [27] noted that the reported DE rates
between evolutionarily diverged organisms shows a high
degree of variation between studies, and suggested that
this variation was caused by differences in the sensitivity
of the experiments. Additionally, the way in which biological variance is measured and accounted for in the
experimental design is a crucial factor in determining
not just how many genes will be detected as DE, but
also the reproducibility of findings. For example, Cassone et al. [28] reported that the calculated rate of DE
genes between two insipient species of mosquitoes was
1-2% of genes when they applied a model that correctly
controlled for the biological variance observed between
colonies of mosquitoes, but would be measured at ~54%
if less stringent controls were applied. Their finding of
little differential gene expression in these closely related
strains is consistent with our results.
Large deviations from our linear model of expression
divergence would be possible if a single mutation altered
a gene’s expression dramatically, and this event had a
cascading effect on the expression of other genes. However, we believe that in wild populations such changes
are likely to be selected against. For example, the change
in expression of RME1 demonstrates that a single base
mutation can dramatically alter the expression of a
gene. However, despite the high divergence within the
intergenic regions of these species, there were only ten
examples of changes in expression that were of the
same magnitude as the change observed in RME1. A
role for purifying selection is further supported by our
finding that the more diverged copy of duplicated genes
also dropped in expression 35% of the time while there
were no such cases for the less diverged copy. This finding is consistent with, and further clarifies, microarraybased findings of expression divergence following gene
duplication events [29,30].
While there are clear signs of purifying selection in
our study, several lines of evidence support the premise
that the primary driver of changes in expression is neutral drift. Only a small fraction of the genes differentially
expressed between individual species showed evidence
of being fixed in any lineage. While two Gene Ontology
categories were over-represented in genes exhibiting

Page 10 of 15

lineage-specific DE, the majority of such genes were not
members of these categories. Furthermore, the linear
correlation between the expression divergence and the
intergenic substitution rate suggests a clock-like divergence. While properties such as TATA boxes and gene
length were associated with increased gene expression
divergence, divergence rates within these categories still
maintained a linear relationship with intergenic substitution rate, consistent with a drift model with a faster diffusion coefficient.
A recent study of a S. cerevisiae - S. bayanus hybrid
identified several categories of genes as being directionally differentially regulated between S. cerevisiae and S.
bayanus, and suggested that these categories were under
evolutionary selection [31]. We did not replicate differential expression in any of their Gene Ontology categories in our study. There were, however, large
differences between our study designs and the statistical
analyses used. A hybrid construct is used to identify
genes that are expressed at different levels due to differences in transcriptional efficiency caused by cis regulatory differences. In Tirosh et al. [32] it was shown that
genes observed as DE between species are not necessarily observed as DE within the hybrid, and vice versa.
Additionally, our strains were prototrophic, whereas the
hybrid strain had several auxotrophies and therefore
required amino acid supplements in the media, making
the growth conditions in the two experiments different.
The auxotrophies may be particularly important differences in light of the fact that two of the five networks
that Bullard et al. identified as directionally regulated in
the hybrid (histidine and lysine biosynthesis) contained
pathways that were not functioning normally because
the strain was auxotrophic for his3 and lys2.

Conclusions
Overall, we found that the changes in expression that
occurred in response to even the subtle environmental
variation of a well-controlled laboratory were similar in
magnitude to the changes in expression that accumulate
over millions of years of evolution. This finding emphasizes the need to design experiments that measure the
evolution of gene expression to avoid introducing any
alternate sources of expression variation into the experiments. The statistical significance of gene expression
changes measured in RNA-Seq experiments must
account for the effects of these different types of variance in each measurement.
Methods
Samples Preparation

All cultures were grown to saturation overnight in 25
mL of SD (6.7 g yeast nitrogen base, without amino
acids, Difco# 0919-15 + 2% glucose). This was then

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

diluted ~1:100 into 1 L of prewarmed SD in 2.8 L flasks
at 30C shaking at 240 RPM. Cells were grown to an
OD600 of 0.8-0.9. We had previously measured the
growth profile for all four of the strains we used by
counting cell number over time (with a hemocytometer)
and comparing this to OD. From this we determined
that all four strains were still in exponential growth at
this OD. Ice was added directly to the cultures to stop
growth. The cells were spun down at 3000 g for 5 minutes. The pellet was washed 1x with 25 mL of ice cold
water and transferred to a 50 mL falcon tubes. The cells
were spun 3000 g for 5 minutes and washed one more
time in ice-cold water. After the final wash the cells
were resuspended in 1 mL of ice cold water and aliquoted to 5 tubes. The cells were spun down at top
speed on a table top centrifuge. The liquid was removed
and the cell frozen in liquid nitrogen. The experiments
were performed in duplicate. All steps were also duplicated. An independent isolate of each strain was taken
from a plate, and media was media separately (not a single batch for all experiments).
RNA Isolation and Sequencing

Whole transcriptome RNA-Seq (WT-Seq) was performed according to a protocol/kit now available from
Life Technologies, with minor modifications that are
described below. Briefly, 5-10 μg of RNA isolated from
each of the eight yeast cultures was depleted of ribosomal RNAs using two rounds of Eukaryotic RiboMinus
treatment (Life Technologies) with overnight ethanol
precipitations for sample re-concentration. The removal
of ribosomal RNAs was confirmed on a Bioanalyser
Nano Chip (Agilent). A total of 500-1,000 ng of
riboRNA-depleted total RNA was fragmented for 18
min at 95°C in NEB buffer 3 followed by 30 minutes
PNK treatment in the same buffer. Fragmentation was
followed by size selection of ~50 to ~150 bp fragments
using the flashPAGE denaturing PAGE-fractionator (Life
Technologies) and ethanol precipitation overnight. The
resulting RNA was directionally ligated, reverse-transcribed and RNaseH treated.
After trial PCR to assess library quality and quantity,
30 μl cDNA was run on a native 6% PAGE gel. The 90120-bp size window (corresponding to 50-80-bp RNA
insert size) was cut from the gel, shredded and inserted
directly into a 400 μl PCR reaction using standard WTSeq kit components and submitted to 11-15 cycles of
PCR. The PCR product was phenol-chloroform
extracted, ethanol precipitated and re-suspended in 20
μl WT-Seq gel loading buffer. The resulting sample was
run on a 6% native PAGE gel, and the 150-175-bp size
range (corresponding to 60-85 bp) was cut from the gel,
shredded, and extracted overnight in WT-Seq PAGE

Page 11 of 15

elution buffer. The resulting library was filtered through
0.45 μm spin filters (Life Technologies) to remove gel
pieces and ethanol precipitated.
We note that WT-Seq can detect neither the 5’-most
fragment from transcripts with 5’-modified ends (such
as mRNA 5’ 7-methyl-guanosine caps) nor the 3’-most
fragment from transcripts with 3’-modified ends. However, for transcripts long enough to produce multiple ≥
50-bp fragments, WT-Seq should detect the remaining
fragments.
Alignment and Quantification

Reads were aligned to their respective genomes using
the MOSAIK alignment program allowing for a threshold of two mismatches between each 35 base pair read
and the reference genome. The alignment output was
parsed using the bamtools API [33] and custom procedures written in C++ and Matlab.
As our main unit of quantification, we used the number of reads uniquely aligning to an annotated region of
the genome (usually coding sequence). Several other
groups have normalized read counts by the length of the
gene that is unique enough for reads to align to calculate
RPKM [34]. We did not do this because we wished to
preserve the raw count of the reads in order to assess the
amount of Poisson noise that is present in a gene’s measurement when we performed our statistical analyses.
Inclusion Criteria for Measured 1:1 Orthologs and Core
Genes

Genes that were selected for inclusion in the comparison of expression of 1:1 orthologs met the following criteria: the gene was annotated in S. cerevisiae; in non- S.
cerevisiae species it was annotated with one ortholog
[15]; its annotation was for a complete ORF (i.e. the
ORF did not extend into an unfinished part of the draft
genome); the annotated length was within 90% to 110%
of the S. cerevisiae annotated length; and, for each sample where the gene was measured, the number of
uniquely aligned reads for this gene was > = 90% of the
total aligned reads.
Core genes met the above criteria for all four species
(Additional File 1, Table S7). The purpose of this set is
to be able to make species-to-species comparisons using
the same gene set in all four species. Because we
required that genes be conserved in all four species, this
set will contain only conserved genes. However, genes
that are missing from one of the non-S. cerevisiae
lineages are more likely to be in unfinished portions of
their draft genomes rather than actually missing in the
species. All core genes had expression detected by at
least one read in one species, and all but 10 genes were
expressed at detectable levels in all four species.

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

The Χ2 Test Statistic

We assessed the statistical significance of differential
expression using a two-by-one Χ 2 test to test the
hypothesis that a gene is expressed at the same level in
both species [35]. If a set of N independent samples (x)
are randomly drawn from a normal distribution of a
known mean (μ) and variance (s2), the resulting set of
test statistics, as calculated by Equation 1, will form a c2
distribution with N degrees of freedom [36]:
Equation 1
X2 =

(x − μ)2
σ2

This relationship can then be used to calculate the
probability that the expression level for the gene in the
control (C g) and the test (T g) conditions were drawn
from the same normal distribution. The principle challenges are to correctly calculate the mean of the common distribution and its variance.
Calculating the means of the common distribution with
normalization

Even when read counts for the same gene are drawn
from the same underlying distribution, the mean of this
distribution will be measured at a higher or lower value
depending on how deeply each sample is sequenced.
Separate means (μ) must be calculated for the control
and test condition that are proportional to the sequencing depth of the sample. Several papers have reported
on the importance of normalizing the RNA-Seq read
counts by the appropriate factors to account for differences in the total number of reads sampled in the two
datasets, as well as the underlying mixture of RNA in
the samples [37]. The principle challenge is that a low
number of highly expressed genes with outlier measurements can significantly affect the total read count for
one of the samples, and the ratio of total read counts in
both samples is therefore not a reliable metric to use to
normalize samples.
We visualized the problem by plotting simulated raw
read counts (See Additional File 1, Supplemental Methods 4 for simulation procedure) on a scatter plot with
the counts for the genes in the control sample on the ×
axis and the test values on the Y axis. We then found
the slope (m) of the line that most closely matched the
known, simulated slope was calculated as the median
ratio of test to control counts, a metric which has been
used previously [38] (Additional File 1, Figure S10 and
Supplemental Methods 8).
The means of the distributions for each of the two
samples are points along this line. The exact point is
found by taking the midpoint of the segment of the
slope line that is bounded by (Cg, Cgm) and (Tg/m, Tg),

Page 12 of 15

as shown in Additional File 1, Figure S11. This point
gives an unbiased weighting to both the control and the
test condition, even when one sample is sequenced
much more deeply than the other, and allows for the
calculation of a distribution mean for each sample without rescaling the read counts.
Calculation of Variance

Because RNA Seq experiments commonly use a low
number of replicates, care must be taken to ensure that
accurate variance estimates are used. Because Poisson
and non-Poisson variance are independent from one
another (Additional File 1, Figure S12), total variance
can be calculated by adding the independent components of the variance [39]. Because Poisson variance is
dependent upon sequencing depth, while non-Poisson
variance is not, it is useful to separate out these two
components in order to ensure a more accurate calculation of the variance.
We identified two approaches which can be used to
estimate the non-Poisson variance. The first, simply
measuring the variance in gene-specific read counts
across replicates, provides an unbiased estimate of variance. The variance measured in replicates for a given
gene (sreps2) will include the combined effects of Poisson and non-Poisson variance (snP ). Poisson variance
can be estimated as the mean of the number of reads
that were used to make the measurement of variance in
replicates (R), and separated from non-Poisson variance
as follows:
Equation 2:
σnP 2 = σreps 2 − R

The measured gene-specific relative non-Poisson standard deviation (sm) is found by dividing the non-Poisson variance by the read count:
Equation 3:
σm =

σnP
R

And is thus:
Equation 4:
σm =

σreps 2 − R
R

The accuracy of the measured variance as an estimate
of the variance of the normal distribution from which
the sample is drawn will be limited by the number of
replicates used and by the amount of Poisson noise that
is present in the measurements that were used to estimate the variance. For example, we do not believe that
expression levels can be measured with complete

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

certainty using RNA-Seq because the values in the technical replicates do not repeat with 100% reliability
(Additional File 1, Figure S1). However, some of the
technical replicate variances (sreps2) will be measured at
zero because the measurements will repeat exactly in
the both replicates by random chance. Error in the estimates of non-Poisson variance will be highest for genes
which are measured with few reads. This is because the
variability in measurements across replicates will be
dominated by Poisson noise making estimates of nonPoisson variance unreliable. Despite these drawbacks,
the measured variance is still the most unbiased approximation of true gene-specific variance.
An alternative approach is to assume a uniform overdispersion, where all genes are assumed to have the
same non-Poisson variance which is set to a uniform
over-dispersion factor (U). The value used as the uniform over-dispersion (U) can be calibrated based on
replicates. By definition, the p-value is the probability
that a difference will be detected as statistically significant (rejection of the null hypothesis) when in fact no
difference exists. In replicates, the null hypothesis is true
for all genes, but would be expected to be falsely
rejected in proportions equivalent to the calculated pvalues. The U is therefore set as the minimal U such
that the percentage of genes that are called DE in biological replicates equals the p-value. For example, if
10,000 genes are calibrated to a U with a p-value of
0.05, the U is the minimum value where 500 of the
genes in the biological replicates have a p-value < 0.05.
The calibration was performed on genes with a mean
count of at least 10 reads across the two conditions.
This cut-off ensures that measurements are not dominated by Poisson noise which may skew calibrations.
The value of U will be approximately the center of the
distribution of measured non-Poisson variances. The
disadvantage to using a uniform over-dispersion is that
it corrects all variances towards a central value. This
correction systematically underestimates the variance of
classes of genes which have high variance, while overestimating the variance for low variance genes. This correction can therefore introduce biases into differential
expression calls.
We resolve these two approaches by further breaking
non-Poisson variance into a technical variance and
gene-specific environmental variance. Technical variance
is caused by errors in the library preparation and
sequencing process. While it is probable that some coding genes may be more susceptible to technical variance
than others, we do not have sufficient information to
identify these genes and therefore our best estimate of
variance is a uniform model where each measurement is
assumed to have a minimal possible snP equal to technical variance (st ). This minimum snP is effectively the

Page 13 of 15

resolution of the RNA-Seq technology. Genes should
not be called DE between two samples if they are closer
in expression than the resolution of the technology. To
assess this resolution we calculate the U for our technical replicates using coding genes (s t = 0.16 in our
experiment).
Gene-specific environmental variance cannot be
assumed to be uniform because a gene’s response to the
environment is determined by its function. Using a uniform model to assess this variance will yield false positives that are enriched for genes which have high
variance in biological replicates. This is undesirable
because it is difficult to distinguish such artifacts from
biological effects. Therefore, when the measured genespecific variance sm was above the uniform technical
variance, this value was used as the estimate of snP:
Equation 5:
σnP = max(σm , σt )

To improve the accuracy of our calculations of variance, we assumed that the gene-specific variance will
be constant across all four species because gene function
is likely to be conserved. This assumption will give each
gene a greater number of data points on which to base
the estimate of variance. We then took the weighted
mean of the non-Poisson relative variances that were
calculated for each gene across the biological replicates
of the four species. Measurements were weighted by the
number of reads on which they were based under the
assumption that genes measured with more reads will
have more accurate assessments of variance because
they will be subject to less Poisson noise. Measurements
made with less than a mean of 30 reads in the two replicates were discarded on the assumption that they were
unreliable due to the fact that more than 20% of their
measured variance is Poisson noise. When the gene was
not measured by at least 30 reads in any of the species
its variance was set to U calibrated for that species’ biological replicates. Because our experiment had sufficient
sampling depth, this correction applied to only 3% of
the core genes.
Because each species’ replicate pair reproduced with a
different overall variance (U), when the measured genespecific variances are used in the Χ2 test statistics they
are scaled to reflect these small differences by multiplying by the U calibrated for the species divided by the
mean U across all four species.
Degrees of Freedom

Each Χ2 test statistic was calculated with an N of 2 (the
control condition and the test condition), which would
suggest that the test statistic should have 2 degrees of
freedom. However, the means of the sampling

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

distributions were calculated based on the measurements from both samples. For this reason, a degree of
freedom is lost. To demonstrate this, we show that a
sampling distribution of Χ 2 test statistics generated
under the null model using the measured non-Poisson
variance (snPC = sm) is reasonably well approximated by
a Χ2 distribution with 1 DF (Additional File 1, Figure
S13A). Using a uniform variance in the Χ2 test statistic
(s nPC = U) also produces a Χ 2 distribution with one
degree of freedom (Additional File 1, Figure S13B).
The corrections to the Χ2 test statistic are designed to
use all of the information available in the experiment to
provide the most accurate identification of DE genes
without introducing substantial biological biases in the
genes that would be falsely detected as DE. In some
cases where the total variance calculated from the replicates was lower than the inherent technical variance calculated from Poisson fluctuation plus the overdispersion between technical replicates we used the
technical variance measured in replicates to represent
the truth. Because of this correction, the final distribution of Χ2 test statistics under the null model shows a
slight deviation from the Χ 2 distribution with 1 DF,
indicating that in some cases our p-values may be
slightly conservative (Additional File 1, Figure S13C). In
biological replicates, the false positive rate at p < 0.05
was 3%.

Page 14 of 15

This confidence interval is attained by propagating the
uncertainty in each measurement [39]. See Additional
File 1, Supplemental Methods 10 for derivation.
Measuring the rate of expression divergence

To measure the rate of expression divergence, we used
least squares regression to draw the line of best fit
through the s2 of the log2 FCs plotted against the intergenic substitution rate. The slope of the line is the measurement of the rate of gene expression divergence,
while the Y intercept is the variance of the log2 fold
changes at time = 0 (biological replicates). The Y intercept is therefore higher for subsets of genes with larger
variance in replicates. We tested the significance of
slope differences using an ANOCOVA test. To eliminate
the possibility that these results were artifacts of the
RNA-Seq technique, where possible, we verified our
results against the data of Tirosh et. al [4], an experiment that used microarrays to calculate expression
response divergence at the individual gene level in genes
under different stress conditions in S. cerevisiae, S. paradoxus, S. mikatae, and S. kudriavzevii (Additional File 1,
Supplemental Methods 6).

Additional material
Additional file 1: This file contains Supplemental Methods and
Supplemental Figures.
Additional file 2: This file provides the output for each crossspecies orthologus gene comparison, including the counts of
unique reads in each species and the results of the X2 statistical
test.

Combining tests

We found that our fold change (FC) calls reproduced
better when we only compared samples which were prepared on the same day (Additional File 1, Supplemental
Methods 9 and Table S8). This finding indicated that
there are batch effects within the data that must be controlled for. Therefore, we performed two tests for each
cross-species comparison: Rep 1 versus Rep 1 and Rep2
vs. Rep 2. We treated each test as an independent test
and combined p-values using Fisher’s combined probability method [40].
Calculation of Confidence Intervals Around Fold Changes

The fold-change was calculated as Tg(n)/Cg(n) where Tg
and Cg(n) are the read counts, normalized by sample
size, for each gene in the test and control samples
(Additional File 1, Supplemental Methods 10). The confidence interval around the fold-change is calculated as
follows:
Equation 6:

(n)

σ

⎛

FT = ⎝
¯
C

⎞2 ⎛

σTg
⎠
Tg × log(2)

+⎝

⎞2

σCg
⎠
Cg × log(2)

List of abbreviations used
CDS: coding sequence; DE: differentially expressed; FC: fold change
Author details
Department of Biology, Boston College, 140 Commonwealth Avenue,
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3961, USA. 2Department of Neurobiology, Harvard
Medical School, 220 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
3
Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 4Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical
School 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, NRB 0356, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 5Broad
Institute of Harvard and MIT, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142.
1

Authors’ contributions
MB participated in the study design, performed the main bioinformatics
analysis, and drafted the manuscript. JG conceived of the study and
participated in study design and analysis. JG and AC developed the protocol
and built the sequencing libraries. CS provided guidance on the statistical
analysis and helped to draft the manuscript. MPS and DB provided code to
perform the alignment and reads processing. JC advised on the analysis. MS
grew the yeast strains and participated in the study design and analysis. GM
participated in the experimental design, coordinated, and oversaw the
project. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 11 May 2011 Accepted: 29 December 2011
Published: 29 December 2011

Busby et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12:635
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/635

References
1. Khaitovich P, Enard W, Lachmann M, Paabo S: Evolution of primate gene
expression. Nat Rev Genet 2006, 7(9):693-702.
2. Parikh A, Miranda ER, Katoh-Kurasawa M, Fuller D, Rot G, Zagar L, Curk T,
Sucgang R, Chen R, Zupan B, et al: Conserved developmental
transcriptomes in evolutionarily divergent species. Genome Biol 2010,
11(3):R35.
3. McManus CJ, Coolon JD, Duff MO, Eipper-Mains J, Graveley BR, Wittkopp PJ:
Regulatory divergence in Drosophila revealed by mRNA-seq. Genome Res
2010, 20(6):816-825.
4. Tirosh I, Weinberger A, Carmi M, Barkai N: A genetic signature of
interspecies variations in gene expression. Nat Genet 2006, 38(7):830-834.
5. Sung HM, Wang TY, Wang D, Huang YS, Wu JP, Tsai HK, Tzeng J, Huang CJ,
Lee YC, Yang P, et al: Roles of trans and cis variation in yeast intraspecies
evolution of gene expression. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26(11):2533-2538.
6. Lemos B, Bettencourt BR, Meiklejohn CD, Hartl DL: Evolution of proteins and
gene expression levels are coupled in Drosophila and are independently
associated with mRNA abundance, protein length, and number of
protein-protein interactions. Mol Biol Evol 2005, 22(5):1345-1354.
7. Liao BY, Zhang J: Low rates of expression profile divergence in highly
expressed genes and tissue-specific genes during mammalian evolution.
Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(6):1119-1128.
8. Liao BY, Zhang J: Evolutionary conservation of expression profiles
between human and mouse orthologous genes. Mol Biol Evol 2006,
23(3):530-540.
9. Chain FJ, Ilieva D, Evans BJ: Single-species microarrays and comparative
transcriptomics. PLoS One 2008, 3(9):e3279.
10. Gilad Y, Rifkin SA, Bertone P, Gerstein M, White KP: Multi-species
microarrays reveal the effect of sequence divergence on gene
expression profiles. Genome Res 2005, 15(5):674-680.
11. Liu S, Lin L, Jiang P, Wang D, Xing Y: A comparison of RNA-Seq and highdensity exon array for detecting differential gene expression between
closely related species. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 39(2):578-588.
12. Marioni JC, Mason CE, Mane SM, Stephens M, Gilad Y: RNA-seq: an
assessment of technical reproducibility and comparison with gene
expression arrays. Genome Res 2008, 18(9):1509-1517.
13. Nagalakshmi U, Wang Z, Waern K, Shou C, Raha D, Gerstein M, Snyder M:
The transcriptional landscape of the yeast genome defined by RNA
sequencing. Science 2008, 320(5881):1344-1349.
14. Auer PL, Doerge RW: Statistical design and analysis of RNA sequencing
data. Genetics 2010, 185(2):405-416.
15. Kellis M, Patterson N, Endrizzi M, Birren B, Lander ES: Sequencing and
comparison of yeast species to identify genes and regulatory elements.
Nature 2003, 423(6937):241-254.
16. Brachmann CB, Davies A, Cost GJ, Caputo E, Li J, Hieter P, Boeke JD:
Designer deletion strains derived from Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C:
a useful set of strains and plasmids for PCR-mediated gene disruption
and other applications. Yeast 1998, 14(2):115-132.
17. McKernan KJ, Peckham HE, Costa GL, McLaughlin SF, Fu Y, Tsung EF,
Clouser CR, Duncan C, Ichikawa JK, Lee CC, et al: Sequence and structural
variation in a human genome uncovered by short-read, massively
parallel ligation sequencing using two-base encoding. Genome Res 2009,
19(9):1527-1541.
18. Dallas PB, Gottardo NG, Firth MJ, Beesley AH, Hoffmann K, Terry PA,
Freitas JR, Boag JM, Cummings AJ, Kees UR: Gene expression levels
assessed by oligonucleotide microarray analysis and quantitative realtime RT-PCR – how well do they correlate? BMC Genomics 2005, 6(1):59.
19. Anders S, Huber W: Differential expression analysis for sequence count
data. Genome Biol 2010, 11(10):R106.
20. Rosner B: Fundamentals of biostatistics. Belmont, CA: Thomson-Brooks/
Cole, 6 2006.
21. Gerke J, Lorenz K, Cohen B: Genetic interactions between transcription
factors cause natural variation in yeast. Science 2009, 323(5913):498-501.
22. Carbon S, Ireland A, Mungall CJ, Shu S, Marshall B, Lewis S: AmiGO: online
access to ontology and annotation data. Bioinformatics 2009,
25(2):288-289.
23. Basehoar AD, Zanton SJ, Pugh BF: Identification and distinct regulation of
yeast TATA box-containing genes. Cell 2004, 116(5):699-709.
24. MacIsaac KD, Wang T, Gordon DB, Gifford DK, Stormo GD, Fraenkel E: An
improved map of conserved regulatory sites for Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:113.

Page 15 of 15

25. Wang Y, Liu CL, Storey JD, Tibshirani RJ, Herschlag D, Brown PO: Precision
and functional specificity in mRNA decay. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002,
99(9):5860-5865.
26. Khaitovich P, Paabo S, Weiss G: Toward a neutral evolutionary model of
gene expression. Genetics 2005, 170(2):929-939.
27. Clark TA, Townsend JP: Quantifying variation in gene expression. Mol Ecol
2007, 16(13):2613-2616.
28. Cassone BJ, Mouline K, Hahn MW, White BJ, Pombi M, Simard F,
Costantini C, Besansky NJ: Differential gene expression in incipient
species of Anopheles gambiae. Mol Ecol 2008, 17(10):2491-2504.
29. Gu X, Zhang Z, Huang W: Rapid evolution of expression and regulatory
divergences after yeast gene duplication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005,
102(3):707-712.
30. Tirosh I, Barkai N: Comparative analysis indicates regulatory
neofunctionalization of yeast duplicates. Genome Biol 2007, 8(4):R50.
31. Bullard JH, Mostovoy Y, Dudoit S, Brem RB: Polygenic and directional
regulatory evolution across pathways in Saccharomyces. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2010, 107(11):5058-5063.
32. Tirosh I, Reikhav S, Levy AA, Barkai N: A yeast hybrid provides insight into
the evolution of gene expression regulation. Science 2009,
324(5927):659-662.
33. Barnett DW, Garrison EK, Quinlan AR, Stromberg MP, Marth GT: BamTools: a
C++ API and toolkit for analyzing and managing BAM files. Bioinformatics
2011, 27(12):1691-1692.
34. Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L, Wold B: Mapping and
quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nat Methods 2008,
5(7):621-628.
35. Pearson K: On the criterion that a given system of deviations from the
probable in the case of a correlated system of variables is such that it
can be reasonably supposed to have arisen from random sampling.
London 1900.
36. Howell DC: Statistical methods for psychology. Belmont, CA: Duxbury
Press, 4 1997.
37. Robinson MD, Oshlack A: A scaling normalization method for differential
expression analysis of RNA-seq data. Genome Biol 2010, 11(3):R25.
38. Anders S, Huber W: Differential expression analysis for sequence count
data. Genome Biol 11(10):R106.
39. Bevington PR: Data reduction and error analysis for the physical sciences.
New York: McGraw-Hill; 1969.
40. Fisher RA: Statistical methods for research workers. Edinburgh [etc.]: Oliver
and Boyd, 4 1932.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-635
Cite this article as: Busby et al.: Expression divergence measured by
transcriptome sequencing of four yeast species. BMC Genomics 2011
12:635.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
