<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Prevalence of SOS-mediated control of integron integrase expression as an adaptive trait of chromosomal and mobile integrons</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6. doi:10.1186/1759-8753-2-6"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Guillaume Cambray"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

RESEARCH

Open Access

Prevalence of SOS-mediated control of integron
integrase expression as an adaptive trait of
chromosomal and mobile integrons
Guillaume Cambray1†, Neus Sanchez-Alberola2,3†, Susana Campoy2, Émilie Guerin4, Sandra Da Re4,
Bruno González-Zorn5, Marie-Cécile Ploy4, Jordi Barbé3, Didier Mazel1* and Ivan Erill3*

Abstract
Background: Integrons are found in hundreds of environmental bacterial species, but are mainly known as the
agents responsible for the capture and spread of antibiotic-resistance determinants between Gram-negative
pathogens. The SOS response is a regulatory network under control of the repressor protein LexA targeted at
addressing DNA damage, thus promoting genetic variation in times of stress. We recently reported a direct link
between the SOS response and the expression of integron integrases in Vibrio cholerae and a plasmid-borne class 1
mobile integron. SOS regulation enhances cassette swapping and capture in stressful conditions, while freezing the
integron in steady environments. We conducted a systematic study of available integron integrase promoter
sequences to analyze the extent of this relationship across the Bacteria domain.
Results: Our results showed that LexA controls the expression of a large fraction of integron integrases by binding to
Escherichia coli-like LexA binding sites. In addition, the results provide experimental validation of LexA control of the
integrase gene for another Vibrio chromosomal integron and for a multiresistance plasmid harboring two integrons. There
was a significant correlation between lack of LexA control and predicted inactivation of integrase genes, even though
experimental evidence also indicates that LexA regulation may be lost to enhance expression of integron cassettes.
Conclusions: Ancestral-state reconstruction on an integron integrase phylogeny led us to conclude that the
ancestral integron was already regulated by LexA. The data also indicated that SOS regulation has been actively
preserved in mobile integrons and large chromosomal integrons, suggesting that unregulated integrase activity is
selected against. Nonetheless, additional adaptations have probably arisen to cope with unregulated integrase
activity. Identifying them may be fundamental in deciphering the uneven distribution of integrons in the Bacteria
domain.

Background
Integrons are bacterial genetic elements capable of incorporating exogenous and promoterless open reading frames
(ORF), referred to as gene cassettes, by site-specific recombination (Figure 1). First described in the late 1980s in
connection with the emergence of antibiotic resistance [1],
integrons always contain three functional components: an
* Correspondence: mazel@pasteur.fr; erill@umbc.edu
† Contributed equally
1
Institut Pasteur, Unité Plasticité du Génome Bactérien, CNRS URA 2171,
75015 Paris, France
3
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County,
Baltimore 21228, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

integrase gene (intI), which mediates recombination; a primary recombination site (attI); and an outward-orientated
promoter (PC) [2]. Cassette integrations occur mainly at
the attI site, ensuring the correct expression of newly captured cassettes by placing them under the control of the
PC promoter [3,4]. To date, two main subsets of integrons
have been described. On the one hand, mobile integrons,
also referred to as multiresistance integrons, contain relatively few (two to eight) cassettes, and collectively encode
resistance to a broad spectrum of antibiotics [5-7]. They
have been conventionally divided into five different classes
according to their intI gene sequence: class 1 for intI1,
class 2 for intI2, class 3 for intI3, class 4 for intISXT (formerly intI9) and class 5 for intIHS [8,9]. Mobile integrons

© 2011 Cambray et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

Page 2 of 15

Figure 1 Schematic organization of integrons. The functional platform of integrons is constituted by an intI gene encoding an integrase, its
own promoter Pint, a cassette promoter PC, and a primary recombination site attI. The system maintains an array that can consist of more than
200 cassettes. Only the few first cassettes are strongly expressed by the PC promoter, as indicated by the fading fill color. Cassettes generally
contain a promoterless open reading frame (ORF) flanked by two recombination sites termed attC. Cassettes can be excised from any position in
the array through attC × attC recombination mediated by the integrase. The resulting circular intermediate can then be integrated by the
integrase, preferentially at attI. Exogenous circular intermediates can also be integrated, owing to the low specificity of the integrase activity,
rendering the system prone to horizontal transfer. The SOS response directly controls the expression of many integron integrases by binding of
its repressor protein, LexA, to a target site in the Pint promoter.

are typically associated with transposons and conjugative
plasmids, ensuring their dissemination across bacterial
species. They are present mostly in the Proteobacteria, but
have also been reported in other bacterial phyla, such as
Gram-positive bacteria [9]. By contrast, chromosomal integrons have been identified in the genomes of many bacterial species [10]. Because their phylogeny reflects a
predominant pattern of vertical inheritance, these integrons are not catalogued based on the class nomenclature
described above, but according to their host species [8,9].
A subfamily of these, termed superintegrons (SIs), has
been specifically identified in the Vibrionaceae and, to
some extent, in the Xanthomonadaceae and Pseudomonadaceae [11-16]. Superintegrons typically encompass
between 20 and 200 cassettes with species-specific
sequence signatures [9], and seem to be ancient residents
of the host genome [13]. Most of the genes in the superintegron cassettes are of unknown function [10], but some
of them are related to existing resistance cassettes [17-20].
Although stable under laboratory conditions, superintegrons have been reported to be the most variable loci of
V. cholerae natural isolates [12,21], suggesting that integron reorganization might be occasionally upregulated
in natural environments. Integron integrases mediate

recombination by interacting with single-stranded (ss)
attC sites present in all reported cassettes, employing a
unique, site-specific recombination process [22-24].
Despite the importance of integrons in the acquisition and
spread of antibiotic-resistance determinants and, from a
broader perspective, in bacterial adaptation, little was
known about the regulatory control and dynamics of cassette recombination until recently, when we reported that
the expression of the integron integrases in the V. cholerae
superintegron and in a class 1 mobile integron was controlled by the SOS response [25].
The SOS response is a global regulatory network governed by a repressor protein (LexA) and principally targeted at addressing DNA damage [26,27]. LexA represses
SOS genes by binding to highly specific binding sites present in their promoter regions. In E. coli and most b- and
g-Proteobacteria, these sites consist of a palindromic
motif (CTGTatatatatACAG) 16 bp long, commonly
known as the LexA box [26]. The SOS response is typically induced by the presence of ssDNA fragments,
which can arise from a number of environmental stresses
[28], but are typically linked to replication-fork stall
caused by DNA lesions. These ssDNA fragments bind
non-specifically to the universal recombination protein

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

RecA [29], enabling it to promote LexA inactivation by
autocatalytic cleavage [30], and thus inducing the SOS
response. Up to 40 genes have been shown to be directly
regulated by LexA in E. coli [31], encoding proteins that
stabilize the replication fork, repair DNA, promote translesion synthesis and arrest cell division. Since its initial
description in E. coli [26], the SOS response has been
characterized in many other bacterial classes and phyla,
and LexA has been shown to recognize markedly divergent motifs in different bacterial groups [27].
In recent years, the SOS response has been linked to
clinically relevant phenotypes, such as the activation and
dissemination of virulence factors carried in bacteriophages [32-34], transposons [35] pathogenicity islands
[36] and in integrating conjugative elements encoding
antibiotic-resistance genes [27,37,38]. Moreover, it has
recently become established that some widely used antibiotics, such as fluoroquinolones, trimethoprim and
b-lactams, are able to trigger SOS induction and are thus
able to promote the dissemination of antibiotic-resistance
genes [27,37,39-42]. This puts forward a positive feedback loop that has been suggested to have important
consequences for the emergence and dissemination of
antibiotic resistance [43]. Our recent work, showing a
link between the SOS response and integrase-mediated
recombination [25] further reinforces this line of reasoning. Such a link provides bacteria with an antibioticinduced mechanism for gene acquisition, reorganization
and dispersal. In hindsight, the coupling of genetic elements capable of cassette integration with a global
response to stress comes out as an elegant and powerful
pairing. Integrons can be seen as stockpiling agents of
genetic diversity that, in addition, can tap into a huge
and variable pool of cassettes through horizontal gene
transfer from the surrounding bacterial communities
(Figure 1) [10,44]. Nonetheless, efficient expression of
these acquired traits is strongly dependent on integrasemediated recombination. Newly acquired cassettes sitting
in the proximal region of the integron are strongly
expressed by the PC promoter, but they can be displaced
gradually to distal parts of the integron by the incorporation of new cassettes, and can thus become partially
silenced. Infrequent excision and integration events can
also relocate cassettes, moving them to distal or proximal
parts of the integron, and thus have the ability to reinstate previously acquired cassettes (Figure 1). The timing
of all these events is therefore of fundamental importance, and depends on the regulatory systems controlling
the expression of the integron integrase gene. In this context, the discovery of a link between the SOS response
and integrase expression is an important first step
towards unraveling the precise mechanisms controlling
integrase expression.

Page 3 of 15

In this study, we expanded on this recent connection
between the SOS response and integron integrase expression by means of a systematic study of integron integrase
promoter regions. By combining in silico and in vitro
methods, we show that LexA control of integrase expression is a widespread phenomenon that arose very early in
the evolutionary history of integrons and has since been
maintained through positive selection in mobile integrons and large chromosomal integrons. We report a significant correlation between the loss of LexA control and
integrase inactivation, indicating that unregulated recombination may be deleterious in these genetic elements.
Exceptions to this rule suggest that secondary adaptations to tolerate unregulated integrase expression may
have arisen in some clades, and that the identification of
such adaptations might shed light onto the uneven distribution of integrons in the Bacteria domain. We discuss
these findings for the adaptive dynamics of integrons,
and their implications for the acquisition and dissemination of antibiotic-resistance determinants.

Results and discussion
Identification of LexA binding sites in intI promoters

We recently identified E. coli-like LexA binding sites in
the promoter region of intI1 integrase genes from mobile
integrons and of the intIA integrase from the V. cholerae
superintegron (Figure 2AB). In V. cholerae and some of
these mobile integrons, the identified LexA boxes partially overlap the -10 element of the intI promoter in a
classic operator organization. We have shown that
expression of V. cholerae and E. coli pAT674 integrase
genes is indeed controlled by the SOS response, leading
to heightened rates of integrase-mediated recombination
upon SOS induction [25].
To gain insight into the general relevance of this observation, we undertook an exhaustive in silico study of integrase regulation by the LexA protein. Using a TBLASTN
search (National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI); http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), we identified 1,483
homologs of intIA in the non-redundant (NR) (971), environmental (ENV) (381) and Whole Genome Shotgun
(WGS) (131) subdivisions of the GenBank database. When
sufficient data were available (1,103 sequences), the nucleotide sequences corresponding to the first 50 bp of the coding region plus 100 bp upstream of the translation start
site (-100, +50) were systematically searched for LexA
binding sites. We conducted independent searches for all
the 15 LexA binding motifs described to date in the literature [27]. Putative LexA binding sites were detected in
56.6% (624) of the 1,103 sequences for which the (-100,+
50) region was available (see Additional file 1), with 40
sequences displaying two LexA binding sites in tandem. All
the identified LexA binding sites corresponded exclusively

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

Page 4 of 15

Figure 2 In silico analysis of integrase promoters. (A) Alignment of representative promoter regions of Vibrionaceae intIA homologs. Putative
LexA binding sequences are boxed, whereas putative s70 promoter elements (-35 and -10) are underlined, and the translation start site of intIA
is boxed and in bold type. The multiple sequence alignment was performed using CLUSTALW with default parameters [89]. (B) Representative
examples of LexA binding sites identified upstream of different integrase genes from mobile integrons, with (1-5) denoting the integrase class.
The provided accessors correspond to IntI proteins from: Escherichia coli pSa (AAA92752), Providencia stuartii ABR23a (ABG21674), Serratia
marcescens AK9373 (BAA08929), Vibrio cholerae 569B (AAC38424) and Vibrio salmonicida VS224 pRVS1 (CAC35342). (C) Sequence logos [100] of
the profile used to search for b/g-Proteobacteria LexA binding sites (top) and the profile emerging from the 93 distinct binding sites located
(bottom). Lan = Listonella anguillarum; Lpe_CIP = L. pelagia CIP 102762T; Val_12G01 = Vibrio alginolyticus 12G01; Vch_N16961 = V. cholerae O1
biovar Eltor str. N16961; Vha_ATCC = Vibrio harveyi ATCC BAA-1116; Vha_HY01 = V. harveyi HY01; Vme = Vibrio metschnikovii; Vmi = Vibrio
mimicus; Vna_CIP = Vibrio natriegens strain CIP 10319; Vpa = Vibrio parahaemolyticus; Vpa_RIMD = V. parahaemolyticus RIMD 2210633; Vsh_AK1 =
Vibrio shilonii AK1; Vsp_DAT722 = Vibrio sp. DAT722; Vsp_Ex25 = Vibrio sp. Ex25; Vvu_CIP754 = Vibrio vulnificus CIP 75.4; Vvu_YJ016 = V. vulnificus
YJ016 (see Additional file 11 for corresponding accession numbers).

to the motif found in E. coli and most b/g-Proteobacteria
(Figure 2C). Given that we searched for 14 additional LexA
binding motifs and that the sample of integrase sequences
contained representatives from the respective clades in
which these motifs have been reported, including one aProteobacteria species, this strongly suggests that the putative LexA regulation of intI genes is restricted to organisms
harboring LexA proteins that are able to recognize the b/gProteobacteria. The LexA binding motif of the b/g-Proteobacteria is markedly divergent from that seen in E. coli and
the b/g-Proteobacteria, and it is known to have arisen after
the split of the a- and b/g-Proteobacteria subclasses
[45-49]. Hence, it seems very likely that LexA regulation of
integrase genes also arose after this evolutionary branching
point. When we examined the core 16 bp sequence of the

identified E. coli-like LexA binding sites, we identified 93
distinct sequences (see Additional file 2). These LexA binding sites presented substantial diversity while maintaining a
high level of conservation, as reflected in their joint information content logo (Figure 2C). Importantly, E. coli-like
LexA sites were detected in almost all Vibrionaceae superintegrons (Figure 2A), and in all but one of the mobile integron classes (Figure 2B), indicating that putative LexA
regulation of intI genes is a widespread phenomenon
among integrons.
Predicted LexA binding sites correspond to functional
transcriptional-control elements

We have previously shown that LexA regulates the
expression of intI in V. cholerae, and our in silico search

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

identified LexA binding sites in the promoter region of
intI for all sequenced Vibrio species (see Additional file
1). To further assess the overall functionality of the
in silico predicted LexA binding sites, we evaluated integrase LexA regulation in Vibrio parahaemolyticus strain
ATCC 17802, which harbors a LexA binding site
upstream of its intIA gene in a genomic context that is
substantially different from that of V. cholerae (Figure
2A). Using quantitative reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR,
we determined the intIA expression level in both the
wild-type strain and its lexA(Def) derivative (lacking a
functional lexA gene). We found an expression ratio of
9.28, revealing a strong LexA regulation of the intIA
gene expression (Figure 3A). Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSA) with purified V. parahaemolyticus LexA protein showed that the observed
upregulation of intIA expression was directly mediated
by LexA in this organism (Figure 3A).
In several class 1 integrons, heightened expression of
the cassette genes has been shown to rely on a secondary
cassette promoter called PC2, located just upstream of the
intI1 gene (see Additional file 3). P C2 is enabled by a
GGG insertion (on the top strand) that increases the distance between the -35 box sequence and a sequence
resembling the -10 box consensus from 14 to 17 bp,
thereby generating a functional s70 promoter [3,4,50,51].
In all its reported instances, this GGG insertion disrupts
a seemingly functional LexA binding site. Therefore, it is
likely that the GGG insertion that enables P C2 should
simultaneously abolish integrase regulation by LexA. We
tested this hypothesis using the E. coli multi-resistant
plasmid pMUR050 [52], which provides an ideal background to test this hypothesis because it harbors two
integrons with inactivated copies of the intI1 gene. The
promoter regions of both intI genes are almost identical,
and differ only in that one (PintI1-) contains a functional
LexA binding site in its promoter, whereas the other
(PintI1+) presents the aforementioned GGG insertion, disrupting the LexA binding site and enabling the PC2 promoter (see Additional file 3). As expected, EMSA
confirmed that E. coli LexA is able to bind the PintI1- promoter, but that the GGG insertion effectively prevents
LexA binding on PintI1 + (Figure 3B). Furthermore, RTPCR in wild-type and lexA-defective backgrounds confirmed that LexA regulation was only present in the
IntI1-integrase carrying the intact LexA binding site, with
a strong deregulation (ratio of 6.55) in the lexA mutant
(Figure 3B). Thus, the GGG insert not only enables the
secondary cassette promoter PC2, but concomitantly disrupts the LexA binding site of the integrase promoter.
To check whether the GGG insert did in fact lead to
the activation of PC2 and increased cassette expression
in the pMUR IntI1 + integrase, we compared RT-PCR
expression profiles for the first cassette gene of both

Page 5 of 15

pMUR integrons. We found that cassette-gene expression was enhanced in the integron containing the GGG
insertion, and that this increase was independent of
LexA (data not shown). In silico searches for disrupted
LexA binding sites found 44 instances of similar GGG
inserts in integrons from a wide variety of species (see
Additional file 4), all corresponding to class 1 mobile
integrons harboring multiple antibiotic-resistance cassettes. Together, these results suggest that LexA regulation may eventually be lost under heavy selection to
promote higher basal levels of the antibiotic-resistance
transcript.
Ancestral-state reconstruction of LexA regulation and
integrase functionality

The presence of confirmed LexA regulation in V. cholerae
and V. parahaemolyticus superintegrons suggested that
SOS control of intI genes probably originated very early in
their evolutionary history. Likewise, the complete absence
of LexA binding motifs different from that of E. coli in all
the intI promoters analyzed in this study indicated that
LexA regulation must have been lost in integrons borne
by species without LexA, or in which LexA recognizes a
divergent motif [27,47]. At the same time, there is ample
evidence of extensive (10% to 30%) and independent integrase inactivation across the Bacteria domain, implying
that loss of integrase functionality may be an adaptive trait
under particular selective pressures [53]. In this respect,
the evidence of integrase inactivation in bacterial groups
in which it is known that LexA does not recognize the
E. coli motif [16,54,55], such as the Xanthomonadales, suggests that loss of LexA regulation might be linked to
mutational inactivation of the integrase gene.
To explore this hypothesis, we developed an automated
system to assess integrase functionality based on the
detection of generic (nonsense and indels) and integrasespecific missense mutations known to inactivate the protein (see Methods). This method was applied to 1,135
intIA homologs identified in this work for which sufficient
coding sequence was available. Consistent with previous
results, we found that a substantial fraction of integrase
genes (43%, see Additional file 5) seem to be inactivated
[53]. For the 755 intIA homologs with sufficient sequence
to apply both analyses, the predicted inactivation status
for each integrase sequence (active/inactive) was combined with the predicted presence of a LexA binding site
in its promoter (-100, +50) region as computed previously.
A correlation analysis was carried out to determine the
existence of a link between loss of LexA regulation and
integrase inactivation. The results of this analysis showed
a significant correlation (Pearson r = 0.58, Spearman r =
0.53; P < 0.001) between both traits (Figure 4), and give
credence to the idea that loss of LexA regulation is associated with integrase inactivation.

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Electrophoretic mobility-shift assay (EMSA) and quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR on different intI genes and
their respective promoters. (A) Vibrio parahaemolyticus integron. EMSA of V. parahaemolyticus intIA promoter with purified V. parahaemolyticus
LexA protein. Competitive assays using either non-specific or Pint non-labeled DNA are also shown. The intA expression factor was calculated as
the ratio of the relative intA mRNA concentration in the V. parahaemolyticus lexA mutant strain with respect to that in the wild type. (B) E. coli
pMUR050 integrons. EMSA of pMUR050 intI1-and intI1+(containing GGG insertion) promoters with purified E. coli LexA protein. The expression
factor for both intI genes was calculated as the ratio of each relative intI mRNA concentration in the E. coli lexA-sulA mutant strain with respect
to that in the wild type. In all cases, the expression factor of recA is shown as a control, and all expression factors are the mean value from three
independent experiments (each in triplicate).

To gain insight into the evolutionary history of this correlation, we generated a phylogenetic tree of 44 representative IntI sequences, and applied ancestral-state
reconstruction methods for both phenotypic characters
(predicted integrase functionality and LexA regulation).

The tree (Figure 5) is in overall agreement with previously published IntI phylogenies [9,53,56]. As in previous phylogenies, two major ecological groups can be
outlined on the tree: marine and freshwater/soil bacteria. Chromosomal superintegrons and class 5 mobile

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

Figure 4 Correlation between inferred LexA regulation and
integron integrase functionality. The plot was generated from
the frequency values for each trait at each reference panel taxon, as
derived from reciprocal BLAST mapping (see Additional file 14).
Pearson and Spearman rank correlations and their respective P
values were computed in Excel (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA,
USA). The asterisk rating system is used for correlation P values (***P
< 0.001). P values are relative to two-tailed Student t-test on the
null hypothesis (no correlation).

integrons borne by marine species form a monophyletic
clade that sits at the root of the tree. From this early
branch, a second radiation of integrons encompassing
both chromosomal integrons and all other mobile integron classes splits neatly into integrons borne by,
respectively, marine and soil/freshwater bacteria. In the
marine species, class 2 and 4 mobile integrons form a
monophyletic cluster with Shewanella chromosomal
integrons that is also in agreement with previous analyses [57,58]. In the soil/freshwater clade, class 1 and 3
mobile integrases form a distinct group, suggesting an
early split from their chromosomal counterparts in the
Proteobacteria [59].
Both parsimony and maximum likelihood (ML) reconstructions of the ancestral state for LexA regulation
strongly supported the notion that this feature was present in the common ancestor of bacterial integrons.
LexA regulation (Figure 5, filled circles) is pervasive
among Vibrio superintegrons and is also widespread
within the marine integron radiation. It is also most
likely (0.7 likelihood in ML reconstruction, see Additional file 6) that LexA regulation was present in the
ancestor of the soil/freshwater radiation, and has been
subsequently lost (Figure 5, open circles) in many of its
internal clades. A notable exception to this trend are the
class 1 and class 3 integrons, in which LexA regulation
is still the norm. Our results thus imply that some particular trait in the environment of both chromosomal

Page 7 of 15

superintegrons and mobile integrons must be exerting a
considerable selective pressure towards preservation of
integrase LexA regulation. In the chromosomal integrons of the Vibrionaceae, the most likely source of this
pressure is the stabilization of large integrons, which
may include essential genes [15]. In mobile integrons, it
seems likely that selection might favor integrons that
remain largely inactive, but are capable of generating
sharp bursts of recombination activity in times of need
for evolutionary innovation.
The reconstruction of ancestral states for inferred
integrase functionality is relatively congruent with the
hypothesis that the loss of LexA regulation might be
associated with integrase inactivation (Figure 5; see
Additional file 7). Even though there is testimonial evidence of inactivation (Figure 5, dotted lines), integrases
from almost all marine species in the tree were found to
be active (Figure 5, solid lines). By contrast, integrase
inactivation was found to be monophyletic for two soil/
freshwater subgroups, hinting at consistent selective
pressure towards inactivation.
Phylogenetic distribution of predicted LexA regulation
and integrase functionality

To further analyze the correlation between integrase LexA
regulation and inactivation, we mapped through reciprocal
BLAST searches [60] the 755 IntI homologs containing
sufficient available sequence to assess both traits against
the panel of IntI sequences used to reconstruct the phylogenetic tree. Even though reciprocal BLAST provides only
a crude estimate of phylogenetic relationship, this mapping process allowed us to observe the apparent frequencies (Figure 5, pie charts) of both traits in the clusters
represented by each tree taxon (Figure 5). Overall, the
results of this analysis broadly agree with those of the
ancestral-state reconstruction, and give further credence
to the idea that loss of LexA regulation is associated with
integrase inactivation. Nonetheless, close inspection of
these results also reveals a complex pattern of phylogenetic distribution for both traits.
Among marine species, LexA regulation of intI genes
is clearly prevalent, and loss of LexA regulation is only
present in a few instances. One such instance is the
V. cholerae SXT integrative-conjugative element (ICE),
which harbors a class 4 integrase and for which SOSdependent transfer has been reported through an indirect
path involving the phage-like SetR repressor [37,38,61].
In spite of this, mapping results show that five out of the
twenty sequences clustering with the V. cholerae SXT
integrase have predicted LexA binding sites. These
sequences belong to mobile integrases in Alteromonadales species that do not have homology with the SetR
transcriptional regulator, suggesting that LexA regulation
may have been preserved in the absence of SetR-mediated

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

Page 8 of 15

Figure 5 Phylogenetic tree of IntI protein sequences. The tree is the majority-rule consensus tree generated by MrBayes. The tree was rooted
using the Escherichia coli and Thiobacillus denitrificans XerCD protein sequences as outgroup. Bayesian posterior probabilities for each branch are
displayed at each branching point. Inferred states for phenotypic traits derived from parsimony ancestral-state reconstruction analysis are
displayed as follows. Integrase functionality: solid lines on tree branches represent inferred integrase functionality in that branch, and dotted lines
indicate non-functionality. LexA regulation: at each taxon and branching point, small filled circles represent inferred presence of LexA regulation,
and open circles indicate loss of LexA regulation. For clarity, the results of maximum likelihood reconstruction are not shown (see Additional file
6 and see Additional file 7 for these). The number of sequences mapping to each taxon in the reciprocal BLAST mapping analysis is shown
between brackets after the taxon name. Stacked pie charts next to this number indicate the observed percentage of integrase functionality
(upper pie) and LexA regulation (lower pie) in all the analyzed integrase sequences mapping to that specific taxon. The M letter followed by a
subscript number (MX) legend indicates mobile integron classes (1 to 5). Background colors delineate the main division into marine and soil/
freshwater radiations and the XerCD outgroup.

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

SOS regulation (see Additional file 8). Another exception
is Lutiella nitroferrum, but the absence of predicted LexA
sites is not surprising in a member of the Neisseriaceae,
because all the sequenced members of this family lack a
lexA gene [27]. A similar reasoning applies to another
exception, Rhodopirellula baltica, because it is known
that the LexA of Planctomycetes does not recognize the
conventional E. coli LexA binding motif [27].
Conversely, loss of LexA regulation seems to be the
norm among soil and freshwater species harboring chromosomal integrons. In most cases, this loss of regulation
has an obvious explanation. Some families, such as the
Nitrosomonadaceae and the Chromatiaceae, simply do
not possess any LexA homologs, Thus explaining the
absence of any LexA binding sites upstream of their intI
genes [27]. A similar argument can be made for the
Xanthomonadaceae, in which neither of the two identified LexA proteins recognizes the b/g-Proteobacteria
LexA binding motif [54], and for the Spirochetes, the
δ-Proteobacteria and the Cyanobacteria, in which LexA
also recognizes divergent motifs [48,62,63]. However,
reciprocal BLAST mapping indicates that there is residual LexA regulation persisting within several of these
groups. The M. flagellatus cluster, for instance, has six
out of thirty-two mapped sequences with predicted
LexA binding sites. Careful examination reveals that, in
this and all other cases of residual LexA regulation of
soil/freshwater bacterial integrons, regulated integrases
turn out to be harbored by a b/g-Proteobacteria species
or originate from environmental samples (see Additional
file 9). This strongly suggests that, for the most part,
LexA regulation is positively maintained when a suitable
genomic background (a compatible lexA gene encoding
a repressor that recognizes the b/g-Proteobacteria motif)
is available.
Several factors explain partly the absence of LexA
binding motifs, other than the b/g-Proteobacteria motif,
regulating integron integrases. An obvious explanation is
the lack of evolutionary time to develop such motifs.
This is manifestly true for many mobile integrons subject to lateral gene transfer. Indeed, predicted b/g-Proteobacteria LexA binding sites can still be seen in the
mobile integrons harbored by species from distant
phyla, such as the Actinobacteria. Integrase inactivation
is another mechanism that several groups, such as those
of the Xanthomonadales, seem to have evolved to compensate for unregulated integrase expression [16]. Even
though this constitutes a general trend (Figure 4) and
functionality can be temporarily restored through nonnative recombination, the observed correlation is moderate (Pearson r = 0.58***). Moreover, integrase functionality has been assayed experimentally in several
soil/freshwater chromosomal integrons in which the

Page 9 of 15

integrase is clearly not regulated [64,65], suggesting that
additional mechanisms must be at play.
Class 1 and 3 mobile integron integrases depart sharply from the trend towards loss of LexA regulation that
is seen among soil/freshwater integrons. Reciprocal
BLAST mapping supports the results of ancestral-state
reconstruction methods, providing ample support for
the persistence of LexA regulation in these well-sampled
mobile integron classes. In addition, the high percentages of LexA regulation seen in both these integron
classes (81% and 64%, respectively) are consistent with
high percentages of predicted regulation in the marine
mobile integrons of classes 2 and 5 (84% and 89%,
respectively; Figure 5). Beyond its fundamental relevance
to bacterial adaptation, the high prevalence of predicted
LexA regulation of mobile integron integrases has serious clinical implications, as it establishes a generic system for genetic interchange under control of a general
stress response shared by a large group of human and
animal pathogens. Furthermore, bacterial conjugation
has been shown recently to induce the SOS response,
triggering integrase-mediated cassette recombination, in
recipient bacteria [66]. In this setting, it is important to
note that integron cassettes encoding resistance to several antibiotics known to induce the SOS response, such
as trimethoprim, quinolones and b-lactams, are common today [5,67]. This suggests that the indirect triggering effect of these antibiotics on the capture of
resistance cassettes may have resulted in a very efficient
selection mechanism.
A less obvious consequence of integrase SOS regulation in clinically relevant mobile integrons is its repercussion on antibiotic-resistance policies. Current policies
rely largely on the detrimental effects that most resistance mechanisms inflict on bacteria, which eventually
lead to loss of resistance genes in the absence of antibiotic exposure [68]. Because most cassettes are promoterless, the most ancient cassettes (located at the distal part
of the integron) are subject to severe polar effects, leading
to rare or non-existent protein products (Figure 1) [4]. In
this context, the incorporation of SOS regulation in integrons puts forward a mechanism by which antibioticresistance genes and other useful adaptations can be
silently set aside, while current adaptive traits are maintained. In time of stress, such as exposure to antibiotics,
the relevant resistance cassettes can be called upon by
integrase-mediated translocation, and thus selected for
only when their expression is required. Furthermore, the
cassette genes that have been temporarily relegated to
distal positions in integrons may also sustain increased
evolution rates, generating a substantial pool of variability
from which to draw on when the appropriate selective
pressures resurface [69].

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

Reciprocal BLAST mapping also shows that predicted
integrase inactivation is very common among soil/freshwater bacteria, coinciding with a prevailing loss of putative
LexA regulation. Nonetheless, predicted integrase inactivation is also relatively common in marine species. Even
though the predicted integrase inactivation correlates well
with reduced LexA regulation (Figure 4), there are notable
outliers to this trend in both radiations. For instance,
among mobile class 5 integrons, only 44% of mapped integrases seem to be functional, despite predicted LexA regulation in 89% of them. The opposite is also true; many
mobile integrons with putatively functional integrases
have disrupted, absent or non-native LexA binding sites.
This suggests that lack of LexA regulation can be tolerated
or selected for when it provides adaptive benefit. We have
shown here that in some mobile class 1 integrons,
the LexA binding site has been disrupted by a GGG insertion that drastically increases the expression of antibioticresistance cassettes (Figure 3). In a similar vein, it seems
likely that sustained integrase activity (with its associated
shuffling of gene cassettes [21,25]) must be preferable to
permanent inactivation under the shifting selective environments associated with clinical environments and mobile
integrons. This would explain why integrase inactivation is
not seen as frequently in mobile integron classes associated with clinical settings, in spite of their dissemination
into bacterial species that do not harbor a lexA gene capable of regulating the preset LexA binding site.
Overall, however, the pattern of integrase inactivation
is broadly in agreement with that reported previously
[53]. In fact, we found a higher proportion (46%) of
inactivated IntI proteins than that reported previously
[53], indicating that integrase inactivation is a pervasive
phenomenon and typically correlated with loss of LexA
regulation. Hence, our findings suggest that putative
integrase inactivation is the main mechanism evolved to
deal with lack of LexA regulation, but it seems likely
that other factors must provide heightened tolerance to
unregulated integrase activity in soil/freshwater bacteria.
Smaller integron sizes and lessened integrase activity
may both contribute to make unregulated integrase
expression more tolerable, but regulation by an alternative transcription factor is an obvious possibility that
needs to be carefully explored. This is particularly true
because most integrase functionality assays have been
carried out in a non-native context [64,65] and may
thus have missed regulatory effects. The quest to define
precisely the multiple mechanisms behind this adaption
is an important goal, because the lack of a mechanism
to mitigate the effects of integrase activity upon loss of
LexA regulation may well lie at the root of the intriguing absence of chromosomal integrons from many
bacterial phyla [53].

Page 10 of 15

Conclusions
The results presented here illustrate the extent of SOS
regulation of integron integrases, and provide several
important clues to the evolution of this regulation and
to the evolution of bacterial integrons. The combination
of in silico and in vivo assays allows us to conclude that
LexA regulation was probably present in the primordial
integron and that its loss may be linked to a number of
factors, including inactivation of the integrase gene and
enhancement of resistance cassettes expression. Our
findings have important clinical implications for the evolution of antibiotic resistance, and suggest that the
emergence of mechanisms to palliate unregulated integrase expression may provide an explanation for the
uneven distribution of integrons across the Bacteria
domain.
Methods
Data mining and preprocessing

A custom set of scripts was developed in BioPhyton to
search for intI homologs on NCBI GenBank databases
(NR, ENV and WGS). The scripts retrieved and reannotated both the intI coding sequences and their corresponding upstream sequences. The scripts used the
whole VchIntIA protein sequence (AAC38424) and its
IntI specific domain [70] (positions 186 to 245 in
VchIntIA) as a query for a TBLASTN search. To limit
the number of false positives, a cut-off e-value of 10-5
was set, and only sequences matching both queries were
retrieved.
TBLASTN results were used to identify frameshift and
deletion events of up to 100 bp. Larger events where not
considered. The nucleotide sequences spanning the full
length of the processed hits and 1 kb upstream of the hit
start were recovered. Conceptual translations of these
sequences (corrected for frameshift when necessary) were
then used to search a curated reference panel using
BLASTP. The reference panel comprised 43 phylogenetically diverse IntI proteins, phage integrases and XerCD
recombinases. The reference sequence of the best reciprocal hit was used to consistently re-annotate the start and
stop points of all retrieved sequences, thereby allowing
homogenization of the dataset and efficient detection of
in-frame premature stop codons. Sequences with a best
reciprocal hit not belonging to the IntI family (that is,
phage integrases and XerCD recombinases) were removed
from further analysis. Similarly, all IntI homologs lacking a
significant amount of coding sequence at both ends of the
predicted coding region (+30 bp downstream of the start
codon and -90 bp upstream of stop codon) were also
removed from further analysis. Duplicates resulting from
the use of partially redundant databases were removed,
defining duplicates as two sequences having the same

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

sequences, coordinates and NCBI taxonomical assignment,
and the same strain or plasmid number when applicable.
The final annotated dataset comprised 1,483 sequences,
and is available online as supplementary material in both
GenBank (.GBK) and spreadsheet-compatible (.XLS) format (see Additional file 10, see Additional file 11).
Assessment of protein functionality

Integrase functionality was assessed systematically using
a custom rule-based system operating on aligned IntI
sequences. To generate functional rules to detect inactivation, we analyzed published structural and mutational
studies of both the chromosomal V. cholerae IntI4 and
the mobile IntI1 integron integrases [22,70-74]. From
this analysis, we identified a list of five essential residues
in the catalytic site that cannot be mutated (R135, K160,
H267, R270, H293, Y302; positions relative to the V.
cholerae IntIA sequence), and eight residues essential
for binding, for which only a limited range of substitutions is likely to be tolerated (L202 (®LIVM), P203
(®PST), K209, Y210 (®YFWH), P211 (®PRQ), R239
(®KRH), H240 (®KRH), H241 (®KRH); positions
again relative to the V. cholerae IntIA sequence).
A multiple alignment of all IntI sequences in the
reference panel was generated using MUSCLE software
http://www.drive5.com/muscle/ with an opening gap
penalty of -20, and otherwise standard parameters [75].
This alignment was used to propagate the functional
rules defined on the VchIntIA sequence towards the
reference panel IntI sequences. The consistency of this
propagation was reviewed manually. Pairwise alignments
of all the TBLASTN identified homologs with their corresponding best hits were used to further propagate the
functional model and allow a decision on whether each
particular protein should be considered functional. IntI
sequences containing an internal stop, a frameshift and/
or any number of inactivating mutations were tagged as
‘non-functional’. If either the start or stop of sequence
was unavailable (see above), the functionality of the corresponding protein was tagged as ‘unknown’. Otherwise,
the protein was considered functional by default.
The automated rule-based system was evaluated
against a reference set of integron integrase sequences
for which activity has been experimentally assessed
[64,65,76-80]. This reference set encompasses active and
inactive integrases from both marine and soil/freshwater
chromosomal integrons, and class 1, 2 and 3 mobile
integrons. The rule-based system was able to correctly
predict integrase activity in all these cases. In addition,
it also detected all indels, frameshift and nonsense
mutations that have been reported previously in independent studies as leading to integrase inactivation
[16,53].

Page 11 of 15

In silico searches for LexA binding sites

The presence of LexA binding sites on all the retrieved
intI homolog sequences was assessed by scanning them
using xFITOM http://compbio.umbc.edu/2280/, a generic program for binding site search in genomic
sequences [81,82]. Searches were conducted using the Ri
index [83] and a motif-normalized threshold as reported
previously [84]. Identified sites were considered ‘w/functional box’ if located within -100 or +50 bp of the reannotated intI start codon. When the sequence in the
specified range was not fully available, this feature was
tagged as ‘unknown’. Searches were conducted using the
15 different LexA binding motifs reported to date [27],
which include those of largely sampled phylogenetic
groups, such as the Firmicutes, the Actinobacteria, the
Cyanobacteira or the Alpha Proteobacteria [62,85-87].
We also identified, and specifically searched for, a particular motif consisting of a LexA binding site inactivated
by the insertion of a GGG triplet. These sites are
referred to as ‘broken’, and were categorized as ‘without
functional box’. The results of integrase functionality
and LexA binding site searches are fully annotated
on the main dataset files (see Additional file 10, see
Additional file 11).
Phylogenetic analyses

Alignments of the reference-panel protein sequences
were carried out using a combined procedure to improve
alignment quality as described previously [88]. Protein
sequences were first aligned with CLUSTALW (version1.83; http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/[89]
using Gonnet matrices and default [10], twenty-five and
five gap-opening penalties for the multiple alignment
stage, thus generating three different alignments. These
three different alignments, together with a local alignment generated by the T-COFFEE Lalign method, were
integrated as libraries into T-COFFEE (version 1.37;
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/tcoffee/[90] for optimization. The optimized alignment was then processed
with Gblocks (version 0.91b; http://molevol.cmima.csic.
es/castresana/Gblocks.html[91] with the half-gaps setting
and otherwise default parameters to select conserved
positions and discard poorly aligned and phylogenetically
unreliable information. Phylogenetic analyses were then
carried out using MrBayes (version 3.1.1; http://mrbayes.
csit.fsu.edu/ and PHYML version 2.4.1; http://code.google.com/p/phyml/[92] for Bayesian inference of tree
topologies as reported previously [88]. A mixed fourcategory g distributed rate plus proportion of invariable
sites model [invgamma] was applied and its parameters
were estimated independently by the program. Eight
independent MrBayes Metropolis-Coupled Markov
Chain Monte Carlo runs were carried out with four

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

independent chains for 10 6 generations. The resulting
phylogenetic trees were plotted with TreeView (version
1.6.6; http://taxonomy.zoology.gla.ac.uk/rod/treeview.
html[93] and edited for presentation using CorelDraw
Graphic Suite (version 12; Corel Corp., Fremont, CA,
USA).
Ancestral-state reconstruction was conducted with the
Mesquite ancestral-state reconstruction package (Mesquite Software Inc., Austin, TX, USA) [94] using the
majority-rule consensus tree generated by MrBayes. The
results of in silico searches for LexA binding sites were
mapped into a discrete (1/0/?) character for each taxon of
the tree. Reconstruction of LexA binding site presence was
first carried out using the ML reconstruction method
[95,96] and the AsymmMk model (Asymmetrical Markov
k-state two-parameter model), estimating asymmetric
rates of change between characters. The estimated rates
(0.145 forward, 0.813 backward) were then converted into
parsimony steps by direct inversion (6.89, 1.23), and used
to generate the step matrix for parsimony reconstruction
[97]. The results from in silico integrase functionality
assessment were also mapped into a discrete (1/0/?) character for each taxon. Ancestral-state reconstruction for
this character was carried out using both an ordered parsimony model and AsymmMk-based maximum-likelihood
model. The results of both reconstruction methods were
broadly in agreement (see Additional file 7), but for clarity,
only parsimony results are superimposed on Figure 5.
EMSA

The V. parahaemolyticus and E. coli lexA genes were
amplified using suitable primers (see Additional file 12)
and cloned into a pET15b vector (see Additional file 13).
Overexpression and purification of the corresponding
LexA protein was performed as described previously for
other LexA proteins [84]. Each DNA probe was constructed using two complementary 100 bp synthetic oligonucleotides (see Additional file 12). EMSA experiments
were performed as described previously [84], using 80
nmol/l V. parahaemolyticus LexA or 200 nmol/l of E.coli
LexA protein and 20 ng of each DIG-marked DNA probe
in the binding mixture. For EMSA competitive assays, 200
fold of either specific or non-specific non-labeled DNA
was added to the binding mixture. In all cases, samples
were loaded onto 6% non-denaturing Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gels. Digoxigenin-labeled DNA-protein complexes were detected using the manufacturer’s protocol
(Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA).
RNA extraction and RT-PCR

RT-PCR experiments were performed (Titan One Tube
RT-PCR System; Roche) with suitable oligonucleotides
(see Additional file 12 for list), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR

Page 12 of 15

analysis of total RNA was carried out in a PCR system,
(LightCycler; Roche), using a commercial kit (LCRNA
Master SYBR Green I Kitl Roche) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Transcription of pMUR050 intID1
and intID2 genes (under control of P intI1 - and P intI1 + ,
respectively) was determined in wild-type E. coli K12 and
in a lexA-defective strain (UA6189). Both strains contained either the pUA1105 (intA1) or the pUA1106
(intA2) plasmid. Expression of the V. parahaemolyticus
intI gene was tested in the ATCC17802 wild-type strain
and in a lexA-defective strain (UA10001) (see Additional
file 13). In both cases, expression of the recA gene was
used as the positive control, and the mRNA concentration for each gene was normalized to that of the housekeeping dxs gene. The expression factor was calculated
as the ratio of the relative mRNA concentration for each
gene in the corresponding lexA mutant strain with
respect to that in the wild type. In each case, the mean
value from three independent experiments (each in triplicate) was calculated. Strains UA6189 and UA10001 were
constructed, respectively, using the Lambda-Red recombinase system [98] or the marker exchange procedure, as
described previously [99].

Funding
This work wmas supported by grants from the Ministère
de la Recherche et de l’Enseignement supérieur, the Conseil Régional du Limousin, the Fondation pour la
Recherche Médicale (FRM) and from the Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(Inserm) for the Ploy laboratory; by the Institut Pasteur,
the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS
URA 2171), the FRM and the EU (NoE EuroPathoGenomics, LSHB-CT-2005-512061), for the Mazel laboratory; and by grants BFU2008-01078/BMC from the
Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación de España and
2009SGR-1106 from the Generalitat de Catalunya, for
the Barbé laboratory. NSA was supported by the Fundació Cellex at the Erill laboratory.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Identified LexA binding sites in the promoter
region (-100, +50 of the start codon) of integrase homologs from
the WGS, NR and ENV NCBI databases.
Additional file 2: List of the 93 unique, distinct LexA binding sites
identified in this work.
Additional file 3: (A) Schematic representation of the pMUR050
plasmid, showing (bold) the location of the two intI1 homologs. (B)
Schematic representation of the promoter region of both intI1 homologs,
showing the organization of the PintI1- and PintI1+ promoters, the standard
cassette promoter (PC and the secondary cassette promoter (PC2) enabled
by the GGG insertion. For both genes, promoter elements are also
mapped into their corresponding sequence fragments. Red boxes depict
LexA binding sites, black boxes outline the -35 and -10 elements of the
PintI1 promoter, and green boxes depict the secondary PC2 promoter.

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

Page 13 of 15

Additional file 4: List of the 45 LexA binding sites presenting GGG
disruption identified in this work.

Additional file 10: Complete and fully annotated set of IntI
homologs identified in this work in GenBank format.

Additional file 5: Predicted functionality status for the 1,135 intI
homolog sequences for which sufficient coding sequence was
available to determine inactivation using the in silico method
reported in this work.

Additional file 11: Complete and fully annotated set of IntI
homologs identified in this work in Excel (XLS) format.

Additional file 6: Phylogenetic tree of IntI protein sequences
showing the maximum likelihood ancestral-state reconstruction of
LexA regulation, as inferred from in silico analyses, using an
asymmetric two-state Markov model (AsymmMk) in Mesquite [94].
The tree is the majority-rule consensus tree generated by MrBayes, and
was rooted using the Escherichia coli and Thiobacillus denitrificans XerCD
protein sequences as outgroup. At each taxon and branching point, piefilled circles indicate the likelihood of LexA regulation at each node, with
a completely filled circle indicating certainty of LexA regulation, and a
completely open circle indicating certainty of lack of LexA regulation.
Taxon name colors indicate the natural habitat of each organism (blue
for marine, green for soil/freshwater, black for ambiguous) or their
pertaining to the outgroup (red). Azo = Azoarcus sp. EbN1; Dar =
Dechloromonas aromatica; Eco = E. coli; Gme = Geobacter metallireducens;
Lan = Listonella anguillarum; Lar = Lentisphaera araneosa; Lni = Lutiella
nitroferrum; Lpe = Listonella pelagia; Mfl = Methylobacillus flagellatus; Neu
= Nitrosomonas europaea; Nmo = Nitrococcus mobilis; Pal = Pseudomonas
alcaligenes; Pme = Pseudomonas mendocina; Ppr = Photobacterium
profundum; PstuBA = Pseudomonas stutzeri BAM; PstuQ = Pseudomonas
stutzeri Q; Rei = Reinekea sp.; Rba = Rhodopirellula baltica; Rge =
Rubrivivax gelatinosus; Sde = Saccharophagus degradans; Sam =
Shewanella amazonensis; Ssp = Shewanella sp. MR-7; Son = Shewanella
oneidensis; Spu = Shewanella putrefaciens; SynSp = Synechococcus sp;
Tden = Treponema denticola; Tde = Thiobacillus denitrificans; Vch = Vibrio
cholerae; Vfi = Vibrio fischeri; Vme = Vibrio metschnikovii; Vmi = Vibrio
mimicus; Vpa = Vibrio parahaemolyticus; Vsp = Vibrio splendidus; Vvu =
Vibrio vulnificus; Xca = Xanthomonas campestris; Xor = Xanthomonas
oryzae; Xsp = Xanthomonas sp.
Additional file 7: Phylogenetic tree of IntI protein sequences
showing the maximum likelihood ancestral-state reconstruction of
integrase functionality, as inferred from in silico analyses, using an
asymmetrical two-state Markov model (AsymmMk) in Mesquite [94].
The tree is the majority-rule consensus tree generated by MrBayes, and
was rooted using the Escherichia coli and Thiobacillus denitrificans XerCD
protein sequences as outgroup. At each taxon and branching point, piefilled circles indicate the likelihood of integrase functionality at each
node, with a completely filled circle indicating certainty of integrase
functionality and a completely open circle indicating certainty of
integrase inactivation. Taxon name colors indicate the natural habitat of
each organism (blue for marine, green for soil/freshwater, black for
ambiguous) or their pertaining to the outgroup (red). Azo = Azoarcus sp.
EbN1; Dar = Dechloromonas aromatica; Eco = Escherichia coli; Gme =
Geobacter metallireducens; Lan = Listonella anguillarum; Lar = Lentisphaera
araneosa; Lni = Lutiella nitroferrum; Lpe = Listonella pelagia; Mfl =
Methylobacillus flagellatus; Neu = Nitrosomonas europaea; Nmo =
Nitrococcus mobilis; Pal = Pseudomonas alcaligenes; Pme = Pseudomonas
mendocina; Ppr = Photobacterium profundum; PstuBA = Pseudomonas
stutzeri BAM; PstuQ = Pseudomonas stutzeri Q; Rei = Reinekea sp.; Rba =
Rhodopirellula baltica; Rge = Rubrivivax gelatinosus; Sde = Saccharophagus
degradans; Sam = Shewanella amazonensis; Ssp = Shewanella sp. MR-7;
Son = Shewanella oneidensis; Spu = Shewanella putrefaciens; SynSp =
Synechococcus sp; Tden = Treponema denticola; Tde = Thiobacillus
denitrificans; Vch = Vibrio cholerae; Vfi = Vibrio fischeri; Vme = Vibrio
metschnikovii; Vmi = Vibrio mimicus; Vpa = Vibrio parahaemolyticus; Vsp =
Vibrio splendidus; Vvu = Vibrio vulnificus; Xca = Xanthomonas campestris;
Xor = Xanthomonas oryzae; Xsp = Xanthomonas sp.
Additional file 8: List of sequences mapping to the VchIntISXT
(AAK95987) taxon according to reciprocal BLAST results. Sequences
belonging to the Alteromonadales order are shown yellow.
Additional file 9: Sequences from soil/freshwater bacteria clusters
showing evidence of residual LexA regulation. Sequences with
identified LexA binding sites are shown in yellow.

Additional file 12: Oligonucleotides used in this work.
Additional file 13: Strains and plasmids used in this work.
Additional file 14: Statistical summary of reciprocal BLAST mapping
results with regard to the two in silico predicted traits analyzed
here: LexA regulation and integrase functionality.

Acknowledgements
We thank Mike C. O’Neill for his careful reading and comments on the
different versions of this manuscript. We also thank Nicholas Friedman for
his assistance in ancestral-state reconstruction techniques.
Author details
Institut Pasteur, Unité Plasticité du Génome Bactérien, CNRS URA 2171,
75015 Paris, France. 2Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain. 3Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore
21228, USA. 4Université de Limoges, Faculté de Médecine, EA3175, INSERM,
Equipe Avenir, Limoges 87000, France. 5Departamento de Sanidad Animal,
Facultad de Veterinaria, and VISAVET, Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
28040 Madrid, Spain.
1

Authors’ contributions
GC implemented the functionality assessment method and carried out data
mining, preprocessing and statistical analysis. NSA performed protein
purification, RT-PCR and mobility-shift assays. SC and JB designed and
directed the in vitro and in vivo studies and provided expertise on LexA
binding motifs. EG, SDR and MCP coordinated in vitro and in vivo analyses
and provided expertise on integrase expression. BGZ provided the pMUR
plasmid and participated in coordination. GC, NSA, DM and IE conceived of
the study and participated in its design and coordination. IE developed the
site-search method, carried out phylogenetic reconstruction and ancestralstate reconstruction, and directed the in silico and statistical analyses. DM
and GC developed the functionality assessment method. DM and IE
coordinated and directed this work and drafted the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 9 November 2010 Accepted: 30 April 2011
Published: 30 April 2011
References
1. Stokes HW, Hall RM: A novel family of potentially mobile DNA elements
encoding site-specific gene-integration functions: integrons. Molecular
microbiology 1989, 3:1669-1683.
2. Collis CM, Kim MJ, Stokes HW, Hall RM: Integron-encoded IntI integrases
preferentially recognize the adjacent cognate attI site in recombination
with a 59-be site. Molecular microbiology 2002, 46:1415-1427.
3. Levesque C, Brassard S, Lapointe J, Roy PH: Diversity and relative strength
of tandem promoters for the antibiotic-resistance genes of several
integrons. Gene 1994, 142:49-54.
4. Collis CM, Hall RM: Expression of antibiotic resistance genes in the
integrated cassettes of integrons. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
1995, 39:155-162.
5. Rowe-Magnus DA, Mazel D: The role of integrons in antibiotic resistance
gene capture. Int J Med Microbiol 2002, 292:115-125.
6. Fluit AC, Schmitz FJ: Resistance integrons and super-integrons. Clin
Microbiol Infect 2004, 10:272-288.
7. Partridge SR, Tsafnat G, Coiera E, Iredell JR: Gene cassettes and cassette
arrays in mobile resistance integrons. FEMS microbiology reviews 2009,
33:757-784.

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.
29.

30.

Cambray G, Guerout AM, Mazel D: Integrons. Annual review of genetics
2010, 44:141-166.
Mazel D: Integrons: agents of bacterial evolution. Nature reviews 2006,
4:608-620.
Boucher Y, Labbate M, Koenig JE, Stokes HW: Integrons: mobilizable
platforms that promote genetic diversity in bacteria. Trends in
microbiology 2007, 15:301-309.
Mazel D, Dychinco B, Webb VA, Davies J: A distinctive class of integron in
the Vibrio cholerae genome. Science (New York, NY) 1998, 280:605-608.
Rowe-Magnus DA, Guerout AM, Mazel D: Super-integrons. Research in
microbiology 1999, 150:641-651.
Rowe-Magnus DA, Guerout AM, Ploncard P, Dychinco B, Davies J, Mazel D:
The evolutionary history of chromosomal super-integrons provides an
ancestry for multiresistant integrons. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 2001, 98:652-657.
Vaisvila R, Morgan RD, Posfai J, Raleigh EA: Discovery and distribution of
super-integrons among pseudomonads. Molecular microbiology 2001,
42:587-601.
Rowe-Magnus DA, Guerout AM, Biskri L, Bouige P, Mazel D: Comparative
analysis of superintegrons: engineering extensive genetic diversity in
the Vibrionaceae. Genome research 2003, 13:428-442.
Gillings MR, Holley MP, Stokes HW, Holmes AJ: Integrons in Xanthomonas:
a source of species genome diversity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2005, 102:4419-4424.
Rowe-Magnus DA, Guerout AM, Mazel D: Bacterial resistance evolution by
recruitment of super-integron gene cassettes. Molecular microbiology
2002, 43:1657-1669.
Melano R, Petroni A, Garutti A, Saka HA, Mange L, Pasteran F, Rapoport M,
Rossi A, Galas M: New carbenicillin-hydrolyzing beta-lactamase (CARB-7)
from Vibrio cholerae non-O1, non-O139 strains encoded by the VCR
region of the V. cholerae genome. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
2002, 46:2162-2168.
Petroni A, Melano RG, Saka HA, Garutti A, Mange L, Pasteran F, Rapoport M,
Miranda M, Faccone D, Rossi A, Hoffman PS, Galas MF: CARB-9, a
carbenicillinase encoded in the VCR region of Vibrio cholerae non-O1,
non-O139 belongs to a family of cassette-encoded beta-lactamases.
Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 2004, 48:4042-4046.
Le Roux F, Zouine M, Chakroun N, Binesse J, Saulnier D, Bouchier C,
Zidane N, Ma L, Rusniok C, Lajus A, Buchrieser C, Médigue C, Polz MF,
Mazel D: Genome sequence of Vibrio splendidus: an abundant
planctonic marine species with a large genotypic diversity. Environmental
microbiology 2009, 11:1959-1970.
Labbate M, Boucher Y, Joss MJ, Michael CA, Gillings MR, Stokes HW: Use of
chromosomal integron arrays as a phylogenetic typing system for Vibrio
cholerae pandemic strains. Microbiology (Reading, England) 2007,
153:1488-1498.
MacDonald D, Demarre G, Bouvier M, Mazel D, Gopaul DN: Structural basis
for broad DNA-specificity in integron recombination. Nature 2006,
440:1157-1162.
Bouvier M, Ducos-Galand M, Loot C, Bikard D, Mazel D: Structural features
of single-stranded integron cassette attC sites and their role in strand
selection. PLoS genetics 2009, 5:e1000632.
Bouvier M, Demarre G, Mazel D: Integron cassette insertion: a
recombination process involving a folded single strand substrate. The
EMBO journal 2005, 24:4356-4367.
Guerin E, Cambray G, Sanchez-Alberola N, Campoy S, Erill I, Da Re S,
Gonzalez-Zorn B, Barbe J, Ploy M-C, Mazel D: The SOS Response Controls
Integron Recombination. Science 2009, 324:1034.
Walker GC: Mutagenesis and inducible responses to deoxyribonucleic
acid damage in Escherichia coli. Microbiol Rev 1984, 48:60-93.
Erill I, Campoy S, Barbe J: Aeons of distress: an evolutionary perspective
on the bacterial SOS response. FEMS microbiology reviews 2007,
31:637-656.
Aertsen A, Michiels CW: Upstream of the SOS response: figure out the
trigger. Trends in microbiology 2006, 14:421-423.
Sassanfar M, Roberts JW: Nature of the SOS-inducing signal in Escherichia
coli. The involvement of DNA replication. Journal of molecular biology
1990, 212:79-96.
Little JW: Mechanism of specific LexA cleavage: autodigestion and the
role of RecA coprotease. Biochimie 1991, 73:411-421.

Page 14 of 15

31. Fernandez De Henestrosa AR, Ogi T, Aoyagi S, Chafin D, Hayes JJ,
Ohmori H, Woodgate R: Identification of additional genes belonging to
the LexA regulon in Escherichia coli. Molecular microbiology 2000,
35:1560-1572.
32. Waldor MK, Friedman DI: Phage regulatory circuits and virulence gene
expression. Current opinion in microbiology 2005, 8:459-465.
33. Quinones M, Davis BM, Waldor MK: Activation of the Vibrio cholerae SOS
response is not required for intestinal cholera toxin production or
colonization. Infection and immunity 2006, 74:927-930.
34. Kimmitt PT, Harwood CR, Barer MR: Toxin gene expression by shiga toxinproducing Escherichia coli: the role of antibiotics and the bacterial SOS
response. Emerging infectious diseases 2000, 6:458-465.
35. Aleshkin GI, Kadzhaev KV, Markov AP: High and low UV-dose responses in
SOS-induction of the precise excision of transposons tn1, Tn5 and Tn10
in Escherichia coli. Mutation research 1998, 401:179-191.
36. Ubeda C, Maiques E, Knecht E, Lasa I, Novick RP, Penades JR: Antibioticinduced SOS response promotes horizontal dissemination of
pathogenicity island-encoded virulence factors in staphylococci.
Molecular microbiology 2005, 56:836-844.
37. Kelley WL: Lex marks the spot: the virulent side of SOS and a closer look
at the LexA regulon. Molecular microbiology 2006, 62:1228-1238.
38. Beaber JW, Hochhut B, Waldor MK: SOS response promotes
horizontal dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes. Nature 2004,
427:72-74.
39. Phillips I, Culebras E, Moreno F, Baquero F: Induction of the SOS response
by new 4-quinolones. The Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy 1987,
20:631-638.
40. Miller C, Thomsen LE, Gaggero C, Mosseri R, Ingmer H, Cohen SN: SOS
response induction by beta-lactams and bacterial defense against
antibiotic lethality. Science (New York, NY) 2004, 305:1629-1631.
41. Maiques E, Ubeda C, Campoy S, Salvador N, Lasa I, Novick RP, Barbe J,
Penades JR: beta-lactam antibiotics induce the SOS response and
horizontal transfer of virulence factors in Staphylococcus aureus. Journal
of bacteriology 2006, 188:2726-2729.
42. Goerke C, Koller J, Wolz C: Ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim cause phage
induction and virulence modulation in Staphylococcus aureus.
Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 2006, 50:171-177.
43. Avison MB: New approaches to combating antimicrobial drug resistance.
Genome biology 2005, 6:243.
44. Michael CA, Gillings MR, Holmes AJ, Hughes L, Andrew NR, Holley MP,
Stokes HW: Mobile gene cassettes: a fundamental resource for bacterial
evolution. The American naturalist 2004, 164:1-12.
45. Tapias A, Barbe J: Mutational analysis of the Rhizobium etli recA operator.
Journal of bacteriology 1998, 180:6325-6331.
46. Campoy S, Fontes M, Padmanabhan S, Cortes P, Llagostera M, Barbe J:
LexA-independent DNA damage-mediated induction of gene expression
in Myxococcus xanthus. Molecular microbiology 2003, 49:769-781.
47. Mazon G, Erill I, Campoy S, Cortes P, Forano E, Barbe J: Reconstruction of
the evolutionary history of the LexA-binding sequence. Microbiology
2004, 150:3783-3795.
48. Jara M, Nunez C, Campoy S, Fernandez de Henestrosa AR, Lovley DR,
Barbe J: Geobacter sulfurreducens has two autoregulated lexA genes
whose products do not bind the recA promoter: differing responses of
lexA and recA to DNA damage. Journal of bacteriology 2003,
185:2493-2502.
49. Campoy S, Salvador N, Cortes P, Erill I, Barbe J: Expression of canonical
SOS genes is not under LexA repression in Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus.
Journal of bacteriology 2005, 187:5367-5375.
50. Kim T-E, Kwon H-J, Cho S-H, Kim S, Lee B-K, Yoo H-S, Park Y-H, Kim S-J:
Molecular differentiation of common promoters in Salmonella class 1
integrons. Journal of Microbiological Methods 2007, 68:453-457.
51. Jove T, Da Re S, Denis F, Mazel D, Ploy MC: Inverse correlation between
promoter strength and excision activity in class 1 integrons. PLoS
genetics 2010, 6:e1000793.
52. Gonzalez-Zorn B, Catalan A, Escudero JA, Dominguez L, Teshager T,
Porrero C, Moreno MA: Genetic basis for dissemination of armA. The
Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy 2005, 56:583-585.
53. Nemergut DR, Robeson MS, Kysela RF, Martin AP, Schmidt SK, Knight R:
Insights and inferences about integron evolution from genomic data.
BMC genomics 2008, 9:261.

Cambray et al. Mobile DNA 2011, 2:6
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/2/1/6

54. Yang MK, Yang YC, Hsu CH: Characterization of Xanthomonas axonopodis
pv. citri LexA: recognition of the LexA binding site. Mol Genet Genomics
2002, 268:477-487.
55. Campoy S, Mazon G, Fernandez de Henestrosa AR, Llagostera M,
Monteiro PB, Barbe J: A new regulatory DNA motif of the gamma
subclass Proteobacteria: identification of the LexA protein binding site
of the plant pathogen Xylella fastidiosa. Microbiology (Reading, England)
2002, 148:3583-3597.
56. Diaz-Mejia JJ, Amabile-Cuevas CF, Rosas I, Souza V: An analysis of the
evolutionary relationships of integron integrases, with emphasis on the
prevalence of class 1 integrons in Escherichia coli isolates from clinical
and environmental origins. Microbiology (Reading, England) 2008,
154:94-102.
57. Boucher Y, Nesbo CL, Joss MJ, Robinson A, Mabbutt BC, Gillings MR,
Doolittle WF, Stokes HW: Recovery and evolutionary analysis of complete
integron gene cassette arrays from Vibrio. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2006, 6:3.
58. Larouche A, Roy PH: Analysis by mutagenesis of a chromosomal integron
integrase from Shewanella amazonensis SB2BT. Journal of bacteriology
2009, 191:1933-1940.
59. Gillings M, Boucher Y, Labbate M, Holmes A, Krishnan S, Holley M,
Stokes HW: The evolution of class 1 integrons and the rise of antibiotic
resistance. Journal of bacteriology 2008, 190:5095-5100.
60. Fuchsman CA, Rocap G: Whole-genome reciprocal BLAST analysis reveals
that planctomycetes do not share an unusually large number of genes
with Eukarya and Archaea. Applied and environmental microbiology 2006,
72:6841-6844.
61. Beaber JW, Waldor MK: Identification of operators and promoters that
control SXT conjugative transfer. Journal of bacteriology 2004,
186:5945-5949.
62. Mazon G, Lucena JM, Campoy S, Fernandez de Henestrosa AR, Candau P,
Barbe J: LexA-binding sequences in Gram-positive and cyanobacteria are
closely related. Mol Genet Genomics 2004, 271:40-49.
63. Cune J, Cullen P, Mazon G, Campoy S, Adler B, Barbe J: The Leptospira
interrogans lexA gene is not autoregulated. Journal of bacteriology 2005,
187:5841-5845.
64. Holmes AJ, Holley MP, Mahon A, Nield B, Gillings M, Stokes HW:
Recombination activity of a distinctive integron-gene cassette system
associated with Pseudomonas stutzeri populations in soil. Journal of
bacteriology 2003, 185:918-928.
65. Leon G, Roy PH: Excision and integration of cassettes by an integron
integrase of Nitrosomonas europaea. Journal of bacteriology 2003,
185:2036-2041.
66. Baharoglu Z, Bikard D, Mazel D: Conjugative DNA transfer induces the
bacterial SOS response and promotes antibiotic resistance development
through integron activation. PLoS genetics 2010, 6:e1001165.
67. Fonseca EL, Dos Santos Freitas F, Vieira VV, Vicente AC: New qnr Gene
Cassettes Associated with Superintegron Repeats in Vibrio cholerae O1.
Emerging infectious diseases 2008, 14:1129-1131.
68. Andersson DI, Levin BR: The biological cost of antibiotic resistance.
Current opinion in microbiology 1999, 2:489-493.
69. Gupta RD, Tawfik DS: Directed enzyme evolution via small and effective
neutral drift libraries. Nature methods 2008, 5:939-942.
70. Messier N, Roy PH: Integron integrases possess a unique additional
domain necessary for activity. Journal of bacteriology 2001, 183:6699-6706.
71. Johansson C, Boukharta L, Eriksson J, Aqvist J, Sundstrom L: Mutagenesis
and homology modeling of the Tn21 integron integrase IntI1.
Biochemistry 2009, 48:1743-1753.
72. Gravel A, Messier N, Roy PH: Point mutations in the integron integrase
IntI1 that affect recombination and/or substrate recognition. Journal of
bacteriology 1998, 180:5437-5442.
73. Demarre G, Frumerie C, Gopaul DN, Mazel D: Identification of key structural
determinants of the IntI1 integron integrase that influence attC × attI1
recombination efficiency. Nucleic acids research 2007, 35:6475-6489.
74. Frumerie C, Ducos-Galand M, Gopaul DN, Mazel D: The relaxed
requirements of the integron cleavage site allow predictable changes in
integron target specificity. Nucleic acids research 2010, 38:559-569.
75. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic acids research 2004, 32:1792-1797.
76. Drouin F, Melancon J, Roy PH: The IntI-like tyrosine recombinase of
Shewanella oneidensis is active as an integron integrase. Journal of
bacteriology 2002, 184:1811-1815.

Page 15 of 15

77. Collis CM, Kim MJ, Partridge SR, Stokes HW, Hall RM: Characterization of
the class 3 integron and the site-specific recombination system it
determines. Journal of bacteriology 2002, 184:3017-3026.
78. Hansson K, Sundstrom L, Pelletier A, Roy PH: IntI2 integron integrase in
Tn7. Journal of bacteriology 2002, 184:1712-1721.
79. Biskri L, Bouvier M, Guerout AM, Boisnard S, Mazel D: Comparative study of
class 1 integron and Vibrio cholerae superintegron integrase activities.
Journal of bacteriology 2005, 187:1740-1750.
80. Martinez E, de la Cruz F: Genetic elements involved in Tn21 site-specific
integration, a novel mechanism for the dissemination of antibiotic
resistance genes. The EMBO journal 1990, 9:1275-1281.
81. Erill I, O’Neill MC: A reexamination of information theory-based methods
for DNA-binding site identification. BMC bioinformatics 2009, 10:57.
82. Bhargava N, Erill I: xFITOM: a generic GUI tool to search for transcription
factor binding sites. Bioinformation 2010, 5:49-50.
83. Schneider TD: Information Content of Individual Genetic Sequences.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 1997, 189:427-441.
84. Abella M, Campoy S, Erill I, Rojo F, Barbe J: Cohabitation of two different
lexA regulons in Pseudomonas putida. Journal of bacteriology 2007,
189:8855-8862.
85. Cheo DL, Bayles KW, Yasbin RE: Elucidation of regulatory elements that
control damage induction and competence induction of the Bacillus
subtilis SOS system. Journal of bacteriology 1993, 175:5907-5915.
86. Movahedzadeh F, Colston MJ, Davis EO: Characterization of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis LexA: recognition of a Cheo (Bacillus-type
SOS) box. Microbiology (Reading, England) 1997, 143(Pt 3):929-936.
87. Fernandez de Henestrosa AR, Rivera E, Tapias A, Barbe J: Identification of
the Rhodobacter sphaeroides SOS box. Molecular microbiology 1998,
28:991-1003.
88. Erill I, Campoy S, Mazon G, Barbe J: Dispersal and regulation of an
adaptive mutagenesis cassette in the bacteria domain. Nucleic acids
research 2006, 34:66-77.
89. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic acids research 1994, 22:4673-4680.
90. Notredame C, Higgins DG, Heringa J: T-Coffee: A novel method for fast
and accurate multiple sequence alignment. Journal of molecular biology
2000, 302:205-217.
91. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Molecular biology and evolution 2000,
17:540-552.
92. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Systematic biology 2003,
52:696-704.
93. Page RD: TreeView: an application to display phylogenetic trees on
personal computers. Comput Appl Biosci 1996, 12:357-358.
94. Mesquite: a modular system for evolutionary analysis. Version 2.72.
[http://mesquiteproject.org].
95. Pagel M: The maximum likelihood approach to reconstructing ancestral
character states of discrete characters on phylogenies. Systematic biology
1999, 48:612-622.
96. Schluter D, Price T, Mooers AO, Ludwig D: Likelihood of ancestor states in
adaptive radiation. Evolution 1997, 51:1699-1711.
97. Omland KE: The assumptions and challenges of ancestral state
reconstructions. Systematic biology 1999, 48:604-611.
98. Datsenko KA, Wanner BL: One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in
Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2000, 97:6640-6645.
99. Abella M, Erill I, Jara M, Mazon G, Campoy S, Barbe J: Widespread
distribution of a lexA-regulated DNA damage-inducible multiple gene
cassette in the Proteobacteria phylum. Molecular microbiology 2004,
54:212-222.
100. Crooks GE, Hon G, Chandonia JM, Brenner SE: WebLogo: a sequence logo
generator. Genome research 2004, 14:1188-1190.
doi:10.1186/1759-8753-2-6
Cite this article as: Cambray et al.: Prevalence of SOS-mediated control
of integron integrase expression as an adaptive trait of chromosomal
and mobile integrons. Mobile DNA 2011 2:6.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
