<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The synapsin gene family in basal chordates: evolutionary perspectives in metazoans</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:32. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-32"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Simona Candiani"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The synapsin gene family in basal chordates:
evolutionary perspectives in metazoans
Simona Candiani1*, Luca Moronti1, Roberta Pennati2, Fiorenza De Bernardi2, Fabio Benfenati3,4,5, Mario Pestarino1

Abstract
Background: Synapsins are neuronal phosphoproteins involved in several functions correlated with both
neurotransmitter release and synaptogenesis. The comprehension of the basal role of the synapsin family is
hampered in vertebrates by the existence of multiple synapsin genes. Therefore, studying homologous genes in
basal chordates, devoid of genome duplication, could help to achieve a better understanding of the complex
functions of these proteins.
Results: In this study we report the cloning and characterization of the Ciona intestinalis and amphioxus
Branchiostoma floridae synapsin transcripts and the definition of their gene structure using available C. intestinalis
and B. floridae genomic sequences. We demonstrate the occurrence, in both model organisms, of a single member
of the synapsin gene family. Full-length synapsin genes were identified in the recently sequenced genomes of
phylogenetically diverse metazoans. Comparative genome analysis reveals extensive conservation of the SYN locus
in several metazoans. Moreover, developmental expression studies underline that synapsin is a neuronal-specific
marker in basal chordates and is expressed in several cell types of PNS and in many, if not all, CNS neurons.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrates that synapsin genes are metazoan genes present in a single copy per
genome, except for vertebrates. Moreover, we hypothesize that, during the evolution of synapsin proteins, new
domains are added at different stages probably to cope up with the increased complexity in the nervous system
organization. Finally, we demonstrate that protochordate synapsin is restricted to the post-mitotic phase of CNS
development and thereby is a good marker of postmitotic neurons.

Background
Synapsins are neuronal phosphoproteins that constitute
a small family of synaptic molecules specifically associated with synaptic vesicles [1,2]. Synapsins regulate the
balance between the readily-releasable pool and the
reserve pool of synaptic vesicles and are involved in the
neurotransmitter release and synaptic plasticity [3-7].
In vertebrates, synapsins are encoded by three distinct
genes (syn1-syn3) that give rise to ten distinct alternative
transcripts (synIa/b, synIIa/b, synIIIa-f) [8,9]. Invertebrate
and vertebrate synapsin transcripts share similarity among
three conserved domains known as A, C and E domains.
In particular, the N-terminal region shows a stretch of
homology in the A-domain containing the unique phosphorylation site for cAMP-dependent protein kinase
(PKA) and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
* Correspondence: candiani@unige.it
1
Department of Biology, University of Genoa, Viale Benedetto XV 5, 16132,
Genova, Italy

I/IV (CaMK I/IV) common to all the synapsins, although
the most extensive homology is found within the Cdomain in a large region that represents the core of the
synapsin transcript. A third conserved domain is located
at the COOH-terminus (E domain) and it is shared by the
a-type isoforms of synapsin I, II and III. In the last decades, a number of new functions have been proposed for
synapsin family proteins, in addition to the classical role in
neurotransmitter release. An involvement in maintaining
vesicle integrity [10] and in regulating the proportion of
functional vesicles [11-13] has been hypothesized.
Synapsins also modulate neuronal development such
as establishment of neuronal polarity, neurite elongation
and synapse formation [14,15,12,16-18]. In mammals,
the three synapsin genes show a distinct temporal pattern of expression in neurons: synapsin III is expressed
early during neuronal development and its expression is
downregulated in mature neurons [16,19], whilst the
product of the other two synapsin genes are upregulated

© 2010 Candiani et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

at the onset of synaptogenesis and remain elevated in
mature neurons [20].
Urochordates (i.e. ascidians and other tunicates) and
cephalochordates (amphioxus) are chordate groups basal
to vertebrates, with urochordates being the closest relatives to vertebrates [21]. Ascidian and amphioxus larvae
posses simple central and peripheral nervous systems
that reproduce well the basic organization of chordate
nervous system and are therefore good models to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the chordate nervous system development [22,23]. In fact, in
spite of the few neurons that constitute their nervous
systems, a number of molecular studies have pointed
out the expression, in both ascidian and amphioxus, of
at least one member for virtually all the gene families
identified in vertebrate development. Thus, synapsin
genes, which are preferentially expressed in neurons, are
useful markers for the investigation of neuron-specific
gene expression.
In this study we have analyzed synapsin homologues in
the ascidian C. intestinalis and amphioxus B. floridae,
from a genomic and a developmental point of view. We
demonstrate the occurrence, in both model organisms, of
a single member of the synapsin family, and the presence
of an alternative transcript exclusively in amphioxus.
Furthermore, we have carried out a comprehensive comparative analysis of the exon-intron structure of the
synapsin gene locus in humans and several metazoan
phyla, and demonstrated a high level of conservation of
its genomic organization. Such analysis was also extended
to the proteins to reconstruct the domain evolution of
synapsin along several metazoans. We conclude that protochordate synapsin is a neuronal-specific marker, which
is expressed in several cell types of PNS (epidermal sensory neurons) and in many, if not all, CNS neurons during the final embryonic differentiation stages and in the
fully developed embryonic nervous system.

Results
A single synapsin gene is present in basal chordates and
in the sister-group of the bilaterian metazoans

The amphioxus B. floridae and the ascidian C. intestinalis genomes contain a single synapsin gene (AmphiSyn
and Ci-Syn) that shows a high degree of sequence conservation with vertebrate synapsins. The full length CiSyn cDNA was 1682 bp long and contained a proteincoding region of 1560 bp. The Ci-Syn cDNA translates
into a polypeptide of 519 amino acids with a predicted
molecular mass of 58 kDa. The exon/intron organization
of the gene encoding Ci-Syn was deduced by comparing
its cDNA sequence with the genomic sequences of scaffold 53 (release version 1.0) and chromosome 5 (release
version 2.0) (Additional file 1). The exonic sequences in
the genomic database and the corresponding regions of

Page 2 of 21

the transcript were 98% identical. Ciona Ci-Syn ORF
was encoded in ~24 kb of genomic DNA in both scaffolds, and distributed in 10 exons with sizes between 58
and 271 bp (Figure 1).
In amphioxus, a single synapsin gene was identified by
in silico analysis and PCR experiments. However, PCR
assay on amphioxus embryonic cDNA library yielded
two synapsin isoforms generated by alternative splicing
of the same gene. These two cDNAs result in a long
protein, termed AmphiSyn-long and a short truncated
protein termed AmphiSyn-short, respectively of 474 and
447 amino acids. The AmphiSyn-long transcript consists
of 12 exons (size between 36 and 248 bp) spanning 36
kb of genomic DNA of the scaffold 37 (Figure 1 and
Additional file 1). The AmphiSyn-short transcript differs
from the long form for the deletion of exon 10 and 11.
The ancestral condition of a single synapsin gene was
previously demonstrated in some invertebrate species
such as two ecdysozoans (the fly Drosophila melanogaster and the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans) [8,24]
and three lophotrochozoans (the mollusks: Loligo pealei,
Aplysia californica and Helix pomatia) [25-27]. Our
results confirm that it was likely that a single synapsin
gene was present in the chordate ancestor. Beyond analyzing the conservation at the chordates origin, we
tested whether this conservation could be further
extended in evolution. Systematic searches for synapsins-related sequences were carried out in the genome
of a deuterostome (echinoderm Strongylocentrotus purpuratus), a lophotrochozoan (annelid Capitella capitata), and a diploblast, the cnidarian sea anemone
Nematostella vectensis, representing one of the morphologically simplest metazoans. Such analysis confirmed
that synapsin genes are metazoan genes present in a single copy per genome, except for vertebrates (Figure 1
and Additional file 1).
Genomic organization of SYN locus

In mammals, each of the synapsin genes is associated
with a single specific TIMP (tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases) gene (Figure 1). The members of the TIMP
family are specific endogenous polypeptide inhibitors of
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), degrading enzymes
that participate in the extracellular matrix turnover. In
mammals, four TIMP (1-4) genes are known, three of
which are nested with a specific SYN gene (SYN1TIMP1, SYN2-TIMP4, SYN3-TIMP3), whereas a single
TIMP (TIMP2) is independent of the SYN locus (Additional file 1). The nested TIMP proteins are similar in
size and are encoded by five exons. In mammals, the
gene structure of the SYN locus is highly conserved
because the nested TIMPs are found at the same locations. To gain a more complete understanding of synapsin biology, we examined the evolutionary history of
synapsin genes through genomic analysis of SYN locus

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Page 3 of 21

Figure 1 Genomic organization of the synapsin locus in human and several invertebrate species. The conservation of nested gene
organization was really high when different species were compared. In all examined species, the TIMP gene is nested within the intron of Syn
gene in reverse orientation, with the exception of Caenorhabditis elegans. Ciona intestinalis and Strongylocentrotus purpuratus are characterized by
a peculiar nested organization of SYN-TIMP locus because more than one TIMP sequence was found (two TIMP in C. intestinalis and ten TIMP in
S. purpuratus). Alternative transcripts generating by use of different exons are shown for Homo sapiens (isoforms a and b of SYNI, II; isoforms a-f
of SYNIII), Branchiostoma floridae (long and short isoforms), Drosophila melanogaster (isoforms a, c and e), C. elegans (isoforms a and b). In
particular, for the various transcripts we show with an arrow the start of the transcript, the different exons and only the last exon in common
with the isoform having the longer ORF (isoform a for H. sapiens, isoform e for D. melanogaster, isoform b for C. elegans and long isoform for B.
floridae). The base-pair length of each coding exon is indicated inside the boxes. The numbers above the colored boxes represent the exon
numbering.

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

of some protostome and deuterostome species and
searched the genome sequences for member of TIMP
families and identified independent TIMPs in some
invertebrates (Figure 1 and Additional file 1). The
nested SYN-TIMP organization appears to be maintained throughout metazoan evolution, with the only
exception of the SYN locus of the C. elegans (Figure 1
and Additional file 1). A comparative analysis of the
SYN-locus of several Caenorhabditis species together
with that of the parasitic nematode Brugia malayi confirms that the absence of nested TIMP is a specific feature of the nematode’s clade (Additional file 1).
Furthermore, a multi-alignment of the synapsin proteins
shows that the location of nested TIMP sequences is
conserved in all analyzed species (Figure 2A) even if
they are encoded by different introns. The SYN locus of
amphioxus, Capitella, Drosophila and Nematostella is
characterized by a single TIMP sequence within a single
intron of the synapsin gene. Instead, the Ciona and
Strongylocentrotus SYN loci possess two or multiple
copies of TIMPs within one intron of the synapsin gene.
Moreover, we identified independent and dependent
TIMPs in both the amphioxus and Nematostella genomes, as well as in humans. However, due to the
extreme divergence of both nested and independent
TIMP sequences in invertebrates, it is not possible to
identify their orthology with vertebrate TIMPs based on
their amino acid sequences.
Conservation of exon-to-protein domain correspondence

Next, we examined the synapsin gene structure (number
of exons, gene length, orthologous exons, intron phases)
to further define the evolution of the synapsin gene
family (Figure 2B). All human synapsin genes exhibit
similarities in their exon structure in both the NH 2 terminal and central regions, whereas the COOH-terminal regions are more variable. In fact, the COOH-terminal region of the human paralogs is involved in
alternative splicing of synapsin genes (Figure 1).
Comparison of the conservation of the exon/intron
boundaries from representative metazoan phyla revealed
the presence of several introns in conserved positions.
Furthermore, several orthologous exons, in which the predicted amino acid sequences from invertebrates and
humans can be aligned over the entire length (Figure 2B),
were observed. We referred to the conservation of the protein domains (A-, C- and E-domains) that can be recognized in all species, although the relative position of B and
D domains of human synapsin Ia were also considered.
The coding sequences of the C domain are conserved
with respect to its exonic location, except for Ciona and
Drosophila where the C domain begins with the third
exon. The A domain is encoded by a sequence within
the first exon; the only exception is found in Ciona and
Drosophila synapsins in which the A domain begins

Page 4 of 21

respectively seven and thirteen amino acid residues
from the NH2-terminus of the protein, and in Nematostella synapsin that does not have a clear counterpart of
A domain in its first exon. The E domain is contained
within the last exon in all sequences, although Nematostella has a highly divergent E domain.
The gene architecture of the C-domain is well conserved in terms of both intron phases and exon sizes in
all analyzed metazoans (Figure 2B). However, some conserved intron loss events were observed. For instance,
amphioxus has an exon 2 that is split in two exons in
other species, whereas Ciona, Drosophila and Nematostella show a single exon (respectively 7, 7 and 6) corresponding to the mammal orthologous exons 6 and 7.
Furthermore, Ciona has an intron loss at exon 8, that is
also shown by Capitella. However, in general the Cdomain intron loss events are well conserved across different invertebrate species.
Comparison of exon/intron organization at C domain
level between human synapsin I and the invertebrate
sequences shows that the organization of S. purpuratus
is the most conserved (eight exons completely conserved
in length), followed by the C-domain of amphioxus with
six exons, Nematostella and Capitella with five exons
completely conserved plus one orthologous exon that
differs for very few nucleotides, and by Ciona with four
completely conserved exons. The situation varies widely
in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis that show highly
divergent exonic sequences.
Protein sequence and phylogenetic analysis

Vertebrate synapsins are a mosaic of multiple protein
domains [28]. While the NH2-terminal portion contains
two highly conserved domains named A and C, connected by the slightly less conserved domain B, the
COOH-terminal portion arises from the combinatorial
arrangement of numerous individual domains (domains
D-J), including the highly conserved E domain which is
shared among the a isoforms of the three human synapsin genes. Synapsins are excellent substrates for a variety
of protein kinases. Protein phosphorylation sites have
been extensively characterized in human synapsins. At
least eight sites (sites 1-8) have been demonstrated
experimentally in human synapsin I (Additional file 2)
[3,29,30]. Sequence analysis allowed us to identify the
three classical conserved domain A, C and E in the
Ciona synapsin and in the two amphioxus isoforms. To
gain a better understanding of the evolution of synapsin
domains, we analyzed a multiple alignment of synapsin
isoforms from Homo sapiens and several invertebrates
(Additional file 3). Such analysis revealed that the highest degree of sequence conservation occurs in the C
domain while a lower identity is found in E and A
domains. However, there were no significant similarities
with the other human domains.

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Page 5 of 21

Figure 2 Structure of the synapsin proteins domains and synapsin genes in representative metazoan phyla. A: A multialignment of
synapsin proteins corresponding to the bordering exons containing the introns encoding for TIMP sequences. Identical residues in all sequences
are shown in black. Residues identical to the human sequences were indicated in red. B: Conservation of exon-to-protein domain
correspondence. The contribution of individual exons or groups of two exons to the C-domain sequence is indicated by colored boxes. The
black boxes indicate the contribution of first and last exons to the A- and E-domains. The white exons correspond to the highly divergent
sequences of the B-domain and region between C and E domains. The grey box indicates that Nematostella lacks of a true comparable A
domain. The orthologous exons found in all species are shown by the same color (an asterisk inside the box indicates when the length of exon
differs from those of humans), whereas the blue boxes indicate when an invertebrate exon is split in two separate exons in humans. Solid lines
and dotted lines represent identical intron locations and intron locations differing only for 5-18 bp, respectively. The base-pair length of each
exon is indicated inside the boxes. The numbers above the colored boxes represent the exon numbering. Bracketed red numbers correspond to
the common intron phase; the different intron phase is indicated by bracketed black numbers. Intron position encoding TIMP sequences is
indicated by a red arrow. The diagram is not drawn to scale. See text for further details.

Using pair-wise comparison, we found that both
amphioxus and Ciona possess between 32-40%, 62-68%,
51-62%, identity to the A, C and E domains of humans,
respectively (Additional file 4). At the same time, lophotrochozoans also share significant sequence identity in
the three conserved domains. Interestingly, even if
Nematostella seems to lack a true comparable A
domain, and possesses a highly divergent E domain, it
shares between 57-61% sequence identity with the C
domain of humans, while Drosophila and Caenorhabditis display only 50% and 30% identity (Additional file 4).
The highly conserved C domain is the largest of the
synapsin domains (approximately 300 amino acids). Studies on the crystal structure of the domain C suggest that
it is structurally similar to ATP utilizing enzymes [31],
with an ATP-binding domain. Such domain was detected

in all analyzed synapsin proteins (Additional file 3). Moreover, all analyzed synapsins contain residues that are
known to be responsible for ATP binding in mammals
(Lys225, Lys269 and Gly276 in human synapsin I), except for
Caenorhabditis synapsin in which there are Lys225 Arg
and Lys269 Ser substitutions (Additional file 3).
The B-domain, as well as the domain connecting the
C- and the E- domains, show little primary sequence
identity between vertebrate synapsin I and invertebrate
synapsins (Additional file 3). However, the proline-rich
region between C- and E-domains is maintained in
almost all invertebrate synapsins, although it is shorter
than in human synapsins. The only exception was found
in Nematostella, in which the linker region between Cand E-domains is too short to be considered as an effective proline-rich domain (Additional file 3).

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

The E-domain is a quite evolutionary-conserved
region, especially for its COOH-terminal portion (~16
amino acids, see Additional file 3), supporting the finding that this region is of functional significance. In fact,
the COOH-terminal region of E domain seems to be
involved in modulating neurotransmitter release [25].
We also predicted the putative phosphorylation sites
in the various invertebrate sequences by using PredPhospho and NetPhosK 1.0 and compared them with those
of humans (Additional files 2 and 3). The most conserved consensus site is site 1 within A domain, which
is a predicted site for phosphorylation by PKA and
CaMKI/IV in all invertebrate synapsins except for
Nematostella, which has a very divergent domain A
(Additional files 2 and 3). The two phosphorylation sites
for mitogen-activated protein kinase-extracellular signalregulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) in the B-domain (sites 4,
5) are well conserved across invertebrate species, especially site 5, that is absent only in Ciona (Additional file
3). Interestingly, our prediction highlighted the presence
of other putative phosphorylation sites in the C-domain
(named A, B, C, D and E) and in E domain (named X
and Y) (Additional files 2 and 3) that appear to be conserved in most of the analyzed species.
To investigate the evolutionary history of synapsin
family, we carried out phylogenetic analyses with
sequences from representative species using both NJ
and ML methods, yielding very similar results (Figure
3). In this study, we presented only the ML tree with
bootstrap values from both NJ and ML analyses. Phylogenetic analysis using several invertebrate and vertebrate
synapsin proteins locates Ci-Syn in proximity of the vertebrate clade synapsins, while AmphiSyn results shifted
nearest the chordate common ancestor. Such results are
highly supported (99/99 and 98/90 bootstrap support)
and are consistent with recent phylogenies that place
cephalochordates basal to {urochordates+vertebrates} in
the chordate lineage. Moreover, Nematostella synapsin
appears more closely related to the deuterostome synapsins as compared to that of Drosophila or Caenorhabditis ones. In addition, lophotrochozoans cluster together
in a separate clade. Finally, based on sequence homology
and phylogenetic analysis, amphioxus/Ciona synapsin
could not be classified as being I-like, II-like, or III-like,
as well as the lamprey synapsin I and II are not I-like o
II-like but are basal to the synapsin III clade.
AmphiSyn expression during amphioxus development

The expression of AmphiSyn was examined during
amphioxus embryonic and larval development by whole
mount in situ hybridization. Transcripts were first
detected in 14-hour neurulae in four cell clusters of the
neural plate (Figures 4A-C). Such clusters are periodically
arranged following the boundary of the somites, beginning at S1/2 and extending to S4/5. Closer examination

Page 6 of 21

of such embryos in cross section (Figure 4C) revealed
that transcripts were primarily confined on either side of
the ventral midline. The same periodicity was also maintained in 16-hour neurulae even if, in front of S1/S2
boundary, a further rostral cluster of cells appeared
(Figure 4D). As development proceeded, AmphiSyn
expression extended in the posterior neural tube, but the
periodicity of positive cell clusters became less evident
(Figure 4E). Cross sections localized the expressing cells
throughout the ventral extent of the neural tube (Figures
4F-I) except for few positive dorsal nerve cells (Figure
4G) that increased just after the first dorsal ocellus (Figure 4E). By 18 hr, a new expressing domain became evident in single epidermal cells located ventro-laterally
along the body of the embryo. Such epidermal cells were
preferentially localized in the sub-epidermal layer (Figures 4F, H, J, K), although few labeled cells also appeared
to reside in the epidermal sheet (Figures 4H, I). Two distinct cell populations in the sub-epidermal sheet were
found: the first one was characterized by spherical
cells preferentially localized in the mid-ventral region
(Figure 4J); the second consisted of elongated cells residing in the ventro-lateral region (Figures 4H, J, K). At the
late-neurula stage (20 hr), the expression in epidermal
cells shifted in a more dorsal region (Figure 4L). At this
stage, we observed a synchronized development between
the epidermal cells expressing AmphiSyn and the underlying somites (Figure 4L). In the neural tube, transcripts
starting at level of the posterior cerebral vesicle,
remained through the two thirds of the total length of
the embryo (Figures 4L, M). The initial clusters of nerve
cells observed in mid-neurulae had now expanded into
clear longitudinal rows (Figure 4M). However, the most
anterior domain of AmphiSyn expression was characterized by a cluster of ventro-lateral nerve cells (Figure 4M).
By early larval stage (24 hr), a new expression domain
appeared in the most anterior tip of the cerebral vesicle
(Figures 5A-C), in a region where the frontal eye complex
will develop. Scattered epidermal cells along the flanks of
the body were still present (Figures 5A and 5E) and several cells were just visible around the preoral organ (Figure 5C) and the rostrum (Figures 5A, C, D). By this stage,
all sensory labeled cells were found exclusively in the epidermal sheet (Figure 5E). At 36-hour larva, the expression in the neural tube remained substantially similar to
that of the preceding specimen, although some further
dorsal cells appeared to express AmphiSyn. The latter
were more abundant in the nerve cord just behind the
first dorsal Hesse ocellus (Figures 5F, M, N), but very few
positive cells were also found in the presumptive region
of lamellar organ (Figure 5L). Moreover, photoreceptor
cells of dorsal Hesse ocellus (Figure 5M) as well as that
of the frontal eye complex were clearly stained (Figures
5G-K). AmphiSyn expression was never found in the

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Page 7 of 21

Figure 3 Maximum likelihood phylogeny of synapsins from several vertebrate and invertebrate species. The ML phylogeny of 18
representative synapsin proteins from various model organisms rooted at midpoint is shown. Numbers at nodes indicate the ML and NJ
percentage bootstrap support with 1000 replicates (first and second values, respectively). Nodes supported only by the maximum likelihood
analysis show a single bootstrap value. The scale bar indicates the number of amino acid substitutions per site.

most posterior part of the embryonic and larval nerve
cord, probably because of the delayed differentiation of
neurons in the more caudal regions. By 36 hours, several
epidermal cells along the midline of the flanks continued
to express AmphiSyn (Figures 5F, H, M, N, O), as well as
further epidermal cells located in the rostrum in a ventro-lateral position (Figure 5G). The latter cells were
clearly located in the subepidermal connective tissue
(Figures 5I and 5J) and probably correspond to the sensory cells precursors of the corpuscles of de Quatrefages.
Ci-Syn expression during Ciona development

Spatial expression pattern of Ci-Syn was examined in
embryos and larvae by whole-mount in situ hybridization. Ci-Syn expression was first detected at the mid
neurula stage (E39, 6.8 hpf, hatching post fertilization),
in two lateral symmetrical cells at the posterior end of
the neural folds (Figures 6A and 6B). At late neurula
stage (E42, 7.4 hpf), when the neural tube closure had
begun in the posterior territories, the two Ci-Syn positive cells moved closer to the dorsal midline (Figure
6C). In initial tailbud embryos (E48, 8.45 hpf), two

additional spots of hybridization signal appeared anterior to the ones already present in earlier stages (Figure
6D). In mid tailbud embryos (E70, 10 hpf), when the
neuropore was closed and the neurulation was completed, Ci-Syn expression also appeared in cells of prospective anterior nervous system. In particular, Ci-Syn
transcripts were present in the dorsal anterior sensory
vesicle in two bilateral symmetrical cells, and in two
more small rostral cells, near the opening of the neuropore (Figures 6E and 6F). From cross sections of hybridized embryos (Figures 6E and 6F) and by staining
nuclei with DAPI (Figure 6K), it was possible to distinguish four positive cells aligned in a single row in the
posterior sensory vesicle floor plate and four pairs of
positive cells in the region that will contribute to form
the visceral ganglion (Figures 6I, K). Further few positive
cells were localized at the caudal tip of the neural tube
(Figure 6J). In late tailbud embryos (E77/13.5 hpf, E91/
15.9 hpf), Ci-Syn transcripts were broadly present in the
posterior sensory vesicle and in the visceral ganglion
(Figures 6L-O). Moreover, Ci-Syn transcripts were

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Page 8 of 21

Figure 4 AmphiSyn expression in amphioxus neurulae. Whole mounts in side views, except for B and M in dorsal view, anterior is to the left.
Cross sections counterstained pink are viewed from the caudal end of the animal. Whole mount and cross section scale bars are 50 and 25 μm,
respectively. A, B: 14-hour neurula showing expression in four spots of the neural plate at the somite boundaries, beginning at S1/2 (between
somites 1 and 2) and extending to S4/5. C: Cross section through level c in A, showing a pair of ventrolateral labeled cells. D: Enlargement of
16-hour neurula showing a new cluster of labeled nerve cells at level of the posterior part of somite 1. E: In 18-hour neurula AmphiSyn
expression extends in the posterior neural tube and a new expression appears in single epidermal cells in the ventro-lateral region of the
embryo. F-K: Cross sections trough levels shown in E. The labeled sensory cells are mostly confined into the subepidermic layer (black
arrowheads). Few positive sensory cells were located in epidermal layer (red arrowheads). In the nerve cord, labeled cells were mainly located
ventrolaterally (F-I), except for few cells located dorsolaterally (E, G). L: In 20-hour neurula the most caudal epidermal labeled cells showed a
periodically arrangement following the somite boundaries (red arrowheads in L). M: Dorsal view of two-thirds of the specimen in L. N-P: Cross
sections through levels shown in L and M.

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Page 9 of 21

Figure 5 AmphiSyn expression in amphioxus larvae. All embryos are oriented with the anterior side to the left. Cross sections are viewed
from the caudal end of the animal. Whole mount and cross section scale bars are 50 and 25 μm, respectively. A: Side view of 24-hour larva.
AmphiSyn expression was found in the most rostral region of the cerebral vesicle. Expression also occurs in the two-third of the nerve cord. B, C:
Enlargement of the rostral region of specimen in A in dorsal and lateral views. The latter shows clearly two large epidermal cell bodies localized
around the preoral organ. D, E: Cross sections trough levels shown in A. In the rostrum, some positive epidermal cells near the blastopore were
visible (D) (arrow). All sensory cells at this stage were localized only in the epidermal sheet (black arrowheads). F: 36-hour larva in lateral view.
Sensory cells were visible in the rostrum and in the lateral body. A high concentration of labeled sensory cells was found in the middle of the
body. G: High power view of the head of the specimen in F, showing AmphiSyn expression in rostral cells located more ventrally. I-K: Cross
sections through levels shown in F. AmphiSyn-positive photoreceptor cells of frontal eye complex (arrowheads) were visible. Presumptive cells
located under the epidermis surface in the ventral portion of the rostrum were visible in I and J (arrows). Such cells could correspond to the
precursors of corpuscles of de Quatrefages. H: Enlargement of the most caudal region of the specimen in F with in focus epidermal sensory cells
located mid-laterally along the flanks of the body. L-O: Cross sections through levels shown in F. In M, photoreceptor cells of dorsal ocellus
express AmphiSyn (arrows).

detected in fibers connecting the sensory vesicle to the
dorsal side of the visceral ganglion and in fibers emerging from the ventral side of the visceral ganglion and
running into the tail (Figure 6M, O). These last positive
fibers extended for the first third of the length of the
tail (Figure 6L, N). Ci-Syn expression was also detected
in cells located in the anterior region of the tail, recently
described by Horie et al. [32] and named anterior caudal
inhibitory neurons (ACIN).
In the hatching larva, Ci-Syn transcripts were present
in the peripheral and central nervous systems. In the
tail, Ci-Syn expression had extended to the anterior two
thirds of length (Figures 7A and 7A’). Histological cross
sections showed that Ci-Syn transcripts were present in
axons of lateral nerves and in some motor neuron endplates. A strong hybridization signal was present in the
sensory vesicle and in the visceral ganglion (Figures 7A,
C, E). Histological cross sections showed that Ci-Syn

transcripts were asymmetrically distributed and localized
in all major neuron clusters: the photoreceptors cells,
the pressure receptor coronet cells, the big dorsal eminens cell. In the neck, Ci-Syn expression was detected in
the ventral region, while in the visceral ganglion the
gene was widely expressed in both dorsal and ventral
regions, where respectively contrapelo neurons and
motor neurons are localized. Expression in ACINs, in
their endplates expanding laterally to the muscular
mass, and lateral running fibers was still present (Figure
7J). These neurons, formerly named planate neurons for
their flat ovoidal shape [33], were at least eight and
their somata were located within the nerve cord, as it
was clearly visible in cross sections (Figures 7J’-N). Gene
expression was also detected in some cells of the peripheral nervous system, and in particular in the sensory
neurons of the palps and in some of the rostral trunk
epidermal neurons (RTEN) described by Takamura [34].

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Page 10 of 21

Figure 6 Ci-Syn expression at the neurula and tailbud stages. Whole mounts in side view, except for A, C in dorsal view, anterior is to the
left. Cross sections viewed from the caudal end of the animal. Scale bars = 50 μm in whole mounts; 20 μm in cross sections. A, B: Mid-neurula
stage embryos in dorsal (A) and lateral (B) view. Ci-Syn signal is present in two lateral spots (arrows) located posterior to the neuropore (np). C:
Dorsal view of a late neurula embryo. The two Ci-Syn positive spots (arrowheads) are closer to the midline than in the previous stage. D: Lateral
view of an initial tailbud embryo. Four bilateral symmetrical spots (arrowheads) are aligned along the posterior dorsal midline. E-K: Mid-tailbud
embryos. E: Lateral view. Ci-Syn expression is found in the sensory vesicle, in the visceral ganglion and in some cells near the posterior end
(arrow). In front view embryo (F) and in cross sections through levels shown in E (G, H), it appears that, in the sensory vesicle, positive cells are
aligned along the posterior floor (arrow) and are present in the anterior roof in bilateral symmetrical spots (arrowheads). I: Cross section at the
level of the visceral ganglion as indicated in E. J: Enlarged view of E showing the positive dorsal neurons near the tip of the tail. K:
Superimposition of in situ hybridization with DAPI staining. Four nuclei are visible in correspondence of Ci-Syn signal in the posterior sensory
vesicle and eight nuclei are present in the visceral ganglion. A single nucleus is visible in correspondence of the dorsal signal in anterior dorsal
sensory vesicle. L-O: Prehatching larvae. M, O: Ci-Syn transcripts are present in posterior sensory vesicle, in fibers connecting the sensory vesicle
to the visceral ganglion (arrow), in cells of the visceral ganglion (arrowhead). white asterisk, pigment cell of otolith; red arrowheads, pigment cell
of ocellus.

In the tail, at least two, often three, large dorsal epidermal neurons were labeled. Such cells correspond to the
bipolar GABAergic interneurons [35]. After hatching,
the nervous system of the larva is still developing.
Accordingly, the expression pattern of Ci-Syn extended
more in a posterior position in the tail in late larva than
in the hatching one and more numerous RTEN
appeared positive in anterior dorsal position (Figures
7O-O’).

Discussion
Antiquity of SYN locus genomic organization

In this study, we have analyzed the molecular evolution
of the synapsin gene family. Our analysis revealed that
protochordates, as well as several invertebrates, possess
a single synapsin gene, whereas higher vertebrates have
three synapsins genes. It is, therefore, safe to assume

that prior to the two rounds of vertebrate genome
duplication (2R hypothesis) [36], only a single synapsin
gene existed. On the other hand, at least two synapsin
genes have been identified in the lamprey and three
genes are present in higher vertebrates [8]. Moreover,
synapsin genes from lower organisms appeared to have
a genomic architecture similar to the vertebrate synapsins. Such conservation has mainly occurred in the
C-domain, although some conserved introns loss events
were observed.
A comparison of the synapsin locus between mammals and several invertebrate species showed that the
nested organization of TIMP and synapsin is a general
feature that has been conserved during evolution. A
well-conserved guest/host relationship is that of the
TIMPs within the synapsin gene family (Syn1/TIMP-1,
Syn3/TIMP-3 and Syn2/TIMP4), which is maintained

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Page 11 of 21

Figure 7 Ci-Syn expression at the larval stage. Whole mounts in side view, except for E’, J, O in dorsal view, anterior is left. Scale bars = 50
μm in whole mounts; 20 μm in cross sections. A-N’: Newly hatched larva. A: Side view, the signal extends from the sv until two/third of nerve
cord (nc). A’: Enlargement of the tail. Ci-Syn is expressed in three bipolar neurons (arrowheads). Small spots are also visible along the nc (arrows).
B, B’: Cross sections through levels in A’ showing the dorsolateral fibers (arrows) and a bipolar neuron (arrowhead). Moreover, a small positive
dot is visible. C: Lateral view. Expression is found in sv, ne, vg, neurons of adhesive papillae and some RTEN. C’-D: Cross sections through levels
in C showing the expression in papillar neurons. D’, E: Cross sections through levels in C. Ci-Syn expression occurs in some RTEN (arrowheads). E’:
Dorsal view of the specimen in A showing expression in several regions of the sv. Expression is also detected in the ne and the vg. F-I’: Cross
sections through levels in E’. J: Enlargement of specimen in C in side view. J’, K: Cross sections through levels in J. J’: Transcripts are in the
ventral neck region. K: A signal is found in ventral motor neurons and in dorsal cp. K’: Enlarged dorsal view of the tail. Red arrowheads indicate
anterior caudal inhibitory neurons (ACINs); arrows indicate motor neuron endplates. L-N’: Cross sections through levels in K’. Ci-Syn is expressed
in ACINs and in ventrolateral elements (arrowheads). O-O’: Late larva. O: Dorsal view, the arrow indicates one RTEN; arrowheads indicate bipolar
neurons. O’: Enlargement of the trunk showing positive RTEN (arrows). cp, contrapelo cells; coronet cells (green arrow), ec, eminens cell; ne, neck;
ph, pharynx; pigment cell of ocellus (red arrowhead in E’and G-I); sv, sensory vesicle; vg, visceral ganglion; white asterisk, pigment cell of otolith.

from Drosophila to human [37]. Here we demonstrate
that such genomic organization arose very early during
metazoan evolution, being also present in the sea anemone, N. vectensis. These data match the new theory
that before the emergence of bilateral animals, cnidarians split from the main animal lineage and their genome retained many of the features present in the last
common ancestor of animals.
In addition, our results demonstrate that the ancestral
Syn-TIMP locus has undergone different duplication

events. In fact, TIMP not nested within a synapsin gene,
previously demonstrated only in vertebrates, was also
found in Nematostella and amphioxus. Interestingly,
two deuterostomes not having an independent TIMP,
such as sea urchin and Ciona, possess a peculiar TIMP
organization with more than one TIMP within the
intron of the synapsin gene. Such data support the view
that the ancestral organization of SYN locus resembles
much more that of amphioxus and Nematostella,
whereas the genomic organization of urochordates and

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

echinoderms was lineage-specific and more divergent.
We conclude that strong stabilizing pressures have been
enforced throughout metazoan evolution to maintain
the comparable genomic organization of present-day
synapsin gene locus across diverse taxa.
Evolutionary conserved domain architecture of synapsin
proteins

In the present work, we show that almost all invertebrate synapsins share similarities among the evolutionary conserved domains A, C and E, even if Nematostella
lacks a clear A-domain. Therefore, the multiple synapsin
domains seem to have evolved at different rates
throughout evolution. During the evolution of vertebrates, at least two gene duplication events can be
hypothesized to give rise to the synapsin gene family
and these events were probably accompanied by the
emergence of additional domains (D-J).
In order to obtain a more exhaustive characterization
of the evolution of synapsin domain architecture and
their relationships in metazoans, we took advantage of
the wide range of genomes now available (see Additional
file 5). BLAST searching in the current genomic and
EST databases of other basal, i.e. diploblastic, animals
failed to identify synapsin-related sequences in sponges
(Amphimedon queenslandica), while positive results
were obtained from other cnidarians species including
Hydra magnipapillata and Acropora millepora. Unfortunately, these sequences are clearly incomplete, due to
gap in the genome and EST and/or difficulties to predict
complete open reading frame. In addition, no synapsin
sequences have been identified in the Trichoplax adhaerens, representing the basal metazoan phylum Placozoa,
as well as the choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis,
which branches as the closest known outgroup to
metazoans [38]. Outside metazoans, synapsin-related
sequences were retrieved from protozoans: in the
amoeba-flagellate Naegleria gruberi and in the amoebozoa Entamoeba histolytica (Additional file 5). Interestingly, the sequences identified in these two protozoans
encode for two proteins characterized by a single
domain sharing significant sequence identity with the
C-domain of invertebrates and vertebrates synapsins
(Additional file 6).
Thus, one possible hypothesis on the evolution of synapsin proteins is that new domains were added at various
stages of evolution probably to cope up with the increased
complexity in protein functions which paralleled the
increased complexity of the nervous system (Figure 8). In
particular, we suggest that: 1) a single C-domain was
already present in protozoans; 2) the E-domain appeared
to have co-evolved with C-domain in basal metazoans.
The conservation of the E-domain over such a wide phylogenetic distance, suggests that it shares a function common to all eumetazoans (cnidarians + bilaterians); 3) three

Page 12 of 21

conserved domains (A, C and E) appeared with protostomia and subsequently were maintained in deuterostomia
and chordates (Figure 8). Thus, the emergence of
E domain appears to be correlated with the beginning of
the genesis of nervous organization, since the simplest
metazoans known to possess a nervous system are those
of the phylum Cnidaria [39].
Alternative transcripts in the synapsin gene family

Mammal synapsins comprise a family of at least ten
members (SYN Ia, Ib, IIa, IIb, IIIa-IIIf) generated by
alternative splicing of three genes. In human, the genes
for SYNI, SYNII, SYNIII contain 13 exons (Figure 1).
The last exon of SYNI gene contains two splice acceptor
sites whose alternative use generates the two isoforms
SYNIa and Ib encoding for proteins of 705 and 669
amino acids, respectively. The two isoforms of SYNII
gene (IIa and IIb) originate from alternative splicing
involving the last three exons. Finally, SYNIII gene gives
rise to several isoforms (IIIa-IIIf). The isoforms b and c
are identical to SYNIIIa except for the absence of exon
11 (in IIIb) and exon 12 (in IIIc) and the difference in
the reading frames of the last exon (Figure 1). The other
isoforms are very peculiar being the result of two different alternative splicing events involving two new exons
between exons 5 and 6 (in IIId) and exons 9 and 10 (in
IIIe, f) (Figure 1) [9].
In invertebrates, Kao and coworkers [8] described the
synapsin gene of C. elegans as composed of 5 exons, but
suggested the existence of one extra exon upstream of
exon 1. By using genomic and EST sequences we can
now state that C. elegans has a single Syn gene, composed of 7 exons, giving rise to two different transcripts,
Cesnn1a and Cesnn1b (Figure 1). The Cesnn1b is identical to the Cesnn1a except for a sequence at the 5’ end
of the coding region found only in the isoform b and
originated by the use of two exons at the most 5’ end.
Alternative transcripts have been also described in Drosophila, Aplysia californica, Loligo pealei [24-26]. In Drosophila, the single synapsin gene leads to 5 different
isoforms. Three of them (isoforms a, c and e) (Figure 1)
differ at the COOH end of the molecule (Additional file
3). Moreover, the isoforms a and c lack a sequence at the
most 5’ end. In Drosophila, two large synapsin isoforms
(d and f) generated by UAG read-through were also
found. In Aplysia four alternative transcripts derived
from a single synapsin gene has been described. Such
splice variants (called 11.1, 2.1, 7.1 and 8.2) differ for two
inserted sequences and one possible substitution located
in the most NH2-terminus and in the central part of the
molecule (Additional file 3). Such isoforms are more
similar to those of invertebrates than to those of vertebrates. In Loligo pealei, two transcript variants (s-synshort and s-syn-long) differing only by a 111-bp deletion/
insertion, located in the COOH-terminal half, are present

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Page 13 of 21

Figure 8 Schematic diagram showing the possible evolution of synapsin protein domains. The colored boxes highlight the insertion of
new conserved domains at different evolutionary nodes shown on the right. See the text for further details.

(Additional file 3). In amphioxus, we demonstrated the
occurrence of a short and a long isoforms in the comparable region of squid synapsin (Additional file 3). The
amphioxus short isoform differs from the long form for
the deletion of exons 10 and 11 (Figure 1).
Looking at the splicing events impacting known functional domains of the synapsins, we can suggest that
invertebrate isoforms are not comparable to those of the
vertebrates (Additional file 3). In fact, the major splicing
events in vertebrate synapsin transcripts encode for
truncated proteins, missing the COOH-terminal end of
the E-domain. In contrast, some invertebrate alternative
splice forms (such as those of Drosophila and Caenorhabditis), involving the NH 2 -terminal coding region,
affect the A-domain, whereas others (such as those of
amphioxus and squid) alter the domain that follows C
domain. Only the isoform c of Drosophila, lacking the
last part of E domain, shares some similarity with the
alternative splice form Ib of human synapsin (Additional
file 3). Finally, the highly sequence identity within the Edomains of vertebrate synapsins Ia, IIa, IIIa, and the
evolutionary conservation of such domain provide evidence that the ancestral synapsin gene encoded for an
a-like synapsin isoform.

Synapsin expression in post-mitotic phase of CNS
development in amphioxus and Ciona

Early during development, some organisms, such as
nematodes and ascidians, show a remarkably invariant
pattern of cell divisions [40-42], and the pattern is so
stereotyped that each cell can be individually named.
Such type of developmental process has been extensively
used to precise embryonic origins of the various neuronal types in these model organisms.
Since ascidian embryos show such invariant pattern of
early cleavage, it has been possible to trace a mitotic
descendant map of cells forming the CNS [42]. Interestingly in Ciona, all cells that express Ci-Syn had ceased
their mitotic activity. Cells within the prospective sensory vesicle cease division as 13th-generation, with the
exception of four cells that become post-mitotic in their
10th (1), 11th (2), or 12th (1) generation. The position of
the two Ci-Syn positive cells in mid-neurula embryos is
compatible with that of the A/A10.57 cells, which had
ceased mitotic activity in their 10th generation. In initial
tailbud embryos, the observed positive spots most probably correspond to the A/A11.117 and A/A11.118 cells,
daughters of A/A10.59, which had entered the postmitotic phase in their 11th generation. Up to this stage,

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Ci-Syn transcripts are restricted in cells of the “A” line.
By mid tailbud stage, after neurulation is completed,
other cells become post-mitotic, including cells of the
“a” line of prospective central nervous system, and in
parallel Ci-Syn expression extends to these territories. In
fact, in mid tailbud embryos Ci-Syn transcripts are present in the dorsal anterior sensory vesicle in the precursors of otolith and ocellus (a/a 10.97) and in two more
rostral small cells, near the opening of the neuropore,
most probably a/a 10.102, that will contribute to form
the neurohypophyseal complex of the larva. Moreover,
at this stage Ci-Syn is expressed in a row of cells in the
floor plate of the posterior sensory vesicle, corresponding to A/A 10.27 and A/A 10.28 post mitotic cells. By
this stage, an additional pair of cells becomes post-mitotic in the prospective visceral ganglion: the A/A 12.239
cells. Together with the A/A 10.57, the A/A 11.117 and
the A/A 11.118, that had ceased mitotic activity in earlier stages, form a group of eight paired neurons located
in the ventro-lateral position of the visceral ganglion,
where cholinergic motor neurons have been identified
in hatching larva [43]. Thus, cholinergic neurons are the
first ones to differentiate in the embryos. Other post
mitotic cells derive from A/A 10.63 and are located at
the caudal tip of the neural tube. These cells clearly correspond to the Ci-Syn positive ones observed in tail and
complete the pattern of Ci-Syn expression in mid tailbud embryos. Moreover, in embryos up to this stage, all
post-mitotic cells are Ci-Syn positive and all Ci-Syn
positive cells are post mitotic. Therefore, Ci-Syn expression can be considered an early marker of neuronal
specification.
On the contrary, amphioxus, as well as vertebrates, do
not possess this type of determinate cell lineage. More
recently, the marker of cell division 5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU) has been used in amphioxus to assess developmental cell proliferation, showing that only some
regions of the neural plate are BrdU labeled during neurogenesis [44]. In particular in mid-neurulae, only a region
in the most anterior and posterior-third of the neural plate
contained proliferating cells. During the subsequent phase
of development, few dividing cells were present in the
middle of cerebral vesicle at level of the neuropore and in
some scattered cells along the posterior neural tube. A
comparison between expression patterns of AmphiSyn and
BrdU data suggests that during CNS development BrdU
labeled cells correspond to the AmphiSyn-negative zone.
Therefore, we can argue that AmphiSyn is a marker for
postmitotic cells that have been committed to a neuronal
phenotype. Although at present it is not possible to establish where the first neurons to be born are located, the
most interesting observation is that the earlier expression
of AmphiSyn corresponded to the region of the neural
plate where the locomotory control system will develop.

Page 14 of 21

In such region, several interneurons and motor neurons
have been demonstrated to be cholinergic [45]. Such
assumptions are quite intriguing when compared with
tunicates, in which, as above stated, the first neurons
which differentiate are cholinergic. Our results shown that
AmphiSyn and Ci-Syn are restricted to the post-mitotic
phase of CNS development and probably are good markers of postmitotic neurons.
AmphiSyn expression in the CNS

The central nervous system of amphioxus lacks an anatomical partition into fore-, mid- and hind-brain regions
although several studies suggested the presence of specific
anatomical domains of vertebrate brains [46-48]. The
amphioxus CNS consists of a cerebral vesicle (the swelling
at the anterior end of the nerve cord), corresponding to a
diencephalic forebrain and a possible midbrain region, and
a posterior hindbrain followed by a spinal cord.
From an evolutionary point of view, the most significant observation of the earlier AmphiSyn expression is
its segmental organization into the area in which the
hindbrain region develops. On the other hand, the
expression in amphioxus embryos of motor neuron markers (such as islet, shox, AmphiKrox, AmphiMnx and
AmphiErr) suggests the occurrence of a segmental organization of cell types in the hindbrain region [49-51].
Therefore, even if the amphioxus hindbrain homologous
lacks a clear anatomical subdivision in rhombomeres,
the segmental expression of several genes in such region
seems to be regulated by adjacent somites as proposed
by Mazet and Shimeld [52]. The importance of the
somites for segmental neuron organization during
amphioxus neurogenesis is also confirmed by the present work. In fact, AmphiSyn expression shows a clear
segmental arrangement with cell pairs at the junctions
between somites, at least at the early stage of neuronal
differentiation.
At larval stage, AmphiSyn expression was confined in
some very anterior cells of the cerebral vesicle, likely
photoreceptor cells of the frontal eye complex, and in
cells of the posterior cerebral vesicle. In the latter, a zone
of motor neurons and large interneurones also known as
primary motor centre (PMC), has been described. The
PMC has been homologized to the reticulospinal neurons
in the midbrain and hindbrain of craniates [53], and
probably represents the region where neurotransmission
via chemical synapses is most abundant [54].
The present data on AmphiSyn expression seems also
to support the absence of typical chemical synapses in
the central region of cerebral vesicle. The staining gap
in the cerebral vesicle corresponds to the region where
the preinfundibular region is found. The preinfundibular
region, a set of ciliated accessory cells, lacks typical chemical synapses, and a paracrine release has been postulated as the preferential modality of transmission [54].

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

AmphiSyn-labeled cells were also identified more
widely in the posterior larval nerve cord in the hindbrain-like region. Such cells are arranged as rows positioned ventrolaterally in the nerve cord, representing
both motor neurons and interneurons. Several types of
neurons in this region have been demonstrated to be
cholinergic [45]. Few labeled cells located dorsally in the
nerve cord are mainly found posterior to the first dorsal
ocellus, except for some very anterior cells located in
the posterior cerebral vesicle at the level of the lamellar
body. In the latter, dopaminergic neurons have been
described [55].
AmphiSyn expression in PNS

AmphiSyn expression appears in the general ectoderm
in single cells scattered along the body of the mid-neurulae and its expression increases during the elongation
of the embryo. These cells probably correspond to the
epidermal sensory neurons belonging to the PNS. The
PNS of amphioxus is composed of several types of neurons, and at least two types of epidermal sensory cells,
widely distributed along either sides of the body, have
been described [56-58]. The type I receptors are primary
sensory neurons having axons projecting to CNS,
whereas the type II receptors are axonless secondary
sensory neurons with synaptic terminals arising at short
distances from the cell body. The former begin to differentiate at neurula stage while the latter start differentiation at early metamorphic larval stage. In amphioxus,
differentiating type I receptors express several neuronal
markers (AmphiTrk, AmphiHu/Elav, AmphiCoe, AmphiPOU-IV, SoxB, AmphiTlx) [59-64], as well as AmphiSyn.
In mid-neurulae, AmphiSyn-labeled cells first appeared
as single epidermal cells located ventro-laterally. The
cross sections revealed that most of labeled cells are
found in the space between the epidermis and the deeper tissue layer. In some cases these cells exhibit a
round shape, whilst in others they are elongated, probably indicating two distinct phases of sensory neuron
differentiation.
The appearance of new AmphiSyn-expressing cells in
the more dorsal position of the animal body in later
neurula stages, strictly resembles the expression pattern
of Amphi-Trk, AmphiHu/Elav and AmphiCoe [59-61].
The migration of the positive signal from ventral regions
to the dorsal area and from the external layer to the
subepidermal one during development, raises the question of whether this effect is due to cell migration or
represents a gene expression shift. A first attempt to
demonstrate such hypothesis was tentatively proved by
DiI labeling experiments on amphioxus, showing that
ventrally-located cells migrate toward dorso-lateral sides
of the embryo [59]. More recently, the origin, migration,
and differentiation of type I receptors in amphioxus

Page 15 of 21

have been described by SEM investigation and expression studies of AmphiTlx gene [64]. Such data support
the idea that primary sensory neurons, developing
directly from the ventral epidermis, migrate into the
subepidermal sheet. During migration from ventral to
dorso-lateral position, cells morphology changes: firstly
round cells located ventrally lose the cilium and extend
pseudopodia, subsequently elongated cells that have
reached the flanks of the body give rise to an axon
before reinserting their perikaria in the epidermal sheet.
AmphiTlx is the first gene that shows clearly nascent
type 1 receptors in the process of delaminating from the
general epidermis and entering the subepidermal space.
However, AmphiTlx expression is downregulated before
receptor cell erupts in the epithelium.
AmphiSyn gene is interesting because it turns on
moderately early in the migrating sensory neurons and
evidently continues to be transcribed during axogenesis
(and perhaps during reinsertion of the perikaria into the
epidermis). On the other hand, clear examination of
cross sections of the same embryo (mid-neurulae and
late-neurulae) showed AmphiSyn-positive cells located
either in the epidermis or just beneath it. Therefore,
precursors of type I receptors begin to express AmphiSyn as they start to migrate and continue to strongly
express the gene also after their complete differentiation.
Another interesting point is the observation that, in
late neurulae, AmphiSyn-labeled cells are in register
with the somites. Such arrangement is also visible in the
SEM specimens reported by Kaltenbach and coworkers
[64], where the migrating sensory cells appear situated
at an indentation of epidermal cells at the level of intersomitic junctions. Thus, it is possible that the direction
of cell migration is controlled by the somite borders.
However, more work needs to be done to elucidate the
patterning of amphioxus type I receptors in relation to
the mesoderm.
In early larvae, the number of epidermal AmphiSynlabeled cells increases in the more dorsal middle of the
body, as well as in more posterior and anterior regions.
In the rostral region, two large cell bodies lying at
some distance from the mouth, just behind and below
the preoral pit, are strongly labeled. Such cells belong
to the oral nerve plexus surrounding the amphioxus
larva mouth [57]. The expression pattern in the epidermal cells also persists in later stages of larval development in individual cells arranged as rows along the
midline of the flanks of the body. At this stage, expression is also visible in the most anterior tip of the larva
in the presumptive primary sensory neurons belonging
to the corpuscles of de Quatrefages [65], structures
having some similarities to the vertebrate olfactory
placodes.

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Expression of Ci-Syn in CNS and PNS

In late tailbud embryos Ci-Syn is broadly expressed in
all the prospective central nervous system, as the number of mature neurons increases and the single cells can
not be identified any longer. In the larva, Ci-Syn transcripts are present in both CNS and PNS. In the sensory
vesicle, Ci-Syn expression is present in all major clusters
of neurons, including the photoreceptor cells, the eminens cells and the coronet cells. These cells have bulbous protrusions extending in the lumen of the sensory
vesicle, express Ci-TH and were suggested to be related
to the vertebrate hypothalamic primordium [66]. Ci-Syn
transcripts were also found in the area of the otolith,
which seems to be a static mechanoreceptor.
Ci-Syn transcripts are completely absent in the most
anterior part of the sensory vesicle (anterior to the otolith), where only glial cells have been described [67], and
are particularly abundant in the posterior region. This
region has been recently named “posterior brain” (PB)
by Horie and coworkers [32] to distinguish it from the
anterior region consisting of the ventricular cavity and
surrounding cells, including sensory organs. The PB
contains a number of diverse interneurons, some of
which form synaptic connections within the PB, and
others send projections to the visceral ganglion. They
presumably form neural circuits for sensory information
processing and motor regulation, since many sensory
neurons send axons that gather in the PB [33,68]. The
widespread expression of Ci-Syn is a further evidence of
the large amount of neuronal connections present in
this area. In histological sections, the distribution of CiSyn transcripts in this area is characteristically uneven
and probably labels specific subpopulations of neurons
whose function is still to be investigated. Notably, in
this area several types of chemically-identified neuronal
types have been reported, including glutamatergic [69],
cholinergic [43] and GABAergic neurons [35]. To
account for the high number of neurons described in
this region, neurons may be present also in Ci-Syn-negative areas. The expression of synaptotagmin, another
synaptic vesicle protein expressed in the ascidian nervous system [33], in later stage is partially overlapping
with the synapsin one, particularly in the sensory vesicle
and the visceral ganglion, but it is detectable also in earlier stages. At the larva stage, synaptotagmin is widely
expressed in the sensory vesicle, in some visceral ganglion motor neurons, in all the antero-trunkal epidermal
neurons as well as in the caudal epidermal neurons
(CEN). Thus, it is possible that a differential distribution
of synapse-specific proteins exists in the PNS. In fact,
the ARTENa and ARTENp, some ventral RTEN and the
CEN do not express Ci-Syn, but they are synaptotagmin-positive. We can suppose that synaptotagmin, as
others synaptic proteins, should contribute to similar

Page 16 of 21

function during development in different cells types and
nervous regions.
At larval stage, the most interesting data show the
presence in the nerve cord of Ci-Syn in the cell soma of
the planate neurons, near the base of the tail as well as
along its length. These neurons are monopolar with
elongated somata aligned along the trajectory of the
ventrolateral nerve bundles, whose axon projects in
either caudal or rostral direction, and the most distal of
them lay halfway along the tail [33]. This is consistent
with our finding, since Ci-Syn expression reaches the
level of bipolar epidermal neurons in the middle of the
tail.
Protochordate and vertebrate synapsins: a comparative
overview

Synapsins are expressed throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems, and their expression varies
across synapse types and brain regions [70-73]. In mammals, synapsins I and II are expressed predominantly in
adult brain, whereas synapsin III appears more abundant
in the fetal brain [9]. Moreover, synapsin III is required
for initial cell elongation and early axon outgrowth [17].
AmphiSyn and Ci-Syn are both expressed in CNS starting at the neurula stage, where they seem to have a role
in neuronal differentiation. In particular, the early
expression of AmphiSyn and Ci-Syn in the developing
motor neurons suggests a role for these genes in the
formation of neuromuscular synapses, as already
demonstrated for synapsins I and II in the Xenopus
embryo [74,12]. Moreover, human synapsin I has been
found in afferent nerve calyces surrounding type I hair
cells and in sensory endings of taste buds [75-77]. At
the same time, synapsins in protochordates are
expressed in PNS, namely in specific subpopulations of
general (non-CNS) ectoderm, representing primary sensory neurons.
In mammals, synapsin I and II are not expressed in
the ribbon synapses of the retina [78], and in some
invertebrates, synapsins seem to be present only in
interneurons of the visual system [79]. On the contrary,
both amphioxus and Ciona show a high concentration
of synapsin transcripts in different types of the photoreceptive system, i.e. the ocellus-related cells in ascidian
and the frontal eye complex and Hesse organ in
amphioxus. On the other hand, the vertebrate retina is
constituted by two distinct types of vesicle-containing
synapses: conventional synapses, found in amacrine
cells, and ribbon synapses (peculiar of vertebrates),
found in photoreceptor and bipolar cells. Mandell and
coworkers [78] described in several vertebrate species
the absence of synapsins I and II immunoreactivities
from all retina ribbon-synapses, but a high abundance of
synapsin proteins in the conventional synapses of amacrine cells. However, synapsins have been identified in

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

both cone and rod cells of bovine retina [80], suggesting
that the complement of vesicle-associated proteins can
vary between species.
Moreover, there are further CNS structures of
amphioxus and Ciona having a similar distribution of
synapsin transcripts, and such structures show a certain
degree of similarity. For example, the sensory vesicle of
the ascidian has been considered the counterpart of the
cerebral vesicle of amphioxus. In particular, the otolith
and ocellus are homologized with the balance organ and
the lamellar body of amphioxus larvae, a clear parallel
has also been suggested between the visceral ganglion of
tunicate and the primary motor centre of amphioxus
larva [81].

Conclusions
Herein, we assembled and analyzed experimentally
cloned and computationally predicted amino acid
sequences of the synapsin genes from mammals, protochordates and several invertebrate species. Using this set
of sequences, we report: (i) the occurrence of a single
synapsin gene in basal metazoans and protochordates;
(ii) the identification of a highly conserved genomic
organization of synapsin locus; (iii) the description of
the conserved domains in the synapsin protein during
evolution; (iv) the protochordate synapsin expression is
highly regulated during neurogenesis and nervous system formation.
Methods
Animal collection and RNA preparation

Amphioxus adults (B. floridae) were collected from
Tampa Bay, FL and electrostimulated to induce gamete
release. Eggs were fertilized, and embryos were cultured
and fixed according to the methods of Holland and
coworkers [82]. Ascidian adults (C. intestinalis) were
collected in the bay of Naples, Italy, and reared in aquaria. Gametes were used for in vitro fertilization and fertilized eggs were raised in filtered sea water at 18°C.
Embryos at appropriate stages were collected by low
speed centrifugation and were frozen for RNA extraction or fixed for whole-mount in situ hybridization.
Total RNA from Ciona larvae was extracted using the
TRIzol LS reagent (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA). Following extraction, RNA was treated with RNAse-free
DNAse I (Ambion Europe Ltd, UK) according to the
manufacturer’s recommendations in order to digest contaminating genomic DNA. First-strand cDNA was
synthesized with 5 μg RNA using the SuperScript firststrand synthesis system (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA) and
oligo(dT) primers.

Page 17 of 21

Amplification and sequencing of synapsin mRNAs from
amphioxus and Ciona

The B. floridae and C. intestinalis genome sequence
databases reported at JGI [83] were examined with vertebrate and invertebrate synapsin sequences using the
tBlastn algorithm [84] to identify candidate gene fragments. The preliminary annotations reported at JGI
[83] were carefully checked and extensively modified
merging the initial sequence data to protein predictions obtained from GenScan [85] and GenomeScan
[86] programs. Then, the predicted coding sequences
of the synapsins were used to design gene specific primers for PCR. We used the following primers: for
amphioxus, 5’ primer ATGAATTATTTACGACGACGA and 3’ primer CTAGGGCTCTCCGAAGATTCC-3’; for Ciona, 5’ primer CTAAAATAA
AGATGTCTTCAATGC and 3’ primer ATATTC
GCGCTATTGCAAGC. An embryonic cDNA library
(kindly provided by Jim Langeland) was used to isolate
amplicons in amphioxus, whereas in Ciona the amplicons were identified by RT-PCR on RNA samples from
larvae. PCRs were carried out in a 50 μl reaction mixture using the Hot Master mix in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions (Eppendorf Srl, Italy). The
PCR products were directly cloned using a TOPO TA
cloning kit (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA) and then
sequenced using a 377 PerkinElmer sequencer. During
the sequencing analysis, we identified two alternative
synapsin transcripts in amphioxus and a single transcript in Ciona. The isolated sequences were deposited
at the Genbank under the following accession numbers: FJ479642 (AmphiSyn-long), FJ479643 (AmphiSynshort) and FJ479644 (Ci-Syn).
Sequence identification and genomic reconstruction

To identify synapsin gene homologues, the complete
sequences of human synapsin genes were used to probe
the genome of Nematostella vectensis, Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus, Capitella capitata, Drosophila melanogaster
and Caenorhabditis elegans using tBlastn (see Additional
file 1). Nematostella and Capitella genome assemblies
and protein sets were downloaded from the JGI [83].
The S. purpuratus assembly Spur_v1.5 and GLEAN3
gene models were obtained from Baylor College of Medicine HGSC [87]. The other genome sequences and corresponding protein sets were downloaded from Ensembl
[88], NCBI [89], Trace NCBI [90] and WormBase [91]
(see Additional files 1 and 5). Most of the identified
sequences were annotated but many are fragmented.
Where possible, these sequences were further refined by
cross-reference to EST databases and direct searching,
and analysis of genomic sequences. In particular, the

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

predicted sequences on genomic browser were analyzed
by GenScan [85] and GenomeScan [86] in order to correct the preliminary annotation. Exon-intron organization was reconstructed using two genomic mapping
software programs: GMAP and Wise2 [92,93]. A list of
sequences used in this work are provided in the Additional file 7.
Sequence protein analysis

The Vector NTI Suite (version 9.0, Informax, North
Bethesda, MD) software package was used for sequence
analysis. The presence of domains and functional
sequence patterns were scanned using MotifScan and
InterProScan. Phosphorylation sites were predicted by
using PredPhospho [94] and NetPhosK 1.0 [95]. The
sequence data were also analyzed using the MEGALIGN
program from LASERGENE (DNASTAR, Madison, WI)
in order to evaluate sequence identity in the A, C and E
domains from several invertebrate and vertebrate
species.
Phylogenetic analysis

Amino acid sequences of A and C domains and a short
region of E domain from all genera were aligned using
ClustalW [96]. Alignments were checked, and gaps were
removed manually before construction of the trees. The
alignment is shown in the Additional file 8. The maximum likelihood (ML) tree was estimated using PhyML
[97,98] under the RtRev model, gamma distribution and
with parameter values indicated by ProtTest [99] using
the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). The Neighbor
joining (NJ) tree was obtained under the RtRev model,
gamma distribution and Poisson model for amino acid
evolution using MEGA 4.0 [100]. Bootstrap confidence
limits were obtained by 1000 replicates in both ML and
NJ analysis. Tree files were viewed by using MEGA 4.0.
In situ hybridization and histological analysis

The cDNAs, corresponding to the clones AmphiSyn-long
and Ci-Syn isolated by PCR, were used as templates for
in vitro transcription by using Boehringer Mannheim
DIG RNA labeling Kit, according to the supplier’s
instruction. In situ hybridization analysis on Ciona and
amphioxus embryos was done according to the protocol
described by Gionti and coworkers [101] and Holland
and coworkers [82], respectively. In amphioxus, the
AmphiSyn riboprobe is supposed to recognize both
short and long transcripts. Labeled whole mount
embryos were photographed using an Olympus IX71
microscope (Olympus Italia Srl, Italy), and then counterstained with 1% Ponceau S in 1% acetic acid, dehydrated
in ethanol, embedded in Spurr’s resin, and serially sectioned at 3-4 μm. Negative control experiments were
done using sense riboprobes and no specific signal was
obtained. Ciona whole mount embryos were also
mounted with Vectashield mounting medium with

Page 18 of 21

DAPI (Vectastain; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame,
CA).
Additional file 1: Identification of the metazoans synapsin and TIMP
sequences used in this study. Identification, accession numbers and/or
protein ID, genomic locations of synapsin and TIMP sequences identified
in several metazoan phyla.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1032-S1.PDF ]
Additional file 2: Experimentally-identified and putative
phosphorylation sites by various protein kinases. The numbering of
amino acids residues is based on the alignment shown in Additional file
3. Experimentally-identified phosphorylation sites are highlighted in grey.
The other putative phosphorylation sites were predicted by sequence
analysis using the following phosphorylation consensus sequences for
the various kinases: PKA, R-R/K-X-S/T; CAMK, R-X-X-S/T; MAPK/ERK, P-X-S/
T-P; cdk, S/T-P-X-R/K; PKC, S/T-X-R/K; GRK, (D/E)n-S/T. The synapsin
isoforms are shown on the left while the phosphorylation sites 1-8 and
A-Y with the respective kinases are reported in columns.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1032-S2.XLS ]
Additional file 3: Multiple alignments of the synapsin domains. This
file contains multiple alignments of synapsin domains performed by the
AlignX program of Vector NTI. Domains A and B are indicated by azure
and pink bars. The C-domain and the ATP-binding domain are indicated
by yellow and grey bars, respectively. Domains D and E are indicated by
red and green bars. Phosphorylation sites corresponding to sites from 1
to 8 (Ser9, Ser568, Ser605, Ser62, Ser67, Ser551, Ser553 and Tyr301) in human
synapsin I are indicated. The letters A-E, X and Y indicate the new
predicted phosphorylation sites. Amino acid residues involved in ATPbinding are indicated by arrowheads. Identical and similar residues in at
least 50% of the species are indicated in red and grey, respectively.
Amino acid positions are numbered on the right. Taxa are abbreviated as
follows: Nv, Nematostella vectensis, Ce, Caenorhabditis elegans; Dm,
Drosophila melanogaster; Ac, Aplysia californica; Lp, Loligo pealei; Hp, Helix
pomatia; Cc, Capitella sp., Sp, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus; Amphi,
amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae); Ci, Ciona intestinalis; Hs, Homo
sapiens.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1032-S3.DOC ]
Additional file 4: Sequence identity matrix of synapsin domains.
Comparisons of domains A, C and E from synapsins of various species
after alignment using GeneWorks (Clustal W method with PAM250
weighting and identical gap costs). Colored boxes indicate percent
identity of A domain (in red), C domain (in green) and E domain (in
yellow).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1032-S4.PDF ]
Additional file 5: Other synapsin sequences used in this study.
Identification of synapsin-related sequences in two cnidarians (Hydra
magnipapillata and Acropora millepora) and two protozoans (Naegleria
gruberi and Entamoeba histolytica).
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1032-S5.PDF ]
Additional file 6: Multiple alignment of Nematostella, amphioxus,
Ciona, human and protozoa synapsins. This file contains a multiple
alignment of C-domain of amphioxus, Ciona, human synapsin and
synapsin full-length sequences of Naegleria gruberi and Entamoeba
histolytica.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1032-S6.PDF ]

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Additional file 7: List of all the sequences used in our study. This file
contains the used protein datasets and abbreviation for the taxa.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1032-S7.TXT ]
Additional file 8: Sequence alignment used in the phylogenetic
analysis of metazoans synapsin proteins. This file contains the
alignment generated by ClustalW in fasta format for reconstructing the
phylogenetic trees of metazoan synapsins.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2148-1032-S8.FAS ]

Page 19 of 21

8.

9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Skip Pierce and John M. Lawrence (Department of
Biology, USF, Tampa, FL) for the use of laboratory space and equipment;
Nick Holland (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA) for his
comments and criticisms; Jim Langeland (Department of Biology, Kalamazoo
College, Kalamazoo, MI) for providing the cDNA library; Ray Martinez and
Marilyn Wetzel (Department of Biology, USF, Tampa, FL) for their logistic
support; Virginia Giannelli for the careful English revision of the manuscript.
This work was supported by MIUR-COFIN and FIRB (to MP and FB) and
Telethon-Italy (to FB).
Author details
1
Department of Biology, University of Genoa, Viale Benedetto XV 5, 16132,
Genova, Italy. 2Department of Biology, University of Milan, Via Celoria 26, I20133, Milan, Italy. 3Department of Experimental Medicine (DIMES), Section
of Human Physiology, University of Genoa, Italy . 4Istituto Nazionale di
Neuroscienze, Viale Benedetto XV 3, 16132, Genova, Italy. 5Department of
Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, The Italian Institute of Technology, Via
Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy.
Authors’ contributions
SC carried out the bioinformatic and molecular analysis and in situ
hybridization assays and drafted the manuscript. RP contributed to the
whole mount in situ experiments and to drafting the manuscript. LM
contributed to the molecular analysis. FB was involved in the analysis of the
conservation of synapsin domains and contributed to data discussion. FD
and MP were responsible for the cellular and evolutionary interpretation of
the data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 19 August 2009
Accepted: 29 January 2010 Published: 29 January 2010
References
1. Huttner WB, Schiebler W, Greengard P, De Camilli P: Synapsin I (protein I),
a nerve terminal-specific phosphoprotein. III. Its association with
synaptic vesicles studied in a highly purified synaptic vesicle
preparation. J Cell Biol 1983, 96:1374-1388.
2. De Camilli P, Benfenati F, Valtorta F, Greengard P: The synapsins. Annu Rev
Cell Biol 1990, 6:433-460.
3. Greengard P, Valtorta F, Czernik AJ, Benfenati F: Synaptic vesicle
phosphoproteins and regulation of synaptic function. Science 1993,
259:780-785.
4. Rosahl TW, Geppert M, Spillane D, Herz J, Hammer RE, Malenka RC,
Südhof TC: Short-term synaptic plasticity is altered in mice lacking
synapsin I. Cell 1993, 75:661-670.
5. Rosahl TW, Spillane D, Missler M, Herz J, Selig DK, Wolff JR, Hammer RE,
Malenka RC, Südhof TC: Essential functions of synapsins I and II in
synaptic vesicle regulation. Nature 1995, 375:488-493.
6. Li L, Chin LS, Shupliakov O, Brodin L, Sihra TS, Hvalby O, Jensen V, Zheng D,
McNamara JO, Greengard P, et al: Impairment of synaptic vesicle
clustering and of synaptic transmission, and increased seizure
propensity, in synapsin I-deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995,
92:9235-9239.
7. Chi P, Greengard P, Ryan TA: Synapsin dispersion and reclustering during
synaptic activity. Nat Neurosci 2001, 4:1187-1193.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Kao HT, Porton B, Hilfiker S, Stefani G, Pieribone VA, DeSalle R, Greengard P:
Molecular evolution of the synapsin gene family. J Exp Zool 1999,
285:360-377.
Porton B, Kao HT, Greengard P: Characterization of transcripts from the
synapsin III gene locus. J Neurochem 1999, 73:2266-2271.
Sudhof TC: The synaptic vesicle cycle. Annu Rev Neurosci 2004, 27:509-547.
Han HQ, Nichols RA, Rubin MR, Bahler M, Greengard P: Induction of
formation of presynaptic terminals in neuroblastoma cells by synapsin
IIb. Nature 1991, 349:697-700.
Valtorta F, Iezzi N, Benfenati F, Lu B, Poo MM, Greengard P: Accelerated
structural maturation induced by synapsin I at developing
neuromuscular synapses of Xenopus laevis. Eur J Neurosci 1995, 7:261-270.
Sugiyama T, Shinoe T, Ito Y, Misawa H, Tojima T, Ito E, Yoshioka T: A novel
function of synapsin II in neurotransmitter release. Mol Brain Res 1995,
85:133-143.
Ferreira A, Kosik KS, Greengard P, Han HQ: Aberrant neurites and synaptic
vesicle protein deficiency in synapsin II-depleted neurons. Science 1994,
264:977-979.
Ferreira A, Han HQ, Greengard P, Kosik KS: Suppression of synapsin II
inhibits the formation and maintenance of synapses in hippocampal
culture. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:9225-9229.
Chin LS, Li L, Ferreira A, Kosik KS, Greengard P: Impairment of axonal
development and of synaptogenesis in hippocampal neurons of
synapsin I-deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995, 92:9230-9234.
Ferreira A, Kao HT, Feng J, Rapoport M, Greengard P: Synapsin III:
developmental expression, subcellular localization, and role in axon
formation. J Neurosci 2000, 20:3736-3744.
Ferreira A, Rapoport M: The synapsins: beyond the regulation of
neurotransmitter release. Cell Mol Life Sci 2002, 59:589-595.
Pieribone VA, Porton B, Rendon B, Feng J, Greengard P, Kao HT: Expression
of synapsin III in nerve terminals and neurogenic regions of the adult
brain. J Comp Neurol 2002, 454:105-114.
Kao HT, Porton B, Czernik AJ, Feng J, Yiu G, Haring M, Benfenati F,
Greengard P: A third member of the synapsin gene family. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1998, 95:4667-4672.
Delsuc F, Brinkmann H, Chourrout D, Philippe H: Tunicates and not
cephalochordates are the closest living relatives of vertebrates. Nature
2006, 439:965-968.
Meinertzhagen IA, Okamura Y: The larval ascidian nervous system: the
chordate brain from its small beginnings. Trends Neurosci 2001,
24:401-410.
Wada H, Satoh N: Patterning the protochordate neural tube. Curr Opin
Neurobiol 2001, 11:16-21.
Klagges BR, Heimbeck G, Godenschwege TA, Hofbauer A, Pflugfelder GO,
Reifegerste R, Reisch D, Schaupp M, Buchner S, Buchner E: Invertebrate
synapsins: a single gene codes for several isoforms in Drosophila. J
Neurosci 1996, 16:3154-3165.
Hilfiker S, Schweizer FE, Kao HT, Czernik AJ, Greengard P, Augustine GJ: Two
sites of action for synapsin domain E in regulating neurotransmitter
release. Nat Neurosci 1998, 1:29-35.
Angers A, Fioravante D, Chin J, Cleary LJ, Bean AJ, Byrne JH: Serotonin
stimulates phosphorylation of Aplysia synapsin and alters its subcellular
distribution in sensory neurons. J Neurosci 2002, 22:5412-5422.
Fiumara F, Milanese C, Corradi A, Giovedì S, Leitinger G, Menegon A,
Montarolo PG, Benfenati F, Ghirardi M: Phosphorylation of synapsin
domain A is required for post-tetanic potentiation. J Cell Sci 2007,
120:3228-3237.
Hilfiker S, Pieribone VA, Czernik AJ, Kao HT, Augustine GJ, Greengard P:
Synapsins as regulators of neurotransmitter release. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 1999, 354:269-79.
Onofri F, Messa M, Matafora V, Bonanno G, Corradi A, Bachi A, Valtorta F,
Benfenati F: Synapsin phosphorylation by SRC tyrosine kinase enhances
SRC activity in synaptic vesicles. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:15754-15767.
Jovanovic JN, Sihra TS, Nairn AC, Hemmings HC Jr, Greengard P, Czernik AJ:
Opposing changes in phosphorylation of specific sites in synapsin I
during Ca2+-dependent glutamate release in isolated nerve terminals. J
Neurosci 2001, 21:7944-7953.
Esser L, Wang CR, Hosaka M, Smagula CS, Südhof TC, Deisenhofer J:
Synapsin I is structurally similar to ATP-utilizing enzymes. EMBO J 1998,
17:977-984.

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

32. Horie T, Nakagawa M, Sasakura Y, Kusakabe TG: Cell type and function of
neurons in the ascidian nervous system. Dev Growth Differ 2009,
51:207-220.
33. Imai JH, Meinertzhagen IA: Neurons of the ascidian larval nervous system
in Ciona intestinalis: I. Central nervous system. J Comp Neurol 2007,
501:316-334.
34. Takamura K: Nervous network in larvae of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis.
Dev Genes Evol 1998, 208:1-8.
35. Zega G, Biggiogero M, Groppelli S, Candiani S, Oliveri D, Parodi M,
Pestarino M, De Bernardi F, Pennati R: Developmental expression of
glutamic acid decarboxylase and of gamma-aminobutyric acid type B
receptors in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis. J Comp Neurol 2008,
506:489-505.
36. Holland PW, Garcia-Fernandez J, Williams NA, Sidow A: Gene duplications
and the origins of vertebrate development. Dev Suppl 1994, 125-133.
37. Pohar N, Godenschwege TA, Buchner E: Invertebrate tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase: structure and nested gene organization within the
synapsin locus is conserved from Drosophila to human. Genomics 1999,
57:293-296.
38. King N, Westbrook MJ, Young SL, Kuo A, Abedin M, Chapman J,
Fairclough S, Hellsten U, Isogai Y, Letunic I, Marr M, Pincus D, Putnam N,
Rokas A, Wright KJ, Zuzow R, Dirks W, Good M, Goodstein D, Lemons D,
Li W, Lyons JB, Morris A, Nichols S, Richter DJ, Salamov A, Sequencing JG,
Bork P, Lim WA, Manning G, Miller WT, McGinnis W, Shapiro H, Tjian R,
Grigoriev IV, Rokhsar D: The genome of the choanoflagellate Monosiga
brevicollis and the origin of metazoans. Nature 2008, 451:783-788.
39. Watanabe H, Fujisawa T, Holstein TW: Cnidarians and the evolutionary
origin of the nervous system. Dev Growth Differ 2009, 51:167-183.
40. Sulston JE, Schierenberg E, White JG, Thomson JN: The embryonic cell
lineage of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev Biol 1983,
100:64-119.
41. Yamada A, Nishida H: Distinct parameters are involved in controlling the
number of rounds of cell division in each tissue during ascidian
embryogenesis. J Exp Zool 1999, 284:379-391.
42. Cole AG, Meinertzhagen IA: The central nervous system of the ascidian
larva: mitotic history of cells forming the neural tube in late embryonic
Ciona intestinalis. Dev Biol 2004, 271:239-262.
43. Takamura K, Egawa T, Ohnishi S, Okada T, Fukuoka T: Developmental
expression of ascidian neurotransmitter synthesis genes. I. Choline
acetyltransferase and acetylcholine transporter genes. Dev Genes Evol
2002, 212:50-53.
44. Holland ND, Holland LZ: Stage- and tissue-specific patterns of cell
division in embryonic and larval tissues of amphioxus during normal
development. Evol Dev 2006, 8:142-149.
45. Candiani S, Lacalli TC, Parodi M, Oliveri D, Pestarino M: The cholinergic
gene locus in amphioxus: molecular characterization and developmental
expression patterns. Dev Dyn 2008, 237:1399-1411.
46. Williams NA, Holland PWH: Molecular evolution of the brain of chordates.
Brain Behav Evol 1998, 52:177-185.
47. Holland LZ, Holland ND: Chordate origins of the vertebrate central
nervous system. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1999, 9:596-602.
48. Wicht H, Lacalli TC: The nervous system of amphioxus: structure,
development, and evolutionary significance. Can J Zool 2005, 83:122-150.
49. Ferrier DE, Brooke NM, Panopoulou G, Holland PW: The Mnx homeobox
gene class defined by HB9, MNR2 and amphioxus AmphiMnx. Dev Genes
Evol 2001, 211:103-107.
50. Jackman WR, Kimmel CB: Coincident iterated gene expression in the
amphioxus neural tube. Evol Dev 2002, 4:366-374.
51. Bardet PL, Schubert M, Horard B, Holland LZ, Laudet V, Holland ND,
Vanacker JM: Expression of estrogen-receptor related receptors in
amphioxus and zebrafish: implications for the evolution of posterior
brain segmentation at the invertebrate-to-vertebrate transition. Evol Dev
2005, 7:223-233.
52. Mazet F, Shimeld SM: The evolution of chordate neural segmentation.
Dev Biol 2002, 251:258-270.
53. Fritzsch B: Similarities and differences in lancelet and craniates nervous
systems. Isr J Zool 1996, 42:S147-S160.
54. Lacalli TC, Kelly SJ: The infundibular balance organ in amphioxus larvae
and related aspects of cerebral vesicle organization. Acta Zool (Stockh)
2000, 81:37-47.

Page 20 of 21

55. Candiani S, Oliveri D, Parodi M, Castagnola P, Pestarino M: AmphiD1/beta, a
dopamine D1/beta-adrenergic receptor from the amphioxus
Branchiostoma floridae: evolutionary aspects of the catecholaminergic
system during development. Dev Genes Evol 2005, 215:631-638.
56. Stokes MD, Holland ND: Embryos and larvae of a lancelet, Branchiostoma
floridae, from hatching through metamorphosis: growth in the
laboratory and external morphology. Acta Zool (Stockh) 1995, 76:105-120.
57. Lacalli TC, Hou S: A re-examination of the epithelial sensory cells of
amphioxus (Branchiostoma). Acta Zool (Stockh) 1999, 80:125-134.
58. Holland ND, Yu JK: Epidermal receptor development and sensory
pathways in vitally stained amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae). Acta Zool
(Stockh) 2002, 83:309-319.
59. Benito-Gutiêrrez E, Nake C, Llovera M, Comella JX, Garcia-Fernàndez J: The
single AmphiTrk receptor highlights increased complexity of
neurotrophin signalling in vertebrates and suggests an early role in
developing sensory neuroepidermal cells. Development 2005,
132:2191-2202.
60. Satoh G, Wang Y, Zhang P, Satoh N: Early development of amphioxus
nervous system with special reference to segmental cell organization
and putative sensory cell precursors: a study based on the expression of
pan-neuronal marker gene Hu/elav. J Exp Zool 2001, 291B:354-364.
61. Mazet F, Masood S, Luke GN, Holland ND, Shimeld SM: Expression of
AmphiCoe, an amphioxus COE/EBF gene, in the developing central
nervous system and epidermal sensory neurons. Genesis 2004, 38:58-65.
62. Candiani S, Oliveri D, Parodi M, Bertini E, Pestarino M: Expression of
AmphiPOU-IV in the developing neural tube and epidermal sensory
neural precursors in amphioxus supports a conserved role of class IV
POU genes in the sensory cells development. Dev Genes Evol 2006,
216:623-633.
63. Meulemans D, Broner-Fraser M: The amphioxus SoxB family: implications
for the evolution of vertebrate placodes. Int J Biol Sci 2007, 3:356-364.
64. Kaltenbach SL, Yu JK, Holland ND: The origin and migration of the
earliest-developing sensory neurons in the peripheral nervous system of
amphioxus. Evol Dev 2009, 11:142-151.
65. Demski LS, Beaver JA, Morrill JB: The cutaneous innervations of
amphioxus: A review incorporating new observations with DiI tracing
and scanning electron microscopy. Isr J Zool 1996, 42:117-129.
66. Moret F, Christiaen L, Deyts C, Blin M, Joly JS, Vernier P: The dopaminesynthesizing cells in the swimming larva of the tunicate Ciona
intestinalis are located only in the hypothalamus-related domain of the
sensory vesicle. Eur J Neurosci 2005, 21:3043-3055.
67. Nicol D, Meinertzhagen IA: Cell counts and maps in the larval central
nervous system of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis (L.). J Comp Neurol 1991,
309:415-429.
68. Tsuda M, Sakurai D, Goda M: Direct evidence for the role of pigment cells
in the brain of ascidian larvae by laser ablation. J Exp Biol 2003,
206:1409-1417.
69. Horie T, Kusakabe T, Tsuda M: Glutamatergic networks in the Ciona
intestinalis larva. J Comp Neurol 2008, 508:249-263.
70. Fried G, Nestler EJ, De Camilli P, Stjärne L, Olson L, Lundberg JM, Hökfelt T,
Ouimet CC, Greengard P: Cellular and subcellular localization of protein I
in the peripheral nervous system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1982,
79:2717-2721.
71. Südhof TC, Czernik AJ, Kao HT, Takei K, Johnston PA, Horiuchi A, Kanazir SD,
Wagner MA, Perin MS, De Camilli P, et al: Synapsins: mosaics of shared
and individual domains in a family of synaptic vesicle phosphoproteins.
Science 1989, 245:1474-1480.
72. Mandell JW, Czernik AJ, De Camilli P, Greengard P, Townes-Anderson E:
Differential expression of synapsins I and II among rat retinal synapses. J
Neurosci 1992, 12:1736-1749.
73. Matus-Leibovitch N, Nevo I, Vogel Z: Differential distribution of synapsin
IIa and IIb mRNAs in various brain structures and the effect of chronic
morphine administration on the regional expression of these isoforms.
Brain Res Mol Brain Res 1997, 45:301-316.
74. Schaeffer E, Alder J, Greengard P, Poo MM: Synapsin IIa accelerates
functional development of neuromuscular synapses. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1994, 91:3882-3886.
75. Favre D, Scarfone E, Di Gioia G, De Camilli P, Dememes D: Presence of
synapsin I in afferent and efferent nerve endings of vestibular sensory
epithelia. Brain Res 1986, 384:379-382.

Candiani et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:32
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/32

Page 21 of 21

76. Finger TE, Womble M, Kinnamon JC, Ueda T: Synapsin I-like
immunoreactivity in nerve fibers associated with lingual taste buds of
the rat. J Comp Neurol 1990, 292:283-290.
77. Scarfone E, Demêmes D, Sans A: Synapsin I and Synaptophysin
expression during ontogenesis of the mouse peripheral vestibular
system. J Neurosci 1991, 11:1173-1181.
78. Mandell JW, Townes-Anderson E, Czernik AJ, Cameron R, Greengard P, De
Camilli P: Synapsins in the vertebrate retina: absence from ribbon
synapses and heterogeneous distribution among conventional synapses.
Neuron 1990, 5:19-33.
79. Leitinger G, Pabst MA, Rind FC, Simmons PJ: Differential expression of
synapsin in visual neurons of the locust Schistocerca gregaria. J Comp
Neurol 2004, 480:89-100.
80. Von Kriegstein K, Schmitz F, Link E, Südhof TC: Distribution of synaptic
vesicle proteins in the mammalian retina identifies obligatory and
facultative components of ribbon synapses. Eur J Neurosci 1999,
11:1335-1348.
81. Lacalli TC: Frontal eye circuitry, rostral sensory pathways and brain
organization in amphioxus larvae: evidence from 3D reconstructions.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 1996, B351:243-263.
82. Holland LZ, Holland PWH, Holland ND, Ferraris JD, Palumbi SR: Revealing
homologies between body parts of distantly related animals by in situ
hybridization to developmental genes: amphioxus versus vertebrates.
Molecular Zoology: Advances, Strategies, and Protocols New York: Wiley-Liss
1996, 267-282.
83. JGI (Joint Genome Institute). http://genome.jgi-psf.org/.
84. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
85. GenScan. http://genes.mit.edu/GENSCAN.html.
86. GenomeScan. http://genes.mit.edu/genomescan.html.
87. Baylor College of Medicine HGSC. http://annotation.hgsc.bcm.tmc.edu/
Urchin/cgi-bin/pubLogin.cgi.
88. Ensembl. http://www.ensembl.org/index.html.
89. NCBI. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
90. Trace NCBI. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/.
91. WormBase. http://www.wormbase.org/.
92. GMAP. http://www.gene.com/share/gmap/.
93. Wise2. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Wise2/.
94. PredPhospho. http://www.nih.go.kr/predphospho/proteo/html/
inc_PredPhospho.htm.
95. NetPhosK 1.0. http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetPhosK/.
96. ClustalW. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw.
97. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52:696-704.
98. Guindon S, Lethiec F, Duroux P, Gascuel O: PHYML Online–a web server
for fast maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic inference. Nucleic Acids
Res 2005, , 33 Web Server: W557-559.
99. Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 12:2104-2105.
100. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
101. Gionti M, Ristoratore F, DiGregorio A, Aniello F, Branno M, Di Lauro R:
Cihox5, a new Ciona intestinalis Hox-related gene, is involved in
regionalization of the spinal cord. Dev Genes Evol 1998, 207:515-523.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-32
Cite this article as: Candiani et al.: The synapsin gene family in basal
chordates: evolutionary perspectives in metazoans. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2010 10:32.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
