<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A study of neural-related microRNAs in the developing amphioxus</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="EvoDevo 2011, 2:15. doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-15"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Simona Candiani"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
A study of neural-related microRNAs in the
developing amphioxus
Candiani et al.
Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15 (1 July 2011)

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

RESEARCH

Open Access

A study of neural-related microRNAs in the
developing amphioxus
Simona Candiani1*, Luca Moronti1, Davide De Pietri Tonelli2, Greta Garbarino1 and Mario Pestarino1

Abstract
Background: MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs regulating expression of protein coding genes at posttranscriptional level and controlling several biological processes. At present microRNAs have been identified in
various metazoans and seem also to be involved in brain development, neuronal differentiation and subtypes
specification. An approach to better understand the role of microRNAs in animal gene expression is to determine
temporal and tissue-specific expression patterns of microRNAs in different model organisms. Therefore, we have
investigated the expression of six neural related microRNAs in amphioxus, an organism having an important
phylogenetic position in terms of understanding the origin and evolution of chordates.
Results: In amphioxus, all the microRNAs we examined are expressed in specific regions of the CNS, and some of
them are correlated with specific cell types. In addition, miR-7, miR-137 and miR-184 are also expressed in
endodermal and mesodermal tissues. Several potential targets expressed in the nervous system of amphioxus have
been identified by computational prediction and some of them are coexpressed with one or more miRNAs.
Conclusion: We identified six miRNAs that are expressed in the nervous system of amphioxus in a variety of
patterns. miR-124 is found in both differentiating and mature neurons, miR-9 in differentiated neurons, miR-7, miR137 and miR-184 in restricted CNS regions, and miR-183 in cells of sensory organs. Therefore, such amphioxus
miRNAs may play important roles in regional patterning and/or specification of neuronal cell types.

Background
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a large class of non-coding
RNAs involved in post-transcriptional regulation. They
were first discovered in nematodes and subsequently
found to be widely distributed in plants and animals
[1-4]. miRNAs are 18 to 24 nucleotides long and regulate translation by binding to the respective mRNA transcripts, either inducing mRNA degradation or directly
inhibiting translation. In animals, miRNAs bind to specific bases in the 3’ untranslated regions (UTR) of mRNA
targets [5]. Each miRNA can regulate translation of several genes and modulate many biological processes such
as developmental timing, cell proliferation, cell death,
Hox gene expression and early embryogenesis [6]. miRNAs play also important roles in stem cell biology,
furthermore altered miRNA functions have been implicated in a number of human disorders and cancers [7].
* Correspondence: candiani@unige.it
1
University of Genoa, Department of Biology, viale Benedetto XV 5, 16132
Genoa, Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

In particular, miRNAs are known to regulate translation
of a number of genes involved in development of the
central nervous system (CNS) [8-10].
miRNAs are to a large extent evolutionarily conserved.
The basal chordate amphioxus has 115 miRNA families,
55 of which are homologous to those of vertebrates
[11-13]. Amphioxus has a prototypical chordate genome
with a high degree of synteny with vertebrate genomes
[14,15], and a body plan that is also similar to that of
vertebrates. Although the amphioxus CNS has comparatively few neurons–an estimated 20,000 in the adult [16]
and lacks a neural crest [17], the basic organization of
the amphioxus CNS is comparable to that in vertebrates.
Comparisons of gene expression and mapping of neurons and their connections have indicated that the
amphioxus CNS consists of a diencephalic forebrain
(the telencephalon is lacking), a small midbrain, a hindbrain and spinal cord [18,19]. The forebrain and small
midbrain are together termed the cerebral vesicle. Thus,
the most anterior photoreceptor (the frontal eye) is
thought to be homologous to the vertebrate paired eyes,

© 2011 Candiani et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

the lamellar body in the dorsal part of the amphioxus
diencephalon is considered to be homologous to the
vertebrate pineal complex, and secretory cells in
the floor of the diencephalon are thought equivalent to
the vertebrate infundibulum which produces Reissner’s
fiber [19]. In addition to the frontal eye, there are many
other photoreceptors in the amphioxus CNS. Those
developing in the hindbrain and spinal cord, called the
organs of Hesse, are rhabdomeric or microvillar photoreceptors, while those in the forebrain, except for the
Joseph cells, are ciliary photoreceptors. The organs of
Hesse and the frontal eye consist of pigment cells containing melanin together with one or more photoreceptive neurons. However, the lamellar body, a ciliary
photoreceptor, and the Joseph cells, which are rhabdomeric photoreceptors located in the posterior part of
the cerebral vesicle, are not associated with pigment
cells. The first photoreceptor to develop is an organ of
Hesse in the middle of the hindbrain. The second is the
frontal eye [20]. About the same time that the first
organ of Hesse forms, at the early to mid-neurula, two
rows of motor neurons also differentiate. Not surprisingly, the larvae are positively phototropic from the
mid-neurula stage and begin muscular movements at
the late neurula stage.
Gene expression is quite similar in the CNS of both
amphioxus and vertebrates. Not only is the expression
of genes involved in rostro-caudal patterning such as
Otx, Hox and Gbx highly conserved [21-23], but also
the expression of genes involved in the neuronal specification. For example, the ERR, islet, Shox, Krox, Mnx
genes are expressed in developing motor neurons in
both amphioxus and vertebrates [24-27]. However, it is
not known whether expression of miRNAs is similar in
the amphioxus and vertebrate CNS. In vertebrates, several miRNAs are expressed in specific brain regions or
specific types of neurons suggesting their involvement
both in development and function of the nervous system [8]. For example, in Xenopus, miR-124 is expressed
in the optic vesicle and forebrain, where it negatively
regulates NeuroD1 [9]. In the mouse brain, miR-124
seems to be largely restricted to differentiating and
mature neurons [28], while miR-124 is expressed in
neural progenitors [10,28]. Its expression appears to be
controlled by a neuron restricted transcriptional repressor (REST/NRSF), which inhibits miR-124 expression in
both nonneuronal cells and neural progenitors [29]. A
second miRNA, miR-9, is also specifically expressed in
proliferating neural precursors in both zebrafish
embryos [30,31], and in mouse embryos and adults
[28,32], while miR-7 and miR-184 are expressed in several types of brain tumors, suggesting a function in cell
proliferation [33-36]. In addition, miR-137 has been
implicated in proliferation of neural stem cells [37,38],

Page 2 of 17

while mir183 is expressed in hair cells in the vertebrate
ear [39,40].
For amphioxus, there is only a single study of miRNA
expression, which showed that two miRNAs (miR-133
and miR-1) are expressed in the developing muscular
somites of amphioxus [13]. Therefore, to gain insights
into the evolution and function of miRNAs during
amphioxus neural development, we determined expression of six miRNAs (miR-124, miR-9, miR-7, miR-183,
miR-184 and miR-137) in two species of amphioxus,
Branchiostoma floridae and B. lanceolatum. All six miRNAs are known to be expressed exclusively or preferentially in the nervous systems of vertebrates and/or other
species. Our results show that all six miRNAs are
expressed in specific regions of the CNS of amphioxus,
many of which can be correlated with cell types identified by microanatomical studies [20,41-43]. In addition
miR-7, miR-137 and miR-184 are also expressed in
endodermal and mesodermal tissues. Together with analysis of potential miRNA targets, these results give
insights into the regulation of neurogenesis in
amphioxus.

Results
We found that all six miRNAs are expressed in the
amphioxus CNS, although miR-7, miR-184 and miR-137
are also present in a strikingly broad spectrum of developing tissues derived from mesoderm and endoderm,
while miR-183 is also expressed in some ectodermal
sensory cells of the peripheral nervous system (PNS).
miR-124 expression during amphioxus development

In both B. floridae and B. lanceolatum, the earliest
miR-124 expression appears in 14 h mid-neurulae in a
periodic pattern of cells on each side of the midline
adjacent to the first five somites (Figure 1A, B). As
development proceeds, expression is visible in two
longitudinal rows of labeled nerve cells beginning at
the posterior cerebral vesicle (cv) and extending to the
hindbrain (Figure 1C, D). Plastic sections of the same
embryos show that such cells are preferentially lateral and
ventrolateral (Figure 1F-I) except for a few neurons in the
floor plate and adjacent to the pigment cell of the first
photoreceptor to form (Figures 1 H). In later larvae (three
to four gill slits), expression of miRNA expands anteriorly
into the cerebral vesicle, but does not reach the anteriormost portion at any stage examined (Figures 1 J-M and
2A, B). In particular, two areas of the cerebral vesicle
express miR-124: one in the middle and the second in the
posterior half of the cerebral vesicle (Figure 2B). Cross sections at different levels of the nervous system showed that
most labeled cells are in the ventro-lateral neural tube
(Figure 2D, E and 2H) whereas very few labeled cells were
located in the dorsal wall (Figure 2F). Expression in the

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

Page 3 of 17

Figure 1 Developmental expression of miR-124 in B. floridae (A-L) and B. lanceolatum (B-M) as analyzed by WM-LNA-ISH. Anterior is to
the left and dorsal is up in all whole mounts. Cross-sections are viewed from the anterior end of animal. Scale bars are 50 μm for whole
mounts and 25 μm for transverse sections. A, B. Dorsal and side views of 14 h neurulae showing expression in five spots (arrows) in the neural
plate. C-E. Side views of 22 hr neurulae. D: Detail in dorsal view of the specimen in C, showing the longitudinal rows of labeled nerve cells
beginning at the posterior cerebral vesicle (cv) and extending to posterior neural tube. F-I. Transverse sections through levels in E show
symmetrical ventrolateral labeled nerve cells (arrows) and a single cell in the ventromedial wall of the neural tube just near the first pigment
spot of the dorsal ocellus (indicated by an arrowhead). J, K: Side views of early larva. L, M: Side views of first gill slit larvae. Dark granules in the
tailbud region of the late-neurula and larval stages of B. lanceolatum are pigment and not a positive reaction for miRNA transcripts.

two rows of ventro-lateral cells also expands posteriorly into the spinal cord during larval development
(Figure 2 A-H). This is in agreement with the pattern
of neurogenin, which initially labels neurons anteriorly
in the CNS with the pattern moving posteriorly as
development proceeds.
miR-9 expression in late larval stage of amphioxus B.
floridae

miR-9 expression was never detected in embryos or
very early larvae of both B. floridae and B. lanceolatum, in contrast to the situation in vertebrates [30,31].
Instead, miR-9 expression appears only later in larvae

(three to four gill slits) (Figure 2I). Here, we show
miR-9 expression exclusively in the B. floridae. miR-9
is expressed in scattered cells throughout the neural
tube except at the most anterior part of the cerebral
vesicle where the frontal eye has just formed (Figure 2J).
Just posterior to the frontal eye, we observed miR-9
transcripts in a very few dorsal cells of the cerebral vesicle (Figure 2J, L). The miR-9 labelled cells cannot be the
same as those expressing miR-124, because the former
are organized as segmental blocks of cells (Figure 2K,
O), while the latter, although segmentally arranged at an
early stage, are no longer segmentally arranged in the
larva (Figure 2B, C, G). Moreover, transverse sections

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

Page 4 of 17

Figure 2 Comparison between miR-124 and miR-9 expression at late larval stage of B. floridae. Anterior to the left. Cross section scale
bars are 25 μm. A, I: Side views of larvae with three to four gill slits. Scale bars: 250 μm. B, J. Anterior enlargement of specimens in A and I,
respectively. Scale bars: 50 μm. C, K. Enlarged view of the neural tube of specimen in A and I at level of three dorsal ocelli (the first dorsal
ocellus appearing during the development and located near the somite 5 is shown by arrows, the most anterior ones are indicated by
arrowheads. Each differing from the first dorsal ocellus in being bicellular associations between a single neuron and a single pigment cell). Scale
bars: 50 μm. D: Cross section through level d in B. E, F: Cross sections through levels e and f in C. L, M: Cross section through levels l and m in
J. N: Cross section through level n in K. G, O: Detail of specimens in A and I at levels of the first dorsal ocellus (arrows). Scale bars: 50 μm. H, P:
Cross sections through levels h and p in G and O, respectively.

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

clearly demonstrate that miR-9 expressing cells
are mainly in the ventral midline of the neural tube (Figure 2M, N, P), while those of miR-124 are more lateral
(Figure 2D-F, H).
miR-7 expression in amphioxus

Unlike miR-124 and miR-9, expression of miR-7 is not
limited to the CNS. The first miR-7 expression appears
at the late neurula stage (20 to 22 hours after fertilization) as a weak signal in the ventral portion of the cerebral vesicle (Figure 3A, J). At the late neural stage, miR7 transcripts were also found in the most anterior end
of the pharyngeal endoderm (Figure 3A) from which
Hatschek’s left anterior diverticulum, also known as the
preoral organ or Hatschek’s pit (a putative homolog to
the vertebrate adenohypophysis), will originate. In the
early larva, miR-7 is detectable in almost the entire ventral portion of the cerebral vesicle including the photoreceptors of the frontal eye (Figure 3B-E, 3I, J). Finally, a
restricted expression was also observed in Hatchek’s pit
(Figure 3C, F, G, J).

Page 5 of 17

miR-183 expression in amphioxus larvae

miR-183 expression is largely restricted to the CNS, but
it is also expressed in some likely ectodermal sensory
cells in the anterior end of the larva. The expression of
miR-183 starts from the larval stage and it does not differ substantially between B. lanceolatum and B. floridae at 72 hr of development (Figure 4). Strong
expression was detected in two groups of epidermal
cells in the rostrum: the first is confined to the most
anterior tip (Figure 4A, B, D, G, H), and the second is
localized in the ectoderm anterior to the cerebral
vesicle and adjacent to the notochord (Figure 4C, E, G,
H), approximately where an anterior sense organ (the
corpuscles of de Quatrefages) will later develop [44].
miR-183 was also found in some dorsolateral cells on
either side of the posterior cerebral vesicle (Figure 4A,
B, F-H). At least some of these cells are located
approximately where the lamellar organ is developing.
Finally, a few scattered cells expressing miR-183 were
also found in the CNS posterior to the cerebral vesicle
(Figure 4A, G, H).

Figure 3 miR-7 expression in B. lanceolatum and B. floridae. Anterior to the left and dorsal up in all whole mounts. Cross-sections are
viewed from the anterior end of animal. Scale bars are 50 μm for whole mounts and 25 μm for cross sections. A: Side view of 22-h neurula.
Expression is restricted to the cerebral vesicle (cv) and anterior pharyngeal endoderm (arrow). B: Side view of a first gill slit larva. C: Higher
magnification of the anterior end of larva in B. Expression is observed in cerebral vesicle and preoral pit (arrow). D, E: Cross sections through
levels d and e in C show several ventrolateral labeled cells of the anterior cerebral vesicle (arrowheads). F, G: Cross sections through levels f and
g in C show miR-7 expression in cells of preoral pit (arrows). H: Side view of 20-h neurula showing expression in the cerebral vesicle. I: Side view
of a three gill slit larva. J: Anterior enlargement of the anterior end of the specimen in I. miR-7 is expressed in cells of the frontal eye complex
and in further regions of cerebral vesicle (cv). A strong signal was also found in the preoral pit (arrow). Arrowhead in C and J points to pigment
spot associated with frontal eye.

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

Page 6 of 17

Figure 4 miR-183 expression in B. lanceolatum and B. floridae. Anterior to the left and dorsal up in all whole mounts. Cross-sections are
viewed from the anterior end of the animal. Scale bars are 50 μm for whole mounts and 25 μm for cross sections. A: Side view of a 72-h larva.
B: Detail of the head region of larva in A showing expression in epidermal cells located in the most anterior tip of rostrum (arrow) and in dorsal
wall of the posterior cerebral vesicle (arrowhead). C: Higher magnification of specimen in A with in focus labeled epidermal cells on the sides of
the rostrum (arrows). D, F: Cross sections through the levels indicated by an arrow (D) and an arrowhead (F) in B, respectively. E: Cross section
through level e in C. G: Side view of B. floridae larva. H: Enlargement of the specimen in G showing expression in epidermal cells of rostrum,
cells of the dorsal posterior region of cerebral vesicle and in scattered cells of the neural tube (arrow).

miR-184 expression in amphioxus

miR-137 expression in amphioxus

mir-184 is expressed very early during development in
both B. floridae and B. lanceolatum (Figure 5). It is
ubiquitously expressed in two-cell embryos (Figure 5A,
K). By the 16-cell stage, expression is limited to the
vegetal blastomeres (Figure 5B, L), although in the
early blastula, it is also expressed, albeit at a lower
level, in the animal blastomeres (Figure 5C, M). At the
gastrula stage, mir-184 is expressed throughout the
presumptive neuroectoderm and at a higher level
throughout the mesendoderm (Figure 5D, N). At the
early (Figure 5O) and mid-neurula stages (Figure 5E,
P), we detected expression in the entire neural tube,
somites and posterior endoderm. This pattern is also
maintained at the late neurula stage (Figure 5F-H),
where miR-184 transcripts are evident in the cerebral
vesicle (Figure 5G), somites (Figure 5H) and in a
group of ventral endodermal cells from which will
arise the first gill slit (Figure 5F). Finally, at the larval
stage, transcripts of miR-184 are detectable in the
anterior and intermediate regions of the cerebral vesicle, in the preoral pit, and in two pharyngeal organs
(endostyle and club shaped gland) (Figure 5J, R) as
well as in cells surrounding the first (Figure 5I) and
second gill slits (Figure 5Q).

miR-137 transcripts were first discernable during the
neurula stage of B. lanceolatum (Figure 6) and B. floridae
(data not shown). In the mid-neurula, expression was
found exclusively in the most anterior end of the neural
tube, the presumptive cerebral vesicle (Figure 6A). In the
early larva (24 to 30 hours after fertilization), the signal
was confined to a very few cells in the posterior cerebral
vesicle (Figures 6B and 7A, B). From this stage onward,
this signal gradually becomes more intense (Figures 6C, D
and 7C). Transverse sections indicated that at least some
of the labeled cells probably are in the presumptive infundibular organ (Figure 6E, F). However, miR-137 is likely
also found just posterior to the infundibular organ in the
tegmental neuropile. Subsequently, expression of miR-137
extended to an additional group of cells more anteriorly in
the cerebral vesicle (Figures 6G, H and 7D, E) and also to
cells arranged in a periodic pattern more posteriorly in the
neural tube (Figures 6G, K-N and 7D-F). Non-neural
expression was also found around the mouth and in the
developing gill slits (Figures 6G and 7D, E)
Amphioxus predicted miRNA targets

At present in silico prediction is generally the first
approach that is used to identify potential miRNA

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

Page 7 of 17

Figure 5 miR-184 expression during B. lanceolatum and B. floridae development. Anterior to the left and dorsal up in D, E, F, I, J. Scale bars
are 50 μm for whole mounts and 25 μm for cross sections. A-D, K-N: 2-cell stage, 16-cell stage (B, viewed from the vegetative pole; L, side
view), blastula stage (3.5 h post fertilization), cup-shaped gastrula (side views, 6 h and 7 h post fertilization in D and N, respectively). O: Dorsal
view of early neurula with anterior toward left. E, P: Side view of mid-neurula. F: Side view of late neurula. Expression was found in the cerebral
vesicle, somites and in the primordium of first gill slit (arrow). G, H: Cross sections through levels g and h in F showing expression in cells of the
cerebral vesicle (arrow) and in somites (arrowheads). I: Side view of a first gill slit larva. Q: Side view of a two gill slit larva. J, R: Higher
magnifications of anterior region of the specimen in I and R respectively showing expression in the cerebral vesicle (cv), preoral pit (arrowhead),
endostyle (e) and club shaped gland (cg) (arrow).

targets. Table 1 and Additional file 1 (Tables S1 and S2)
show that miR-124, miR-7, miR-183, miR-184 and miR137 probably regulate different target genes, some of
which could be regulated by many miRNAs. Comparison of the expression patterns of these miRNAs with
those of their putative target mRNAs revealed both
overlapping and non overlapping expression. Animal
microRNA target prediction is particularly challenging
because of the complexity of miRNA target recognition.
At present, comprehensive rules controlling miRNA target recognition and binding have not been discovered,
and false positive and false negative results are a problem. In animals, miRNA:mRNA duplexes often contain
several mismatches, gaps and G:U base pairs in many
positions, which limit the length of contiguous
sequences of perfect nucleotide matching.
Often miRNAs inhibit translation of their direct targets, and, therefore, the miRNA and its target are coexpressed. However, miRNAs may also regulate the
levels of expression of their target mRNAs. This mode
of gene regulation is generally linked to a non overlapping expression between miRNAs and their targets
[45-47]. However, there are also examples of partially
or completely overlapping expression of targets and

miRNAs [48]. Alternatively, the target can be
expressed in cells that express the miRNA but at
higher levels in those cells that do not express the
miRNA [49,50]. Here, we used four different programs
(miRanda, FindTar, RNAhybrid and PITA) to predict
putative amphioxus miRNA targets. We argued that if
at least three programs predict the same target sites,
the likelihood of false positives is reduced [51]. Unfortunately, several common programs used for vertebrates, Drosophila and worms (ex. TargetScan and
PicTar) are not available for “non standard” animal
species such as amphioxus. Thus, we have erred on
the side of caution and may have missed a number of
targets. Indeed, almost one third of the predicted targets were not common to the data generated by three
of the four methods.
Therefore, we searched 3’UTR sequences of 68 genes
of B. floridae for potential binding sites of the six miRNAs (Additional file 1 Table S2). In particular, we
selected some genes that are expressed in the nervous
system during amphioxus development (Additional file 1
Table S2). For some of them expression in B. lanceolatum is also known [52] (Table 1). Of 68 genes expressed
in the amphioxus nervous system, we found 17

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

Page 8 of 17

Figure 6 miR-137 expression in B. lanceolatum. Anterior to the left and dorsal up in all whole mounts. Cross-sections are viewed from the
anterior end of animal. Scale bars are 50 μm for whole mounts and 25 μm for cross sections. A: Side view of 16-h neurula. Expression was
found in the most anterior part of the neural tube (arrow). B: Lateral view of 24 hr larva. Transcripts are visible in a cluster of cells (arrow) of the
posterior cerebral vesicle (cv). C: Side view of 48-h larva. D: Higher magnification of the specimen in C with detail of labeled cells of the cerebral
vesicle just above the preoral pit (po). E, F: Consecutive cross sections trough levels e and f in D showing transcripts in a group of ventrolateral
cells that forms the infundibular organ. G: Side view of 72 hr larva. Expression was found in the neural tube and in cells located around the
mouth (arrow) and in the first gill slit (arrowhead). H: Anterior enlargement of specimen in G. Two groups of cells in the cerebral vesicle express
miR-137. The most anterior is found in the middle (arrow), the more posterior (arrowhead) correspond to the cells of the infundibular organ and
to the tegmental neuropile. I: Cross section through level indicated by an arrow in H. J: Cross section through level indicated by an arrowhead
in H, K, L: Enlargements of different parts of the neural tube of the specimen in G showing miR-137 expression in segmentally arranged nerve
cells. M, N: cross sections through levels m and n in K and L, respectively. miR-137 is expressed in ventrolateral nerve cells.

transcripts with one or more sites for the 5 miRNAs
(Table 1 and Additional file 1 Table S1). miR-9 does not
show hits for the selected transcripts. Only eight miRNAs were predicted by at least 4 methods to bind at the
same site. Our analysis shows that among 17 putative
targets, expressed in the CNS of amphioxus, 13 are
coexpressed with the one or more of the 5 miRNAs and
6 are not coexpressed (Table 1 and Additional File 1
Table S1). Therefore, we hypothesize that amphioxus
miRNAs regulate targets both by controlling translation
and by mRNA degradation.
Comparison of the expression patterns of the six miRNAs and their potential targets shows that only miR184, which is very broadly expressed, is co-expressed

with all the potential targets we identified (Table 1 and
Additional file 1 Table S1). For example, in the CNS,
miR-184 is co-expressed in the cerebral vesicle with calmodulin, FoxG (BF1), TH, TR2/4, Otx. In contrast,
none of the selected transcripts contains target sites for
miR-9. However, since there are relatively few data concerning gene expression at the late larval stage of
amphioxus when miR-9 starts to be expressed, it is difficult to compare its expression with that of other potential targets.
The other 4 miRNAs are all co-expressed with one or
more of their potential targets in the CNS. For example,
among the several predicted targets of miR-124
expressed in the nervous system (Table 1 and Additional

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

Page 9 of 17

Figure 7 miR-137 expression in B. floridae. A: Side view of 24-h
larva. B: Anterior enlargement of the specimen in A showing
expression in a discrete region of the posterior cerebral vesicle just
above the preoral pit (po). C: Higher magnification of the anterior
end of a 30-h larva. D: Side view of a three gill slit larva with
expression in the neural tube and gill slits (arrow). E: Anterior of
larva in D showing expression in different cells of cerebral vesicle
(arrows) and in segmentally arranged cells of the neural tube just
posterior. F: Enlargement of the posterior neural tube just posterior
to the pigment of the first dorsal ocellus (arrowhead) with miR-137
transcripts in cells segmentally arranged in the neural tube.

file 1 Table S1) only Chordin is co-expressed and only
at the late neurula stage. At the larval stage, expression
of the two no longer overlaps as chordin expression
becomes restricted to the cerebral vesicle, where miR124 is never expressed. Expression of FoxG (BF1), Hairy

A, Wnt8 and Calmodulin never overlaps with that of
miR-124. Transcripts of FoxG (BF1), Wnt8 and Calmodulin in the CNS are limited to the cerebral vesicle,
while those of Hairy A in the CNS are posterior to that
of miR-124, and by the larval stage become confined to
endodermally-derived structures (Table 1).
The only putative target of miR-7 is NK2.2. In the CNS,
expression of miR-7 and NK2.2 appears to overlap in the
posterior 2/3 of the cerebral vesicle at the late neurula
and larval stages. However, NK2.2 is also expressed in
gut cells, while miR-7 is expressed in the preoral pit.
Among the predicted amphioxus targets of miR-183
we found two genes showing an overlapping expression: Calmodulin and Netrin (Table 1). For example, at
larval stage Netrin is found in the lamellar body as
mir-183. On the contrary, Gbx and ax2/5/8 are putative targets of miR-183 known to be expressed at larval
stage in the hindbrain region where miR-183 is not
present (Table 1).
Putative targets of amphioxus miR-137 are Six-4/5,
TR2/4/and Gbx (Table 1). Of these, the first two are coexpressed with miR-137. Six-4/5 and TR2/4 are overlapping with miR-137 in some regions of cerebral vesicle
and in cells of the mouth and gill slits, whereas Gbx is a
putative target not coexpressed with miR-137.

Discussion
Cephalochordates, commonly known as amphioxus or
lancelets, are the most basal, living group of chordates.

Table 1 Coexpression of miRNAs and enriched brain putative targets
putative
miRNA targets

miR-124

Calmodulin

FT-RH-Mir

Chordin

miR-7

miR-183

miR-137

References

FT-Pita-RH-Mir

Pita-RH-Mir

FT-RH-Mir

miR-184

[109]
[110,52]

Coe

FT-Pita-RH-Mir

[111]

Engrailed

FT-Pita-RH-Mir

[112]

FT-RH-Mir

[113]

FoxG (BF1)

FT-Pita-RH-Mir

Gbx
Hairy A

FT-Pita-RH-Mir

FT-Pita-RH

[23]

FT-Pita-RH-Mir

[114]

Mnx (2 sites)

FT-Pita-Mir

[27]

FT-Pita-RH-Mir
Netrin

FT-Pita-RH-Mir

NK2.2

[115]

FT-RH-Mir

[116]

Otx

FT-Pita-RH

Pax-2/5/8

FT-Pita-RH

Six-4/5

[21,52]
[117,52]

FT-RH-Mir

[118]

Snail

FT-RH-Mir

[119]

TH

FT-RH-Mir

[120]

FT-Pita-RH

[121]

TR2/4
Wnt8

FT-Pita-RH
Pita-RH-Mir

[122]

Expression of miRNA and enriched brain putative targets detected by at least three of the four bioinformatics algorithms (FindTar, Pita, RNAhybrid and miRanda).
miRNA-target coexpression is written in bold. Abbreviations are the followings: FT, FindTar, RH, RNAhybrid, Mir, miRanda.

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

At least 20 species of the genus Branchiostoma have
been described but only three of them are mainly
investigated: B. floridae in North America, B. lanceolatum in Europe, and B. belcheri in East Asia. Mitochondrial DNA sequences indicate that they probably
diverged from 100 to 200 Mya [53,54]. These species
are morphologically very much the same. For B. lanceolatum and B. floridae, the major differences in larvae are the long anterior end and the pigmented tail
in the former. Given this high level of morphological
conservation, it is not surprising that developmental
gene expression is proving to be nearly identical in the
two species [52]. Thus, it is not also surprising that
miRNAs are conserved between B. floridae, B. belcheri
and B. japonicum [11-13] (Figure 8) and that we
found their expression patterns in at least B. floridae
and B. lanceolatum also to be much the same. For the
six mature miRNAs sequences investigated in the present study, there are a few differences in sequences
including insertion/deletion of few nucleotides in the
3’ ends of miR-9, miR-184, miR-183 and miR-137
(Figure 8), outside the 5’-seed region (two to eight
nucleotides), which is known to be involved in target
recognition. In fact, there is also a high level of
sequence identity among these miRNAs in vertebrates
and Branchiostoma. During miRNA biogenesis, one
strand of the RNA duplex is preferentially selected for
entry into a silencing complex, whereas the other

Page 10 of 17

strand, known as the passenger strand or miRNA*
strand, is degraded. Recently, some miRNA* sequences
were reported to be abundantly expressed, and generally are less conserved across species. This situation is
particularly evident for miR-9* with high levels of
nucleotide divergence despite of their partners were
highly conserved (Figure 8).
Amphioxus miRNAs show spatially localized
expression in CNS

The CNS of larval amphioxus comprises an anterior cerebral vesicle (diencephalon plus small midbrain) and a
long nerve cord (hindbrain plus spinal cord). The cerebral vesicle, includes the frontal eye rostrally, the infundibular organ ventrally and the lamellar organ
dorsocaudally, which is also a photoreceptor. Just caudal
to the infundibular organ, there is a thick ventral commissure (tegmental neuropile) receiving fibers that originate from the lamellate cells and just behind this is the
primary motor centre (pmc) containing the anteriormost
motoneurons and large premotor interneurons with caudal projections (Figure 9). The latter represents the ventral control locomotory system of amphioxus larva
thought to be involved in initiating swimming and
escape behaviors [18,19,55]. According to the microanatomical reconstructions and gene expression data, the
posterior neural tube of amphioxus does not have segmented rhombomeres as vertebrates; but the collinear

Figure 8 Sequence alignment of mature miRNA sequences. The alignment was performed using the mature miRNA sequences of three
Branchiostoma species (belcherii, bbe; floridae, bfl; japonicum, bj) and three vertebrates (Homo sapiens, has; Danio rerio, dre; Petromyzon marinus,
pma). Different residues and insertions/deletions are highlighted in red in the alignment. The miR-9* sequence alignment showed several
differences between Branchiostoma sp. and vertebrates. The sequences of mature miRNAs of B. floridae, Homo sapiens, Danio rerio, Petromyzon
marinus were obtained from miRBase. The sequences of miRNAs of B. belcherii and B. japonicum from [12,13].

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

Page 11 of 17

similar to that of miR-9 in the positioning of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) in zebrafish [31]. In
addition, expression of some amphioxus miRNAs suggested roles in neuronal specification and/or differentiation. For instance, miR-124 is initially expressed where
five pairs of motor neurons develop in the hindbrain.
This segmental pattern is very similar to that of several
genes including islet, Krox, Mnx, ERR, Shox, synapsin
and ChAT/VAChT [24-27,57,58]. However, neither of
these genes seems to be recognized by miR-124.
Figure 9 Schematic representation of the left side of
amphioxus larva showing the expression of miRNAs in CNS
and PNS. Above the figure the putative territories homologous to
the vertebrate diencephalon (D), midbrain (M), hindbrain (HB) and
spinal cord (SC) are reported. The expression of miRNAs are shown
by colored boxes. Different color shades of boxes indicate different
stages of development in which we observed the appearance of
new expression domains (light green correspond to the expression
of miR-124 up to larva with a first gill and dark green miR-124
expression at larva with 3-4 gill slits; light yellow indicates miR-137
expression until 48 hour larva and dark yellow miR-137 expression
at 72 hour larva). miR-7 and miR-183 transcripts in the preoral organ
and epidermal sensory cells of PNS (red spots and pink triangles
respectively) are also represented. The position of the frontal eye
complex (fe), infundibular cells (io), tegmental neuropile (tg),
lamellar organ (lb) and primary motor centre (pmc) are indicated.
The first pigment spot of dorsal ocellus is also indicate (ps) as well
as preoral organ (po), gill slits (gs) and notochord (n).

expression pattern of AmphiHox, as well as the segmental expression pattern of islet in the amphioxus neural
tube, suggests that amphioxus have at least a hindbrainrelated region [25,56] (Figure 9).
Our study shows that miRNAs in amphioxus are differentially expressed within the CNS suggesting that
they have region-specific functions. Within the cerebral
vesicle, miR-137 and miR-183 show restricted expression in specific cell types, whereas miR-184 and miR-7
are broadly expressed (Figure 9). In 48 h larvae, miR137 is expressed ventrally in the infundibular organ and
likely more posterior in the tegmental neuropile,
whereas miR-183 is found dorsal to the infundibulum.
At the same stage, miR-124 is preferentially expressed
in the hindbrain, whereas in the cerebral vesicle it
appears to be limited to few cells in the more posterior
part (Figure 9). Moreover, miR-124 expression is also
probably found in both interneurons and motoneurons
located ventro-laterally in the pmc. Regional expression
of miR-9 is similar to that of miR-124, although the
exact cells in the neural tube expressing the two may
not be the same. The regionally restricted expression
suggests that miRNAs may regulate specific cell types in
the CNS of amphioxus. These miRNAs could act in the
regionalization of the nervous system in a manner

Conservation of miRNAs across species

Given the sequence conservation of many miRNAs
across species (Figure 8), it is perhaps not surprising
that their developmental roles seem to be quite conserved as well. For example, miR-124 is a highly conserved miRNA expressed in the nervous systems not
only of amphioxus and vertebrates, but also of several
invertebrates including some lophotrochozoans and
ecdysozoans, but not in C. elegans and Aplysia, where it
is mostly confined to sensory neurons in the PNS
[28,30,59-65]. In mammals, miR-124 is the most abundant miRNA in the embryonic and adult brain [60]. In
particular, during neurogenesis, miR-124 is present at
undetectable or very low levels in neural progenitors but
is highly expressed in differentiating and mature neurons [10,28,66,67]. In amphioxus, miR-124 is expressed
exclusively in the CNS, initially, in five groups of cells
located ventro-laterally and ventrally in the midbrain
and hindbrain at mid-neurula stage and later, more
anteriorly, but still mostly in ventro-lateral neurons.
Early expression of Neurogenin and ERR in the first
motor neurons to differentiate is similar to that of miR124 [24,68]. However, whether miR-124 is expressed in
the same or adjacent cells is not certain. Certainly, more
cells express miR-124 than expresses ERR.
In vertebrates, miR-124 is expressed in proliferating
neuroblasts. However, in amphioxus, at least at the midneurula stage, expression of miR-124 seems to be in
post-mitotic cells. At that stage, the only proliferating
cells are in the most anterior and posterior-third of the
neural tube [69] where miR-124 expression is not found.
Interestingly, miR-124 expression was found in the most
posterior part of the nerve cord only in later larvae,
probably because of the delayed differentiation of neurons there.
miR-9 and miR-124 are both widely expressed in the
amphioxus CNS, however cross-sections show that they
are expressed in different cells with miR-124 being largely expressed ventrolaterally whereas miR-9 is
expressed in the ventral midline. Moreover, unlike mir124, miR-9 expression is limited to later larvae and it is
likely not involved in neurogenesis as described in mammals. In addition the amphioxus miR-9* sequence in

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

amphioxus has little sequence identity with its vertebrate counterparts (Figure 8), and like miR-9 it is probably not involved in the proliferation of neuronal
progenitors.
Although amphioxus and vertebrate miR-9 genes are
both expressed in the brain [60,70], unlike miR-124,
the functions of miR-9 do not appear to be highly evolutionarily conserved across phyla. In zebrafish and
mice, miR-9 is expressed in neural progenitor cells and
promotes neurogenesis by repressing suppressors of
neuronal differentiation. In addition, miR-9 also targets
members of the transcriptional repressor REST complex, inhibiting the expression of neuronal genes in
non-neuronal cells [29,71]. Several studies have
suggested that miR-9 and miR-9* can both suppress
progenitor proliferation and promote neural differentiation [66,71-73]. In zebrafish, miR-9 helps establish
the MHB by antagonizing FGF signaling, thus, promoting neurogenesis [31]. However, miR-9 is also
expressed in differentiated neurons of the telencephalon [10,66,74]. Moreover, miR-9 is one of four highest
expressed miRNA genes in the adult brain of the
lamprey Petromyzon marinus [75]. In contrast, in Drosophila embryos, miR-9 is not expressed in the CNS.
Instead, it is expressed in ectodermal cells near some
sensory organ precursors (SOPs), where it regulates
the specification of sensory neurons by repressing the
proneural gene senseless in the ectodermal non-SOP
cells [76]. The difference between miR-9 function in
Drosophila and vertebrates might be because miR-9
regulates different genes in these two organisms – for
example, proneural genes in Drosophila and inhibitors
of neurogenesis in vertebrates. In other protostomes,
such as the annelid Platynereis dumerilii, miR-9
is expressed in cells at the base of the antennae, a pair
of head appendages likely acting as chemosensory
organs [59].
In amphioxus, miR-184 is ubiquitously expressed in
early embryos and larvae although there is expression in
the cerebral vesicle in later larvae (Figure 9). In other
species, it is similarly widely expressed. For example, it
is expressed not only in the CNS, but also in eye and
testis of mouse, pharyngeal arch ectoderm and lateral
plate mesoderm in the chick, and in the developing eye,
hatching gland and epidermis in the zebrafish [30,77].
Similarly in the lamprey, miR-184 is expressed in several
organs (brain, gills, kidney, heart, muscle) [75]. Moreover, in Drosophila, while miR-184 transcripts are present at high levels in the CNS, they are also present at
high levels in eggs and during early embryogenesis in
the mesoderm and anterior endoderm as well as in the
female germline [63,78,79].
Expression of miR-7 is comparatively evolutionarily
conserved. In amphioxus, miR-7 expression in the CNS

Page 12 of 17

is limited to the cerebral vesicle (Figure 9). In late neurulae, it is expressed in the presumptive frontal eye,
which consists of a cluster of pigment cells (the pigmented cup) and four rows of neurons [20] and where serotonin-containing cells will later differentiate [80]. In
larvae, miR-7 transcripts also occur in the middle and
posterior cerebral vesicle, including the infundibular
cells. Interestingly, we also found miR-7 expression in
developing preoral pit in amphioxus (Figure 9), which
has been suggested to be homologous to the vertebrate
pituitary [81-83].
In other species, miR-7 is also expressed in photoreceptors [84]. In Drosophila, together with repression of
Yan protein (a repressor of retinal cell differentiation),
miR-7 regulates photoreceptor differentiation induced
by FGF signaling [85]. In the mouse, and zebrafish miR7 is also expressed in the hypothalamus in neurons with
sensory or neurosecretory functions [86,87]. Similarly, in
the annelid Platynereis, miR-7 is expressed in vasotocinergic, FMRFamidergic and serotonergic neurons. In
addition, miR-7 is expressed in some non-neural tissues
including endocrine cells of the pancreas (islets of Langerhans) [88] and in the pituitary gland in mammals
[77]. In lamprey, miR-7 is expressed at the larval and
adult stage. The brain is the major site of production of
such miRNA, although other organs (kidney, skin and
gills) express it at low levels [75].
Expression of miR-137 is also highly conserved across
species. Vertebrate miR-137, like miR-7, is expressed in
specific nuclei in the thalamus/hypothalamus and dorsal
tegmentum [66] and enriched in the synaptic compartment of neurons in the mammalian forebrain [89,90]. In
the annelid Platynereis, miR-137 and miR-7 are
expressed in the same region of the CNS [59], while in
amphioxus, miR-137 starts to be expressed in some cells
of the infundibular organ and in the tegmental neuropile
(Figure 9) [19,91]. Moreover, in later larvae it is also
expressed in other regions of the cerebral vesicle and in
the posterior neural tube. Outside the neural tube we
also found expression in the mouth region and gill slits
(Figures 7 and 8). Similarly, in the lamprey miR-137 is
also expressed in the mouth as well as in the brain [75].
miR-183 family members represent one of the most
highly conserved regulators in sensory organ
development

In vertebrates, miR-183 family members (miR-182, miR96, and miR-183) are co-transcribed from a 1 to 4 kb
segment of intergenic DNA [92] and miR-183 and miR96 genes appear to be adjacent in genomes of the urochordate Ciona intestinalis [93]. More recently, the
genomic linkage of miR-182/miR-9/miR-183 has been
described in other deuterostomes (Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus, Saccoglossus kowalevskii and Branchiostoma

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

floridae) [13]. Expression of miR-183 in sensory cells is
highly conserved. In amphioxus, it is expressed in
potential precursors of ectodermal sensory cells in the
rostrum (Figure 9) [44] and, where the lamellar body,
thought homologous to the epiphysis of agnathans [41],
which also expresses miR-183 [30]. In vertebrates, the
three miR 183 family members have very similar expression patterns in specific sensory cell types in the eye,
nose, and inner ear [30,40,92]. miR-183 expression is
also conserved in neuromasts of teleosts, amphibians
and agnathans [93]. In mammals, the miR-183 family
was predicted to recognize several genes known to have
important roles in various sensory organs, supporting
the hypothesis of the sensory organ specificity of this
cluster [92]. In Drosophila and C. elegans, miR-183
homologs are also expressed in ciliated sensory cells of
mechano- and chemo-sensory organs [93,94]. Similarly,
in the hemichordate Saccoglossus kowalevskii, several
potential neurosensory cells express miR-183 [93].

Conclusion
Many miRNAs are evolutionarily conserved and some
have limited expression patterns with strict tissue, cell,
and temporal specificities, while others demonstrate ubiquitous or constitutive expression. Moreover, the high
phylogenetic conservation of several miRNAs suggests
their ancient origin and crucial function in evolutionarily conserved developmental processes.
Our study has set the stage for future investigations of
control of neuronal development by microRNA in
amphioxus. Amphioxus is a particularly favorable model
given the small number of neurons in this model chordate
and previous studies mapping each neuron and its connections in the amphioxus brain. In light of the conservation
of neural patterning and miRNA expression in amphioxus
and vertebrates, results from amphioxus should be highly
relevant to understanding the mechanisms of neuronal
patterning in the more complex vertebrate brain.
Methods
Embryos collection and whole-mount in situ hybridisation

Adults amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae) were collected from Old Tampa Bay, FL, USA. In vitro fertilization, embryo culture, and fixation were performed as
described [95]. Adults amphioxus (Branchiostoma lanceolatum) were collected in the bay of Argelès-sur-Mer,
France, and gametes were obtained by heat stimulation
[96,97]. Fixation was performed as described [95].
Expression patterns of mature miRNAs were determined
by whole-mount in situ hybridizations using Locked
Nucleic Acid (LNA)-modified oligonucleotide probes
(WM-LNA-ISH). The sequences of mature miRNAs of
B. floridae were obtained from miRBase release 17 [98].
LNA-modified probes were purchased from Exiqon

Page 13 of 17

(Denmark) and were directly labeled with DIG at both
their 5’ and 3’-ends, or at 3’-ends only, as previously
described [10]. The sequences of LNA probes are the
following: miR-124: 5’-GGCATTCACCGCGTGCCTTA3’; miR-9: 5’-CATACAGCTAGATAACCAAAGA-3’;
miR-7: 5’-ACAACAAAATCACTAGTCTTCCA-3’; miR183: 5’-AGTGAATTCTACCAGTGCCATA-3’; miR-184:
5’-CCCTTATCAGTTCTCCGTCCA-3’; miR-137: 5’ACGTGTATTCTCAAGCAAT-3’. Whole mount in situ
hybridization was performed essentially as described by
Holland and coworkers [95] with some modifications. In
particular, the temperature of hybridization and subsequent washing steps was adjusted to approximately 22°C
below the predicted melting temperatures of the LNA
modified probes. All miRNA probes were used at the
same concentration (final concentration 5 nM) and in
parallel. To determine the miRNA expression patterns
more precisely at the cellular level, some embryos were
also sectioned. Labeled embryos were counterstained
with 1% Ponceau S in 1% acetic acid, dehydrated in
ethanol, embedded in Spurr’s resin, and sectioned at 3
to 4 μm. Images were collected by using an Olympus
IX71 microscope (Olympus Italia s.r.l., Italy) equipped
with the chilled color digital camera ColorView II (Soft
Imaging System GmbH, Germany) and images were
processed using the analySIS software package (Soft
Imaging System GmbH, Germany).
Prediction of amphioxus microRNA target genes

To identify potential target genes of the six miRNAs
analyzed in the present paper we examined a suite of
RNAs known to be expressed in the nervous system
(Additional file 1 Table S2). Because the B. floridae
genome is not fully annotated, and several transcripts
did not contain the 5’ UTR and 3’ UTR regions we
selected full-length cDNA sequences to allow identification of the stop codons and consequently the
3’UTRs. Therefore, sequences of 3’UTRs were obtained
from the B. floridae EST data sets [99] and from the
JGI web site [100]. To improve the accuracy of target
prediction we used four target prediction algorithms:
miRanda, RNAhybrid, FindTar, PITA [101-104]. miRNAs with binding sites in the 3’-UTR as predicted by
three of the four bioinformatics algorithms were
selected as putative regulators of transcripts (Table 1
and Additional file 1 Table S1). For target prediction
with miRanda software we used the following parameters: gap opening penalty of -8; a gap extension
penalty of -2; a score threshold of 60; an energy
threshold of -20 kcal/mol; a scaling parameter of 2.
For RNAhybrid we considered only the sites with ΔG
< -20 kcal/mol, with seed 2 to 8 and allowing G:U
wobble pairs. PITA identifies putative targets assigning
an energetic score (ddG). Only sites with ddG values

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

Page 14 of 17

below -10 were considered as significant. For FindTar
we used default parameters: loop score > 15 and ΔG <
-15 kcal/mol. PITA, FindTar and miRanda executable
can be downloaded from their specific websites
[105-107]. RNAhybrid is available at BIBiserv [108].

4.

Additional material

7.

5.
6.

8.
Additional file 1: Amphioxus putative miRNA targets. Additional file
1, Table S1: Amphioxus putative miRNA targets expressed in the nervous
system. Score values, energetic scores (ddG), free energy (ΔG) and loop
scores produced by the different target prediction tools are shown.
Additional file 1, Table S2: Complete list of transcripts analyzed by
miRNA target prediction programs.

9.

10.

Abbreviations
miRNA: microRNA; UTRs: untranslated regions; CNS: central nervous system;
B. floridae and B-lanceolatum: Branchiostoma floridae and Branchiostoma
lanceolatum; PNS: peripheral nervous system; REST/NRSF: RE1 silencing
transcription factor/neural-restrictive silencing factor; pmc: primary motor
centre; MHB: midbrain-hindbrain boundary; SOPs: sensory organ precursors;
WM-LNA-ISH: whole-mount in situ hybridizations using Locked nucleic acid
(LNA)-modified oligonucleotide probes.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Skip Pierce and John M. Lawrence (Department of
Biology, USF, Tampa, FL) for the use of laboratory space and equipment;
Linda Holland (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA) for her
comments and criticisms; Ray Martinez and Marilyn Wetzel (Department of
Biology, USF, Tampa, FL) for their logistic support. We are deeply grateful to
Héctor Escriva and collaborators (Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7232, Université Pierre et Marie Curie
Paris 06, ObservatoireOcéanologique, F-66651 Banyuls-sur-Mer, France) for
the important support in collecting Branchiostoma lanceolatum adults and
embryos and for providing us with laboratory space, scientific and technical
assistance. This work was supported by MIUR (PRIN Program n° 20088JEHW3001) (to SC and MP). DDPT was supported by intramural funds of
Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia.
Author details
University of Genoa, Department of Biology, viale Benedetto XV 5, 16132
Genoa, Italy. 2The Italian Institute of Technology, Department of
Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.
16.

17.

18.
19.

1

Authors’ contributions
SC carried out the bioinformatic and in situ hybridization assays and drafted
the manuscript. LM and GG contributed to the whole mount in situ
experiments and bioinformatic analysis, respectively. DDPT was involved in
the comparison of the miRNA and expression patterns and contributed to
data discussion. SC and MP were responsible for the cellular and
evolutionary interpretation of the data. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

Received: 7 April 2011 Accepted: 1 July 2011 Published: 1 July 2011
References
1. Bartel B, Bartel DP: MicroRNAs: at the root of plant development? Plant
Physiol 2003, 132:709-717.
2. Lagos-Quintana M, Rauhut R, Lendeckel W, Tuschl T: Identification of
novel genes coding for small expressed RNAs. Science 2001,
294:853-858.
3. Ambros V: The functions of animal microRNAs. Nature 2004, 431:350-355.

25.
26.
27.

Grimson A, Srivastava M, Fahey B, Woodcroft BJ, Chiang HR, King N,
Degnan BM, Rokhsar DS, Bartel DP: Early origins and evolution of
microRNAs and Piwi-interacting RNAs in animals. Nature 2008,
455:1193-1197.
Bartel DP: MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function.
Cell 2004, 116:281-297.
Pasquinelli AE, Hunter S, Bracht J: MicroRNAs: a developing story. Curr
Opin Genet Dev 2005, 15:200-205.
Esquela-Kerscher A, Slack FJ: Oncomirs - microRNAs with a role in cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer 2006, 6:259-269.
Sempere LF, Freemantle S, Pitha-Rowe I, Moss E, Dmitrovsky E, Ambros V:
Expression profiling of mammalian microRNAs uncovers a subset of
brain-expressed microRNAs with possible roles in murine and human
neuronal differentiation. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R13.
Liu K, Liu Y, Mo W, Qiu R, Wang X, Wu JY, He R: miR-124 regulates early
neurogenesis in the optic vesicle and forebrain, targeting NeuroD1.
Nucleic Acids Res 2011, 1:1-11.
De Pietri Tonelli D, Calegari F, Fei JF, Nomura T, Osumi N, Heisenberg CP,
Huttner WB: Single-cell detection of microRNAs in developing vertebrate
embryos after acute administration of a dual-fluorescence reporter/
sensor plasmid. Biotechniques 2006, 41:727-732.
Dai Z, Chen Z, Ye H, Zhou L, Cao L, Wang Y, Peng S, Chen L:
Characterization of microRNAs in cephalochordates reveals a correlation
between microRNA repertoire homology and morphological similarity in
chordate evolution. Evol Dev 2009, 11:41-49.
Chen X, Li Q, Wang J, Guo X, Jiang X, Ren Z, Weng C, Sun G, Wang X,
Liu Y, Ma L, Chen JY, Wang J, Zen K, Zhang J, Zhang CY: Identification and
characterization of novel amphioxus microRNAs by Solexa sequencing.
Genome Biol 2009, 10:R78.
Campo-Paysaa F, Sémon M, Cameron RA, Peterson KJ, Schubert M:
microRNA complements in deuterostomes: origin and evolution of
microRNAs. Evol Dev 2011, 13:15-27.
Putnam NH: The amphioxus genome and the evolution of the chordate
karyotype. Nature 2008, 453:1064-1071.
Holland LZ: The amphioxus genome illuminates vertebrate origins and
cephalochordate biology. Genome Res 2008, 18:1100-1111.
Nicol D, Meinertzhagen IA: Cell counts and maps in the larval central
nervous system of the ascidian Ciona intestinalis (L.). J Comp Neurol 1991,
309:415-429.
Yu JK, Meulemans D, McKeown SJ, Bronner-Fraser M: Insights from the
amphioxus genome on the origin of vertebrate neural crest. Genome Res
2008, 18:1127-1132.
Holland LZ, Holland ND: Chordate origins of the vertebrate central
nervous system. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1999, 9:596-602.
Wicht H, Lacalli TC: The nervous system of amphioxus: structure,
development, and evolutionary significance. Can J Zool 2005, 83:122-150.
Lacalli TC: Frontal eye circuitry, rostral sensory pathways and brain
organization in amphioxus larvae: evidence from 3D reconstructions.
Philos Transact R Soc B: Biol Sci 1996, 351:243-263.
Williams NA, Holland P WH: Old head on young shoulders. Nature 1996,
383:490.
Holland LZ, Holland ND: Expression of AmphiHox-1 and AmphiPax-1 in
amphioxus embryos treated with retinoic acid: insights into evolution
and patterning of the chordate nerve cord and pharynx. Development
1996, 122:1829-1838.
Castro LF, Rasmussen SL, Holland PW, Holland ND, Holland LZ: A Gbx
homeobox gene in amphioxus: insights into ancestry of the ANTP class
and evolution of the midbrain/hindbrain boundary. Dev Biol 2006,
295:40-51.
Bardet PL, Schubert M, Horard B, Holland LZ, Laudet V, Holland ND,
Vanacker JM: Expression of estrogen-receptor related receptors in
amphioxus and zebrafish: implications for the evolution of posterior
brain segmentation at the invertebrate-to-vertebrate transition. Evol Dev
2005, 7:223-333.
Jackman WR, Langeland JA, Kimmel CB: islet reveals segmentation in the
amphioxus hindbrain homolog. Dev Biol 2000, 220:12-26.
Jackman WR, Kimmel CB: Coincident iterated gene expression in the
amphioxus neural tube. Evol Dev 2002, 4:366-374.
Ferrier DE, Brooke NM, Panopoulou G, Holland PW: The Mnx homeobox
gene class defined by HB9, MNR2 and amphioxus AmphiMnx. Dev Genes
Evol 2001, 211:103-107.

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

28. Deo M, Yu JY, Chung KH, Tippens M, Turner DL: Detection of mammalian
microRNA expression by in situ hybridization with RNA oligonucleotides.
Dev Dynamics 2006, 235:2538-2548.
29. Conaco C, Otto S, Han JJ, Mandel G: Reciprocal actions of REST and a
microRNA promote neuronal identity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:2422-2427.
30. Wienholds E, Kloosterman WP, Miska E, Alvarez-Saavedra E,
Berezikov E, de Bruijn E, Horvitz HR, Kauppinen S, Plasterk RH:
MicroRNA expression in zebrafish embryonic development. Science
2005, 309:310-311.
31. Leucht C, Stigloher C, Wizenmann A, Klafke R, Folchert A, Bally-Cuif L:
MicroRNA-9 directs late organizer activity of the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary. Nat Neurosci 2008, 11:641-648.
32. Kloosterman WP, Wienholds E, de Bruijn E, Kauppinen S, Plasterk RH: In situ
detection of miRNAs in animal embryos using LNA-modified
oligonucleotide probes. Nat Methods 2006, 3:27-29.
33. Kefas B, Godlewski J, Comeau L, Li Y, Abounader R, Hawkinson M, Lee J,
Fine H, Chiocca EA, Lawler S, Purow B: microRNA-7 inhibits the epidermal
growth factor receptor and the Akt pathway and is down-regulated in
glioblastoma. Cancer Res 2008, 68:3566-3572.
34. Ferretti E, De Smaele E, Po A, Di Marcotullio L, Tosi E, Espinola MS, Di
Rocco C, Riccardi R, Giangaspero F, Farcomeni A, Nofroni I, Laneve P,
Gioia U, Caffarelli E, Bozzoni I, Screpanti I, Gulino A: MicroRNA profiling in
human medulloblastoma. Int J Cancer 2009, 124:568-577.
35. Wong TS, Liu XB, Wong BY, Ng RW, Yuen AP, Wei WI: Mature miR-184 as
Potential Oncogenic microRNA of Squamous Cell Carcinoma of Tongue.
Clin Cancer Res 2008, 14:2588-2592.
36. Chen Y, Stallings RL: Differential patterns of microRNA expression in
neuroblastoma are correlated with prognosis, differentiation, and
apoptosis. Cancer Res 2007, 67:976-983.
37. Szulwach KE, Li X, Smrt RD, Li Y, Luo Y, Lin L, Santistevan NJ, Li W, Zhao X,
Jin P: Cross talk between microRNA and epigenetic regulation in adult
neurogenesis. J Cell Biol 2010, 189:127-141.
38. Smrt RD, Szulwach KE, Pfeiffer RL, Li X, Guo W, Pathania M, Teng ZQ, Luo Y,
Peng J, Bordey A, Jin P, Zhao X: MicroRNA miR-137 regulates neuronal
maturation by targeting ubiquitin ligase mind bomb-1. Stem Cells 2010,
28:1060-1070.
39. Friedman LM, Dror AA, Mor E, Tenne T, Toren G, Satoh T, Biesemeier DJ,
Shomron N, Fekete DM, Hornstein E, Avraham KB: MicroRNAs are essential
for development and function of inner ear hair cells in vertebrates. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:7915-7920.
40. Sacheli R, Nguyen L, Borgs L, Vandenbosch R, Bodson M, Lefebvre P,
Malgrange B: Expression patterns of miR-96, miR-182 and miR-183 in the
development inner ear. Gene Expr Patterns 2009, 9:364-370.
41. Lacalli TC, Holland ND, West JE: Landmarks in the anterior central nervous
system of amphioxus larvae. Philos Transact R Soc B 1994, 344:165-185.
42. Lacalli TC, Kelly SJ: The infundibular balance organ in amphioxus larvae
and related aspects of cerebral vesicle organization. Acta Zool
(Stockholm) 2000, 81:37-47.
43. Lacalli TC: Ventral neurons in the anterior nerve cord of amphioxus
larvae. II. Further data on the pacemaker circuit. J Morphol 2003,
257:212-218.
44. Baatrup E: On the Structure of the Corpuscles of de Quatrefages
(Branchiostoma lanceolatum (P)). Acta Zool (Stockholm) 1982, 63:39-44.
45. Ronshaugen M, Biemar F, Piel J, Levine M, Lai EC: The Drosophila
microRNA iab-4 causes a dominant homeotic transformation of halteres
to wings. Genes Dev 2005, 19:2947-2952.
46. Stark A, Brennecke J, Bushati N, Russell RB, Cohen SM: Animal microRNAs
confer robustness to gene expression and have a significant impact on
3’UTR evolution. Cell 2005, 123:1133-1146.
47. Stark A, Bushati N, Jan CH, Kheradpour P, Hodges E, Brennecke J, Bartel DP,
Cohen SM, Kellis M: A single Hox locus in Drosophila produces functional
microRNAs from opposite DNA strands. Genes Dev 2008, 22:8-13.
48. Tsang J, Zhu J, van Oudenaarden A: MicroRNA-mediated feedback and
feedforward loops are recurrent network motifs in mammals. Mol Cell
2007, 26:753-767.
49. Farh KK, Grimson A, Jan C, Lewis BP, Johnston WK, Lim LP, Burge CB,
Bartel DP: The widespread impact of mammalian microRNAs on mRNA
repression and evolution. Science 2005, 310:1817-1821.

Page 15 of 17

50. Sood P, Krek A, Zavolan M, Macino G, Rajewsky N: Cell-type-specific
signatures of microRNAs on target mRNA expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2006, 103:2746-2751.
51. Kuhn DE, Martin MM, Feldman DS, Terry AV Jr, Nuovo GJ, Elton TS:
Experimental validation of miRNA targets. Methods 2008, 44:47-54.
52. Somorjai I, Bertrand S, Camasses A, Haguenauer A, Escriva H: Evidence for
stasis and not genetic piracy in developmental expression patterns of
Branchiostoma lanceolatum and Branchiostoma floridae, two amphioxus
species that have evolved independently over the course of 200 Myr.
DevGenes Evol 2008, 218:703-713.
53. Cañestro C, Albalat R, Hjelmqvist L, Godoy L, Jörnvall H, Gonzàlez-Duarte R:
Ascidian and amphioxus Adh genes correlate functional and molecular
features of the ADH family expansion during vertebrate evolution. J Mol
Evol 2002, 54:81-89.
54. Nohara M, Nishida M, Manthacitra V, Nishikawa T: Ancient phylogenetic
separation between Pacific and Atlantic cephalochordates as revealed
by mitochondrial genome analysis. Zool Sci 2004, 21:203-210.
55. Shimeld SM, Holland ND: Amphioxus molecular biology: insights into
vertebrate evolution and developmental mechanisms. Can J Zool 2005,
83:90-100.
56. Wada H, Holland PW: Colinear and segmental expression of amphioxus
Hox genes. DevBiol 1999, 213:131-141.
57. Candiani S, Lacalli TC, Parodi M, Oliveri D, Pestarino M: The cholinergic
gene locus in amphioxus: molecular characterization and developmental
expression patterns. Dev Dynamics 2008, 237:1399-1411.
58. Candiani S, Moronti L, Pennati R, De Bernardi F, Benfenati F, Pestarino M:
The synapsin gene family in basal chordates: evolutionary perspectives
in metazoans. BMC EvolBiol 2010, 10:32.
59. Christodoulou F, Raible F, Tomer R, Simakov O, Trachana K, Klaus S,
Snyman H, Hannon GJ, Bork P, Arendt D: Ancient animal microRNAs and
the evolution of tissue identity. Nature 2010, 463:1084-1088.
60. Lagos-Quintana M, Rauhut R, Yalcin A, Meyer J, Lendeckel W, Tuschl T:
Identification of tissue-specific microRNAs from mouse. Current Biol 2002,
12:735-739.
61. Aboobaker AA, Tomancak P, Patel N, Rubin GM, Lai EC: Drosophila
microRNAs exhibit diverse spatial expression patterns during embryonic
development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:18017-18022.
62. Darnell DK, Kaur S, Stanislaw S, Konieczka JH, Yatskievych TA, Antin PB:
MicroRNA expression during chick embryo development. DevDynamics
2006, 235:3156-3165.
63. Watanabe T, Takeda A, Mise K, Okuno T, Suzuki T, Minami N, Imai H: Stagespecific expression of microRNAs during Xenopus development. FEBS
Letters 2005, 579:318-324.
64. Clark AM, Goldstein LD, Tevlin M, Tavare S, Shaham S, Miska EA: The
microRNA miR-124 controls gene expression in the sensory nervous
system of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:3780-3793.
65. Rajasethupathy P, Fiumara F, Sheridan R, Betel D, Puthanveettil SV, Russo JJ,
Sander C, Tuschl T, Kandel E: Characterization of small RNAs in Aplysia
reveals a role for miR-124 in constraining synaptic plasticity through
CREB. Neuron 2009, 63:803-817.
66. De Pietri Tonelli D, Pulvers JN, Haffner C, Murchison EP, Hannon GJ,
Huttner WB: miRNAs are essential for survival and differentiation of
newborn neurons but not for expansion of neural progenitors during
early neurogenesis in the mouse embryonic neocortex. Development
2008, 135:3911-3921.
67. Makeyev EV, Zhang J, Carrasco MA, Maniatis T: The MicroRNA miR-124
promotes neuronal differentiation by triggering brain-specific alternative
pre-mRNA splicing. Mol Cell 2007, 27:435-448.
68. Holland LZ, Schubert M, Holland ND, Neuman T: Evolutionary conservation
of the presumptive neural plate markers AmphiSox1/2/3 and
AmphiNeurogenin in the invertebrate chordate amphioxus. Dev Biol 2000,
226:18-33.
69. Holland ND, Holland LZ: Stage- and tissue-specific patterns of cell
division in embryonic and larval tissues of amphioxus during normal
development. Evol Dev 2006, 8:142-149.
70. Giraldez AJ, Cinalli RM, Glasner ME, Enright AJ, Thomson JM, Baskerville S,
Hammond SM, Bartel DP, Schier AF: MicroRNAs regulate brain
morphogenesis in zebrafish. Science 2005, 308:833-838.
71. Packer AN, Xing Y, Harper SQ, Jones L, Davidson BL: The bifunctional
microRNA miR-9/miR-9* regulates REST and CoREST and is
downregulated in Huntington’s disease. J Neurosci 2008, 28:14341-14346.

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

72. Yoo AS, Staahl BT, Chen L, Crabtree GR: MicroRNA-mediated switching of
chromatin-remodelling complexes in neural development. Nature 2009,
460:642-646.
73. Zhao C, Sun G, Li S, Shi Y: A feedback regulatory loop involving
microRNA-9and nuclear receptor TLX in neural stem cell fate
determination. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2009, 16:365-371.
74. Kapsimali M, Kloosterman WP, de Bruijn E, Rosa F, Plasterk RH, Wilson SW:
MicroRNAs show a wide diversity of expression profiles in the
developing and mature central nervous system. Genome Biol 2007, 8:
R173.
75. Heimberg AM, Cowper-Sal-lari R, Sémon M, Donoghue PC, Peterson KJ:
MicroRNAs reveal the interrelationships of hagfish, lampreys, and
gnathostomes and thenature of the ancestral vertebrate. ProcNatl Acad
Sci USA 2010, 107:19379-19383.
76. Li Y, Wang F, Lee JA, Gao FB: MicroRNA-9a ensures the precise
specification of sensory organ precursors in Drosophila. Genes Dev 2006,
20:2793-2805.
77. Bak M, Silahtaroglu A, Møller M, Christensen M, Rath MF, Skryabin B,
Tommerup N, Kauppinen S: MicroRNA expression in the adult mouse
central nervous system. RNA 2008, 14:432-444.
78. Iovino N, Pane A, Gaul U: miR-184 has multiple roles in Drosophila female
germline development. Dev Cell 2009, 17:123-133.
79. Li P, Peng J, Hu J, Xu Z, Xie W, Yuan L: Localized expression pattern of
miR-184 in Drosophila. Mol Biol Rep 2011, 38:355-358.
80. Holland ND, Holland LZ: Serotonin-containing cells in the nervous system
and other tissues during ontogeny of a lancelet, Branchiostoma floridae.
Acta Zool 1993, 74:195-204.
81. Candiani S, Pestarino M: Expression of the tissue-specific transcription
factor Pit-1 in the lancelet, Branchiostoma lanceolatum. J Comp Neurol
1998, 392:343-351.
82. Glardon S, Holland LZ, Gehring WJ, Holland ND: Isolation and
developmental expression of the amphioxus Pax-6 gene (AmphiPax-6):
insights into eye and photoreceptor evolution. Development 1998,
125:2701-2710.
83. Candiani S, Holland ND, Oliveri D, Parodi M, Pestarino M: Expression of the
amphioxus Pit-1 gene (AmphiPOU1F1/Pit-1) exclusively in the
developing preoral organ, a putative homolog of the vertebrate
adenohypophysis. Brain Res Bull 2008, 75:324-330.
84. Arora A, McKay GJ, Simpson DA: Prediction and verification of miRNA
expression in human and rat retinas. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2007,
48:3962-3967.
85. Li X, Carthew RW: A microRNA mediates EGF receptor signaling and
promotes photoreceptor differentiation in the Drosophila eye. Cell 2005,
123:1267-1277.
86. Lee HJ, Palkovits M, Young WS: miR-7b, a microRNA up-regulated in the
hypothalamus after chronic hyperosmolar stimulation, inhibits Fos
translation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:15669-15674.
87. Tessmar-Raible K, Raible F, Christodoulou F, Guy K, Rembold M, Hausen H,
Arendt D: Conserved sensory-neurosecretory cell types in annelid and
fish forebrain: insights into hypothalamus evolution. Cell 2007,
129:1389-1400.
88. Bravo-Egana V, Rosero S, Molano RD, Pileggi A, Ricordi C, DomínguezBendala J, Pastori RL: Quantitative differential expression analysis reveals
miR-7 as major islet microRNA. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008,
366:922-926.
89. Siegel G, Obernosterer G, Fiore R, Oehmen M, Bicker S, Christensen M,
Khudayberdiev S, Leuschner PF, Busch CJ, Kane C, Hübel K, Dekker F,
Hedberg C, Rengarajan B, Drepper C, Waldmann H, Kauppinen S,
Greenberg ME, Draguhn A, Rehmsmeier M, Martinez J, Schratt GM: A
functional screen implicates microRNA-138-dependent regulation of the
depalmitoylation enzyme APT1 in dendritic spine morphogenesis. Nat
Cell Biol 2009, 11:705-716.
90. Silber J, Lim DA, Petritsch C, Persson AI, Maunakea AK, Yu M,
Vandenberg SR, Ginzinger DG, James CD, Costello JF, Bergers G, Weiss WA,
Alvarez-Buylla A, Hodgson JG: miR-124 and miR-137 inhibit proliferation
of glioblastoma multiforme cells and induce differentiation of brain
tumor stem cells. BMC Med 2008, 6:14.
91. Olsson R, Yulis R, Rodriguez EM: The infundibular organ of the lancelet:
an immunocytochemical study. Cell Tissue Res 1994, 277:107-114.

Page 16 of 17

92. Xu S, Witmer PD, Lumayag S, Kovacs B, Valle D: MicroRNA (miRNA)
transcriptome of mouse retina and identification of a sensory organspecific miRNA cluster. J Biol Chem 2007, 282:25053-25066.
93. Pierce ML, Weston MD, Fritzsch B, Gabel HW, Ruvkun G, Soukup GA:
MicroRNA-183 family conservation and ciliated neurosensory organ
expression. Evol Dev 2008, 10:106-113.
94. Hilgers V, Bushati N, Cohen SM: Drosophila microRNAs 263a/b confer
robustness during development by protecting nascent sense organs
from apoptosis. PLoS Biol 2010, 8:e1000396.
95. Holland LZ, Holland PWH, Holland ND, Ferraris JD, Palumbi SR: Revealing
homologies between body parts of distantly related animals by in situ
hybridization to developmental genes: amphioxus versus vertebrates. In
Molecular Zoology: Advances, Strategies, and Protocols. Volume 267. Edited
by: Ferraris JD, Palumbi SR. New York: Wiley Press; 1996-282, 473-483.
96. Fuentes M, Schubert M, Dalfo D, Candiani S, Benito E, Gardenyes J,
Godoy L, Moret F, Illas M, Patten I, Permanyer J, Oliveri D, Boeuf G, Falcon J,
Pestarino M, Fernandez JG, Albalat R, Laudet V, Vernier P, Escriva H:
Preliminary observations on the spawning conditions of the European
amphioxus (Branchiostoma lanceolatum) in captivity. J Exp Zool B: Mol
Dev Evol 2004, 302:384-391.
97. Fuentes M, Benito E, Bertrand S, Paris M, Mignardot A, Godoy L, JimenezDelgado S, Oliveri D, Candiani S, Hirsinger E, D’Aniello S, Pascual-Anaya J,
Maeso I, Pestarino M, Vernier P, Nicolas JF, Schubert M, Laudet V,
Geneviere AM, Albalat R, Garcia Fernandez J, Holland ND, Escriva H: Insights
into spawning behavior and development of the European amphioxus
(Branchiostoma lanceolatum). J Exp Zool Part B: Mol Dev Evol 2007,
308:484-493.
98. miRBAse:[http://www.mirbase.org/].
99. cDNA Database of Branchiostoma floridae:[http://amphioxus.icob.sinica.edu.
tw/].
100. JGI web site:[http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Brafl1/Brafl1.home.html].
101. Enright AJ, John B, Gaul U, Tuschl T, Sander C, Marks DS: MicroRNA targets
in Drosophila. Genome Biol 2003, 5(1):R1..
102. Rehmsmeier M, Steffen P, Hochsmann M, Giegerich R: Fast and effective
prediction of microRNA/target duplexes. RNA 2004, 10:1507-1517.
103. Ye W, Lv Q, Wong CK, Hu S, Fu C, Hua Z, Cai G, Li G, Yang BB, Zhang Y:
The effect of central loops in miRNA:MRE duplexes on the efficiency of
miRNA-mediated gene regulation. PLoS One 2008, 3:e1719.
104. Kertesz M, Iovino N, Unnerstall U, Gaul U, Segal E: The role of site
accessibility in microRNA target recognition. Nat Genet 2007,
39:1278-1284.
105. PITA:[http://genie.weizmann.ac.il/pubs/mir07/mir07_exe.html].
106. FindTar3:[http://bio.sz.tsinghua.edu.cn/content/download].
107. miRanda:[http://cbio.mskcc.org/research/sander/data/miRNA2003/
miranda_new.html].
108. RNAhybrid:[http://bibiserv.techfak.uni-bielefeld.de/rnahybrid/submission.
html].
109. Li B, Lin Y, Zhang W, Shao M, Bian Y, Huang S, Feng L, Zhang H:
Developmental expression pattern of calmodulin gene in amphioxus
Branchiostoma belcheri tsingtauense. Chinese J Oceanol 2010, 28:1221-1226.
110. Yu JK, Satou Y, Holland ND, Shin-I T, Kohara Y, Satoh N, Bronner-Fraser M,
Holland LZ: Axial patterning in cephalochordates and the evolution of
the organizer. Nature 2007, 445:613-617.
111. Mazet F, Masood S, Luke GN, Holland ND, Shimeld SM: Expression of
AmphiCoe, an amphioxus COE/EBF gene, in the developing central
nervous system and epidermal sensory neurons. Genesis 2004, 38:58-65.
112. Holland LZ, Kene M, Williams NA, Holland ND: Sequence and embryonic
expression of the amphioxus engrailed gene (AmphiEn): the metameric
pattern of transcription resembles that of its segment-polarity homolog
in Drosophila. Development 1997, 124:1723-1732.
113. Torreson H, Martinez-Barbera JP, Beardsley A, Cubit X, Krauss S:
Conservation of BF-1 expression in amphioxus and zebrafish suggests
evolutionary ancestry of anterior cell types that contribute to the
vertebrate telencephalon. Dev Genes Evol 1998, 208:431-439.
114. Minguillón C, Jiménez-Delgado S, Panopoulou G, Garcia-Fernàndez J: The
amphioxus Hairy family: differential fate after duplication. Development
2003, 130:5903-5914.
115. Shimeld S: An amphioxus netrin gene is expressed in midline structures
during embryonic and larval development. Dev Genes Evol 2000,
210:337-344.

Candiani et al. EvoDevo 2011, 2:15
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/2/1/15

Page 17 of 17

116. Holland LZ, Venkatesh TV, Gorlin A, Bodmer R, Holland ND:
Characterization and developmental expression of AmphiNk2-2, an NK2
class homeobox gene from Amphioxus. (Phylum Chordata; Subphylum
Cephalochordata). Dev Genes Evol 1998, 208:100-105.
117. Kozmik Z, Holland ND, Kalousova A, Paces J, Schubert M, Holland LZ:
Characterization of an amphioxus paired box gene, AmphiPax2/5/8:
developmental expression patterns in optic support cells, nephridium,
thyroid-like structures and pharyngeal gill slits, but not in the midbrainhindbrain boundary region. Development 1999, 126:1295-1304.
118. Kozmik Z, Holland ND, Kreslova J, Oliveri D, Schubert M, Jonasova K,
Holland LZ, Pestarino M, Benes V, Candiani S: Pax-Six-Eya-Dach network
during amphioxus development: conservation in vitro but context
specificity in vivo. Dev Biol 2007, 306:143-159.
119. Langeland JA, Tomsa JM, Jackman WR Jr, Kimmel CB: An amphioxus snail
gene: expression in paraxial mesoderm and neural plate suggests a
conserved role in patterning the chordate embryo. Dev Genes Evol 1998,
208:569-577.
120. Candiani S, Oliveri D, Parodi M, Castagnola P, Pestarino M: AmphiD1/beta,
a dopamine D1/beta-adrenergic receptor from the amphioxus
Branchiostoma floridae: evolutionary aspects of the catecholaminergic
system during development. Dev Genes Evol 2005, 215:631-638.
121. Escriva H, Holland ND, Gronemeyer H, Laudet V, Holland LZ: The retinoic
acid signaling pathway regulates anterior/posterior patterning in the
nerve cord and pharynx of amphioxus, a chordate lacking neural crest.
Development 2002, 129:2905-2916.
122. Schubert M, Holland LZ, Panopoulou GD, Lehrach H, Holland ND:
Characterization of amphioxus AmphiWnt8: insights into the evolution
of patterning of the embryonic dorsoventral axis. Evol Dev 2000, 2:85-92.
doi:10.1186/2041-9139-2-15
Cite this article as: Candiani et al.: A study of neural-related microRNAs
in the developing amphioxus. EvoDevo 2011 2:15.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
