<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1477-7827-2-46.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Reproductive Biology and
Endocrinology

BioMed Central

Open Access

Review

Comparative aspects of trophoblast development and placentation
Anthony M Carter*1 and Allen C Enders2
Address: 1Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Southern Denmark, Winsloewparken 21, DK-5000 Odense, Denmark and
2Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
Email: Anthony M Carter* - acarter@health.sdu.dk; Allen C Enders - acenders@ucdavis.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 05 July 2004
Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

doi:10.1186/1477-7827-2-46

Received: 26 December 2003
Accepted: 05 July 2004

This article is available from: http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46
© 2004 Carter and Enders; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted
in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Based on the number of tissues separating maternal from fetal blood, placentas are classified as
epitheliochorial, endotheliochorial or hemochorial. We review the occurrence of these placental
types in the various orders of eutherian mammals within the framework of the four superorders
identified by the techniques of molecular phylogenetics. The superorder Afrotheria diversified in
ancient Africa and its living representatives include elephants, sea cows, hyraxes, aardvark, elephant
shrews and tenrecs. Xenarthra, comprising armadillos, anteaters and sloths, diversified in South
America. All placentas examined from members of these two oldest superorders are either
endotheliochorial or hemochorial. The superorder Euarchontoglires includes two sister groups,
Glires and Euarchonta. The former comprises rodents and lagomorphs, which typically have
hemochorial placentas. The most primitive members of Euarchonta, the tree shrews, have
endotheliochorial placentation. Flying lemurs and all higher primates have hemochorial placentas.
However, the lemurs and lorises are exceptional among primates in having epitheliochorial
placentation. Laurasiatheria, the last superorder to arise, includes several orders with
epitheliochorial placentation. These comprise whales, camels, pigs, ruminants, horses and
pangolins. In contrast, nearly all carnivores have endotheliochorial placentation, whilst bats have
endotheliochorial or hemochorial placentas. Also included in Laurasiatheria are a number of
insectivores that have many conserved morphological characters; none of these has
epitheliochorial placentation. Consideration of placental type in relation to the findings of
molecular phylogenetics suggests that the likely path of evolution in Afrotheria was from
endotheliochorial to hemochorial placentation. This is also a likely scenario for Xenarthra and the
bats. We argue that a definitive epitheliochorial placenta is a secondary specialization and that it
evolved twice, once in the Laurasiatheria and once in the lemurs and lorises.

Introduction
Early in mammalian development, the conceptus differentiates into an inner cell mass and an outer sphere of
cells, the trophoblast. The latter contributes solely to the
extra-embryonic membranes. The tissues of the embryo
are all derived from the inner cell mass as are the amnion
and major components of the yolk sac and allantois. The
yolk sac endoderm may soon become apposed to the tro-

phoblast, but this two layered structure (the bilaminar
omphalopleure) is not regarded as a true placenta. Efficient maternal-fetal exchange first becomes possible when
mesoderm is interposed between the endoderm and trophoblast, carrying with it branches of the vitelline vessels.
Together these tissues form the choriovitelline or yolk sac
placenta (trilaminar omphalopleure). Somewhat later,
the allantois grows into the exocoelom and expands until
Page 1 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

it comes into contact with the trophoblast. The chorioallantoic placenta is formed of trophoblast and allantois
and is vascularized by the allantoic or umbilical vessels. In
some mammals, the allantois displaces the yolk sac from
the trophoblast, so that yolk sac placentation is succeeded
by chorioallantoic placentation (Figure 1). Some mammals, including man, form only a chorioallantoic placenta. In still others, notably rodents and lagomorphs, the
yolk sac placenta persists until term. There is then partial
or complete inversion of the germ layers such that yolk sac
endoderm forms a maternal-facing absorptive epithelium
(inverted yolk sac placenta).
In marsupials, the separation of embryonic and trophoblastic areas of the blastocyst is less distinct than in eutherians [1]. Most marsupials form only a yolk sac placenta,
although bandicoots do have an additional chorioallantoic placenta. Nevertheless, it has been argued that the
allantochorion is an ancestral character present in the
stem species of marsupials and that the yolk sac became
predominant during evolution of the marsupial placenta
[2]. Extra-embryonic membranes participate in maternalfetal exchange in many non-mammalian vertebrates, too,
as detailed in several recent publications [3-5]. However,
the present review will be restricted to placentation in
eutherian mammals.
The interhemal area
The trophoblast sometimes but not always invades the
uterine wall displacing and/or replacing one or more
layers of tissue. Grosser's classification of placentas [6],
based on the number of tissues separating maternal from
fetal blood, has had an enormous influence [7]. According to whether the trophoblast is apposed to uterine epithelium, the endothelium of maternal vessels, or directly
to maternal blood, placentas are classified as, respectively,
epitheliochorial, endotheliochorial or hemochorial. Nevertheless, once placentas could be studied at the
ultrastructural level, it became apparent that this classification is of limited functional significance, since extensive
thinning of the tissues reduces the diffusion distance
between fetal and maternal blood even in epitheliochorial
placentas [8]. At the same time, studies of placental
ultrastructural made it clear that there were many variations in the structure of the interhemal area (Table 1).

The list in Table 1 by no means exhausts the known
number of placental types. Many placentas have specialized areas concerned with histiotrophic nutrition, that is,
absorption of secretions from the uterine glands or phagocytosis of cellular debris. A large number have hemophagous regions in which maternal erythrocytes are taken up
as a source of iron for the fetus. There are often large areas
that seem to be concerned more with protein synthesis
than materno-fetal exchange, as they are not penetrated

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

by fetal blood vessels; examples are the spongy zones of
rodent and hyrax placentas. Not surprisingly, there are
many variations in placental shape, from the diffuse and
cotyledonary forms in hoofed mammals through the circumferential ("zonary") placenta of carnivores to the
familiar discoid form of the human or mouse placenta.
Phylogenetic perspectives
Clearly each placental type is able to support a successful
pregnancy. Nevertheless, students of placental structure
have continued to ask why there is so much variability
and how the placenta evolved. The debate started with
Huxley and Owen in the nineteenth century (reviewed by
Pijnenborg and Vercruysse [9]), continued with Wislocki
[10] and Portmann [11], and culminated with the publications of Mossman [12,13] and Luckett [14]. The success
of molecular phylogenetics in identifying the relations
between the orders of mammals allows us to view placental structure from a new perspective [15,16]. It appears
that all extant eutherian mammals can be classed in four
superorders. These have been named Afrotheria, Xenarthra, Euarchontoglires and Laurasiatheria [17,18].
Accordingly, the approach taken here will be to review
placentation in each superorder in turn.

Placentation in the Afrotheria
This superorder was proposed following analysis of DNA
sequence data. It includes six orders of mammals. Three of
these, elephants, sea cows and hyraxes, were already considered to be closely related. Inclusion of the elephant
shrews and the aardvark is not controversial. There has,
however, been some debate about the sixth order, Tenrecomorpha or Afrosoricida, which comprises the golden
moles and tenrecs. This is in part because analysis of morphological characters fails to reveal a single synapomorphy in support of Afrotheria [19].
Placentation in the African elephant has been well studied
[20-23]. The placenta is of the circumferential type, forming a broad equatorial band, but is attached to the uterus
by only a narrow hilus. There is now information on the
fine structure of the interhemal area [23]. It is endotheliochorial with the maternal blood vessels closely invested
by cellular trophoblast. The basement membrane of the
maternal endothelial cells is thickened, but is pierced by
narrow processes from the trophoblast cells. On the fetal
side, these are deeply indented by fetal capillaries, reducing the diffusion distance between maternal and fetal
blood (Figure 2A). Beneath the labyrinth is a zone of cellular trophoblast that is actively phagocytic [20]. Of particular note is the persistence of a large allantoic sac
divided into four compartments by septa that carry
branches of the umbilical vessels.

Page 2 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

also tend to have discoid, hemochorial placentas. In elephant shrews and tenrecs, there is an additional circumferential area or paraplacenta [31,33]. We examined the
interhemal area of the Madagascar lesser hedgehog tenrec
and found that it comprised a single layer of cellular trophoblast similar to the rock hyrax (Figure 2B) [33]. In the
otter shrews, the only tenrecs found on mainland Africa,
the situation is more complex. There appears to be a circumferential, endotheliochorial placenta (Enders, Carter
and Vogel, unpublished data). The giant otter shrew has
the four-lobed allantoic sac found in all the other orders
of Afrotheria [34].
Many of the placentas of afrotherians have hemophagous
regions (Table 2). These are very prominent in the tenrecs
[33], found at the margins of the placenta in elephants
and aardvark [20,26], and distributed across the surface of
the placenta sea cows [24]. Hemophagous regions are
absent in hyraxes, elephant shrews and golden moles, all
of which have hemochorial placentation.

Figure 1
Eutherian fetal membranes
Eutherian fetal membranes. The embryo is enclosed in the
amnion. Trophoblast (blue) and mesoderm (red) form the
chorion. Trophoblast and yolk sac endoderm (yellow)
together constitute a bilaminar omphalopleure. A choriovitelline or yolk sac placenta is then formed by interposition
of mesoderm containing fetal blood vessels. Later the allantois expands into the exocoelom and the allantoic and chorionic mesoderm fuse to form a chorioallantoic placenta. The
allantois will continue to expand into the exocoelom and
eventually displace the yolk sac. The full sequence of events is
seen most clearly in species with epitheliochorial placentation, such as horse and pig, although this cartoon is based on
the rock hyrax (reference [82]).

All these features are apparent in the placenta and fetal
membranes of the manatee [24], rock hyrax (Figure 2C)
[25] and aardvark [26,27]. However, whilst the aardvark
and possibly the manatee [13] have endotheliochorial
placentation, the rock hyrax placenta is hemomonochorial. The single layer of trophoblast in the interhemal barrier is cellular not syncytial [28]. One could thus envisage
how this arrangement could be derived from an endotheliochorial placenta such as that of the African elephant.
Elephant shrews have a discoid placenta. It is hemochorial
and the trophoblast in the barrier may be syncytial [29],
although this needs to be re-examined. Elephant shrews
do share the large, four-lobed allantoic sac with other
afrotherians [30,31]. Golden moles [32] and tenrecs [33]

Nothing is known about early development in sea cows,
but an extensive choriovitelline placenta is formed in all
other orders of Afrotheria. Following establishment of the
chorioallantoic placenta, however, the yolk sac is very
much reduced.
Based on current knowledge of placentation in the extant
species, it seems possible that the common ancestor of the
Afrotheria had the following features. (1) A circumferential, endotheliochorial placenta as in the elephant, manatee, aardvark and otter shrews. Loss of maternal
endothelium would lead to the hemochorial condition
seen in rock hyraxes, elephant shrews and some tenrecs.
The formation in elephant shrews and tenrecs of a discoid
placenta with a more or less extensive paraplacenta would
also be a derived state. (2) A prominent hemophagous
organ as in otter shrews and tenrecs, retained in elephants,
aardvark and manatee, but lost in rock hyraxes and elephant shrews. (3) A four-lobed allantoic sac, retained in
otter shrews and all other Afrotheria, but seemingly lost in
some members of Tenrecomorpha. (4) A short cord sending four leashes of vessels to the placenta.

Placentation in Xenarthra
This superorder is thought to have evolved in South America during the geographical isolation of this subcontinent
in the Cretaceous period. The close association of armadillos with American anteaters and sloths is apparent
from analyses of morphological characters and is strongly
supported by molecular phylogenetics [35]. In all three
orders, the embryo develops within a simplex uterus. Placentation has been most thoroughly examined in some
species of armadillo. In the nine-banded armadillo the
placental villi enter a series of maternal venous sinuses in

Page 3 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

Table 1: Variations in the trophoblast comprising the interhemal area of the chorioallantoic placenta.

Placental Type

Trophoblast Component

Examples

Hemomonochorial

Syncytial trophoblast, villous
Syncytial trophoblast, labyrinthine

Armadillo; higher primates
Most hystricomorph rodents (e.g. guinea pig, capybara);
sciuromorph rodents (squirrels)
Hyraxes; spiny tenrecs (e.g Echinops); mollosid bats (late
gestation); some myomorph rodents (Zapus, Jaculus)
Lagomorphs; vespertilionid bats
Most myomorph rodents (e.g. rat, mouse)

Cellular trophoblast
Hemodichorial
Hemotrichorial
Endotheliochorial

Epitheliochorial
Synepitheliochorial

Syncytial (maternal facing) and cellular trophoblast
Cellular trophoblast (maternal facing) and two layers of
syncytial trophoblast
Syncytial trophoblast (fenestrated)
Syncytial trophoblast (nonfenestrated)
Cellular trophoblast
Cellular trophoblast only
Cellular trophoblast with trophoblastic girdle cells
Cellular trophoblast; fusion of binucleate trophoblastic cells
with uterine epithelium

the fundic region of the uterus [36,37]. The villi then
spread within the sinuses in the body of the uterus, and
the villi that were initially in the fundic region degenerate.
Thus the placenta starts as discoid, then appears to be zonary. However the allantoic vessels of the four quadruplets
vascularize different areas of the zonary band. The placental villi are similar to those of primates in having an outer
layer of syncytial trophoblast in contact with maternal
blood (Figure 3B); they differ however in having the
cytotrophoblast confined to the growing tips of the villi
rather than as a Langhans layer. Little is known about placentation in anteaters except that they have a hemochorial
placenta and greatly enlarged fetal mesenchymal cells in
the villi in late pregnancy, as do the armadillos. As
pointed out by Benirschke [38], it is difficult to compare
the anteaters to other xenarthrans because of the absence
of fine structural studies of this group.
The sloth placenta differs in several respects from that of
anteaters and armadillos. It is diffuse in early stages but
later becomes discoid or even double discoid. The
exchange area is labyrinthine, not villous, and the interhemal area is endotheliochorial (Figure 3A). It consists of
hypertrophied maternal endothelial cells; a small amount
of extracellular material and spindle-shaped cells of presumed maternal origin; a layer of syncytial trophoblast
that although thick is fenestrated; and the fetal capillary
endothelium. In addition, the fetal connective tissue contains hypertrophied mesenchymal cells similar to those in
the armadillo and anteater, but also found in shrews and
tree shrews; these cells are characterized by abundant
granular endoplasmic reticulum [39].

Sloths; shrews (insectivores)
Carnivores and pinnipeds
Elephants; some sciuromorph rodents (Dipodomys,
Microdipodops); some bats (Natalus, Saccopteryx)
Lower primates; pangolin; some artiodactyls (e.g. pig)
Equids (perissodactyls, e.g. horse)
Ruminants (artiodactyls, e.g. sheep, cow)

In contrast to the afrotherians, xenarthrans have only a
rudimentary allantoic sac. However, the armadillos have
large inverted yolk sacs that persist well into gestation. Little is known about yolk sac placentation in anteaters. It is
doubtful that sloths have a choriovitelline placenta since
in late gestation the yolk sac is small and rudimentary.
Since the hemochorial placenta of the armadillo is not
preceded by an endotheliochorial condition and the placenta of armadillos and anteaters differs from that of the
sloths, it is not clear which might be considered more
derived. It is notable, however, that epitheliochorial placentation is not encountered in Xenarthra or Afrotheria,
the superorders considered closest to the root of the eutherian tree [17].

Placentation in Euarchontoglires
The Superorder Euarchontoglires or Superprimates comprises two sister groups. Glires unites rodents and lagomorphs (rabbits and pikas). The Euarchonta include three
orders: primates, flying lemurs and tree shrews
Placentation in Glires
The rodent order is so rich in species that only a small
sample of placentas has been described [40]. However,
the placentas of rodents and lagomorphs tend to conform
to a basic pattern. They are discoid to spherical in shape,
the exchange area is labyrinthine and hemochorial, and
there is a well developed spongy zone. An inverted or partially inverted yolk sac placenta supports the early development of the embryo and is retained until term.

There are three principal types of interhemal area in Glires
[41-43]. Hystricomorph rodents, such as the guinea pig

Page 4 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

A

CYTO TR

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

B MBS

FC

ENDO

CYTO TR
FC
FC
MBS

C
Chorioallantoic
Placenta
Allantois
Yolk Sac

Figure 2
Placentation in Afrotheria
Placentation in Afrotheria. (A) Endotheliochorial placenta of the African elephant, Loxodonta africana. The cellular trophoblast
(CYTO TR) is deeply indented by the fetal capillary (FC), which is separated by <3 µm from the endothelium of the maternal
capillary (ENDO). Reprinted from reference [23] with permission ©Elsevier 2003. (B). Hemochorial placenta of the lesser
Madagascar hedgehog tenrec, Echinops telfairi. Maternal blood spaces (MBS) are lined by cellular trophoblast (CYTO TR) with
microvilli (arrow). Reprinted from reference [33] with permission ©Elsevier 2003. (C) Fetal membranes in the rock hyrax Procavia capensis. The large allantoic sac is divided into four lobes by septa that carry four sets of allantoic vessels to the zonary
placenta. The yolk sac is greatly reduced in late gestation. Reprinted from reference [83] with permission from the Carnegie
Institution of Washington.

Page 5 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

Table 2: Morphological evidence of iron transfer: hemophagous zones.

Placental Type

Species

Hemophagous zone

Synepitheliochorial
Endotheliochorial

Sheep, goat
Dog and cat
Mustelids
Sac wing bat
Elephant
Shrew
Tenrecs
Otter shrews
Hyena

Base of fetal villi
Marginal
Central
Base of fetal villi
Lateral area of placental band
Trophoblastic curtain
Central
Central off labyrinth
Junctional zone

Hemochorial

A

B

MBS

MC

ENDO

SYN TR
FC

SYN TR
FC
Figure 3
Placentation in Xenarthra
Placentation in Xenarthra. (A) Endotheliochorial placenta of the three-toed sloth, Bradypus tridactylus. The interhemal membrane comprises the enlarged maternal endothelial cells (ENDO), syncytial trophoblast (SYN TR) and the endothelium of the
fetal capillary (FC). (B) Villous, hemomonochorial placenta of the nine-banded armadillo, Dasypus novemcinctus. The maternal
blood space (MBS) is separated from the fetal capillary (FC) by syncytiotrophoblast (SYN TR).

and capybara, have hemomonochorial placentas with a
single layer of syncytial trophoblast in the interhemal
barrier. So do the sciuromorph rodents or squirrels (Figure 4B). In lagomorphs the placenta is hemodichorial
with an outer layer of syncytial and inner layer of cellular
trophoblast. In most myomorph rodents the interhemal
area is hemotrichorial (Figure 4A). Although the outer
layer is cellular, it contains large pores and the inner layers
of syncytial trophoblast are thought to constitute the placental barrier [44].

There are some notable exceptions. The kangaroo rats
Dipodomys and Microdipodops are sciuromorph rodents,
but in this family (Heteromyidae) the interhemal area is
endotheliochorial and contains cellular trophoblast (Figure 4D) [45]. In two families of myomorph rodents, jerboas (Dipodidae) and jumping mice (Zapodidae), there
is a reduction in the trophoblast layers and the maternal
blood channels are lined by trophoblastic giant cells (Figure 4C) [46].

Page 6 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

A

MBS

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

B

MBS
SYN TR
ISL
FC

FC
T1

T2

T3

FC

C

D

FC

CYTO TR
MC
MBS

CYTO TR
FC

FC

Figure 4
Placentation in rodents (Glires)
Placentation in rodents (Glires). (A) Hemotrichorial placenta of the lemming, Lemmus lemmus. One layer of cellular trophoblast
(T1) and two layers of syncytiotrophoblast (T2–T3) are interposed between the maternal blood space (MBS) and fetal capillaries (FC). (B) Hemomonochorial placenta of the golden-mantled ground squirrel, Spermophilus lateralis. The syncytiotrophoblast
(SYN TR) has intrasyncytial bays (ISL). (C) Hemomonochorial placenta of a jumping mouse, Zapus sp. The interhemal membrane includes a single layer of giant trophoblast cells (CYTO TR). (D) Endotheliochorial placenta of a kangaroo rat, Dipodomys
sp. The interhemal membrane comprises the endothelium of the maternal capillary (MC), cellular trophoblast (CYTO TR) with
lipid inclusions and the endothelium of the fetal capillary (FC).

Page 7 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

In most rodent placentas the labyrinth and spongy zone
form distinct layers. In hystricomorph rodents, however,
folding gives rise to a lobed placenta. The lobes are the
exchange areas and they are separated by interlobular trophoblast that is the equivalent of a spongy zone. In addition, hystricomorphs have a unique structure of unknown
function, the subplacenta [47].
Rodents represent the only order of eutherian mammals
for which placentation has been subjected to a strict cladistic analysis. Mess [43] concluded that the stem pattern
was labyrinthine and hemochorial with a single layer of
syncytial trophoblast in the exchange area. She did not
extend this analysis to include the lagomorphs. It is pertinent to note that, on this analysis, the mouse placenta represents an elaboration of the stem pattern. This has
potential implications for discussion of structural and
functional homologies between mouse and human placentas [48,49].
Placentation in Euarchonta
Ever since the seminal work of Hill [50], the evolution of
placentation in primates has posed some interesting questions [51]. Clearly there is a striking difference between
the lemurs and lorises (Strepsirhini) and other primates
(Haplorhini). The former have epitheliochorial and the
latter hemochorial placentation. The recognition that tree
shrews were closely related to primates, which receives
further support from molecular studies, adds a further
layer of complexity, since tree shrews (Scandentia) have
endotheliochorial placentas [52]. Finally Hill, who
regarded hemochorial placentation as the derived state,
opined that it had evolved separately in the tarsiers than
in the monkeys and apes.

The colugos or flying lemurs (Dermoptera) have attracted
less attention. Molecular phylogeneticists group them
with primates and tree shrews, although the relations
between the three orders are not well resolved [53]. Their
placenta has been little studied. It is discoid and appears
to contain labyrinthine and villous areas. The interhemal
area is hemodichorial [13].
In contrast, the fetal membranes of tree shrews have been
well studied [52,54] and were included in an early cladistic analysis by Luckett [55]. Tree shrews have a quite distinctive form of endotheliochorial placentation (Figure
5B), involving twin discoid attachments to special pads
developed on the lining of the uterus. Conserved features
of their fetal membranes include retention of a large allantoic vesicle and a large yolk sac [55].
Lemurs and lorises present a curious case in that they have
diffuse, non-deciduate and epitheliochorial placentas
(Figure 5A). The resemblance to placentation in pigs

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

extends to the presence of thickened areas of trophoblast
opposite the openings of the uterine glands [50], which
parallel the areolae of the porcine placenta. There is a large
allantoic vesicle, which is lobed as in the afrotherians. A
temporary yolk sac placenta supports development of the
early embryo.
Tarsiers have a discoid, hemochorial placenta. Except that
it is labyrinthine rather than villous, the placenta is
generally similar to that of monkeys and apes. The allantois is not vesicular, as in lemurs, but forms an almost
solid connecting stalk of mesodermal tissue as in higher
primates, a point to which Hill [50] attached particular
importance.
There are strong resemblances in the early development of
the platyrrhine or New World monkeys, the catarrhine
monkeys of the Old World and the anthropoid apes.
However, in platyrrhine monkeys, proliferation of the trophoblast continues until much later in gestation and connections persist between the villi, which form a trabecular
network, not unlike that of the tarsier placenta. Only at a
late stage of fetal development are branched villi found
within a more or less continuous intervillous space. In
catarrhine monkeys, on the other hand, arborescent chorionic villi are present from a very early stage, as they are in
the human placenta. Although macaque and baboon
implantation sites develop – sequentially – trophoblastic
plate, lacunar and villous stages as do the anthropoid
apes, in the former animals trophoblast taps maternal vessels early and the lacunae expand the placenta into the
uterine lumen [56]. Macaques also form a secondary placenta on the opposite side of the uterus from the original
implantation. In man and anthropoid apes the trophoblast proceeds further into the uterus and the abembryonic
as well as the polar trophoblast forms lacunae, resulting in
an interstitial placenta. In all of these animals the definitive placenta is discoidal with free and anchoring villi and
an intervillous space perfused by maternal blood (Figure
5C).
Based on their diffuse, non-deciduate and epitheliochorial placentation, Hill [50] argued that the lemurs and
lorises were a more primitive form of primate than the tarsiers. This argument went to the very heart of the current
debate about parallelism in the evolution of the placenta.
Many found it difficult to accept that rodents, insectivores
and primates arose from a common stem with a diffuse
type of placentation. Among the doubters was Wislocki
[10], who advanced the view that hemochorial placentation was the more primitive type of placentation and that
the epitheliochorial placenta of the lemurs was the result
of a secondary simplification.

Page 8 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

A

B
MAT ENDO

MC

CYTO TR

FC

SYN TR

FC
UT EP

C

MBS
SYN TR

FC

Figure 5
Placentation in primates (Euarchonta)
Placentation in primates (Euarchonta). (A) Epitheliochorial placenta of a bush baby, Galago crassicaudata. The interhemal membrane comprises maternal capillary (MC) endothelium, uterine epithelium (UT EP), cellular trophoblast (CYTO TR) and fetal
capillary (FC) endothelium. (B) Endotheliochorial placenta of a tree shrew, Tupaia glis. The interhemal region contains maternal
endothelium (MAT ENDO), syncytiotrophoblast (SYN TR) and the endothelium of the fetal capillary (FC). Reprinted from reference [52] with permission ©Springer-Verlag 1985. (C) The villous, hemomonochorial human placenta. The maternal blood
space (MBS), or intervillous space, is lined by a thin layer of syncytiotrophoblast (SYN TR).

Page 9 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

A lucid discussion of the evolution of placentation in primates is given by Luckett [55]. He noted that there is substantial homology in fetal membrane development
between taxa with epitheliochorial placentation, but not
between those with the endotheliochorial or hemochorial
types. He argued that this was indicative of convergent
evolution of hemochorial placentation, whereas the epitheliochorial type was part of the primitive eutherian
condition.
On the grounds of parsimony, one might argue that the
widespread occurrence of hemochorial placentation in
Euarchonta reflects their common ancestry and follow
Wislocki [10] in regarding the epitheliochorial placenta of
strepsirhine primates as a derived state. Tree shrews have
many conserved characters and it is possible that endotheliochorial placentation is one of these rather than being
derived from a hemochorial type.

Placentation in Laurasiatheria
Many types of placentation are found in the Superorder
Laurasiatheria. Not surprisingly for an order that has
undergone such a high degree of adaptive radiation, the
greatest diversity is found among the bats. The insectivores now included in Eulipotyphla also present a variety
of placental types. Carnivores and pinnipeds have
endotheliochorial placentation. The three remaining
orders have epitheliochorial placentas. These are the
whales and cloven-hoofed mammals (Cetartiodactyla);
horses, tapirs and rhinoceroses (Perissodactyla); and pangolins (Pholidota).
Core insectivores
The order of insectivores has undergone steady attrition,
the most recent exclusions being the tenrecs and golden
moles. The relations between the core insectivores
(shrews, moles, hedgehogs and Solenodon) continue to
puzzle even the molecular phylogeneticists [57,58]. Most
have discoid labyrinthine placentae. The interhemal area
is hemochorial in hedgehogs and Solenodon [59]. The
American mole Scalopus has a circumferential placenta
that is considered to be epitheliochorial [60], whereas the
European mole Talpa is definitely endotheliochorial [61].
However, Prasad et al. [60] had only a single midgestation
specimen to examine by electron microscopy, and the
looping arrangement of the maternal vessels is more similar to that seen in endotheliochorial placentas than that
in typical epitheliochorial placentas. In the short-tailed
shrew Blarina the interhemal area is endotheliochorial,
but the trophoblast component is fenestrated [62]. In the
musk shrew Suncus the placenta is endotheliochorial, but
there is progressive thinning and fenestration of the
trophoblast layer [63]. There are even areas where processes from the two endothelial layers contact one another
through the pores in the trophoblast.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

All insectivores have a partially or completely inverted
yolk sac that is maintained to term. The allantoic sac is
large in Talpa, medium sized in the hedgehog, small in
Scalopus and small or rudimentary in shrews. This is a
group of mammals that would repay close study using
modern techniques.
Bats
As befits a widely diversified adaptive group of mammals
[64], bats and especially microbats have evolved a multitude of endotheliochorial and hemochorial placental
types (Table 1; reviewed by Badwaik and Rasweiler [65]).
The most common type of definitive placenta is the
hemodichorial placenta, where syncytial trophoblast that
has intrasyncytial bays fronts the maternal blood space
and is underlain by cytotrophoblast (Figure 6A). Endotheliochorial placentas are found both as a diffuse placenta in
midpregnancy and as a cellular endotheliomonochorial
discoid placenta in late pregnancy (Figure 6B). In some
mollosid bats the central area of the placenta near term is
cellular hemomonochorial (Figure 6C). Megabats (fruit
eating bats) have hemochorial placentas with Rousettus
having a syncytial hemomonochorial type and Pteropus
having a hemodichorial one, at least in midpregnancy.
Although 13 of the 18 families of bats have been studied
[65], there is still a great deal to be learned both about the
fine structure and about other advanced features of membrane development [14].
Carnivores and pinnipeds
The terrestrial carnivores and their aquatic relatives the
pinnipeds (sea lions, walruses and seals) usually have circumferential, labyrinthine and endotheliochorial placentas, although the hyena develops hemochorial
placentation late in pregnancy [66,67]. Carnivore placentas have hemophagous regions of variable size and location [68]. Mossman [12] at one time considered the
carnivore fetal membranes to be the most primitive type
among extant eutherians, because both the yolk sac and
allantoic sac are large and persist until term.
Cetartiodactyls, perissodactyls and pangolins
The remaining orders of Laurasiatheria are characterized
by epitheliochorial placentation. The placenta may be diffuse with villi distributed over the surface of the chorioallantoc sac, as in whales [69], Suiformes (pigs, peccaries,
and hippopotamus) [70], camels [71] and pangolins [13],
or with microcotyledons as in the horse [16,72]. Most
ruminants have cotyledonary placentas with the cotyledons varying in number from 5–8 in deer to 50–175 in
bovids [8]. Chevrotains are considered to be the most
primitive ruminants and, interestingly, they have diffuse
placentas [73].

Page 10 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

A

SYN TR

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

ISL

B

CYTO TR

MBS

MC
MAT
ENDO
FC

FC

CYTO TR
FC

D

C

MC

MBS
FC
CYTO TR

FC

Figure 6
Placentation in bats and a ruminant
Placentation in bats and a ruminant. (A) Hemodichorial placenta of little brown bat, Myotis lucifugus (Vespertilionidae). There is
an outer layer of syncytiotrophoblast (SYN TR) and an inner layer of cellular trophoblast (CYTO TR). Note the subsurface
intrasyncytial spaces or bays (ISL) (B) Endotheliochorial placenta of funnel-eared bat, Natalus sp. (Natalidae) in late gestation.
The interhemal region contains enlarged maternal endothelial cells (MAT ENDO) and cytotrophoblast (CYTO TR). (C)
Hemomonochorial placenta of the Mexican free-tailed bat, Tadarida brasiliensis (Molossidae). The maternal blood spaces (MBS)
are lined by cytotrophoblast (CYTO TR). (D) Epitheliochorial placenta of the sheep. The endometrial connective tissue has
"decidual" cells whilst the fetal component comprises cellular trophoblast (T). Fusion of fetal and maternal cells gives rise to a
syncytium (S). Therefore this type of placenta is sometimes referred to as synepitheliochorial. Reprinted from reference [8]
with permission.

Page 11 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

The epitheliochorial type of arrangement has as its advantage the safety factor of the isolation of fetal and maternal
components. The presence of two complete epithelia
should diminish immunological problems as well as the
deportation of fetal cells to the maternal organism. The
disadvantage is the greater difficulty in passage of materials between organisms, but this is overcome by a variety
of mechanisms. Most importantly, indenting of trophoblast and uterine epithelium by capillaries decreases the
interhemal distance. There are often, but not always, small
absorptive and phagocytic areas, for example the areolae
of the pig placenta. In equids, girdle cells of fetal origin
invade the uterine epithelium to form endometrial cup
cells that secrete equine chorionic gonadotropin [74-76].
However, not all perissodactyls have endometrial cups
[8]. In ruminants such as sheep and cow, binucleate trophoblast cells fuse with maternal epithelial cells and this
facilitates passage of prolactin to the maternal organism
[77]; this type of placenta is sometimes referred to as
synepitheliochorial.
The diffuse type of epitheliochorial placenta usually is
associated with an extensive allantoic sac. The cotyledonary type tends to be associated with a long, tubular allantoic cavity, although it is still large. There is a temporary
yolk sac placenta early in development, where this has
been examined, and a free yolk sac later in gestation.
Mossman [13] noted the resemblance in definitive yolk
sac placentation between whales, artiodactyls,
perissodactyls and pangolins, but grouped them together
with some non-laurasiatherians.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

Cetartiodactyla
Perissodactyla
Carnivora
Pholidota

Laurasiatheria

Chiroptera
Eulipotyphla

Glires
Dermoptera
Scandentia
Strepsirhina
Haplorhina

Euarchontoglires

Xenarthra
Afrotheria
Marsupialia

Figure 7
Cladogram based on nucleotide sequence analysis
Cladogram based on nucleotide sequence analysis. The four
superorders of eutherian mammals and the marsupial outgroup are shown in bold face. Epitheliochorial placentation,
indicated in red, occurs in three orders of Laurasiatheria and
one suborder of Euarchontoglires. These are the orders
Cetartiodactyla (whales, pigs and hippopotami, camels, ruminants); Perissodactyla (horses, tapirs and rhinoceroses); Pholidota (pangolins or scaly anteaters); and the primate
suborder Strepsirhina (lemurs and lorises).

How did the placenta evolve?
Although placental structure is directly involved in the
success of fetal growth, it is only one aspect of the complex
interrelationship between reproductive success of
individual matings and the overall reproductive success of
a given female [78]. Consequently different aspects of the
total reproductive process may be more or less important
depending on the relationship of a given species to its
environment. Nevertheless placental structure has been
considered useful as one of the characters to be used in
tracing relationships as it is considered conservative [14].
Although physiological data would be useful, unfortunately such data as the increase in fetal weight per weight
of placenta per day is available for only a few domestic
and laboratory animals, limiting our ability to use such
data on a comparative basis [79].
The evolutionary pressure favoring some type of hemochorial placenta has evidently been great. Hemochorial
placentas are found in insectivores, primates, tenrecs,
rodents, bats, hyraxes, elephant shrews, anteaters, armadillos, flying lemurs and even hyenas. The large variation
in the definitive form of the placenta, the divergent way in

which the hemochorial condition is achieved, and the
variety of unrelated orders in which it is found might
seem to suggest convergent evolution [15].
An endotheliochorial condition is succeeded by hemochorial placentation in the hyena. This could very well
have been the path of evolution in Afrotheria and perhaps
in Xenarthra and some bats. The question then arises of
whether either placental type arose from an epitheliochorial condition. It vexed the pioneers in this field, who were
puzzled to find that the tenrecs, which were mammals
with many conserved characters, nonetheless had hemochorial placentas (see [33]). Later, Wislocki [10] advanced
the view that hemochorial placentation was the more
primitive type and that epitheliochorial placentation was
the result of a secondary simplification. A similar opinion
was held by Portmann [11]. Certainly, it is more parsimonious to assume that epitheliochorial placentation is a
derived state arising perhaps twice, in Laurasiatheria and
in the strepsirhine primates (Figure 7). Of interest, invasive trophoblast occurs in marsupials, although there is
too little information to tell whether invasiveness is part

Page 12 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

of the stem species pattern or arose independently in
metatherian and eutherian mammals [2].

lections at the Hubrecht Laboratory, Utrecht. The studies were supported
in part by The Carlsberg Foundation, Denmark.

Additional clues to placental evolution are provided by
the early development of the fetal membranes. Luckett
[14,55] argued that ancestral mammals would have had
an amnion formed by folding rather than cavitation and
possessed a large allantoic vesicle. A large vascular yolk sac
would have been present early in development, forming a
choriovitelline placenta, but the yolk sac would have been
reduced in later stages [14]. These features are found with
endotheliochorial and hemochorial placentas in Afrotheria as well as with epitheliochorial placentas in some
Laurasiatheria.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.

Portmann [11] argued that the allantoic sac had evolved
along two paths. Mammals with epitheliochorial
placentation had retained a large allantoic sac as a receptacle for the dilute urine produced by a large and persistent mesonephros. The carnivores had also followed this
route. In contrast the allantoic cavity had become reduced
or was absent in mammals that had a poorly developed
mesonephros, such as rodents, higher primates, bats and
xenarthrans. Most of these had a hemochorial placenta
that was thought to have assumed the function of the mesonephros as first proposed by Bremer [80]. This hypothesis needs to be tested and refined in the light of current
concepts of mammalian phylogenetics and kidney development [81].

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Conclusions
The position argued here resembles that originally
adopted by Mossman [12]. He considered that the
endotheliochorial and hemochorial conditions were
closely related and that the endotheliochorial type was the
more primitive. We have shown that the likely path of
evolution was from endotheliochorial to hemochorial in
the Afrotheria. It certainly occurred with the carnivores
and more than likely in the bats and Xenarthra. There may
be an epitheliochorial stage during placental ontogeny,
but Mossman [12] argued that a definitive epitheliochorial placenta was a secondary specialization; he regarded
the cotyledonary placentas of ruminants as among the
most highly specialized. We are inclined to agree. Consideration of placental type in relation to the findings of
molecular phylogenetics suggests that epitheliochorial
placentation evolved just twice, once in the Laurasiatheria
and once in Euarchontoglires.

Acknowledgements
It is a pleasure to acknowledge Diana Mossman and Paula Holahan for making available material from the Mossman Collection at the University of
Wisconsin Zoological Museum. We also wish to thank Graham Burton for
access to and assistance with the Boyd Collection at Cambridge University,
and Jenny Narraway for access to and help with the Hill and Hubrecht Col-

14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.

Lillegraven JE: Polarities in mammalian evolution seen through
homologs of the inner cell mass. J Mammal Evol 2003,
10:277-333.
Freyer C, Zeller U, Renfree MB: The marsupial placenta: a phylogenetic analysis. J Exp Zoolog Part A Comp Exp Biol 2003,
299:59-77.
Blackburn DG, Johnson AR, Petzold JL: Histology of the extraembryonic membranes of an oviparous snake: towards a reconstruction of basal squamate patterns. J Exp Zoolog Part A Comp
Exp Biol 2003, 299:48-58.
Cateni C, Paulesu L, Bigliardi E, Hamlett WC: The interleukin 1
(IL-1) system in the uteroplacental complex of a cartilaginous fish, the smoothhound shark, Mustelus canis. Reprod Biol
Endocrinol 2003, 1:25.
Flemming AF, Blackburn DG: Evolution of placental specializations in viviparous African and South American lizards. J Exp
Zoolog Part A Comp Exp Biol 2003, 299:33-47.
Grosser O: Frühentwicklung, Eihautbildung und Placentation des Menschen und der Säugetiere. Munich 1927.
Amoroso EC: Placentation. In: Marshall's Physiology of Reproduction
Volume II. Edited by: Parkes AS. London, Longmans; 1952:127-311.
Wooding FBP, Flint APF: Placentation. In: Marshall's Physiology of
Reproduction, Part I Volume III. Edited by: Lamming GE. London, Chapman and Hall; 1994:233-460.
Pijnenborg R, Vercruysse L: Thomas Huxley and the rat placenta in the early debates on evolution. Placenta 2004,
25:233-237.
Wislocki GB: On the placentation of the primates, with a consideration of the phylogeny of the placenta. Contr Embryol
Carneg Inst 1929, 20:51-80.
Portmann A: Die Ontogenese der Säugetiere als
Evolutionsproblem. Biomorphosis 1938, 1:49-66.
Mossman HW: Comparative morphogenesis of the fetal membranes and accessory uterine structures. Contrib. Embryol. Carnegie Inst 1937, 26:129-246.
Mossman HW: Vertebrate Fetal Membranes: Comparative Ontogeny and
Morphology; Evolution; Phylogenetic Significance; Basic Functions; Research
Opportunities Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire and London,
Macmillan; 1987.
Luckett WP: Uses and limitations of mammalian fetal membranes and placenta for phylogenetic reconstruction. J Exp
Zool 1993, 266:514-527.
Carter AM: Evolution of the placenta and fetal membranes
seen in the light of molecular phylogenetics. Placenta 2001,
22:800-807.
Enders AC, Carter AM: What can studies of comparative placental structure tell us? Placenta 2004, 25(Suppl A):S3-S7.
Murphy WJ, Eizirik E, O'Brien SJ, Madsen O, Scally M, Douady CJ,
Teeling E, Ryder OA, Stanhope MJ, de Jong WW, Springer MS: Resolution of the early placental mammal radiation using Bayesian phylogenetics. Science 2001, 294:2348-2351.
Waddell PJ, Kishino H, Ota R: A phylogenetic foundation for
comparative mammalian genomics. Genome Inform Ser Workshop Genome Inform 2001, 12:141-154.
Douady CJ, Chatelier PI, Madsen O, de Jong WW, Catzeflis F,
Springer MS, Stanhope MJ: Molecular phylogenetic evidence
confirming the Eulipotyphla concept and in support of
hedgehogs as the sister group to shrews. Mol Phylogenet Evol
2002, 25:200-209.
Amoroso EC, Perry JS: The foetal membranes and placenta of
the African elephant (Loxodonta africana). Phil Trans R Soc Lond
B 1964, 248:1-34.
Perry JS: Implantation, foetal membranes and early placentation of the African elephant, Loxodonta africana. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1974, 269:109-135.
Allen WR, Mathias S, Wooding FBP, Skidmore J, van Aarde RJ: Placentation in the African elephant, Loxodonta africana. I.
Endocrinological aspects. Reprod Suppl 2002, 60:105-116.
Allen WR, Mathias S, Wooding FBP, van Aarde RJ: Placentation in
the African elephant (Loxodonta africana) II. Morphological
aspects. Placenta 2003, 24:598-617.

Page 13 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

24.
25.
26.
27.

28.
29.
30.

31.

32.
33.
34.
35.

36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

43.

44.
45.
46.
47.

Wislocki GB: The placentation of the manatee (Trichechus
latorostris). Mem Museum Comp Zool, Harvard College 1935,
54:158-178.
Wislocki GB, van der Westhuysen OP: The placentation of Procavia capensis, with a discussion of the placental affinities of
the Hyracoidea. Contrib Embryol Carnegie Inst 1940, 28:65-88.
Mossman HW: The fetal membranes of the aard vark. Mitt
Naturforsch Ges Bern 1957, 14:119-128.
Taverne MAM, Bakker-Slotboom MF: Observations on the delivered placenta and fetal membranes of the aardvark, Orycteropus afer (Pallas, 1766). Bijd Tierkunde Amsterdam 1970,
40:154-162.
Oduor-Okelo D, Musewe VO, Gombe S: Electron microscopic
study of the chorioallantoic placenta of the rock hyrax (Heterohyrax brucei). J Reprod Fertil 1983, 68:311-316.
Oduor-Okelo D: Ultrastructural observations on the chorioallantoic placenta of the golden-rumped elephant shrew, Rhynchocyon chrysopygus. Afr J Ecol 1985, 23:155-166.
De Lange D: Communication on the attachment and early
development of Macroscelides (=Elephantulus) rozeti Duv.,
the North African jumping shrew. Bijd Dierkunde Amsterdam
1949, 28:255-285.
Oduor-Okelo D, Gombe S, Amoroso EC: The placenta and fetal
membranes of the short-nosed elephant shrew, Elephantulus rufescens (Peters, 1878). Säugertierkundliche Mitt 1980,
28:293-301.
De Lange D: Contribution to knowledge of the placentation of
the Cape golden mole (Chrysochloris). Bijd Dierkunde
Amsterdam 1919, 21:161-173.
Carter AM, Blankenship TN, Künzle H, Enders AC: Structure of
the definitive placenta of the tenrec, Echinops telfairi. Placenta
2004, 25:218-232.
Hill JP: The macroscopic features of the placenta of the water
shrew (Potamogale velox). Biomorphosis 1938, 1:331-332.
Delsuc F, Stanhope MJ, Douzery EJ: Molecular systematics of
armadillos (Xenarthra, Dasypodidae): contribution of maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses of mitochondrial and
nuclear genes. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 28:261-75.
Enders AC, Welsh AO: Structural interactions of trophoblast
and uterus during hemochorial placenta formation. J Exp Zool
1993, 266:578-87.
Enders AC: Implantation in the nine-banded armadillo: how
does a single blastocyst form four embryos? Placenta 2002,
23:71-85.
Benirschke K: Comparative Placentation.
[http://medi
cine.ucsd.edu/cpa/]. accessed 27 November 2003
King BF, Pinheiro PB, Hunter RL: The fine structure of the placental labyrinth in the sloth, Bradypus tridactylus. Anat Rec
1982, 202:15-22.
King BF, Hastings RA: The comparative fine structure of the
interhemal membrane of chorioallantoic placentas from six
genera of myomorph rodents. Am J Anat 1977, 149:165-180.
Enders AC: A comparative study of the fine structure of the
trophoblast in several hemochorial placentas. Am J Anat 1965,
116:29-68.
Miglino MA, Carter AM, dos Santos Ferraz RH, Fernandes Machado
MR: Placentation in the capybara (Hydrochaerus hydrochaeris), agouti (Dasyprocta aguti) and paca (Agouti paca). Placenta 2002, 23:416-428.
Mess A: Evolutionary transformations of chorioallantoic placental characters in rodentia with special reference to hystricognath species. J Exp Zoolog Part A Comp Exp Biol 2003,
299:78-98.
Glazier JD, Jones CJ, Sibley CP: Preparation of plasma membrane vesicles from the rat placenta at term and measurement of Na+ uptake. Placenta 1990, 11:451-63.
King BF, Tibbitts FD: The ultrastructure of the placental labyrinth in the kangaroo rat, Dipodomys. Anat Rec 1969,
163:543-54.
King BF, Mossman HW: The fetal membranes and unusual giant
cell placenta of the jerboa (Jaculus) and jumping mouse
(Zapus). Am J Anat 1974, 140:405-31.
Luckett WP, Mossman HW: Development and phylogenetic significance of the fetal membranes and placenta of the African
hystricognathous rodents Bathyergus and Hystrix. Am J Anat
1981, 162:265-85.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.

54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.

63.
64.

65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.

72.
73.

Rossant J, Cross JC: Placental development: lessons from
mouse mutants. Nat Rev Genet 2001, 2:538-48.
Georgiades P, Ferguson-Smith AC, Burton GJ: Comparative developmental anatomy of the murine and human definitive
placentae. Placenta 2002, 23:3-19.
Hill JP: The developmental history of the primates. Phil Trans
Roy Soc B 1932, 221:45-178.
Carter AM: J. P. Hill on placentation in primates. Placenta 1999,
20:513-517.
Kaufmann P, Luckhardt M, Elger W: The structure of the tupaia
placenta. II. Ultrastructure. Anat Embryol (Berl) 1985,
171:211-221.
Schmitz J, Zischler H: A novel family of tRNA-derived SINEs in
the colugo and two new retrotransposable markers separating dermopterans from primates. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003,
28:341-349.
Luckett WP: Evidence for the phylogenetic relationships of
the tree shrews (Tupaiidae) based on the placenta and foetal
membranes. J Reprod Fert Suppl 1969, 6:419-33.
Luckett WP: Cladistic relationships among primate higher
categories: evidence of the fetal membranes and placenta.
Folia Primatol 1976, 25:245-276.
Enders AC: Implantation of the blastocyst. II. Implantation in
primates. In: The Endometrium Edited by: Glasser S, Aplin J, Giudice
L, Tabibzadeh S. New York. Taylor and Francis:341-351.
Douady CJ, Douzery EJ: Molecular estimation of eulipotyphlan
divergence times and the evolution of "Insectivora". Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 28:285-296.
Asher RJ, Novacek MJ, Geisler JH: Relationships of endemic African mammals and their fossil relatives based on morphological and molecular evidence. J Mamm Evol 2003, 10:131-194.
Wislocki GB: The placentation of Solenodon paradoxus. Am J
Anat 1940, 66:497-531.
Prasad MR, Mossman HW, Scott GL: Morphogenesis of the fetal
membranes of an American mole, Scalopus aquaticus. Am J
Anat 1979, 155:31-68.
Malassiné A, Leiser R: Morphogenesis and fine structure of the
near-term placenta of Talpa europaea: I. Endotheliochorial
labyrinth. Placenta 1984, 5:145-58.
Wimsatt WA, Enders AC, Mossman HW: A reexamination of the
chorioallantoic placental membrane of a shrew, Blarina brevicauda: resolution of a controversy. Am J Anat 1973,
138:207-233.
Kiso Y, Yasufuku K, Matsuda H, Yamauchi S: Existence of an
endothelio-endothelial placenta in the insectivore, Suncus
murinus. Cell Tissue Res 1990, 262:195-7.
Enders AC, Blankenship TN, Lantz KC, Enders SS: Morphological
variations in the interhemal areas of chorioallantoic
placentas. In The Maternal-Fetal Interface, Trophoblast Res 1998,
12:1-19.
Badwaik NK, Rasweiler JJ: Pregnancy. In Reproductive Biology of Bats
Edited by: Chrichton EG. London, Academic Press; 2000.
Wynn RM, Hoschner JA, Oduor-Okelo D: The interhemal membrane of the spotted hyena: an immunohistochemical
reappraisal. Placenta 1990, 11:215-21.
Oduor-Okelo D, Neaves WB: The chorioallantoic placenta of
the spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta Erxleben): an electron
microscopic study. Anat Rec 1982, 204:215-222.
Burton GJ: Review Article. Placental uptake of maternal
erythrocytes: a comparative study. Placenta 1982, 3:407-433.
Wislocki GB, Enders RK: The placentation of the bottle-nosed
porpoise (Tursiops truncatus). Am J Anat 1941, 68:97-114.
Leiser R, Dantzer V: Initial vascularisation in the pig placenta:
II. Demonstration of gland and areola-gland subunits by histology and corrosion casts. Anat Rec 1994, 238:326-34.
Abd-Elnaeim MM, Pfarrer C, Saber AS, Abou-Elmagd A, Jones CJ,
Leiser R: Fetomaternal attachment and anchorage in the
early diffuse epitheliochorial placenta of the camel (Camelus
dromedarius). Light, transmission, and scanning electron
microscopic study. Cells Tissues Organs 1999, 164:141-54.
Steven DH: Placentation in the mare. J Reprod Fertil Suppl 1982,
31:41-55.
Soma H: Malay chevrotain (lesser mouse deer) Tragulus javanicus. In: Comparative Placentation. [http://medicine.ucsd.edu/cpa/].
accessed 27 November 2003

Page 14 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 2004, 2:46

74.
75.
76.

77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.

http://www.rbej.com/content/2/1/46

Allen WR: Immunological aspects of the equine endometrial
cup reaction and the effect of xenogeneic pregnancy in
horses and donkeys. J Reprod Fertil Suppl 1982, 31:57-94.
Enders AC, Liu IK: Trophoblast-uterine interactions during
equine chorionic girdle cell maturation, migration, and
transformation. Am J Anat 1991, 192:366-381.
Enders AC, Lantz KC, Schlafke S, Liu IKM: New cells and old vessels: the remodeling of the endometrial vasculature during
establishment of endometrial cups. In: Equine Reproduction VI,
Biol Reprod Mono Ser 1995, 1:181-190.
Wooding FBP: The synepitheliochorial placenta of ruminants:
binucleate cell fusions and hormone production. Placenta 1992,
13:101-113.
Haig D: Altercation of generations: genetic conflicts of
pregnancy. Am J Reprod Immunol 1996, 35:226-32.
Stulc J: Placental transfer of inorganic ions and water. Physiol
Rev 1997, 77:805-836.
Bremer JL: The interrelations of the mesonephros, kidney and
placenta in different classes of animals. Am J Anat 1916,
19:179-210.
Moritz KM, Wintour EM: Functional development of the mesoand metanephros. Pediatr Nephrol 1999, 13:171-178.
Thursby-Pelham D: The placentation of Hyrax capensis. Phil
Trans R Soc Lond B 1923, 213:1-20.
Wislocki GB: On an unusual placental form in the Hyracoidea:
its bearing on the theory of the phylogeny of the placenta.
Contrib Embryol Carnegie Inst 1930, 21:118-133.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 15 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
