<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1476-0711-3-10.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Annals of Clinical Microbiology and
Antimicrobials

BioMed Central

Open Access

Review

A second-generation anti TB vaccine is long overdue
Mauricio Castañón-Arreola and Yolanda López-Vidal*
Address: Programa de Inmunología Molecular Microbiana, Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad
Nacional Autonoma de México (UNAM), Mexico City, Mexico
Email: Mauricio Castañón-Arreola - xmaurice@hotmail.com; Yolanda López-Vidal* - lvidal@servidor.unam.mx
* Corresponding author

Published: 03 June 2004
Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3:10

doi:10.1186/1476-0711-3-10

Received: 24 January 2004
Accepted: 03 June 2004

This article is available from: http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10
© 2004 Castañón-Arreola and López-Vidal; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article
are permitted in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Summary
Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccine significantly reduces the risk of tuberculosis by 50% and continues
to be used to prevent tuberculosis around the world. However, it has been shown to be ineffective
in some geographical regions. The existence of different BCG strains was described more than 60
years ago, these vary in their antigenic content but the genetic mutations in BCG strains have yet
been shown to affect their protection. After the declaration of tuberculosis as a global emergency
in 1993, current research attempts to develop a novel more-effective vaccine. Using new
technologies, recombinant, auxotroph, DNA, subunit and phylogenetically closely related
mycobacteria, naturally or genetically attenuated, have been used as vaccines in animal models, but
their protective efficacy, is less than that offered by the current BCG vaccine. Today it is mandatory
that a major effort be made to understand how different BCG vaccine strains influence immune
response and why in some cases vaccines have failed, so we can rationally develop the next
generation of tuberculosis vaccines to reduce the prevalence from 10% to less than 2 % for
developed countries.

Introduction
Tuberculosis (TB) was the first disease to be declared a global emergency by the World Health Organization
(WHO). It is an infectious disease caused by 3 closely
related Mycobacterium strains (M. tuberculosis, M. africanum
and M. bovis), which are commonly known as the TB-complex. Human tuberculosis continues to be a major worldwide health problem and is the leading killer of youths
and adults in developing countries, being responsible for
approximately 3 million deaths each year. The HIV epidemic and the appearance of multidrug-resistant strains
of M. tuberculosis (MDRTB) have contributed to the resurgence of TB. The risk of developing TB has increased and
for HIV positive patients, TB enhances the progression of
HIV infection to AIDS [1].

The most well known form of disease prevention is BCG
vaccination, for which a variable efficacy rate from 0% to
80% has been reported [2,3,5]. In regions of the world
where the disease is most widespread, BCG vaccination is
ineffective and therefore, the search for novel, more effective vaccines is paramount. There are a number of possible
explanations for the discrepancies in BCG protector efficacy: (i) genetic host susceptibility [5], (ii) a wide range of
virulence among M. tuberculosis strains, (iii) progressive
loss of BCG capacity to stimulate a durable immune
response (iv) prevalence of other mycobacterial infections
in the study population, (v) variations in protection
against different forms of tuberculosis, and (vi) the level
of exposure to environmental mycobacteria [6,2], however, none of these have strong clinical and research support [3].

Page 1 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3

http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10

BCG strains in an evolutionary approach, which was supported by BCG historical records [10]. These studies only
led to the understanding of the genes missing from M.
bovis leaving deeper research to be carried out to explore
the association between the 61 ORF genes deleted from
BCG during evolution and virulence attenuation, and
may be more importantly, research into the loss in protective efficacy over the last eight decades [11]. What remains
unknown is the irrefutable role that the smallest deletions, duplications and polymorphisms in the nucleotide
sequence play to induce protective efficacy, as well as the
production of antigens in the overall attenuation of BCG
[9,12].

BCG development
Albert Calmette and Camille Guèrin developed BCG
between 1908 and 1921 by successfully passing an isolated strain of M. bovis in vitro. In the first half of the 20th
Century, BCG vaccines were prepared and preserved by
different manufacturing laboratories. This resulted in genotypic and phenotypic differences in the daughter strains
with variations in tuberculin conversion and the frequency of adverse reactions. During this time, BCG
showed a progressive decrease in virulence, the most
important during the first 15 passes [7,8]. Over the next
40 years, until the freeze-dried process of the Pasteur
strain in 1961 and after more than 1,000 passes, it was
clear that the standardization and stability of vaccine
strains needed to be enforced. This led to the adoption of
the seed-lot system by the International BCG Technical
Conference in 1956 [8]. Furthermore, Colditz, et al [3]
independently quantified the detrimental or protective
benefit of the vaccine in several prospective trials from
case control studies and concluded that BCG significantly
reduced the risk of active TB development by an average
of 50%. The different criteria applied to interpret the confounding variables in the human trials make it difficult to
identify the impact of BCG vaccines on protective efficacy
[4].

Polymorphism in BCG daughter strains
Following adoption of the seed-lot system, several BCG
sub-strains of the original vaccine strain are now in circulation. It is known that these sub-strains vary in certain
characteristics (Table 1), such as their antigenic structure,
secreted protein profiles [13-15], IS6110 copy number
[11], mycolic acid pattern [16], and the characteristics and
quantity of exoquelins [17]. Alterations in the mycolic
acid subclass directly affect not only cell wall fluidity and
permeability to hydrophobic agents, but also the ability of
strains to grow within macrophages. In addition, strains
with an altered cord factor have altered virulence [16,18].

In 1999, Behr et al [9] elucidate some of the molecular
events that occur during BCG attenuation. Under laboratory conditions used for bacterial passes, and using microarray technology and genome sequence of M. tuberculosis
H37Rv as a framework, they inferred the genealogy of

Today, the most commonly used BCG sub-strains are the
Pasteur, Japanese and the Glaxo (Figure 1) but other
daughter strains are/or were in use (Moreau, Montreal,
Russian, Prague, Danish, Birkhaugh, Australian) [12].

Table 1: Listing of gene and antigen differences presented in Mycobacterium bovis BCG daughter strains. The data was taken from
research and historical reports. Genetic and phenotypic differences of M. bovis BCG daughter strains.

STRAIN

SYNONIMOUS

PASTEUR
PHIPPS
FRAPPIER
CONNAUGHT
TICE
DENMARK
GLAXO
PRAGUE
BIRKHAUG
SWEDEN
JAPAN
MOREAU
RUSSIA
MEXICO

PHILADELPHIA
MONTREAL
TORONTO
CHICAGO
DANISH 1331

GHOTHENBURG
TOKYO
BRAZIL
MOSCOW

DELETIONS
(ORF's)

MPB64

MPB70

Methoxymycoli
c acid's

EXOCHELIN'S
µg/ml

DR1, DR2, DR14
(28)
DR1, DR2 (20)
DR1, DR2, DR8 (24)
DR1, DR2, DR8 (24)
DR1, DR2 (20)
DR1, DR2 (20)
DR1, DR2 (20)
DR1, DR2 (20)
DR1, DR2 (20)
DR1 (9)
DR1 (9)
DR1, DR 16 (15)
DR1 (9)
DR1, DR2 (20)

P

LOW

N

345

P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
N
N
N
N
P

LOW
LOW
LOW
LOW
LOW
LOW
LOW
LOW
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
HIGH
LOW

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
P
P
P
P
N

ND
ND
ND
390
140
75
ND
ND
ND
150
ND
ND
ND

DR: Deleted Regions, ORF: Open Reading Frame, P: Protein or antigen expression, N: Non protein or antigen expression, ND: Non
determinate.

Page 2 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3

http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10

Figure 1
Organization evolution of the four M. bovis BCG strains currently licensed to produce for use in humans by the World Health
Documented
Documented evolution of the four M. bovis BCG strains currently licensed to produce for use in humans by the World Health
Organization. The arrows indicate the chronologic evolution of Japanese and Danish strains from the original BCG Pasteur
1921 and Glaxo strain from Danish 1331. Boxes indicate occurrence of deletions of the genome during derivation of BCG. The
year of derivation are indicated by (). The number in the arrows is the in vitro passages documented to have occurred during
the evolution of BCG Pasteur and daughter strains since 1921 to the freeze dried of BCG in 60th.

Recently, Lagranderie et al [20] evaluated the capacity of
five BCG sub-strains to trigger and maintain the immune
response in mice and found statistically significant differences in their protective efficacy. However, the data are
subject to the particular experimental conditions used in
their mice model. In reality, vaccine candidates are tested
in several models and under different evaluation criteria.
It is clear that the strategies for the development and evaluation of the new vaccine candidates need to be standardized under shared criteria in order to understand their
ability to induce protection [21] in animal models that
mimic the key aspects of naturally occurring human
tuberculosis [22]. Currently, work is being carried out to
understand the differences in the major BCG vaccines
being used in human trials. In these studies, BCG vaccines
are being studied in a well-characterized mouse model of
pulmonary tuberculosis, which tries to mimic natural
human infection as much as possible [23]. Under these
conditions 10 different daughter strains shown to induce
a wide range of protection against M. tuberculosis intratracheal infection displaying differences in terms of colony

forming units (CFU's) reduction, delayed type hypersensitivity response and proportion lung surface affected by
pneumonia going to be difficult correlate the protective
response offered by the current disposable vaccines with
the protective efficacy determined in previous human
clinical trials (Figure 2 shown representative lung section
of mice unvaccinated or vaccinated with these daughter
strains) [unpublished data].
The availability of the complete genome sequence of two
M. tuberculosis strains and the partial sequence of the BCG
Pasteur sub-strain, may lead to the understanding of the
principal source of antigenic variations, which would be
significant for vaccine design and for inducing protective
immunity in tuberculosis [24-26]. As seen in BCG substrains, variation in colony morphology among isolates of
M. tuberculosis from patients is extremely common and
multiple phenotypes are often apparent even from a
microbial culture from a single sputum sample. However,
attempts to correlate such differences with pathogenic
potential cannot be sustained.

Page 3 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3

http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10

Figure
H37Rv 2
Representative cross-sections from lungs of BALB/c mice vaccinated and infected with virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Representative cross-sections from lungs of BALB/c mice vaccinated and infected with virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis
H37Rv. A. Typical lung section from health non infected mice, no pneumonic or infiltrate were detected. B. Lung from mice
non vaccinated and challenge with M. tuberculosis. C. Lung from mice vaccinated with heat inactivated Mycobacterium vaccae a
closely related Mycobacterial strains. D. Lung from mice vaccinated with BCG Phipps strain. Significant reduction in the tissue
damage was seen only in the mice vaccinated with BCG, the use of saprophytic bacilli as vaccine no induce immune response
capable to control infection and pneumonic development. Vaccines were evaluated under a mice model of pulmonary tuberculosis (unpublished data) (H:E stain 50×).

Immunological considerations for new tuberculosis vaccine
development
The development of a new vaccine with improved protective immunity against M. tuberculosis depends on the efficient recruitment of antigen-specific T-cells principally
CD4+ in the lungs, as well as on the cytokines that are
released particularly IFN-γ, which is important for inducing the macrophage killing activation mechanism [27].

Cell-mediated immunity plays the principal role in containing infection, and the routes of vaccine administration

and immunization influences immune response development. In infants, BCG vaccination generally induces a Th1
cytokine response and stimulates cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
activity in neonates [28]. An alternative route of BCG
administration, which does not induce the side effects
associated with subcutaneous immunization, is via rectal
delivery. This method induces a similar immune response
and protection in several animal models [29,30] without
altering the recruitment patterns of activated T-cells [31].
Intranasal immunization induces higher protection by
rapid induction of IFN-γ and T-cell response in the lung

Page 4 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3

tissue but there are some who have serious misgivings in
using live bacilli. However, nasal administration of
recombinant BCG as a means to deliver immune dominant antigens to the mucosa shows some promise for
therapeutic use in HIV infection [32,33].
M. tuberculosis has a complex multiplicity of antigens with
a diverse chemical and immune reactive nature as has
been demonstrated in lipids, polysaccharides, and proteins. Some of these induce the granuloma formation,
macrophage activation, and adjuvant activity while others
are immunosuppressive and enhance host toxicity
[27,34]. It should be remembered that the T-cell mediated
immune response can result in protective immunity but it
may also lead to pathological immunity that is detrimental to the host. The understanding of specific antigens
expressed during early infection, disease, latency or reactivation and their immunological characterization are key
for the development of new vaccines.
Looking back in the history of tuberculosis research, during the second half of 20th Century, various types of vaccines have been developed against mycobacterial
infection to control bacilli replication and dissemination
in order to stop tuberculosis transmission and future eradication. This vaccine development has been included the
use of secreted proteins and surface exposed proteins,
nucleic acid vaccination, rational attenuation of Mycobacterium sp strains, and recombinant BCG vaccines, all of
which are currently being tested in a wide variety of animal models before future use in human clinical trials
[25,35-37].
Now a day M. bovis BCG vaccine is the only live bacterial
vaccine in use, which shows no major side effects. This is
the most used vaccine and has been administered to more
than two billon people worldwide and has showed longlasting immunity.
Until now, medical staffs and health care workers
accepted that BCG strains have been able to induce protection in the first year of life as well in all animal models
that have been used; something that other vaccine candidates have still failed to achieve. Recent data of protective
efficacy coming from more than 180 vaccine candidates
put in perspective the evaluation of existing BCG vaccines
in a way to identify potential candidate for a rationally
designed recombinant BCG vaccine or an auxotroph vaccine by comparing protective efficacy [21]. These new
designed recombinant vaccines have been shown to
induce Th1 and long-lasting protective response with a
smaller number and size of granulomas and a reduced
load of colony forming units.

http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10

The development of new acellular vaccines composed of
one or more antigens may offer a faster route for creating
an alternative to BCG vaccines. However, this approach
needs a distasting research to identify and defining those
potential proteins recognized by human T-cells which are
capable of inducing cell-mediated and long-lasting
immunity. On last ten years attention has mainly been
focused on the group of proteins secreted by the bacteria
in culture media during the active replication of M. tuberculosis in early growth phase. These have been recognized
in the early stages of tuberculosis infection in several animal models and may be the reason that viable mycobacteria are needed for effective vaccination against M.
tuberculosis infection [25,35].
Various approaches are currently being analyzed using
sub-unit vaccines based on culture filtrate proteins of M.
tuberculosis, which when are administrated with an adjuvant have been shown to induce protective immunity in
mice, guinea pigs and non-human primate models [40].
Antigen isolation has depended on the use of monoclonal
antibodies [39] or by direct chromatography of culture filtrates. Such isolation procedures are characterized by biochemical and immunological techniques, with the
corresponding genes being sequenced and cloned for further use as a vaccine. Several antigens have been cloned
and purified as recombinant proteins, due to the largedoses required for immunization. The choice of an antigen or several antigens to formulate optimal immunological cocktails for vaccine use needs to be tested through in
vitro and in vivo studies. In in vitro human studies, ESAT-6,
CFP-10, MPT64, MPB70 and fusion proteins of the ESAT6 and antigen 85B have been tested to show their ability
to induce protective T-cell response. The most used
criteria for tuberculosis vaccine designs are antigen-specific proliferation and IFN-γ secretion assays [35,40-42].
ESAT-6 was a promises in this area because is an immune
dominant antigens most frequently recognized by TB
patients, which contains a great number of T-cell epitopes.
In animal models, ESAT-6 has been recognized in the first
phase of infection and has been demonstrated to be a
strong T-cell immunogen inducing prime memory immunity, which persisted in individuals who had recovered
from disease [25,43]. The 30/32-kDa complex is among
the most important secretor proteins of M. tuberculosis and
has been shown to be protective in the guinea pig model
of pulmonary tuberculosis. Their abundant production
either extracellulary in broth culture or intracellulary in
human monocytes, suggests a vital role in the physiology
of the bacterium.
The recent elucidation of complete genome sequence of
two M. tuberculosis strains and accelerated development of
genetic tools for the study of M. tuberculosis has enabled
the development of DNA vaccination, which has been

Page 5 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3

tested in several animal models [44,45]. Over the last few
years, genetic immunization has become the most popular strategy in vaccine development and may be a successful alternative for the delivery of M. tuberculosis antigens
that drive the cellular immune response. The DNA vaccines that expressed the 85B, MPT64 and ESAT-6 antigens
has been demonstrated that they reduced the level of pulmonary infection following M. tuberculosis challenge, by
the specific CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell response [44,46,47]. It
was also shown that combined vaccination with three
antigens was more effective than vaccination with a singe
vector. The use of cytokines to increase vaccine protection
enhanced the specificity of the immune response triggered
against these antigens, thereby potentially maintaining
the TH1 response [46]. These results concur with previous
studies concerning sub-unit vaccines that have shown
them to be only equal at best to BCG vaccines. In these
way, immunization using a DNA vaccine of the 32-kDa
protein stimulated protective immunity against BCG and
M. tuberculosis infection [47,48]. Plasmid vectors expressing the 38-kDa glycoprotein induce a comparable level of
protection with other DNA vaccines and develop a strong
antigens-specific Th1 response in human and murine
lymphocytes, characterized by IFN-γ secretion [45]. However, genetic vaccination with the 19-kDa lipoprotein
resulted in a non-protective antibody response [49]. Even
though 38 kDA and 19 kDa are important antigens that
induce a Th1 type immune response, they do not protect
mice from M. tuberculosis infection. Similarly, no protection was observed when immunization used chaperonlike proteins, in contrast with early works in which the
heat-shock proteins like HSP60 and HSP70 resulted in a
protective effect. Similar results to those using 38 kDa and
19 kDa have been obtained by immunizing with MPB83
DNA vaccines [50,51].
The major advance in DNA immunization is the notion
that intramuscular vaccination is better for inducing a
protective Th 1 type immune response against tuberculosis without sensitizing the animal to tuberculin testing. An
alternative to DNA immunization is the use of recombinant vaccine viruses that express immune dominant
antigens [52].
Although DNA vaccines are an attractive alternative for
the development of a new vaccine, they do not surpass the
protection conferred by BCG vaccination [53] and need
further safety evaluation prior to testing in human
populations.
The stable expression of foreign DNA in BCG on a plasmid vector established a basis for the construction of polyvalent recombinant BCG vaccine but the antibiotic
resistance markers are not appropriate for the selection or
maintenance of recombinant plasmid containing anti-

http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10

gens. An alternative would be to develop auxotroph
mutants that would maintain stability, as they offer a
genetic function required for the survival of the mycobacteria in their host. For this purpose defining mycobacterial
promoter sequences is critical for expressing high levels of
selected antigens responsible for cell-mediated immunity.
Recombinant BCG vaccines will have the excellent adjuvant activity of BCG and thus, significant levels of T-cell
reactivity but it is uncertain whether they will be capable
of generating high levels of cytotoxic T-cell response. The
use of BCG as a live vaccine vector [60] for the presentation of heterologous and homologous antigens can be a
powerful method for driving the immune response to the
Th1 phenotype or for replacement of BCG target genes by
homologous recombination [55].
Auxotroph and avirulent mutants of M. tuberculosis and M.
bovis [56-59] have been developed showing wide variability in their avirulent character giving equivalent protection
between them and comparable to that of BCG, which
have also proved safe in individuals with immunodeficiency disease.
Post-genomic approach
With the complete genomic sequence and database comparisons, it is now possible to attribute tentative functions
to roughly 40% of the 3924 protein coding genes for the
genome of M. tuberculosis [24]. In addition, this information reveals new members of family proteins and potential variation between M. tuberculosis, M. bovis and M. bovis
BCG [60]. Until recently, there have been two principal
ways to learn more about the role of new antigens in the
immune pathology of tuberculosis. All primary results
come from some biochemical or immune proliferative
assays induced by individual proteins with further characterization under specific conditions in animal models.
Studies using such tools have resulted in the identification
of immune dominant antigens, which are strongly recognized in humans and with the potential for developing of
a novel TB vaccine. An applied approach allowed the
identification of deleted genes and the development of
antigens that can distinguish between M. tuberculosis
infection and BCG vaccination [61]. This offers the prospect of starting vaccine design using the genetic information by reverse vaccinology [26].

Comparative analysis of the complete genome sequence
of M. tuberculosis, M. bovis, BCG strains and M. leprae and
other mycobacterial species may allow the identification
and development of subunit vaccines with an exceptional
specificity, however the high similarity of these strains
limit this potential window of antigens.

Page 6 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3

http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10

The recent development of recombinant BCG vaccines
that secrete cytokines or specific antigens is one of the
most secure routes in the development of improved vaccines against tuberculosis [36,62]. However, as seen in the
sub-unit vaccine approach, adverse results from antigens
which are capable of enhancing protection efficacy of the
current BCG vaccine could be found. Using recombinant
BCG that secretes, IFN-γ or IL-2, which have been shown
to reduce disease in a pre-infection vaccine model, as well
as TNF-alpha which is indispensable for the formation of
tuberculous granulomas, leading to an increase in lung
pathology without reducing bacillary loads [48,63].

mutants have been produced by transposon mutagenesis
or illegitimate recombination. The current strategy is to
use antibiotics to select mutant strains that better express
antigens than induce protection. However, the use of antibiotics in this way and the possibility to revert their
virulence or recombination events between these and the
wild type strains means that this alternative is a long way
from human trials [37]. The exciting aspect of this early
research is the specificity of the response elicited by each
one of these strains, which plays a key role in protection
[59] through homologous or analogous challenge with
the virulent strain.

Other recombinant live vaccines that produce pore-forming cytolysin [64], Interferon alpha 2B [62] demonstrate
enhanced immune genecity but not improved protection.
Recently, Horwitz [65] reported enhanced protective
response to challenges with virulent M. tuberculosis following vaccination with recombinant BCG that secreted 30Kda antigen of M. tuberculosis.

Discussion

The use of closely related species of Mycobacterium may be
the second most interesting route to follow for vaccine
improvement. Mycobacterium microti is a naturally attenuated strain with a narrow host range. In mice and rabbit
models, vaccination with this strain resulted in significant
reduction in the M. tuberculosis load and histopathology
lesions [66]. Another approach is the use of different host
vectors that express shared antigens [64,67] such as Salmonella thyphimurium that secretes ESAT-6, which is used as a
vaccine and reduces the load of mycobacteria throughout
the course of infection. M. vaccae is a saprophytic bacillus
which, as other members of the Mycobacterium genera,
share the major antigens and this was used recently as
alternative immunotherapy in addition to chemotherapy
in MDRTB cases [68].
Finally, little is known about the effect of vaccine boosters
using some antigens and how this strategy may be able to
drive the response to maintain a prorogued Th1-type
memory T-cell response].
The use of atypical mycobacteria as hosts for the production of M. tuberculosis antigens needs to be designed with
the same precautions as for BCG. Post et al [69], demonstrated the inefficacy of recombinant strains of M. vaccae
and M. smegmatis that expressed the 19-kDa lipoprotein,
and the abrogation of the protection conferred by host
strains alone [49]. On the other hand, the deletion of
these genes in M. bovis has a significant effect on the ability of BCG to protect against M. tuberculosis challenge [70].
The rational mutation of virulence genes or putative virulence factors is being evaluated for their biological function [71]. In order to develop better vaccines, several

BCG is an attenuated derivative of virulent bacilli generated by 230 serial passes of the parent strain through laboratory media. It is believed that attenuation is caused by
chromosomal rearrangements such as small duplications
or inversions. Such variations would have been difficult to
detect by the genetic and molecular approaches that currently exist.
The mechanism by which BCG induces protective immunity has not been established. The mutation that affects
BCG provides potential answers as to why there have been
differences in protective efficacy during various human
trials.
The development of new vaccines requires a clear understanding of the nature of both innate and acquired immunity in the lung and the role that these two sets of
mechanisms play in the protective immune response
against M. tuberculosis, as well as the construction of delivery vectors with the ability to elicit an optimal protective
response that controls the pathogen. Despite the rapid
development of molecular biology techniques, DNA vaccines have not proved to be better than live attenuated
vaccines, such as BCG, for inducing protective immunity
against tuberculosis. M. tuberculosis has evolved many
interrelated processes that favour the particular ecological
niche, which the organism occupies; the resistance of the
bacilli to chemical injury, dehydration and certain antibiotics is directly related to the low permeability of its
unique cell wall envelope, which also is a rich source of
immunogenic antigens.
Some unresolved issues regarding BCG efficacy are the
duration of protective immunity, the efficacy of the BCG
daughter strains, the phenotypic differences among BCG
vaccines, and their overall protection. In bovine studies, it
has been demonstrated that BCG protection would be
enhanced with repetitive immunization at short intervals
[72]. Also, the prevalence of BCG infection is unknown
because many laboratories cannot quickly differentiate
between BCG and other members of the M. tuberculosis

Page 7 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3

complex. The development of a low-cost vaccine that
immunizes efficiently with only one dose would be
important for some developed countries, which do not
offer a free national immunisation programme for BCG,
especially considering that most (69.5%) of the TB cases
in 1990 occurred among racial and ethnic minorities.
An improved BCG vaccine would help in fulfilling a
number of established criteria: (i) the World Health
Organization recommends that BCG should be administrated at birth; (ii) one dose should be sufficient to confer
long lasting immunity; (iii) it is the most effective known
adjuvant in animals and man; (iv) the production cost is
low (~$0.55 per dose) (v) BCG is offered as an integral
compound of the World Health Organization Expanded
Program on Immunization (EPI).
It is necessary to identify the efficacy, safety and biochemical differences between the BCG sub-strains in use today.
Understanding these characteristics involves much more
than simply testing for growth in the spleen or lung of animal models used for this purpose. In addition, care must
be taken when considering the very artificially high-dose
intravenous infection models of the disease, which
involves significant dissemination and in which it is
impossible to evaluate factors that influence their efficiency, nature of the granulomatous response or cessation. BCG is the only TB vaccine currently licensed and
administered to children. The development and eventual
acceptance of a new TB vaccine is several years away with
safety, protection and long-term efficacy still needing to
be proved. The use of recombinant BCG vaccines that over
produce secreted antigens may be of particular significance in the induction of a protective immune response
but in the same way, they may produce increased tissue
damage as they may enhance delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction following infection. Other mycobacterial
genes still need to be defined in terms of their capacity to
polarize Th1 type immune response and protect against
tuberculosis. A careful integration of the biochemistry and
pathogenesis of M. tuberculosis, in parallel with a complete
study of the immune response and resistance to infection
compiled during the last Century, may hold the key to the
development of a really effective vaccine against
tuberculosis.

Conclusions
The development of a new attenuated vaccine that is more
effective than BCG depends not only on the identification
of genes and products that contribute to pathogenesis in
order to drive the attenuating mutations, but also a precise
definition of the antigenic machinery used by the
immune system to develop a protective response. Another
issue requiring consideration is the potential that a new
vaccine has for clearing the infection because many cases

http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10

of clinically active tuberculosis arise from reactivation of
an infection acquired years before and reflect the re-emergence of the actively growing organism from an apparently non-replicative state. In addition, there is no
evidence that current TB vaccine protection lasts for more
than 15 years in any population [15,73]. The number of
patients developing tuberculosis through reactivation versus re-infection is a topic currently being investigated in
developing countries.
Finally, we can conclude that developing of new vaccines
would be directed in two ways, in one hand we need a vaccine that induce protective immunity in infants and control and clearance the infection, and in the other hand a
vaccine to treat the high proportion of latent infected people. These approaches in the optimal scenery can be
present in a new based BCG vaccine that could be administrated at any time of life, as single dose infancy in high
incidence countries and at the time of exposition in the
developed countries when the rates of infected people are
lesser than 10/ 100 000 people. Until development of this
vaccine (s) the reduction of latent infection, and proportion of infected subjects (10%) whose develop tuberculosis In meanwhile, the actual incidence rate will no
decreased promptly.
Before field introduction of any new vaccine, several
researches should be focused to support the enhanced
efficacy of NEW vaccines against tuberculosis, mainly in
their capability to clearance initial tuberculosis infection
named granuloma, due to many of the inefficacy of contemporary BCG vaccine to control tuberculosis infection
where innate and acquired immune response play an
important role in the develop of a vaccine success.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.
5.
6.

7.
8.

De Cock KM, Dworkin MS: HIV infection and TB. World Health
1998, 51:14-25.
Brandt L, Feino Cunha J, Weinreich Olsen A, Chilima B, Hirsch P,
Appelberg R, Andersen P: Failure of the Mycobacterium bovis
BCG vaccine: some species of environmental mycobacteria
block multiplication of BCG and induction of protective
immunity to tuberculosis. Infect Immun 2002, 70:672-678.
Colditz GA, Brewer TF, Berkey CS, Wilson ME, Burdick E, Fineberg
HV, Mosteller F: Efficacy of BCG Vaccine in the Prevention of
Tuberculosis. Meta-analysis of the published literature. JAMA
1994, 271:698-702.
Brewer TF: Preventing Tuberculosis with Bacillus CalmetteGuèrin Vaccine: A Meta-Analysis of the Literature. Clin Infect
Dis 2000, 31(Suppl 3):S64-S67.
Buu N, Sanchez F, Schurr E: The BCG host-resistance gene. Clin
Infect Dis 2000, 31(Suppl 3):S81-S85.
Buddle BM, Wards BJ, Aldwell FE, Collins DM, de Lisle GW: Influence of sensitization to environmental mycobacteria on subsequent vaccination against bovine tuberculosis. Vaccine 2002,
20:1126-1133.
Phenotypes of BCG-vaccines seed lot strains: results of an
international cooperative study. International Union against Tuberculosis. Tubercle 1978, 59:139-142.
Osborn TW: BCG vaccine: an investigation of colony morphology from four different strains after their introduction
as seed for vaccine preparation in four production
laboratories. J Biol Stand 1983, 11:19-27.

Page 8 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3

9.

10.

11.
12.
13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.
19.

20.

21.
22.
23.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

Behr MA, Wilson MA, Gill WP, Salamon H, Schoolnik GK, Rane S,
Samll PM: Comparative Genomics of BCG Vaccines by
Whole-Genome
DNA
Microarray.
Science
1999,
284:1520-1522.
Oettinger T, Jorgensen M, Ladefoged A, Haslov K, Andersen P:
Development of the Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccine:
review of the historical and biochemical evidence for a genealogical tree. Tuber Lung Dis 1999, 79:243-250.
Behr MA, Small PM: A historical and molecular phylogeny of
BCG strains. Vaccine 1999, 17:915-922.
Behr MA: Correlation between BCG genomics and protective
efficacy. Scand J Infect Dis 2001, 33:249-252.
Abou-Zeid C, Smith I, Grange J, Steele J, Rook G: Subdivision of
daughter satrains of bacille Calmete-Guèrin (BCG) according to several protein patterns. J Gen Microbiol 1986,
132:3047-3053.
Matsuo T, Matsumoto S, Ohara N, Kitaura H, Mizuno A, Yamada T:
Differential transcription of the MPB70 genes in two major
groups of Mycobacterium bovis BCG substrains. Microbiology
1995, 141:1601-1607.
Li H, Ulstrup JC, Jonassen TO, Melby K, Nagai S, Harboe M: Evidence for absence of the MPB64 gene in some substrains of
Mycobacterium bovis BCG. Infect Immun 1993, 61:1730-1734.
Behr MA, Schroeder BG, Brinkman JN, Slayden RA, Barry CE 3rd: A
point mutation en the mma3 gene is responsible for
impaired methoxy mycolic acid production in Mycobacterium bovis BCG strains obtained after 1927. J Bacteriol 2000,
182:3394-3399.
Gobin J, Wong DK, Gibson BW, Horwitz MA: Characterization of
exochelins of the Mycobacterium bovis type strain and BCG
substrains. Infect Immun 1999, 67:2035-2039.
Barry CE 3rd, Lee RE, Madluli K, Sampson AE, Schroeder BG, Slayden
RA, Yuan Y: Mycolic acids: structure biosynthesis and physiological functions. Prog Lipid Res 1998, 37:143-179.
Mustafa AS, Shaban FA, Abal AT, Al-Attyah R, Wiker HG, Lundin
KEA, Oftung F, Huygen K: Identification and HLA restriction on
Naturally Derived Th1-Cell Epitopes from the secreted
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Antigen 85B Recognized by Antigen-Specific Human CD4+ T-Cell Lines. Infect and Immun 2000,
68:3933-3940.
Lagranderie MRR, Balazuc AM, Deriaud E, Leclerc CD, Gheorghiu M:
Comparison of immune response of mice immunized with
five different Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccine strains. Infect
Immun 1996, 64:1-9.
McMurray DN: Disease model: pulmonary tuberculosis. Trends
Mol Med 2001, 7:135-137.
Smith D, Wiegeshaus E, Balasubramanian V: Animal models for
experimental tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 2000, 31(Suppl
3):S68-S70.
Hernandez Pando R, Orozco H, Samperi A, Pavon L, Velasquillo C,
Larriva-Shd J, Alcocer JM, Madid MV: Correlation between the
kinetics of Th1, Th2 cells and pathology in a murine model of
experimental pulmonary tuberculosis. Immunology 1996,
89:26-33.
Cole ST, Brosch R, Parkhill J, Garnier T, Churcher C, Harris D, Gordon S, Eiglmeier K, Gas S, Barry CE 3rd, et al.: Deciphering the
biology of Mycobacterium tuberculosis from the complete
genome sequence. Nature 1998, 393:537-544.
Louise R, Skjot V, Agger EM, Andersen P: Antigen discovery and
tuberculosis vaccine development in the post-genomic era.
Scand J Infect Dis 2001, 33:643-647.
Rappuoli R: Reverse vaccinology. Curr Opin Microbiol 2000,
3:445-450.
Ellner JJ: Review: The Immune Response in Human Tuberculosis-Implications for Tuberculosis Control. J Infect Dis 1997,
176:1351-1359.
Hussey GD, Watkins ML, Goddard EA, Gottschalk S, Hughes EJ, Iloni
K, Kibel MA, Ress SR: Neonatal mycobacterial specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte and cytokine profiles in response to distinct BCG vaccination strategies. Immunology 2002,
105:314-324.
Lagranderie M, Balazuc AM, Abolhassani M, Chavarot P, Nahori MA,
Thouron F, Milon G, Marchal G: Development of mixed Th1/Th2
type immune response and protection against Mycobacterium tuberculosis after rectal or subcutaneous immunization

http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.
35.

36.
37.
38.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.
47.

of newborn and adult mice with Mycobacterium bovis BCG.
Scand J Immunol 2002, 55:293-303.
Lagranderie MA, Chavarot P, Balazuc AM, Marchal G: Mycobacterium bovis BCG induces similar immune responses and protection by rectal and parenteral immunization routes. Infect
Immun 2000, 68:5657-5662.
Palendira U, Bean AG, Feng CG, Britton WJ: Lymphocyte recruitment and protective efficacy against pulmonary mycobacterial infection are independent of the route of prior
Mycobacterium bovis BCG immunization. Infect Immun 2002,
70:1410-1416.
Lyadova IV, Vordermeier HM, Eruslanov EB, Khaidukov SV, Apt AS,
Hewinson RG: Intranasal BCG vaccination protects BALB/c
mice against virulent Mycobacterium bovis and accelerates
production of IFN-gamma in their lungs. Clin Exp Immunol 2001,
126:274-279.
Hiroi T, Goto H, Someya K, Yanagita M, Honda M, Yamanaka N, Kiyono H: HIV mucosal vaccine: nasal immunization with rBCGV3J1 induces a long term V3J1peptide-specific neutralizing
immunity in Th1- and Th2-deficient conditions. J Immunol
2001, 167:5862-5867.
Rastogi N, McFadden J, Ottenhoff THM, van Eden W: First International Conference on the Pathogenesis of Mycobacterial
Infections: A summary. Clin Infect Dis 1992, 14:308-312.
Mustafa AS, Amoudy HA, Wiker HG, Abal AT, Ravn P, Oftung F,
Andersen P: Comparison of Antigen-Specific T-Cell
Responses of Tuberculosis Patients using Complex or Single
Antigens of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Scand J Immunol 1998,
48:535-543.
Ohara N, Yamada T: Recombinant BCG vaccines. Vaccine 2001,
19:4089-4098.
Collins DM: New tuberculosis vaccines based on attenuated
strains of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. Immunol
Cell Biol 2000, 78:342-348.
Pehler K, Brasky KM, Butler TM, Attanasio R: Mycobacterium
tuberculosis-secreted protein antigens: immunogenicity in
baboons. J Clin Immunol 2000, 20:306-316.
Freer G, Florio W, Dallacasa B, Castagna B, Maisetta G, Batoni G,
Corsini V, Senesi S, Campa M: Characterization of antigens recognized by new monoclonal antibodies raised against culture
filtrate proteins of Mycobacterium bovis bacillus CalmetteGuèrin. FEMS Immunology and Med Microbiol 1998, 20:129-138.
Harth G, Lee B-Y, Wang J, Clemens DL, Horwitz MA: Novel
Insights into the Genetics, Biochemistry, and Immunocytochemistry of the 30-Kilodalton Major Extracellular Protein
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infect Immun 1996, 64:3038-3047.
Moreira AL, Tsenova L, Aman MH, Bekker LG, Freeman S, Mangaliso
B, Schroder U, Jagirdar J, Rom WN, Tovey MG, et al.: Mycobacterial
antigens exacerbate disease manifestations in Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected mice. Infect Immun 2002,
70:2100-2107.
Weinrich Olsen A, van Pinxteren LA, Meng Okkels L, Birk Rasmussen
P, Andersen P: Protection of mice with a tuberculosis subunit
vaccine based on a fusion protein of antigen 85b and esat-6.
Infect Immun 2001, 69:2773-2778.
Wu-Hsieh BA, Chen CK, Chang JH, Lai SY, Wu CH, Cheng WC,
Andersen P, Doherty TM: Long-lived immune response to early
secretory antigenic target 6 in individuals who had recovered from tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 2001, 33:1336-1340.
Kamath AT, Feng CG, Macdonald M, Brioscole H, Brotton WJ: Differential protective Efficacy of DNA Vaccines Expressing
Secreted Proteins of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infect Immun
1999, 67:1702-1707.
Zhu X, Venkataprasad N, Thangaraj HS, Hill M, Singh M, Ivanyi J, Vordermeier HM: Function and Specificity of T Cells Following
Nucleic Acid Vaccination of Mice Against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis Infection. J Immunol 1997:5921-5926.
Morris S, Kelley C, Howard A, Li Z, Collins F: The immunogenicity
of single and combination DNA vaccines against
tuberculosis. Vaccine 2000, 18:2155-2163.
Tanghe A, Denis O, Lambrecht B, Motte V, van der Berg T, Huygen
K: Tuberculosis DNA Vaccine Encoding Ag85A Is Immunogenic and Protective When Administered by Intramuscular
Needle Injection but Not by Epidermal Gene Gun
Bombardment. Infect Immun 2000, 68:3854-3860.

Page 9 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials 2004, 3

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.
53.

54.
55.
56.

57.

58.

59.

60.
61.

62.

63.

64.
65.

Palendira U, Kamath AT, Feng CG, Martin E, Chaplin PJ, Triccas JA,
Britton WJ: Co expression of interleukin-12 chains by a selfsplicing vector increases the protective cellular immune
response of DNA and Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccines
against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infect Immun 2002,
70:1949-1956.
Post FA, Manca C, Neyrolles O, Ryffel B, Young DB, Kaplan G: Mycobacterium tuberculosis 19-kilodalton lipoprotein inhibits
Mycobacterium smegmatis-induced cytokine production by
human macrophages in vitro. Infect Immun 2001, 69:1433-1349.
Chambers MA, Williams A, Hatch G, Gavier-Widen D, Hall G, Huygen K, Lowrie D, Marsh PD, Hewinson RG: Vaccination of guinea
pigs with DNA encoding the mycobacterial antigen MPB83
influences pulmonary pathology but not haematogenous
spread following aerogenic infection with Mycobacterium
bovis. Infect Immun 2002, 70:2159-2165.
Turner OC, Roberts AD, Frank AA, Phalen SW, McMurray DMM,
Content J, Denis O, D'Souza S, Tanghe A, Huygen K, Orme IM: Lack
of Protection in Mice and Necrotizing Bronchointerstitial
Pneumonia with Bronchiolitis in Guinea Pigs Immunized
with Vaccines Directed against the hsp60 Molecule of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infect Immun 2000, 68:3674-3679.
Zhu X, Venkataprasad N, Ivanyi J, Vordermeier HM: Vaccination
with recombinant vaccinia viruses protects mice against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Immunology 1997, 92:6-9.
Delogu G, Li A, Repique C, Collins F, Morris SL: DNA vaccine combinations expressing either tissue plasminogen activator signal sequence fusion proteins or ubiquitin-conjugated
antigens induce sustained protective immunity in a mouse
model of pulmonary tuberculosis. Infect Immun 2002,
70:292-302.
McMurray DN: A coordinated strategy for evaluating new vaccines for human and animal tuberculosis. Tuberculosis 2001,
81:141-146.
Baulard A, Kremer L, Locht C: Efficient Homologous Recombination in Fast-Growing and Slow-Growing Mycobacteria. J
Bacteriol 1996, 178:3091-3098.
Jackson M, Phalen SW, Lagranderie M, Ensergueix D, Chavarot P,
Marchal G, McMurray DN, Gicquel B, Guilhot C: Persistence and
protective efficacy of a Mycobacterium tuberculosis auxotroph vaccine. Infect Immun 1999, 67:2867-2873.
Chambers MA, Williams A, Gavier-Widen D, Whelan A, Hall G,
Marsh PD, Bloom BR, Jacobs WR, Hewinson RG: Identification of
a Mycobacterium bovis BCG auxotrophic mutant that protects guinea pigs against M. bovis and haematogenous spread
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis without sensitization to
tuberculin. Infect Immun 2000, 68:7094-7099.
De Lisle GW, Wilson T, Collins DM, Buddle BM: Vaccination of
guinea pigs with nutritionally impaired avirulent mutants of
Mycobacterium bovis protects against tuberculosis. Infect
Immun 1999, 67:2624-2626.
Wards BJ, de Lisle GW, Collins DM: An esat6 knockout mutant
of Mycobacterium bovis produced by homologous recombination will contribute to the development of a live tuberculosis
vaccine. Tuber Lung Dis 2000, 80:185-189.
Gordon SV, Eiglmeier K, Garnier T, Brosch R, Parkhill J, Barrell B,
Cole ST, Hewinson RG: Genomics of Mycobacterium bovis.
Tuberculosis 2001, 81:157-163.
Spencer JS, Marques MAM, Lima MCBS, Junqueira-Kipnis AP, Gregory
BC, Truman RW, Brennan PJ: Antigenic Specificity of the Mycobacterium leprae Homologue of ESAT-6. Infect Immun 2002,
70:1010-1013.
Luo Y, Chen X, Han R, O'Donnell MA: Recombinant bacille Calmette-Guèrin (BCG) expressing human interferon-alpha 2B
demonstrates enhanced immunogenicity. Clin Exp Immunol
2001, 123:264-270.
Young S, O'Donell M, Lockhart E, Buddle B, Slobbe L, Luo Y, DeLisle
G, Buchan G: Manipulation of immune responses to Mycobacterium bovis by vaccination with IL-2- and IL-18-secreting
recombinant bacillus Calmette Guèrin. Immunol Cell Biol 2002,
80:209-215.
Hess J, Kaufmann SH: Development of live recombinant vaccine
candidates against tuberculosis. Scand J Infect Dis 2001,
33:723-734.
Horwitz MA, Harth G, Dillon BJ, Maslesa-Galic' S: Recombinant
bacillus Calmette-Guèrin (BCG) vaccines expressing the

http://www.ann-clinmicrob.com/content/3/1/10

66.

67.
68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis 30-kDa major secretory protein
induce greater protective immunity against tuberculosis
than conventional BCG vaccines in a highly susceptible animal model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000, 97:13853-13858.
Dannenberg AM, Bishai WR, Parrish N, Ruiz R, Johnson W, Zook BC,
Boles JW, Pitt LM: Efficacies of BCG and vole bacillus (Mycobacterium microti) vaccines in preventing clinically apparent
pulmonary tuberculosis in rabbits: a preliminary report. Vaccine 2000, 19:796-800.
Mielcarek N, Alonso S, Locht C: Nasal vaccination using live bacterial vectors. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001, 51:55-69.
Stanford JL, Stanford CA, Grange JM, Lan NN, Etemadi A: Does
immunotherapy with heat-killed Mycobacterium vaccae offer
hope for the treatment of multi-drug-resistant pulmonary
tuberculosis? Res Med 2001, 95:444-447.
Post FA, Manca C, Neyrolles O, Ryffel B, Yoong DB, Kaplan G: Mycobacterium tuberculosis 19-kilodalton lipoprotein inhibits
Mycobacterium smegmatis-induced cytokine production by
human macrophages in vitro. Infect Immun 2001, 69:1433-1439.
Yeremeev VV, Stewart GR, Neyrolles O, Skrabal K, Avdienko VG,
Apt AS, Young DB: Deletion of the 19 kDa antigen does not
alter the protective efficacy of BCG. Tuber Lung Dis 2000,
80:243-247.
Williams A, Davies A, Marsh PD, Chambers MA, Hewinson RG:
Comparison of the protective efficacy of bacille CalmetteGuèrin vaccination against aerosol challenge with Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Mycobacterium bovis. Clin Infect Dis 2000,
Suppl 3:S299-S301.
Corner LA, Buddle BM, Pfeiffer DU, Morris RS: Vaccination of the
brush tail possum (Trichosurus vulpecula) against Mycobacterium bovis infection with bacille Calmette-Guerin: the
response to multiple doses. Vet Microbiol 2002, 84:327-336.
Colditz GA, Berkey CS, Mosteller F, Brewer TF, Wilson ME, Burdick
E, Fineber HV: The efficacy of bacillus Calmette-Guèrin vaccination of newborns and infants in the prevention of tuberculosis: meta-analysis of the published literature. Pediatrics 1995,
96:29-35.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 10 of 10
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
