<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Origin of the cell nucleus, mitosis and sex: roles of intracellular coevolution</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010 5:7. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-7"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Thomas Cavalier-Smith"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

RESEARCH

Open Access

Origin of the cell nucleus, mitosis and sex:
roles of intracellular coevolution
Thomas Cavalier-Smith*

Abstract
Background: The transition from prokaryotes to eukaryotes was the most radical change in cell organisation since
life began, with the largest ever burst of gene duplication and novelty. According to the coevolutionary theory of
eukaryote origins, the fundamental innovations were the concerted origins of the endomembrane system and
cytoskeleton, subsequently recruited to form the cell nucleus and coevolving mitotic apparatus, with numerous
genetic eukaryotic novelties inevitable consequences of this compartmentation and novel DNA segregation
mechanism. Physical and mutational mechanisms of origin of the nucleus are seldom considered beyond the longstanding assumption that it involved wrapping pre-existing endomembranes around chromatin. Discussions on the
origin of sex typically overlook its association with protozoan entry into dormant walled cysts and the likely
simultaneous coevolutionary, not sequential, origin of mitosis and meiosis.
Results: I elucidate nuclear and mitotic coevolution, explaining the origins of dicer and small centromeric RNAs for
positionally controlling centromeric heterochromatin, and how 27 major features of the cell nucleus evolved in
four logical stages, making both mechanisms and selective advantages explicit: two initial stages (origin of 30 nm
chromatin fibres, enabling DNA compaction; and firmer attachment of endomembranes to heterochromatin)
protected DNA and nascent RNA from shearing by novel molecular motors mediating vesicle transport, division,
and cytoplasmic motility. Then octagonal nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) arguably evolved from COPII coated
vesicle proteins trapped in clumps by Ran GTPase-mediated cisternal fusion that generated the fenestrated nuclear
envelope, preventing lethal complete cisternal fusion, and allowing passive protein and RNA exchange. Finally,
plugging NPC lumens by an FG-nucleoporin meshwork and adopting karyopherins for nucleocytoplasmic
exchange conferred compartmentation advantages. These successive changes took place in naked growing cells,
probably as indirect consequences of the origin of phagotrophy. The first eukaryote had 1-2 cilia and also walled
resting cysts; I outline how encystation may have promoted the origin of meiotic sex. I also explain why many
alternative ideas are inadequate.
Conclusion: Nuclear pore complexes are evolutionary chimaeras of endomembrane- and mitosis-related
chromatin-associated proteins. The keys to understanding eukaryogenesis are a proper phylogenetic context and
understanding organelle coevolution: how innovations in one cell component caused repercussions on others.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Anthony Poole, Gáspár Jékely and Eugene Koonin.

Background
Cells are of only two fundamental kinds: bacteria (=prokaryotes; cells with DNA segregated by surface membrane motors) and eukaryotes (nucleated cells dividing
by mitosis) [1,2]. In bacteria the typically single and circular DNA chromosome is attached to the surface cytoplasmic membrane and segregated by protein motors
* Correspondence: tom.cavalier-smith@zoo.ox.ac.uk
Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1
3PS, UK

associated with that membrane, and ribosomes start
translating messenger RNA (mRNA) even during transcription. Eukaryote chromosomes are normally multiple
and linear and never attach directly to the surface
plasma membrane. Instead they are fixed to and surrounded by a specialised part of the endomembrane system (the nuclear envelope, NE) during interphase, the
part of the cell cycle when the cell grows, genes are
transcribed, and DNA replicated. During cell division,
by contrast, eukaryotic chromosomes are compacted,

© 2010 Cavalier-Smith; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

precluding transcription or replication, and attach by
their centromeres to microtubules of the mitotic spindle,
which moves them into daughter cells. The problem of
nuclear origins therefore requires understanding coevolution of about 27 cell components (Appendix 1) and
how they became functionally interlinked into the fundamentally novel eukaryotic life cycle [3-5], approximately 850 My ago, at least two billion years after
bacteria evolved [6]. Not only mitosis, but also sex, i.e.
meiosis and syngamy (cell and nuclear fusion), must
have evolved at the same time. This conclusion follows
irrespective of whether the eukaryote tree is between
unikonts (animals, fungi and three protozoan phyla) and
bikonts (plants, chromists and all other protozoan phyla
[7,8] or is instead between Euglenozoa and all other
eukaryotes as shown in Fig. 1 in line with recent arguments for the root lying within Eozoa (Euglenozoa plus
excavates), most likely between Euglenozoa and excavates sensu stricto [9]. Peroxisomes, mitochondria, centrioles, cilia, and Golgi dictyosomes must also have
originated prior to the last common ancestor of all
extant eukaryotes, whichever of these positions of the
root is correct [6]. This radical transformation of cell
structure (eukaryogenesis) is the most complex and
extensive case of quantum evolution in the history of
life [2,3,6]. Beforehand earth was a sexless, purely bacterial and viral world. Afterwards sexy, endoskeletal
eukaryotes evolved morphological complexity: diatoms,
butterflies, corals, whales, kelps, and trees.
Evolution of complex characters typically involves preadaptation, radical mutational innovation, and different
selective forces acting in succession [3,6,10]. Here I
paint an integrated picture of how the nucleus, sex, and
the eukaryotic cell cycle originated and congealed into a
novel, unified, and very conservative cellular lifestyle
during later stages of the conversion of a bacterium into
a eukaryote. In addition to establishing the phylogenetic
context (Fig. 1) there are three crucial problems for
understanding the origin of the nucleus [5]: (1) assembly
of endomembranes around chromatin (the DNA-histone
complex); (2) evolution of the nuclear pore complex
(NPC), which crucially allows a channel between nucleoplasm and cytoplasm; and (3) origin of centromeres and
mitotic spindle, without which nuclear chromosomes
cannot be stably inherited. As first argued 30 years ago
[11], origin of the cell nucleus cannot be understood in
isolation from other major innovations of the eukaryotic
cell; intracellular coevolution among different cell constituents that interact physically or that profoundly
affect selective forces acting on each other is the key to
understanding eukaryote origins [3,4]. Elements of the
present synthesis were presented then [11], e.g. that sex
began even before the nuclear envelope, i.e. in a prekaryote phase of evolution (see Fig. 1) and the dominant

Page 2 of 78

selective advantages. However, the phylogenetic context
has changed dramatically with our now much more
robust understanding of cell phylogeny (1) [3,7,8,12,13].
Moreover, genomics has enabled molecular origins of
many key eukaryotic constituents, including NPCs, to be
traced [14-17], whilst advances in molecular cell biology
tell us how nuclei actually assemble [18,19] and function. Building on these insights, I now propose the first
specific physical mechanism for evolving nuclear envelope architecture and explain its major genetic consequences and why other theories are inadequate.
As the field of eukaryogenesis has been confused by a
plethora of contradictory ideas, some not compatible
with established evidence, before presenting the novel
explanations I summarise two areas to put them in context: (1) the phylogenetic origin of the eukaryotic components, and (2) the origin of the endomembrane
system and cytoskeleton. I only outline the conclusions,
giving references for details, as most of the evidence and
arguments is not new, being already published. Because
the nature of molecular changes during major evolutionary transitions is more diversified and complex than
some molecular evolutionists have realised, I also preface my original explanations of the origin of the
nucleus with an outline of some basic but widely
neglected evolutionary principles that apply to all such
major innovations in body plan. This background is
rather long because the proper evolutionary context is
so important: the nucleus did not evolve on its own;
explanations of its origin make no sense without understanding the prior evolution of the endomembrane system of which its envelope is a specialised part.
Intracellular coevolution of about a 100 novel properties
is at the core of understanding eukaryogenesis.
Phylogenetic context for eukaryogenesis

Eukaryote cells are all evolutionary chimaeras of an
ancestrally phagotrophic host cell with nucleus, endomembranes, and endoskeleton [3] and an enslaved aproteobacterium converted into a mitochondrion close
to the time when the nucleus itself originated, i.e. prior
to divergence of any extant eukaryotic lineages (Fig. 1)
[20]. Contrary to some assumptions [17,21], the host for
that symbiogenesis was not an archaebacterium, but an
otherwise fully developed early eukaryote with NE and
cilium (a protoeukaryote) or else an intermediate stage
(prekaryote) that had already evolved rudiments of phagocytosis (the likely means of engulfing the a-proteobacterium) and internal membranes already
differentiated into a primitive ER and peroxisomes,
endoskeleton, centrosomes and mitosis (see [3,6,20,22]
for further explanation). Fig. 1 emphasizes the key
importance for early cell evolution of ancestral groups
like Posibacteria and Eobacteria that are necessarily

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Page 3 of 78

Figure 1 The tree of life and major steps in cell evolution. Archaebacteria are sisters to eukaryotes and, contrary to widespread assumptions,
the youngest bacterial phylum [6,13]. This tree topology, coupled with extensive losses of posibacterial properties by the ancestral
archaebacterium, explains (without lateral gene transfer) how eukaryotes possess a unique combination of properties now seen in
archaebacteria, posibacteria and a-proteobacteria. Eukaryote origins in three stages indicated by asterisks probably immediately followed
divergence of archaebacteria and eukaryote precursors from the ancestral neomuran. This ancestor arose from a stem actinobacterial
posibacterium by a quantum evolutionary shake-up of bacterial organization - the neomuran revolution [6,12]: surface N-linked glycoproteins
replaced murein; ribosomes evolved the signal recognition particle’s translational arrest domain; histones replaced DNA gyrase, radically
changing DNA replication, repair, and transcription enzymes. The eukaryote depicted is a hypothetical early stage after the origin of nucleus,
mitochondrion, cilium, and microtubular skeleton but before distinct anterior and posterior cilia and centriolar and ciliary transformation (anterior
cilium young, posterior old: [3]) evolved (probably in the cenancestral eukaryote [9]). Kingdom Chromista was recently expanded to include not
only the original groups Heterokonta, Cryptista and Haptophyta, but also Alveolata, Rhizaria and Heliozoa [9], making the name chromalveolates
now unnecessary. Excavata now exclude Euglenozoa and comprise just three phyla: the ancestrally aerobic Percolozoa and Loukozoa and the
ancestrally anaerobic Metamonada (e.g. Giardia, Trichomonas), which evolved from an aerobic Malawimonas-related loukozoan. Sterols and
phosphatidylinositol (PI) probably evolved in the ancestral stem actinobacterium but the ancestral hyperthermophilic archaebacterium lost them
when isoprenoid ethers replaced acyl ester lipids.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

paraphyletic (in contrast to derived holophyletic groups
like archaebacteria and actinobacteria), but which are
phylogenetically perfectly respectable, the ‘arguments’
against them being fundamentally flawed (see [23]).
Figure 1 differs from many widely discussed views of
the tree of life in three major respects: the position of
the root of the whole tree, the position of the eukaryotic
root, and in the idea that both archaebacteria and eukaryotes evolved from Posibacteria. Though these topics are
explained in detail in other papers, many readers may
not have assimilated the evidence therein that rather
strongly supports them, so I shall begin by outlining the
evidence for these interpretations and add a few novel
arguments and new evidence for them and explain the
flaws in alternative ideas on the rooting and topology of
the tree.
Clade neomura and its posibacterial origin

Archaebacteria are clearly related to the eukaryote host
(together forming a clade called neomura [4,12]). But
there is no sound evidence that archaebacteria are
directly ancestral to eukaryotes. Instead several arguments show they are their sisters [6,12,13]. Thus the
>20 features shared by both groups but absent from
eubacteria (e.g. N-linked glycoproteins, more complex
RNA polymerases, core histones) are not specifically
archaebacterial, but neomuran characters that evolved
in their common ancestor during the neomuran revolution [4,6,12,13]. Purely archaebacterial characters
(notably unique isoprenoid ether lipids and flagella)
evolved in the ancestral archaebacterium after it
diverged from the prekaryote lineage [12,13]. Moreover, genes shared by eukaryotes and eubacteria, but
not archaebacteria (e.g. MreB that became actin [3,6],
and eubacterial surface molecules that became NE
lamin B receptors [14], and enzymes making acyl ester
phospholipids), were probably lost by the ancestral
archaebacterium, which apparently underwent massive
gene loss during its secondary adaptation to hyperthermophily [12,13]. In addition to those earlier arguments,
the most comprehensive multigene analysis to date
convincingly places archaebacteria as a holophyletic
clade that is sister to eukaryotes, not ancestral to them
[24]. However, these authors confusingly refer to the
‘deep archaeal origin of eukaryotes’ despite their strong
evidence that all extant archaebacteria form a derived
clade not a paraphyletic ancestral group. The phrase
‘archaeal origin’ wrongly implies that the common
ancestor of eukaryotes and archaebacteria had the specific positive attributes of archaebacteria that distinguish them from both eukaryotes and eubacteria, of
which there are very few: notably the isoprenoid ether
lipids, archaeosine modified rRNAs, flagella, and duplicate versions of DNA polymerase B [25].

Page 4 of 78

It is unparsimonious to assume that such characters
were present in and then lost by the ancestors of eukaryotes. Though the replacement of archaebacterial lipids
by acyl ester lipids derived from the enslaved proteobacterial ancestor of mitochondria is a formal possibility
[26], it would be evolutionarily extremely onerous and
thus unlikely, and phylogeny gives no convincing reason
to assume it in the first place. Moreover, the hypothesis
of replacement by archaebacterial lipids by eubacterial
lipids from the a-proteobacterial symbiont totally fails
to explain the origin of phosphatidylinositol, which
played a key role in eukaryogenesis [27] and is present
in all the actinobacterial relatives of neomura but never
in archaebacteria or proteobacteria. Thus, it is far more
likely that both archaebacteria and eukaryotes evolved
from a common ancestor that was a prokaryote with
acyl ester lipids including phosphatidylinositol, but
which had not yet evolved either the specifically archaebacterial properties like isoprenoid ether lipids or any
eukaryotic properties.
Sterol evolution even more strongly refutes the idea
that eukaryotes evolved from archaebacteria and independently shows that neomura are most closely related
to actinobacteria. Sterols in actinobacteria and eukaryotes are synthesised from squalene, as are the hopanoids of eubacteria. In all posibacteria squalene is
produced from isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP), which is
also the precursor for the isoprenoid tails of archaebacterial lipids; in posibacteria, archaebacteria, and eukaryotes that never have plastids (which use instead the
cyanobacterial DOX isoprenoid pathway) IPP is generated by the mevalonate synthetic pathway, the enzymes
of which were clearly in place and inherited vertically
from the last common ancestor of Posibacteria and neomura [28,29]. As the enzymes that convert IPP into sterols are entirely absent from archaebacteria and mostly
absent from a-proteobacteria, this simultaneously
refutes the popular but totally erroneous ideas that
archaebacteria were directly ancestral to eukaryotes
[26,30,31] and that eukaryotes got sterols from the
enslaved mitochondrion [26,31-33]. Actinobacteria are
the only bacteria in which many genes needed for making sterols are phylogenetically widespread and of
ancient origin within the group. Sequence trees for four
major enzymes of sterol synthesis refute the idea that
any of these genes entered actinobacteria by lateral gene
transfer [34] and are totally consistent with the vertical
descent of sterol biosynthesis from an actinobacteriumlike posibacterium to the first eukaryote (and their loss
in the ancestral archaebacterium when replacement of
acyl esters by isoprenoid ethers provided an alternative
and superior means of making membranes more rigid).
Oddly, though recognising that their trees rule out lateral transfer from eukaryotes to actinobacteria,

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Desmond and Gribaldo [34] evade the obvious conclusion that Posibacteria were indeed ancestral to neomura
by postulating lateral transfer (LGT) of these genes from
a stem pre-eukaryotic lineage into actinobacteria, despite
there being no evidence whatever for that implausible
and unparsimonious scenario, which would require that
Actinobacteria are younger than pre-eukaryotes. The
first enzyme of sterol synthesis for squalene monooxygenation (making squalene epoxide) is so widespread in
actinobacteria that it must have been present in their
last common ancestor [34]; elsewhere in prokaryotes it
is known only from a few gamma and delta proteobacteria and one planctomycete (all members of the clade
Gracilicutes [13]); as the trees do not require any LGT
it probably evolved in the last common ancestor of Posibacteria and Gracilicutes after the prior divergence of
Cyanobacteria and the oxygenation of the atmosphere; it
is entirely absent from archaebacteria and a-proteobacteria. As sterol synthesis requires oxygen its loss by secondarily or facultatively anaerobic lineages is
unsurprising (the likelihood that the ancestral archaebacterium was largely anaerobic [12] is another reason
why it lost sterols).
The second enzyme of the sterol synthesis pathway,
oxidosqualene cyclase, catalyzing cyclisation of squalene
epoxide to make lanosterol and/or cycloartenol is even
more widespread in eubacteria, being present in both
posibacterial subphyla (Actinobacteria, Endobacteria) as
well as Proteobacteria (including even a-proteobacteria),
Planctobacteria, and Cyanobacteria, so probably evolved
even earlier before Cyanobacteria diverged from the
other groups, and was presumably never present in
Eobacteria and lost by Sphingobacteria, Spirochaetae,
and Archaebacteria. The tree suggests that one planctobacterium (Stigmatella) replaced its own enzyme by one
from eukaryotes, but gives no evidence for LGTs
amongst eubacteria, contrary to the authors assumption
[34]. Such replacement by LGT of one enzyme within a
pathway is mechanistically simple, but there is no evidence for LGT of the whole pathway at any time in the
history of life (by contrast symbiogenetic replacement by
whole cell enslavement did allow the mevalonate part of
the pathway to be replaced by that of cyanobacteria).
The third enzyme in the pathway that catalyses C14
demethylation of lanosterol is known only from the
order Actinomycetales (widespread) within Actinobacteria and from one delta and one gamma proteobacterium; as the tree does not support the idea of LGT, most
likely it evolved at the same time as the first enzyme but
was lost (or evolved beyond bioinformatic recognition)
more often. The enzyme DHCR24, which makes the
more complex sterols ergosterol and cholesterol, is present widely and phylogenetically deeply in Actinomycetales within Actinobacteria and is sister to its eukaryotic

Page 5 of 78

homologue [34] if the tree is rooted between them and
the b-proteobacterium Rhodoferax in accord with Fig. 1,
suggesting that this enzyme also originated at the same
time as enzymes one and three but was lost even more
often. Homologues were detected in only one other bacterium: Methylococcus; its sequence branches well within
opisthokonts and was therefore probably acquired by
LGT from an animal; however there is no evidence for
LGT for that gene provided one roots the tree correctly.
The simplest interpretation of the alternative lanosterol
and cycloartenol pathways in eukaryotes [35] is that the
first eukaryote inherited the posibacterial oxidosqualene
cyclase vertically and that it was mutationally modified
in plants at the time of origin of plastids and to make
cycloartenol preferentially and later transferred to other
eukaryotes by secondary symbiogenesis (i.e. to chromists
and photosynthetic euglenoids); the sequence tree [34]
is consistent with the rooting of eukaryotes within
Eozoa (Fig. 1) and refutes my old idea that the plant
enzyme came from the cyanobacterial ancestor of plastids [4].
Thus sterol and phosphatidylinositol evolution independently refute the idea that eukaryotes evolved from
archaebacteria and both strongly indicate that the closest relatives to neomura are actinobacteria (in agreement with a dozen other characters [12]). However, the
evolution of archaebacterial lipids and neomuran glycoproteins suggests that neomura may have evolved from
the other posibacterial subphylum, Endobacteria. Homologues of the glycosyl transferases that make N-linked
glycoproteins were detectable only in Endobacteria
among eubacteria [13] and geranylgeranylglyceryl phosphate synthase (GGGPS) the enzyme that attaches isoprenoid tails to sn-Glycerol-1-P to make the membrane
lipids of archaebacteria is known only from Endobacteria (specifically Bacillales) and the sphingobacterium
Cytophaga, making it likely that Endobacteria rather
than Actinobacteria were ancestral to neomura. This
evidence for an endobacterial origin of neomura can be
readily reconciled with the more extensive evidence for
their actinobacterial affinities by the posibacterial tree
topology of Fig. 1, where Endobacteria are shown as
ancestral to both neomura and their sister Actinobacteria. We need only postulate that the cenancestral actinobacterium lost glycosyl transferase and GGGPS after
it diverged from neomura and that phosphatidylinositol
evolved immediately prior to that bifurcation and was
lost only by archaebacteria (together with other acyl
esters). This topology also allows the extra 5’ Alu
domain of the neomuran signal recognition 7SL RNA to
have been inherited directly from Endobacteria [12],
making it unnecessary to postulate that the positionally
equivalent domain present in some Endobacteria (alone
among eubacteria) is convergent [13] - assuming that 5’

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

domain was lost in the ancestral actinobacterium. As
previously discussed [13], the other key enzyme for the
archaebacterial replacement of eubacterial lipids, sn-glycerol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase, which makes their
unique sn-glycerol-1-phosphate, almost certainly evolved
from a known posibacterial homologue (also present in
Thermotoga and Proteobacteria [28,29]). The idea that
archaebacterial lipids evolved independently of eubacterial biosynthetic pathways and the idea that their cells
evolved independently of eubacterial cells [36,37] are
both utter nonsense.
If actinobacteria are holophyletic (Fig. 1), there is also
no need to assume that any of the five unique proteins
of actinobacteria [38] or any of the actinobacterially
unique paralogues of more widespread proteins like the
iron uptake regulator Fur [39] were lost by the ancestor
of neomura. However, one would have to assume that
the most divergent actinobacterial branches had lost 20S
proteasomes, as they are restricted to Actinomycetales
[13]. Skophammer et al. [40] suggest that archaebacteria
plus Endobacteria are a clade because of two claimed
shared indels; however, it is evident that one gene pair
they considered are not really paralogues and the other
is self contradictory [41] so there is no convincing evidence against the topology shown in Figure 1. A quaternary structure argument for dihydroorotate
hydrogenase (PyrD) evolution [41] supports a common
ancestry for archaebacteria and Endobacteria; but that
does not mean that they alone form a clade, for we all
accept that the ancestral eukaryote was cladistically closer to Archaebacteria than Endobacteria, so it must have
lost the PyrD 1B paralogue; an additional loss by the
ancestral actinobacterium reconciles their argument
with Fig. 1. An indel argument to exclude the root of
the tree of life from Actinobacteria [42] actually
excludes it only from the orders Actinomycetales and
Bifidobacteriales, as their analysis included no DNA gyrase GyrA proteins from the three most deeply branching
orders. But that limitation of the argument does not
matter, as there was never any reason to think the root
was within Actinobacteria in the first place. My own
alignment indicates that the only available GyrA from
the deepest branching actinobacterium (Rubrobacter)
does not have the four amino acid insertion found in
other actinobacteria, suggesting that it evolved after the
first internal divergence, possibly substantially later
(incidentally the insertion region seems incorrectly
aligned in [42] and the gap should probably be moved
by five amino acids). One cannot use this indel to argue
against the topology or rooting of Fig. 1 because when
histones evolved in the neomuran ancestor DNA gyrase
was replaced by DNA topoisomerase VI [12], whose B
subunit probably evolved from GyrB, but whose A subunit is so radically different that they cannot be aligned

Page 6 of 78

with GyrA [43,44]. A eukaryote-specific topoisomerase
(IIA) probably also evolved from DNA gyrase by fusion
of GyrA and GyrB to make a chimaera also so different
from its eubacterial ancestors that one cannot apply the
indel argument to it. Given the ancestral neomuran
transformations of gyrase into novel topoisomerases, the
very few archaebacterial GyrAs that can be aligned with
those of eubacteria almost certainly entered archaebacteria by LGT from eubacteria [43], so the absence in
them of the higher actinobacterial 4-amino acid insertion [42] must not be used to argue against actinobacteria being sisters of neomura (Fig. 1).
The above arguments from eukaryote and archaebacterial lipid evolution strongly contradict (and are more
compelling than) a recent 53-gene analysis in which, in
contrast to standard phylogenetic methods that show
archaebacteria as holophyletic sisters of eukaryotes, a
theoretically superior heterogeneous method shows
archaebacteria as paraphyletic ancestors to eukaryotes
[45]. Several statistically strongly supported branches
within eukaryotes on that tree are topologically incorrect, so it cannot safely be concluded (as the authors
did) that the grouping of eukaryotes as sisters to crenarchaeotes alone is not also a phylogenetic reconstruction error - as I think is likely. The same problem
applies to their analyses of rRNA and 41 protein genes
[46]. Virtually all these genes underwent marked episodic accelerated evolution in the eukaryote stem, making
them so substantially different from those of archaebacteria that reconstructing the correct tree with confidence
is extremely difficult. None of these trees adequately test
my thesis about the sister relationship of neomura and
actinobacteria as no actinobacteria were included and
taxon sampling was generally too sparse to get the best
trees. Given that methods and datasets conflict and that
the topology within eukaryotes is suspect (and contradictorily different) in all the trees, even though it ought
to be easier to reconstruct, I do not share the authors’
hope that this type of analysis can establish the historical truth by itself unambiguously enough to be trusted.
Comparison of their overall tree with their eukaryotes
only tree shows that including the prokaryotic outgroups changes the topology within the eukaryotes and
misroots the eukaryote part of the tree. As the stem at
the base of neomura is even longer than the stem at the
base of eukaryotes it is likely to cause even worse problems of misrooting within the basal neomuran
branches. Therefore one can have no confidence in the
conclusion of this analysis. The difficulty of deciding by
even the best current sequence tree methods whether
archaebacteria are holophyletic or paraphyletic emphasizes two things: (1) we should give more weight to
other phylogenetic evidence for establishing the correct
phylogeny, as I and Lake [40,42,47-51] have, and (2) it is

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

very unlikely that archaebacteria can be several times as
old as eukaryotes, as the assumption that archaebacteria
are as old as eubacteria (e.g. [36]) would require given
the fossil evidence that eubacteria are at least 2.5 and
more likely 3-4 times older than eukaryotes [6]; if
archaebacteria were really 2.5-4× older than eukaryotes,
sequence trees should place eukaryotes clearly relatively
shallowly within one or other of the two archaebacterial
subphyla, which they never do. By far the most parsimonious interpretation of the overall evidence concerning
the topology and root of the tree of life is that the common ancestor of neomura was neither an archaebacterium nor a eubacterium (to label it as either is seriously
confusing), but a transitional intermediate between these
two major groups, which had eubacterial/eukaryotic type
lipids, but neomuran N-linked surface glycoproteins and
DNA-handling enzymes [3,4,12].
As this transitional ‘missing link’ arose somewhat earlier than eukaryotes themselves, during what I named
the ‘neomuran revolution’, the reader is referred to earlier discussions of this enabling revolution in cell structure, and of the compelling evidence from the fossil
record and transition analysis that eubacteria are paraphyletic and ancestral to neomura and very much older
[6,13]. These papers refute the unwarranted, widespread
assumption that the root of the tree of life is between
neomura and eubacteria (assumed for example by [52],
notwithstanding their mistaken assertion that their Fig
1. tree was ‘unrooted’). They detail why that is incorrect,
and why the root is within photosynthetic gram-negative
eubacteria (Negibacteria: Fig. 1, where ancestrally photosynthetic taxa are green or purple) [6,12,13]. The conclusion that the root of the bacterial tree is within
Negibacteria has been questioned on the basis of indel
distributions [40,42,47-51], but Valas and Bourne [41]
have re-examined these indels critically in the light of
protein three dimensional structure and show that the
supposed contradictions to my thesis cannot be substantiated and that a root of the tree within Negibacteria,
specifically beside or within Chlorobacteria, remains the
best interpretation for rooting the tree of life.
As eubacteria are the basal, most ancient group of
cells from which neomura evolved, far more genes than
often supposed were inherited by the ancestral prekaryote vertically from the eubacterial ancestor of neomura
and were already present before mitochondria and
nuclei evolved. The absence of numerous eukaryotic
gene homologues in archaebacteria, and their presence
in many eubacteria, is often used to suggest that they
were acquired from the enslaved a-proteobacterium or
by independent lateral gene transfer (LGT) [17]. However, that conclusion is probably wrong, being based on
dubious assumptions: that LGT is easier than multiple
gene losses; that the host was an archaebacterium not a

Page 7 of 78

prekaryote derived from the neomuran ancestor. The
eubacterial ancestor of neomura could not have been a
negibacterium with two bounding membranes, but was
a posibacterium with a single surface membrane, like
neomura; probably a stem actinobacterium, i.e. an early
intermediate between Endobacteria and crown Actinobacteria [4,6,12,13]. As such, it was probably extremely
gene-rich. Thus archaebacteria are probably secondarily
simplified, their ancestor having lost many hundreds of
eubacterial genes during its novel adaptation to
hyperthermophily after its divergence from the eukaryote ancestor, e.g. the loss of most genes for aerobic
metabolism, including the cytochrome P450s that were
precursors of ER respiration, which probably was not
derived from the proteobacterial symbiont (see [22] for
discussion of the likely gene numbers of the putative
intermediates and of the relative contributions of the
two major gene donors in eukaryogenesis, which corrects some widespread misconceptions). Like mycoplasmas, archaebacteria are highly derived and specialised,
not primitive, bacteria. By contrast their large-celled
aerobic sister group, the prekaryote lineage became far
more genetically complex through the greatest burst of
gene (and probably genome) duplication in the history
of life. By the time the nucleus began to evolve, members of this lineage had ceased to be bacteria, having
already evolved ER and rudimentary endoskeleton [6,12].
The eozoan root of the eukaryote tree between
Euglenozoa and neokaryotes

Just as one must work upwards from bacteria to eukaryotes with a reliable phylogeny rooted in cellular and
palaeontological reality, not unfounded speculation, so
one must work downwards systematically from the
known diversity of eukaryotes to infer the nature of
their last common ancestor. Only when both inferences
are sound can we hope to explain the transition from
prokaryote to eukaryote realistically. Past reasoning has
been hampered by the root of the eukaryote tree also
often being misplaced. Though not as inherently difficult as rooting the whole tree of life, correcting these
errors has not been easy. We can now rule out the earlier idea that any premitochondrial lineage of eukaryotes
survives as there is good evidence that all extant lineages
have relics of a mitochondrion [53]; thus the root of the
tree cannot lie within the secondarily anaerobic excavate
phylum Metamonada that includes Giardia and Trichomonas, as was often supposed in the past, and must lie
amongst ancestrally aerobic protozoan phyla. That the
double-membrane mitosomes of Giardia indeed evolved
from mitochondria and did not evolve separately from
a-proteobacteria (as some have speculated) is shown by
the presence of Tom40 [54], the outer-membrane protein that in all mitochondria of neokaryotes (i.e. all

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

eukaryotes except the early diverging Euglenozoa [9])
mediates protein import into the mitochondrion from
the cytosol.
A few years ago evidence suggested that the eukaryotic root lies between two major groups differing radically
in cytoskeletal and ciliary organization: unikonts and
bikonts [3,7,8]. Unikonts, comprising animals, fungi,
Choanozoa, and Amoebozoa, were postulated ancestrally
to have had one cilium and centriole and interphase
microtubular cytoskeleton in the form of a cone of single microtubules emanating from the centriole, like a
half-spindle [3]. Bikonts, comprising the plant and chromist kingdoms plus 10 protozoan phyla that form four
clades (alveolates, excavates, Rhizaria, Apusozoa), ancestrally had an asymmetric cortical skeleton of bands of
multiple microtubules forming the roots of two dissimilar cilia and centrioles [3]. However, it now seems that
that interpretation was mistaken [9]. One argument for
this bifurcation being fundamental was based on a misinterpretation of ciliary and centriolar development of
the unikont slime mould Physarum that suggested that
these were fundamentally different in the unikont
Amoebozoa from the prevailing pattern in bikonts, but
the discovery of an overlooked correction to the earlier
interpretation now makes it likely that most, possibly
all, eukaryotes share fundamentally the same pattern of
cilia transformation and evolved from an early ancestor
that had already evolved two centrioles and ciliary and
the widespread pattern of ciliary transformation from a
younger to an older cilium [55]. Recent evidence that
the biciliate gliding Apusozoa are phylogenetically
within unikonts (apusomonads at least probably being
sisters to opisthokonts [9,56]) makes it likely that the
simple cytoskeletal patterns of Amoebozoa and opisthokonts are secondarily derived following the independent
loss respectively of the posterior and anterior cilium. A
second argument based on a derived fusion gene against
the root being within bikonts [8,57] is also now invalidated by the growing evidence that apusomonads, which
have that fusion gene [57], belong within unikonts as
sisters to opisthokonts [56].
Another favoured position for the position of the root
was within the excavates beside the jakobid flagellates
because of the primitive nature of their mitochondrial
genome [58]. However, stronger arguments stem from
the numerous distinctive features of Euglenozoa, which
are most simply explained if the root is between Euglenozoa and excavates [9] as shown in Figure 1. Two
euglenozoan characters in particular, the absence of
mitochondrial import protein Tom40 and of the DNA
replication preinitiation ‘origin recognition complex’
(ORC), both of which are likely to be ancestral characters of the most primitive eukaryotes rather than secondarily derived simplifications [9]. Previously Tom40 and

Page 8 of 78

ORC were assumed to have originated in the ancestral
eukaryote; I now think it more likely that both arose
somewhat later in the common ancestor of all eukaryotes other than eukaryotes (collectively called neokaryotes to contrast them with the very different
Euglenozoa [9]). It seems possible that RNA polymerase
II transcription factors IIA, F, and H also originated
only in the ancestral neokaryote not the first eukaryote,
which are absent from trypanosomatid genomes, unless
they were lost by Euglenozoa when their cenancestor
replaced the original neomuran transcriptional regulation by posttranscriptional gene regulation [59].
We can confidently eliminate most other formally
possible positions of the eukaryotic root, and infer
with high confidence that the last common ancestor of
all eukaryotes was a phagotrophic protozoan with
nucleus, at least one centriole and cilium, facultatively
aerobic mitochondria, sex (meiosis and syngamy) and
dormant cyst with cell wall of chitin and/or cellulose,
and peroxisomes (Fig. 2); these conclusions all follow
whether the root is beside the jakobids or the Euglenozoa. This last ancestor was probably non-photosynthetic, unless cyanobacteria enslaved chloroplasts
simultaneously with mitochondria, as has sometimes
been proposed [60] but which is unlikely if the root is
beside or within Euglenozoa or excavates. Importantly
for the present paper, the eukaryotic cenancestor (last
common ancestor) already had a highly developed
nuclear envelope with complex NPCs with all proteins
shared by animals, plants, and Euglenozoa and at least
eight different karyopherins to mediate nucleocytoplasmic exchange. Those NPC proteins apparently missing
in the parasites Giardia and Plasmodium [14,17] have
either diverged sharply beyond recognition (most
likely) or been lost, and do not represent a simpler primitive state as some suggest [17]. This is certainly so
for Plasmodium, which diverged from plants after the
origin of red algae, whose plastid their ancestor
enslaved (given chromalveolate monophyly: [61,62]).
However, if the root is indeed between Euglenozoa and
the rest of eukaryotes, at least some of those apparently absent from the trypanosomatid Leishmania [17]
might be genuinely, primitively and universally missing
from Euglenozoa. The last common ancestor of all
eukaryotes (cenancestor) was almost certainly sexual
and probably haploid, undergoing syngamy prior to
encystment, and meiosis during cyst germination
(excystment), but further study of ploidy in early diverging lineages is needed to test this [3,63]. Though most
euglenoids have been considered to be asexual (Scytomonas is the only one with proven syngamy, but even
for it meiosis has not been seen), evidence for relatively normal sexual mechanisms is growing for the
euglenozoan Trypanosoma brucei [64,65].

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Page 9 of 78

Figure 2 Inferred life cycle and high degree of organellar complexity of the last common ancestor of all extant eukaryotes. This
reconstruction assumes that the root of the eukaryotic tree is between Euglenozoa and excavates [7,8]. If so, every homologous character
present on both sides of the neokaryote/euglenozoan split must have evolved prior to the cenancestor, provided that its later lateral gene
transfer from one to the other can be ruled out, as it can for the complex characters shown. The major uncertainty is whether there were only
one centriole and cilium as shown or more likely two of each [9]. In addition to the pellicular microtubules there would also have been
centriolar roots consisting of bands of microtubules (probably two if the ancestor was uniciliate and three if biciliate) and a specialized anterior
cytostome and cytopharynx for prey ingestion (all not shown for simplicity). The peroxisome (p) was probably attached to the nucleus and the
Golgi was probably attached to a centrin body; centrin would also have been associated with the centriole and intranuclearly at mitotic spindle
poles. The mitochondrion (m) was probably actually attached to the centriole and/or nucleus. A branched actin cytoskeleton permeating the
cytoplasm was linked to nuclear envelope (NE) via KASH/Sun integral membrane protein complexes and to the plasma membrane via
membrane-embedded integrin proteins. Syngamy involved fusion of plasma membrane, NE, and probably mitochondria.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

This rerooting of the tree is important for thinking
about the origin of eukaryotes, as it means that several
characters often assumed to be general for eukaryotes
and to have evolved in the first eukaryote actually
evolved later, e.g. in the ancestor of neokaryotes or neozoa. Thus it now seems that eukaryotic N-linked glycoproteins were probably initially somewhat simpler than
in animals and plants. If other Euglenozoa resemble trypanosomatids in lacking glucose termini in the glycosyl
group that is added to proteins cotranslationally in the
RER [66], then the enzyme making dolichol-phosphateglucose the donor in neokaryotes for adding three extra
residues may have evolved only in the ancestral eozoan,
not the first eukaryote; probably quality control over
glycoproteins was also simpler as they lack two of the
four enzymes that Neozoa use to digest faulty ones
(Mannosidase I and peptide-N-glycanase) [67].
Unless the root of the eukaryote tree were within
Euglenozoa between the euglenoid Scytomonas, which
(possibly primitively) has only a single centriole and
cilium [68], and all other Euglenozoa that ancestrally
had two (a possibility that cannot currently be
excluded), then the last common ancestor of eukaryotes
almost certainly had two centrioles and cilia per daughter cell. Centrioles would probably have been duplicated
at the beginning of S-phase and the two parental centrioles would have separated prior to division, each associated with one new daughter centriole, as in all well
studied ciliated eukaryotes. As the closest group to
Euglenozoa on unrooted trees is the excavate phylum
Percolozoa (Heterolobosea and their relatives) [69], if
the root is between Euglenozoa and excavates, the earliest branching excavates would have been the discicristate phylum Percolozoa. This is important for
understanding the origin of mitosis, as both Percolozoa
and Euglenozoa have intranuclear mitosis with an intact
nuclear envelope and a nucleolus that divides, very
unlike the open mitosis of animals and plants where the
nucleolus and nuclear envelope both disperse prior to
metaphase. This probable root position between Euglenozoa and Percolozoa means also that in the ancestral
eukaryote (as in both these phyla) the centrioles will not
have been be directly at spindle poles but were indirectly attached to them by a cytoplasmic fibrillar cytoskeleton. Moreover, as neither phylum was ancestrally
amoeboid, their common ancestor would have had a
well developed semi-rigid cell cortex supported by longitudinal cortical microtubules; thus both mitosis and cell
division probably evolved in a cell with semi-rigid surface, this rigidity probably stabilising the earliest eukaryotes and allowing fairly accurate DNA segregation
following the loss of the eubacterial cell wall; as previously argued [70] the widespread assumption that the
earliest eukaryotes were soft-surfaced amoebae is

Page 10 of 78

probably a myth; such formless intermediates would
have exacerbated the problems of maintaining efficient
DNA segregation during eukaryogenesis when the bacterial connection of chromosomal DNA to the cell surface and rigid wall was lost.
Geometric order is essential for DNA and organelle
segregation. The important point for this paper is that
the eukaryotic cenancestor had at least one centriole
and cilium in daughter cells (possibly two) and at least
two centrioles (possibly four) in predivision cells, probably attached to the nucleus during interphase to form a
karyomastigont complex. Probably the cortical microtubular skeleton that persists during the whole cell cycle
and is divided amongst daughters, with new elements
being inserted into each, coevolved with the purely temporary mitotic spindle; the origin of the first protozoan
pellicle is important for understanding eukaryogenesis
as is discussed below. Furthermore, the cenancestral
eukaryote had already evolved the coupling of centriole
duplication to the onset of DNA replication at the
beginning of S-phase [71-76], and had fully eukaryotic
cell cycle controls [77] based on cell cycle kinases, phosphatases, and proteases, plus cyclin-mediated anaphase
proteolytic resetting of hundred of proteins, as well as
growth control over the G1 to S transition and post Sphase involvement of ε-tubulin in centriole duplication
[78]. This temporal ordering is as important as geometric order for accurate cell reproduction. All these
novelties were evolving simultaneously during the prokaryote-eukaryote transition, effectively at the same time
as the nucleus, our main subject.
Symbiogenesis: an accessory to eukaryogenesis,
not the primary instigator

Although symbiogenesis explains the origin of mitochondria, Mereschkowsky’s theory of a symbiotic origin of the
nucleus [79], and recent attempts to modernize it, are all
decisively refuted by the NE being three subdomains of
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (to say it is ‘connected
to’ ER [17] is wrong; it is ER, invariably having ribosomes
on its outer surface); analogies with mitochondria or bacteria are extremely naïve [80]. The really distinctive steps
in eukaryogenesis - all much more radical than the helotic origin of mitochondria - were the integrated origins of
phagocytosis, endomembranes, endoskeleton, mitosis,
nuclei, centrioles, cilia, cell cycle controls, meiosis, and
syngamy [3,4,11]. As stressed above, these arguably
evolved by the rapid autogenous structural transformation of a bacterial cell through entirely novel selective
forces and drastic intracellular structural transformations
caused by the onset of phagotrophy [3,4]. Although mitochondrial symbiogenesis involved transfer of many aproteobacterial genes to the nucleus, whose proteins
were often (not always) retargeted to the mitochondrion

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

[20], these genes were probably inessential for any nonmitochondrial major innovations, except for supplying in
some transferred genes group II self-splicing introns that
evolved into spliceosomal introns and RNAs [3,81]. It is
important to realise that the mitochondrion itself is an
evolutionary chimaera with many key proteins of host
origin being imported, e.g. the inner membrane carrier
proteins [20]. Recent trees indicate that the inner membrane proteins Oxa1 (which inserts respiratory chain proteins from the mitochondrial matrix) and Oxa2 (which
assembles cytochrome oxidase) evolved in the ancestral
eukaryote by duplication from the host’s YidC gene,
rather than from the a-proteobacterial YidC (as crenarchaeotes lack YidC they cannot have been ancestral to
eukaryotes) [82]. On the YidC tree [82] neomuran
sequences are a clade (with archaebacteria and eukaryotes sisters) that branches between Endobacteria and
Actinobacteria and there is a clear bipartition between
the neomuran/posibacterial sequences and those of negibacteria plus chloroplasts, consistently with Fig. 1.
Chloroplast symbiogenesis was probably after the unikont/corticate split (Fig. 1), shortly followed by secondary enslavement of a red alga to yield chromalveolates
[83]; both major photosynthetic symbiogeneses replaced
host fatty acid and other enzymes, but did not significantly affect basic nuclear properties, except that in
chromists among chromalveolates membrane fusion
placed the enslaved red alga within the perinuclear cisterna [61]. In contrast to mitochondria the AlbC protein
that inserts proteins from the stroma into the thylakoids
probably evolved from the cyanobacterial YidC, the host
YidC being unavailable by then for such co-option as it
had already been modified for mitochondrial function as
Oxa1 and 2; its weakly supported failure to group with
cyanobacterial rather than other negibacterial sequences
is probably artifactual [82]. But even chloroplasts are
chimaeric having inner membrane carriers of host origin, and having like mitochondria had their original
outer membrane lipopolysaccharides replaced by host
phosphatidylcholine.
An important, insufficiently appreciated, feature of
symbiogenesis is that it supplied several novel genetic
membranes to the eukaryotic cell. In many ways addition of genetic membranes was more important than
that of DNA, genes or genomes, because without them
genes for oxidative phosphorylation would be useless.
Lateral gene transfer had enabled foreign genes to be
acquired by bacteria since life began, but for 3.5 Gy
never succeeded in transferring oxygenic photosynthesis
from one bacterium to another. In free-living prokaryotes cell lineages have been strictly vertical throughout
history. By acquiring phagotrophy, eukaryotes could
acquire whole cells and novel genetic membranes as
well as genomes, not just genes from other organisms,

Page 11 of 78

so the inheritance of membranes has rarely been horizontal among unrelated taxa. Of course, sex also
involves the horizontal transfer of membranes as well as
genes. Membrane heredity is at least as old as DNA heredity - probably older [84] - and just as important for
understanding cell evolution [20,62,84-88]. All membranes have been inherited from those of the first cell
and the origins of novel mechanisms of protein targeting into and across membranes is central to eukaryogenesis, which involved a marked increase in the number of
genetic membranes, some initiated in association with
and enabling (not caused by) foreign cell enslavement
[85] and some not, i.e. being purely autogenous.
Coevolutionary origin of the endomembrane system and
cytoskeleton

The endomembrane system and cytoskeleton are coadapted and interact in numerous ways. Branching networks of actin attach to plasma membrane,
endomembranes and organelles by specific protein links.
The endomembrane system fundamentally depends on
coat-mediated budding of vesicles from one compartment, uncoating, and fusion of smooth vesicles with target compartments. Both budding and fusion are
mediated by suites of mechanical effectors, targeting
specificity factors, and controlling proteins among which
GTPases play a major role. Vesicles are transported
along the cytoskeleton by molecular motors absent in
bacteria: myosins for actin filaments, dyneins and kinesins for microtubules. Probably three different functionally specialised myosins were present in the cenancestral
eukaryote [7] (this estimate is not changed by recent
rerooting the tree [9], though one must now regard the
addition of the most widespread tail domains to two of
them as neokaryote synapomorphies only, not shared by
the earlier diverging Euglenozoa). They evolved during
eukaryogenesis by successive gene duplications after
their common ancestor became the first myosin by the
radical transformation of a former bacterial GTPase by a
shift in nucleotide specificity to ATP [89] and various
domain fusions [90] to make a complex motor. Likewise
the cenancestral eukaryote probably had 11 different
heavy chain kinesins [91], with multiple roles in mitosis,
ciliary motility and vesicle transport, including interactions with dynein (note that the recent rooting of the
tree between Euglenozoa and neokaryotes [9] reduces
the previously estimated number in the cenancestral
eukaryote because one can now treat kinesins 4-8 and
15 as having evolved later in the ancestral neokaryote
only; the rerooting also invalidates the earlier suggestion
that kinesin-17 is a synapomorphy for bikonts [91];
instead it probably originated in the ancestral eukaryote
and was lost by the ancestral unikont, as it was independently several times within Plantae and Chromista).

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Kinesins and myosins are structurally related ATPases,
probably having a common origin in the prekaryote by a
primary gene duplication. Dynein motors are related not
to them but to midasin and arose independently from a
bacterial ATPase [92]. Duplications produced nine different heavy chain dyneins in the cenancestor [93], most
involved in ciliary motility [94].
When I proposed that the origin of actin for a role in
phagocytosis was the primary molecular invention that
triggered eukaryogenesis [11] it was not even known
that actin and myosin were thus involved. Since then a
universal role has become apparent for actin and myosin, not only in phagocytosis but in other forms of
endocytosis retained even by eukaryotes like yeast,
whose ancestors abandoned phagotrophy [95-99]. Thus,
an intimate association of actomyosin with endocytosis
in all its forms and with endomembrane vesicle trafficking is central for eukaryote cells. Actin is a key player in
endomembrane biology and not just involved in general
cell motility and cytoplasmic division. It originated from
the bacterial membrane skeleton protein MreB, which
like actin helps mediate both cell shape and division
[100-105]. Prekaryote gene duplications produced not
only actin, but actin related proteins (Arps) that nucleate actin filaments, Arp2/3 being essential for branching
to make a 3D skeletal network for the first time and for
endocytosis. Similarly, six tubulins (a, b for microtubules, g-tubulin for centrosomal nucleation, and δ, ε, h
for centrioles) must have arisen prior to the cenancestor
by gene duplications of a relative of FtsZ, the filamentous bacterial GTPase which dates back to the last common ancestor of all life and is the general marker for
the site of bacterial division (despite being secondarily
lost by the ancestor of many crenarchaeotes and also
within Planctobacteria).
Novel proteins and eukaryogenesis

Thus prior to the origins of the nucleus and mitochondrion the prekaryote underwent massive gene duplications that created characteristic eukaryote structures
[106]; notably of small GTPases involved in vesicle budding or fusion [107]; of actin, tubulins, and molecular
motors; of proteins of the proteasome making this
digestive cylinder immensely more complex than in bacteria because of the novel ubiquitin-linked proteolytic
controls over the cell cycle and removal of faulty ER
lumen proteins by the ERAD system [108]; and - of special significance for the origin of the nucleus - coated
vesicle proteins (e.g. COPII, COPI, clathrin). These gene
duplications, and origins of novel protein domains (the
most extensive since cells began) [6], had a key role in
eukaryogenesis, the central logic of which is summarized
in Fig. 3 in six major stages. (a). Ancestrally an FtsZ ring
between daughter DNA termini (T) divided bacteria,

Page 12 of 78

their shape being controlled by cortical skeletal MreB
(blue) and rigid murein wall (brown). (b). The origin of
phagotrophy then disrupted this. In the neomuran
ancestor flexible glycoproteins (yellow) replaced murein,
allowing MreB in the ancestor of eukaryotes to become
actin (blue) and power phagocytosis, which internalised
DNA-membrane attachments (centre); soon thereafter
evolution of COP-coated vesicle budding, and fusion
with plasma membrane after uncoating, made permanent endomembranes (EM: precursor of ER, NE, Golgi,
lysosomes; peroxisomes (P) separated earlier) and disrupted bacterial DNA segregation. (c). Hypothetical origin of simple mitosis in a prekaryote cell where FtsZ
gene duplications evolved stable microtubules and gtubulin-containing centromeres (probably also containing centrin) still attached to the surface membrane.
Centrosome binding to the chromosome origin and
microtubule attachment parallel to the cell membrane
throughout the cell cycle prevented phagocytosis in that
region (upper) and thus avoided chromosome internalization as in b but allowed it elsewhere (e.g. lower example shown). Actin and myosin that originally evolved for
phagocytosis were recruited to form a contractile ring
for cytokinesis, replacing the lost function of FtsZ. Probably they were thus recruited before FtsZ duplicated to
a-, b- and g-tubulin and the prime function of microtubules was to prevent actomyosin dividing the cell before
replication finished or internalising the chromosome
attachment sites. This stabilising function would be less
demanding for the initial origin of microtubules and
centrosomes than many more complex later ones. Kinesin (a myosin relative) may have evolved by gene duplication and divergence from myosin at this stage to push
apart the antiparallel microtubules attached to the
daughter centrosomes, only then would slight microtubule shortening allow the actomyosin ring to cleave the
cell. This phagotrophic prekaryote I, with both kinesin
and myosin motors that could segregate its DNA and
divide the cell, had a centrosome duplication cycle, but
no nuclear envelope and perhaps not yet even permanent endomembranes. (d). Accidents in centrosome
duplication and phagotrophic membrane internalisation
generated a more complex prekaryote II in which stable
endomembranes differentiated into peroxisomes (P) and
protoendomembranes (EM, i.e. the ancestors of ER and
Golgi; see [27]), some of the latter remaining associated
with the internalised centrosome and DNA, whereas
another centrosome remained at the cell surface and
continued to stabilise it and control the site of cytokinesis by the actin ring. Ultimately the surface centrosome
generated the pellicular microtubules and the centriolar
and ciliary microtubules of the cenancestral eukaryote,
whereas the ER-associated MNC nucleated its intranuclear spindle. (e). The first eukaryote. EM attachments

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Page 13 of 78

Figure 3 Evolution of eukaryotes from a posibacterium, emphasizing changes in DNA segregation caused by internalization of DNAmembrane attachments. (a). An FtsZ ring between daughter DNA termini (T) divides bacteria; cortical skeletal MreB (blue) and rigid murein
wall (brown) control cell shape. (b). Disruptive effects of phagotrophy. Left: flexible glycoproteins (yellow) replaced murein, allowing MreB to
become actin (blue) and power phagocytosis, which internalised DNA-membrane attachments (centre); evolution of COP-coated vesicle budding,
and fusion with plasma membrane after uncoating, made permanent endomembranes (EM: precursor of ER, NE, Golgi, lysosomes; peroxisomes
(P) separated earlier) and disrupted bacterial DNA segregation. (c). Hypothetical origin of simple mitosis in a prekaryote where FtsZ gene
duplications evolved stable microtubules and g-tubulin-containing centromeres still attached to the surface membrane. (d). Accidents in
centrosome duplication and phagotrophic membrane internalisation generated a more complex prekaryote II in which stable endomembranes
differentiated into peroxisomes (P) and protoendomembranes (EM, i.e. the ancestors of ER and Golgi; see [27]), some associated with the
internalised centrosome and DNA; another centrosome remained at the cell surface stabilising it; the actin ring controlled the site of cytokinesis.
Ultimately the surface centrosome generated pellicular microtubules and centriolar and ciliary microtubules of the cenancestral eukaryote; the
ER-associated MNC nucleated its intranuclear spindle. (e). The first eukaryote. (f). Adding NPCs, mitochondria, and cilium, and nuclear
chromosome linearization and kinetochore evolution, made the cenancestral eukaryote, shown in G1 of the cell cycle; bacterial ingestion was via
a specialised microtubule-supported pocket-like cytostome (CY) at the apical ciliary end, making the cell asymmetric.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

around DNA made a primitive NE, and connectors
(brown, possibly containing centrin) evolved to ensure
that both nuclear and cytoplasmic organelles were properly segregated at division, which was constrained to be
between sister cytoplasmic centrosomes and their
attached pellicular microtubules. The Golgi apparatus
(G) was probably by then differentiated from the ER and
attached to the centrosome.
At some stage between (e) and (f) dynein motors
evolved to move cargo along microtubules to their
minus end (i.e. towards MNCs where g-tubulin resides).
Perhaps initially for moving cytoplasmic vesicles along
microtubules (tiny open circles in f, moved by kinesin in
the other direction and by myosin along actin filaments), dynein was recruited for sliding ciliary microtubules and (perhaps almost simultaneously) to drive
kinetochores on spindle microtubules towards the poles,
probably improving segregation, but the origins of kinetochore motility is not discussed here as much of what
is known about neokaryote centromeres and kinetochores, mainly based on opisthokonts only [109], may
not apply to Euglenozoa or the cenancestral eukaryote.
Logically it had to follow the prior evolution of kinesindriven centrosome separation. Euglenoids, unlike other
Euglenozoa, do not exhibit significant anaphase shortening of kinetochore spindle fibres, segregation being largely by centrosome separation and without a
prometaphase chromosome movement to form a metaphase equatorial arrangement [110]; the possibility exists
that both were also true for the ancestral eukaryote
mitosis. Adding NPCs, mitochondria, and cilium (whose
basal centriole [=basal body] differentiated following
further duplication of the cytoplasmic centrosome and
of extra tubulins), and nuclear chromosome linearization
and kinetochore evolution, made the cenancestral eukaryote, shown in Fig. 3f in G1 of the cell cycle; a transient
intranuclear spindle will develop after the intranuclear
centrosome duplicates. The pellicular microtubules prevented phagocytosis over most of the cell surface, so
bacterial ingestion was via a specialised microtubulesupported pocket-like cytostome (CY) at the apical ciliary end, which made the cell asymmetric. The mitochondrion was probably attached to the centriole as in
kinetoplastid Euglenozoa (orange linker on Fig. 3f), the
peroxisome to the nucleus, the Golgi to a centrin-containing body that positioned it near the nucleus and
centriole, and the centriole to the cell membrane by the
transitional fibres and to many internal structures via
two bands of root microtubules (a second centriole and
cilium with another microtubular root is not shown in
Fig. 3f but would also have been present in the cenancestor unless the eukaryotic root is between Scytomonas
and other euglenoids [see 9 for discussion of the latter
possibility]).

Page 14 of 78

Coated vesicles were crucial: origin of COPII-coated
vesicles budding from the primitive endomembranes
physically generated from the surface membrane by phagocytosis helped make endomembranes permanent [3].
By fusing with the cell surface after uncoating the first
coated vesicles allowed it to grow despite selectively
excluding ribosome receptors and DNA-attachment proteins, which caused secretory ribosomes and DNA to
remain on the endomembranes, thus creating protorough ER/NE [3]. I shall not enumerate all the vesicle
coat proteins, SNARE targeting/fusion factors and small
GTPases that also must have arisen at this time by gene
duplication from bacterial ancestors to generate novel
superfamily after superfamily of specifically eukaryotic
proteins. Jékely [111] critically reviewed ideas about
endomembrane origins and concluded that the autogenous explanation is probably correct and symbiotic
models are highly implausible and of little or no explanatory value. I will simply emphasise that this was the
largest burst of gene duplication in the history of life,
affecting almost every feature of the cell except basic
metabolism and bioenergetics (Fig. 3), and now clarify
the general character of this innovation and its causes.
Functional shifts, quantum evolution, and the origins of
molecular novelty

Molecules like FtsZ, MreB and the ATPase and GTPase
ancestors of eukaryotic motors originated in the first
bacteria about 3.5 billion years ago. Ever since they have
been gradually diverging and changing in small ways
that do not radically affect their function, which is
essentially the same in extant bacteria as in their 3.5 billion year old ancestors. Likewise their very different descendant tubulins, actin, and dynein, myosin, and kinesin
motors have been evolving slowly and mutually diverging for over 800 million years without radical change.
What has kept their change so slow, within bacteria and
within eukaryotes, that we can make comprehensible
sequence trees to trace their divergence of over such
long periods is very strong stabilising or purifying selection; this eliminates variants that too much disrupt their
function and interactions with the hundreds of other
cellular components [112]. Thus for most of earth history stabilising selection limiting change, and minor
directional changes perfecting the details and adapting
the descendants to slightly different niches, have been
the dominant force. In marked contrast, during the origin of eukaryotes all these molecules radically altered in
that one lineage only. If one were to extrapolate the
slow rate of change normally seen in such molecules to
the prokaryote-eukaryote transition it would take several
times the age of the universe to effect as much change
as actually happened in a time so short geologically as
to be a mere blink of an eyelid. No other lineages ever

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

changed in this radical way; only one did. It may have
done so, I contend, in much less than 0.1 million years.
The changes undergone in this one lineage by these
proteins were many orders of magnitude faster and
more extensive than the generally slow changes in the
bacterial and eukaryotic versions of these molecules.
Such extremely rapid evolution is what the great
palaeontologist and evolutionist Simpson called quantum evolution [10,113], because it occurs almost instantaneously from the long perspective of the geological
timescale. He pointed out that during the origin of a
new body plan some features of an organism - those
involved directly in the greatest novelty - invariably
undergo such extreme quantum evolution, whereas
others are extremely conservative and hardly change at
all [10,113].
Thus evolution of new body plans is characteristically
mosaic [114], affecting some key characters immensely
more than others. Some undergo quantum evolution;
some are almost static. In sequence terms, such mosaic
evolution (not to be confused with chimaeric evolution)
means that molecules that are unaffected by the innovation may continue to evolve at their normal slow, relatively steady (though not strictly clock-like) pace
throughout a major transition yielding a new body plan,
e.g. many metabolic enzymes of unaltered function. At
the other extreme some evolve so rapidly that new protein domains are invented, even erasing evidence of past
relationships [12,22]. Somewhat less dramatically changed proteins retain structural evidence of their ancestry
but their sequences diverge so much that one cannot
make sequence trees that include both ancestral and
descendant molecules, e.g. the molecular motors. Major
innovation often also involves both gene duplications
and gene fusions to make more complex chimaeric
genes with multiple domains. This non-uniform broad
spectrum of evolutionary modes during a major transition has important implications for our ability to reconstruct the changes and for what methods are most
appropriate. Thus, molecules that have undergone the
most dramatic change are simultaneously the most
important for understanding its basic nature, e.g. the
nuclear pore complex and lamina structural proteins for
nuclear origins, but also the most difficult to use for
sequence trees and sequence-based bioinformatic methods. By contrast those to which such methods can be
best applied are the most conservative molecules of
unchanged function that only underwent trivial changes
and are essentially irrelevant for understanding the
change itself, and of use only as phylogenetic markers
for tracing the origin of a different minor subset of cell
components. In the middle of the spectrum are conservative molecules which were not central to the change,
and therefore retained their ancestral function and

Page 15 of 78

enough useful information for us to make trees, yet
nonetheless were sufficiently strongly affected indirectly
by the changes as to have undergone a temporary major
acceleration in evolutionary rate and coadaptive evolution during the transition.
Among such intermediate-character molecules in the
case of eukaryogenesis are ribosomal RNA and proteins
and the RNA polymerases. Their basic function was
unchanged during the origin of eukaryotes, but the
functions of RNA polymerases were so significantly
modified by the duplications that generated separate
polymerases for rRNA, mRNA and tRNA that they
underwent a rapid spurt of evolution as they became
specialised for these subtly different roles; once thus
perfected they thereafter settled down to the normal
slower paced evolution dominated by purifying selection
[3]. Such a rapid and substantial, but purely temporary,
spurt of evolution is the general rule for the evolution
of paralogues by gene duplication [13]. The more radical
the modification the longer will be the stem at the base
of each paralogue subtree. But the length of these sister
stems is related almost entirely to the degree of functional shift during their primary divergence, bearing little or no relation to elapsed time; commonly for novel
eukaryote-specific paralogues it is as long as the whole
subsequent slow diversification phase; the latter lasted at
least 800 million years, but to assume that the contrasting adaptation of two sister paralogues would also take
800 million years before any eukaryotes could diversify
and leave modern descendants is evolutionarily
ridiculous.
Population genetics of large microbial populations and
modest selective forces could achieve this in much less
than 80,000 years, even 8,000 years (well over 3 million
generations; ten times the number that separates us
from our common ancestor with other apes), so very
likely stem lengths of paralogue subtrees are commonly
inflated 10,000-fold or more by quantum evolutionary
divergence consequential upon divergence of sister paralogues, compared with rates of change deduced by comparisons among derived groups where purifying
selection dominates and keeps change slow. As argued
previously [12], a comparable gross rate inflation probably applied to cytoplasmic rRNA temporarily during
eukaryogenesis as a consequence of the evolution of the
nuclear envelope and nucleolus with novel processing
and transport (but not to mitochondrial rRNA, which
evaded these novel coevolutionary selective forces by
being kept entirely within the mitochondrial matrix).
Thus, extreme quantum evolution can occur not only
following divergence of paralogues but in unduplicated
molecules given a sufficiently intense shift of function.
Overlooking the fundamentally different evolutionary
principles that apply to megaevolution compared with

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

ordinary macroevolutionary divergence has led to much
misinterpretation of rRNA and paralogue trees. These
misinterpretations have most seriously affected interpretations of the timing of evolutionary events and the
rooting of trees, but quantum evolution can also introduce such serious long-branch artefacts that no algorithm can reconstruct the correct topology. Molecules
like rRNA and RNA polymerase are not evolutionary
chronometers, but evolve extremely heterogeneously in
speed across time; rates can be roughly estimated only
by considering both the fossil record and the degree to
which quantum evolution may be involved, which cannot be statistically modelled - unique events like the origin of eukaryotes or the vertebrate skeleton violate all
naïve statistical assumptions of regularity and repetitiveness. It is fundamentally wrong to assume that all molecules evolve the same way throughout time and to
ignore unpredictable irregularities. A related kind of
misinterpretation concerns the source of the different
components of eukaryotes. For example Esser et al.
[115] concluded that among bioinformatically tractable
proteins, the majority in yeast were more similar to
those of eubacteria than to archaebacteria. From this
truth they concluded a probable falsehood - that most
nuclear genes came from the a-proteobacterial ancestor
of mitochondria.
There are three reasons why that conclusion is
unsound. First, the evidence that eubacteria are ancestral
to archaebacteria implies that ancestral archaebacteria
probably lost about 1000 genes compared with eubacteria [6,13,22]. If most of those genes were lost after
they diverged from the prekaryote lineage, 1000 extra
genes of host origin would have been present in the
host to leave modern eukaryotic descendants, which
would radically increase the proportion deduced to have
come from the host, by itself completely reversing the
authors’ conclusion. In other words, the genes now in
archaebacteria grossly underestimate the much wider
spectrum present in the neomuran ancestor; many
eubacteria-like eukaryotic genes probably came not from
the mitochondrion (as others undoubtedly did) but from
the host, their sister homologues being lost by the
archaebacteria. Secondly, proteins well enough conserved during the prokaryote/eukaryote transition to
allow such sequence comparisons are a small, nonrepresentative sample of the total. Most of those host
proteins that evolved radically novel, specifically eukaryotic, functions (such as nuclear pore complexes and
vesicle coat proteins, and molecular motors) were so
transformed by quantum evolution that their sequences
are too divergent to be recognisable by BLAST analysis.
Evidence of the precise phylogenetic origin of the majority of eukaryotic genes has simply been erased by the
quantum evolution that made eukaryotes. Probably the

Page 16 of 78

vast majority came vertically from the host, not the aproteobacterial symbiont. The third major bias to the
proportions is symbiont replacement of functionally
equivalent host genes. This well-known evolutionary
phenomenon applies not only to the primary symbiogenetic origin of mitochondria and chloroplasts, but to
secondary symbiogenesis, e.g. the acquisition of plant
fatty acid biosynthesis genes from the enslaved cyanobacterium [83,116] and later from the enslaved red alga
by the ancestral chromalveolate [117]. Symbiogenesis
introduces thousands of symbiont genes into the host
nucleus. If the encoded proteins were exactly equivalent
to host proteins, there is a good chance that some will
replace host proteins, since among two equally well
expressed and well controlled proteins it does not matter which is lost by functionally advantageous elimination of wasteful duplicates [60]. If the symbiont is a
bacterium, as was the protomitochondrion, the host versions of many of the relatively unaltered metabolic
genes they share will be eliminated. But novel host
eukaryotic genes that have become so different from
their bacterial progenitors that the protomitochondrion
had no close relatives are less likely to be lost. Thus,
host gene replacement by symbiont genes is biased
towards a small subset of genes - relatively conserved
and bioinformatically tractable metabolic genes and
against those very genes that played the most important
role in the origin of eukaryotes and whose ancestry cannot be traced from their sequence.
The value of symbiogenesis was that it created a novel
organelle with minimal structural change to the enslaved
bacterium and no fundamental genetic change simply by
adding one novelty: inner membrane carriers and associated protein-import machinery [20,22]; the elimination
of thousands of symbiont genes and retargeting of some
were inevitable consequences of this one key innovation.
Symbiogenesis probably contributed very little, if anything, to the key initial steps in eukaryogenesis, the concerted origin of the cytoskeleton, endomembranes, and
mitosis. Two major effects on the host were the origin
of spliceosomal introns from a-proteobacterial group II
self splicing introns, and the loss of its own plasma
membrane/endomembrane ATP-generating, oxidative
phosphorylation enzymes - assuming that the host, like
the symbiont was a facultative aerobe able to live both
in fully aerobic and temporarily anaerobic environment
[22].

Results: the Origin of Mitosis and the Nucleus
Megaevolutionary principles apply to cell and molecular
evolution

From the classic megaevolutionary perspective of Simpson [10,113], understanding the origin of eukaryotes
(eukaryogenesis) is much less difficult than is often

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

supposed, despite it being the most dramatic molecular,
cellular and genetic upheaval in the history of life. The
central requirement for a convincing explanation is to
specify correctly the adaptive shift that caused the innovation in body plan and the nature of the ancestral
organism that made that innovation - in this case predation by phagotrophy. Thereafter it is relatively straightforward to reconstruct a biologically sensible and
mechanistically plausible sequence of likely successive
changes.
Most megaevolution occurs without any symbiogenesis; only five megaevolutionary events in the history of
life involved symbiogenesis. In the origin of the kingdoms Plantae and Chromista (now = chromalveolates
[9]), of chlorarachnean Cercozoa and Euglenia, the
internal symbiogenetic enslavement of a photosynthetic
cell was the central determinative event; in every case
phagocytosis engulfed the slave, proving that phagotrophy preadapts a cell for symbiogenetic enslavement of
other cells. Symbiogenesis was of the essence, but phagotrophy was the essential preadaptation. In the fifth
case, the origin of eukaryotes, phagotrophy was causally
primary and mitochondrial enslavement purely secondary. The fundamental novelty in body plan and way of
life of eukaryotes involved the unique origin of phagotrophy, internal cytoskeleton and endomembranes. Very
likely the host that acquired a mitochondrion was
already a facultative aerobe with oxidative phosphorylation [3]. Adding mitochondria was an important extra
refinement to increase energy efficiency, but probably
did not fundamentally change the cell’s way of life or
body plan or impose any radically new selective forces
on it as did the evolution of phagocytic prey capture
and internal digestion. Oxidative phosphorylation had
been around for ~2 billion years before eukaryotes
evolved [12]; phagotrophy only arose with them. Margulis [32,33] claimed that mitochondrial enslavement preceded and enabled phagotrophy. But neither she nor
recent adherents to this unsubstantiated view (e.g.
[26,36]) ever convincingly explained how such an
implausible reversal of the above logic could have
worked selectively or mechanistically to produce the
cytoskeleton and endomembrane system.
Simpson emphasised that the magnitude of megaevolutionary steps ensure that they occur only if the ancestral lineage was in many ways preadapted for the
transition, both by its structure and physiology and its
ecological accessibility to the empty adaptive zone that
it alone has a realistic potential to invade. Evolution
occurs not in abstract sequence space, but in the real
world of organisms with specific body plans and ecological contexts. Preadaptation does not imply evolutionary
foresight or planning; it is just an historical accident not a lethal accident or uncaused accident, but one

Page 17 of 78

culminating a unique stream of historical events that
gave one lineage uniquely suitable properties for being a
viable vehicle for mutations of radical effects that would
have extinguished less fitted lineages of different background. Fish with lungs and lobed fins happened to be
preadapted for land life and becoming tetrapods, in a
way that fish with spiny fins and no lungs, or still worse
echinoderms or jellyfish, which never made it to land,
were not. Phylogenetic preadaptation of a unique lineage
is a necessary part of the explanation of every megaevolutionary event. Exceptional preadaptation and discontinuity invariably apply to body plan innovation. Thus,
the origin of eukaryotes was necessarily an intrinsically
abnormal event, not one understandable simply by
extrapolating the trivial tinkering that occupies most
evolution. To understand it we must invoke something
quite exceptional. Actually four things, none miraculous
but all uniquely innovative: one is preadaptation of one
lineage for phagotrophy; secondly the novel selective
forces that phagotrophy brings; thirdly the disruptive
effects that phagotrophy had on the cell division and
DNA segregation machinery by internalising the DNAmembrane attachment sites [4,11]. Not only did this disruption necessitate the adoption of novel systems (cell
division by actomyosin and DNA segregation by microtubules/kinesin), but also because these were inevitably
initially inefficient it directly caused repeated polyploidy
(whole genome duplication in modern jargon) in the
transitional intermediate. This would make the cells
large, as in the giant bacterium Epulopiscium [118],
probably advantageous for ingesting others as food.
Every gene probably duplicated many times in just a few
days. The intermediate was almost certainly multigenomic and in consequence also larger than its ancestors
and better able to engulf other cells and also survive
some otherwise harmful mutations. Interestingly, large
complex filamentous multigenomic cyanobacteria and
actinomycetes can segregate their DNA randomly, and
thus remain viable without MreB, unlike most bacteria
[58,119]. Advanced large, metabolically diversified and
multigenomic prokaryotes, not the tiny degenerate ones
implausibly postulated by Margulis [32,33,120] as our
ancestors, could best have made the transition to
eukaryotes.
Key novelties and preadaptations for eukaryogenesis

There were three key preadaptive features of the
ancestor of eukaryotes. First it had one bounding
membrane (like Posibacteria and Archaebacteria alone
among prokaryotes), not two as in all other eight
eubacterial phyla, which would have prevented the
evolution of phagocytosis and endomembrane budding.
Thus of eubacteria, only Posibacteria were preadapted
to become the ancestor of either eukaryotes or

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

archaebacteria. This first preadaptation was the origin
of Posibacteria by the loss of the negibacterial outer
membrane, probably at least 700 million years before
the origin of eukaryotes, thus not a triggering event
[121]. Secondly, the three dimensionally covalently
bonded murein wall of most eubacteria makes both
the origin of phagotrophy and sex (cell fusion and
ploidy reduction by meiosis) impossible. The essential
preadaptation was the replacement of the murein cell
wall by individually potentially mobile surface N-linked
glycoproteins. This neomuran revolution was I argued
the triggering event for the origin of eukaryotes [4]
and equally of their archaebacterial sisters; each
evolved divergently, one by genome reduction and cell
compaction and the other by gene multiplication and
cellular expansion. The third preadaptation for eukaryogenesis was a combination of ideal cellular factors:
large cell size to enable engulfing of other bacteria,
large genome size with many potential gene ancestors,
a diverse set of lipids to favour endomembrane differentiation, a large secretome including many digestive
enzymes as precursors for internal digestion (about a
third of eukaryotic proteins are secretory); and a facultatively aerobic/anaerobic metabolism to allow them
most simply to become hosts to a facultative aerobic/
anaerobic, probably photosynthetic, a-proteobacterium
[3,4].
Of the two posibacterial subphyla, Endobacteria and
Actinobacteria, no Endobacteria were thus preadapted,
but many actinobacteria were. Actinobacteria have the
largest secretome of any bacteria - over 800 secretory
proteins, mostly digestive enzymes, large genomes and
cells, complex life cycles with protein phosphorylation
controls, differentiated resting spores, phosphatidylinositol, proteasomes of the neomuran type for intracellular
protein digestion, and H1-like histone, and enzymes
related to those that make eukaryotic sphingolipids, and
many more cytochrome P450 (precursors of the ER oxidation system) than other bacteria. Regulation of actin
polymerisation by phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
activated by a small GTPase [107] can only have evolved
in an actinobacterium-derived ancestor, as no other prokaryotes whatsoever have phosphatidylinositol [13]; the
inositol phospholipids of myxobacteria are chemically
different (dialkyl ethers not acyl esters; see [13]); citing
them as evidence for a myxobacterial rather than an
actinobacterial ancestry [122] is a spurious argument.
Duplications of the same GTPase gene family provided
Ran GTPase for NE assembly and nucleocytoplasmic
transport and GTPases for endomembrane differentiation during the multiplication of novel genetic membranes [85,107]. Among actinobacteria, actinomycetes
are of special significance for eukaryogenesis (and the
origin of archaebacteria) as they not only have

Page 18 of 78

eukaryote-like small GTPases, crucial for endomembrane differentiation and nuclear origins, and a neomuran type proteasome, but also biosynthetic pathways
for polyketides like fungi, protozoa, chromalveolates and
plants; mycobacteria can also make cholesterol. Contrary
to Margulis [32], who suggested that mitochondrial
enslavement by a mycoplasma-like host introduced
sterol synthesis into prekaryotes thereby enabling phagotrophy, a-proteobacteria do not make sterols, and mycoplasmas are too small to have been the host; they
evolved as intracellular parasites inside eukaryote cells
after phagocytosis had already evolved, enabling a posibacterial ancestor to lose its murein wall in an osmotically protective environment and for mycoplasma cells
and genomes to be miniaturized. Mycoplasmas lost their
posibacterial walls independently of the neomuran
ancestor. The genomic reduction of the ancestral
archaebacterium, associated small size, lack of extensive
secretome or suitable lipid precursors, more anaerobic
lifestyle, a likely hyperthermophilic specialisation,
absence of phosphatidylinositol or other phospholipids
and sterols, all make archaebacteria entirely implausible
as ancestors of the eukaryote host, being devoid of most
preadaptations that would have been present in the neomuran ancestor. Though in lipid biology mycobacteria
seem preadapted for the evolution of eukaryotes, they
are so specialised that the actual ancestor of neomura
was more likely a less specialised early diverging relative
with similar metabolic capabilities.
Jékely [107] suggested that eukaryogenesis was
initiated not by phagocytosis, but by the evolution of
secretion by exocytosis, with phagocytosis arising later,
simply because this appeared more compatible with his
small GTPase sequence tree. While I once briefly held
that view [70,123], it has immensely less explanatory
power than phagotrophy as the initiator [3,4,6]. Moreover, the GTPase tree that fuelled his proposal (see Fig.
4a) was misleading through concealing branch lengths
and misinterpreted. It is evident from other work that
the Arf branch is the longest among the eukaryote paralogues and that the small GTPase tree is essentially
unresolved at its base [124]; therefore rooting of the tree
with the far longer eubacterial outgroup could have
wrongly attracted it to the base. It is as unwise as for
other paralogue trees to assume that the rooting is accurate. Even if the position of the root is correct, it was
wrong to infer that the Arf containing branch arose
prior to the Rab-containing branch. In such a basal
divergence one cannot say that one sister branch is earlier than the other. The worst argument, however, was
that the Arf-1 branch is involved in secretion and the
Rab one in phagocytosis, and to combine these two bad
arguments to conclude that exocytosis evolved before
phagocytosis [107]. In fact, there is ample evidence that

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Page 19 of 78

Figure 4 Evolutionary differentiation of endomembranes. (a). Schematic tree for controlling small GTPases [124,128]. Sar-1 and Arf-1 have an
extra, derived insertion, so the root cannot be in that branch. Because of disparate rates of evolution among paralogues and the shortness of
the molecules it is unclear from trees whether the seven eukaryotic clades (lower) are all mutually related as shown and which of the four
bacterial clades (upper) are their closest relatives. (b). After endomembranes, peroxisomes, and plasma membrane became distinct genetic
membranes (Fig. 3b) most secretory ribosomes were on old DNA-bearing cisternae; the first COP/adaptin coats generated vesicles (V) from the
protoendomembrane/phagosome; early SNAREs (SN, left) fused them with the plasma membrane. Endomembrane differentiation improved
digestion by targeting digestive enzymes specifically to phagosomes, mediated by successive concerted duplications and divergence of coat
proteins, cognate SNAREs able to bind to them, and associated small GTPases. Primary specialisation between digestion and synthesis involved
clathrin vesicles (CL) associated with plasma membrane SNAREs (SNP) and COPII vesicles associated with endomembrane SNAREs (SNE).
Interpolation of Golgi, by mutual fusion of uncoated COPII vesicles, stabilised by COPI-mediated recycling (right), allowed specialisation between
lysosomes and surface growth. For a fuller discussion of endomembrane origins see [91].

Rab paralogues are extensively involved in secretion in
early, middle and late stages [125,126], and conversely
that Arf1 is involved on phagocytosis [127]. Thus Arf
and the Rab paralogues are both required for secretion
and exocytosis and equally for endocytosis and phagocytosis, decisively invalidating any attempt to infer the
relative timing of the origin of these complementary
processes from GTPase paralogue trees. Since his work
additional prokaryotic small GTPases paralogue classes

have been discovered, which complicate the story and
disrupt the branching pattern of the tree [128]. In my
view these authors also are overconfident of their
(somewhat different) tree and misinterpret it as evidence
for separate origins of Arf/Sar and Rab/Ras/Rho from
different bacteria; more likely both these major classes
of eukaryotic GTPases have a common ancestry in the
RarD paralogue found only in archaebacteria and actinobacteria [87]. Rather than making dubious deductions

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

from possibly distorted sequence trees, it is preferable to
use general evolutionary and cell biological principles
and as much relevant knowledge as possible to infer the
overall most likely sequence of events. Fig. 4b therefore
proposes a plausible and simple scenario for endomembrane differentiation prior to the origin of the nucleus;
almost certainly endocytosis and exocytosis coevolved,
recruiting from a common pool of enzymes when
assembling their toolkit.
Endomembrane differentiation required not only
duplications of vesicle coat proteins and GTPases controlling budding but also of SNAREs controlling targeting of each type of uncoated vesicle [85] (and GTPases
controlling fusion) [107]. Even the first step, separation
of rough ER (RER) from plasma membrane probably
needed SNAREs initially. 20 different SNAREs arose
before the eukaryotic cenancestor [129]. The genetic
identity of RER was secured by insertion of SRP-recognising docking protein (pentagons Fig. 3a, b) in which
small GTPase SRb participates [107]. It was more efficient for digestive enzyme-laded CopII vesicles budding
from proto-ER to fuse with phagosomes not the cell
surface. Thus was born the primary divergence between
ER outwards secretory traffic and plasma membrane
inwards endocytic traffic seen in GTPase [107] and
SNARE [130] trees. So we should not ask ‘did phagocytosis or exocytosis evolve first?’ Both evolved together,
with phagotrophy being the entirely novel selective
advantage, as De Duve [131] and Stanier [2] first argued.
I refer the reader to [27] for a more detailed discussion
of the origin of the endomembrane system, which had
to precede the origin of the nucleus.
The overlapping origins of mitosis, centrioles
and the nucleus

As Fig. 3 indicated, a simple form of mitosis probably
originated before the nucleus (Fig. 3c), but the modern
version is more complex and its elaboration must have
overlapped and coevolved with the origin of the
nucleus. A nucleus could not evolve without a relatively
efficient means of DNA segregation, making it misleading to consider the origin of the nucleus on its own, as
many do. I shall argue that NPCs and nucleocytoplasmic transport and the chromatin-attachment of NPCs
and the inner envelope membrane - the key features of
the cell nucleus - evolved by the structural and functional integration of novel duplicates of pre-existing key
proteins whose basic functions originally evolved separately for endomembrane and chromatin-associated
mitotic functions. Before explaining this integration I
must outline the origins of endomembranes and of
mitosis, the essential prerequisites for the origin of the
nuclear envelope, NPCs and nucleocytoplasmic
compartmentation.

Page 20 of 78

As explained in the first detailed discussion of the
logic of the transition from bacterial to eukaryotic DNA
segregation [70], this involves three major changes. First
a change in the timing of DNA replication relative to
mechanical separation; both processes are spread over
almost the whole cell cycle in bacteria and replication
origins are separated (as then postulated, but now
known [132,133]) well before replication is complete,
whereas in eukaryotes replication is completed before
sister chromatid separation begins. Second was the origin of the eukaryotic chromosome condensation cycle in
which DNA is relatively dispersed for replication and
transcription but typically more tightly condensed during mitosis. Third, was a topographic change from chromosomes being attached to and geometrically ordered
on the bacterial cell surface membrane and wall to chromosomes being attached to the nuclear envelope in
interphase during replication but attached instead to the
mitotic spindle microtubules during cell division. Spindle microtubules consist of a- and b-tubulin and are
nucleated by g-tubulin at the core of the centrosome;
when these and the other universal tubulins evolved by
repeated gene duplications of a bacterial GTPase they
underwent such radical changes in a short time that
they now have only a slight sequence similarities to
their bacterial relatives FtsZ [134] and TubZ [135]. It
has usually been assumed that tubulin evolved from
FtsZ [136], whose single filaments form the core of the
Z-ring which marks the site of division in most bacteria
and chloroplasts and the more primitive mitochondria.
However, the recently discovered GTPase TubZ, a double filament protein that is important for the segregation
of DNA in certain plasmids of the posibacterium Bacillus, is a better analogue of tubulin, because it seems to
have similar treadmilling and capping properties and
might actually be involved in pushing apart sister DNA
molecules [135,137], unlike FtsZ which is more a morphogenetic marker to guide the membrane scission
machinery into place. The fact that TubZ coexists in
cells with FtsZ means that its DNA segregation properties can evolve without at the same time abandoning
FtsZ’s marker function. I suggest that tubulins evolved
from either an early relative of TubZ itself (quite likely
as it evolved like tubulin in the posibacterial lineage) or
an independently evolved paralogue of FtsZ that functioned similarly in plasmid DNA segregation. TubZ
evolves much faster than either tubulin or FtsZ, presumably because it interacts with fewer other proteins, and
is extremely divergent in sequence from both. During
the origins of a-, b-tubulin g-tubulin numerous new features evolved to allow a- and b-tubulin to form dimers
and their protofilaments to form microtubules and gtubulin to nucleate them, so much so that sequence
trees cannot be expected to establish which bacterial

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

paralogue tubulin evolved from [134]. However, an origin from a treadmilling posibacterial TubZ involved in
plasmid DNA separation would offer the easiest transition for the origin of microtubules and the mitotic spindle, with the least trauma for the evolving phagotroph.
By contrast there was a much less radical change in
the organization of a fourth key component of the DNA
segregation system, whose role and universal importance
to DNA segregation was unknown even 20 years ago:
SMC proteins and kleisins [138]. SMC (acronym of
structural maintenance of chromosomes) proteins have
homologues in all organisms and are essential for accurate DNA segregation. SMCs are giant proteins with a
globular domain at each end and a long helically coiled
rod in the middle. They exist as dimers in which the
rods are antiparallel and twisted around each other as
coiled coils, and hinged in the middle enabling them to
form a V shape in which the end of each arm contains
one C-terminal and one N-terminal globular domain.
This close association of the contrasting domains
enables the globular head end of each arm to bind ATP
and function as an ATPase. Each head interacts with
kleisin proteins; when these are bound to both, the
whole complex forms a ring known as a cohesin or condensin (depending on its function and which SMCs and
kleisins it contains). Cohesin rings enclose sister DNA
molecules and prevent their separation till the cell is
ready to divide, because they are loaded onto the parent
DNA molecule before replication is completed (in
eukaryotes before it even starts). When the cell is ready
to divide proteases digest the kleisin (at anaphase in
eukaryotes), converting the ring into an open V, thereby
allowing the mechanical separation of DNA sister molecules (chromatids) [139,140].
Eukaryotic cohesins are loaded into DNA at the G1-S
phase transition. Bacterial DNA segregation broadly follows the principles adumbrated long ago [141], but we
now know the molecular machinery [132,133]. Bacterial
SMC condensins are loaded onto replication origins by
the DNA partitioning protein ParB and thereby mediate
chromosome compaction of daughter chromosomes
[132,133,142], which is essential for accurate DNA segregation as the origins are moved to opposite poles by
an ATPase (Soj), i.e. actively as postulated [141]. Thus
DNA gyrase in eubacteria and histones in eukaryotes
are not sufficient for chromosome compaction as was
originally assumed [70]. The ring-shaped condensins
that hold DNA loops together to allow proper chromosome folding [142] clearly evolved in the last common
ancestor of all life, as SMC is known from most bacterial phyla [143] and I have found them by BLAST in the
earliest diverging Chlorobacteria (their greater sequence
divergence within this phylum compared with most
others is consistent with it being the oldest [6,13]).

Page 21 of 78

Moreover SMC had also undergone two gene duplications in the last common ancestor to generate two proteins for DNA repair: Rec9 and SbcC. RecN is a
eubacterial protein involved in repairing double-strand
breaks in DNA; neomura have a homologue (also for
break repair) called Rad50 that probably evolved from it.
SbcC helps in other forms of DNA repair and seems to
have been lost by the ancestral neomuran. A small subset of g-proteobacteria of the family Enterobacteriacae
(including Escherichia, Salmonella and Shigella) replaced
SMC by a larger but related protein, MukB that interacts with different kleisins, and groups on trees with
SbcC and must have evolved either from it or from
SMC by radical changes. Possibly these unique drastic
changes in these enterobacterial SMC-like proteins
occurred when their ancestor (alone among prokaryotes?) evolved the capacity to initiate several successive
rounds of chromosome replications, yielding branching
chromosomes that allow the cell cycle to become even
shorter than the replication fork travel time [141].
SMC proteins are so long (over 100 amino acids) and
well conserved that they make better sequence trees
[143] than most proteins commonly used for prokaryote
phylogeny (e.g. [45]); the SMC tree shows archaebacteria, neomura, and ‘neomura plus Posibacteria’ all as
monophyletic and places neomura between actinobacteria and Endobacteria as in Fig. 1 (though as sisters of
Endobacteria not Actinobacteria). Prokaryote SMCs are
all homodimers, whereas in eukaryotes they are always
heterodimers. During the origin of eukaryotes two gene
duplications generated four paralogues [143]: Smc1 and
3, which form cohesin by binding the kleisin Ssc1; and
Smc2 and 4, which form condensin I by binding the
kleisin CAP-H (or CAP-H2 in condensin II which
evolved later in an early animal only). As Smc1 and 2
group together on trees, as do Smc3 and 4, it is likely
that stem eukaryotes initially evolved an ancestral general purpose heterodimer containing one of each of
these pairs, but that further duplications differentiated it
into cohesin (loaded onto chromatin in interphase) and
condensin (loaded during prophase of mitosis). This differentiation must have gone hand in hand with the new
temporal controls via cyclins and phosphorylation. The
first heterodimeric SMC was probably a condensin as in
bacteria; the newer function of cohesin depended on the
coevolution of novel anaphase proteolysis of Scc1 (see
below). Though Euglenozoa have condensin I, and cohesin, Ssc1 and the separase enzyme that cuts it are essential for chromosome segregation [144], they lack another
Smc heterodimer (Smc5/6), which may act as a cohesin
for rDNA segregation [144] as well as having functions
in DNA repair or recombination, suggesting that it
evolved somewhat later (in the ancestral neokaryote,
being present in Naegleria and Giardia genomes).

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Chromosome condensation, separation and all other
aspects of mitosis and the cell cycle are regulated by
four related families of eukaryotic serine/threonine (S/T)
protein kinases: Cdk, Nek, aurora and polo-like. All are
present in the most divergent eukaryotes (Euglenozoa)
so all originated by gene duplication in the ancestral
eukaryote. Their closest relatives and putative ancestors
of these and numerous other eukaryotic families of S/T
kinases is the PKN2 family of eubacterial kinases which
are widely and mainly present in Posibacteria (both subphyla) and Cyanobacteria but never in archaebacteria
[145]. Almost certainly they were vertically inherited
from Posibacteria to the ancestral neomuran and
immensely multiplied by eukaryotes but lost by the
ancestral archaebacterium. The idea that they originated
from nowhere in the first eukaryote and were repeatedly
laterally transferred into eubacteria [145] is bizarre,
implausible, and not supported by trees (presumably
proposed because the authors accepted the erroneous
dogma that eubacteria are not ancestral to neomura). In
two groups of actinobacteria the S/T kinases regulate
cell growth and division including DNA segregation
[146]. I suggest that this was also true of the stem actinobacterium from which neomura probably evolved, so
there was even some continuity of cell cycle regulation
between these posibacteria and eukaryotes. These posibacterial kinases have a binding site for peptidoglycan
[147], which would have been lost when the ancestral
neomuran replaced murein by glycoproteins allowing
their recruitment for new cell cycle functions when the
segregation machinery in the ancestral eukaryote was
internalised as a consequence of phagocytosis (see next
section below).
Though archaebacterial S/T kinases are more widespread [147] than previously thought [145], the apparent
absence of cell cycle regulating PKN subfamily S/T
kinases is yet another reason why archaebacteria, unlike
Posibacteria, cannot be ancestral to eukaryotes. It is
important to stress that as well as chromosomes mitosis
segregates other organelles. Golgi duplication and centriole duplication are also regulated by some of these
cell cycle kinases; so all segregation mechanisms must
have coevolved. Polo-like kinases are essential for centriole and Golgi duplication (the latter by phosphorylating Golgi-nucleating centrin blobs [148]) and separase is
important for centriole as well as chromosome separation in Euglenozoa [149], so these functions all evolved
in the early eukaryote at the same time as the nucleus.
Aurora and polo-like families are probably sisters; on
the polo-like paralogue-rooted aurora kinase tree Euglenozoa are the most divergent eukaryotes [150], as they
are for each of the four SMC subtrees [144] and on Fig.
1, giving further support to the conclusion that Euglenozoa are the earliest diverging eukaryotes [9]. In

Page 22 of 78

trypanosomes aurora kinase has more diverse and basic
cell cycle functions than polo-like [151,152] suggesting
that it might have been the original mitosis related
kinase; the involvement of polo-like kinase in centriole
duplication, mitochondrial DNA segregation and cytokinesis [153] suggests an early division of labour
between the two kinases with respect to chromosome
segregation (aurora) and cytoplasmic organelle segregation (polo-like). Proper geometric localization of the segregation machinery, exemplified by that of polo-like
kinase along the presumptive division plane [154] would
have been important in the early evolution of eukaryote
cell division and would have been facilitated by the
complex and semi-rigid character of the cell cortex supported by an extensive array of cortical microtubules;
the rooting of the tree between Euglenozoa and Percolozoa (both of which ancestrally had rigid microtubule
supported pellicle) plus a distinct cytostome for ingestion [9] confirms that the importance of cell surface
rigidity for the evolution of organelle segregation that I
have long emphasized; contrary to early ideas dating
back to Haeckel the cenancestral eukaryote was not a
formless amoeba but a phagotrophic flagellate with rigid
cell cortex and localised ingestion apparatus for phagocytosis. That is the only way to reconcile the conflicting
demands of surface rigidity for geometric control of segregation and surface fluidity for ingestion during the
prokaryote to eukaryote transition. The transitional
organism had simultaneously to perfect ingestion and
digestion and maintain viability by reasonably accurate
organelle segregation. Mutual attachment of almost
every cell organelle is seen in such modern cells as trypanosomes [155-157] and the cercozoan Sainouron
[158].
The contractile calcium-binding protein centrin and
proteins that bind it play key roles in organellar positional control that are often more disparate and pervasive than its core centrosomal function. Trypanosomes
have five centrins [156] with diverse functions including
coordinating cell and nuclear division [159] and ciliates
far more, mainly to construct their uniquely complex
and pervasive contractile cortical infraciliary lattice
[160]; some protists (especially those that lost centrioles
and cilia) have only one, probably secondary simplification. Centrin forms a variety of structures and is related
to other calcium-binding proteins that likewise have
four EF-hand folds, notably the cytosolic calmodulin
and ER lumen calreticulin; all three are present in
Euglenozoa and clearly originated in the ancestral eukaryote from a common ancestor. Archaebacteria have no
EF-hand proteins; those with a single EF-hand motif are
very widespread in eubacteria [161], but multiple EFhand motifs are much rarer, proteins with four as in
eukaryotes being restricted to Actinobacteria,

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Proteobacteria, and Cyanobacteria. Very likely they came
vertically from the stem actinobacterium but sequences
are too short to test this adequately. Calnexin, a second
ER calcium-binding protein, is absent from Euglenozoa
[67], and probably evolved by gene duplication from calreticulin only in early neokaryotes. Centrin trees [162]
show that at least two slowly evolving centrins were present in the cenancestral eukaryote, and other data suggest that one (the clade that includes human centrins 1,
2 and 4) was probably associated with centrioles and the
other (the clade that includes human centrin 3) with
spindle poles.
I previously argued that mitosis (i.e. DNA segregation
by microtubules) evolved in two stages: a primitive system with only one microtubule nucleating centre
(MNC) associated with the origin of replication of the
ancestral neomuran organ of replication in which microtubules were constitutively present at the cell surface;
and a more advanced one caused by the simultaneous
origin of the nuclear envelope, centriole, and cilium in
which there were separate cytoplasmic (permanent) and
intranuclear microtubules (transient) each with their
own MNC [4]. The initial function of microtubules was
argued to be preventing the phagocytic internalisation of
the DNA/membrane attachment sites (and consequent
mis-segregation in the absence of mitosis) by providing
a subpellicular corset of microtubules conferring surface
rigidity in place of that abandoned when the bacterial
cell wall was lost when prey ingestion evolved. The key
merit of this two-stage evolution of mitosis was allowing
continuity between bacterial segregation at the cell surface and intranuclear mitosis in the first protozoa [4].
The intermediate stage on the cell surface did not
require major changes to the chromosome but would
allow MNCs and microtubules to evolve with a function
closer to ancestral TubZ (separating plasmid DNA at
the cell surface) or FtsZ (constraining the plane of cell
membrane division between daughter DNAs) than the
much more complex intranuclear mitosis or cilia, but
with the potential to evolve both later by adding extra
functions. The likelihood that the two-stage theory is
correct has been substantially increased by what has
been learned since then about bacterial DNA segregation (outlined above) and by the rooting of the eukaryote tree between Euglenozoa and excavates [9]. As the
earliest branching excavates, given that root position,
are the Percolozoa (e.g. the amoeboflagellate Naegleria),
the root of the eukaryotic tree is between them and
Euglenozoa; we can therefore infer with confidence that
any characters common to both of these protozoan
phyla were present in their cenancestor and thus also in
the eukaryote cenancestor. For example, Euglenozoa and
Percolozoa are informally collectively known as discicristate protozoa because they each ancestrally had flat

Page 23 of 78

discoid mitochondrial cristae, which must have been the
ancestral condition for eukaryotes; the more widespread
protozoan condition of tubular cristae evolved later in
the excavate Loukozoa. Mitosis in discicristates is always
closed with a transient intranuclear spindle nucleated by
an inconspicuous intranuclear MNC, whereas the cytoplasmic pellicular microtubules are present throughout
the cell cycle and divide longitudinally by an antero-posterior cleavage furrow after the centrioles separate.
Furthermore in all discicristates the nucleoli divide at
mitosis in a dumbbell manner and do not disassemble
and reassemble as they do in higher eukaryotes.
Thus the open mitosis of animals and of streptophyte
green plants (i.e. embryophyte land plants and their
charophyte algal ancestors) in which nucleoli and the
nuclear envelope both fragment during prophase and
are reassembled at telophase are clearly convergent secondary adaptations (which probably evolved for reasons
of larger cell size and calcium control as explained elsewhere [163]) and positively misleading for understanding the origin of mitosis. Nucleolar fragmentation
evolved in excavates after Loukozoa and Percolozoa
diverged, but closed mitosis was retained by excavates
and by the ancestral neozoa and ancestral unikonts
(being retained by fungi and Apusozoa) and corticates
(being retained by alveolates, red algae and many chlorophyte green algae). Open mitosis evolved independently from animals and streptophyte green plants
within Amoebozoa among unikonts and in many chromist groups other than alveolates. It is notable that
Eozoa and alveolates generally have more centrin paralogues than more derived eukaryotes, the most widespread number being four [162]. I suggest that the
cenancestral eukaryote had three or four centrin paralogues: one in the nucleus for specifying mitotic poles and
two or three in the cytoplasm for positioning the anterior microtubule nucleation centres for the pellicular
microtubule corset, centriole(s), and Golgi apparatus.
This many centrin foci at least is needed for the complex cytoskeletal architecture of discicristates. When
higher fungi (ancestors of yeasts) lost centrioles and
centriolar roots and their wall allowed the loss of pellicular microtubules [164,165], they unsurprisingly lost all
centrin paralogues except that for the intranuclear centrosome (which was modified in appearance to form the
spindle-pole bodies). Acentriolar Amoebozoa like the
slime mould Dictyostelium independently lost the extra
redundant centrins when their cells were morphologically simplified for amoeboid locomotion (not an ancestral character for eukaryotes). In green plants the
ancestor of Chlamydomonas lost all centrin paralogues
except one when it evolved semi-open mitosis, in which
the nuclear envelope breaks down during mitosis only
near the poles of the spindle allowing cytoplasmic

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

centrosomal microtubules to penetrate the polar gap
and contact the chromosomes that remain inside the
rest of the NE [166]. The independence of this green
plant centrin simplification from that of higher fungi
also fits the fact that they lost the former intranuclear
paralogue (unlike fungi, which retained it) and retained
a cytoplasmic one for both spindle poles and centrioles
[162]. In seed plants, higher gymnosperms and angiosperms apparently retained the same paralogue as Chlamydomonas for their cytoplasmic spindle poles when
they lost cilia and centrioles [162]. I suspect that the
clade of two paralogues labelled ‘alveolate-specific’ in
[162] may not really be unique to that group; more
likely they are related to one or both of the so-called
group-specific branches for the Euglenozoa (trypanosomatids), Percolozoa (Naegleria) and Metamonada (Trichomonas; Giardia has only two so may have undergone
some secondary simplification compared with other
Eozoa) and that the long branches for all four groups
prevent their grouping correctly. That each of these four
groups convergently acquired multiple deep-branching
paralogues seems improbable, especially as the presence
of several deep-branching centrin paralogues in Eozoa is
to be expected from the ancestral great complexity of
their cytoplasmic organelles (Fig. 2). Alveolates are the
only group of corticates that have extensively retained
the ancestral discicristate cell organization of a separate
permanent cortical array of pellicular microtubules and
intranuclear spindle, which is almost certainly not convergent with that of Eozoa but a persisting ancient character; so their retention of more centrin paralogues than
in plants animal, Amoebozoa or fungi is understandable.
It should be noted that in these eozoan flagellates, as
well as in apicomplexan alveolates, the cortical pellicular
microtubules are nucleated at the cell apex and that the
apical MNC duplicates prior to cell division just as does
the intranuclear MNC; during cytokinesis the microtubules attached to the apical MNC separate as two half
cones of microtubules geometrically similar to the much
smaller intranuclear mitotic half-spindles. Thus cell division in Eozoa ancestrally was like dividing a Russian
doll with a nuclear half-spindle (attached to the inner
face of the inner nuclear membrane) nested within a larger half-spindle (attached to the inner face of the plasma
membrane). The MNCs of both are mutually attached
and their duplication and separation must be temporally
coordinated. Paradoxically this very complexity of
eozoan cell architecture makes it much easier to understand how mitosis evolved than if the first eukaryote
was a formless amoeba with no cytoplasmic microtubules as many wrongly assume. Organelle segregation is
a geometric and mechanical problem; architectural complexity and geometric order, mediated by semi-rigid
mutual attachments of organelles, make it less likely to

Page 24 of 78

go wrong and conceptually simpler to understand than
a more fluid or disordered system.
On my theory of the origin of mitosis [4] the larger
cytoplasmic half-spindle is more like the ancestral prekaryotic version than the transient intranuclear mitotic
one that evolved only at the time of chromosome internalisation, which must have been accompanied by the
permanent duplication and differentiation of the MNC
to give separate evolutionary divergent versions for
plasma and nuclear membrane division: division of the
two membranes was as important as division of the
chromosome and all three had to be coordinated by
direct physical attachments of each by cytoskeletal proteins. When the pellicular microtubular cones separate
they are arranged side-by-side and not at 180° in mirror
symmetry as are half-spindles in classical open mitosis
of animals and plants (orthomitosis). However, in many
protists with closed mitosis (e.g. some metamonads,
some fungi like microsporidia, some Euglenozoa like
trypanosomatids, most Retaria in the Rhizaria, and even
one primitive green alga) mitotic half-spindles also are
side-by-side in early stages and throughout most of
mitosis (then called pleuromitosis), often only becoming
oppositely oriented just before or as the cells separate.
Thus the duplication and division mechanism of both
are probably fundamentally similar, the main difference
being to which membrane they are attached and that
nuclear microtubules only transiently assemble. It is just
as if a single MNC and microtubular cone became
doubled and differentiated for two complementary functions, as my two stage theory proposed [4]. The theory
is here improved by arguing (1) that discicristates retain
both the original cell surface MNC and pellicular
microtubules and the more derived intranuclear ones,
and (2) that the differentiation went hand-in-hand with
the membrane internalisation that generated the ER/NE.
Surface pellicular microtubules of discicristates and
their division mode were the mental model in mind
when I proposed that microtubules first thus evolved at
the cell surface [4], but because the tree was misrooted
I did not then think (as I now do) that their cytoplasmic/cytokinetic/pellicular microtubular division
mechanism probably descended directly from the
hypothetical prekaryotic surface system, and is not just
an analogy.
The two key constituents of centrosomes are gamma
tubulin, the nucleator for microtubule assembly, and
centrin for positional control and architecture. It is centrin, the positional controller that underwent gene
duplication to several paralogues to enable the complex
structure of the cenancestral eukaryote. However, in the
prekaryote before the origin of nuclei and cilia a simple
centrosome with just one centrin paralogue would have
sufficed. When I first speculated about the origin of

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

eukaryotic chromosomes [70] it was generally assumed
that bacterial DNA segregation was passive, by wall
growth between DNA attachment points, so I proposed
that centromeres evolved from the termini of bacterial
replicons, because of the requirement that DNA replication be completed before division and the idea that
replication termination could physically directly signal
this to a adjacent segregation machinery and wall division site. Later I decided that bacterial DNA segregation
must be by active pulling apart of replicon origins by
ATPase motors [141], now known to be true, and
argued instead that the first microtubule nucleation site
therefore probably evolved in association with the preexisting binding sites on the cell membrane of bacterial
replication origins, as shown in Fig. 3c. We now know
that Par genes that are central to bacterial DNA segregation cluster close to bacterial chromosome origins and
that ParS marks the site of loading Smc condensins
[132,133]; the bacterial Par system is widely considered
a centrosome analogue, so the idea that centromeres
originated from the origin region of the bacterial chromosome is common place, albeit seldom made explicit.
However at the prekaryote stage when chromosomes
were still attached to the cell surface membrane and
there was only a single MNC, the distinction between a
primitive centrosome and primitive centromere was less
clear; both functions could have been assumed by a single macromolecular complex at one point on the cell
surface [141]. I considered the postulated single MNC
to have been a proto-centrosome (not a centrosome)
because microtubule nucleation and the division of
MNCs had to evolve before there could be any selective
force for the evolution of kinetochores to attach chromosomes to the growing end of microtubules. MNCs
are much more fundamental and general that kinetochores because they are essential for the segregation of
many other organelles as well as chromosomes and
because all interphase cell architecture is organised
around the various cytoplasmic MNCs and centrin foci
and their attachments to the nucleus.
I assumed above that when the nucleus evolved there
was only a single MNC at each spindle pole. However
that might not be true, because in euglenoids there are
several distinct sub-spindles in the nucleus [110] so they
must have multiple MNCs at each pole. If the eukaryotic root were actually within euglenoids (e.g. between
the unicentriolar Scytomonas and more typical bicentriolar genera) then this multiple MNC condition would
have been ancestral for all eukaryotes. Even if the root
is between Euglenozoa and neokaryotes it could still
have been the ancestral condition and the uni-MNC
condition of neokaryotes and Kinetoplastida/Diplonemea
(the main other putative euglenozoan clade than euglenoids) could have arisen independently by polar MNC

Page 25 of 78

merger. Previously I argued that the polarity seen in animal epithelial cells, and to a lesser extent also in migratory mesenchymal cells [167] stems fundamentally from
the cell polarity that evolved in the first phagotrophic
zooflagellate [58]. With the root being beside or within
the ancestrally zooflagellate Euglenozoa [9] we can now
say that the basic pattern and mechanisms of such cell
polarity go right back to the last common ancestor of
all eukaryotes and that it is a universal principle of
eukaryotic cell biology. Haeckel’s idea that ancestral
eukaryotes and cells generally were amorphous amoebae
without centrioles or cilia [168] has mislead thinking for
over 150 years. Skeletal organisation is fundamental to
understanding eukaryogenesis; in the cytoplasm the
cytoskeleton consists of cross-linked actin filaments and
microtubules. The nucleoskeleton is primarily chromatin
itself [169,170], heterochromatin in particular whose origin I next discuss. Actin is being found to be increasingly important also in nuclear functions of animals at
least [171-173]. But as its role in Eozoa, if any is
unknown, and even in animals actin’s contribution to
basic nuclear architecture is much smaller than that of
chromatin, I omit discussing it, beyond pointing out
that if it has similar roles in trypanosomatids, these
must be of universal significance and must eventually be
taken into account in fuller discussions of nuclear
origins.
Origin of Heterochromatin and Centromeres

Heterochromatin evolution is of key importance for the
origin of the nucleus because the nuclear envelope is
generally bound to at least a thin layer of condensed
chromatin that would usually be called heterochromatin
and bacteria have no equivalent structure [174]. Traditionally, constitutive heterochromatin was defined as
chromatin that was condensed and microscopically visible throughout the cell cycle in contrast to euchromatin
that dispersed in interphase and condensed only in
mitosis as visible chromosomes. It has bizarre and largely unexplained patterns of variation in abundance and
intranuclear distribution among organisms and developmental stages, but is often associated with centromeres,
telomeres and the nuclear envelope. Until recently its
function was a mystery; it was assumed not to be transcribed. All these ideas were oversimplified. Some
organisms like budding yeasts lack visible chromatin
condensation in both mitosis and interphase and others
like euglenoids have visibly condensed chromosomes
throughout the cell cycle. Heterochromatin generally
has a low density of ordinary protein-coding genes; but
much is transcribed at some stage of the life history to
make transient non-coding RNA of varied functions.
Long ago I postulated that heterochromatin is really
DNA that has a largely structural role, such that its

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

volume and degree of folding or unfolding can be
modulated according to its needs - both in the interphase nucleus (where volume needs to be modulated at
different developmental stages) and during mitosis
where the compaction of DNA into centromeres and
the geometric ordering of their kinetochore microtubule
binding sites must be critical [169,175,176]. I also suggested that multicellular organisms may often transcribe
it at stages when maximal nuclear volume was needed
[169,170].
Recent ideas about heterochromatin have been dominated by the discovery that it is typically formed by the
covalent modification of histones and is associated with
an elaborate gene silencing machinery involving small
20-30-nucleotide non-coding RNA (microRNA or
miRNA [177]) and associated enzymes that cut RNA
that miRNA recognises by base pairing [178-181]. The
significance of this vast body of work has been unclear
for nuclear origins because although known in all higher
eukaryotes (specifically Neozoa - all descendants of the
last common ancestor of animals and plants) it was
uncertain which phenomena and molecules were in the
first nucleus. It is best known in the fission yeast fungus
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, where RNA polymerase II
transcribes heterochromatin (especially centric) only
briefly during S phase and the RNA silencing machinery
chops up the transcripts (recognised via double stranded
loops) to make miRNAs which direct the histone deacetylating and methylating machinery for transmitting the
heterochromatic state to the same locations in newly
replicated DNA [182-185]; a form of epigenetic positional control. Plants use different specialized RNA polymerases (IV and V) for transcription and methylate
DNA as well as histones to make heterochromatin, but
the principle of RNA silencing and the machinery for
generating and using small RNA is similar across all
neozoa. Just enough is known about gene silencing and
histones in trypanosomes to say that the basic gene
silencing machinery was already present in the eukaryote cenancestor, but probably with substantially lower
molecular complexity than in animals. As in neozoa, all
four core histones are acetylated and methylated (sometimes at homologous sites) in trypanosomes [186], and a
limited number of homologous acetylating, deacetylating, and methylating enzymes (mostly targeting lysines)
exist; there are also a few chromatin remodelling
enzymes and histone-binding proteins with bromodomains, PDH fingers and Tudor domains, so this basic
machinery all evolved in the ancestral eukaryote. There
is also clear evidence for telomere silencing, which presumably evolved in the ancestral eukaryote when telomeres arose making chromosomes linear. But it is
unclear whether their core histones are phosphorylated
or ubiquitinated; though core histone phosphorylation

Page 26 of 78

by aurora kinase can occur in vitro in trypanosomes, it
is likely that the mechanisms and their uses are simpler
in Euglenozoa.
In neozoa, heterochromatin assembly at the centromere is typically a prerequisite for the loading of CenpA
onto kinetochores and therefore for binding spindle
microtubules (i.e. in all but budding yeasts (Saccharomyces), which secondarily evolved point centromeres
where a different histone variant Cse-1 is loaded directly
onto centromeric DNA in association with proteins able
directly to recognize the centromeric DNA sequence
[187]; model systems are often the exception to the rule,
as for E. coli and SMCs). Neozoan heterochromatin is
marked by heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) which
recognises lysine 9 (K9) in histone H3, directing methyltransferase Clr4 to methylate it. However trypanosome
H3 lacks lysine K9, having four fewer amino acids in
this region, so like Saccharomyces they must also use
different machinery for assembling heterochromatin. As
archaebacterial histones [188] lack the N- and C-terminal tails that in eukaryotes are important for the chromosome condensation cycle and which are modulated
by acetylation and methylation, the slightly shorter Nterminal tails of trypanosomatids plausibly represent the
ancestral eukaryotic condition, but until we know more
about H3 and H4 in other Euglenozoa we cannot be
sure that they are not secondary deletions. Although
archaebacteria do not acetylate histones, they do acetylate their other major chromatin protein, Alba [188]
which is a prerequisite for Mcm function in replication
[189]; Alba probably evolved from a more universal
RNaseP protein [190]; deacetylation is done by a homologue of the eukaryotic Sir2 histone deacetylase, so the
acetylation/deacetylation machinery was in place in the
neomuran ancestor before the origin of the nucleus and
could be co-opted as soon as histone tails were added
(probably the key step in evolving eukaryotic chromatin)
and gene duplication produced H2A and H2B and octomeric nucleosomes and the associated capacity for
reversible condensation, for which histone H1 modifications are also important (in neozoa at least).
Gene silencing depends on small non-coding RNAs
that bind to a protein of the Argonaute/PIWI family to
form a complex that recognises targets for destruction
or repression [191]. Also always involved are homologues of RNase III, an endonuclease that in all organisms
cuts prerRNA during rRNA formation [192]. Some bacteria have Argonaute proteins [193,194], so both key
enzymes were present in the neomuran ancestor before
eukaryotes evolved. Moreover archaebacteria have a
variety of small non-coding RNAs [195]; of these, small
nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), which guide the processing
machinery for prerRNA in all neomura (both for methylation and other modifications of nucleotides and

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

cutting the backbone) [196,197] evolved in their cenancestor as did the protein fibrillarin - the catalyst of prerRNA methylation and a core protein of nucleoli, the
part of the nucleus where prerRNA is processed and
ribosomal subunits assembled (after their cytoplasmically made proteins are imported into the nucleus). Bacterial RNase IIIs all have a single RNase III domain (as
do at least some of those that process prerRNA in
eukaryotes [198]) and thus function as homodimers so
that the two strands of the target double-stranded RNA
undergo staggered cuts by separate active centres. The
RNase III eukaryotic homologues involved in gene silencing (the most ancient one is usually called dicer) have
two adjacent RNase III domains, produced by internal
tandem duplication of a gene duplicate of class I RNase
III in the ancestral eukaryote, which can cut both
strands as a monomer [199]. During gene silencing
dicer generates 21-23 nucleotide fragments. Dicer of
neokaryotes has an N-terminal RNA helicase domain
and a central PAZ domain as does Argonaute, but the
two dicer-like RNase IIIs of trypanosomes lack both
domains, whereas the excavate Giardia has the PAZ
domain but not the helicase domain [200]. I suggest
that the simple situation in trypanosomes (Euglenozoa)
which is most like the ancestral neomuran class RNase
III was the ancestral condition for dicer and that the
PAZ domain was added in an early excavate and the
helicase domain in the ancestral neozoan. This progressive increase in complexity of dicer agrees perfectly with
the tree topology of Fig. 1 (with the first eukaryotic
divergence between Euglenozoa and neokaryotes), and
means that extra dicer functions were added during
eukaryote evolution and we must be cautious in generalising functions so far demonstrated only in neozoa to
other eukaryotes and to their cenancestor.
What then was the first function for these small
RNAs? In neozoa three functions are known: developmental regulation by gene silencing (either during or
after transcription); destroying transcripts of viruses or
endogenous retroelements; heterochromatin formation
(and possibly other aspects of chromosome structure or
stability). It has been suggested that defence by destroying RNA of parasitic genetic elements may have been
the first function [201]. However, I do not find that
plausible because the need for such defence has been
present for billions of years and dicer did not evolve in
bacteria despite suitable precursors being present.
Developmental regulation also is a primordial need, not
specifically eukaryotic. We must explain why dicer-generated small RNAs evolved specifically during eukaryogenesis. Facilitating heterochromatin formation is the
most obvious function that does this, but others connected with eukaryotic novelties are also possible. I originally proposed that heterochromatin evolved first for

Page 27 of 78

folding centromeric and telomeric chromatin appropriately and then spread to interstitial chromosomal
regions by the possibly selfish transposition of heterochromatin labelling sequences - the former to provide a
strong enough selective advantage to evolve a complex
machinery and the latter to explain the apparently haphazard distribution of interstitial constitutive heterochromatin [175]. Later I argued that the primary
selective force for the origin of heterochromatin was
probably the folding of centrosomal histones to allow
accurate DNA segregation by mitosis [18]. Small RNAs
could provide a sequence-specific mediator between heterochromatin determining sequences and heterochromatin establishing proteins, whether facilitators of
posttranscriptional modification of histones or of the
loading of special proteins onto those regions. In neokaryotes, heterochromatin structure itself is the prerequisite for loading the centromeric histone CenpA onto
adjacent DNA [202]; small RNAs are not themselves
needed; their function is simply to ensure that centromeres form in the right place. As heterochromatin formation mechanistically precedes CenpA loading in
neokaryotes but CenpA is absent in Euglenozoa, centromeric heterochromatin probably evolved before CenpA
and was, I postulate, the primary determinant of centrosome function in early eukaryotes and probably evolved
in the prekaryote during the origin of mitosis prior to
the cell nucleus. Trypanosomes do use both histone
methylation and deacetylation in cell cycle related controls [186,203] and Argonaute (and thus small RNAs) is
essential for proper DNA segregation [204] (I suggest
through controlling centromeric heterochromatin) and
some trypanosomatids use small RNAs for suppressing
transposons [205] and silencing their own genes [206].
However their canonical case of gene silencing is of
genes located near telomeres that probably exploited a
pre-existing telomeric gene silencing machinery (see
next section). In trypanosomes one Argonaute protein is
used for controlling chromosome segregation and also
mRNA in polysomes for posttranslational control [205],
while another targets exogenous RNA [207]. Probably
the first eukaryote had a single Argonaute [208] primarily concerned with heterochromatin assembly. The
heavy emphasis on translational control in trypanosomes
is not likely to be a primitive character, but is probably
a secondary consequence of the evolution of polycistronic messengers and universal trans-splicing of mini
exons to pre-mRNA in the ancestor of Euglenozoa
[59,209-211], coupled with the virtual abandonment of
transcriptional control, which must have occurred after
Euglenozoa diverged from neokaryotes. The fact that
gene control in neokaryotes is largely transcriptional as
in prokaryotes means that this must have been true also
of the eukaryote cenancestor. Likewise the use of

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

histone variants to label the boundaries of polycistronic
transcripts in Euglenozoa [212,213] is almost certainly a
secondary innovation for them, but it could have
evolved from a more basic early eukaryotic use of histone variants to label functional chromosome domain
boundaries.
I suggest that gene repression by small RNAs (miRNAs) and suppression of exogenous viral or transposons
transcripts by destruction via analogous small silencing
RNAs (siRNAs) could both easily have evolved and be
applied to a great variety of targets according to the specific needs of different lineages after the basic small
RNA-based machinery evolved for centromeric assembly
and was modified for telomeric chromatin. Both latter
functions are general for all eukaryotes, but specific
gene repressions such as mating type silencing in yeast
or variant surface antigen repression in the parasites
Giardia and trypanosomatids are lineage-specific exploitations of a more basic pre-existing machinery. Various
eukaryotes have secondarily lost the capacity for suppressing exogenous RNA by siRNA (also called RNA
interference), e.g. S. cerevisiae ([214], but related budding yeasts have retained it [215]) and Trypanosoma
cruzi (but T. brucei retains it). That such organisms still
have some heterochromatin suggests that the origin of
heterochromatin was more complex than I have implied;
study of its types and functions in Euglenozoa broadly
are important for clarifying its origin. The secondary
origin of centromeres by direct binding of centrosomal
proteins to specific DNA sequences (bypassing typical
heterochromatin) that evolved in budding yeasts may
have predisposed some of them (e.g. S. cerevisiae) to
lose the standard siRNA mechanism, as purifying selection for efficient centromere function would no longer
retain it.
A more broadly distributed form of miRNA that probably evolved almost as early as centromeric small RNAs
is miRNAs derived from snoRNAs, which arose at least
as early as excavates, being found in Giardia as well as
across neozoa [216]. One potential hypothetical function
for snoRNA-derived miRNA that might be universal
would be the positional control of nucleolar heterochromatin which is present in most eukaryotes and likely to
be important in nucleolar architecture. snoRNAs
evolved in the ancestral neomuran and come in two
classes, boxC/D snoRNAs that recognize sites for
methylation (or in one case - U3 - proper folding of
prerRNA for cleavage [217]) and boxH/ACA snoRNAs
that recognize prerRNA sites for isomerization to pseudouridine; each interacts with a different 4-protein catalytic complex. They underwent little change during the
origin of the nucleus; trypanosomatid and euglenoid
snoRNAs are notably simpler than those of neokaryotes
(including the excavate Giardia) and more closely

Page 28 of 78

resemble those of archaebacteria [218-220], giving additional strong support to the primary eukaryote divergence being between Euglenozoa and neokaryotes (Fig.
1). Unsurprisingly on this view of the root, U3, which is
far more variable in length than other eukaryotic snoRNAs, is shortest in trypanosomatids [217].
Origins of telomeres and telomeric heterochromatin

The primary reason d’être for telomeres was to solve the
end replication problem of linear chromosomes [221]
and the telomerase machinery could in principle have
been recruited either from host enzymes or from exogenous selfish genetic elements [70,222]. Linear chromosomes have evolved several times in viruses, bacteria,
and mitochondrial DNA as well as during the origin of
eukaryotes and the solution to the end replication problem has been varied. Probably in most cases the original fragmentation of the once circular chromosomes
was accidental and all mechanisms were ad-hoc rescues.
The origin of linear eukaryotic chromosomes may have
occurred in the prekaryote prior to the origin of the
nuclear envelope if meiosis (see below) began then,
since odd numbers of meiotic crossovers or mitotic sister chromatid exchanges in circular chromosomes produce circular dimers, resulting in accidental breaks
during DNA segregation [11,70]. Even before the origin
of the nucleus telomeres would have acquired additional
proteins to help block accidental covalent joining of
ends of different chromosomes; a key protein involved
in this end protection is Rap1 [223] that must have
been present in the ancestral eukaryote as it present in
trypanosomatid telomeres, where it is also essential for
silencing genes located in telomeric heterochromatin
[224,225]. Telomeric and centromeric gene silencing
may both be by-products of the assembly of heterochromatin. Telomeric heterochromatin depends not only on
region-specific proteins like Rap1, but also on others
shared with centromere biogenesis; histone acetylases
are involved [203] and the mi-RNAs derived from snoRNAs [216] potentially target the telomere-located variant
surface antigen proteins. If this is also true of Euglenozoa it could mean that snoRNA derived miRNAs were
recruited for telomere heterochromatin formation even
in the first eukaryote. However, when the nuclear envelope evolved (see next two sections) telomeres would
have acquired additional functions for attaching to it.
Both in interphase and meiotic prophase telomeres are
normally attached to the nuclear envelope. Probably the
compacted nature of both centromeric and telomeric
heterochromatin were prekaryotic preadaptations that
would have facilitated the attachment of endomembranes to the surface of chromatin, the central evolutionary innovation in the origin of the nuclear envelope.
The nucleolus also typically has associated

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

heterochromatin, which also might have evolved before
the nucleus and might as suggested above depend on
small RNAs for its positional control.
Phagocytosis, endomembranes, mitosis and novel cell
cycle controls

It is often overlooked that internalisation of DNAattachment sites by primitive phagocytosis would automatically produce an endomembrane vesicle with the
chromosome attached to its surface by bacterial membrane proteins that bind DNA [4]. Almost certainly
some such proteins were retained for similar DNA-binding duties in the inner membrane domain of the NE
during eukaryogenesis. Likely candidates are Man1 (its
MSC domain is related to the DNA-binding helix-turn
helix fold of many bacterial transcription regulators) and
RfB [14,17]. There had to be much continuity in DNA
attachment and segregation processes during eukaryogenesis, despite its radical nature, or cells would die [4].
This DNA-bearing endomembrane was the NE precursor [4]. Such internalization of DNA must immediately
have caused segregation problems [4,70], for any membrane division machinery carried with it might divide
the endomembrane after DNA replication, yielding two
daughter DNAs attached to separate cisternae, these
would not be attached to the cell surface, which initially
might still divide by an FtsZ ring. Without direct physical coordination of division of surface and endomembranes, daughters lacking DNA or having multiple
chromosomes would inevitably be produced at a fair frequency until protoNE/DNA segregation became less
random [3,4]. Avoiding this was the primary selective
force for the radical origin of mitosis [3,4,70]; as suggested above the difficulty of the transition may have
been somewhat mitigated by the transitional intermediate being multigenomic, so unequal divisions would produce DNA-free cells with lower frequency than if there
were only one genome per cell. Provided that the transitional cell had a uniquely strong compensating advantage that completely set it apart from all bacterial
competitors (eating other cells) it could still enjoy net
reproductive success and rapid population growth
despite the handicap of generating a proportion of
DNA-less daughters.
Once it achieved this degree of success the main competition would be among its offspring, leading to
increased segregational efficiency of the best lineage,
with all the less efficient ones dying out. This same
principle would apply to all innovative aspects of eukaryogenesis, ensuring that there was probably only one
eventually successful lineage surviving the transition,
with no half-evolved lineages persisting long enough to
become ecologically important. Mis-segregation could
be avoided only by coordinating division of both

Page 29 of 78

membranes through novel indirect physical connections
to the cell surface. As the surface skeletal bacterial protein MreB had already undergone duplication and
evolved into actin and Arps for phagocytosis, other gene
duplications produced Arps to nucleate a contractile
actomyosin ring for dividing the surface membrane [6];
even in eubacteria the divisome includes an actin relative, FtsA [226]. Membrane division also needs membrane deforming and membrane scission proteins. It
now appears that novel proteins of this sort evolved
during the neomuran revolution when the peptidoglycan
wall was replaced by surface glycoproteins. In eubacteria
it is presumed that the actual membrane scission might
involve the growth of the wall and formation of the new
murein septum, though all the machinery involved has
not been identified [227]. Obviously that could not continue when murein was lost. Instead ancestral neomura
evolved a novel membrane deforming and scission
machinery using proteins ancestral to both the ESCRT
III complex of eukaryotes [228] and the CdvA, B proteins of (mainly) crenarchaeote archaebacteria [229,230].
In eukaryotes this is involved in membrane division during cytokinesis and endosome division and in archaebacteria in cytokinesis and membrane blebbing into the
environment [231]. The mesophilic former crenarchaeotes now called Thaumarchaeota [232] retain both the
old FtsZ and the new ESCRT-like division machinery
(which probably have complementary functions), but
hyperthermophilic crenarchaeotes lost FtsZ (and so
could not be ancestral to eukaryotes unless eukaryotes
got their tubulin ancestor from FtsZ mitochondrial
ancestor - very unlikely) and retained only ESCRT-like
division machinery (Thermoproteales evolved a third
unknown mechanism for their odd snapping division),
as did eukaryotes (assuming tubulin evolved from TubZ
not FtsZ). Conversely euryarchaeotes except Thermoplasma lost ESCRT-like division proteins. Another
membrane division novelty, the large GTPase dynamin,
which promotes division by forming a helical collar
around the neck of constricted membranes, evolved
later in the ancestor of eukaryotes only. Many dynamin
paralogues evolved for different functions: cytokinesis,
vesicle budding from the Golgi, endocytosis, peroxisome
(probably all before the origin of the nucleus during
endomembrane diversification [27]) and also for nuclear
fusion (see below); and later mitochondrial division, and
even later a plant cytokinetic one was further duplicated
to help chloroplast division [233].
Another likely consequence of murein loss was a basic
change in the termination of DNA replication. The
ancestral mechanism in eubacteria is DNA site-specific
and tightly linked to murein septation, and involves a
recombinase (Xer in proteobacteria) that unlinks catenanes by site-specific recombination at the terminus

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

[234,235], together with a DNA translocase (FtsK in
proteobacteria) that strips proteins from DNA and helps
unlinking [236]. This machinery was lost in the ancestral
neomura, which all use non-site specific DNA termination mechanisms and different ways of controlling DNA
replication in relation to the cell cycle, including novel
topoisomerase II enzymes that can separate intertwined
sister DNAs. As argued before [12], many novel features
of neomuran DNA replication machinery and its control
stem from the origin of histones rather than the loss of
murein in the cenancestral neomuran. This is arguably
so for the new preinitiation machinery involving Mcm
proteins and Cdc6 discussed below.
Triplication of a TubZ-like gene in the ancestor of
eukaryotes alone to yield g-tubulin (centrosomes) and
a- and b-tubulins making microtubules [3,6] provided a
new machinery for DNA segregation, but as Fig. 3 indicated an initial key role may have been surface stabilisation to prevent DNA internalisation by phagocytosis.
Initially there was no need for kinetochores and microtubule attachment to DNA since centrosomes and chromosomes were both bound to the membrane (Fig. 3c).
DNA and endomembrane would automatically be cosegregated if microtubule polymerisation pushed daughter
centrosomes apart [3,6], as is postulated for TubZ.
Later, efficiency increased by evolution of kinesin
motors to actively slide apart antiparallel centrosome-tocentrosome microtubules (Fig. 3c), and probably later
still of dyneins to move vesicles and chromosomes
towards the minus end of microtubules (Fig. 3e, f). Thus
all major elements of mitotic spindles, possibly remaining through interphase as stable half-spindles, probably
evolved before the nucleus [3,4,6], though I suspect that
dynein, whose sister paralogue is midasin (a giant protein involved in rRNA export from the nucleus) may
only have evolved at the same time as the nuclear envelope; most dyneins are concerned with ciliary function. I
reserve discussion of the origin of centrioles (whose
basic function is generating cilia) and cilia themselves to
a later paper because of its complexity and because they
are not fundamental to mitosis, being just ‘there for the
ride’ [237-240], even though they originated prior to the
eukaryote cenancestor. That FtsZ starts to assemble at
the time of initiation of DNA replication [241] is intriguingly similar to the synchronization of centriole duplication at the beginning of S-phase; might the timing of
g-tubulin’s initial assembly have been inherited from
bacteria? By contrast to the more optional centrioles, as
soon as protoER/NE became a distinct genetic membrane [85], its segregation without loss was as important
for viability as that of DNA [163].
Efficient segregation and avoidance of DNA breakage
(whether by entanglement with molecular motors effecting chromosome or vesicle movement or by contraction

Page 30 of 78

by the new actin contractile ring) required greater chromosome compaction [4,11,70]. Thus histone H3 and/or
H4 (both arose in the neomuran ancestor [12,13])
underwent duplication and major modification, yielding
histones H2a and H2b, forming octomeric nucleosomes,
and an H1 precursor already present in the actinobacterial ancestor (lost by archaebacteria) [12], was
recruited to link them as solenoidal 30 nm chromatin
fibres. Methylating, phosphorylating, and acetylating
enzymes were recruited and temporally coordinated to
effect a chromosome condensation cycle (aurora kinase
phosphorylates opisthokont H3 and Cdk1 does for H1
[242]), with looser interphase transcribed chromosomes
alternating with inactive mitotic chromosomes of 30 nm
fibre loops tightly folded around a proteinaceous core,
including especially DNA topoisomerase II, essential to
relieve positive supercoiling during transcription and to
separate tangled sister DNAs. A further histone duplication generated CenpA, the core constituent of centromeres. It was previously assumed that this allowed
evolution of specific microtubule binding directly to
chromatin for the first time and thus fully developed
mitosis and that it arose in the cenancestor of eukaryotes [12]. However, the rerooting of the eukaryote tree
between Euglenozoa and other eukaryotes makes it possible that the apparent absence of CenpA in kinetoplastid Euglenozoa is the primitive state for all Euglenozoa
and eukaryotes generally and that CenpA evolved only
in the ancestor of neokaryotes (all eukaryotes other than
Euglenozoa: [9]); CenpA homologues are present in
excavates, including the earliest diverging Percolozoa, e.
g. Naegleria [212]. Given that minichromosomes or
yeast and trypanosomes can be segregated accurately
without all the machinery associated with typical large
chromosomes the ability to move organelles bipolarly
on spindles is probably more basic and general than the
specific modes of attachment. As suggested above the
most fundamental innovation for centromeres may have
been the origin of properly folded centromeric heterochromatin assembled at positions controlled by the base
pairing of small RNAs. The requirement of Argonaute
in trypanosomes for segregation of both mini and ordinary chromosomes [118], which do not have the same
kind of kinetochores (and neither has CenpA), supports
this.
That separase is needed but cohesin is not for trypanosome minichromosomes whereas both are needed for
the large chromosomes [149] confirms the multiplicity
or redundancy of the segregation machinery, as does its
ability to segregate other organelles such as centrioles,
Golgi, mitochondria and the nuclear envelope ER; in
many protozoa the singleness and nuclear attachment of
peroxisomes means that they also must be attached to
the segregation machinery [158]. That segregation of

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

these organelles may depend on similar mechanism to
chromosome disjunction is shown by mammal cohesin
being involved in centriole adhesion and separase cleavage of Scc1 (perhaps recruited to centrosomes by protein Aki1) causing their separation [243]. As separase
mediates centriole separation in both trypanosomes and
mammals, cohesin was probably recruited for attaching
parent and daughter centrioles when centrioles first
evolved prior to the eukaryote ancestor (between stages
e and f on Fig. 3). The evidence that eukaryotes were
ancestrally biciliate and that even the cenancestor had
evolved ciliary transformation from a younger anterior
to an older posterior cilium [9] means that proteolytic
separation of mutually attached old and next generation
centrioles must date from then. It is remarkably simplifying that chromosomes and centrioles use the same
mechanism for adhesion and separation despite their
fundamentally different structures and modes of
duplication.
Very little is known about the molecular mechanisms
of mitosis in Euglenozoa, except that mitosis differs
cytologically in several respects from that of neokaryotes
as well as among the euglenozoan classes, always lacking
a chromatin condensation cycle (permanently condensed
in euglenoids, permanently diffuse in kinetoplastids); in
trypanosomatids there are often both minichromosomes
(often more than the number of spindle microtubules so
their segregation is unconventional); euglenoids also can
have large numbers of small chromosomes; localised
sites for binding DNA topoisomerase II may correspond
with centromeres in some but not all trypanosomatid
chromosomes [212,213]. Comparative studies of molecular mechanisms in Euglenozoa should greatly clarify the
origin and early evolution of mitosis.
Two other key features of the eukaryote cell cycle
[244] probably arose at about the same time as centromeres: DNA replication licensing and pervasive anaphase proteolysis and cycle resetting. Internalisation of
DNA by phagocytosis would have disrupted not only
the spatial coordination of DNA segregation but also
the temporal coordination of replication and cell division as practised by bacteria [70]. This would have
immediately been exacerbated by the origin of centromeres, because efficient mitotic DNA segregation totally
removed the ancestral stabilizing selective force requiring only a single replicon per chromosome so replication termination could directly signal division to occur
directly between the only two daughter replicon termini
[70]. Thus inevitable recurrent mutations multiplying
replicon origins or termini previously stringently
removed by purifying selection for >2 Gy would suddenly be harmless and spread like wildfire [70] (and be
beneficial, as multiple replicons would ensure more
rapid completion of replication long before division

Page 31 of 78

might try segregating incomplete daughters and abolish
wasteful overlapping rounds of replication [70]). Likewise mutations making several separate chromosomes
would spread automatically, as mitosis, unlike bacterial
systems, can cope with many [70]. Furthermore, rapid
replication of numerous replicons removed any constraint for circularity arising from the need for replication forks to converge on a single terminus and signal
completion, making mutations for linearity less harmful
[70]. Thus, the characteristic multi-replicons of eukaryote chromosomes (and in part their linearity) are consequences of the origin of mitosis plus mutation
pressure, not positive selection [70]. Having multiple
replicons caused problems for ensuring that all replication was complete before division. The two solutions
were evolution of Mcm-based DNA licensing to ensure
all replicons initiated together, and of cyclins and
recruitment of protein phosphorylation, dephosphorylation and proteolysis to coordinate this with cell growth,
so that on average a round of replication was initiated
at every doubling of cell size, with mitosis being inhibited till its completion. Mcm proteins themselves
evolved earlier in the neomuran ancestor as they are
also present in archaebacteria [245], but not apparently
eubacteria, and work as a six-protein DNA helicase that
moves replication forks. In archaebacteria and in the
early diverging kinetoplastid Euglenozoa [246] replication origins are recognised by the protein Cdc6, which
with the help of a partially related protein Cdt1 loads
the Mcm hexamer onto replication origins. In neokaryotes the system is more complex: an additional prereplication complex consisting of up to six different origin
recognition complex (ORC) proteins is also required. A
major domain of five ORC proteins (Orc1-5) is related
to Cdc6. I proposed that at least two of them (Orc1 and
Orc2) evolved by gene duplication from Cdc6 in the
ancestral neokaryote after it diverged from Euglenozoa
[9], but that Orc4 (apparently missing from Naegleria)
evolved only after the divergence of Percolozoa from
other eukaryotes. Orc6 evolves faster and its origin is
less clear. It thus appears that not all features of the
ORC system that are universally present in higher
eukaryotes (Neozoa) were present in the first eukaryotes
and that the neozoan cell cycle control system probably
evolved in stages during the successive divergences of
Eozoa. Direct biochemical studies of excavate and euglenozoan cell cycle controls are essential to test this and
elucidate the various steps.
Proteasomes, which probably arose in thermophilic
actinobacterial ancestors of neomura to degrade denatured proteins [13], were complexified in the ancestral
eukaryote by numerous gene duplications and access to
them for destruction became controlled by the novel
ubiquitin system and they were recruited for anaphase

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

proteolysis. Numerous proteins, including especially the
cohesin loops [247-249] that hold sister DNA molecules
together from replication onwards (even in bacteria;
they are also Smc proteins related to condensins) [63],
were thus destroyed at the anaphase transition: the key
switch of the eukaryote cell cycle [244]. It may be that
this system is simpler in Euglenozoa and did not evolve
all at once; one difference is that unlike in higher eukaryotes trypanosomatid Cdc6 is not degraded at S phase
and persists in association with chromatin throughout
the cycle [250].
Later, additional checkpoints blocking mitosis until
all was ready were added. Attempts to deduce the
order of evolution of cell cycle kinases from paralogue
trees [251] are hopeless, as trees are obviously dominated by systematic biases caused by the radically different ways each family adapted immediately after gene
duplication, against which statistical tests provide no
protection whatever. Kinase trees do not remotely
reflect time, are almost certainly misrooted (a pervasive
problem with paralogue trees [13]), and likely to be
topologically wrong. Fig. 3 of [251] has no valid outgroup and is simply ‘rooted’ among the three longest
branches; cdc28 may appear late merely because since
the cenancestor it evolved 2-3 times slower than them.
All we can safely conclude from those trees is that all
major mitotic and meiotic controls existed before the
cenancestor (and the subsequent relative evolutionary
rates of each paralogue). However gene duplication
order is less important than the principle that the pervasive selective force of avoiding mis-segregation and
DNA breakage made the eukaryote cell cycle, which
was a rescue operation after the genetically immensely
disruptive effects of DNA/membrane internalization by
phagocytosis, which arose because of its immense
trophic benefits despite this harm. Thus much of
eukaryogenesis occurred to find a new equilibrium in
which the benefits of phagocytosis could persist without its severe genetic costs. It is not intrinsically better
to divide cells the eukaryote rather than the prokaryote
way, but if DNA is attached to endomembranes instead
of the cell surface there is no other option but a radically new solution, which was clearly constrained by
the possible precursors that happened to be available
and the new cell structure.
Thus, prior to compartmentation that finally made the
nucleus, many features of eukaryotic chromosomes,
including the chromatin condensation cycle and novel
replication controls and novel segregation machinery,
had probably evolved as an indirect consequence of the
changeover from surface membrane to mitotic DNA
segregation. As soon as the novel replication and other
cell cycle controls were in place (necessitated to complete replication well before mitosis which is sudden at

Page 32 of 78

anaphase and not gradual and spread out over the
whole cell cycle as in bacteria) accidental duplications of
replicon origins inevitably spread them across the whole
chromosome, but this would also have been positively
selected as simultaneous replication at many points
could compensate for the much slower movement of
replication origins though nucleosomes and allow
shorter cell cycles than otherwise); overall replication
time would no longer limit genome size. There is no
reason to think that an increase in genome size per se,
which in eukaryotes is independent of organismal complexity [17], or quantitative population genetic factors
such as effective population size were determinants of
such a radical change in genome organization, as is
sometimes claimed [79]. The above concentrated on the
cell’s trophic phase, but the cenancestral eukaryote also
had resting cysts [3]. The evolution of syngamy and
meiosis were probably associated respectively with
encystation and excystation; a later section argues that
the fundamental reason for the origin of sexual cycles
with haploid and diploid nuclei was the conflicting
selective forces during growth and dormancy (cell multiplication and survival respectively). However, I first consider the next steps in the origin of the nucleus of
trophic cells, even though in reality sex-related chromosomal evolution was probably concurrent with the evolution of interphase nuclear structure.
Nucleocytoplasmic separation: a two phase evolution

NPCs must have evolved in two stages with different
selective advantages [5]. Initially the basic octagonal
cylinder embedded in the NE evolved, primarily to prevent complete fusion of ER cisternae (Fig. 3d) around
chromatin, which would have been lethal by preventing
transcripts reaching the cytoplasm and stopping growth
[4,5]. Later this wide cylinder, allowing nucleocytoplasmic exchange by passive diffusion (Fig. 5a), was constricted by inserting the inner FG repeat nucleoporins
(Nups) to exclude ribosomes from the nucleus and
DNA and RNA polymerases and RNA processing complexes from the cytoplasm, and active transport machinery evolved to export and import them (Figs 3e, 5b). FG
repeat proteins have long domains consisting of numerous repeats in which the basic amino acid phenylalanine
(F) and the acidic amino acid glutamic acid (G) predominate, leading to a structure that is far less ordered
than in most proteins. While probably a little more
ordered than random coils, the FG-repeat Nups appear
to form a hydrophilic meshwork with dynamic properties that impede the spontaneous diffusion of large
macromolecular complexes through the NPCs, but can
be modulated by the temporary binding of karyopherins
[252] that can thus force large macromolecular complexes bound to them through the FG repeat putative

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Page 33 of 78

Figure 5 Two-phase origin of the nuclear envelope and trans-envelope transport. (a). Nucleoporins (Nups) forming the octagonal
cylindrical scaffold evolved by duplications of coat proteins of COPII secretory vesicles with a-solenoid and/or b-propeller domains, being
attached by integral membrane Nups descended from actinobacterial membrane proteins; (b). NPC lumens were narrowed by plugs of FGrepeat-rich Nups, which form a dynamic gel-like meshwork that prevents passive diffusion of macromolecular complexes and mediates active
specifically-targeted nucleocytoplasmic exchange by carrier complexes, typically consisting of large karyopherin proteins and their cargo either
bound directly or by adaptors. (c). Phase I surface view, showing complete Ran GTPase-mediated fusion of RER cisternae prevented by COPII
coat proteins (black blobs) remaining in place to become octagonal NPC scaffolds.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

hydrogel. FG repeat Nups not only dominate the central
plug of the NPCs, but are also prominent in the nuclear
basket that caps the NPCs on their nucleoplasmic face
and in the long cytoplasmic filaments that help to control ingress to the nucleus nuclear on the cytoplasmic
side. A gradient in binding affinity between karyopherins and the FG repeat Nups from weak outside to
strongest on the nuclear basket is instrumental in the
efficient polarised import of karyopherins and their cargos [253]. A basic principle of the evolution of the
NPCs is that karyopherins and FG repeat Nups must
have coevolved, as must karyopherins and their disparate cargos.
Extensive gene duplication and domain shuffling generated the two extensive and structurally different but
functionally complementary protein families, the transenvelope shuttling karyopherins and the FG-repeat
Nups. The selective force for the coupled restriction of
free diffusion of larger molecules and of active transport
across Npcs was the benefit of compartmentation and
specialization; higher concentrations of protein synthesis
enzymes in the cytoplasm only and, especially nucleic
acid synthesis enzymes in the nucleus could be maintained at much lower cost [4,5]; especially important in
reducing cost was the effective exclusion of nuclear proteins from the much larger cytoplasmic compartment,
thereby reducing the biosynthetic load on the cell.
I previously suggested that NPC transport machinery
might in part have arisen from that for secretory vesicles
[5,70]. This seems partially true. The basic octagonal
scaffold Nups have a-solenoid and/or b-propeller
domains clearly related to those of coated vesicles
(COPII from ER; COPI from Golgi; clathrin-associated
adaptins from plasma-membrane and endosomes)
[15-17]. I now suggest that the NPC scaffold evolved
from COPII coats, probably before COPI evolved; at
that time COPII vesicles would be uncoated and fuse
directly with the plasma membrane or protoendomembranes, processes mediated by small GTPases, that
themselves underwent differentiative duplications in
concert with those of vesicle coats that multiplied the
number of genetically distinct endomembranes. Two bpropeller proteins (Sec13/She1) actually form a subcomplex in both COPII coats and NPCs [15-17]. b-propellers have several vanes composed of WD repeats that
are widely present in proteins involved in binding other
proteins (some in bacteria and many in eukaryotes). The
combination of b-propellers and a-solenoid domains
that is found in several core Nups is unique to eukaryotes; as such proteins are centrally involved not only in
NPCs, and coated vesicles, but also in ciliary transport
particles that supply growing ciliary axonemes with
newly made proteins (and had also already evolved prior
to the eukaryote cenancestor), their origin and

Page 34 of 78

diversification by gene duplication and domain shuffling
were centrally important for eukaryogenesis. Since this
paper was written the close structural relationship
between the structural scaffold of the nuclear pore complex and the COPII outer coat lattice has been directly
demonstrated by solving the crystallographic structure
of the Nup85 20 a-helix/Seh1 b-propeller complex, placing their evolutionary relationship beyond reasonable
doubt [254].
The universal binding of the nuclear envelope to chromatin during interphase is a really fundamental feature
of the nucleus of profound importance for the evolution
of eukaryote genome size and for the explanation of
why eukaryote genome size correlates with cell volume
[18], but has been largely overlooked by geneticists and
theorisers about nuclear origins unfamiliar with cell
biology. It was crucial for nuclear envelope evolution,
because its inner membrane and components of the
NPC are bound to chromatin and because the binding
of RanGTP to chromatin, and the exclusion of the
ancestrally soluble RanGAP that mediates its conversion
to RanGDP provide a directional polarity to nucleocytoplasmic transport and nuclear assembly. RanGTP is concentrated in the nucleus because of the chromatinattachment of its cofactor RCC1. Nuclear RanGTP
binds to karyopherins, promoting the disassembly of
cargo from karyopherins involved in import (e.g. importins a and b and the attachment of cargo to those
involved in export of which the exportin Crm1 (exportin
1) that exports ribosomal subunits and many other cargos is most important) [255]. RanGTP remains bound
to karyopherins till they exit the nucleus but is converted to RanGDP in the cytoplasm with the help of the
activator protein RanGAP that promotes GTP hydrolysis
to GDP; free RanGTP is concentrated in the cytosol
because of the cytoplasmic location of RanGAP. In contrast to RanGTP, RanGDP promotes the attachment of
cytoplasmic proteins to karyopherins for import into the
nucleus, but it does not accompany them. Thus nucleocytoplasmic transport continually depletes the nucleus
of Ran; it is replenished by transport to the nucleus of
RanGDP bound not to karyopherin but to a completely
unrelated carrier, an NTF2 dimer, which binds to FGNups in a different but partially similar way [256,257].
Inside the nucleus, RCC1 charges Ran with GTP, dissociating it from NTF2, which is transported back into the
cytosol. The complementary distribution of the two
forms of Ran [258] must have been a pervasive spatial
backcloth against which the nucleocytoplasmic exchange
machinery evolved [259].
Its importance, however, goes way beyond the origin
of the nucleus, because RanGTP is intimately involved
in spindle assembly and mitosis through promoting
kinetochore and centrosome functions. If as I have

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

repeatedly argued the origin of mitosis was so crucial to
the survival of the earliest prekaryote cells that its main
features must have evolved before the nucleus [3,4], it is
reasonable to suppose that the initial function of the
Ran system was for mitosis [260], thus preadapting the
prekaryote for the subsequent and probably immediately
following origin of the nucleus. RanGTP promotes the
assembly of microtubules at the kinetochores, and its
binding to chromatin may have originally evolved for
this reason. Its putatively pre-existing chromatin location explains how the assembly of the envelope (itself
under RanGTPase control) was spatially organized
around chromatin from the outset. If the basic features
of the RanGTP/GDP cycle existed prior to the origin of
the nucleus, it both shaped and facilitated the latter. As
proposed by Jékely [260], RanGTPase probably originated for its mitotic functions by gene duplication and
divergence from Rabs. Prior to the origin of the nuclear
envelope I suggest RanGTPase was already associated
with chromatin by its RCC1 exchange factor that is
essential for the conversion of RanGTP to RanGDP (the
cytosolic form). Thus the RanGTP/GDP cycle and the
chromatin attachment of RanGTP via RCC1 probably
evolved for the control of mitosis including its spatial
aspects in the prekaryote. Interestingly RCC1 is another
b-propeller protein with 7 WD-40 domain blades like so
many other such proteins (e.g. trimeric G proteins, the
vesicular traffic protein Sec13) that proliferated during
eukaryogenesis. Thus even before the origin of NPCs
the cell was spatially polarised into Ran-GTP-rich chromatin and RanGTP-rich cytosol [259]. RanGTPase and
a suite of Ran binding proteins played key roles in both
phases of NPC evolution.
Phase one: from coated vesicles to nuclear pore complex

The key step thereafter for the origin of the nuclear
envelope, I propose, involved duplication and modification of some COPII component(s) that allowed cisternal
fusion without prior total separation of vesicles from the
donor membrane and therefore necessarily without
uncoating (Fig. 5c left). Thus the essential key innovation for making the nucleus was a modification of
COPII coats. As the cisternae fused together, the
COPII-derived coatomers would remain on the membrane (Fig. 5c centre) and automatically become
clumped as cylindrical aggregates, shown in surface view
in Fig. 5c. Thus, a single mechanistic innovation in the
known precursor would at a stroke evolve both a fenestrated nuclear envelope and NPC scaffolds allowing
passive nucleocytoplasmic exchange. Cytoplasmic
motors actively moving COPII, and later other, secretory
vesicles would be prevented from causing DNA damage
and interference with transcription, by getting entangled
with DNA and nascent RNA, especially pre-rRNA,

Page 35 of 78

which being so long (comprising 3 molecules before
cleavage) would be especially susceptible to shearing.
Homotypic fusion of ER-derived COPII vesicles occurs
in modern cells to generate the preGolgi intermediate
compartment [261,262]; allowing it to go ahead without
prior uncoating would generate a plausible precursor of
the nuclear envelope (including its pore complex) in a
single step, provided that cisternae already attached to
chromatin (or COPII vesicles containing chromatinattachment proteins) were also involved in that fusion.
Thus, avoiding DNA and RNA breakage was the primary advantage of the NE and NPC, which initially was
only narrow enough to exclude secretory vesicles but
not ribosomes and polymerases (Fig. 5a). Avoiding DNA
breakage has been criticised as a selective force, by the
claim that there is no problem ‘...during mitosis, even in
species where they are permanently uncondensed,
despite the fact that the nuclear envelope disintegrates
at the beginning of mitosis...’ [122]. This objection is
misleading and invalid. The supposed counter-example
actually indirectly supports my thesis, because the only
eukaryotes in which histones have been lost and DNA is
truly uncondensed during mitosis are peridinean dinoflagellates in which the mitotic spindle is entirely outside the nucleus and the envelope never breaks down
[263-265]. Their perpetually relatively condensed but
histone-free chromosomes [266] probably evolved secondarily only after, almost uniquely, spindle and chromosome separation by evolving intra-NE kinetochores
bypassed the shearing problem by a different route
[267]. However, avoiding transcript breakage, a novel
proposition, was perhaps an even stronger force, not
only for the origin of the NE but also of the gel-like
interphase nuclear matrix [163], in which DNA topoisomerase plays a key role to relieve positive supercoiling
ahead of transcription complexes.
Thus, we have both a plausible physical mechanism
based on known cell biology and a plausible selective
advantage for the origin of the nuclear envelope. As the
envelope-associated part of the NPC involved over a
dozen proteins of the scaffold Nups have a-solenoid
and/or b-propeller domains prior to the eukaryote cenancestor, there must have been a rapid multiplication of
these following the minimal change in just one or two
needed to set the process in motion. In so far as some
of these core scaffold proteins are relocated to kinetochores and/or centrosomes during mitosis, it is possible
that some of these duplications actually preceded the
origin of the core complex and were selected initially for
their functions in mitosis rather than in pore complexes.
However, fruitful speculation along these lines in
impeded by our knowledge of the detailed cell biology
of the mitotic behaviour and possible mitotic functions
of NPC components being primitive and largely

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

restricted to one eukaryote lineage only (opisthokonts,
which include animals and fungi), almost nothing being
known for bikonts, which have an even greater range of
mitotic behavioural diversity than opisthokonts. It is
especially important to study these processes in Euglenozoa as features currently assumed to be universal for
eukaryotes might only characterise neokaryotes. A
related problem is that even within opisthokonts NPC
behaviour differs substantially among organisms with
closed mitosis (e.g. yeasts), open mitosis (animals), or
semi-open mitosis (e.g. Aspergillus); without comparable
knowledge for a good range of bikonts inferring the
ancestral state even for opisthokonts, still less for eukaryotes, is hazardous. A key recent discovery is that a
major core complex of about 10 scaffold Nups (the
Nup107-160 complex in animals; different names in
fungi) behaves as a unit during mitosis. This complex
probably includes proteins with membrane curving
functions likely to have been central to the origin of
nuclear pores, but present knowledge also does not
allow one to deduce which components would minimally have been necessary for the first phase of NPC
evolution and which might have been added later in the
second phase, dominated by the addition of a completely different class of Nups, the FG Nups and their
interactions with karyopherins.
Compartmentation and its consequences: Ran-GTPase,
FG-Nups and karyopherins

Karyopherins, which mediate protein import/export and
the FG-rich Nups with which they interact to allow
nucleocytoplasmic exchanges are both large eukaryotic
gene families with extremely few bacterial homologues
that became highly diversified during eukaryogenesis
prior to the eukaryotic cenancestor [14,17]. The fact
that karyopherins use basic amino acids as nuclear localisation signals (NLS) arguably stems from their major
early cargo having been very basic histones and other
DNA binding proteins [3] as well as basic proteins that
bind RNA, especially ribosomal proteins [259]; early
cargo probably included inner-membrane DNA-binding
proteins [19], that would otherwise be impeded by the
novel integral membrane Nups, unless from the start
NPCs opened to let them cross the NPC NE domain,
and histones. Ribosomal assembly became localised to
the nucleolus probably because transcription of such
long molecules is so slow that it is optimal to start
assembling proteins onto them and process them by
RNA cleavage, and base modification; the neomuran
ancestor already had numerous RNPs and enzymes on a
fibrillarin matrix associated with transcription sites [3].
Evolution normally takes the line of least resistance and
changes as little as possible; stabilising selection prevents
capricious ‘redesign’ so there was no chance of

Page 36 of 78

relocating ribosomal assembly to the cytoplasmic point
of use. tRNAs are exported by attachment to karyopherins by proteins with NLSs, but completely separate
machinery evolved for exporting ribosomal subunits and
another for mRNA [17], indicating that their localisation
was probably perfected in parallel not serially. Messenger RNA capping and polyadenylation probably arose
primarily to prevent RNAase degradation during the
much longer time it would take for mRNA to reach
ribosomes than in bacteria, mitochondria and plastids,
where they can attach during transcription [70]. But
both probably became markers of maturity and readiness for export by the novel mRNA export machinery
that arose by duplication of a bacterial GTPase to make
Nug1p/Nug2p [17]. The ribosome-subunit export
machinery recruited a duplicated neomuran AAA+
ATPase as Rix7P [17], possibly in the ancestral neokaryote, not the first eukaryote.
As previously argued [3,5] a phase of passive restriction of molecular exchange between the nucleoplasm
must be postulated prior to active and selective import
and export. Recently the likely intermediate stages have
been modelled by Jékely [259], demonstrating by diffusion-reaction simulation that partial enclosure of chromatin by membranes with quite large apertures can lead
to marked differences in molecular concentrations,
which makes such intermediates selectively plausible;
furthermore he showed that, even without any membrane boundary, direct or indirect binding of molecules
to chromatin can change local concentrations of diffusible molecules. A limitation of such spatial modelling is
that we do not know the size of the cell in which the
nuclear envelope originated. Even though it almost certainly greatly increased in size compared with its bacterial ancestor [4] during the origin of the endoskeleton
and phagocytosis, it could have been much smaller than
the 20 μm he assumed, which would have made it
harder to develop significant concentration gradients in
the pre-envelope phase than in his model and thus
increase the relative selective advantage of using a membrane and NPCs for effective compartmentation over
simple binding to chromatin. The modelling has heuristic value but is notably oversimplified for the final stage
with NPCs as it ignores the fact that RanGTP is
exported and RanGDP imported on carriers (different
ones) and do not diffuse freely.
Karyopherins have three distinct domains: an N-terminal Ran-binding loop, a central nucleoporin (Nup)binding domain, and a C-terminal cargo-binding motif
that interacts with NLS (in the case of importins) or
NES (in the case of exportins). Their central region that
interacts with Nups consists of HEAT repeats (comprising pairs of antiparallel a-helices) that can bind the FG
repeats of FG nucleoporins. The great diversity of

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

karyopherins and FG Nups must have arisen during
eukaryogenesis from a common ancestor by repeated
gene duplications, probably with some domain shuffling.
As karyopherins have other functions independent of
the nuclear pore complex it is likely that one of these
was the ancestral one. Deciding what that was is not
easy, partly because many of these functions are still
poorly understood. The karyopherin Crm-1 is a member
of the importin-b superfamily of transport receptors
[268] that in addition to nuclear export is also needed
for the intranuclear maturation and possibly export of
the small ribosomal subunit. Crm-1 recognizes a leucine-rich NES [269]. This specificity might stem from
the fact that RanGAP might have been its initial cargo
(whether first to exclude it from the nucleus or even
earlier for mitotic functions). It was recently discovered
that Crm-1 has roles in mitosis (at least in opisthokonts)
as it mediates the recruitment of the RanGAP1/RanBP2
complex to kinetochores and maintains kinetochorefibre integrity [270]. Crm-1 is also involved in centrosome duplication in animals and interacts strongly with
the centrosome (spindle pole body) of fungi [271].
Domain shuffling or quantum divergence was involved
in early karyopherin diversification since Crm-1 has its
own special N-terminal domain that differs from the
globular N-terminal domain of most importins that is a
mixture of HEAT and ARM (armadillo, a related type of
repeat) repeats. Likewise the tRNA exporter (exportin-t)
has a unique C-terminal domain that presumably recognises tRNA cargo. Once Crm-1 became able to export
its first cargo, whatever that was, by binding to leucinerich NESs, additional cargos could be added to its repertoire by adding such residues to pre-existing proteins or
by evolving binding of adaptor proteins already bearing
them to cargo (notably various RNAs) that lack them,
allowing them to piggy back on NES bearers.
Many importins act as cytosolic chaperones and bind
strongly to basic proteins such as histone H1 and some
ribosomal proteins, which would stop them binding to
or interfering with cytoplasmic RNA, e.g. mRNA [272].
This would have been useful even before the origin of
the nucleus. As Jékely [259] pointed out, that might
have been their primary function before they were
recruited as karyopherins. Such acquisition of additional
functions by pre-existing molecules reduces the difficulty of evolving all components of the complex transport machinery simultaneously. Though the basic idea
that some elements of the transport machinery had
evolved before Nups and the envelope is attractive, as is
the idea that chaperones of various sorts were probably
important before compartmentation, I am unconvinced
by his specific suggestion that the primary function was
for binding to ribosomal proteins [259]. This is partly
because different importins are used for different

Page 37 of 78

ribosomal proteins, which suggests secondary recruitment of variants after a primary karyopherin function
was established, partly because some of these bind other
basic proteins (e.g. the importin b-importin7 heterodimer binds rpL4, rpL6 and histone H1 [272]) and I do
not see how one can say that ribosomal protein chaperoning was primary, partly because before the nuclear
envelope evolved ribosomal proteins could have bound
rather quickly to nascent rRNA, which would have been
available in large amounts in the same compartment in
a fairly small cell, and partly because I prefer the idea
that the first nucleoporin was directly associated with
loading proteins, e.g. RanGTP or histones directly onto
chromatin, as Crm-1 does today for mitosis.
One class of chaperones that likely predated the
nuclear envelope is histone chaperones. The two multimers from which the core nucleosome octomers are
made (H3/4 and H2a/H2b) each have different chaperones (e.g. CaAF-1, Asf-1 for H3/4 or for H2a/H2b),
some of which associate with them prior to import.
Though they are imported as macromolecular complexes it is the core histones themselves that bear the
NLS (several that can interact with several different karyopherins; there are always many different karyopherins;
15 in yeast). Core histones are imported by a monomeric importin b, in contrast to many proteins that use
a more complex heterodimer in which importin a acts
as an adaptor between NLS and importin b (including
histone H1: [273]). I suggest that this simpler system,
which is also used for most ribosomal proteins may be
the ancestral one and that the classical one involving
also importin a and more complex NLS is derived.
Once a primitive import system evolved importin gene
duplications would generate many different importins
and numerous molecules that unlike histones did not
have NLS as part of their intrinsic structure could have
added them.
One such clear case of addition of NLS is the export
adapter Nmd3; its C-terminal domain has both NLS for
entering the nucleus and nuclear export signals (NES)
for exiting it so it can shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm. Inside the nucleus it binds to newly made 60S
ribosome subunits and carries them out with it [274].
As the archaebacterial homologue of Nmd3 lacks this
C-terminal domain it was clearly added during eukaryogenesis to allow such shuttling and ribosome export.
The most important and perhaps original export receptor is Crm-1, the karyopherin that mediates export of
the Nmd3-60S-ribosome complex among many others,
e.g. the signal recognition particle, spliceosomal
snRNAs, 5S rRNA, but not most mRNAs. Obviously
karyopherins themselves have to be exported. Most exit
the nucleus as they enter it under their own steam. But
importin a piggy backs on importin b on the way in

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

and on karyopherin 109 on the way out, which might be
interpreted as evidence that it evolved after those two
similarly ubiquitous types.
The ancestral karyopherin may have arisen by gene
duplication from the adaptins that attach clathrin coats
to transport vesicles as they are structurally similar with
HEAT repeats [17]; if the suggestion that the closest
bacterial relatives of these proteins are certain phycobilisome proteins of cyanobacteria [17] stood up to more
thorough study, this could be the first example of lateral
gene transfer from cyanobacterial food of the prekaryote
predator being important in early eukaryote evolution.
That NPCs and Sec13 are not the only nuclear pore
associated proteins with affinities with coated vesicle
proteins strongly supports the view that the origin of a
primitive endomembrane system with various types of
coated vesicles preceded and was more fundamental to
eukaryogenesis than the origin of the nucleus itself
[4,5,11,70,123,163].
The difficulty of deciding on the likely ancestral functions of such pervasive molecules as RanGTP and karyopherins is highlighted by the fact that in animals at least,
importins a and b are both involved in spindle and
nuclear envelope assembly; to be consistent both with
my thesis that some mitotic functions preceded NPCrelated nucleocytoplasmic exchange functions and that
importins a was not part of the ancestral karyopherin
importer one would have to suppose that the mitotic
roles of importin a are secondary (i.e. evolved after
NPCs), which current evidence cannot exclude. An analogous problem concerns the fact that RanGDP is
imported into the nucleus not by karyopherins but by
its own custom importer, NTF2. The suggestion that
this may be because Ran import evolved before karyopherins [17] is implausible for two reasons. Such a small
molecule would be the least likely to be excluded by a
primitive FG Nup plug and could hardly have provided
the first impetus for the evolution of active import. Secondly, if it did evolve first, why did all the other things
that are imported by karyopherins not adopt that carrier. It seems to me that the diversity of karyopherins
argues that they came first and were co-opted for the
transport of any molecule that could acquire NLSs or
could be bound by available or readily evolvable NLSbearing adaptors to karyopherins. Perhaps the RanGDP
is so small that it could not acquire a basic NLS without
disrupting its function. If it did acquire an NLS this
would also be present on RanGTP, which is exported
(by binding to karyopherins), so its addition would contradict the need to export the GTP-bound form and
import the GDP-bound one of the very same protein. It
may have been easier to adopt a different carrier that
would circumvent that contradiction. Its novel acidic Cterminal tail that is recognized by NTF2 was probably

Page 38 of 78

co-opted as the import signal because it is distinctive
and absent from other Rab/Ras family proteins and thus
would not lead to their accidental import into the
nucleus. The suggestion that NTF2 which is essential
for nuclear envelope function was acquired from the
proteobacterial premitochondrial symbiont because
homologues exist widely in eubacteria but not archaebacteria is fallacious, because of the likelihood that this
was one of many eubacterial proteins that were lost by
the ancestral archaebacterium after it diverged from its
neomuran sister from which eukaryotes evolved. Such
proteins are widely present in both actinobacterial and
endobacterial Posibacteria so would have been present
in the ancestral neomuran. Thus the phylogenetic history of this and other nuclear-envelope related proteins
present widely in eubacteria but not archaebacteria do
not constitute evidence that the nucleus evolved after
mitochondria, a fallacious conclusion stemming from
considering archaebacteria to be ancestral to eukaryotes
rather than their sisters, a phylogenetic mistake which
prevents many from accepting that Posibacteria and
with their typically eubacterial genes were ancestral to
both archaebacteria and eukaryotes.
Although there is some redundancy among karyopherins [275] some are essential for a small subset of molecules. Thus import of histone H1 is much more
complex than for core histones, and some ribosomal
proteins require different machinery from the majority.
This complexity suggests that many molecules that were
not initially imported were added later to the import
repertoire in a piecemeal fashion by acquiring a diversity
of NLS recognized preferentially by different karyopherins. Some ribosomal proteins show clear evidence of the
later addition of NLS in expansion segments [276], an
example of the quantum evolutionary impact on ribosomes of the origin of the nuclear envelope earlier postulated [3,70]. Though one might think that replication
and repair enzymes and RNA polymerases were among
the early molecules imported [3], it remains unclear
how many of these, especially RNA polymerase are
imported [277]; the case of transcription initiation factors is interesting in emphasizing that in a large macromolecular complex only some (minimally one)
constituents needs an NLS - thus TAF10 a component
of transcription factor complex TFII (that recognizes
TATA boxes) and other transcription regulatory complexes lacks an NLS but is imported by being bound to
three proteins with histone fold domains that contain
NLS [278]; these histone-fold factors might themselves
have evolved from core histones and thus ancestrally
would have had NLSs.
Transport of multiprotein complexes is a major way in
which evolution can add extra proteins to the transport
repertoire without adding NLS to each; transport of

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

ribonucleoprotein complexes in which at least one protein had an NES was key to the export of RNAs which
themselves could not mutationally acquire NESs.
Because NLSs and NESs are rather generalized, many
proteins would by chance have had weak transport signals that could be improved by mutation, without having to add or insert an extra NLS domain. However the
generalized nature of the signals also means that numerous proteins that do not need to be transported could
by chance confuse the system so there was probably
also selection against such resemblances becoming too
strong. There is evidence from in vivo studies that such
confusion is a real factor [275], emphasizing that evolution has, unsurprisingly, not been able to evolve perfect
discrimination. Though I have speculated as to what
may have been imported or exported early or initially,
one must emphasize that selection for compartmentation would probably not act separately on single molecular types but be a bulk selection for numerous
simultaneous mutations in different genes that collectively yielded economies in protein synthesis or accelerated growth.
Origin of the NE would have complicated sex, requiring nuclear fusion before meiosis, but appropriate timing of Ran GTPase fusion control probably fixed that.
Because selfish DNA, especially transposons and endogenous retroviruses, spreads much more slowly in clonal
than in sexual populations [279,280], a sexual protoeukaryote would have suddenly been inundated by such
genetic parasites [4]. One response was to evolve posttranscriptional gene silencing to destroy double-stranded
RNA.
Nuclear envelope structural proteins and cytoplasmic
organelle attachment proteins

Numerous new NE structural protein and organelle
attachment proteins evolved during eukaryogenesis, but
little is known about them in most organisms and still
less about their evolution. Of special importance for NE
structure and attachments of other organelles to the
nucleus are two families of NE membrane proteins:
those with Sun or KASH domains [281,282]. These two
protein families are jointly responsible for holding
together the two (topologically continuous) NE membranes and for attaching them to the cytoskeleton and
the nucleoskeleton. As Figure 6 shows, Sun-domain protein dimers are embedded in the inner membrane by
membrane spanning domain(s) near their N termini
with their C-terminal Sun domain protruding into the
lumen of the perinuclear cisterna. Their Sun domains
bind firmly to the C-terminal KASH domains of a variety of proteins similarly embedded in the outer membrane of the envelope, forming a linker complex holding
the two membrane domains close together [281]. The

Page 39 of 78

N-termini of the Sun-domain proteins binds firmly to
the DNA of the peripheral heterochromatin, whereas
the N-termini of the KASH proteins are much more
variable, binding to the actin cytoskeleton as well as via
the molecular motors dynein or kinesin to microtubules
[283]. Centrosomes are also attached to the nucleus by
either KASH proteins (animals [284]) or by a Sun protein (Sun-1 in Dictyostelium [285]). The Sun/KASH linker complex forms a mechanically robust bridge
between the inner and outer membranes of the NE that
can firmly bind the nucleus to other organelles or transmit forces from outside motors (as in nuclear migration
in animals [286]). In meiosis cytoplasmic microtubule
motors also move telomeres together, creating the bouquet stage of prophase to help homologous chromosomes pair; Sun-KASH linkers across the NE mediate
this movement [287,288]. In fission yeast Sun-KASH
and other NE proteins link intranuclear centromeres
through the envelope to cytoplasmic microtubules [289].
I propose that the origin of the Sun/KASH protein linkers was a key step in the original attachment of protoER membranes to heterochromatin during the
formation of the nucleus.
Earlier I postulated that lamins were ancestrally
involved at this attachment [4,5,18,163] but this is now
unlikely because, like other intermediate filament family
proteins, they are restricted to animals and known for
sure only in animals with guts and nervous systems
(Cnidaria and above). Sun proteins are much better candidates for a central role in NE origins because they are
evolutionarily more widespread and because of their key
role in ensuring nuclear integrity and attachment to
other cell structures. The Sun domain is related to the
discoidin domain; this broader domain family is present
in all eukaryotes and even in some bacteria such as actinobacteria [17] so would have been present in the
ancestral neomuran ancestor. The Sun-KASH interaction has only been studied experimentally and the locations of the proteins verified in unikonts, but Sun
proteins have been detected through sequence homology
across the neozoa [17,290]. When I studied Sun-1 and
Sun-2 in Dictyostelium by BLASTP I could detect
homologues for Sun-1 also only in neozoa, but using
Sun-2 found plausible homologues with conserved Sun
domains in three phyla of Eozoa including Euglenozoa,
but none in bacteria. KASH proteins are more diverse
in domain structure length and sequence, making such
simple comparisons more difficult. Nonetheless, it is
likely that Sun-domain inner membrane proteins
evolved at a very early stage in the origin of the nuclear
envelope to attach endomembranes directly to chromatin; that is a simpler origin for chromatin membrane
attachment than one mediated by proteins like lamins
that are not themselves inner membrane proteins.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Page 40 of 78

Figure 6 Role of Sun-domain and KASH-domain proteins in nuclear envelope architecture. Sun-domain proteins embedded in the inner
membrane attach it directly to the DNA surface of the peripheral heterochromatin (the nucleoskeleton). Their Sun-domains (yellow) bind to the
KASH domains (purple) of proteins embedded in the outer membrane, which attach it to the cytoplasmic actin filaments, microtubules, and
centrosome of the cytoskeleton. Grey pentagons represent the membrane spanning domain(s) of the KASH-domain proteins and grey rods their
flexible cytoskeleton-binding N-terminal domains, which differ greatly among the various types. Microtubules may be attached to KASH-domain
proteins either by kinesin or dynein motors. The firm Sun-KASH linker complex (known as LINC) within the perinuclear cisterna holds the inner
and outer membrane domains of the NE together with the correct spacing and transmits mechanical forces from cytoskeleton to nucleoskeleton
or vice versa without damaging it. Some eukaryotes, e.g. animals, lobose amoebae and peridinean dinoflagellates, (probably polyphyletically)
evolved a proteinaceous lamina beneath the inner membrane to further strengthen the nuclear periphery, but this was probably absent in the
first eukaryotes; additionally to the universal interactions shown, in animals only cytoplasmic intermediate filaments (IF) attach to KASH proteins
via plectin adaptors and lamin IF proteins associate with the intranuclear domain of Sun proteins. For simplicity the fact that Sun-domain
proteins are homodimers with a coiled coil domain between their two membrane-spanning and chromatin binding domains (lumped here as
grey rectangles) and two Sun domains is not depicted.

KASH proteins would probably have evolved almost
immediately thereafter to stabilise the envelope
mechanically.
Although animal Sun-domain proteins bind to lamins
as well as to DNA or chromatin this is probably not
their primary mode of targeting to the nuclear periphery
as localization there is not prevented by the absence of
lamins; some have known DNA-binding motifs. In Dictyostelium Sun-1 binds directly to DNA and also to a
protein linker to cytoplasmic centrosomes, apparently
independently of the characterized KASH protein. At
least two different Sun-domain inner membrane

proteins had evolved by the ancestral neozoan [290]. I
suggest that a nuclear lamina composed of lamins and
the intermediate filament family as a whole may have
evolved in the ancestral animal (sponge) to increase the
mechanical strength of the giant oocyte nucleus when
the ancestor of animals evolved oogamy (giant eggs and
tiny sperm) and that the family diversified into various
cytoplasmic filaments when epithelia evolved in the first
sponge to give added mechanical strength to them. Different paralogues were probably selected early for
somatic cells and oocytes. The mechanical robustness of
the lamina may have made it essential for it to be

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

reversibly disassembled at mitosis, which may have been
simplest to achieve through fragmentation of the whole
envelope; thus open mitosis [291] probably evolved
simultaneously with the lamina in the ancestral animal.
Choanoflagellates, the closest outgroup to animals, have
semi-open mitosis [292], making it likely that the direct
unicellular ancestor of animals (probably a stem choanoflagellate [293]) also did.
A proteinaceous nuclear lamina evolved independently in amoebae of the amoebozoan subphylum
Lobosa (e.g. Amoeba, Hartmannella), where in the
giant amoebae it is far thicker and more complex than
in animals [294]. Their ancestor lost cilia, centrioles
and all cytoplasmic microtubules so as to focus on
locomotion by actomyosin; a proteinaceous lamina was
probably especially important to protect the nucleus
from shearing forces which must be far greater in such
amoebae that undergo repeated sol-gel transformations
compared with the ancestral zooflagellate eukaryotic
cells where the cytoplasm is almost permanent semirigid actin gel, except during cytokinesis by cell cleavage. Having evolved such a robust lamina lobose
amoebae could dispense with the peripheral chromatin
that underlies the NE in the zooflagellates most closely
related to them (choanoflagellates and Apusozoa).
Apusozoa (apusomonads and planomonads) are either
sister to opisthokonts (animals, Choanozoa, Fungi) or
the paraphyletic ancestors of both opisthokonts and
Amoebozoa and have particularly strongly developed
peripheral and internal heterochromatin in their nuclei,
so must have a higher DNA content per unit nuclear
volume than choanoflagellates. By contrast lobose
amoebae have almost no heterochromatin visible in
interphase, so their DNA per unit nuclear volume must
be rather low (which goes some way to explaining why
getting enough DNA for even simple PCR and sequencing from sparse cultures is often much harder for
Lobosa [295] than other eukaryotes). Another group
that often has giant nuclei and a proteinaceous lamina
are the dinoflagellates. This coupled with the evolution
of an extranuclear spindle with kinetochores embedded
in the nuclear envelope probably allowed peridinean
dinoflagellates to dispense entirely with heterochromatin as a nuclear skeleton and even largely also with histones, which are absent from the majority of their
DNA [296] which is neutralized by divalent cations
instead [297] and sparse bacterial-type DNA-binding
proteins [298,299]; only one standard histone is known,
perhaps involved in double-strand break repair [300];
the loss of histones entailed radically altered transcription factors that bind to TTTT instead of TATA
boxes, but dinoflagellates retain standard telomeres
associated with the nuclear envelope [301] and relatively normal spliceosomal intron splicing [302].

Page 41 of 78

The origin of lamins and open mitosis in animals, a
convergent kind of lamina and open mitosis in Lobosa,
and of the dinoflagellate closed mitosis with extranuclear spindle, are all mentioned as examples of secondary
changes from the ancestral state that must not be
allowed to confuse us in reconstructing the first eukaryote. The peculiar mitosis of dinoflagellates in which
kinetochores are embedded in the NE was once proposed as a model for an early version of mitosis before
microtubules evolved, but that idea became untenable
when it was discovered that they do have microtubules;
I argued long ago that it was irrelevant to the origin of
eukaryotes because dinoflagellates are so complex that
they cannot be primitive and must be very advanced
higher eukaryotes [70], which is demonstrated beyond
question by their branching within the alveolates and
these within the kingdom Chromista that was formed by
the secondary symbiogenetic enslavement of a red alga
(Fig. 1) [9,61,86,87,303]. Despite this irrelevance, dinoflagellate mitosis is oddly still sometimes mentioned as
being germane to the origin of meiosis because telomeres are similarly moved on the NE [290]; though the
movement of dinoflagellate kinetochores may well use
the same cytoplasmic machinery (microtubules and
dynein) as do meiotic pre-bouquet telomeres, and it is
likely that the attachment of both depends on Sundomain inner membrane, it is most unlikely that the
ancillary attachment proteins for telomeres (e.g. Bqt1-4
[304,305]) are related to those of dinoflagellate NE plaques. How peridinean dinoflagellate mitosis may have
evolved from the more normal patterns found in other
alveolates is discussed in [267]. Independently of dinoflagellates, metamonad Parabasalia evolved NE-envelope
embedded centromeres and extranuclear spindle, but
they are equally irrelevant to the origin of mitosis or
meiosis despite sometimes being mentioned in that context. Nonetheless, molecular studies of NE-embedded
peridinean and parabasalian centromeres would be very
revealing for cell biology and evolution.
The ratio of heterochromatin to euchromatin mass
affects the quantitative relationships between genome
size and nuclear and cell size [18]. However the reasons
for its variation even in protists are poorly understood. I
originally assumed that if a nuclear lamina was universally present euchromatin and heterochromatin ought to
be able to serve equally well as a nuclear skeleton and
nuclear volume determinant [169]. On that view it
ought to be more economical of DNA and protein to
use the less dense euchromatin for this function rather
than the denser heterochromatin as less material would
be needed for the same volume. I assumed that the presence of heterochromatin in so many animal and plant
somatic cells mainly reflected the fact that their nuclear
volumes varied so greatly that heterochromatin was only

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

unwound fully to make dispersed chromatin in the largest cells such as giant neurons, whose large nuclei lack
condensed chromatin [169,170,176]. Thus multicellular
organisms would have a complete range of chromatin
unfolding and nuclear volume from such giants to the
most compact nuclei of sperm and red blood cell nuclei
where all is maximally condensed and transcriptionally
inactive. I argued that protists with multiple fission life
cycles with alternation between giant cells with huge
nuclei and tiny ones with compact ones should have
heterochromatin, but that those with simple binary fission cycles should not, and cited much comparative
supportive evidence [306]. However, as recently
explained there are now several clear counter-examples
to that thesis, which must therefore have been oversimplified [18]. Several examples of ordinary binary fission
cell cycles without major changes in nuclear volume
beyond the normal two-fold per cycle but with extensive
heterochromatin, especially on the nuclear periphery,
but also interstitially are now apparent. This include
cryptomonads and haptophytes (interestingly now
grouped together in the chromist subkingdom Hacrobia,
for which extensive heterochromatin was arguably the
ancestral state); Apusozoa [307,308]; choanoflagellates
(probably with a lower heterochromatin/euchromatin
ratio); and euglenoids. In all these cases the whole
group possesses this character. It is noteworthy that in
other whole groups, e.g. lobose amoebae, Excavata, and
in euglenozoan Kinetoplastea and Diplonemea condensed chromatin is largely absent or relatively sparse in
interphase. Thus there is strong phylogenetic constraint;
for many protist groups changes from a heterochromatin-rich to heterochromatin-sparse nuclei or the converse are only made relatively rarely in protist evolution.
One way to rationalize this is to suggest that the
ancestral eukaryote was a middle-sized cell in which
large amounts of heterochromatin were the primary
nuclear skeleton on which the nuclear envelope was
assembled and cryptomonads, haptophytes, and euglenoids, for example, have retained that heterochromatinrich state but that the protist groups with more dispersed chromatin hit upon more economical ways of
making or using their nuclear skeleton or ones more
suited to their individual life styles. I pointed out above
that the evolution of giant nuclei in lobose amoebae and
dinoflagellates was associated with cytological novelties
that arguably allowed them to dispense with heterochromatin as a peripheral nuclear skeleton (the nuclear
lamina of Lobosa and the permanently condensed histone-depleted chromosomes of Peridinea) and depart
radically from the ancestral eukaryote condition. I now
suggest that evolving especially small cells and nuclei
coupled with a relatively rigid cytoplasm may also have
allowed the loss of most peripheral heterochromatin

Page 42 of 78

(and associated metabolic and spatial economy) without
mechanically harmful consequences, and a big increase
in the ratio of coding to non-coding DNA. This may be
why phylogenetically diverse organisms converged on a
largely heterochromatin free-state (free-living budding
yeasts, intracellular Microsporidia, and above all the
nucleomorphs of cryptomonads and chlorarachneans
(relict enslaved nuclei)) or on a sparse heterochromatin
state (the intracellular parasitic coccidian Sporozoa, like
the malaria parasite Plasmodium) and more gene-rich
genomes than most eukaryotes. Somewhat intermediate
relatively small-celled organisms like choanoflagellates,
Filasterea or bodonids with some peripheral heterochromatin but less than Apusozoa or cryptomonads may
have made some minor economy but with less radical
change. In protists there are numerous secondary adaptations affecting the nuclear envelope, for example the
huge macronuclei of ciliates or the large nuclei of actinophryid heliozoa that nucleate axopodia or the huge
nuclei of many Retaria (Rhizaria). This proposal fits
much comparative data but would require several independent reductions in heterochromatin richness in excavates and within plants and chromists, which is not
unreasonable.
I have long thought it an attractive idea that both centromeres and telomeres were ancestrally attached to the
nuclear envelope [4,309]. Their heterochromatin could
have been a major fraction of the heterochromatin that
forms the periphery of nuclei onto which the inner
membrane is attached by Sun proteins. The involvement
of Sun proteins as the direct binder of chromatin makes
it clearer than ever that chromatin itself is really the
fundamental nucleoskeleton, as I have repeatedly argued
[18,169,170,176,211,309]. A major consequence of the
nuclear envelope was the initiation of a new nucleoskeletal function for DNA. Elsewhere I explained how this,
coupled with the adaptively significant huge variation in
cell volumes of eukaryotes that the origin of the endoskeleton and endomembranes made possible, is the fundamental evolutionary reason why eukaryotic genomes
are typically much larger than bacterial genomes, why
their size varies so immensely, and why it correlates so
well with cell volume but not with organismal complexity [18]. The (nucleo)skeletal DNA explains many
aspects of the evolution of eukaryotic genome size
where the still more popular selfish DNA/mutation
pressure theories fail totally [18,310]. The reason why
most of the non-coding DNA in eukaryotic genomes
exists is fundamentally structural, which is why it is
called skeletal DNA whether it is centromeric, telomeric
or interstitial [18]. Parts of it are transcribed and
involved in the positional control of centrosomes and
heterochromatin, but at base these are structural and
not coding functions; the transcription and base-pairing

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

are needed for positional control of structure within the
skeletal DNA component of the genome. As adumbrated over 30 years ago, the evolution of eukaryotic
genomes are to be understood in terms of the complementary functions of genic and skeletal DNA [169]. As
stressed then, the more skeletal DNA a cell has, the larger the habitat available for viruses and transposons to
flourish in without harming the cell as much as they
would if they if inserted themselves into genic DNA.
Therefore one expects larger genomes to have more
parasitic genetic elements and for these to be especially
concentrated in heterochromatin because this is where
they can best evade purifying selection against them.
However, many have confused these well-known correlations of selfish element abundance and location with
causation. In my view they are consequences of the deeper cell biological evolutionary forces acting on nuclei,
not their fundamental causes [18]. It does not matter
functionally whether genomes increase in size by duplication of genes, non-coding DNA, selfish genetic elements or whole genomes - all have been important in
the past - because the mutational mechanism of origin
of the extra DNA is not the main or fundamental determinant of the actual spectrum of genome sizes in different organisms. To understand these we must
understand the adaptive significance of the differing cell
volumes in organisms with different life styles and the
cell biological principles of intracellular scaling that
make an approximately constant ratio of nuclear and
cell volume functionally superior [18]. These cell biological considerations did not exist before the origin of
the nuclear envelope and are the major reason why the
evolution of genomes is so radically different in eukaryotes compared with bacteria [18,211,311]. Purely population genetic perspectives are fundamentally misleading
as they fail to appreciate the key role of the major innovations in cell structure during eukaryogenesis in stimulating first a radical change in chromosome structure
and then in the selective forces acting on genome size,
and sometimes [121] even misrepresent what is known
about the radical differences in cell biology between
bacteria and eukaryotes. Though mutations in DNA
initiated and promoted the changes, from a deeper perspective of cellular constraints affecting the selective
forces governing the failure or spread of the causative
mutations, cell biology led and DNA and genetics followed, contrary to such widespread misconceptions.
Without a cell biological perspective eukaryogenesis is
impossible to understand. Nonetheless, the interplay of
selection acting on cell properties and that acting on the
spread of parasitic genetic elements have both shaped
eukaryotic genomes.
The most important evolutionary consequences of
selfish genetic elements were probably in the origin of

Page 43 of 78

introns [81,312], and the origin of near universal transsplicing in Euglenozoa [211], though they might also
have been involved in the origin of telomeres. But they
are not the fundamental reason why eukaryotic genomes
are so large and variable.
Selfish DNA, introns and spliceosomes

Nucleocytoplasmic compartmentation facilitated the origin of spliceosomal introns from group II introns supplied by gene transfer from the enslaved mitochondrion
to the nucleus. Only rapidly self-spliced introns in
mRNA or rRNA or extremely short easily proteinspliced tRNA introns seem compatible with prokaryote/
mitochondrial/plastid organisation; the ready access of
ribosomes to mRNA during transcription and the
extreme slowing of spliceosomal splicing probably prevented it from ever evolving in prokaryotes [4,5,81]. It
could not have evolved until after the second phase of
NPC evolution when inner Nups arose to exclude ribosomes entirely and ribosome-subunit export arose (Fig.
5b). Spliceosomal introns could not have evolved in the
prekaryote phase, and recent suggestions that the NE
evolved to prevent translation of unspliced messengers
(latest [21,122]) are illogically back to front. This also
cannot possibly have been the initial selective force for
the formation of either the nuclear envelope or the
initial scaffold part of the NPCs (Fig. 5a) since neither
would have excluded ribosomes. This popular theory
wrongly endows selection with foresight. By contrast,
protection of DNA and nascent rRNA from cytoplasmic-motor shearing damage provides a strong selective
force for phase I (Fig. 5a); compartmentation benefits do
so for phase II (Fig. 5b). Only then could spliceosomal
introns have evolved, as described previously [81]. They
are consequences not causes of the NE.
I concur, however, with the suggestion that the selfish
origin of spliceosomal introns caused the origin of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay [21]. This mechanism,
conserved in unikonts and corticates (all key proteins
and both major mechanisms are in Arabidopsis [313]),
must have evolved prior to the neozoan cenancestor but
after the origin of spliceosomal introns. It depends on
ribosomes (probably attached to the outer NE) and a
test translation recognising stop codons upstream of
exon-exon junction sites marked by bound UF3 complexes and stimulating mRNA destruction [314]. A
selective force for the origin of this junction-site specificity of UF3 is unimaginable prior to the origin of a high
density of spliceosomal introns in genes and inevitable
mis-splicing yielding harmful stop codons; though once
evolved it could be used, as it now is in plants and
fungi, also to destroy intronless similarly flawed mRNA
of many intronless genes, which inevitably have sites
mimicking exon junctions sequences. Thus like splicing

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

itself, and many genomic oddities like RNA editing
[211], nonsense-mediated decay is a consequence of
selfish DNA evolution; correcting the bad effects of
mutation pressure, not positively adaptive. Intriguingly,
the cleavage enzyme itself probably evolved from one
used by selfish bacterial plasmids to kill host cells losing
the plasmid by mis-segregation [315]. When it originated is unclear, as it has not been demonstrated to
occur in any Eozoa. If it evolved after the origin of the
nucleus as is possible it could not have influenced its
origin. However, the RNA helicase UPF-1 that plays a
central role clearly originated in the ancestral eukaryote
as it is present in excavates and Euglenozoa, as is UPF-2
with which it binds in the nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay but as this helicase has multiple functions this
does not prove that nonsense-mediated mRNA decay
itself arose that early. Nonsense mediated decay is triggered by failure to remove the exon junction complex
(EJC) from intron-containing RNA; two of the four EJC
proteins are present in trypanosomatids [316], presumably involved in checking trans-splicing (as introns are
extremely rare in trypanosomes [317]), so these at least
are also ancient.
Origins of nuclear protein modification by sumoylation

Sumoylation is a universal eukaryote-specific process
mediated by Small Ubiquitin-like MOdifier proteins
(SUMO for short) that mainly modifies nuclear proteins
[318,319]. It probably evolved at the same time as ubiquitination of proteasome-digested proteins very early in
eukaryogenesis, and ought to have been included in
Table 1 of reference [27], where I omitted to discuss its
origin and importance for eukaryotes. Sumoylation is
vital for heterochromatinization, maintaining the stability of eukaryotic chromosomes, for the nucleocytoplasmic exchange via the nuclear pore complex, as well as
for tubulin assembly [320-323] and is thus crucial for
many non-mitochondrial (’host’) eukaryotic properties.
Animal, fungal and plant SUMO machinery is strongly
associated with the nuclear pore complex [324] and
essential for viability [325] and thus was present, and
probably essential for pore complex function, in the last
common ancestor of neokaryotes. SUMO is also present
and strongly conserved in structure in Euglenozoa [326]
so evolved in the ancestral eukaryote, though little is
known of its functions and ancillary proteins in Eozoa.
SUMO proteins belong to the ancient and diverse ubiquitin superfamily; ubiquitin and SUMO have similar 3D structures and probably diverged from a common
ancestral protein. Moreover, enzymes E1 and E2 that
mediate ubiquitination are related to the two that add
SUMO to proteins. Both ubiquitin ligase proteins probably originated during eukaryogenesis when the ubiquitin superfamily expanded massively by repeated gene

Page 44 of 78

duplication [327,328]. Though neither ubiquitin nor
SUMO occur in prokaryotes, Iyer et al. [329] discovered
ubiquitin-related genes in a scattered array of eubacteria
(never archaebacteria) clustered in an operon with E1and E2-related protein genes and also a gene for a JABdomain protein related to the JAB-domain deubiquitinating and desumoylating enzymes. They reasonably
suggest that these four proteins represent an ancestral
protein modifying system that was widespread in eubacteria before eukaryotes evolved. As such operons are not
known from either actinobacteria or a-proteobacteria,
they could have entered early eukaryotes by lateral gene
transfer from incompletely digested prey DNA. Their
scattered distribution within eubacteria is suggestive of
lateral gene transfer among them, so the possibility also
exists of lateral transfer to the specific actinobacterial
lineage that was ancestral to eukaryotes prior to
eukaryogenesis.
A curious twist to the origin of this eukaryotic protein
modification machinery is the unexpected discovery of
an analogous system in actinobacteria, in which the
small protein Pup is covalently attached to selected proteins destined for degradation by the actinobacterial
proteasomes [330]. Though Pup was called ubiquitinlike by its discoverers [330], Iyer et al. [331] convincingly show it to have a different 3-D structure. It is
thus unrelated, having evolved instead from a family of
enzymes containing the b-grasp domain; they also
showed that the putative Pup ligase (PafA) is unrelated
to the ubiquitinating enzymes E1 and E2, and probably
works by a different mechanism, being more closely
related to glutamine synthetase. Thus the actinobacterial
proteasome-related protein modification system was
probably replaced by a completely unrelated one during
eukaryogenesis. Why? A possible explanation could have
been the transitional novel use of proteasomes for
digesting externally attached prey, which I recently postulated preceded the evolution of phagocytosis [27]. As I
stressed [27], it would be advantageous to digest all prey
proteins indiscriminately; thus the actinobacterial
restriction of digestion to a few proteins by pupylation
would have been disadvantageous and was therefore lost
before it could be recruited and modified for novel
eukaryotic uses that arguably arose after the early endomembrane system [27]. Therefore, protoeukaryotes
evolved a different pre-existing, fully functional ubiquitin-like system based on E1, E2 enzymes and JAG proteins that happened to be available for recruitment to
the now more complex 26S proteasome. A 20S core of
the proteasome itself, by contrast, was probably directly
inherited from the actinobacterial ancestor [12], as was
the eukaryotic chaperone PAC2 required for its assembly; Iyer et al. [331] show that a gene encoding a PAC2related protein that forms a toroidal trimer suitable for

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

nucleating the assembly of the cylindrical proteasome
(also present in archaebacteria) is closely linked to
PAC2-homologues in actinobacteria, but is absent from
more distant species such as the planctomycete Rhodopirellula and the δ-proteobacterium Plesiocystis, which
belong to groups that typically lack a pupylation system
(Pup and Pup ligase) [331], suggesting that both
obtained it by lateral transfer from actinobacteria.
Origin of meiosis and sex (syngamy and nuclear fusion)

As discussed in detail elsewhere [3,4,63,332,333], the
initial function of meiosis was probably ploidy reduction
to correct failures of DNA segregation caused by mitotic
or cell cycle control errors that would probably have
been greater during eukaryogenesis. As there explained,
the key step would have been a duplication of cohesin
genes to create separate meiotic cohesins that would be
loaded onto chromosomes at the beginning of pre-meiotic S-phase. The changed meiotic cohesins would be
digested only from the chromosome arms at meiotic
prophase, remaining at the centromere, thus preventing
sister chromatid separation until meiosis II. Retention of
meiotic centrosomal cohesin in prophase I also arguably
prevented the relief of the standard block to further
DNA replication initiations imposed at the beginning of
each S phase, thereby letting meiosis II continue without
a preceding DNA replication, halving the nuclear DNA
content to produce haploid cells. Pairing was mediated
by DNA hybridization during prophase I, which has a
duration proportional to genome size as expected if it is
rate-limited by DNA hybridization. As Cleveland first
noted [334], the origin of meiosis also requires a novelty
in the control of centriolar and centrosomal duplication.
In normal mitotic cell cycles centrioles and centrosomes
duplicate at the beginning of DNA synthesis S phase
(also true of fungal spindle pole bodies, which are simply specialized centrosomes) [71,72,75,76,335-338]. But
in meiosis they must also be allowed to duplicate during
the abnormal interphase between meiosis I and II,
which could be achieved by preventing in anaphase I
the normal anaphase proteolytic digestion of the protein
SAS-6, whose amount controls centriole duplication
[71], the third key step in the origin of meiosis.
Conversely to meiosis, the origin of syngamy requires
plasma membrane fusion and also the merger of two
parental centrosomes into one or the destruction/loss of
one parental centrosome or the destruction of both and
the re-emergence of a single one de novo [332]. In principle two centrosomes could merge into one if they lack
centrioles as in higher seed plants, but for centrioles
that would be mechanistically impossible. In some animals the centriolar reduction associated with syngamy is
associated with the loss/destruction of the egg centriole,
only that from the sperm being transmitted. In

Page 45 of 78

Chlamydomonas all four parental centrioles from the
isogamous bicentriolar gametes are disassembled in the
zygote and new ones are formed in the germinating
zygospore shortly before meiotic prophase I [166], as are
all their associated microtubular and centrin-containing
fibrillar roots. Controlling their proper numbers and
assembly in the premeiotic cell would be simplest if the
centrioles of one mating type were totally destroyed in
the zygote but those of the other remained as two
microscopically invisible procentrioles until germination.
In the euglenoid Scytomonas, whose gametes both have
a single cilium and centriole, the zygote is initially biciliate but one cilium is quickly lost and the diploid cell
then swims with the other [68]. This suggests that unilateral destruction of one zygote centriole may have
been the ancestral condition for eukaryotes.
Meiosis could have started to evolve as soon as cyclinbased eukaryotic cell cycle controls and cohesin evolved.
Arguably it did not initially depend on synaptonemal
complexes, but these were soon added to increase the
mechanical stability of paired chromosomes. As synaptonemal complexes have been casually observed ultrastructurally in one bodonid euglenozoan, this stage must
have been reached in the eukaryotic cenancestor. However there are no studies of meiosis in any of the three
most deeply branching eukaryotic phyla (Euglenozoa,
Percolozoa, Loukozoa), but recombination and Mendelian processes is established for several trypanosomatids.
Therefore we do not know if any of these early branching eukaryotes have a bouquet stage of meiosis as in
neozoa or whether Sun-KASH nuclear envelope protein
roles in meiotic prophase evolved in the first eukaryote
or only later, e.g. in the immediate ancestor of neozoa
which all have fundamentally similar meiosis.
As mentioned above, meiosis is likely to have arisen
prior to the origin of the nuclear envelope, probably as
soon as the earliest form of mitosis evolved with primitive centrosomes and centromeres, as the selective
advantage of correcting ploidy errors would have then
been at its peak and cohesins, the essential molecular
precursors of the meiotic machinery, would already have
evolved. Explaining both its mechanistic origin and how
it was selected are both much easier than if meiosis originated after the nuclear envelope and had to be preceded by the evolution of nuclear fusion, which in the
absence of meiosis has no rationale or advantage. Ploidy
reduction is a real, powerful, and experimentally demonstrable evolutionary force [339]. Ploidy reduction
requires only chromosome pairing and meiotic cohesins
and arguably evolved even before the nuclear envelope.
The cytoplasmic motor driven congress of telomeres to
form the bouquet stage must have followed the origin of
the nuclear envelope and Sun-KASH domain interactions across it. Nuclear fusion, an essential part of sexual

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

cycles must also have followed the evolution of the
envelope. Thus the evolution of meiosis probably
straddled nucleogenesis and was an integral part of
eukaryogenesis, not a late evolutionary afterthought.
What about syngamy?
I have argued that syngamy evolved marginally after
meiosis and its primary functional significance was
related to the fact that even the first eukaryotes would
have had dormant resting cysts, which I argued evolved
from posibacterial exospores [3,63,332,333]. Its prime
role was two-fold: to make zygotes larger and increase
their survival rate by being able to store more solid food
reserves; to provide genetic redundancy in the dormant
cysts so that accidental damage, notably double-strand
breaks by radiation or other environmental insults or by
physiological errors could be repaired by homologous
recombination among genomes. Maximising the number
of offspring when conditions improved and the cyst
could germinate explains why meiosis probably ancestrally occurred then and vegetetative cells were haploid
[333]. The feast and famine existence of the first predators on earth thus probably played a key role in the origin of sex, and life cycle ploidy control, its prime raison
d’être. Predatory feeding came before sex. I refer readers
to other discussions of the likely prime importance of
circumventing deleterious mutations in the origin of sex
[340,341]. It is now widely considered that removing
harmful mutations may be a more important factor in
the maintenance of sex than making favourable allele
combinations, which sex can equally undo [342-344]
and which can also be made by mitotic recombination
[345]. The origin of sex cannot be considered apart
from the origin of the new eukaryotic cell cycle controls,
mitosis, and a wall-free cell surface with internal actin
gel cytoskeleton that mechanically allow gametes the
ability to fuse and the stability to survive without walls
prior to fusion. The origin of syngamy did not just
involve the control of plasma membrane and nuclear
envelope fusion but also the merger of the cytoskeletons
of the gametes. The only Eozoa where meiosis has been
widely studied are parasitic Metamonada, where its hormonal synchronization with insect host moulting physiology made it technically easier. In oxymonads, unlike
morphologically more conservative metamonads like the
free-living Trimastix and parasitic retortamonads, the
microtubular skeleton is no longer mainly pellicular instead most microtubules form a giant contractile axostyle organelle deep in the cytoplasm. Remarkably, when
oxymonad gametes fuse, their two axostyles also fuse
into one [346], illustrating the need in all eozoan sex to
halve the number of cytoplasmic organelles as well as
fuse nuclei during syngamy.
Even though sex can undo favourable gene combinations as well as make them and always has some cost,

Page 46 of 78

the likelihood that syngamy was already evolving in the
vegetatively wall-free prekaryote that periodically made
dormant walled cysts at times of starvation, would have
allowed different lineages of transitional forms to
recombine their eukaryotic innovations and could have
speeded up the transition. This is because eukaryogenesis differs radically from discussions of the maintenance
of sex, which deal with a quasi-equilibrium situation
where repeated (and often reversible) mutations of the
same general sort may be the main factor and radical
innovation is rare [342-345]. By contrast, during eukaryogenesis mutations that had never occurred before in
the history of life, rather than recurrent everyday allelic
mutations, were of key importance at numerous times
in the process. I have given many instances where the
origin of new protein paralogues by unique gene duplication and divergence, or radically new protein domains
never before found in bacteria, and of totally new
domain combinations to make novel multidomain proteins, were decisively important for the origin of the
majority of novel eukaryotic proteins, structures and
processes. Thus, once basic meiosis had evolved for
ploidy reduction, accidental cell fusions between related
lineages with different novel useful genes would not be
so harmful; by combining independently evolved innovations it could indeed have speeded up the evolutionary
transition from bacteria to eukaryotes. I do not think it
reasonable to regard this as the driving force for the origin of meiosis, but it could have been a third important
reason for improving the cell fusion machinery and
restricting its expression to times of dormancy onset,
where life was threatened already by famine and the cell
had less to lose and more to gain by fusing with others.
Fusion during normal growth with abundant prey when
cell fusion would have been disadvantageous for a zooflagellate and therefore increasingly stringently
repressed. Such condition-dependent sex is much easier
to evolve than if every reproductive act is sexual, as the
costs are more easily outweighed by the benefits [347];
this obviously applies to protozoa where most reproduction is clonal with cell fusion being rare at best and to
bacteria where cell fusion probably almost never occurs
in nature - controlled cell fusion began with the first
eukaryotes.
Rerooting the eukaryote tree between Euglenozoa and
Percolozoa [9] makes it much clearer than ever before
that the forms of vegetative cell fusion that make multinucleate plasmodia, exhibited for example by myxogastrid slime moulds (e.g. Physarum) in the Amoebozoa
(unikonts) and by the naked cercomonad zooflagellates
in the Cercozoa (Rhizaria in the corticates) are evolutionarily advanced not primitive characters. Such plasmodial stages in the life history are entirely unknown in
Eozoa, and there is now little doubt that the last

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

common ancestor of all eukaryotes had a semi-rigid
micro-tubule supported pellicle that would preclude
plasmodia formation. Though amoebae did evolve secondarily within Percolozoa to form Heterolobosea [348]
(and even in one instance, Dientamoeba, within parabasalid metamonads), the main thrusts of eukaryotic soft
surfaced evolution were in advanced groups of unikonts,
which probably ancestrally evolved myosin II-based
pseudopodia [9] (notably in Amoebozoa), and the corticate kingdom Chromista (not only in the ancestrally
amoeboflagellate Rhizaria, but also in several independently amoeboid subgroups), which by contrast were
probably ancestrally strongly pelliculate zooflagellates
without amoeboid stages prior to the internal enslavement of the red alga. But for understanding early sex it
is the discicristate zooflagellates with strongly developed
pellicles that need to be considered. Sadly, sex is unstudied in any of their free-living representatives; for
almost none of them (exceptions one bodonid and the
euglenoid Scytomonas) do we even know whether they
have sex at all or whether it has been lost long ago by
many or even most of them, as is perfectly possible.
However, if the present rooting of the eukaryotic tree is
correct, we can be sure that the cenancestral eukaryote
was a pelliculate zooflagellate with dormant cysts,
ciliated gametes, meiosis, and a synaptonemal complex.
If, as I have argued, sex and meiosis began in a prekaryote with a single cell-surface-associated centrosome
containing centrin and g-tubulin and attached on the
one hand to the chromosome replicon origin and on the
other to stable microtubules that were permanently present through the cell cycle, then it is relatively easy to
see how sexual life cycles could have originated despite
their apparent complexity.
If the chromosome replication origin at that stage was
also permanently attached to the cell surface, the lateral
fusion of two such cells would have generated a zygote
with two side by side chromosomes in the same compartment that could form hybrid DNA segments with
each other quite easily when single stranded DNA was
transiently produced, e.g. during replication or repair.
By generating unequal crossover and chromosome
breakage they would have been deleterious. Though this
would have thereby selected against such fusions, the
cell phenotype produced by syngamy, with two side-byside chromosomes able to recombine, is essentially the
same as that produced every cell cycle by replication
prior to division. Thus the suppression, control or repair
of such adjacent chromosomes exchanges would be
important even for vegetative growth. In bacteria such
dimers can be resolved by the Xer decatenation machinery at the cell surface at the presumptive division plane
[235,349]; similar processes must have been in process
during eukaryogenesis; given the magnitude of the

Page 47 of 78

changes associated with chromosome internalization on
endomembrane vesicles it seems almost inevitable that
at some stage chromosomes would be broken, even in
vegetative cells merely undergoing binary fission and
not engaging in syngamy. Odd numbers of sister chromatid exchanges for circular chromosomes have the
same dimerization and consequential breakage potential
as meiotic cross-overs, so the linearization of eukaryotic
chromosomes and addition of telomeres need not have
awaited the evolution of a primitive meiosis and sexual
cycle as earlier suggested [11] but was likely as soon as
the ordered segregation along the bacterial cell surface
broke down during the replacement of the bacterial cell
wall by a cell surface coat, endoskeleton and protozoan
pellicle. Thus telomeres probably evolved soon after the
origin of the first centrosomes. It has been proposed
that centromeres evolved from telomeres [350], but the
arguments are unconvincing. It was claimed that the
fact that only linear chromosomes have evolved proper
centromeres means that telomeres must have evolved
first [350]. But the argument can easily be reversed; it is
just as (il)logical to argue that as proper telomeres only
evolved in chromosomes with proper centromeres, centromeres must have come first. As eukaryogenesis was
unique, one cannot reasonably use its uniqueness per se,
as did these authors, to argue the polarity of any of its
component unique events. Instead one must use a logical reconstruction of the likely nature of transitional
intermediates, the nature of their probable precursors,
the phylogenetic context, and the selective advantage of
each postulated stage, as attempted here and in previous
discussions [4,70]. Those authors were unaware of those
arguments that centromeres arose before telomeres
[4,70], wrongly stating that the only past discussion of
the origin of centromeres was [351]. The arguments in
this paragraph suggest that telomeres probably slightly
post-dated proto-centrosomes but could have preceded
eukaryotic centromeres and kinetochores. The heterochromatic properties of centromeres and telomeres
could have evolved simultaneously, but I still think it
likely that centromeres came first as there would probably have been a stronger selective advantage for chromosomes to associate with microtubules than for
telomeric functions. As soon as chromosome origins
lost their association with centrosomes there would
have been selection for secondary association with
microtubules via proto-kinetochores. It seems simplest
to suppose that these evolved from the bacterial origin
region as both are involved in bacterial chromosome
movement and that this happened soon after the origin
of the nuclear envelope when the ancestral centrosome
duplicated to make a separate intranuclear MNC. Telomeres might have evolved either from the chromosome
terminus or random breaks elsewhere repaired by

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

adding telomeric repeats; derivation from the replicon
origin [4] now seems less likely.
Nuclear fusion

Nuclear fusion involves both membrane fusion and the
integration of the nuclear skeleton into one. If, as I have
argued, the first eukaryotes had no proteinaceous
nuclear lamina and the inner membrane was attached
directly to chromatin by Sun-domain proteins among
others, this simplifies the origin of nuclear fusion. One
only has to make each membrane fuse in turn, as in
Chlamydomonas [352] and yeast [353]; for the fusion of
the outer membrane proteins involved in ER membrane
fusions were probably recruited. Fusion of mitochondria
from both gametes also commonly occurs in protists as
diverse as yeasts, slime moulds and Chlamydomonas,
and must also involve fusion of two membranes. I am
unaware of any examples in Eozoa, so we do not know
whether it evolved early in eukaryote and mitochondrial
evolution. It might have occurred relatively late, for
example after the ancestral bacterial FtsZ division
mechanism was replaced by host dynamin division
machinery [354], which could also have helped fusion.
Given the multifarious roles of dynamin in membrane
division (which also involves membrane fusion) [355]
and that it is located on the nuclear envelope in ciliates
[356] it would not be surprising if it were also recruited
to help with nuclear fusion. Chloroplast fusion also
occurs during syngamy in many green algae [352] and
clearly evolved much later than nuclear or mitochondrial fusion, but is an important part of some sexual
cycles.
Ploidy cycle evolution

Attentive pedants will have noticed that my saying that
meiosis evolved for ‘ploidy reduction’ prior to the origin
of the nuclear envelope is terminologically questionable.
This is because the distinction between polyploidy and
multinuclearity strictly only applies to eukaryotes with a
NE. In bacteria with single chromosomes and lacking
plasmids there is no distinction between genomes and
chromosomes and the concept of ploidy does not
strictly apply. In bacteria filamentous cells containing
several nucleoids within one cell (quite common) are
more analogous to eukaryotic multinucleate plasmodia
produced by delaying cytokinesis compared with mitosis,
and are not really polyploids and no special reduction
division is needed to reduce their genome copy number.
The neomuran precursor of eukaryotes would conceptually have stopped being a bacterium as soon as centrosomes, microtubules, cyclin-based eukaryotic cell cycle
controls, and cohesin evolved, though would not have
been a protoeukaryote until the nuclear envelope
evolved. But as soon as cell division of this prekaryote

Page 48 of 78

became obligately linked to centrosome duplication and
anaphase proteolysis of cohesins, it becomes reasonable
to regard cells in which this linkage has failed and
which contained multiple chromosomes but only one
centrosome as analogous to plant autopolyploids. With
only one centrosome they would have no way of knowing that they had too many chromosomes or halving
their numbers without somehow blocking DNA replication while allowing an extra centrosomal duplication,
one of the hallmarks of meiosis. Thus as soon as special
meiotic cohesins and partial protection of their anaphase
I digestion (on chromosome arms) had evolved one can
reasonably speak of prekaryotic meiosis and of ploidy
reduction.
It is unclear what was the ploidy of the first eukaryotes as ploidy levels are unknown for free-living discicristates (the fact that some trypanosomatids are
diploids does not allow us to infer the condition even
for their closest relatives the bodonids, still less for
ancestral Euglenozoa or Percolozoa), though it should
be possible to deduce whether Naegleria is haploid or
diploid when its genome sequence is properly studied. I
have long supposed that the ancestor would have been
haploid and only the zygote diploid, as in Dictyostelium,
Crypthecodinium and Chlamydomonas, as that is probably the most widespread condition in free-living protozoa, except for those with very large cells like the
somatically polyploid ciliates, the plasmodial myxogastrids or reticulose Foraminifera [3,63,306]. I have argued
that selection for large or small cell size played a major
role in evolving the diversity of protist life cycles, and
that selection for small trophic cells and larger resting
cells may have been of key importance in the evolution
of haplo-diploid life cycles, including cell cycle variants
such as multiple fission (always derived) rather than binary fission (clearly the ancestral state for eukaryotes)
[306]. Experimental studies on yeasts are clarifying the
selective forces acting on ploidy levels of this normally
diploid saprotrophic fungus [339,357-359], but caution
is needed in applying these to predatory protists with
their very different ecology. Direct studies of discicristate ploidy and life cycles are needed to clarify early
eukaryote ploidy evolution.

Discussion
According to the present coevolutionary theory, the origin of the nucleus depended on the prior evolution of a
primitive endomembrane system and a primitive mitosis,
both brought about by and associated with the origin of
phagocytosis. The revised multistage theory for the
simultaneous origin of mitosis and the pellicular microtubule array of the first discicristate eukaryotes offered
here (Fig. 3) explains the transition from posibacterial to
eukaryotic skeletal, segregational, and cell division

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

structures distinctly more smoothly and in more detail
than previous ideas. The new interpretations of the origins of heterochromatin and its positional control by
small RNA and the new theory for the origin of the
nuclear envelope and nuclear pore complexes by coated
vesicle fusion (Fig. 5) integrate a vast body of molecular
and cell biological data into a coherent picture of how
nucleocytoplasmic compartmentation originated, with
plausible mechanisms and selective advantages for each
stage. The discussion of the origin of meiosis and syngamy explains the origin of sex and of eukaryotic life
cycles with alternating ploidy levels as the almost inevitable outcome of those new mechanisms of mitosis, cell
cycle control, and cell compartmentation, given the
need to reduce cell cycle errors in ploidy, maximize survival in dormant states induced by famine or environmental adversity that precludes growth, and the
contrasting requirements for maximizing reproductive
rates when food is plentiful. This is all done within a
critically interpreted phylogenetic framework for both
the ancestral bacterial and the derived eukaryotic parts
of the tree of life, which is consistent with all major
lines of evidence, molecular, cellular, and
palaeontological.
In comparison with the above proposals, previous discussions about the origin of the nucleus are either unnecessarily complicated or fail to explain the most
essential things. This is particularly the case with theories that invoke symbiogenesis or prokaryotic cell
fusions as ‘explanations’ of the basic features of eukaryotic cells. To illustrate such unnecessary complexity and
explanatory failure, consider the serial symbiogenetic/
autogenous theory of my good friends López-García and
Moreira [122]. I single this out for detailed criticism not
because it is worse than other cell fusion/symbiotic theories but because it attempts to be more detailed, which
is praiseworthy; most are so empty scientifically that a
critic can gain no useful purchase.
Small GTPase origins: vertical inheritance, lateral transfer
or extra symbioses/cell fusions?

The ancestral eukaryotic small GTPase gene gave rise to
about 10 functionally distinct paralogues [124] during
the later phases of eukaryogenesis, all important for
controlling the cytoskeleton, secretion, phagocytosis and
nucleocytoplasmic exchange (e.g. the Ran GTPase). For
some years Moreira and López-García have argued that
the closest relatives of these small GTPases, are absent
not only from archaebacteria and posibacteria but also
from a-proteobacteria, but are present in myxobacteria
(δ-proteobacteria) [360,361]. They thought that eukaryotic small GTPases came from neither the host nor the
premitochondrial symbiont. If such GTPases were truly
absent from both host and mitochondrial lineages, the

Page 49 of 78

simplest interpretation would be that the prekaryote
instead acquired a small GTPase gene by lateral gene
transfer (LGT) from a negibacterium; presumably one
that it ate in the earliest days of phagotrophy after actin
and endomembrane vesicle traffic started but before
control by small GTPases evolved [3]. However small
GTPases of the BglA family are widely present in negibacteria, not just myxobacteria [3]. They have also now
even been found in a-proteobacteria and several other
paralogue families have been discovered in bacteria
[128]. Most important is the RarD family restricted to
actinobacteria and archaebacteria. This is the prime candidate for a direct vertical ancestry for all eukaryotic
small GTPases making LGTs or more complex scenarios
pointless.
Yet Moreira and López-García [360,361] imagined that
the nucleus evolved as part of a three way symbiosis in
which a myxobacterium was the host for the engulfment
and enslavement of an archaebacterium and an a-proteobacterium. Supposedly, the initial stimulus for this
was metabolic syntrophy between the different bacteria,
followed by serial endosymbiosis, also metabolically driven. In the latest version of this syntrophy theory [122]
the archaebacterium became the nucleus, but its membrane was lost, as were the outer membrane and genome of the myxobacterium! Not only is this
unnecessarily and excessively complex, but its logic is
fundamentally flawed, and it explains nothing important
about eukaryote origins. None of the 27 novelties of
Appendix 1 is explained, most not even being mentioned. The theory states that a myxobacterium phagocytosed first a methanogenic archaebacterium, to which
it supplied CO2 and hydrogen for making methane, and
then a methane-oxidising a-proteobacterium. Then the
myxobacterium grew surface membrane invaginations to
surround the archaebacterium, supposedly to help the
archaebacterium secrete proteins into the environment
across the three membranes and two cell walls that then
surrounded it (its own cytoplasmic membrane and cell
wall and the cytoplasmic membrane, peptidoglycan wall
and the outer membrane of its host myxobacterium).
How this could possibly help secretion across these five
barriers was not explained, nor was it stated what specific proteins were secreted or any selective advantage of
that secretion mentioned. Despite these omissions that
render it explanatorily empty, that membrane invagination was put forward as the primary selective ‘explanation’ of the origin of the nuclear envelope.
In the next hypothetical step the archaebacterial membrane was lost but its genome took over as the main
genome of the cell, with the loss of the myxobacterial
genome after transferring most metabolic genes into the
former archaebacterial genome [122]. The physical
mechanism of loss of the methanogen’s membrane was

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

entirely unspecified, presumably because no plausible
mechanism exists. I cannot imagine any DNA mutation
that could achieve that or any selective advantage for it.
Indeed there is no known case in the history of life
when one cell living inside another lost its bounding
membrane and survived. If a bacterium thus lost its
cytoplasmic membrane, it would be disastrous for DNA
segregation that depends on membrane proteins. This
theory says nothing whatever about the transition from
bacterial DNA segregation to mitosis, and is physically
and cell biologically absurd. The same is true of all the
numerous ‘theories’ that invoke a chimaeric fusion of
two bacterial cells prior to the origin of mitochondria, e.
g. [120,362-364]; most of the others do not even attempt
to explain the origin of the nuclear envelope or mitosis,
so one cannot explicitly criticise their logic, if they have
any - which is not evident. The next flaw concerns the
claim that the next selective advantage for wrapping the
secretory membranes around a former methanogen was
that it would prevent the harm done by putting opposing metabolic pathways, e.g. methanogenesis and
methane oxidation, in the same compartment. This is
illogical, because that harm only comes when you
remove the archaebacterial membrane. Since the authors
argue that methanogenesis mechanically requires the
membrane and was lost with the membrane, there never
could have been any selective harm from having methanogenesis and methane oxidation in the same compartment. To suggest that such a selective advantage could
favour the growth of the membrane prior to archaebacterial membrane loss is equally unsound; it is impossible
mechanistically, as it assumes that natural selection has
foresight, essentially a creationist attitude not a biological one. Nor can one specify any metabolic segregation
that making the nuclear envelope could alleviate.
Nuclear pores are so large that any metabolite could diffuse through them.
The authors then suggest that the next selective
advantage for the further evolution of the nuclear envelope was to prevent the hypothetical harm done by the
origin of spliceosomal introns if they evolved when transcription and translation were in the same compartment
[81]. This is precisely the same as Martin and Koonin’s
[21] suggestion for the primary selective force for the
origin of the nuclear envelope. Both proposals are
equally illogical, failing as explanations. First, if as I originally argued [81] this was such a strong selective
forces that it prevented the evolution of spliceosomal
introns for 3.5 billion years in all bacteria, and for 800
My in all mitochondria and chloroplasts, which all have
only rapidly self-splicing introns, there is no reason to
postulate that spliceosomal introns evolved before the
nuclear envelope - a gratuitous assumption devoid of
evidence. Secondly, if they did evolve before the

Page 50 of 78

envelope, the damage was already done, and could not
be reversed by making an envelope. Thirdly, as
explained above, the earliest stages of nuclear envelope
evolution would not have excluded ribosomes from the
nucleoplasm, and thus selection to separate transcription and translation cannot have been the initiating
force.
Another flaw in the myxobacterial theory is that myxobacteria have two bounding membranes, so the outer
membrane would have to be lost to make a eukaryote.
Losing a negibacterial outer membrane is very difficult; I
have argued that it only happened once in the history of
life (during the origin of Posibacteria from negibacteria)
and that the physical mechanism was by mutationinduced murein hypertrophy making the wall so thick
that contacts between cytoplasmic membrane and outer
membrane were suddenly physically broken [4,13].
Neither López-García and Moreira [122] nor others
have ever suggested another physical mechanism for losing the outer membrane. Yet they assume such loss, citing the loss of the outer membrane by Posibacteria as
an historical precedent. But that is irrelevant unless the
same mechanism also is assumed, which they do not
suggest. In fact, they ignore both the mechanism and
the selective advantage of the loss, making the theory
scientifically empty and unrealistic. It is however gratifying that they now accept the origin of posibacteria by
outer membrane loss as an historical fact, despite
López-García as a referee strongly criticising my conclusion of its truth, mislabelling it an assumption [13]
rather than a deduction by reasoned argument.
Another defect of their theory is its assumption of two
successive phagocytic uptakes of foreign bacteria,
coupled with the contradictory assertion that phagocytosis itself evolved after the origin of mitochondria and the
nucleus. This is unparsimonious and illogical. No bacteria have phagocytosis. There is not even one known
example of free-living eubacteria that take up other cells
into their cytoplasm by any mechanism. To postulate
that something never known to happen did so twice in
one cell prior to the origin of eukaryotes is not the most
parsimonious explanation of their origin. It is almost
infinitely more likely that the mitochondrial enslavement
was after prekaryote cells started to evolve phagocytosis
rather than before. Exactly as did Martin [26] for the
hydrogen hypothesis, refuted in detail previously [3],
López-García and Moreira [122] make a spurious
defence of their prokaryotic host theory by citing the
discovery of a cellular symbiont with a proteobacterium
that is itself a parasite of eukaryote cells, which they
claim invalidates my criticisms of prokaryote host theories like theirs. It does not. It is unreasonable to extrapolate to a free-living cell from a parasite, which has a
more stable environment for the origin of intimate

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

associations, and in which cell wall peptidoglycan can
become thinner or even be lost (mycoplasmas, chlamydias), and therefore weaken one barrier to rare cell
uptake. However, the criticism of host prokaryote theories would not be invalidated even by the discovery of
several examples of one free-living bacterium engulfing
another. It would remain true that almost all free-living
protozoa can engulf other cells any day, so this has happened trillions of times in the history of life; moreover
there are thousands of examples of symbionts surviving
uptake; but at present not one example for free-living
bacteria. It is therefore undeniable that uptake of
another cell by a protozoan is vastly more likely than by
a free-living bacterium. On grounds of parsimony and
likelihood, one should not invoke uptake of a bacterium
by another prokaryote as the initiating step in eukaryogenesis unless there were compelling evidence that
requires us to do so. There is no such evidence.
The belief that many eukaryotic genes exist, whose
source cannot be explained as from either our neomuran
or a-proteobacterial ancestors [122], is phylogenetically
unsubstantiated. Even if it were true for a few - or even
many genes - it would not justify the cell biologically
impractical and evolutionally unrealistic suggestion of cellular fusion or chimaerism among prokaryotes. Instead,
the proven ease with which phagotrophs can acquire
genes from their prey [365] would suffice to explain their
origin. It is puzzling why Moreira and López-García
[360,361] assumed cell fusion, not the much simpler LGT,
to explain the origin of a few additional genes (if any
clearly required it, which almost none do). Neither they
nor any other proponents of prokaryote host theories
going back to Sagan [366] have ever validly criticised the
phagotrophy first theory [367]. The even more complex
symbiotic [122] rather than syntrophic theory rested its
assumption that phagocytosis was relatively late in eukaryogenesis on Jékely’s fallacious argument that exocytic
secretion came first [107], which I refuted above. LópezGarcía and Moreira [122] wrongly wrote that Jékely [107]
thought that a Sar1-like GTPase was acquired by myxobacteria via LGT from eukaryotes; he did not, instead
assuming, probably correctly, that such eubacterial
GTPases, which his tree also included for other negibacteria, were the outgroup by which he could root his tree!
The assumption that obligately anaerobic methanogens
(derived euryarchaeotes) provided either the cytoplasm
[26] or the nucleus [122] of the eukaryotic cell are both
phylogenetically refuted by the evidence that archaebacteria as a whole are sisters of eukaryotes, not ancestral to
them [12,24]. They are phylogenetically wrong, cell biologically flawed, and explain nothing important.
Even LGT probably had only a minimal role in eukaryogenesis. One possible example is the six NE-associated proteins with homologues in cyanobacteria but

Page 51 of 78

no other eubacteria [14]. It needs to be established
whether LGT was from eukaryotes to cyanobacteria or
the reverse. If cyanobacteria were donors, it would be
intriguing to know if any of these proteins are associated with thylakoids, invoked as precursors of the NE
in the original version of the phagotrophy theory [11].
However, at present the dominant genetic aspect of
eukaryogenesis is a massive origin of new genes by gene
duplication, radically sudden divergence (often beyond
recognition by sequence alone) of genes already present
in the actinobacterial ancestor of neomura, and gene
chimaerization to yield novel domain combinations, all
in response to the novel cellular membrane topology
and endoskeleton produced by the unique evolution of
phagotrophy.
Inadequacy of other theories

Sometimes the internal membranes of Planctomycetes
[368] are invoked as possible precursors of the nuclear
envelope. However, this is a complete red herring as
they are totally irrelevant - crude analogies at best.
There has been no serial sectioning analysis to show
that they actually define a distinct cellular compartment
separating nucleoid and cytoplasm. The simplest interpretation of the published pictures and others I saw
when visiting Fuerst is that these membranes are unusually extensive invaginations of the cytoplasmic membrane, topologically equivalent to proteobacterial
chromatophores, albeit much more extensive. Possibly
their stronger development than in most negibacteria
has something to do with the fact that the ancestors of
Planctomycetes lost the murein wall and evolved a proteinaceous layer between the cytoplasmic and outer
membrane; conceivably this layer can extend inwards to
help support more extensive membrane that can murein. To call the openings sometimes seen in these membranes ‘NPC-like’ [122] is sloppy. There is no evidence
whatever that they are structurally related. Nor is there
any evidence from planctobacterial genomes for a specific relationship with eukaryotes; they are far away from
both eukaryotes and archaebacteria on all multigene
trees. The idea that a negibacterium with two bounding
membranes, as in Planctobacteria, could be ancestral to
phagotrophic eukaryotes is cell biological nonsense,
especially for Planctomycetes as there is no known
mechanism for losing the outer membrane in peptidoglycan-free negibacteria. Even their Chlamydia relatives,
among the most reduced intracellular parasites, never
lost the outer membrane despite losing murein and
ATP biosynthesis; nor did mitosomes, the most phylogenetically reduced negibacterial descendants of all,
which additionally lost their entire genome [369].
The discovery of a- and b-tubulin genes in some
Planctomycetes is also irrelevant to eukaryote origins, as

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

they are evidently lateral gene transfers from eukaryotes
[370-372], evolving so much faster than any others that
they cannot possibly be ancestral to eukaryotic genes
and probably lost microtubule functions and evolved
others instead with weaker stabilising selection. Just as
one swallow does not make a summer, two tubulins do
not make a eukaryote. Several others are needed, as are
hundreds of other cytoskeletal proteins.
The latest version of the spirochaete theory of the origins of cilia, mitosis and the nucleus [120] is as devoid
of phylogenetic support, explicit transformational reasoning, and cell biological plausibility as the earlier versions dating from Sagan [366], so past criticisms [366]
still apply. It is imagined that a sulphur-reducing
archaebacterium, like Thermoplasma, the smallest
archaebacterium, successfully engulfed a much larger
spirochaete (with two bounding membranes) and converted it into a mitotic spindle and cilium and the genomes of the two bacteria merged to become the
nucleus. How any of this could have happened is totally
unexplained. Early predictions of the theory that spirochaetes would have tubulins and other precursors of
spindles and cilia have been firmly refuted, but instead
of being properly rejected the ‘theory’ is now emptied of
all content that might allow refutation, making it pure
science fiction. The complexity of cilia with about 1000
proteins, most novel to eukaryotes and many related to
non-ciliary eukaryotic proteins, always made it naïve to
think of their origin primarily in terms of where tubulin
came from.
By comparison, the autogenous theory [4,238-240]
according to which cilia are very complex modifications of many disparate elements of a simpler cytoskeleton that evolved in the earliest eukaryotes remains
valid and unrefuted, and goes from strength to
strength. Though I do not agree with all details in the
latest formulations [122,373], which can be further
modified and improved, they are firmly founded on
real cell biology and careful reasoning. An important
point is that the ciliary transport particle, essential for
ciliary biogenesis, contains a-solenoid and/or b-propeller domains, and so like the NPC may also have
evolved from transport vesicle coats [374]. This makes
it plausible that the origin of coated vesicles was not
only the cause of making endomembranes permanent
but also an essential prerequisite for the origin of both
nucleus and cilia, whose origin is therefore subsequent
to that of endomembranes. The recent rooting of the
eukaryotic tree indicates that the cenancestral eukaryote had both a nucleus and an attached centriole and
cilium: what classical protozoologists called a karyomastigont. The theory of the simultaneous origin of
cell nuclei and centrioles and cilia is therefore correct
[4]; it is accepted even by Margulis [120], who

Page 52 of 78

unfortunately also retains its associated postulate that
some extant protozoa are primitively without mitochondria, now firmly disproved [106].
We now see that the origins of mitochondria, nuclei,
and cilia were virtually simultaneous. As each was a
complex series of processes it is most likely that they
overlapped in time, so disputing which was first may
be meaningless. One clue to relative timing is that ubiquitin is essential for spliceosomal assembly [375]; this
suggests that ubiquitin was already present before the
mitochondrion donated group II introns to the
nucleus, allowing the origin of spliceosomes. As the
role of ubiquitin in proteasomal digestion of faulty ER
proteins and cell cycle proteins is likely more fundamental, these mechanisms probably evolved prior to
the origin of mitochondria; thus the host was probably
already eukaryotic in most respects prior to its enslavement and the origin of spliceosomes. Ubiquitination
probably evolved very early in eukaryogenesis as soon
as the endomembranes became stably separate from
the cell surface [27]. That paper proposed that proteasomes played a key role in the origin of eukaryotes
immediately before the origin of phagocytosis, by
digesting prey proteins translocated directly across the
ancestral plasma membrane, and that ubiquitination
evolved after this hypothetical intermediate evolved
phagocytosis and lysosomes, making such digestion of
prey proteins redundant.
Was ribosomal chimaerism the major selective factor in
pore-complex origin?

Since this paper was written a new suggestion about the
selective force initiating nuclear evolution appeared
[376]. This builds on my earlier idea that the symbiotic
origin of mitochondria and transfer of mitochondrial
ribosomal protein genes to the nucleus would have
influenced cytoplasmic ribosome evolution, because of
selection to avoid chimaeric cytoplasmic ribosomes with
some incorporated mitochondrial ribosomal proteins
[3,377]. I argued that cytoplasmic and mitochondrial
rRNAs and proteins diverged to reduce the extent of
heterologous misassembly. Jékely [376] proposes that
this selective force would have been strong enough to
favour also the origin of the nuclear envelope and pore
complex. He notes that 24 mitochondrial proteins were
transferred to host chromosomes before the eukaryote
cenancestor, assumes that this happened before the origin of the nuclear envelope and caused enough harm to
stimulate the origin of the envelope. I am unconvinced,
for several reasons, the first two already expressed by
Forterre, who refereed his paper [376]. First, there is no
evidence that the mitochondrion evolved before the
nuclear envelope; Jékely himself earlier noted, as I had
previously, that the recent conclusion that the ancestral

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

eukaryote already had mitochondria has been misinterpreted as evidence for mitochondria being enslaved by a
eukaryotic host before the origin of phagotrophy, when
it is nothing of the kind. This is not a strong objection
because I suspect that they evolved roughly simultaneously. Secondly, supposing that the transfer of genes
could be tolerated with impunity for a period and then
became a compelling force for evolving the envelope is
problematic. This explanation is like the spliceosomal
intron one in putting the damage first with a rescue
later: the cart before the horse. If transfer were so
strongly disadvantageous, it would be more likely either
that cells with transferred genes would lose out in competition or that host genes and transferred genes were
simply modified to reduce the problem, as I proposed
earlier (we know that substantial modification took
place, though whether the reason I gave is the best
explanation is hard to test). However, there is little
doubt that sometimes cells do suffer non-lethal harmful
effects that are later phenotypically corrected in roundabout ways, so this style of reasoning is not intrinsically
unsound; but its plausibility hinges on difficult judgements of selective disadvantages and advantages, and
the likelihood of different modes of correction and
weighing all these against other likely factors that are
hard to evaluate. Thirdly, the benefits of differential concentration and nucleocytoplasmic distribution would
have been the net benefit of excluding hundreds of different proteins from the nucleus and the positive import
of hundreds of others. If avoiding ribosomal chimaerism
were one of them, it was probably of such minor importance that the nucleus would have evolved as it did
without it. Singling out exclusion of one class of proteins as markedly more critical than others is very arbitrary. In any case, my earlier suggestion of a
modification of host ribosomal proteins and RNA (helping to causing their long-known much greater divergence from prokaryotic ancestors than for
mitochondrial ribosomes) [3,377] would be a much simpler and more direct way of reducing the problems of
ribosomal chimaeras.
Nonetheless, Jékely’s [376] simulation studies of concentration gradients between localised chromatin and
cytoplasm in a cell without full nucleocytoplasmic compartmentation and transport are extremely important as
showing how in principle proteins that can bind to
chromatin can be localised and influence the local concentration of interactors/product in ways beneficial to
the cell. Thus even though I am sceptical of a dominant
role being assigned to the avoidance of ribosomal chimaerism, the principles he demonstrates can be applied
to all kinds of molecules whose concentration collectively could have provided a strong selective force at all
stages of nuclear envelope evolution. It is highly likely

Page 53 of 78

that many molecules were initially concentrated in chromatin regions by binding directly or indirectly to chromatin or by being generated by enzymes that were thus
bound. The origin of the pore complex and nucleocytoplasmic exchange was so complex that many components must have evolved initially independently and
been combined in successive selectively advantageous
stages. As a general principle, compartmentation can
explain the origin of the nucleus irrespective of whether
it slightly preceded, slightly followed, or was contemporaneous with mitochondrial enslavement. That makes
it a more general explanation that unlike Jékely’s is
insensitive to the precise order of events; his interpretation is a special case of the general principle.
The primacy of the precursor and mutation; selection is a
secondary metaphor

Many theories of eukaryote origins and other megaevolutionary events make the mistake of assuming that
selection is the primary force in evolution. It is not.
Selection is simply a consequence of a mutation and the
environment in which it is found; it is not a third force,
or even a force at all. In a stable environment, a novel
mutation increases reproductive success, decreases it or
is neutral. The relative increase over generations of individuals bearing a novel beneficial mutation is a direct
consequence of the phenotype of that mutation; its
most important phenotypic property is that it increases
reproductive success. Selection is just a metaphorical
name given to the mathematical fact that genotypes that
inherently increase that success necessarily spread at the
expense of those reduce it. Thus major innovation
comes only from within the organism by mutation and
is not imposed from outside by the environment or a
designer or even ‘natural selection’. The environment
was irrelevant except in a very general permissive way
for the origin of eukaryotes. The possibility of an organism getting its food by eating another existed even
before the origin of life. There is no reason to think that
the environment prevented phagotrophy and the origin
of the nucleus for the roughly 2.8 billion years that
elapsed between the origin of the first bacterial cell and
the origin of the nucleus. The possibility of syntrophy
existed for billions of years without making eukaryotes,
and the possibility of being an aerobic eukaryote heterotroph existed for about 1.6 Gy before the first one
evolved. Eukaryogenesis was so long delayed because of
the exceeding difficulty of evolving phagocytosis in a
eubacterial cell enclosed by a rigid corset of murein
peptidoglycan, and because replacement of murein by a
more flexible glycoprotein coat that allowed the evolution of phagocytosis was itself so difficult and unlikely
that it did not happen till 2.8 billion years after life
began [6]. Thus the nature of existing precursor

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

organisms limits evolution. Most changes are harmful
and eliminated by selection. Selection for efficient function in bacteria prevented the origin of the nucleus for
nearly three billion years. No selective force could make
a normal eubacterium or even a normal archaebacterium evolve a nucleus. There would be no advantage in
giving up its traditional attachment of DNA to the cytoplasmic membrane and DNA segregation by membrane
motors.
Only the forcible disruption of prokaryotic cell organization by novel forces - actomyosin, mediating phagocytosis - could have triggered such a radical change.
No DNA mutation ever directly made endomembranes.
Actomyosin provides the real physical force that
powers our muscles, enables speech, writing, eukaryotic cell division, and phagocytosis, thereby making
endomembranes. The first proto-endomembranes are
easily understood as incidental physical consequences
of phagocytosis [3,4,11]. Membrane heredity was as
important as DNA heredity in stabilising them as distinct genetic membranes [85]. The origin of eukaryotes
involved no metabolic innovations, unlike much bacterial evolution. At its core were structural innovations
in the cell skeleton and its association with membranes, catalysts and genes. Only phagotrophy first and
intracellular coevolution theories provide a clear logical
explanation of the origin of the nucleus and of the way
in which endomembranes, cytoskeleton, and eukaryotic
chromosomes are so mutually interdependent in their
functions. They must have coevolved. Enslavement of a
proteobacterium to make a mitochondrion provided no
novel metabolism. It merely made phagotrophy more
efficient in an already aerobic host by improved division of labour by compartmentalisation [3]. Metabolic/
bioenergetic theories of eukaryogenesis fail to explain
why or how eukaryotes evolved. Prokaryotic host or
prokaryotic cell fusion theories are incompatible with
cell biology and have explained nothing of significance,
yet may remain popular among those who avoid the
fundamental issue of radical cellular transformation
and how to explain it plausibly without assumptions
that would kill the cell.
Novel adaptive zones, new body plans, and
megaevolution

Eukaryote origins has all the hallmarks of what Simpson [10,113] called megaevolution; the origin of major
new body plans that distinguish higher taxa like phyla,
classes and orders. He argued that such evolution
occurred by the normal processes of mutation and
selection but was exceptionally fast and radical in its
consequences. He showed that the fossil record indicated that body plan innovation invariably occupied a
very short time compared with the subsequent history

Page 54 of 78

of an innovatory new body plan. Almost invariably the
most important adaptive radiations of a new major
type also occur relatively soon after its origin with subsequent megaevolutionary stasis. New inventions, like
arthropod cuticle and jointed limbs, land plant cuticle
and vascular systems, the vertebrate jaw or tetrapod
limbs, create what Simpson called a new adaptive zone
(in plainer language, a novel way of life). Within it an
immense variety of organisms able to fill related but
distinct niches can relatively easily evolve by making
minor variants of their shared body plan. New body
plans always develop by gradual piecemeal modifications of pre-existing ones, but gradual does not mean
slow! Typically they do so very suddenly, because transitions from one major adaptive zone to another are
difficult because of the sharply conflicting selection
pressures that apply to them. Unless the right organism is present in the right place at the right time and
experiences a suitable succession of lucky chances, it
will not happen - especially if the properties selectively
advantageous in the new zone are disadvantageous in
the old one.
Megaevolution, quantum evolution, and mosaic evolution are distinct but complementary concepts. Quantum evolution can occur independently of
megaevolution. It is not necessarily associated with a
novel body plan or higher taxon - it could just affect
one molecule that suddenly found a novel function, e.
g. following a gene duplication. It refers only to the
rate being abnormally high - way beyond the normal
range. Mosaic evolution simply refers to a basic truth
about organisms: they are not homogeneous, so different parts can evolve in different ways at different times
and vastly different rates. All three are just descriptive
terms; they do not invoke special mechanisms beyond
mutation and selection. This does not lessen their key
importance for accurately portraying the pattern of
evolution and countering the mistaken view that it is
uniform in rate and mode throughout history. We
need to understand not only the basic mechanisms of
mutation, selection, and symbiogenesis, but also how
historical and phylogenetic preconditions, environmental changes, and chance at many levels have combined
with these to shape the tree of life into a unique unrepeatable and extremely non-uniform historical record.
In other words understanding evolution demands not
only mechanistic analysis but also critical historical
synthesis. Haldane, the pioneer of population genetics,
was well aware of the necessity of adding a detailed
organismal and historical dimension to it to give a realistic picture of the causes and pattern of evolution
[378] - much more so than some of his successors
who mistakenly suppose that population genetics and
evolutionary biology are one and the same. It was

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Simpson who first really tried to make such a synthesis, but it needs to be updated every generation.
Simpson correctly argued that the most dramatic
innovations occur when an adaptive zone never occupied before in the history of life originates, as was true
for phagotrophy and eukaryogenesis. This is because
the first organism able to exploit an entirely novel lifestyle has no competitors in its new niche, and can
multiply and leave diversified descendants even if it is
relatively inefficient at exploiting it compared with its
descendants that later perfected the new body plan.
However, its very inefficiency means that there will be
exceptionally strong selection for directional improvement until few further gains can accrue. Fast improvement is therefore inevitable given the initial success of
the new body plan, and ensures that intermediates will
die out before they can significantly radiate, so are
never alive today for study and were so transiently and
locally present that the chances of their fossilization
are exceptionally low. Once they become so efficient
that further improvement can only be minor, stabilising selection inhibiting further radical change once
again becomes dominant, until the next megaevolutionary breakthrough. The central logic of megaevolutionary innovation, easily recognised when discussing
major shifts in habitat such as from sea to land, also
applies to major functional shifts, e.g. from fin to leg,
from leg to wing, where stabilising selection normally
prevents incipient changes that might normally lead to
a really dramatic shift. Anthropomorphically put, generally it is better to do what you already do best than
to try something so radically different that the chances
of a successful transition to its new requirements are
very low, often effectively zero.
Mass extinctions never completely emptied a really
major adaptive zone or eliminated whole phyla, so no
new phyla ever arose as a result. However, some did
totally extinguish a few classes and more orders, providing opportunities for other members of the same or
adaptively similar phyla to make mid-level megaevolutionary innovations and fill the vacated adaptive zones.
In such cases environmental change indirectly caused
the timing of some, relatively minor, megaevolutionary
events, such as the replacement of one kind of reefbuilding coral by another or one molluscan or reptilian
group by another. There is however no reason whatever to think that abiotic environmental change stimulated any of the most important innovations in the
history of life: the origins of phyla or kingdoms, which
arose less than 60 times in 3.5 Gy, were limited by the
difficulty of the transition and availability of suitable
precursors [6]. All or almost all the 48 extant eukaryote phyla probably arose after the melting of snowball
earth ~635 My ago, most within 50 million years of

Page 55 of 78

the Cambrian/Precambrian boundary (530 My); only
four phyla evolved substantially later, the terrestrial
fungi (Ascomycota, Basidiomycota) and land plants
(Bryophyta, Tracheophyta), being delayed by over 100
My simply because of the difficulty of the transition to
land [6]. These Cambrian explosions of phyla are attributable simply to the previous absence of eukaryotes
to serve as ancestors. Thus their late origin was triggered internally and biotically by the origin of a suitable ancestor, not by external abiotic factors. By
contrast eight of the 10 bacterial phyla (all negibacteria) had probably arisen by 2.9 Gy ago, with only
unibacteria (Posibacteria and Archaebacteria) arising
significantly later, archaebacteria being the most recent
of all - coterminous with the eukaryotes, and possibly
triggering the Neoproterozoic snowball earth [6]. Most
bacterial phyla could have arisen within a few million
years of the origin of oxygenic photosynthesis in the
only really major explosive adaptive radiation prior to
the Cambrian explosion. Thus on the grand sweep of
earth history there were only two major megaevolutionary radiations in the history of life: that of eubacteria consequent on the origin of the bacterial cell; and
that of eukaryote phyla stemming directly from the
origin of the eukaryote cell [6]. Over long time scales
and across major transitions the assumption of uniform rates of change for functionally significant structures or sequences is always wrong, sometimes grossly
so, notwithstanding its approximate truth for functionally less significant sequences in some lineages for
comparatively brief periods.
Conclusion: phagotrophy, the novel adaptive zone that
made the eukaryotic cell

Now that we are reasonably certain that the ancestral
eukaryote was a phagotrophic protozoan [9], not a nonphagotrophic photosynthetic alga or osmotrophic fungus, as on some past now firmly rejected theories, it is
beyond serious question that eukaryogenesis involved
the origin of phagotrophy [91]. De Duve [131], who discovered lysosomes and peroxisomes, and Stanier [2],
apparently independently, first emphasised the key role
of phagotrophy in explaining the origins of the endomembrane system. Stanier [2] proposed that phagocytosis was also the stimulus for the evolution of larger
cells, microtubules and cilia. Then my coevolutionary
theory [11] argued that compartmentation by endomembranes and the cytoskeleton must have coevolved and
together fundamentally changed the chromosomes and
gene expression machinery, because DNA segregation,
transcription and ribosome biogenesis are tied up with
cell structure and compartmentation. It proposed that
loss of the bacterial peptidoglycan wall and subsequent
origin of actomyosin were the primary stimuli for the

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

origin of phagocytosis and the nucleus [11]. Thus the
genetic peculiarities of eukaryotes were indirectly also
consequences of the origin of phagotrophy in a wall-free
prokaryote [4,5,11,163,379,380]. No compelling evidence
or arguments have yet been found against this thesis,
yet the idea that the novel genetic systems of eukaryotes
are a consequence, not a cause, of their feeding behaviour and novel cell structure has not been popular, perhaps because of a widespread misconception that DNA
makes cells. It does not; cells make DNA, which is an
inert informational repository. Proteins and RNA are
the catalysts and effectors; lipids, proteins, and glycans
the builders. Trophic behaviour is the architect within
the ecological landscape. DNA is not primary, but is
important. We must explain its reasonably efficient segregation to daughter cells across the prokaryote/eukaryote divide.
Recently De Duve [367] reappraised the evidence for
eukaryotic origins in the light of modern molecular cell
biology and now accepts that peroxisomes were early
offshoots of the endomembrane system [3,11] and that
theories that he and I once espoused of a separate symbiotic origin for them are entirely superfluous. According to the coevolutionary theory of the eukaryote cell,
cytoskeleton, endomembranes, peroxisomes, cilia and
genetic systems are part of a unified whole, within
which food came first and sex was an afterthought [3].
The autogenous origin of all these structures was far
more radical than the minor tinkering when the resulting phagotroph converted an engulfed but undigested
proteobacterium into a mitochondrion - another afterthought [20]; ultrastructurally and functionally mitochondria are still easily recognisable as slightly modified
negibacteria. Intracellular coevolution is strongly exemplified between the endomembrane system and cytoskeleton; and in the way that internalization of membraneattached DNA revolutionised DNA segregation [70]; in
how the origin of centromeres led to other eukaryotic
chromosomal properties through mutation pressure
[70]; in the way the origin of motor ATPases provided
selective forces for nuclear origins; and the origins of
coat proteins by duplications both diversified endomembranes into ER, Golgi, endosomes [4] and yielded NPCs
and ciliary transport particles [374] necessary for the
simultaneous origin of cilia from astral microtubules
attached orthogonally to the cell surface by transitional
fibres [4].
It is thus hardly surprising that except for mitochondria piecemeal discussions of the origin of only one
eukaryotic component largely failed. Symbiogenetic theories, especially, have been a 40-year distraction from
the core problems of how a bacterium was transformed
into a eukaryote.

Page 56 of 78

Appendix 1
Key innovations in the origin of the nucleus and
eukaryotic cell cycle
1. Internalization of DNA attachment sites as protoNE/rough ER [3,4,11,380]
2. Cell division by actomyosin not FtsZ
[3,4,6,11,70,240]
3. Chromatin condensation cycle: histone phosphorylation, methylation, acetylation; heterochromatin
[18,170]
4. Mcm replication licensing system controlled by
cyclins [244,251]
5. FtsZ triplication to make tubulins; (g for centrosome) and a and b for microtubules fixing it to cell
surface [3,4,6]
6. Kinesin to separate centromeres via antiparallel
microtubules [6]
7. Centromeres/kinetochores (CenpA from core histone) for attaching DNA to microtubules [3,4,6]
(note that as discussed in the text CenpA might be a
property of neokaryotes only, but even Euglenozoa
have some kind of kinetochores)
8. Dynein for moving cargo towards the minus end
of microtubules and related midasin for ribosome
export [6]
9.
meiosis
and
synaptonemal
complex
[3,63,70,332,333,381]
10. telomerases and telomeres [3-5,70]
11.
post-transcriptional
gene
silencing
[177,199,201,203,382]
12. proteinaceous interphase nuclear matrix with
bound DNA-topoisomerase II and its ability to reorganize as mitotic chromosome cores [163]
13. nuclear lamina [18,163]
14. nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) [14-17,85]
15. nucleolus and more complex rRNA processing
(e.g. 5.8S rRNA) [3]
16. Ran GTP/GDP cycle for directionality of NE
export/import [14,17,107]
17. karyopherins [14,17]
18. ribosome subunit export machinery [14,17] (note
that most proteins involved have not been detected
in Euglenozoa so they might use a simpler system
than neokaryotes)
19. mRNA capping and export machinery [14,17,70]
20. polyA transcription termination system [70]
21. 26S proteasomes [27]
22. ubiquitin system [329,331,383,384]
23. sumoylation of nuclear and other proteins
[318-323]
24. cell cycle resetting by anaphase proteolysis
[6,13,18]

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

25. nuclear envelope fusion and syngamy [332]
26. spliceosomes and spliceosomal introns
[4,70,81,211,385]
27. nonsense-mediated mRNA decay [314]
Innovations are listed in likely order of occurrence,
but some (e.g. 3-6, 17-19, 22-23) were likely to have
been simultaneous. Some were likely to have been rapid
consequences of others (e.g. 9 of 1-7; 16-20 of 13,14; 26
& 27 of 14; 27 of 26). References indicate where their
evolution or molecular basis is reviewed in more detail.
Reviewers’ comments

Anthony Poole
This is a fascinating and important paper on a complicated topic. Overall, I rate Cavalier-Smith’s take on the
evolutionary origin of the nucleus as the most thoroughly considered attempt published to date, and there
is little doubt in my mind that the main conclusions he
makes are better supported than those of competing
models. I see no significant problems with the theory as
presented, and agree with the central points.
There are two general take-home messages here. The
first, eloquently summarised in the final paragraph of the
paper, is that symbiogenetic theories have been a ‘40-year
distraction’. Cavalier-Smith’s forceful and cogent attack
on these views makes for enjoyable reading (though perhaps not if one is on the receiving end), and the arguments here amply demonstrate why the position
advanced by Yutin and collegues in their recently published paper (Biology Direct 2009, 4:9) is specious at best.
The second general message is that, to have any hope of
explaining the origin of the nucleus, it cannot be considered in isolation from other key eukaryotic cellular features (as has all too often been the case).
The only real gripe I have with this paper concerns its
proportions. It is like a sandwich made with bread sliced
too thickly, and meat sliced too thinly. The Introduction
is an interesting though long and, at times, meandering
read, and the Discussion is nine tenths diatribe (on why
everyone else is utterly wrong on almost everything). Let
me make it clear that I don’t have any major concerns
about the content of these sections, but the really exciting material (the ‘Results’ section) is concertinaed into a
few brief pages. To give some perspective, there is about
10 pages in the Discussion devoted to the slating of
other published theories (I found this interesting reading
but note that many of these critiques have been made
elsewhere, either by Cavalier-Smith or by others) and
around the same proportion of the 58 pages of text in
this manuscript is dedicated to developing the novel
ideas. This has two effects. One is that the novel material is deeply buried, and as a reader one has to work
hard to extract the author’s insights from such a lengthy

Page 57 of 78

composition. The second is that, on account of the
brevity of the ‘Results’ one has to spend a lot of time
figuring out exactly what Cavalier-Smith means. I am
probably not alone in acknowledging that CavalierSmith has a broader knowledge of the subject matter
than I, but it makes it hard to follow the reasoning
when a number of points are assumed to be common
knowledge and stated without some sort of background.
While one might say I should have done my homework,
I think much would be gained from acknowledging that
the topic of this paper is of interest to a broad range of
evolutionary and cell biologists, and providing the requisite detail would therefore be of value. In some cases
the arguments are indeed well-supported and developed,
but for other points there may be a greater degree of
speculation, and the difficulty is that without a fair
recollection of Cavalier-Smith’s extensive canon, it may
be hard to follow all the reasoning. This is a pity
because, some points might therefore be mistaken as
superficial speculation when they are in fact wellsupported.
Authors response: Only one bread slice (the introduction) was substantially thicker than the meat. That is
because it provides background to help digest the meat.
The referee requests more background for certain topics in
the results section; the problem with such a broad field is
that readers differ greatly in which parts of the background they really need; some may want more on some
points and less on others than provided. I have amplified
only parts of the introduction for which at least one
referee seemed to need more information. Cutting some or
inserting more might please some readers but irritate
others: each can skim what to them is obvious and linger
over what seems novel. I also amplified the meat section
on the evolution of nucleocytoplasmic transport to clarify
points raised by the next referee, moved the general section on megaevolution to the discussion so readers reach
the meat faster, and made the results discussion of the
origins of mitosis (now mentioned in the title), meiosis
and heterochromatin more thorough with more background even though this needs some revisiting of arguments and evidence discussed previously. A diatribe is
defined as bitter and abusive; my discussion has much
robust but carefully reasoned criticism of arguments,
including some of each referee, but is neither bitter nor
abusive so is not a diatribe. I would welcome similarly
robust, reasoned and discriminating criticisms of my
ideas, much preferable to their being ignored or uncritically accepted. I thank all referees for their comments;
more such dialogue is needed in this field.
What follows are a few specific comments or questions concerning ideas presented:
p7, “The eubacterial ancestor of neomura could not
have been a negibacterium with two bounding

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

membranes, but was a posibacterium with a single surface membrane, like neomura; probably an actinobacterium, but possibly an early intermediate between
Endobacteria and Actinobacteria”.
Here I wish to request a clarification. This statement
builds on two points. One is that archaea and eukaryotes are sister groups. The other is that the neomura
(archaea + eukaryotes) evolved from within the bacteria.
The view that neomura evolved from bacteria is based
on an argument Cavalier-Smith has made before (see in
particular Biology Direct 2006, 1:19), and is where the
statement ‘probably an actinobacterium’ comes from.
This gives the impression that neomura (archaea +
eukaryotes, and ignoring any genetic contribution from
mitochondria) evolved from the actinobacterial crown. I
would like to ask whether the author’s statement should
be taken to mean this is a possibility, or whether actinobacterial-neomuran affinity refers to a split before the
most recent common ancestor of actinobacteria (i.e. a
stem actinobacterium).
Author’s reply: I thought there was no compelling evidence either way, so stated the point thus, and simply
referred to my previous discussion of the uncertainties
[13]. The radical changes in so many genes that caused
the neomuran revolution make it exceedingly difficult to
answer this question using gene sequence trees - more
difficult than establishing the branching order of the
eubacterial phyla (itself largely unresolved by sequence
trees alone). However, reasons now specified in the introduction indicate that neomura are most likely sisters to
crown actinobacteria, as shown in the more resolved
revision of Fig. 1. Insofar as the posibacterial ancestor of
neomura must already have evolved phosphatidylinositol, sterols, and 20S proteasomes, it was a stem actinobacterium rather than an endobacterium (though it may
well have had endospores as do the most divergent actinobacteria). Phosphatidylinositol can be considered a
synapomorphy of actinobacteria that clearly differentiates them from Endobacteria, which unlike the other two
has not been secondarily lost within the group. If, as previously suggested [12] that ancestor was a thermophile
(not hyperthermophilic), it might also have had a GCrich genome.
I also think it is worth me pointing out for those who
might disagree with the bacterial origin of neomura that
one does not need to accept all the steps preceding the
archaeal-eukaryote split in figure 1 - for the purposes of
following the novel arguments developed here the
reader should concentrate on the three stages marked
with stars.
Author’s reply: That is correct. The nature of the
mechanistic and selective forces that led to the nucleus is
logically independent of the phylogenetic origin of neomura (seemingly not realised by the third referee).

Page 58 of 78

However it is likely that destabilization of eubacterial
structure assumed by the overall theory during the origin
of neomura almost immediately prior to the origin of the
eukaryote cell was of key evolutionary importance in
facilitating the radical changes during the origin of phagotrophy. A close association in time between this putative destabilization and the divergent origins of both
eukaryotes and archaebacteria and the probable rapidity
of the transitions is a major part of the explanation of
the absence of extant intermediates between the three
domains; it helps explain why they are so phenotypically
distinct. Moreover, readers also need to take on board
the palaeontological evidence that eubacteria are much
older than eukaryotes, combined with the phylogenetic
evidence that archaebacteria are sisters rather than
ancestral to eukaryotes and the absence of any compelling evidence that archaebacteria are as old as eubacteria because this is important for understanding the
phylogenetic origin of the individual components of the
eukaryotic host, especially those that are absent from
archaebacteria. It is important to appreciate the major
role that unsubstantiated assumptions, fashion, and the
very name archaebacteria, rather than critical reasoning,
has played in the prevailing view (in my view wrong) of
the equal age of neomura and eubacteria.
p23 ‘and possibly triggering the Neoproteozoic snowball earth’
and
’in the only really major explosive adaptive radiation
prior to the Cambrian explosion’
and (on p25) ‘Every gene probably duplicated many
times in just a few days’
One factor that makes this paper frustrating to read is
all the distraction. The above comments do not really
seem necessary for presenting the central ideas. The
first is a speculative aside that Cavalier-Smith has given
elsewhere and does nothing more than derail the reader’s concentration by throwing in an unnecessary spanner. The second is a qualitative statement of the
throwaway kind, better suited to a narrative piece, and
is again distracting. The statement from p25 is again
terribly speculative, and, to my mind these types of
statement (there are many more) detract from the
strengths of the paper.
Author’s response: these are fair comments, reflecting
our differing opinions of how one should present ideas;
however, it would have been better to have said that
such brief, less central statements may detract from
some readers’ perceptions of the strength of the paper.
They do not reduce the actual strength of the central
arguments, which stand on their own merits. I retain
them to alert readers to these possibilities, the last one
as a deliberate irritant to stimulate readers to consider
that key changes can be much faster than often assumed.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Because they are peripheral and/or speculative it is not
useful to amplify them here.
I like the discussion of Simpson’s writings, but think
the author might get to the last paragraph, and the last
sentence of the last paragraph (’These are just descriptive
terms; they do not invoke special mechanisms beyond
mutation and selection’), a little earlier. I found that, having an idea of what the author was actually saying made
the second reading of the paper much easier; the first
time through I was heavily distracted by all the strong
statements about microevolution, e.g. p4, ‘.dramatic innovations like the origin of the nucleus that are incomprehensible by just extrapolating normal microevolutionary
changes’. I think that one does have to be careful with
this sort of blanket statement since ‘microevolutionary
processes’ has in the past been very broadly defined. Suffice it to say, it is clear with careful reading that CavalierSmith is not invoking special ad hoc mechanisms to
account for the origin of the nucleus, so this is perhaps a
case of smoke without fire, though with statements such
as ‘the origin of eukaryotes was an intrinsically abnormal
event, not one understandable simply by extrapolating
the trivial tinkering that occupies most evolution. To
understand it we must invoke something quite exceptional’ (p25), it is easy to think this is the case.
This melodramatic wordsmithery is followed by a brief
list of four important items (note to the author: only
three are listed): preadaptation to phagotrophy, ‘novel
selective forces’ that phagotrophy brings (these are left
unexplained), and disruption to cell division and DNA
segregation as a consequence of phagotrophy. This at
least tempers the hyperbole immediately preceding it.
What follows that is an interesting discussion of preadaptations that the ancestor of eukaryotes must have
possessed: a single membrane, loss of the murein cell
wall and several cellular attributes (large cell and genome sizes, diverse lipids, a secretome and a facultatively
aerobic/anaerobic metabolism). Cavalier-Smith argues
that Actinobacteria appear to carry these preadaptations.
In this view, the lineage leading to archaea secondarily
lost these preadaptations.
The points concerning preadaptation are essential for
Cavalier-Smith to place this work within the wider context
of his own ideas on the neomuran revolution, and are
interspersed with slicing critiques of others’ proposals for
the cellular nature of the host that engulfed the mitochondrial ancestor (i.e. an archaeal host or a mycoplasma).
What is most important to my mind is that identifying
these preadaptations provides important cell biological
insight into the origin of the eukaryote cell, regardless of
the specifics of the actinobacterial-eukaryote affinity.
Author’s response: These perceptive comments highlight the difficulty of getting over the idea of radical differences in scale, style, and speed of megaevolution

Page 59 of 78

compared with day to day microevolution without exaggerating or underplaying the importance of the descriptive
distinction, and without being misunderstood because of
past exaggerations or mistaken claims for radically different mechanisms or contradictions that do not exist that
make many reasonably wary of such distinctions. It is
pleasing that nonetheless you understood the essence of
what I tried to say. I have now placed the last paragraph
as the second paragraph with some modifications that
may help other readers understand my message more
easily. Emphasizing the dramatic contrast between megaevolutionary events and most evolution is not hyperbole;
it is an essential truth. It is the extravagant exaggeration
by some students of microevolution to the effect that ‘all
evolution is just changes in allele frequency’ that is truly
hyperbolic and wrong. The origin of eukaryotes is a prime
example where the origins of hundreds of new genes and
protein domains and of dozens of radically new cellular
structures was far more important than changes in the
frequency of alleles of existing genes, and thus involves
considerations entirely outside the scope of standard
population genetics, which does not consider cell structure
or unique events at all. The more general parts of this discussion are now moved to the discussion.
I have three questions for the author concerning the
evolution of chromosomes from a circular to linear
form (p33):
1. What do you make of the multiple secondary emergences of linear chromosomes among bacteria [386]?
The constraints you raise (’the need for replication forks
to converge on a single terminus and signal completion’,
p33) do not seem to apply to these cases.
Author’s response: These examples show that some
bacteria can evolve linear chromosomes if they solve the
end replication problem, which can be done in several
different ways (no bacteria use mechanisms homologous
to telomeres; the spirochaete Borrellia, like some viruses,
uses the hairpin mechanism I originally proposed for
eukaryotes [221], and the actinobacterium Streptomyces
uses terminal proteins like some plasmids or viruses).
Thus the constraints against bacterial linear chromosomes are not absolute, but that does not mean that no
constraints other than the end replication problem exist
(the same must apply to mitochondria, where linear genomes have also evolved multiply; apparently plastid genomes never did). It would be interesting to study the
control of replication termination and its coordination
with segregation and division in each case of secondary
origin of linear chromosomes. A thorough understanding
of this should show either that the putative constraint I
invoked is irrelevant or that these bacteria found novel
ways around it or for some reason can better tolerate
linear chromosomes. I doubt whether they would reveal
an advantage for linearity, which I suspect is a

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

functionless evolutionary accident driven by mutation
pressure, but do not exclude the possibility of an
advantage.
2. The discussion presented regarding the consequences of phagocytosis includes the idea that, prior to
this, there were strong constraints on the number of origins of replication. The relaxation of these constraints
(’only a single replicon per chromosome so replication
termination could directly signal division to occur
directly between the only two daughter replicon termini’) is thus something that is proposed to postdate
the archaeal-eukaryote split. Sulfolobus species are
known to have more than one origin of replication
[387,388] - do you have an opinion as to why multiple
origins are found in some archaea? - this observation
doesn’t obviously support your statement that additional
origins would be ‘stringently removed by purifying selection for >2Gy’.
Author’s response: Sulfolobus is an interesting exception to the general rule. In so far as I consider that Sulfolobus evolved well after eukaryotes, this important
exception does not invalidate my statement from which
you omitted the key word ‘previously’: my actual statement ‘previously stringently removed by purifying selection for >2 Gy’ remains true. As this exception is found
in an archaebacterium, which unlike eubacteria have
Mcm-related DNA synthesis initiation proteins (Cdc6
proteins) related to those of eukaryotes, it is clear that
replication initiation was significantly changed during
the neomuran revolution (I argue as a coevolutionary
result of the origin of core histones). These changes might
have preadapted both eukaryotes and archaebacteria to
evolve multiple replicon origins, provided there is a selective advantage for this. In the case of eukaryotes I suggested that this selective advantage was to ensure that
their much larger genomes were replicated by their much
slower replication forks in a small fraction of the cell
cycle. Though Sulfolobus has a rather small genome, its
replication forks move an order of magnitude more
slowly than in most prokaryotes [387]. With three origins
replication takes 40% of the cell cycle; with only one it
would take 120%, clearly impossible; without multiple
origins the cell cycle would be markedly longer, a severe
selective disadvantage. Thus the exceptional slowness of
Sulfolobus replication forks imposed a novel selective
force for multiple origins, as in eukaryotes (I would argue
probably independently, though the mechanisms of its
synchronous initiation of multiple origin control need
elucidating in detail to test this). Sulfolobus has asynchronous replicon termination, which raises the same
issue of coordination with division as linear chromosomes: understanding this better would also help test
these ideas. It seems that in general in archaebacteria
there is a long gap after replication termination before

Page 60 of 78

division and no archaebacteria are known to use the
trick of successive initiations at single origins (at shorter
intervals than total fork transit time) whereby Escherichia coli and other enterobacteria speed up DNA replication and allow cell cycles shorter than replication
time. The absence of such mechanisms combined with
slow forks would favour multiple origins. In these and
some other respects [389,390] there are closer resemblances in cell cycle controls of archaebacteria with
eukaryotes than with eubacteria; possibly when archaebacterial cell cycles are better understood, additional
preadaptations for what are currently thought of as typically eukaryotic mechanisms will become apparent. If
they do, such cell features would have arisen in the
ancestral neomuran - and thus be neomuran not eukaryotic innovations. In Sulfolobus multiple origins clearly
arose by gene duplication (two of the three are linked to
cdc6 genes) [387], as I originally suggested for eukaryotes
[4]. Why replication should be so exceptionally slow in
Sulfolobus could be related to its exceptional environment (80C and pH 3) that may have led to unusually
stable chromatin structure, likely to delay strand separation by DNA helicases. Overall this exception illuminates
the rule and supports my interpretation of the reasons
for it, which explain both the rule and this exception.
3. Thermophily has previously been proposed to be a
selective pressure favouring the emergence of circular
chromosomes [391]. Earlier in the manuscript (p6), you
state that the ancestral archaebacterium was subjected
to massive gene loss (including genes such as MreB)
during ‘secondary adaptation to hyperthermophily’.
Given the statement that the ancestral archaeon was not
hyperthermophilic, it would be nice to hear the author’s
view on the proposal that Cenarchaeum symbiosum
(and related mesophilic ‘Crenarchaeota’) be classified as
a distinct phylum (Thaumarchaeota - [232]), one possible implication from that work is of course that the
ancestral archaeon was not hyperthermophilic. I haven’t
discussed this with Forterre yet, but an ancestrally
mesophilic archaeon could potentially kill the argument
for circular chromosomes as a direct thermoadaptation
(since Cenarchaeum has a circular genome).
Author’s response: You misinterpreted the significance
of ‘secondary’ in my sentence. I did not state that the
ancestral archaebacterium was not hyperthermophilic.
As explained in detail before [12] I have consistently
argued since 1987 that it was hyperthermophilic and
that hyperthermophily was the key innovation involved
in the origin of the special archaebacterial lipids. Secondary means only that the ancestral neomuran and its
eubacterial ancestors were not hyperthermophilic. Thus
in the context of the whole tree of life ancestral archaebacterial hyperthermophily is secondary. I have never
favoured Foterre’s argument for thermophily as an

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

explanation of the circularity of the chromosome as I
have never accepted that archaebacteria are as old as
eubacteria, which also mostly have circular chromosomes
and are mostly non-thermophiles, which means that circularity evolved prior to the last common ancestor of all
prokaryotes, for which there is no reason to assume
hyperthermophily or even thermophily. Forterre’s idea of
the origin of prokaryotes by reductive evolution of eukaryotes is mechanistically totally implausible (nobody has
ever suggested plausible intermediate stages or how you
could undo the eukaryotic endomembrane system or
cytoskeleton, still less how the first cell could have
evolved it) and refuted by the fossil record, so his ‘explanation’ of circular chromosomes was a non-starter.
Your question about Cenarchaeum has a phylogenetic
and a taxonomic aspect. Taxonomically I oppose making
it a distinct phylum, just as I oppose cren- and euryarchaeotes as distinct phyla, for their phenotypic disparity is
too small to justify a rank above subphylum. There have
been too many unmerited designations of new phyla
among bacteria based just on sequence trees rather than
phenotype. Another unmerited phylum ranking is the
hyperthermophilic Korarchaeota [392]. It would be more
appropriate to make thaumarchaeotes and korarchaeotes
new crenarchaeote orders, possibly classes. Ranking is a
subtle thing and bacteriologists underuse the intermediate ranks of class and subphylum compared with order
and phylum (technically division), yielding unbalanced
and less useful classifications.
Phylogenetically there are two contradictory positions
for Cenarchaeum: as sister to hyperthermophilic crenarchaeotes as on the 2-gene rRNA tree of BrochierArmanet et al. [232] and both protein trees of [393] and
as sister to all other archaebacteria as in the 53 ribosomal protein tree of [232]. It was unwise to assume as
they did that the latter is the correct topology, as Cenarchaeum is represented only by one lineage and its position on the tree could reflect systematic bias, not true
history. Indeed the EF2 tree and one based on 35 ribosomal plus 3 RNA polymerase proteins give strong support
to Cenarchaeum being sister to hyperthermophilic crenarchaeotes. Furthermore the 16S-23S rRNA tree including Korarachaeum gave unequivocal support to it and
Cenarchaeum both being the deepest branching members
of the crenarchaeote clade. The latter trees based on a
greater diversity of different proteins and including also
a korarchaeote (unlike [232]) are more likely to be correct than the ribosomal protein tree of [232]. Interestingly the 38-gene tree places Cenarchaeum and
‘Korarchaeum’ as sisters with good support and this
clade as sister to the traditional thermophilic crenarchaeotes with 100% support. If this is correct then your
question would be irrelevant, as the conclusion that the
cenancestral archaebacterium was hyperthermophilic

Page 61 of 78

would remain, as it would be most parsimonious to suppose that Cenarchaeum, like several euryarchaeote
lineages, was secondarily mesophilic (it could also be
sensible to group Cenarchaeum and Korarchaeum in one
new class). I agree with Brochier-Armanet et al. that the
characters shared by Cenarchaeum and euryarchaeotes
are likely to be ancestral to archaebacteria and were
probably lost by hyperthermophilic crenarchaeotes, but if
such characters are indeed ancestral one cannot use
their presence in Cenarchaeum as a reason for preferring
one topology over the other. If Cenarchaeum is sister to
all other archaebacteria, which seems to me unlikely in
the light of [393] this would make their ancestral state
harder to deduce; Brochier-Armanet et al. candidly
admit that one could not confidently decide whether the
cenancestor was hyperthermophilic or mesophilic just
from the topology [232]; that is because a hyperthermophilic ancestry would involve only one more reversion to
mesophily than the several we are confident of in euryarchaeotes; thus it is not so unlikely that we can reasonably reject it purely for parsimony. Even in the
unlikely eventuality that Cenarchaeum is truly the deepest branching archaebacterium it would remain more
likely that the cenancestor was hyperthermophilic, as
that more satisfactorily explains the origin of their lipids
and reverse DNA gyrase.
Forterre’s explanation of the origin of reverse gyrase as
a chimaera of two eubacterial proteins strongly shows
that eubacteria are indeed ancestral to archaebacteria
and neomura, as all the most compelling evidence congruently indicates. The trees and genome data of [393]
confirm that erecting Korarchaeota as a separate phylum
based on bad and misleading 16S rRNA trees (an all too
common practice for bacteria) was premature and
unwise, and together with the genome data for Cenarchaeum make the same point for it; neither is more radically different from other crenarchaeotes than the very
diverse euryarchaeotes are from each other; moreover
they show that the differences between crenarchaeotes
and euryarchaeotes have been exaggerated; many now
clearly stem from secondary losses in the cenancestor of
the traditional hyperthermophilic crenarchaeotes, just as
I argued [12]. It is increasingly clear that archaebacteria
were ancestrally hyperthermophilic, evolved from eubacteria, that both subphyla generated secondary mesophiles, and that reductive evolution by multiple gene
losses has been far more important in their origin and
diversification than is yet widely accepted. But there is
absolutely no evidence for the generation of prokaryotes
by the loss of eukaryotic organelles. I would rank Thaumarchaeota and Crenarchaeota each as classes, not
phyla.
p39: ‘Because selfish DNA, especially transposons and
endogenous retroviruses, spread much more slowly in

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

sexual than in clonal populations, a sexual protoeukaryote would have suddenly been inundated by such
genetic parasites.’ There is an error here: presumably
this sentence was supposed to read ‘spread much more
slowly in clonal than in sexual populations’. Here I
think it would be an oversight not to cite the seminal
paper by Hickey [280]. I am not aware of ‘spread’ in clonal systems, though there may be ‘persistence’ of some
types of mobile element. Arkhipova & Meselson [394]
showed loss of retroelements during the evolution of
asexuality in Bdelloid rotifers, which makes sense given
these elements propagate through replicative transposition. It seems that DNA transposons persist, and, given
that they can transpose by conservative mechanisms,
this may well be a case persistence rather than slow
spread. It is noteworthy that bacterial transposons are
primarily conservative, but can occasionally transpose by
replicative means - overall there doesn’t seem to be
much evidence for proliferation (at least judging by prevalence in prokaryote genomes).
Author’s response: It was an inversion error, now corrected. I inserted reference to Hickey [280] and also to
my paper that was probably first to argue that noninfectious selfish DNA cannot spread easily in clonal
populations [279], and which directly stimulated Hickey
to show that it can easily in sexual ones. I originally
cited neither because this is old established history, just
as one does not cite Darwin every time one mentions
evolution or Watson and Crick every time one mentions
a DNA double helix. With respect to bdelloids, they contain many more transposons than previously thought
[395], indicating that transposons can spread even in
clonal asexuals by lateral gene transfer (e.g. by viral
infection), for which there is also good evidence in bdelloids [396] (or that bdelloids are not strictly asexual).
This does not alter the fact that evolving sex added an
extra easy way for transposons to spread.
Gáspár Jékely
Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology,
Tübingen, Germany
This paper presents a critical review of various models
on the evolution of the nucleus along with a long argument that intracellular coevolution is the key to understanding eukaryote origins, as well as a scenario on
endomembrane and nucleus evolution. I find this a very
detailed and insightful synthesis. Below I comments on
certain parts of the paper, which relate to some cell biological aspects of the author’s model. I focus on those
parts where the author’s scenarios disagree with some of
the scenarios I had proposed on the origin of secretory
membranes, predation and the nucleus. Hopefully this
discussion will help to improve our models and also
help to recognise the merits and weaknesses of the
somewhat contrasting scenarios.

Page 62 of 78

Comments about the small GTPase tree
You challenge some of my earlier suggestions that
were based on the phylogeny of eukaryotic small
GTPases [65]. You write, that “It is evident from other
work that the Arf branch is the longest among the
eukaryote paralogues and that the small GTPase tree is
essentially unresolved at its base [83]; therefore rooting
of the tree with the far longer eubacterial outgroup
could have wrongly attracted it to the base.” Ref. 83
does not show that Arf is the longest branch, and in the
tree shown in this paper only Ran is unresolved. The
small GTPase tree is also resolved at its base in other
analyses (see also my Bayesian tree in [ref. [67]]).
Besides, I didn’t claim that Arf came first, but that the
first split separated Sar1/Arf/SR? from the rest. Sar1/
Arf/SR? also forms a distinct group in [ref. [87], which
paper suggests independent origin for this branch and
the Ras/Rab/Rac/Ran branch. Looking back at my paper
[65], I realised that you probably misinterpret the numbers at the nodes of the tree in my Fig. 1[65], which
solely indicated the nodes, to simplify discussion about
them, and not branching orders.
You also write, that “It is as unwise as for other paralogue trees to assume that the rooting is accurate.”
Rooting with the closest eukaryotic paralogs, the trimeric G-protein alpha subunits, also gives the same
position for the root [67].
Further down you write: “The worst argument, however, was that the Arf-1 branch is involved in secretion
and the Rab one in phagocytosis, and to combine these
two bad arguments to conclude that exocytosis evolved
before phagocytosis [65].” I disagree. It can be safely
deduced that the Sar1/Arf/SR? branch ancestrally regulated secretory membranes. Sar1 and SR? still exclusively
do this, and Arf1 has indispensable functions in Golgi.
The ancestral function is not so clear for the other
branch. Later you write, that “almost certainly endocytosis and exocytosis coevolved, recruiting from a common
pool of enzymes when assembling their toolkit.” I agree
with this, but I still think that putting whole-cell phagocytosis first is cell biologically unrealistic. There had to
be some preadaptation also in the membrane trafficking
system to allow complete cell engulfment.
You also write, that “Thus was born the primary
divergence between ER outwards secretory traffic and
plasma membrane inwards endocytic traffic seen in
GTPase [65] and SNARE [89] trees.” Funnily, this is the
same over-simplification that you just criticised above as
my worst argument (in ref [65]).
Author’s reply: We both agree that ‘endocytosis and
exocytosis coevolved, recruiting from a common pool of
enzymes when assembling their toolkit’ and also that it
is not easy to infer whether the Rab branch was originally involved in phagocytosis or exocytosis. That being so,

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

it is not safe to infer what was the ancestral role in the
common ancestor of both branches. The difference
between us may not be that huge. I agree that there
must have been much preadaptation in several respects
not least with respect to surface membrane properties. I
also agree that on the grand scale of things secretion preceded phagocytosis as it is done by all prokaryotes
whereas phagocytosis is derived. However secretion and
exocytosis are not the same. My ‘oversimplification’ and
your ‘worst argument’ are not the same - both for this
reason and also because my statement about SNAREs is
obviously not the same as yours about Rabs. You argued
from the Rab tree that exocytosis preceded phagocytosis.
I argued that secretion (which ancestrally did not involve
exocytosis) preceded both and that primitive phagocytosis
marginally preceded exocytosis, but that well-developed
exocytosis and phagocytosis must have coevolved; even
my statement about both trees mentioned only primary
divergence and did not involve a claim that exocytosis
came first. With respect to ‘putting whole cell phagocytosis first’ my recent discussion of the origin of the endomembrane system argues that predation was the
primary driving force for eukaryogenesis but that some
novel features of the endomembrane system evolved during an earlier phase of extracellular digestion prior to
phagocytosis itself, but that (as argued earlier) cell ingestion was what first generated internal membranes and
thus membranes that could for the first time undergo
exocytosis [27]. I refer the reader to that paper for
details.
Comments about the nature of the first
endomembranes
You also disagree with my secretory membranes-first
scenario, although the difference between our scenarios
may not be so great as it seems from this criticism, and
I think that our models will eventually converge. You
step back a little in this paper, but in your recent paper
[91] you postulated an early phase of membrane evolution, even discussing the possibility of some tubulation
before phagotrophy, as I suggested in [65]. In ref [91]
you also speculate on the primacy of ER-linked functions, such as surface secretion of membrane-anchored
digestive enzymes and ERAD. In my scenario these
evolved on the early membrane tubules, somewhat
before total cell engulfment and were preadaptations to
allow regulated secretion during phagotrophy and possibly membrane splitting/fusion. The prey might not have
been exclusively cellular, as you also write [91], it could
have been digested nutrients or viruses and these could
have been digested/absorbed by a tubular endomembrane network (and I agree that ERAD is a very plausible mechanism [91]). I would argue that the
phagocytosis machinery, which is based on actin, Rac
and pseudopodia, evolved independently, although

Page 63 of 78

always functionally linked (e.g. via digestive enzyme targeting) to the secretory membranes, which is rather
based on microtubule motor, tubules and vesicles. Your
figures are still not updated to include these tubules,
which would emanate from the prey vesicle in your
scheme, or directly from the PM, before total engulfment, according to my scheme.
You also write, that “So we should not ask ‘did phagocytosis or exocytosis evolve first?’: both evolved together,
with phagotrophy being the entirely novel selective
advantage, as De Duve [90] and Stanier [2] first argued.”
Actually Stanier in ref [2] wrote ‘endocytosis’, and De
Duve expressed views, which are more similar to the
enzyme secreting, food capturing tubules I described in
ref [65], rather than to whole-cell engulfment. According to De Duve [90] endomembranes evolved by “infolding of the cell membrane, allowing the formation of
internalized extracellular pockets into which captured
food and secreted enzymes were trapped together ... If
this hypothetical reconstruction is correct, then the
decisive event may have been simply the progressive
spreading, with concomitant infolding, of a membrane
already adapted for secretion and absorption.” Assuming
that the food was not cellular, it is easier to imagine
such (tubular) invaginations, generated by primitive
membrane bending coats and molecular motors pulling
on membranes [65]. These membranes could have had
both secretory and absorptive function. In these membrane invaginations and networks fusion and fission
could evolve, all preadaptations for total cell engulfment.
Otherwise I cannot imagine what your prekaryote did
when it first engulfed a whole bacterium and topologically separated the phagosome from the plasmamembrane. How did it re-fuse the vacuole if no membrane
fusion machinery was present? How did the cell do it
on a regular basis to earn a living? I would like to
emphasize, that my model also posits that eukaryogenesis was driven by the evolution of predation, but I
incorporate some intermediate steps before total cell
engulfment, that also make the scenario cell biologically
more plausible. The selective logic and a possible social
scenario for the evolution of predation is described in
(Biol Direct. 2007 Jan 19;2:3.).
Author’s reply: Our thinking is certainly much more
similar than either is to some deeply contrasting views
that seem to ignore cell biology, especially in that we
both see membrane budding and fusion as the most crucial innovation in eukaryogenesis and give a central role
to novel selective forces and mechanisms stimulated by
predation. You also rightly guessed that the present
paper and figures were prepared long before my recent
paper that proposes a predatory and partially extracellular digestion phase prior to ingestive phagocytosis [27].
That modification to my earlier ideas was made because,

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

like you, I think that some degree of preadaptation is
essential in explaining complex innovation and because
my proposal also neatly explains many aspects of the
evolution of the ERAD machinery that was unknown
when I first thought about the origin of phagocytosis. I
imagined that some refusion of food vacuoles with the
plasma membrane could have occurred accidentally
because of an inherent tendency of membranes to refuse,
but grant that this would probably be inefficient and
that an evolution of phagocytosis without a simultaneous
improvement to exocytosis could hardly have occurred; I
pointed that out long ago [11], and thus have never
thought that phagocytosis evolved in detail prior to exocytosis. Thus without a very rapid improvement of refusion by the origin of specific membrane fusion proteins,
there would have been a severe bottleneck. This would
have given an extremely strong selective advantage to the
evolution of exocytosis, stronger I think than in your scenario. The intermediate where I now postulate both were
perfected is assumed to have ‘made its living’ initially by
extracellular breakup the cellular prey and import of the
proteins, so the transition to engulfing whole cells would
make absorption of proteins more efficient and thus not
be as radical a change in way of ‘earning a living’ as
your question implies; complete internalization would
also allow the better exploitation of energy rich lipids. In
a chicken-and-egg problem like this it is more likely that
exocytosis and endocytosis evolved together rather than
either developed alone. I did not complicate the present
figures by introducing tubulation because this paper
focuses on the later origin of the nucleus, the necessarily
prior origin of endomembranes having been discussed in
detail in [27].
I am not against membrane tubulation per se as an
intermediate stage; the difference between us is that I
invoked it to improve the efficiency of absorption, as did
de Duve, whereas you did so to increase the efficiency of
secretion at the cell surface, which is less plausible to
me. If as you now say such invaginations ‘could have
had both secretory and absorptive function’, we are
indeed coming closer; what I objected to was singling out
secretion as their primary one. Until at least some membrane budding to internalize membrane had occurred,
there would have been no internal membranes that
could be externalized by exocytosis or from which exocytotic vesicles could bud and later fuse with the cell surface. Thus exocytosis must have followed some
membrane internalization; such internalization would be
most simply initiated by a rudimentary form of endocytosis/phagocytosis. If so, the rudiments of phagocytosis at
least briefly preceded the rudiments of exocytosis. With
respect to history, you misinterpret Stanier’s use of ‘endocytosis’; at the time he wrote the term included both
phagocytosis and pinocytosis (see p. 9 of his paper); it

Page 64 of 78

was specifically invented to embrace both; its much more
recent use to refer mainly to receptor mediated micropinocytosis in contrast to phagocytosis is a complete distortion of its original meaning. As you probably know,
Stanier went on to say (p. 27): ‘the capacity for endocytosis would have conferred on its early possessors a new
biological means for obtaining nutrients; predation on
other cells.’ prior to discussing the impact of this on cell
structural complexification. There is no doubt that he
had in mind mainly phagocytosis rather than pinocytosis
as the driving force, just as I did when proposing actin
as the key molecular invention enabling phagocytosis
and eukaryogenesis [10].
Comment about the constriction of the NPC cylinder
About the early evolution of the NPC you write, that
“Later this wide cylinder, allowing nucleocytoplasmic
exchange by passive diffusion (Fig. 5a), was constricted to
exclude ribosomes from the nucleus” A simple constriction of the proto-NPC cannot exclude ribosomes and
other factors from the nucleus. For exclusion FG-repeats
are needed. A constriction will only result in more limited diffusion, but not (size) selectivity. Ribosomes cannot
be excluded this way, because they are assembled in the
nucleus. What such a diffusion barrier could achieve is
increased RanGTP levels in the nucleus and a sharper
RanGTP gradient (as shown in ref [139]). Everything
then follows from this, as nuclear transport evolves. An
increase in localized RanGTP was probably the primary
reason for constricting the proto-NE and NPCs.
Author’s reply: there is a misunderstanding here; the
Figure citation relating to ‘constriction’ is 5b, which does
have the FG repeats. I thought it was clear that in 5a
where there are no FG repeats the ribosomes had free
passage but in 5b when they are added they do not. To
prevent others misinterpreting my meaning I changed
‘constricted’ to ‘constricted by inserting the inner FG
repeat ring’. I do not really understand the statement
about ribosomes not being excluded because they are
assembled in the nucleus; precursor ribosomal subunits
are indeed thus assembled, but complete ribosomes with
messenger are larger and generally only assembled in the
cytoplasm and thus generally are excluded.
You also write, that “possibly their first cargo was
inner-membrane DNA-binding proteins [18], that would
otherwise be impeded by the novel integral membrane
Nups, unless from the start NPCs opened to let them
cross the NPC NE domain” It is not clear that NPCs
have to open to allow the crossing of transmembrane
cargo. There are clear gaps between the NE and the
NPC that may allow the passage of transmembrane proteins (Cell 1992 69:1133-41, Nature 2007 449:611-5,
Science, 2008 322:1369-73).
Author’s reply: an interesting comment. However there
is evidence that some integral membrane proteins are

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

imported by karyopherins [397]. I suspect that my and
your proposals about which were the first things to be
transported may both be oversimplified guesswork, and
that we may never be able to reconstruct with confidence
the order in detail.
Comment about the selective forces during the evolution of the nucleus
I am unconvinced by the kinetic argument for phase 2
of the evolution of the nucleus (the first steps in the
evolution of selective transport). In ribosome assembly
the rate-limiting step is rRNA transcription and maturation, and is not limited by the diffusion of ribosomal
proteins, which is very fast. So even if the cell can concentrate its ribosomal proteins by active nuclear transport, it will not make more ribosomes. The anuclear cell
can simply make the amount of ribosomal proteins
needed, which will quickly diffuse to the site of ribosome assembly as the rRNA is made. Similarly, during
nucleosome assembly the rate limiting step is replication, and concentrating histones doesn’t help. So no
cost is spared, but it is costly to drive transport by
RanGTP. So evolving nuclear transport in order to concentrate ribosomal proteins and histones around DNA
is not a good explanation. In my model [ref [139]] the
evolution of nuclear transport is not simply about absolute, but relative concentrations (host ribosomal proteins
relative to mitochondrial ones).
Author’s reply: As explained previously [4,5] but not
reiterated here, compartmentation advantages centrally
involve the lower cost of maintaining a high concentration of key molecule if they are excluded from the bulk of
the cell. By largely excluding free histone, other nuclear
proteins and ribosomal proteins from the cytoplasm,
roughly 10-fold less of each protein is needed per cell
cycle to maintain a given nuclear concentration than if
they were evenly spread through the cell. That is a large
economy. Thus it is not just a question of rate limitation
as you assume. If replication were the rate-limiting step
for nucleosome assembly why would there be so many
different nucleosome assembly chaperones?
Comments on the criticism of the ribosome chimerism
model
You also criticize my model on the origin of the
nucleus [139]. You write, that “First, there is no evidence that the mitochondrion evolved before the
nuclear envelope” This I also acknowledge in the paper.
However, you also note, that “We now see that the origins of mitochondria, nuclei, and cilia were virtually
simultaneous. As each was a complex series of processes
it is most likely that they overlapped in time, so disputing which was first may be meaningless.” So, simply, we
don’t know the order. My theory is based on the
assumption that the mitochondrium came slightly earlier, than the nucleus, but clearly after phagotrophy

Page 65 of 78

evolved. You also write, that “Secondly, it is not very
logical to suppose that the transfer of genes could be
tolerated with impunity for a period and then became a
compelling force for evolving the envelope.” In my theory the nucleus evolve to correct the bad effects of
mutation pressure. It is the same logic as the one you
apply to explain the origin of NMD: “Thus like splicing
itself, and many genomic oddities like RNA editing
[105], nonsense-mediated decay is a consequence of
selfish DNA evolution; correcting the bad effects of
mutation pressure, not positively adaptive.” I say the
same about the gene transfer ratchet of mitochondrial
ribosomal proteins (slightly deleterious mutations fixed
by drift), and when the harm is done, the problem is
fixed by compensatory advantageous mutations as the
nucleus evolves. Since there are 24 individual transfers,
the harm is done in small steps, and compensation can
also evolve in small steps.
You also write, that “If transfer were so strongly disadvantageous, it would be more likely either that cells with
transferred genes would lose out in competition” It was
probably not more strongly disadvantageous, than the
shearing forces you postulate. This was collateral
damage, caused by the evolution of other cellular features, which were either selected for or spread by drift,
and then had to be fixed. Further on you write, that
“Thirdly, just as for the intron harm theory criticised
above, the early stages in nuclear envelope assembly
could not have helped solve the problem” This is not a
valid criticism either. Figure 2 and 3 in the paper [139]
clearly show how the first stages could have reduced the
problem. Actually, I can even give an explanation for
the origin of the RanGTP gradient around chromatin,
which can create a compositionally distinct region of
the cytoplasm, which is not explained by invoking only
shearing forces, as you do. Later you write: “Fourthly, in
the final stages of evolution of nuclear import increased selectivity - the benefit would have been the
net benefit of excluding hundreds of different proteins
from the nucleus and the positive import of hundreds of
others.” I agree, and I also mention [139] that in the
final stages many transport processes and cargos had to
coevolve.
Author’s reply: I am not against the principle of phenotypic correction of unavoidable mutation pressure
being important in cell evolution, having invoked it several times myself, e.g. in the origin of spliceosomal
introns, RNA editing, chloroplast DNA minicircles, and
even with respect to ribosomal evolution as a consequence of the chimaera problem [3,211,398,399]. The difference between us is primarily over the likely selective
disadvantages and advantages of the steps discussed. I
apologize for not having properly appreciated your simulation studies, which I agree refute my original third

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

objection to your ideas. I have therefore deleted it, making the fourth objection the third. I have also revised this
objection to cast it in the form of strong support for your
general thinking of how a degree of compartmentation
could have been achieved prior to complete pores combined with scepticism over the special importance of
avoiding chimaerism. We are both agreed in the central
importance of compartmentation and coevolution for the
origin of the nucleus, but I think it likely that there were
many simultaneous benefits of compartmentation.
Minor comments:
The conservation of EJC-dependent NMD in plants
has also been demonstrated experimentally (EMBO J
2008 27:1585-95).
The structural similarity of COPII and NPC has
recently been demonstrated (Science, 2008 322:1369-73).
Author’s reply: references added.
The section “Origins of nuclear protein modification
by sumoylation” does not really fit into the Discussion.
Sumoylation is not mentioned in the main text. It
would be better to include it into the Results section.
Author’s reply: moved.
Eugene Koonin
’Intracellular coevolution and the origin of the cell
nucleus and sex’
This is a very far-reaching, extensive discussion of a
paramount problem in evolutionary biology, at least,
with regard to the evolution of eukaryotes, the origin of
the nucleus and sex.
The article is quite long but is overall an excellent
read. Furthermore, I am very sympathetic with the succinct conclusion of the abstract on the importance of
studying coevolution of different eukaryotic organelles
for understanding eukaryogenesis. Yes, I think such a
systemic approach is indeed key.
I am afraid, however, that this is where I have to stop
with my comments. The text of the article, interesting
as it undoubtedly is, does not appear to be an objective
discussion of the problem, but rather a one-sided narrative that I am not inclined to analyze and criticize in
detail. The show stopper to me is that the “painted picture” is based on several major assumptions that are
accepted here as unquestionable but that I find either
highly controversial or outright implausible. The highly
controversial assumptions are the archaezoan nature of
the proto-eukaryotes that was the host of the mitochondrial endosymbiont, that is, the assertion that this
organism was a bona fide phagotroph that possessed the
principal eukaryotic features such as the endomembrane
system, the cytoskeleton, and the nucleus itself; and the
bikont-unikont phylogeny of eukaryotes.
Author’s response: The core subject of this paper is
not the origin of mitochondria, treated in detail elsewhere [20], but new proposals on the physical

Page 66 of 78

mechanism and selective forces causing the origin of the
nucleus. These are entirely independent of whether or
not the eukaryote tree is rooted between unikonts and
bikonts, as the original version of this paper assumed, or
not. Indeed, new evidence suggests that that rooting was
mistaken [9,55] and that the root is instead within
Eozoa, specifically between excavates and Euglenozoa (or
possibly even within Euglenozoa) as explained elsewhere
[9]. But this does not in any way affect the mechanistic
and selective arguments proposed here, which are independent of the precise rooting. As I stated, no reasonable
alternative alters the conclusion ‘that the last common
ancestor of all eukaryotes was a phagotrophic protozoan
with nucleus, at least one centriole and cilium, facultatively aerobic mitochondria, sex (meiosis and syngamy)
and dormant cyst with cell wall of chitin and/or cellulose, and peroxisomes’.
The referee inaccurately states that I asserted that the
host for the origin of the mitochondrion was a fully
developed eukaryote with a nucleus. I did not. I said it
was either such a well-developed eukaryote or else a
somewhat earlier ‘intermediate stage’ that already had
evolved ‘rudiments of phagocytosis and endomembranes’.
My arguments as to the mechanistic cause of the origin
of the nucleus depend (as do most scenarios for its origin)
on the prior evolution of the endomembrane system, but
are independent of whether mitochondria were acquired
after the origin of the nucleus (as in the disproved archezoan hypothesis [400]), before the origin of the nucleus
(as Martin and Koonin postulated [21])or temporally
overlapping with the origin of the nucleus. My positive
arguments for the selective forces that favoured the origin
of the nucleus in successive stages are also independent
of the relative timing of nuclear and mitochondrial origins. My negative arguments against the prior acquisition
of mitochondria and of introns derived from them as
being a plausible selective force for the initiation of the
origin of the nucleus are also independent of the historical fact of whether the mitochondrion came before, after,
or during the origin of the nucleus. Thus even were it
true that the mitochondrion came first, I would not consider it plausible that the origin of spliceosomal introns
was the primary selective cause of the origin of the
nucleus. It is also misleading to refer to my present views
as favouring an archezoan host, as for over a decade I
have rejected my earlier hypothesis that there are extant
primitively mitochondrial eukaryotes (Archezoa) as all
putative Archezoa turned out to be secondary anaerobes
with relict degenerate mitochondria.
To refer to the idea that the host for mitochondrial
enslavement was a bona fide phagotroph as ‘highly controversial’ is misleading and tendentious. Unless you
place the root within non-phagotrophic Plantae (which
the single symbiogenetic origin of chloroplasts forbids) or

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Fungi (which much evidence contradicts), we can safely
conclude that the last common ancestor of eukaryotes
was a bona fide aerobic and sexual protozoan phagotroph with all standard eukaryotic organelles. That its
earlier ancestor which engulfed the ancestor of mitochondria was also a phagotroph obviously cannot be stated
with equal confidence. Nonetheless, as no free-living bacteria (=prokaryotes) have ever been shown to internalize
a foreign cell and maintain it as a symbiont, the alternative assumption [21] that the host that thus internally
enslaved an proteobacterium was a prokaryote is
mechanistically implausible and much less justifiable
than to suppose that the host was a phagotrophic prekaryote or protoeukaryote that regularly engulfed prey
cells. Phagocytosis provides the easiest and most widespread mechanism whereby symbiotic cells enter host
cells. Intracellular symbiosis is so widespread in eukaryotes mainly (not entirely) because of the existence of
phagocytosis; billions of cells daily are thus taken up by
free-living eukaryotes. Conversely there are no examples
of free-living prokaryotes able to engulf other cells or harbour intracellular symbionts (the only known example of
intracellular symbiosis within a prokaryote is a parasite
of eukaryotes); thus there is no evidence that a free-living
prokaryote did so even once during 3.5 billion years. It is
therefore immensely more likely that mitochondria
entered eukaryotes after the origin of at least a rudimentary phagocytosis. Furthermore there is no phylogenetic
evidence that mitochondria were taken up before the origin of the nucleus. To assume that they were is phylogenetically gratuitous and to assume that the host was a
non-phagotrophic bacterium is mechanistically extremely implausible. Therefore it is not scientifically sound
to invoke the formal possibility that mitochondria came
before phagocytosis in evolutionary explanations; unless
new evidence or compelling arguments to the contrary
are adduced, it is more parsimonious and more likely
that phagocytosis preceded mitochondrial acquisition.
Evolutionary explanations should distinguish between
mere formal possibilities and genuinely likely events
based on known properties of organisms. A remote formal possibility is not a valid explanation of an historical fact if a simpler one based on known phenomena
exists. Therefore it is the alternative invocation of an
unknown, unprecedented mechanism for engulfment by a
free-living prokaryotic host (e.g. by [21])that is unwarranted and ‘highly controversial’, not the idea that at
least a rudimentary version of phagocytosis had probably
evolved prior to the origin of mitochondria, which is
mechanistically much sounder and phylogenetically
entirely acceptable.
Because there are no phagotrophic prokaryotes it is
unlikely that phagotrophy would have long preceded the
origin of the nucleus (if such organisms existed for

Page 67 of 78

millions of years there is no reason why they should all
now be extinct as the niches would still be available),
and because there appear to be no primitively amitochondrial eukaryotes (if such organisms existed for millions of years there is no reason why they should all now
be extinct as the niches would still be available), it is
equally unlikely that the acquisition of mitochondria
long preceded that of the origin of nuclei. Therefore for
some years, in contrast to my earlier, now disproved,
archezoan hypothesis [60,400,401], I have considered
that the origins of phagocytosis, mitochondria, and nuclei
were most likely essentially contemporaneous [3,27]and
that we are unlikely ever to be able to order the two latter with certainty in time. All these events may have
occupied well under a million years [27].
An implausible one, as far as I can judge, is the “neomuran” origin or archaea (archaebacteria, under the terminology used here). All these assumptions are accepted
as statements of fact, largely, on the force of previous
publications, without much elaboration. My understanding, however, is that the arguments in those publications
were seriously flawed, so I cannot accept the
assumptions.
Author’s response: I wish you had said what you think
the flaws are so that we could see if your objections have
any weight. As you agree with me that archaebacteria
are holophyletic sisters to eukaryotes [24], I do not see
how you can logically object to my deducing that characters shared by both groups were present in their common
ancestor, whereas characters unique to each probably
arose only in their individual last common ancestors.
The latter means that with respect to lipids the ancestor
of neomura had acyl esters and was thus eubacterial not
archaebacterial in nature. From your previous writings, I
assume that you do not like the idea that eubacteria are
older than both eukaryotes and archaebacteria, but you
ought to consider both the palaeontological and transition analysis arguments for the greater antiquity of
eubacteria and if you disagree for definite reasons should
attempt to refute them. I refer readers to the latest discussion by Valas and Bourne [41] on the position of the
root of the tree of life, which concludes that available
evidence most strongly supports my conclusion, and that
the post-1977 mindset of so many microbiologists of
assuming the antiquity of archaebacteria without proper
evaluation of the evidence is probably mistaken.
I did not present this view dogmatically but did so only
briefly ‘relying on previous arguments’. As the arguments
in my previous papers on this topic all remain valid and
have not been refuted, and as the logic of my explanation for the rooting of the tree (both mechanisms and
selective forces) is valid independently of the rooting of
the overall tree of life, about which I had few novel arguments, I simply cited those in my earlier papers. As the

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

referee criticises my doing that and as the root position is
important for another aspect of the origin of the nucleus
(the phylogenetic origin of each key protein), I have now
introduced two even more compelling new arguments
from lipid evolution for the posibacterial ancestry of neomura and summarise the overall logic below (readers
familiar with this can skip the next two paragraphs):
First is the phylogenetic argument that archaebacteria are holophyletic sisters to eukaryotes, not their
paraphyletic ancestors. I originally based that argument
on (1) the view that the unique lipids of archaebacteria
are a shared derived character of archaebacteria alone
and that the acyl ester lipids of eukaryotes are an
ancestral eubacterial character vertically inherited by
the host from an ultimately eubacterial ancestor, plus
(2) the palaeontological fact that eubacteria are much
older than eukaryotes but no unambiguous fossil evidence exists that archaebacteria are any older than
eukaryotes, together with (3) the view that there is no
mechanistically plausible way that the far simpler prokaryotic cells could be secondarily derived from eukaryotes, which was congruent with the fossil evidence that
prokaryotes, specifically eubacteria, are older [4]. This
original argument was made somewhat less decisive by
the demonstration that all extant archezoa are secondarily derived from aerobic mitochondriate ancestors, as
this meant that the origin of the nucleus and mitochondrion must have roughly coincided, raising the formal
possibility that the eukaryotic acyl ester lipids were
derived by lipid replacement from the mitochondrial
rather than the host ancestor [31]. Elsewhere I explained
why that formal possibility is mechanistically and selectively extremely implausible [3]. At that time I introduced a new argument that three gene splits found in
archaebacteria alone, which are unlikely to have been
reversed in the last common ancestor of eukaryotes, are
additional evidence for the holophyly of archaebacteria
[12]. Two new arguments introduced here are that Martin’s idea of host lipid replacement by the mitochondrion
[31] cannot explain the origin of phosphatidylinositol or
sterols; phosphatidylinositol was crucial for eukaryogenesis [27] but is totally absent from both archaebacteria
and proteobacteria but is universally present in actinobacteria, the likely ancestors of neomura; and the
enzymes for making sterols are very widespread in actinobacteria and were not acquired by LGT from eukaryotes. Thus neomura must either have evolved from
actinobacteria or be their sisters as suggested here. The
latest trees from the referee’s own group based on 355
genes argue much more strongly for the holophyly of
archaebacteria than did any previous trees [24]. Thus,
despite conflicting/ambiguous but unconvincing evidence
from some gene trees [46], evidence for archaebacterial
holophyly is stronger than ever.

Page 68 of 78

If archaebacteria are indeed holophyletic, one cannot
justifiably infer that the last common ancestor of archaebacteria and eukaryotes had any of the characters that
are unique to archaebacteria or any that are unique to
eukaryotes. Instead it is most parsimonious to suppose
that this common ancestor had all the properties shared
by archaebacteria and eukaryotes, plus all those shared
by archaebacteria and eubacteria alone (i.e. prokaryotic
genome and cell structure), plus all those shared by
eukaryotes and the phylogenetically older eubacteria (i.e.
acyl ester lipids, and dozens of genes ancestrally absent
in archaebacteria such as Hsp70). In other words this
last common ancestor of eukaryotes and archaebacteria
(collectively neomura) was a not an archaebacterium,
because on the most parsimonious assumptions it had
acyl ester lipids like a eubacterium and prokaryotic cell
structure. It resembled a posibacterial eubacterium
because it had a single membrane not a double bounding envelope as do all other eubacteria (negibacteria).
But it would be equally incorrect to call it a eubacterium as it would have had N-linked glycoproteins on its
surface and presumably had already lost the peptidoglycan wall. Thus the last common ancestor of neomura
was prokaryotic, but neither an archaebacterium nor a
posibacterial eubacterium, but a missing link with some
properties of each that was most probably derived from
a posibacterium prior to the origin of either eukaryotic
or archaebacteria-specific characters. That is why it is
misleading to use modern names of extant groups to
label such inferred intermediates; better call it an ancestral neomuran. The ancestor of the neomuran clade
prior to the replacement of the peptidoglycan by glycoprotein and the origin of histones was a eubacterium,
specifically a stem actinobacterium that still retained
some key endobacterial properties that persist in
neomura.
As the referee does not give any reasons why these
arguments for a posibacterial/neomuran origin of
archaebacteria are ‘implausible’ or ‘deeply flawed’ or cite
any from the literature (I am aware of none that have
been clearly laid out) I cannot do more to defend them
than I did in previous publications. The referee does not
mention any better explanation of the ancestry of
Archaebacteria than that given previously [4,12]. The
widespread assumption that they came from a mythical
‘progenote’ devoid of specific properties [37], which he
presumably shares, is no more informative or better
based than the idea of special creation.
One important discovery from the referee’s research
[402] illuminates the nature of the cenancestral neomuran further. They have shown that crenarchaeote and
korarchaeote archaebacteria possess actin-like proteins
that are more similar to actin and actin-related proteins
(Arp 2 and 3) than are eubacterial MreB and ParM

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

proteins. This implies that certain key changes that differentiate actin from MreB (and related eubacterial proteins ParM and MamK) occurred in the neomuran
ancestor prior to the divergence of eukaryotes and
archaebacteria. It is reasonable to suppose that these
were associated with the loss of the peptidoglycan wall
and the development instead of an improved internal
cell skeleton for osmotic protection and mechanical stability. This finding does not alter the fact that the gene
duplications that generated actin and the related Arp2/3
which nucleate its polymerization and mediate branching took place after the pre-eukaryotic lineage diverged
from archaebacteria. This is consistent with the argument that this major step in actin evolution was associated with the origin of phagocytosis [6,27]. Thus
archaebacteria lack this key feature of the actin skeleton;
a three dimensionally cross-linked actin gel remains
unique to eukaryotes. It was misleading to write of the
archaeal ancestry of actins [402] as the tree for their
actin-related proteins provides no evidence that crenarchaeotes are ancestral to eukaryotes; instead they
appear as their sisters. Thus the novel features shared by
actin/Arp2/3 and crenarchaeote actin-related protein
(notably large related insertions near the C-terminal) are
most parsimoniously interpreted as having evolved in the
ancestral neomuran. Their absence in euryarchaeotes
can be attributed to secondary loss. Very likely during
the neomuran burst of gene duplication of MreB/actinrelated proteins a number of paralogues was generated;
one would have been ancestral to actin/Arp2/3 and crenarchaeote actin and a more conservative one to the
methanogenic euryarchaeote MreB. Additional paralogue
loss within crenarchaeotes can explain the findings of
Yutin et al. [207]more simply than lateral transfers and
protein replacements that they invoke between crenarchaeotes and korarchaeotes.
Their assumption of lateral gene transfer of MreB from
eubacteria to methanogenic archaebacteria is also entirely
unnecessary if one accepts the rooting of the tree of life
within eubacteria [4,6,12,13,40,47,48,50,381]; vertical
transmission from posibacteria to archaebacteria alone
would suffice. Their assumption of lateral transfer to
Thermoplasma is a bit more plausible because such
transfer may be inherently more likely for a plasmid
encoded paralogue like ParM than for MreB, but is also
probably unnecessary. It is not obvious that its placement
on the tree within the ParM/StpA clade is correct; I suspect it is a long branch artefact (LBA): a strong divergence
in Thermoplasma actin-like protein caused by the loss of
the eukaryote cell wall and ensuing selection for a better
internal skeleton would have made it so divergent from its
ancestral type (whether MreB or the crenarchaeote/actin
paralogue) that it might not group correctly with them. It
is evident from the tree that ParM evolves much faster

Page 69 of 78

than MreB. The alignment indicates that Thermoplasma
protein is very idiosyncratic compared with all others in
respect of both indels and sequence - just the sort of protein likely to be misplaced on trees; I do not think one can
reliably distinguish between 3-5 possibilities: (1) that it is
really sister to the crenarchaeote protein, but misplaced
on the tree by LBA, (2) that it is really a ParM protein
(descended either vertically from the neomuran ancestor
or by LGT from another eubacterium) or (4) that it is an
independent derivative of an MreB ancestor (descended
either vertically or by LGT, but if the latter not necessarily
from a eubacterium). Nonetheless the first possibility
seems simplest.
Portrayal of the last common ancestor of eukaryotes by
the referee’s group [402] as a cell with a branched actin
skeleton and mitochondrion but no nucleus or cilium
was wrong. No matter where one roots the eukaryotic
tree the last common eukaryotic ancestor had both
nucleus and mitochondrion. Provided that one places the
root somewhere between the five supergroups shown it is
inescapable that it also had a cilium; that figure confused the last common ancestor that we can rigorously
infer cladistically with a purely hypothetical intermediate between prokaryotes and eukaryotes. As Jékely
pointed out, the implication that Rhizaria may lack phagocytosis is entirely erroneous; the group has two phyla:
Retaria (Foraminifera and Radiozoa, in which every single one of the over 10,000 species feeds by phagocytosis)
and Cercozoa in which all but a handful of the thousands of free-living species feed by phagocytosis. As referees Gribaldo and Jékely correctly argued, the conclusion
that phagocytosis was absent from the cenancestral
eukaryote and evolved several times independently in different eukaryotic supergroups is entirely unjustified. The
authors conceded that the actin branching and control
machinery was present in the last common ancestor of
eukaryotes and thus accept that molecules of this core
machinery like Arp2/3 which have not been detected in
diplomonads must either have been lost or evolved dramatically in sequence beyond bioinformatic detection in
a diplomonad ancestor. It is perfectly reasonable to
argue that the same is true of other near universal
eukaryotic proteins, e.g. Jékely also pointed out that the
assumption that Ras was derived from mitochondria was
not justified. Thus Yutin et al. [402]provided no new
convincing evidence for their assumption that mitochondria arose before the nucleus, nor any reason for their
calling the hypothetical primitively phagotrophic intermediate an archaebacterium rather than an intermediate pre-eukaryotic derivative of the ancestral neomuran.
The first referee of the present paper shares my scepticism of their basic thesis, calling it ‘specious at best’.
Once again, this is interesting reading that reveals
remarkable erudition of the author, a lot of interesting

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

literature is cited, and the reader will benefit from a
variety of exposition to an important and exciting
research field, and possibly, from some of the ideas proposed in the manuscript. However, for reasons outlined
above, I find that this manuscript does not call for serious discussion, so I offer none such.
Author’s response: A pity you did not give any reasons
for your disagreement. It is important that those many
who do not accept the phylogenetically older character of
eubacteria compared with both eukaryotes and archaebacteria seriously consider (and not just ignore) the now
quite compelling and varied evidence for this, which rests
on a combination of palaeontological and phylogenetic
evidence, both critically interpreted [6,12,13,41]. To
establish an historical fact like the position of the root,
we need arguments and evidence, not unjustified
assumptions. Your assertion when reviewing another
paper on the position of the root of the universal tree
[41] that the sheer magnitude of the differences between
archaebacteria and eubacteria is sufficient to place the
root between neomura and eubacteria and to ‘close’ the
debate on the position of the root and that you do not
need to go into ‘the minute details’ of the evidence was
phylogenetically unsound and not a good scientific attitude. Thank you, however, for being open-minded enough
to recommend publication despite your disagreement.
Please try to open your mind still further to the arguments and evidence [4,6,12,13,23,41,403] that refute this
idea stemming from the extremely weak speculations of
Woese and Fox [404]. Alternatively, please explicitly
explain any errors in the reasoning concerning the
roughly 20 polarizations from eubacteria to neomura
[12] and 13 additional ones within eubacteria [6,13]; i.e.
over 30 independent arguments that are mutually consistent evidence for the root being in Eobacteria. No similarly coherent integration of palaeontology and cell and
molecular evolution has ever been presented in support
of their now pervasive but almost certainly erroneous
assumption (it is nothing more) that archaebacteria are
as ancient as eubacteria.
Acknowledgements
I thank NERC for grant and fellowship support.
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
Received: 16 December 2009
Accepted: 4 February 2010 Published: 4 February 2010

Page 70 of 78

3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.
22.

23.
24.
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

References
1. Cavalier-Smith T: A revised six-kingdom system of life. Biol Rev Camb
Philos Soc 1998, 73(3):203-266.
2. Stanier RY: Some aspects of the biology of cells and their possible
evolutionary significance. Organization and Control in Prokaryotic and
Eukaryotic Cells (Society for General Microbiology Symposium no 20)
Cambridge: Cambridge University PressCharles HP, Knight JG 1970, 1-38.

31.

32.

Cavalier-Smith T: The phagotrophic origin of eukaryotes and
phylogenetic classification of Protozoa. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2002, 52(Pt
2):297-354.
Cavalier-Smith T: The origin of eukaryotic and archaebacterial cells. Ann N
Y Acad Sci 1987, 503:17-54.
Cavalier-Smith T: Origin of the cell nucleus. BioEssays 1988, 9(2-3):72-78.
Cavalier-Smith T: Cell evolution and Earth history: stasis and revolution.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2006, 361(1470):969-1006.
Richards TA, Cavalier-Smith T: Myosin domain evolution and the primary
divergence of eukaryotes. Nature 2005, 436:1113-1118.
Stechmann A, Cavalier Smith T: The root of the eukaryote tree
pinpointed. Curr Biol 2003, 13(17):R665-R666.
Cavalier-Smith T: Kingdoms Protozoa and Chromista and the eozoan root
of eukaryotes. Biol Lett 2009.
Simpson GC: The Major Features of Evolution. New York: Columbia
University Press 1953.
Cavalier-Smith T: The origin of nuclei and of eukaryotic cells. Nature 1975,
256:463-468.
Cavalier-Smith T: The neomuran origin of archaebacteria, the
negibacterial root of the universal tree and bacterial megaclassification.
Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2002, 52(Pt 1):7-76.
Cavalier-Smith T: Rooting the tree of life by transition analysis. Biology
Direct 2006, 1:19.
Bapteste E, Charlebois RL, MacLeod D, Brochier C: The two tempos of
nuclear pore complex evolution: highly adapting proteins in an ancient
frozen structure. Genome Biol 2005, 6:R85.
Devos D, Dokudovskaya S, Alber F, Williams R, Chait BT, Sali A, Rout MP:
Components of coated vesicles and nuclear pore complexes share a
common molecular architecture. PLoS Biol 2004, 2(12):e380.
Devos D, Dokudovskaya S, Williams R, Alber F, Eswar N, Chait BT, Rout MP,
Sali A: Simple fold composition and modular architecture of the nuclear
pore complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:2172-2177.
Mans BJ, Anantharaman V, Aravind L, Koonin EV: Comparative genomics,
evolution and origins of the nuclear envelope and nuclear pore
complex. Cell Cycle 2004, 3:1612-1637.
Cavalier-Smith T: Economy, speed and size matter: evolutionary forces
driving nuclear genome miniaturization and expansion. Ann Bot 2005,
95:147-175.
King MC, Lusk CP, Blobel G: Karyopherin-mediated import of integral
inner nuclear membrane proteins. Nature 2006, 442:1003-1007.
Cavalier-Smith T: Origin of mitochondria by intracellular enslavement of a
photosynthetic purple bacterium. Proc Biol Sci. 2006,
273(1596):1943-1952.
Martin W, Koonin EV: Introns and the origin of nucleus-cytosol
compartmentalization. Nature 2006, 440:41-45.
Cavalier-Smith T: The chimaeric origin of mitochondria: photosynthetic
cell enslavement, gene-transfer pressure, and compartmentation
efficiency. Origin of Mitochondria and Hydrogenosomes Berlin: SpringerVerlagMartin WF, Müller M 2007, 161-199.
Cavalier-Smith T: Deep phylogeny, ancestral groups, and the four ages of
life. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2010, 365(1537):111-132.
Yutin N, Makarova KS, Mekhedov SL, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The deep archaeal
roots of eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(8):1619-1630.
Rogozin IB, Makarova KS, Pavlov YI, Koonin EV: A highly conserved family
of inactivated archaeal B family DNA polymerases. Biol Direct 2008,
3(1):32.
Martin W, Müller M: The hydrogen hypothesis for the first eukaryote.
Nature 1998, 392:37-44.
Cavalier-Smith T: Predation and eukaryote cell origins: a coevolutionary
perspective. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009, 41:307-322.
Boucher Y, Kamekura M, Doolittle WF: Origins and evolution of isoprenoid
lipid biosynthesis in archaea. Mol Microbiol 2004, 52(2):515-527.
Peretó J, López-García P, Moreira D: Ancestral lipid biosynthesis and early
membrane evolution. Trends Biochem Sci 2004, 29:469-477.
Van Valen LM, Maiorana VC: The archaebacteria and eukaryotic origins.
Nature 1980, 287:248-250.
Martin W: A briefly argued case that mitochondria and plastids are
descendants of endosymbionts, but that the nuclear compartment is
not. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1999, 266:1387-1395.
Margulis L: Origin of eukaryotic cells. New Haven: Yale University Press
1970.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

33. Margulis L: Symbiosis in cell evolution. San Francisco: Freeman 1981.
34. Desmond E, Gribaldo S: Phylogenomics of sterol synthesis: insights into
the origin, evolution and diversity of a key eukaryotic feature. Genome
Biol Evol 2009, 2009:364.
35. Summons RE, Bradley AS, Jahnke LL, Waldbauer JR: Steroids, triterpenoids
and molecular oxygen. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2006,
361(1470):951-968.
36. Martin W, Russell MJ: On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the
evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic
prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 2003, 358(1429):59-85.
37. Woese CR, Fox GE: The concept of cellular evolution. J Mol Evol 1977,
10:1-6.
38. Gao B, Sugiman-Marangos S, Junop MS, Gupta RS: Structural and
phylogenetic analysis of a conserved actinobacteria-specific protein
(ASP1; SCO1997) from Streptomyces coelicolor. BMC Struct Biol 2009, 9:40.
39. Santos CL, Vieira J, Tavares F, Benson DR, Tisa LS, Berry AM, MoradasFerreira P, Normand P: On the nature of fur evolution: a phylogenetic
approach in Actinobacteria. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:185.
40. Skophammer RG, Servin JA, Herbold CW, Lake JA: Evidence for a grampositive, eubacterial root of the tree of life. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(8):1761-1768.
41. Valas RE, Bourne PE: Structural analysis of polarizing indels: an emerging
consensus on the root of the tree of life. Biol Direct 2009, 4:30.
42. Servin JA, Herbold CW, Skophammer RG, Lake JA: Evidence excluding the
root of the tree of life from the actinobacteria. Mol Biol Evol 2008,
25(1):1-4.
43. Forterre P, Gadelle D: Phylogenomics of DNA topoisomerases: their origin
and putative roles in the emergence of modern organisms. Nucleic Acids
Res 2009, 37(3):679-692.
44. Forterre P, Gribaldo S, Gadelle D, Serre MC: Origin and evolution of DNA
topoisomerases. Biochimie 2007, 89(4):427-446.
45. Cox CJ, Foster PG, Hirt RP, Harris SR, Embley TM: The archaebacterial origin
of eukaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(51):20356-20361.
46. Foster PG, Cox CJ, Embley TM: The primary divisions of life: a
phylogenomic approach employing composition-heterogeneous
methods. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009, 364(1527):2197-2207.
47. Lake JA, Skophammer RG, Herbold CW, Servin JA: Genome beginnings:
rooting the tree of life. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009,
364(1527):2177-2185.
48. Lake JA, Servin JA, Herbold CW, Skophammer RG: Evidence for a new root
of the tree of life. Syst Biol 2008, 57(6):835-843.
49. Lake JA, Herbold CW, Rivera MC, Servin JA, Skophammer RG: Rooting the
tree of life using nonubiquitous genes. Mol Biol Evol 2007, 24(1):130-136.
50. Skophammer RG, Herbold CW, Rivera MC, Servin JA, Lake JA: Evidence that
the root of the tree of life is not within the Archaea. Mol Biol Evol 2006,
23(9):1648-1651.
51. Lake JA, Rivera MC: Deriving the genomic tree of life in the presence of
horizontal gene transfer: conditioned reconstruction. Mol Biol Evol 2004,
21(4):681-690.
52. Kurland CG, Collins LJ, Penny D: Genomics and the irreducible nature of
eukaryote cells. Science 2006, 312(5776):1011-1014.
53. Hampl V, Silberman JD, Stechmann A, Diaz-Trivino S, Johnson PJ, Roger AJ:
Genetic evidence for a mitochondriate ancestry in the ‘amitochondriate’
flagellate Trimastix pyriformis. PLoS One 2008, 3(1):e1383.
54. Dagley MJ, Dolezal P, Likic VA, Smid O, Purcell AW, Buchanan SK, Tachezy J,
Lithgow T: The protein import channel in the outer mitosomal
membrane of Giardia intestinalis. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26(9):1941-1947.
55. Roger A, Simpson AGB: Evolution: revisiting the root of the eukaryotic
tree. Curr Biol 2009, 19:R165-167.
56. Kim E, Simpson AG, Graham LE: Evolutionary relationships of
apusomonads inferred from taxon-rich analyses of 6 nuclear encoded
genes. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(12):2455-2166.
57. Stechmann A, Cavalier-Smith T: Rooting the eukaryote tree by using a
derived gene fusion. Science 2002, 297(5578):89-91.
58. Cavalier-Smith T: Flagellate megaevolution: the basis for eukaryote
diversification. The Flagellates London: Taylor and FrancisGreen JC,
Leadbeater BSC 2000, 361-390.
59. Clayton C, Shapira M: Post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression
in trypanosomes and leishmanias. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2007,
156(2):93-101.

Page 71 of 78

60. Cavalier-Smith T: The simultaneous symbiotic origin of mitochondria,
chloroplasts, and microbodies. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1987, 503:55-71.
61. Cavalier-Smith T: Genomic reduction and evolution of novel genetic
membranes and protein-targeting machinery in eukaryote-eukaryote
chimaeras (meta-algae). Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2003,
358(1429):109-133.
62. Cavalier-Smith T: Chromalveolate diversity and cell megaevolution:
interplay of membranes, genomes and cytoskeleton. Organelles, genomes
and eukaryote phylogeny London: CRC PressHirt RP, Horner DS 2004, 75-108.
63. Cavalier-Smith T: Origins of the machinery of recombination and sex.
Heredity 2002, 88(2):125-141.
64. Gibson W, Peacock L, Ferris V, Williams K, Bailey M: The use of yellow
fluorescent hybrids to indicate mating in Trypanosoma brucei. Parasit
Vectors 2008, 1(1):4.
65. Gibson W, Peacock L, Ferris V, Williams K, Bailey M: Analysis of a cross
between green and red fluorescent trypanosomes. Biochem Soc Trans
2006, 34(Pt 4):557-559.
66. Conte I, Labriola C, Cazzulo JJ, Docampo R, Parodi AJ: The interplay
between folding-facilitating mechanisms in Trypanosoma cruzi
endoplasmic reticulum. Mol Biol Cell 2003, 14(9):3529-3540.
67. Banerjee S, Vishwanath P, Cui J, Kelleher DJ, Gilmore R, Robbins PW,
Samuelson J: The evolution of N-glycan-dependent endoplasmic
reticulum quality control factors for glycoprotein folding and
degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104(28):11676-11681.
68. Mignot J-P: Contribution à l’étude cytologique de Scytomonas pusilla
(Stein) (Flagellé euglénien). Bull Biol Fr Belg 1961, 95:665-678.
69. Hampl V, Hug L, Leigh JW, Dacks JB, Lang BF, Simpson AG, Roger AJ:
Phylogenomic analyses support the monophyly of Excavata and resolve
relationships among eukaryotic “supergroups”. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106(10):3859-3864.
70. Cavalier-Smith T: The origin and early evolution of the eukaryotic cell.
Molecular and cellular aspects of microbial evolution Cambridge: Cambridge
University PressCarlile MJ, Collins JF, Moseley BEB 1981, 33-84.
71. Strnad P, Leidel S, Vinogradova T, Euteneuer U, Khodjakov A, Gonczy P:
Regulated HsSAS-6 levels ensure formation of a single procentriole per
centriole during the centrosome duplication cycle. Dev Cell 2007,
13(2):203-213.
72. Salisbury JL: A mechanistic view on the evolutionary origin for centrinbased control of centriole duplication. J Cell Physiol 2007, 213(2):420-428.
73. Haren L, Remy MH, Bazin I, Callebaut I, Wright M, Merdes A: NEDD1dependent recruitment of the gamma-tubulin ring complex to the
centrosome is necessary for centriole duplication and spindle assembly.
J Cell Biol 2006, 172(4):505-515.
74. Bettencourt-Dias M, Rodrigues-Martins A, Carpenter L, Riparbelli M,
Lehmann L, Gatt MK, Carmo N, Balloux F, Callaini G, Glover DM: SAK/PLK4
is required for centriole duplication and flagella development. Curr Biol
2005, 15(24):2199-2207.
75. Zou C, Li J, Bai Y, Gunning WT, Wazer DE, Band V, Gao Q: Centrobin: a
novel daughter centriole-associated protein that is required for centriole
duplication. J Cell Biol 2005, 171(3):437-345.
76. Habedanck R, Stierhof YD, Wilkinson CJ, Nigg EA: The Polo kinase Plk4
functions in centriole duplication. Nat Cell Biol 2005, 7(11):1140-1146.
77. de Lichtenberg U, Jensen TS, Brunak S, Bork P, Jensen LJ: Evolution of cell
cycle control: same molecular machines, different regulation. Cell Cycle
2007, 6(15):1819-1825.
78. Chang P, Giddings TH Jr, Winey M, Stearns T: Epsilon-tubulin is required
for centriole duplication and microtubule organization. Nat Cell Biol 2003,
5(1):71-76.
79. Mereschkovsky C: Theorie der Zwei Plasmaarte als Grundlage der
Symbiogenesis, einer neue Lehre von der Entstehung der Organismen.
Biol Zentralbl 1910, 30:278-303.
80. Rotte C, Martin W: Related Articles L: Does endo-symbiosis explain the
origin of the nucleus?. Nat Cell Biol 2001, 3:E173-174.
81. Cavalier-Smith T: Intron phylogeny: a new hypothesis. Trends Genet 1991,
7(5):145-148.
82. Zhang YJ, Tian HF, Wen JF: The evolution of YidC/Oxa/Alb3 family in the
three domains of life: a phylogenomic analysis. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:137.
83. Cavalier-Smith T: Membrane heredity and early chloroplast evolution.
Trends Plant Sci 2000, 5(4):174-182.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

84. Cavalier-Smith T: Obcells as proto-organisms: membrane heredity,
lithophosphorylation, and the origins of the genetic code, the first cells,
and photosynthesis. J Mol Evol 2001, 53(4-5):555-595.
85. Cavalier-Smith T: The membranome and membrane heredity in
development and evolution. Organelles, genomes and eukaryote phylogeny
London: Taylor & FrancisHirt RP, Horner DS 2004, 335-351.
86. Cavalier-Smith T: Chloroplast evolution: secondary symbiogenesis and
multiple losses. Curr Biol 2002, 12(2):R62-64.
87. Cavalier-Smith T: Principles of protein and lipid targeting in secondary
symbiogenesis: euglenoid, dinoflagellate, and sporozoan plastid origins
and the eukaryotic family tree. J Euk Microbiol 1999, 46:347-366.
88. Cavalier-Smith T: Membrane heredity, symbiogenesis, and the multiple
origins of algae. Biodiversity and Evolution Tokyo: The National Science
Museum FoundationArai R, Kato M, Doi Y 1995, 75-114.
89. Leipe DD, Wolf M, Koonin EV, Aravind L: Classification and evolution of Ploop GTPases and related ATPases. J Mol Biol 2002, 317:41-72.
90. Odronitz F, Kollmar M: Drawing the tree of eukaryotic life based on the
analysis of 2,269 manually annotated myosins from 328 species. Genome
Biol 2007, 8(9):R196.
91. Wickstead B, Gull K: A “holistic” kinesin phylogeny reveals new kinesin
families and predicts protein functions. Mol Biol Cell 2006,
17(4):1734-1743.
92. Garbarino JE, Gibbons IR: Expression and genomic analysis of midasin, a
novel and highly conserved AAA protein distantly related to dynein.
BMC Genomics 2002, 3(1):18.
93. Wilkes DE, Watson HE, Mitchell DR, Asai DJ: Twenty-five dyneins in
Tetrahymena : A re-examination of the multidynein hypothesis. Cell Motil
Cytoskeleton 2008, 65(4):342-351.
94. Wickstead B, Gull K: Dyneins across eukaryotes: a comparative genomic
analysis. Traffic 2007, 8(12):1708-1721.
95. Lee YJ, Szumlanski A, Nielsen E, Yang Z: Rho-GTPase-dependent
filamentous actin dynamics coordinate vesicle targeting and exocytosis
during tip growth. J Cell Biol 2008, 181(7):1155-1168.
96. Doreian BW, Fulop TG, Smith CB: Myosin II activation and actin
reorganization regulate the mode of quantal exocytosis in mouse
adrenal chromaffin cells. J Neurosci 2008, 28(17):4470-4478.
97. Sokac AM, Bement WM: Kiss-and-coat and compartment mixing: coupling
exocytosis to signal generation and local actin assembly. Mol Biol Cell
2006, 17(4):1495-1502.
98. Jerdeva GV, Wu K, Yarber FA, Rhodes CJ, Kalman D, Schechter JE, HammAlvarez SF: Actin and non-muscle myosin II facilitate apical exocytosis of
tear proteins in rabbit lacrimal acinar epithelial cells. J Cell Sci 2005,
118(Pt 20):4797-4812.
99. Bader MF, Doussau F, Chasserot-Golaz S, Vitale N, Gasman S: Coupling actin
and membrane dynamics during calcium-regulated exocytosis: a role for
Rho and ARF GTPases. Biochim Biophys Acta 2004, 1742(1-3):37-49.
100. Vats P, Rothfield L: Duplication and segregation of the actin (MreB)
cytoskeleton during the prokaryotic cell cycle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104(45):17795-17800.
101. Divakaruni AV, Baida C, White CL, Gober JW: The cell shape proteins MreB
and MreC control cell morphogenesis by positioning cell wall synthetic
complexes. Mol Microbiol 2007, 66(1):174-188.
102. Mazza P, Noens EE, Schirner K, Grantcharova N, Mommaas AM,
Koerten HK, Muth G, Flardh K, van Wezel GP, Wohlleben W: MreB of
Streptomyces coelicolor is not essential for vegetative growth but is
required for the integrity of aerial hyphae and spores. Mol Microbiol
2006, 60(4):838-852.
103. Kruse T, Blagoev B, Lobner-Olesen A, Wachi M, Sasaki K, Iwai N, Mann M,
Gerdes K: Actin homolog MreB and RNA polymerase interact and are
both required for chromosome segregation in Escherichia coli. Genes Dev
2006, 20(1):113-124.
104. Shih YL, Kawagishi I, Rothfield L: The MreB and Min cytoskeletal-like
systems play independent roles in prokaryotic polar differentiation. Mol
Microbiol 2005, 58(4):917-928.
105. Kruse T, Gerdes K: Bacterial DNA segregation by the actin-like MreB
protein. Trends Cell Biol 2005, 15(7):343-345.
106. Makarova KS, Wolf YI, Mekhedov SL, Mirkin BG, Koonin EV: Ancestral
paralogs and pseudoparalogs and their role in the emergence of the
eukaryotic cell. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:4626-4638.
107. Jékely G: Small GTPases and the evolution of the eukaryotic cell.
BioEssays 2003, 25:1129-1138.

Page 72 of 78

108. Raasi S, Wolf DH: Ubiquitin receptors and ERAD: a network of pathways
to the proteasome. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2007, 18(6):780-791.
109. Przewloka MR, Glover DM: The kinetochore and the centromere: a
working long distance relationship. Annu Rev Genet 2009, 43:439-465.
110. Triemer RE, Farmer MA: The ultrastructural organization of heterotrophic
euglenids and its evolutionary implications. The biology of free-living
heterotrophic flagellates Oxford: Clarendon PressPatterson DJ, Larsen J 1991,
185-204.
111. Jékely G: Origin of eukaryotic endomembranes: a critical evaluation of
different model scenarios. Adv Exp Med Biol 2007, 607:38-51.
112. Erickson HP: Evolution of the cytoskeleton. BioEssays 2007, 29(7):668-677.
113. Simpson GC: Tempo and Mode in Evolution. New York: Columbia
University Press 1944.
114. De Beer G: Archaeopteryx and evolution. Adv Sci 1954, 42:160-170.
115. Esser C, Ahmadinejad N, Wiegand C, Rotte C, Sebastiani F, Gelius-Dietrich G,
Henze K, Kretschmann E, Richly E, Leister D, Bryant D, Steel MA, Lockhart PJ,
Penny D, Martin W: A genome phylogeny for mitochondria among
alpha-proteobacteria and a predominantly eubacterial ancestry of yeast
nuclear genes. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21(9):1643-1660.
116. Cavalier-Smith T: The origin, losses and gains of chloroplasts. Origin of
Plastids: Symbiogenesis, Prochlorophytes and the Origins of Chloroplasts New
York: Chapman & HallLewin RA 1993, 291-348.
117. Ryall K, Harper JT, Keeling PJ: Plastid-derived Type II fatty acid
biosynthetic enzymes in chromists. Gene 2003, 313:139-148.
118. Mendell JE, Clements KD, Choat JH, Angert ER: Extreme polyploidy in a
large bacterium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(18):6730-6734.
119. Hu B, Yang G, Zhao W, Zhang Y, Zhao J: MreB is important for cell shape
but not for chromosome segregation of the filamentous
cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC 7120. Mol Microbiol 2007,
63(6):1640-1652.
120. Margulis L, Dolan M, Whiteside JH: “Imperfections and oddities” in the
origin of the nucleus. Paleobiology 2005, 31:175-191.
121. Lynch M, Conery JS: The origins of genome complexity. Science 2003,
302:1401-1404.
122. López-García P, Moreira D: Selective forces for the origin of the
eukaryotic nucleus. BioEssays 2006, 28:525-533.
123. Cavalier-Smith T: Cell compartmentation and the origin of eukaryote
membranous organelles. Endocytobiology: Endosymbiosis and Cell biology, a
Synthesis of Recent Research Berlin: de GruyterSchwemmler W, Schenk HEA
1980, 893-916.
124. Jiang SY, Ramachandran S: Comparative and evolutionary analysis of
genes encoding small GTPases and their activating proteins in
eukaryotic genomes. Physiol Genomics 2006, 24(3):235-251.
125. Siriputthaiwan P, Jauneau A, Herbert C, Garcin D, Dumas B: Functional
analysis of CLPT1, a Rab/GTPase required for protein secretion and
pathogenesis in the plant fungal pathogen Colletotrichum
lindemuthianum. J Cell Sci 2005, 118(Pt 2):323-329.
126. Lipatova Z, Tokarev AA, Jin Y, Mulholland J, Weisman L, Segev N: Direct
interaction between a myosin V motor and the Rab GTPases Ypt31/32 is
required for polarized secretion. Mol Biol Cell 2008, 19:4177-4187.
127. Braun V, Deschamps C, Raposo G, Benaroch P, Benmerah A, Chavrier P,
Niedergang F: AP-1 and ARF1 control endosomal dynamics at sites of
FcR mediated phagocytosis. Mol Biol Cell 2007, 18(12):4921-4931.
128. Dong JH, Wen JF, Tian HF: Homologs of eukaryotic Ras superfamily
proteins in prokaryotes and their novel phylogenetic correlation with
their eukaryotic analogs. Gene 2007, 396(1):116-124.
129. Kloepper TH, Kienle CN, Fasshauer D: An elaborate classification of SNARE
proteins sheds light on the conservation of the eukaryotic
endomembrane system. Mol Biol Cell 2007, 18(9):3463-3471.
130. Dacks JB, Doolittle WF: Molecular and phylogenetic characterization of
syntaxin genes from parasitic protozoa. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2004,
136:123-136.
131. De Duve C, Wattiaux R: Functions of lysosomes. Ann Rev Physiol 1966,
28:435-492.
132. Gruber S, Errington J: Recruitment of condensin to replication origin
regions by ParB/SpoOJ promotes chromosome segregation in B. subtilis.
Cell 2009, 137(4):685-696.
133. Sullivan NL, Marquis KA, Rudner DZ: Recruitment of SMC by ParB-parS
organizes the origin region and promotes efficient chromosome
segregation. Cell 2009, 137(4):697-707.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

134. Vaughan S, Wickstead B, Gull K, Addinall SG: Molecular evolution of FtsZ
protein sequences encoded within the genomes of archaea, bacteria,
and eukaryota. J Mol Evol 2004, 58(1):19-29.
135. Chen Y, Erickson HP: In vitro assembly studies of FtsZ/tubulin-like
proteins (TubZ) from Bacillus plasmids: evidence for a capping
mechanism. J Biol Chem 2008, 283(13):8102-8109.
136. Löwe J, Amos LA: Evolution of cytomotive filaments: the cytoskeleton
from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009, 41(2):323-329.
137. Larsen RA, Cusumano C, Fujioka A, Lim-Fong G, Patterson P, Pogliano J:
Treadmilling of a prokaryotic tubulin-like protein, TubZ, required for
plasmid stability in Bacillus thuringiensis. Genes Dev 2007,
21(11):1340-1352.
138. Nasmyth K, Haering CH: The structure and function of SMC and kleisin
complexes. Annu Rev Biochem 2005, 74:595-648.
139. Peters JM, Tedeschi A, Schmitz J: The cohesin complex and its roles in
chromosome biology. Genes Dev 2008, 22(22):3089-3114.
140. Nasmyth K, Haering CH: Cohesin: its roles and mechanisms. Annu Rev
Genet 2009, 43:525-558.
141. Cavalier-Smith T: Bacterial DNA segregation: its motors and positional
control. J Theor Biol 1987, 127(3):361-372.
142. Graumann PL, Knust T: Dynamics of the bacterial SMC complex and SMClike proteins involved in DNA repair. Chromosome Res 2009, 17(2):265-275.
143. Cobbe N, Heck MM: The evolution of SMC proteins: phylogenetic analysis
and structural implications. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21(2):332-347.
144. Gluenz E, Sharma R, Carrington M, Gull K: Functional characterization of
cohesin subunit SCC1 in Trypanosoma brucei and dissection of mutant
phenotypes in two life cycle stages. Mol Microbiol 2008, 69(3):666-680.
145. Leonard CJ, Aravind L, Koonin EV: Novel families of putative protein
kinases in bacteria and archaea: evolution of the “eukaryotic” protein
kinase superfamily. Genome Res 1998, 8(10):1038-1047.
146. Fiuza M, Canova MJ, Zanella-Cleon I, Becchi M, Cozzone AJ, Mateos LM,
Kremer L, Gil JA, Molle V: From the characterization of the four serine/
threonine protein kinases (PknA/B/G/L) of Corynebacterium glutamicum
toward the role of PknA and PknB in cell division. J Biol Chem 2008,
283(26):18099-180112.
147. Krupa A, Srinivasan N: Diversity in domain architectures of Ser/Thr kinases
and their homologues in prokaryotes. BMC Genomics 2005, 6:129.
148. de Graffenried CL, Ho HH, Warren G: Polo-like kinase is required for Golgi
and bilobe biogenesis in Trypanosoma brucei. J Cell Biol 2008,
181(3):431-438.
149. Bessat M, Ersfeld K: Functional characterization of cohesin SMC3 and
separase and their roles in the segregation of large and
minichromosomes in Trypanosoma brucei. Mol Microbiol 2009,
71(6):1371-1385.
150. Brown JR, Koretke KK, Birkeland ML, Sanseau P, Patrick DR: Evolutionary
relationships of Aurora kinases: implications for model organism
studies and the development of anti-cancer drugs. BMC Evol Biol 2004,
4(1):39.
151. Tu X, Kumar P, Li Z, Wang CC: An aurora kinase homologue is involved in
regulating both mitosis and cytokinesis in Trypanosoma brucei. J Biol
Chem 2006, 281(14):9677-9687.
152. Kumar P, Wang CC: Dissociation of cytokinesis initiation from mitotic
control in a eukaryote. Eukaryot Cell 2006, 5(1):92-102.
153. Hammarton TC, Kramer S, Tetley L, Boshart M, Mottram JC: Trypanosoma
brucei Polo-like kinase is essential for basal body duplication, kDNA
segregation and cytokinesis. Mol Microbiol 2007, 65(5):1229-1248.
154. Umeyama T, Wang CC: Polo-like kinase is expressed in S/G2/M phase
and associated with the flagellum attachment zone in both procyclic
and bloodstream forms of Trypanosoma brucei. Eukaryot Cell 2008,
7(9):1582-1590.
155. Moreira-Leite FF, Sherwin T, Kohl L, Gull K: A trypanosome structure
involved in transmitting cytoplasmic information during cell division.
Science 2001, 294(5542):610-612.
156. Selvapandiyan A, Kumar P, Morris JC, Salisbury JL, Wang CC, Nakhasi HL:
Centrin1 Is required for organelle segregation and cytokinesis in
Trypanosoma brucei. Mol Biol Cell 2007, 18(9):3290-301.
157. Vaughan S, Gull K: The structural mechanics of cell division in
Trypanosoma brucei. Biochem Soc Trans 2008, 36(Pt 3):421-424.
158. Cavalier-Smith T, Lewis R, Chao EE, Oates B, Bass D: Morphology and
phylogeny of Sainouron acronematica sp. n. and the ultrastructural unity
of Cercozoa. Protist 2008, 159:591-620.

Page 73 of 78

159. Shi J, Franklin JB, Yelinek JT, Ebersberger I, Warren G, He CY: Centrin4
coordinates cell and nuclear division in T. brucei. J Cell Sci 2008, 121(Pt
18):3062-3070.
160. Gogendeau D, Klotz C, Arnaiz O, Malinowska A, Dadlez M, de Loubresse NG,
Ruiz F, Koll F, Beisson J: Functional diversification of centrins and cell
morphological complexity. J Cell Sci 2008, 121(Pt 1):65-74.
161. Zhou Y, Yang W, Kirberger M, Lee HW, Ayalasomayajula G, Yang JJ:
Prediction of EF-hand calcium-binding proteins and analysis of bacterial
EF-hand proteins. Proteins 2006, 65(3):643-655.
162. Mahajan B, Selvapandiyan A, Gerald NJ, Majam V, Zheng H,
Wickramarachchi T, Tiwari J, Fujioka H, Moch JK, Kumar N, Aravind L,
Nakhasi HL, Kumar S: Centrins, cell cycle regulation proteins in human
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. J Biol Chem 2008,
283(46):31871-31883.
163. Cavalier-Smith T: The evolution of the nuclear matrix and envelope. The
nuclear envelope and matrix New York: Alan R. LissMaul GG 1982, 307-318.
164. Cavalier-Smith T: The origin of Fungi and pseudofungi. Evolutionary
biology of the Fungi Cambridge University PressRayner ADM, Brasier CM,
Moore D 1987, 339-353.
165. Cavalier-Smith T: What are Fungi?. The Mycota Berlin: SpringerVerlagMcLaughlin DJ, McLaughlin EJ, Lemke P 2000, VII(Part A):3-37.
166. Cavalier-Smith T: Basal body and flagellar development during the
vegetative cell cycle and the sexual cycle of Chlamydomonas reinhardii. J
Cell Sci 1974, 16(3):529-556.
167. Bornens M: Organelle positioning and cell polarity. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
2008, 9(11):874-886.
168. Haeckel E: Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Berlin: Reimer 1866.
169. Cavalier-Smith T: Nuclear volume control by nucleoskeletal DNA,
selection for cell volume and cell growth rate, and the solution of the
DNA C-value paradox. J Cell Sci 1978, 34:247-278.
170. Cavalier-Smith T: Skeletal DNA and the evolution of genome size. Annu
Rev Biophys Bioeng 1982, 11:273-302.
171. Krauss SW, Chen C, Penman S, Heald R: Nuclear actin and protein 4.1:
essential interactions during nuclear assembly in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2003, 100(19):10752-10757.
172. Gieni RS, Hendzel MJ: Actin dynamics and functions in the interphase
nucleus: moving toward an understanding of nuclear polymeric actin.
Biochem Cell Biol 2009, 87(1):283-306.
173. Kitayama K, Kamo M, Oma Y, Matsuda R, Uchida T, Ikura T, Tashiro S,
Ohyama T, Winsor B, Harata M: The human actin-related protein hArp5:
nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling and involvement in DNA repair. Exp Cell Res
2009, 315(2):206-2017.
174. Fransz P, Soppe W, Schubert I: Heterochromatin in interphase nuclei of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Chromosome Res 2003, 11(3):227-240.
175. Cavalier-Smith T: Eukaryote gene numbers, non-coding DNA and
genome size. The evolution of genome size Chichester: WileyCavalier-Smith
T 1985, 69-103.
176. Cavalier-Smith T: Coevolution of vertebrate genome, cell and nuclear
sizes. Symposium on the evolution of terrestrial vertebrates Selected Symposia
and Monographs V ZI, 4 Modena: MuchiGhiara G, et al 1991, 51-88.
177. Carthew RW, Sontheimer EJ: Origins and mechanisms of miRNAs and
siRNAs. Cell 2009, 136(4):642-655.
178. Lu J, Gilbert DM: Cell cycle regulated transcription of heterochromatin in
mammals vs. fission yeast: functional conservation or coincidence?. Cell
Cycle 2008, 7(13):1907-1910.
179. Kim SM, Dubey DD, Huberman JA: Early-replicating heterochromatin.
Genes Dev 2003, 17(3):330-335.
180. Djupedal I, Ekwall K: Epigenetics: heterochromatin meets RNAi. Cell Res
2009, 19(3):282-295.
181. Volpe TA, Kidner C, Hall IM, Teng G, Grewal SI, Martienssen RA: Regulation
of heterochromatic silencing and histone H3 lysine-9 methylation by
RNAi. Science 2002, 297(5588):1833-1837.
182. Cam HP, Chen ES, Grewal SI: Transcriptional scaffolds for heterochromatin
assembly. Cell 2009, 136(4):610-614.
183. Chen ES, Zhang K, Nicolas E, Cam HP, Zofall M, Grewal SI: Cell cycle control
of centromeric repeat transcription and heterochromatin assembly.
Nature 2008, 451(7179):734-737.
184. Cam HP, Sugiyama T, Chen ES, Chen X, FitzGerald PC, Grewal SI:
Comprehensive analysis of heterochromatin- and RNAi-mediated
epigenetic control of the fission yeast genome. Nat Genet 2005,
37(8):809-819.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

185. Cam H, Grewal SI: RNA interference and epigenetic control of
heterochromatin assembly in fission yeast. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant
Biol 2004, 69:419-427.
186. Figueiredo LM, Cross GA, Janzen CJ: Epigenetic regulation in African
trypanosomes: a new kid on the block. Nat Rev Microbiol 2009,
7(7):504-513.
187. Mizuguchi G, Xiao H, Wisniewski J, Smith MM, Wu C: Nonhistone Scm3
and histones CenH3-H4 assemble the core of centromere-specific
nucleosomes. Cell 2007, 129(6):1153-1164.
188. Sandman K, Reeve JN: Archaeal chromatin proteins: different
structures but common function?. Curr Opin Microbiol 2005,
8(6):656-661.
189. Marsh VL, McGeoch AT, Bell SD: Influence of chromatin and single strand
binding proteins on the activity of an archaeal MCM. J Mol Biol 2006,
357(5):1345-1350.
190. Aravind L, Iyer LM, Anantharaman V: The two faces of Alba: the
evolutionary connection between proteins participating in chromatin
structure and RNA metabolism. Genome Biol 2003, 4(10):R64.
191. Farazi TA, Juranek SA, Tuschl T: The growing catalog of small RNAs and
their association with distinct Argonaute/Piwi family members.
Development 2008, 135(7):1201-1214.
192. Drider D, Condon C: The continuing story of endoribonuclease III. J Mol
Microbiol Biotechnol 2004, 8(4):195-200.
193. Wang Y, Juranek S, Li H, Sheng G, Tuschl T, Patel DJ: Structure of an
argonaute silencing complex with a seed-containing guide DNA and
target RNA duplex. Nature 2008, 456(7224):921-926.
194. Wang Y, Sheng G, Juranek S, Tuschl T, Patel DJ: Structure of the guidestrand-containing argonaute silencing complex. Nature 2008,
456(7219):209-213.
195. Dennis PP, Omer A: Small non-coding RNAs in Archaea. Curr Opin
Microbiol 2005, 8(6):685-694.
196. Reichow SL, Hamma T, Ferre-D’Amare AR, Varani G: The structure and
function of small nucleolar ribonucleoproteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2007,
35(5):1452-1464.
197. Reichow SL, Varani G: Nop10 is a conserved H/ACA snoRNP molecular
adaptor. Biochemistry 2008, 47(23):6148-6156.
198. Comella P, Pontvianne F, Lahmy S, Vignols F, Barbezier N, Debures A,
Jobet E, Brugidou E, Echeverria M, Saez-Vasquez J: Characterization of a
ribonuclease III-like protein required for cleavage of the pre-rRNA in the
3’ETS in Arabidopsis. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(4):1163-1175.
199. Jin L, Kryukov K, Suzuki Y, Imanishi T, Ikeo K, Gojobori T: The evolutionary
study of small RNA-directed gene silencing pathways by investigating
RNase III enzymes. Gene 2009, 435(1-2):1-8.
200. Macrae IJ, Zhou K, Li F, Repic A, Brooks AN, Cande WZ, Adams PD,
Doudna JA: Structural basis for double-stranded RNA processing by
Dicer. Science 2006, 311(5758):195-198.
201. Cerutti H, Casas-Mollano JA: On the origin and functions of RNAmediated silencing: from protists to man. Curr Genet 2006, 50(2):81-99.
202. Kagansky A, Folco HD, Almeida R, Pidoux AL, Boukaba A, Simmer F,
Urano T, Hamilton GL, Allshire RC: Synthetic heterochromatin bypasses
RNAi and centromeric repeats to establish functional centromeres.
Science 2009, 324(5935):1716-1719.
203. Kawahara T, Siegel TN, Ingram AK, Alsford S, Cross GA, Horn D: Two
essential MYST-family proteins display distinct roles in histone H4K10
acetylation and telomeric silencing in trypanosomes. Mol Microbiol 2008,
69(4):1054-1068.
204. Durand-Dubief M, Absalon S, Menzer L, Ngwabyt S, Ersfeld K, Bastin P: The
Argonaute protein TbAGO1 contributes to large and mini-chromosome
segregation and is required for control of RIME retroposons and RHS
pseudogene-associated transcripts. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2007,
156(2):144-153.
205. Shi H, Chamond N, Djikeng A, Tschudi C, Ullu E: RNA interference in
Trypanosoma brucei : the role of the amino-terminal RGG domain and
the polyribosome association of Argonaute1. J Biol Chem 2009,
284(52):36511-36520.
206. Shi H, Ullu E, Tschudi C: Function of the trypanosome Argonaute 1
protein in RNA interference requires the N-terminal RGG domain and
arginine 735 in the Piwi domain. J Biol Chem 2004, 279(48):49889-49893.
207. Patrick KL, Shi H, Kolev NG, Ersfeld K, Tschudi C, Ullu E: Distinct and
overlapping roles for two Dicer-like proteins in the RNA interference

Page 74 of 78

208.
209.
210.

211.

212.
213.

214.

215.
216.
217.
218.

219.
220.

221.
222.

223.
224.
225.

226.
227.
228.
229.

230.
231.

232.

233.

pathways of the ancient eukaryote Trypanosoma brucei. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2009, 106(42):17933-17938.
Murphy D, Dancis B, Brown JR: The evolution of core proteins involved in
microRNA biogenesis. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:92.
Archer S, Queiroz R, Stewart M, Clayton C: Trypanosomes as a model to
investigate mRNA decay pathways. Methods Enzymol 2008, 448:359-377.
Ivens AC, Peacock CS, Worthey EA, Murphy L, Aggarwal G, Berriman M,
Sisk E, Rajandream MA, Adlem E, Aert R, et al: The genome of the
kinetoplastid parasite, Leishmania major. Science 2005, 309(5733):436-442.
Cavalier-Smith T: Evolution of the eukaryotic genome. The Eukaryotic
Genome Cambridge University PressBroda P, Oliver SG, Sims P 1993,
333-385.
Talbert PB, Henikoff S: Chromatin-based transcriptional punctuation.
Genes Dev 2009, 23(9):1037-1041.
Siegel TN, Hekstra DR, Kemp LE, Figueiredo LM, Lowell JE, Fenyo D,
Wang X, Dewell S, Cross GA: Four histone variants mark the boundaries
of polycistronic transcription units in Trypanosoma brucei. Genes Dev
2009, 23(9):1063-1076.
Harrison BR, Yazgan O, Krebs JE: Life without RNAi: noncoding RNAs and
their functions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochem Cell Biol 2009,
87(5):767-779.
Drinnenberg IA, Weinberg DE, Xie KT, Mower JP, Wolfe KH, Fink GR,
Bartel DP: RNAi in budding yeast. Science 2009, 326(5952):544-550.
Saraiya AA, Wang CC: snoRNA, a novel precursor of microRNA in Giardia
lamblia. PLoS Pathog 2008, 4(11):e1000224.
Marz M, Stadler PF: Comparative analysis of eukaryotic U3 snoRNA. RNA
Biol 2009, 6(5):503-507.
Luo J, Teng M, Zhang GP, Lun ZR, Zhou H, Qu LH: Evaluating the
evolution of G. lamblia based on the small nucleolar RNAs identified
from Archaea and unicellular eukaryotes. Parasitol Res 2009,
104(6):1543-1546.
Doniger T, Michaeli S, Unger R: Families of H/ACA ncRNA molecules in
trypanosomatids. RNA Biol 2009, 6(4):370-374.
Russell AG, Schnare MN, Gray MW: A large collection of compact box C/D
snoRNAs and their isoforms in Euglena gracilis : structural functional and
evolutionary insights. J Mol Biol 2006, 367:1548-1565.
Cavalier-Smith T: Palindromic base sequences and replication of
eukaryote chromosome ends. Nature 1974, 250(5466):467-470.
Cavalier-Smith T: Genetic symbionts and the origin of split genes and
linear chromosomes. Endocytobiology II Berlin, de GruyterSchwemmler W,
Schenk HEA 1983, 29-45.
Greenwood J, Cooper JP: Trapping Rap1 at the telomere to prevent
chromosome end fusions. Embo J 2009, 28(21):3277-3278.
Horn D: Antigenic variation: extending the reach of telomeric silencing.
Curr Biol 2009, 19(12):R496-498.
Yang X, Figueiredo LM, Espinal A, Okubo E, Li B: RAP1 is essential for
silencing telomeric variant surface glycoprotein genes in Trypanosoma
brucei. Cell 2009, 137(1):99-109.
Adams DW, Errington J: Bacterial cell division: assembly, maintenance
and disassembly of the Z ring. Nat Rev Microbiol 2009, 7(9):642-653.
Lutkenhaus J: FtsN–trigger for septation. J Bacteriol 2009,
191(24):7381-7382.
McDonald B, Martin-Serrano J: No strings attached: the ESCRT machinery
in viral budding and cytokinesis. J Cell Sci 2009, 122(Pt 13):2167-2177.
Lindas AC, Karlsson EA, Lindgren MT, Ettema TJ, Bernander R: A unique cell
division machinery in the Archaea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105(48):18942-18946.
Ettema TJ, Bernander R: Cell division and the ESCRT complex: A surprise
from the archaea. Commun Integr Biol 2009, 2(2):86-88.
Ellen AF, Albers SV, Huibers W, Pitcher A, Hobel CF, Schwarz H, Folea M,
Schouten S, Boekema EJ, Poolman B, Driessen AJ: Proteomic analysis of
secreted membrane vesicles of archaeal Sulfolobus species reveals the
presence of endosome sorting complex components. Extremophiles 2009,
13(1):67-79.
Brochier-Armanet C, Boussau B, Gribaldo S, Forterre P: Mesophilic
Crenarchaeota: proposal for a third archaeal phylum, the
Thaumarchaeota. Nat Rev Microbiol 2008, 6(3):245-252.
Miyagishima SY, Kuwayama H, Urushihara H, Nakanishi H: Evolutionary
linkage between eukaryotic cytokinesis and chloroplast division by
dynamin proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(39):15202-15207.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

234. Sherratt DJ, Soballe B, Barre FX, Filipe S, Lau I, Massey T, Yates J:
Recombination and chromosome segregation. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci 2004, 359(1441):61-69.
235. Grainge I, Bregu M, Vazquez M, Sivanathan V, Ip SC, Sherratt DJ: Unlinking
chromosome catenanes in vivo by site-specific recombination. Embo J
2007, 26(19):4228-4238.
236. Graham JE, Sivanathan V, Sherratt DJ, Arciszewska LK: FtsK translocation on
DNA stops at XerCD-dif. Nucleic Acids Res 2009.
237. Pickett-Heaps JD: Evolution of mitosis and the eukaryote condition.
BioSystems 1974, 6:37-45.
238. Cavalier-Smith T: The evolutionary origin and phylogeny of microtubules,
mitotic spindles and eukaryote flagella. BioSystems 1978, 10(1-2):93-114.
239. Cavalier-Smith T: The evolutionary origin and phylogeny of eukaryote
flagella. Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Flagella 35th Symposium of the Society of
Experimental Biology Cambridge University PressAmos WB, Duckett JG 1982,
465-493.
240. Cavalier-Smith T: Origin of the cytoskeleton. The Origin and Evolution of
the Cell Singapore: World Scientific PublishersHartman H, Matsuno K 1992,
79-106.
241. Inoue I, Ino R, Nishimura A: New model for assembly dynamics of
bacterial tubulin in relation to the stages of DNA replication. Genes Cells
2009, 14(3):435-544.
242. Ferrari S: Protein kinases controlling the onset of mitosis. Cell Mol Life Sci
2006, 63(7-8):781-795.
243. Nakamura A, Arai H, Fujita N: Centrosomal Aki1 and cohesin function in
separase-regulated centriole disengagement. J Cell Biol 2009,
187(5):607-614.
244. Nasmyth K: Evolution of the cell cycle. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
1995, 349(1329):271-281.
245. Maiorano D, Lutzmann M, Mechali M: MCM proteins and DNA replication.
Curr Opin Cell Biol 2006, 18(2):130-136.
246. Duncker BP, Chesnokov IN, McConkey BJ: The origin recognition complex
protein family. Genome Biol 2009, 10(3):214.
247. Wirth KG, Wutz G, Kudo NR, Desdouets C, Zetterberg A, Taghybeeglu S,
Seznec J, Ducos GM, Ricci R, Firnberg N, Peters JM, Nasmyth K: Separase: a
universal trigger for sister chromatid disjunction but not chromosome
cycle progression. J Cell Biol 2006, 172(6):847-860.
248. Gruber S, Arumugam P, Katou Y, Kuglitsch D, Helmhart W, Shirahige K,
Nasmyth K: Evidence that loading of cohesin onto chromosomes
involves opening of its SMC hinge. Cell 2006, 127(3):523-537.
249. Haering CH, Farcas AM, Arumugam P, Metson J, Nasmyth K: The cohesin
ring concatenates sister DNA molecules. Nature 2008, 454(7202):297-301.
250. Godoy PD, Nogueira-Junior LA, Paes LS, Cornejo A, Martins RM, Silber AM,
Schenkman S, Elias MC: Trypanosome prereplication machinery contains
a single functional orc1/cdc6 protein, which is typical of archaea.
Eukaryot Cell 2009, 8(10):1592-1603.
251. Krylov DM, Nasmyth K, Koonin EV: Evolution of eukaryotic cell cycle
regulation: stepwise addition of regulatory kinases and late advent of
the CDKs. Curr Biol 2003, 13(2):173-177.
252. Bayliss R, Littlewood T, Strawn LA, Wente SR, Stewart M: GLFG and FxFG
nucleoporins bind to overlapping sites on importin-beta. J Biol Chem
2002, 277(52):50597-55606.
253. Pyhtila B, Rexach M: A gradient of affinity for the karyopherin Kap95p
along the yeast nuclear pore complex. J Biol Chem 2003,
278(43):42699-42709.
254. Brohawn SG, Leksa NC, Spear ED, Rajashankar KR, Schwartz TU: Structural
evidence for common ancestry of the nuclear pore complex and vesicle
coats. Science 2008, 322(5906):1369-1373.
255. Sorokin AV, Kim ER, Ovchinnikov LP: Nucleocytoplasmic transport of
proteins. Biochemistry (Mosc) 2007, 72(13):1439-1457.
256. Bayliss R, Leung SW, Baker RP, Quimby BB, Corbett AH, Stewart M:
Structural basis for the interaction between NTF2 and nucleoporin FxFG
repeats. Embo J 2002, 21(12):2843-2853.
257. Isgro TA, Schulten K: Association of nuclear pore FG-repeat domains to
NTF2 import and export complexes. J Mol Biol 2007, 366(1):330-345.
258. Kalab P, Heald R: The RanGTP gradient - a GPS for the mitotic spindle. J
Cell Sci 2008, 121(Pt 10):1577-1586.
259. Jékely G: Origin of the nucleus and Ran-dependent transport to
safeguard ribosome biogenesis in a chimeric cell. Biol Direct 2008, 3:31.
260. Jékely G: Small GTPases and the evolution of the eukaryotic cell.
BioEssays 2003, 25:1129-1138.

Page 75 of 78

261. Bentley M, Liang Y, Mullen K, Xu D, Sztul E, Hay JC: SNARE status regulates
tether recruitment and function in homotypic COPII vesicle fusion. J Biol
Chem 2006, 281(50):38825-38833.
262. Xu D, Hay JC: Reconstitution of COPII vesicle fusion to generate a preGolgi intermediate compartment. J Cell Biol 2004, 167(6):997-1003.
263. Oakley BR, Dodge JD: Kinetochores associated with the nuclear envelope
in the mitosis of a dinoflagellate. J Cell Biol 1974, 63(1):322-325.
264. Goode D: Evolution of mitosis in protozoa: the association of
chromosomes, nuclear envelope, kinetochores and microtubules.
Biosystems 1975, 7(3-4):318-325.
265. Oakley BR, Dodge JD: Mitosis and cytokinesis in the dinoflagellate
Amphidinium carterae. Cytobios 1976, 17(65):35-46.
266. Costas E, Goyanes V: Architecture and evolution of dinoflagellate
chromosomes: an enigmatic origin. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 109(13):268-275.
267. Cavalier-Smith T, Chao EE: Protalveolate phylogeny and systematics and
the origins of Sporozoa and dinoflagellates (phylum Myzozoa nom.
nov.). Eur J Protistol 2004, 40(3):185-212.
268. Strom AC, Weis K: Importin-beta-like nuclear transport receptors. Genome
Biol 2001, 2(6):REVIEWS3008.
269. Hutten S, Kehlenbach RH: CRM1-mediated nuclear export: to the pore
and beyond. Trends Cell Biol 2007, 17(4):193-201.
270. Torosantucci L, De Luca M, Guarguaglini G, Lavia P, Degrassi F: Localized
RanGTP accumulation promotes microtubule nucleation at kinetochores
in somatic mammalian cells. Mol Biol Cell 2008, 19(5):1873-1882.
271. Neuber A, Franke J, Wittstruck A, Schlenstedt G, Sommer T, Stade K:
Nuclear export receptor Xpo1/Crm1 is physically and functionally linked
to the spindle pole body in budding yeast. Mol Cell Biol 2008,
28(17):5348-5358.
272. Jäkel S, Mingot JM, Schwarzmaier P, Hartmann E, Gorlich D: Importins fulfil
a dual function as nuclear import receptors and cytoplasmic chaperones
for exposed basic domains. Embo J 2002, 21(3):377-386.
273. Bäuerle M, Doenecke D, Albig W: The requirement of H1 histones for a
heterodimeric nuclear import receptor. J Biol Chem 2002,
277(36):32480-32489.
274. Trotta CR, Lund E, Kahan L, Johnson AW, Dahlberg JE: Coordinated nuclear
export of 60 S ribosomal subunits and NMD3 in vertebrates. Embo J
2003, 22(11):2841-2851.
275. Timney BL, Tetenbaum-Novatt J, Agate DS, Williams R, Zhang W, Chait BT,
Rout MP: Simple kinetic relationships and nonspecific competition
govern nuclear import rates in vivo. J Cell Biol 2006, 175(4):579-593.
276. Chen IJ, Wang IA, Tai LR, Lin A: The role of expansion segment of human
ribosomal protein L35 in nuclear entry, translation activity, and
endoplasmic reticulum docking. Biochem Cell Biol 2008, 86(3):271-277.
277. Hardeland U, Hurt E: Coordinated nuclear import of RNA polymerase III
subunits. Traffic 2006, 7(4):465-473.
278. Soutoglou E, Demeny MA, Scheer E, Fienga G, Sassone-Corsi P, Tora L: The
nuclear import of TAF10 is regulated by one of its three histone fold
domain-containing interaction partners. Mol Cell Biol 2005,
25(10):4092-4104.
279. Cavalier-Smith T: How selfish is DNA?. Nature 1980, 285(5767):617-618.
280. Hickey DA: Selfish DNA: a sexually-transmitted nuclear parasite. Genetics
1982, 101(3-4):519-531.
281. Fridkin A, Penkner A, Jantsch V, Gruenbaum Y: SUN-domain and KASHdomain proteins during development, meiosis and disease. Cell Mol Life
Sci 2009, 66(9):1518-1533.
282. Tzur YB, Wilson KL, Gruenbaum Y: SUN-domain proteins: ‘Velcro’ that links
the nucleoskeleton to the cytoskeleton. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006,
7(10):782-798.
283. Östlund C, Folker ES, Choi JC, Gomes ER, Gundersen GG, Worman HJ:
Dynamics and molecular interactions of linker of nucleoskeleton and
cytoskeleton (LINC) complex proteins. J Cell Sci 2009, 122(Pt
22):4099-4108.
284. Minn IL, Rolls MM, Hanna-Rose W, Malone CJ: SUN-1 and ZYG-12,
mediators of centrosome-nucleus attachment, are a functional SUN/
KASH pair in Caenorhabditis elegans. Mol Biol Cell 2009, 20(21):4586-4595.
285. Xiong H, Rivero F, Euteneuer U, Mondal S, Mana-Capelli S, Larochelle D,
Vogel A, Gassen B, Noegel AA: Dictyostelium Sun-1 connects the
centrosome to chromatin and ensures genome stability. Traffic 2008,
9(5):708-724.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

286. Burke B, Roux KJ: Nuclei take a position: managing nuclear location. Dev
Cell 2009, 17(5):587-597.
287. Penkner A, Tang L, Novatchkova M, Ladurner M, Fridkin A, Gruenbaum Y,
Schweizer D, Loidl J, Jantsch V: The nuclear envelope protein Matefin/
SUN-1 is required for homologous pairing in C. elegans meiosis. Dev Cell
2007, 12(6):873-885.
288. Sato A, Isaac B, Phillips CM, Rillo R, Carlton PM, Wynne DJ, Kasad RA,
Dernburg AF: Cytoskeletal forces span the nuclear envelope to
coordinate meiotic chromosome pairing and synapsis. Cell 2009,
139(5):907-919.
289. King MC, Drivas TG, Blobel G: A network of nuclear envelope membrane
proteins linking centromeres to microtubules. Cell 2008, 134(3):427-438.
290. Hiraoka Y, Dernburg AF: The SUN rises on meiotic chromosome
dynamics. Dev Cell 2009, 17(5):598-605.
291. Güttinger S, Laurell E, Kutay U: Orchestrating nuclear envelope
disassembly and reassembly during mitosis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009,
10(3):178-191.
292. Karpov SA, Mylnikov AP: Preliminary observations on the ultrastructure of
mitosis in choanoflagellates. Eur J Protistol 1993, 29:19-23.
293. Cavalier-Smith T: Neomonada and the origin of animals and fungi.
Evolutionary relationships among Protozoa London: Chapman and
HallCoombs GH, Vickerman K, Sleigh MA, Warren A 1998, 375-407.
294. Raikov IB: The protozoan nucleus: morphology and evolution. Vienna:
Springer-Verlag 1982.
295. Smirnov AV, Nassonova ES, Chao EE, Cavalier-Smith T: Phylogeny, evolution
and taxonomy of vannellid amoebae. Protist 2007, 158:295-324.
296. Bhaud Y, Guillebault D, Lennon J, Defacque H, Soyer-Gobillard MO,
Moreau H: Morphology and behaviour of dinoflagellate chromosomes
during the cell cycle and mitosis. J Cell Sci 2000, 113(Pt 7):1231-1239.
297. Levi-Setti R, Gavrilov KL, Rizzo PJ: Divalent cation distribution in
dinoflagellate chromosomes imaged by high-resolution ion probe mass
spectrometry. Eur J Cell Biol 2008, 87(12):963-976.
298. Chan YH, Wong JT: Concentration-dependent organization of DNA by
the dinoflagellate histone-like protein HCc3. Nucleic Acids Res 2007,
35(8):2573-2583.
299. Wong JT, New DC, Wong JC, Hung VK: Histone-like proteins of the
dinoflagellate Crypthecodinium cohnii have homologies to bacterial DNAbinding proteins. Eukaryot Cell 2003, 2(3):646-650.
300. Hackett JD, Scheetz TE, Yoon HS, Soares MB, Bonaldo MF, Casavant TL,
Bhattacharya D: Insights into a dinoflagellate genome through expressed
sequence tag analysis. BMC Genomics 2005, 6(1):80.
301. Alverca E, Cuadrado A, Jouve N, Franca S, Moreno Diaz de la Espina S:
Telomeric DNA localization on dinoflagellate chromosomes: structural
and evolutionary implications. Cytogenet Genome Res 2007,
116(3):224-231.
302. Alverca E, Franca S, Diaz de la Espina SM: Topology of splicing and snRNP
biogenesis in dinoflagellate nuclei. Biol Cell 2006, 98(12):709-720.
303. Cavalier-Smith T: Evolution and relationships of algae: major branches of
the tree of life. Unravelling the Algae Boca Raton: CRC PressBrodie J, Lewis J
2007, 21-55.
304. Chikashige Y, Tsutsumi C, Yamane M, Okamasa K, Haraguchi T, Hiraoka Y:
Meiotic proteins bqt1 and bqt2 tether telomeres to form the bouquet
arrangement of chromosomes. Cell 2006, 125(1):59-69.
305. Chikashige Y, Yamane M, Okamasa K, Tsutsumi C, Kojidani T, Sato M,
Haraguchi T, Hiraoka Y: Membrane proteins Bqt3 and -4 anchor
telomeres to the nuclear envelope to ensure chromosomal bouquet
formation. J Cell Biol 2009, 187(3):413-427.
306. Cavalier-Smith T: r- and K-tactics in the evolution of protist
developmental systems: cell and genome size, phenotype diversifying
selection, and cell cycle patterns. Biosystems 1980, 12(1-2):43-59.
307. Cavalier-Smith T, Chao EE, Stechmann A, Oates B, Nikolaev S:
Planomonadida ord. nov. (Apusozoa): ultrastructural affinity with
Micronuclearia podoventralis and deep divergences within Planomonas
gen. nov. Protist 2008, 159:535-562.
308. Cavalier-Smith T, Chao EE: Phylogeny of Choanozoa, Apusozoa, and other
Protozoa and early eukaryote megaevolution. J Mol Evol 2003, 56:540-563.
309. Cavalier-Smith T: Cell volume and the evolution of genome size. The
evolution of genome size Chichester: WileyCavalier-Smith T 1985, 105-184.
310. Beaton MJ, Cavalier-Smith T: Eukaryotic non-coding DNA is functional:
evidence from the differential scaling of cryptomonad genomes. Proc
Biol Sci. 1999, 266(1433):2053-2059.

Page 76 of 78

311. Cavalier-Smith T, Beaton MJ: The skeletal function of non-genic nuclear
DNA: new evidence from ancient cell chimaeras. Genetica 1999, 106(12):3-13.
312. Cavalier-Smith T: Selfish DNA and the origin of introns. Nature 1985,
315:283-284.
313. Pendle AF, Clark GP, Boon R, Lewandowska D, Lam YW, Andersen J,
Mann M, Lamond AI, Brown JW, Shaw PJ: Proteomic analysis of the
Arabidopsis nucleolus suggests novel nucleolar functions. Mol Biol Cell
2005, 16(1):260-269.
314. Maquat LE: Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay: splicing, translation and
mRNP dynamics. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2004, 5(2):89-99.
315. Anantharaman V, Aravind L: New connections in the prokaryotic toxinantitoxin network: relationship with the eukaryotic nonsense-mediated
RNA decay system. Genome Biol 2003, 4:R81.
316. Bercovich N, Levin MJ, Clayton C, Vazquez MP: Identification of core
components of the exon junction complex in trypanosomes. Mol
Biochem Parasitol 2009, 166(2):190-193.
317. Mair G, Shi H, Li H, Djikeng A, Aviles HO, Bishop JR, Falcone FH,
Gavrilescu C, Montgomery JL, Santori MI, Stern LS, Wang Z, Ullu E,
Tschudi C: A new twist in trypanosome RNA metabolism: cis-splicing of
pre-mRNA. Rna 2000, 6(2):163-169.
318. Matic I, Macek B, Hilger M, Walther TC, Mann M: Phosphorylation of
SUMO-1 occurs in vivo and is conserved through evolution. J Proteome
Res 2008, 7(9):4050-4057.
319. Schimmel J, Larsen KM, Matic I, van Hagen M, Cox J, Mann M, Andersen JS,
Vertegaal AC: The ubiquitin-proteasome system is a key component of
the SUMO-2/3 cycle. Mol Cell Proteomics 2008, 7(11):2107-2122.
320. Shiio Y, Eisenman RN: Histone sumoylation is associated with
transcriptional repression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003,
100(23):13225-13230.
321. Nathan D, Ingvarsdottir K, Sterner DE, Bylebyl GR, Dokmanovic M,
Dorsey JA, Whelan KA, Krsmanovic M, Lane WS, Meluh PB, Johnson ES,
Berger SL: Histone sumoylation is a negative regulator in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and shows dynamic interplay with positive-acting histone
modifications. Genes Dev 2006, 20(8):966-976.
322. Gao C, Ho CC, Reineke E, Lam M, Cheng X, Stanya KJ, Liu Y, Chakraborty S,
Shih HM, Kao HY: Histone deacetylase 7 promotes PML sumoylation and
is essential for PML nuclear body formation. Mol Cell Biol 2008,
28(18):5658-5667.
323. Zhao X, Blobel G: A SUMO ligase is part of a nuclear multiprotein
complex that affects DNA repair and chromosomal organization. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(13):4777-4782.
324. Xu XM, Rose A, Muthuswamy S, Jeong SY, Venkatakrishnan S, Zhao Q,
Meier I: NUCLEAR PORE ANCHOR, the Arabidopsis homolog of Tpr/Mlp1/
Mlp2/megator, is involved in mRNA export and SUMO homeostasis and
affects diverse aspects of plant development. Plant Cell 2007,
19(5):1537-1548.
325. Saracco SA, Miller MJ, Kurepa J, Vierstra RD: Genetic analysis of
SUMOylation in Arabidopsis : conjugation of SUMO1 and SUMO2 to
nuclear proteins is essential. Plant Physiol 2007, 145(1):119-134.
326. Shang Q, Xu C, Zhang J, Zhang X, Tu X: Solution structure of SUMO from
Trypanosoma brucei and its interaction with Ubc9. Proteins 2009,
76(1):266-269.
327. Burroughs AM, Balaji S, Iyer LM, Aravind L: A novel superfamily containing
the beta-grasp fold involved in binding diverse soluble ligands. Biol
Direct 2007, 2:4.
328. Burroughs AM, Balaji S, Iyer LM, Aravind L: Small but versatile: the
extraordinary functional and structural diversity of the beta-grasp fold.
Biol Direct 2007, 2:18.
329. Iyer LM, Burroughs AM, Aravind L: The prokaryotic antecedents of the
ubiquitin-signaling system and the early evolution of ubiquitin-like betagrasp domains. Genome Biol 2006, 7(7):R60.
330. Pearce MJ, Mintseris J, Ferreyra J, Gygi SP, Darwin KH: Ubiquitin-like
protein involved in the proteasome pathway of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. Science 2008, 322(5904):1104-1107.
331. Iyer LM, Burroughs AM, Aravind L: Unraveling the biochemistry and
provenance of pupylation: a prokaryotic analog of ubiquitination. Biol
Direct 2008, 3:45.
332. Cavalier-Smith T: Cell cycles, diplokaryosis, and the archezoan origin of
sex. Archiv f Protistenkunde 1995, 145:189-207.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

333. Cavalier-Smith T: Meiosis. The Oxford Encyclopaedia of Evolution New York:
Oxford University Press 2002, 700-708.
334. Cleveland LR: The origin and evolution of meiosis. Science 1947,
105(2724):287-289.
335. Kilmartin JV: Sfi1p has conserved centrin-binding sites and an essential
function in budding yeast spindle pole body duplication. J Cell Biol 2003,
162(7):1211-1221.
336. Pelletier L, Ozlu N, Hannak E, Cowan C, Habermann B, Ruer M, MullerReichert T, Hyman AA: The Caenorhabditis elegans centrosomal protein
SPD-2 is required for both pericentriolar material recruitment and
centriole duplication. Curr Biol 2004, 14(10):863-873.
337. Nash B, Bowerman B: Uncoiling centriole duplication. Nat Cell Biol 2004,
6(7):573-575.
338. Lange BM, Faragher AJ, March P, Gull K: Centriole duplication and
maturation in animal cells. Curr Top Dev Biol 2000, 49:235-349.
339. Gerstein AC, McBride RM, Otto SP: Ploidy reduction in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Biol Lett 2008, 4(1):91-94.
340. Keightley PD, Otto SP: Interference among deleterious mutations favours
sex and recombination in finite populations. Nature 2006, 443:89-92.
341. Kondrashov AS: The asexual ploidy cycle and the origin of sex. Nature
1994, 370(6486):213-216.
342. Otto SP: The evolutionary enigma of sex. Am Nat 2009, 174(Suppl 1):
S1-S14.
343. Hill JA, Otto SP: The role of pleiotropy in the maintenance of sex in
yeast. Genetics 2007, 175(3):1419-1427.
344. Agrawal AF, Otto SP: Host-parasite coevolution and selection on sex
through the effects of segregation. Am Nat 2006, 168(5):617-629.
345. Mandegar MA, Otto SP: Mitotic recombination counteracts the benefits
of genetic segregation. Proc Biol Sci 2007, 274(1615):1301-1307.
346. Cleveland LR: Brief accounts of the sexual cycle of the flagellates of
Cryptocercus. J Protozool 1956, 3:161-180.
347. Hadany L, Otto SP: Condition-dependent sex and the rate of adaptation.
Am Nat 2009, 174(Suppl 1):S71-78.
348. Cavalier-Smith T, Nikolaev S: The zooflagellates Stephanopogon and
Percolomonas are a clade (class Percolatea: phylum Percolozoa). J
Eukaryot Microbiol 2008, 55:501-509.
349. Trigueros S, Tran T, Sorto N, Newmark J, Colloms SD, Sherratt DJ,
Tolmasky ME: mwr Xer site-specific recombination is hypersensitive to
DNA supercoiling. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37(11):3580-3587.
350. Villasante A, Abad JP, Mendez-Lago M: Centromeres were derived from
telomeres during the evolution of the eukaryotic chromosome. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2007, 104(25):10542-10547.
351. Tyler-Smith C, Floridia G: Many paths to the top of the mountain: diverse
evolutionary solutions to centromere structure. Cell 2000, 102(1):5-8.
352. Cavalier-Smith T: Electron microscopic evidence for chloroplast fusion in
zygotes of Chlamydomonas reinhardii. Nature 1970, 228(269):333-335.
353. Tartakoff AM, Jaiswal P: Nuclear fusion and genome encounter during
yeast zygote formation. Mol Biol Cell 2009, 20(12):2932-29342.
354. Kiefel BR, Gilson PR, Beech PL: Diverse eukaryotes have retained
mitochondrial homologues of the bacterial division protein FtsZ. Protist
2004, 155:105-115.
355. Kuroiwa T, Misumi O, Nishida K, Yagisawa F, Yoshida Y, Fujiwara T,
Kuroiwa H: Vesicle, mitochondrial, and plastid division machineries with
emphasis on dynamin and electron-dense rings. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol
2008, 271:97-152.
356. Rahaman A, Elde NC, Turkewitz AP: A dynamin-related protein required
for nuclear remodeling in Tetrahymena. Curr Biol 2008, 18(16):1227-1233.
357. Gerstein AC, Chun HJ, Grant A, Otto SP: Genomic convergence toward
diploidy in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS Genet 2006, 2(9):e145.
358. Gerstein AC, Otto SP: Ploidy and the causes of genomic evolution. J Hered
2009, 100(5):571-581.
359. Otto SP, Gerstein AC: The evolution of haploidy and diploidy. Curr Biol
2008, 18(24):R1121-1124.
360. Moreira D, López-García P: Symbiosis between methanogenic archaea
and delta-proteobacteria as the origin of eukaryotes: the syntrophic
hypothesis. J Mol Evol 1998, 47(5):517-530.
361. López-García P, Moreira D: Metabolic symbiosis at the origin of
eukaryotes. Trends Biochem Sci 1999, 24(3):88-93.
362. Rivera MC, Lake JA: The ring of life provides evidence for a genome
fusion origin of eukaryotes. Nature 2004, 431(7005):152-155.

Page 77 of 78

363. Gupta RS, Golding GB: The origin of the eukaryotic cell. Trends Biochem Sci
1996, 21(5):166-171.
364. Hartman H, Fedorov A: The origin of the eukaryotic cell: a genomic
investigation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(3):1420-1425.
365. Doolittle WF: You are what you eat: a gene transfer ratchet could
account for bacterial genes in eukaryotic nuclear genomes. Trends Genet.
1998, 14(8):307-311.
366. Sagan L: On the origin of mitosing cells. J Theor Biol. 1967, 14(3):255-274.
367. De Duve C: The origin of eukaryotes: a reappraisal. Nat Rev Genet 2007,
8:395-403.
368. Lindsay MR, Webb RI, Strous M, Jetten MS, Butler MK, Forde RJ, Fuerst JA:
Cell compartmentalisation in Planctomycetes: novel types of structural
organisation for the bacterial cell. Arch Microbiol 2001, 175(6):413-429.
369. Giezen van der M, Tovar J: Degenerate mitochondria. EMBO Rep 2005,
6(6):525-530.
370. Staley JT, Bouzek H, Jenkins C: Eukaryotic signature proteins of
Prosthecobacter dejongeii and Gemmata sp. Wa-1 as revealed by in silico
analysis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2005, 243(1):9-14.
371. Pilhofer M, Rosati G, Ludwig W, Schleifer KH, Petroni G: Coexistence of
tubulins and FtsZ in different Prosthecobacter species. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24(7):1439-1442.
372. Pilhofer M, Bauer AP, Schrallhammer M, Richter L, Ludwig W, Schleifer KH,
Petroni G: Characterization of bacterial operons consisting of two
tubulins and a kinesin-like gene by the novel Two-Step Gene Walking
method. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35(20):e135.
373. Mitchell DR: The evolution of eukaryotic cilia and flagella as motile and
sensory organelles. Adv Exp Med Biol 2007, 607:130-140.
374. Jékely G, Arendt D: Evolution of intraflagellar transport from coated
vesicles and autogenous origin of the eukaryotic cilium. Bioessays 2006,
28(2):191-198.
375. Bellare P, Small EC, Huang X, Wohlschlegel JA, Staley JP, Sontheimer EJ: A
role for ubiquitin in the spliceosome assembly pathway. Nat Struct Mol
Biol 2008, 15(5):444-451.
376. Jékely G: Origin of the nucleus and Ran-dependent transport to
safeguard ribosome biogenesis in a chimeric cell. Biol Direct 2008, 3:31.
377. Cavalier-Smith T: Kingdom Protozoa and its 18 phyla. Microbiol Rev 1993,
57(4):953-994.
378. Haldane JBS: The causes of evolution. London: Longmans, Green and Co.
1932.
379. Cavalier-Smith T: The evolution of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
Fundamentals of Medical Cell biology Greenwich, Conn.: J.A.I. PressBittar GE
1991, I:217-272.
380. Cavalier-Smith T: The evolution of cells. Evolution of Life Tokyo: SpringerVerlagOsawa S, Honjo T 1991, 271-304.
381. Cavalier-Smith T: The origin of cells: a symbiosis between genes,
catalysts, and membranes. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 1987,
52:805-824.
382. Heard E, Colot V: Chromosome structural proteins and RNA-mediated
epigenetic silencing. Dev Cell 2008, 14(6):813-814.
383. Larsen CN, Wang H: The ubiquitin superfamily: members, features, and
phylogenies. J Proteome Res 2002, 1(5):411-419.
384. Schwartz DC, Hochstrasser M: A superfamily of protein tags: ubiquitin,
SUMO and related modifiers. Trends Biochem Sci 2003, 28(6):321-328.
385. Cavalier-Smith T: Selfish DNA and the origin of introns. Nature 1985,
315(6017):283-284.
386. Hinnebusch J, Tilly K: Linear plasmids and chromosomes in bacteria. Mol
Microbiol 1993, 10(5):917-922.
387. Lundgren M, Andersson A, Chen L, Nilsson P, Bernander R: Three
replication origins in Sulfolobus species: synchronous initiation of
chromosome replication and asynchronous termination. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2004, 101(18):7046-7051.
388. Robinson NP, Dionne I, Lundgren M, Marsh VL, Bernander R, Bell SD:
Identification of two origins of replication in the single chromosome of
the archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus. Cell 2004, 116(1):25-38.
389. Lundgren M, Bernander R: Archaeal cell cycle progress. Curr Opin Microbiol
2005, 8(6):662-668.
390. Lundgren M, Malandrin L, Eriksson S, Huber H, Bernander R: Cell cycle
characteristics of Crenarchaeota: unity among diversity. J Bacteriol 2008,
190(15):5362-5367.
391. Forterre P: Thermoreduction, a hypothesis for the origin of prokaryotes.
C R Acad Sci III 1995, 318(4):415-422.

Cavalier-Smith Biology Direct 2010, 5:7
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/7

Page 78 of 78

392. Barns SM, Delwiche CF, Palmer JD, Pace NR: Perspectives on archaeal
diversity, thermophily and monophyly from environmental rRNA
sequences. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996, 93(17):9188-9193.
393. Elkins JG, Podar M, Graham DE, Makarova KS, Wolf Y, Randau L, Hedlund BP,
Brochier-Armanet C, Kunin V, Anderson I, Lapidus A, Goltsman E, Barry K,
Koonin EV, Hugenholtz P, Kyrpides N, Wanner G, Richardson P, Keller M,
Stetter KO: A korarchaeal genome reveals insights into the evolution of
the Archaea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(23):8102-8107.
394. Arkhipova I, Meselson M: Transposable elements in sexual and ancient
asexual taxa. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97(26):14473-14477.
395. Arkhipova IR, Meselson M: Diverse DNA transposons in rotifers of the
class Bdelloidea. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(33):11781-11786.
396. Gladyshev EA, Meselson M, Arkhipova IR: Massive horizontal gene transfer
in bdelloid rotifers. Science 2008, 320(5880):1210-1213.
397. King MC, Lusk CP, Blobel G: Karyopherin-mediated import of integral
inner nuclear membrane proteins. Nature 2006, 442(7106):1003-1007.
398. Zhang Z, Cavalier-Smith T, Green BR: A family of selfish minicircular
chromosomes with jumbled chloroplast gene fragments from a
dinoflagellate. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18(8):1558-1565.
399. Zhang Z, Cavalier-Smith T, Green BR: Evolution of dinoflagellate unigenic
minicircles and the partially concerted divergence of their putative
replicon origins. Mol Biol Evol 2002, 19(4):489-500.
400. Cavalier-Smith T: A 6-kingdom classification and a unified phylogeny.
Endocytobiology II Berlin: de GruyterSchwemmler W, Schenk HEA 1983,
l027-l034.
401. Cavalier-Smith T: Endosymbiotic origin of the mitochondrial envelope.
Endocytobiology II Berlin: de GruyterSchwemmler W, Schenk HEA 1983,
265-279.
402. Yutin N, Wolf MY, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The origins of phagocytosis and
eukaryogenesis. Biol Direct 2009, 4:9.
403. Cavalier-Smith T: Concept of a bacterium still valid in prokaryote debate.
Nature 2007, 446(7133):7257.
404. Woese CR, Fox GE: Phylogenetic structure of the prokaryotic domain: the
primary kingdoms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1977, 74(11):5088-5090.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-7
Cite this article as: Cavalier-Smith: Origin of the cell nucleus, mitosis
and sex: roles of intracellular coevolution. Biology Direct 2010 5:7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
