<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-5-52.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Software

GeneOrder3.0: Software for comparing the order of genes in pairs
of small bacterial genomes
Srikanth Celamkoti†1, Sashidhara Kundeti†1, Anjan Purkayastha1,
Raja Mazumder2, Charles Buck3 and Donald Seto*1
Address: 1Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, School of Computational Sciences, George Mason University. 10900 University Boulevard,
MSN 5B3, Manassas, VA 20110 USA, 2Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Georgetown University School of Medicine. 4000
Reservoir Road, Washington, D.C. 20057 USA and 3Virology Program, American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). 10801 University Boulevard,
Manassas, VA 20110, USA
Email: Srikanth Celamkoti - scelamko@gmu.edu; Sashidhara Kundeti - skundeti@gmu.edu; Anjan Purkayastha - purkayas@hotmail.com;
Raja Mazumder - rm285@georgetown.edu; Charles Buck - cbuck@atcc.org; Donald Seto* - dseto@gmu.edu
* Corresponding author †Equal contributors

Published: 05 May 2004
BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:52

Received: 16 January 2004
Accepted: 05 May 2004

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/52
© 2004 Celamkoti et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: An increasing number of whole viral and bacterial genomes are being sequenced and
deposited in public databases. In parallel to the mounting interest in whole genomes, the number
of whole genome analyses software tools is also increasing. GeneOrder was originally developed
to provide an analysis of genes between two genomes, allowing visualization of gene order and
synteny comparisons of any small genomes. It was originally developed for comparing virus,
mitochondrion and chloroplast genomes. This is now extended to small bacterial genomes of sizes
less than 2 Mb.
Results: GeneOrder3.0 has been developed and validated successfully on several small bacterial
genomes (ca. 580 kb to 1.83 Mb) archived in the NCBI GenBank database. It is an updated webbased "on-the-fly" computational tool allowing gene order and synteny comparisons of any two
small bacterial genomes. Analyses of several bacterial genomes show that a large amount of gene
and genome re-arrangement occurs, as seen with earlier DNA software tools. This can be
displayed at the protein level using GeneOrder3.0. Whole genome alignments of genes are
presented in both a table and a dot plot. This allows the detection of evolutionary more distant
relationships since protein sequences are more conserved than DNA sequences.
Conclusions: GeneOrder3.0 allows researchers to perform comparative analysis of gene order
and synteny in genomes of sizes up to 2 Mb "on-the-fly." Availability: http://binf.gmu.edu/
genometools.html and http://pasteur.atcc.org:8050/GeneOrder3.0.

Background
Whole genome DNA sequence data are being generated
and deposited into proprietary and public domain databases at an increasingly rapid rate as a result of more efficient and less expensive DNA sequencing and analysis
technology. An on-line database, http://www.genomes

online.org[1], lists a running count of 182 published
complete genomes with 488 on-going prokaryotic
genome projects as of March 26, 2004.
There are relatively few whole genome comparison software tools owing to the previous paucity of whole genome
Page 1 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

data. However, there are a growing number of these tools
available, and along with earlier versions of GeneOrder
and CoreGenes [2-4], there is increasing interest in developing software comparing the gene order and synteny of
whole genomes at the gene level, as evidenced by two
recent publications [5,6].
As genome sequencing projects are completed, greater scientific curiosity and attention focuses on the analysis and
data mining of these whole genomes. In turn, this stimulates additional interest in obtaining and analyzing more
and diverse genomes, as seen currently with the increase
in software tools development. As a necessary complement to understanding these large data sets, bioinformatics and whole genome informatics must provide software
tools that allow mining of gene and putative gene data at
this whole genome level [7-13]. Key software challenges
include developing platform-independent, interactive
and user-friendly tools that are flexible and useful for
research. These are either currently being developed or are
available to perform comparative genomics at different
levels of biological complexity.
There are several genome analysis tools and database
extant. Software such as STRING (EMBL; http://
string.embl.de/) [10] and KEGG (Kyoto University Bioinformatics Centre; http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/) [11]
are web resources and databases that offer information on
proteins, as well as provide tools for the analysis of proteins at the functional level. They also offer useful genome
comparison tools.
STRING is a database comprising orthologous proteins
and predicted functional interactions between proteins in
prokaryotes. It identifies functional interactions from various lines of evidence, both computational and experimental. However, STRING does not perform gene order
analysis. KEGG is a database comprising various levels of
biological information. At the lowest level, it contains
information on gene annotation, orthology and whole
genome alignments. At the highest levels, it has information on metabolic and functional pathways. KEGG provides pre-computing archived whole genome alignments.
Unfortunately, being a pre-computed resource, KEGG is
of limited use when performing comparative genomics
with a novel or proprietary prokaryotic genomic
sequence.
A number of whole genome sequence alignment tools
have also been developed over the past few years. Noteworthy among them are MUMmer (TIGR) and AVID
(LNBL) [12,13]. MUMmer http://www.tigr.org/software/
mummer/ performs a pair-wise alignment of two large
and closely related nucleic acid sequences. It is based on a
suffix tree alignment algorithm, which is a departure from

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/52

the
traditional
hashing-based
'generate-and-test'
approach. Another tool in this package PROmer performs
amino acid alignments of genomic sequences, after a sixframe translation. This is applicable for genome
sequences that are too divergent to align at the nucleotide
level. Synteny may be inferred from the aligned
sequences.
AVID is a global alignment tool, designed to align large
genomic regions. The VISTA suite of comparative genomics tools http://www-gsd.lbl.gov/vista/index.shtml uses
AVID as the alignment program for a range of comparative studies. While both MUMmer and AVID display synteny at the nucleotide and/or the translated amino acid
level, they do not display the arrangement of syntenic
genes in the aligned genomes. There is an alignment software tool, ACT, which does generate maps (Sanger Centre;
http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/ACT/). It provides
alignments of multiple annotated genomic sequences,
however the display graphics is complicated. This output
is difficult to navigate.
GeneOrder3.0 occupies a unique niche among these
whole genome computational tools. It performs a whole
genome comparison of two prokaryotes at the level of the
coding sequence, without any assumptions of phylogenetic relatedness. The alignment is displayed as the relative arrangement of similar coding sequences between the
two species, allowing for easy identification of regions of
synteny. All alignments are computed "on-the-fly," thus
providing flexibility in running this software, for example,
newly acquired genome sequences not yet archived or
proprietary sequences not archived in public databases.
Plans are in place for storing pre-computed alignments for
immediate returns upon subsequent requests. Moreover,
GeneOrder3.0 is easy to use for a typical molecular biologist with limited computational experience.
Very recently, reports on two other gene order and synteny
identification software have been published [5,6]. These
two software programs, GOV ("Gene Order Visualizer;"
http://kishore2.bii.a-star.edu.sg/Gov.html (not currently
accessible 05/17/04) and GeneSyn ftp://159.149.110.11/
pub/GeneSyn_1.0), are reported to identify syntenic
genes between two organisms of interest. The GOV software [5] is a web-based site that was inaccessible during
the course of this evaluation process. GeneSyn [6] is a
Unix-based software that is resident on the user's workstation. It compares the arrangements of genes in multiple
genomes; however, it does not include a graphical display.
It also requires files to be in a format that is not widely
used. Furthermore it is not immediately clear how the
genes are compared to one another to identify synteny.
Both have deficiencies relative to GeneOrder- both current and past versions.

Page 2 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

In light of the recent publications of whole genome comparative tools, it is clear that one increasingly important
approach in comparative genomics is to identify common
and related genes (orthologs, paralogs and metalogs) in
the organisms, and to study their locations and physical
relationships to each other within the genomes. Gene
order and synteny are important components of this
whole genome examination. These were topics at a workshop on "Gene order dynamics, comparative maps and
multigene families" (Sainte-Adele, Quebec on Sept. 22–
25, 2000).
Due to the initial expenses and limitations of the emerging sequencing technology, small genomes were necessarily the first to be compiled and analyzed. These genomes
enabled studies which included comparing gene order
among fully sequenced genomes of viruses, mitochondria
and chloroplasts [14]. Early versions of GeneOrder and
CoreGenes were developed to examine these genomes,
with input limitations of about 350,000 bases [2-4]. It was
understood that larger genomes, particularly the bacterial
genomes, are of more interest to the general research community. In response to this, GeneOrder3.0 has been
developed to allow researchers to compare the order of
genes between two small bacterial genomes up to 2 Mb.
Technical difficulties have precluded the application to
larger genomes. These are being addressed to allow GeneOrder analyses of 4+Mb genomes. GeneOrder3.0 is a
"stepping-stone" that has been tested on full genome
sequence data for available small bacterial genomes that
are obtainable from the NCBI GenBank database. Its continued application will generate data and results, and
elicit comments and suggestions for enhancements from
the genome and microbial research communities as part
of the evolving nature of software and research tools.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/52

Results and discussion
GeneOrder3.0 presents "on-the-fly" genome comparisons
between two organisms, both as a two-dimensional dot
blot graph and as a table, listing the order of similar genes.
It is based on BLAST [15]. Hyperlinks are provided from
the table, leading to its corresponding "Protein Coding
Region" entry in the NCBI database. BLAST scores are collected and parsed into either default or user specified
ranges, available in three ranges designated 'highest',
'high' and 'low' values. These high score parameters have
been previously discussed in detail [7]. Briefly, these
scores are derived from the BLAST comparisons; as an
example, gene number 5 of ovine adenovirus OAV287
(U40839) aligns with gene number 5 of human adenovirus HAV12 (X73487) with a BLAST score of 737 (probability of matching by chance of 4.3 × 10–77). The default
scores are set at [200+) for 'highest,' [100–200) for 'high'
and [75–100) for 'low.' The three levels allow the user to
identify immediately the best matches as well as probable
and possible matches. The low scores matches may not be
true matches, but could warrant additional analysis.
GeneOrder3.0 allows for the identification and visualization of gene and genomic re-arrangements in small bacterial genomes. Gene shuffling has been detected by DNA
comparison methods on whole genomes. However,
GeneOrder allows this comparison to be performed on a
protein level. This allows the detection of evolutionary
more distant relationships, since protein sequences are
more conserved than DNA sequences. In essence, it allows
for the alignment and comparison of genomes for which
the nucleotide sequences are too divergent to detect similarity. This is a major advantage of GeneOrder.

Implementation
GeneOrder3.0 relies on the BLAST sequence alignment
algorithm [12]. The client-sever architecture has been
implemented in J2EE technologies (Servlets and Applets),
JavaScript and HTML. It uses the 'setdb' and 'BLASTP' programs from WU-BLAST http://BLAST.wustl.edu. This software is platform-independent; however, up-to-date
versions of web browsers are required in order to run the
JavaScript, especially to visualize the graph applet
(Ptolemy II). Running times may vary; as an example, a
Macintosh Powerbook G4 running Netscape v7.2 analyzed a pair of Mycoplasma genomes in 8 minutes and a
pair of Hemophilus genomes in 37 minutes. This is also a
function of genome downloading from GenBank. One
important caveat: GenBank accession numbers MUST
start with "NC_ ....."

Figure 1
(NC_000908) analysis of Mycoplasma genitalium
GeneOrder3.0versus Mycoplasma pneumoniae (NC_000912)
GeneOrder3.0 analysis of Mycoplasma genitalium
(NC_000908) versus Mycoplasma pneumoniae (NC_000912).
BLAST scores are set at the defaults of 200, 100 and 75 as
represented by the dots, crosses and open squares,
respectively.

Page 3 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

Applications
The smallest genomes in the bacterial world belong to the
genus Mycoplasma. These bacteria are distinguished by
their lack of a cell wall and by their small genome sizes.
Sequenced Mycoplasma genomes range in size from ca.
580 kb to 1.35 Mb. Their genomes encode far fewer genes
than larger "free-living" bacteria (e.g., Escherichia coli).
This and other features of the genus make these smaller
genomes an intriguing model for early comparative
genomic studies and for testing whole genome comparison software, e.g., as a 'stepping stone' to the development
of software to analyze much larger genomes. Therefore,
for validation, GeneOrder3.0 has been used to analyze
pairs of the following sequenced genomes: Mycoplasma
genitalium (580,074 bases, NC_000908), M. pneumoniae
(816,394 bases, NC_000912), M. pulmonis (963,879
bases, NC_002771), M. penetrans (1,358,633 bases,
NC_004432) and M. gallisepticum (996,442 bases,
NC_004829). Additionally two other small genome bacteria were also examined: Ureaplasma Ureyliticum
(751,719 bases, NC 002162) and Tropheryma whipplei str.
Twist (927,303 bases, NC_004572). GeneOrder3.0 has
been used to compare H. influenzae (1,830,136 bases,
NC_000907) to H. ducreyi (1,698,955 bases,
NC_002940).
Figure 1 shows an analysis of M. genitalium with M. pneumoniae. From this display of the relative arrangements of
coding sequences we can easily see that gene order and
synteny have been largely maintained between the two
organisms. Portions of the genomes (specifically genes
from '100–300' region of the organisms) have been translocated. There are two large gaps in the diagonal at this
region; a perfect diagonal represents perfect synteny.
These gaps appear to be a result of translocations of segments of the chromosome. Individual genes that are
highly conserved but nevertheless have moved are also
seen as red dots (BLAST score 200+) away from the diagonal. In addition, there are several crosses and squares (representing BLAST score ranges of '100–200' and '75–100,'
respectively) that putatively represent fast evolving genes,
and therefore may be involved in specialized or adaptive
functions such as pathogenesis. In addition, genes aligned
horizontally or perpendicularly may represent potentially, but not necessarily, related genes. A careful and
detailed analysis of the graph generated by GeneOrder3.0
reveals several genes that can be investigated further to
understand better the species-specific differences of the
two organisms. This allows the researcher to home in on
potential reasons of specialization and adaptations.
As with all software and research tools, further work
remains to allow more flexibility and usefulness. For
example, plans include the important aspect of re-developing the algorithm and software coding to allow efficient

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/52

and rapid analysis of larger genomes (ca. 4+Mb), currently
limited by technical non-trivial difficulties. A database of
pre-computed data will be made available so that subsequent identical requests are filled immediately. An alternative to the graph applet will allow users (1) to link each
point to a GenBank entry, current available as links from
the table, (2) to print the graph directly and (3) to provide
"mouse whispers" that allow a brief notation of the gene
under the cursor on screen.

Conclusions
GeneOrder3.0 is a web-accessible whole genome comparative tool that provides gene order and synteny visualization for a pair of genomes of sizes up to 2 Mb "on-the-fly."
The current GeneOrder3.0 input limitation of ca. 2 Mb
genomes is a "stepping stone" in developing the algorithm to accommodate the analyses of more interesting
and complicated larger prokaryotic genomes, ca. 4+Mb.
Mounting interest in the larger bacterial genomes and
their analyses is illustrated in the recent bacterial genome
comparisons publications [16-18] and by the accumulation of larger numbers of these genomes. The growing
whole genomes database requires the development of
whole genome analyses tools, including alternative versions of similar tools for versatility and availability.
GeneOrder3.0 is such a tool.

Availability and requirements
GeneOrder3.0 is a platform-independent, web-based
application. GenBank accession numbers or proprietary
lists of contiguous genes in a FASTA format are required
for input. The site is available at http://binf.gmu.edu/
genometools.html and at http://pasteur.atcc.org:8050/
GeneOrder3.0. GeneOrder3.0 software requires a webbrowser that supports Javascript.

Authors' contributions
SC and SK provided software development and testing of
the software, as well as technical support and maintenance of the site. AP provided supervision and genome
validation; RM assisted in the development of the algorithm and interpretation of the GeneOrder plots. CB provided biological direction and validation of the tool. DS
conceived of this project, and participated in its design
and coordination. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.

Acknowledgements
DS dedicates this work to the memory of Dante Ferrini (March 26, 1915 –
January 26, 2004). JAVA-based programming is coded using "Jakarta-Tomcat," which is generously made available by the Apache Software foundation
http://www.apache.org. Ptolemy II is available through the Regents of the
University of California http://ptolemy.eecs.berkeley.edu/ptolemyII. We
thank Dr. Jennifer Weller for critical comments on this manuscript. This
work has been supported in part by a grant from ATCC and a Faculty

Page 4 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/5/52

Development Award from the Office of the Provost (George Mason
University).

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.

Bernal A, Ear U, Kyrpides N: Genomes OnLine Database
(GOLD): a monitor of genome projects world-wide. Nucleic
Acids Res 2001, 29:126-127.
Mazumder R, Kolaskar A, Seto D: GeneOrder: comparing the
order of genes in small genomes. Bioinformatics 2001,
17:162-166.
Zafar N, Mazumder R, Seto D: Comparisons of gene colinearity
in genomes using GeneOrder2.0. Trends Biochem Sci 2001,
26:514-516.
Zafar N, Mazumder R, Seto D: CoreGenes: a computational tool
for identifying and cataloging "core" genes in a set of small
genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2002, 3:12.
Sakharkar KR, Chow VT: Exploring genome architecture
through GOV: a www-based Gene Order Visualizer. Bioinformatics 2004, 20:984-5.
Pavesi G, Mauri G, Jannelli F, Gissi C, G P: GeneSyn: a tool for
detecting conserved gene order across genomes. Bioinformatics in press.
Schwartz S, Zhang Z, Frazer KA, Smit A, Riemer C, Bouck J, Gibbs R,
Hardison R, Miller W: PipMaker – a web server for aligning two
genomic DNA sequences. Genome Res 2000, 10:577-586.
Cummings L, Riley L, Black L, Souvorov A, Resenchuk S, Dondoshansky I, Tatusova T: Genomic BLAST: custom-defined virtual databases for complete and unfinished genomes. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 2002, 216:133-138.
Xie T, Hood L: ACGT – a comparative genomics tool. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1039-1040.
vonMering C, Huynen M, Jaeggi D, Schmidt S, Bork P, Snel B:
STRING: a database of predicted functional associations
between proteins. Nuc Ac Res 2003, 31:258-261.
Kanehisa M, Goto S, Kawashima S, Okuno Y, Hattori M: The KEGG
resource for deciphering the genome. Nuc Ac Res 2004,
32Database issue:D277-280.
Bray N, Dubchak I, Pachter L: AVID: a global alignment
program. Gen Res 2003, 13:97-102.
Kurtz S, Phillippy A, Delcher AL, Smoot M, Shumway M, Antonescu
C, Salzberg SL: Versatile and open software for comparing
large genomes. Gen Biol 2004, 5:R12. Epub Jan 30.
Boore JL, Brown WM: Big trees from little genomes: mitochondrial gene order as a phylogenetic tool. Curr Opin Genet Dev
1998, 8:668-674.
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local
alignment search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
Bhattacharyya A, Stilwagen S, Ivanova N, D'Souza M, Bernal A, Lykidis
A, Kapatral V, Anderson I, Larsen N, Los T, Reznik G, Selkov E Jr,
Walunas TL, Feil H, Feil WS, Purcell A, Lassez JL, Hawkins TL,
Haselkorn R, Overbeek R, Predki PF, Kyrpides NC: Wholegenome comparative analysis of three phytopathogenic
Xylella fastidiosa strains. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002,
99:12403-12408.
Raymond J, Zhaxybayeva O, Gogarten JP, Gerdes SY, Blankenship RE:
Whole-genome analysis of photosynthetic prokaryotes. Science 2002, 298:1616-1620.
Ivanova N, Sorokin A, Anderson I, Galleron N, Candelon B, Kapatral
V, Bhattacharyya A, Reznik G, Mikhailova N, Lapidus A, Chu L, Mazur
M, Goltsman E, Larsen N, D'Souza M, Walunas T, Grechkin Y, Pusch
G, Haselkorn R, Fonstein M, Ehrlich SD, Overbeek R, Kyrpides N:
Genome sequence of Bacillus cereus and comparative analysis with Bacillus anthracis. Nature 2003, 423:87-91.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 5 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
