<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Taxon ordering in phylogenetic trees: a workbench test</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:58. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-58"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Francesco Cerutti"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Cerutti et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/58

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Taxon ordering in phylogenetic trees: a
workbench test
Francesco Cerutti1,2, Luigi Bertolotti1,2, Tony L Goldberg3, Mario Giacobini1,2*

Abstract
Background: Phylogenetic trees are an important tool for representing evolutionary relationships among
organisms. In a phylogram or chronogram, the ordering of taxa is not considered meaningful, since complete
topological information is given by the branching order and length of the branches, which are represented in the
root-to-node direction. We apply a novel method based on a (l + μ)-Evolutionary Algorithm to give meaning to
the order of taxa in a phylogeny. This method applies random swaps between two taxa connected to the same
node, without changing the topology of the tree. The evaluation of a new tree is based on different distance
matrices, representing non-phylogenetic information such as other types of genetic distance, geographic distance,
or combinations of these. To test our method we use published trees of Vesicular stomatitis virus, West Nile virus
and Rice yellow mottle virus.
Results: Best results were obtained when taxa were reordered using geographic information. Information
supporting phylogeographic analysis was recovered in the optimized tree, as evidenced by clustering of
geographically close samples. Improving the trees using a separate genetic distance matrix altered the ordering of
taxa, but not topology, moving the longest branches to the extremities, as would be expected since they are the
most divergent lineages. Improved representations of genetic and geographic relationships between samples were
also obtained when merged matrices (genetic and geographic information in one matrix) were used.
Conclusions: Our innovative method makes phylogenetic trees easier to interpret, adding meaning to the taxon
order and helping to prevent misinterpretations.

Background
Phylogenetic trees are an important tool in evolutionary
biology for representing the history of evolution of
organisms. They are composed of nodes, representing
hypothetical ancestors, and branches or edges, reflecting
the relationship between nodes. Terminal nodes or taxa
represent the taxa whose evolution has been investigated, and they can represent extant or extinct organisms [1]. In phylograms and chronograms, branches
contain information, e.g. character changes or evolutionary time; in both cases they represent distances between
nodes. Consequently, the taxon order is meaningless,
and the closeness of taxa can be misleading. For
example, two taxa lying adjacent to each other on a
* Correspondence: mario.giacobini@unito.it
1
Department of Animal Production, Epidemiology and Ecology, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Torino, via Leonardo da Vinci 44, 10095,
Grugliasco (TO), Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

phylogenetic tree may actually be very distantly related,
creating problems of interpretation.
Previous work has already accepted the challenge of
ordering the taxa to add a meaning according to the
genetic distance. The software Neighbor-Net [2] is shown
to build a network which also minimizes the distance
among taxa, given a matrix that fulfill the Kalmanson
inequalities [3,4]. This software relies on phylogenetic networks, using an algorithm based on Neighbor Joining
[5]. Levy and Pachter [4] showed that the algorithm,
considering the problem as a “traveling salesman” problem, is robust for ordering taxa according to a distance matrix. Other studies have endeavored to
minimize the distance between taxa as a minimum
Hamiltonian path [6,7], either while building the tree
or after having built it.
In our previous work [8,9] we introduced an innovative
method to order taxa on a phylogenetic tree to make taxon
order more meaningful. We used (l + μ) - Evolutionary

© 2011 Cerutti et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Cerutti et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/58

Algorithms (EAs) [10,11] to reorganize taxon order by
random rotation of internal nodes (thus not modifying
the topology), evaluating the modified tree on the
basis of genetic distances. Figure 1 reports a brief
scheme of the process to generate and select the optimal tree. The main goal is to order the taxa on a phylogenetic tree according to any given distance matrix.
The tree can be built with any software for phylogenetic inference and then used as input for our
algorithm.
In the current study we apply this method to different
data sets using different types of distances. We chose
published phylogenetic trees of three RNA viruses
infecting different hosts with different modes of transmission: Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) presented by
Perez et al. [12], West Nile virus (WNV) presented by
Bertolotti et al. [13] and Rice yellow mottle virus
(RYMV) presented by Abubakar et al. [14]. We reorganized each tree using genetic and geographic distance
matrices as well as combined distances (geographic and
genetic) to improve graphical representation by optimizing the order of taxa.

Page 2 of 8

Results and discussion
VSV case study

VSV is a negative-sense single-stranded RNA virus
member of the family Rhabdoviridae, which causes vesicular stomatitis in horses, cattle, swine, and certain wildlife species [15]. Starting from the tree originally
published in [12], we created an Euclidean distance
matrix from collection sites coordinates. Then, the EA
was run 50 times, each starting with the original tree
plus l-1 different initial trees (see Methods), generated
from the original one (Figure 2a). The performance of
the runs was comparable, and we analyzed the best
trees (Figure 2b). The order of taxa follows a clear
north-south progression, reflecting the geographic
arrangement of collection sites, represented in the map
in Figure 3. In other words, the algorithm was able to
group those taxa belonging to the same state (geographically closer each other). We also tested the algorithm
using a separate genetic distance matrix and a combined
genetic and geographic distance matrix. Using genetic
distances only, the improvement in tree representation
is less evident, as might be expected considering that

Figure 1 Evolutionary algorithm. Starting from the parent tree, the algorithm generates possible solutions randomly rotating branches
connected to the same node. After the fitness evaluation, the best individuals are selected as the parent population in the next cycle of the
algorithm.

Cerutti et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/58

Page 3 of 8

Figure 2 VSV trees. The original tree, as presented by Perez et al. (A). The best trees obtained using the geographic (B), genetic (C) and
combined (D) distances. The dashed line in C and D highlights the “C” shape acquired by the clades.

the original tree was constructed using genetic data.
However, the EA returns a tree in which the most
genetically divergent clades are moved to the extremities
of the phylogeny, leading to a “C”-like shape, as shown
in Figure 2c. The effect of combining the two matrices
is strongly evident: the tree has the same “C”-like shape
arrangement as the genetically modified tree, and moreover it conserves the aggregation of taxa from same
states (locations) (Figure 2d).

WNV case study

WNV is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus
belonging to the family Flaviviridae, and it is transmitted primarily through the bite of infected mosquitoes
to birds. Occasionally it infects horses and humans causing West Nile febrile illness and neurologic disease [16].
The original tree, from [13], shown in Figure 4a, was
rearranged using a matrix of geographic distances, as
described in the Methods section. In the case of WNV,

Cerutti et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/58

Page 4 of 8

RYMV case study

Figure 3 Map of VSV samples. Map representing the study area of
USA and Mexico where VSV samples were collected. Each site has a
color, that is the same of the tips of the samples collected in it.

the geographic arrangement of locations is not linear
(Figure 5), as in the case of VSV. In the modified tree
(Figure 4b), taxa nevertheless group by sampling location. Due to large sample size and constraints of tree
topology, this grouping is less evident than in case of
VSV.
In the original paper, the authors declared that more
than the 90% of viral genetic variance was contained
within sampling sites. Modifying the tree using a matrix
of genetic distances yielded a tree that did not tend to
group taxa by geographic location (Figure 4c); rather, the
modified tree acquired the aforementioned “C”-like
shape. As reported in the same paper, the authors found
a significant association between viral genetic and spatial
distances, with samples collected from the same site
likely to be genetically similar. The modified tree
obtained with merged genetic and geographic distance
matrices tended to move samples collected from the
same location closer, supporting the original contention
that that viruses from the same location are also genetically similar (Figure 4d). Furthermore the “C”-like shape
of the tree was conserved even when merged matrices
were used. The new trees obtained therefore graphically
support the statistical analyses in the original publication
showing weak genetic-geographic association [13].

RYMV is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus
belonging to the genus Sobemovirus and it is considered
to be among the most important rice pathogens in subSaharan Africa [17,18]. The original tree of RYMV, published in [14], is shown in Figure 6a and has fewer taxa
than trees in the previous examples. For this reason,
RYMV provided a convenient system to examine the
influence of the radius parameter in the fitness evaluation, where we previously showed [8] that r = 8 offers
an acceptable balance between computational intensity
and accuracy. In the RYMV case, where the tree had 39
terminal taxa, r = 8 was too large to discriminate differences among samples, such that we examined r Î {2, 4}.
The best relative fitness improvement was obtained by
r = 2, since this value was able to discriminate well
among distances in the process of fitness evaluation.
The tree modified using geographic distance (shown
in Figure 6b) shows two clusters of geographic locations:
samples from West and East Africa (see map in Figure 7).
Within clusters, the taxon order reflects the geographic
relationship on the map. In addition, samples from central Africa (dots in red, dark red and dark blue on the
map) were moved farther away from Tanzanian samples
(dots in greens and black) than from samples in Western
African countries. This result may be explained by the
fact that the algorithm would be expected to optimize
taxon order within clusters more efficiently than between
clusters. We note that manually modifying the tree in
order to improve geographic order often returned a
worse fitness compared to the artificially evolved tree
(data not shown).

Conclusions
In our previous studies [8,9] we introduced an innovative method to give a meaning to the order of taxa on a
phylogenetic tree using an evolutionary algorithm. Here
we test the algorithm using different viral systems, trees
and distances with the aim of improving the graphic
representation of the tree without modifying its topology. Qualitatively, the most improved tree was obtained
when we evolved the VSV phylogenetic tree using a
matrix of geographic distances, since the order of taxa
on the improved tree closely mirrored geography. In the
case of WNV, our algorithm generated trees that support previous studies of genetic diversity and spatial correlation. In the case of RYMV, we identified a possible
limitation of the algorithm: the improvement in graphical representation may be less pronounced when the
tree contains small numbers of taxa. For this reason we
evaluated the role of r, highlighting that, in case of small
sample sets, small radii may be sufficient to achieve
marked improvements. The strength of this method is
that a phylogeny can be inferred using any available

Cerutti et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/58

Page 5 of 8

Figure 4 WNV trees. The original tree, as presented by Bertolotti et al. (A). The best trees obtained using the geographic (B), genetic (C) and
combined (D) distances. The dashed line in C and D highlights the “C” shape acquired by the clades.

method for building trees, using distance and algorithm,
from a simple approach (like Neighbor-Joining) to a
more accurate Bayesian inference. The user can choose
the appropriate method, using the genetic information
contained in the considered sequences and, in the next
step, add a second matrix, containing for example

geographic information. The tests of the algorithm presented here showed promise. Very good results were
achieved when the geographic distribution of the samples was linear, as in the VSV and RYMV cases. When
the geographic distribution was more complex, as in the
case of WNV, the grouping of taxa collected from the

Cerutti et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/58

Figure 5 Map of WNV samples. Map representing Cook and
DuPage counties, and the collection sites used in [30]. Each site has
a color, that is the same of the tips of the samples collected in it.

Page 6 of 8

Figure 7 Map of RYMV samples. Map representing African states
and sample origins, as reported in [14]. Each site has a color, that is
the same of the tips of the samples collected in it.

improving the interpretation of phylogenetic trees and
making them more understandable.
same site is hard to see. In this case, geographic information alone is not enough, but much greater improvement is gained when both genetic and geographic
information are incorporated, as shown in Figure 3d. In
conclusion, the algorithm tested in this paper offers a
customizable method that can help biologists to better
represent results of their phylogenetic analyses,

Methods
(5 + 5)- EA

The (5 + 5)- EA used in the present study is a particular
case of the large family of (l + μ)-EAs. As briefly
reported in Figure 1, the algorithm starts from an original tree and creates. l-1 trees by random swaps of pairs

Figure 6 RYMV trees. The original tree, as presented by Abubakar et al. (A). The best trees obtained using the geographic (B) distances.

Cerutti et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/58

of internal nodes. In this way, a total of l starting trees,
with the same topology but different order of taxa, are
obtained. In each generation, μ trees are generated by
random mutation of those selected with μ tournaments
between couples chosen by random sampling with reintroduction among the l trees. The next generation parents are then the l fittest trees among the l + μ ones.
The selection of the best trees is based on the fitness
evaluated as the sum of the distances between each
taxon and the next r tips, where r is the radius in the
fitness evaluation. The distances are contained in a
matrix, used as input for the algorithm. Any available
data that are able to discriminate among taxa can be
used to generate the distance matrix. As a starting tree,
an original tree obtained by any available method of
phylogenetic inference with any method (e.g. distancebased, parsimony-based, or likelihood-based) is suitable.
Experimental validations

For the experimental validation of the algorithm, we
selected three phylogenetic trees from published works,
following two criteria: availability of genetic and geographic data and published phylogenetic trees and associated phylogeographic interpretations. All the distance
matrices were normalized to the highest value in order
to have values lying in the range [0, 1].
VSV data

We reconstructed the tree presented by Perez et al.
using the maximum-likelihood optimality criterion as
implemented in PAUP* version b10 [19] and the nucleotide substitution parameters as estimated using Modeltest, version 3.7 [20], as reported in [12]. Unlike the
original tree, the new tree contains only 55 taxa instead
of 59, because of availability of both sequences and geographic coordinates. For the genetic distance matrix, we
used nucleotide-level distances corrected with the HKY
substitution model [21]. For the geographic distance
matrix, we used euclidean distances between collection
sites in a Latitude/Longitude coordinate system. The
combined matrix of distances was created averaging the
cells in the genetic and geographic matrices.
WNV data

The tree is from Bertolotti et al. [13] and contains 140
samples collected from Chicago, USA. We re-evaluated
the best evolution model with Modeltest, version 3.7,
and inferred the phylogeny using MrBayes software
[22,23]. The genetic distance matrix was created from
nucleotide sequence data and an uncorrected p-distance
[24]. The geographic distance matrix was created from
Euclidean distances between collection sites in a Latitude/Longitude coordinate system. The combined
matrix of distances was created with the same method
used for the VSV example.

Page 7 of 8

RYMV data

RYMV is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus
belonging to the genus Sobemovirus and it is considered
to be among the most important rice pathogens within
sub-Saharan Africa [17,18]. We considered the tree published by Abubakar et al. and re-built it using neighborjoining tree and pairwise nucleotide sequence distances
with the Kimura two-parameters model, as reported in
the original paper [14], but removing the out-group
sequence; thus the tree has 39 taxa instead of 40. The
geographic distances were computed as a Euclidean
distances between the centroids of the district (for
Tanzania) or of the area of the state (for the other
states) in a UTM coordinate system, zone 36.
Geographic data

Data on country borders were obtained from shapefiles
available online, managed and plotted with R software
[25] and the packages maptools [26] and shape [27]. In
particular, USA border data were downloaded from
http://www.census.gov/geo/www/cob/st2000.html in
ESRI Shapefile (.shp) format for all 50 States, D.C., and
Puerto Rico; Mexico shapefile was downloaded from
http://www.vdstech.com/map_data.htm and Africa shapefile was downloaded from http://www.maplibrary.org/
index.php. Collection site coordinates for VSV were
kindly provided by L. Rodriguez, A. Perez and S. Pauszek.
WNV collection site coordinates were already available.
RYMV collection site coordinates were extracted from
the shapefile using GRASS-GIS software [28]; specifically,
coordinates of Tanzanian collection sites were selected as
the centroid of the collection district (Mwanza, Mbeya,
Morogoro, Pemba, as described in [14]), and coordinates
of the other states were selected as the centroids of those
states.
Computational performance

Algorithms were written in R, using the package ‘ape’
[29]. The runs were performed on the cluster IBM-BCX
available at the Supercomputing Group of the CINECA
Systems & Tecnologies Department between February
and June 2010.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Supercomputing Group of the CINECA Systems &
Tecnologies Department for supporting in computations. MG
acknowledges funding (60% grant) by the Ministero dell’Università e della
Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica. LB gratefully acknowledges financial
support by Ricerca Sanitaria Finalizzata 2008-Regione Piemonte. This work
is supported by the National Science Foundation/National Institutes of
Health Ecology of Infectious Diseases Program under award number EF0840403. Furthermore the authors thank L. Rodriguez, A. Perez and S.
Pauszek for kindly sharing genetic and geographic data. The authors also
acknowledge Donal Bisanzio for his precious help for geographic data
management and map plotting.

Cerutti et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:58
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/58

Author details
1
Department of Animal Production, Epidemiology and Ecology, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Torino, via Leonardo da Vinci 44, 10095,
Grugliasco (TO), Italy. 2Molecular Biotechnology Center, University of Torino,
via Nizza 52, 10126, Torino, Italy. 3Department of Pathobiological Sciences,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1656 Linden
Drive, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706, USA.
Authors’ contributions
FC implemented the computational model, carried out the simulations, and
participated in the interpretation of the results. LB conceived the design of
the study, implemented the computational model, and participated in the
interpretation of the results. TLG conceived the design of the study and
participated in the interpretation of the results. MG conceived the design of
the study, participated in the interpretation of the results, and coordinated
the participants’ contributions. All authors participated in writing the
manuscript and approved it.
Received: 8 September 2010 Accepted: 22 February 2011
Published: 22 February 2011
References
1. Page RDM, Holmes EC: Molecular evolution: a phylogenetic approach WileyBlackwell; 1998.
2. Bryant D, Moulton V: Neighbor-net: an agglomerative method for the
construction of phylogenetic networks. Molecular biology and evolution
2004, 21(2):255-65.
3. Thuillard M, Fraix-Burnet D: Phylogenetic applications of the minimum
contradiction approach on continuous characters. Evolutionary
Bioinformatics 2009, 5:33-46.
4. Levy D, Pachter L: The neighbor-net algorithm. ArXiv Mathematics e-prints
2007, 1-23.
5. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution 1987,
4(4):406-425.
6. Moscato P, Buriol L, Cotta C: On the analysis of data derived from
mitochondrial DNA distance matrices: Kolmogorov and a traveling
salesman give their opinion. In Advances in Nature Inspired Computation:
the PPSN VII Workshops. Edited by: Corne D. PEDAL, University of Reading;
2002:37-38.
7. Cotta C, Moscato P: A memetic-aided approach to hierarchical clustering
from distance matrices: application to gene expression clustering and
phylogeny. Biosystems 2003, 72(1-2):75-97.
8. Cerutti F, Bertolotti L, Goldberg TL, Giacobini M: Adding Vertical Meaning
to Phylogenetic Trees by Artificial Evolution. Proceedings of the 10th
European Conference on Artificial Life (ECAL 2009), Volume LNCS/LNAI 5777,
5778 Springer; 2010.
9. Cerutti F, Bertolotti L, Goldberg T, Giacobini M: Investigating Populational
Evolutionary Algorithms to Add Vertical Meaning in Phylogenetic Trees.
In Evolutionary Computation, Machine Learning and Data Mining in
Bioinformatics, Volume 6023 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Edited by:
Pizzuti C, Ritchie MD, Giacobini M. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg; 2010:240-247.
10. Eiben AE, Smith J: Introduction to Evolutionary Computing (Natural
Computing Series) Springer; 2010.
11. Tettamanzi A, Tomassini M: Soft Computing: Integrating Evolutionary, Neural,
and Fuzzy Systems Springer; 2010.
12. Perez AM, Pauszek SJ, Jimenez D, Kelley WN, Whedbee Z, Rodriguez LL:
Spatial and phylogenetic analysis of vesicular stomatitis virus overwintering in the United States. Preventive veterinary medicine 2010,
93(4):258-64.
13. Bertolotti L, Kitron UD, Walker ED, Ruiz MO, Brawn JD, Loss SR, Hamer GL,
Goldberg TL: Fine-scale genetic variation and evolution of West Nile
Virus in a transmission “hot spot” in suburban Chicago, USA. Virology
2008, 374(2):381-389.
14. Abubakar Z, Ali F, Pinel A, Traore O, N’Guessan P, Notteghem J, Kimmins F,
Konate G, Fargette D: Phylogeography of Rice yellow mottle virus in
Africa. Journal of General Virology 2003, 84(3):733-743.
15. Rodriguez LL, Nichol S: In Vesicular stomatitis viruses. r edition. Edited by:
Webster. London: Academic Press; 1999:1910-1919.

Page 8 of 8

16. Diamond MS: West Nile Encephalitis Virus Infection: viral pathogenesis and the
host immune response Springer, New York; 2009.
17. Regenmortel M, Fauquet C, Bishop D, Carstens E, Estes M, Lemon S,
Maniloff J, Mayo M, McGeoch D, Pringle C: Virus taxonomy classification and
nomenclature of viruses, seventh report of the International Committee on
Taxonomy of Viruses Academic Press; 2000.
18. Abo ME, Sy AA, Alegbejo MD: Rice Yellow Mottle Virus (RYMV) in Africa:
Evolution, Distribution, Economic Significance on Sustainable Rice
Production and Management Strategies. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture
1997, 11(2):85-111.
19. Swofford D: PAUP: phylogenetic analysis using parsimony, version 4.0
b10. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA 2002.
20. Posada D, Crandall K: MODELTEST: testing the model of DNA
substitution. Bioinformatics 1998, 14(9):817-818.
21. Hasegawa M, Kishino H, Yano Ta: Dating of the human-ape splitting by a
molecular clock of mitochondrial DNA. Journal of Molecular Evolution
1985, 22(2):160-174.
22. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F, Nielsen R, Bollback JP: Bayesian inference of
phylogeny and its impact on evolutionary biology. Science (New York, N.Y.)
2001, 294(5550):2310-4.
23. Ronquist F: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference under mixed
models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(12):1572-1574.
24. Nei M: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Columbia University Press; 1987.
25. Team RDC: R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing 2008.
26. Lewin-Koh N, Bivand R, Pebesma E, Archer E: S: Maptools Tools for reading
and handling spatial objects 2008.
27. Soetaert K: shape: Functions for plotting graphical shapes, colors 2009.
28. Neteler M, Mitasova H: In Open source GIS: a GRASS GIS approach. Volume 9.
Springer; 2008.
29. Paradis E: APE: Analyses of Phylogenetics and Evolution in R language.
Bioinformatics 2004, 20(2):289-290.
30. Bertolotti L, Kitron U, Goldberg TL: Diversity and evolution of West Nile
virus in Illinois and the United States, 2002-2005. Virology 2007,
360:143-9.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-58
Cite this article as: Cerutti et al.: Taxon ordering in phylogenetic trees: a
workbench test. BMC Bioinformatics 2011 12:58.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
