<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Meeting Report for Mobile DNA 2010</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Mobile DNA 2010 1:20. doi:10.1186/1759-8753-1-20"/>
<meta name="Author" content="George Chaconas"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chaconas et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:20
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/20

MEETING REPORT

Open Access

Meeting Report for Mobile DNA 2010
George Chaconas1,2, Nancy Craig3,4, M Joan Curcio5, Prescott Deininger6, Cedric Feschotte7, Henry Levin8,
Phoebe A Rice9, Daniel F Voytas10*

Abstract
An international conference on mobile DNA was held 24-28 April 2010 in Montreal, Canada. Sponsored by the
American Society for Microbiology, the conference’s goal was to bring together researchers from around the world
who study transposition in diverse organisms using multiple experimental approaches. The meeting drew over 190
attendees and most contributed through poster presentations, invited talks and short talks selected from poster
abstracts. The talks were organized into eight scientific sessions, which ranged in topic from the evolutionary
dynamics of mobile genetic elements to transposition reaction mechanisms. Here we present highlights from the
platform sessions with a focus on talks presented by the invited speakers.
Keynote address
The meeting was launched with a Keynote Address by
Frederic Bushman (University of Pennsylvania, USA).
Bushman summarized the extensive work his laboratory
has conducted over the past several years to better
understand mechanisms of retroviral integration. The
Bushman laboratory pioneered the use of high throughput sequencing methods to map large numbers of retrovirus insertion sites. Bushman described how this
approach revealed a preference for HIV to integrate into
transcription units and the features of transcriptionally
active chromatin that characterize these preferred sites.
The relevance of this work was brought home when
Bushman discussed integration patterns in the genomes
of patients who received retroviral gene therapy. A better mechanistic understanding of how integration sites
are selected should lead to better therapeutic approaches
and limit the mutagenic outcome that caused leukemia
in some of these patients.
Session 1: genome evolution
Over the past several years, mobile DNA has progressively moved from second fiddle to centre stage in the
field of genome evolution. The ‘genome evolution’ session highlighted the intricate and intertwined evolutionary trajectories of parasitic elements and their host
genomes. Presenters and audience alike were amazed by
* Correspondence: voytas@umn.edu
10
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology & Development, The University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

the omnipresence and bewildering diversity of mobile
DNA as they swung from one branch of the tree of life
to another (including plants, primates, fruit flies, fungi,
bacteria and a grab bag of protists).
Although viruses are found virtually everywhere on
the planet, it is in the oceans that their abundance and
extraordinary diversity is the most impressive, as Curtis
Suttle (University of British Colombia, Canada)
explained. He argued that viruses should be viewed both
as an essential component of the ecosystem and as a
threat to cellular organisms.
A flurry of talks by Mark Batzer (Louisiana State University, USA), Brandon Gaut (University of California,
Irvine, USA), Pierre Capy (CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette,
France) and Richard Cordaux (CNRS, Poitiers, France)
presented the results of empirical and theoretical studies, showing how adaptive processes (for example, epigenetic defense mechanisms) as well as non-adaptive
processes (for example, population size) and life history
traits of the host species (for example, the breeding system and endosymbiosis) have helped to shape the
diverse genome landscapes adorned by transposons.
Another group of presentations focused on the involvement of mobile elements in the function of the genome. Josefa Gonzalez (Stanford University, USA) drew
on the power of Drosophila population genomics to
uncover a set of rare transposon insertions likely to be
involved in the flies’ adaptation to temperate climates.
Another approach presented by Cédric Feschotte (University of Texas, Arlington, USA), which relies on multispecies genome alignments to demarcate evolutionarily

© 2010 Chaconas et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chaconas et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:20
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/20

conserved and likely functional elements, revealed thousands of primate-specific conserved non-coding
sequences derived from transposable elements. Another
mode of transposon domestication, whereby the transposition enzymes themselves are co-opted for host genome function, was illustrated by Irina Arkhipova
(Marine Biological Laboratory, USA). She discovered an
intriguing group of reverse transcriptases in fungi that
apparently serve an, as yet, uncharacterized cellular
function. Brian Higgins (Princeton University, USA),
provided evidence for the involvement of transposases
in programmed genome rearrangement in the ciliate
Oxytricha.

Session 2: genome diversification
The genome diversification session contained an eclectic
collection of talks on widely differing systems and
organisms, unified by a common theme. Marjorie Oettinger (Massachusetts General Hospital, USA) discussed
V(D)J recombination, the DNA rearrangement process
that generates a highly assorted collection of immunoglobulin molecules. She reported data on a new regulatory mechanism for V(D)J shuffling. The C-terminus of
the recombination-activating gene 2 (RAG2) protein
(one of the recombinase subunits) preferentially recognizes histone H3 that is dimethylated at Arg2 and trimethylated at Lys4, and methylation increases V(D)J
recombination. Another layer of regulation may be contributed by chromatin accessibility modulated by the
DNA binding protein CCCTC-binding factor, whose
expression is regulated by an extracellular signal.
Genome diversification in ciliated protozoans was also
a focal point of the session, with talks by Mireille Betermier on Paramecium (CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France)
and Alexander Vogt on Tetrahymena (Austrian Academy of Science). During the sexual development of
these organisms a new macronucleus is derived from
the germline which involves a process referred to as
DNA elimination. During this process a large number of
internal eliminated sequences (IESs) are removed. Both
groups have shown that this process is driven by a
domesticated piggyBac transposase in Paramecium and
Tetrahymena, providing yet another example of a
domesticated transposase with an important function.
The domesticated transposase localizes to the new
developing macronucleus in both organisms. The CNRS
group has also highlighted a role for DNA ligase
IV/XRCC in completing the DNA elimination reaction.
Other examples of a genome diversification process
are the DNA rearrangements underlying changes in surface proteins (antigenic variation) by which pathogens
escape immunosurveillance in the host. Nina Papavasiliou (Rockefeller University, USA) reported that induction of a double-stranded break (DSB) contiguous to the

Page 2 of 6

expressed variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) gene of
Trypanosoma brucei results in a 200-fold increase in
VSG recombination. Moreover, naturally occurring
DSBs were detected upstream of the expression locus,
suggesting that DSBs may be the trigger that initiates
the DNA rearrangements underlying antigenic switching. The mechanism of DNA switching at the vlsE locus
in Borrelia burgdorferi is being studied in the laboratory
of George Chaconas (University of Calgary, Canada). He
reported that, out of the 14 genes identified in antigenic
switching in Neisseria, only the ruvAB function is
required in B. burgdorferi. The lack of a requirement for
recA and other recombination/repair functions may be
explained by the observed ability of DNA sequences in
the vls locus to promote synapsis and template strand
switching by DNA polymerase to generate recombinant
DNA molecules. These findings suggest an unusual
DNA-driven mechanism for antigenic switching that
reduces protein involvement in the recombination process at the antigenic variation locus in this organism.
A very unusual mechanism of genome diversification
was discussed by Jeff F. Miller (University of California,
Los Angeles, USA). Diversity-generating retroelements
(DGRs) are found in bacteria and phage, including
human pathogens. These elements direct nucleotide
substitutions (A to any base) within specific regions in
protein coding sequences in target genes through a
mutagenic homing pathway. The results are a constellation of diversified proteins with altered properties. Such
sequence scrambling can offer a selective advantage for
protein optimization through diversification, particularly
in surface receptor proteins. The non-proliferative copyand-replace mechanism involves integration of diversified complimentary DNA (cDNA) copies generated by
the DGR-encoded reverse transcriptase.

Session 3: DNA transposons
The very interesting talks in the ‘DNA transposons’ session ranged from an in vitro high-resolution crystallographic dissection of transposase architecture to an in
vivo analysis of the roles of host proteins in transposition. They provided answers to some long-standing
issues in the field and also provided exciting new topics
to be explored.
Fred Dyda (National Institutes of Health, USA) discussed the known structures of DNA transposases and
retroviral integrases of the DDE type. He emphasized
that, while we do know the structure of several such
enzymes, many more transposable elements have been
bioinformatically described for which there has been no
experimental work. Will all these other elements fit the
DDE paradigm and transpose using similar chemical
steps? Julia Richardson (University of Edinburgh, UK)
presented her structure of the Mos1 transposase bound

Chaconas et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:20
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/20

to DNA. Notably, the configuration of the Mos1 transposon ends is quite distinct from that of Tn5, the only
other DNA-transposase co-crystal. In Mos1, the two
transposon ends are positioned in parallel in the active
sites of the transposase dimer as opposed to the antiparallel alignment in Tn5.
Several talks focused on how cleavage at the transposon ends occurs. Corentin Claeys Bouuaert (University
of Nottingham, UK) reported experiments also using
Mos1 that support the view that the active transposase
form is indeed a dimer but that a single protomer
bound to each end carries out a double strand break that is, cleaves both the 5’ and 3’ strands at each end.
However, it remains to be determined how a single protomer can promote cleavage of both DNA strands.
Rasika Harshey (University of Texas, USA) provided a
key insight into a long-standing issue in Mu transposition of how donor site DNA that contains the 5’ ends of
the transposon is cleaved upon integration into the bacterial chromosome to form the Mu lysogen. She has
identified a 5’ end endonuclease activity in the Mu
transposase that performs the 3’ end cleavage and target-joining steps.
Two other talks dealt with how transposon target sites
are found. Joe Peters (Cornell University, USA) discussed his findings that the Tn7 TnsE protein interacts
with the bacterial processivity factor and is thus
recruited preferentially to replicating DNA. Nancy Craig
(Johns Hopkins University, USA) presented work
demonstrating that, in a heterologous Saccharomyces
cerevisiae system, the favoured chromosomal targets of
the insect hAT element Hermes are nucleosome-free
regions.

Session 4: non-long terminal repeat (LTR)
retrotransposons and group II introns
The session on non-LTR retrotransposons and group II
introns illustrated both the continued activity of these
elements in altering the human genome and the remarkable diversity of regulatory mechanisms of the various
non-LTR elements. Talks by Haig Kazazian (University
of Pennsylvania, USA) and John Moran (University of
Michigan, USA) described new approaches to detect the
remarkable level of ongoing L1 activity in the human
genome. The Kazazian talk utilized a polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)-based approach combined with next generation sequencing to look at L1 diversity in 25 different
human genomes. He found that there were typically
about 285 L1 inserts which were polymorphic between
any two different individuals and approximately 10,000
such polymorphisms among the 25 individuals surveyed.
The Moran study utilized a paired-end sequencing
procedure on fosmids from different individuals that
allowed identification of full-length and, therefore,

Page 3 of 6

potentially active elements in six geographically distinct
individuals. This approach avoids the use of PCR which
aided in testing the retrotransposition potential of these
elements, and they found that highly active elements are
much more common in the genome than previously
predicted.
The L1 talks were rounded out by Elena Khazina (MaxPlanck-Institute for Developmental Biology, Tuebingen,
Germany), who presented an elegant model of L1 open
reading frame (ORF)1p function based on crystal structure determination at the 1.4 angstrom level. She found a
strikingly flexible structure between the required RNA
recognition motif (RRM) and C-terminal (CTD) domain
that suggests a need for a dynamic structure in functional
ORF1p. Tom Eickbush (University of Rochester, USA)
pushed his studies on the target-primed reverse transcription of insect R2 elements to a new level by demonstrating that their processing from the ribosomal
transcripts in which they are initially made is the result
of a conserved ribozyme domain that specifically cleaves
at the 5’ end of the functional R2 RNA.
There were two talks on SINEs from Prescott Deininger (Tulane Cancer Center, USA) and Jean-Marc Deragon (Université de Perpignan, France). Deininger
summarized the structural features of human Alu elements that combine to silence all but the most recent
Alu inserts. Variations in the A-tail led to the most rapid
decline of activity with damage to the 3’ end of the A-tail
being most disruptive. These rules helped identify the
most likely source element for an Alu insertion causing
cystic fibrosis. Deragon described more diverse groups of
short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs) found in
maize with a particular emphasis on SINE families that
end in runs of T residues rather than As. The polythymine (polyT) end on these element families is not consistent with the classical target primed reverse transcription
(TPRT) mechanism and suggests the need for an as yet
unknown variation on the normal priming mechanism.
Marlene Belfort (Wadsworth Center, USA) spoke
about group II introns, which are self-splicing RNAs
found principally in prokaryotes and archaea. Group II
introns are hypothesized to be precursors to eukaryotic
spliceosomal introns. However, they are not found in
eukaryotic nuclear DNA. By introducing a bacterial
group II intron into the yeast genome, Belfort’s group
found that the intron is spliced effectively but the RNA
is subject to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and is
poorly translated. This suggests a hostile eukaryotic genome may have promoted intron loss and the evolution
of a protein-dependent splicing apparatus.

Session 5: host-element interactions
The talks in the ‘host-element interactions’ session
revealed the ever-expanding diversity of mechanisms by

Chaconas et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:20
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/20

which host-element crosstalk reflects developmental
changes in the organism and influences genome structure. Each talk focused on different host-element relationships, ranging from the highly domesticated a3
DNA transposon of the yeast, Kluyveromyces lactis to
the exogenous HIV retrovirus that infects human cells.
Stefan Åström (Stolkhom University, Sweden) presented evidence that the K. lactis a3 mating-type (MAT)
gene is a transposon that is excised from the chromosome as a circular DNA molecule. The a3-encoded protein contains a DDE motif that is conserved among
transposases and is essential for the excision event and
for mating type switching. Mobilization of the a3 transposon results in a chromosome break. Formation of the
chromosome break induces the introduction of a-cellspecific information from another chromosomal locus,
completing the switch from MATa to MATa. Excision
circle formation, and therefore mating-type switching,
requires the host Mts1 protein which, in turn, is regulated by the nutrient-sensing RAS/cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) pathway, thereby linking this
transposon-mediated mating type switch to nutrient
availability.
By comparison to the a3 transposon, the Ty1 retrotransposon of S. cerevisiae is not as domesticated. However, its mobility is regulated by environmental stresses
through host cell signalling pathways and it facilitates
chromosomal rearrangements, retrogene formation and
telomere elongation in the absence of telomerase.
Therefore, it is not surprising that Ty1 retrotransposition relies heavily on the host to carry out basic replication steps, such as Ty1 RNA packaging into virus-like
particles. Joan Curcio (Wadsworth Center, USA)
reported that packaging of Ty1 RNA requires the host
5’ to 3’ mRNA degradation pathways. Ty1 RNA is
sequestered from translation in high molecular weight
particles, and Ty1 Gag localizes to mRNA processing
bodies, where the 5’ to 3’ mRNA degradation machinery
is concentrated. Curcio speculated that Ty1 RNA packaging might be associated with the host mRNA degradation machinery to exclude cellular mRNAs from Ty1
virus-like particles.
Transposable element activity is frequently held in
check by the activity of a nuclear immune system that
silences potentially dangerous repetitive DNA. Damon
Lisch (University of California, Berkeley, USA) talked
about regulated expression of the MuDR elements of
maize. He revealed a surprising loss of epigenetic control of MuDR expression in leaves that are undergoing a
transition from juvenile to adult. Lisch speculates that
there is a close relationship between the transition to
reproductive maturity and mechanisms for transposon
recognition and silencing.

Page 4 of 6

How does the intimate host-element relationship
begin? Sarah Schaack (University of Texas, Arlington,
USA) presented recent findings that address this question. Transposable element families in a blood-sucking
triatomine bug are almost identical to those found in
the genomes of a variety of phylogenetically diverse animals that are related by their geographic distribution
and by being hosts to the triatomine bug. The findings
by Schaack and colleagues highlight the central role that
parasites may play in introducing transposable elements
(TEs) from one animal species to another by horizontal
transfer. The subsequent expansion of horizontally
transferred TEs is likely to impact the structure of the
host genome.
Alan Engelman (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, USA)
rounded off the session by discussing the idea of
exploiting the host-element relationship. The lentiviral
integrase binding protein, lens epithelium-derived
growth factor (LEDGF) is involved in targeting HIV to
active genes during integration. Altering the chromatin
binding capacity of recombinant LEDGF fusion proteins
redirected HIV to novel integration sites, suggesting that
LEDGF fusions could one day help steer lentiviral gene
therapy vectors to benign regions of the human genome.
Engelman also presented a new model for the active
HIV intasome nucleoprotein complex based on the
recent foamy virus integrase-DNA crystal structure,
which highlighted novel HIV integrase-DNA contacts.

Session 6: LTR retrotransposons
The ‘LTR retrotransposon’ session began with a talk by
Dan Voytas (University of Minnesota, USA) who
described work from his laboratory on the LTR-retrotransposon Ty5 and its behaviour in S. cerevisiae. Mapping the positions of individual integration sites revealed
that Ty5 integrates specifically into regions of heterochromatin such as the mating type locus and telomeres.
In order to get a comprehensive view of insertion sites
throughout the genome, Voytas used ligation-mediated
PCR and 454 pyrosequencing. This approach provided
thousands of insertion sites and was able to show that a
full 5% of the insertions occurred in euchromatin. Interestingly, the insertions in euchromatin clustered
upstream of ORFs. Additional analysis revealed that Ty5
integration avoided ORFs and nucleosomes but showed
an association with origins of replication.
DNA methylation in mammalian cells is known to
repress the activity of transposable elements. Tetsuji
Kakutani (National Institute of Genetics, Japan)
described his study of DNA methylation in Arabidopsis
thaliana. The protein DDM1 is responsible for methylating transposon sequences. Strains lacking DDM1
exhibited very high levels of transposition of the

Chaconas et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:20
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/20

elements ATGP3, ATCOPIA13, ATCOPIA21 and
ATCOPIA93. Kakutani also described wild isolates of
plants that contained recent bursts of transposition of
ATCOPIA93 all of which were found in centromeres.
The patterns of transposition caused by the mutation of
ddm1 were similar to those in wild plants suggesting
that the DDM1 system serves as an important model for
the mobility of transposons in A. thaliana.
The LTR-retrotransposon Tf1 of Schizosaccharomyces
pombe integrates with a strong preference for the promoters of pol II-transcribed genes. Henry Levin
(National Institutes of Health, USA) described the use
of pyrosequencing to identify large numbers of Tf1
insertions. These data provided a highly reproducible
measure of integration levels within each promoter of
the genome. Interestingly, the bulk of Tf1 integration
occurred within just 20% of all promoters. Levin also
described the transposition activity of Hermes, a DNA
‘cut and paste’ transposon from the housefly. Hermes
exhibits high levels of transposition in S. pombe and
33% of the inserts occurred within ORFs. With this system, Levin used pyrosequencing of integration in a haploid to map the essential genes of S. pombe. This
approach represents a novel application of pyrosequencing for mapping essential sequences throughout the
genome.

Session 7: site-specific recombinases and their
relatives
Classic site-specific recombinases from the serine family
were featured in two talks. Both of these recombinases
are regulated by substrate topology and are activated in
the context of a larger complex that promotes a dimertetramer transition. Reid Johnson (University of California, Los Angeles, USA) detailed extensive cross-linking
of Hin invertase and its host cofactor Fis, leading to a
well-supported model for the full synaptic complex.
Marshall Stark (University of Glasgow, Scotland)
described an extensive analysis of the conserved residues
found in the catalytic site of Tn3 resolvase and the very
surprising result that only the very C-terminal portion
of the catalytic domain is required for synaptic tetramer
formation.
Tyrosine recombinases comprise the other ‘classic’
family of site-specific recombinases. CTnDOT, a conjugative transposon integrase, is an unusual example that
was described by Jeff Gardner (University of Illinois,
USA). Unlike other family members, this integrase is
not deterred by mismatches within its crossover site.
Sequence alignments also imply that it is missing a critical catalytic residue. However, structural modelling and
biochemical experiments show that it may be replaced
by another residue from a different portion of the

Page 5 of 6

primary sequence that could occupy the same position
in the tertiary structure.
Three talks focused on the IS200/605 family of ‘Y1’
transposases. These enzymes are a branch of the Hishydrophobic-His motif (HUH) superfamily of nucleases
and are remarkable among transposases for acting on
single-stranded DNA substrates and recognizing a short
target sequence through DNA-DNA contacts. Mick
Chandler (CNRS, Toulouse, France) described how
these elements target replication forks while Laure Lavatine from the Chandler laboratory presented data showing that IS608 transposase is targeted to stalled
replication forks in vivo, perhaps through the influence
of host factors. Jaroslav Nunvar (Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic) described the genomic association
of a subfamily of these transposases with bacterial repetitive extragenic palindromic (REP) elements, suggesting
that REP elements may be mobilized by Y1 transposases.
Finally, Phoebe Rice (University of Chicago, USA) presented a crystal structure of an active complex of bacteriophage Mu transposase, a DDE-family enzyme,
bound to both phage ends and target DNA.

Session 8: biological impacts of transposition
The conference was capped with a session addressing
biological impacts of transposition and included talks
that provided a new understanding of key transposition
mechanisms as well as additional insights into how
mobile elements shape the biology of their hosts.
Peter Cherepanov (Imperial College, UK) reported on
his recent and much anticipated structure of the complete foamy virus integrase bound to DNA. Cherepanov
observed extensive protein-DNA and protein-protein
interactions among the three structural domains of integrase. Binding of strand-transfer inhibitors displaced
viral DNA from the active site and the extension of
these studies should aid in the development of new antiretroviral drugs. Further, this work allows the structural
modelling of other retroviral integrases, including HIV.
Mechanisms of DNA mobility were also addressed by
Alan Lambowitz (University of Texas, Austin, USA).
The Lambowitz group studies mobile group II introns,
and work was presented describing the mechanisms that
contribute to the proliferation of group II introns in
thermophilic cyanobacteria. Interestingly, group II
introns from thermophiles rely on elevated temperatures
to help promote DNA strand separation, making it possible for them to utilize a larger number of DNA target
sites through base pairing with the intron RNA. Jef
Boeke (Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
USA) moved one step away from the transposition reaction to assess effects of chromatin on retrotransposon
target site choice. Boeke’s element of study was Ty1

Chaconas et al. Mobile DNA 2010, 1:20
http://www.mobilednajournal.com/content/1/1/20

from S. cerevisiae, which prefers to integrate upstream
of genes transcribed by RNA polymerase III. Using high
throughput DNA sequencing to analyze thousands of
Ty1 integration events, Boeke provided evidence that
Ty1 integrates preferentially into nucleosomes upstream
of preferred targets. A clear integration hotspot was
observed in the nucleosome-bound DNA, suggesting
histone modifications may dictate this integration bias.
Rob Martienssen (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory,
USA) moved the discussion further into the realm of
host/element interactions. The Martienssen group has
shown that otherwise silent transposable elements
become activated during Arabidopsis pollen and egg
development. Activation occurs in somatic companion
cells that do not provide DNA to the fertilized zygote.
Small RNAs corresponding to transposable elements in
these somatic cells are thought to reprogram heterochromatin in the germline to silence mobile elements
and preserve genome integrity in the next generation.
The theme of host-element interactions was further
developed by Harmit Malik (Frederick Hutchinson Cancer Institute, USA). Malik described the new field of
paleovirology - the study of ancient, extinct viruses and
how they impact host genome evolution. The most
obvious paleoviruses are the endogenous retroviruses
that riddle most vertebrate genomes. Malik suggests that
other paleovirus infections influenced the evolution of
host defense mechanisms and thereby the repertoire of
defense strategies available to combat emerging viruses.

Page 6 of 6

60637, USA. 10Department of Genetics, Cell Biology & Development, The
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 10 August 2010 Accepted: 24 August 2010
Published: 24 August 2010

doi:10.1186/1759-8753-1-20
Cite this article as: Chaconas et al.: Meeting Report for Mobile DNA
2010. Mobile DNA 2010 1:20.

St Malo 2012
The tradition of a large international meeting on ‘mobile
DNA’ will continue. In the spring of 2012, the International Congress on Transposable Elements will be held
in St Malo, France. Stay tuned for more details!
Abbreviations
A: adenine; DDM1: deficient in DNA methylation 1 protein; DGR: diversitygenerating retro element; DSB: double-stranded break; LEDGF: lens
epithelium-derived growth factor; LTR: long terminal repeat; MAT: matingtype; mRNA: messenger RNA; ORF: open reading frame; PCR: polymerase
chain reaction; REP element: repetitive extragenic palindromic element; SINE:
short interspersed nuclear elements; TE: transposable element; VSG: variant
surface glycoprotein gene.
Author details
1
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, T2N 4N1, Canada. 2Department of Microbiology and
Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 4N1, Canada.
3
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 4Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
4000 Jones Bridge Road, Chevy Chase, MD 20815-6789, USA. 5The
Wadsworth Center, Center for Medical Sciences, Albany, NY 12201, USA.
6
Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
7
Department of Biology, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX
76019, USA. 8Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 9Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago IL

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
