<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Reconstructing phylogeny from metabolic substrate-product relationships</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:S27. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-S1-S27"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Che-Wei Chang"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S27

RESEARCH

Open Access

Reconstructing phylogeny from metabolic
substrate-product relationships
Che-Wei Chang1†, Ping-Chiang Lyu1, Masanori Arita2,3,4*
From The Ninth Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Conference (APBC 2011)
Inchon, Korea. 11-14 January 2011

Abstract
Background: Many approaches utilize metabolic pathway information to reconstruct the phyletic tree of fully
sequenced organisms, but how metabolic networks can add information to original genomic annotations has
remained open.
Methods: We translated enzyme reactions assigned in 1075 organisms into substrate-product relationships to
represent the metabolic information at a finer resolution than enzymes and compounds. Each organism was
represented as a vector of substrate-product relationships and the phyletic tree was reconstructed by a simple
hierarchical method. Obtained results were compared with several other approaches that use genome information
and network properties.
Results: Phyletic trees without consideration of network properties can already extract organisms in anomalous
environments. This efficient method can add insights to traditional genome-based phylogenetic reconstruction.
Conclusions: Structural relationship among metabolites can highlight parasitic or symbiont species such as
spirochaete and clamydia. The method assists understanding of species-environment interaction when used in
combination with traditional phylogenetic methods.

Background
Understanding the phyletic relationship among living
organisms has long been a fundamental challenge since
the concept of evolution had emerged. Traditionally,
molecular biologists constructed phylogenetic trees
based on the sequence similarity of small subunit ribosomal RNA [1] or other single genes. As whole-genome
sequencing technologies advance, vast amount of
sequence data become available for download and analysis. Without question, the comparative analysis of whole
genomes can provide more information to reconstruct
the phylogeny than individual genes do. Consequently,
numerous methods have been proposed to reconstruct
the phylogenetic trees from whole genome features such
as oligonucleotide compositions [2], genome fragment
* Correspondence: arita@bi.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
† Contributed equally
2
Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science,
The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku Hongo 7-3-1, 113-0033 Tokyo, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

occurrence [3], and absence/presence of metabolic features [4].
In parallel with genomic comparisons, many studies
focused on the similarity of metabolic processes. Metabolic profiles of a living organism are strongly related to
its environment, and metabolism is adapted to balance
compounds taken up from its surroundings [5,6]. Thus,
metabolic consideration can add insights into speciesenvironment interaction such as symbiosis or convergent adaptation to extreme environments. To analyze
the phyletic relationship in metabolic capability, there
are at least 3 approaches. The first is machine learning.
Oh et al. used a distance computed by the exponential
graph kernel, i.e., the weighted sum of similarities
between adjacency matrices of 1-step neighbors, 2-step
neighbors, and so on for 81 organisms [7]. The second
is network comparison. Zhang et al. defined existence/
absence of metabolic pathways and computed the network similarity measure for 47 organisms [8]. The last is
EC-based classification. Clemente et al. used sets of EC

© 2011 Chang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S27

numbers to define pathway similarity and compared
metabolism of 8 bacteria [9].
Metabolic data are well standardized in previous
approaches because all works depended on the bulkdownloadable KEGG database [10]. Less concerned,
however, was the strategy for transforming enzymatic
reactions into graphs (or networks). Depending on the
strategy, resulting networks are drastically different
enough to change fundamental network centralities [11].
For example, Borenstein et al. converted each enzymatic
reaction to a fully connected bipartite graph between
substrates and products to enhance connectivity and
defined ‘seed’ compounds for each organism as the
union of essential metabolites in all environments [12].
This transformation is known to overestimate the ability
to synthesize/degrade metabolites. On the other hand,
using the EC numbers for pathway analysis tend to
underestimate the metabolic network because the numbers are assigned to biochemical transformation, and
not to enzyme themselves. We here propose a more suitable data representation, and elucidate the phylogenies
across three domains of life. Its effectiveness is shown in
comparison with previous approaches.

Page 2 of 7

between compounds because any two metabolites can
be falsely linked through metabolic hubs regardless of
their structures [11].
To avoid this bypassing effect, we employ the substrate-product decomposition of reactions [13]. In this
scheme, each reaction is decomposed into a set of structurally related substrate-product pairs at the atomic
scale. The data are also available from the RPAIR database [14], and the same method has been used in several
recent works [15-17]. This representation avoids bias
originating from currency metabolites. In other words,
the method focuses on the variation of structural transformations, not the occurrence of each metabolite. The
decomposition results of EC-numbered reactions are
accessible at our wiki-based site: http://metabolomics.jp/
wiki/Enzyme:[EC-number]. For example, the details of
hexokinase can be accessed at http://metabolomics.jp/
wiki/Enzyme:2.7.1.1. In the transformation, we replaced
generic names such as alcohol or amino acids with concrete compound names. For hexokinase, as many as 15
reactions are included depending on hexose types.
Through this decomposition, a set of enzymatic reactions becomes a set of substrate-product pairs. We did
not consider the multiplicity of each pair in our analysis.

Methods
Enzyme annotation for organisms

Phyletic reconstruction

Enzyme annotations and corresponding EC reactions for
1075 organisms (895 bacteria, 67 archaea, and 113
eukaryotes) were obtained from the KEGG database
through its application program interface. The number
of EC reactions was 3116, covering as many as 154
pathway maps. Metabolic annotations in each species
were represented as a set of substrate-product relationships by transforming all assigned EC reactions into a
set of metabolite pairs (see the next section). Most
EC-numbered entries correspond to multiple enzymatic
reactions. For example, alcohol dehydrogenase (EC
1.1.1.1) can catalyze a multitude of compounds with a
hydroxyl group. For such generic EC-numbered functions we manually integrated possible reactions to
ensure the coverage of biochemical transformation
shown in the metabolic maps.

Phyletic trees were created by a hierarchical clustering
method (pairwise complete linkage algorithm) using the
Cluster 3.0 software program [18]. Each organism was
represented as a vector of substrate-product pairs,
where the absence/presence of each relationship was
denoted as 0 or 1. For visualization, Dendroscope software program [19] was used to analyze and compare
phyletic trees. The employed simple algorithm may be
controversial for phyletic reconstruction, and will be discussed later.

Strategy for graph transformation

To compare with the phylogeny reconstruction based on
the ‘seed’ metabolites [12], we reconstructed a phyletic
tree for 478 species (the same number as the original
article) using our substrate-product pairs. Figure 1
shows the summarized view of both trees of life. Both
approaches clustered 6 main domains successfully, but
the seed approach placed plants and fungi among bacteria. This is a serious artifact; since the seed approach
focuses on essential metabolites, classification based on
secondary metabolites becomes unstable. In both trees,
a few seemingly dispersed clades (protists in eukaryota)

An enzymatic reaction usually has multiple inputs (substrates) and outputs (products). Although standard
metabolic pathway charts are depicted as hypergraphs,
substrate-product relationships must be specified for
each reaction to transform it into a graph. A standard
way is to use a fully connected bipartite graph [7,8,12].
The network connectivity then portrays the ‘reaction
membership’; frequently occurring metabolites become
hub nodes in the resulting graph. The representation,
however, does not capture biochemical transformation

Results
We compared results of our data representation with
several recent, well known studies.
Phyletic trees for multi-domains of life based on
substrate-product relationships

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S27

Page 3 of 7

Figure 1 Reconstructed phlogeny. Left: Our reconstruction. Species in the same family were grouped into leaf nodes. Right: Reconstruction by
Borenstein et al. [12] using the ‘seed’ metabolites. Reprinted with permission. Copyright (2008) National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.
Abbreviations: Bac, bacteria (orange); Arc, archaea (cyan); Pla, plants (light green); Ani, animals (navy blue); Fun, fungi (dark green); Pro, protists
(light purple).

existed. This is reasonable because the definition of protist is a structural simplicity regardless of its metabolic
capability. Note here that our method correctly classified
eukaryotes and also placed spirochaeta and chlamydia in
a group separated from the other bacteria. This indicates these parasitic/pathogenic species exhibit anomalous metabolism in comparison with the other species,
but further investigation is necessary to confirm its
reason.
As the second comparison, our approach was compared with the golden standard tree, reconstructed by

using concatenated alignment of 31 universal protein
families covering 191 species [20] (Figure 2). Our
method could clearly separate three main domains, bacteria, archaea and metazoan, except Nanoarchaeum
equitans, which is an obligatory symbiont on Ignicoccus.
It lacks many essential metabolic pathways and therefore
became an orphan branch in our reconstruction. Similarly, the reconstruction reflected more on metabolic
phenotypes rather than genetic evolution. For example,
Mycoplasma spp. were located far from the other bacteria and closer to eukaryotes in our tree because they

Figure 2 Reconstructed phylogeny. Left: Our reconstruction. Right: Reconstruction by Ciccarelli et al. [20] using the 31 universal protein
families. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. Bacteria (purple), Archaea (green), thermo Archaea (yellow green), Metazoa (pink).

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S27

lack many metabolic pathways (higher animals lack
many amino acid biosynthesis, for example). This defect
was also observed in the comparison with the ‘seed’based tree. Some invertebrate parasites were also
grouped with Caenorhabditis elegans due to their metabolic similarity of unknown reason. Note that systematics of C. elegans is contentious and still unresolved
because of its high evolutionary rate [21]. In summary,
our method could reproduce comparable results with
the standard tree. In addition, it could extract metabolically anomalous species which could not be easily found
by simple genetic comparisons by comparing results
with the standard phylogeny.
Phyletic trees with or without network connectivity

To investigate the information gain by considering
metabolic network connectivity, we carefully compared
our approach with the network topology-based approach
[8]. There are few discrepancies between our and their
results. In our approach, some proteobacteria and
hyperthermophils were not properly grouped into the
same sub-clusters (Figure 3). These clades are labeled as
“other independent bacteria” and their proper positions
are context-dependent. For this reason, we do not consider our classification inappropriate. On the other
hand, we could correctly cluster Mycobacterium tuberculosis and M. leprae into Gram-positive bacteria. In
addition, parasites and symbionts (spirochaete and clamydia) were classified more correctly in our method. In
summary, although overall classification was similar, we

Page 4 of 7

could better, or at least equally, classify parasitic or symbiotic species in comparison with the results with
another phyletic approach.
Comparison with EC number-based classification

Clemente et al. investigated the relationship among 8
photosynthetic bacteria using pseudo-alignment of over
60 metabolic pathways using the EC hierarchy [9]. Lastly,
we compared their results with ours and found 2 differences from the EC-based phylogeny (Figure 4): the positions of Synechocystis (syn) and Synechococcus (syw),
both of which belong to Chroococcales together with
Thermosynechococcus elongates (tel). The misplacement
of Chroococcales was observed in the work by Clemente
et al. too and presumably results from the insufficiency
of gene annotations in these species (Figure 4). In terms
of metabolic similarity, our reconstruction seems more
accurate because Gloeobacter violaceus (gvi) and tel were
isolated from rocks and hot springs, respectively, whereas
the remaining 6 species were isolated from fresh or sea
water. Therefore, the two species should be regarded as
metabolic out-groups as in our classification.
Central metabolites

We previously argued that metabolic hubs are better
identified in the substrate-product graph than in other
graph representations, because the approach does not
count the frequency of metabolite names in reactions
but the number of structural transformations [11]. The
number of transformations roughly reflects the structural

Figure 3 Reconstructed phylogeny. Left: Our reconstruction. Right: Reconstruction by Zhang et al. [8]. Reprinted under the BioMed Central
Open License agreement (BMC Bioinformatics).

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S27

Page 5 of 7

Figure 4 Reconstructed phylogeny. Left: Our reconstruction. Abbreviations: Anabaena (ana), Gloeobacter violaceus (gvi), Prochlorococcus marinus
marinus (pma), P. marinus pastoris (pmm), P. marinus (pmt), Synechocystis (syn), Synechococcus (syw), Thermosynechococcus elongatus (tel). Most
separated are the two photosynthetic eukaryotes: Arabidopsis thaliana (ath) and Cyanidioschyzon merolae (cme). Right: EC-number based
classification by Clemente et al. [9] Reprinted with permission from Oxford University Press.

variation of catalytic sites of respective enzymes, and
therefore reflects the diversity of metabolic capabilities.
Table 1 is the list of metabolites in the three domains
which appear as the top 10 hubs in more than 20%
organisms for each domain. The abundance of adenosine-related metabolites for all domains indicates the
ancientry of purine-related metabolism, which coincides
with the analysis on protein structures [22]. The presence of CO 2 and NH 3 is an unavoidable artifact of
counting all decarboxylations and amino-transfers.
High-degree metabolites are largely conserved. It can be
seen that eukaryotes contain more reactions with glucuronate, glutathione, and galactose, which appear in

drug metabolism. At the same time, eukaryotes use less
L-aspartate- or 5-phospho-alpha-D-ribose 1-phosphatedependent reactions. Archaea lack malonyl-acyl carrier
proteins and coenzyme A, which often appear in lipid
metabolism for eukaryotes and bacteria. Archaea also
use L-glutamine more often than the other domains.
Metabolic differences between bacteria, archaea, and
eukaryotes

To elucidate the metabolic differences between the
three domains of life, we created a heat map of the
substrate-product relationships in 535 species. In Figure 5, the vertical and horizontal directions are the

Table 1 Most differently transforming metabolites in the three domains. The full list is available at
http://sarst.life.nthu.edu.tw/metabolic/SD.csv
Domain

List of hubs in the descending order of appearance

Archaea (67 spp)

ATP, L-Glutamate, CO2, Acetyl-CoA, L -Glutamine, Pyruvate, NH3, L -Aspartate, AMP, 5P-alpha-D-ribose 1P, S-Adenosyl- L
-methionine

Bacteria (895 spp) CO2, ATP, NH3, Pyruvate, L -Glutamate, Acetyl-CoA, 5P-alpha-D-ribose 1P, CoA, Malonyl-ACP, L -Aspartate, Glutathione, AMP,
S-Adenosyl- L -methionine, Glycine
Eukaryotes (113
spp)

L -Glutamate, CO2, Acetyl-CoA, NH3, CoA, ATP, AMP, Glutathione, Pyruvate, Malonyl-ACP, S-Adenosyl- L -methionine, Glycine,
D-Galactose, UDP-glucuronate, L -Serine, L -Glutamine

Highlighted metabolites are mentioned in the main text. Abbreviations: P … phosphate; ACP … acyl carrier proteins.

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S27

Page 6 of 7

Figure 5 The heat map of substrate-product relationships in 535 organisms. The horizontal line at the topmost right part corresponds to
animal- and plant-specific pathways (the rightmost line is plants. Animals are the next-right line just below plants. The black horizontal line just
below the eukaryotes (plants and animals) is Mycoplasma, which lack most pathways. Archaea are clustered at the bottom of the figure.

hierarchically clustered organisms and the substrateproduct relationships, respectively. Note that substrateproduct relationships in species-specific pathways tend
to cluster in this scheme. Archaea and Mycoplasma lack
the fatty acid biosynthesis and many other pathways.
However, many archaeal pathways are overlooked in the
KEGG annotations (e.g. energy metabolism and etherlipid metabolism for membrane synthesis), and their
uniqueness is not easily discerned in this analysis. In
contrast, Plantae and Animalia kingdoms in eukaryotes
are easy to locate because animals possess drug- and
other secondary metabolism, and plants possess unique
secondary biosynthetic pathways (Figure 5).

Discussion
Our reconstruction using substrate-product relationships efficiently extracted metabolically interesting species in comparison with the standard phylogenetic
approach. Previous approaches which used metabolic
information could also produce informative results
[7-9,12], but the achievements were similar to those
found by genetic comparisons [2-4]. This is understandable because in their approach metabolic reactions correspond roughly one-to-one to enzymes or genes.
Why can substrate-product relationships add insights?

Our approach is more robust to pathway gaps (incomplete annotation) or currency metabolites by evaluating
each biochemical transformation with an equal weight.
It is also robust to biases by the number of genes or
their multiplicity. Standard phylogenetic methods
can elucidate evolutionary relationship, whereas our
approach can locate species of anomalous or interesting
metabolism in comparison. Therefore, the method is
useful in combination (not exclusive) with existing phyletic/phylogenetic clustering.
Our method is also computationally lightweight and
scalable, requiring O(N2V) time for computing pairwise
similarity, where N is the number of organisms and V is
the maximum number of reactions in one organism. On
the contrary, for example, the exponential graph kernel
requires O(NV3+N2V2) time to compute the similarity [7].
Our computational complexity is equivalent to the
recently presented pathway alignment method [23], but
the method exploits the graph topology and the result is

expected to be similar to the one by Zhang et al [8]. Lastly,
the ‘seed’ approach uses a heuristic to find metabolic seeds
[12], but an accurate identification of metabolic seeds is
NP-complete [24]. There is a huge gap as to the scalability
to the other metabolic approaches.
Algorithms to find phylogeny

Our method uses a simplistic complete linkage clustering algorithm to reconstruct the phylogeny. This may
sound inappropriate but is grounded on our data representation. Since the substrate-product relationship disregards the occurrence of metabolites, a frequently
appearing reaction type (e.g. ATP-kinase) and a rare
reaction type (e.g. sterol synthase) are given the same
weights. For this reason, standard parsimony or evolutionary distance does not properly reflect the distance
between species in our scheme. Since we wanted to
focus on metabolic differences, the complete linkage
method was employed. However, other algorithms
should be systematically tested and evaluated for their
appropriateness, which is left as our future work.
Sharing metabolic knowledge through wiki

We publicize the substrate-product relationships on a
wiki-based site so that readers can check every detail of
our analysis. This is especially important in the era of
high-throughput data management because more and
more research results tend to become irreproducible
due to the insufficiency of publicized data or incomplete
description of methods. To overcome this difficulty, the
traceability and transparency of data and their analysis
is important in the evaluation of research.

Conclusions
Phylogeny was reconstructed by using structural relationship between annotated metabolites. This method is
robust to pathway gaps or gene copy numbers, and can
extract metabolically anomalous species by comparing
the result with other phyletic or phylogenetic reconstructions. Through several comparisons, our method
could highlight metabolic anomaly in clamydia and spirochaete, both of which are well known parasitic species.
The metabolic comparison thus assists understanding of
species-environment interaction in combination with
other gene-oriented strategies.

Chang et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S1/S27

Acknowledgements
CWC conducted research in Japan for 6 months with Elite Scholarship
Program, Ministry of Education, Taiwan. Authors thank Prof. Kenta Nakai
(University of Tokyo) and Dr. Kazuhiro Takemoto (University of Tokyo) for
helpful comments to our draft.
This work is supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority
Areas “Systems Genomics” from Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology, Japan.
This article has been published as part of BMC Bioinformatics Volume 12
Supplement 1, 2011: Selected articles from the Ninth Asia Pacific
Bioinformatics Conference (APBC 2011). The full contents of the supplement
are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12?
issue=S1.
Author details
1
Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology, National Tsing Hua
University, 101, Section 2 Kuang Fu Road, 30013, Taiwan. 2Department of
Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The University of
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku Hongo 7-3-1, 113-0033 Tokyo, Japan. 3Computational
Biology Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science
and Technology, Koto-ku Aomi 2-42, 135-0064 Tokyo, Japan. 4Institute for
Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Baba-cho 14-1, Tsuruoka City, 9970035 Yamagata, Japan.

Page 7 of 7

15.
16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
Authors’ contributions
MA designed, and CWC conducted research under supervision of PCL. CWC
and MA wrote the paper together.
Competing interests
There is no competing interests.
Published: 15 February 2011
References
1. Woese CR, Kandler O, Wheelis ML: Towards a natural system of
organisms: proposal for the domains Archaea, Bacteria, and Eucarya.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990, 87:4576-4579.
2. Ma HW, Zeng AP: Phylogenetic comparison of metabolic capacities of
organisms at genome level. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2004, 31:204-213.
3. Lin J, Gerstein M: Whole-genome trees based on the occurrence of folds
and orthologs: implications for comparing genomes on different levels.
Genome Res 2000, 10:808-818.
4. Aguilar D, Aviles FX, Querol E, Sternberg MJ: Analysis of phenetic trees
based on metabolic capabilites across the three domains of life. J Mol
Biol 2004, 340:491-512.
5. Almaas E, Kovacs B, Vicsek T, Oltvai ZN, Barabasi AL: Global organization of
metabolic fluxes in the bacterium Escherichia coli. Nature 2004,
427:839-843.
6. Varma A, Palsson BO: Stoichiometric flux balance models quantitatively
predict growth and metabolic byproduct secretion in wild-type
Escherichia coli W3110. Appl Environ Microbiol 1994, 60:3724-3731.
7. Oh SJ, Joung JG, Chang JH, Zhang BT: Construction of phylogenetic trees
by kernel-based comparative analysis of metabolic networks. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:284.
8. Zhang Y, Li S, Skogerbo G, Zhang Z, Zhu X, Sun S, Lu H, Shi B, Chen R:
Phylophenetic properties of metabolic pathway topologies as revealed
by global analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:252.
9. Clemente JC, Satou K, Valiente G: Phylogenetic reconstruction from nongenomic data. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:e110-115.
10. Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M: KEGG: kyoto
encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:29-34.
11. Arita M: The metabolic world of Escherichia coli is not small. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2004, 101:1543-1547.
12. Borenstein E, Kupiec M, Feldman MW, Ruppin E: Large-scale reconstruction
and phylogenetic analysis of metabolic environments. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2008, 105:14482-14487.
13. Arita M: In silico atomic tracing by substrate-product relationships in
Escherichia coli intermediary metabolism. Genome Res 2003, 13:2455-2466.
14. Kotera M, Hattori M, Oh M-A, Yamamoto R, Komeno T, Yabuzaki J,
Tonomura K, Goto S, Kanehisa M: RPAIR: a reactant-pair database

24.

representing chemical changes in enzymatic reactions. Genome
Informatics 2004, 15:P062, (poster abstract).
Faust K, Croes D, van Helden J: Metabolic pathfinding using RPAIR
annotation. J Mol Biol 2009, 388:390-414.
Pitkänen E, Jouhten P, Rousu J: Inferring branching pathways in genomescale metabolic networks. BMC Syst Biol 2009, 3:103.
Tohsato Y, Nishimura Y: Reaction Similarities Focusing Substructure
Changes of Chemical Compounds and Metabolic Pathway Alignments.
Inform Media Technol 2009, 4:390-399.
de Hoon MJ, Imoto S, Nolan J, Miyano S: Open source clustering software.
Bioinformatics 2004, 20:1453-1454.
Huson DH, Richter DC, Rausch C, Dezulian T, Franz M, Rupp R:
Dendroscope: An interactive viewer for large phylogenetic trees. BMC
Bioinformatics 2007, 8:460.
Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.
Gamulin V, Muller IM, Muller WEG: Sponge proteins are more similar to
those of Homo sapiens than to Caenorhabditis elegans. Biol J Linnean Soc
2000, 71:821-828.
Caetano-Anollés G, Kim HS, Mittenthal JE: The origin of modern metabolic
networks inferred from phylogenomic analysis of protein architecture.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007, 104:9358-9963.
Mano A, Tuller T, Béjà O, Pinter RY: Comparative classification of species
and the study of pathway evolution based on the alignment of
metabolic pathways. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11(Suppl 1):S38.
Pitkänen E, Rantanen A, Rousu J, Ukkonen E: Finding Feasible Pathways in
Metabolic Networks. Lecture Notes in Comput Sci 2005, 3746:123-133.

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-S1-S27
Cite this article as: Chang et al.: Reconstructing phylogeny from
metabolic substrate-product relationships. BMC Bioinformatics 2011 12
(Suppl 1):S27.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
