<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Ensembl variation resources</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-293"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Yuan Chen, Fiona Cunningham, Daniel Rios, William M McLaren, James Smith, Bethan Pritchard, Giulietta M Spudich, Simon Brent, Eugene Kulesha, Pablo Marin-Garcia, Damian Smedley, Ewan Birney, Paul Flicek"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Open Access

DATABASE

Ensembl variation resources
Database

Yuan Chen†1, Fiona Cunningham†1, Daniel Rios1, William M McLaren1, James Smith2, Bethan Pritchard2,
Giulietta M Spudich1, Simon Brent2, Eugene Kulesha1, Pablo Marin-Garcia2, Damian Smedley1, Ewan Birney1 and
Paul Flicek*1,2

Abstract
Background: The maturing field of genomics is rapidly increasing the number of sequenced genomes and producing
more information from those previously sequenced. Much of this additional information is variation data derived from
sampling multiple individuals of a given species with the goal of discovering new variants and characterising the
population frequencies of the variants that are already known. These data have immense value for many studies,
including those designed to understand evolution and connect genotype to phenotype. Maximising the utility of the
data requires that it be stored in an accessible manner that facilitates the integration of variation data with other
genome resources such as gene annotation and comparative genomics.
Description: The Ensembl project provides comprehensive and integrated variation resources for a wide variety of
chordate genomes. This paper provides a detailed description of the sources of data and the methods for creating the
Ensembl variation databases. It also explores the utility of the information by explaining the range of query options
available, from using interactive web displays, to online data mining tools and connecting directly to the data servers
programmatically. It gives a good overview of the variation resources and future plans for expanding the variation data
within Ensembl.
Conclusions: Variation data is an important key to understanding the functional and phenotypic differences between
individuals. The development of new sequencing and genotyping technologies is greatly increasing the amount of
variation data known for almost all genomes. The Ensembl variation resources are integrated into the Ensembl
genome browser and provide a comprehensive way to access this data in the context of a widely used genome
bioinformatics system. All Ensembl data is freely available at http://www.ensembl.org and from the public MySQL
database server at ensembldb.ensembl.org.
Background
The amount of publicly available biological sequence data
has been increasing exponentially over the last decade. In
addition to the many reference genome sequences now
available, variation data is being produced in significant
quantities. These data fundamentally seek to extend our
knowledge of the genome sequence from the concept of a
single "reference" genome sequence, representing a single
individual, to a more comprehensive understanding of
the genomic diversity of entire species.
Today most variation data is produced in the context of
large-scale genotyping assays or resequencing projects
* Correspondence: flicek@ebi.ac.uk
1 European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,

Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK
Contributed equally

†

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

which focus either on the whole genome or selected functional regions of the genome such as protein coding
regions, regulatory regions or sites of known disease
mutations. One of the larger resources includes a comprehensive haplotype map of the human genome created
by the International HapMap Project, based on DNA
from 270 individuals from four populations [1]. The HapMap Project used array-based genotyping to assess markers with minor allele frequency (MAF) of greater than
approximately 5%. Following on from this project, many
of these same HapMap individuals are included with others in the 1000 Genomes Project [2], which seeks to assay
variant sites including those with much lower MAFs. Previous efforts to map variation in other species include
strain specific mouse resequencing [3,4], a haplotype
mapping in rat [5], as well as data mining of public
domain resources such as NCBI's dbSNP [6]. Whole

© 2010 Chen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

genome shotgun sequencing can be used for reliable variant discovery in a single sequenced individual by comparing the sequencing reads to the final consensus assembly
as done with platypus [7]. When a reference assembly
exists, it is more efficient to compare the sequenced individual to that assembly as this technique facilitates the
discovery of both heterozygous variants within the individual and variants between the individual and the reference. Reference based variation discovery has been used
for several species including human [8,9], mouse [4], rat
[5], and chicken [10].
These huge datasets including variation data are often
available from the original sources in a variety of formats
requiring the development of various methods to integrate, archive and display these data in a consistent fashion. Ensembl [11], University of California at Santa Cruz
(UCSC) [12,13] and the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) [14] have expertise in the storage
and manipulation of biological data and have developed
genome browsers and other methods to archive and display these data alongside their other large scale data
resources. The variation data stored in Ensembl are discussed here.
Ensembl

The Ensembl project is a comprehensive bioinformatics
resource for chordate genomes. Thousands of researchers
from around the world access Ensembl data every day
through the various portals provided by the project
including the web interface at http://www.ensembl.
org[15], the Ensembl API [16], and Ensembl BioMart
[17]. In addition to the chordate genomes, selected model
organisms (D. melanogaster, C. elegans, S. cerevisiae) are
included to facilitate comparative analysis. More comparative analysis is available using species supported by
Ensembl Genomes project, a sister project extending
Ensembl analysis across a larger taxonomic space [18].
Ensembl is updated approximately every two months
with newly sequenced genomes and newly available or
processed data for existing genomes. The project specialises in integrating large-scale data from many different
sources in a variety of formats with a high-quality annotation of the genome and gene set. In addition to comparative and functional genomics data resources, Ensembl
provides variation data for a number of supported species.
Each year, Ensembl publishes a general update of all the
project's resources [11,19,20]. In contrast to these highlevel overviews, this is a more in-depth report specifically
on the growing number of variation resources available
within Ensembl. It describes, in detail, how data is
extracted and combined from primary sources such as
the Ensembl Trace Archive [21] and NCBI's dbSNP [6],
how it is generated using data from resequencing infor-

Page 2 of 16

mation, how it is visualised and how to obtain the data via
the website.

Construction and Content
Ensembl produces variation databases for a subset of the
genomes available in Ensembl (first two columns of Table
1). This allows integration and easy access to variation
data from multiple sources as well as the effects of
sequence variation on the genes. The databases incorporate four types of data: a complete polymorphism catalogue, genotype data from specific projects, phenotype
data and selected resequencing data. The primary source
of polymorphism and genotype data for SNPs and in-dels
is from dbSNP, the major public archive of variation data,
which is integrated with data from other sources as
described below. Structural variants are imported from
DGVa [22] and for some species, additional variants are
generated from uniform processing and variation discovery using sequencing reads from the Ensembl Trace
Archive (see column 4 of Table 1). Phenotype data comes
from both a manually curated resource and a public
archive, as explained below. Finally a series of qualitycontrol stages are implemented as described below. In
this way, Ensembl can begin to provide a comprehensive
picture of variations, their effects, and their context.
The Ensembl variation resources are updated when a
new genome assembly is released, a new set of gene annotations is available or revised, an external data source
such as dbSNP at the NCBI is updated or a major new
data collection becomes available.
Variation data is stored in a structured MySQL database. A companion paper describes the underlying database technology that is used to efficiently store and
manage this data and the associated Application Program
Interface (API) for programmatic access to the data [23].
Data Sources
Importing variation data from dbSNP

The bulk of the SNP and in-del variation data in Ensembl
is an imported dataset from dbSNP. This information is
selected from dbSNP's largest tables. Table 2 describes
the relationship between the dbSNP database tables and
the corresponding Ensembl variation database tables.
Normally, the reference genome assembly used by
Ensembl matches the one used in the current build of
dbSNP. When this is the case, the variant mapping positions can be imported directly from dbSNP and are therefore in sync with the rest of the data in Ensembl. As the
genome browser at UCSC also uses the dbSNP variant
mappings, using the same assembly is good for consistency across the major genome browsers.
In some cases however, the current genome assembly
supported by Ensembl is ahead of the one used in the
most recent build of dbSNP. When this occurs, the vari-

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Page 3 of 16

Table 1: Variation statistics for release 56, September 2009 http://sep2009.archive.ensembl.org/index.html.
Name

Number of variants **

Genome size* (Assembly name)

Data source of variants

Homo sapiens

17,999,182

3,101,804,741 (GRCh37)

dbSNP; Resequencing reads

Pan troglodytes

1,520,077

3,350,417,645 (CHIMP2.1)

dbSNP

Pongo pygmaeus abelii

1,384,342

3,446,771,396 (PPYG2)

Assembly Reads

Mus musculus

14,888,174

2,716,965,481 (NCBIM37)

dbSNP; Resequencing reads

Rattus norvegicus

2,854,253

2,718,897,321 (RGSC3.4)

dbSNP; Resequencing reads

Canis familiaris

3,057,889

2,531,673,953 (BROADD2)

dbSNP

Bos taurus

2,057,872

2,918,205,644 (Btau_4.0)

dbSNP

Ornithorhynchus anatinus

1,207,507

2,073,148,626 (OANA5)

Assembly reads

Gallus gallus

2,960,841

1,100,480,441 (WASHUC2)

dbSNP

Danio rerio

617,481

1,481,257,891 (Zv8)

dbSNP

Tetraodon nigroviridis

903,588

358,618,246 (TETRAODON8)

Assembly reads

Taeniopygia guttata

4,745,545

1,233,169,488 (taeGut3.2.4)

Assembly reads

*Genome size refers to the length of the reference assembly.
**Distinct mapped variants

ants and their flanking sequences need to be remapped to
the new assembly using a method in the core Ensembl
API. For those variants that fail to map, new mappings
are obtained using ssaha2, an improved version of
SSAHA http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/
ssaha2/ [24]. The flanking sequence is aligned with the
parameters kmer = 12 seed = 4 cut = 1000 depth = 5 best =
1. For species with shorter flanking sequences, such as
the zebrafish, seed = 2 is used.
The effect of this procedure is to ensure that dbSNP
variation data in Ensembl is mapped to the most recent
genome assembly supported by Ensembl, even if the
assembly is not yet supported by dbSNP. As noted above,
when the new dbSNP build is released, Ensembl is
updated with the dbSNP defined variant positions. For a
very small number of SNPs, this dbSNP update will result
in changes to the SNP locations that had been defined by
the Ensembl mappings on the new assembly. These
changes are due to the method of incorporation of newly
submitted data by reclustering of the variants as part of
each dbSNP build.

Genotype data is imported from dbSNP and integrated
with the polymorphism data described above. For example, in release 56 Ensembl has genotype data for 8335
individuals from a number of reference data sets including the HapMap [25], Perlegen [26] and the 1000
Genomes Project [2].
Array Data: Illumina, Affymetrix

Primary identifiers are assigned to variations. Usually
these are from dbSNP (rs and ss identifiers). However,
there may be other sources for variations. Names in these
other datasets are only used as primary IDs if there is no
matching dbSNP record. In the case of a dbSNP record,
the IDs from other datasets are included as synonyms.
As of release 56 (September 2009), Ensembl imports
variants positions from the following arrays: Affymetrix
GeneChip Human Mapping 100 K Array Set, Affymetrix
GeneChip Human Mapping 500 K Array Set, Affymetrix
Genome-Wide Human SNP array 6.0, Illumina whole
genome SNP genotyping chips designed for association
studies (Human 660W-Quad, Human 1M-Duo V3) and
for cytogenetic analysis (Cyto SNP-12 v1).

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Page 4 of 16

Table 2: List of Ensembl tables generated and dbSNP tables used
Ensembl tables generated

dbSNP tables used

source
variation

SNP, SNPAncestralAllele

variation synonym*

SubSNP, SNPSubSNPLink, ObsVariation
Batch, UniVariAllele

population/sample/population structure/sample synonym

PopClassCode, PopClass, PopLine

individual/sample/individual population/sample synonym

SubmittedIndividual, Individual PedigreeIndividual

allele

Allele, AlleleFreqBySsPop, SubSNP

flanking sequence

SubSNPSeq5, SubSNPSeq3, SNP

individual genotype

SubInd, ObsGenotype, SubmittedIndividual

population genotype

GtyFreqBySsPop, UniGty, Allele

variation feature

SNPContigLoc, ContigInfo

Legacy variation identifiers

Previously, Ensembl provided the identification page
numbers from The SNP Consortium [9] and HGVBase
[27] as synonyms to the primary variation identifiers.
These identification numbers were prefaced with codes
TSC and SNP respectively. As neither of these databases
is active the identification numbers have been removed
from the current database but are still accessible via the
Ensembl Archive websites http://www.ensembl.org/info/
website/archives/index.html and available by FTP ftp://
ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/software/ensembl/snp/.
Phenotype data

Ensembl currently imports phenotype data from two
sources: The National Human Genome Research Institute's (NHGRI) Office of Population Genomics and from
the European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA) database
[28].
NHGRI has developed a curated database of published
significant genomic regions identified from genome-wide
association studies http://www.genome.gov/GWAstudies[29]. More regions are being added as additional
GWAS studies are published. These data are updated for
every release of Ensembl.
The EGA database at the European Bioinformatics
Institute is designed to provide a permanent archive for
all types of personally identifiable genetic data including

genotypes, genome sequence, and associated phenotype
data.
In Ensembl release 56 (September 2009), data from
these two resources total 134 phenotypes from 1120 possible phenotype annotations associated with 142 different
variants. There is a direct link from the web page to the
original submitter's data entry under the "Source" column
in order to acknowledge the contributor directly. In addition a link is provided to the publication record in
PubMed.
Data generation
Algorithm for Variant discovery from Sequencing reads

Ensembl provides the location of specific variants in individuals, laboratory strains and breeds. These variants are
calculated as described here using publicly available
Sanger-style resequencing data such as from the Ensembl
Trace Archive or from whole genome projects that
sequence a single individual (with both haplotypes) or
small number of individuals. By aligning the sequencing
reads to the reference assemblies for the same species,
Ensembl is able to identify any heterozygous sites in the
sequenced individual by mismatches in the alignment [4].
These alignments are determined using the ssahaSNP
pipeline
http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/
ssahasnp/[24] and require both the sequence data and

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

sequencing quality PHRED scores in order to ensure high
quality. Using the neighbourhood quality score (NQS)
method [30], SNPs were called from alignments only
when the variant base in the sequencing read had PHRED
quality value greater than or equal to 23, the five bases on
each side of the variant aligned exactly to the assembly
with PHRED quality scores greater than 15 and when
there was no more than one mismatch in 10 flanking base
pairs.
Furthermore, potential variants are filtered and discarded if they have more than 30 mismatches from a single sequence read or are in a region with more than 100
aligned reads. (These values are reduced if the sequencing coverage is less than approximately 0.1×). Read pair
information is used to filter out wrongly mapped reads,
and variants with more than two alleles for one strain/
individual are discarded. For individuals or strains with a
read coverage of greater than 3, a SNP will be reported if
at least two reads have the minor allele.
Ensembl also examines the resequencing reads that
align to known SNP loci in order to verify the sequence of
the resequenced individual at these locations. If there is
sufficient evidence (defined with the same quality metrics
as above) to determine that the given individual does not
have an alternative allele at the tested location, this information is stored in the database as a "SARA" (Same As
Reference Assembly) position, which can be thought of as
a computational genotyping assay.
A representation of the resequencing coverage for several mouse and rat strains as well as the Watson and Venter genome sequences is stored in the variation database
as a range of start and end coordinates with an indication
of the level of read coverage.
The variation database generated by Ensembl's SNP
calling pipeline is then merged with the variation database imported from dbSNP. Part of the merging procedure involves modifying all of the dbSNP imported
variants to represent them on the positive strand. A variant by Ensembl from resequencing data that has the same
locus as one already in dbSNP is assigned the rsID from
dbSNP for that locus as the primary ID; those not yet in
dbSNP can be identified by the Ensembl style identifiers
and are submitted by Ensembl to dbSNP.
Data quality checks

Once the database has been populated with variation
data, a series of post processing steps is performed to
ensure data consistency and quality. Variants observed
multiple times (e.g. in data imported from dbSNP and
created by analysis of the Ensembl Trace Archive) are collapsed into a single record with supporting identifiers
stored as synonyms.
Variants are considered unreliable and flagged as
"failed" if they exhibit any of the following characteristics:

Page 5 of 16

variants which map more than three times; those which
do not map to the genome; those with no observed allele
matching the reference allele; those with more than three
observed alleles. Failed variants remain in the database
but have no associated mapping position. There is also a
checklist to ensure those medically important or other
known to be correct variants that exhibit one of the above
characteristics are not moved inadvertently to the failed
variation table. Approximately 689660 variants are classified as failed across all supported species in release 56
(September 2009) (see Table 3).
Variation consequence annotation

Once a list of reliable variants has been identified, they
are integrated with the Ensembl gene annotations in
order to estimate the consequence of each variant on all
transcripts. A list of possible consequences assigned in
shown in Table 4. This section of the pipeline is recalculated whenever the gene sets for a species is updated.
Variants are associated with transcripts if they are
located within transcript or intron sequences, within 5
KB of a transcript start or end, or if they are located
within a regulatory region associated with a gene or transcript. Ensembl ranks these "consequence types" in estimated order of importance, including any effect of the
variant on the sequence of the final protein product. For
example ESSENTIAL SPLICE SITE is considered one of
the most important consequence types as it would have
great affect on the protein product.
Calculation of Linkage Disequilibrium (LD)

The method used to calculate LD (r2 and D') is described
below. For each population with a sample size of at least
40, variants are ordered by their positions and pairwise
LD (r2 values) are calculated within a 100 kb window size.
If r2 values are less than 0.05 they are discarded and the
rest are stored in a table. This table is only used for the
calculation of tagged SNPs and is not present in the final
database. The r2 and D' values used in Ensembl web interface are calculated separately on demand [23].
Calculation of tagged SNPs

A list of tagged variants for haplotype analysis is produced for each of the HapMap and Perlegen populations
and stored in the database. This is designed to choose
common variants in each region of the genome (i.e. tag
SNPs) from which the genotypes of surrounding SNPs in
high LD can be derived. In order to store a minimal list,
variants are selected per population and any other variants in high LD with this one are filtered out. To do this,
variants that have genotypes are sorted by start position.
For each variant, the MAF is calculated by population
and then these are ordered by frequency with the highest
MAF first. For each ordered variant, the pairwise r2 value

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Page 6 of 16

Table 3: Breakdown of failed variants by type for each species
Name

Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Type 4

Type 5

Total number

132,037

494,262

37,456

3,359

13,768

680,882

Pan troglodytes

0

0

7

0

2,885

2,892

Pongo pygmaeus abelii

0

0

0

0

0

0

155,456

299,923

0

0

25,691

481,070

1,475

482

1

0

216

2174

27,518

15,660

55

0

11,986

55,219

9,679

103,072

0

0

490

113,241

0

4849

0

0

0

4,849

11,070

88,558

0

0

229,878

329,506

Danio rerio

0

0

0

0

44,841

44,841

Tetraodon nigroviridis

0

0

0

0

0

0

Taeniopygia guttata

0

0

0

0

0

0

Homo sapiens

Mus musculus
Rattus norvegicus
Canis familiaris
Bos taurus
Ornithorhynchus anatinus
Gallus gallus

Type 1: Variant maps to more than 3 different locations
Type 2: None of the variant alleles match the reference allele
Type 3: Variant has more than 3 different alleles
Type 4: Loci with no observed variant alleles in dbSNP
Type 5: Variant does not map to the genome

for all variants within a 100 KB is extracted from the LD
table described above. If the r2 value between the variations is greater than 0.99 (i.e. the two variants are in high
LD), the associated variant with the lower MAF is
removed from the list. This process removes variation
data in high LD with other variants that have lower MAF.
The remaining variations are called tagged SNPs and are
stored in the database.

Utility and access of variation data
As with all Ensembl databases, the data is accessible in
multiple ways: either programmatically via the Ensemblstyle Application Program Interface (API) [23], or online
using the Ensembl genome browser visualisation tools
and the Ensembl BioMart tool. Ensembl's variation specific web displays, along with a variation focused BioMart
query, are described in detail below. To facilitate bioinformatics analysis, the Ensembl databases are publicly available at the MySQL database server on ensembldb.

ensembl.org and the BioMart databases at martdb.ensembl.org.
Data Visualisation

Ensembl provides a number of specialised and highly
interactive web displays focusing on four levels: a
genomic location, a gene, a transcript and a variation.
These four types of view support distinct pathways into
the data (Table 5), and are reflected by the four main tabs
in the Ensembl interface. This allows researchers to
explore complementary information from various perspectives. It is possible to customise most views in
Ensembl using the "configure this page" link at the left of
the web pages. The first tab considered, the variation tab,
is available for all species with variation data within
Ensembl (see the first column of Table 1).
The variation tab

Consider the variation rs2476601, which has been wellstudied (see for example http://www.snpedia.com/index.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Page 7 of 16

Table 4: List of consequence types in the transcript variation table
Consequence type

Effect

Sequence location

Stop gained

causes a gain of a stop codon

coding sequence of the peptide

Stop lost

causes a loss of a stop codon

coding sequence of the peptide

complex InDel

change in nucleic acid

Indel spanning exon/intron or CDS/UTR border

Frameshift coding

causes a frameshift of the reading frame

affects the coding sequence of the peptide

Stop gained, frameshift coding

multi-allelic variant that introduces a stop
codon or causes a frameshift

affects the coding sequence

Non-synonymous coding

causes an amino acid change

coding sequence of the peptide

Stop gained, splice site

causes a gain of a stop codon

1-3 bps into an exon

Stop lost, splice site

causes a loss of a stop codon

1-3 bps into an exon

Frameshift coding, splice site

causes a frameshift

1-3 bps into an exon

stop gained, Frameshift coding, splice site

Multi-allelic variant that introduces a stop
codon or causes a frameshift

1-3 bps into an exon

Non-Synonymous coding, splice site

causes an amino acid change

1-3 bps into an exon

Synonymous coding

change in nucleic acid but no change in
amino acid

coding sequence of the peptide

Splice site, synonymous coding

change in nucleic acid but no change in
amino acid

1-3 bps into an exon

Regulatory region

change in nucleic acid

regulatory region annotated by Ensembl

Within mature miRNA

change in nucleic acid

within mature miRNA

5' UTR

change in nucleic acid

In 5' UTR

Splice site, 5' UTR

change in nucleic acid

1-3 bps into a 5' UTR exon

3' UTR

change in nucleic acid

In 3' UTR

Splice site, 3' UTR

change in nucleic acid

1-3 bps into a 3' UTR exon

Intronic

change in nucleic acid

In intron

Essential splice site, intronic

change in nucleic acid

in the first 2 or the last 2 base pairs of an intron

Splice site, intronic

change in nucleic acid

3-8 bps into an intron

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Page 8 of 16

Table 4: List of consequence types in the transcript variation table (Continued)
Upstream

change in nucleic acid

Within 5 kb upstream of the 5'-end of a transcript

Downstream

change in nucleic acid

Within 5 kb downstream of the 3'-end of a transcript

Within non-coding gene

change in nucleic acid

Within non-coding gene

Intergenic

change in nucleic acid

More than 5 kb away from a transcript

php?title=Rs2476601) and has been implicated in rheumatoid arthritis [31], among other diseases. Entering
rs2476601 in the search box at http://www.ensembl.org
returns a link to the variation tab, described below. A
search for a disease or phenotype will also link to the variation views.
The variation tab contains data reports for one specific
variation. A menu of links to these reports is available at
the left hand side of the variation tab Figure 1, label 1.
The variation identifier at the top of the variation summary is the dbSNP rs identifier, if one exists, otherwise
the ss identifier or local identifier is chosen. Where
appropriate, there is a link to the corresponding variation
page in the dbSNP browser. The synonyms field (Figure 1,
label 2) shows additional names for the variant, for
example dbSNP ss IDs and IDs from other sources
including Affymetrix SNP arrays and Illumina platforms,
as described above. Flanking sequence, as reported by the
dbSNP database, is shown on the page as are links to LD
(linkage disequilibrium) plots, if available.

Table 5: Variation Displays in the Ensembl website
Browser Object

Sub Panel

Location

resequencing data
linkage data

Gene

variation table
variation image

Transcript

population comparison
comparison image

Variation

summary
gene/transcript
population genetics
individual genotypes
context
phenotype data
phylogenetic context

LD plots Following the link to an LD plot displays the LD
data calculated within a region (Figure 2). The variation
sources represented by the LD plot are customisable.
Below the transcript diagrams there is a track showing all
variations (Figure 2, label 1), a track showing only genotyped variations (label 2) and a track for tagged variants
(label 4). Using the conventions described above and
listed in Table 4, these tracks are colour-coded according
to their location/effect on the transcript (label 3). Below
this are LD r2 and LD D' plots. The data for these plots, as
described above, is calculated on-the-fly using a standard
EM algorithm for calculating LD. The export data link at
the left of the page will generated downloadable files of
pairwise r2 and D' values along with rs IDs, in HTML,
text, or Microsoft Excel format. The data can also be
exported in a format for uploading into Haploview software [32].
Variation links Links at the left of the page (Figure 1,
label 1) are to views that provide information about the
variation summary, the genes or transcripts in Ensembl
associated with this variation, population allele and genotype frequencies imported from dbSNP, individual genotypes, a graphical view of the variation and neighbouring
variations (the context link), phenotype data from the
manually curated NHGRI GWAS catalogue and European Genome- phenome Archive http://www.ebi.ac.uk/
ega/, and the phylogenetic context of the variant showing
the allele at this position across species (including calculated Ensembl ancestral alleles) (Figure 3).
Gene/Transcript link A table displays any transcript in
Ensembl associated with the variant. The predicted effect
of the variant is listed (e.g. intronic, synonymous coding,
etc.) along with the position of the allele in the spliced
transcript and protein. These values can be exported
using BioMart.
Population genetics Data from projects such as The
HapMap Project or Perlegen are included in this view.
Allele frequencies are displayed for specific populations,
along with a summary of genotype information.
Individual genotypes This next view shows a breakdown of genotypes for each individual stored in the database.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Page 9 of 16

Figure 1 Variation summary for rs2476601. Label 1 indicates the links to information for this specific variant. Label 2 indicates the summary, which
includes the source (dbSNP), synonyms or other IDs for this variant in other databases or array platforms, alleles found and genomic location. Flanking
sequence is also found in the summary information but not shown in the figure. http://Mar2010.archive.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Variation/Summary?source=dbSNP;v=rs2476601.

Context The variant of interest is shown by default in a
30 Kb region with neighbouring SNPs as boxes and indels
as triangles. Variation colour-coding is consistent
throughout the Ensembl website and depend on the variant's localisation within a transcript (table 3).
Phenotype data Listed in tabular format are any associated diseases, appropriate study and PubMed references,

associated genes, the highest-risk allele and associated
variant.
Phylogenetic context This view displays a section from a
whole-genome, multi-species alignment in this region.
These alignments, including the calculated ancestral
sequences are produced by Ensembl's three step EnredoPecan-Ortheus (EPO) pipeline [33,34]. Briefly, the pro-

Figure 2 LD (linkage disequilibrium) plot for the region around rs2476601. LD values in this figure were calculated based on allele frequencies
in the CEPH human population. The LD data between variants is represented using a triangular grid shaded on a gradient from white to red depending
on the strength of the LD (where red is high LD, white is low). Hovering the mouse cursor over one of the coloured regions in the plot reveals a popup box displaying the two variation IDs for that coloured region, and the LD value between them. http://Mar2010.archive.ensembl.org/
Homo_sapiens/Location/LD?focus=variation;pop1=CSHL-HAPMAP:HapMap-CEU;r=1:114367568-114387567;v=rs2476601;vf=1916990.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Page 10 of 16

Figure 3 Variation views. Views available in the variation tab are titled with the name of the link leading to each set of information. The data in the
figure correspond to rs2476601. The gene/transcript panel shows an Ensembl gene with this variant where it has different effects depending on the
splice variant. Allele frequencies have been measured in four HapMap populations, as shown in the population genetics panel. The NHGRI associates
Crohn's disease, Rheumatoid Arthritis and Type I Diabetes to this SNP, displayed in phenotype data. The phylogenetic context panel shows a common
allele at this position in the reference sequences for chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes), orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus), macaque (Macaca mulatta), mouse
(Mus musculus), rat (Rattus norvegicus), horse (Equus caballus), dog (Canis familiaris), cow (Bos taurus), opossum (Monodelphis domestica), and chicken
(Gallus gallus). Platypus (Ornithorhynchus anatinus) shows a different nucleotide (T).

cess consists first of Enredo, which produces the initial
collinear segments that appropriately take into consideration rearrangements, deletions and duplications from
the genomes to be aligned. In the second step, the consistency-based method Pecan aligns the sets of sequences
identified by Enredo taking into account the phylogenetic
tree of species to be aligned. Finally, Ortheus uses a probabilistic transducer model to create genome-wide ancestral sequence reconstructions.
The gene tab

Genetic variation: table and image Clicking on an
Ensembl gene identifier or searching for a gene in the
Ensembl search box (e.g. ENSG00000134242) moves the
display to the gene tab. The gene tab provides links to the
genetic variation table and the genetic variation image,
which display the collection of known variation for a gene
in a given species (Figure 4A, label 1).
In the variation table, each transcript (i.e. splice isoform) for the specific gene is shown, along with any asso-

ciated variation. Effect on the transcript (if any), position
in genomic coordinates, alleles, amino acids encoded and
amino acid coordinates (if any) are listed. The source (or
sources) of the variation and validation status are also
shown.
The variation image (Figure 4) provides a graphical
representation of this information. The addition of protein domains mapped to the amino acid sequences makes
it possible to estimate any effect of a variation on protein
structure and/or function.
Gene sequence The genomic sequence can be configured to highlight variant positions. Exons are highlighted
in this view, allowing immediate visualisation of where a
variation falls, in the context of a gene.
The transcript tab

Transcript variation: table and image The gene-based
variation pages described in the section above compare
and collate information across alternative transcripts for
the reference sequence assembly. The transcript views

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

provide an in depth focus on one transcript, or splice isoform, across individuals, breed or strains. A list of these
views and links are shown at the left of figure 5.
The transcript tab may be reached by clicking on any
Ensembl transcript identifier link within the browser. All
transcript identifiers (such as ENST00000359785) have
the letter T immediately before the series of numbers. In
the genetic variation section in the left hand menu of the
transcript tab, the population comparison table and
image can be found. The table lists all the variation for
the transcript including details of genomic location,
allele, variation source and validation status. The difference between this table and the one found in the gene tab
is the ability to list variations across the genome

Page 11 of 16

sequences of individual humans, laboratory strains of rats
and mice and breeds of dogs, chicken and other species.
The comparison image depicts information in the table,
graphically (Figure 5). A track representing resequencing
information is drawn below each transcript (Figure 5,
label 1). A direct comparison of alleles across individuals,
breeds or strains is shown (Figure 5, label 4).
cDNA sequence Variation data may be displayed on the
spliced transcript sequence as in Figure 6. Select the
cDNA link in the sequence section of the left hand menu
in the transcript tab. Three sequence displays can be
compared (cDNA, coding sequence, and protein) (Figure
6A).
In figure 6B, the red amino acid R at position 183 in the
protein sequence (547 in the coding sequence, and posi-

Figure 4 Variation image. A. The variation image in the gene tab shows all transcripts for an Ensembl gene in red, and variations mapping to each
transcript as coloured boxes. Intronic variants are, by default, only drawn if within 100 bp of an exon. Change this by clicking on configure this page
and selecting full introns. Protein domains and motifs encoded by the transcript sequence from databases such as PIR-Superfamily, PROSITE and Pfam
are drawn in purple along each transcript. B. An expanded view of the box drawn in A is shown. Label 1 indicates the exon structure of Ensembl transcript ENST00000359785. Filled boxes are coding sequence within the exons, and unfilled boxes indicate untranslated regions (UTRs). Variations are
indicated by label 2, and are colour-coded as to their effect on the transcript (see legend on the page). For this transcript, many intronic (dark blue)
variations are shown, along with four non-synonymous (yellow) SNPs that display the potential amino acids at each position. Label 3 indicates a PIRSuperfamily domain (purple) that maps to the protein sequence. http://Mar2010.archive.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/
Variation_Gene?db=core;g=ENSG00000134242;r=1:114356437-114414375;t=ENST00000359785.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Page 12 of 16

Figure 5 Population comparison image. The ENST00000359785 transcript is shown, along with a representation of the genomes of Craig Venter
and James Watson and the reference sequence (GRCh37) in this region. The left hand side of the view shows links available from the transcript tab.
Label 1: The genomes of Craig Venter and James Watson have high coverage in this region (i.e. at least two sequencing reads or present for both
strands of the chromosome), shown by a thick grey bar. Label 2: Variants are drawn as boxes if the allele differs from the reference sequence. A nonsynonymous variation is shown in yellow, with two potential amino acids indicated (tryptophan and arginine). Label 3: The nucleotides possible for
this variation are displayed upon clicking the corresponding yellow box. Label 4: A table compares each allele at positions of variation. This view indicates the alleles in both Venter and Watson's genomes are different to the reference sequence allele, for this variation. Watson is heterozygous at this
position, and Venter is homozygous. http://Mar2010.archive.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Transcript/Population/Image?db=core;g=ENSG00000134242;r=1:114356437-114414375;t=ENST00000359785.

tion 677 in the transcript sequence) indicates a non-synonymous variation.

shown in figure 7, Venter and Watson's diploid genomes
are compared with the reference sequence, GRCh37.

The location tab

The fourth and final tab described in this section contains
location-based views, showing a region of the genome.
View this tab by selecting it, or by clicking on any
genomic coordinates-range presented in the browser.
This tab was already visited in the data visualisation section of this paper as it houses the LD plots.
Variation data may be displayed in the genomic alignments view, highlighted where present in the sequence of
the multiple species alignments. Variants can also be
drawn in the region overview and region in detail views.
Here, variations are displayed as vertical lines along the
genome, colour-coded by the effect on the transcript.
Turn variations on and off in these displays by clicking on
configure this page and selecting the appropriate options.
Resequencing The genetic variation section of the location tab shows a link to the resequencing alignments.
These are sequence alignments across individuals, strains
(for mouse, rat) or breeds (for dogs). In the example

Data export with BioMart

The BioMart tool utilises denormalised Ensembl databases and can be used to query the Ensembl core or variation databases [17]. As no programming is required, the
tool may be especially useful for scientists with little computer experience. The BioMart tool is accessible from the
top right of all Ensembl pages as well as from the BioMart
portal at http://www.biomart.org.
Starting a BioMart query and choosing the Ensembl
database (for release 56, this is listed as "Ensembl 56"
from the dropdown menu, where 56 refers to the September 2009 version of Ensembl) allows gene-specific information to be exported. For example all variation for a
gene can be exported in tabular format. In addition, a
user may input a list of gene IDs, a region, or even an
entire chromosome to mine genes and associated variations.
The Ensembl variation database may also be selected as
the starting point for a BioMart query. This allows input

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

Page 13 of 16

Figure 7 Sequence alignments between the human reference sequence, GRCh37, and the genomes of Venter and Watson. Variation data are highlighted in green and indicated by an IUPAC code. A.
The default display replaces nucleotides with dots if the genome has
the same allele as the reference assembly. B. The display can be
changed by using the matching basepairs: show all option in the configure this page link. http://Mar2010.archive.ensembl.org/
Homo_sapiens/Location/SequenceAlignment?db=core;g=ENSG00000134242;r=1:114382907114387906;t=ENST00000359785.

provided at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DXPaBd
PM2vs&feature=channel_page.
Figure 6 The cDNA sequence for ENST00000359785. A. The untranslated region (UTR) is highlighted in yellow. Numbering of the first
line begins at 1 at the start of the UTR. Numbering of the second line
starts at 1 at the beginning of the coding sequence. The third line
shows line numbering and sequence of the protein. Codons are indicated by light yellow alternating with no highlight. B. Further down
the sequence shown in A, a variation is highlighted. This variation is at
position 183 in the protein sequence, 547 in the coding sequence, and
677 in the transcript sequence is shown to be rs34590413. The ID is revealed upon clicking on the IUPAC or ambiguity code above the highlighted nucleotide, which provides a link to the variation tab. The nonsynonymous variations are shown by a red-coloured amino acid. Hovering over the indicated amino acid with the mouse shows the possible amino acids at that position. http://Mar2010.archive.ensembl.org/
Homo_sapiens/Transcript/
Sequence_cDNA?db=core;g=ENSG00000134242;r=1:114356437114414375;t=ENST00000359785.

of variation IDs, and is not contingent upon a gene annotation (i.e. intergenic regions are allowed). Furthermore,
variations can be compared across populations, strains or
breeds, starting with the variation database and using the
"strain polymorphisms" attributes page. Export includes
tabular formats such as csv, tsv, and Microsoft Excel.
Alternatively, FASTA sequences can be exported.
These BioMart queries can also be run programatically
using a Perl API or through Web Services. Although the
programmatic scripts can be written from scratch, the
simplest way to access these interfaces is to build the variation query using the BioMart website and then use the
"Perl" or "XML" buttons in the toolbar to produce the
appropriate API or Web Services queries.
Additional information about BioMart queries is available from the BioMart help pages at http://www.biomart.
org/biomart/mview/help.html and FAQ at http://www.
biomart.org/faqs.html. Video BioMart tutorials are also

Data access using the API

Advanced data mining is possible through direct MySQL
queries of the Ensembl public database server at ensembldb.ensembl.org or by using the Ensembl variation API
[23].
Data downloads

For convenience, Ensembl data is also available in species-specific files on the FTP site http://www.ensembl.
org/info/data/ftp/index.html. This includes sequence
data in FASTA format, annotation in EMBL, GENBANK
and GTF format and SQL files for the databases. Resequencing data is provided for supported species in a flat
file format termed EMF (Ensembl Multi Format) which is
a compact, genome wide representation of the data
shown in the resequencing display on the website, as
described above.

Future developments
New data is expected to greatly increase the already vast
variation information in Ensembl databases. The 1000
Genomes Project is generating a large number of individual reads and variation data that will be integrated into
Ensembl. There is also additional reference copy number
and structural variation (CNV/SV) data planned to be
incorporated from the Database of Genomic Variants
[35] and other public archives that store CNV/SV data.
This will also certainly result in new or enhanced web displays for these data.
The publication of many new genome wide association
studies are expanding the list of alleles that can be reliably
linked to disease phenotypes and both associated and
causative variants will be incorporated into Ensembl as
they are identified. Additionally, as part of the LRG proj-

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

ect [36] (http://www.lrg-sequence.org/) and in collaboration with the NCBI, Ensembl is working to establish
locus-specific reference sequences. These LRG (Locus
Reference Genomic) sequences can be used as a framework for data exchange of annotated disease variants currently stored in diagnostic laboratories and LSDBs
(Locus-Specific Databases). Both of these developments
will greatly enhance the existing phenotype annotation in
the Ensembl variation databases.
Other future developments include more interactive
analysis of user's variation data through the Ensembl web
site including an online-based upload tool for which will
enable users to upload their own set of variant positions
and for these to be viewable on the genome browser and
for Ensembl to estimate their effects based on their relative positions to the Ensembl gene sets.

Conclusions
Ensembl's variation resources provide a comprehensive
and integrated resource for biologists and bioinformaticians to support a wide variety of research applications.
Continuously increasing biological information sources
require effective and integrated bioinformatics tools and
visualisation that relatively few sources are able to provide.
Ensembl's variation resources provide several advantages for users. The resources are fully integrated within
to the Ensembl genome browser and with the high-quality Ensembl gene sets in order to estimate the consequences of each variant. The data is updated with each
Ensembl release including automatic mapping when new
genome assemblies are released, such that Ensembl's variation data may be provided in advance of a new dbSNP
build. Given the breadth of species available within
Ensembl, it is also easy to compare the information across
many vertebrate and model organism species. Another
strength of Ensembl is the availability of all its resources
for free and in a variety of ways to suit a range of users as
described in the availability section below. In particular,
the variation API is unique among other large-scale integrative bioinformatics projects.
Finally, Ensembl is a service-focused resource. Comprehensive instructions and additional details about the project can be found at http://www.ensembl.org/info/
website/help/index.html. There are video tutorials and
PDFs to provide a walk-through of variation displays on
the website:
http://www.ensembl.org/info/website/tutorials/index.
html. Requests for assistance with any specific example or
display can be addressed to
helpdesk@ensembl.org
.

Page 14 of 16

Availability
All Ensembl data and source code are freely available for
any purpose and may be downloaded in their entirety
from http://www.ensembl.org. Each Ensembl release is
maintained as an archive web site for at least two years
after the date of initial release (see http://www.ensembl.
org/info/website/archives/index.html).
Ensembl
is
updated approximately every two months with new data,
genome assemblies, and sequenced genomes. Not every
species has sufficient new data to warrant an update for
each release. The current release number and month of
release are shown at the bottom of every Ensembl web
page.
Authors' contributions
The database resources were created by YC, WM, DR, and FC. The variationspecific web displays were created by FC, EK, JS, BP and SB with input from all
of the other authors. PMG and DS developed specific software for Ensembl
variation. GS created the tutorials. FC, PF and EB defined requirements and PF
provided overall project supervision. The paper was written by FC, PF, YC, GS
and DS with input from all of the other authors. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank all of the Ensembl users, especially those who have taken the time to
contact us with suggestions and other helpful comments.
The Ensembl project is funded primarily by the Wellcome Trust. Additional
funding for Ensembl's variation resources comes from EMBL, the European
Union Framework 6 STAR project, European Union Framework 7 Programme
GEN2PHEN project and the UK Medical Research Council. We thank the other
members of the greater Ensembl group at the EBI and the WTSI and Guy
Coates, Pete Clapham and Tim Cutts for maintaining the Ensembl computer
systems.
Author Details
1European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK and 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome
Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK
Received: 10 September 2009 Accepted: 11 May 2010
Published: 11 May 2010
© 2010 Chen available from: distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
This is an Open2010, 11:293 http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293
BMC article is et Access article
Genomics al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

References
1. International HapMap Consortium, Frazer KA, Ballinger DG, Cox DR, Hinds
DA, Stuve LL, Gibbs RA, Belmont JW, Boudreau A, Hardenbol P, Leal SM,
Pasternak S, Wheeler DA, Willis TD, Yu F, Yang H, Zeng C, Gao Y, Hu H, Hu
W, Li C, Lin W, Liu S, Pan H, Tang X, Wang J, Wang W, Yu J, Zhang B, Zhang
Q, Zhao H, Zhao H, Zhou J, Gabriel SB, Barry R, Blumenstiel B, Camargo A,
Defelice M, Faggart M, Goyette M, Gupta S, Moore J, Nguyen H, Onofrio
RC, Parkin M, Roy J, Stahl E, Winchester E, Ziaugra L, Altshuler D, Shen Y,
Yao Z, Huang W, Chu X, He Y, Jin L, Liu Y, Shen Y, Sun W, Wang H, Wang Y,
Wang Y, Xiong X, Xu L, Waye MM, Tsui SK, Xue H, Wong JT, Galver LM, Fan
JB, Gunderson K, Murray SS, Oliphant AR, Chee MS, Montpetit A, Chagnon
F, Ferretti V, Leboeuf M, Olivier JF, Phillips MS, Roumy S, Sallée C, Verner A,
Hudson TJ, Kwok PY, Cai D, Koboldt DC, Miller RD, Pawlikowska L, TaillonMiller P, Xiao M, Tsui LC, Mak W, Song YQ, Tam PK, Nakamura Y, Kawaguchi
T, Kitamoto T, Morizono T, Nagashima A, Ohnishi Y, Sekine A, Tanaka T,
Tsunoda T, Deloukas P, Bird CP, Delgado M, Dermitzakis ET, Gwilliam R,
Hunt S, Morrison J, Powell D, Stranger BE, Whittaker P, Bentley DR, Daly MJ,
de Bakker PI, Barrett J, Chretien YR, Maller J, McCarroll S, Patterson N, Pe'er
I, Price A, Purcell S, Richter DJ, Sabeti P, Saxena R, Schaffner SF, Sham PC,
Varilly P, Stein LD, Krishnan L, Smith AV, Tello-Ruiz MK, Thorisson GA,
Chakravarti A, Chen PE, Cutler DJ, Kashuk CS, Lin S, Abecasis GR, Guan W,
Li Y, Munro HM, Qin ZS, Thomas DJ, McVean G, Auton A, Bottolo L, Cardin

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

N, Eyheramendy S, Freeman C, Marchini J, Myers S, Spencer C, Stephens
M, Donnelly P, Cardon LR, Clarke G, Evans DM, Morris AP, Weir BS, Mullikin
JC, Sherry ST, Feolo M, Skol A, Zhang H, Matsuda I, Fukushima Y, Macer DR,
Suda E, Rotimi CN, Adebamowo CA, Ajayi I, Aniagwu T, Marshall PA,
Nkwodimmah C, Royal CD, Leppert MF, Dixon M, Peiffer A, Qiu R, Kent A,
Kato K, Niikawa N, Adewole IF, Knoppers BM, Foster MW, Clayton EW,
Watkin J, Muzny D, Nazareth L, Sodergren E, Weinstock GM, Yakub I, Birren
BW, Wilson RK, Fulton LL, Rogers J, Burton J, Carter NP, Clee CM, Griffiths
M, Jones MC, McLay K, Plumb RW, Ross MT, Sims SK, Willey DL, Chen Z,
Han H, Kang L, Godbout M, Wallenburg JC, L'Archevêque P, Bellemare G,
Saeki K, Wang H, An D, Fu H, Li Q, Wang Z, Wang R, Holden AL, Brooks LD,
McEwen JE, Guyer MS, Wang VO, Peterson JL, Shi M, Spiegel J, Sung LM,
Zacharia LF, Collins FS, Kennedy K, Jamieson R, Stewart J: A second
generation human haplotype map of over 3.1 million SNPs. Nature
2007, 449:851-861.
The 1000 Genomes Project [http://www.1000genomes.org]
Mural RJ, Adams MD, Myers EW, Smith HO, Miklos GL, Wides R, Halpern A,
Li PW, Sutton GG, Nadeau J, Salzberg SL, Holt RA, Kodira CD, Lu F, Chen L,
Deng Z, Evangelista CC, Gan W, Heiman TJ, Li J, Li Z, Merkulov GV, Milshina
NV, Naik AK, Qi R, Shue BC, Wang A, Wang J, Wang X, Yan X, Ye J, Yooseph
S, Zhao Q, Zheng L, Zhu SC, Biddick K, Bolanos R, Delcher AL, Dew IM,
Fasulo D, Flanigan MJ, Huson DH, Kravitz SA, Miller JR, Mobarry CM,
Reinert K, Remington KA, Zhang Q, Zheng XH, Nusskern DR, Lai Z, Lei Y,
Zhong W, Yao A, Guan P, Ji RR, Gu Z, Wang ZY, Zhong F, Xiao C, Chiang CC,
Yandell M, Wortman JR, Amanatides PG, Hladun SL, Pratts EC, Johnson JE,
Dodson KL, Woodford KJ, Evans CA, Gropman B, Rusch DB, Venter E, Wang
M, Smith TJ, Houck JT, Tompkins DE, Haynes C, Jacob D, Chin SH, Allen DR,
Dahlke CE, Sanders R, Li K, Liu X, Levitsky AA, Majoros WH, Chen Q, Xia AC,
Lopez JR, Donnelly MT, Newman MH, Glodek A, Kraft CL, Nodell M, Ali F,
An HJ, Baldwin-Pitts D, Beeson KY, Cai S, Carnes M, Carver A, Caulk PM,
Center A, Chen YH, Cheng ML, Coyne MD, Crowder M, Danaher S,
Davenport LB, Desilets R, Dietz SM, Doup L, Dullaghan P, Ferriera S, Fosler
CR, Gire HC, Gluecksmann A, Gocayne JD, Gray J, Hart B, Haynes J, Hoover
J, Howland T, Ibegwam C, Jalali M, Johns D, Kline L, Ma DS, MacCawley S,
Magoon A, Mann F, May D, McIntosh TC, Mehta S, Moy L, Moy MC,
Murphy BJ, Murphy SD, Nelson KA, Nuri Z, Parker KA, Prudhomme AC, Puri
VN, Qureshi H, Raley JC, Reardon MS, Regier MA, Rogers YH, Romblad DL,
Schutz J, Scott JL, Scott R, Sitter CD, Smallwood M, Sprague AC, Stewart E,
Strong RV, Suh E, Sylvester K, Thomas R, Tint NN, Tsonis C, Wang G, Wang
G, Williams MS, Williams SM, Windsor SM, Wolfe K, Wu MM, Zaveri J,
Chaturvedi K, Gabrielian AE, Ke Z, Sun J, Subramanian G, Venter JC,
Pfannkoch CM, Barnstead M, Stephenson LD: A comparison of wholegenome shotgun-derived mouse chromosome 16 and the human
genome. Science 2002, 296:1661-1671.
Cunningham F, Rios D, Griffiths M, Smith J, Ning Z, Cox T, Flicek P, MarinGarcin P, Herrero J, Rogers J, Weyden L van der, Bradley A, Birney E, Adams
DJ: TranscriptSNPView: a genome-wide catalog of mouse coding
variation. Nat Genet 2006, 38:853.
STAR Consortium, Saar K, Beck A, Bihoreau MT, Birney E, Brocklebank D,
Chen Y, Cuppen E, Demonchy S, Dopazo J, Flicek P, Foglio M, Fujiyama A,
Gut IG, Gauguier D, Guigo R, Guryev V, Heinig M, Hummel O, Jahn N,
Klages S, Kren V, Kube M, Kuhl H, Kuramoto T, Kuroki Y, Lechner D, Lee YA,
Lopez-Bigas N, Lathrop GM, Mashimo T, Medina I, Mott R, Patone G,
Perrier-Cornet JA, Platzer M, Pravenec M, Reinhardt R, Sakaki Y, Schilhabel
M, Schulz H, Serikawa T, Shikhagaie M, Tatsumoto S, Taudien S, Toyoda A,
Voigt B, Zelenika D, Zimdahl H, Hubner N: SNP and haplotype mapping
for genetic analysis in the rat. Nat Genet 2008, 40:560-566.
Sherry ST, Ward MH, Kholodov M, Baker J, Phan L, Smigielski EM, Sirotkin K:
dbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res 2001,
29:308-311.
Warren WC, Hillier LW, Marshall Graves JA, Birney E, Ponting CP, Grützner F,
Belov K, Miller W, Clarke L, Chinwalla AT, Yang SP, Heger A, Locke DP,
Miethke P, Waters PD, Veyrunes F, Fulton L, Fulton B, Graves T, Wallis J,
Puente XS, López-Otín C, Ordóñez GR, Eichler EE, Chen L, Cheng Z, Deakin
JE, Alsop A, Thompson K, Kirby P, Papenfuss AT, Wakefield MJ, Olender T,
Lancet D, Huttley GA, Smit AF, Pask A, Temple-Smith P, Batzer MA, Walker
JA, Konkel MK, Harris RS, Whittington CM, Wong ES, Gemmell NJ,
Buschiazzo E, Vargas Jentzsch IM, Merkel A, Schmitz J, Zemann A,
Churakov G, Kriegs JO, Brosius J, Murchison EP, Sachidanandam R, Smith
C, Hannon GJ, Tsend-Ayush E, McMillan D, Attenborough R, Rens W,
Ferguson-Smith M, Lefèvre CM, Sharp JA, Nicholas KR, Ray DA, Kube M,
Reinhardt R, Pringle TH, Taylor J, Jones RC, Nixon B, Dacheux JL, Niwa H,

Page 15 of 16

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

Sekita Y, Huang X, Stark A, Kheradpour P, Kellis M, Flicek P, Chen Y, Webber
C, Hardison R, Nelson J, Hallsworth-Pepin K, Delehaunty K, Markovic C,
Minx P, Feng Y, Kremitzki C, Mitreva M, Glasscock J, Wylie T, Wohldmann P,
Thiru P, Nhan MN, Pohl CS, Smith SM, Hou S, Renfree MB, Mardis ER,
Wilson RK: Genome analysis of the platypus reveals unique signatures
of evolution. Nature 2008, 453:175-183.
Taillon-Miller P, Gu Z, Li Q, Hillier L, Kwok PY: Overlapping genomic
sequences: a treasure trove of single-nucleotide polymorphisms.
Genome Res 1998, 8:748-754.
Sachidanandam R, Weissman D, Schmidt SC, Kakol JM, Stein LD, Marth G,
Sherry S, Mullikin JC, Mortimore BJ, Willey DL, Hunt SE, Cole CG, Coggill
PC, Rice CM, Ning Z, Rogers J, Bentley DR, Kwok PY, Mardis ER, Yeh RT,
Schultz B, Cook L, Davenport R, Dante M, Fulton L, Hillier L, Waterston RH,
McPherson JD, Gilman B, Schaffner S, Van Etten WJ, Reich D, Higgins J,
Daly MJ, Blumenstiel B, Baldwin J, Stange-Thomann N, Zody MC, Linton L,
Lander ES, Altshuler D, International SNP Map Working Group: A map of
human genome sequence variation containing 1.42 million single
nucleotide polymorphisms. Nature 2001, 409:928-933.
Wong GK, Liu B, Wang J, Zhang Y, Yang X, Zhang Z, Meng Q, Zhou J, Li D,
Zhang J, Ni P, Li S, Ran L, Li H, Zhang J, Li R, Li S, Zheng H, Lin W, Li G, Wang
X, Zhao W, Li J, Ye C, Dai M, Ruan J, Zhou Y, Li Y, He X, Zhang Y, Wang J,
Huang X, Tong W, Chen J, Ye J, Chen C, Wei N, Li G, Dong L, Lan F, Sun Y,
Zhang Z, Yang Z, Yu Y, Huang Y, He D, Xi Y, Wei D, Qi Q, Li W, Shi J, Wang
M, Xie F, Wang J, Zhang X, Wang P, Zhao Y, Li N, Yang N, Dong W, Hu S,
Zeng C, Zheng W, Hao B, Hillier LW, Yang SP, Warren WC, Wilson RK,
Brandström M, Ellegren H, Crooijmans RP, Poel JJ van der, Bovenhuis H,
Groenen MA, Ovcharenko I, Gordon L, Stubbs L, Lucas S, Glavina T, Aerts A,
Kaiser P, Rothwell L, Young JR, Rogers S, Walker BA, van Hateren A,
Kaufman J, Bumstead N, Lamont SJ, Zhou H, Hocking PM, Morrice D, de
Koning DJ, Law A, Bartley N, Burt DW, Hunt H, Cheng HH, Gunnarsson U,
Wahlberg P, Andersson L, Kindlund E, Tammi MT, Andersson B, Webber C,
Ponting CP, Overton IM, Boardman PE, Tang H, Hubbard SJ, Wilson SA, Yu
J, Wang J, Yang H, International Chicken Polymorphism Map Consortium:
A genetic variation map for chicken with 2.8 million single-nucleotide
polymorphisms. Nature 2004, 432:717-722.
Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Ayling S, Ballester B, Beal K, Bragin E, Brent S, Chen Y,
Clapham P, Clarke L, Coates G, Fairley S, Fitzgerald S, Fernandez-Banet J,
Gordon L, Graf S, Haider S, Hammond M, Holland R, Howe K, Jenkinson A,
Johnson N, Kahari A, Keefe D, Keenan S, Kinsella R, Kokocinski F, Kulesha E,
Lawson D, Longden I, Megy K, Meidl P, Overduin B, Parker A, Pritchard B,
Rios D, Schuster M, Slater G, Smedley D, Spooner W, Spudich G, Trevanion
S, Vilella A, Vogel J, White S, Wilder S, Zadissa A, Birney E, Cunningham F,
Curwen V, Durbin R, Fernandez-Suarez XM, Herrero J, Kasprzyk A, Proctor
G, Smith J, Searle S, Flicek P: Ensembl 2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37:D690-D697.
Kuhn RM, Karolchik D, Zweig AS, Wang T, Smith KE, Rosenbloom KR,
Rhead B, Raney BJ, Pohl A, Pheasant M, Meyer L, Hsu F, Hinrichs AS, Harte
RA, Giardine B, Fujita P, Diekhans M, Dreszer T, Clawson H, Barber GP,
Haussler D, Kent WJ: The UCSC Genome Browser Database: update
2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D755-D761.
Thomas DJ, Trumbower H, Kern AD, Rhead BL, Kuhn RM, Haussler D, Kent
WJ: Variation resources at UC Santa Cruz. Nucleic Acids Res 2007,
35:D716-D720.
Sayers EW, Barrett T, Benson DA, Bryant SH, Canese K, Chetvernin V,
Church DM, DiCuccio M, Edgar R, Federhen S, Feolo M, Geer LY, Helmberg
W, Kapustin Y, Landsman D, Lipman DJ, Madden TL, Maglott DR, Miller V,
Mizrachi I, Ostell J, Pruitt KD, Schuler GD, Sequeira E, Sherry ST, Shumway
M, Sirotkin K, Souvorov A, Starchenko G, Tatusova TA, Wagner L, Yaschenko
E, Ye J: Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D5-15.
Stalker J, Gibbins B, Meidl P, Smith J, Spooner W, Hotz HR, Cox AV: The
Ensembl Web site: mechanics of a genome browser. Genome Res 2004,
14:951-955.
Stabenau A, McVicker G, Melsopp C, Proctor G, Clamp M, Birney E: The
Ensembl core software libraries. Genome Res 2004, 14:929-933.
Smedley D, Haider S, Ballester B, Holland R, London D, Thorisson G,
Kasprzyk A: BioMart--biological queries made easy. BMC Genomics
2009, 10:22.
Kersey PJ, Lawson D, Birney E, Derwent PS, Haimel M, Herrero J, Keenan S,
Kerhornou A, Koscielny G, Kähäri A, Kinsella RJ, Kulesha E, Maheswari U,
Megy K, Nuhn M, Proctor G, Staines D, Valentin F, Vilella AJ, Yates A:

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:293
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/293

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.
25.
26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

Ensembl Genomes: extending Ensembl across the taxonomic space.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:D563-D569.
Hubbard TJ, Aken BL, Beal K, Ballester B, Caccamo M, Chen Y, Clarke L,
Coates G, Cunningham F, Cutts T, Down T, Dyer SC, Fitzgerald S,
Fernandez-Banet J, Graf S, Haider S, Hammond M, Herrero J, Holland R,
Howe K, Johnson N, Kahari A, Keefe D, Kokocinski F, Kulesha E, Lawson D,
Longden I, Melsopp C, Megy K, Meidl P, Ouverdin B, Parker A, Prlic A, Rice
S, Rios D, Schuster M, Sealy I, Severin J, Slater G, Smedley D, Spudich G,
Trevanion S, Vilella A, Vogel J, White S, Wood M, Cox T, Curwen V, Durbin R,
Fernandez-Suarez XM, Flicek P, Kasprzyk A, Proctor G, Searle S, Smith J,
Ureta-Vidal A, Birney E: Ensembl 2007. Nucleic Acids Res 2007,
35:D610-D617.
Flicek P, Aken BL, Beal K, Ballester B, Caccamo M, Chen Y, Clarke L, Coates
G, Cunningham F, Cutts T, Down T, Dyer SC, Eyre T, Fitzgerald S,
Fernandez-Banet J, Gräf S, Haider S, Hammond M, Holland R, Howe KL,
Howe K, Johnson N, Jenkinson A, Kähäri A, Keefe D, Kokocinski F, Kulesha
E, Lawson D, Longden I, Megy K, Meidl P, Overduin B, Parker A, Pritchard B,
Prlic A, Rice S, Rios D, Schuster M, Sealy I, Slater G, Smedley D, Spudich G,
Trevanion S, Vilella AJ, Vogel J, White S, Wood M, Birney E, Cox T, Curwen V,
Durbin R, Fernandez-Suarez XM, Herrero J, Hubbard TJ, Kasprzyk A, Proctor
G, Smith J, Ureta-Vidal A, Searle S: Ensembl 2008. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:D707-D714.
Cochrane G, Akhtar R, Aldebert P, Althorpe N, Baldwin A, Bates K,
Bhattacharyya S, Bonfield J, Bower L, Browne P, Castro M, Cox T, Demiralp
F, Eberhardt R, Faruque N, Hoad G, Jang M, Kulikova T, Labarga A,
Leinonen R, Leonard S, Lin Q, Lopez R, Lorenc D, McWilliam H, Mukherjee
G, Nardone F, Plaister S, Robinson S, Sobhany S, Vaughan R, Wu D, Zhu W,
Apweiler R, Hubbard T, Birney E: Priorities for nucleotide trace, sequence
and annotation data capture at the Ensembl Trace Archive and the
EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D5-12.
DGAa [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/dgva]
Rios D, McLaren WM, Chen Y, Birney E, Stabenau A, Flicek P, Cunningham
F: A database and API for variation, dense genotyping and
resequencing data. BMC Bioinformatics 2010, 11:238.
Ning Z, Cox AJ, Mullikin JC: SSAHA: a fast search method for large DNA
databases. Genome Res 2001, 11:1725-1729.
International HapMap Consortium: A haplotype map of the human
genome. Nature 2005, 437:1299-1320.
Hinds DA, Stuve LL, Nilsen GB, Halperin E, Eskin E, Ballinger DG, Frazer KA,
Cox DR: Whole-genome patterns of common DNA variation in three
human populations. Science 2005, 307:1072-1079.
Fredman D, Siegfried M, Yuan YP, Bork P, Lehväslaiho H, Brookes AJ:
HGVbase: a human sequence variation database emphasizing data
quality and a broad spectrum of data sources. Nucleic Acids Res 2002,
30:387-391.
The European Genome-phenome Archive [http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega]
Hindorff LA, Sethupathy P, Junkins HA, Ramos EM, Mehta JP, Collins FS,
Manolio TA: Potential etiologic and functional implications of genomewide association loci for human diseases and traits. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2009, 106:9362-9367.
Altshuler D, Pollara VJ, Cowles CR, Van Etten WJ, Baldwin J, Linton L,
Lander ES: An SNP map of the human genome generated by reduced
representation shotgun sequencing. Nature 2000, 407:513-516.
Harrison P, Pointon JJ, Farrar C, Brown MA, Wordsworth BP: Effects of
PTPN22 C1858T polymorphism on susceptibility and clinical
characteristics of British Caucasian rheumatoid arthritis patients.
Rheumatology (Oxford) 2006, 45:1009-1011.
Barrett JC, Fry B, Maller J, Daly MJ: Haploview: analysis and visualization
of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics 2005, 21:263-265.
Paten B, Herrero J, Beal K, Fitzgerald S, Birney E: Enredo and Pecan:
Genome-wide mammalian consistency-based multiple alignment with
paralogs. Genome Res 2008, 18:1814-1828.
Paten B, Herrero J, Fitzgerald S, Beal K, Flicek P, Holmes I, Birney E:
Genome-wide nucleotide-level mammalian ancestor reconstruction.
Genome Res 2008, 18:1829-1843.
Iafrate AJ, Feuk L, Rivera MN, Listewnik ML, Donahoe PK, Qi Y, Scherer SW,
Lee C: Detection of large-scale variation in the human genome. Nat
Genet 2004, 36:949-951.
Dalgleish R, Flicek P, Cunningham F, Astashyn A, Tully RE, Proctor G,
Chen Y, McLaren WM, Larsson P, Vaughan BW, Beroud C, Dobson G,
Lehvaslaiho H, Taschner PEM, den Dunnen PT, Devereau A, Birney E,
Brookes AJ, Maglott DR: Locus Reference Genomic sequences: an

Page 16 of 16

improved basis for describing human DNA variants. Genome Medcine
2010, 2:24 [http://www.lrg-sequence.org].
doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-293
Cite this article as: Chen et al., Ensembl variation resources BMC Genomics
2010, 11:293

</pre>
</body>
</html>
