<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>UPS 2.0: unique probe selector for probe design and oligonucleotide microarrays at the pangenomic/ genomic level</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:S6. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S4-S6"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Shu-Hwa Chen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S6

PROCEEDINGS

Open Access

UPS 2.0: unique probe selector for probe design
and oligonucleotide microarrays at the
pangenomic/ genomic level
Shu-Hwa Chen1, Chen-Zen Lo1, Sheng-Yao Su1, Bao-Han Kuo1, Chao A Hsiung2, Chung-Yen Lin1,2,3,4*†
From Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010)
Tokyo, Japan. 26-28 September 2010

Abstract
Background: Nucleic acid hybridization is an extensively adopted principle in biomedical research, in which the
performance of any hybridization-based method depends on the specificity of probes to their targets. To
determine the optimal probe(s) for detecting target(s) from a sample cocktail, we developed a novel algorithm,
which has been implemented into a web platform for probe designing. This probe design workflow is now
upgraded to satisfy experiments that require a probe designing tool to take the increasing volume of sequence
datasets.
Results: Algorithms and probe parameters applied in UPS 2.0 include GC content, the secondary structure, melting
temperature (Tm), the stability of the probe-target duplex estimated by the thermodynamic model, sequence
complexity, similarity of probes to non-target sequences, and other empirical parameters used in the laboratory.
Several probe background options,Unique probe within a group,Unique probe in a specific Unigene set,Unique
probe based onthe pangenomic level, and Unique Probe in the user-defined genome/transcriptome, are
available to meet the scenarios that the experiments will be conducted. Parameters, such as salt concentration and
the lower-bound Tm of probes, are available for users to optimize their probe design query. Output files are
available for download on the result page. Probes designed by the UPS algorithm are suitable for generating
microarrays, and the performance of UPS-designed probes has been validated by experiments.
Conclusions: The UPS 2.0 evaluates probe-to-target hybridization under a user-defined condition to ensure highperformance hybridization with minimal chance of non-specific binding at the pangenomic and genomic levels.
The UPS algorithm mimics the target/non-target mixture in an experiment and is very useful in developing
diagnostic kits and microarrays. The UPS 2.0 website has had more than 1,300 visits and 360,000 sequences
performed the probe designing task in the last 30 months. It is freely accessible at http://array.iis.sinica.edu.tw/ups/.
Screen cast: http://array.iis.sinica.edu.tw/ups/demo/demo.htm

Background
Nucleic acid hybridization is an extensively adopted
principle in biomedical research. Several methods have
been derived based on this principle to detect targets
* Correspondence: cylin@iis.sinica.edu.tw
† Contributed equally
1
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, No. 128 Academia Rd.,
Sec. 2, Taipei 115, Taiwan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

using sequence-specific probes (e.g., northern blot,
southern blot, and in situ hybridization). The lab protocol for probe hybridization is further optimized and
miniaturized into microarray format to detect transcriptional activity of thousands of genes simultaneously [1].
The performance of these widely adopted methods
depends on the specificity of probes to their targets.
The selection of suitable oligonucleotide probes remains
a bottleneck in the microarray workflow [2]. To find the

© 2010 Chen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S6

best, unique probe(s) for detecting target(s) from a sample cocktail, we developed an algorithm and implemented this algorithm in a probe design web platform, the
Unique Probe Selector (UPS) [3]. The parameters used
in UPS include GC content, GC clamps, the duplex stability estimated by thermodynamic theory model, the
secondary structure of probes, a low-complexity mask,
and other empirical preferences of wet-lab researchers.
Thus, this probe design tool is able to overcome the
problem of background noise during hybridization.
Several tools are available for probe design. OligoArray 2.1 [4,5], GoArrays [6], OligoPicker [7], ArrayOligoSelector [8], YODA [9], ProbeSelect [10], and Picky [11]
are stand-alone tools that run in command mode and
provide unique probe candidates for input sequences
under the constraints of GC%, Tm, absence of low complexity, and position near the 3’ end. OligoWiz2 [12] is
a java-based server-client solution for probe design in a
graphical user interface. Oligodb [13] and OligoArrayDb
[14] are databases providing pre-calculated probes for
human/mouse transcriptome and sequenced Archaea/
Bacteria/Eukaryote species, respectively. Golfier et al.
[15] developed an informatics tool called SOL, which
updates mouse sequences in the NCBI/RefSeq semiautomatically and outputs a collection of mouse oligonucleotide probe candidates. Researchers can set up an
SOL and refine the parameters when working on probe
design tasks for other species. Although most of these
tools are useful when designing nucleotide probes, few
consider background noise of cross-hybridization, or
require user skills to set up and optimize the tool for an
experiment. Thus, we implemented a user-friendly webbased tool UPS [3] for designing probes with small likelihoods of forming non-specific duplexes to the other
submitted targets in the same query batch or to the
sequence set of an NCBI/Unigene-listed species, and
upgrades its capability for a customized reference
sequence set in the current version.
Recent advances in sequencing methods, such as next
generation sequencing (NGS) technology, allow
researchers to decrypt gene contexts of an unknown
genome faster and cheaper than ever before. These
methods run millions of sequencing reactions in parallel,
generating short sequence reads on the gigabase-scale,
and harvest assembled contigs by algorithms. These
methods have been successfully applied for genome resequencing and have been expended to resolve novel
genomes and multiple genomes in a mixture (the
approach of metagenome). An application for sequencing a transcriptome to resolve the gene context of an
unknown genome is also available. Since both the time
and cost of sequencing a transcriptome or genome are
markedly reduced, researchers are willing to use a

Page 2 of 7

sequencing approach to leap over the bottlenecks when
conducting a classical genome/EST library sequencing
project. Thus, the collection of non-target sequences of
a hybridization experiment has an increased possibility
of its availability, even when the target organism is not a
well-studied model species. The NGS assemblies can
also be raw material for designing probes for fabricating
arrays such as 16S rRNA gene-based diagnostic arrays
[16]. Several widely used tools, such as ORMA [17],
ARB [18], and PRIMROSE [19], are available for classification and phylogenetic analysis of bacterial species.
These tools conduct the probe design process when the
collection of molecular phylogenetic markers (i.e., 16S
rRNA) is updated along with the renewal of the
sequence database. The primer design strategy of each
tools are different; it is difficult in choosing probes provided from different tools.
As mentioned, the UPS algorithm can find best probes
for input target sequences using parameters of sequence
uniqueness and duplex stability to achieve good hybridization uniformity (Fig. 1). In UPS 2.0, two new options
have been added for probe design, and the reference
sequence database and server hardware framework have
been upgraded. The new option “Unique Probe based
on the pangenomic level” allows users to employ environmental nucleotide sequences (Env_NT) or the nonredundant NCBI nucleotides database (NCBI_NT) as a
potential background noise source. Probe designed
using this option can be applied in detecting sequences
from samples with mixed genomes or transcriptomes
such as specimens in a metagenomic study. Another
new function, “Unique Probe in the user-defined genome/ transcriptome,” selects probes for target sequences
using the genome/transcriptome sequence set (in
FASTA format) as the background reference uploaded
with the probe designing query. The background reference in the option “Unique probe in the specific Unigene set” is updated; currently, 128 species derived from
Unigene (Feb 2010) are listed in this option. Some
probe parameters, such as the number of probe candidates for each submitted sequence, GC%, salt concentration, and lower-bound value of probe melting
temperature, can be adjusted for increased flexibility of
UPS pipeline. Besides, one tendency in the post-genomic
era is the fast growth of sequences deposited in public
sequence databases or resolved in an individual lab, thus
the increased target sequence entries will be submitted
in a probe design query. Therefore, an automatic
mechanism to check the redundancy of sequence identifier (ID) in input file is essential for avoiding the chaos
in probe ID assignment. The outputs of UPS 2.0 are
presented in several layout formats, such that output fits
the special needs of users (Fig. 2).

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S6

Page 3 of 7

Figure 1 The concept of UPS 2.0 for pangenomic/genomic studies.

Results
Criteria for probe selection in UPS 2.0

To reduce the likelihood of non-target hybridization,
we designed a workflow for finding the best probes of
input sequences based on uniqueness of probe
sequence and probe-to-target duplex stability. The
Nearest-Neighbor model [20] and blastn were applied
to identify probe candidates for each input sequence
with a minimal likelihood of cross-hybridization. First,
probes with single, di-, or tri- nucleotide repeats are
excluded as described previously. Next, the similarity
of probes for a non-target sequence is evaluated. The
following criteria developed by Li et al.[21] are used to
further exclude unsuitable oligonucleotides: 1) overall
similarity of a probe to its non-target sequences in the
same submitted batch should be <85%; and, 2) a continuous identical stretch of a probe to non-target
sequences must not exceed 17 bases. Both criteria integrated with blastn are called in silico hybridization in
this work. Furthermore, the uniqueness of probes is
assessed using the frequency table built from the reference sequence set given in one of three customized
options. The simplest condition is finding unique
probes for each sequence among an input sequence set
(the “Unique probe within a group” option). The

second option, “Unique probe in the specific Unigene,” is for devising unique probes for each submitted
sequence with the smallest chance of cross-hybridizing
the selected Unigene set. To meet the needs of
researchers conducting metagenomic studies, this work
developed a new option, “Unique Probe based on the
pangenomic level“, which allows users to design
probes using the environmental nucleotide sequences
(Env_NT) or the non-redundant NCBI nucleotides
database (NCBI_NT) as background reference set. Via
another novel option, “Unique Probe in the userdefined organism,” users can design probes by adopting uploaded sequences as the background reference.
The file size of the uploaded reference sequence set
can be up to 30 Mb, and the sequence length of a single sequence entry is up to 5 million bases. Probe candidates passing the criteria (e.g., Tm cutoff, GC%, the
proximity of 3’ end, in silico hybridization (sequence
complexity and homology to non-target sequence), are
ranked by the E-value of the probe-target duplex
(blastn) using the scoring matrix built from the customized reference sequence. Additional details of in
silico hybridization can be found on the UPS 2.0 online
HELP page (http://array.iis.sinica.edu.tw/ups/help1.
html).

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S6

Page 4 of 7

Figure 2 Output of UPS 2.0. (A) The advanced filter by Tm and GC%, and the probe list with downloadable files. (B) The output for the best
probe without cross-hybridization in FASTA format. (C) All selected probes (Top 3) for each sequence. (D) In silico hybridization result based on
blastn with several checking rules. (E) Detailed information in the tabular format.

Applications and experimental validation
Scenario 1. Best probes for detecting specific targets from
PCR fragments

Using common primer sets, such as a consensus primer
set of small subunit rRNA gene region, a bundle of PCR
products can be amplified from a sample with mixed
microbial genomes. To detect the presence of a particular species, a dot blotting assay can be contrived based
on a small set of probes with good discrimination
power. Using the UPS option “Unique Probe within a
group,” a user can find unique probes for each sequence
with minimal likelihood of matching non-target
sequences in the uploaded sequence set. Such a probe
set is suitable for detecting malicious pathogens in
environmental samples or food contaminants. If target
sequences are mixed with various genomes, such as
sludges from sanitary sewers, one can use the option
“Unique Probe based on the pangenomic level” to assign
all known environmental sequences as the reference
background. The assay can be started with a PCR using

degenerated primer sets to amplify target sequences, following by an hybridization on a small array with
sequence-specific probes to detect the presence of specific bacteria species.
Scenario 2. Finding probes to detect exogenous/
pathogenous genes on a Unigene-listed species

The spatiotemporal activity of a pathogenic genome is a
critical issue. To design probes for detecting pathogen
sequences in a specimen from a particular organism in
the Unigene species list (e.g., human) or a closely related
one, we may set pathogen sequences as the input set in
the option “Unique Probe in a specific Unigene set” and
assign the sequence set of the species (Homo_sapiens,
in this case) as the reference background. Then, UPS 2.0
will find suitable probes for identifying pathogen
sequences with low false-positive hits on host sequences.
Scenario 3. Unique probes working on the user-uploaded
sequence(s) as the reference background

Unigene collects EST clusters from more than 100 species; however, partially or unpublished sequence

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S6

assemblies from species other than those in Unigene list
may be available in individual labs. To design probes
working in a biopsy from a particular organism, such as
detecting pathogen transcripts, one can assign the background by uploading a set of reference sequences (a file
in FASTA format) of this species using the option
“Unique Probe in the user-defined organism.” Thus,
pathogen-specific probes will be selected using UPS criteria, which ensure reduced likelihood of cross-hybridization of a probe to a non-target sequence.
Verification by experiment

A cooperation project with researchers devoted to
shrimp virology is ongoing. The researchers carried out
intensive sequencing tasks for deciphering the shrimp
virus (WSSV) genome [22] and shrimp transcriptome
[23]. The primary goal of this project is to track the
expression of viral genes throughout the entire infection
process. Here, a new strategy in UPS 2.0 is utilized to
design probes for a shrimp/pathogen microarray. Briefly,
EST reads from Penaeus monodon (roughly 25,000
sequences, public database + unpublished data) are
assembled into roughly 7,000 clusters (contigs).
Together with 701 putative viral (ORFs), these
sequences were submitted to UPS 2.0 via the option
“Unique Probe within a group” to produce customized
microarrays in the 44k format (six probe replicates for
each submitted sequence) by in situ synthesis technology (Agilent). The mRNA was extracted from the timecoursed samples (infected shrimp tissue, gills in this
case, 0–48 hours) from viral challenge experiments and
the gene profile was sketched using the microarray platform. The researchers randomly picked several viral
ORFs to assess the correlation between array data and
QPCR data (Fig. 3). In most cases, the correlation
between gene expression levels quantified by the array
and by QPCR is strong, as evaluated by the correlation
between two expression profiles (Pearson’s correlation
coefficient) and the linear correlation R2 of each probe/
gene pair. The coefficients of linear regression of geneto-probe pairs were >0.7 and were strongly correlated
(Pearson’s correlation coefficient, 0.86–0.99).

Discussion and conclusions
UPS 2.0 is an updated from the previous platform,
which is a probe design tool for identifying the unique
segment in each submitted sequence in a query dataset,
or the unique segment of input sequences in the userdefined background. With the flexible and intuitive
interface in UPS 2.0, users can easily customize their
probe design parameters by following the user-friendly
online instruction and obtain probes with quality information. Probes designed in UPS 2.0 can be utilized to
detect a target in a classical hybridization-based assay.

Page 5 of 7

Notably, probes from such batch-wise query meet the
requirements of microarray probe design. In UPS 2.0,
Unigene data are updated, and UPS 2.0 can take the
user-uploaded sequence set as a background reference.
To date, more than 100 species are listed in the current
Unigene dataset and this number continues to increase.
The new option allows users to upload a reference set
other than the Unigene list. These improvements
expand the choice of a user-defined reference during
probe design.
The UPS workflow mimics the condition of target/
non-target mixture in an actual experiment to be carried
out in a lab bench. This is beneficial when developing a
kit for molecular diagnosis or typing. Thus, probes
designed by UPS 2.0 are particularly suitable for detecting infectious agents, such as bacteria and viruses, with
little chance of cross hybridization of host transcripts, or
for detecting a specially selected gene list (gene signatures) using small arrays with minimal background
noise. A single entry in the user-uploaded reference set
can be 5×106 bps, meaning that most prokaryote genomes can serve as the working probe background in
UPS 2.0.
UPS has run stably for over 2 years. More than 1,300
visitors have submitted their queries and about 360,000
sequences have been submitted to UPS 2.0. The performance of UPS will be continually improved by applying
a relatively more sophisticated algorithm and reducing
calculation time. The spectrum of reference backgrounds has been expanded by incorporating published
metagenomic datasets, environmental nr, and the entire
genome sequence set in the public domain into customized options to optimize oligonucleotide probe design
for experiments on the pangenomic/genome scale.

Methods
System implementation

To improve the performance of UPS 2.0, the hardware
was upgraded on symmetrical multi-processor (SMP)
PCs equipped with quad CPUs (Intel Xeon E5420
2.5GHz) and 16 GB RAM. The LAPP structure (SUSE
Linux Enterprise Server 10, Apache v.2.04, PostgreSQL
v.8.2.4, PHP v.5.1.0) facilitates web access, file uploading,
format checking, result storing/downloading, and job
controlling, and supports e-mail notifying functions.
All calculations in the core algorithm for suffix arrays,
constraints for probe selection (GC%, low complexity
masking, distance from the 3’ end), free energy for a
probe’s secondary structure, melting temperature estimated in a thermodynamic model, and in silico hybridization based on the NCBI blastn [20] with several checking
rules, i.e., percentage of similarity and maximum overlapped bases of continued sequences between probe and
possible targets, are performed in Boland Delphi 2006 on

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S6

Page 6 of 7

Figure 3 Validation of the performance of UPS 2.0 designed probes by QPCR. The expression level of nine white spot syndrome virus (WSSV)
genes, determined by either QPCR or a microarray, were normalized to the measurement at 48h post viral infection. The coefficients of linear
regression of gene-to-probe pairs are >0.7. The gene profile of an example, gene E, is plotted in the insert panel. The normalized measurement
by QPCR and the microarray are strongly correlated for gene E (Pearson’s correlation coefficient, 0.99) and all others in this test (data not shown).

an MS Windows 2003 server. To provide the most
updated background reference, an automatic procedure
for rebuilding suffix arrays for each species from the
updated Unigene databases is currently scheduled.
Hybridization parameters

UPS parameters were described in Chen et al[3]. Some
probe parameters are adjustable with increased flexibility
in UPS 2.0 in response to user requests. Briefly, probe
length is adjustable (range, 30 - 120 mers in length). The
salt concentration is set at 0.58M and is adjustable (range
0 - 1M) to fit the ionic strength in the user-defined condition. Probe candidates with a low complexity segment(s),
such as five or more continual nucleotides and continuous
di-/tri-nucleotide repeats, are excluded. The acceptable
GC% of probes is 30 - 70% empirically and can be adjusted
by users. Further constraints on probe features, GC% and
the lower-bound of Tm, are available in the output browsing interface. The melting temperature of probes is calculated based on the Nearest-Neighbor model [21], and the
secondary structure of a designed probe is calculated via
the Perl program UNAFold.pl [24]. Thermodynamic theory was integrated to estimate the ΔG of probe-target
duplexes, probe-non-target duplexes, and the probe secondary structure.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the National Science Council of the
Republic of China, Taiwan, for financially supporting this research under
Contract Nos. NSC 98-2221-E-001-018 and NSC 98-3112-B-400-010. Yu-Bin
Wang, Jan-Hrong Lu, and Chu-Fang Lo from National Taiwan University are
appreciated for their works on experimental validation and Ted Knoy for his
editorial assistance.
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 11
Supplement 4, 2010: Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010): Computational Biology. The full contents of the supplement are
available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11?issue=S4.
Author details
1
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, No. 128 Academia Rd.,
Sec. 2, Taipei 115, Taiwan. 2Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics,
National Health Research Institutes. No. 35 Keyan Rd. Zhunan, Miaoli County
350, Taiwan. 3Institute of Fisheries Science, College of Life Science, National
Taiwan University, No. 1, Roosevelt Rd. Sec 4, Taipei, Taiwan. 4Research
Center of Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, No. 128 YanChiu-Yuan Rd., Sec. 2, Taipei 115, Taiwan.
Authors’ contributions
SHC and CYL designed the algorithm and method, and drafted the
manuscript together. CZL, SYS and BHK were responsible for implementation
and system integration. SHC and CAH participated in discussions and
conceptualization as well as revising the draft. All the authors read and
approved the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 2 December 2010

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(Suppl 4):S6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/S4/S6

References
1. Schena M, Shalon D, Davis RW, Brown PO: Quantitative monitoring of
gene expression patterns with a complementary DNA microarray.
Science 1995, 270:467-470.
2. Lemoine S, Combes F, Le Crom S: An evaluation of custom microarray
applications: the oligonucleotide design challenge. Nucleic acids research
2009, 37:1726-1739.
3. Chen SH, Lo CZ, Tsai MC, Hsiung CA, Lin CY: The unique probe selector: a
comprehensive web service for probe design and oligonucleotide
arrays. BMC bioinformatics 2008, 9(Suppl 1):S8.
4. Rouillard JM, Herbert CJ, Zuker M: OligoArray: genome-scale
oligonucleotide design for microarrays. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
2002, 18:486-487.
5. Rouillard JM, Zuker M, Gulari E: OligoArray 2.0: design of oligonucleotide
probes for DNA microarrays using a thermodynamic approach. Nucleic
acids research 2003, 31:3057-3062.
6. Rimour S, Hill D, Militon C, Peyret P: GoArrays: highly dynamic and
efficient microarray probe design. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2005,
21:1094-1103.
7. Wang X, Seed B: Selection of oligonucleotide probes for protein coding
sequences. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2003, 19:796-802.
8. Bozdech Z, Zhu J, Joachimiak MP, Cohen FE, Pulliam B, DeRisi JL:
Expression profiling of the schizont and trophozoite stages of
Plasmodium falciparum with a long-oligonucleotide microarray. Genome
biology 2003, 4:R9.
9. Nordberg EK: YODA: selecting signature oligonucleotides. Bioinformatics
(Oxford, England) 2005, 21:1365-1370.
10. Li F, Stormo GD: Selection of optimal DNA oligos for gene expression
arrays. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2001, 17:1067-1076.
11. Chou HH, Hsia AP, Mooney DL, Schnable PS: Picky: oligo microarray
design for large genomes. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2004,
20:2893-2902.
12. Wernersson R, Nielsen HB: OligoWiz 2.0–integrating sequence feature
annotation into the design of microarray probes. Nucleic acids research
2005, 33:W611-615.
13. Mrowka R, Schuchhardt J, Gille C: Oligodb–interactive design of oligo
DNA for transcription profiling of human genes. Bioinformatics (Oxford,
England) 2002, 18:1686-1687.
14. Rouillard J-M, Gulari E: OligoArrayDb: pangenomic oligonucleotide
microarray probe sets database. Nucl Acids Res 2009, 37:D938-941.
15. Golfier G, Lemoine S, van Miltenberg A, Bendjoudi A, Rossier J, Le Crom S,
Potier MC: Selection of oligonucleotides for whole-genome microarrays
with semi-automatic update. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 2009,
25:128-129.
16. Stedtfeld RD, Wick LM, Baushke SW, Tourlousse DM, Herzog AB, Xia Y,
Rouillard JM, Klappenbach JA, Cole JR, Gulari E, et al: Influence of dangling
ends and surface-proximal tails of targets on probe-target duplex
formation in 16S rRNA gene-based diagnostic arrays. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2007, 73:380-389.
17. Severgnini M, Cremonesi P, Consolandi C, Caredda G, De Bellis G,
Castiglioni B: ORMA: a tool for identification of species-specific variations
in 16S rRNA gene and oligonucleotides design. Nucleic acids research
2009, 37:e109.
18. Ludwig W, Strunk O, Westram R, Richter L, Meier H, Yadhukumar ,
Buchner A, Lai T, Steppi S, Jobb G, et al: ARB: a software environment for
sequence data. Nucleic acids research 2004, 32:1363-1371.
19. Ashelford KE, Weightman AJ, Fry JC: PRIMROSE: a computer program for
generating and estimating the phylogenetic range of 16S rRNA
oligonucleotide probes and primers in conjunction with the RDP-II
database. Nucleic acids research 2002, 30:3481-3489.
20. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. Journal of molecular biology 1990, 215:403-410.
21. Li X, He Z, Zhou J: Selection of optimal oligonucleotide probes for
microarrays using multiple criteria, global alignment and parameter
estimation. Nucleic acids research 2005, 33:6114-6123.
22. Leu JH, Yang F, Zhang X, Xu X, Kou GH, Lo CF: Whispovirus. Current topics
in microbiology and immunology 2009, 328:197-227.
23. Leu JH, Chen SH, Wang YB, Chen YC, Su SY, Lin CY, Ho JM, Lo CF: A
Review of the Major Penaeid Shrimp EST Studies and the Construction
of a Shrimp Transcriptome Database Based on the ESTs from Four
Penaeid Shrimp. Mar Biotechnol (NY) 2010.

Page 7 of 7

24. Markham NR, Zuker M: DINAMelt web server for nucleic acid melting
prediction. Nucleic acids research 2005, 33:W577-581.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-S4-S6
Cite this article as: Chen et al.: UPS 2.0: unique probe selector for probe
design and oligonucleotide microarrays at the pangenomic/ genomic
level. BMC Genomics 2010 11(Suppl 4):S6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
