<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Interrogation of alternative splicing events in duplicated genes during evolution</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:S16. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-S3-S16"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ting-Wen Chen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

PROCEEDINGS

Open Access

Interrogation of alternative splicing events in
duplicated genes during evolution
Ting-Wen Chen1,2, Timothy H Wu1, Wailap V Ng1, Wen-Chang Lin1,2*
From Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics – First
ISCB Asia Joint Conference 2011 (InCoB/ISCB-Asia 2011)
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 30 November - 2 December 2011

Abstract
Background: Gene duplication provides resources for developing novel genes and new functions while retaining
the original functions. In addition, alternative splicing could increase the complexity of expression at the
transcriptome and proteome level without increasing the number of gene copy in the genome. Duplication and
alternative splicing are thought to work together to provide the diverse functions or expression patterns for
eukaryotes. Previously, it was believed that duplication and alternative splicing were negatively correlated and
probably interchangeable.
Results: We look into the relationship between occurrence of alternative splicing and duplication at different time
after duplication events. We found duplication and alternative splicing were indeed inversely correlated if only
recently duplicated genes were considered, but they became positively correlated when we took those ancient
duplications into account. Specifically, for slightly or moderately duplicated genes with gene families containing 2 7 paralogs, genes were more likely to evolve alternative splicing and had on average a greater number of
alternative splicing isoforms after long-term evolution compared to singleton genes. On the other hand, those
large gene families (contain at least 8 paralogs) had a lower proportion of alternative splicing, and fewer alternative
splicing isoforms on average even when ancient duplicated genes were taken into consideration. We also found
these duplicated genes having alternative splicing were under tighter evolutionary constraints compared to those
having no alternative splicing, and had an enrichment of genes that participate in molecular transducer activities.
Conclusions: We studied the association between occurrences of alternative splicing and gene duplication. Our
results implicate that there are key differences in functions and evolutionary constraints among singleton genes or
duplicated genes with or without alternative splicing incidences. It implies that the gene duplication and
alternative splicing may have different functional significance in the evolution of speciation diversity.

Background
Gene duplication is one way to increase genome complexity, and may provide a source for genetic novelty. After
duplication, genes are temporally released from evolutionary constraint, and may be subject to pseudogenization,
subfunctionalization or neofunctionalization [1]. Previous
results have demonstrated that after duplication those
duplicates had a higher evolutionary rate, due to relaxation
* Correspondence: wenlin@ibms.sinica.edu.tw
1
Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

of purifying selection [2-5]. This acceleration of evolutionary rate may create divergent function(s) for one or both of
the duplicates. Gene duplication provides raw material for
generating new protein function, and accordingly, not all
gene duplication events could be preserved and eventually
fixed in the population. It has been shown in yeast genomes that complex genes with longer protein sequences,
more protein domains and more cis-regulatory regions are
more likely to remain as duplicated genes after a whole
genome duplication event [6,7].
In addition to duplication events, some genes in
eukaryotes can undergo alternative splicing to increase

© 2011 Chen et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

their expressional flexibility, and increase the complexity
at the transcriptome or proteome level [8,9]. The relationship between alternative splicing (AS) and gene
duplication is an interesting question in the evaluations
of gene functions and evolution. Previous studies have
shown that there was a negative correlation between
gene duplication events and AS especially in newly
duplicated genes in human [6,10], and C. elegans[11,12].
These results implied that duplication and AS may
share similar function and therefore can be interchangeable in evolution [10,13]. However, there was also a
recent study reported where duplicated genes actually
had a higher proportion of AS and larger number of AS
isoforms per duplicated locus in human [14]. Whether
duplicated genes tend to gain more AS compared to single copy genes (singletons), and the relationship between
gene duplication and AS in evolution, are unsolved and
interesting questions to be answered.
There are two advances we make to help answer this
question. First, it has been found that fewer newly duplicated genes possess AS, and it also has been suggested
that the acquirement of AS after gene duplication is one
factor to avoid pseudonization or gene loss in plants and
Drosophila [15,16]. Therefore, the age of duplication may
play an important role in acquiring AS. Hence we took
this into consideration in this study by defining gene
duplicates with different identity criteria. Second, aided by
improved sequencing technology and increasing EST and
cDNA experimental data, many more alternative splice
isoforms had been identified [17,18]. Most human genes
are expected to have alternative splicing isoforms [19].
The relationship between alternative splicing and gene
duplication using the newly updated data is worthy of
further investigation.
In addition to the relationship between duplication and
AS, since these are two different means to achieve diversity, we think that genes which employ both, either, or
none of these two separate strategies might be distinct
from each other in terms of evolutionary rates, and in
other characteristics such as functions. Therefore, we
study the length of protein product, number of domains,
evolutionary rate, and gene functions for these four groups
(duplicates with/without AS and singletons with/without
AS) of genes.

Results
Duplicates acquired more AS than singletons

In order to further investigate the relationship between
alternative splicing and gene duplication, we compared
the proportion of genes with/without AS and duplication.
All genes in human and mouse were divided into four
groups: with neither AS nor paralog (no AS singletons),
with AS but not paralog (AS singletons), with paralog but
not AS (no AS duplicates), and with both AS and paralog

Page 2 of 12

(AS duplicates). In order to distinguish those newly
duplicated genes and anciently duplicated genes, paralogs
were identified with different identity criteria. The distribution of those four groups across different identity criteria for human and mouse is shown in Fig. 1. As one
may expect, with a higher identity criterion, only those
recently duplicated genes were identified as duplicated
paralogs, while with a lower identity criterion, those
more ancient of the paralogs were included as duplicated
genes. Therefore, the proportion of duplicated genes
(summation of AS duplicates and no AS duplicates)
increases as the identity criterion decreases. We were
interested in the alterations of relative proportion of AS
in duplicated genes and singletons.
The proportion of these four groups varied at different
identity criteria. Under the high identity criterion, many
genes are classified as singletons, and the AS proportion
for singletons is much higher than that observed for
duplicates. There is a low proportion of AS in duplicates
under a high identity criterion, and the proportion of AS
increases as the identity criterion becomes lower. Take
an identity criterion >90 and >20 in human as an example, 49% and 67% of duplicated genes have AS, respectively. On the other hand, 68% and 65% of singleton
genes have AS for identity >90 and >20, respectively.
Under an identity criterion >90, there is a significant
enrichment of AS in singleton genes (Pearson’s Chisquared test, p-value < 2.2e-16). While under an identity
criterion >20, the trend is reversed, and there is a significant enrichment of AS in the duplicated genes (Pearson’s
Chi-squared test, p-value = 0.01). Given that at a lower
identity criterion the gene families identified include
those gene families identified at a higher identity criterion, and that AS proportion still increases at a lower
identity criterion, we could observe that anciently duplicated genes overall have a much higher proportion of AS
compared to those recently duplicated genes and singletons. Similar reasoning can be made in the subsequent
analyses.
Smaller gene families have higher AS proportion and
more AS isoforms contrary to large gene families

In addition to the occurrence of duplication, the number
of duplicates in the gene families was shown to be correlated with the AS proportion, and the number of AS isoforms [10,14]. Therefore, we further investigated the
relationship between the size of gene families and AS
across different identity criteria. We stratified duplicated
genes into gene families of different family size, and
plotted the AS proportion for different identity criteria
(Fig. 2). We found that the AS proportion seemed to
decrease in larger-sized gene families at a higher identity
criterion. When a lower identity criterion was used, this
negative correlation between gene family size and AS

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

Page 3 of 12

Figure 1 Distribution of singletons and duplicated genes with and/or without AS. This figure shows the distribution of singleton and
duplicates across different criteria of percent identity. The ratios of singletons (or duplicates) having AS under each criterion are also listed at the
lower panel of the figure. For those high identity criteria groups, only recently duplicated genes are considered as duplicates, while for those
lower identity criteria, both new and anciently duplicated genes are grouped as duplicates. As the percent identity threshold for a duplicated
gene becomes lower, the proportion of duplicated genes (summation of red and blue) grows. The proportion of duplicated genes having
alternative splicing also grows, and the growth rate is actually faster than the growth rate of duplicated genes. As a result, the proportion of
genes having AS among duplicates is statistically significantly greater than the proportion of AS among singletons at lower identity criteria
(identity >20 for both human and mouse). That is, those ancient duplicated genes have more alternative splice isoforms than singletons.

Figure 2 Proportion of AS. Proportion of AS in different sizes of gene families and singletons across different identity criteria. Gene families
identified by different identity criteria were grouped according to their family size and the proportions of AS were calculated for each group.
There is consistently a lower proportion of AS in large gene families across different identity criteria in both human and mouse. This negative
correlation between proportion of AS and protein duplication is more significant for those darker green groups. For genes with the same gene
family size, the proportion of AS increases as the identity criterion decreases.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

proportion became less evident. Meanwhile, we found
that there was consistently the lowest AS proportion for
large gene families (gene families possessing at least 8
duplicates) across all identity criteria.
It is worth noting in Fig. 2 the trend of increasing AS
proportion in duplicated genes as the identity criterion
gets lower. The AS proportions of duplicated genes
become larger than that of singletons at those lower identity criteria. If we take singletons (gene family size =1) into
consideration, the AS proportions of singletons are larger
than all sizes of gene families at higher identity criteria
(>70 or >90), but become smaller than those small and
moderate gene families (gene family size range from 2 - 4
or even 5 - 7) at lower identity criteria (>50, >30 or >10).
Even though the AS proportions for large gene families
(greater or equal to 8) remain lower than singletons across
all identity criteria, the AS proportions for other gene
families (gene families size from 2 to 7) are significantly
higher than that in singleton groups at a lower identity criterion, especially for the group identity >10. This result
shows that our finding of a higher AS proportion for
duplicated genes was mainly contributed by those slight or
moderately duplicated gene families.
In addition to the AS proportion, the average number of
AS isoforms was also previously shown to be correlated
with the size of gene families. It was shown that there
were on average fewer AS isoforms in large gene families
in both human and C. elegans [10,11]. In order to investigate whether this phenomenon existed in our dataset, we

Page 4 of 12

calculated the average number of AS isoforms for different
gene family sizes across different identity criteria as shown
in Fig. 3. The big gene families (gene families having at
least 8 paralogs) do have fewer AS isoforms in both
human and mouse at all identity criteria. There are fewer
AS isoform numbers in all sizes of gene families at higher
identity criteria (>90 or >70). This is consistent with previous findings that the newly duplicated genes usually do
not have AS [15]. On the other hand, at those lower identity criteria (>50, >30 or >10), the AS isoform numbers of
those small and moderate gene families (gene family size
no more than 7) increase and become larger than comparable singletons. It suggests that those anciently duplicated
genes tend to evolve toward having more AS isoforms
compared to those non-duplicated genes. Interestingly, we
notice that there is a slight rise in the number of isoforms
for those moderately sized gene families (gene family size
5 - 7) for both human and mouse, even at higher identity
criteria (>90 and >70).
Features comparison among AS/no AS duplicates/
singletons

The positive correlation between duplication and AS
found at lower identity criteria indicates that there are
genes that somehow tend to both gain duplication and
undergo AS, while there are other genes that have neither
in the long-term consideration. This suggests that there
may be two extreme types of genes, one is more likely to
become diverse whether through gene duplication or AS.

Figure 3 Average number of AS isoforms. Average number of AS isoforms for singleton and duplicated genes across different identity criteria.
For gene duplicates identified by >90 identity criterion (bars with darkest green) there is a decrease in the number of average AS isoforms
compared to the number of average AS isoforms of singleton genes in both human and mouse. On the other hand, for those gene families
identified by >30 or >10 identity criteria, the number of average AS isoforms in smaller gene families (≦7) is larger than singletons, which in turn
is still larger than the average number in the big gene families (≧8).

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

The other type does not need to become diverse, and
tends to remain as a single copy gene in the genome, and
may also express only one transcript. In addition to these
two extreme types of genes, there are still some genes
which may gain either AS or duplication. We are interested in the differences in features between these four
groups of genes which have not been examined in previous studies. In order to investigate these questions, we
make comparisons among the following four groups:
gene family where all of the members have AS (A_F),
gene family where none of the members of the family has
AS (N_F), AS singletons (A_S) and no AS singletons
(N_S). We investigated the difference in protein length,
domain number, evolutionary rate, and GO distribution
in these four groups and found some significant and evident differences did exist.
Length of protein product

We plotted the distribution of protein length for all of
these four groups of genes from human (Fig. 4). The
average length of A_F is longer than N_S for both >10
and >50 identity criteria. We found that overall genes
with AS were longer than those without AS. The same
phenomena could be observed in mouse data as well
(Additional file 1). This kind of difference was most evident for those duplicated gene families. We also found
that the most recently duplicated genes without AS
seems to be the shortest group. In a recent study, tandem
exon duplications and following alternative splicing had
been shown to increase the diversity of metazoans [20].
We propose that after gene duplication, some genes may
have evolved to become longer (e.g. by exon duplication)
and then gained AS, or they may have evolved to gain AS
then became longer.
Distribution of number of domains

We also analyzed the distribution of these four groups of
human genes based on number of domains (Fig. 5 for
identity >10, and Additional file 2 for identity >90 and
identity >50). As shown on the plots, the rankings of the
groups by the number of domains are different under different identity criteria. Nevertheless, genes without AS
always have fewer number of domains whether they are
duplicated or not. In addition, the N_F have the least
number of domains across all identity criteria. On the
other hand, for identity criterion >10, A_F have the greatest number of domains followed by A_S, N_S, and finally
N_F. For identity criteria >50 or >90, the group with the
largest number of domains became A_S (Additional file
2). This can be explained as those genes containing large
number of domains are more likely to be grouped into
duplicated genes while using lower identity criterion (e.g.
>10) compared to genes containing fewer domains. That

Page 5 of 12

is, those anciently duplicated genes with AS tend to be
genes having many more domains compared to the background. Besides these gene features, the evolutionary rate
after gene duplication is also an interesting topic. We
further investigated the evolutionary rates of those four
groups.
Evolutionary rate

The evolutionary rate of the four groups of genes across
different identity criteria was analyzed. The Ka and Ks
of human genes derived from comparison of mouse
orthologs were used to calculate the Ka over Ks values
and the results were plotted and are shown in Fig. 6.
We found that these recently duplicated genes (gene
families identified by >90 identity criterion) had significantly higher Ka over Ks. For the case under identity
>50 and >10, even though the N_F seem to have similar
Ka over Ks value with singletons, the overall Ka over Ks
value is higher for singletons compared to those duplicated gene sets (for the total gene number, A_F are
much more than N_F). These results are consistent with
previous reports which suggest that the duplicated genes
actually are more conserved compared to singleton
genes, even though they may have an accelerated evolutionary rate soon after the duplication [21,22]. Interestingly, we found that among those more anciently
duplicated genes, gene families without AS had higher
evolutionary rates compared to gene families with AS.
We obtained similar results when we used the Ka and
Ks values derived from human and chimp orthologs
instead (data not shown), only that we found the N_F
had even slightly higher evolutionary rate compared to
singleton genes in that case. As our results indicate,
there is a different evolutionary constraint on those no
AS duplicates compared to duplicates with AS, the function of those two different groups of genes are interesting and in need of further exploration.
GO analysis

We investigated the distribution of molecular functions
and biological processes for the four groups of genes. For
molecular function, there is an apparent enhancement of
“molecular transducer activity” for N_F (Fig. 7). In addition, the “nucleic acid binding transcription factor activity” is slightly enhanced for duplicated genes (for both
N_F and A_F) and the “structural molecule activity” is
enriched for singletons. We also found genes without AS
are enriched with the ‘enzyme regulator activity’ category
comparing to genes with AS for both duplicates and singletons. On the other hand, for “catalytic activity”, singletons with AS are slightly more enriched than singletons
without AS, whereas duplicates with AS are much higher
than duplicates without it. For biological process, the

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

Page 6 of 12

Figure 4 Box plot of protein lengths. Protein length of four groups of genes: A_F, N_F, A_S, and N_S (for AS gene families genes, no AS gene
families genes, AS singletons, no AS singletons, respectively) of human across three different identity criteria (>10, >50, >90). When comparing
within the same identity and the same duplication status, the length of genes with AS are longer than genes without AS, and this tendency is
especially obvious for duplicated genes (gene families) or at lower identity criterion (>10).

distribution patterns for the four groups vary by a significant amount (Fig. 8). There is a higher proportion of the
“multicellular organismal process” and “signaling” annotations for N_F. Meanwhile the “metabolic process” and
“cellular process” annotations are most abundant for A_S
followed by N_S, A_F, and N_F groups. Genes possessing
AS had previously been shown to have an enrichment in

certain molecular functions (immune and nervous systems) [23]. In our results, the immune system process
does have about double the proportion for A_S compared to N_S (2.9% compared to 1.5%) but this trend is
not found in duplicated genes. For the four groups identified by >50 and >90 identity criteria, the results are
similar (data not shown).

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

Page 7 of 12

Figure 5 Number of domain(s). Domain number distribution for genes of four groups of genes: A_F, N_F, A_S, and N_S (for AS gene families
genes, no AS gene families genes, AS singletons, no AS singletons, respectively) identified with identity criterion >10. The y axis is a log
transformed frequency among each group. The lower the frequency, the longer the line is on the plot, and the higher the frequency the shorter
the line is. There are sparse lines for domain number larger than 50. For both gene families and singletons the no AS genes have less number
of domain(s) compared to AS genes. Overall, N_F have the least number of domains.

Discussion
Previous studies have suggested that duplication and AS
may be interchangeable and therefore were reversely
correlated [10,13]. On the other hand, a recent study suggested a positive correlation [14]. The apparent discrepancy may be due to the availability of AS data at the
times of these studies, or how the duplicates were defined.
Previous studies identified duplicated genes by either
InParnoid [24] or BLASTP which are both based on

sequence similarity [10,13,14]. In this study, we used
duplicates identified by EnsemblCompara GeneTrees
which also took the phylogenetic tree structure into consideration and may provide higher coverage and better
ability to handle large gene families [25]. The discrepancy
may most probably be due to the similarity cutoffs used to
determine duplicates, which are reflections on the age of
duplications. Therefore in this paper, we investigated the
relationship between duplication and AS across different

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

Page 8 of 12

Figure 6 Boxplot of Ka over Ks. Boxplot of Ka/Ks value for the four groups: N_F, A_F, N_S, and A_S (no AS gene families genes, AS gene
families genes, no AS singletons, and AS singletons, respectively) across three different identity criteria (>10, >50, and >90). Overall, there is no
significant difference observed for Ka over Ks values among singletons. For duplicated gene sets, the most similar gene families N_F (>90) and
A_F (>90) have the top two highest Ka over Ks which imply a higher evolutionary rate. Conversely, those more anciently duplicated genes with
AS, i.e. A_F (>10) and A_F (>50), have the lowest Ka over Ks values.

duplication times (e.g. Duplicates were identified according to identity >10, >50 or >90). We found that in human
and mouse overall the duplicated genes had higher proportion of alternative splicing after long-term evolution,
even though those recently duplicated genes tended not to
have AS. This finding is consistent with a recent publication which concluded that the gain of AS in duplicated
genes is in a age-dependent manner [26].

The evolutionary rate of genes after gene duplication
was though to be increased due to the relaxation of selection [4]. Previously, Jin et al. proposed an “Accelerated AS
model”, which suggested that the relaxation of constraint
for duplicates after gene duplication may accelerate the
rate of AS acquirement [14]. Our results do not directly
support nor reject the hypothesis; we could not conclude
whether the acceleration exists since the time needed for

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

Page 9 of 12

Figure 7 Molecular function distribution. Molecular function distribution for four groups of genes: N_F, A_F, N_S, and A_S (no AS gene
families genes, AS gene families genes, noAS singletons, and AS singletons, respectively). Only categories having proportion larger than 1% are
shown, and categories having a proportion smaller than 1% are tallied together as “others”. There is an enrichment (more than 6 times) of
molecular transducer activity for N_F compared to the other three groups. The molecular transducer activity for N_F, A_F, N_S and A_S are
23.9%, 3.3%, 3.6% and 2.3% respectively.

the acquisition of alternative splicing is unclear. However,
we made an interesting observation that although duplicated genes did have a higher evolutionary rate (Ka/Ks),
the proportion of AS among recently duplicated genes
(identity >90) was lower than those of singleton. It was
only after the inclusion of ancient duplicates did the proportion of AS becomes higher compared to that of the
singletons.
We did try to investigate whether this trend exists in
other mammalian species. We observed the same trend
by choosing 4 relatively well-studied mammals: human,
mouse, rat, and chimp, and used the “all” information
(without removing those peptides labeled as “novel”, and
including all paralogous information) provided by
Ensembl to perform the same analysis. The fractions of
alternative splicing among their singleton gene and duplicated gene sets are listed in Table 1. Even though there is
a trend that better-studied species do have higher

fraction of alternative splicing in both duplicated gene
and non-duplicated gene groups, the average alternative
splicing rate in the duplicated genes is still significantly
higher than the rate in the non-duplicated genes in all 4
mammalian species. It is likely this phenomenon exists in
all mammals.
On the other hand, we did not observe this kind
enrichment of AS for duplicated genes in zebrafish, fly,
and worm. This may result from different evolutionary
stresses between mammalian and other eukaryotes and
therefore the preference of alternative splicing and gene
duplication in the genome are different. It is also possible
that this trend does exist in other eukaryotes but is not
being observed only because of the lack of alternative
splicing information for zebrafish, fly, and worm. We
actually found a tendency to increase in proportion of
alternative splicing in duplicated genes in both zebrafish
and fly, even though they are not statistically significant.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

Page 10 of 12

Figure 8 Biological process distribution. Biological process distribution for four groups of genes: N_F, A_F, N_S, and A_S (no AS gene families
genes, AS gene families genes, no AS singletons, and AS singletons, respectively). The category “others” is derived similarly as in Fig. 7.

A recent study in Drosophila also showed that newly
duplicated genes usually did not have alternative splicing
isoforms and were expressed at a lower expression level,
while those genes may have gained their diverged function or expression patterns after they developed alternative splicing activity [15]. It is possible that we did not
observe the same trend in zebrafish, fly, and worm simply
due to the lack of proper AS information. As NGS

Table 1 Proportion of Alternative splicing (AS) for
singletons and duplicated genes of four mammalian
genomes
Organism

AS proportion for singletons

AS proportion for duplicates

human

66.5%

73.2%

mouse
chimp

41.0%
34.7%

52.7%
42.7%

rat

25.6%

31.9%

* paired t test, p value = 0.0035

technique improves and data accumulates, further investigation can be done to answer this question in the
future.
Genes categorized as having no AS may really have
none, but it is also possible that its AS isoforms are not
detected due to their relatively low level of expression
[27]. In order to examine this possibility in our dataset,
we tested whether those genes express at a relatively
lower level by exploring current human EST datasets.
The result of the EST hit distribution is shown in Additional file 3. We found that there was indeed a high correlation between the EST counts and AS detection.
Genes without alternative splicing annotation may be a
misleading artifact arising from its low expression level,
and it is possible that their AS isoforms are not yet
found. Therefore we could not rule out the possibility
that a portion of the no AS gene families may actually
have AS. However, the apparent lack of AS prompted us
to attribute these genes into the no AS categories.

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

As previous studies on gene retention after whole genome duplication have suggested, subsets of genes were
more likely to remain as duplicates and may be more likely
to evolve diverse functions [28,29]. Among those genes apt
to become diverse, some develop either duplication or AS,
and still some gain both duplication and AS. From our
results, we suggest that longer genes and genes which contain more domains are more likely to increase their gene
diversity at the genomic level via gene duplication, and
increase their complexity at the transcriptome level by
acquiring alternative splicing. Or in alternative, genes
which undergo duplication and alternative splicing may
become longer and may increase their number of domains.
In addition, we found that there are different evolutionary
rates and preferences for molecular function or biological
process for no AS gene families and AS gene families.
These all imply that the selection between duplication and
AS are highly dependent and is not random. Further investigation on what factors affect gene duplication and AS
may reveal the evolutionary relationship between those two
mechanisms. In conclusion, our analysis revealed a sophisticated relationship between duplication and AS depending
on the age of the duplicates. Compared to singletons, there
is actually a higher proportion of ancient duplicates that
have AS isoforms, while fewer new duplicates have alternative splicing isoforms. In addition, among those duplicated
genes, genes with longer sequence and more domains are
more likely to develop AS. As for the evolutionary rate, our
results suggest that in consideration of a long-term evolution, duplicated genes may be under higher evolutionary
constraints compared to singleton genes, and among those
duplicated genes, those having AS are the ones actually
under higher constraints compared to those having no AS.

Conclusions
Our analysis revealed a sophisticated relationship between
duplication and AS depending on the age of the duplicates. Compared to singletons, there is actually a higher
proportion of ancient duplicates that have AS isoforms,
while fewer new duplicates have alternative splicing isoforms. In addition, among those duplicated genes, genes
with longer sequence and more domains are more likely
to develop AS. As for the evolutionary rate, our results
suggest that in consideration of a long-term evolution,
duplicated genes may be under higher evolutionary constraints compared to singleton genes, and among those
duplicated genes, those having AS are the ones actually
under higher constraints compared to those having no AS.
Methods
Materials

The protein sequences and paralog information of seven
species: human (Homo sapiens), mouse (Mus musculus),
rat (Rattus norvegicus), chimp (Pan troglodytes), zebrafish

Page 11 of 12

(Danio rerio), worm (Caenorhabditis elegans) and fly (Drosophila melanogaster) were downloaded from Ensembl
release 60 [30]. For most analysis, only the peptides labeled
as “known” were preserved. The Ka, Ks, cDNA sequences
and protein GO category of human and mouse were also
downloaded from Ensembl.
Duplication and AS identification

The paralog pairs were generated by grouping paralog
information derived from EnsemblCompara GeneTrees
[25]. Different set of paralog pairs are identified at different identity criterion. A paralog pair is qualified as a pair
if at least one gene aligns to the other with a protein
sequence identity larger than the identity criterion chosen. Genes were classified as duplicated genes if they
have any paralog(s). Gene pairs were clustered together
as a gene family if there was at least one gene in common. Gene families were further classified into AS gene
families, no AS gene families, and others. AS gene
families were defined as gene families within which all
paralogs have AS, and no AS gene families were defined
as gene families within which none of the paralogs have
AS. Genes were classified as having alternative splicing
isoforms if their genes have more than one protein product recorded as known peptides in Ensembl.
Features of genes analysis

The raw data of gene information downloaded from
Ensembl were further used in analyzing human (and
mouse sometimes) for protein function, domain number,
gene length, and Ka over Ks analysis. Domains in protein
sequences were identified by RPS-BLAST using pfam
release 24.0 as database [31] with default parameters,
except the expected value is set be smaller than 0.01.
EST analysis

Human EST data were downloaded through the NCBI ftp
server: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/. Not all
EST data were suitable for expression analysis since some
libraries may have been subject to expression count distortions such as amplification or normalization. Therefore, EST libraries were subject to manual reviews based
on extended annotations of clone libraries obtained from
the Cancer Genome Anatomy Project (CGAP) http://
cgap.nci.nih.gov/. ESTs from unsuitable libraries were
eliminated. Representative transcription isoforms were
also selected and repeat-masking was applied with
RepeatMasker [32]. ESTs from the prior procedure were
aligned against the set of transcription isoforms with
BLAT [33]. Based on the BLAT result, each EST was
assigned to the best-matching isoform provided that the
EST sequence was at least 100 bp long and the alignment
region had to achieve 95% identity or higher. If more
than one best-match existed, an arbitrary assignment was

Chen et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 3):S16
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S3/S16

made. An expression profile of the representative isoforms was generated basing on EST assignments.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Box plot of protein lengths Box plot of protein
lengths for four groups of genes: A_F, N_F, A_S, and N_S (AS gene
families genes, no AS gene families genes, AS singletons, no AS
singletons, respectively) of mouse across three different identity criteria
(>10, >50, >90). This pattern of length distribution is similar to the
pattern observed for human.
Additional file 2: Number of domain(s) distribution Number of
domain(s) for genes of four groups of genes: A_F, N_F, A_S, and N_S (AS
gene families genes, no AS gene families genes, AS singletons, no AS
singletons, respectively) identified with identity criteria >50 and >90.
Additional file 3: Average EST hits per transcript for gene families
and singletons with/without AS. The labels on the x axis are A_F, N_F,
A_S, and N_S (for AS gene families genes, no-AS gene families genes, AS
singletons, no AS singletons, respectively) across different identity criteria.
Genes within N_F have relatively fewer EST hits compared to genes
within A_F. These genes within N_F may actually have alternative
splicing isoforms but are classified as no AS, resulting from the relatively
lower expression level. We noticed that expression of these recently
duplicated genes (gene families identified under identity criterion >90)
are low compared to their comparable groups e.g. A_F (>90) compared
to A_F (>10) and A_F (>50).

Page 12 of 12

8.
9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.
19.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported in part by grant from Academia Sinica and National
Science Council.
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 12
Supplement 3, 2011: Tenth International Conference on Bioinformatics – First
ISCB Asia Joint Conference 2011 (InCoB/ISCB-Asia 2011): Computational
Biology. The full contents of the supplement are available online at http://
www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12?issue=S3.
Author details
Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan. 2Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

20.

21.
22.
23.

1

24.

Authors’ contributions
WL and TC conceived and designed the experiments. TC and TW performed
the experiments and analysed the data. TC wrote the manuscript. WL and
WN supervised and revised the manuscript.

25.

26.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

27.

Published: 30 November 2011

28.

References
1. Ohno S: Evolution by gene duplication. Springer: Berlin; 1970.
2. Han MV, Demuth JP, McGrath CL, Casola C, Hahn MW: Adaptive evolution
of young gene duplicates in mammals. Genome Res 2009, 19(5):859-867.
3. Nembaware V, Crum K, Kelso J, Seoighe C: Impact of the presence of
paralogs on sequence divergence in a set of mouse-human orthologs.
Genome Res 2002, 12(9):1370-1376.
4. Lynch M, Conery JS: The evolutionary fate and consequences of
duplicate genes. Science 2000, 290(5494):1151-1155.
5. Conant GC, Wagner A: Asymmetric sequence divergence of duplicate
genes. Genome Res 2003, 13(9):2052-2058.
6. He X, Zhang J: Gene complexity and gene duplicability. Curr Biol 2005,
15(11):1016-1021.
7. Lin YS, Hwang JK, Li WH: Protein complexity, gene duplicability and gene
dispensability in the yeast genome. Gene 2007, 387(1-2):109-117.

29.

30.
31.

32.
33.

Graveley BR: Alternative splicing: increasing diversity in the proteomic
world. Trends Genet 2001, 17(2):100-107.
Kriventseva EV, Koch I, Apweiler R, Vingron M, Bork P, Gelfand MS,
Sunyaev S: Increase of functional diversity by alternative splicing. Trends
Genet 2003, 19(3):124-128.
Su Z, Wang J, Yu J, Huang X, Gu X: Evolution of alternative splicing after
gene duplication. Genome Res 2006, 16(2):182-189.
Irimia M, Rukov JL, Penny D, Garcia-Fernandez J, Vinther J, Roy SW:
Widespread evolutionary conservation of alternatively spliced exons in
Caenorhabditis. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(2):375-382.
Hughes AL, Friedman R: Alternative splicing, gene duplication and
connectivity in the genetic interaction network of the nematode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetica 2008, 134(2):181-186.
Kopelman NM, Lancet D, Yanai I: Alternative splicing and gene
duplication are inversely correlated evolutionary mechanisms. Nat Genet
2005, 37(6):588-589.
Jin L, Kryukov K, Clemente JC, Komiyama T, Suzuki Y, Imanishi T, Ikeo K,
Gojobori T: The evolutionary relationship between gene duplication and
alternative splicing. Gene 2008, 427(1-2):19-31.
Zhan Z, Ren J, Zhang Y, Zhao R, Yang S, Wang W: Evolution of alternative
splicing in newly evolved genes of Drosophila. Gene 2011, 470(1-2):1-6.
Zhang PG, Huang SZ, Pin AL, Adams KL: Extensive divergence in
alternative splicing patterns after gene and genome duplication during
the evolutionary history of Arabidopsis. Mol Biol Evol 2010,
27(7):1686-1697.
Boue S, Letunic I, Bork P: Alternative splicing and evolution. Bioessays
2003, 25(11):1031-1034.
Kan Z, States D, Gish W: Selecting for functional alternative splices in
ESTs. Genome Res 2002, 12(12):1837-1845.
Wang ET, Sandberg R, Luo S, Khrebtukova I, Zhang L, Mayr C, Kingsmore SF,
Schroth GP, Burge CB: Alternative isoform regulation in human tissue
transcriptomes. Nature 2008, 456(7221):470-476.
Irimia M, Maeso I, Gunning PW, Garcia-Fernandez J, Roy SW: Internal and
external paralogy in the evolution of tropomyosin genes in metazoans.
Mol Biol Evol 2010, 27(7):1504-1517.
Jordan IK, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Duplicated genes evolve slower than
singletons despite the initial rate increase. BMC Evol Biol 2004, 4:22.
Davis JC, Petrov DA: Preferential duplication of conserved proteins in
eukaryotic genomes. PLoS Biol 2004, 2(3):E55.
Modrek B, Resch A, Grasso C, Lee C: Genome-wide detection of
alternative splicing in expressed sequences of human genes. Nucleic
Acids Res 2001, 29(13):2850-2859.
O’Brien KP, Remm M, Sonnhammer EL: Inparanoid: a comprehensive
database of eukaryotic orthologs. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33(Database issue):
D476-480.
Vilella AJ, Severin J, Ureta-Vidal A, Heng L, Durbin R, Birney E:
EnsemblCompara GeneTrees: Complete, duplication-aware phylogenetic
trees in vertebrates. Genome Res 2009, 19(2):327-335.
Roux J, Robinson-Rechavi M: Age-dependent gain of alternative splice
forms and biased duplication explain the relation between splicing and
duplication. Genome Res 2011, 21(3):357-363.
Melamud E, Moult J: Stochastic noise in splicing machinery. Nucleic Acids
Res 2009, 37(14):4873-4886.
He X, Zhang J: Higher duplicability of less important genes in yeast
genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(1):144-151.
Brunet FG, Roest Crollius H, Paris M, Aury JM, Gibert P, Jaillon O, Laudet V,
Robinson-Rechavi M: Gene loss and evolutionary rates following wholegenome duplication in teleost fishes. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23(9):1808-1816.
Flicek P, Amode MR, Barrell D, Beal K, Brent S, Chen Y, Clapham P, Coates G,
Fairley S, Fitzgerald S, et al: Ensembl 2011. Nucleic Acids Res 2011.
Finn RD, Mistry J, Tate J, Coggill P, Heger A, Pollington JE, Gavin OL,
Gunasekaran P, Ceric G, Forslund K, et al: The Pfam protein families
database. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38(Database issue):D211-222.
Smit A, Hubley R, Green P: RepeatMasker Open-3.0. 2010.
Kent WJ: BLAT–the BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome Res 2002,
12(4):656-664.

doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-S3-S16
Cite this article as: Chen et al.: Interrogation of alternative splicing
events in duplicated genes during evolution. BMC Genomics 2011 12
(Suppl 3):S16.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
