<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Clustering-based identification of clonally-related immunoglobulin gene sequence sets</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Immunome Research 2010 6:S4. doi:10.1186/1745-7580-6-S1-S4"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Zhiliang Chen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chen et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 1):S4
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S1/S4

IMMUNOME RESEARCH

PROCEEDINGS

Open Access

Clustering-based identification of clonally-related
immunoglobulin gene sequence sets
Zhiliang Chen1, Andrew M Collins2, Yan Wang2, Bruno A Gaëta1*
From Asia Pacific Bioinformatics Network (APBioNet) Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010)
Tokyo, Japan. 26-28 September 2010

Abstract
Background: Clonal expansion of B lymphocytes coupled with somatic mutation and antigen selection allow the
mammalian humoral immune system to generate highly specific immunoglobulins (IG) or antibodies against
invading bacteria, viruses and toxins. The availability of high-throughput DNA sequencing methods is providing
new avenues for studying this clonal expansion and identifying the factors guiding the generation of antibodies.
The identification of groups of rearranged immunoglobulin gene sequences descended from the same
rearrangement (clonally-related sets) in very large sets of sequences is facilitated by the availability of
immunoglobulin gene sequence alignment and partitioning software that can accurately predict component
germline gene, but has required painstaking visual inspection and analysis of sequences.
Results: We have developed and implemented an algorithm for identifying sets of clonally-related sequences in
large human immunoglobulin heavy chain gene variable region sequence sets. The program processes sequences
that have been partitioned using iHMMune-align, and uses pairwise comparisons of CDR3 sequences and similarity
in IGHV and IGHJ germline gene assignments to construct a distance matrix. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering
is then used to identify likely groups of clonally-related sequences. The program is available for download from
http://www.cse.unsw.edu.au/~ihmmune/ClonalRelate/ClonalRelate.zip.
Conclusions: The method was evaluated on several benchmark datasets and provided a more accurate and
considerably faster identification of clonally-related immunoglobulin gene sequences than visual inspection by
domain experts.

Background
The human immune system has the ability to produce
millions of different types of antibodies in the defence
against bacteria, virus and toxins. Immunoglobulin
heavy and light chain gene rearrangement happens during the early differentiation of the B cell precursors. The
rearranged immunoglobulin heavy (IGH) chain is
formed by recombination of genes selected from three
sets of germline genes: variable (immunoglobulin heavy
chain variable, IGHV), diversity (IGHD) and joining
(IGHJ) [1]. Additional diversity is introduced by N
* Correspondence: bgaeta@unsw.edu.au
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South
Wales, NSW 2052, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

nucleotide addition (the process of adding non-germline-encoded nucleotides at the time of gene rearrangement) and, during clonal selection, by the introduction
of point mutations through the process of somatic
hypermutation. The accumulation of mutations during
clonal expansion improves antigen binding affinity and
results in the formation of clonally-related immunoglobulin gene sets, each derived from a single germline
rearrangement.
The development of ultra-deep DNA sequencing technologies is opening a powerful new avenue of investigation into the B cell-mediated immune response, by
enabling the characterisation of antibody diversity in
individuals [2].The identification of sets of clonallyrelated sequences is a significant component of this

© 2010 Gaëta et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chen et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 1):S4
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S1/S4

analysis as it allows determining the shape of the clonal
expansion in response to antigen exposure and other
conditions [3]. This information may have a critical
bearing on the clinical significance imputed to clonal B
cells in the blood, in terms of their ability to persist and
potentially mediate relapse of disease, or in autoimmune diseases [4,5].
Previous studies have demonstrated the importance
and potential of accurate alignment and analysis for
studying the immune response, using software such as
IMGT/V-QUEST [6] , SoDA [7], iHMMune-align [8],
Ab-origin [9], etc. However, none of these programs
allow the direct identification of clonally-related immunoglobulin gene sets.
The third complementarity determining region
(CDR3) is a highly variable region in V domain. This
region encodes a protein loop that lies at the centre of
the antigen binding site [10,11], and its length and composition influence antigen binding [12]. The CDR3 of an
IGH variable domain (VH) spans the VH- DH- JH joint,
with interposed N region addition, and is the most variable region of the heavy chain genes. As such it has the
greatest potential for the identification of clonal relationships between sequences. Previous studies [13,14]
have demonstrated that antigen receptor gene arrangement and B cell diversification can be analyzed by modelling the length distribution of CDR3 in IGH genes.
Here we demonstrate a new method for identifying
clonally related sequences in large sets of rearranged
IGH sequences, based on analysis of the highly variable
CDR3 region of the VH domain. Sequences are partitioned using iHMMune-align [8] then clustered based
on CDR3 similarity and common V and J genes. Clusters meeting an empirical quality criterion are then
identified and extracted as sets of potentially clonally
related sequences. This method is particularly well suited to the automated extraction of clonally related
sequences sets from high throughput sequencing data.

Results
A hierarchical agglomerative clustering method was
implemented to group IG gene sequences on the basis
of CDR3 sequence similarity and IGHV and IGHJ usage,
with clusters below an empirically selected threshold
classified as clonally related. The resulting software program can be downloaded from http://www.cse.unsw.edu.
au/~ihmmune/ClonalRelate/ClonalRelate.zip. It accepts
as input a set of sequences partitioned by iHMMunealign (as a semi-colon separated text file) and outputs a
comma-separated text file listing the sequences and
their clonal set assignment, together with dendrograms
showing the structure of the clonal sets, in XML format.
Several methods were tested for calculating a pairwise
distance reflecting clonal relationships that was suitable

Page 2 of 7

for clustering. The resulting algorithms were evaluated
using a benchmark sequence set containing known clonally-related sequence sets. The best performing version
of the algorithm provided a more accurate identification
of clonal sets than review by a domain expert.
Benchmark sequence set

In order to evaluate the suitability of clustering for identifying clonally-related sequence sets in large sets of IG
genes, a human IGH sequence dataset known to contain
multiple clonally-related sets obtained by Sanger
sequencing (PNG dataset, Genbank HM773966HM775073)(Wang et al., unpublished results) was
selected as a benchmark set to evaluate methods for
clonally-related set identification. The dataset was scrutinised by a domain expert and sequences recognised as
containing sequencing errors were removed. The resulting benchmark dataset contained 1116 human IGH
sequences. Sequences were partitioned using the hidden
Markov model based immunoglobulin gene sequence
partitioning tool, iHMMune-align. Partitioning results
were then examined, and clonally related sequence sets
were identified by an iterative process of visual inspection by domain experts and automated clustering using
the methods developed in this study. The final benchmark data set contained 182 sequences grouped into 66
clusters of clonally related sequences (Table 1).
Two additional sets of clonally related sequence,
PW99 and PW57, derived from tonsillar IgD classswitched B cells, have been previously described [15].
These sets contained 57 and 99 unique sequences
respectively with each set, known to be derived from the
same V-D-J rearrangements. These two sets were used
to calculate the threshold used to label clusters as clonally related.
Distance measure selection

The major difference between hierarchical clustering
algorithms is the measure of similarity between each
pair of clusters and the underlying modelling of the
clusters. We experimentally evaluated the performance
of different distance measures to generate a hierarchical

Table 1 PNG benchmark dataset
Number of Clusters

Numbers of Sequences in a Cluster

1

16

1

7

1

6

2

5

3

4

16

3

42

2

Chen et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 1):S4
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S1/S4

Page 3 of 7

representation of the clonal relatedness of a set of
sequences.
Measuring the similarity of DNA sequences can be
considered as a problem of comparing two strings. The
Edit distance also known as the Levenshtein distance
[16], can be considered as a classic measure of the similarity of two strings. However the un-normalised
Levenshtein distance (LD) can yield biased results when
comparing sequences of different lengths. The post-normalized edit distance (PNED) attenuates this effect, but
it tends to yield smaller values for comparisons between
similar-length strings. The normalized edit distance
(NED) was tested in other fields (for example pattern
recognition) and can be considered as a similarity measure that is really independent of the length of the comparison [17-19].
Distance matrices were generated by pairwise comparison of CDR3s from sequences in the PNG benchmark
dataset using un-normalised, post-normalised and normalised Levenshtein distances. The benchmark dataset
sequences were then clustered based on these distance
matrices and the resulting clusters were compared to
the benchmark “expert” clustering. Comparisons were
performed using a range of gap penalties (0 to 8) and
the best results were obtained in all cases with a fixed
gap penalty of 3 per gap (independent of gap length).
This value was subsequently adopted for all other tests.
Table 2 demonstrates that the Normalized Edit Distance
provided a better clustering of clonally related sequence
sets than the other two distance measures.
Incorporating germline gene identity into the distance
metric

The CDR3 is the most variable region of the immunoglobulin V domain, and was therefore selected as the
main criterion for clonal relatedness. However clonally
related sequences share the same component germline
genes and therefore including this information into the

comparison should improve its accuracy. IGHD germline gene identity was not used as a criterion as this
gene is difficult to identify accurately [20] and it is completely contained within the CDR3. For IGHV and
IGHJ, germline gene assignments obtained from iHMMune-align were compared for each pair of sequences.
Penalties for mismatches at the level of the allele, gene
and subgroup were used to modify the CDR3 edit distance as detailed in Methods. Several combinations of
penalties were trialled and the best performing scoring
scheme (5 for mismatching family, 3 for mismatching
gene, 1 for mismatching allele) was selected. The resulting distance metric (NED_VJ) improved the accuracy of
clonally-related set identification in the benchmark set
relative to the unmodified distance (NED) (Table 2).
Distance threshold estimation

An agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm was
used to group sequences on the basis of their pairwise
distance and to construct a dendrogram. An average
linkage scheme [21] was implemented to calculate the
mean distance between each elements of each cluster.
In order to estimate the threshold distance below
which a cluster corresponds to a clonally related
sequence set, an evaluation graph showing the cumulative merging of sequences into clusters as the threshold
distance between leaves is increased was plotted. This
graph was constructed for the PNG, PW99 and PW57
datasets, using NED_VJ as similarity measure. Figure 1
shows this graph (derived from the whole dataset) juxtaposed with a sample dendrogram (consisting of 90 random selected sequences from PNG dataset) to clarify
the merging process used in the evaluation graph. The
PNG graph shows that after an initial rapid merging of
clonally-related sequences into clusters, the plot flattens
out as there are fewer similar sequences to merge into
clusters. Once the merging distance increases to a level
where the program starts clustering clonally-unrelated

Table 2 Comparison of distance measures for clustering immunoglobulin gene variable sequences
Clustering
method

Number of clusters
below the threshold

(a) Expert
inspection

67

(b) LD

117

(c) PNED

93

Number of sequences in
clusters below threshold
184

Number of clusters
different from benchmark
set

Number of incorrectly
assigned sequences

Correctly
clustered
sequences (%)

4

16

95.1

364

71

182

50.0

258

36

76

70.5

(d) NED

78

211

15

29

85.9

(e) NED_VJ

70

190

4

8

95.8

Sequences in the benchmark PNG dataset were clustered using the following 4 methods (a) Expert inspection carried out by visual inspection of the partitioned
gene segments without automated clustering. (b) LD: automated clustering based on pairwise Levenshtein Distance between CDR3 sequences. (c) PNED:
automated clustering based on post-normalized edit distance. The Levenshtein Distances of each sequence pair is normalize by square root of the length of
longer sequence in comparison. (d) NED: automated clustering based on the Normalized Edit Distance. (e) NED_VJ: automated clustering based on the
Normalized Edit Distance, incorporating germline gene identity. Gap penalties of 3 were applied to each automated method. The resulting clusterings were
evaluated relative to the “benchmark” clustering obtained by combination of automated clustering and visual inspection.

Chen et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 1):S4
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S1/S4

Figure 1 Maximum distance (NED_VJ) within a cluster versus
number of clusters processed for the PNG, PW99 and PW57
datasets. The red line corresponds to the distance threshold below
which sequences are considered to be clonally-related.

sequences the slope of the curve increases sharply. A
cutoff distance of 0.32 (red line) allows good discrimination between clonally-related and unrelated sequences in
the PNG set as well as correct clustering of all the
sequences in the PW99 and PW57 sets.
Algorithm performance

The performance of the algorithm can be evaluated by
evaluating the performance of the edit distance calculation algorithm and that of the agglomerative hierarchical
clustering algorithm.
Given two gene sequences X and Y of lengths m and
n, and n ≤ m. Let LD(X, Y) be the Levenshtein Distance
between X and Y, and NED(X,Y) be the normalized edit
distance between X and Y. Using dynamic programming, the computation of LD(X,Y) can be finished in O
(mn) time and memory space The actual space requirements can be reduced to O(n) in implementation [17].
However, calculation of NED requires higher time and
space complexity. According to Marzal and Vidal [17]
NED requires computing NED(X,Y) in O(m · n2) time
and an array of (m+1) · (n+1) · (m+n) memory locations.

Page 4 of 7

The time and space complexities of calculating a distance matrix within a gene sequence dataset greatly
depends on the size of the dataset S. Time and space
complexity will increase by S2.
Agglomerative hierarchical clustering using averagelink clustering merges in each iteration the pair of clusters with the highest cohesion. This algorithm does not
scale well: the time complexity is at least O(n2), where n
is the number of total objects.
However CDR3 sequences are short sequences with
lengths usually no more than 80 nucleotides. Therefore
the computation of NED for each pair of sequences can
be managed in a reasonably short time. The main limitation in the performance of the program is due to the
large number of sequences being analysed. In our
experiments with high-throughput data obtained by 454
sequencing [22], the largest datasets always comprised
less than 5000 non-redundant sequences per individual.
We have tested the performance of our program on the
PNG dataset (1116 sequences) and on a dataset containing 4152 sequences, using a personal laptop computer
with fairly standard specifications (Intel Core 2 Duo
2.53GHz, with 4GB RAM, Ubuntu Linux 8.04). The program was analysed the PNG dataset in 85.4 seconds and
the large dataset in 1773 seconds (29.55 minutes). This
level of performance is acceptable when considering the
time required for generating and partitioning the
sequence sets.

Discussion
B cell diversification is an integral part of the normal
immune response and includes processes of somatic
hypermutation (SHM) and isotype class switching within
the germinal centres of the lymph nodes [20]. Understanding the origin and clonal evolution of B cells is critical to the overall understanding of the immune
response in disease. A number of studies [3-5] have
demonstrated the usefulness of analysing clonally-related
immunoglobulin gene sequence sets in this context.
We designed a tool for identifying clonally related sets
as a component in a pipeline for processing highthroughput rearranged immunoglobulin gene sequence
data. This tool requires as input a set of sequences partitioned into their likely component germline gene
using iHMMune-align, and labels these sequences with
information about their likely clonally-related sequence
cluster membership. iHMMune-align is used to obtain
the identity of the IGHV and IGHJ genes and was
selected as it is a component of our analysis pipeline
and the only currently available utility suitable for scriptable high-throughput analysis. However there is no reason why the clustering program cannot be modified to
make use of other partitioning programs such as

Chen et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 1):S4
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S1/S4

IMGT/V-QUEST or SoDA if these are available in highthroughput versions.
Standard phylogeny inference methods are not suitable for exploring clonal relationships within an immunoglobulin gene sequence dataset as antibodies diversify
through processes that differ substantially from those of
long time scale evolutionary events. However, string
comparison methods that are widely used in sequence
analysis are still applicable: sequence insertions, deletions and substitutions can be thought of as editing
operations that transform one string into another. Pairwise distances between sequences can be calculated
from string edit distances. Clonally related sequences
are similar in length and have many common mutations,
and this is reflected in their pairwise edit distances. A
dendrogram representing the hierarchical structure of
the relationship between sequences can then be
constructed.
The major differences between different hierarchical
clustering algorithms are the measure of similarity
between each pair of clusters and the underlying modelling of the clusters. Distance measures which can accurately represent relationships between sequences result
in improved accuracy in the identification of clonally
related sets. The Levenshtein distance is the most commonly used metric for measuring the dissimilarity
between strings. However, it is not very suitable for
strings of different lengths since it lacks normalization
for appropriately weighting edit operations relative to
the length of the strings being compared. It should be
clear that one difference between two short strings is
more critical than one difference between two longer
strings.
There are two well-known approaches for normalizing
the Levenshtein distance: one based on the editing path
lengths (normalized edit distance, NED), and the other
on the string lengths (post normalized edit distance,
PNED). Post normalized edit distance (PNED) normalizes the editing transformation by the length of one
of the strings, while NED normalizes the editing transformation by the alignment path length. Marzal and
Vidal [17] demonstrated the improved accuracy of NED
relative to PNED when comparing string patterns. Our
results also demonstrated that NED resulted in
improved accuracy when clustering clonally-related
immunoglobulin gene sequences relative to PNED and
to the un-normalized Levenshtein distance.
The clustering accuracy was further improved by
incorporating information about common usage of V
and J genes between sequences, in addition to the CDR3
similarity. However CDR3 similarity remains the main
criterion, as it is less sensitive to potential errors in
germline gene identification. The resulting NED_VJ distance produced a clustering of clonally-related

Page 5 of 7

sequences in the benchmark set that, when examined by
domain experts, was found to improve on their initial
classification by visual inspection of the iHMMune-align
outputs. This demonstrates the value of our approach
not only in automating the painstaking task of identifying clonally-related sequence sets by visual inspection
but also in improving the accuracy of that identification.
Various combinations of values for the gap, V mismatch and J mismatch penalty parameters were tested
using the PNG dataset in order to select the best performing values. The PNG dataset covers a wide range of
germline gene usage and mutation level and is very
likely to be representative of most heavy chain gene
sets. The resulting values are therefore likely to be suitable for all immunoglobulin heavy chain gene sets. However the user has the option of modifying these values if
deemed necessary.
One issue with clonally-related sequence identification
is the presence of sets of sequences which appear clonally-related but are only similar as a result of chance
matching. This is particularly an issue with sequences
containing very short IGHD genes where CDR3 similarity can more readily occur by chance and is less likely
to reflect a common clonal origin. This issue was
addressed by selecting a conservative distance threshold
below which a cluster is considered to be a clonallyrelated sequence set, although this may decrease the
sensitivity of our method. Some improvements may be
obtained by taking into account IGHD gene identity and
number of shared mutations, when these can be determined with confidence [20].
Another source of error in the classification of the
benchmark dataset was the presence of chimeric
sequences in the dataset. These chimeric sequences are
formed from recombination of two sequences and may
have identical CDR3 sequences, but different V genes.
Our method relies primarily on CDR3 differences for
identifying clonally related sets, and therefore cannot
avoid erroneous clustering of chimeric sequences. This
problem was minimised by inclusion of IGHV identity
in distance calculations.

Conclusions
The identification of clonally related immunoglobulin
gene sequences is usually performed by visual inspection
of N1, IGHD and N2 regions from sequences previously
identified as having the same IGHV and IGHJ regions,
This visual inspection method is unsuitable for analysing
high throughput sequencing data obtained using newly
developed DNA sequencing technologies. To our knowledge, the hierarchical clustering based method presented
here is the first automated method for clonally related
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene identification. It identified clonally-related sequences with more accuracy

Chen et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 1):S4
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S1/S4

than visual inspection alone, and successfully identified
the known PW57 and PW99 clonally related sets when
they were mixed into a much larger set of immunoglobulin gene sequences.
Our current method uses the most highly variable
region in immunoglobulin gene, CDR3, as a key indicator
of clonal relatedness and supplements it with information
about shared V and J gene usage. Best results in terms of
both speed and accuracy were obtained when preinspecting the input datasets to filter out sequencing
errors and especially chimeric sequences. However, in
the absence of an automated method for detecting such
error sequences, our method can still be applied to unfiltered data sets as visual detection of chimeric sequences
is easier on a dataset that has been processed to identify
clonally-related sequences. In such a dataset, chimeric
sequences typically show a pattern of IGHV mutations
that differ significantly from the other sequences in their
cluster and therefore stand out in the results.
Clustering-based identification of clonal relatedness in
immunoglobulin heavy chain genes improves our ability
to study the clonal expansion in B cells, and provides a
new tool for understanding the immune response in a
large number of clinically important conditions including autoimmune diseases, infectious diseases and cancer

Methods

Page 6 of 7

The CDR3 ending length library storing the distances
between the start of each IGHJ germline gene and the
end of CDR3 (defined as the first TGG (Trp) codon)
was constructed in the same way.
Partitioning of immunoglobulin sequences

Rearranged V-D-J sequences were aligned to the
reported germline repertoire using the iHMMune-align
program, an alignment tool based on a hidden Markov
model of the rearranged variable domain [8]. Sequences
were partitioned into V, N1, D, N2 and J segments, and
V/D/J segments were assigned to the most appropriate
germline gene/allele.
Extraction of immunoglobulin CDR3 sequences

For each iHMMune-align-partitioned sequence, the CDR3
was extracted by concatenating the end of the IGHV
region (as defined by the CDR3 starting length library),
the N1, IGHD, N2 regions and the beginning of the IGHJ
region (as defined by the CDR3 ending length library).
Calculation and normalisation of edit distance between
CDR3 sequences

Levenshtein distance (LD), post-normalized edit distance
(PNED) and normalized edit distance (NED) were calculated from pairs of CDR3 sequences using the described
algorithms [16-18], implemented in a Java program.

Immunoglobulin sequences sets

The PNG immunoglobulin sequence set was sampled
from blood from a cohort of Papua New Guinea individuals. Sequences were visually inspected to filter out
sequencing errors before running the test. The two
other benchmark sets of clonally related sequences,
PW99 and PW57, were derived from tonsillar IgD classswitched B cells [15], and consist of 57 and 99 unique
sequences known to be derived from the same V-D-J
rearrangements.
Construction of CDR3 starting and ending length libraries

The human germline IGHV and IGHJ repertoires were
the same repertoires used by the current version of
iHMMune-align. They include sequences obtained from
IMGT [22,23,25] modified on the basis of a recent reevaluation of the germline IGHV repertoire [22,26].
The CDR3 was defined as per the IMGT unique numbering [27], from position 105 to position 117 (codon or
amino acid). This corresponds to the DNA regions
between the IGHV region 2 nd -CYS 104and the IGHJ
region J-TRP 118.
The IGHV germline repertoire was processed through
IMGT/V-QUEST [6] to calculate, for each IGHV germline
gene in the repertoire, the distance between the CDR3
start nucleotide and the end of the IGHV germline gene,
which was stored in a CDR3 starting length library.

Calculation of NED-VJ distance

In the iHMMune-align results, V regions are identified
by subgroup, gene and allele [28] (e.g. for IGHV1-2*01,
subgroup is IGHV1, gene is IGHV1-2 and allele is
IGHV1-2*01). IGHJ germline genes are not classified
into families and are therefore labelled only with gene
and allele numbers.
The NED_VJ distance was calculated as:
NED _ VJ =

(LD + Sv + SJ )
L

Where LD is the un-normalised Levenshtein distance,
SV is the mismatch penalty for IGHV germline gene (0
when the two sequences match the same IGHV gene, 1
when only the allele differs, 3 when the gene differs, and
5 for different subgroups), SJ is the mismatch penalty for
IGHJ gene (0 when the two sequences match the same
IGHJ germline gene, 1 when they differ only in allele
assignment and 3 when they match different genes). L is
the CDR3 alignment length (edit path length).
Hierarchical clustering

Agglomerative hierarchical clustering was performed
using the mean distance between elements of each cluster (average linkage) to build a dendrogram for the

Chen et al. Immunome Research 2010, 6(Suppl 1):S4
http://www.immunome-research.com/content/6/S1/S4

sequence set. The algorithm was implemented in Java.
The resulting dendrogram was stored as an XML tree
file.

Page 7 of 7

7.

8.

Extraction of clonally related sequence sets

The distance threshold defining a clonally-related
sequence cluster was determined by analysis of the overall agglomerative clustering pattern in the PNG dataset
and using two sets of sequences known to be clonallyrelated (PW57 and PW99). Sub-clusters below this
threshold were extracted and stored into XML sub-tree
files. Clonally-related sequence sets were also output as
a comma-delimited text file for import into a spreadsheet for further analysis.

9.

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Michael Bain and Katherine Jackson for helpful comments
and feedback.
This article has been published as part of Immunome Research Volume 6
Supplement 1, 2010: Ninth International Conference on Bioinformatics
(InCoB2010): Immunome Research. The full contents of the supplement are
available online at http://www.immunome-research.com/supplements/6/S1.

15.

16.
17.

Author details
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South
Wales, NSW 2052, Australia. 2School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, University of New South Wales, NSW 2052, Australia.

18.

Authors’ contributions
ZC developed, implemented and tested the algorithm under the supervision
of BG. YW and AC provided the benchmark datasets and expert evaluation
of the method as well as feedback on its performance. All authors reviewed
and agree with the final version of the manuscript.

20.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

19.

21.
22.

Published: 27 September 2010
23.
References
1. Jung D, Giallourakis C, Mostoslavsky R, Alt FW: Mechanism and control of
V(D)J recombination at the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus. Annu Rev
Immunol 2006, 24:541-570.
2. Boyd SD, Marshall EL, Merker JD, Maniar JM, Zhang LN, Sahaf B, Jones CD,
Simen BB, Hanczaruk B, Nguyen KD, et al: Measurement and clinical
monitoring of human lymphocyte clonality by massively parallel VDJ
pyrosequencing. Sci Transl Med 2009, 1:12ra23.
3. Tabibian-Keissar H, Zuckerman NS, Barak M, Dunn-Walters DK, SteimanShimony A, Chowers Y, Ofek E, Rosenblatt K, Schiby G, Mehr R, Barshack I:
B-cell clonal diversification and gut-lymph node trafficking in ulcerative
colitis revealed using lineage tree analysis. Eur J Immunol 2008,
38:2600-2609.
4. Zuckerman NS, Howard WA, Bismuth J, Gibson K, Edelman H, BerrihAknin S, Dunn-Walters D, Mehr R: Ectopic GC in the thymus of
myasthenia gravis patients show characteristics of normal GC. Eur J
Immunol 2010, 40:1150-1161.
5. Manske MK, Zuckerman NS, Timm MM, Maiden S, Edelman H, Shahaf G,
Barak M, Dispenzieri A, Gertz MA, Mehr R, Abraham RS: Quantitative
analysis of clonal bone marrow CD19+ B cells: use of B cell lineage trees
to delineate their role in the pathogenesis of light chain amyloidosis.
Clin Immunol 2006, 120:106-120.
6. Brochet X, Lefranc MP, Giudicelli V: IMGT/V-QUEST: the highly customized
and integrated system for IG and TR standardized V-J and V-D-J
sequence analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:W503-508.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Volpe JM, Cowell LG, Kepler TB: SoDA: implementation of a 3D alignment
algorithm for inference of antigen receptor recombinations.
Bioinformatics 2006, 22:438-444.
Gaeta BA, Malming HR, Jackson KJ, Bain ME, Wilson P, Collins AM:
iHMMune-align: hidden Markov model-based alignment and
identification of germline genes in rearranged immunoglobulin gene
sequences. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:1580-1587.
Wang X, Wu D, Zheng S, Sun J, Tao L, Li Y, Cao Z: Ab-origin: an enhanced
tool to identify the sourcing gene segments in germline for rearranged
antibodies. BMC Bioinformatics 2008, 9(Suppl 12):S20.
Rock EP, Sibbald PR, Davis MM, Chien YH: CDR3 length in antigen-specific
immune receptors. J Exp Med 1994, 179:323-328.
Rosenberg WM, Moss PA, Bell JI: Variation in human T cell receptor V
beta and J beta repertoire: analysis using anchor polymerase chain
reaction. Eur J Immunol 1992, 22:541-549.
Sanz I: Multiple mechanisms participate in the generation of diversity of
human H chain CDR3 regions. J Immunol 1991, 147:1720-1729.
Saada R, Weinberger M, Shahaf G, Mehr R: Models for antigen receptor
gene rearrangement: CDR3 length. Immunol Cell Biol 2007, 85:323-332.
Miqueu P, Guillet M, Degauque N, Dore JC, Soulillou JP, Brouard S:
Statistical analysis of CDR3 length distributions for the assessment of T
and B cell repertoire biases. Mol Immunol 2007, 44:1057-1064.
Zheng NY, Wilson K, Wang X, Boston A, Kolar G, Jackson SM, Liu YJ,
Pascual V, Capra JD, Wilson PC: Human immunoglobulin selection
associated with class switch and possible tolerogenic origins for C delta
class-switched B cells. J Clin Invest 2004, 113:1188-1201.
Levenshtein VI: Binary Codes Capable of Correcting Deletions, Insertions
and Reversals. Soviet Physics Doklady 1966, 10:707-710.
Marzal A, Vidal E: Computation of Normalized Edit Distance and
Applications. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 1993, 15:926-932.
Yujian L, Bo L: A Normalized Levenshtein Distance Metric. IEEE Trans
Pattern Anal Mach Intell 2007, 29:1091-1095.
Arslan AN, Egecioglu O: An Efficient Uniform-Cost Normalized Edit
Distance Algorithm. String Processing and Information Retrieval Symposium
& International Workshop on Groupware; Cancun, Mexico IEEE Computer
SocietyOmer E 1999, 8.
Jackson KJ, Gaeta BA, Collins AM: Identifying highly mutated IGHD genes
in the junctions of rearranged human immunoglobulin heavy chain
genes. J Immunol Methods 2007, 324:26-37.
Mitchell TM: Machine Learning. New York ; London: McGraw-Hill 1997.
Boyd SD, Gaeta BA, Jackson KJ, Fire AZ, Marshall EL, Merker JD, Maniar JM,
Zhang LN, Sahaf B, Jones CD, et al: Individual variation in the germline Ig
gene repertoire inferred from variable region gene rearrangements. J
Immunol 2010, 184:6986-6992.
Lefranc MP, Giudicelli V, Ginestoux C, Jabado-Michaloud J, Folch G,
Bellahcene F, Wu Y, Gemrot E, Brochet X, Lane J, et al: IMGT, the
international ImMunoGeneTics information system. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, 37:D1006-1012.
Lefranc MP: IMGT, the international ImMunoGeneTics information
system: a standardized approach for immunogenetics and
immunoinformatics. Immunome Res 2005, 1:3.
Giudicelli V, Chaume D, Lefranc MP: IMGT/GENE-DB: a comprehensive
database for human and mouse immunoglobulin and T cell receptor
genes. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:D256-261.
Wang Y, Jackson KJ, Sewell WA, Collins AM: Many human immunoglobulin
heavy-chain IGHV gene polymorphisms have been reported in error.
Immunol Cell Biol 2008, 86:111-115.
Lefranc MP, Pommie C, Ruiz M, Giudicelli V, Foulquier E, Truong L,
Thouvenin-Contet V, Lefranc G: IMGT unique numbering for
immunoglobulin and T cell receptor variable domains and Ig
superfamily V-like domains. Dev Comp Immunol 2003, 27:55-77.
Lefranc MP: WHO-IUIS Nomenclature Subcommittee for
immunoglobulins and T cell receptors report. Immunogenetics 2007,
59:899-902.

doi:10.1186/1745-7580-6-S1-S4
Cite this article as: Chen et al.: Clustering-based identification of
clonally-related immunoglobulin gene sequence sets. Immunome
Research 2010 6(Suppl 1):S4.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
