<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Single feature polymorphism (SFP)-based selective sweep identification and association mapping of growth-related metabolic traits in Arabidopsis thaliana</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:188. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-188"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Liam H Childs"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Single feature polymorphism (SFP)-based
selective sweep identification and association
mapping of growth-related metabolic traits in
Arabidopsis thaliana
Liam H Childs1*†, Hanna Witucka-Wall2†, Torsten Günther3,4†, Ronan Sulpice1, Maria V Korff2,5, Mark Stitt1,
Dirk Walther1, Karl J Schmid6, Thomas Altmann2,4

Abstract
Background: Natural accessions of Arabidopsis thaliana are characterized by a high level of phenotypic variation
that can be used to investigate the extent and mode of selection on the primary metabolic traits. A collection of
54 A. thaliana natural accession-derived lines were subjected to deep genotyping through Single Feature
Polymorphism (SFP) detection via genomic DNA hybridization to Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0 Arrays for the detection of
selective sweeps, and identification of associations between sweep regions and growth-related metabolic traits.
Results: A total of 1,072,557 high-quality SFPs were detected and indications for 3,943 deletions and 1,007
duplications were obtained. A significantly lower than expected SFP frequency was observed in protein-, rRNA-,
and tRNA-coding regions and in non-repetitive intergenic regions, while pseudogenes, transposons, and noncoding RNA genes are enriched with SFPs. Gene families involved in plant defence or in signalling were identified
as highly polymorphic, while several other families including transcription factors are depleted of SFPs. 198
significant associations between metabolic genes and 9 metabolic and growth-related phenotypic traits were
detected with annotation hinting at the nature of the relationship. Five significant selective sweep regions were
also detected of which one associated significantly with a metabolic trait.
Conclusions: We generated a high density polymorphism map for 54 A. thaliana accessions that highlights the
variability of resistance genes across geographic ranges and used it to identify selective sweeps and associations
between metabolic genes and metabolic phenotypes. Several associations show a clear biological relationship,
while many remain requiring further investigation.

Background
Many plant species show a wide geographical range
across contrasting ecological environments. Reciprocal
transplantation experiments of ecotypes from different
geographic origins in a common garden, provided evidence for local adaptation within the species range that
resulted in fitness differences [1-3]. Local adaptation by
means of natural selection affects both the interaction
with the abiotic environment, such as soil, temperature
or photoperiod, as well as biotic interactions with
* Correspondence: childs@mpimp-golm.mpg.de
† Contributed equally
1
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Mühlenberg 1,
14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany

competitors, pathogens and pollinators [4]. Frequently,
plant species show a high level of phenotypic variation
among ecotypes in morphology, phenology and biochemistry that is geographically structured [5,6]. The
high levels of phenotypic diversity lead to a key question: Which traits are polymorphic due to natural selection and which ones result from the differential fixation
of random mutations by genetic drift? Since plants are
sessile organisms showing highly structured populations
and a propensity for self-fertilization, random drift is
expected to play a significant role in local populations.
Therefore, one of the central goals of plant evolutionary
biology is to disentangle the effects of both processes, to

© 2010 Childs et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

identify traits under selection and the genes controlling
these traits.
Natural accessions of Arabidopsis thaliana are characterized by a high level of phenotypic variation in morphological, developmental, metabolic, resistance and
reproductive traits [6]. Since A. thaliana shows a large
distribution range throughout the Northern Hemisphere
[7] and grows in highly differentiated local habitats, it is
ideally suited to investigate the roles of drift and selection in phenotypic variation. For example, flowering
time and the vernalisation response show a latitudinal
gradient across Europe [8,9], suggesting local adaptation
to different day lengths. Early flowering plants with a
summer annual habit are predominately observed in
Southern Europe whereas late flowering plants with a
strong vernalisation response tend to occur in Northern
Europe. Major candidate genes controlling flowering
time and vernalisation response have been identified
and allelic variation segregating at these loci shows evidence of positive Darwinian selection [10-12]. A similar
variation in flowering time was also observed in other
species, indicating that latitudinal pattern does not
result from past historical processes like the re-colonization of glacial habitats and the fixation of new mutations
by genetic drift, but resembles local adaptation. Genes
that mediate resistance to pathogens (R genes) are also
well known to be highly polymorphic in A. thaliana
[13] and indications of various modes of selection acting
on these genes have been obtained [13-20].
In addition to flowering time and pathogen resistance,
the utilization of available resources is of central importance for plant fitness. Nutrient availability and the
environmental conditions influencing carbon fixation
show a high level of spatial and temporal variation. Very
substantial variation of biomass accumulation and metabolite composition has recently been observed across
A. thaliana accessions [21-23] suggesting that local
adaptation involves changes in metabolic traits that may
result from natural selection. In A. thaliana, a positive
correlation between above-ground biomass and fecundity was found [24] as well as a strong correlation
between biomass and the metabolic profile in a recombinant inbred line population of two genetically divergent accessions [25]. A subsequent analysis of 94
A. thaliana accessions uncovered much phenotypic variation in more than 90 metabolites and significant negative correlations between biomass and several
metabolites [23]. This work also revealed starch as a
major integrator of the metabolic response. Allelic variation at two candidate genes, whose expression is affected
by carbon regulation are associated with biomass,
thereby providing a target for natural selection. While
positive selection has been shown to operate on genes
involved in the synthesis of compounds involved in

Page 2 of 15

plant defence and to drive diversification in plant secondary metabolism [26], and despite the documentation
of significant genetic variation in enzyme activities of
primary (and secondary) metabolism in A. thaliana
[27,28], very little information is available on the extent
and mode of selection on primary metabolic traits in
plants.
Hybridization-based arrays have been used to address
a broad range of questions related to genomic variation
[29], such as the identification of natural variation
between closely related organisms [30]. Tiling arrays
hold sets of microarray hybridization probes that contain both genic and non-genic portions of the genome
and can be used to discover polymorphisms throughout
the entire genome. Such polymorphisms are called single feature polymorphisms (SFPs) because they differ
from a common reference sequence. Although the exact
nature of polymorphism in SFPs is difficult to identify
they have been established to be a useful alternative to
the genotyping of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) [31].
In the present study we seek to widen the scope of previous genotyping experiments by increasing the number
of studied accessions and the density of SFP calling and
by broadening the analysis to include representative primary metabolic traits. Two previous studies both investigated ~20 accessions with two different types of arrays:
the Affymetrix ATH1 microarray [32] and the Perlegen
high density re-sequencing microarray [33]. While the
high density re-sequencing arrays provide the best possible resolution available for a hybridization-based
approach, high cost limits the number of accessions that
can be investigated. The ATH1 microarray on the other
hand is limited to ~11 probes per annotated gene. By
using the Affymetrix Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0 Array and
analysing 54 accessions, we substantially increased the
coverage of the A. thaliana population analysed by deep
genotyping and phenotyping at the cost of not covering
29% of the genome and not knowing the exact nature of
the underlying polymorphism. We also aim to add to the
type of traits studied in A. thaliana by including phenotypic and metabolic data. Metabolic traits have been chosen primarily based on their correlation with biomass in
a set of 94 accessions [23]. Five of them significantly correlated with biomass (proteins, total amino acids, sucrose,
starch and threonic acid) while three metabolites did not
show any significant correlation (erythritol, b-alanine,
and myo-inositol). Using both types of data, we tested
associations between metabolic and growth-related traits
such as fresh weight, protein content and metabolite
levels and polymorphisms of metabolic genes. In a
further step we demonstrate how genome-wide SFPs can
be used to detect genomic regions showing signs of
recent selection that are associated with phenotypic

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

variation in metabolic traits. Our goal was to identify
genomic regions and genes that harbor genetic variation
that played a role during the recent history of A. thaliana
and may have contributed to local adaptation and to use
the physiological data to seek indications of the involvement of changes in growth and metabolic features. We
achieved this by identification of regions with unusual
haplotype structures that may have resulted from the
rapid fixation of advantageous mutations and by testing
for significant associations with phenotypic variation in
the aforementioned growth-related and metabolic traits.

Results
Patterns of SFP diversity

Using Affymetrix Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0 Arrays, high
density SFP maps for 54 genetically diverse A. thaliana
accessions were created. An analysis of various possible
SFP prediction criteria using a Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) reveals that the log base 2 (log2)-fold change
between Col-0 and non-Col-0 arrays accounts for greater
than 99% of the predictive power and is more discriminatory than other tested predictive variables including well
established and previously used statistical measures such
as Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) or Student’s t-test (Additional File 1, Figure S2.7). Based on
these results, a threshold to the log2-fold change in order
to call SFPs based on hybridization signals was applied as
it provides the best sensitivity and specificity with the
lowest computational time.
The quality of the predicted SFPs for 12 accessions was
tested against the 2010 dataset of SNPs determined by
sequencing [34] using Receiver Operator Characteristic
(ROC) plots. A threshold of -1.5 (2.8-fold decrease in signal) was applied to the log2-fold change based on the plots
as it produced a suitable False Discovery Rate (FDR - the
proportion of false positives among the called SFPs) across
the 12 accessions. At this threshold, we were able to predict SFPs at FDRs between 0.45% and 16.0% (Additional
File 1, Table S2.1). The False Negative Rates (FNRs defined as the proportion of false negatives among all
polymorphic probes) were estimated to be between 60%
and 70% when compared to the 2010 dataset. These relatively high FNRs were due to the stringent threshold set to
reduce the number of false positives. False negatives, i.e.
probes showing weak differences in signal intensities upon
hybridization with perfect match DNA versus mismatch
DNA are probably caused by cumulative effects of properties of the probes and the nature of the sequence polymorphisms: The position of an SNP in a probe, the
number of SNPs in a probe and the %G+C of probe
(Additional File 1, Figures S2.1-2.5) all affected the
observed fold changes in signal. The effect of three properties on the probe signal intensity was also tested. By using
only probes with a single exact match to the A. thaliana

Page 3 of 15

genome to call SFPs, we obtained 1,072,557 SFP sites
across 54 accessions. The overall SFP density distribution
as well as the corresponding gene density across all five
Arabidopsis chromosomes is plotted in Figure 1. Based on
calculations using the 12 accessions shared with the 2010
dataset, 15% of the predicted SFP sites are estimated to
have more than two alleles. It can be expected that this
proportion increases with more accessions. On average,
159,313 SFPs were called per accession ranging from
111,259 in Co-3 to 231,383 in H-O-G (Additional File 1,
Table S2.2). Our control, Col-0, is used as the reference
genome on the array, and produced only 1,560 SFPs, thus
confirming the applied SFP calling procedure produces a
low FDR.
Using the TAIR8 genomic annotation information
[35], we compared the observed number of SFP sites in
genomic features with the expected number under the
assumption of a random SFP distribution. For each
genomic feature, we calculated the significance of the
difference from random expectation using an unpaired
Students t-test. As expected, SFP site frequency per
nucleotide is significantly reduced in functional regions
of the chromosomes (Figure 2). Interestingly, also intergenic regions showed a significantly lower than expected
frequency of SFPs. By contrast, there is a significantly
higher than expected frequency of SFP sites per nucleotide in non-coding RNA, pseudogenes, and transposons.
Introns, miRNA, snRNA and snoRNA show no significant difference from a random distribution.
For protein coding regions, we collated functional categories from TAIR and NCBI. Of these 40 chosen gene
families, 20 contained a significantly greater than random
number of SFPs and 18 contained significantly fewer
SFPs than expected from a random distribution. Disease
resistance, plant defence and signalling genes comprised
the majority of the gene families, which were enriched in
SFPs. Various transcriptions factors comprised the
majority of the top 20 most significant gene families,
which were observed depleted in SFPs (Figure 3).
Deletions and duplications

Using the Affymetrix Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0 Array, consecutive stretches of SFPs were observed that may be
caused by an accumulation of many sequence alterations
in a certain region resulting in highly deviant non-Col-0
alleles or may be due to deletions. Thus, to classify such
regions as deletions it was assumed that strong sequence
deviations of non-Col-0 alleles are likely to be confined
to short stretches of coding regions and, therefore, consecutive SFP stretches that were longer than the average
A. thaliana exon were deletions (~350 bp or 10 SFPs).
For simplicity, the same threshold was applied to detecting duplications. 3,943 deleted regions with a mean
length of 1,086 bp (on average 28 probes in a row) were

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

Page 4 of 15

Figure 1 The density of SFPs and genes across each chromosome of A. thaliana. SFP density is calculated for all accessions per base pair
(bp) using a sliding window of 50 kbp and the density at each position is plotted on a log scale (shown in black). The gene density, calculated
as coding bp per every 50,000 genomic bp is also calculated (shown in light blue). The olive regions show the position of the centromeres.
Deletions are shown in red and are defined as 10 probes in a row that were called SFPs (~350 bp). In the figure, the number of deleted bp
calculated in a 50 kbp window. We have defined a duplication to be at least 10 probes in a row with a log2-fold change of greater than 1
(2-fold increase in signal). In this figure, the number of duplicated bp is calculated in 50 kb windows across the chromosome (green).

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

Page 5 of 15

Figure 2 The presence of SFPs in various genomic structural features is shown as the number of SFPs per base pair for each entity.
The spread of observed values across all accessions is shown in black. The blue band shows the range between the 1st and 3rd quartile while
the red line shows the median value. A chi-squared test is used to determine whether the observed amount of SFPs per class was close to the
expected number due to random chance. All classes are significantly greater than or less that random (p < 0.05) except for the classes ‘intron’,
‘snRNA’ and ‘snoRNA’.

observed. A small minority of the deleted regions occur
across many accessions; however, the majority occur in
only one. The accessions show a broad range in the
number of deleted regions ranging from 25 in Co-3 to
415 in Dal-12, with a mean of 135 deleted regions per
accession (Additional File 1, Table S2.2). Many of the
areas with a high SFP density are explained by an abundance of deletions. Of the chosen gene families, the
combined length of deletions is largest in Nucleotide
Binding Site-Leucine Rich Repeat (NBS-LRR) genes and
smallest in bHLH transcription factors (Additional
File 1, Table S3.2).
For duplications we chose a threshold of 10 consecutive SFP sites with a fold change of greater than 4-fold
as a conservative estimate of duplication. We detected
1,007 duplicated regions, with a mean length of 1,088
bp. Similar to deleted regions, the majority of duplications occurred only in a single accession, while a small
minority occurred in many accessions. The accessions

also showed a range in the number of duplicated regions
from 8 in Blh-1 to 83 in Shakdara, with a mean of 34
duplicated regions per accession (Additional File 1,
Table S2.2). Like deletions and SFPs, NBS-LRR and
F-box genes had the highest total length of duplicated
regions, whereas many other categories were not represented in duplicated regions at all (Additional File 1,
Figure S3.3). However, in this case, the enrichment in
duplications was not significant for these gene families
although it remained significant for MADS-box transcription factors and glycoside hydrolase. It is of note
that the same gene classes show a high frequency of
insertions and deletions.
Choice of phenotypic traits

Nine phenotypic traits were selected from a larger data
set, including rosette fresh weight (FW) and eight metabolic traits; five of which showed significant correlations
with rosette FW [23]. All of the measured traits used in

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

Page 6 of 15

Figure 3 Number of SFPs in selected gene families. Of the available gene families in Additional File 1, Table S3.1, 13 are shown here that
have been investigated in previous studies for comparison purposes. The observed number (black) of SFPs in a gene family is compared to the
expected number (red) due to random chance. Gene families are sorted by the significance of the difference between observed and expected
SFP numbers. All gene families show significantly different observed SFPs than expected except for RING genes (Additional File 1, Table S3.1).
Deletions follow a similar pattern to SFPs by removing the most nucleotides from resistance, F-box and receptor-like kinase genes but differ by
removing fewer nucleotides from cytoplasmic ribosomal genes. Duplications rarely occur in any of the chosen gene families. Although they do
occur in resistance genes, the difference between observed and expected is not significant.

the association study were shown to be normally distributed. Minimum, maximum and median values are summarized in the Additional File 1, Table S1.2.
Population structure analysis

The analysis of population structure with both the SFP
data and independently genotyped SNPs confirms the
existence of population structure, even among accessions
from Central Europe. It was previously thought that they
represent admixture zones since past glaciation events
[36,37]. A STRUCTURE analysis [38]http://pritch.bsd.
uchicago.edu/structure.html identified four major clusters of accessions (Additional File 1, Figure S1.1-2).
These clusters separate the Central Asian, Eastern

European, Central/Western European and Iberian accessions. A high proportion of the Central European and
Eastern European accessions are admixed individuals,
probably reflecting the effect of postglacial population
admixture and subsequent genomic recombination in
suture zones. The STRUCTURE analysis on SNP data is
supported by clustering based on pairwise distance of the
SFP data (Additional File 1, Figure S2.8). Distance
matrices from both marker systems are highly correlated.
The SNP markers also show a significant correlation
between geographic and genetic distance although it is
weak, possibly because of the large proportion of individuals from Central Europe and the disturbance of the
geographic distribution by human agriculture. Taken

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

together, the population structure analysis indicates the
need for correction of population structure for this sample in the subsequent association study.
Association testing

Association testing was performed between 612,249
unique SFP sites, with a minor allele frequency of at
least 5%, and all nine phenotypic traits using a general
linear model (GLM) as implemented in the TASSEL
program [39] providing an empirical distribution of
F-scores from which the p-values for each marker were
calculated. The effects of population structure were controlled for by using a Q-matrix estimated in STRUCTURE and based on 417 SNPs and four populations
(k = 4) as described in the Additional File 1, Section 1.4.
We applied a significance threshold of p = 1e-3 to
obtain 12,189 significantly associated SFPs for which we
estimate a FDR of 45% based on the empirical distribution as only 5500 random association would be expected
at this significance threshold. We chose to tolerate this
threshold to provide sufficient numbers of associations
for later downstream analysis. However, for later experimental analysis a much more stringent threshold such
as p = 1e-4 will yield a more favourable FDR of 20%.
For a detailed bioinformatics analysis, we focused on
6,187 metabolic SFP sites, defined as the full set of SFPs
detected in the 5,745 metabolic genes annotated in AraCyc, which allows a direct connection to be made
between any significantly associated metabolite and
metabolic genes associated with that metabolite via
known metabolic pathway relationships. After mapping
each SFP site to metabolic genes, 15 metabolic genes
were found to significantly associate with fresh weight,
12 genes with starch, 10 genes with sucrose, 9 genes
with total protein, 40 genes with total amino acids, and
36 genes with threonic acid (Additional File 1, Figure
S4.1). For the three metabolites not correlated with
fresh weight (b-alanine, erythritol, myo-inositol), 20
metabolic genes were found to associate with b-alanine,
30 genes with erythritol, and 26 genes with myo-inositol.
The significantly associated genes, along with the average trait measurement of each phenotype for Col-0 and
non-Col-0 can be found in the Additional File 1, Table
S4.1. In total, a non-redundant set of 198 metabolic
genes associate with the nine traits. Interestingly, 17
genes were associated with more than one trait. In ten
cases, the associations with the different traits were by
the same SFP, while in the other seven cases the different traits were associated with different SFPs within the
same gene. A Mann-Whitney U was used to test the
F-scores of metabolic SFPs against the remaining nonmetabolic SFPs and showed no significant (p = 0.435)
deviation from the empirical distribution implying that

Page 7 of 15

metabolic genes in general are not specifically implicated in the phenotypic variation of the tested traits.
To investigate whether genes serving functions other
than metabolic ones may be more likely associated with
the metabolic traits examined here, we correlated the
total association F-score across all metabolic trait associations with the metabolic gene density for all five
chromosomes. Generally, there were no significant correlations detectable, except for chromosome 3, for
which a positive correlation was found supporting the
notion of metabolic genes being more likely associated
with metabolic genes than other gene categories on this
chromosome (Additional File 1, Figure S4.1).
To provide a broad overview, the pathways significantly over/under-represented in the associations were
identified using a Mann-Whitney U test by comparing
the F-scores belonging to the SFPs annotated with a
particular pathway with those of the remaining metabolic pathways. After multiple testing correction 11
pathways were found to be significantly more associated
with their respective traits than the remaining pathways.
Four pathways, associating with sucrose, show significant (p ≤ 0.01) deviation from the metabolic SFP
F-scores, 4 each for myo-inositol and total protein content, two for starch and threonic acid, and one for erythritol and fresh weight (Additional File 1, Table S4.2).
That significantly over-represented pathways were
detected may indicate that the FDR for associations is
lower than estimated.
Analysis of selective sweeps

Putative selective sweep regions were identified by
detection of unusual patterns of shared haplotypes
among accessions based on the notion that genomic
regions with selected haplotypes will be longer than
regions without selected haplotypes due to hitchhiking
of linked variation with the selected mutation [40].
Hence, young and selected alleles will be surrounded by
extensive linkage disequilibrium (LD) which produces
longer haplotypes, while older alleles would show lower
LD due to recombination. Plots of pairwise SFP haplotype sharing indicate regions with high levels of haplotype sharing (Additional File 1, Figure S5.1). We used
the pairwise haplotype sharing score (PHS), which was
previously applied to A. thaliana data [10]. Five significant sweep regions were identified and designated as
SR1 to SR5 (Table 1 and Figure 4). These regions show
a high proportion of significantly scoring SFPs with
unusual haplotype patterns.
The PHS-test provides the length of the haplotype
around each allele and thus the allele with the
longer haplotype is likely to be the selected allele. The
selected alleles for sweeps regions 1-5 are non-Col-0,

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

Page 8 of 15

Table 1 Overview of sweep-candidate regions used for the association analysis
Name

From

To

SR1

Chr. Focal position
1 12,104,888

12,102,020

12,108,376

Length of avg. haplotype sharing
6,356

SR2

1 23,826,967

23,824,815

23,829,023

4,208

SR3

3 16,905,787

16,905,273

16,906,447

1,174

SR4

3 17,859,222

17,858,441

17,860,021

1,580

SR5

4 198,623

195,197

201,162

5,965

Candidates were called from proportion of high PHS in a sliding window of 2000 SFPs (threshold = 45%). The focal SFP is the highest scoring SFP in the
candidate region.

Col-0, Col-0, non-Col-0 and non-Col-0, respectively.
The neighbouring tendencies of the geographic locations
for like-alleles in each of the five detected sweeps were
calculated using a Mann-Whitney U test to compare the
distances of like alleles in each sweep against those
based on 10,000 shuffled variations (Additional File 1,
Figure S5.3). This shows that the alleles in sweeps SR2,
3 and 5 have significant neighbouring tendencies with
p-values of 3.73E-4, 8.71E-3 and 3.31E-8, respectively.
Combined, these results show that SR2 Col-0 alleles
cluster in Central Europe in Germany, Switzerland and
Czech Republic, the SR3 Col-0 accessions cluster

Figure 4 Map over all sweep candidates. The graph shows the
density of significantly scoring SFPs measured by the proportion of
significant SFPs in a sliding window (windows size of 1000 SFPs,
offset between windows of 50 SFPs) across the genome. The
dashed line represents the cut-off for the definition of sweep
candidates. Sweep candidate regions (SR) are denoted in red.

strongly around Western Germany and around the
Belarusian/Russian border, and the SR5 non-Col-0
accessions cluster around Western Germany, Austria,
Switzerland, and Northern Europe.
The candidate regions range from a length of 145 kb
(SR2) to 353 kb (SR4) and the average length of haplotype sharing around the focal SFP ranges from 1.2 kb
(SR3) to 6.4 kb (SR1). The genome-wide highest scoring
SFP is located in SR3 and, thus, was chosen as focal SFP
for this region. For the other SRs, focal SFPs were chosen similarly as the highest scoring SFP in the candidate
region. The F-scores of the focal SFPs indicate that only
SR5 associates significantly (p = 0.03) with starch. However, the F-scores for all the markers contained within
the sweeps, according to a Mann-Whitney U test, show
a slight but significant bias (p = 0.0013) towards higher
values indicating that markers within sweep regions are
more likely to be associated with one of the nine traits
than those outside the sweep regions.

Discussion
Genotyping through hybridization of genomic DNA to
genome tiling arrays as applied in this study is characterized by an extraordinarily high degree of multiplexation
surpassing all other genotyping methods except the use
of whole-genome re-sequencing microarrays [33] and
genome re-sequencing using second generation sequencing methods [41]: The Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0 array
represents 3,039,991 sites, each 25 nucleotides in length,
of the Arabidopsis thaliana nuclear genome of which
3,035,275 occur uniquely, and can thus be simultaneously
used for identification and localization of sequence variation detected as a substantial deviation of the obtained
hybridization signal from that of the reference (DNA of
the genotype whose sequence has been used to design
the array, Col-0 in the case of A. thaliana). Through the
use of Affymetrix Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0 arrays, we were
able to monitor, in a collection of 54 different non-reference accessions, over one million high quality SFPs. This
substantially expands previous data sets [32,33]. Furthermore, we could detect haplotypes and selective sweeps,
and associate metabolic and phenotypic traits with the
responsible genomic regions. We confirm that SFP

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

monitoring is a viable and cost efficient alternative to
SNP typing as proposed by Kim et al. [31] and also
demonstrated by Borevitz et al. [32], which (in contrast
to the latter approach) does not depend on prior knowledge of sequence variation.
Using known sequence information (the ‘2010 dataset’) [34] of 12 A. thaliana accessions that were also
used in this study, we confirmed that the method used
here is suitable for detection of high quality SFPs. The
obtained FDRs ranging from 0 and 16% are similar or
lower than those reported in previous studies [32,42],
which may be due to improvements of the data normalization and/or the metric used for SNP calling or due to
higher stringency. The latter is reflected in a relatively
high FNR of about 65%. Despite the limitations of the
approach, which lie in coverage (71.4% of the genome),
obscurity (the exact mutation is not identified and
masking of polyallelic variation) and novel/duplicate
sequence (unable to analyse novel sequence or the position of duplications), we were able to create high density
SFP maps. On average we predicted approximately
160,000 SFPs per accession, which is equivalent to about
one SFP per 750 bp of genomic sequence in each pairwise comparison of an accession with the reference.
About 25% to 30% of the SFPs detected in this study
were previously identified as sequence polymorphisms
in each of the 10 accessions that were also investigated
by Clark et al. [43] using resequencing microarrays
(Additional File 1, Table S2.3). The limited overlap
between the two data sets may be explained partly by
the difference in coverage and partly by the different
SNP/SFP detection procedures used in the two
approaches: The resequencing microarray hybridization
data were analysed based on differential hybridization of
8 oligonucleotides for each position in the genome in
order to infer base substitutions [43]. This approach is
sensitive to further adjacent polymorphisms that interfere with the hybridization to all 8 oligonucleotides [44].
In contrast, SFP calling based on signal intensity comparisons of individual probes between hybridizations of
DNA from a particular accession and from the reference
is even enhanced at sites with two or more mismatches.
The reliability of the data is not only verified by the
2010 dataset but also by a phylogenetic tree that we
were also able to construct, based on the SFPs (Additional File 1, Figure S2.8), that groups the accessions
according to their geographic location (Additional
File 1, Figure S1.1).
The frequency of SFPs among the genomic features
shows greater selective pressure on functional regions of
the genome especially in coding areas, rRNA and tRNA.
SFPs occurring in pseudogenes, transposons and noncoding RNA (ncRNA) appear to be under much reduced
selective pressure and, in some accessions, can

Page 9 of 15

accumulate to rates as high as one SFP every 400 bp. Of
the remaining genomic regions, it is remarkable that
non-repetitive intergenic regions also experience a relatively low mutation rate, even lower than that of coding
regions. This could be indicative of hitherto largely
undiscovered functional regions in the A. thaliana genome including regulatory sites.
In addition to individual SFP sites, regions of multiple,
immediately neighbouring, polymorphisms were
detected. Consecutive stretches of 10 or more polymorphic sites (equivalent to at least 350 bp), all showing
reduced signals, were classified as deletions. Across the
54 accessions almost 4000 deleted regions of a mean
length of approx. 1.1 kb were detected, most of which
occur in only a single accession and on average 135
deletions were detected per accession with a total length
of 974 kbp. According to the threshold of 10 consecutive SFP sites, smaller deletions were not considered as
they could not be readily distinguished from instances
of multiple SNPs or multiple small InDels in close vicinity. Furthermore, as only probes with a unique occurrence in the genome sequence were considered, this
analysis was restricted to non-repetitive Col sequence.
The fraction of deleted genome sequences detected here
can thus be regarded as a conservative minimum number. Conversely, regions were called duplicated if 10 or
more adjacent probes displayed greater than a two-fold
increase in hybridization signal. Again, the total of about
1000 duplicated regions of an average length of approx.
1.1 kb (across the 54 accessions with a mean of 34
duplicated regions per accession) has to be regarded as
a minimum number. The notion of substantial variation
in presence or copy number of genomic sequences in
A. thaliana accessions is supported by the previous
observation of 750 InDels larger than 100 bp detected in
263 Mbp shotgun sequence of the Ler-1 accession when
compared to the Col-0 sequence, where 93% of the
InDels identified in total were shorter than 100 bp [45].
A remarkable variation in nuclear DNA content has
been observed through very accurate flow cytometry of
21 A. thaliana accessions [46]. This analysis revealed
approx. 10% higher DNA content in the accessions with
the largest genomes as compared to those with the lowest values. Interestingly, the Col-0 accession, whose full
genome sequence has been used to design the Arabidopsis Tiling 1.0 array, had the lowest genome content
of the 21 accessions analysed. Throughout the present
study we observed fewer duplications than deletions in
the 54 accession analysed. While it remains to be analysed how much of the variation in genomic DNA
across accessions is accounted for by repetitive DNA,
our results indicate that the additional DNA in the
accessions with larger genomes is not merely caused by
increased copy numbers of sequences present in the

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

Col-0 accession (which should have been detected as a
much higher incidence of duplications). Thus, a substantial fraction of the genome complement of the
A. thaliana species represented by the additional
nuclear DNA in many accessions is apparently yet
uncharacterized.
While the detected duplications are so rare that they
do not affect any of the analysed gene families of in
most accessions, their occurrence in some functional
categories is particularly striking in a few accessions: For
example, 22,000 bp of the NBS-LRR disease resistance
genes are duplicated in accession El-0. This is significantly more than the expected 307 bp. In a similar case,
37,000 bp of the MADS-box transcription factors are
duplicated in the Wei-1 accession.
The obtained polymorphism information was used to
investigate the degrees of diversity among a broad range
of functional gene classes. Whether they are duplications, deletions or individual SFPs, there are a much
greater number of polymorphisms than expected at random in disease resistance and defence related gene
families (Additional File 1, Table S3.1-3). Across a broad
geographic range, an encounter with a large spectrum of
pathogens can be expected and the high occurrence of
polymorphisms in the resistance genes reflects the need
for defence genes to adapt to the local pathogens and
environmentally specific challenges. Among the genes
that have the most significantly greater number of SFPs
than expected, are the Nucleotide Binding Site-Leucine
Rich Repeat (NBS-LRR), anthranilate synthase, F-box,
terpene and monooxygenase gene families. All these
gene families are either directly involved or implicated
in plant defence. Transmembrane receptor, thioredoxin,
leucine-rich repeat kinase, receptor-like kinase, and
wall-associated protein kinase gene families and a subset
of the proteins encoded by the other genes families
identified to be highly polymorphic are involved in
inter- and intracellular signalling potentially reflecting
variation in responses to external and internal signals
that may be relevant for local adaptation. F-box, NBSLRR and transmembrane receptor genes have been previously identified as having a high number of polymorphisms [32,43]. On the other hand, many
transcription factors, calmodulin binding genes, helicases, ABC transporters, glycosyl transferases, and acyl
lipid metabolism genes contain significantly fewer SFPs
than expected. Proteins encoded by these genes thus
appear to be involved in more conserved processes.
As a first step towards investigating the viability of
genome-wide associations testing for the identification
of functionally relevant sequence variation, we subjected
all SFP sites to association tests with nine phenotypic
traits including total biomass (fresh weight), starch content, total protein content, total amino acid content, and

Page 10 of 15

contents of five individual metabolites (sucrose, threonic
acid, erythritol, myo-inositol, and b-alanine, with particular focus on those which were located in genes annotated with metabolic functions according to AraCyc. In
total 198 significant gene-trait associations were
detected. In some cases the non-Col-0 allele may actually be a heterogeneous group and elevated numbers of
false negatives are thus expected. This would be the
case when the sub-groups show both raised and lowered
trait measurements relative to Col-0 thus obscuring the
signal even though they may be significant when associated individually. Furthermore, associations caused by
population structure alone are difficult to identify, here
we used the method by Yu [47] as implemented in TASSEL. However, there may still be residual population
structure confounding the data.
Several of the gene functions are directly biologically
related to the trait with which the gene is associated.
These include various amino acid synthesis and degradation genes associated with total amino acids, b-alanine
biosynthesis and putrescine biosynthesis with b-alanine
(the degradation of putrescine products produces b-alanine) and starch degradation with starch. Although
these annotations may accurately describe the association, it is probable that it is the combined effect of
many genes that produce variation in the associated
phenotype. Nevertheless, these examples indicate that
SFP-based association testing leads to the identification
of polymorphisms in genes with (proposed) metabolic
function, that are worth to be further investigated as
they may lead to the discovery of functionally relevant
variation.
Based on the minimum paths calculated between the
metabolic genes and the significantly associated metabolites, a considerable number of gene-metabolite pairs
were found to have no known connection. For example
the associations between AT1G16780 (UDP-glucose biosynthesis) and erythritol, AT2G43760 (molybdenum
cofactor biosynthesis) and myo-inositol, or AT1G47260
(aerobic respiration) and threonic acid. While some of
these associations may be false positives, at least a subset of them may hint to hitherto unknown or un-annotated connections between the gene products and the
associated metabolites. An observed association may
however also be caused by linkage disequilibrium and
thus a neighbouring gene or mutation may be responsible for the change in metabolite level. A further interesting possible process causing seemingly functionally
unrelated gene-metabolite associations may be co-evolution. In previous studies a certain combination of a
large number of metabolite levels rather that individual
metabolite levels were found to correlate well with plant
biomass [25] and multiple metabolite - metabolite correlations were observed [21,23]. Thus, adaptation to

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

certain environments may involve numerous metabolic
modifications that may lead to detectable associations
although the gene products and the associated metabolite reside in unlinked metabolic pathways and thus are
only connected through higher level functional integration. Such considerations may warrant follow-up studies
on the metabolites of the pathways the detected gene
products are involved with and on their correlations
with the associated compounds identified here.
Using the pairwise haplotype sharing score (PHS) as
criterion to identify regions with signs of recent selection, five candidate selective sweep regions, SR1 through
SR5 were identified. The FNR leads to an overestimation
of Col haplotype length and an underestimation von
non-Col haplotypes; however, three of our sweeps are
non-Col alleles. Due to the interference of the FNR on
sweep detection, the sweep analysis should be considered preliminary. The applied PHS test was not able to
show significant signatures of selection in the candidate
regions previously suggested by Clark et al. [33].
Although we found extensive haplotype sharing in one
of their candidates on chromosome 1, this region
showed no clear peak in PHS density even if we relaxed
the threshold for significant scores. This discrepancy
might be caused by the different composition of our
sample, but the most important difference may be the
method used for the identification of sweep candidates.
Clark et al. simply identified regions with a low diversity
over a long range. The PHS test compares the length of
the different haplotypes around a core allele and, additionally, accounts for the population structure and local
recombination rate. Hence, the PHS test represents a
more rigid measurement to identify selective sweeps
then the approach by Clark et al. [33]. The power of the
PHS test to detect true positive signals of selective
sweeps is demonstrated by the identification of candidate region SR5. This region includes the gene FRIGIDA, which is a major regulator of flowering time and
which was previously identified to evolve under selection
[2,10].
A relative overrepresentation of SFPs with extreme
PHS values (multiple testing adjusted p = 1.6E-10) was
observed in NBS-LRR protein-encoding genes. This suggests that these genes are preferred targets of selection
in A. thaliana in addition to being highly polymorphic
(see above). The other functional class significantly
enriched in extreme PHS values (p = 0.04) is the receptor-like kinases genes-category. Interestingly, although
cytoplasmic ribosomal protein genes and F-Box genes
are among the most highly polymorphic genes (Additional File 1, Figure S5.4-5), none of the chosen gene
families show significant enrichment or depletion in the
sweep. Due to the obscurity of the SFPs, it is hard to
exclude that the identified sweep regions may in fact

Page 11 of 15

represent multiple independent sweeps in the same
region. However, it has been shown that the power to
detect sweeps based on their haplotype structure is
reduced if more than one sweep occurs in the same
region [48]. Thus, the identified candidates most likely
represent single sweeps and can be regarded as biallelic
for the associations although the strength may be
overestimated.
The 54 non-Col accessions investigated here have
been thoroughly characterized with respect to their biomass accumulated during growth in controlled condition and they have been investigated for more than 90
metabolic parameters including protein and chlorophyll
contents, starch, a large number of low molecular
weight metabolites and several enzyme activities [23].
Substantial variation in biomass accumulation and many
of the metabolic traits as well as complex relations
between them were observed raising the question
whether or not this is a result of recent selection related
to adaptation that occurred during the recent evolution
of A. thaliana. As a first step towards addressing this
question, associations were tested between the selected
haplotypes of the sweeps and plant fresh weight as well
as eight metabolic traits chosen as representatives of different groups of cellular components including structural and storage compounds as well as central
metabolic intermediates. A significant association was
detected between one of the five sweep regions (SR5)
and starch. Furthermore, SR5 coincides with a strong
biomass QTL and a metabolite QTL hot spot detected
in the Col-0/C24 RIL and IL populations [49] and this
region furthermore confers heterosis of biomass and 23
metabolites [49,50]. Although SR5 exhibits a considerable population structure, we do not assume that the
association is confounded by it. The signal is retained
after different corrections for population structure in
the PHS test and the GLM and is further supported by
the presence of the QTL. This indicates that at least
some of the metabolic differences between the accessions analysed here occurred as a result of or are coincidental with recent selection. While further analysis will
be required to investigate which traits controlled by
which genes within the sweep regions were driving the
selection, the observations made in this study provide a
hint that genes within the sweep regions may contribute
directly or indirectly to the metabolic diversity represented in the A. thaliana population. These regions do
not include known metabolic genes and the results may
thus open the opportunity to identify genes with
hitherto unknown enzymatic or regulatory function.
As sweeps are likely due to positive selection and thus
should have an observable impact on phenotypic variation, it is expected that a significantly greater number of
sweep SFP sites should associate with the measured

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

traits than those that are randomly chosen and the
sweep marker-trait association result presented supports
this hypothesis. However, only a small number of phenotypes were tested. To truly test this hypothesis, a larger number of phenotypes need to be included in the
association mapping.
Due to the large proportion of false negatives, the size
and number of the predicted sweeps are likely to be
reduced along with the number of associations. The
false negatives are not likely to impact the quality of the
associations and sweeps as they reduce existing signal
rather than add noise. That is, in association mapping
the correlation between high/low metabolite levels and
presence/absence of a SFP can only be reduced by false
negatives and similarly for detecting sweeps. False positives can increase the noise and lead to false associations
and sweeps. However, these are estimated to be called at
low rates and as they are randomly distributed throughout the genomes, their impact on the quality of the
results is further reduced.

Page 12 of 15

genetic substitution lines, mutants, and transgenic plants
grown in a variety of conditions. They also indicate how
powerful this approach will become in the near future
upon availability of deep genotype/re-sequencing information and phenotypic data of hundreds of A. thaliana
accessions.

Conclusions
By hybridizing genomic DNA extracted from 54 Arabidopsis thaliana accessions to Arabidopsis tiling microarrays, we identified a large set of Single Feature
Polymorphisms, thereby generating a high density polymorphism map of Arabidopsis thaliana. Its analysis
revealed a pronounced variability of resistance genes
across geographic ranges and identified selective sweeps
and associations between metabolic genes and metabolic
phenotypes. Several associations show a clear biological
relationship, while many remain requiring further
investigation.
Methods

Natural selection mapping versus molecular genetics

Creating the dataset

We have identified genomic regions with genetic variation that are associated significantly with growth-related
metabolic traits in greenhouse conditions. Even though
the phenotypic analysis was not conducted under natural conditions or in nature itself, the associations
strongly suggest the location of variants that have a
robust effect on complex traits. It can not be excluded,
though, that in nature or evolutionary history, a different phenotypic effect of the selected region may have
been selected. Furthermore, the region is large, and the
phenotypic effect could hitchhike with the selected
mutation, that in fact is responsible for another type of
phenotypic variation.
A critical issue in natural selection mapping is the age
of the sweeps. Even though phenotypic variation is associated with the sweep, it may not necessarily be the trait
that evolved under selection, but may even be a
(slightly) disadvantageous trait. If the sweep occurred
recently, there may not have been much time for compensatory mutations to neutralize this phenotypic effect
[51].
Nevertheless, this analysis represents a precedence of a
viable procedure to identify genomic regions carrying
functionally relevant variation in (probably regulatory)
genes, which is potentially involved in adaptation. On
the one hand these results open the exciting opportunity
to identify and characterize the genes responsible for the
phenotypic variation of growth-related metabolic traits
through the investigation of the sequence variation of
the identified regions across the accession population
and the functional analysis of the encoded genes and
their alleles through phenotypic characterization of

The materials and methods used for accession selection,
plant material preparation, phenotypic analysis, DNA
preparation and array hybridization are presented in the
Additional File 1, Sections 1.1-3. Measurements of linkage disequilibrium and population structure are presented in the Additional File 1, Section 1.4. Tiling array
analysis and SFP calling are presented in the Additional
File 1, Section 1.5.
SFP annotation and analysis

Statistically significant enrichments or depletions in
annotated genomic regions (coding regions, intergenic
regions etc...) were detected by comparing the observed
number of SFPs in a region to the expected number
assuming that SFPs are distributed proportionally to the
total size of the region. Gene families and functional
annotations were obtained from TAIR and NCBI. Forty
gene families were chosen based on families analysed in
previous studies [33] and the gene families available in
TAIR. Statistical significance was evaluated using an
unpaired Students t-test.
SFP-trait associations

To reduce the multiple testing problem, only SFPs that
lay in metabolic genes (as annotated by AraCyc 11/03/
2009) were used in association testing. Marker-trait
associations were calculated using general linear models
(GLM) [47] as implemented in the Tassel program [39].
The GLM requires a population matrix (Q), which was
obtained from the program Structure 2.2.
The GLM (general linear model) function of the Tassel program was applied with the Structure results for

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

Page 13 of 15

k = 4 to determine the significance of marker-trait associations for following traits: fresh weight, protein, amino
acids, sucrose, starch, myo-inositol, b-alanine, threonic
acid and erythritol. Associations were tested between all
SFP sites and phenotypic traits simultaneously providing
an empirical distribution from which p-values were calculated[52]. Phenotype data were calculated as least
squares means (LSM) values over the experiments. The
GLM that was used for the calculations was (Eq. 1):
v  M  Env  Q k 4  E,

(1)

where v is the dependent variable, M is a marker
effect, Env is an effect of environment of different
experiments, Q is population structure cofactor, E is
experimental error. A least squared means (lsmeans)
test that shows the change in phenotypic measurement
between Col-0 and non-Col-0 genotypes is included in
the Tassel analysis.
Association annotation

Each SFP was annotated with the metabolic pathways of
the gene they lay within according to AraCyc [35]. To
reduce the effect of potential biases introduced by linkage disequilibrium, all analyses were conducted using
whole genes rather than the SFP themselves.
The minimum paths between the gene products and
the associated metabolites were determined using the
AraCyc reactions database [35]. When calculating the
minimum path, common and readily available molecules
such as water, carbon dioxide, oxygen, free protons,
ATP, NADH etc. were ignored.
Each trait associated significantly with a number of
different genes, many of which belonged to the same
pathway. Pathways of interest were tested using a
Mann-Whitney U test to show if they were over-represented for each trait. The number of tested pathways
was limited to 13 of particular interest, out of a possible
317, to reduce the effect of multiple testing which was
corrected for using Benjamini-Hochberg correction [53].
Identification of selective sweeps

The detection of selective sweeps followed the approach
of Toomajian et al. [10]. The PHS statistic [10] was
computed for all SFPs with a minor allele frequency of
at least 5%. This test for selection corrects for the population structure by taking the pairwise similarity of
accessions into account, therefore it should be suitable
for our structured sample from natural populations.
Additionally, it accounts for the local recombination
rate by using genetic distances between the markers. For
this conversion, we fitted a polynomial curve to 253
markers for which physical and genetic position are
known, as previously done [54]. Since SFPs in close

proximity tend to be in high LD, the PHS test assigns
similar scores to these markers. To avoid the redundancy of such nearby markers and the over-counting of
high SFP density regions only the highest scoring SFP
among highly linked neighbouring SFP pairs (r2 > 0.5
and r positive) was included in the following analysis
(standardisation, identification of sweep candidates) [10].
The scores were then standardized for their allele
frequency f like follows (Eq. 2):
standardised PHS 

(PHS  median f [PHS])
SD f [PHS]

,

(2)

where SDf and medianf refer to standard deviation and
median, respectively, computed for all alleles with a frequency of f; the median is used instead of the mean
because it is less sensitive to extreme values.
To identify sweep candidate regions, the density of top
0.5% standardized scores were determined by calculating
the proportion of such outliers in a sliding window
along the genome (window size of 1000 SFPs and offset
of 50 SFPs between adjacent windows). Windows with
an outlier proportion of more than 45% were denoted as
sweep candidates and within windows the highest scoring SFP was taken for the associations. The identified
sweeps are represented as a focal SFP site that best
resembles all the SFP sites in the sweep.
Sweep associations

Once identified, only the focal SFP sites in each sweep
were used to test for association between the sweeps
and the phenotypic traits thereby reducing the chance
for spurious associations based on linked SFPs.

Availability
All data presented in this study are available from
http://sfp.mpimp-golm.mpg.de.
Additional file 1: Supplementary Material, Methods and Additional
Analyses. This file contains the methods and materials for plant growth,
metabolic measurements and SFP calling. Also included are accession
specific details (number of called SFPs per accession etc...), annotation for
both the polymorphisms and associations and sweep annotation.

Abbreviations
SFP: Single Feature Polymorphism; SNP: Single Nucleotide Polymorphism;
FDR: False Discovery Rate; FNR: False Negative Rate; NBS-LRR: Nucleotide
Binding Site-Leucine Rich Repeat; PHS: Pairwise Haplotype Sharing Score.
Acknowledgements
We thank C. Marona for expert technical assistance in DNA preparation,
fragmentation, and labelling and the MPI-MP green team for plant
cultivation. This work was supported by grants of the German Ministry for
Education and Research (BMBF) in the frame of the GABI initiative (GABIEVAST project; funding code: 0313122) to M.S. and T.A. and by the Max
Planck Society.

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

Author details
1
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Mühlenberg 1,
14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany. 2Potsdam University, Department of
Genetics, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam, KarlLiebknecht-Strasse 24-25, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany. 3Humboldt
University, Faculty of Agriculture and Horticulture, Invalidenstr 42, 10115,
Berlin, Germany. 4Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research
(IPK), Corrensstr 3, 06466, Gatersleben, Germany. 5Max-Planck Institute for
Plant Breeding Research, Carl-von-Linné-Weg 10, 50829 Köln, Germany.
6
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Department of Plant Biology
and Forest Genetics, Dag Hammarskjölds väg 181, Uppsala, Sweden.
Authors’ contributions
LC developed and implemented the SFP calling methods, performed all
computational analyses, interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript,
HWW and MKS performed all experimental work and conducted the
association study, TG and KS performed the sweep region identification and
wrote the manuscript, RS and MS generated and supplied the phenotypic
data, DW analysed and interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript, TA
initiated and co-ordinated the study, interpreted the results and wrote the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final version of the
manuscript.
Received: 4 December 2009 Accepted: 20 March 2010
Published: 20 March 2010
References
1. Clausen J, Keck DD, Hiesey W: Experimental studies on the nature of
species. I. Effects of varied environments on western North American
plants. Carnegie Inst Wash Publ 1940, 520.
2. Korves TM, Schmid KJ, Caicedo AL, Mays C, Stinchcombe JR,
Purugganan MD, Schmitt J: Fitness Effects Associated with the Major
Flowering Time Gene FRIGIDA in Arabidopsis thaliana in the Field. The
American Naturalist 2007, 169(5):E141-E157.
3. Schemske DW, Bierzychudek , Paulette : Spatial differentiation for flower
color in the desert annual Linanthus parryae: Was Wright right? Evolution
2007, 61(11):2528-2543.
4. Bradshaw HD Jr, Schemske DW: Allele substitution at a flower colour
locus produces a pollinator shift in monkeyflowers. Nature 2003,
426(6963):176-178.
5. Holub EB: Natural variation in innate immunity of a pioneer species. Curr
Opin Plant Biol 2007, 10(4):415-424.
6. Koornneef M, Alonso-Blanco C, Vreugdenhil D: Naturally occurring genetic
variation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2004, 55:141-172.
7. Hoffmann MH: Biogeography of Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh.
(Brassicaceae). Journal of Biogeography 2002, 29(1):125-134.
8. Dijk HV, Boudry P, McCombre H, Vernet P: Flowering time in wild beet
(Beta vulgaris ssp. maritima) along a latitudinal cline. Acta Oecologica
1997, 18(1):47-60.
9. Stinchcombe JR, Weinig C, Ungerer M, Olsen KM, Mays C, Halldorsdottir SS,
Purugganan MD, Schmitt J: A latitudinal cline in flowering time in
Arabidopsis thaliana modulated by the flowering time gene FRIGIDA.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101(13):4712-4717.
10. Toomajian C, Hu TT, Aranzana MJ, Lister C, Tang C, Zheng H, Zhao K,
Calabrese P, Dean C, Nordborg M: A nonparametric test reveals selection
for rapid flowering in the Arabidopsis genome. PLoS Biology 2006, 4(5):
e137.
11. Balasubramanian S, Sureshkumar S, Agrawal M, Michael TP, Wessinger C,
Maloof JN, Clark R, Warthmann N, Chory J, Weigel D: The PHYTOCHROME
C photoreceptor gene mediates natural variation in flowering and
growth responses of Arabidopsis thaliana. Nat Genet 2006, 38:711-715.
12. Le Corre V: Variation at two flowering time genes within and among
populations of Arabidopsis thaliana: comparison with markers and traits.
Mol Ecol 2005, 14(13):4181-4192.
13. Bakker EG, Toomajian C, Kreitman M, Bergelson J: A Genome-Wide Survey
of R Gene Polymorphisms in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2006, 18(8):1803-1818.
14. Allen RL, Bittner-Eddy PD, Grenville-Briggs LJ, Meitz JC, Rehmany AP,
Rose LE, Beynon JL: Host-Parasite Coevolutionary Conflict Between
Arabidopsis and Downy Mildew. Science 2004, 306(5703):1957-1960.
15. Bergelson J, Kreitman M, Stahl EA, Tian D: Evolutionary Dynamics of Plant
R-Genes. Science 2001, 292(5525):2281-2285.

Page 14 of 15

16. Mauricio R, Stahl EA, Korves T, Tian D, Kreitman M, Bergelson J: Natural
Selection for Polymorphism in the Disease Resistance Gene Rps2 of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Genetics 2003, 163(2):735-746.
17. Mondragon-Palomino M, Meyers BC, Michelmore RW, Gaut BS: Patterns of
Positive Selection in the Complete NBS-LRR Gene Family of Arabidopsis
thaliana. Genome Res 2002, 12(9):1305-1315.
18. Stahl EA, Dwyer G, Mauricio R, Kreitman M, Bergelson J: Dynamics of
disease resistance polymorphism at the Rpm1 locus of Arabidopsis.
Nature 1999, 400(6745):667-671.
19. Thilmony R, Underwood W, Sheng Yang He: Genome-wide transcriptional
analysis of the Arabidopsis thaliana interaction with the plant pathogen
Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 and the human pathogen
Escherichia coli O157:H7. The Plant Journal 2006, 46(1):34-53.
20. Tian D, Araki H, Stahl E, Bergelson J, Kreitman M: Signature of balancing
selection in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99(17):11525-11530.
21. Cross JM, von Korff M, Altmann T, Bartzetko L, Sulpice R, Gibon Y,
Palacios N, Stitt M: Variation of enzyme activities and metabolite levels in
24 Arabidopsis accessions growing in carbon-limited conditions. Plant
Physiology 2006, 142(4):1574-1588.
22. Keurentjes J, Sulpice R, Gibon Y, Steinhauser M-C, Fu J, Koornneef M,
Stitt M, Vreugdenhil D: Integrative analyses of genetic variation in
enzyme activities of primary carbohydrate metabolism reveal distinct
modes of regulation in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genome Biology 2008, 9(8):
R129.
23. Sulpice R, Pyl E-T, Ishihara H, Trenkamp S, Steinfath M, Witucka-Wall H,
Gibon Y, Usadel Br, Poree F, Piques MCÃo, et al: Starch as a major
integrator in the regulation of plant growth. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 2009, 106(25):10348-10353.
24. Aarssen LW, Clauss MJ: Genotypic variation in fecundity allocation in
Arabidopsis thaliana. J Ecol 1992, 80:109-114.
25. Meyer RC, Steinfath M, Lisec J, Becher M, Witucka-Wall H, Torjek O, Fiehn O,
Eckardt A, Willmitzer L, Selbig J, et al: The metabolic signature related to
high plant growth rate in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104(11):4759-4764.
26. Benderoth M, Textor S, Windsor AJ, Mitchell-Olds T, Gershenzon J,
Kroymann J: Positive selection driving diversification in plant secondary
metabolism. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2006,
103(24):9118-9123.
27. Mitchell-Olds T, Pedersen D: The molecular basis of quantitative genetic
variation in central and secondary metabolism in Arabidopsis. Genetics
1998, 149(2):739-747.
28. Lisec J, Schauer N, Kopka J, Willmitzer L, Fernie A: Gas chromatography
mass spectrometry-based metabolite profiling in plants. Nature Protocols
2006, 1(1):387-396.
29. Gresham D, Dunham M, Botstein D: Comparing whole genomes using
DNA microarrays. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:291-302.
30. Gilad Y, Borevitz J: Using DNA microarrays to study natural variation. Curr
Opin Genet Dev 2006, 16(6):553-558.
31. Kim S, Zhao K, Jiang R, Molitor J, Borevitz JO, Nordborg M, Marjoram P:
Association mapping with single-feature polymorphisms. Genetics 2006,
173(2):1125-1133.
32. Borevitz JO, Hazen SP, Michael TP, Morris GP, Baxter IR, Hu TT, Chen H,
Werner JD, Nordborg M, Salt DE, et al: Genome-wide patterns of singlefeature polymorphism in Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104(29):12057-12062.
33. Clark RM, Schweikert G, Toomajian C, Ossowski S, Zeller G, Shinn P,
Warthmann N, Hu TT, Fu G, Hinds DA, et al: Common sequence
polymorphisms shaping genetic diversity in Arabidopsis thaliana. Science
2007, 317(5836):338-342.
34. Nordborg M, Hu TT, Ishino Y, Jhaveri J, Toomajian C, Zheng H, Bakker E,
Calabrese P, Gladstone J, Goyal R, et al: The pattern of polymorphism in
Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS Biology 2005, 3(7):e196.
35. The Arabidopsis Information Resource. [http://www.arabidopsis.org].
36. Sharbel TF, Haubold B, Mitchell-Olds T: Genetic isolation by distance in
Arabidopsis thaliana: biogeography and postglacial colonization of
Europe. Molecular Ecology 2000, 9(12):2109-2118.
37. Schmid KJ, Torjek O, Meyer R, Schmuths H, Hoffmann MH, Altmann T:
Evidence for a large-scale population structure of Arabidopsis thaliana
from genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism markers. Theor Appl
Genet 2006, 112(6):1104-1114.

Childs et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:188
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/188

Page 15 of 15

38. Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P: Inference of population structure
using multilocus genotype data. Genetics 2000, 155(2):945-959.
39. Bradbury PJ, Zhang Z, Kroon DE, Casstevens TM, Ramdoss Y, Buckler ES:
TASSEL: software for association mapping of complex traits in diverse
samples. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(19):2633-2635.
40. Sabeti PC, Reich DE, Higgins JM, Levine HZ, Richter DJ, Schaffner SF,
Gabriel SB, Platko JV, Patterson NJ, McDonald GJ, et al: Detecting recent
positive selection in the human genome from haplotype structure.
Nature 2002, 419(6909):832-837.
41. Mardis ER: The impact of next-generation sequencing technology on
genetics. Trends Genet 2008, 24(3):133-141.
42. Borevitz JO, Liang D, Plouffe D, Chang HS, Zhu T, Weigel D, Berry CC,
Winzeler E, Chory J: Large-scale identification of single-feature
polymorphisms in complex genomes. Genome Res 2003, 13(3):513-523.
43. Birney E, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Dutta A, Guigo R, Gingeras TR,
Margulies EH, Weng Z, Snyder M, Dermitzakis ET, Thurman RE, et al:
Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1% of the human
genome by the ENCODE pilot project. Nature 2007, 447(7146):799-816.
44. Zeller G, Clark RM, Schneeberger K, Bohlen A, Weigel D, Ratsch G:
Detecting polymorphic regions in Arabidopsis thaliana with
resequencing microarrays. Genome Res 2008, 18(6):918-929.
45. Jander G, Norris SR, Rounsley SD, Bush DF, Levin IM, Last RL: Arabidopsis
Map-Based Cloning in the Post-Genome Era. Plant Physiol 2002,
129(2):440-450.
46. Schmuths H, Hoffmann MH, Bachmann K: Geographic distribution and
recombination of genomic fragments on the short arm of chromosome
2 of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Biol (Stuttg) 2004, 6(2):128-139.
47. Yu JM, Pressoir G, Briggs WH, Bi IV, Yamasaki M, Doebley JF, McMullen MD,
Gaut BS, Nielsen DM, Holland JB, et al: A unified mixed-model method for
association mapping that accounts for multiple levels of relatedness. Nat
Genet 2006, 38(2):203-208.
48. Chevin L-M, Billiard S, Hospital F: Hitchhiking Both Ways: Effect of Two
Interfering Selective Sweeps on Linked Neutral Variation. Genetics 2008,
180(1):301-316.
49. Lisec J, Meyer RC, Steinfath M, Redestig H, Becher M, Witucka-Wall H,
Fiehn O, Törjék O, Selbig J, Altmann T, et al: Identification of metabolic
and biomass QTL in Arabidopsis thaliana in a parallel analysis of RIL and
IL populations. The Plant Journal 2008, 53(6):960-972.
50. Meyer RC, Lisec J, Sulpice R, Steinfath M, Gärtner T, Becher M, WituckaWall H, Korff Mv, Günther T, Childs L, et al: Analysis of Arabidopsis natural
variation in biomass accumulation and metabolism. New Biotechnology
2009, 25(Supplement 1):S307-S307.
51. Smith SE, Macnair MR: Hypostatic modifiers cause variation in degree of
copper tolerance in Mimulus guttatus. Heredity 1998, 80(6):760-768.
52. Churchill GA, Doerge RW: Empirical threshold values for quantitative trait
mapping. Genetics 1994, 138(3):963-971.
53. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical
and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society Series B (Methodological) 1995, 57(1):289-300.
54. Schmid KJ, Ramos-Onsins S, Ringys-Beckstein H, Weisshaar B, MitchellOlds T: A multilocus sequence survey in Arabidopsis thaliana reveals a
genome-wide departure from a neutral model of DNA sequence
polymorphism. Genetics 2005, 169(3):1601-1615.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-188
Cite this article as: Childs et al.: Single feature polymorphism (SFP)based selective sweep identification and association mapping of
growth-related metabolic traits in Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Genomics
2010 11:188.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
