<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Q&A: Primary generalized glucocorticoid resistance</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Medicine 2011, 9:27. doi:10.1186/1741-7015-9-27"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="George Chrousos"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Chrousos BMC Medicine 2011, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/9/27

QUESTION & ANSWER

Open Access

Q&A: Primary generalized glucocorticoid
resistance
George Chrousos
What is ‘Primary Generalized Glucocorticoid
Resistance’ (PGGR)?
PGGR means that all tissues in an organism have
decreased sensitivity or “resistance” to the natural glucocorticoid, in us humans, cortisol.
What biological processes underlie this
“resistance” to cortisol?
Because this resistance includes the hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis negative feedback regulatory
centers in the brain and pituitary gland, this axis is activated to “overcome” or compensate for the glucocorticoid action defect (Figure 1). The production of
hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH),
arginine-vasopressin (AVP) and pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) increase and the adrenal cortices hyperfunction, secreting large amounts of cortisol,
adrenal steroid precursors and adrenal androgens. The
adrenal steroid precursors include deoxy-corticosterone
and corticosterone, both of which, as well as cortisol,
have sodium-retaining activity through the mineralocorticoid receptor, which is normal in patients with cortisol
resistance. Thus, the patient tissues are exposed to elevated levels of adrenal androgens and mineralocorticoids,
which result in manifestations of hyperandrogenism and
hypermineralocorticoidism.
What are these manifestations of
hyperandrogenism and
hypermineralocorticoidism?
These manifestations include acne, hirsutism, oligoamenorrhea, male-pattern baldness, and hypofertility in
women and virilization in children, and hypertension
and alkalosis with or without hypokalemia in both sexes,
respectively.

And are there any non-hyperandrogenism and
non-hypermineralocorticoidism-related
manifestations linked to PGGR?
Generally, there are no manifestations of glucocorticoid
excess (Cushing syndrome) or deficiency (Addison disease), with the exception of chronic fatigue in some
patients and profound hypoglycemia in a recently
reported infant with complete glucocorticoid resistance.
Similarly, there are no concretely proven manifestations
expected from the increases of hypothalamic CRH, such
as anxiety and depression.
What is the etiology of PGGR?
The etiology of Familial or Sporadic Primary Generalized Glucocorticoid Resistance in most reported cases
has been ascribed to molecular defects of the glucocorticoid receptor gene, however, one would expect manifestations of the syndrome in other faults of the
glucocorticoid signaling system. Interestingly, there
may be abnormalities in factors shared between the
glucocorticoid signaling system and other cellular
pathways, causing syndromes with both overlapping
and distinct manifestations. For instance, defects in
shared transcriptional co-activators might result in
manifestations not only of glucocorticoid but also of
other steroid hormone resistance states. In the early
1980s, my colleagues and I discovered that all New
World primates compared to prosimian species or Old
World primates have a fully compensated “pan-steroid”
and sterol (Vitamin D) hormone resistance. We concluded then that there must be a nodal molecule(s)
shared by all steroid/sterol hormone action networks
in the cells of these animals. The identity of this molecule(s) remains unknown to this day. Whether this
pan-steroid/sterol resistance conferred some selective
advantage or whether it was the result of tolerated
genetic drift also remains an enigma.

Correspondence: chrousge@med.uoa.gr
Department of Pediatrics, National University of Athens, Mikras Asias 75, 115
27, Athens, Greece
© 2011 Chrousos; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Chrousos BMC Medicine 2011, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/9/27

Page 2 of 4

Generalized
Glucocorticoid Resistance

Normal

Manifestations
Anxiety/Depression?

(-)

CRH/AVP
Hyperandrogenism
Acne/Hirsutism/Male
Acne/Hirs tism/Male pattern
baldness
Oligo- amenorrhea/
Hypofertility
H
f tilit

(-)

ACTH
Androgens

DOC/B
Cortisol

Androgens
DOC/B
Cortisol

Virilization/Precocious puberty
Ambiguous genitalia
Hypertension
+/- Alkalosis/Hypokalemia

Figure 1 Pathophysiologic Mechanisms of Familial or Sporadic Generalized Glucocorticoid Resistance (Chrousos) Syndrome. In this
syndrome, hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and arginine-vasopressin (AVP) and pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) are hypersecreted to compensate for the target tissue sensitivity defect, because of decreased glucocorticoid negative feedback. In
response, the adrenal cortices hypertrophy and hypersecrete cortisol, adrenal androgens and steroid precursors, such as deoxy-corticosterone
(DOC) and corticosterone (B) with mineralocorticod activity. The increased adrenal androgens may cause acne, hirsutism, male pattern baldness,
oligo-amenorrhea and hypofertility in women and precocious puberty and ambiguous genitalia in children. The increased cortisol, DOC and B
can cause hypertension with or without concurrent hypokalemic alkalosis. The increased hypothalamic CRH and AVP may cause anxiety and/or
depression. The increased levels of ACTH may stimulate growth of adrenal rests in the testes of male patients causing oligospermia and
infertility. (Modified from Chrousos GP, Detera-Wadleigh S, Karl M: Syndromes of Glucocorticoid Resistance. Ann Int Med 1993, 119:1113-1124).

How large an impact has the discovery and the
subsequent clarification of the underlying
pathophysiology of PGGR Syndrome had on the
biomedical community as a whole?
The implications of the discovery of the PGGR Syndrome
and the elucidation of its pathophysiologic mechanisms
sensitized the biomedical community to expect and look
for glucocorticoid signaling involvement in the pathophysiology of a large number of rare and common disorders,
including autoimmune, allergic and behavioral disorders
and the scourge of our modern aging societies, the
“chronic noncommunicable diseases”, such as obesity,
hypertension, metabolic syndrome, diabetes mellitus type
2, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases, and
major depression. This realization occurred by making
the usual logical extrapolations: (1) A severe disorder
may have milder, even subclinical (formes frustes) forms;
(2) a hormone resistance syndrome may have its mirror

image, a hormone hypersensitivity syndrome; and, (3) a
generalized resistance or hypersensitivity syndrome may
have tissue-specific counterparts.
Indeed, over the last 30 years, we have recognized
extremely mild generalized glucocorticoid resistance or
hypersensitivity in the general population, which results
from polymorphisms of the glucocorticoid receptor gene
and which makes a difference in the longevity, and
metabolic syndrome and depressive manifestations of
the people who carry them. Also, a clear-cut rare case
of generalized glucocorticoid hypersensitivity syndrome
that resulted from an activating mutation of the glucocorticoid receptor gene was published. And, finally, we
have several examples of tissue-specific glucocorticoid
resistance and hypersensitivity in several immune, autoimmune/inflammatory and dysmetabolic states, including hematologic malignancies, AIDS, rheumatoid
arthritis and visceral obesity/insulin resistance.

Chrousos BMC Medicine 2011, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/9/27

A recent paper (Bouligand et al., PLoS One. 2010
22:5:e13563), proposes that glucocorticoid
receptor haploinsufficiency compromises
glucocorticoid sensitivity and may represent a
novel genetic cause of subclinical
hypercortisolism. How do the results of this paper
impact on the understanding of this disease?
When I first read this paper I was surprised to find out
that the authors did not refer to the first family that
presented with familial glucocorticoid resistance because
of haploinsufficiency of the glucocorticoid receptor
gene, published by Karl et al. in 1993 (J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 1993 76:683-689). It is apparent that having 50%
of the normal glucocorticoid receptor may cause primary glucocorticoid resistance manifestations, including
hyperandrogenism, as in the human family, or hypermineralocorticoidism, as in the animal model. Adrenocortical hyperplasia is expected in primary glucocorticoid
resistance as a result of the hyperstimulation and hyperfunctioning of the adrenal cortices.
What are the current treatment strategies for
PGGR?
The first patient with the disorder, and since then,
many patients with PGGR have been treated successfully with conventionally high doses of synthetic glucocorticoids that have no inherent mineralocorticoid
activity, such as dexamethasone, at clinically and biochemically titrated doses. Such medications suppress
ACTH secretion and adrenocortical function without
stimulating the mineralocorticoid receptor. Thus,
hyperandrogenism and hypermineralocorticoidism are
corrected, while glucocorticoid actions at the target
tissues remain compensated.
So is there a need for novel treatments for this
condition?
Treatment with dexamethasone remains a relatively easy
and practical approach. Of course, correcting the actual
defect of the glucocorticoid receptor or any other molecule involved in the pathogenesis of the syndrome
would be more natural, but I expect that this will happen when gene therapy technologies become available in
the future.
What are the difficulties encountered in forming
a diagnosis of this disease given its fairly low
prevalence rate?
Once we suspect the diagnosis, the evaluation is
straightforward. In my experience, a patient with early
Cushing syndrome may be referred because of a discrepancy between a mild clinical phenotype and high biochemical indices of hypercortisolism. The known
prevalence of the condition is low, however, in reality,

Page 3 of 4

there are no systematic studies of large series of patients
with hyperandrogenism or hypertension, two relatively
common states, in whom cortisol secretion and its
responsiveness to dexamethasone were evaluated.

What prospects are there for the formation of
novel tools to aid in the diagnosis of this
condition?
We have developed accurate and sensitive clinical and
laboratory methods to diagnose sporadic or familial primary glucocorticoid resistance. We also have at our disposal quite sophisticated tools to examine and define
the molecular etiology of the disorder in the patients in
whom known components of the glucocorticoid signaling system are defective. This knowledge will include
defining and understanding not only the genetics but
also the epigenetics of this system and their overall
effect on the phenotype of the patient.
Is this disease a good example in case of why we
should be looking to expedite a move to more
personalized medicine based on a patient’s
genetic profile?
Indeed it is. The glucocorticoid signaling system is
involved in a major fashion in human physiology and
pathology and knowing details about its activity will be
part of the personalized genotype and “epigenotype” of
an individual and his or her risk for developing certain
diseases.
A recent review by your long time collaborators
Evangelia Charmandari and Tomoshige Kino
(Charmandari and Kino, Eur J Clin Invest 2010
40:932-942) has proposed renaming PGGR as
‘Chrousos syndrome’ in recognition of your
ground-breaking work into this field. What are
your feelings after this suggestion?
Obviously, I am greatly honored and thankful. Over my
career, I have had the privilege of working with fantastic
mentors, colleagues and students. Their trust, friendship,
and continuing support have been a source of inspiration for me. I am proud of the over 60 physicians and
scientists that trained in my laboratory and pursued successful, independent careers in Academia and industry. I
see this proposal as a manifestation of appreciation and
I am grateful.
Given your long history and impressive work in
this field, what, in your opinion, are the key
breakthroughs made in understanding more
about this syndrome?
The key breakthroughs in this syndrome are its discovery,
the dexamethasone binding studies that pinpointed the
defect to the glucocorticoid receptor, the understanding of

Chrousos BMC Medicine 2011, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/9/27

its macropathophysiology and conceiving the principle of
its therapy, the identification of the molecular defects, the
conceptual extrapolation to glucocorticoid hypersensitivity
states, the discovery of polymorphisms of the receptor and
their epidemiologic significance, and the conceptual extrapolation and search for mild forms and tissue-specific
pathologies.

What do you think are the future directions of
research into this field?
The new directions include: (1) finding the true prevalence of the syndrome in hyperandrogenism, hypertension and other conditions in which glucocorticoid
resistance could be etiologically relevant; (2) exploring
the interactions of the glucocorticoid signaling system
and other cellular signaling pathways and their combined effect on human pathology; (3) looking further
into the New World primates for nodal molecules of multiple networks related to steroid and sterol (Vitamin D)
hormone actions; (4) exploring the tissue-specific changes
of the glucocorticoid signaling system resulting in
behavioral pathology. Tissue-specific and conditional
knock-out and transgenic animals are key in this endeavor,
however, soon, with the availability of sensitive and
dynamic imaging methods, it will be hopefully possible to
directly examine regions of the brain in which changes of
the glucocorticoid signaling system could explain manifestations such as anxiety (amygdala), depression (dopaminergic reward system), and cognitive (frontal cortex) or
memory dysfunction (hippocampus).

Page 4 of 4

implications of glucocorticoid signalling changes. Eur
J Clin Invest 2010, 40:932-942.
Charmandari E, Ichijo T, Jubiz W, Baid S, Zachman K,
Chrousos GP, Kino T: A Novel Point Mutation in the
Amino Terminal Domain of the Human Glucocorticoid Receptor (hGR) Gene Enhancing hGR-mediated
Gene Expression. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008,
93:4963-4968.
Chrousos GP, Detera-Wadleigh S, Karl M: Syndromes
of Glucocorticoid Resistance. Ann Int Med 1993,
119:1113-1124.
Chrousos GP and Kino T: Glucocorticoid Signaling
in the Cell: Expanding Clinical Implications to Complex Human Behavioral and Somatic Disorders. In:
Glucocorticoids and Mood: Clinical Manifestations, Risk
Factors, and Molecular Mechanisms. Pro. NY Acad Sci
2009, 1179:153-166.
Chrousos GP, Renquist D, Brandon D, Eil C, Pugeat
M, Vigersky R, Cutler G., Loriaux DL, Lipsett MB: Glucocorticoid Resistance and Primate Evolution: Receptor-mediated Mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1982,
179:2036-2040.
Karl M, Lamberts SW, Detera-Wadleigh SD, Encio IJ,
Stratakis CA, Hurley DM, Accili D, Chrousos GP:
Familial glucocorticoid resistance caused by a splice
site deletion in the human glucocorticoid receptor
gene. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1993, 76:683-689.
Received: 4 February 2011 Accepted: 23 March 2011
Published: 23 March 2011

Where can I find out more?
Books

Chrousos GP, Loriaux DL, Lipsett MB, Eds. Steroid
Hormone Resistance: Mechanisms and Clinical Aspects.
New York: Plenum Press; 1986. In the Series: Advances
in Experimental Medicine and Biology, Vol. 196.
Chrousos GP, Olefsky JM, Samols E, Eds. Hormone
Resistance and Hypersensitivity States. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 2002. In Modern Endocrinology Series.
Kino T, Charmandari E, Chrousos G, Eds. Glucocorticoid Action: Basic and Clinical Implications. Ann N Y
Acad Sci, 2004, Vol 1024.
Articles

Bouligand J, Delemer B, Hecart AC, Meduri G, Viengchareun S, Amazit L, Trabado S, Fève B, GuiochonMantel A, Young J, Lombès M: Familial glucocorticoid
receptor haploinsufficiency by non-sense mediated
mRNA decay, adrenal hyperplasia and apparent
mineralocorticoid excess. PLoS One. 2010, 5:e13563.
Charmandari E, Kino T: Chrousos syndrome: a seminal report, a phylogenetic enigma and the clinical

Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/9/27/prepub
doi:10.1186/1741-7015-9-27
Cite this article as: Chrousos: Q&A: Primary generalized glucocorticoid
resistance. BMC Medicine 2011 9:27.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
