<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A novel web-based TinT application and the chronology of the Primate Alu retroposon activity</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-376"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Gennady Churakov"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Churakov et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/376

SOFTWARE

Open Access

A novel web-based TinT application and the
chronology of the Primate Alu retroposon activity
Gennady Churakov1*†, Norbert Grundmann2†, Andrej Kuritzin3, Jürgen Brosius1, Wojciech Makałowski2,
Jürgen Schmitz1

Abstract
Background: DNA sequences afford access to the evolutionary pathways of life. Particularly mobile elements that
constantly co-evolve in genomes encrypt recent and ancient information of their host’s history. In mammals there
is an extraordinarily abundant activity of mobile elements that occurs in a dynamic succession of active families,
subfamilies, types, and subtypes of retroposed elements. The high frequency of retroposons in mammals implies
that, by chance, such elements also insert into each other. While inactive elements are no longer able to retropose,
active elements retropose by chance into other active and inactive elements. Thousands of such directional,
element-in-element insertions are found in present-day genomes. To help analyze these events, we developed a
computational algorithm (Transpositions in Transpositions, or TinT) that examines the different frequencies of
nested transpositions and reconstructs the chronological order of retroposon activities.
Results: By examining the different frequencies of such nested transpositions, the TinT application reconstructs the
chronological order of retroposon activities. We use such activity patterns as a comparative tool to (1) delineate
the historical rise and fall of retroposons and their relations to each other, (2) understand the retroposon-induced
complexity of recent genomes, and (3) find selective informative homoplasy-free markers of phylogeny. The
efficiency of the new application is demonstrated by applying it to dimeric Alu Short INterspersed Elements (SINE)
to derive a complete chronology of such elements in primates.
Conclusion: The user-friendly, web-based TinT interface presented here affords an easy, automated screening for
nested transpositions from genome assemblies or trace data, assembles them in a frequency-matrix, and
schematically displays their chronological activity history.

Background
Discernible transposed elements (TEs) occupy about half
of the human genome [1]. They integrate into host DNA
in waves of activity. In the face of increasing density, they
frequently insert into each other. Nested insertions
encrypt valuable historical information about the relative
age of the elements, comparable to fossils in distinct layers
of earth. As old fossils are absent in young layers, older
inactive TEs are not inserted into younger elements. In
contrast, young TEs are able to occupy all strata of older
elements as well as those active at the same time.
Hence TEs active at different historical periods display
* Correspondence: churakov@uni-muenster.de
† Contributed equally
1
Institute of Experimental Pathology, ZMBE, University of Münster, VonEsmarch-Str. 56, 48149 Münster, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

characteristic insertion profiles. Comprised as they are of a
substantial fraction of TEs, mammalian genomes are ideally suited for such analyses. Moreover, even low genomic
accumulations (e.g., about 3% genomic coverage of CR1
elements in chicken; [2]), are sufficient for distinct profiles
of retroposon activity [3].
Over more than one hundred and sixty million years,
mammals have accumulated elements from four major
classes of transposons, Long INterspersed Elements
(LINEs), Short INterspersed Elements (SINEs), retrovirus-like Long Terminal Repeats (LTRs), and DNA
transposons [4]. While members of the last group move
via a cut and paste mechanism, the other three elements
transpose by a copy and paste mechanism via an RNA
intermediate reverse transcribed into cDNA. In humans
such RNA transposons represent more than 90% of all
transposed elements [1]. Active LINE and LTR elements

© 2010 Churakov et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Churakov et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/376

encode the enzymatic machinery that is necessary for
their own propagation, and in the case of LINEs also
the co-propagation of SINEs or any other RNA. For
LINE1-mediated retroposition, there is a slight preference for A-rich integration sites known as kinkable sites
[5]. Such regions contain a TTAAAA consensus motif
and are frequently found in the junction of dimeric retroposons such as Alu elements in primates. Alu elements are primate-specific, 7SL RNA-derived SINEs that
arose from Fossil Left and Right Alu monomers [6].
A retrospective, sequence-based insight into deep evolutionary periods is feasible via inferences from
sequence divergence, but is accompanied by uncertainties due to changing regional and temporal substitution
rates, mutation saturation, and the occurrence of highly
mutated CpG sites. Especially older, highly diverged,
and short elements lead to unreliable estimations.
Counting and comparing nested insertions, however, is
less sensitive to such considerations.
There are currently two different approaches for calculating the relative activity periods of subtypes of transposed elements, both of which draw on RepeatMasker
annotations. The Transposon Cluster Finder (TCF) estimates how often certain elements have been fragmented
by the insertions of other elements over evolutionary
time [7]. A compilation of representative subsets of
interacting transposed elements is then presented in an
adjacency matrix displaying frequencies of interruptions
optimized for their potential chronological order. This
Interruptive Matrix Analysis (IMA) starts from a random chronological order of elements and systematically
repositions them so as to minimize the number of nonzero entries in the part of the matrix defined by the artificial transposition of old elements into new ones.
At about the same time as the TCF application was
developed, we developed the Transposition in Transposition (TinT) algorithm [3], which also uses RepeatMasker coordinates to compile interrupted and nested
retroposons. The frequencies of fragmented versus
nested elements are counted, assembled in a data
matrix, and sorted by pre-selected retroposon types.
This matrix applies a specific probabilistic likelihood
model (Additional file 1) to calculate the relative integration period for each retroposon subtype in relation
to all other subtypes.
Due to the high frequency and multiple interactions of
different elements, both the TCF and the TinT methods
exhibit high intrinsic complexities and are neither easy
nor self-explanatorily applicable for the scientific community. To compensate for these shortcomings, we have
now developed an easy to use, web-based interface for
the TinT application. TinTs can be directly screened for
in model organisms or in any allocated RepeatMasker
report data. To demonstrate and test the web-based

Page 2 of 9

TinT method, we investigated the representative primate
genomes of Homo sapiens, Macaca mulatta (rhesus),
Callithrix jacchus (New World marmoset), Tarsius syrichta (Tarsius), and Microcebus murinus (grey mouse
lemur) and their well-characterized, primate-specific
Alu dimeric elements. Because of the well-known evolutionary histories of both the species and their retroposons [8,9], primates represent an ideal test group for the
TinT application.

Implementation
The TinT application is implemented in a Java environment (version 1.5 or higher) and executed from a bioinformatics web page that runs as an applet on the client
computer. TinT reads and optimizes RepeatMasker
information of nested transposons and transfers this
information into a data matrix of transpositions in
transpositions (TinT). The data matrix is than included
in a probability calculation to derive a graphical framework of relative activity periods of transposed elements.
The probabilistic model considers a simplified assumption with just one period of activity of elements and no
specific target site preference. The applet calculates the
relative activity periods of elements, but in the current
version no time calibration is implemented. The usage
of the web-based application is illustrated in Additional
file 2.
Results
Principle of the TinT

The first step in generating a TinT profile is to detect
nested retroposons. The local version of RepeatMasker
http://www.repeatmasker.org/RMDownload.html produces report files containing all necessary information
about element types and coordinates of nested and
interrupted elements (Figure 1). We considered an element to be unambiguously nested if (1) it is located at
the same genomic region as the interrupted element
parts, (2) its element index is higher than the identical
indices of the interrupted element parts, (3) the starting
and end-coordinates of all elements span ≥20 nt each
(minimal query length), (4) the interrupted host
sequences show the same orientation, and (5) the separated parts of the host element’s consensus sequence are
preferably ≥50 nt (minimal repeat extension), but at
least ≥18 nt (minimal repeat extension overlay) and
include an overlap of ≤35 nt (maximal repeat overlay;
overlapping host sequence regions are the result of target site duplications or low complexity regions). In cases
where the separated host parts have been incorrectly
assigned to different subfamilies (as evidenced by
detailed retroposon inspection), we adopted the name of
the largest part. Single elements (that did not insert or
were not fragmented by other elements) were excluded

Churakov et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/376

Page 3 of 9

Figure 1 Interpretation of RepeatMasker outfiles and TinT information. Schematic representation of the nested insertion of an AluSq
element (coordinates in red) into an AluJb element (coordinates in blue). The framed area of the RepeatMasker outfile contains the information
analyzed by the TinT application and the default parameters. The five characteristics used for extracting unambiguous nested clusters are as
follows: (1) fragmented/inserted elements must be located at the same query sequence, (2) for stringent conditions, the element indices for the
two parts of the fragmented element must be identical and the index for the nested element must be higher than this; for relaxed conditions
the same class of fragmented element parts is sufficient, (3) the minimum size of all elements (starting/ending coordinates) must be 20 nt or
more, (4) the fragmented parts of the host element must both be in the same orientation, and (5) the non-overlapping host elements should
preferably be larger than 50 nt, but at least ≥ 19 nt with an overlap of no more than 35 nt (starting/end-position consensus).

Churakov et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/376

Page 4 of 9

from analyses. Nested integrations of identical elements
were used only to tune the parameters of the model. All
parameters shown in Figure 1 were optimized by
empirical data and can be changed individually. To relax
the conditions, the element indexes can be ignored (see
Figure 1; element index and Additional file 2: item 4).
With this setting, the TinT application only considers
whether the interrupted host fragments refer to the
same class of elements. Furthermore, the stringency can
be altered if the minimal query length, the minimal
repeat extension, and minimal repeat extension overlay
and/or the maximal repeat overlay is changed. Relaxed
conditions are only recommended if the amount of data
is reduced or rare elements are involved. If elements are
considered that integrate without recognizable target
site duplications, such as CR1 elements in birds, the
maximal repeat overlay parameter can be reduced and
the minimal repeat extension overlay proportionally
increased.
After identifying nested retroposons, they were
counted, sorted by element subtypes, and compiled in a
data matrix. Finally, we developed a symmetric probabilistic likelihood model based on a normal distribution of
element activity that transforms the information of the
TinT matrix into a pattern of chronological integration
periods indicating the probability of activity for each
analyzed element type. The underlying mathematical
model considers a simple scenario with only one period
of activity for each element type and similar probabilities of insertions based on the following assumptions:

Web-based version of TinT

i
1. Elements of type i inserted at time points  k (k = 1,
2, ..., ni; where ni is the number of all elements of type i).
2. In each of such points in time, inserted element of
type i may fragment some elements of type j with a

An example data set from primates

i
certain probability p i , j ( k ) (including the case: j = i).

3. Considering an identical probability of insertion
into any preexisting element, denoted by a,
then probability

i
p i , j ( k ) can be represented as

i
i
p i , j ( k ) =  ⋅  j ( k ) , where h

j

(t) is the number of

elements of type j preexisting at time point t.
4. Function h j (t) is approximated using the normal
(Gaussian) distribution with mean tj and standard deviation nj, e.g.,  j (t ) =

t −t j
j

nj
2

∫

2

−

y2
2 dy

, where sj = nj, and its

−∞

derivative d  j (t ) = 1 e
dt

e
−

(t − t j ) 2
2n 2
j

has the maximum at

time point t = tj. All details of the model are presented
as Additional file 1.

The web-based version of TinT is located at http://www.
bioinformatics.uni-muenster.de/tools/tint and requires
Java version 1.5. The application is written as a java
applet and was developed using the multi-language software development environment Eclipse, which is an
integrated development environment with a repository
system (CVS) in the background that keeps software
changes disposable. There are two input options. First,
any RepeatMasker report file can be uploaded and variable subsets and combinations of elements can be
selected for TinT calculations. Furthermore, pre-analyzed model organisms and specific elements can be
selected for a TinT analysis. Currently, 19 pre-computed
genomes are available for the TinT analysis and the data
(RepeatMasker output files) can be downloaded from
http://www.bioinformatics.uni-muenster.de/tools/tint/
download/RepeatMasker/.DIR. The TinT activity pattern
is then graphically displayed. It should be mentioned
that the application is executed locally on the computer
where it is accessed. Optional parameters for reading
RepeatMasker data may be entered into a special dialog
box. Transpositions can be grouped and this information can be loaded from a file to provide flexibility for
further analysis. Printing or exporting the generated
graphs is a basic part of the software, so the results can
be used in other applications. Exporting depends on the
standard printer dialog of the computer system - if
available the print is directed to a postscript file.

After selectively screening the human genome with
RepeatMasker, we detected 1,004,931 dimeric Alu elements, 2,268 of which were considered to be unambiguous nested insertions. The frequencies of insertions
extracted from the retroposon matrix (Figure 2A) were
used to calculate their activity probabilities (Additional
file 2). Because of the multidimensional insertion pattern, the probable relative activity of each given element
subtype is directly interrelated to those of the other subtypes. AluJo appears as the first active Alu dimer, followed by AluJb. AluSx shows the most expanded
activity with the 75% interval of probable activity overlapping that of both the AluJ elements and the other
AluS subfamilies. The AluY elements are clearly separated from the older elements and contain those that
are currently still active representatives of Alu dimers
(Additional file 2).
From the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) genome
sequences we detected 950,960 dimeric elements including 2,008 nested, TinTs. The pattern of these Alu
dimers (Figure 2B) is similar to that of human;
but includes, in addition, rhesus monkey-specific,

Churakov et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/376

Page 5 of 9

Figure 2 Results of the TinT analysis for different Alu dimers in primates. The lower part of each panel represents the data matrix derived
from the RepeatMasker outfile. Subtypes listed across the top represent host elements; those listed along the left side are the inserted elements.
The copy numbers of Alu elements are indicated in the last column and the sums of nested insertions for both hosts and inserted elements are
shown across the bottom and to the right, respectively. The upper parts of each panel present a graphical display of the chronological activities
of the elements sorted by the peak of each activity. The center of each oval represents the maximum of each activity period; the ends of each
oval encompass 75%, the vertical lines 95%, and the ends of each line 99% of the probable activity period range. Elements within grey boxes
are taxon-specific elements. A relative time scale is shown below. TinT profiles for (A) Homo sapiens, (B) Macaca mulatta, (C) Callithrix jacchus,
(D) Tarsius syrichta, and (E) Microcebus murinus.

AluY-related AluR elements [10]. Because the resolution
of individual AluYR elements was too low, the related
AluYRb-d elements (TinT-option: merging elements)
were combined.
The 2,132 nested elements from the 1,057,994 Alu elements detected in the New World marmoset (Figure 2C)

also show a distribution comparable to those of human
and rhesus monkey. In addition, there are three New
World monkey-specific AluTa elements with the most
recent activities [11].
The 995 nested elements from the 917,008 dimeric
Alu elements detected in the Tarsius genomic sequences

Churakov et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/376

(Figure 2D) comprise only the two known AluJ elements. The TinT analysis showed that AluJo was older
than the AluJb. Tarsius-specific Alu elements have not
yet been detected.
The RepeatMasker screen of the gray mouse lemur
(Microcebus murinus) sequences (Figure 2E) revealed a
total of 438,443 Alu elements, of which 1,905 were
unambiguously nested. The mouse lemur lacks the
AluJb elements that are present in all other primate
groups. In addition to other potential but as yet uncharacterized Alu dimers, there are several recently
described, lemur-specific Alu elements with very dominant and recent distributions (AluL, AluLa, and AluMim; Repbase; [12]).
Comparison to the TCF defragmentation pattern

Giordano et al. [7] presented their fragmentation analysis based on a Transposon Cluster Finder (TCF) software package. The transposon defragmentation analysis
included most known mammalian TE classes and
families but only the three main Alu groups AluJ, AluS,
and AluY. Therefore a direct comparison to our TinT
activity pattern of Alu elements is limited. Furthermore,
the TCF software is not freely available to derive a comparable set of data. The TCF pattern for Alu elements
roughly confirms the TinT-derived succession of these
elements, but indicates an artificial activity overlay of
AluJ with AluS and AluY elements.

Discussion
In light of the many ongoing genome sequence projects,
the TinT method should prove to be quite valuable for
characterizing the retroposon-influenced architecture
and evolutionary history of genomes and provides a
basic aid in conducting efficient retroposon-based phylogenetic reconstructions. To test and demonstrate the
advanced efficiency of the TinT algorithm and to present a user-friendly web-based application, we performed a comparative analysis of nested primate specific
dimeric Alu SINEs, a group of elements with an established evolutionary history [8,9]. Using standard consensus sequences of Alu repeats [13] to screen all available
genomic sources of primates, represented by human and
macaque (both Catarrhini), marmoset (Platyrrhini), Philippine Tarsius (Tarsiiformes), and gray mouse lemur
(Strepsirrhini), we extracted and analyzed more than
9,300 nested from 4.5 million detected Alu SINEs. The
relative activity periods of Alu elements revealed by the
TinT analyses coincide with our current knowledge of
these elements in primates [14].
It should be mentioned that a substantial proportion
of the nested elements are ancestral insertion events
and consequently are shared among different primate
groups. Such common TinTs lead to similar activity

Page 6 of 9

patterns of species, especially for older elements (see
also for example [15], Figure 1).
Nine diagnostic mutations distinguish AluJo from
AluJb [14]. The TinT profiles support the activity of
AluJo having preceded that of AluJb and, with the
probable absence of AluJb in strepsirrhines, indicate an
origin of latter elements in the common ancestor of
Tarsius and higher primates. The phylogenetic affiliation of these two groups in a clade Haplorrhini was
previously significantly supported by four orthologous
insertions of retroposed elements [16,17]. This relationship is now overwhelmingly supported with quantitative and chronological evidence from 414,037 AluJb
elements specific for Haplorrhini that are clearly
absent in strepsirrhines. Beside some few specific elements humans and macaques have nearly identical
profiles of Alu SINE activity. Similar activity profiles
for older Alu SINEs (AluJo, AluJb and AluSx) were
also detected in New World monkey (marmoset). In
contrast, the overlapping activity patterns of the
younger AluS and AluY SINEs vary among primate
groups. The TinT patterns of element activities (Figure
2) fit well to the sequence-based reconstruction of the
evolution of Alu elements (Additional file 3) and to
the commonly accepted phylogenetic tree of primates
(Figure 3). Three implications can be drawn from the
TinT patterns of Alu SINEs: (1) several subtypes of
Alu elements were active during overlapping periods,
(2) a significant change in Alu activity took place after
Tarsius separated from a common ancestor with
anthropoids, and (3) the TinT activity profiles correlate
perfectly with the well known activity patterns of Alu
elements [14]. Comparing TinT profiles of dimeric Alu
elements to the phylogenetic relationships of different
primate species documents the correlation between the
activity of retroelements and species evolution (Additional file 3).
However, comparing the TinT analysis of dimeric Alu
elements to the TCF defragmentation pattern [7]
demonstrates that the TinT analysis provides a more
accurate activity pattern and implements information
about the number of elements in the genome. The TCF
defragmentation analysis shows an AluJ activity time
span that overlaps with that of both AluS and AluY elements. The TinT profiles clearly indicate that AluJ elements were already silent before the divergence of
Anthropoidea and before the appearance of most AluS
subtypes and AluY (Additional file 3). Furthermore, the
TCF analysis requires that any given element type interact with at least 29% of all other analyzed element types.
The TinT model requires that a given element type
interact with only two additional types. Especially for
small amounts of genomic data, this raises the sensitivity
drastically.

Churakov et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/376

Page 7 of 9

Figure 3 TinT activity patterns and species evolution. Schematic representation of the phylogenetic relationships of the five major primate
groups: Strepsirrhini (represented by Microcebus murinus), Tarsiiformes (represented by Tarsius syrichta), Platyrrhini (represented by Callithrix
jacchus), Cercopithecoidea (represented by Macaca mulatta), and Hominoidea (represented by Homo sapiens). The dating is taken from [25,26].
AluJo elements were active at the divergence of Strepsirrhines and AluJb at the divergence of Tarsiiformes. The main activity of AluS elements
occurred around the evolution of Anthropoidea; AluY elements arose on the lineage leading to Cercopithecoidea and are still active in
Catarrhini, including Macaca mulatta and Homo sapiens. Group-specific Alu elements are indicated at terminal branches (L = AluL, La = AluLa,
Mim = AluMim; Ta = AluTa; YR = AluYR).

For TinT analyses it is important to carefully preselect
and compile the elements of interest. Large elements (e.g.,
the 6,000 bp, full length, primate-specific L1P type of
LINEs) have a higher chance of being occupied by other
elements than do smaller ones (e.g., the 300 bp Alu SINE
elements.) Therefore, we advise users to analyze such
groups separately (see for example [18]). TinT analyses of
both monomeric and dimeric elements together should be
interpreted with care. Alu elements for example are composed of two monomers connected via an oligo(A)
sequence. Such A-rich regions are preferred targets for
insertions [5,19] and can bias the insertion profile.

Conclusions
The insertion patterns of retroposed elements provide a
homoplasy-free character set for tracing the evolutionary
history of species [20]. The insertion of a given element
at the same genomic location in two species and its
absence in a reference species indicates a close relationship between the two sharing species [21]. However,
randomly choosing retroposed elements for laborious
phylogenetic analysis is highly inefficient, while preselecting specific informative element types (e.g., for deep
phylogenetic splits) significantly raises the efficiency
of downstream experimental analyses. The TinT

Churakov et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/376

application provides a priori information about the relative activity periods of given elements (e.g., to investigate
old splits by selectively analyzing old elements that were
active in the potential common ancestor of a specific
group). The phylogenetic application of TinT-derived
element activities significantly aided in resolving the
evolutionary histories of galliformes [3], marsupials [15],
and lagomorphs [22].
It is well known that retroposed elements significantly
influence genome evolution, architecture, and gene
function; hence, a clear understanding of their insertion
events is a key to understanding the genomic architecture of present-day genomes. Therefore, in addition to a
statistical compilation of such elements, TinT affords an
invaluable tool for analyzing the chronological activity
of retroposed elements. Because SINE elements depend
on the LINE retroposition machinery for their insertion,
their activity is closely connected to LINE activity. As an
example, mammalian-wide interspersed elements (MIRs
[23]) coincide with the activity of LINE2 elements and
presumably the propagation of MIRs ended after the
inactivation of such elements. To understand the dependence of SINE-LINE associations, overlapping activity
periods are a first indication of potential interactivity. A
potential non-autonomous and autonomous element
affiliation was shown for a novel SINE-like snoRTE element and BovB_Plat autonomous retroposons in platypus [24].
Genome-wide chronological analyses of transposed
elements using TinT build on the RepeatMasker detection of elements or fragments thereof. The detection is
based on sequence similarity to a predefined compilation of transposons. Although TinT performs a subsequent stringent quality-check of detected fragmented
elements, miss-annotations, especially if old and thus
highly diverged elements are involved, cannot be completely excluded. Therefore, more sequence data leads to
an increase in precision.
In future TinT updates, we plan to implement two
additional levels of complexity. By a genome-wide prescreening of element-specific insertions, we intend to
add empirical retroposon information of type-specific
(monomer-dimer, short-long elements) insertion
probabilities; thus, freeing the algorithm from the
assumption that all elements have similar insertion
probabilities. Associated with this, we intend to improve
the accuracy of TinT analyses by introducing an asymmetric model of element activity, whereby elements will
not necessary reach their highest probability of activity
at the center of their activity range. Furthermore, we
plan to incorporate an absolute time scale of activity by
incorporating divergence data of elements.

Page 8 of 9

Methods
Required RepeatMasker Input Data

The RepeatMasker source file can be a critical source of
errors due to miss-annotations of elements or their fragments. To overcome this potential problem, we developed a quality check of the RepeatMasker TinT
coordinates and automatically selected only unambiguously nested insertions for our analyses. The stringent
selection works well for genome data and frequently
occurring elements, and provides a reliable TinT pattern. For the analysis of lesser quantities of data or genomes with low copy number elements, we have
provided the option of applying less stringent parameters (relaxed conditions; Figure 1).
However, for the human genome, the minimal
amount of data that is necessary under stringent conditions to retain a full TinT resolution is about 10% of
the genome, for instance about 300,000 traces are sufficient to receive the representative full TinT pattern.
This means, the pattern is stable and reproducible after
adding additional portions of data. It is noteworthy that
this calculation varies from species to species and
depends on the frequency of available elements. The
precision of the TinT approach increases with the
amount and quality of the input data. To derive the
most reliable TinT pattern, all available sequences of
selected species should be downloaded from genome
(ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/ or trace databases ftp://
ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/TraceDB/). The most time-consuming step of the TinT analysis is the upstream RepeatMasker screening. Depending on the amount of
genomic data, the size of the RepeatMasker library
used, and the available computational power, this process might run for several days. To reduce this screening time, it is advisable to restrict the RepeatMasker
library to specific element groups (e.g., SINEs or
LINEs). The local RepeatMasker library can be
assembled with specific elements or element groups.
Similar retroposon types should always be included in
one run to avoid artificial annotation of the masked
repeats. The report file can be directly applied to downstream processes.
Primate Test Sets of Data

Genomes of Homo sapiens (hg19), Macaca mulatta
(rheMac2), and Callithrix jacchus (calJac1) were downloaded from the UCSC Genome Bioinformatics site;
http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/downloads.html; Tarsius
syrichta (Tarsyr1.0) and Microcebus murinus (MicMur1.0) genomes were downloaded from the Broad
Institute; http://www.broadinstitute.org/ftp/pub/assemblies/mammals.

Churakov et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:376
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/376

Availability and Requirements
Project name: TinT
Project home page: http://www.bioinformatics.unimuenster.de/tools/tint
Operating system: Platform independent (Requires a
Java Virtual Machine (JVM) on the target system)
Programming language: Java
Requirements: Java Runtime Environment
License: GPL for academic users
Additional material

Page 9 of 9

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.
12.

Additional file 1: TinT probabilistic model
Additional file 2: TinT tutorial
Additional file 3: Sequence-based phylogeny of Alu elements

13.
14.
15.

Acknowledgements
We thank Marsha Bundman for editing the manuscript. The primate
paintings were provided by Jón Baldur Hlíðberg. This work was supported
by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SCHM 1469/3-1).
Author details
1
Institute of Experimental Pathology, ZMBE, University of Münster, VonEsmarch-Str. 56, 48149 Münster, Germany. 2Institute of Bioinformatics, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Münster, Niels Stensen Str. 14, 48149 Münster,
Germany. 3Department of Physics and Mathematics, Saint Petersburg State
Institute of Technology, 26 Moskovsky av., St.-Petersburg 198013, Russia.
Authors’ contributions
GC, JS, WM, and NG conceived of the user-friendly TinT web-interface. AK
and GC adjusted the probabilistic model of TinT, NG and WM implemented
TinT into the Java-based web-interface. JB contributed computational
equipment. JS wrote the paper. All authors read, edited, and approved the
final manuscript.
Received: 18 June 2010 Accepted: 2 December 2010
Published: 2 December 2010
References
1. Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K,
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, Funke R, Gage D, Harris K, Heaford A,
Howland J, Kann L, Lehoczky J, LeVine R, McEwan P, McKernan K,
Meldrim J, Mesirov JP, Miranda C, Morris W, Naylor J, Raymond C, Rosetti M,
Santos R, Sheridan A, Sougnez C, et al: Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 2001, 409(6822):860-921.
2. Hillier LD, Miller W, Birney E, Warren WC, Hardison RC, Ponting CP, Bork P,
Burt DW, Groenen MAM, Delany ME, Dodgson JB, Chinwalla AT, Cliften PF,
Clifton SW, Delehaunty KD, Fronick C, Fulton RS, Graves TA, Kremitzki C,
Layman D, Magrini V, McPherson JD, Miner TL, Minx P, Nash WE, Nhan MN,
Nelson JO, Oddy LG, Pohl CS, Randall-Maher J, et al: Sequence and
comparative analysis of the chicken genome provide unique
perspectives on vertebrate evolution. Nature 2004, 432(7018):695-716.
3. Kriegs JO, Matzke A, Churakov G, Kuritzin A, Mayr G, Brosius J, Schmitz J:
Waves of genomic hitchhikers shed light on the evolution of gamebirds
(Aves: Galliformes). BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:190.
4. Kramerov DA, Vassetzky NS: Short retroposons in eukaryotic genomes. Int
Rev Cytol 2005, 247:165-221.
5. Jurka J, Klonowski P, Trifonov EN: Mammalian retroposons integrate at
kinkable DNA sites. J Biomol Struct Dyn 1998, 15(4):717-721.
6. Quentin Y: Origin of the Alu family: a family of Alu-like monomers gave
birth to the left and the right arms of the Alu elements. Nucleic Acids Res
1992, 20(13):3397-3401.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.
21.
22.

23.
24.

25.
26.

Giordano J, Ge Y, Gelfand Y, Abrusan G, Benson G, Warburton PE:
Evolutionary history of mammalian transposons determined by genomewide defragmentation. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3(7):e137.
Britten RJ: Rates of DNA sequence evolution differ between taxonomic
groups. Science 1986, 231(4744):1393-1398.
Goodman M, Porter CA, Czelusniak J, Page SL, Schneider H, Shoshani J,
Gunnell G, Groves CP: Toward a phylogenetic classification of Primates
based on DNA evidence complemented by fossil evidence. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 1998, 9(3):585-598.
Han K, Konkel MK, Xing J, Wang H, Lee J, Meyer TJ, Huang CT, Sandifer E,
Hebert K, Barnes EW, Hubley R, Miller W, Smit AF, Ullmer B, Batzer MA:
Mobile DNA in Old World monkeys: a glimpse through the rhesus
macaque genome. Science 2007, 316(5822):238-240.
Ray DA, Batzer MA: Tracking Alu evolution in New World primates. BMC
Evol Biol 2005, 5:51.
Liu GE, Alkan C, Jiang L, Zhao S, Eichler EE: Comparative analysis of Alu
repeats in primate genomes. Genome Res 2009, 19(5):876-885.
Jurka J, Milosavljevic A: Reconstruction and analysis of human Alu genes.
J Mol Evol 1991, 32(2):105-121.
Kapitonov V, Jurka J: The age of Alu subfamilies. J Mol Evol 1996,
42(1):59-65.
Nilsson MA, Churakov G, Sommer M, Tran NV, Zemann A, Brosius J,
Schmitz J: Tracking marsupial evolution using archaic genomic
retroposon insertions. PLoS Biol 2010, 8(7):e1000436.
Schmitz J, Ohme M, Zischler H: SINE insertions in cladistic analyses and
the phylogenetic affiliations of Tarsius bancanus to other primates.
Genetics 2001, 157(2):777-784.
Schmitz J, Roos C, Zischler H: Primate phylogeny: molecular evidence
from retroposons. Cytogenet Genome Res 2005, 108(1-3):26-37.
Warren WC, Hillier LW, Marshall Graves JA, Birney E, Ponting CP, Grutzner F,
Belov K, Miller W, Clarke L, Chinwalla AT, Yang SP, Heger A, Locke DP,
Miethke P, Waters PD, Veyrunes F, Fulton L, Fulton B, Graves T, Wallis J,
Puente XS, Lopez-Otin C, Ordonez GR, Eichler EE, Chen L, Cheng Z,
Deakin JE, Alsop A, Thompson K, Kirby P, et al: Genome analysis of the
platypus reveals unique signatures of evolution. Nature 2008,
453(7192):175-183.
Levy A, Schwartz S, Ast G: Large-scale discovery of insertion hotspots and
preferential integration sites of human transposed elements. Nucleic
Acids Res 2009, 38(5):1515-1530.
Ryan SC, Dugaiczyk A: Newly arisen DNA repeats in primate phylogeny.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989, 86(23):9360-9364.
Shedlock AM, Okada N: SINE insertions: powerful tools for molecular
systematics. Bioessays 2000, 22(2):148-160.
Kriegs JO, Zemann A, Churakov G, Matzke A, Ohme M, Zischler H, Brosius J,
Kryger U, Schmitz J: Retroposon insertions provide insights into deep
lagomorph evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2010.
Smit AF, Riggs AD: MIRs are classic, tRNA-derived SINEs that amplified
before the mammalian radiation. Nucleic Acids Res 1995, 23(1):98-102.
Schmitz J, Zemann A, Churakov G, Kuhl H, Grutzner F, Reinhardt R,
Brosius J: Retroposed SNOfall - A mammalian-wide comparison of
platypus snoRNAs. Genome Research 2008, 18(6):1005-1010.
Steiper ME, Young NM: Primate molecular divergence dates. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2006, 41(2):384-394.
Roos C, Schmitz J, Zischler H: Primate jumping genes elucidate
strepsirrhine phylogeny. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101(29):10650-10654.

doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-376
Cite this article as: Churakov et al.: A novel web-based TinT application
and the chronology of the Primate Alu retroposon activity. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:376.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
