<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary history of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase gene family in eukaryotes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-308"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Matteo Citarelli"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1221/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolutionary history of the poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase gene family in eukaryotes
Matteo Citarelli1, Sachin Teotia1,2, Rebecca S Lamb1,2*

Abstract
Background: The Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase (PARP) superfamily was originally identified as enzymes that catalyze
the attachment of ADP-ribose subunits to target proteins using NAD+ as a substrate. The family is characterized by
the catalytic site, termed the PARP signature. While these proteins can be found in a range of eukaryotes, they
have been best studied in mammals. In these organisms, PARPs have key functions in DNA repair, genome
integrity and epigenetic regulation. More recently it has been found that proteins within the PARP superfamily
have altered catalytic sites, and have mono(ADP-ribose) transferase (mART) activity or are enzymatically inactive.
These findings suggest that the PARP signature has a broader range of functions that initially predicted. In this
study, we investigate the evolutionary history of PARP genes across the eukaryotes.
Results: We identified in silico 236 PARP proteins from 77 species across five of the six eukaryotic supergroups. We
performed extensive phylogenetic analyses of the identified PARPs. They are found in all eukaryotic supergroups
for which sequence is available, but some individual lineages within supergroups have independently lost these
genes. The PARP superfamily can be subdivided into six clades. Two of these clades were likely found in the last
common eukaryotic ancestor. In addition, we have identified PARPs in organisms in which they have not
previously been described.
Conclusions: Three main conclusions can be drawn from our study. First, the broad distribution and pattern of
representation of PARP genes indicates that the ancestor of all extant eukaryotes encoded proteins of this type.
Second, the ancestral PARP proteins had different functions and activities. One of these proteins was similar to
human PARP1 and likely functioned in DNA damage response. The second of the ancestral PARPs had already
evolved differences in its catalytic domain that suggest that these proteins may not have possessed poly(ADPribosyl)ation activity. Third, the diversity of the PARP superfamily is larger than previously documented, suggesting
as more eukaryotic genomes become available, this gene family will grow in both number and type.

Background
Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity was originally identified
in the 1960s [1-5]; it is the rapid and reversible posttranslational covalent attachment of ADP-ribose subunits onto glutamate, aspartate, and lysine residues of
target proteins. The ADP-ribose polymer is formed by
sequential attachment of ADP-ribosyl moieties from
NAD + ; the polymers can reach a length of over 200
units and can have multiple branching points. Overall,
the ADP-ribose polymer is highly negatively charged

* Correspondence: lamb.129@osu.edu
1
Plant Cellular and Molecular Biology Department, Ohio State University, 500
Aronoff Laboratory, 318 W. 12th Ave., Columbus, OH 43210 USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

and has large physiological consequences on functional
and biochemical properties of the proteins modified.
Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is done by enzymes called poly
(ADP-ribose)polymerases (PARPs). The so-called PARP
signature, a catalytic ß-alpha-loop-B-alpha NAD+ fold
[6,7], characterizes these enzymes. PARPs are found in
diverse groups of eukaryotes [8,9], but are best studied
in animals. PARPs have been shown to be involved in
DNA damage repair, cell death pathways, transcription
and chromatin modification/remodelling (reviewed in
[10-13]). PARPs have been implicated in a wide range of
human diseases (reviewed in [14]) and are important
targets for anti-cancer therapies [15]. A polymorphism
in human PARP1, which causes decreased enzymatic
activity, has been reported to be associated with an

© 2010 Citarelli et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

increased cancer risk and a decreased risk of asthma
[16,17], further underlining the importance of this class
of enzymes and their complex roles in disease.
The first PARP purified and cloned, PARP1 from
human, remains the best studied. PARP1 was long
thought to be the only enzyme with poly(ADP-ribosyl)
ation activity until two PARP isoforms were identified in
plants [18] and, simultaneously, tankyrase was identified
as a PARP localized at the telomere in humans [19].
Subsequently, studies on PARP1 knock out mice
demonstrated that the mutant mice still possessed poly
(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity and developed normally
[20,21], suggesting other enzymes existed. Since these
studies, a number of genes containing the PARP signature have been identified, although a minority of them
have been functionally characterized.
The PARP-like family has been best characterized in
humans, where there are seventeen family members that
share the PARP catalytic domain, but vary widely in
other parts of the proteins [8,9]. It is postulated that different PARPs subfamilies participate in diverse events
mediated by their variable domain structures. However,
only some of the family members have been shown to
have PARP activity, mostly in humans (PARP1 [22] and
its orthologs from other species (for example, [23,24]),
PARP2 [25,26], tankyrase1 [19,27], tankyrase2 [28,29],
and vPARP [30]). Most of these enzymes contain an
evolutionarily conserved catalytic glutamate residue in
an “HYE” catalytic triad. This residue was shown to be
essential for poly(ADP-ribose) chain elongation in
human PARP1 [31]. It is clear that some proteins with
PARP signatures missing the catalytic glutamate residue
or other residues known to be important for chain elongation do not act in poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. For example, human PARP10 has transferase activity rather than
polymerase activity, adding one ADP-ribose subunit to
target proteins [32]. It is thought that other PARP-like
proteins may actually function in mono(ADP-ribosyl)
ation [32-34] or even have non-enzymatic functions;
human PARP9 appears to not have enzymatic activity
[35]. Even enzymes that retain the catalytically important residues that have been identified may not act as
PARPs. For example, conflicting reports about the catalytic activity of human PARP3 exist; it has been reported
act in poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation [36] and mono(ADP-ribosyl)ation [37].
Our knowledge of the PARP gene family is principally
based on animals, in particular mammals. This taxon is
a member of the Opisthokonts, one of the six eukaryotic
“supergroups” [38,39] and therefore represents only a
portion of the evolutionary history and diversity of
known eukaryotes. For the other five eukaryotic supergroups, studies on PARPs have been limited or nonexistent. A previous study on PARPs indentified new

Page 2 of 26

members in more basal animals, amoebas, fungi and
plants [40]. However, no representatives from Excavates
or Chromalveolates were included in the analysis and
only one member of Plantae (Arabidopsis thaliana).
Here we use comparative genomics and phylogenetic
analysis to investigate the distribution of PARP genes
across almost the entire breadth of eukaryotes, to reconstruct the evolutionary history of this protein family and
to gain insights into its functional diversification. Our
results indicate that the last common ancestor of extant
eukaryotes encoded at least two PARP proteins, one
similar to human PARP1 and functioning in DNA repair
and damage response, the other likely acting in mono
(ADP-ribosyl)ation; the cellular role of the last group is
not known.

Results
Identification of PARP genes from eukaryotic genomes

We used the information obtained from the Pfam database [41-43] and Uniprot [44,45] along with BLAST
searches [46] of sequenced eukaryotic genomes at the
DOE Joint Genome Institute (JGI), the Broad Institute,
the J. Craig Venter Institute, ToxoDB [47], NCBI, dictyBase [48] and the Arabidopsis Information Resource
(TAIR) [49] to compile the sequences of over 300 PARP
proteins. After preliminary alignment and phylogenetic
analysis, we reduced the number of species representing
animals; specifically we choose representative species of
vertebrates since the genes from this group are shared
by all and kept Drosophila melanogaster or Anopheles
gambiae to represent insects, since all of our sequences
were from Diptera. This left us with 236 sequences
from 77 eukaryotic species (Additional file 1). In addition, another 46 sequences contained regions with high
similarity to the PARP catalytic domain (Additional file
2); however, these sequences were incomplete and not
included in the alignment. Nonetheless, these sequences
likely represent bona fide members of the PARP catalytic domain. The PARP catalytic domain was extracted
from the proteins sequences and aligned using MUSCLE
[50]. This alignment can be found in Additional file 3.
Phylogenetic analysis of the PARP family suggests that
the ancestral eukaryote had at least two PARP enzymes

We first analyzed all the PARP-like genes we identified in
the eukaryotic lineage. We used the multiple sequence
alignment of the PARP catalytic domain generated above
(Additional file 3) to generate a maximum-likelihood
phylogenetic tree of the PARP family (Additional file 4).
We defined six clades of PARPs based on our maximumlikelihood tree, an examination of domains found outside
of the PARP catalytic domain used to generate that tree
and the evolutionary relationships of organisms within
clades (Clades 1-6; Figure 1). Clades were defined as

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 3 of 26

Figure 1 The PARP gene family forms six clades. A. Graphical representation of the maximum-likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree of all
identified eukaryotic PARPs indicating the relationships between the six clades as defined in the text. The full tree can be found in Additional
file 4. The tree was based on an alignment of the PARP catalytic domains (Additional file 3). B. Graphical representation of the ML phylogenetic
tree of Clade 1 PARPs indicating the relationships between nine subclades as defined in the text. C. Graphical representation of the ML
phylogenetic tree of Clade 2 indicating the relationships between the two subclades as defined in the text. D. Graphical representation of the
ML phylogenetic tree of Clade 3 PARPs indicating the relationships between the six subclades as defined in the text. E. Graphical representation
of the ML phylogenetic tree of Clade 5 PARPs indicting the relationship between the two subclades as defined in the text. F. Graphical
representation of the maximum-likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree of Clade 6 PARPs indicating the relationships between the six subclades as
defined in the text. Numbers in the clades or subclades indicate the number of proteins in each. Colors and letters indicate the eukaryotic
supergroup or groups represented. A, Amoebozoa; O, Opithokonts; E, Excavata; P, Plantae; C, Chromalveolates. Purple, Amoebozoa; red,
Opithokonts; orange, Excavata; green, Plantae; blue, chromalveolates. Branch support values are indicated at the nodes as computed in PhyML
using an aLRT non-parametric Shimodaira-Hasegawa-like (SH) procedure and a midpoint rooting method. Triangle and branch colors indicate
either the presence of the HYE (red) or variant (blue) catalytic triad in each group. Branch lengths do not indicate genetic distance.

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

having a bootstrap value of at least .8, one or more
shared domains outside of the PARP catalytic domain,
and having subbranches consisting of proteins from closely related species. Within each major clade one or
more subclades were defined by similar reasoning; however, the branch supports for subclades were less stringent. Clade 5 contains proteins with almost the exact
same domain structures all from closely related species;
therefore, subclades were not defined for this clade. Four
proteins (Dictyostelium discoideum DDB0232241, Naegleria gruberi 72525, Naegleria gruberi 80603 and Caenorhabditis elegans PME5) did not fall clearly into any
clades; rather they fell between clades or next to proteins
from widely divergent species (Additional file 4). Therefore, they have not been included in any of the defined
clades. Dictyostelium DDB0232241 contains two WWE
domains and a Cwf15/Cwc15 domain. WWE domains
are postulated to be protein-protein interaction domains
and are found in proteins involved in the ubiquitin/proteosome pathway and in PARPs [51]. Cwf15/Cwc15
domains are of unknown function and found in splicing
factors [52]. Naegleria gruberi is a member of the Heterolobosea within the eukaryotic group Excavates (Figure 2).
Heterolobosea are protozoa, many of which, including
Naegleria gruberi, can transform between amoeboid, flagellate, and encysted stages. Naegleria gruberi is the only
member of this group of organisms with a completed
genome, making it impossible to determine if these genes
are representative of ones found in a wide range of heterolobosea species or are more specific to Naegleria and
its relatives. The two Naegleria PARP-like proteins are
relatively short proteins with the PARP catalytic domain
at their very C termini. Their N termini contain no
known functional domains. The function of these proteins remains obscure, although they retain the “HYE”
catalytic triad (Additional File 3), and may act as bona
fide PARPs. C. elegans PME5 has been characterized as a
tankyrase [53,54] and does share ankyrin repeats in its N
terminus with those proteins, which are found in Clade
4. The placement of this protein outside of the defined
clades likely reflects the large changes found in C. elegans
PARPs (see below).
The PARP lineages (which will be detailed below) include
one clade, Clade 1, which contains representatives from
five of the six so-called eukaryotic supergroups: Plantae,
Opisthokonts, Chromalveolates, Excavates, and Amoebozoa (Figures 1, 2 and 3; [38,39]). There is no completely
sequenced species available from the sixth supergroup,
Rhizaria. This broad distribution suggests that the last
common ancestor of all extant eukaryotes encoded a
gene similar to those of Clade 1. Clade 6 is only found in
three of the eukaryotic supergroups; however, the position of this clade as sister group to all other members of

Page 4 of 26

the PARP superfamily and the placement of these groups
within eukaryotes supports the hypothesis that the last
common eukaryote also encoded such a gene (Figure 2).
Clade 1: the PARP1 clade

Clade 1 is the most broadly distributed PARP clade among
eukaryotes (Figures 1, 2 and 3 and [40]). The distribution
of Clade1 proteins among eukaryotic species suggests that
there was at least one Clade 1-like PARP protein encoded
in the genome of their last common ancestor. This group
of PARPs can be subdivided into nine subclades (A-H; Figures 1 and 3). Almost all members of Clade 1 are characterized by the presence of WGR and PARP regulatory
domains (PRD) in addition to the PARP catalytic domains,
one of the reasons we placed these proteins together (Figure 4). The WGR domain is found in PARPs as well an
Escherichia coli molybdate metabolism regulator and
other proteins of unknown function. Its exact function is
unclear, but it is proposed to be a nucleic acid binding
domain. The PRD domain is found only in Clade 1 PARP
proteins and has been shown to increase the poly(ADPribosyl)ation activity of proteins that contain it. Consistent
with the presence of PRD domains, many members of
Clade 1 have been demonstrated to have poly(ADPribosyl)ation activity, making it likely that most if not all
members have this activity; this is also supported by the
finding that the so-called HYE catalytic triad is conserved
in almost all of these proteins (Additional files 5 and 6).
Another commonality between members of Clade 1 is that
many of them have been shown to have roles in DNA
repair. Other common domains found in Clade 1 proteins
are zinc finger DNA binding domains, BRCT domains
and PADR1 domains. The BRCT domain, originally identified in the C terminus of the BRCA-1 protein, is usually
found in proteins involved in cell cycle regulation and/or
DNA repair [55]. The PADR1 domain is found only in
PARPs (specifically Clade 1 PARPs) and is of unknown
function [56].
Clade 1A is found in Amoebozoa (Dictyostelium),
Opisthokonta (fungi) and Chromalveolates (the ciliate
Paramecium tetraurelia) and is the sister group to most
of the other Clade 1 subclades (with the exception of
Clade 1I; Figure 3). This subclade is unique within
Clade 1 in containing proteins with ankyrin repeats, in
addition to WGR, PRD and PARP catalytic domains.
Clade 1B contains members from both the Opisthokonta (animals and Choanoflagellata) and the Excavata
(the Heterolobosea member Naegleria). This subclade is
typified by human PARP1, the founding member of the
superfamily. This protein has three N terminal zinc fingers that contribute to DNA binding, a BRCT domain
and a PADR1 domain in addition to WGR, PRD, and
the catalytic domain (Figure 4; [22,57,58]).

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 5 of 26

Figure 2 Phylogenetic distribution of the PARP family across eukaryotes. The topology of the schematic tree is based on recent evidence
from single- and multi-gene phylogenetic analyses of eukaryotes or subgroups thereof. Some nodes, especially the deepest ones (e.g.
monophyly of Excavates, Plantae or Chromalveolates + Rhizarians), remain controversial; these uncertainties do not affect the conclusions
concerning the evolutionary history of the PARP family. Branch lengths do not reflect genetic distance. Presence or absence of PARP proteins are
indicated by a red + or a blue -, respectively. For each species or group, PARP family members are listed with the clade numbers introduced in
Figure 1. For an expanded phylogeny of the fungi, please see Figure 11. Accession numbers of the genes and details on the source of data for
individual taxa is provided in Additional files 1 and 2. The six eukaryotic supergroups are indicated as follows: Amoebozoa, purple; Opisthokonta,
red; Excavata, orange; Plantae, green; Rhizaria, black; Chromalveolates, blue. ND, no data; NA, not applicable; O, orphan PARPs, as discussed in the
text; 3?, reflects the ambiguity of placement of the Tetrahymena proteins into this clade, as discussed in the text.

Figure 3 Phylogenetic analysis of Clade 1 PARP genes. The represented tree is a ML tree. This tree is based on a multiple alignment that
includes the PARP catalytic domain (Additional file 5). Clade 1 proteins can be divided into nine subclades A-I, as indicated. Branch supports as
in Figure 1. Scale bar indicates genetic distance reflected in branch length.

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 6 of 26

Figure 4 Schematic representation of domains found in PARP proteins. Proteins are arranged by clade as defined in Figure 1 and in the
text (indicated on the left). The protein name is given on the right, with species in parenthesis. Numbers indicate amino acids. Protein domains
are illustrated by coloured boxes and were defined according to Pfam 23.0. Although each protein is represented in scale, the proteins are not
in scale between each other. vWA, von Willebrand factor type A; VIT, vault inter-alpha-trypsin domain; Ankyrin, ankyrin repeats; UBCc, ubiquitin
conjugating enzyme catalytic domain; PfamB_2311, domain of unknown function found in Clade 6 PARPs; UIM, ubiquitin interaction motif; PARP
catalytic, catalytic domain of PARPs, PARP Zn2+, DNA binding zinc finger; Macro, macro domain; WWE, WWE domain; SAM, sterile alpha domain;
PRD, PARP regulatory domain; PADR1, domain of unknown function found in PARPs; BRCT, BRCA-1 C terminus domain; CCHH Zn2+, DNA binding
zinc finger; RRM1, RNA-binding motif; FPE, Fungal PARP E2-like domain; WGR, domain defined by conserved Trp, Gly, and Arg residues; U-box,
modified ring finger found in E3 ubiquitin ligases; SAP, DNA binding domain. Human, Homo sapiens; Dictyostelium, Dictyostelium discoideum;
Arabidopsis, Arabidopsis thaliana; Magnaporthe, Magnaporthe grisea; Physcomitrella, Physcomitrella patens.

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Both Clade 1C and 1D both contain proteins that have
in common WGR, PRD and PARP catalytic domains and
mostly do not contain other functional domains. Clade
1C is confined to several Oomyocete Phytophtora species
(within the Excavata) and one basal animal. Clade 1D
contains members from Opisthokonta (the animals Xenopus laevis (Q566G1) and Schistosoma japonicum
(Q5DAZ0) and the fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) and Plantae (land plants) as well as ciliate members
of the Chromalveolates. Some of the land plant members
of Clade 1D have acquired SAP domains DNA binding
domains [59] N terminal to the other domains (Figure 4).
In addition, the land plant members of this group have
altered their catalytic triad, alone among Clade 1 members (Additional files 5 and 6). All the plant proteins have
a cysteine in place of the histidine while all except for the
moss protein have a valine instead of the tyrosine in the
second position. However, the plant Clade 1D proteins
have retained the glutamic acid in the third position. It is
unclear what effect these changes might have on the catalytic activity of these proteins.
Clade 1E contains most of the fungal members of
Clade 1 and is characterized by proteins with BRCT
domains N terminal to WGR, PRD and PARP catalytic
domains. Clade 1F is specific to the Excavata. The Toxoplasma gondii representative (TGME49_070840) has a
similar domain structure to human PARP1, found in
Clade 1B. Clade 1G is confined to the Opisthokonta
(both animals and the Choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis), contains proteins with only WGR, PRD and
PARP catalytic domains and includes human PARP2.
All five eukaryotic supergroups that contain sequenced
species are represented in Clade 1H (Figures 1 and 3).
This clade includes human PARP3. Interestingly, land
plants have duplicated one of their Clade 1H genes; one
duplicate lineage appears to be changing rapidly, based
on the long-branch length in the phylogenetic tree (Figure 3). These proteins may have acquired a novel function or the original function may have been split
between the two copies in these species (neofunctionalization or subfunctionalization), as these processes are
hypothesized to increase the probability of retention of
duplicate genes [60].
The final subclade in Clade 1, Clade 1I, consists of two
Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) proteins, PME1 and
PME2, which have been characterized previously [61].
PME1 contains zinc fingers and PADR1, WGR, PRD and
PARP domains, while PME2 only has WGR, PRD and
PARP domains. As will be discussed further below, many
of the nematode proteins are anomalous.
Clade 2: the RCD1 clade

Clade 2 of PARP-like genes consists of proteins identified only in land plants, with representatives found from

Page 7 of 26

bryophytes to angiosperms (Figures 2 and 5), a finding
that has also been made by another group [62]. However, there is no genomic information available for any
member of the streptophyte algae, the sister group to
land plants within Plantae, leaving open the possibility
that members of this clade may be found in these
organisms (Figure 2). All groups of land plants also contain members of Clade 1 PARPs, while the moss Physcomitrella patens contains Clade 6 proteins in addition
(Figure 2).
The founding member of this type of PARP-like protein, RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH 1 (RCD1),
was identified in a genetic screen in the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana for genes involved in cell death in
response to ozone [63] and has been shown to be
involved in response to a number of abiotic stresses
[64]. Other members of this clade have subsequently
been identified based on sequence similarity and several
are also involved in stress response [62,65,66]. Clade 2 is
made up two subclades (Figure 5). Clade 2A consists of
proteins that have, in common with RCD1, an N terminal WWE domain, the PARP signature and a C terminal extension (Figure 4) and are found throughout the
breadth of the land plants (Figure 5). Clade 2B is apparently eudicot specific (Figure 5) and consists of relatively
short proteins with only the PARP signature and the C
terminal extension (Figure 4). Although Clade 2A proteins contain WWE domains, they do not group with
another group of WWE containing PARPs, which fall
into Clade 3, a clade with no plant representatives (see
below). RCD1 has recently been shown to be enzymatically inactive, a result consistent with the lack of conservation of many of the catalytic residues within the PARP
domain (Additional file 7; [62]).
One interesting observation we made concerning
Clade 2 was the large number of independent gene
duplications that have occurred within this gene lineage
(Figure 5). While this is likely due to the propensity of
plant genomes to undergo whole genome duplications
(reviewed in [67]), the retention of many of the gene
pairs suggests that Clade 2 proteins are undergoing neofunctionalization and/or subfunctionalization at a high
rate [60,68]. This supposition is supported for a pair of
Clade 2A paralogs in Arabidopsis thaliana, RCD1 and
SIMILAR TO RCD ONE 1 (SRO1), which have been
shown to be only partially redundant despite a relatively
recent evolutionary origin [65,69].
Clade 3

Clade 3 contains proteins from three of the six eukaryotic supergroups: Opisthokonts (animals), Amoebozoa
(Dictyostelium discoideum) and Chromalveolates (Tetrahymena thermophila) (Figures 1 and 6). This clade is
likely to be somewhat artificial; the domain structures

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 8 of 26

Figure 5 Phylogenetic analysis of Clade 2 PARP genes. The represented tree is a ML tree. This tree is based on a multiple alignment that
includes the PARP catalytic domain (Additional file 7). Clade 2 proteins can be divided into two subclades as indicated. Branch supports as in
Figure 1. Scale bar indicates genetic distance reflected in branch length.

outside of the PARP catalytic domain are heterogeneous
among Clade 3 proteins and the presence of Tetrahymena
thermophila sequences within a group that otherwise contains Opisthokonts and Amoebozoa (which are sister
groups) is unlikely to be real. These proteins do share certain characteristics in their catalytic domains suggestive of
a switch from PARP activity to mART activity. PARP
family members have catalytic domains containing the
“HYE” catalytic triad conserved throughout the ADPr
transferase superfamily [32]. The third residue, normally a
glutamic acid, is not conserved in most Clade 3 members
(Figure 7 and Additional file 8), with only one of its members retaining this residue (Tetrahymena thermophila
Q22F17), while a second has a glutamine (Tetrahymena
thermophila Q24C77). Most members of the clade have
substituted the aliphatic amino acids isoleucine, valine,
methionine or leucine for the glutamic acid, while one
Tetrahymena protein (Q22SD0) as well as human PARP9
and its vertebrate orthologs have threonine or serine at
this position. These substitutions have consequences for
the catalytic activity of these proteins; these proteins likely
do not have poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity [32]. It is likely
that the grouping of at least the Tetrahymena proteins

into this clade is a result of convergent evolution of
mART activity.
Given the heterogeneous composition of Clade 3, it is
difficult to divide into subclades; however, we classified
the proteins into six subclades as outlined below, partially for the purpose of discussion, and partially based
on common domain structures and features of the catalytic domains (Figures 6 and 7 and Additional file 8).
Clade 3A is composed of two proteins, including human
PARP10, containing an RRM RNA binding domain [70],
a glycine-rich region (GRD), and a UIM domain, known
to bind monoubiquitin and polyubiquitin chains [71].
The proteins found in Clade 3B and 3C contain at least
one Macro domain N terminal to their C terminal catalytic domain (Figure 4). Macro domains have been
shown to bind to poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) [72]. Clade
3B includes representatives from the most basal animal
in our study Trichoplax adhaerens, while 3C includes
two human proteins, PARP14 and PARP15. PARP10,
PARP14 and PARP15 have been demonstrated to have
mART activity [32].
Clade 3D consists of the two Dictyostelium discoideum
and four Tetrahymena thermophila proteins. Unlike the

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 9 of 26

Figure 6 Phylogenetic analysis of Clade 3 PARP genes. The represented tree is a ML tree. This tree is based on a multiple alignment that
includes the PARP catalytic domain (Additional file 8). Clade 3 proteins can be divided into six subclades A-F as indicated. Branch supports as in
Figure 1. Scale bar indicates genetic distance reflected in branch length.

majority of animal proteins in Clade 3, only one of these
proteins have a proline located one amino acid away
from the third residue of the catalytic triad (Figure 7).
The four proteins from the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophilia have no known functional domains outside of
their C terminal PARP catalytic domains and are only
similar to one another in this region (data not shown),
again supporting the idea that these proteins are not
closely evolutionarily related to the other proteins in
Clade 3. One of the Tetrahymena proteins has retained
the glutamic acid of the “HYE” (Figure 7), again supporting this interpretation. All four proteins also share a
H/NNSK motif just past the last amino acid of the putative catalytic triad not found in other members of Clade
3 (Figure 7). The Dictyostelium proteins in 3D do not
show high similarity outside of the PARP domain.
DDB0304590 is a relatively short protein with only the
PARP catalytic domain and a short C terminal extension. DDB0232928 has a Macro domain and, at its
very N terminus, a U-box (Figure 4). The U-box is a

modified RING finger [73] found in E3 ubiquitin ligases
known to bind ubiquitin E2 enzymes [74]. As Amoebozoa is the sister group to Opisthokonts within eukaryotes and given that DDB0232928 contains a Macro
domain as do some other members of Clade 3, it is possible that these proteins are orthologous to at least
some of the animal Clade 3 proteins.
Clade 3E is confined to animals, but is not represented
in Placozoa (Figure 6). Members of this subclade contain one to two WWE domains, alone or in combination
with zinc fingers (either CCCH or CCCH types) in front
of their PARP catalytic domains (Figure 4). All members
of 3E have replaced the glutamic acid characteristic of
PARPs with an isoleucine except for two (human ZCC2/
PARP13 and Nematostella vectensis A7RWC0) that contain valines at that site (Figure 7). This subclade also
contains human PARP12 and human PARPT/PARP7.
Clade 3F, which is sister group to all other Clade 3 subclades, contains human PARP9 and orthologs from vertebrates. These proteins contain two Macro domains N

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 10 of 26

Figure 7 Clade 3 PARPs have divergent catalytic domains. Alignment of the deduced amino acid sequences of part of the PARP catalytic
domains from Clade 3 proteins. Species names and protein accession numbers are shown at left. Numbers indicate amino acid position within
each PARP catalytic domain while the labels on the right indicate the subclade to which the sequences belong. Dots indicate gaps introduced
to maximize the alignment; the black thick lines indicate missing amino acids introduced to allow representation of all three residues of the
catalytic triad, indicated by the blue boxes (C1 = H; C2 = Y; C3 = E). Only one Clade 3 protein contains a glutamic acid residue at the third
position, while another has a glutamine (both indicated with red asterisks). Most Clade 3 proteins have substituted aliphatic amino acids (no
asterisk), while five have serine or threonine at the position of the glutamic acid (blue asterisks). The black box surrounds a short motif
characteristic of Tetrahymena thermophila Clade 3 proteins. The black box labelled with an asterisk indicates a proline residue that is found in
most of the Clade 3 proteins. Shaded sequences indicate proteins for which a 3D structure is available.

terminal to their PARP catalytic domains (Figure 4) and
have a more divergent catalytic triad than the rest of Clade
3, having Q-Y/S-T/S instead of HYE (Figure 7 and Additional file 8). Human PARP9 has been shown to be inactive [35], suggesting that no Clade 3F proteins act as
enzymes. PARP9 was originally identified as a gene conferring risk for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and named
BAL1 (B-aggressive lymphoma 1) [75]. Interestingly, two
proteins identified by their similarity to BAL1, PARP14/
BAL2 and PARP15/BAL3, although their domain structures resemble that of PARP9/BAL1, group in subclade 3C
(Figures 6 and 7), and act as mARTs [35].
Clade 4: the tankyrase clade

Clade 4 proteins are characterized by fifteen to eighteen
ankyrin repeats followed by a sterile alpha motif (SAM),

most likely a protein-protein interaction domain [76],
and the PARP catalytic domain (Figure 4). These proteins are so similar to one another that we have not
further subdivided them (Figure 8 and Additional file 9).
The two human members of this clade, tankyrase1 and
tankyrase2, have been shown to have poly(ADP-ribosyl)
ation activity [19,27,77]. All proteins grouped in this
clade retain the “HYE” catalytic triad (Figure 1 and
Additional file 8), suggesting that they are likely to be
active enzymes.
Our analysis indicates true tankyrases are confined to
animals, and in fact do not appear to be found outside
of the bilateria (Figures 2 and 8). A duplication event
that generated two tankyrase-encoding genes appears to
have occurred within the vertebrates, sometime after the
separation of the amphibians. The absence of tankyrase

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 11 of 26

Figure 8 Phylogenetic analysis of Clade 4 PARP genes. The represented tree is a ML tree. This tree is based on a multiple alignment that
includes the PARP catalytic domain (Additional file 9). Branch supports as in Figure 1. Scale bar indicates genetic distance reflected in branch
length.

orthologs outside of the animals contradicts the report
of such proteins in protozoa such as Dictyostelium discoideum and Tetrahymena thermophila [78]. However,
these protozoan proteins differ from the canonical tankyrases in structure; although they have ankyrin repeats
in their N terminal region, these are followed by WGR
and PRD domains rather than a SAM motif (Figure 4).
Consistent with the presence of the WGR and PRD
domains and the low similarity between their PARP catalytic domain and that of tankyrases, these proteins fall
into Clade 1A (Figure 3). This suggests that PARP proteins independently acquired ankyrin repeats at least
twice.
Clade 5: The vPARP clade

Clade 5 is found only in the Opishthokonts (animals)
and Amboezoa (Figure 9 and Additional file 10) and is
characterized by the position of the PARP catalytic
domain. In this group, the PARP signature is found in
the middle of the protein, rather than at the C terminus
and is typified by human vPARP/PARP4. vPARP has the
catalytic domain preceded by a BRCT domain and followed by a vault protein inter-alpha-trypsin (VIT)
domain, and a von Willebrand factor type A domain
(vWA) (Figure 4; [30]). Both VIT and vWA domains are
commonly found in proteins of multiprotein complexes
and are structurally related to each other [79]. Clade 5
is further subdivided into two subclades (Figure 9).
Clade 5A contains animal proteins while Clade 5B

contains two proteins from the amoeba Dictyostelium
discoideum (Q54HY5 and Q55GU8). The amoeba proteins have a different protein structure than the animal
members of this clade; they too have BRCT domains N
terminal to their PARP catalytic domains and long C
terminal extensions. However, there are no VIT or vWA
domains found in these proteins.
vPARP is associated with vaults, very large cytoplasmic
ribonucleoprotein particles first described in the 1980s
whose function is unclear [80]. Vaults have a patchy
taxonomic distribution within eukaryotes. Our analysis
suggests that the phylogenetic distribution of vPARP is
also limited (Figures 2 and 9); members of Clade 5A
with the vPARP domain structure are found only in animals that have been shown to contain vaults, while
Clade 5B proteins are found in Dictyostelium, which
also contains vaults [81]. However, although vaults have
been identified in trypanosomes [82], no evidence of
proteins sharing the domain structure of vPARP can be
found in this group of organisms, although such proteins may be present in species with currently unsequenced genomes.
mART activity may be ancient

Clade 6 proteins are found in Opisthokonts (animals
and fungi), Excavates (Parabasalids and Heterolobosa),
and Plantae (chlorophyta and bryophytes) (Figures 1, 2
and 10 and Additional file 11). Based on its position as
sister group to all other clades of PARPs (Figure 1) and

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 12 of 26

Figure 9 Phylogenetic analysis of Clade 5 PARP genes. The represented tree is a ML tree. This tree is based on a multiple alignment that
includes the PARP catalytic domain (Additional file 10). Clade 5 proteins can be divided into two subclades, A-B, as indicated. Branch supports as
in Figure 1. Scale bar indicates genetic distance reflected in branch length.

the distribution of species containing Clade 6 PARPs
within the eukaryotes (Figure 2), it is likely that the last
common eukaryotic ancestor had at least one Clade 6like protein encoded in its genome. This clade is characterized by N termini with no known functional domains
and C terminal extensions beyond the PARP catalytic
domain of varying lengths. Almost all of these proteins
contain a PfamB_2311 domain immediately before their
PARP catalytic domain (Figure 4), although the function
or significance of this domain is unknown, supporting
the placement of these proteins in a single clade.
Another characteristic of Clade 6 members is changes
within the PARP catalytic domain. None of the Clade 6
proteins we identified contain the final glutamic acid of
the HYE catalytic triad, although they mostly retain the
histidine and tyrosine (Additional file 11). This might
lead to an inability to catalyze poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation.
In fact, the human proteins in this clade (PARP6, 8, and
16) have been predicted to have mono(ADP-ribosyl)
ation activity based on structural models [32], although
this awaits experimental confirmation. None of the
Clade 6 PARPs have been functionally characterized.

Clade 6 can be subdivided into five groups (6A-E; Figure 10). Clade 6A contains fungal proteins exclusively
(Figure 10; [40,83]). These proteins consist of a long N
terminal region containing no known functional
domains, a PfamB_2311 domain, the PARP catalytic
domain, and a C terminal extension containing an
UBCc (Figure 4 and Additional files 12 and 13). The
UBCc domain is the catalytic domain contained in E2
Ub-conjugating enzymes (UBCs) [84]. These enzymes
carry Ub and transfer it either directly to a substrate in
cooperation with an E3 enzyme or to the E3 Ub-ligase.
An active cysteine residue [84] characterizes the UBCc
domain and is found in Clade 6A proteins (Additional
files 12 and 13A-B). In addition, these proteins also
share a number of residues conserved across a range of
UBCc and UBCc-like domains (Additional files 12 and
13A-B). These include the residues making up the proline-hydrophobic side chain interaction at the top of the
so-called E2 fold flap, and a chain of interacting residues
at the bottom of the flap (see bolded residues in
Additional file 13A-B). These residues have been implicated in the mechanical structure of the E2 fold [85].

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 13 of 26

Figure 10 Phylogenetic analysis of Clade 6 PARP genes. The represented tree is a ML tree. This tree is based on a multiple alignment that
includes the PARP catalytic domain (Additional file 11). Clade 6 can be divided into five subclades, A-E, as indicated. Branch supports as in
Figure 1. Scale bar indicates genetic distance reflected in branch length.

Although it is unusual for E2 enzymes to have multiple
functional domains, there is at least one other family of
such enzymes, the BRUCE-like family, which has multiple domains. These proteins are large (between four and
five thousand amino acids) and contain Baculovirus
Inhibitor of apoptosis Repeats (BIR; [86,87]) in their N
termini, followed by a large region of unknown function,
and a UBCc domain at their C termini [88].
No other known functional domains can be identified
in Clade 6A proteins; however, most of these proteins
do share another PfamB domain, 30617, at their very N
termini [41]. This domain is confined to fungal species
and appears to only occur in Clade 6A family members
with the exception of a protein from the fungus Uncinocarpus reesii (EEP82442.1) that consists only of this
domain (Additional file 14). Pfam-B_30617 averages 360
amino acids in length and has some secondary structure
similarity to the RWD domain when modelled using the
Protein Homology/Analogy Recognition Engine (Phyre;

[89]), and is predicted to form an alpha helix/beta
strand/alpha helix/beta strand/alpha helix structure
(Additional file 13C). The RWA domain has some structural similarity to the UBCc domain [90], further providing a link between the Clade 6A proteins and Ub. The
RWA domain is thought to mediate non-catalytic protein-protein interactions. We propose renaming the
Pfam-B_30617 domain FPE, for Fungal PARP E2associated.
Clade 6B proteins are found in a subset of green algae
(Figure 10). These proteins have no other domains of
known function but do contain PfamB_2311 domains as
well as the PARP catalytic domain. Green algae have
not previously been shown to have any PARP-like proteins encoded in their genomes. Clade 6C proteins are
animal specific and are found in species from across this
group, including human (PARP16; Figure 10). Again,
other than a PfamB_2311 domain and a PARP catalytic
domain, no other obvious protein motifs are present.

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Clade 6D is confined to Deuterostomes with the exception of the mollusc Lottia gigantea. These proteins consist of no identifiable domains other than a PfamB_2311
domain and the PARP catalytic domain (Figure 4).
Human PARP6 and PARP8 are found within this group
of proteins.
Clade 6E consist of seven proteins encoded by Trichomonas vaginalis, the only member of the Parabasalids
(Excavata) with a fully sequenced genome and one fungal protein (Nectria haematocca 83215). Trichomonas is
the causative agent of the sexually transmitted disease
trichomoniasis in humans; without other completed
genomes available for the parabasalids, it is impossible
to determine if members of Clade 6E are found elsewhere in this group. Besides the PARP catalytic domain,
the only other identified domain in these proteins is a
PfamB_2311 domain. The Nectria haematocca protein
does not have a PfamB_2311 domain or any known
functional domain.
Phylogenetic analysis suggest multiple independent
losses of PARP genes across the eukaryotes

Although the five supergroups of eukaryotes with genome information contain organisms with PARP-encoding genes in their genome, some lineages appear to have
lost all PARP genes (Figure 2 and Table 1). For example,
in Plantae the sequenced genomes available for three
red algae and a subset of green algae do not encode any
PARP genes (Table 1), although it is possible that such
genes may be present in other species not yet
sequenced. The complement of PARP proteins present
can differ even between closely related species; for
example, the green algae Chlorella sp. NC64A contains
a Clade 6 PARP representative while Chlorella vulgaris
does not (Figure 2 and Table 1). Diatoms and brown
algae (members of the Chromalveolates) do not appear
to have PARPs, nor do the sequenced members of the
Excavates group Diplomonads. While the sequenced
species represent only a small amount of the diversity in
these groups of organisms, the lack of PARP genes suggests that these lineages have lost PARPs and, further,
demonstrate that these genes are not absolutely essential
for eukaryotic life.
The fungal lineages within the Opisthokonts provide a
particularly interesting pattern of gene loss. This group
of organisms contain Clade 1 and 6 PARP proteins, and
based on the phylogenetic distribution of these genes,
the fungal ancestor contained proteins representing both
clades (Figure 2). However, not all current fungal groups
or species have both types of PARPs and some do not
encode PARP genes at all (Figure 11A and Table 1). For
example, the two major model fungal species, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe, do not
have PARPs. It appears that there have been at least five

Page 14 of 26

independent losses of PARPs within the fungi. The basal
fungi are not well represented by sequenced genomes,
however within the Mucorales the genomes of three
species have been sequenced and two have Clade 1
PARPs (Rhizopus oryzae and Mucor circinelloides) while
the other has none (Phycomyces blakesleeanus). The
Basidiomycota has had at least two losses of PARPs; one
loss has occurred within the Pucciniomycotina and one
within the Agaricomycotina. Only two species within
the Pucciniomycotina are represented in our analysis
and neither encodes PARP proteins (Table 1). Within
the Agaricomycotina, there appear to have been two
losses of PARPs. Both Clade 1 and 6 PARPs are found
in some species within this group of Basidiomycota;
however, Postia placenta (Polyporales) has retained only
a Clade 1 PARP while Heterobasidion annosum (Russulales) has lost both types of PARPs (Figure 11B). The
Ascomycota are the fungal group including the most
species with sequenced genomes and have both Clade 1
and 6 PARPs (Figure 11A). This group has seen at least
two independent losses of PARPs. The Taphrinomycotina (represented by Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
contain no PARP genes while none of the Saccharomycotina has Clade 6 proteins and only a basal member of
this group, Yarrowia lipolytica, retains Clade 1 proteins
(Figure 11C). Interestingly, as previously noted by other
groups [91], PARPs or PARP-like proteins are mostly
retained in fungi that have multicellular hyphae and/or
elaborate developmental programs, but not in yeasts
(Figure 11).

Discussion
Evolutionary history of the PARP family

The broad distribution of PARPs across the eukaryotes
indicates that the last common eukaryotic ancestor
(LCEA) had genes encoding members of this protein
family. Clade 1 PARPs are found in all five eukaryotic
supergroups for which sequence information is available;
this implies that the LCEA encoded at least one enzyme
of this type, and may have had multiple members (Figures 2 and 12A). Based on the domain structure of
modern Clade 1 proteins, we hypothesize that the Clade
1 enzyme or enzymes found in the LCEA consisted of
WGR, PRD, and PARP catalytic domains (Figure 12B).
Members of Clade 1 have been characterized in a
range of organisms, encompassing three of the six
eukaryotic supergroups. While a wide range of functions
has been described for these PARPs, most characterized
members of Clade 1 have been implicated in or demonstrated to have roles in DNA damage response and
repair. In Plantae, two of the Arabidopsis thaliana Clade
1 members, AtPARP1 and AtPARP2, have been shown
to be induced by DNA damage and be involved in the
response to it [92,93]. In the Opisthokonts, several

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 15 of 26

Table 1 Eukaryotic organisms with no identifiable PARP genes in their nuclear genomes
Eukaryotic Supergroup

Rank

Species

Citation or sequencing group

Plantae
Chlorophyta
Chlorella vulgaris

JGI

Ostreococcus lucimarinus

[162]

Micromonas pusilla

JGI

Red algae
Guillardia theta

JGI

Hemiselmis andersenii
Cyanidioschyzon merolae

NCBI
[163]

Opisthokonts
Fungi
Saccharomyces cerevisiae

[164]

Schizosaccharomyces pombe

[165]

Pichia stipitis

[166]

Heterobasidion annosum

JGI

Melampsora laricis-populina
Phycomyces blakesleeanus

JGI
JGI

Candida albicans

[167]

Sporobolomyces roseus

JGI

Phaeodactylum tricornutum

[168]

Thalassiosira pseudonana

[169]

Aureococcus anophagefferens

JGI

Giardia intestinalis

[170]

Spironucleus vortens

JGI

Chromalveolates
Diatoms

Brown algae
Excavates
Diplomonads

Species listed have had their genomes individually searched by BLAST to determine if any PARP proteins were present. NCBI, National Center for Biotechnology
Information; JGI, Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute.

animal Clade 1 members have been investigated and
shown to be involved in DNA repair. This is a wellknown function for the human Clade 1 members,
PARP1, PARP2, and PARP3 [26,94,95]. In addition, a
fungal protein, PrpA from Aspergillus nidulans, has
been shown to act early in the DNA damage response
[91], while loss of its ortholog from Neurospora crassa,
NPO, causes sensitivity to DNA damage and acceleration of replicative aging [83]. Within the Excavates, a
Trypanosoma cruzi Clade 1 member, TcPARP, has been
shown to be induced in response by DNA damage, be
enzymatically activated by nicked DNA and to require
DNA for catalytic activity [96]. Clade 1 members in the
Chromalveolates and the Amoebozoa have not been
functionally characterized, but are also likely to function
in DNA damage response. Dictyostelium discoideum in
the Amoebozoa has at least four Clade 1 proteins
encoded in its genome (Figure 3). Drug studies have

implicated PARP activity in oxidative stress response
and DNA damage in this organism [97], but no direct
evidence of which PARP or PARPs is involved has been
published. The ubiquitous distribution of Clade 1 members and the consistent association of the proteins with
DNA damage response suggests that this gene lineage is
ancient and that the original function of this family was
in DNA repair and genome integrity.
While Clade 6 is found in only three of the five eukaryotic supergroups with available genome information
(Opisthokonta, Excavata, and Plantae), the phylogenetic
relationship of these groups within eukaryotes suggests
that a Clade 6-like protein was found in the LCEA (Figures 2 and 12A). Subsequently, during the eukaryotic
radiation, Amoebozoa (or at least Dictyostelium discoideum) and Chromalveolates lost Clade 6 PARPs. The
ancestral Clade 6 protein was likely to consist of a
PfamB_2311 domain N terminal to the PARP catalytic

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 16 of 26

Figure 11 Multiple independent losses of PARP genes have taken place in the fungal lineage. A. Phylogeny of the fungi. The topology of
the schematic tree is based on a recent higher order examination of the fungi [159]. B. Simplified phylogeny of the Agarimycotina. This tree is
based on that of [160]. C. Simplified phylogeny of the Saccharomycotina, based on that of [161]. Branch lengths are not proportional to genetic
distance in any of the phylogenetic trees. Presence or absence of PARP proteins are indicated by a red + or a blue -, respectively. Groups in
which some species have lost PARPs while others have retained them are indicated by a +/- symbol. For each species or group, PARP family
members are listed with the clade numbers introduced in Figure 1. Accession numbers of the genes and details on the source of data for
individual taxa is provided in Additional file 1 and Table 1. ND, no data.

domain (Figure 12B). Members of Clade 6 were more
difficult to identify than other PARPs; it was necessary
to do supplemental BLAST searches with the human
PARP6 catalytic domain to find most of these proteins
(see Methods). This is consistent with the positioning of
Clade 6 as sister group to the rest of the PARP superfamily. The fact that Clade 6 PARPs represent an
ancient lineage further suggests that changes in the
PARP catalytic domain likely to eliminate or change
enzymatic activity evolved early in this protein family or,

alternatively, PARP activity evolved from mART activity.
It is difficult to speculate on the possible function of the
Clade 6 ancestral protein, as none of the extant Clade 6
members have been functionally characterized.
One group of PARPs defined in our study has an unusual distribution. Clade 3 is found in animals (Opisthokonta), Dictylostelium discoideum (Amoebozoa) and the
ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila (Chromalveolates), but
no other species in our analysis, including the ciliate
Paramecium tetraurelia. Our phylogenetic tree is based

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

Page 17 of 26

Figure 12 General summary of the evolutionary hypothesis of the PARP enzyme family. A. Simplified phylogeny of the eukaryotes. The
last common eukaryotic ancestor (LCEA) contained Clades 1 and 6 PARPs. Subsequently, Clade 6 PARPs were lost in two supergroups
(Amoebozoa and Chromalveolates), while individual supergroups gained novel clades of PARPs. Branch lengths do not reflect genetic distance.
B. Schematic representation of the domain structure of ancestral PARP proteins present in the LCEA. WGR, WGR domain; PRD, PARP Regulatory
Domain; PARP, PARP catalytic domain; 2311, PfamB_2311.

on the PARP catalytic domain. Clade 3 proteins have
evolved to become either mARTs or non-enzymatic
(Figure 7; [32]). We propose that the grouping of the
Tetrahymena proteins in Clade 3 is an artefact caused
by this group of proteins independently beginning to
evolve similar changes in the PARP catalytic domain.
Clades 3 and 6 independently acquired somewhat similar changes, supporting the idea that changes within the
PARP catalytic domain may be constrained in order to
preserve overall structure. The hypothesis that the Tetrahymena proteins are not closely related to the other
Clade 3 proteins is supported by the fact that one of
them (Q22F17) retains the glutamic acid of the PARP
catalytic triad, while another (Q24C77) has a conservative substitution of a glutamine at that position and that
they do not share any domains outside of the catalytic
domain with other members of Clade 3. When more
sequences within the ciliates become available, it may
become possible to determine if this hypothesis is correct. The Dictyostelium proteins found in Clade 3 may
be orthologous to the animal proteins, since one of
them has a Macro domain, a domain found in other
members of this clade (Figure 4).
In extant eukaryotes, the animal lineage within
Opisthokonta appears to have the most diverse collection of PARPs. Most animal genomes encode representatives of at least two clades of PARPs. In addition, a
PARP clade has been acquired in this lineage, Clade 4
(Figure 12A). Vertebrates contain the highest number
and type of PARPs of any group examined within the

eukaryotes, containing members of Clades 1, 3, 4, 5 and
6; additionally they often encode more than one representative of each clade. However, within animals the
nematodes are unusual. C. elegans, within the order
Rhabditida, only encodes two Clade 1I proteins, PME1
and PME2 (Figure 3), and a protein (PME5) that did not
clearly fall into any clade (Additional file 4). Within
Clade 1, the nematode 1I PARPs do not group with
other animal PARPs but rather are found as the sister
group to all of the Clade 1 proteins. PME5 somewhat
resembles tankyrases in domain structure but does not
group with them. However, the branches leading to the
C. elegans proteins are long. The length of these
branches likely results in long-branch effects, causing
misplacement of these proteins within the tree. Such
long-branch effects can be caused by the independent
acquisition of identical character states [98], phylogenetic signal erosion (“long branch repulsion”) [99], or by
symplesiomorphy (retention of an old conserved character state) [100]. In contrast to the situation in C. elegans,
we were unable to identify any Clade 1 PARPs in the
nematode Brugia malayi, in the order Spirudida, but did
identify a clear tankyrase (Figures 2, 3 and 8). The
nematodes are clearly outliers within the animal lineage
and a closer examination of the PARP family across a
greater number of such species would be interesting.
Although PARPs are found throughout the eukaryotes,
these proteins are not essential for eukaryotic life. This is
illustrated most clearly in the fungal lineage within the
Opisthokonta. In contrast to their fellow Opisthokont

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

lineage the animals, fungi encode members of only
Clades 1 and 6 PARPs (Figures 2 and 11). Lineages within
the fungi have independently lost PARPs at least five
times, illustrating that eukaryotic organisms do not absolutely require this family of proteins. In addition, it
should be noted that none of the fungal species examined
retained Clade 6 PARPs in the absence of Clade 1 PARPs.
This underscores the relative importance of the so-called
“classical” Clade 1 PARPs in these organisms. Interestingly, many of the fungi that have lost all PARPs, including the model fungal systems Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and Schizosaccharomyces pombe, are yeasts. This suggests
fungi with more complex life cycles may retain PARPs
more readily than yeasts do. It is possible that a selective
advantage is found in organisms with relatively rapid
generation times in dispensing with this class of proteins.
This is supported by the retention of Clade 1 PARPs in
the basal Saccharomycia fungus Yarrowia lipolytica while
the two other sequenced members of this fungal group
have lost all PARPs (Figure 11C). Yarrowia can grow in
three forms: as yeast, hyphae and pseudohyphae. Candida albicans, also a Saccharomyces member, is trimorphic but lacks PARPs; however, this diploid organism
lacks a known sexual cycle, suggesting a simplification of
its life cycle. Sacchromyces cerevisiae is only dimorphic,
growing only as yeast or pseudohyphae (reviewed in
[101]). Other groups have noted the association of retention of PARPs with filamentous growth [91]. This correlation is also found in the dimorphic human pathogen
Histoplasma capsulatum, the cause of histoplasmosis,
which grows as either yeast or hyphae. In this organism,
we have found that its Clade 6A PARP gene is expressed
only during the filamentous growth stage and not when
the fungus is growing in the yeast form (Lee and Lamb,
data not shown).
Our conclusions about the function and distribution
of PARP proteins in the eukaryotes are limited by the
availability of species with sequenced genomes. Currently, there is a dearth of sequences available in many
groups of eukaryotes while animals, particularly vertebrates, and fungi are relatively well represented. A number of phylogenetically important groups such as
streptophyte algae, glaucophytes, phaeophytes, dinoflagellates, and archamoebe have no sequenced genomes.
The eukaryotic supergroup Amoebozoa is represented
by only one species, Dictyostelium discoideum, while
there are no representatives of Rhizaria sequenced.
Despite the limitations of the available sequences, we
have identified unique types of PARPs in Naegleria gruberi, Trichomonas vaginalis and green algae and clarified
the phylogenetic distribution of tankyrases. There are
likely to be additional variations of PARPs discovered as
more eukaryotic genomes are sequenced and a further

Page 18 of 26

advancement of our understanding of evolution of this
important proteins superfamily.
Clade 5 and vaults

The Clade 5 PARPs have a limited phylogenetic distribution, found only in a subset of animals and amoeba
(Figure 9). vPARP was originally identified in a twohybrid screen using the major vault protein (MVP) protein as bait and shown to act as a bona fide PARP [30].
vPARP associates not only with the ribonucleoprotein
vault complex, but also can be found in the nucleus,
associated with the telomere and the mitotic spindle.
The function of vPARP at any of its locations is unclear.
Vaults have been best studied in mammals and in these
organisms are composed of three proteins, MVP, TEL1
(also found at telomeres), and vPARP. In addition, several vault specific RNAs (vRNAs) are found. The function or functions of vaults are still unclear; they are
associated with drug resistance and several signalling
pathways (reviewed in [102]), as well as the nuclear pore
complex [103,104]. vPARP-deficient mice are normal
and fertile with no defects in telomeres or vaults [105].
More recently these mice have been found to develop
more tumours in response to carcinogens, suggesting a
role in chemically induced cancers [106].
Vaults have been identified in diverse animals and in
other eukaryotes such as the amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, flatworms, and trypanosomatides [81,82].
However, vaults appear to be missing from fungi, a
number of model animals (C. elegans and Drosophila
melanogaster) and in plants [107-109].
The fact that vPARP does not appear essential for
normal development or vault structure in mouse [105]
suggests that this protein is not essential for vault function. This may explain why organisms that have been
demonstrated to contain vaults in their cells do not
always encode proteins that look like vPARP.
Clade 2 plant-specific PARPs are involved in stress
responses

In addition to containing three Clade 1 PARPs throughout and Clade 6 PARPs only in the bryophytes, the land
plants contain a unique clade of PARP-like proteins.
This clade can be subdivided into two subclades, one of
which contains proteins with an N terminal WWE
domain. Clade 2 is distinct from Clade 3, which also
contains proteins with WWE domains. A group within
Clade 2, confined to the eudicots within the angiosperms, consists of truncated proteins lacking the N
terminal WWE domain. Examination of the phylogeny
of Clade 2 clearly illustrates the importance of genome
duplication during plant evolution [110-112]; plant species tend to encode gene pairs (Figure 5).

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

The plant Clade 2 proteins have only been investigated in the model angiosperm Arabidopsis thaliana.
Arabidopsis has two genes, RCD1 and SRO1, which
encode full-length members of Clade 2A [64,113]. RCD1
was originally identified as a stress response gene [63].
It is involved in the response to several abiotic stresses
and shows altered hormone accumulation and gene
expression [64,114,115]. rcd1 mutants also display pleiotropic developmental defects including reduced stature,
malformed leaves, and early flowering [64]. Loss of
SRO1 causes only minor defects; however rcd1; sro1
double mutants are severely affected with a majority of
individuals dying during embryogenesis [65,69], indicating that this clade of PARP proteins has essential functions in land plants. RCD1 has been shown to bind to a
number of transcription factors, suggesting that Clade 2
PARPs may function in transcriptional regulation
[69,113]. RCD1 does not appear to have catalytic activity, consistent with the absence of the HYE catalytic
triad in this protein (Figure 1 and Additional file 7);
however, other members of this clade do contain variant
HYE motifs that may confer activity (Additional file 7).
Therefore, it will be necessary to test individual members of this clade for activity.
Four genes in Arabidopsis, SRO2-5, encode proteins
within Clade 2 that lack the N terminal WWE domain
[64,113] and consist of two gene pairs: SRO2/SRO3 and
SRO4/SRO5 (Figure 5). These genes may be involved in
stress signalling; SRO5 is necessary for response to both
salt and oxidative stress [66] and can bind transcription
factors [62] and SRO2 is up regulated in chloroplastic
ascorbic peroxidase mutants [116].
Multiple independent acquisitions of mART activity within
the PARP superfamily

Although not closely evolutionarily related (Figure 1),
the proteins belonging to Clades 3 and 6 have modified
their catalytic domains, replacing the glutamic acid of
the “HYE” catalytic triad with various other amino acids
(Figure 7 and Additional files 8 and 11). The catalytic
activity of several human members of Clade 3 has been
experimentally investigated. PARP10, which falls into
Clade 3A and has an isoleucine instead of a glutamic
acid in its catalytic site, has been reported to have auto
(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity and modify core histones
[33,34]. More recently it was shown to have mono
(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity, not poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation
activity, and therefore function as a mono(ADP-ribosyl)
transferase (mART) rather than a PARP [32]. Molecular
modelling suggested that this enzyme uses substrateassisted catalysis in order to activate the NAD + substrate. This group further demonstrated that PARP14/
BAL2, a Clade 3C member with a leucine in place of
the glutamic acid, also has mART activity, consistent

Page 19 of 26

with an earlier paper demonstrating auto(ADP-ribosyl)
ation activity [35]. A human member of Clade 3F,
PARP9/BAL1, has not only replaced the glutamic acid
within the catalytic PARP signature but have also
replaced the histidine (with a glutamic acid). This
enzyme has been shown to be inactive [32,35]. Almost
all of the proteins comprising both Clade 3 and Clade 6
have replaced at least the glutamic acid of the “HYE”
triad. It is likely that none of these proteins function as
bone fide PARPs but rather are either mARTs or are no
longer enzymatically active. Clade 3 has a limited taxonomic distribution (Figures 2 and 6); Clade 6, on the
other hand, is found in at least three of the six eukaryotic supergroups and was likely present in the LCEA (Figure 12A). This suggests that the evolution of mART
activity within the PARP gene family occurred before
the full complement of crown groups had formed. In
addition, the changes in the catalytic domain of the
Clade 2 proteins also suggest that these proteins have
altered enzymatic activities (Additional file 6). Therefore,
it is likely that mART activity and/or loss of enzymatic
activity has evolved at least twice from PARP activity (in
Clades 3 and 2) and that mART activity in extant Clade
6 proteins represents an even earlier acquisition of this
enzymatic activity.
What functions do PARP-like/mART proteins play?
While no members of Clade 6 have been characterized,
several members of Clade 3 have, all in mammalian systems. PARP9/BAL1, PARP14/BAL2, and PARP15/BAL3
have been shown to interact with transcription factors
and mediate transcriptional repression or activation
[35,75,117,118]. PARP13/ZCC2/ZAP has been shown to
bind to viral RNA through its zinc fingers and promote
degradation of the RNA by the exosome [119-124].
PARP12 shares significant similarity to PARP13 and is
thought to function similarly. PARP10 interacts with
MYC and inhibits transformation; its overexpression
leads to a loss of cell viability [33,34]. To date, no clear
consensus about the function of Clade 3 proteins can be
formulated.
True tankyrases are confined to animals

Human tankyrase1 was originally identified as a telomeric protein interacting with TRF1, a negative regulator of telomere length. It was shown to act as a PARP
and automodify itself as well as TRF1 [19]. A second
human tankyrase, tankyrase2 (Figure 4), was identified
shortly after the initial discovery of tankyrase1
[28,29,125]. Human tankyrases can be found both in the
nucleus [19], at the nuclear pore and centrosome [126],
and in the cytoplasm associated with the Golgi or vesicles [127] or the plasma membrane [128]. Since their
initial discovery, the known functions of these proteins
have expanded to include spindle assembly and vesicle

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

trafficking (reviewed in [78]), sister chromatid segregation [129], and regulation of the WNT pathway
[130-132]. Tankyrases have been identified in a number
of animal species, including mouse. In this model organism, it appears tankyrase may not function in telomere
length control [133], but its other functions are conserved and its function is essential [134]. Consistent
with functions outside of the telomere, a tankyrase is
found in Drosophila melanogaster (Figure 8; [78]), an
organism with a highly divergent telomere consisting of
transposons rather than the short repeats found in other
eukaryotes [135].
Our phylogenetic tree places a number of proteins
previously reported as tankyrases in Clade 1, rather than
within Clade 4 (Figures 3 and 8). These proteins do
have a different domain structure than tankyrases, sharing ankyrin repeats with tankyrases but having WGR
and PRD domains rather than SAM motifs (Figure 4). It
is likely that the Clade 1 ankyrin repeat proteins do not
share functions with tankyrases.
PME5 from C. elegans was reported as a tankyrase
and has been functionally characterized. As mentioned
above, this protein does not clearly group with any
clade, including Clade 4 (Additional file 4). In the original paper describing PME5, it was shown to be more
closely related to a Dictyostelium discoideum protein we
have placed in Clade 1A (Q54E42) and to have a higher
similarity within the catalytic domain to human PARP1
than human tankyrase [54]. In addition, the induction of
PME5 expression by DNA damaging agents, the
increased apoptosis in pme5(RNAi) lines after DNAdamage, and the constitutively nuclear chromatin-associated localization of PME5 [53,136] is more consistent
with a role in DNA damage. However, the difficulty in
placing C. elegans PARPs into clades complicates the
issue. Further work will need to be done to determine
the function of PME5.
Connections between ubiquitination, SUMOylation and
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation

The attachment of ubiquitin to proteins is an important
mechanism in regulating many cellular processes. Similarly to ADP-ribosylation, one to many ubiquitin units
can be added to proteins, although only on lysine
resides. A chain consisting of at least four ubiquitin
linked together by Lys48 residues causes destruction of
the protein via the 26S proteasome [137,138], while
either monubiquitination or polyubiquitination with
chains linked at Lys63 serve as nonproteolytic signals in
such processes as trafficking, DNA repair, and signal
transduction [139,140]. Ubiquitination of proteins
involves an enzymatic cascade involving ubiqutin-activating (E1), ubiquitin-conjugating (E2), and ubiquitinligating (E3) enzymes.

Page 20 of 26

A number of connections between PARP proteins and
ubiquitination have emerged. One connection involves
the fact that both attachment of ubiquitin and ADPribose can be made at lysine residues, suggesting that
these post-translational modifications could compete for
substrates. In addition, several protein domains found in
PARP proteins can also be found in proteins associated
with the ubiquitin system (Figure 4). For example, many
Clade 1 proteins have BRCT domains; these domains
were originally identified in the BRCA1 protein. BRCA1
functions as an E3 ligase in a multi-protein complex in
response to DNA damage [141-143]. Within Clade 6,
Clade 6A proteins have a UBCc domain, similar to that
found in ubiquitin E2s [144], at their C termini, as well
as FPE domains at their N termini (Additional Figures
12, 13 and 14). This novel domain has some similarity
to the RWD domain, which in turn is related to the
UBCc domain, although thought to be non-catalytic.
WWE domains are found in Clade 2 and 3 proteins and
also in certain ubiquitin E3 ligases [51]. Some Clade 3
proteins have UIM domains, which can bind ubiquitin
and polyubiquitin chains [145]; this domain is also
found in the BRCA1-interacting protein Rap80 [141].
The Dictyostelium discoideum protein DDB0393590
contains a U-box (Figure 4), found in E3 ubiqutin
ligases and known to bind E2 enzymes [74].
In addition to the structural similarities found between
PARPs and classes of Ub enzymes, some functional connections are also known. Human PARP14/BAL2, a
Clade 3E member, has been shown to bind to the multifunctional phosphoglucose isomerase/autocrine motility
factor (PGI/AMF). This binding inhibits polyubiquitination of PGI/AMF, stabilizing the protein [146]. PARP1
in humans is regulated by ubiquitination [147] and has
been shown to bind to the E2 enzyme hUBC9 [148].
Proteasome-mediated proteolysis of ubiquitinated tankyrase has also been documented; this is promoted by
the auto-poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of tankyrase, which
releases the protein into the cytoplasm [128]. This is
similar to the mechanism whereby tankyrase poly(ADPribosyl)ates the telomeric protein TRF1, releasing it
from the telomere, allowing its ubiquitination and
degradation [149] and the regulation of axin by tankyrase [130]. There are likely to be more connections
found in the future between post-translational ADPribosylation and ubiquitination.
Recently, a connection between poly(ADP-ribosyl)
ation and SUMOylation has also been demonstrated.
PARP1 itself is SUMOylated [150,151], and this takes
place within its automodification domain and does not
regulate poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity [150]. Rather,
PARP1’s transcriptional co-activator activity is modified
[150,151]. PARP1 can also form higher order complexes
and influence SUMOylation of other proteins. In

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

response to both heat shock and DNA damage, human
PARP1 associates with the SUMO E3 ligase PIASy
[151,152] and this requires a PAR-binding motif in this
protein [152]. Upon DNA damage, PIASy associates
with PAR on PARP1 and subsequently its target NEMO
binds and is SUMOylated by PIASy, leading to NF-kappaB activation [152]. Clearly, the interplay between poly
(ADP-ribosyl)ation and other post-translational modifications is just beginning to be explored.

Conclusions
We present here a large-scale phylogenetic analysis of
the PARP gene family that extends previous examination of this family. Several main conclusions can be
drawn from our study. First, the phylogenetic distribution of the PARP protein family is tremendously broad
across the eukaryotes, consistent with the last common
ancestor of modern eukaryotes containing at least two
PARP-encoding genes. Second, two types of PARP-like
proteins were present in the LCEA; one likely functioned in DNA repair and genomic maintenance and
resembled modern members of Clade 1. The second
probably had mART activity. Third, increasing numbers
and types of PARP-like protein are likely to be found as
more eukaryotic organisms have their genomes
sequenced.
Methods
Retrieval of the PARP gene sequences

The initial sequence set was selected from the Pfam
database (http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/; [41-43]), using the
sequences identified as members of the PARP family
(PF00644). The full sequences of the proteins were
retrieved from UniProt [44,45], using the links provided
by Pfam. Additional sequences were retrieved from
other eukaryotic organisms at the DOE Joint Genome
Institute (JGI; http://www.jgi.doe.gov/), the Broad Institute http://www.broadinstitute.org, the J. Craig Venter
Institute http://www.jcvi.org/, ToxoDB (http://toxodb.
org/toxo/; [47]), and the Arabidopsis Information
Resource (TAIR; http://www.arabidopsis.org/) using
BLAST searches [46] based on human or Arabidopsis
thaliana PARP catalytic domain sequences as search
queries. Specific phylogenetically interesting genomes
were also individually searched by BLAST to confirm
the absence of PARP proteins (see Table 1). The catalytic domains of most retrieved sequences were delineated
using Pfam. Sequences in Clade 6 have lower similarity
to the classical PARPs (i.e. Clade 1) used to generate the
Pfam HMM, so the PARP catalytic domains for these
sequences were identified using BLAST searches based
on human PARP6 catalytic domain as the query and
identifying the region of retrieved sequences that had
similarity to this PARP signature. In addition, many

Page 21 of 26

sequences whose catalytic domain was incompletely
identified by Pfam were completed by BLAST searches
using closely related complete PARP catalytic domains
from other closely related species, in order to provide as
much sequence information as possible for the alignment and phylogeny inference. The identified PARP catalytic domains were extracted using the extract.pl tool
in the Wildcat Toolbox set of Perl utilities (http://proteomics.arizona.edu/wildcat_toolbox; [153]). Sequences
of less than 100 amino acids in length and many that
were missing important structural elements of the PARP
domain were discarded to allow better alignment and
phylogenetic signal recovery. Many of these sequences
were obtained from shotgun sequencing and are presumably incomplete.
Phylogenetic analyses

The collected PARP catalytic domains were aligned
using the MUSCLE3.8.31 multiple alignment tool, using
default settings [50]. The multiple alignment was subjected to a maximum-likelihood (ML) analysis using
PhyML3.0 [154] using the computer facilities at the
Ohio Supercomputer Center http://www.osc.edu. The
substitution model parameters using for the PhyML
analysis were the WAG substitution matrix, Γ8+I correction to model site rate heterogeneity and empirical equilibrium frequencies. These parameters were selected as
the optimal substitution model based on analysis by
ProtTest v2.4 [155]. A parsimony-based starting tree
was used. Branch supports were computed in PhyML
using an aLRT non-parametric Shimodaira-Hasegawalike (SH) procedure [156]. Once a tree with all PARP
domains had been generated, it was used to identify the
six clades referred to in the text in combination with
examination of domains outside of the PARP catalytic
domain. After the six clades were defined, sequences
from each clade were aligned separately using MUSCLE.
These alignments were used to generate individual clade
trees using PhyML with identical parameters. The
phylogenetic trees were generated for figures using
FigTree http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree. Alignment figures were generated using TEXshade [157] and
Jalview [158].
Prediction of protein domains

After sequences of PARP family members were retrieved
and placed into clades, the sequences were checked for
other domains at the Pfam website [41]. Domains identified are shown in Figure 4. PfamB_30617 was identified in Clade 6A fungal proteins and extracted aligned
as above. This domain was further analyzed using the
Protein homology/analogy recognition engine (Phyre)
[89] and renamed FPE (Fungal PARP E2-associated).
Subsequently, a consensus FPE sequence was used in

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

BLAST searches to find other proteins containing this
region. The UBCc domains from Clade 6A proteins
were similarly processed.

Additional material
Additional file 1: List of all protein sequences used in our study.
The protein name is given as species followed by accession number. The
eukaryotic supergroup, phylum, class and order are also indicated. The
source of the sequence is given as well as the link to the sequence. The
proteins are arranged alphabetically by species.
Additional file 2: Alignment of protein sequences removed from
analysis due to incomplete PARP catalytic domains.
Additional file 3: Multiple alignment of the PARP catalytic domain.
These alignments only show the conserved PARP catalytic domain. Only
sequences containing complete domains were used to generate the
alignment.
Additional file 4: Phylogenetic analysis of PARP genes in
eukaryotes. The represented tree is a ML tree, based on an alignment of
the PARP catalytic domain. Branch supports as in Figure 1. Scale bar
indicates genetic distance reflected in branch length.
Additional file 5: Multiple alignment of the PARP catalytic domains
of Clade 1 PARP proteins. These alignments only show the conserved
PARP catalytic domain and the numbers indicate amino acids within the
catalytic domain. Due to the large number of proteins in Clade 1, some
needed to be removed in order to annotate the sequence. Dots indicate
gaps introduced to optimize the alignment and identical amino acids
indicated by red shading and similar amino acids indicated by orange
shading. The structural elements present in Gallus gallus PARP1 are
shown at the bottom of the alignment, with the six “core” ß strands
indicated [6]. Subclades are separated from one another by spaces with
Clade 1A at the top. The amino acids of the HYE catalytic triad are
boxed in blue and labelled C1 (H), C2 (Y) and C3 (E).
Additional file 6: Multiple alignment of the PARP catalytic domains
of Clade 1 PARP proteins.
Additional file 7: Multiple alignment of the PARP catalytic domains
of Clade 2 PARP proteins annotated with structural predictions.
These alignments only show the conserved PARP catalytic domain. The
structural elements predicted to be present in Arabidopsis thaliana RCD1
by Phyre are shown at the bottom of the alignment [89]. Annotations as
in Additional file 5.
Additional file 8: Multiple alignment of the PARP catalytic domains
of Clade 3 proteins annotated with structural information. These
alignments only show the conserved PARP catalytic domain. The
structural elements present in Homo sapiens PARP15 are shown at the
bottom of the alignment. The crystal structure of PARP15 is available in
the Protein Data Bank (PDB; http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/explore/explore.do?
structureId=3GEY; [171]). Annotations as in Additional file 5.
Additional file 9: Multiple alignment of the PARP catalytic domain
from Clade 4 PARP proteins annotated with structural information.
These alignments only show the conserved PARP catalytic domain. The
structural elements present in Homo sapiens TNK1are shown at the
bottom of the alignment [172]. Annotations as in Additional file 5.
Additional file 10: Multiple alignment of the PARP catalytic domain
from Clade 5 PARP proteins. These alignments only show the
conserved PARP catalytic domain. The structural elements present in
Homo sapiens vPARP are shown at the bottom of the alignment.
Annotations as in Additional file 5.
Additional file 11: Multiple alignment of the PARP catalytic domain
from Clade 6 PARP proteins annotated with structural information.
These alignments only show the conserved PARP catalytic domain. The
structural elements predicted to be present in Homo sapiens PARP8 by
Phyre are shown at the bottom of the alignment [89]. Annotations as in
Additional file 6.

Page 22 of 26

Additional file 12: Multiple alignment of the UBCc domain of Clade
6A PARPs. The entire UBCc domains as defined by Pfam from Clade 6A
proteins are shown.
Additional file 13: Clade 6A PARP proteins contain FPE and UBCc
domains. A. Clade 6A PARPs contain UBCc domains in their C termini.
An alignment of the HMM consensus sequence of the UBCc domain
from Pfam (UBCc) and the UBCc domain from Phaeosphaeria nodorum
QOUPJ2 (Pn6F). The sequence similarity between the UBCc and UBCc-like
domains is shown in red (CONS). +, similar amino acids; -, gaps
introduced to maximize the alignment; ., any amino acid. Residues in
bold have been shown to be diagnostic of UBCc domains as discussed
in the text and [85]. B. Alignment of a region of the Clade 6A PARP
UBCc-like domains, containing the catalytic cysteine. The names of the
proteins and the amino acid positions (within the UBCc domain) are
indicated at left. The blue asterisk marks a histidine and the red asterisk
marks the catalytic cysteine, both shared with typical UBCc domains. C.
The FPE domain consists of alpha helices and beta strands. The
sequence of the FPE domain from the Phaeosphaeria nodorum Clade 6A
member (QOUPJ2) is shown. Secondary structural characteristics as
detected by Phyre are shown above the sequence. h, alpha helices; e,
beta strands.
Additional file 14: Multiple alignment of the FPE from Clade 6A
PARP proteins. The entire PfamB_30617/FPE domains as defined by
Pfam from Clade 6A proteins are shown.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Iris Meier (Ohio State University) and two anonymous
reviewers for critical reading of the manuscript and members of the Lamb
laboratory for discussions. This work was supported in part by an allocation
of computing time from the Ohio Supercomputer Center. This work was
supported by a grant from the Ohio Plant Biotechnology Consortium to RSL
and by funds from the Ohio State University.
Author details
1
Plant Cellular and Molecular Biology Department, Ohio State University, 500
Aronoff Laboratory, 318 W. 12th Ave., Columbus, OH 43210 USA. 2Molcular,
Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210 USA.
Authors’ contributions
MC retrieved the sequences, made the sequence alignments, and performed
the phylogenetic analyses. RSL performed the domain analysis using Pfam
and Phyre. ST, MC and RSL participated in data analysis and figure
preparation. MC and RSL participated in the design and coordination of the
study. RSL drafted the manuscript and all the authors participated in the
editing of the manuscript. All the authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 7 October 2009 Accepted: 13 October 2010
Published: 13 October 2010
References
1. Chambon P, Weill JD, Mandel P: Nicotinamide mononucleotide activation
of new DNA-dependent polyadenylic acid synthesizing nuclear enzyme.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1963, 11:39-43.
2. Fujimura S, Hasegawa S, Shimizu Y, Sugimura T: Polymerization of the
adenosine 5’-diphosphate-ribose moiety of nicotinamide-adenine
dinucleotide by nuclear enzyme. I. Enzymatic reactions. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1967, 145(247-259).
3. Chambon P, Weil JD, Doly J, Strosser MT, Mandel P: On the formation of a
novel adenylic compound by enzymatic extracts of liver nuclei. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 1966, 25:638-643.
4. Nishizuka Y, Ueda K, Nakazawa K, Hayaishi O: Studies on the polymer of
adenosine diphosphate ribose. I. Enzymic formation from nicotinamide
adenine dinuclotide in mammalian nuclei. J Biol Chem 1967,
242(13):3164-3171.

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

Doly J, Petek F: Etude de la structure d’un compose “poly(ADP-ribose”
synthetise par des extraits nucleaires de foie de poulet. CR Hebd Scanc
Acad Sci Ser D Sci Nat 1966, 263:1341-1344.
Ruf A, Mennissier de Murcia J, de Murcia G, Schulz GE: Structure of the
catalytic fragment of poly(AD-ribose) polymerase from chicken. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1996, 93(15):7481-7485.
Oliver AW, Ame JC, Roe SM, Good V, de Murcia G, Pearl LH: Crystal
structure of the catalytic fragment of murine poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-2. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(2):456-464.
Hottiger MO, Hassa PO, Luscher B, Schuler H, Koch-Nolte F: Toward a
unified nomenclature for mammalian ADP-ribosyltransferases. Trends
Biochem Sci 2010, 35(4):208-219.
Ame JC, Spenlehauer C, de Murcia G: The PARP superfamily. Bioessays
2004, 26(8):882-893.
Kim MY, Zhang T, Kraus WL: Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation by PARP-1: ‘PARlaying’ NAD+ into a nuclear signal. Genes Dev 2005, 19(17):1951-1967.
Schreiber V, Dantzer F, Ame JC, de Murcia G: Poly(ADP-ribose): novel
functions for an old molecule. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006, 7(7):517-528.
Hassa PO, Hottiger MO: The diverse biological roles of mammalian
PARPS, a small but powerful family of poly-ADP-ribose polymerases.
Front Biosci 2008, 13:3046-3082.
Hassa PO, Haenni SS, Elser M, Hottiger MO: Nuclear ADP-ribosylation
reactions in mammalian cells: where are we today and where are we
going? Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2006, 70(3):789-829.
Pacher P, Szabo C: Role of the peroxynitrite-poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
pathway in human disease. Am J Pathol 2008, 173(1):2-13.
Fong PC, Boss DS, Yap TA, Tutt A, Wu P, Mergui-Roelvink M, Mortimer P,
Swaisland H, Lau A, O’Connor MJ, Ashworth A, Carmichael j, Kaye SB,
Schellens JH, de Bono JS: Inhibition of Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase in
Tumors from BRCA Mutation Carriers. N Engl J Med 2009, 361(2):123-134.
Cottet F, Blanche H, Verasdonck P, Le Gall I, Schachter F, Burkle A, Muiras ML:
New polymorphisms in the human poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1
coding sequence: lack of association with longevity or with increased
cellular poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity. J Mol Med 2000, 78(8):431-440.
Tezcan G, Gurel CB, Tutluoglu B, Onaran I, Kanigur-Sultuybek G: The Ala
allele at Val762Ala polymorphism in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1
(PARP-1) gene is associated with a decreased risk of asthma in a Turkish
population. J Asthma 2009, 46(4):371-374.
Babiychuk E, Cottrill PB, Storozhenko S, Fuangthong M, Chen Y,
O’Farrell MK, Van Montagu M, Inze D, Kushnir S: Higher plants possess two
structurally different poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases. Plant J 1998,
15(5):635-645.
Smith S, Giriat I, Schmitt A, de Lange T: Tankyrase, a poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase at human telomeres. Science 1998, 282(5393):1484-1487.
Wang ZQ, Auer B, Stingl L, Berghammer H, Haidacher D, Schweiger M,
Wagner EF: Mice lacking ADPRT and poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation develop
normally but are susceptible to skin disease. Genes Dev 1995,
9(5):509-520.
Wang ZQ, Stingl L, Morrison C, Jantsch M, Los M, Schulze-Osthoff K,
Wagner EF: PARP is important for genomic stability but dispensable in
apoptosis. Genes Dev 1997, 11(18):2347-2358.
Uchida K, Morita T, Sato T, Ogura T, Yamashita R, Noguchi S, Suzuki H,
Nyunoya H, Miwa M, Sugimura T: Nucleotide sequence of a full-length
cDNA for human fibroblast poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 1987, 148(2):617-622.
Mahajan PB, Zuo Z: Purification and cDNA cloning of maize Poly(ADP)ribose polymerase. Plant Physiol 1998, 118(3):895-905.
Podesta D, Garcia-Herreros MI, Cannata JJ, Stoppani AO, Fernandez
Villamil SH: Purification and properties of poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase
from Crithidia fasciculata. Automodification and poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation
of DNA topoisomerase I. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2004, 135(2):211-219.
Johansson M: A human poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase gene family
(ADPRTL): cDNA cloning of two novel poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
homologues. Genomics 1999, 57(3):442-445.
Ame JC, Rolli V, Schreiber V, Niedergang C, Apiou F, Decker P, Muller S,
Hoger T, Menissier-de Murcia J, de Murcia G: PARP-2, A novel mammalian
DNA damage-dependent poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. J Biol Chem 1999,
274(25):17860-17868.
Rippmann JF, Damm K, Schnapp A: Functional characterization of the
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity of tankyrase 1, a potential
regulator of telomere length. J Mol Biol 2002, 323(2):217-224.

Page 23 of 26

28. Kuimov AN, Kuprash DV, Petrov VN, Vdovichenko KK, Scanlan MJ,
Jongeneel CV, Lagarkova MA, Nedospasov SA: Cloning and
characterization of TNKL, a member of tankyrase gene family. Genes
Immun 2001, 2(1):52-55.
29. Lyons RJ, Deane R, Lynch DK, Ye ZS, Sanderson GM, Eyre HJ, Sutherland GR,
Daly RJ: Identification of a novel human tankyrase through its
interaction with the adaptor protein Grb14. J Biol Chem 2001,
276(20):17172-17180.
30. Kickhoefer VA, Siva AC, Kedersha NL, Inman EM, Ruland C, Streuli M,
Rome LH: The 193-kD vault protein, VPARP, is a novel poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase. J Cell Biol 1999, 146(5):917-928.
31. Marsischky GT, Wilson BA, Collier RJ: Role of glutamic acid 988 of human
poly-ADP-ribose polymerase in polymer formation. Evidence for active
site similarities to the ADP-ribosylating toxins. J Biol Chem 1995,
270(7):3247-3254.
32. Kleine H, Poreba E, Lesniewicz K, Hassa PO, Hottiger MO, Litchfield DW,
Shilton BH, Luscher B: Substrate-assisted catalysis by PARP10 limits its
activity to mono-ADP-ribosylation. Mol Cell 2008, 32(1):57-69.
33. Yu M, Schreek S, Cerni C, Schamberger C, Lesniewicz K, Poreba E,
Vervoorts J, Walsemann G, Grotzinger J, Kremmer E, Mehraein Y,
Mertsching J, Kraft R, Austen M, Luscher-Firzlaff J, Luscher B: PARP-10, a
novel Myc-interacting protein with poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity,
inhibits transformation. Oncogene 2005, 24(12):1982-1993.
34. Chou HY, Chou HT, Lee SC: CDK-dependent activation of poly(ADPribose) polymerase member 10 (PARP10). J Biol Chem 2006,
281(22):15201-15207.
35. Aguiar RC, Takeyama K, He C, Kreinbrink K, Shipp MA: B-aggressive
lymphoma family proteins have unique domains that modulate
transcription and exhibit poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity. J Biol
Chem 2005, 280(40):33756-33765.
36. Augustin A, Spenlehauer C, Dumond H, Menissier-De Murcia J, Piel M,
Schmit AC, Apiou F, Vonesch JL, Kock M, Bornens M, De Murcia G: PARP-3
localizes preferentially to the daughter centriole and interferes with the
G1/S cell cycle progression. J Cell Sci 2003, 116(Pt 8):1551-1562.
37. Loseva O, Jemth AS, Bryant HE, Schuler H, Lehtio L, Karlberg T, Helleday T:
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-3 (PARP-3) is a mono-ADP ribosylase that
activates PARP-1 in absence of DNA. J Biol Chem 2010, 285(11):8054-8064.
38. Simpson AG, Roger AJ: The real ‘kingdoms’ of eukaryotes. Curr Biol 2004,
14(17):R693-696.
39. Keeling PJ, Burger G, Durnford DG, Lang BF, Lee RW, Pearlman RE,
Roger AJ, Gray MW: The tree of eukaryotes. Trends Ecol Evol 2005,
20(12):670-676.
40. Otto H, Reche PA, Bazan F, Dittmar K, Haag F, Koch-Nolte F: In silico
characterization of the family of PARP-like poly(ADP-ribosyl)transferases
(pARTs). BMC Genomics 2005, 6:139.
41. Coggill P, Finn RD, Bateman A: Identifying protein domains with the Pfam
database. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics 2008, Chapter 2, Unit 2 5.
42. Sammut SJ, Finn RD, Bateman A: Pfam 10 years on: 10,000 families and
still growing. Brief Bioinform 2008, 9(3):210-219.
43. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, Hotz HR, Ceric G,
Forslund K, Eddy SR, Sonnhammer EL, Bateman A: The Pfam protein
families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36 Database: D281-288.
44. Jain E, Bairoch A, Duvaud S, Phan I, Redaschi N, Suzek BE, Martin MJ,
McGarvey P, Gasteiger E: Infrastructure for the life sciences: design and
implementation of the UniProt website. BMC Bioinformatics 2009, 10:136.
45. The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) 2009. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, ,
37 Database: D169-174.
46. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
47. Gajria B, Bahl A, Brestelli J, Dommer J, Fischer S, Gao X, Heiges M, Iodice J,
Kissinger JC, Mackey AJ, Pinney DF, Roos DS, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Wang H,
Brunk BP: ToxoDB: an integrated Toxoplasma gondii database resource.
Nucleic Acids Res 2008, , 36 Database: D553-556.
48. Fey P, Gaudet P, Curk T, Zupan B, Just EM, Basu S, Merchant SN,
Bushmanova YA, Shaulsky G, Kibbe WA, Chisholm RL: dictyBase–a
Dictyostelium bioinformatics resource update. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, , 37
Database: D515-519.
49. Swarbreck D, Wilks C, Lamesch P, Berardini TZ, Garcia-Hernandez M,
Foerster H, Li D, Meyer T, Muller R, Ploetz L, Radenbaugh A, Singh S,
Swing V, Tissier C, Zhang P, Huala E: The Arabidopsis Information

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

50.
51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.
60.
61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.
69.

70.

Resource (TAIR): gene structure and function annotation. Nucleic Acids
Res 2008, , 36 Database: D1009-1014.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
Aravind L: The WWE domain: a common interaction module in protein
ubiquitination and ADP ribosylation. Trends Biochem Sci 2001,
26(5):273-275.
Ohi MD, Link AJ, Ren L, Jennings JL, McDonald WH, Gould KL: Proteomics
analysis reveals stable multiprotein complexes in both fission and
budding yeasts containing Myb-related Cdc5p/Cef1p, novel pre-mRNA
splicing factors, and snRNAs. Mol Cell Biol 2002, 22(7):2011-2024.
White C, Gagnon SN, St-Laurent JF, Gravel C, Proulx LI, Desnoyers S: The
DNA damage-inducible C. elegans tankyrase is a nuclear protein closely
linked to chromosomes. Mol Cell Biochem 2009, 324(1-2):73-83.
Gravel C, Stergiou L, Gagnon SN, Desnoyers S: The C. elegans gene pme-5:
molecular cloning and role in the DNA-damage response of a tankyrase
orthologue. DNA Repair (Amst) 2004, 3(2):171-182.
Bork P, Hofmann K, Bucher P, Neuwald AF, Altschul SF, Koonin EV: A
superfamily of conserved domains in DNA damage-responsive cell cycle
checkpoint proteins. FASEB J 1997, 11(1):68-76.
Staub E, Fiziev P, Rosenthal A, Hinzmann B: Insights into the evolution of
the nucleolus by an analysis of its protein domain repertoire. Bioessays
2004, 26(5):567-581.
Kameshita I, Matsuda Z, Taniguchi T, Shizuta Y: Poly (ADP-Ribose)
synthetase. Separation and identification of three proteolytic fragments
as the substrate-binding domain, the DNA-binding domain, and the
automodification domain. J Biol Chem 1984, 259(8):4770-4776.
Langelier MF, Servent KM, Rogers EE, Pascal JM: A third zinc-binding
domain of human poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 coordinates DNAdependent enzyme activation. J Biol Chem 2008, 283(7):4105-4114.
Aravind L, Koonin EV: SAP - a putative DNA-binding motif involved in
chromosomal organization. Trends Biochem Sci 2000, 25(3):112-114.
Lynch M, Force A: The probability of duplicate gene preservation by
subfunctionalization. Genetics 2000, 154(1):459-473.
Gagnon SN, Hengartner MO, Desnoyers S: The genes pme-1 and pme-2
encode two poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Biochem J 2002, 368(Pt 1):263-271.
Jaspers P, Overmyer K, Wrzaczek M, Vainonen JP, Blomster T, Salojarvi J,
Reddy RA, Kangasjarvi J: The RST and PARP-like domain containing SRO
protein family: analysis of protein structure, function and conservation
in land plants. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:170.
Overmyer K, Tuominen H, Kettunen R, Betz C, Langebartels C,
Sandermann H Jr, Kangasjarvi J: Ozone-sensitive arabidopsis rcd1 mutant
reveals opposite roles for ethylene and jasmonate signaling pathways in
regulating superoxide-dependent cell death. Plant Cell 2000,
12(10):1849-1862.
Ahlfors R, Lang S, Overmyer K, Jaspers P, Brosche M, Tauriainen A, Kollist H,
Tuominen H, Belles-Boix E, Piippo M, Inze D, Palva ET, Kangasjarvi J:
Arabidopsis RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1 belongs to the WWE
protein-protein interaction domain protein family and modulates
abscisic acid, ethylene, and methyl jasmonate responses. Plant Cell 2004,
16(7):1925-1937.
Teotia S, Lamb RS: The paralogous genes RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1
and SIMILAR TO RCD ONE1 have partially redundant functions during
Arabidopsis development. Plant Physiol 2009, 151(1):180-198.
Borsani O, Zhu J, Verslues PE, Sunkar R, Zhu JK: Endogenous siRNAs
derived from a pair of natural cis-antisense transcripts regulate salt
tolerance in Arabidopsis. Cell 2005, 123(7):1279-1291.
Doyle JJ, Flagel LE, Paterson AH, Rapp RA, Soltis DE, Soltis PS, Wendel JF:
Evolutionary genetics of genome merger and doubling in plants. Annu
Rev Genet 2008, 42:443-461.
Lawton-Rauh A: Evolutionary dynamics of duplicated genes in plants. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2003, 29(3):396-409.
Jaspers P, Blomster T, Brosche M, Salojarvi J, Ahlfors R, Vainonen JP,
Reddy RA, Immink R, Angenent G, Turck F, Overmyer K, Kangasjarvi J:
Unequally redundant RCD1 and SRO1 mediate stress and developmental
responses and interact with transcription factors. Plant J 2009,
60(2):268-279.
Birney E, Kumar S, Krainer AR: Analysis of the RNA-recognition motif and
RS and RGG domains: conservation in metazoan pre-mRNA splicing
factors. Nucleic Acids Res 1993, 21(25):5803-5816.

Page 24 of 26

71. Swanson KA, Kang RS, Stamenova SD, Hicke L, Radhakrishnan I: Solution
structure of Vps27 UIM-ubiquitin complex important for endosomal
sorting and receptor downregulation. EMBO J 2003, 22(18):
4597-4606.
72. Karras GI, Kustatscher G, Buhecha HR, Allen MD, Pugieux C, Sait F, Bycroft M,
Ladurner AG: The macro domain is an ADP-ribose binding module. EMBO
J 2005, 24(11):1911-1920.
73. Aravind L, Koonin EV: The U box is a modified RING finger - a common
domain in ubiquitination. Curr Biol 2000, 10(4):R132-134.
74. Hatakeyama SNK: U-box proteins as a new family of ubiquitin ligases.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003, 302(4):635-645.
75. Aguiar RC, Yakushijin Y, Kharbanda S, Salgia R, Fletcher JA, Shipp MA: BAL is
a novel risk-related gene in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas that
enhances cellular migration. Blood 2000, 96(13):4328-4334.
76. Ponting CP: SAM: a novel motif in yeast sterile and Drosophila
polyhomeotic proteins. Protein Sci 1995, 4(9):1928-1930.
77. Cook BD, Dynek JN, Chang W, Shostak G, Smith S: Role for the related
poly(ADP-Ribose) polymerases tankyrase 1 and 2 at human telomeres.
Mol Cell Biol 2002, 22(1):332-342.
78. Hsiao SJ, Smith S: Tankyrase function at telomeres, spindle poles, and
beyond. Biochimie 2008, 90(1):83-92.
79. Bork P, Rohde K: More von Willebrand factor type A domains? Sequence
similarities with malaria thrombospondin-related anonymous protein,
dihydropyridine-sensitive calcium channel and inter-alpha-trypsin
inhibitor. Biochem J 1991, 279(Pt 3):908-910.
80. Kedersha NL, Rome LH: Isolation and characterization of a novel
ribonucleoprotein particle: large structures contain a single species of
small RNA. J Cell Biol 1986, 103(3):699-709.
81. Vasu SK, Rome LH: Dictyostelium vaults: disruption of the major proteins
reveals growth and morphological defects and uncovers a new
associated protein. J Biol Chem 1995, 270(28):16588-16594.
82. Kedersha NL, Miquel MC, Bittner D, Rome LH: Vaults. II. Ribonucleoprotein
structures are highly conserved among higher and lower eukaryotes. J
Cell Biol 1990, 110(4):895-901.
83. Kothe GO, Kitamura M, Masutani M, Selker EU, Inoue H: PARP is involved in
replicative aging in Neurospora crassa. Fungal Genetics and Biology 2010,
47(4):297-309.
84. Cook WJ, Jeffrey LC, Sullivan ML, Vierstra RD: Three-dimensional structure
of a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2). J Biol Chem 1992,
267(21):15116-15121.
85. Burroughs AM, Jaffee M, Iyer LM, Aravind L: Anatomy of the E2 ligase fold:
implications for enzymology and evolution of ubiquitin/Ub-like protein
conjugation. J Struct Biol 2008, 162(2):205-218.
86. Birnbaum MJ, Clem RJ, Miller LK: An apoptosis-inhibiting gene from a
nuclear polyhedrosis virus encoding a polypeptide with Cys/His
sequence motifs. J Virol 1994, 68(4):2521-2528.
87. Verhagen AM, Coulson EJ, Vaux DL: Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins and
their relatives: IAPs and other BIRPs. Genome Biol 2001, 2(7), REVIEWS3009.
88. Bartke T, Pohl C, Pyrowolakis G, Jentsch S: Dual role of BRUCE as an
antiapoptotic IAP and a chimeric E2/E3 ubiquitin ligase. Mol Cell 2004,
14(6):801-811.
89. Kelley LA, Sternberg MJ: Protein structure prediction on the Web: a case
study using the Phyre server. Nat Protoc 2009, 4(3):363-371.
90. Doerks T, Copley RR, Schultz J, Ponting CP, Bork P: Systematic
identification of novel protein domain families associated with nuclear
functions. Genome Res 2002, 12(1):47-56.
91. Semighini CP, Savoldi M, Goldman GH, Harris SD: Functional
characterization of the putative Aspergillus nidulans poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase homolog PrpA. Genetics 2006, 173(1):87-98.
92. Vanderauwera S, De Block M, Van de Steene N, van de Cotte B, Metzlaff M,
Van Breusegem F: Silencing of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase in plants
alters abiotic stress signal transduction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104(38):15150-15155.
93. Doucet-Chabeaud G, Godon C, Brutesco C, de Murcia G, Kazmaier M:
Ionising radiation induces the expression of PARP-1 and PARP-2 genes in
Arabidopsis. Mol Genet Genomics 2001, 265(6):954-963.
94. Trucco C, Oliver FJ, de Murcia G, Menissier-de Murcia J: DNA repair defect
in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-deficient cell lines. Nucleic Acids Res 1998,
26(11):2644-2649.
95. Rouleau M, McDonald D, Gagne P, Ouellet ME, Droit A, Hunter JM,
Dutertre S, Prigent C, Hendzel MJ, Poirier GG: PARP-3 associates with

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

96.

97.

98.
99.
100.
101.
102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.
108.
109.
110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

polycomb group bodies and with components of the DNA damage
repair machinery. J Cell Biochem 2007, 100(2):385-401.
Fernandez Villamil SH, Baltanas R, Alonso GD, Vilchez Larrea SC, Torres HN,
Flawia MM: TcPARP: A DNA damage-dependent poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase from Trypanosoma cruzi. Int J Parasitol 2008, 38(3-4):277-287.
Rajawat J, Vohra I, Mir HA, Gohel D, Begum R: Effect of oxidative stress
and involvement of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) in Dictyostelium
discoideum development. FEBS J 2007, 274(21):5611-5618.
Felsenstein J: Cases in which parsimony or compatibility methods will be
positively misleading. Syst Zool 1978, 27:401-410.
Pol D, Siddall ME: Biases in maximum likelihood and parsimony: a
simulation approach to a 10-taxon case. Cladistics 2001, 17:266-281.
Hennig W: Phylogenetic Systematics. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press
1966.
Bastidas RJ, Heitman J: Trimorphic stepping stones pave the way to
fungal virulence. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(2):351-352.
Berger W, Steiner E, Grusch M, Elbling L, Micksche M: Vaults and the major
vault protein: novel roles in signal pathway regulation and immunity.
Cell Mol Life Sci 2009, 66(1):43-61.
Dickenson NE, Moore D, Suprenant KA, Dunn RC: Vault ribonucleoprotein
particles and the central mass of the nuclear pore complex. Photochem
Photobiol 2007, 83(3):686-691.
Vollmar F, Hacker C, Zahedi RP, Sickmann A, Ewald A, Scheer U,
Dabauvalle MC: Assembly of nuclear pore complexes mediated by major
vault protein. J Cell Sci 2009, 122(Pt 6):780-786.
Liu Y, Snow BE, Kickhoefer VA, Erdmann N, Zhou W, Wakeham A, Gomez M,
Rome LH, Harrington L: Vault poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase is associated
with mammalian telomerase and is dispensable for telomerase function
and vault structure in vivo. Mol Cell Biol 2004, 24(12):5314-5323.
Raval-Fernandes S, Kickhoefer VA, Kitchen C, Rome LH: Increased
susceptibility of vault poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-deficient mice to
carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis. Cancer Res 2005, 65(19):8846-8852.
Kickhoefer VA, Vasu SK, Rome LH: Vaults are the answer, what is the
question? Trends Cell Biol 1996, 6(5):174-178.
van Zon A, Mossink MH, Scheper RJ, Sonneveld P, Wiemer EA: The vault
complex. Cell Mol Life Sci 2003, 60(9):1828-1837.
Suprenant KA: Vault ribonucleoprotein particles: sarcophagi, gondolas, or
safety deposit boxes? Biochemistry 2002, 41(49):14447-14454.
Bowers JE, Chapman BA, Rong J, Paterson AH: Unravelling angiosperm
genome evolution by phylogenetic analysis of chromosomal duplication
events. Nature 2003, 422(6930):433-438.
Maere S, De Bodt S, Raes J, Casneuf T, Van Montagu M, Kuiper M, Van de
Peer Y: Modeling gene and genome duplications in eukaryotes. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(15):5454-5459.
Tang H, Wang X, Bowers JE, Ming R, Alam M, Paterson AH: Unraveling
ancient hexaploidy through multiply-aligned angiosperm gene maps.
Genome Res 2008, 18(12):1944-1954.
Belles-Boix E, Babiychuk E, Van Montagu M, Inze D, Kushnir S: CEO1, a new
protein from Arabidopsis thaliana, protects yeast against oxidative
damage. FEBS Lett 2000, 482(1-2):19-24.
Fujibe T, Saji H, Arakawa K, Yabe N, Takeuchi Y, Yamamoto KT: A methyl
viologen-resistant mutant of Arabidopsis, which is allelic to ozonesensitive rcd1, is tolerant to supplemental ultraviolet-B irradiation. Plant
Physiol 2004, 134(1):275-285.
Overmyer K, Brosche M, Pellinen R, Kuittinen T, Tuominen H, Ahlfors R,
Keinanen M, Saarma M, Scheel D, Kangasjarvi J: Ozone-induced
programmed cell death in the Arabidopsis radical-induced cell death1
mutant. Plant Physiol 2005, 137(3):1092-1104.
Kangasjarvi S, Lepisto A, Hannikainen K, Piippo M, Luomala EM, Aro EM,
Rintamaki E: Diverse roles for chloroplast stromal and thylakoid-bound
ascorbate peroxidases in plant stress responses. Biochem J 2008,
412(2):275-285.
Goenka S, Cho SH, Boothby M: Collaborator of Stat6 (CoaSt6)-associated
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity modulates Stat6-dependent gene
transcription. J Biol Chem 2007, 282(26):18732-18739.
Goenka S, Boothby M: Selective potentiation of Stat-dependent gene
expression by collaborator of Stat6 (CoaSt6), a transcriptional cofactor.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(11):4210-4215.
Muller S, Moller P, Bick MJ, Wurr S, Becker S, Gunther S, Kummerer BM:
Inhibition of filovirus replication by the zinc finger antiviral protein. J
Virol 2007, 81(5):2391-2400.

Page 25 of 26

120. Zhang Y, Burke CW, Ryman KD, Klimstra WB: Identification and
characterization of interferon-induced proteins that inhibit alphavirus
replication. J Virol 2007, 81(20):11246-11255.
121. Guo X, Ma J, Sun J, Gao G: The zinc-finger antiviral protein recruits the
RNA processing exosome to degrade the target mRNA. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2007, 104(1):151-156.
122. MacDonald MR, Machlin ES, Albin OR, Levy DE: The zinc finger antiviral
protein acts synergistically with an interferon-induced factor for
maximal activity against alphaviruses. J Virol 2007, 81(24):13509-13518.
123. Kerns JA, Emerman M, Malik HS: Positive selection and increased antiviral
activity associated with the PARP-containing isoform of human zincfinger antiviral protein. PLoS Genet 2008, 4(1):e21.
124. Zhu Y, Gao G: ZAP-mediated mRNA degradation. RNA Biol 2008, 5(2):65-67.
125. Monz D, Munnia A, Comtesse N, Fischer U, Steudel WI, Feiden W, Glass B,
Meese EU: Novel tankyrase-related gene detected with meningiomaspecific sera. Clin Cancer Res 2001, 7(1):113-119.
126. Smith S, de Lange T: Cell cycle dependent localization of the telomeric
PARP, tankyrase, to nuclear pore complexes and centrosomes. J Cell Sci
1999, 112(Pt 21):3649-3656.
127. Chi NW, Lodish HF: Tankyrase is a golgi-associated mitogen-activated
protein kinase substrate that interacts with IRAP in GLUT4 vesicles. J Biol
Chem 2000, 275(49):38437-38444.
128. Yeh TY, Meyer TN, Schwesinger C, Tsun ZY, Lee RM, Chi NW: Tankyrase
recruitment to the lateral membrane in polarized epithelial cells:
regulation by cell-cell contact and protein poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation.
Biochem J 2006, 399(3):415-425.
129. Hsiao SJ, Smith S: Sister telomeres rendered dysfunctional by persistent
cohesion are fused by NHEJ. J Cell Biol 2009, 184(4):515-526.
130. Huang SM, Mishina YM, Liu S, Cheung A, Stegmeier F, Michaud GA,
Charlat O, Wiellette E, Zhang Y, Wiessner S, et al: Tankyrase inhibition
stabilizes axin and antagonizes Wnt signalling. Nature 2009,
461(7264):614-620.
131. Karlberg T, Markova N, Johansson I, Hammarstrom M, Schutz P, Weigelt J,
Schuler H: Structural basis for the interaction between tankyrase-2 and a
potent Wnt-signaling inhibitor. J Med Chem 2010, 53(14):5352-5355.
132. Karner CM, Merkel CE, Dodge M, Ma Z, Lu J, Chen C, Lum L, Carroll TJ:
Tankyrase is necessary for canonical Wnt signaling during kidney
development. Dev Dyn 2010, 239(7):2014-2023.
133. Muramatsu Y, Ohishi T, Sakamoto M, Tsuruo T, Seimiya H: Cross-species
difference in telomeric function of tankyrase 1. Cancer Sci 2007,
98(6):850-857.
134. Chiang YJ, Hsiao SJ, Yver D, Cushman SW, Tessarollo L, Smith S, Hodes RJ:
Tankyrase 1 and tankyrase 2 are essential but redundant for mouse
embryonic development. PLoS One 2008, 3(7):e2639.
135. Levis RW, Ganesan R, Houtchens K, Tolar LA, Sheen FM: Transposons in
place of telomeric repeats at a Drosophila telomere. Cell 1993,
75(6):1083-1093.
136. Dequen F, Gagnon SN, Desnoyers S: Ionizing radiations in Caenorhabditis
elegans induce poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation, a conserved DNA-damage
response essential for survival. DNA Repair (Amst) 2005, 4(7):814-825.
137. Chau V, Tobias JW, Bachmair A, Marriott D, Ecker DJ, Gonda DK,
Varshavsky A: A multiubiquitin chain is confined to specific lysine in a
targeted short-lived protein. Science 1989, 243(4898):1576-1583.
138. Thrower JS, Hoffman L, Rechsteiner M, Pickart CM: Recognition of the
polyubiquitin proteolytic signal. EMBO J 2000, 19(1):94-102.
139. Hicke L, Schubert HL, Hill CP: Ubiquitin-binding domains. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 2005, 6(8):610-621.
140. Grabbe C, Dikic I: Functional roles of ubiquitin-like domain (ULD) and
ubiquitin-binding domain (UBD) containing proteins. Chem Rev 2009,
109(4):1481-1494.
141. Yan J, Kim YS, Yang XP, Li LP, Liao G, Xia F, Jetten AM: The ubiquitininteracting motif containing protein RAP80 interacts with BRCA1 and
functions in DNA damage repair response. Cancer Res 2007,
67(14):6647-6656.
142. Wu W, Koike A, Takeshita T, Ohta T: The ubiquitin E3 ligase activity of
BRCA1 and its biological functions. Cell Div 2008, 3:1.
143. Feng L, Huang J, Chen J: MERIT40 facilitates BRCA1 localization and DNA
damage repair. Genes Dev 2009, 23(6):719-728.
144. Winn PJ, Religa TL, Battey JN, Banerjee A, Wade RC: Determinants of
functionality in the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme family. Structure 2004,
12(9):1563-1574.

Citarelli et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:308
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/308

145. Sato Y, Yoshikawa A, Mimura H, Yamashita M, Yamagata A, Fukai S:
Structural basis for specific recognition of Lys 63-linked polyubiquitin
chains by tandem UIMs of RAP80. EMBO J 2009, 28(16):2461-2468.
146. Yanagawa T, Funasaka T, Tsutsumi S, Hu H, Watanabe H, Raz A: Regulation
of phosphoglucose isomerase/autocrine motility factor activities by the
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase family-14. Cancer Res 2007,
67(18):8682-8689.
147. Wang T, Simbulan-Rosenthal CM, Smulson ME, Chock PB, Yang DC:
Polyubiquitylation of PARP-1 through ubiquitin K48 is modulated by
activated DNA, NAD+, and dipeptides. J Cell Biochem 2008,
104(1):318-328.
148. Masson M, Menissier-de Murcia J, Mattei MG, de Murcia G, Niedergang CP:
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase interacts with a novel human ubiquitin
conjugating enzyme: hUbc9. Gene 1997, 190(2):287-296.
149. Chang W, Dynek JN, Smith S: TRF1 is degraded by ubiquitin-mediated
proteolysis after release from telomeres. Genes Dev 2003,
17(11):1328-1333.
150. Messner S, Schuermann D, Altmeyer M, Kassner I, Schmidt D, Schar P,
Muller S, Hottiger MO: Sumoylation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1
inhibits its acetylation and restrains transcriptional coactivator function.
FASEB J 2009, 23(11):3978-3989.
151. Martin N, Schwamborn K, Schreiber V, Werner A, Guillier C, Zhang XD,
Bischof O, Seeler JS, Dejean A: PARP-1 transcriptional activity is regulated
by sumoylation upon heat shock. Embo J 2009, 28(22):3534-3548.
152. Stilmann M, Hinz M, Arslan SC, Zimmer A, Schreiber V, Scheidereit C: A
nuclear poly(ADP-ribose)-dependent signalosome confers DNA damageinduced IkappaB kinase activation. Mol Cell 2009, 36(3):365-378.
153. Haynes PA, Miller S, Radabaugh T, Galligan M, Breci L, Rohrbough J,
Hickman F, Merchant N: The wildcat toolbox: a set of perl script utilities
for use in peptide mass spectral database searching and proteomics
experiments. J Biomol Tech 2006, 17(2):97-102.
154. Guindon S, Gascuel O: A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to estimate
large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Syst Biol 2003, 52(5):696-704.
155. Abascal F, Zardoya R, Posada D: ProtTest: selection of best-fit models of
protein evolution. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(9):2104-2105.
156. Anisimova M, Gascuel O: Approximate likelihood-ratio test for branches:
A fast, accurate, and powerful alternative. Syst Biol 2006, 55(4):539-552.
157. Beitz E: TEXshade: shading and labeling of multiple sequence alignments
using LATEX2 epsilon. Bioinformatics 2000, 16(2):135-139.
158. Waterhouse AM, Procter JB, Martin DM, Clamp M, Barton GJ: Jalview
Version 2–a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis
workbench. Bioinformatics 2009, 25(9):1189-1191.
159. Hibbett DS, Binder M, Bischoff JF, Blackwell M, Cannon PF, Eriksson OE,
Huhndorf S, James T, Kirk PM, Lucking R, et al: A higher-level phylogenetic
classification of the Fungi. Mycol Res 2007, 111(Pt 5):509-547.
160. Hibbett DS: A phylogenetic overview of the Agaricomycotina. Mycologia
2006, 98(6):917-925.
161. Spatafora JW, Sung GH, Johnson D, Hesse C, O’Rourke B, Serdani M,
Spotts R, Lutzoni F, Hofstetter V, Miadlikowska J, et al: A five-gene
phylogeny of Pezizomycotina. Mycologia 2006, 98(6):1018-1028.
162. Palenik B, Grimwood J, Aerts A, Rouze P, Salamov A, Putnam N, Dupont C,
Jorgensen R, Derelle E, Rombauts S, et al: The tiny eukaryote Ostreococcus
provides genomic insights into the paradox of plankton speciation. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104(18):7705-7710.
163. Nozaki H, Takano H, Misumi O, Terasawa K, Matsuzaki M, Maruyama S,
Nishida K, Yagisawa F, Yoshida Y, Fujiwara T, Takio S, Tamura K, Chung SJ,
Nakamura S, Kuroiwa H, Tanaka K, Sato N, Kuroiwa T: A 100%-complete
sequence reveals unusually simple genomic features in the hot-spring
red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae. BMC Biol 2007, 5:28.
164. Goffeau A, Barrell BG, Bussey H, Davis RW, Dujon B, Feldmann H, Galibert F,
Hoheisel JD, Jacq C, Johnston M, Louis EJ, Mewes HW, Murakami Y,
Philippsen P, Tettelin H, Oliver SG: Life with 6000 genes. Science 1996,
274(5287):546, 563-547.
165. Wood V, Gwilliam R, Rajandream MA, Lyne M, Lyne R, Stewart A, Sgouros J,
Peat N, Hayles J, Baker S, et al: The genome sequence of
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Nature 2002, 415(6874):871-880.
166. Jeffries TW, Grigoriev IV, Grimwood J, Laplaza JM, Aerts A, Salamov A,
Schmutz J, Lindquist E, Dehal P, Shapiro H, Jin YS, Passoth V,
Richardson PM: Genome sequence of the lignocellulose-bioconverting
and xylose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis. Nat Biotechnol 2007,
25(3):319-326.

Page 26 of 26

167. Jones T, Federspiel NA, Chibana H, Dungan J, Kalman S, Magee BB,
Newport G, Thorstenson YR, Agabian N, Magee PT, Davis RW, Scherer S:
The diploid genome sequence of Candida albicans. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2004, 101(19):7329-7334.
168. Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP, et al: The Phaeodactylum genome
reveals the evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature 2008,
456(7219):239-244.
169. Armbrust EV, Berges JA, Bowler C, Green BR, Martinez D, Putnam NH,
Zhou S, Allen AE, Apt KE, Bechner M, et al: The genome of the diatom
Thalassiosira pseudonana: ecology, evolution, and metabolism. Science
2004, 306(5693):79-86.
170. Morrison HG, McArthur AG, Gillin FD, Aley SB, Adam RD, Olsen GJ, Best AA,
Cande WZ, Chen F, Cipriano MJ, et al: Genomic minimalism in the early
diverging intestinal parasite Giardia lamblia. Science 2007,
317(5846):1921-1926.
171. Dutta S, Burkhardt K, Young J, Swaminathan GJ, Matsuura T, Henrick K,
Nakamura H, Berman HM: Data deposition and annotation at the
worldwide protein data bank. Mol Biotechnol 2009, 42(1):1-13.
172. Lehtio L, Collins R, van den Berg S, Johansson A, Dahlgren LG,
Hammarstrom M, Helleday T, Holmberg-Schiavone L, Karlberg T, Weigelt J:
Zinc binding catalytic domain of human tankyrase 1. J Mol Biol 2008,
379(1):136-145.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-308
Cite this article as: Citarelli et al.: Evolutionary history of the poly(ADPribose) polymerase gene family in eukaryotes. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2010 10:308.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
