<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Complex phylogenetic distribution of a non-canonical genetic code in green algae</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-327"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ellen Cocquyt"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Cocquyt et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/327

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Complex phylogenetic distribution of a noncanonical genetic code in green algae
Ellen Cocquyt1*, Gillian H Gile2, Frederik Leliaert1, Heroen Verbruggen1, Patrick J Keeling2, Olivier De Clerck1

Abstract
Background: A non-canonical nuclear genetic code, in which TAG and TAA have been reassigned from stop
codons to glutamine, has evolved independently in several eukaryotic lineages, including the ulvophycean green
algal orders Dasycladales and Cladophorales. To study the phylogenetic distribution of the standard and noncanonical genetic codes, we generated sequence data of a representative set of ulvophycean green algae and
used a robust green algal phylogeny to evaluate different evolutionary scenarios that may account for the origin of
the non-canonical code.
Results: This study demonstrates that the Dasycladales and Cladophorales share this alternative genetic code with
the related order Trentepohliales and the genus Blastophysa, but not with the Bryopsidales, which is sister to the
Dasycladales. This complex phylogenetic distribution whereby all but one representative of a single natural lineage
possesses an identical deviant genetic code is unique.
Conclusions: We compare different evolutionary scenarios for the complex phylogenetic distribution of this noncanonical genetic code. A single transition to the non-canonical code followed by a reversal to the canonical code
in the Bryopsidales is highly improbable due to the profound genetic changes that coincide with codon
reassignment. Multiple independent gains of the non-canonical code, as hypothesized for ciliates, are also unlikely
because the same deviant code has evolved in all lineages. Instead we favor a stepwise acquisition model,
congruent with the ambiguous intermediate model, whereby the non-canonical code observed in these green
algal orders has a single origin. We suggest that the final steps from an ambiguous intermediate situation to a
non-canonical code have been completed in the Trentepohliales, Dasycladales, Cladophorales and Blastophysa but
not in the Bryopsidales. We hypothesize that in the latter lineage an initial stage characterized by translational
ambiguity was not followed by final reassignment of both stop codons to glutamine. Instead the standard code
was retained by the disappearance of the ambiguously decoding tRNAs from the genome. We correlate the
emergence of a non-canonical genetic code in the Ulvophyceae to their multinucleate nature.

Background
The genetic code, which translates nucleotide triplets into
amino acids, is universal in nearly all genetic systems,
including viruses, bacteria, archaebacteria, eukaryotic
nuclei and organelles [1,2]. However, a small number of
eubacterial, eukaryotic nuclear, plastid and mitochondrial
genomes have evolved slight variations of the standard or
canonical genetic code [3,4]. Most codon reassignments
have been traced to changes in tRNAs, either by single
nucleotide substitution, base modification, or RNA editing.
* Correspondence: EllenE.Cocquyt@UGent.be
1
Phycology Research Group and Center for Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281 S8, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Two main models have been proposed to explain the evolutionary changes in the genetic code [reviewed in [4-7]].
The “codon capture” model [8] proposes that bias in GC
content can eliminate certain codons from the entire genome, after which they can reappear through random
genetic drift, and become reassigned (“captured”) by mutations of noncognate tRNAs. This mechanism is essentially
neutral, that is, codon reassignment is accomplished
without the generation of aberrant and non-functional
proteins. The “ambiguous intermediate” model is a nonneutral model, which posits that codon reassignment
occurs through an intermediate stage where a particular
codon is ambiguously decoded by both the cognate tRNA
and a tRNA that is mutated at locations other than at the

© 2010 Cocquyt et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Cocquyt et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/327

anticodon, after which the mutant tRNA may take over
decoding of the ambiguous codon if it is adaptive [9]. The
two models are not mutually exclusive and codon reassignments may be driven by a combination of different
mechanisms [10,11]. For example, ambiguous intermediate
stages may be preceded by strong GC bias [12].
Similar evolutionary mechanisms of gradual codon
reassignment have been suggested to apply to reassignment of stop codons to sense codons, in which a mutated
tRNA may initially recognize and eventually capture a
stop codon from the cognate release factor [5]. Stop
codons may be particularly prone to reassignment either
because they are less prevalent than sense codons (occurring only once per gene) and therefore cause minimal
detrimental effects if they are reassigned, or because
changes to release factors can occur rapidly [4,13].
Only five eukaryotic lineages are known to have evolved
non-canonical nuclear genetic codes, including ciliates,
hexamitid diplomonads, fungi (in the genus Candida and
many ascomycetes), polymastigid oxymonads, and green
algae (in the Dasycladales and Cladophorales). By far the
most common variant is the reassignment of the stop
codons TAG and TAA (TAR) to glutamine, which has
occurred independently in hexamitid diplomonads [14],
several ciliates [15,16], polymastigid oxymonads [17,18]
and dasycladalean and cladophoralean green algae [19-21].
Interestingly, this TAR®Gln reassignment has never been
observed in prokaryotes or organelles.
The aim of the present study is to document the phylogenetic distribution of the non-canonical genetic code in
green algae, with emphasis on the ulvophycean relatives of
the Dasycladales and Cladophorales. Our approach consists of screening green algal nuclear genes for the presence of non-canonical glutamine codons and interpreting
the evolution of the genetic code and glutamine codon
usage in a phylogenetic framework. The apparently complex phylogenetic distribution of a non-canonical code in
closely related ulvophycean lineages offers a unique opportunity to study the mechanisms of the protein translational
machinery that may have led to codon-reassignment.

Results
The dasycladalean genera Acetabularia, Batophora and
Parvocaulis, and the cladophoralean genera Cladophora
and Chaetomorpha have been shown previously to use
the TAR®Gln genetic code [19-21]. We have characterized one or more of 8 different genes from 21 taxa
representing the breadth of ulvophycean diversity [this
study and [22], see also Additional files 1 and 2]. From
these data, we found that the non-canonical glutamine
codons appear in nuclear-encoded genes of additional
members of the both Dasycladales (genus Bornetella)
and Cladophorales (genera Boergesenia, Boodlea, Cladophora, Dictyosphaeria, Phyllodictyon, Siphonocladus,

Page 2 of 9

Valonia), as well as Trentepohliales (genus Trentepohlia) and the genus Blastophysa, which is currently not
assigned to an order. We inferred that an organism uses
a non-canonical code if TAR codons were found at
highly conserved positions where land plants and other
green algae encode glutamine. Only TGA is used as
stop codon in EST sequences that we obtained for Cladophora (40 S ribosomal protein S9, GQ421515; OEE1,
GQ421494). Moreover, other sequences deposited in
GenBank from Cladophora (GapA, DQ270261; EF-1a,
EF551321) and Acetabularia (PsbS, BK006014) terminate with TGA codons only. The presence of TGA as
the only stop codon for species having TAR at conserved glutamine positions further supports our inference of a non-canonical genetic code.
The presence of the standard code was determined for
the genus Ignatius and the order Bryopsidales (genera
Caulerpa, Bryopsis) by the presence of only canonical
glutamine codons and the use of all three stop codons.
The Ignatius actin gene has TAG as stop codon, while
the b tubulin and HPS90 genes have TAA as stop
codons. For Caulerpa, both b tubulin and HPS90 genes
have TAA as stop codons, so we did not observe the use
of TAG for stop. In publicly available sequences from
Bryopsis all three stop codons are used: TAA in ribonuclease Bm2 gene (AB164318), TAG in lectin precursor
and oxygen evolving protein of photosystem II genes
(EU410470 and AB293980), and TGA in the bryohealin
precursor gene (EU769118). Taken together, this shows
that the Bryopsidales use the standard genetic code.
The occurrence of the standard and TAR®Gln code is
plotted onto the reference phylogeny in Figure 1. The
Streptophyta, prasinophytes, Trebouxiophyceae and
Chlorophyceae possess the standard genetic code. Within
the class Ulvophyceae, the standard code is found in the
orders Ulvales, Ulotrichales, Bryopsidales and the genus
Ignatius whereas the orders Dasycladales, Cladophorales,
Trentepohliales and the genus Blastophysa have a noncanonical code. However, the taxa with the TAR®Gln
code do not form a monophyletic group (Figure 1).
If both the phylogeny and the distribution of the genetic
codes shown in Figure 1 are correct, then more than one
gain and/or loss event of the non-canonical code must be
postulated. To examine the validity of the phylogeny, we
performed AU topology tests to evaluate whether the data
rejected a topology in which all taxa with the non-canonical code formed a monophyletic group. Specifically, we
found that the topology where Bryopsidales is sister to all
Ulvophyceae with the TAR®Gln code is rejected with
high significance (ΔlnL = 27.9; p < 0.0001).
The estimated evolution of glutamine codon usage frequencies is shown in Figure 2 (only the green algal
classes Chlorophyceae, Trebouxiophyceae and Ulvophyceae are shown). In general, the canonical codon CAG

Cocquyt et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/327

Page 3 of 9

Figure 1 Phylogenetic distribution of the standard and non-canonical genetic codes in green algae. The occurrence of a non-canonical
genetic code (TAR®Gln) is indicated with gray squares. The taxa with the non-canonical code do not form a monophyletic group Three
alternative scenarios can explain this phylogenetic distribution: (1) A single origin of the non-canonical code along the branch leading to the
orders Trentepohliales, Dasycladales, Bryopsidales, Cladophorales and the genus Blastophysa and a subsequent reversal to the universal code in
the Bryopsidales (indicated with black arrow and cross). (2) Three independent gains of the non-canonical code in the Trentepohliales, the
Dasycladales and the Cladophorales + Blastophysa (indicated with gray arrows). (3) A stepwise process of evolution of the non-canonical code
with a single initiation of the process along the branch leading to the orders Trentepohliales, Dasycladales, Bryopsidales, Cladophorales and the
genus Blastophysa, followed by a completion of the process in all lineages except the Bryopsidales (black arrow combined with gray arrows). The
reference phylogeny of the green plant lineage was obtained by maximum likelihood inference of a 25% site stripped dataset containing 7
nuclear genes, SSU nrDNA and plastid genes rbcL and atpB [22]. Numbers at nodes indicate ML bootstrap values (top) and posterior probabilities
(bottom); values below respectively 50 and 0.9 are not shown.

Cocquyt et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/327

Page 4 of 9

Figure 2 Estimated ancestral frequencies of glutamine codon usage. Canonical codon CAG is most commonly used, followed by the other
canonical codon, CAA. Among the non-canonical codons, TAG is used more commonly then TAA. The estimate ancestral frequencies of noncanonical codon usage along the nodes of interest are indicated with arrows.

is most commonly used, followed by the canonical
codon CAA. The dominance of the canonical glutamine
codons CAG over CAA is also reflected in the noncanonical glutamine codons, TAG being much more
common than TAA. The bias towards CAG and TAG is
likely a product of the overall bias of these species and/
or genes for GC residues, leading to increased use of G
in the third codon position. Changes from canonical to
non-canonical glutamine codons require a single transition (C ® T) at the first codon position.

Discussion
Our results reveal a broad distribution of a non-canonical
nuclear genetic code in the Ulvophyceae, where glutamine is encoded by canonical CAG and CAA codons as

well as non-canonical TAG and TAA codons. Surprisingly, we find that taxa with this non-canonical code do
not form a monophyletic group according to the seemingly robust phylogeny of the organisms (Figure 1). If
the inferred phylogeny is indeed correct, three alternative
scenarios can explain the distribution of the code on that
tree: (1) a single origin of the non-canonical code along
the branch leading to the orders Trentepohliales, Dasycladales, Bryopsidales, Cladophorales and the genus
Blastophysa and a subsequent reversal to the standard
code in the Bryopsidales (Figure 1: indicated with black
arrow and cross), (2) three independent gains of the noncanonical code in the Trentepohliales, the Dasycladales
and the Cladophorales + Blastophysa (Figure 1: indicated
with gray arrows), and (3) a stepwise process of evolution

Cocquyt et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/327

of the non-canonical code with a single initiation of the
process along the branch leading to the orders Trentepohliales, Dasycladales, Bryopsidales, Cladophorales and
the genus Blastophysa, followed by a completion of the
process in all lineages except the Bryopsidales (Figure 1:
black arrow combined with gray arrows). Alternatively,
because changes in the genetic code are so rare, the possibility that the reference phylogeny is wrong should not
be passed over too easily. More specifically, if one
assumes that the current position of the Bryopsidales is
wrong and that in reality this group is sister to all the
taxa with a non-canonical code, only a single transition
to a non-canonical genetic code would have to be
invoked. In what follows, we will discuss each of these
possibilities in more detail and report on some cytological correlates of the non-canonical genetic code.
Phylogenetic uncertainty

Our phylogenetic tree is based on the most comprehensive dataset currently available for the Ulvophyceae. It is
inferred from a concatenated dataset including seven
nuclear genes, SSU nrDNA and two plastid genes using
model-based techniques with carefully chosen partitioning strategies and models of sequence evolution and
application of a site removal approach to optimize the
signal-to-noise ratio [22]. Our tree shows a sister relationship between Dasycladales and Bryopsidales with
moderate to high statistical support (BV 81 and PP 1.00).
This relationship is concordant with a recently published
74-taxon phylogeny of the green lineage based on SSU
nrDNA and two plastid genes [23]. Both phylogenies
show major improvements in taxon and gene sampling
within the Ulvophyceae compared to previously published phylogenies, which were either based on a single
marker, did not include the Bryopsidales, or could not
resolve the relationships among the Bryopsidales, Dasycladales and Cladophorales [24-26]. Based on the dataset
used to infer our reference tree, the alternative topology
in which the Bryopsidales are sister to all taxa with a
non-canonical code is significantly less likely than the
ML tree as shown by AU tests. As a consequence, we
must conclude based on all available information that the
ulvophycean taxa with the non-canonical code form a
paraphyletic group and one of the more complex evolutionary scenarios for the gain of the non-canonical code
has to be invoked.
Gain-reversal hypothesis

A reversal from the non-canonical to the standard genetic
code is unlikely for several reasons, indeed arguably more
unlikely than the original change to the non-canonical
code. Following a transition to the non-canonical code,
TAR glutamine codons would be present in many coding
sequences. In order to revert to the canonical code, these

Page 5 of 9

codons would all have to revert to canonical CAR codons
or they would terminate translation, with obvious detrimental effects. The improbability of this reversal is
enforced by the increased frequency of the codons: stop
codons appear only once per gene, whereas glutamine is
present many times per gene on average. Our ancestral
state estimates indicate a non-negligible usage frequency
of both non-canonical codons along the ancestral nodes of
interest (Figure 2C, D, indicated with arrows). These
results must be considered with caution because of the
intrinsic limitations of ancestral state estimation [27] and
the fact that the non-independence of the evolution of the
genetic code and glutamine codon usage cannot be captured by the Brownian motion model. The possibility of a
reversal from a non-canonical to a canonical code cannot
be ruled out entirely. For example, this could have been
possible through an ambiguous intermediate stage in
which TAR codons are both recognized by normal glutamine tRNAs and release factors. It is worth mentioning
here that gain-reversal scenarios have been demonstrated
in a number of cases. For example in arthropod lineage
mitochondrial genomes, reassignment of AGG from Ser to
Lys has been shown to occur at the base of the arthropods
and has been reversed to the normal code several times
independently. These reversals have been correlated with
mutations in anti-codons of the tRNA-Lys/-Ser and with
low abundance of the AGG codon [28]. Nevertheless, the
major argument against a reversal from a stop to sense
reassignment as observed in the Ulvophyceae is the sudden appearance of many internal stop codons. In addition,
it has been suggested that the non-canonical TAR®Gln
code is more robust to error than the standard code,
further reducing the likelihood of reversals [29]. Taken
together, the reversal of a non-canonical code to the standard code appears highly unlikely.
Multiple independent gains

Several independent acquisitions of non-canonical codes
have been reported for ciliates [4,30-32]. Stop codon
reassignments are surprisingly frequent in this group of
organisms: the same non-canonical TAR®Gln code has
evolved several times, another non-canonical code in
which TGA codes for tryptophan evolved twice, a noncanonical code that translates TGA to cysteine evolved
once and a fourth non-canonical codes which translates
TAA into glutamic acid has been reported for three ciliate species. In the present study, the distribution of the
non-canonical code in the phylogenetic tree would
require three gains: in the Trentepohliales, the Dasycladales and the Cladophorales + Blastophysa. Contrary to
the situation in ciliates, however, Ulvophyceae only
evolved a single type of non-canonical code and they
did so in closely related lineages, and even within the
ciliates it has been suggested that the reassignment of

Cocquyt et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/327

TAR codons to glutamine in some oligohymenophoran
lineages and glutamic acid in others may share a common origin [32]. It seems unparsimonious to suggest
that such a rare occurrence as codon reassignment
could take place three times independently in three closely related lineages, but the possibility cannot be
excluded altogether.
Stepwise acquisition model

Several studies have suggested that stop codon reassignment is a gradual process requiring changes to tRNA and
eukaryotic release factor 1 (eRF1) genes [reviewed in
[4,5,10]]. In several eukaryotes, the two glutamine tRNAs
recognizing CAG and CAA are also able to read TAR
codons by a G·U wobble base pairing at the third anticodon position [33]. Under normal circumstances (standard
code), the eukaryotic release factor outcompetes the glutamine tRNAs when it comes to binding TAG and TAA.
Mutations in glutamine tRNA copies that allow them to
bind TAG and TAA may increase the capacity to translate TAG and TAA to glutamine. This leads to an intermediate step in which both eRF1 and the mutated tRNAs
can easily bind to TAR glutamine codons. The ciliate
Tetrahymena thermophila has three major glutamine
tRNAs, one that recognizes the canonical CAR codons,
and two supplementary ones that recognize the noncanonical TAR codons. These two supplementary tRNAs
were shown to have evolved from the normal glutamine
tRNA [16]. A similar situation likely exists in diplomonads [14]. In order to alter the genetic code, mutations
are required not only in glutamine tRNAs but also in
eRF1 so they no longer recognize TAG and TAA codons.
In ciliates it has been shown that eRF1 sequences are
highly divergent in domain 1 between species with a
canonical and non-canonical code, which might suggest
that eRF1 can no longer recognize TAG and TAA
codons in the species with a non-canonical code [31,34].
An additional mechanism that constrains the evolvability
of the genetic code and therefore represents yet another
potential step in the process of codon reassignment is
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) [35,36]. NMD
reduces errors in gene expression by eliminating mRNAs
that encode for an incomplete polypeptide due to the
presence of stop codons. In the case of a TAR®Gln code
this NMD mechanism would have to be altered also in
order to prevent degradation of mRNAs containing TAG
and TAA codons.
A gradual, stepwise acquisition model of codon reassignment can reconcile the opposed and problematic
hypotheses of multiple gains versus a single gain with
subsequent loss. For example, the ambiguous intermediate model [5,9] would explain the distribution of the
non-canonical code in Ulvophyceae as follows: mutations

Page 6 of 9

in the anticodons of canonical glutamine tRNAs occurred
once along the branch leading to the orders Trentepohliales, Dasycladales, Bryopsidales, Cladophorales and the
genus Blastophysa (Figure 1, black arrow). The presence
of these mutated tRNAs allowed TAG and TAA codons
to be translated to glutamine instead of terminating
translation. At this step, the mutated tRNAs compete
with eRF1 for the TAA and TAG codons. To complete
the transition to the non-canonical code, subsequent
mutation of the release factors preventing termination
for TAG and TAA codons is required. If one assumes
that this step occurred three times independently in the
Trentepohliales, Dasycladales and Cladophorales + Blastophysa (Figure 1, gray arrows), whereas the mutated
tRNAs decreased in importance or went extinct through
selection or drift along the branch leading to the Bryopsidales, the distribution of the non-canonical code in the
Ulvophyceae would be explained. A detailed comparison
of eukaryotic release factors and glutamine tRNAs in the
respective clades of the Ulvophyceae is needed to verify
this evolutionary scenario.
Alternatively, the observed distribution could also be
explained under a stepwise version of the codon capture
model [13]. We then assume that the TAR stop codons
disappeared from a common ancestor (Figure 1: black
arrow) and were subsequently reassigned independently
to glutamine codons in the Trentepohliales, Cladophorales + Blastophysa and Dasycladales (Figure 1: grey
arrows) and reappeared with their old function in the
Bryopsidales. Although there is some evidence for different GC usage patterns in Ulvophyceae and earlierbranching Chlorophyta [37], we consider codon capture
an unlikely candidate to explain TAR®Gln codon reassignments because a pressure towards either AT or GC
across the entire genome cannot explain the extinction
of both TAA and TAG codons.
The stepwise acquisition model with ambiguous intermediates is expected to reduce organismal fitness during
intermediate stages due to competition between release
factors and glutamine tRNAs resulting in aberrant peptides. However, the fact that several eukaryotes have
natural nonsense suppressor tRNAs that can translate
stop codons, though generally at low efficiency [33], and
that these have been maintained over evolutionary time,
suggest that readthrough may not be a severe problem
and could even increase fitness during periods of environmental instability [5]. Considering that the Ulvophycean orders diversified during the environmentally
instable Cryogenian [37-39] and that early-branching
Ulvophyceae occur in a variety of habitats including
marine, freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems, one could
speculate that genetic code ambiguity may have been
advantageous during their early evolution.

Cocquyt et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/327

Page 7 of 9

Cytological correlates of non-canonical code

phylogenetic uncertainty, gain-reversal hypothesis, multiple independent gains and stepwise acquisition model.
Considering the robustness of our phylogeny, the profound genetic changes that coincide with codon reassignments and the scarcity of codon reassignments, we
conclude that a stepwise acquisition model is the most
likely hypothesis. The present study has provided a framework to better understand the evolution of the genetic
code. Further insights will be gained by sequencing and
analyzing release factors and glutamine tRNAs of taxa
using non-canonical codes.

In the ciliates, the multiple appearances of alternative
codes have been attributed to their nuclear characteristics
[40]. Ciliates are unicellular organisms with two nuclei: a
small, diploid micronucleus which is not expressed and
represents the germ line for DNA exchanges during the
sexual process, and a large, polyploid macronucleus, which
is actively transcribed and ensures vegetative cell growth,
but is not passed on to progeny after sexual conjugation
and is replaced by a newly formed macronucleus after a
number of rounds of mitotic division. There is therefore a
time lag between the occurrence of mutations in the
micronucleus and the expression of these mutations in the
macronucleus, and this has been postulated to be a contributing factor to why ciliates have evolved alternative
genetic codes more frequently [40]. In this context it is
worth mentioning that hexamitid diplomonads, for which
a single origin of a non-canonical code has been shown,
have two semi-independent but similar nuclei per cell
[17]. The same genetic code is also used by the uninucleate enteromonads, but enteromonads are known to have
evolved from within diplomonads [41], so the code originated in a binucleate ancestor. Several ulvophycean groups
are also characterized by multinucleate cells, namely the
Dasycladales, Bryopsidales, Cladophorales and Blastophysa
[22]. However, it should be mentioned that the Trentepohliales, which also uses the non-canonical code, is characterized by uninucleate cells. The Cladophorales and
Blastophysa are branched filamentous seaweeds consisting
of multinucleate cells with a few to thousands of nuclei
arranged in non-motile cytoplasmic domains (siphonocladous organization). Members of the Bryopsidales and
Dasycladales have a siphonous organization: they consist
of a single, giant tubular cell with a single giant nucleus or
with numerous nuclei, and complex patterns of cytoplasmic streaming. The presence of multiple nuclei per cell
might provide an opportunity to experiment with the
genetic code because the cell as an entity might still be
able to function normally and each nucleus can potentially
be passed to the next generation. Despite the fact that
some eukaryotes with a non-canonical code do not feature
multinucleate cells and that there are plenty of examples
of groups with multinucleate cells that have not evolved
alternative codes, this observation suggests that a multinucleate cytology may facilitate codon reassignments.

Conclusions
We demonstrate that the Dasycladales and Cladophorales
share the TAR to glutamine reassignment with the related
order Trentepohliales and the genus Blastophysa, but not
with the Bryopsidales, which is sister to the Dasycladales.
We discuss several alternative scenarios for the origin of
this complex distribution of the non-canonical code:

Methods
RNA isolation, polymerase chain reaction and sequencing

Total RNA was extracted from 43 taxa representing the
major lineages of the Viridiplantae as described previously
[22]. Portions of seven nuclear genes (actin, GPI, GapA,
OEE1, 40 S ribosomal protein S9 and 60 S ribosomal proteins L3 and L17) were amplified, cloned when necessary
and sequenced as described in Cocquyt et al. [[22] and
Additional file 1]. A histone H3 gene was amplified using
the same PCR conditions with an annealing temperature
of 55°C. The primers were based on a Cladophora coelothrix cDNA sequence aligned with GenBank sequences
from green algae and land plants (His-F: 5’-ATG GCI
CGT ACI AAG CAR AC-3’ and His-R: 5’-GGC ATG
ATG GTS ACS CGC TT-3’). In addition, total RNA was
extracted from Ignatius tetrasporus and the bryopsidalean
species Caulerpa cf. racemosa as described previously
[21]. Portions of actin, b-tubulin, and HSP90 genes including the stop codon were amplified from these taxa by 3’
RACE using the First Choice RLM-RACE kit (Ambion)
using nested degenerate primers (actin-outer: 5’-TAC
GAA GGA TAC GCA CTN CCN-3’ C and actin-inner:
5’- GAG ATC GTG CGN GAY ATH AAR GA-3’; b-tubulin-outer: 5’-GAT AAC GAG GCT CTN TAY GAY ATH
TG-3’ and b-tubulin-inner: 5’-CCT TTC CGA CGG CTN
CAY TTY TT-3’; HSP90-outer: 5’-ATG GTC GAT CCN
ATH GAY GAR TA-3’ and HSP90-inner: 5’-GCT AAG
ATG GAG MGN ATH ATG AA-3’). ). These sequences
were deposited in Genbank under accession numbers
HQ332547-HQ332551.
Genetic codes

The presence of a non-canonical nuclear genetic code in
green algal taxa was detected by screening alignments of
nuclear genes for supposed stop codons at positions
coding for glutamine in other green plant taxa and by
the presence of only TGA as a functional stop codon at
the predicted 3’ end of genes. The presence of the standard code was inferred if only canonical glutamine
codons were present and all three stop codons occurred
at the predicted end of genes.

Cocquyt et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/327

Molecular phylogenetics

We constructed a reference phylogeny of the Viridiplantae based on a 10-gene alignment to study the phylogenetic distribution of the standard and non-canonical
genetic code [see Additional file 2]. For a detailed treatment of the methods used for tree reconstruction we
refer to Cocquyt et al. [22]; we will only provide a summary here. The phylogenetic analysis was carried out on
an alignment consisting of the seven nuclear genes mentioned above, together with SSU nrDNA and the plastid
genes rbcL and atpB. Histone genes were excluded from
the analysis because they are known to be duplicated
across genomes [42,43]. Phylogenetic analyses were carried out with model-based techniques (maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference) after selection of a suitable
partitioning strategy and models of sequence evolution.
The model selection procedure proposed 8 partitions:
SSU nrDNA was partitioned into loops and stems (2 partitions) and nuclear and plastid genes were partitioned
into codon positions (2 × 3 partitions). GTR+Γ8 was the
preferred model for all partitions. Noise-reduction techniques were applied to counteract the erosion of ancient
phylogenetic signal caused by fast-evolving sites. The
phylogenetic tree presented here is based on the 75%
slowest-evolving sites [22].
Evolution of glutamine codon usage

The evolution of glutamine codon usage was estimated
using ancestral state inference techniques. The frequency
of the two canonical and two non-canonical glutamine
codons was calculated for each species in the phylogenetic tree. Codon frequencies were mapped along the
reference tree using the ace function of the APE package
[44]. This function estimates ancestral character states by
maximum likelihood optimization [45]. The branch
lengths were based on ML estimates because we consider
them to be a more relevant approximation of the amount
of codon usage evolution that can be expected to take
place than absolute time [cf. [23]]. The output from APE
was mapped onto the reference tree with TreeGradients
v1.03 [46] to plot ancestral states as colors along a color
gradient.
Topological hypothesis testing

Approximately unbiased tests [AU test, [47]] were used
to test an alternative relationship between ulvophycean
orders as suggested by the distribution of the canonical
genetic code (see results). Site-specific likelihoods were
calculated by maximum likelihood optimization in Treefinder using the same model specifications as for phylogenetic inference [22]. AU tests were performed with
CONSEL V0.1i [48].

Page 8 of 9

Additional material
Additional file 1: GenBank accession numbers. Table with the
Genbank accession numbers.
Additional file 2: Alignment. nexus file of the data matrix containing 7
nuclear genes, SSU nrDNA and plastid genes rbcL and atpB.

Abbreviations
eRF1: eukaryotic release factor 1; BV: boostrap value; CAR: CAG or CAA;
GapA: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GPI: glucose-6phosphate isomerase; Gln: glutamine; HSP: heat shock protein; Lys: lysine;
ML: maximum likelihood; OEE1: oxygen-evolving enhancer protein; PP:
posterior probability; Ser: serine, TAR: TAG or TAA.
Acknowledgements
We thank Caroline Vlaeminck for assisting with the molecular work and Wim
Gillis for IT support. Funding was provided by the Special Research Fund
(Ghent University, DOZA-01107605), a grant from the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (227301), an NSERC postgraduate
doctoral scholarship to GHG and Research Foundation Flanders postdoctoral
fellowships to HV, FL. PJK is a Fellow of the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research and a Senior Investigator of the Michael Smith Foundation for
Health Research. Phylogenetic analyses were largely carried out on the
KERMIT computing cluster (Ghent University).
Author details
Phycology Research Group and Center for Molecular Phylogenetics and
Evolution, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281 S8, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
2
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Department of Botany, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, V6 T 1Z4 Canada.
1

Authors’ contributions
EC, ODC and FL designed the study. EC and GHG carried out lab work. EC
and FL maintained algal cultures. EC and HV analyzed data. EC and ODC
drafted the manuscript and FL, HV, PJK and GHG contributed to the
interpretation of the data. All authors revised and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 30 June 2010 Accepted: 26 October 2010
Published: 26 October 2010
References
1. Woese CR: Order in the genetic code. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1965,
54(1):71-75.
2. Crick FHC: The origin of the genetic code. J Mol Biol 1968, 38(3):367-379.
3. Jukes TH, Osawa S: Evolutionary changes in the genetic code. Comp
Biochem Phys B 1993, 106(3):489-494.
4. Knight RD, Freeland SJ, Landweber LF: Rewiring the keyboard: Evolvability
of the genetic code. Nat Rev Genet 2001, 2(1):49-58.
5. Santos MAS, Moura G, Massey SE, Tuite MF: Driving change: the evolution
of alternative genetic codes. Trends Genet 2004, 20(2):95-102.
6. Osawa S: Evolution of the Genetic Code. Oxford University Press, Oxford;
1995.
7. Sengupta S, Yang XG, Higgs PG: The mechanisms of codon
reassignments in mitochondrial genetic codes. J Mol Evol 2007,
64(6):662-688.
8. Osawa S, Jukes TH: Codon reassignment (codon capture) in evolution.
J Mol Evol 1989, 28:271-278.
9. Schultz DW, Yarus M: Transfer RNA mutation and the malleability of the
genetic code. J Mol Biol 1994, 235(5):1377-1380.
10. Sengupta S, Higgs PG: A unified model of codon reassignment in
alternative genetic codes. Genetics 2005, 170(2):831-840.
11. Koonin EV, Novozhilov AS: Origin and Evolution of the Genetic Code: The
Universal Enigma. IUBMB Life 2009, 61(2):99-111.

Cocquyt et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:327
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/327

12. Massey SE, Moura G, Beltrao P, Almeida R, Garey JR, Tuite MF, Santos MAS:
Comparative evolutionary genomics unveils the molecular mechanism
of reassignment of the CTG codon in Candida spp. Genome Res 2003,
13:544-557.
13. Osawa S, Jukes TH, Watanabe K, Muto A: Recent evidence for evolution of
the genetic code. Microbiological Reviews 1992, 56(1):229-264.
14. Keeling PJ, Doolittle WF: A non-canonical genetic code in an early
diverging eukaryotic lineage. EMBO Journal 1996, 15(9):2285-2290.
15. Horowitz S, Gorovsky MA: An unusual genetic code in nuclear genes of
Tetrahymena. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985, 82(8):2452-2455.
16. Hanyu N, Kuchino Y, Nishimura S, Beier H: Dramatic events in ciliate
evolution - alteration of UAA and UAG termination codons to glutamine
codons due to anticodon mutations in two Tetrahymena tRNAs-Gln.
EMBO Journal 1986, 5(6):1307-1311.
17. Keeling PJ, Leander BS: Characterisation of a non-canonical genetic code
in the oxymonad Streblomastix strix. J Mol Biol 2003, 326(5):1337-1349.
18. de Koning AP, Noble GP, Heiss AA, Wong J, Keeling PJ: Environmental PCR
survey to determine the distribution of a non-canonical genetic code in
uncultivable oxymonads. Environ Microbiol 2008, 10(1):65-74.
19. Schneider SU, de Groot EJ: Sequences of two rbcS cDNA clones of
Batophora oerstedii: structural and evolutionary considerations. Curr
Genet 1991, 20(1-2):173-175.
20. Schneider SU, Leible MB, Yang XP: Strong homology between the small
subunit of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase of two
species of Acetabularia and the occurrence of unusual codon usage. Mol
Gen Genet 1989, 218(3):445-452.
21. Gile GH, Novis P, Cragg D, Zuccarello GC, Keeling PJ: The distribution of
elongation factor-1alpha (EF-1α), elongation factor-like (EFL), and a noncanonical genetic code in the Ulvophyceae: discrete genetic characters
support a consistent phylogenetic framework. J Eukaryot Microbiol 2009,
56(4):367-372.
22. Cocquyt E, Verbruggen H, Leliaert F, De Clerck O: Evolution and
cytological diversification of the green seaweeds (Ulvophyceae).
Molecular Biology and Evolution. Mol Biol Evol 2010, 9:2052-2061.
23. Cocquyt E, Verbruggen H, Leliaert F, Zechman FW, Sabbe K, De Clerck O:
Gain and loss of elongation factor genes in green algae. BMC Evol Biol
2009, 9:39.
24. Zechman FW, Theriot EC, Zimmer EA, Chapman RL: Phylogeny of the
Ulvophyceae (Chlorophyta): cladistic analysis of nuclear-encoded rRNA
sequence data. J Phycol 1990, 26(4):700-710.
25. López-Bautista JM, Chapman RL: Phylogenetic affinities of the
Trentepohliales inferred from small-subunit rDNA. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol
2003, 53:2099-2106.
26. Watanabe S, Nakayama T: Ultrastructure and phylogenetic relationships
of the unicellular green algae Ignatius tetrasporus and Pseudocharacium
americanum (Chlorophyta). Phycol Res 2007, 55(1):1-16.
27. Martins EP: Estimation of ancestral states of continuous characters: A
computer simulation study. Syst Biol 1999, 48(3):642-650.
28. Abascal F, Posada D, Knight RD, Zardoya R: Parallel evolution of the
genetic code in arthropod mitochondrial genomes. Plos Biol 2006, 4(5):
e127.
29. Kurnaz ML, Bilgin T, Kurnaz IA: Certain non-standard coding tables appear
to be more robusr to error than the standard genetic code. J Mol Evol
2010, 70:13-38.
30. Baroin Tourancheau A, Tsao N, Klobutcher LA, Pearlman RE, Adoutte A:
Genetic code deviations in the ciliates: evidence for multiple and
independent events. EMBO Journal 1995, 14(13):3262-3267.
31. Lozupone CA, Knight RD, Landweber LF: The molecular basis of nuclear
genetic code change in ciliates. Curr Biol 2001, 11(2):65-74.
32. Sánchez-Silva R, Villalobo E, Morin L, Torres A: A new noncanonical nuclear
genetic code: Translation of UAA into glutamate. Curr Biol 2003,
13(5):442-447.
33. Beier H, Grimm M: Misreading of termination codons in eukaryotes by
natural nonsense suppressor tRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 2001,
29(23):4767-4782.
34. Inagaki Y, Blouin C, Doolittle WF, Roger AJ: Convergence and constraint in
eukaryotic release factor 1 (eRF1) domain 1: the evolution of stop codon
specificity. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30(2):532-544.
35. Baker KE, Parker R: Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay: terminating
erroneous gene expression. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2004, 16(3):293-299.

Page 9 of 9

36. Maquat LE: Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay: Splicing, translation and
mRNP dynamics. Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio 2004, 5(2):89-99.
37. Cocquyt E: Phylogeny and molecular evolution of green algae (Doctoral
thesis). Ghent University; 2009.
38. Butterfield NJ, Knoll AH, Swett K: Paleobiology of the Neoproterozoic
Svanbergfjellet formation, Spitsbergen. Fossils Strata 1994, 34:1-84.
39. Verbruggen H, Ashworth M, LoDuca ST, Vlaeminck C, Cocquyt E, Sauvage T,
Zechman FW, Littler DS, Littler MM, Leliaert F, De Clerck O: A multi-locus
time-calibrated phylogeny of the siphonous green algae. Mol Phylogenet
Evol 2009, 50(3):642-653.
40. Cohen J, Adoutte A: Why does the genetic code deviate so easily in
ciliates? Biol Cell 1995, 85(2-3):105-108.
41. Kolisko M, Cepicka I, Hampl V, Leigh J, Roger AJ, Kulda J, Simpson AGB,
Flegr J: Molecular phylogeny of diplomonads and enteromonads based
on SSU rRNA, alpha-tubulin and HSP90 genes: Implications for the
evolutionary history of the double karyomastigont of diplomonads. BMC
Evol Biol 2008, 8:205.
42. Nei M, Rooney AP: Concerted and birth-and-death evolution of
multigene families. Annu Rev Genet 2005, 39:121-152.
43. Wahlberg N, Wheat CW: Genomic outposts serve the phylogenomic
pioneers: designing novel nuclear markers for genomic DNA extractions
of Lepidoptera. Syst Biol 2008, 57(2):231-242.
44. Paradis E, Claude J, Strimmer K: APE: Analyses of Phylogenetics and
Evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 2004, 20(2):289-290.
45. Schluter D, Price T, Mooers AO, Ludwig D: Likelihood of ancestor states in
adaptive radiation. Evolution 1997, 51(6):1699-1711.
46. Verbruggen H: TreeGradients v1.02. 2009 [http://www.phycoweb.net].
47. Shimodaira H: An approximately unbiased test of phylogenetic tree
selection. Syst Biol 2002, 51(3):492-508.
48. Shimodaira H, Hasegawa M: CONSEL: for assessing the confidence of
phylogenetic tree selection. Bioinformatics 2001, 17(12):1246-1247.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-327
Cite this article as: Cocquyt et al.: Complex phylogenetic distribution of
a non-canonical genetic code in green algae. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2010 10:327.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
