<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>2041-9139-1-6 1..13</title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1221/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

RESEARCH

Open Access

Early development of Ensatina eschscholtzii:
an amphibian with a large, yolky egg
Andres Collazo1,3,4,5*, Ray Keller2

Abstract
Background: Comparative analyses between amphibians, concentrating on the cellular mechanisms of
morphogenesis, reveal a large variability in the early developmental processes that were thought to be conserved
during evolution. Increased egg size is one factor that could have a strong effect on early developmental processes
such as cleavage pattern and gastrulation. Salamanders of the family Plethodontidae are particularly appropriate for
such comparative studies because the species have eggs of varying size, including very large yolky eggs.
Results: In this paper, we describe for the first time the early development (from fertilization through neurulation) of
the plethodontid salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii. This species has one of the largest eggs known for an amphibian,
with a mean ± SD diameter of 6 ± 0.43 mm (range 5.3-6.9; n = 17 eggs). Cleavage is meroblastic until approximately
the 16-cell stage (fourth or fifth cleavage). At the beginning of gastrulation, the blastocoel roof is one cell thick, and
the dorsal lip of the blastopore forms below the equator of the embryo. The ventral lip of the blastopore forms closer
to the vegetal pole, and relatively little involution occurs during gastrulation. Cell migration is visible through the
transparent blastocoel roof of the gastrula. At the end of gastrulation, a small archenteron spreading dorsally from
the blastopore represents the relatively small and superficial area of the egg where early embryonic axis formation
occurs. The resulting pattern is similar to the embryonic disk described for one species of anuran.
Conclusions: Comparisons with the early development of other species of amphibians suggest that an
evolutionary increase in egg size can result in predictable changes in the patterns and rate of early development,
but mainly within an evolutionary lineage.

Background
The objective of this study was to investigate how egg
size and yolk content affects the mechanisms of morphogenesis in early amphibian development, with an
analysis of cleavage, gastrulation and neurulation in a
caudate amphibian with a large yolky egg, Ensatina
eschscholtzii. Gastrulation and early development have
been examined in many species of amphibians, but until
relatively recently, most studies have considered these
events in terms of superficial similarities and differences,
rather than in terms of the detailed mechanisms of cell
movements [1,2]. Moreover, differences in underlying
cellular mechanisms have been overlooked because of
the emphasis on a few species that are easy to maintain
and manipulate.

* Correspondence: ACollazo@hei.org
1
Division of Cell Biology and Genetics, House Ear Institute, 2100 West Third
Street, Los Angeles, CA 90057, USA

The species in which gastrulation and other aspects of
early development has been described in the most detail
is the frog Xenopus laevis [3-7]. Because of this, developmental patterns shown by Xenopus are often taken to
be general characteristics of Amphibia. However, even
some of the earliest aspects of development vary
between amphibian taxa. For example, studies on the
hylid frog, Gastrotheca riobambae, have indicated significant differences in early development from that of
Xenopus, such as meroblastic and asynchronous early
cleavages, an uncoupling of events of the midblastula
transition, and blastopore closure before archenteron
and notochord elongation [8-10]. All amphibian eggs
eventually have holoblastic cleavage (the egg is totally
divided by the first and all the following cleavage
planes), but in some species (particularly those with
large yolky eggs) the first few cleavage planes fail to pass
completely through the egg [11-15].

© 2010 Collazo and Keller; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

Comparative analysis of the cellular mechanisms of
morphogenesis in early development reveals a large
variability in ontogenetic processes that were thought to
be conserved during evolution. Current studies at the
cellular level show that early morphogenesis of amphibians differs in the initial location of prospective tissues
and in the types of cellular mechanisms contributing to
what appear to be similar morphogenetic movements
[1,2]. For example, all urodeles studied thus far [16-19]
and most anurans [18,20-22] have prospective mesoderm in the surface epithelial layer of the marginal
zone, whereas Xenopus has very little [23-25]. In Xenopus, multiple cellular processes contribute to involution
of the marginal zone, including migration of involuted
mesoderm along the blastocoel roof and convergent
extension of the involuted mesoderm and noninvoluting
neural plate [26,27]. Convergent extension of the mesoderm alone is sufficient to produce involution and many
of the other gastrulation movements in Xenopus [28-30].
By contrast, migration of mesoderm on the blastocoel
roof is needed for gastrulation of the salamander Pleurodeles [31,32]. Convergent extension in salamanders
appears to occur only in the late gastrula and during
neurulation [33-35].
Leaving aside for a moment the question of possible
phylogenetic differences in gastrulation between amphibian orders, a major factor potentially responsible for
variation in gastrulation mechanisms is difference in egg
size. Egg size appears to be largely a function of the
amount of yolk in the eggs. Large, yolky eggs may present biomechanical problems to cleavage and gastrulation [36-39], although this has yet to be experimentally
demonstrated. A larger egg size in an amphibian would
presumably be due to deposition of more yolk in the
vegetal region, and in this case, the marginal zone may
be displaced animally, near or perhaps above the equator. Under these conditions, convergent extension of the
marginal zone would not be useful in closing the blastopore because these movements would squeeze yolk outward [1,2,4].
Salamanders of the family Plethodontidae, such as
Ensatina, are particularly appropriate for studies of the
effects of increased egg size on cleavage pattern and gastrulation because the species have eggs of varying size,
including very large yolky eggs [40]. Egg size is related
to the evolution of direct development - the development of the embryo into a miniature adult within the
egg membranes. This is in contrast to the mode of
development among better studied amphibians; that is,
those which have free-living aquatic larvae [41]. Ensatina eschscholtzii belongs to plethodontid Clade C, and
lays one of the largest eggs known for a plethodontid
(5 to 7 mm dia in recently oviposited eggs) [40,42,43].
This is only the second species within plethodontid

Page 2 of 13

Clade C whose early development has been described in
any detail, the first being Desmognathus aeneus [44].
Our study of early development in Ensatina was undertaken to understand how large egg size influences development and whether salamanders differ from frogs in
this respect [45]. We believe that this organism and
others like it should be brought into more common use,
and thus we also describe the natural history and the
methods of obtaining and working with the eggs and
embryos.

Methods
Obtaining and handling embryos

We gathered material for embryological study by collecting the relatively common adult animals, because
egg clutches of Ensatina are rarely found in nature. One
clutch is laid in the spring of every other year, deep
underground or inside large fallen trees [46]. Gravid
E. eschscholtzii were collected in various California locations in the springs of 1986 to 1989, and oviposition
was induced by intraperitoneal injections of 0.1 ml of
luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH; cat. no.
L-2761; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA), diluted to
a concentration of 0.05 mg/ml in sterile distilled H2O.
Females store viable sperm from previous matings for at
least 6 months in a spermatheca and the eggs are fertilized as they are laid. In total, 19 egg clutches were
obtained, ranging in size from 9 to 16 eggs (mean ± SD
12 ± 2.3). All eggs were raised at 13 to 14°C on wet
paper towels inside plastic containers. Because the eggs
deposited by non-injected females developed in the
same way as those deposited by injected females and
because eggs deposited by injected females hatched into
apparently normal juveniles, we concluded that the
development observed after LHRH-induced oviposition
is normal.
Microscopy, fixation, marking experiments and analysis

Living embryos were examined by light microscopy
using a dissecting microscope (Wild/Leica, Heerbrugg,
Switzerland), and were then fixed in either 2.5% glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2) or 10% neutral
buffered formalin. Fixed embryos were dissected for
examination of internal features. Jelly coats were typically mechanically removed with forceps after the
embryos were preserved. In some embryos, the jelly
coats were removed chemically with 2% cysteine HCL
solution (pH 8.1) by placing embryos in this solution for
20 to 50 minutes.
Two of the living embryos were stained with vital dye
during the blastula and gastrula stages to test the viability of this technique and to better observe morphogenetic movements. To stain the embryos, most of the
jelly coat layers were mechanically removed with

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

forceps, leaving a thin layer of jelly coat and the vitelline
membrane. If the vitelline membrane is punctured at
these early stages, the embryo explodes through the
hole and dies. A crystal of Nile blue sulfate was pressed
into the jelly layer and against the vitelline membrane,
over the areas to be marked, with a needle or fine forceps. The dye typically soaked through the vitelline
membrane within 2 minutes. The regions labeled were
recorded and followed over known time intervals.

Results
Egg size and developmental rate

Eggs of E. eschscholtzii are very large for an amphibian,
with a diameter of 6 ± 0.43 mm (range 5.3 to 6.9;
n = 17 eggs) across the recently laid egg within its
membranes. This variation in egg size is relatively large
for a single species of amphibian [47,48]. Within a given
clutch, the variation was substantially smaller. Stebbins
observed large variation in ovum diameter in dissected
gravid females, with different subspecies having different
mean ovum sizes [46]. Eggs are unpigmented, and therefore surface details are difficult to discern. Early development is very slow, with neurulation beginning 23 days
after egg deposition at 13 to 14°C (Figure 1). Figure 1
plots the rate of development over stages 1 to 20 for 19
embryos from 17 clutches, with the stage numbers
being those used to describe salamander development
[49]. Although determining the equivalent stage to those
of published normal tables is relatively straightforward
at these early stages of development, it is more difficult
with postneurula stages because of differences in the
relative appearance of superficial structures.
The embryos are easily damaged by mechanical
manipulation throughout these early stages. Eggs in

Page 3 of 13

which most of the jelly coats are removed and the vitelline membrane is left intact can continue to develop,
even at blastula and gastrula stages. However, if the
vitelline membrane is removed (possible only if the egg
is chemically dejellied first) [5], the flaccid embryo falls
apart, presumably from the lack of structural support
provided by the vitelline membrane.
Cleavage pattern

Figure 2 shows photomicrographs of several different
embryos at early cleavage stages. Figure 3 shows drawings of the early cleavage pattern at different times for
six individual eggs from a different clutch. Cleavage
initially occurs only in the animal pole, with no cleavage
furrow visible in the vegetal pole until about the 16- cell
stage (fourth or fifth cleavage). Cleavages, even if only
the animal pole cells are considered, are unsynchronized
and uneven after the four-cell (second cleavage) stage.
Cleavages that start in the animal pole pass through the
entire embryo by the early blastula stages, so cleavage
is holoblastic, although it does not appear to be so
initially.
Blastulation and gastrulation

Blastulation is characterized by large asymmetries in cell
sizes between animal and vegetal poles. Throughout the
blastula stage, the cells of the animal pole are less than
half the diameter of those in the vegetal pole (Figure
4A, B). The size differences between the large cells of
the vegetal pole and the small cells of the animal pole
are abrupt, not gradual. By the beginning of gastrulation,
the boundary between the smaller animal cells and the
larger vegetal cells lies below the equator of the spherical embryo and marks the area of dorsal lip formation.

Figure 1 Rate of early development in Ensatina eschscholtzii. The stages of development are from Harrison (1969) and range from 1 (one
cell) to 20 (neural folds fused). Figure legends consist of symbol, subspecies (clutch number) year. Key to subspecies of E eschscholztii: Eee, E. e.
eschscholztii; Eec, E. e. croceator; Eek, E. e. klauberi; Eeo, E. e. oregonensis; Eep, E. e. picta; Eeeo, possible hybrid of E. e. eschscholztii X E. e.
oregonensis; Eeox, possible hybrid of E. e. oregonensis X E. e. xanthoptica.

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

Page 4 of 13

Figure 2 Animal pole view of four live embryos from two different clutches. (A, B) Two embryos in early cleavage stages; white
arrowheads point to two of the three jelly coat layers. (C) Uncleaved egg; (D) embryo at four cell stage. Scale bars = 1.0 mm.

By the late blastula stages and throughout gastrulation,
the roof of the blastocoel is a translucent epithelial sheet
one cell thick. Even at the earliest blastula stages,
the roof appears to be just one or two cell(s) thick
(Figure 4E). The roof becomes thinner because the
majority of cleavages that these cells undergo appear to
be lateral as opposed to radial. Epiboly (the spreading of
an epithelial sheet of cells) is a major morphogenetic
movement during late blastula and gastrula stages, leading to expansion of the thin blastocoel roof.
Gastrulation begins with the formation of bottle cells
(Figure 4C, D), as in other amphibians studied
[19,30,50-52] but differs in several respects from that of
other species. Note the large size of the endodermal cells
near the center of the embryo (Figure 4C), even at a stage
of development when the morphogenetic movements of
gastrulation (for example, epiboly) are beginning. Involuting cells form a large, circular blastopore with relatively little involution in the ventral lip during
gastrulation. Because of the relatively small amount of
involution, the ventral lip forms close to its final location
(Figure 4F). The involuting cells of the dorsal lip can be
seen migrating along the thin, (one cell layer thick) blastocoel roof (Figure 4G, H). Closure of the blastopore lip
proceeds over the course of 9 days (Figure 4F, I, J) until
the yolk plug becomes small. This closure is asymmetrical. A cross-section of the embryo at late gastrula stage
(Figure 5A, B) shows the remnant of the blastocoel and

the larger archenteron. Note that although the yolk plug
is very small, the archenteron is not as large relative to
the total egg volume as in Xenopus [8,23]. During the
completion of gastrulation and the beginning of neurulation, the embryonic disk elongates anteroposteriorly,
strongly implying that the cellular mechanism of convergent extension is operative [2,26,28,33,34].
Formation of an embryonic disk

Gastrulation, neurulation and organogenesis involve a
relatively small and superficial part of the total surface
of the egg (Figure 5C-E). This pattern of development,
although superficially reminiscent of the blastodisc type
of development seen in chickens, is actually more similar to the embryonic disk type of development described
for G. riobambae, for two reasons [9,53]. First, the
yolk of chickens remains uncleaved, whereas that of
G. riobambae, like Ensatina and all other amphibians, is
cleaved by this stage. Second, most of the embryonic
axis (region of organogenesis) forms superficially along
the surface of the egg, in the embryonic disk type of
development described for some species of amphibians
with large eggs. The embryonic disk in G. riobambae is
derived from a population of yolk-poor cells, symmetrically localized around the small blastopore of the late
gastrula, and initially results in a very small and symmetrical archenteron. In Ensatina, most of the embryo is
derived from a population of yolk-poor cells mostly

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

Page 5 of 13

Figure 3 Early cleavage patterns of same individual eggs at different times. Six different eggs from the same clutch at three different
stages of cleavage. Note the variability in pattern of cleavage. (A-C) Animal pole view of first egg; (D) vegetal pole view of third stage; (E-G)
animal pole view of second egg; (H-J) animal pole view of third egg; (K-M) animal pole view of fourth egg; (N-P) animal pole view of fifth egg;
(Q-S) animal pole view of sixth egg; (T) vegetal pole view of third stage. Egg diameter is 7.0 mm.

dorsal to the yolk plug. These cells spread anteriorly as
the archenteron elongates. In fixed embryos, it is relatively easy to see which cells are yolk-poor, because
such cells are white whereas yolky cells are yellow in
color. The early embryonic disk, therefore, takes on a
white appearance in the otherwise yellow egg. Formation
of an embryonic disk results in a small percentage of
egg volume contributing to embryonic structures in
both Ensatina and G. riobambae. However, there are
other species of plethodontids in which a small percentage of the egg volume contributes to embryonic structures, but no embryonic disk is apparent [41,44].
Natural history

Months of oviposition over the 5 years of this study are
shown in Figure 6. We found that 88% of the females

oviposited in April and May, with April being the main
month of oviposition in 1986 and 1987, and May in
1989. All the clutches were fertile (at least one embryo
developed normally). Approximately 50% of gravid
females actually oviposited. The time between injection
and oviposition was highly variable. For 16 clutches,
the mean was 12.2 days (range 7 to 42.5 days). When
the largest clutch size was excluded from the analysis,
the mean was 10.2 days (range 7 to 16.5 days). There
was no correlation with female body size. Two females
oviposited without being injected.
Females turned on their backs to lay eggs, as Stebbins
described previously [46]. This unorthodox manner of
oviposition has been described in other species of salamanders [54]. Oviposition is slow; more than 24 hours
may be required for completion. Previous descriptions

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

Page 6 of 13

Figure 4 Developing embryos from early blastula to gastrula stages. (A, B) Animal pole view of early blastula stages. Two different live
embryos from same clutch. (C, D) Two magnifications of same embryo cut in half at the beginning of gastrulation, showing bottle cells. White
arrows point to apical end of bottle cells. (C) Lower magnification view that shows large yolky cells near the center of the embryo. (D) High
magnification view of the dorsal lip region showing bottle cells. Black arrowhead points to basal edge of one bottle cell. (E, F) Two views of a live
embryo at a mid-gastrula stage. (E) Animal pole view showing the blastocoel roof; (F) vegetal pole view of the blastopore. The dorsal side of the
blastopore is towards the top (white arrowhead). (G, H) Animal pole view of cells migrating along the blastocoel roof of a live embryo. Arrow
points to front of migrating cells. The cells are migrating to the right. (G) low magnification; (H) high magnification. (I, J) Vegetal pole view of the
blastopore of a late gastrula stage embryo. Dorsal region is towards the top. (I) low magnification; (J) high magnification. Scale bars = 1.0 mm.

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

Page 7 of 13

Figure 5 End of gastrulation through neurula stages showing embryonic disk. (A, B) Fixed embryo cut in half at the late gastrula stage
illustrating internal structures. (A) Low magnification. Dorsal region of embryo is towards the top. (B) High magnification. Arrows delineate the
small size of the yolk plug. (C-E) Illustration of the embryonic disk in living Ensatina embryos. The two embryos are at an early neurula stage.
Arrows indicate the lateral edges of the neural plate. Arrowheads point to closed blastopore. (C) Low magnification view of whole dorsal surface
of embryo. Blastopore is towards the top. (D) High magnification of same embryo. (E) Low magnification view of a different embryo with the
blastopore toward the top right corner (arrowhead). Ar = Archenteron; Bl = Blastocoel. Scale bar = 1.0 mm.

of the number of jelly coats (three) and their adhesiveness were confirmed (Figure 2B) [46].

Discussion
The development of Ensatina differs in many respects
from that of most other amphibians. We propose that
large egg size is the major reason for most of these
differences.
Egg size is a formal evolutionary constraint

An egg can become only so large before a shift from
holoblastic to meroblastic cleavage occurs [1,13,55,56].
Such an evolutionary event has occurred at least five
times within vertebrates, in lineages leading to hagfishes,
elasmobranchs, teleosts, coelacanths and amniotes [40].

The egg size at which the shift from holoblastic to
meroblastic cleavages occurs varies between animal taxa;
knowing egg size alone does not necessarily predict the
type of cleavage. Teleosts and reptiles have meroblastic
cleavages, even though some species have eggs the same
size as those of amphibians that cleave holoblastically.
The identification of a new tissue type in the amphibian
embryo - the nutritional endoderm - may provide an
intermediate state towards the evolution of amniote
meroblastic cleavage [13]. In the large-egged frog,
Eleutherodactylus coqui, the nutritional endoderm consists of yolk-rich cells that do not contribute to differentiated tissues. It is possible that Ensatina also has
nutritional endoderm, but further study is necessary. By
comparing different groups of amphibians (for example,

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

Page 8 of 13

Figure 6 Bar graph showing months of oviposition of Ensatina clutches used in this study. Accumulated over a period of 5 years.

frogs, salamanders and caecilians) it might be determined if these taxa respond similarly to increases in egg
size with regard to early development and gastrulation.
We suggest that the asymmetries and asynchronies in
early cleavage are influenced by egg size and represent a
formal constraint on evolution [57]. This developmental
pattern has been reported in previous studies of other
salamanders with relatively large yolky eggs: Eurycea
bislineata [14], Desmognathus fuscus [58] and Cryptobranchus alleganiensis [15] (diameters of 2.5, 2.8 and
4.0 mm, respectively). The better studied salamander
taxa such as Pleurodeles, Triturus and the axolotl
(Ambystoma mexicanum) have smaller eggs (1.7, 2.1 and
1.9 mm diameter, respectively) [59]. E. bislineata, D. fuscus and Ensatina represent two of the three major
clades of plethodontids, whereas Cryptobranchus is not
closely related to plethodontids [42,43]. The fact that
the asymmetries and asynchronies in early cleavage seen
in these four species are qualitatively similar and that
these species represent two disparate salamander
families suggests that large egg size and not phylogenetic relationship accounts for the differences in development from amphibians with smaller eggs. Ensatina,
with the largest egg size of any salamander studied to
date, offers the most extreme example of asymmetry
and asynchrony. Meroblastic-like cleavages of the sort
reported in this study were described in E. bislineata,
D. fuscus and Cryptobranchus, but in these species a
cleavage plane splits the vegetal pole by about the eightcell stage, earlier than in Ensatina.
Large egg size is clearly a factor in the asymmetrical
and asynchronous cleavages seen in Ensatina. There
may be biomechanical interference with positioning
of the mitotic spindles and the actin contractions

associated with cytokinesis of the developing embryo
[60]. The cellular mechanisms that can cause atypical
cleavage patterns have been the subject of both theoretical studies [36,38] and reviews. Most of the theoretical
work has concentrated on invertebrate patterns. Experimental studies in sea urchin eggs, using centrifugation
to concentrate the yolk and alter the plane of cleavage
has provided supporting data for the theoretical work
[37]. Centrifugation experiments have also been performed on Xenopus to demonstrate the importance of
cytoplasmic factors on pattern formation [61,62]. This
technique could be used in studies of early cleavage patterns as a means of testing the effect of a concentrated
region of yolk on cytokinesis in amphibian embryos.
There is reason to believe that the mechanisms that
govern cleavage in invertebrates may have some relevance to the understanding of amphibian cleavage [60].
Work on invertebrates can help direct research that
investigates mechanisms for the production of atypical
cleavage patterns in amphibians. For example, a potential factor causing asymmetrical cleavage, not directly
related to yolk, is an attachment of the mitotic spindle
to the animal cortex of the dorsal region as seen in the
mollusc Spisula solidissima [63]. Studies have demonstrated that cortical complexes are important for pattern
formation in Xenopus [64-66].
Blastulation

Blastula formation in Ensatina appears to be a modification of the typical amphibian pattern and again the differences can probably be attributed to the large amount
of yolk. The blastocoel, compared with the diameter of
the egg, is much smaller in Ensatina than in smalleregged amphibians. Large and yolky endodermal cells

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

make up most of the egg, which means that the animal
pole cells represent a smaller proportion of the egg,
creating a relatively small blastocoel. A one-cell-thick
blastocoel roof means that the cells that form tight junctions to the outer environment of the embryo are also
the cells secreting an extracellular matrix on which
involuting cells migrate [27]. In Xenopus, the blastocoel
roof is several layers thick and consists of two different,
stratified populations in terms of protein secretion [67].
This implies that the epithelial sheet of the blastocoel
roof in Ensatina has a single cell population that exhibits the role of two cell populations in other species,
assuming similar secretory behavior to that in Xenopus.
The thin (one cell thick) blastocoel roof is a characteristic of other species of plethodontids, some with relatively small eggs [40].
Convergent extension versus cell migration

Convergent extension of the involuting cells during gastrulation is the major mechanism moving cells along the
blastocoel roof in Xenopus [26,28,68,69]. Migration (the
crawling of the cells along the blastocoel roof) is another
possible cellular mechanism and is the major, although
not exclusive, mechanism of involution in the salamander Pleurodeles waltl [31,32]. The observations in these
two species have been used to argue that cell migration
is the more important morphogenetic process during
gastrulation in salamanders, whereas convergent extension is the more important morphogenetic process in
frogs [32,70]. Interestingly, more recent analyses of
other species of Anurans suggests that there are frog
species without convergent extension [2]. The importance of the role of convergent extension during salamander neurulation is accepted [33,34]; the controversy
here is its role during gastrulation. In the salamander
A. mexicanum, both migration and convergent extension
are important mechanisms [2,16]. Convergent extension
may be occurring during Ensatina gastrulation because
Anuran species without convergent extension have symmetrically closing blastopores, whereas Ensatina has an
asymmetrically closing blastopore with more involution
on the dorsal side. Of course, in other species of salamanders, subduction, involving apical constrictions and
ingression of mesoderm, seems to be a major morphogenetic process during gastrulation and the same may
well be true for Ensatina [2,19]. This study could not
distinguish which mechanism of involution was more
important or even estimate the extent of ingression in
this species, but it did demonstrate that cell migration
occurs along the blastocoel roof of Ensatina.
Blastopore closure and archenteron formation

Blastopore closure is a biomechanical problem when
the egg is as large as in Ensatina [4,26]. The slowness

Page 9 of 13

of the gastrulation process is one consequence. The
differences in the rate of blastopore closure between
Ensatina and other salamanders are probably due to
the larger absolute egg size (including amount of yolk)
of Ensatina. Epiboly of the noninvoluting cells presumably helps surround the yolky endoderm cells. The
vitelline membrane is very elastic and tightly stretched
around the embryo, and it provides support for the
flaccid Ensatina embryo. Without this support the
embryo could not develop, much less gastrulate.
These differences do not entail any new cellular
mechanisms.
Keller predicted that, unless there is some fundamental change in gastrulation mechanisms, the dorsal
lip of a large-egged amphibian must form below the
equator in order for blastopore closure to occur, which
seems to borne out in the case of Ensatina [4]. By contrast, the yolky sturgeon egg appears to avoid this difficulty by reproportioning and retiming these
movements so that extension occurs first, without convergence, moving the marginal zone below the equator
and then converging to close the blastopore [26,71].
Despite their apparent versatility, convergent extension
movements are not universally used in gastrulation,
even for relatively small eggs, where they offer few
apparent disadvantages. For example, P. waltl, which
does not appear to use convergent extension until later
stages, has eggs not much larger (1.7 mm) [72] than
those of Xenopus (1.4-1.5 mm) [3], and their marginal
zone lies near the vegetal pole. Subduction, the morphogenetic mechanism for blastopore closure seen in
many salamander species (including P. waltl), can also
result in asymmetrical blastopore closure [2,19]. Even
other species of frogs, some with larger eggs, do not
seem to use convergent extension during gastrulation,
as shown by the lack of notochord elongation as visualized by Brachyury staining [2,8]. It is clear that there
is still much to understand about the effect of egg size
on morphogenesis.
The archenteron that is formed at an advanced stage
of blastopore closure is small in Ensatina (Figure 5).
The formation of such a small archenteron is indicative of the formation of an embryonic disk, as
described in the tropical tree frog Gastrotheca. riobambae (Anura: Hylidae) [8,73]. However, the archenteron
of Ensatina is larger than that of G. riobambae.
Furthermore, it is not symmetrically located around
the blastopore but is skewed almost totally towards the
dorsal side. Interestingly, this aspect of archenteron
formation is more similar to that observed in Xenopus
than to that observed in Dendrobatid frogs and G. riobambae [8]. Archenteron formation in Ensatina is
similar to that in another large-egged salamander,
Andrias japonicus [74].

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

Comparisons with other amphibian clades

Early development of large amphibian eggs has rarely
been examined in more than a cursory manner, and few
reports are available for comparison with our own
observations. The third order of amphibians, the Gymnophiona, has some species with large eggs and many of
the developmental characteristics seen in Ensatina: initially incomplete cleavage, and presence of a thin blastocoel roof and an embryonic disk [11,75]. However, early
developmental data on gymnophiones are very scarce.
Early development of anurans is known in more detail
and in more species. G. riobambae shows the three patterns of early development mentioned for gymnophiones
and these patterns are similar in appearance to those
observed in this study: initially incomplete, asynchronous and asymmetrical cleavage; a one-cell-thick, translucent blastocoel roof; and an embryo forming from a
superficial embryonic disk [9,53]. In G. riobambae, large
egg size has been implicated as a possible explanation
for these developmental patterns [10].
The above discussion of the possible effects of large
egg size on early development has been cast in a causal
light, concentrating on mechanistic explanations. In discussing the effects of large egg size on early development in an evolutionary context, it must be understood
what is meant by large egg size. There are at least two
possible criteria for defining what is a large egg size for
amphibians: (i) an absolute measure based on the range
of egg sizes (generally diameter) in all species of a
taxon; or (ii) a relative measure based on a ratio of egg
size (such as indicated by cytoplasmic volume) to some
developmentally crucial cell parameter such as cytoskeletal elements and/or nuclear volume (typically represented by genome size) [76,77]. A large egg size as
defined by the first criterion will have implications to
related quantitative characters such as volume, surface
area and mass. We believe it is not unreasonable to
assume some correlation between these measurements
and another quantitative measure, the amount of yolk.
A large egg size as defined by the second criterion is
more complicated and probably more realistic. However,
there are probably interspecies comparisons where the
first criterion is a close approximation of the underlying
cellular differences. Any discussion on the effects of
large egg size on early development should take these
criteria into account.
Both G. riobambae and Ensatina could be considered
to have a large egg size by the usage of either criterion.
Ensatina has a large egg size in an absolute sense
because the egg diameter is close to the maximum
observed across all amphibians (this maximum is
10 mm for urodeles and anurans [55], slightly more for
gymnophiones). The absolute egg diameter of G. riobambae is not small, but it is smaller (4-5 mm

Page 10 of 13

diameter) than that of Ensatina. However, by taking
into account genome size (the only relative and crucial
cell parameter for which data are broadly available), the
eggs of G. riobambae have a larger effective egg size
because of their much smaller genome size [9,78]. If
both species are considered to have a large egg size,
because they fulfill either criterion, then the unusual
patterns of early development observed in both species
(initially incomplete, asynchronous and asymmetrical
cleavage; a one-cell-thick translucent blastocoel roof;
and an embryo forming from a superficial embryonic
disk) correlate with large egg size.
Data on egg size and early development of some other
species of amphibians contradict this simple correlation,
and suggest a more complicated evolutionary interaction
between large egg size (defined by either of the two criteria mentioned) and morphogenetic patterns of early
development. Studies on the development of a frog from
a different family (Eleutherodactylus coqui; Leptodactylidae) supports this conclusion [55,79]. The egg diameter
of this species is the same as G. riobambae, yet
its development is not nearly as unusual as that of
G. riobambae; for example, E. coqui does not develop a
superficial embryonic disk [55,79]. Because genome sizes
are similar for these two genera, determination of which
has a larger egg size based on the relative criteria does
not alleviate this apparent contradiction. Embryos of
E. coqui do have one unusual feature in their early
development, a translucent blastocoel roof, which indicates thinness [79].
Using the terminology of Gould, we propose that the
differences between these two species of anurans suggest
that the effect of egg size on two of the three developmental patterns discussed (one-cell-thick blastocoel roof
and an embryo forming from a superficial embryonic
disk) are not a formal but possibly a historical constraint
in frogs [57]. This is in contrast to effect of egg size on
early cleavage patterns, which, as stated above, appears
to be a formal constraint. If large egg size always correlated with unusual patterns of early development, then
egg size could be considered a formal constraint, but
this is not the case because frogs with similar sized eggs
can have very different developmental patterns.
Comparisons with other species of plethodontids

A related plethodontid, Batrachoseps, shows two of the
three patterns of early development seen in Ensatina
and G. riobambae (initially incomplete, asynchronous
and asymmetrical cleavage and an embryo forming from
a superficial embryonic disk), but it differs in having a
blastocoel roof two to three cells thick [80]. Other species of plethodontids, such as Desmognathus quadramaculatus and D. wrighti, show all three patterns of early
development [40,41,44]. Batrachoseps has a genome size

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

similar to that of Ensatina [78] but an egg diameter
(3.4 mm) just over half that of Ensatina; nevertheless,
Batrachoseps is considered to have a large, yolky egg
relative to that of other amphibians. The two species of
Desmognathus have the same genome size [81], which is
less than half that of Ensatina, and differ in egg size,
with D. quadramaculatus having a larger egg diameter
(3.9 mm) than that of D. wrighti (2.3 mm) [40]. It is
possible that the two species of Desmognathus have a
large egg size based on a relative criteria using a ratio of
genome size to egg diameter, explaining their unusual
early development [41,44]. Further studies need to be
carried out on the early development of other species of
plethodontids to better understand the extent of variation in early development
In interspecies comparisons, both between anuran
families and within plethodontids, the effects of
increased egg size on patterns of early development
appear complex. The species comparisons that do not
support a simple correlation between large egg size and
patterns of early development are those between distantly related taxa, suggesting that large egg size may be
a useful predictive factor for early development only
within an evolutionary lineage.
Factors influencing the rate of development

In most species of salamanders studied, as in this one,
development is slow, but in salamanders this may be
due not only to egg size but also to the large amount of
nuclear DNA, which is known to slow cell cycle time
and regeneration [82,83]. Comparative studies between
anurans have led researchers to conclude that large egg
size does not necessarily slow the rate of development
[10]. Based on comparative studies of plethodontid
development, genome and egg sizes seem to affect the
rate of early development only when they reach extremely large sizes (Collazo and Wake, unpublished data).
The differences in genome sizes necessary to affect the
rate of early development may need to be larger than
those seen in the four species of plethodontids discussed
above. However, the relatively large size of the genome
in Ensatina together with its large egg size may be acting synergistically to slow down the rate of development. We believe that the most important single factor
for the slow rate of development in Ensatina is probably
egg size, simply because of the mechanics of cytokinesis
through such a large egg volume and morphogenesis
across such a large surface area. The same situation
seems to be true in anuran lineages. Even though the
genome size of G. riobambae is larger than that of most
other hylids (6 pg per haploid genome), it is not much
larger, and is in fact small relative to that of salamanders
and many other anurans [9,78,84]. We see no obvious

Page 11 of 13

correlation between large genome size and the unusual
patterns of development in the amphibians we have
discussed. Further studies of the potential role of large
genome sizes on early development are warranted.

Conclusions
We suggest that large egg size and the large amount of
yolk associated with this increase explains the unusual
patterns of early cleavage in a biomechanical context,
and the unusual patterns of blastulation and gastrulation
in a morphogenetic context. Comparison with frogs having different amounts of yolk supports this, although the
interspecies comparisons do suggest a caution in that
the role of increased egg size on early development
requires a phylogenetic context. Evolutionary effects of
large egg size on the rate of development are similar to
that of large genome size in that large increases are
necessary to produce a slower rate of development.
Experiments could be performed to corroborate the
importance of yolk; these would involve changing of egg
size by removing and adding yolk. Manipulations of the
amount of yolk are very difficult in Ensatina, although
manipulations have been successfully performed on
groups as diverse as Sceloporus lizards and sea urchins
[85,86]. Fortunately, Ensatina has seven subspecies,
some of which vary greatly in size [87,88]. Our data
include the two most extreme subspecies in terms of
egg diameter. Stebbins measured the diameter of ova in
gravid females and found that E. eschscholtzii picta had
the smallest mean egg size whereas E. eschscholtzii croceater had the largest [46]. Preliminary results suggest
that females of the smaller subspecies lay smaller eggs
whose postneurula development is more rapid than that
of the larger eggs used in this study. These ‘natural’
experiments provide an opportunity to study the effects
of egg size on development.
Large egg size in amphibians appears to produce significant and predictable changes in early development,
even across different orders. The criteria used to define
large egg size must be clearly stated. A phylogenetic
context is also important in further understanding the
influence off egg size on morphogenesis during early
development and on the rate of early development.
Acknowledgements
This work was part of a dissertation submitted by A. Collazo to the
University of California at Berkeley. Special thanks to D. B. Wake and M. H.
Wake for intellectual and moral support during all phases of this project. The
manuscript benefitted from the thoughtful comments of D. B. Wake, M. H.
Wake, J. Gerhart and J. A. Bolker. Thanks to K. Sakai for scanning the images
used to make up the figures. This project was funded by National Science
Foundation (NSF) Grant BSR 86-19630 (to D. B. Wake). A. Collazo was
supported by a NSF Graduate Minority Fellowship and is currently supported
by his NIH NIDCD RO1 Grant DC004061. Core resources were provided by
NIH NIDCD P-30 grant DC006276 to D. J. Lim.

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

Author details
1
Division of Cell Biology and Genetics, House Ear Institute, 2100 West Third
Street, Los Angeles, CA 90057, USA. 2Department of Biology, University of
Virginia, P.O. Box 400328, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4328, USA. 3University of
Southern California, Neuroscience Graduate Program, Hedco Neurosciences
Bldg. RM 120E, 3641 Watt Way, Los Angeles, CA. 90089-2520, USA.
4
Department of Cell and Neurobiology, Keck School of Medicine, University
of Southern California, CA, USA. 5Department of Otolaryngology, Keck School
of Medicine, University of Southern California, CA, USA.
Authors’ contributions
AC collected and analyzed the embryological material, and discussed and
drafted the manuscript. RK helped in the fixation and dissection of embryos
to reveal and identify internal structures. RK also provided the intellectual
background for interpreting early development and helped draft the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 28 February 2010 Accepted: 3 August 2010
Published: 3 August 2010
References
1. Shook DR, Keller R: Epithelial type, ingression, blastopore architecture
and the evolution of chordate mesoderm morphogenesis. J Exp Zool B
Mol Dev Evol 2008, 310:85-110.
2. Shook DR, Keller R: Morphogenic machines evolve more rapidly than the
signals that pattern them: lessons from amphibians. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev
Evol 2008, 310:111-135.
3. Nieuwkoop PD, Faber J: Normal Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin)
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 2 1967.
4. Keller RE: The cellular basis of amphibian gastrulation. Developmental
Biology: a Comprehensive Synthesis New York: Plenum PressBrowder CW
1986, 2:241-237.
5. Sive HL, Grainger RM, Harland RM: Early Development of Xenopus Laevis: a
Laboratory Manual Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press 2000.
6. Harland R, Gerhart J: Formation and Function of Spemanns Organizer.
Ann Rev Cell Dev Biol 1997, 13:611-667.
7. Keller R: Shaping the vertebrate body plan by polarized embryonic cell
movements. Science 2002, 298:1950-1954.
8. Moya IM, Alarcon I, del Pino EM: Gastrulation of Gastrotheca riobambae
in comparison with other frogs. Dev Biol 2007, 304:467-478.
9. del Pino EM: Modifications of oogenesis and development in marsupial
frogs. Development 1989, 107:169-187.
10. del Pino EM, Loor-Vela S: The pattern of early cleavage of the marsupial
frog Gastrotheca riobambae. Development 1990, 110:781-789.
11. Brauer A: Beiträge zur kenntnis der entwicklung und anatomie der
Gymnophionen. II. Die entwicklung der äussern form. Zool Jahrb Anat
1899, 12:477-508.
12. del Pino EM, Escobar B: Embryonic stages of Gastrotheca riobambae
(Fowler) during maternal incubation and comparison of development
with that of other egg-brooding hylid frogs. J Morphol 1981, 167:277-295.
13. Elinson RP: Nutritional endoderm: a way to breach the holoblasticmeroblastic barrier in tetrapods. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol 2009,
312:526-532.
14. Goodale HD: The early development of Spelerpes bilineatus (Green). an J
Anat 1911, 12:173-247.
15. Smith BG: The embryology of Cryptobranchus allegheniensis, including
comparisons with some other vertebrates. J Morphol 1912, 23:455-579.
16. Lundmark C: Role of bilateral zones of ingressing superficial cells during
gastrulation of Ambystoma mexicanum. JEmbryol Exp Morphol 1986,
97:47-62.
17. Smith JC, Malacinski GM: The origin of the mesoderm in an anuran,
Xenopus laevis and a urodele, Ambystoma mexicanum. Dev Biol 1983,
98:250-254.
18. Vogt W: Gestaltungsanalyse am amphibienkeim mit örtlicher
vitälfarbung. II. Teil. Gastrulation und mesodermbildung bei urodelen
und anuren. Wilhelm Roux Arch Entwicklungsmech Org 1929, 120:384-706.

Page 12 of 13

19. Shook DR, Majer C, Keller R: Urodeles remove mesoderm from the
superficial layer by subduction through a bilateral primitive streak. Dev
Biol 2002, 248:220-239.
20. King HD: The formation of the notochord in the amphibia. Biol Bull 1903,
4:287-300.
21. Purcell SM, Keller R: A different type of amphibian mesoderm
morphogenesis in Ceratophrys ornata. Development 1993, 117:307-317.
22. Vogt W: Chorda, hypochorda und darmentoderm bei anuren amphibien.
Verh Anat Ges 38 vers Tubingen Anat Anz Erg 1929, 67:153-163.
23. Minsuk SB, Keller RE: Surface mesoderm in Xenopus: a revision of the
stage 10 fate map. Development Genes and Evolution 1997, 207:389-401.
24. Shook DR, Majer C, Keller R: Pattern and morphogenesis of presumptive
superficial mesoderm in two closely related species, Xenopus laevis and
Xenopus tropicalis. Dev Biol 2004, 270:163-185.
25. Nieuwkoop P, Florshutz P: Quelques caracteres speciaux de la gastulation
et de la neurulation de l’oeuf de Xenopus laevis, Daud. et de quelques
autres Anoures. l’ère partie. - Etude descriptive. Arch Biol (Liege) 1950,
61:113-150.
26. Keller R, Davidson LA, Shook DR: How we are shaped: the biomechanics
of gastrulation. Differentiation 2003, 71:171-205.
27. Winklbauer R: Mesodermal cell migration during Xenopus gastrulation.
Dev Biol 1990, 142:155-168.
28. Keller R, Davidson L, Edlund A, Elul T, Ezin M, Shook D, Skoglund P:
Mechanisms of convergence and extension by cell intercalation. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2000, 355:897-922.
29. Keller R, Jansa S: Xenopus Gastrulation without a blastocoel roof. Dev Dyn
1992, 195:162-176.
30. Keller RE: An experimental analysis of the role of bottle cells and the deep
marginal zone in gastrulation of Xenopus laevis. J Exp Zool 1981, 216:81-101.
31. Shi DL, Darribère T, Johnson KE, Boucat J-C: Initiation of mesodermal cell
migration and spreading relative to gastrulation in the urodele
amphibian Pleurodeles waltlii. Development 1989, 105:351-363.
32. Shi DL, Delarue M, Darribère T, Riou J-F, Boucaut J-C: Experimental analysis
of the extension of the dorsal marginal zone in Pleurodeles waltlii
gastrulae. Development 1987, 100:147-161.
33. Jacobson AG: Morphogenesis of the neural plate and tube.
Morphogenesis and Pattern Formation New York: Raven PressConnelly TG,
Brinkley LL, Carlsen, BM 1981, 233-263.
34. Jacobson AG, Gordon R: Changes in the shape of the developing
vertebrate nervous system analyzed experimentally, mathematically and
by computer simulation. J Exp Zool 1976, 197:191-246.
35. Keller R, Shih J, Sater A: The cellular basis of the convergence and
extension of the Xenopus neural plate. Dev Dyn 1992, 193:199-217.
36. Alonso JLMR: A field description of cleavage and early morphogenesis.
PhD Thesis Sussex: University of Sussex 1981.
37. Freeman G: The role of egg organization in the generation of cleavage
patterns. Time, Space and Pattern in Embryonic Development New York: Alan
R. Liss 1983, 171-196.
38. Goodwin BC, Trainor LEH: A field description of the cleavage process in
embryogenesis. J Theor Biol 1980, 85:757-770.
39. Soin SG: A new classification of the structure of mature eggs of fishes
according to the ratio of yolk to ooplasm. Sov J Dev Biol (Engl Transl
Ontogenez) 1981, 12:13-17.
40. Collazo A: Evolutionary correlations between early development and lifehistory in Plethodontid salamanders and teleost fishes. Amn Zool 1996,
36:116-131.
41. Collazo A, Marks SB: Development of Gyrinophilus porphyriticus:
Identification of the ancestral developmental pattern in the salamander
family plethodontidae. J Exp Zool 1994, 268:239-258.
42. Chippindale PT, Bonett RM, Baldwin AS, Wiens JJ: Phylogenetic evidence
for a major reversal of life-history evolution in plethodontid
salamanders. Evolution 2004, 58:2809-2822.
43. Mueller RL, Macey JR, Jaekel M, Wake DB, Boore JL: Morphological
homoplasy, life history evolution and historical biogeography of
plethodontid salamanders inferred from complete mitochondrial
genomes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:13820-13825.
44. Marks SB, Collazo A: Direct development in Desmognathus aeneus
(Caudata: Plethodontidae): A staging table. Copeia 1998, 637-648.
45. Elinson RP, Beckham Y: Development in frogs with large eggs and the
origin of amniotes. Zoology (Jena) 2002, 105:105-117.

Collazo and Keller EvoDevo 2010, 1:6
http://www.evodevojournal.com/content/1/1/6

46. Stebbins RC: Natural history of the salamanders of the plethodontid
genus Ensatina. Univ Calif Publ Zool 1954, 54:47-124.
47. Kaplan RH: Ontogenetic energetics in Ambystoma. Physiol Zool 1980,
53:43-56.
48. Kaplan RH: The implications of ovum size variability for offspring fitness
and clutch size within several populations of salamanders (Ambystoma).
Evolution 1980, 34:51-64.
49. Harrison RG: Organization and Development of the Embryo New Haven: Yale
University Press 1969.
50. Hardin J, Keller R: The behavior and function of bottle cells during
gastrulation of Xenopus laevis. Development 1988, 103:211-230.
51. Holtfreter J: Properties and function of the surface coat in amphibian
embryos. J Exp Zool 1943, 93:251-323.
52. Holtfreter J: A study of the mechanics of gastrulation. Part I. J Exp Zool
1943, 94:261-318.
53. Elinson RP, del Pino EM: Cleavage and gastrulation in the egg-brooding,
marsupial frog, Gastrotheca riobambae. J Embryol Exp Morph 1985,
90:223-232.
54. Bishop SC: The salamanders of New York. New York State Mus Bull 1941,
1-365.
55. Elinson RP: Change in developmental patterns: Embryos of amphibians
with large eggs. Development as an Evolutionary Process New York: Alan R.
Liss, IncRaff RA, Raff EC 1987, 8:1-21, [MBL Lectures in Biology].
56. Elinson RP: Egg evolution. Complex Organismal Functions: Integration and
Evolution in Vertebrates New York: John Wiley and Sons, LtdWake DB, Roth
G 1989, 251-262.
57. Gould SJ: A developmental constraint in Cerion, with comments on the
definition and interpretation of constraint in evolution. Evolution 1989,
43:516-539.
58. Hilton WA: General features of the early development of Desmognathus
fusca. J Morphol 1909, 20:533-547.
59. Dettlaff TA, Vassetzky SG: Animal Species for Developmental Studies.
Vertebrates New York: Consultants Bureau 1991, 2.
60. Eggert US, Mitchison TJ, Field CM: Animal cytokinesis: from parts list to
mechanisms. Annu Rev Biochem 2006, 75:543-566.
61. Black SD, Gerhart JC: Experimental control of the site of embryonic axis
formation in Xenopus laevis centrifuged before first cleavage. Dev Biol
1985, 108:310-324.
62. Black SD, Gerhart JC: High-frequency twin embryos from Xenopus eggs
doubly centrifuged before first cleavage. Dev Biol 1986, 115.
63. Dan K, Ito S: Studies of unequal cleavage in molluscs: I. Nuclear behavior
and anchorage of a spindle pole to cortex as revealed by isolation
technique. Develop Growth and Differ 1984, 26:249-262.
64. Elinson RP, Rowning B: A transient array of parallel microtubules in frog
eggs: Potential tracks for a cytoplasmic rotation that specifies the dorsoventral axis. Dev Biol 1988, 128:185-197.
65. Vincent JP, Scharf SR, Gerhart JC: Subcortical rotation in Xenopus eggs: a
preliminary study of its mechanochemical basis. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton
1987, 8:143-154.
66. Vincent J-P, Gerhart JC: Subcortical rotation in Xenopus eggs: An early
step in embryonic axis specification. Dev Biol 1987, 123:526-539.
67. Roberts SJ, Leaf DS, Moore HP, Gerhart JC: The establishment of polarized
membrane traffic in Xenopus laevis embryos. J Cell Biol 1992,
118:1359-1369.
68. Keller RE, Danilchik M, Gimlich R, Shih J: The function and mechanism of
convergent extension during gastrulation of Xenopus laevis. J Embryol
Exp Morphol 1985, 89:185-209.
69. Keller RE, Danilchik M, Gimlich R, Shih J: Convergent extension by cell
intercalation during gastrulation of Xenopus laevis. Molecular
Determinants of Animal Form. Volume New Series 31 New York: A. R.
LissEdelman GM 1985, 111-141, [UCLA Symposia on Molecular and Cellular
Biology].
70. Keller R, Winklbauer R: The role of the extracellular matrix in amphibian
gastrulation. Semi Develo Biol 1990, 1:25-33.
71. Bolker JA: The mechanism of gastrulation in the white sturgeon. J Exp
Zool 1993, 266:132-145.
72. Gallien L, Durocher M: Table chronologique du developpement chez
Pleurodeles waltlii Michah. Bulletin Biologique de la France et Belgique 1957,
91:97-114.
73. del Pino EM, Elinson RP: A novel development pattern for frogs:
gastrulation produces an embryonic disk. Nature 1983, 306:589-591.

Page 13 of 13

74. Ishikawa C: The gastrulation of the gigantic salamander, Megalobatrachus
maximus. Zool Mag 1905, 17:26-29.
75. Sarasin P, Sarasin F: Ergebnisse naturwissenschaftlicher. Forschungen auf
Ceylon. Zur Entwicklungsgeschichte und Anatomie der Cerylonesischen
Blindwühle, Ichthyophis glutinosus Wiesbaden: C. W. Kreidel’s
Verlag1887-1890.
76. Newport J, Kirschner M: A major developmental transition in early
Xenopus embryos: II. Control of the onset of transcription. Cell 1982,
30:687-696.
77. Newport J, Kirschner M: A major developmental transition in early
Xenopus embryos: I. characterization and timing of cellular changes at
the midblastula stage. Cell 1982, 30:675-686.
78. Sessions SK: Cytogenetics and evolution in salamanders. Ph. D Berkeley:
University of California, Berkeley 1984.
79. Elinson RP: Fertilization and aqueous development of the Puerto Rican
terrestrial-breeding frog, Eleutherodactylus coqui. J Morphol 1987,
193:217-224.
80. Collazo A: Development and evolution in the salamander family
Plethodontidae. Ph. D Berkeley: University of California at Berkeley 1990.
81. Hally MK, Rasch EM, Mainwaring HR, Bruce RC: Cytophotometric evidence
of variation in genome size of desmognathine salamanders.
Histochemistry 1986, 85:185-192.
82. Cavalier-Smith T: Nuclear volume control by nucleoskeletal DNA,
selection for cell volume and cell growth rate and the solution of the
DNA C-value paradox. J Cell Sci 1978, 34:247-278.
83. Sessions SK, Larson A: Developmental correlates of genome size in
plethodontid salamanders and their implications for genome evolution.
Evolution 1987, 41:1239-1251.
84. Olmo E, Morescalchi A: Genome and cell sizes in frogs: A comparison
with salamanders. Experientia 1978, 34:44-46.
85. Sinervo B, Huey RB: Allometric engineering: an experimental test of the
causes of interpopulational differences in performance. Science 1990,
248:1049-1164.
86. Sinervo B, McEdward LR: Developmental consequences of an
evolutionary change in egg size: An experimental test. Evolution 1988,
42:885-899.
87. Kuchta SR, Parks DS, Wake DB: Pronounced phylogeographic structure on
a small spatial scale: geomorphological evolution and lineage history in
the salamander ring species Ensatina eschscholtzii in central coastal
California. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2009, 50:240-255.
88. Stebbins RC: Speciation in salamanders of the plethodontid genus
Ensatina. Univ Calif Publ Zool 1949, 48:377-526.
doi:10.1186/2041-9139-1-6
Cite this article as: Collazo and Keller: Early development of Ensatina
eschscholtzii: an amphibian with a large, yolky egg. EvoDevo 2010 1:6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
