<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2180-2-22.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="petere"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Microbiology
BMC Microbiology
2002,
2

Methodology article

BioMed Central

x

Measurement of microbial activity in soil by colorimetric
observation of in situ dye reduction: an approach to detection of
extraterrestrial life
Ronald L Crawford*1, Andrzej Paszczynski1, Qingyong Lang2,
Daniel P Erwin1, Lisa Allenbach1, Giancarlo Corti4, Tony J Anderson4, I
Francis Cheng2, Chien Wai2, Bruce Barnes3, Richard Wells3, Touraj Assefi5
and Mohammad Mojarradi6
Address: 1Environmental Biotechnology Institute; University of Idaho, Moscow ID 83844, 2Departments of Chemistry, University of Idaho,
Moscow ID 83844, 3Electrical Engineering, University of Idaho, Moscow ID 83844, 4Mechanical Engineering; University of Idaho, Moscow ID
83844, 5Microelectronics Research and Communication Institute, University of Idaho, Moscow ID 83844 and 6Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
E-mail: Ronald L Crawford* - crawford@uidaho.edu; Andrzej Paszczynski - andrzej@uidaho.edu; Qingyong Lang - lang9912@uidaho.edu;
Daniel P Erwin - derwin@moscow.com; Lisa Allenbach - lisaa@uidaho.edu; Giancarlo Corti - cort4258@uidaho.edu;
Tony J Anderson - tandersn@uidaho.edu; I Francis Cheng - ifcheng@uidaho.edu; Chien Wai - cwai@uidaho.edu;
Bruce Barnes - barnesb@mrc.uidaho.edu; Richard Wells - rwells@mrc.uidaho.edu; Touraj Assefi - tassefi@uidaho.edu;
Mohammad Mojarradi - mohammad.m.mojarradi@jpl.nasa.gov
*Corresponding author

Published: 31 July 2002
BMC Microbiology 2002, 2:22

Received: 7 May 2002
Accepted: 31 July 2002

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/22
© 2002 Crawford et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This article is published in Open Access: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all media for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: Detecting microbial life in extraterrestrial locations is a goal of space exploration
because of ecological and health concerns about possible contamination of other planets with
earthly organisms, and vice versa. Previously we suggested a method for life detection based on the
fact that living entities require a continual input of energy accessed through coupled oxidations and
reductions (an electron transport chain). We demonstrated using earthly soils that the
identification of extracted components of electron transport chains is useful for remote detection
of a chemical signature of life. The instrument package developed used supercritical carbon dioxide
for soil extraction, followed by chromatography or electrophoresis to separate extracted
compounds, with final detection by voltammetry and tandem mass-spectrometry.
Results: Here we used Earth-derived soils to develop a related life detection system based on
direct observation of a biological redox signature. We measured the ability of soil microbial
communities to reduce artificial electron acceptors. Living organisms in pure culture and those
naturally found in soil were shown to reduce 2,3-dichlorophenol indophenol (DCIP) and the
tetrazolium dye 2,3-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide inner
salt (XTT). Uninoculated or sterilized controls did not reduce the dyes. A soil from Antarctica that
was determined by chemical signature and DNA analysis to be sterile also did not reduce the dyes.
Conclusion: Observation of dye reduction, supplemented with extraction and identification of
only a few specific signature redox-active biochemicals such as porphyrins or quinones, provides a
simplified means to detect a signature of life in the soils of other planets or their moons.

Page 1 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

Background
The detection of microbial life in extraterrestrial locations
is an important goal of human exploration of space because of ecological and health concerns about possible
contamination of other planets with earthly organisms,
and vice versa [1,2]. Several indirect methods for detecting
extraterrestrial life have been proposed in the prior literature. These include (a) examining the ratios of stable isotopes in important elements such as carbon and sulphur
for discrimination against heavy isotopes and selective use
of the lighter isotopes, (b) microscopic observations of
highly organized or specifically-shaped structures [3,4],
(c) examination of soils for the presence of specific types
of organic moieties [5], and (d) the detection of chiral
molecules in extraterrestrial samples [6–12].
Previously we suggested a thermodynamic approach to
the detection of life. Since living entities require a continual source of usable energy, we should be able to detect a
chemical signature of life in the form of mixtures of redox
molecules such as porphyrins, quinones, and flavins that
transport electrons along redox gradients between electron donors and acceptors [13]. We examined methods to
extract and detect the components of electron transport
chains that might be used to indicate the presence of life
on site in extraterrestrial locations. Our experiments
showed this to be a promising approach, though instrument development and miniaturization for this purpose
will be challenging [14].
Here we discuss the possibility of a related, but simpler
approach for detecting life that will measure the actual existence of functioning electron transport chains. This can
theoretically be done remotely and on site using robotically collected extraterrestrial soil samples. The method
involves detection of actual activity of respiratory electron
transport using artificial electron acceptors such as DCIP
and tetrazolium dyes such as XTT. DCIP, for example,
couples directly with NADH or NADPH to form DCIPH2
and NAD+ or NADP+, making it an ideal electron transport chain indicator [15]. XTT has been used to measure
microbial respiratory activity in complex natural environments [16]. Respiratory dyes have been used commercially for many years in the Biolog™ system to help identify
pure cultures of microorganisms by their patterns of oxidation of multiple organic substrates [17]. Biolog™ also
has been used to characterize oxidation capabilities of soil
microbial communities [18]. Rodriquez, et al. [19] used
the redox dye 5-cyano-2,3-ditolyl tetrazolium chloride
(CTC) for direct epifluorescent microscopic enumeration
of respiring bacteria in environmental samples. The oxidized form of CTC is nearly colorless and non-fluorescent.
Oxidized CTC was observed to be reduced by biological
electron transport systems, forming a fluorescent, insoluble CTC-formazan. The formazan accumulated intracellu-

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/22

larly and could be visualized by epifluorescence
microscopy in wet-mount preparations, on polycarbonate
membrane filter surfaces, or directly in some biofilms.
Thus, coupled with more limited analyses for specific electron transport molecules (e.g., porphyrins or quinones),
the use of respiratory dyes for detection of active electron
transport in the biological redox range could provide very
convincing evidence for life in extraterrestrial locations.
This approach would obviously only detect presently living entities, but these could include dormant life forms
such as spores that might germinate and grow using added
nutrients.

Results
Examination of the presence of a chemical signature of life
in various soils
Figure 1 presents the results of a comparison of supercritical carbon dioxide extractions of control (heat treated at
600°C) and life-positive (unheated Idaho red sand) soils.
We confirmed the structures of the compounds shown as
marked peaks by their respective UV-VIS and mass spectra.
The supercritical carbon dioxide (SCCO2) extracts of Idaho red sand (Figure 1) and a Lake Boney Basin Antarctica
soil, which contained relatively few bacteria (Table 1),
showed detectable signature molecules in the extracted
samples using either a diode array detector or an amperometric detector (Figure 1). The sterile soil, after heat treatment, did not yield significant amounts of our targeted
redox signature molecules: nicotinamide, riboflavin, Q0,
FMN, FAD, and porphyrin (Figure 1). To confirm that soil
samples yielding negative results and those yielding signatures of redox moieties were different because of the presence and absence of biological entities, we counted viable
organisms and extracted DNA from the heated control
sand, a Beacon Valley Antarctic soil, a Lake Boney Basin
Antarctic soil, and the Idaho red sand (Table 1). There
were small amounts of organic compounds in the extract
of the Beacon Valley soil, but none matching our standards (no redox signature). At a detection limit of 1 ng per
gram of soil, DNA was absent from the control and the
Beacon Valley soil, as were cultivable bacteria. Soils that
contained electron transport moieties (e.g., the Idaho red
sand and Lake Boney Basin soil) also contained both DNA
and cultivable bacteria.
Redox dye reduction by various soils
Figure 2 illustrates the color change seen when a soil microbial community reduces the dye XTT. Figure 3 shows
results of measurement of DCIP reduction in an autoclaved control soil and an extraterrestrial surrogate soil
(Idaho red sand). Figure 4 shows results of XTT reduction
by the control soil and the life-positive Idaho red sand.
Figure 5 shows results of XTT reduction by the control and
the life-positive Boney Basin, Antarctica soil. The Beacon
Valley, Antarctica soil did not reduce either dye. As anoth-

Page 2 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/22

Riboflavin

3.0

70
FMN

60

2.0

50

1.5

FAD

40

Nicotinamide

1.0

mVolts

AU at 230 nm

2.5

30
Q0

Protoporphyrin

0.5

20

0.0
10

20

30

40

Time (minutes)

Figure 1
Supercritical carbon dioxide extract of unamended
sandy soil (Idaho red sand) analyzed by ion pair
HPLC For this separation we used a Supelco Discovery
Amide C16 reverse phase column (15 cm × 4.6 mm, 5 µm).
The elution method is described in the text; at the end of the
run porphyrin was eluted with 100% acetonitrile. The filled
chromatogram shows data from the optical detector (230
nm); the solid line chromatogram shows data from the electrochemical (amperometric) detector (ECD). For the ECD,
the dual carbon electrode was set at two potentials: the first
electrode was at -0.5 V and the second at +1.0 V. Signals
from the second electrode were recorded. The ECD electrodes were polished at least once a day to keep the carbon
electrode fresh for maximum sensitivity. The dashed line
chromatogram shows optical data (230 nm) from extracted
soil that had been heated at 600°C before extraction. Peaks
for targeted redox signature compounds (nicotinamide, riboflavin, Q0, FMN, FAD, and porphyrin) were not observed in
this control. Compounds identified in the chromatogram
peaks of extracts of living soil (filled chromatogram and solid
line chromatogram) are marked with flags and names. AU =
Absorbance Units

er control, Figure 6 shows the reduction of XTT by a pure
culture of Pseudomonas putida.

Discussion
Energy use by living organisms directs our experimental
design for seeking signs of extraterrestrial life. In terrestrial
biological systems, energy is tapped via stepwise electron
transport between electron donors and acceptors via an
electron transport chain. Applying this principle universally,
we should be able to detect the chemical components of
electron transport chains or electron transport itself as a
signature of life.
Our assumptions about the centrality of electron transport processes to life led us to a direct experimental approach for detection of life. We were able to measure
actual electron transport in the redox range between -1.0

Figure 2
Color change resulting from the microbial reduction
in soil of the respiratory dye XTT Bottle on the far left
is a control of the oxidized dye in sterile water. The middle
bottle shows lack of dye reduction by a sandy soil that was
autoclaved. The bottle on the far right shows dye reduction
(increase in orange color measurable at 465 nm) from a biologically active (contains living bacteria) sandy soil.

and +1.0 V in a microbe-poor soil, in the presence of air,
and both with and without additions of an electron donor
(dilute nutrient broth). The respiratory electron-accepting
dyes DCIP and XTT were used to "short-circuit" microbial
electron transport, and this was observed (dye reduction)
by visible spectroscopy. This method might entail some
site-specific challenges in environments that are different
from those on Earth, especially in developing appropriate
controls for abiotic processes. NASA learned this lesson
from the Viking biology mission to Mars. In the Viking's
gas exchange experiment, water vapor exposed to the Martian soil released O2, but possibly only as a result of the
activity of powerful soil oxidants that also might have
been responsible for the chemical reactivity seen in other
Viking biology experiments [20]. A molecule such as
DCIP or XTT might be destroyed by oxidation in the presence of such soils. However, soil samples taken from borings beneath the surface, which is exposed to high energy,
oxidant-generating ultraviolet radiation, or from other
protected areas, might not be so destructive of organic
compounds. Such stability problems should not be of
such concern for extraterrestrial sites such as Europa or Titan. Thus, our ability, confirmed here, to detect actual
electron transport within the redox potential range of life
processes, and to observe simultaneously some of the signature chemical structures involved, offers a promising direct approach to detecting the capability of living entities
in soil on Earth or elsewhere in our solar system to move
electrons between universal donors and acceptors and obtain energy to support replication.

Page 3 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/22

AU at 600 nm

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4
0

20

40

60

80

100

Hours

Figure 3
Reduction of DCIP dye by the heat-treated control
soil and the extraterrestrial surrogate soil (Idaho red
sand) Data points represent: (᭿), autoclaved (killed) control
soil; (▲), live soil; (᭹) blank, no soil. Data points are means
of 3 replicates. Error bars represent +/- standard deviation.
Dye-only controls showed no reduction over the time
course of the experiment. AU = Absorbance Units

Since we are not yet able to test this approach extraterrestrially, we validated our proposed detection method using
pure microbial cultures and microbe-poor soils collected
on Earth. A select group of signature chemicals were extracted from an organic-poor soil (Figure 1) and identified
with instruments that eventually can be miniaturized for
use on space exploration missions [13,21,22]. Actual electron transport by living cells was confirmed by use of two
specific dyes (DCIP and XTT) that short-circuit respiratory
electron transport chains. This was demonstrated using a
pure strain of the common earthly soil microorganism,
Pseudomonas putida (Figure 6), and with native soil microorganisms within two nutrient-supplemented soil matrixes (Figures 3,4,5). We easily detected a signature of
biological electron transport within a biologically poor,
sandy soil containing about 30,000 cultivable cells per
gram (Idaho red sand), and also from a soil from the extreme environment of Lake Boney Basin, Antarctica (Table
1). Though the Boney Basin soil readily reduced XTT, it
only very slowly reduced DCIP (data not shown), and the
rate of reduction was not significantly different between
untreated soil and killed controls. Since DCIP and XTT
have different redox potentials, and XTT in our work appears to generally be more easily reduced by soil microbial
communities, this shows a need to use more than one respiratory dye in this type of experiment.
In this work, we emphasized that during validation on
Earth of any life detection method there is a requirement
for control measurements that corroborate earthly results

of assays that might be carried out remotely on other planets. We chose measurements of DNA (present in all earthly life) and readily cultivable bacteria (present in most
earthly soils) for validating our specific redox chemistry
based approach. In the future, as we and others work to
increase the sensitivity of this life detection approach toward values needed for the extreme environments on
Earth and places such as the regolith of Mars, the simple
controls we used should be supplemented by a number of
others. These could include controls such as direct microscopic counts of active and inactive bacteria [19], extraction and quantitation of ATP [23], extraction and analysis
of fatty acids [24], real-time PCR of universal 16S rDNA
markers [25], and/or use of a larger variety of culture media, including dilute organic media, in place of or in addition to plate count agar [26]. All of these approaches also
have problems, such as the possible presence in soil of biological molecules that are not associated with living cells,
the always-present inability of microbiologists to culture
most of the bacteria present in soil, and the often unpredictable performance of PCR primers. However, the sum
of such multiple controls would build toward ultimate
confidence in the sensitivity of this or any other life detection technique.
Our observations also indicate that in soils from extreme
environments, one may expect differences in their patterns of dye reduction that probably reflect differences in
their community phylogenetic compositions. A soil from
Beacon Valley, Antarctica that showed no DNA at our detection limit also showed no dye reduction activity with

2.0

1.5

AU at 465 nm

1.4

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5
0

10

20

30

40

50

Hours

Figure 4
Reduction of XTT dye by the heat-treated control
soil and the life-positive Idaho red sand Data points
represent: (᭹), sterilized soil; and (᭿), live soil. Data points
are means of three replicates, +/- standard deviation. Dyeonly controls showed no reduction over the time course of
the experiment. AU = Absorbance Units

Page 4 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/22

We need to improve the current detection limit for organic
moieties (Figure 1), estimated at 3 × 106 cells per gram of
soil. Processing larger quantities of soil could easily increase sensitivity for detection of redox molecules. Supplementing soils with appropriate electron donors and
acceptors could stimulate extensive growth of low numbers of indigenous organisms. In theory, even a few cells/
gram of soil might be detected using this approach. The
former procedure might be accomplished by using a
"flow-through" soil extractor that could receive multiple
soil additions and concentrate the extracted residues prior

2.00
1.75

AU at 465 nm

1.50
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

D a ys

Figure 5
Reduction of XTT by the heat-treated control soil
and the life-positive Lake Boney Basin, Antarctica
soil Data points represent: (▼), Live Boney Basin Soil; (᭿),
Killed Boney Basin Soil; (᭹), Negative Control (no soil); Lake
Boney Basin soil only very slowly reduced DCIP (data not
shown). Data points are means of three replicates, +/- one
standard deviation. Dye-only controls showed no reduction
over the time course of the experiment. AU = Absorbance
Units

2.0

1.5

AU at 465 nm

either dye. This soil appears to be sterile by our method of
life detection; certainly it contains fewer microbial cells
than our detection limit. Further investigations of this soil
are thus warranted. For the Idaho red sand, assuming
30,000 cells represent about 1% of actual biomass in the
soil, the detection limit of our method should be about
3,000,000 cells/g. Though the amount of DNA observed
in the Lake Boney Basin soil was actually higher than seen
in the Idaho red sand, the microbial counts were lower
(Table 1). This shows once again the limitation of viable
counts, which only count organisms that grow on the specific medium employed. It is well known that most bacteria in nature cannot be cultured. Our work indicates there
is probably a more dominant non-cultivable microbial
community in the Antarctic soil compared to the Idaho
soil, since DNA analysis indicated high numbers of microorganisms that were not reflected in viable count data.

1.0

0.5

0.0
0

10

20

30

40

50

Hours

Figure 6
XTT reduction by a pure culture of Pseudomonas putida. Data points represent: (᭹), control without pseudomonad; (᭿), soil inoculated with P. putida. Data points are
means of three replicates. AU = Absorbance Units
to downstream analysis. The latter procedure could be implemented by using a microtiter plate format similar that
employed by Biolog™, where hundreds of potential electron donors could be examined simultaneously and the
results (dye reduction) read by an on-board UV-visible
spectral scanner designed for scanning microtiter plates.
Examples of donor-acceptor combinations might include:
simple sugars and/or amino acids or other organic molecules in the presence of oxygen or nitrate (organisms capable of heterotrophic respiration), hydrogen and ferric ions
or oxidized iron minerals (chemoautotrophic hydrogen
oxidizers), organic acids and ferric ions or oxidized iron
minerals (heterotrophic iron reducers), bicarbonate/carbonate and trace minerals in the presence and absence of
light (photosynthetic organisms), carbon dioxide and a
reduced metal such as ferrous ions (chemoautotrophs),
ammonium ion and bicarbonate/carbonate (ammonia
oxidizers), etc. The combinations could be adapted to the
environment under study, such as Mars (perhaps an irondominated energy system).
Because there is great diversity among habitats for microbial life on the Earth, and sterility of an earthly soil is rare,
it would be desirable to examine as many as possible of
these environments to determine the absolute reliability
of our techniques for use extraterrestrially. Unfortunately,
we cannot sample all possible terrestrial environments on
Earth, or even a small fraction of them. We feel the diversity we have examined is sufficient to indicate the value of
our approach, particularly since one of these extreme environments we did examine (Beacon Valley, Antarctica)
appears to be sterile. We also cannot examine all known
heterotrophic bacteria stored in culture collections to confirm that all or most of them effect dye reduction. Howev-

Page 5 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/22

Table 1: Confirmation of the presence of bacterial life in terrestrial soil samples.

Soil Type

Plate Count1 (viable cells/g soil)

Fluorescence2 (ng DNA/g soil)

Red sand
Silica sand
Beacon Valley, Antarctica
Lake Boney Basin, Antarctica
Blank (reagents only)

2.74 × 104
ND
ND
4.2 × 103
0

3.68
ND
ND
38.9
0

Data are means of three replicates. Standard deviations were less than 5% for all results. 1Soil was suspended in distilled H2O, diluted, and an aliquot spread onto Plate Count Agar plates for quantification of colonies. Counts were taken after 48 h. 2Our detection limit was about 1 ng DNA/g
soil. A 0.5 g amount of soil was used for each extraction. ND = not detected

er, the many years of experience using the Biolog™ system,
which employs respiratory dyes to indicate microbial metabolism [17,18], is strong support for our hypothesis that
respiratory dye reduction is a robust and conclusive assay
for heterotrophic life in soil. Further validation efforts
may show that observation of redox cycling of artificial
electron acceptors of appropriate redox potentials may be
sufficient in itself as a signature of life, greatly simplifying
instrumentation requirements for extraterrestrial missions
in our solar system and beyond.

Conclusions
Coupled with limited analyses for specific electron transport molecules (e.g., porphyrins and/or quinones), the
use of respiratory dyes for detection of electron transport
in the biological redox range could provide very convincing evidence for life in extraterrestrial locations.

Methods
Signature chemicals
As detailed in our prior work [13], the following compounds were used as representative examples of electron
transport chain components. Protoporphyrin IX, hemin,
hematin, and nicotinamide (vitamin B3) were purchased
from Aldrich (Milwaukee, WI). Nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD), riboflavin (vitamin B2), flavin mononucleotide (FMN), flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD),
and DCIP were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
2,3-Dimethoxy-5-methyl-,4-benzoquinone (coenzyme
Q0) was purchased from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland). XTT
was purchased from TCI America, Inc. (Portland, OR).
The other chemicals and solvents used were of the highest
available purity.
Soils
Natural sand from dune areas of southern Idaho (Idaho
red sand), poor in organic content and rich in oxidized
iron minerals, was used as a life-positive soil and surrogate for extraterrestrial soils. As a control we used cleaned,

highly pure silica sand purchased from Fisher Scientific.
These soils are described in our previous paper [13]. Other
extraterrestrial surrogate soils were collected from Beacon
Valley and Lake Boney Basin, Antarctica. The soil from
Beacon Valley was from an area where higher organisms
such as nematodes have never been observed.
Extraction of soil organic moieties
Soil samples of 5 to 15 g were used for supercritical fluid
extraction (SFE) with supercritical CO2 (SCCO2). Samples
were first hydrolyzed in 5 to 10 ml of acetone containing
2 M NH4OH under ultrasound agitation (water bath at
160 watts) for 1 h at room temperature. Nitrogen blown
over the sample then evaporated the solvents. The SFE extraction was performed with the dry sample within one
day to avoid any degradation of redox compounds. A
piece of Whatman glass fiber filter paper (1.0 µm pore
size) was cut into a 0.8 cm diameter circle and placed at
the outlet end of a 10-ml SFE extraction cell to retain large
particles. A hydrolyzed sample (10 ml) was then packed
into the vessel until it was full. Exactly 1.0 ml of 25% (v/
v) trimethylamine in methanol as modifier was added to
the sample, and the vessel was immediately connected to
the SFE system. The extraction pressure was set at 300 atm,
the oven temperature at 35°C, and the outlet valve temperature at 60°C. After a 15 min static extraction, a dynamic extraction was started until approximately 30 ml of
liquid CO2 passed through the SFE cell [27]. The flow rate
was controlled at 5 to 10 ml/min by the outlet valve. In order to achieve maximum recovery, the SFE procedure was
repeated again under identical conditions.
Chromatography
Separations were performed using a Hewlett Packard HP1090 HPLC (Avondale, PA). Samples of 20 to 50 µL were
injected onto a Discovery Amide C16 or Discovery C18 reverse phase column (15 cm × 4.6 mm, 5 µm, Supelco,
Bellefonte, PA), and analytes were separated using the
ion-pair chromatographic method. Solvent A was 5 mM

Page 6 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

tetrabutylammonium phosphate, 30 mM KH2PO4, and
4% acetonitrile (V/V). Solvent B was 100% acetonitrile.
Runs were performed over 35 min with gradient elution
of 0 to 40% B, then with static elution over 35 to 40 min
with 60% A/40% B, followed by 40 to 42 min with 100%
A and a post-run wash of 5 min at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/
min [28]. Detectors used were a tandem diode array detector (DAD) and dual carbon electrode amperometric detector (ECD).
Electrospray tandem mass-spectrometry
The identities of signature species present in extracts were
confirmed by negative or positive electrospray ionization
tandem mass spectrometry (Quattro II, Micromass Ltd.,
UK). Samples were delivered into the source at a flow rate
of 5 µl/min using a syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus,
South Natick, MA) or directly from a HPLC column, with
effluent from the column split 1:100. A potential of 2.5 to
3 kV was applied to the electrospray needle. The sample
cone was kept at an average of 15 V. The counter electrode,
skimmer, and RF (radio frequency) lens potentials were
tuned to maximize the ion beam for a given solvent. The
resolution of the detector was 15,000, and the source temperature was kept constant at 80°C. The instrument was
calibrated using a polyethylene glycol solution. All spectra
were an average of 10 to 15 scans.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/22

Reduction of XTT was monitored similarly as described
for DCIP, except we measured the increase in absorbance
at 465 nm resulting from reduction of the colorless oxidized dye to an orange product [16].

Authors' contributions
All authors worked within a multidisciplinary team. RLC
conceived the study, and participated in its design and coordination. AP directed the analytical chemistry work reported and interpreted the analytical data. QL performed
the SCCO2 extractions. DPE and LBA performed the dye
reduction experiments and provided ideas for improvements of methods. GC and TJA designed the SCCO2 soil
extraction cell. FC provided expertise on voltammetric detection of analytes. CW, BB, RW, TA, and MM provided input regarding data analyses and overall life detection
system design for potential future use on extraterrestrial
missions.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
The work described here was partially performed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautic and Space Administration (award 1212404). We thank
Sarah Koerber for editorial assistance. We thank Dorota Parazinska, Andy
Parsons, Diana Wall, and Colorado State University for assisting in the collection of soils from Antarctica.

Biomass and DNA analysis in soil
The numbers of cultivable soil microorganisms were estimated by standard plate count and serial dilution methods. Standard plate count medium (PCM) was used to
culture bacteria from soil samples [29]. DNA was extracted from different soils using the FastPrep DNA spin kit
from Qbiogene, Inc. (Carlsbad, CA). The concentration of
DNA was estimated by measuring fluorescence at 520 nm.
Fluorescence was measured after staining the sample with
Pico Green fluorescent dye (Molecular Probes, Eugene,
OR). Our detection limit was about 1 ng of DNA in 1 g of
soil.

References

DCIP and XTT reduction assays
Working in a sterile laminar flow hood, we added 2.0 g of
soil, 16.0 mL of sterile 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH
7.5), 2 mL of 100X Nutrient Broth as a biological reductant (Difco), and 1.0 mL of 1 mM DCIP to a sterile 25 mL
serum bottle. Bottles were plugged and capped with sterile
closures and shaken at room temperature for required experimental time. Periodically, samples (1.0 mL) were removed aseptically and centrifuged to remove solids. The
absorbance of the filtrate was measured at 600 nm. Concentrations of DCIP (oxidized) were calculated using a
molar extinction coefficient of ∈ = 21.0 × 103 M-1 cm-1.
Reoxidation of DCIPH2 was negligible under our experimental conditions. Samples were run in triplicate.

5.

1.
2.

3.

4.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Scher S, Packer E, Sagan C: Biological contamination of Mars I.
Survival of terrestrial microorganisms in simulated Martian
environments. Life Sci Space Res 1964, 2:352-6
Horneck G, Facius R, Reitz G, Rettberg P, Baumstark-Khan C, Gerzer
R: Critical issues in connection with human planetary missions: protection of and from the environment. Acta Astronaut
2001, 49:279-288
McKay DS, Gibson EK Jr, Thomas-Keprta KL, Vali H, Romanek CS,
Clemett SJ, Chiller XDF, Maechling CR, Zare RN: Search for past
life on Mars: possible relic biogenic activity in Martian meteorite ALH84001. Science 1996, 273:924-990
Thomas-Keprta KL, Clemett SJ, Bazylinski DA, Kirschvink JL, McKay
DS, Wentworth SJ, Vali H, Gibson EK Jr, McKay MF, Romanek CS:
Special Feature: Truncated hexa-octahedral magnetite crystals in ALH84001: presumptive biosignatures. PNAS 2001,
98:2164-2169
Benner SA, Matveeva LN, Devine KG, Powell DH: The missing organic molecules on Mars. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:24252430
Bailey J, Chrysostomou A, Hough JH, Gledhill TM, McCall A, Clark S,
Menard F, Tamura M: Circular polarization in star-formation
regions. Science 1998, 281:672-674
Brack A, Spach G: Search for chiral molecules and optical activity in extraterrestrial systems, example of Titan. Biosystems
1987, 20:95-98
Cronin JR, Pizzarello S: Enantiomeric excesses in meteoritic
amino acids. Science 1997, 275:951-955
Donn B: Comets: chemistry and chemical evolution. J Mol Evol
1982, 18:157-160
Engel MH, Macko SA: Isotopic evidence for extraterrestrial
non-racemic amino acids in the Murchison meteorite. Nature
1997, 389:265-268
Thiemann W: Life and chirality beyond the earth. Orig Life 1975,
6:475-481
Whittet DC: Is extraterrestrial organic matter relevant to the
origin of life on Earth? Orig Life Evol Biosph 1997, 27:249-262

Page 7 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

Crawford RL, Paszczynski A, Lang Q, Cheng IF, Barnes B, Anderson
TJ, Wells R, Wai C, Corti G, Allenbach L, Erwin DP, Park J, Assefi T,
Mojarradi M: In search of the molecules of life. Icarus 2001,
154:531-539
Lang Q, Cheng IF, Wai CM, Paszczynski A, Crawford RL, Barnes B,
Anderson TJ, Wells R, Corti G, Allenbach L, Erwin DP, Assefi T, Mojarradi M: Supercritical fluid extraction and high-performance
liquid chromatography-diode array-electrochemical detection of signature redox compounds from sand and soil samples. Anal Biochem 2002, 301:225-234
Tang HT, Hajizadah K, Halsall NB, Heinemann WR: Flow-injection
analysis with electrochemical detection of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide using 2,6-dichlorophenol as a redox coupling agent. Anal Biochem 1991, 192:243-250
Roslev P, King GM: Application of a tetrazolium salt with a water-soluble formazan as an indicator of viability of respiring
bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 1993, 59:2891-2896
Muller AK, Rasmussen LD, Sorensen SJ: Adaptation of the bacterial community to mercury contamination. FEMS Microbiol Lett
2001, 204:49-53
Nedoluha PC, Owens S, Russek-Cohen E, Westhoff DC: Effect of
sampling method on the representative recovery of microorganisms from the surfaces of aquacultured finfish. J Food Prot
2001, 64:1515-1520
Rodriguez GG, Phipps D, Ishiguro K, Ridgway HF: Use of a fluorescent redox probe for direct visualization of actively respiring
bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 1992, 58:1801-1808
Quinn RC, Zent AP: Peroxide-modified titanium dioxide: a
chemical analog of putative Martian soil oxidants. Orig Life Evol
Biosph 1999, 29:59-72
Henry CE: The incredible shrinking mass spectrometers. Anal
Chem News Features 1999, 264A-268A
Hunt LD, Glavin DP, Bada JL, Mathies RA: Microfabricated capillary electrophoresis amino acid chirality analyzer for extraterrestrial exploration. Anal Chem 1999, 71:4000-4006
Bjorkman KM, Karl DM: A novel method for the measurement
of dissolved adenosine and guanosine triphosphate in aquatic
habitats: applications to marine microbial ecology. J Microbiol
Methods 2001, 47:159-167
Litchfield CD, Irby A, Kis-Papo T, Oren A: Comparisons of the polar lipid and pigment profiles of two solar salterns located in
Newark, California, USA, and Eilat, Israel. Extremophiles 2000,
4:259-265
Stubner S: Enumeration of 16S rDNA of Desulfotomaculum lineage 1 in rice field soil by real-time PCR with SybrGreen detection. J Microbiol Methods 2002, 50:155-164
Crocker FH, Fredrickson JK, White DC, Ringelberg DB, Balkwill DL:
Phylogenetic and physiological diversity of Arthrobacter
strains isolated from unconsolidated subsurface sediments.
Microbiology 2000, 146:1295-1310
Smart NG, Carleson TE, Kast T, Clifford AA, Burford MD, Wai CM:
Solubility of chelating agents and metal containing compounds in supercritical fluid carbon dioxide–a review. Talanta
1997, 44:137-150
Payne SM, Ames BN: A procedure for rapid extraction and
high-pressure liquid chromatographic separation of the nucleotides and other small molecules from bacterial cells. Anal
Biochem 1982, 123:151-161
Hattori T, Hattori R: The plate count method: an attempt to
delineate the bacterial life in the microhabitat of soil. In Soil
Biochemistry (Edited by: Bollag J-M and Stotzky G) New York, Marcel
Dekker, Inc. 2000, 10(chapter 6):

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/22

Publish with BioMed Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMedcentral will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical research in our lifetime."
Paul Nurse, Director-General, Imperial Cancer Research Fund

Publish with BMC and your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours - you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/manuscript/

BioMedcentral.com
editorial@biomedcentral.com

Page 8 of 8
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
