<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A manual collection of Syt, Esyt, Rph3a, Rph3al, Doc2, and Dblc2 genes from 46 metazoan genomes - an open access resource for neuroscience and evolutionary biology</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010 11:37. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-37"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Molly Craxton"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

A manual collection of Syt, Esyt, Rph3a, Rph3al,
Doc2, and Dblc2 genes from 46 metazoan
genomes - an open access resource for
neuroscience and evolutionary biology
Molly Craxton*

Abstract
Background: Synaptotagmin proteins were first identified in nervous tissue, residing in synaptic vesicles.
Synaptotagmins were subsequently found to form a large family, some members of which play important roles in
calcium triggered exocytic events. These members have been investigated intensively, but other family members are
not well understood, making it difficult to grasp the meaning of family membership in functional terms. Further
difficulty arises as families are defined quite legitimately in different ways: by common descent or by common
possession of distinguishing features. One definition does not necessarily imply the other. The evolutionary range of
genome sequences now available, can shed more light on synaptotagmin gene phylogeny and clarify family
relationships. The aim of compiling this open access collection of synaptotagmin and synaptotagmin-like sequences, is
that its use may lead to greater understanding of the biological function of these proteins in an evolutionary context.
Results: 46 metazoan genomes were examined and their complement of Syt, Esyt, Rph3a, Rph3al, Doc2 and Dblc2
genes identified. All of the sequences were compared, named, then examined in detail. Esyt genes were formerly
named Fam62. The species in this collection are Trichoplax, Nematostella, Capitella, Helobdella, Lottia, Ciona,
Strongylocentrotus, Branchiostoma, Ixodes, Daphnia, Acyrthosiphon, Tribolium, Nasonia, Apis, Anopheles, Drosophila,
Caenorhabditis, Takifugu, Tetraodon, Gasterosteus, Oryzias, Danio, Xenopus, Anolis, Gallus, Taeniopygia,Ornithorhynchus,
Monodelphis, Mus and Homo. All of the data described in this paper is available as additional files.
Conclusions: Only a subset of synaptotagmin proteins appear able to function as calcium triggers. Syt1, Syt7 and Syt9
are ancient conserved synaptotagmins of this type. Some animals carry extensive repertoires of synaptotagmin genes.
Other animals of no less complexity, carry only a small repertoire. Current understanding does not explain why this is
so. The biological roles of many synaptotagmins remain to be understood. This collection of genes offers prospects for
fruitful speculation about the functional roles of the synaptotagmin repertoires of different animals and includes a great
range of biological complexity. With reference to this gene collection, functional relationships among Syt, Esyt, Rph3a,
Rph3al, Doc2 and Dblc2 genes, which encode similar proteins, can better be assessed in future.

Background
Synaptotagmin (Syt) proteins participate in regulated
membrane fusion events in multicellular organisms. Syt
research dates back to 1981, when the first Syt was
identified as an integral protein of synaptic vesicles [1].
Since then, much effort has gone into discovering the
* Correspondence: mollycraxton@btinternet.com
Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road,
Cambridge, CB2 0QH, UK

function and the detailed mechanism of action of this
protein, Syt1. Numerous experimental approaches have
shown that Syt1 is crucially involved in fast neurotransmitter release at synapses [reviewed in [2-6]]. Syt1 binds
calcium, serving as the calcium sensor which triggers
synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Syt1 also binds to the neuronal SNARE proteins which are required for membrane
fusion, as well as to membranes directly. The primary
structure of Syt1 [7] revealed three important features:
an N-terminal transmembrane (TM) domain, which

© 2010 Craxton; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

serves to anchor the protein in the synaptic vesicle, plus
two, tandem, C-terminal, cytoplasmic C2 domains (C2A
and C2B) which specify the calcium, SNARE and membrane binding properties. Crystallographic studies of
some Syt C2 domains [8,9] have revealed the exact nature of their calcium binding abilities. Structural bioinformatics [10-12] has shown that C2 domains are very
common in the eukaryotic protein repertoire, but not all
act to bind calcium. C2 domains can occur singly or as
multiple copies in a given protein [13]. The particular
domain organisation of Syt1 is important for its role in
synaptic vesicle exocytosis. The TM domain tethers the
protein to the membrane. The C2A and C2B domains,
endowed with individual capacities to bind calcium,
SNARE proteins, other accessory proteins and phospholipids, act both independently and synergistically, at different stages during the life cycle of the synaptic vesicle,
to promote or inhibit fusion [14-16].
After the genetic code for Syt1 was discovered [7]
genes similar to Syt1 were sought and found. Biochemical methods which were employed initially, led to an
increase in the size of the rodent Syt family, from one
member to thirteen members and beyond. Syt relatives
were also identified and studied in D. melanogaster and
C. elegans. All of these homologous Syt genes were
found to encode proteins with a common domain architecture: an N-terminal TM domain connected by a variable length, poorly conserved linker sequence, to well
conserved, tandem, C-terminal C2A and C2B domains
and this domain architecture was taken to define the
family. Functional studies with the proteins in vivo and
in vitro, indicate that some respond to calcium but
others do not. Whether or not they respond to calcium,
Syt proteins are able to regulate membrane fusion due
to common properties of their C2 domains [17-21]. Studies of the anatomical expression patterns of Syt genes
show that Syt1 is abundantly expressed in nervous tissue
[1,22-26]. In D. melanogaster, Syt1 expression is neuron
specific but other Syt genes are expressed elsewhere
[27]. In rodents, most Syt genes are expressed in the
brain [28].
With the publication of whole genome sequences
from multicellular organisms, it became possible to
identify and compare complete genome complements of
Syt genes using computational methods [29,30]. The
phylogeny of these genes could be examined by comparing sequences from different organisms. Seventeen Syt
homologues were found in each of the complete H.
sapiens and M. musculus genome sequences. These
were named SYT1 (Syt1) to SYT17 (Syt17) according to
the nomenclature conventions of the HUGO Gene
Nomenclature Committee [31] (and the Mouse Genome
Informatics Database [32]). Some of these genes however, encode Syt proteins which lack the requisite

Page 2 of 21

domain architecture for inclusion in a Syt family defined
by domain structure. The complete genome sequences
of C. elegans, D. melanogaster and A. thaliana were analysed, together with draft genome sequences from other
eukaryotes, to assess their Syt coding potential [30]. Proteins which share the stereotypical Syt domain architecture, are encoded by distinct (not phylogenetically
homologous) gene families in plants and in animals [33]
further confounding the notion of a homologous Syt
family defined in terms of domain architecture. Functional similarity between plant and animal Syt proteins,
at the level of calcium and membrane binding, has been
demonstrated [34,35] in keeping with the notion that
protein form specifies function. Proteins have been classified as Syt family members by the presence or absence
of suitable characteristics in terms of protein form and
function [eg. [6,36,37]] without studious regard to gene
ancestry. Legitimately but confusingly, family membership can be defined in different ways: in terms of descent from a common ancestor (homology) or in terms
of the common possession of distinguishing features.
Since it is not straightforward to demonstrate that
homology is the cause of the similarity between biological entities such as proteins, it is often just assumed,
leading to the confusion of two different notions of a
protein family. Please see [38,39] for explanations of the
terminology of homology. Examination of the genomic
specification of eukaryotic proteins can help to reveal
their phylogenetic relationships because the evolutionary
conservation of gene structure provides additional information on which to base an inference of homology.
Families may thereby be resolved as those related by
homology and those otherwise related. Ambiguity still
remains however, because depending on the exact biological context, members of a family, however defined,
can sometimes be considered as functionally interchangeable and thus worthy of a common functional
identity. Thus, genes and proteins can acquire multiple
identities depending on the perspective from which they
are considered. Universal agreement about nomenclature for genes and proteins which is suitably clear and
meaningful is a challenge for the future, but norms for
gene nomenclature according to phylogenetic relationships are established [31,32].
It may be the case (as is often assumed for an orthologous family group) that members of a gene family
related by heredity, share a common functional role
[38-41]. However, due to the dynamics of eukaryotic
genome evolution [41-45] the functional attributes of
gene relatives can diverge. It is also possible, that separate start points, through advantageous gain of function,
can lead through selection, to convergence upon a common form and function. While it is practicable to assign
family membership to genes or proteins based on their

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

apparent hereditary relationships, the functional implications of family membership cannot simply be deduced.
More than a decade of research effort has been aimed at
understanding how Syt1 works. Considerable effort has
also been directed at understanding the functions of
other Syt proteins. Current understanding however, is
insufficient to predict the functions of a whole genome
complement of Syt proteins, or indeed to predict what a
genome complement of Syt proteins might consist of.
To help improve this lack of understanding, I have put
together an open access resource intended to serve
future research aimed at understanding the biological
meaning of the hereditary and functional relationships
among some of the metazoan Syt-like proteins. I have
collected and compiled manually, information about
homologous Syt, Esyt, Rph3a, Rph3al, Doc2 and Dblc2
genes from 46 metazoan genome sequences spanning a
wide evolutionary range. I have not attempted to collect
all genes capable of encoding proteins with similarity on
any level to Syt proteins. Such a collection would ultimately include perhaps, all eukaryotic C2 domain proteins. My collection is restricted to homologous Syt
genes plus a small group of genes already identified as
similar but not homologous to Syt genes [33]. The collection does include a new group of homologous genes
(Dblc2) which are present in the genomes of marine
invertebrates and encode proteins similar to Syt proteins. The information in this collection may interest
investigators in the field of evolutionary biology, with
examples of dynamic genome evolution including whole
gene duplication, partial duplication, gene fission, acquisition of novel coding exons, gene inactivation, extreme
sequence divergence, intron mobilization and a variety
of routes to the expression of altered gene products. For
experimentalists who want to understand how Syt proteins act to effect the biology of animal nervous systems,
the collection provides a utility with great evolutionary
depth. In order to make progress in neuroscience,
appropriate model organisms must be chosen. The
choice of model organism is fundamental to the type of
science which can be pursued. The range of organisms
and genes in this collection, offer novel possibilities for
future descriptive, comparative and hypothesis driven
research.
In order to make the large amount of information
described by this paper available for public scrutiny, it is
available as 50 additional files which can be accessed
online.

Results and Discussion
Origin of this gene collection

The origin of this manual gene curation project lay in
an attempt to annotate some of the plant NTMC2 genes
I had identified previously [33]. I chose the unique

Page 3 of 21

NTMC2 nomenclature to emphasise the phylogenetic
relationships among these plant genes and to distinguish
them from animal Syt genes. Plant NTMC2T1,
NTMC2T2 and NTMC2T3 genes resemble animal Syt
genes in having the same domain architecture. That this
shared domain architecture implies functions in common, has now been demonstrated experimentally
[34,35]. The A. thaliana NTMC2T1.1 protein (also
known as SYT1 [34,35,37]) possesses calcium and membrane binding activities which allow it to function in a
plasma membrane repair pathway induced by stress.
While using the annotation facilities at DOE-JGI [46] I
realised that the evolutionary range of genome
sequences available for inspection at DOE-JGI, could be
used to search for earlier origins of the embryophyte
NTMC2 genes and metazoan Syt genes. The genome
sequence of M. brevicollis [47] has demonstrated that, as
theorised [48,49] the evolutionary transition from unicellularity to multicellularity involved abundant domain
shuffling in proteins. M. brevicollis, a unicellular protist,
closely related but basal to metazoans, does not possess
Syt genes. It does have a gene with a degree of gene
structure similarity, domain architecture similarity and
amino acid sequence similarity to plant NTMC2 and
animal Esyt proteins XM_001748216. Proteins with
similarity to NTMC2 and Esyt proteins (but without
similarity at the gene structure level) are present in
other unicellular eukaryotes [33]. It seems reasonable
therefore, to propose that while NTMC2 and Esyt genes
could ultimately be homologous, having attained their
current forms through descent from a unicellular ancestor, Syt genes, distinguished by their conserved gene
structure, more likely represent a metazoan novelty.
On finding uniquely metazoan Syt homologues, with
their characteristic gene structures, in the genomes of T.
adhaerens and N. vectensis [50,51] I decided to compile
afresh, the Syt repertoire of the currently available genomes of evolutionary significance. In addition to Syt
genes, I set out to gather Esyt, Rph3a, Rph3al and Doc2
homologues. These gene families, while clearly distinct
from the Syt family at the gene structure level, encode
proteins with high level sequence similarity to the tandem C2 domain region of Syt (Rph3a and Doc2) or with
similarity, in common with NTMC2 proteins, at a more
crude domain architecture level (Esyt). Because of these
similarities in form, there will be common functions. A
collection like this can be used to further define these
functions, by revealing the patterns of sequence conservation (indicating selection and functional importance)
and sequence divergence, apparent in: 1. the individual
domains of an orthologous group of proteins, 2. the
equivalent domain in different groups, not necessarily
homologous. Such knowledge can provide clues about
how these proteins function as molecular machines in

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

cells and about how these functions have developed over
evolutionary time. I used the annotation facilities at
DOE-JGI to create and annotate gene models where
possible. Full details of all genes are listed in additional
files 1, 2, 3 and 4. Figures 1, 2 and 3 summarise the
genes in additional files 1, 2 and 3 respectively.
Gene identification

I searched for homologues among the metazoan genome
sequences at DOE-JGI [46] NCBI [52] and UCSC [53]. I
employed a variety of methods, first to identify, then to
piece together, gene sequences for homologues of Syt,
Esyt, Rph3a,Rph3al and Doc2. These are generally large,
multi-exon genes which encompass regions of high (the
C2 domain region of Syt proteins for example) and low
(the N-terminal portion of Syt proteins for example)
levels of sequence conservation. As a first step, I used
blatp [54] or tblastn [55] with amino acid sequence
probes representing already known homologues, to identify genomic loci with potential to encode a similar protein. I then examined a 3-frame translation [56] of the
genomic region to look at the possible exon-intron
structure. Intron positions and phases are generally well
conserved among these genes and serve as a useful diagnostic tool. In cases where the draft genome sequence
was highly fragmented, homologues were pieced
together exon by exon. Where sequence conservation
between amino acid probe and novel genomic locus was
high, it was straightforward to identify exons and
introns. Where sequence conservation was low, the conservation of intron position and phase could serve as a
guide to judge possible exon boundaries. In all cases,
when transcript sequences from the locus under examination, or from a homologous locus in a closely related

Page 4 of 21

organism, were available, these were used to help identify exons. Occasionally, trace archive reads were sought
to confirm exon sequences, where there was a gap or
where there appeared to be frameshift errors in a section of draft sequence for example. Details of such
instances are noted in additional files 1, 2 and 3.
Where transcript sequences indicated the expression
of alternative variants, I collected the variants. In the
case of M. musculus and H. sapiens, where there is
abundant transcript variation, particularly at certain
genomic loci, I collected only those variants indicated
by two or more transcript sequences. Where evidence of
alternative splicing exists but is not represented by full
length transcripts (the majority of cases) the resultant
gene predictions require validation, as do all gene predictions for which no transcript evidence exists. For
genomic loci with conserved variant exons, which could
be employed to extend the length of the encoded protein but where transcript evidence was lacking, the gene
prediction includes all of the conserved exons. Transcript evidence for the gene predictions is listed in additional files 1, 2, 3 and 4.
Once I had gathered a set of crude gene predictions, I
compared the sequences in order to refine the predictions. Exon-intron junctions, gaps, novel regions of
sequence conservation useful as probes to fill gaps, were
all carefully examined using multiple alignments [57]. In
this way, it was possible to extend and improve the gene
predictions significantly. Many of the gene predictions
in this collection are still incomplete, at the N-terminal
region of Syt proteins in particular. When there was no
transcript coverage and no detectable sequence conservation or very short coding exons, it was not possible to

Figure 1 Summary of the genes collected from marine invertebrate genomes. The website of the organisation which sequenced the
genome is listed below the organism name. Underneath the Gene Name heading, gene symbols are listed. Red symbols indicate sequences
containing all ten acidic amino acid positions required for function as a calcium trigger for exocytosis.

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

Page 5 of 21

Figure 2 Summary of the genes collected from ecdysozoan genomes. The websites of the organisations which sequenced the genome or
which provide access to multiple genomes within a single genus, are listed below the organism name. Underneath the Gene Name heading,
gene symbols are listed. Red symbols indicate sequences containing all ten acidic amino acid positions required for function as a calcium trigger
for exocytosis. Websites for the relevant nomenclature authorities are listed alongside the Gene Name heading. Gene symbols within brackets
are currently officially approved, but in conflict with the nomenclature proposed here.

make a prediction. All incomplete predictions are noted
in additional files 1, 2, 3 and 4.
Sequence comparison: global comparison and
nomenclature

Having collected 711 genes from 46 genomes, I used
clustalw2 at EBI [58,59] to compare subsets of amino
acid sequences, in order to examine their relationships
of similarity overall. I compared sets which excluded
expressed variants but which included one sequence per
gene, whether complete or not. Comparisons of invertebrate sequences (additional file 5) vertebrate sequences
(additional file 6) invertebrate (one representative per
genus) plus mammalian sequences (additional file 7)
and invertebrate (one representative per genus) plus a
subset of vertebrate sequences (additional file 8) were
used to examine relationships and assign a suitable
name to each gene. I assigned a common name to those
genes which clustered together in conserved groups.
When a conserved group included a homologue from
M. musculus/H. sapiens, the assigned name was chosen
to be consistent with that in M. musculus/H. sapiens.
For those Syt genes which did not consistently cluster
together and are not conserved among different organisms, I assigned them numbers upward from the last
conserved group. This process led to the identification
of 22 conserved groups of Syt genes plus a further 35
unique Syt genes named with the Syt stem symbol plus

a number identifier, in order to provide a recognisable
name (albeit provisional) for each. This naming system
allows further sampling of the tree of life by gene
sequencing to reveal: 1. more unique Syt genes, from
Syt58 upwards, all members of a recognisably homologous family and 2. previously unrecognisable patterns of
conservation among Syt genes, from Syt22 upwards. I
contacted the relevant organism nomenclature authorities [31,60-66] to discuss this nomenclature. This wide
consultation led to agreement to change FAM62, a temporary HGNC symbol for this poorly characterised gene
family, to Esyt [67]. Where current approved nomenclature is discordant with that proposed here, the approved
nomenclature is indicated within brackets, in additional
files 1, 2, 3 and figures 1, 2 and 3. There is inconsistency
in the application of my naming rationale in Drosophila
and Caenorhabditis, where it was more practical to stick
with the approved nomenclature than propose new
names. As yet, and in comparison to vertebrates, invertebrates are poorly represented by organised gene
nomenclature authorities. My proposed nomenclature
for a large number of genes in this collection, therefore,
awaits sanction. Note that due to differing nomenclature
conventions, the gene symbols in different organisms,
range from having no capital letters to all capital letters.
The generic form, which I have used to label the genes
from organisms outside the purview of nomenclature

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

Page 6 of 21

Figure 3 Summary of the genes collected from Vertebrate genomes. The websites of the organisations which sequenced the genome or
which provide this information, are listed below the organism name. Underneath the Gene Name heading, gene symbols are listed. Red
symbols indicate sequences containing all ten acidic amino acid positions required for function as a calcium trigger for exocytosis. Websites for
the relevant nomenclature authorities are listed alongside the Gene Name heading. Gene symbols within brackets are currently officially
approved, but in conflict with the nomenclature proposed here.

authorities, is first letter in capitals. This designation will
be used here, to describe the gene in general, without
reference to a specific organism.
Deciding whether relationships of orthology or some
other kind exist among a group of similar genes, can be
complicated. The processes of duplication, deletion, and
rearrangement of genes, plus the action of selection or
absence of selection on gene sequences, can obscure
relationships. Whether absence from a genome assembly
reflects true absence, or incompleteness of the assembly,
presents a further problem of some seriousness [68]. In
M. musculus and H. sapiens there are several groups of
duplicated Syt genes: group 1 [Syt1, Syt2, Syt5, Syt8]

group 2 [Syt4, Syt11] group 3 [Syt3, Syt6, Syt9, Syt10]
and group 4 [Syt14, Syt16]. Each group contains genes
which share a distinct gene structure. Additional files 5,
6, 7, 8 and figure 4, indicate that the parental gene of
group 1 is Syt1. The parental gene of group 2 is Syt4,
that of group 3 is Syt9 and that of group 4 is Syt16. In
each of these cases, the parental gene is more similar to
a gene present in an evolutionarily more ancient genome than it is to another member of the mammalian
group, which is to say, orthologous [39]. Orthologous
genes in different organisms, are related by vertical descent from a common ancestor. Relevant pairwise comparison scores are listed in figure 4. It is worthwhile

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

trying to determine the phylogenetic relationships
between the Syt genes of mammals and those of other
animals because it is the rodent Syt proteins which are
best characterised functionally. However, because mammalian organisms and their brains in particular, represent biological systems of such complexity, modelling
these systems by using simpler systems is essential. The
relationships and nomenclature proposed here, are in
good general agreement with the Syt data at Treefam
[69,70] which does not include many of the invertebrate
Syt genes in this collection.
This gene collection includes several previously unrecognised Syt groups which are absent from M. musculus/
H. sapiens. Members of the Syt18 group appear in vertebrates and invertebrates, but the Syt19 group has yet to
be found beyond vertebrates. Neither of these groups
are well conserved, both genes having diverged significantly over time. The Syt18 group ranges from members
encoding: tandem C2 domains (S. purpuratus, B. floridae, A. carolinensis) a single C2B domain (L. gigantea,
X. tropicalis, the fish genomes) or no C2 domains at all
(the Syt18b duplicates in the fish genomes). Syt20
appears in only two hexapod species in this collection.
The other Syt groups absent in vertebrates, are Sytalpha
and Syt21. Of these, the Sytalpha group has a higher
level of sequence conservation. The Sytalpha designation applies to all members of the conserved group
which contains the D. melanogaster Sytalpha gene (see
additional file 5). There are many invertebrate Syt genes,
related to some degree, at the gene structure level,
which are not conserved among different phyla (Syt22

Page 7 of 21

to Syt57 in this collection). N. vectensis, for example, has
a very large number ofunique and divergent Syt genes
(Syt24 to Syt43). Most of these encode stereotypical Syt
proteins, but some have only one C2 domain and some
lack a TM domain (as noted in additional file 1). The
Caenorhabditis Syt repertoire, in common with many
others in this collection, demonstrates that variant Syt
proteins which lack the TM domain, are usually
included. They are encoded either by separate genes or
by alternative splicing. Caenorhabditis snt-3 is very similar to snt-1 at the amino acid sequence level, but does
not encode a TM domain. In the Ciona Syt repertoire, it
is Syt16 which produces a variant lacking the TM
domain, but by alternative splicing. In mammals, Syt17
does not encode a TM domain, but a number of other
mammalian Syt genes which do encode a TM domain,
express splice variants which lack the TM domain (Syt5,
Syt6,Syt8,Syt9,Syt10,Syt12,Syt13,Syt15,Syt16). Transcript
variants are listed in additional files 1, 2, and 3.
Sequence comparison: gene duplications

The duplicate genes in the fish genomes presented a
nomenclature challenge and I am very grateful for help
from the Zfin nomenclature coordinator [62,63] in
choosing the most appropriate names for these genes
based on gene structure similarity and synteny. A number of genes present as a single copy in mammals (Syt7,
Syt9, Syt14, Esyt2, Rph3a) are present as duplicates in
the fish genomes. In addition, Syt6 and Syt11 are duplicated in D. rerio (figure 3). It is notable that the single
Rph3a of tetrapods appears to have undergone duplication and fission, giving rise to Rph3al and Doc2b genes

Figure 4 Syt orthologues and paralogues in M. musculus. Percent identity scores produced by the align facility at EBI, of pairwise
comparisons of full length protein sequences, are listed. Top scores from mouse versus lizard comparisons are highlighted in blue, indicating an
orthologous relationship between the mouse gene and the evolutionarily more ancient lizard gene. Top scores from comparisons between
mouse and the much more evolutionarily ancient polychaete worm, Capitella, are highlighted in green, indicating that of these mouse genes,
Syt1, Syt4, Syt9 and Syt16 are orthologous to genes in Capitella.

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

[as noted in 33]. Rph3al and Doc2b are linked as a tandem pair in tetrapod genomes (noted in additional file
3). Invertebrates have a single, equivalent Rph, but no
Doc2 genes. It is possible that D. pulex Rphl represents
an N-terminal Rph fission product. In the fish genomes,
there are duplicate Rph3a genes, but only in the lineage
leading to D. rerio, has a supposed Rph3a duplication
led to the retention of linked rph3al and doc2b fission
products (noted in additional file 3). In the other fish
genomes, doc2b genes are present, along with the paralogous doc2a and doc2d genes, as well as duplicate
rph3aa and rph3ab genes, so Doc2b genes are not
always linked to a Rph3al fission product. Apart from
the gene duplications already noted, other paralogous
gene expansions are evident in this collection (figures 1,
2 and 3). In the case of Esyt gene duplications, retroposition of processed transcripts has occasionally led to
gene duplication (N. vectensis Esyt2a and X. troplicalis
Esyt2b, as noted in additional files 1 and 3).
Sequence comparison: multiple alignments

In order to illustrate the conserved features of the proteins in this collection, I used Multalin [57] to construct
multiple alignments of subsets of sequences, including
expressed variants (additional files 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44,
45, 46, 47, 48, 49 and 50). The conserved groups of vertebrates and invertebrates are compared separately but
the Syt18 group (additional file 37) contains members
from vertebrates and invertebrates. All of the Syt
sequences from N. vectensis (additional file 41) are compared. These multiple alignments illustrate the patterns
of sequence conservation (indicating the action of selection) distinctive of different groups. Common patterns
of alternative splicing which serve to alter particular
domains, are also illustrated. Where calcium coordinating residues are absolutely conserved (indicating the
action of purifying selection on calcium binding activity)
these are indicated by arrows. These absolutely conserved sequences are highlighted in red in figures 1, 2
and 3. In the many more cases where calcium coordinating positions are not absolutely conserved, there is a
range, down to zero conservation, of the ten sites present in the absolutely conserved, calcium responsive Syt
proteins. A conserved region 20-50 residues upstream of
the C2A domain, often recognisable as a variant of this
motif: GRIKPELY is indicated where present. Conservation of this motif was noticed previously [30] but it is
obvious here, that this region is much more widely conserved. Its function is yet to be investigated. The position and phase of introns are also illustrated, in order to
show the gene structures distinctive of different family
groups, as well as instances of intron mobilization.
Intron mobilization within a genus is specifically noted

Page 8 of 21

in additional file 2. Intron phase is indicated by colour:
black for phase 0, red for phase +1 and blue for phase
+2.
Syt1 homologues

Additional file 9 shows a multiple alignment of the
invertebrate Syt1 protein sequences in this collection.
The ten conserved calcium coordinating positions are
indicated by arrows. The C2AB region is highly conserved whereas the N-terminal portion has much more
sequence variation. Expressed variants are included to
demonstrate the regions altered by alternative splicing
and RNA editing. The region between the TM domain
and the C2A domain is commonly altered, for instance
in S. purpuratus, B. floridae, A. gambiae and D. melanogaster. The next region expressed as alternative forms, is
the region between C2A and C2B, as indicated by D.
pulex and A. gambiae variants. The third region to be
altered, by alternative splicing or by RNA editing, is the
central portion of the C2B domain. In Caenorhabditis,
this recoding alters not only the identity of positions
within this exon of 45 amino acids length in all other
cases, but extends its length by 2 or 3 amino acids.
Additional file 9 also includes the snt-3 sequences from
Caenorhabditis. The snt-3 gene encodes a protein very
similar to the snt-1 protein which is the Syt1 orthologue. The snt-3 proteins however, lack the N-terminal
membrane anchoring portion. The snt-3 proteins also
differ in the region between C2A and C2B.
Additional file 10 shows a multiple alignment of the
vertebrate Syt1 protein sequences in this collection. The
ten conserved calcium coordinating positions are indicated by arrows. The C2AB region is highly conserved
whereas the N-terminal portion has a little more
sequence variation. Expressed variants are included to
demonstrate the regions altered by alternative splicing.
This time, the alteration is restricted to the region
between the TM and C2A domain. Conserved N-glycosylation consensus sites are indicated by blue boxes. In
the first coding exon, the N-glycosylation site and the
conserved upstream O-glycosylated threonine, are
known to be important functional sites in vivo
[25,71,72].
Additional files 11, 12 and 13 show multiple alignments of the vertebrate Syt2, Syt5 and Syt8 protein
sequences, respectively. For Syt2, Syt5 and Syt8 genes,
there is transcript evidence of alternatively expressed
forms which lack the TM domain. Syt1, Syt2, Syt5 and
Syt8 are all related by duplication, with Syt1 being the
parental gene (figure 4). In the fish genomes, there are
yet more duplicates. In order to distinguish the relationships among these duplicates, pairwise comparison
scores (figure 5) and syntenic relationships (figure 6)
were examined. The top scores highlighted in blue in
figure 5, indicate that D. rerio syt1a is orthologous to

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

the Syt1 gene of other vertebrates and that D. rerio syt8
is orthologous to the Syt8 gene of other vertebrates. The
pairwise comparison scores do not however, indicate
orthology for the other duplicates. Figure 6 shows that
relationships of orthology, are indeed present. The
neighbouring genes of Syt1, Syt2, Syt5 and Syt8, in the
genomes of H. sapiens, X. tropicalis and D. rerio, reveal
conserved syntenic blocks in each genome. This synteny
indicates that the four genomic segments share ancestry.
Orthologous relationships exist between: H. sapiens
SYT1 and the duplicated syt1a/syt1b in D. rerio, between
SYT2 and syt2/syt2b and between SYT5 and syt5a/syt5b,
respectively. Since there is so much interest in the
mechanism of Syt1 function, close examination of the
Syt1 orthologues and paralogues in this collection, to
see how they have been shaped by evolution, may prove
productive.
Syt4 homologues

Additional file 14 shows a multiple alignment of the
invertebrate Syt4 protein sequences in this collection.
The variants of D. pulex differ at the C-terminal end
and those of A. gambiae differ at the N-terminal end.
Additional file 15 shows a multiple alignment of the vertebrate Syt4 protein sequences. The variants of G. gallus
differ in the region between C2A and C2B. Additional
file 16 shows a multiple alignment of the protein
sequences of Syt11, the vertebrate paralogue of Syt4.
Here, the variants in G. gallus, M. musculus and H.
sapiens differ in the C2B domain. Recent functional studies of mouse Syt4 [20,21] have built on initial gene
knockout results [73] which suggested that SYT4 dysfunction could be responsible for some human psychiatric disease. SYT11 dysfunction has also been implicated
in human psychiatric disease [74].
Syt7 homologues

Additional file 17 shows a multiple alignment of the
invertebrate Syt7 protein sequences in this collection.
Here, there is evidence from D. melanogaster, of variant
forms lacking the TM domain. Additional file 18 shows
the vertebrate Syt7 sequences. In comparison to the
invertebrate Syt7 genes, the vertebrate Syt7 genes

Page 9 of 21

contain additional coding capacity in the region between
the TM and C2A domains. Several additional exons
which can be alternatively spliced, are available to
extend the length of the region linking the TM and
C2A domains. A study of constitutive versus alternative
splicing, has examined the SYT7 alternative exons [75].
Recent gene knockout studies in mice [76,77] appear to
confirm a role for Syt7 in glucose homeostasis.
Syt9 homologues

Additional file 19 shows a multiple alignment of the
invertebrate Syt9 protein sequences in this collection.
The conserved motif upstream of the C2A domain is
indicated. Additional file 20 shows the vertebrate Syt9
sequences. The variants expressed by M. musculus and
H. sapiens differ at one or other end. Additional files 21,
22 and 23 show the protein sequences of the vertebrate
Syt9 paralogues, Syt3, Syt6 and Syt10, respectively. All of
these proteins retain all ten calcium coordinating residues and are thus likely to have been selected to act as
calcium sensors. They also retain the motif of unknown
function upstream of the C2A domain. Transcript evidence from X. tropicalis, M. musculus and H. sapiens
indicates the expression of alternative forms of Syt6
which lack the TM domain. The C-terminal region of
Syt6 is also expressed as alternative forms. Functional
studies have examined the conserved cysteine residues
of the N-terminal region which are unique to this paralogous family in vertebrates [78]. Syt6 is thought to play
a role in sperm acrosomal exocytosis [79]. Mouse Syt9
has been identified as upregulated during meiosis in
fetal ovaries [80]. Note that some investigators working
with Syt proteins, use different synonyms for the protein
products of certain Syt genes. The officially approved
gene nomenclature is used throughout this paper. In the
functional literature, the protein products of Syt5 and
Syt9 have most often been referred to differently [81].
Syt16 and Syt17, so far poorly characterised, have also
been prone to a similar lack of recognition [6,81].
Syt12 homologues

Additional file 24 shows a multiple alignment of the
invertebrate Syt12 protein sequences in this collection.

Figure 5 Pairwise comparisons of Syt1 paralogues in vertebrates. Percent identity scores produced by the align facility at EBI, of pairwise
comparisons of full length protein sequences, are listed. Top scores are highlighted in blue, indicating an orthologous relationship between the
compared genes.

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

Page 10 of 21

Figure 6 Synteny of Syt1 paralogues in D. rerio, X. tropicalis and H. sapiens. Gene symbols for four groups of neighbouring genes in H.
sapiens, are enclosed by a black box. Within the red box, the chromosomal locations of each gene in the current human genome reference
sequence, are indicated along with a reference transcript sequence. The genomic locations and transcript sequences for the X. tropicalis gene
relatives are within the green box and those for D. rerio are within the blue box.

While there is some variation in length, of sequences
from different organisms in the C2B region, the more
pronounced difference is a trend towards increased
length of the region between TM and C2A domains in
insects. Additional file 25 shows the vertebrate Syt12
sequences. Transcript evidence indicates the expression
of forms varying in the N-terminal region in H. sapiens.
Little functional work has been done so far with Syt12
[19,82].
Syt13 homologues

Additional file 26 shows a multiple alignment of the
invertebrate Syt13 protein sequences in this collection.
In most of these genes, there are two alternative Nterminal coding exons, only one of which encodes a TM
domain. These sequences also retain the motif of
unknown function just upstream of the C2A domain.
Additional file 27 shows the vertebrate Syt13 sequences.
Transcript sequences from H. sapiens indicate the
expression of a form lacking the TM domain. A recent
study suggests that human SYT13 may function as a
tumour supressor [83].
Syt15 homologues

Additional file 28 shows a multiple alignment of the
invertebrate Syt15 protein sequences in this collection.
In these sequences, it is the C2A domain which is more
highly conserved than the C2B domain. The motif
upstream of the C2A domain is present. There is a large
amount of variation in amino acid sequence, intron
position and intron phase in the N-terminal portion of
these sequences. Additional file 29 shows the vertebrate
Syt15 sequences. Transcript evidence from M. musculus
and H. sapiens indicates the expression of variants

differing at the C-terminal end. Transcripts from H.
sapiens indicate variant forms at the N-terminal end,
which lack the TM domain. Very little is known about
the function of Syt15 [19].
Syt16 homologues

Additional file 30 shows a multiple alignment of the
invertebrate Syt16 protein sequences in this collection.
Transcript evidence indicates the expression of variants
in C. savignyi, C. intestinalis and S. purpuratus which
differ at the N-terminal end and lack the TM domain.
Additional file 31 shows the vertebrate Syt16 sequences
which contain a TM domain. Additional file 32 shows
the vertebrate Syt16 sequences which lack a TM
domain. Additional file 33 shows vertebrate Syt14
sequences. Transcript evidence in X. tropicalis, M. musculus and H. sapiens indicates the expression of variant
forms of Syt14 with altered C2B domains. Human
SYT14 transcripts also differ at the N-terminal region,
resulting in forms which lack the TM domain. Loss of
function of human SYT14 has been associated with neurodevelopmental abnormalities [84]. In the human genome, there is a repeat of a portion of the SYT14 gene
(which is on chromosome 1) on chromosome 4, apparently the result of retroposition of a SYT14 transcript.
The chromosome 4 locus has been named SYT14L by
HGNC [31]. SYT14L is classed as a pseudogene by
NCBI (GeneID: NR_027094) and is not included in this
collection.
Syt17 homologues

Additional file 34 shows a multiple alignment of the
invertebrate Syt17 protein sequences in this collection.
A possible motif upstream of the C2A domain is

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

indicated. Additional file 35 shows the vertebrate Syt17
sequences. Transcript evidence in M. musculus and H.
sapiens indicates the expression of variants altered at Nterminal and C-terminal ends. A possible motif
upstream of the C2A domain is indicated. The protein
product of Syt17 has been referred to as B/K protein,
but not much is known about its function [85].
Sytalpha homologues

Additional file 36 shows the Sytalpha sequences in this
collection. A possible motif upstream of the C2A
domain is indicated. The only functional study relevant
to Sytalpha is its anatomical localisation in D. melanogaster [27].
Syt18 homologues

Additional file 37 shows the Syt18 sequences in this collection. These proteins are so far completely
uncharacterised.
Syt19 homologues

Additional file 38 shows the vertebrate Syt19 sequences
in this collection. These proteins are so far completely
uncharacterised.
Syt21 homologues

Additional file 39 shows the invertebrate Syt21
sequences in this collection. These proteins are so far
completely uncharacterised.
Syt homologues in N. vectensis

Additional file 40 shows all of the Syt proteins of N. vectensis, demonstrating enormous sequence variation.
These proteins are so far completely uncharacterised.
Dblc2 homologues

Additional file 41 shows the Dblc2 sequences in this
collection. Transcript variants are indicated. These proteins have not previously been reported and are so far
completely uncharacterised. Dblc2 sequences are detectably similar to Syt sequences at the amino acid
sequence level and occur in the genomes of marine
invertebrates in this collection. While they lack an Nterminal TM domain, they have a tandem C2 domain
architecture in common with Syt proteins. Dblc2 genes
lack similarity to Syt genes at the gene structure level,
so a new gene symbol was chosen to represent these
genes. The Dblc2 designation represents a fuller description: double C2 domain protein. Dblc2 is thus similar
but recognisably different from Doc2, the designation
for the homologous family of double C2 domain proteins of vertebrates.
Esyt homologues

Additional file 42 shows the invertebrate Esyt2
sequences in this collection. Transcript variants are
indicated. The arthropod Esyt2 genes include mutually
exclusive alternative exons which serve to alter the specification of the first C2 domain. Additional file 42
shows the sequence of the first of these alternatives
only. Additional file 43 shows all versions of this

Page 11 of 21

alternatively coded region. Additional file 44 shows the
vertebrate Esyt1 sequences. Transcript variants are indicated. In the fish genomes, Esyt1 has duplicated, resulting in esyt1a and esyt1b. The esyt1b duplicate has
acquired an internal duplication which contributes an
additional four C2 domains to the product of this gene
[33]. Within this duplicated section, the pink dot marks
the position of an apparent phase 0 intron loss in the
tetraodontiform fish. In each of the three other occurrences (two prior, one subsequent) of this portion of
the esyt1b gene, the phase 0 intron is present. This
intron is also present in each of the two repeats of this
sequence, in the esyt1a genes. Additional file 45 shows
the vertebrate Esyt2 sequences. Transcript variants are
indicated. In the fish genomes, Esyt2 has duplicated,
resulting in esyt2a and esyt2b. Additional file 46 shows
the vertebrate Esyt3 sequences. Transcript variants are
indicated.
Similarity between Syt genes and what are now named
Esyt genes, was first evident from genome sequence
comparisons [29,30]. In trying to classify and annotate
the genes within the human genome, HGNC [31]
noticed that these genes formed a distinct gene family,
separate from Syt genes. As there was little functional
data associated with these genes, a temporary nomenclature with no functional implication was provided:
FAM62A, FAM62B and FAM62C. The functional data
which did exist, was in the form of a cDNA representing
Rat Esyt1, which had been cloned during an investigation of adipocyte proteins and found to encode a membrane bound C2 domain protein with similarity to
proteins in plants [86]. Further genome sequence comparisons indicated that Syt, FAM62 and plant NTMC2
genes encode proteins with amino acid sequence similarity and domain architecture similarity, but belong to
distinct gene families [33]. Apart from [86] and until
recently, functional data associated with plant NTMC2
and animal FAM62 gene families had been lacking. An
initial investigation of proteins encoded by the Human
FAM62A, FAM62B and FAM62C genes, has now been
published and the authors named these proteins Esyt1,
Esyt2 and Esyt3, to stand for extended synaptotagminlike proteins [67]. Consultation with the nomenclature
committees during the preparation of this paper, led to
the decision to implement the Esyt nomenclature in
place of Fam62. In an initial pair of studies on one
member of the plant NTMC2 gene family [34,35] the
authors put forward the name SYT1 for this particular
gene and gene product. As discussed in the background
section of this paper, when different communities make
naming decisions based on the criteria most relevant to
them (gene phylogeny, protein structure, biological function) it is inevitable that multiple names will be used to
identify the same entities.

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

Rph3a homologues

Additional file 47 shows the invertebrate Rabphilin
sequences in this collection. In Caenorhabditis, alternative N-terminal exons can be used. Sequence conservation among Rabphilins is high in the N-terminal, Rab
binding portion [87] and the C-terminal tandem C2
domain portion, but a large middle portion is very
poorly conserved. This means that where transcript confirmation is absent, the gene predictions across this portion are unlikely to be accurate. Additional file 48 shows
the vertebrate Rph3a sequences. Transcript variants are
indicated. In vertebrates, all 10 calcium coordinating
positions are absolutely conserved, but not all are conserved in invertebrates. In additional file 47, the positions of these 10 amino acids are indicated by pink dots.
The position of the fifth calcium coordinating residue in
the C2A domain is not strictly conserved, but in most
cases a suitable aspartate or glutamate residue is present
one residue earlier. I am not aware of biochemical evidence for calcium binding by invertebrate Rabphilin
proteins, but genetic evidence [88] suggests that C. elegans rbf-1 at least, appears to function similarly to its
mammalian homologues. For this reason, in figures 1,
and 2, I have counted the fifth position as present when
a suitable aspartate or glutamate residue occurs at the
usual spacing or one residue earlier.
Rph3al homologues

Additional file 49 shows vertebrate Rph3al sequences.
Transcript variants are indicated. In the functional literature, products of Rph3al genes have been referred to
as Noc2 [89,90]. As outlined above, Rph3al genes appear
to be the result of duplication and fission of an ancestral
Rph3a gene, producing linked Rph3al and Doc2b genes
in tetrapods and in D. rerio. Rph3al represents the Nterminal portion of the ancestral Rph3a gene and Doc2b
represents the C-terminal portion, as seems clear from a
comparison of the gene structures of Rph3a, Rph3al and
the linked Doc2b genes (additional files 48, 49, and 50).
As also indicated above, Doc2b genes do not always
accompany Rph3al genes, as they exist in other fish genomes where Rph3al genes do not occur (see figure 3).
Doc2 homologues

Additional file 50 shows the vertebrate Doc2 protein
sequences. Transcript variants are indicated as well as
the positions of the calcium coordinating residues,
which are conserved in all of the Doc2 proteins except
Doc2g. I have included potential Doc2g products from
the human gene locus. Although spliced transcripts are
produced from this locus, they cannot encode full length
proteins and it is not known whether protein products
are translated from these transcripts. It is clear from the
shared gene structure of Doc2 genes and Rph3a genes,
that Doc2 genes represent the C-terminal portion of a
Rph3a gene. Since Rph genes exist in invertebrates, but

Page 12 of 21

Doc2 genes do not, it seems reasonable to suggest that
Doc2 genes arose via duplication and fission of a Rph3a
gene. Evidence for this, in the form of the two linked
fission products (Rph3al and Doc2b) is present in the
genomes of D. rerio, X. tropicalis, A. carolinensis, G. gallus, T. guttata, O. anatinus, M. domestica, M. musculus
and H. sapiens. In this collection, the fish genomes
reveal a novel lineage of Doc2 genes, which in consultation with Zfin staff [62,63] were given the gene symbol
Doc2d, to stand for Doc2 delta. The first Doc2 gene,
cloned in 1995 [91] was soon found to represent the
first member of a family of three genes in rodents. The
protein products of these three genes were named Doc2
alpha, Doc2 beta and Doc2 gamma [92]. The conserved
region present in the N-terminal portion of Doc2
sequences, specifies the Munc13 binding capacity of
Doc2 proteins [93].

Conclusions
This paper describes a manually curated collection of
genes pertinent to intercellular trafficking in multicellular animals. The collection includes 141 genes from the
genome sequences of 9 marine invertebrates (additional
file 1) 215 genes from the genome sequences of 24
ecdysozoans, including the 12 Drosophila and 5 Caenorhabditis genomes (additional file 2) plus 355 genes from
13 vertebrate genomes (additional file 3). When viewed
overall (figures 1, 2 and 3) the collection implies that
particular homologues which are always present in the
genome repertoire, serve to specify functions required
for animal life. The basis for this view is that these
genes have not been lost, but have been retained and
conserved, over the long period of metazoan evolution.
Such a view about the essentiality of gene function, differs from a synthetic biology view, which considers the
genes necessary to specify an operable system which
functions outside the natural world. It differs too, from
a reductionist molecular biology view where, if a gene
can be deleted in the laboratory setting, without killing
the organism, it is not considered essential. Such gene
deletion experiments have been done with Syt1 in different organisms [94-96] and according this view, Syt1 is
not strictly essential to animal life because snt-1 null
mutants are not lethal in Caenorhabditis. In Drosophila
and Mus however, Syt1 null mutants are indeed lethal
as they cannot survive to reproduce as adults. While my
previous genomic comparison of Syt genes [30] could
have been interpreted as indicating a correlation
between increased numbers of Syt genes and increased
organism complexity [33] the analysis here, which is
much more comprehensive, definitively rules that conclusion out. This collection of genes offers prospects for
fruitful speculation about the functional roles of the Syt
repertoires of different animals and includes a great

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

range of biological complexity. The conclusions drawn
from evolutionary genomics approaches are always provisional, because they depend on the quality of information available (draft or ‘complete’ genome sequence,
availability of transcript information) and are thus subject to review when better information becomes available. Conclusions drawn from reassembled and
reannotated genomes will inevitably be more accurate
than those drawn from the first draft. The D. rerio genome being repeat rich, is taking time to assemble into a
complete version. Among the genomes in this collection,
the draft D. rerio genome ranks first in terms of gene
number. D. rerio surely presents a useful model system
with which to investigate the functional divergence of
close paralogues [41].
Currently, it is the rodent Syt proteins and, with the
advent of transgenic mouse studies, their respective
genes, which garner most interest and have been best
characterised. Work with Syt genes in other animal species has provided information supporting hypotheses
about how Syt genes fulfil their functional roles
[94,95,97,98]. To date, these studies indicate a primary
role for Syt1 in specifying a neuron specific synaptic
vesicle protein which serves to trigger exocytosis. The
genomic specification of Syt1 expression patterns, has
been investigated and utilised in ascidian species
[99-102]. In C. elegans, the anatomical expression patterns of the mutually exclusive alternative exon variants
of Syt1 have been mapped [103]. This gene collection
shows that such mutually exclusive exon deployment
has arisen on a number of occasions in invertebrates,
altering C2 domains in Syt1, Syt34 and Esyt2 proteins
(see additional file 5). The repeated evolution of this
type of C2 domain alteration, suggests that careful comparison of the altered forms might prove a useful focus
for investigations aimed at understanding how these C2
domains operate as molecular machines. The feature
most widely shared among the great diversity of Syt proteins in this collection, is sequence conservation of the
C-terminal C2B region, which suggests that a defining
function of Syt proteins is located here.
The regulatory machinery controlling variant expression can be illuminated by comparative analyses of
genomic sequences, as was done to investigate the RNA
editing of Syt1 which occurs in hexapods [104]. Another
comparative analysis [105] examining the genomic specification of alternative splicing of Syt1, concluded that
splice variants expressed in D. melanogaster, C. pipiens,
B. mori, T. castaneum and P. humanus depend on correctly coded intronic, cis-acting regulatory sequences
acting on the requisite splice donor/acceptor sequences.
In this collection, there is evidence from A. gambiae, D.
melanogaster, D. pulex, S. purpuratus, B. floridae, D.
rerio, X. tropicalis, A. carolinensis, G. gallus, M.

Page 13 of 21

musculus and H. sapiens of RNA editing and alternative
splicing of Syt1 (additional files 1, 2, 3, 9 and 10). These
sequences may aid future efforts to identify the cissequences involved in transcript processing. The biochemical understanding of transcript production and
processing, acquired at great pains over many years [see
[43]] is not quite up to the task of extracting the full
meaning from the flood of new transcript data from
high throughput sequencing. An enormous amount of
experimental work will need to be done to understand
the varied roles of transcripts in complex organisms.
The problem of identifying and annotating different
kinds of transcript sequences is discussed in [106].
Work to assess the functional significance of alternatively expressed Syt genes has barely begun
[103,107-112] so it is difficult at present, to judge the
importance of the transcript variants listed in this collection. Evolutionary conservation of variant production,
probably argues for functional significance. New developments in mass spectrometry [113] are bound to aid
attempts to examine complex mixtures of proteins such
as synaptic vesicle preparations [114,115]. It is more
likely however, that the functional impact of Syt protein
variants will eventually be revealed by research focussed
on Syt proteins of known importance.
The significance of the conservation of intron position
and phase within Syt genes could be investigated by
gene targeting in transgenic mice, now a common route
to investigate Syt roles [6,21]. The best conserved intron,
a signature feature of Syt genes, is the phase +1 intron
at the start of the third beta strand of the C2B domain
[29,33,36] (additional files 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 and 41). A single point
mutation to inactivate this intron acceptor dinucleotide
would be predicted to have devastating consequences
for the expression of the host gene. In contrast to the
approach of disabling a gene by creating a large deletion, the production of a null mutant by such a small
intervention would be unlikely to cause collateral
damage. The chances of cryptic splice acceptors being
deployed to restore normal function to such a targeted
Syt splice site point mutant, seem remote, based on the
importance of this region to Syt protein function. The
presence of this intron in so many Syt genes could be
interpreted as evidence that evolutionary alteration of
this site is hazardous.
An example of a gene inactivating mutation which is
not rescued by altered splicing, is present in this gene
collection. The H. sapiens gene which is orthologous to
M. musculus Doc2g has acquired a frameshift mutation
in the fifth coding exon which introduces a stop codon.
Human transcript sequences indicate that an alternative
intron acceptor dinucleotide capable of restoring the

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

reading frame, which exists 20 nucleotides upstream of
the exon 5 acceptor, is not used. The regulatory
sequences necessary to select this alternative acceptor
are not present within this short intron (figure 7). It is
not known what protein products, if any, are produced
by this gene in H. sapiens and it appears likely that the
human gene is non functional. This observation underscores the importance of splicing signals which are
poorly understood at present, as well as the importance
of transcript analysis to verify gene predictions.
In sea urchin species, the Syt1 protein has been shown
to act in cortical granule exocytosis [98]. Syt1 products
are used as pan neuronal markers in echinoderms,
hemichordates and urochordates [25] and the role of
Syt1 in synaptic vesicle exocytosis is assumed. Few comparative studies have attempted to map the expression
patterns of the Syt repertoire of a particular organism
but all of the Syt genes of D. melanogaster [27] and a
large fraction of those of R. norvegicus [28] have been
examined in this way. T. adhaerens is thought to lack
cells equivalent to neurons, but it has a well conserved
Syt1 as well as genes encoding the requisite neuronal
SNAREs and complexin for fast neurotransmission
(additional file 4). Although never observed in the
laboratory, T. adhaerens is expected to produce gametes
in the wild [116,117] so a role for the T. adhaerens Syt1
similar to that of sea urchin Syt1 in cortical granule exocytosis is possible, alongside any yet to be discovered
‘neural’ role. N. vectensis, which has a bona fide nervous

Page 14 of 21

system, also has Syt1 and the requisite neuronal
SNAREs and complexin (additional file 4).
N. vectensis is quite unusual among the metazoans
collected here, in having so many highly divergent Syt
genes (additional file 41). Of all the N. vectensis Syt
genes, only Syt1 and Syt7 encode all ten calcium coordinating positions, indicating their likely role in calcium
triggered membrane fusion. Future studies to determine
the anatomical expression patterns of the N. vectensis
Syt genes in vivo, will be of great interest to further
understand the evolutionary development of animal nervous systems. Initial study of the molecular anatomy of
the N. vectensis nervous system has examined the
expression patterns of neurotransmitters, neuropeptides,
transcription factor and cell adhesion genes [118].
Synaptotagmin gene expression was used to label differentiated neurons in Platynereis, in a study of the evolutionary development of the central nervous system of
animals [119]. Capitella, like Platynereis, is an annelid
member of the Lophotrochozoa, but has the advantage
as a model organism, of a whole genome sequence
[120]. Study of neurogenesis in Capitella is now underway [121]. In situ hybridization analysis of Syt1 expression in Capitella, shows a broad neural pattern (Elaine
Seaver, personal communication).
It will be important in future, to describe and compare anatomical expression patterns and functions of
Syt genes, both conserved and unique, in vertebrates
and invertebrates. Such comparisons will be essential

Figure 7 Genomic sequence surrounding coding exons 4 and 5 in mouse Doc2g and the equivalent human region. Genomic sequence
surrounding coding exons 4 and 5 of mouse Doc2g and the equivalent region in human, are shown. Exonic and intronic sequences are
indicated. The reading frame is indicated by grey bars between codons. The single nucleotide deletion in the human exon 5 region is
highlighted with a red exclamation mark. The deletion in human exon 5 disrupts the reading frame, leading to a premature termination codon
which is boxed and highlighted with a red exclamation mark. An alternative splice acceptor dinucleotide which could restore the correct
reading frame to human exon 5 is indicated by a blue arrow. Blue bars between the first few codons indicate the reading frame were the
alternative splice acceptor to be functional. Human exon 5 has an alternative start codon, which is boxed and highlighted with a question mark.
There is a possibility that this start codon could allow normally spliced transcripts to be translated into the N-terminal and C-terminal protein
products listed in additional file 50.

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

to improve, or reduce confidence in functional annotation of genomes based on phylogenetic homology, or
similarity otherwise defined. Good annotation of genomes is a necessary step in the process of biocuration
[122] a new field aimed at using twenty first century
sequencing and information technology to make accessible to bench scientists, the vast amount of information they require, distilled, in order to take forward
wisely informed hypothesis driven research. Community deposition of a variety of types of biological data
into appropriate databases, database efforts to curate,
update and integrate this data with relevant data in
other databases, will if pursued successfully, lead to
great progress in biology in the years ahead. For the
time being, the manual gene collection made available
here, can be used immediately, by bench scientists
engaged in hypothesis driven investigation of membrane trafficking by these proteins, to widen the
bounds of a field already stretching from biophysical
study in vitro at the atomic level, to phenotypic assessment of gene function in model organisms.
Additional file 1: Comprehensive information about the marine
invertebrate genes in this collection. This spreadsheet file
(MarineInvertebrates.xls) contains full details of each gene identified in
the marine invertebrate genomes in this collection.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S1.XLS ]
Additional file 2: Comprehensive information about the ecdysozoan
genes in this collection. This spreadsheet file (Ecdysozoa.xls) contains
full details of each gene identified in the ecdysozoan genomes in this
collection.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S2.XLS ]
Additional file 3: Comprehensive information about the vertebrate
genes in this collection. This spreadsheet file (Vertebrates.xls) contains
full details of each gene identified in the vertebrate genomes in this
collection.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S3.XLS ]

Page 15 of 21

Additional file 6: Dendrogram of relationships among the
vertebrate sequences in this collection. Additional file 6 displays the
guide tree of the clustalw2 comparison of the vertebrate sequences in
this collection, excluding variants, totalling 355 sequences. Mouse genes
are highlighted with a red box. Conserved groups of Syt genes which
have not previously been described, are highlighted with a blue box.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S6.PDF ]
Additional file 7: Dendrogram of relationships among the
invertebrate and mammalian sequences in this collection. Additional
file 7 displays the guide tree of the clustalw2 comparison of the
invertebrate sequences (one representative per genus) excluding variants,
plus mammalian sequences, excluding variants, totalling 289 sequences.
Mouse genes are highlighted with a red box. Conserved groups of Syt
genes which have not previously been described, are highlighted with a
blue box.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S7.PDF ]
Additional file 8: Dendrogram of relationships among the
invertebrate and vertebrate sequences in this collection. Additional
file 8 displays the guide tree of the clustalw2 comparison of the
invertebrate sequences (one representative per genus) excluding variants,
plus a subset of vertebrate sequences, excluding variants, totalling 454
sequences. Mouse genes are highlighted with a red box. Conserved
groups of Syt genes which have not previously been described, are
highlighted with a blue box.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S8.PDF ]
Additional file 9: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt1 sequences,
plus Caenorhabditis snt-3. Amino acid position is marked every
hundred amino acids approximately, at the top of each page of the
alignment. Splice variants are included and highlighted with black dots
where they differ. Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured
bar between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars
indicate phase +1 introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. The five
conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by black
arrows at the top of the alignment. X residues indicate where a portion
of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S9.PDF ]

Additional file 4: Comprehensive information about the SNARE and
complexin genes identified in T. adhaerens and N. vectensis. This
spreadsheet file (SNAREs.xls) contains full details of the genes identified
in T. adhaerens and N. vectensis which are similar to neuronal SNAREs
and complexin.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S4.XLS ]

Additional file 10: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt1 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. The five conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are
indicated by black arrows at the top of the alignment. Conserved Nglycosylation consensus sites are indicated by blue boxes. The conserved
threonine, which can be O-glycosylated is also indicated by a blue box.
X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S10.PDF ]

Additional file 5: Dendrogram of relationships among the
invertebrate sequences in this collection. Additional file 5 displays the
guide tree of the clustalw2 comparison of the invertebrate sequences in
this collection, excluding variants, totalling 356 sequences. Genes which
encode mutually exclusive alternative exons are highlighted with a green
box. Conserved groups of Syt genes which have not previously been
described, are highlighted with a blue box.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S5.PDF ]

Additional file 11: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt2 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. The X. tropicalis
splice variant is included and highlighted with a black dot where it
differs. Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar
between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars
indicate phase +1 introns. The five conserved acidic amino acids in each
C2 domain are indicated by black arrows at the top of the alignment. X
residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S11.PDF ]
Additional file 12: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt5 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. The five conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are
indicated by black arrows at the top of the alignment. X residues
indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S12.PDF ]
Additional file 13: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt8 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S13.PDF ]
Additional file 14: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt4 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. X residues indicate where a
portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S14.PDF ]
Additional file 15: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt4 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. The G. gallus
splice variant is included and highlighted with a black dot where it
differs. Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar
between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars
indicate phase +1 introns. X residues indicate where a portion of
sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S15.PDF ]
Additional file 16: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt11 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S16.PDF ]
Additional file 17: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt7 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. The D.
melanogaster splice variant is included and highlighted with a black dot
where it differs. Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured
bar between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars
indicate phase +1 introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. The five
conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by black
arrows at the top of the alignment. X residues indicate where a portion
of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S17.PDF ]

Page 16 of 21

Additional file 18: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt7 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. The five conserved acidic
amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by black arrows at the top
of the alignment. X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is
missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S18.PDF ]
Additional file 19: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt9 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Intron position
and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black
bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue
bars indicate phase +2 introns. The widely conserved motif of unknown
function, just upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. The five
conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by black
arrows at the top of the alignment. X residues indicate where a portion
of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S19.PDF ]
Additional file 20: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt9 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. The widely conserved motif
of unknown function, just upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. The
five conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by
black arrows at the top of the alignment. X residues indicate where a
portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S20.PDF ]
Additional file 21: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt3 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Intron position
and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black
bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue
bars indicate phase +2 introns. The widely conserved motif of unknown
function, just upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. The five
conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by black
arrows at the top of the alignment. X residues indicate where a portion
of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S21.PDF ]
Additional file 22: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt6 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. The widely conserved motif
of unknown function, just upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. The
five conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by
black arrows at the top of the alignment. X residues indicate where a
portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S22.PDF ]
Additional file 23: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt10 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Intron position
and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black
bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue
bars indicate phase +2 introns. The widely conserved motif of unknown
function, just upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. The five
conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by black
arrows at the top of the alignment.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S23.PDF ]
Additional file 24: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt12 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Intron position
and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black
bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue
bars indicate phase +2 introns. Because of their differing positions, TM
domains are highlighted in blue. X residues indicate where a portion of
sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S24.PDF ]
Additional file 25: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt12 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. The H. sapiens
splice variant is included and highlighted with a black dot where it
differs. Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar
between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars
indicate phase +1 introns. X residues indicate where a portion of
sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S25.PDF ]
Additional file 26: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt13 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
which specify an alternative N-terminus lacking a TM domain, are
indicated on top, with a dotted line indicating where they join the
common C-terminal portion. Intron position and phase is indicated with
a coloured bar between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns.
Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns.
The widely conserved motif of unknown function, upstream of the C2A
domain, is indicated. X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is
missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S26.PDF ]
Additional file 27: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt13 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. The H. sapiens
splice variant is included and highlighted with a black dot where it
differs. Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar
between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars
indicate phase +1 introns. The widely conserved motif of unknown
function, just upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. X residues
indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S27.PDF ]
Additional file 28: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt15 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Intron position
and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black
bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue
bars indicate phase +2 introns. Because of their differing positions, TM
domains are highlighted in blue. The widely conserved motif of
unknown function, just upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. X
residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file

Page 17 of 21

[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S28.PDF ]
Additional file 29: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt15 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. The widely conserved motif
of unknown function, just upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. X
residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S29.PDF ]
Additional file 30: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt16 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
which specify alternative N-termini lacking TM domains, are included and
highlighted with black dots where their sequences differ. TM domains
are highlighted in blue. Intron position and phase is indicated with a
coloured bar between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns.
Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns.
X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S30.PDF ]
Additional file 31: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt16 sequences
which have TM domains. Amino acid position is marked every hundred
amino acids approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment.
Splice variants are included and highlighted with black dots where they
differ. Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar
between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars
indicate phase +1 introns. X residues indicate where a portion of
sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S31.PDF ]
Additional file 32: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt16 sequences
which lack TM domains. Amino acid position is marked every hundred
amino acids approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment.
Splice variants are included and highlighted with black dots where they
differ. Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar
between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars
indicate phase +1 introns. X residues indicate where a portion of
sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S32.PDF ]
Additional file 33: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt14 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S33.PDF ]
Additional file 34: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt17 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Intron position
and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black
bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue
bars indicate phase +2 introns. The widely conserved motif of unknown
function, upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. X residues indicate
where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S34.PDF ]

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

Additional file 35: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt17 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. A possible motif just
upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. X residues indicate where a
portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S35.PDF ]
Additional file 36: Alignment of the invertebrate Sytalpha
sequences. Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Intron position
and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black
bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue
bars indicate phase +2 introns. The widely conserved motif of unknown
function, just upstream of the C2A domain, is indicated. X residues
indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S36.PDF ]
Additional file 37: Alignment of the Syt18 sequences. Amino acid
position is marked every hundred amino acids approximately, at the top
of each page of the alignment. Intron position and phase is indicated
with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0
introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. X residues indicate where a
portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S37.PDF ]
Additional file 38: Alignment of the vertebrate Syt19 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Intron position
and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black
bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. The X
residue indicates where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S38.PDF ]
Additional file 39: Alignment of the invertebrate Syt21 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. TM sequences
are highlighted in blue. Intron position and phase is indicated with a
coloured bar between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns.
Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. X residues indicate where a portion
of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S39.PDF ]
Additional file 40: Alignment of the N. vectensis Syt sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. TM
sequences are highlighted in blue. Intron position and phase is indicated
with a coloured bar between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0
introns. Red bars indicate phase +1 introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2
introns. X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S40.PDF ]
Additional file 41: Alignment of the invertebrate Dblc2 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns.

Page 18 of 21

Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S41.PDF ]
Additional file 42: Alignment of the invertebrate Esyt2 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. X residues indicate where a
portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S42.PDF ]
Additional file 43: Alignment of the mutually exclusive alternative
Esyt2 exons. In addition to the alternatively coded exon which is
highlighted, the exon upstream and the exon downstream are shown.
Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between
amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Blue bars indicate phase
+2 introns.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S43.PDF ]
Additional file 44: Alignment of the vertebrate Esyt1 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. The
middle portion is only present in the fish esyt1b sequences. A pink dot
in this portion, marks an intron loss in T. rubripes and T. nigroviridis. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2
introns. X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S44.PDF ]
Additional file 45: Alignment of the vertebrate Esyt2 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2
introns. X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S45.PDF ]
Additional file 46: Alignment of the vertebrate Esyt3 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. Some intron positions are
marked with dotted lines. In these cases, transcript sequence covers a
gap in the genomic sequence and the intron presence is assumed. X
residues indicate where a portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S46.PDF ]
Additional file 47: Alignment of the invertebrate Rabphilin
sequences. Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are indicated. Intron position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar
between amino acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars
indicate phase +1 introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. The five
conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by pink
dots at the top of the alignment. X residues indicate where a portion of
sequence is missing.
Click here for file

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S47.PDF ]

Page 19 of 21

7.

Additional file 48: Alignment of the vertebrate Rabphilin (Rph3a)
sequences. Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. The five conserved acidic
amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by black arrows at the top
of the alignment. X residues indicate where a portion of sequence is
missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S48.PDF ]

8.

Additional file 49: Alignment of the vertebrate Rph3al sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. X residues indicate where a
portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S49.PDF ]

12.

Additional file 50: Alignment of the vertebrate Doc2 sequences.
Amino acid position is marked every hundred amino acids
approximately, at the top of each page of the alignment. Splice variants
are included and highlighted with black dots where they differ. Intron
position and phase is indicated with a coloured bar between amino
acids. Black bars indicate phase 0 introns. Red bars indicate phase +1
introns. Blue bars indicate phase +2 introns. Some intron positions are
marked with dotted lines. In these cases, transcript sequence covers a
gap in the genomic sequence and the intron presence is assumed. The
five conserved acidic amino acids in each C2 domain are indicated by
black arrows at the top of the alignment. X residues indicate where a
portion of sequence is missing.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-1137-S50.PDF ]

9.

10.
11.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the UK Medical Research Council. I wish to
thank Hugh Pelham for making it possible for me to complete this work.
Authors’ contributions
The author had sole responsibility for the design and execution of this work.

23.

24.
25.

Received: 10 August 2009
Accepted: 15 January 2010 Published: 15 January 2010
26.
References
1. Matthew WD, Tsavaler L, Reichardt LF: Identification of a synaptic vesiclespecific membrane protein with a wide distribution in neuronal and
neurosecretory tissue. J Cell Biol 1981, 91:257-269.
2. Südhof TC: The synaptic vesicle cycle. Annu Rev Neurosci 2004, 27:509-547.
3. Wojcik SM, Brose N: Regulation of membrane fusion in synaptic
excitation-secretion coupling: speed and accuracy matter. Neuron 2007,
55:11-24.
4. Chapman ER: How does synaptotagmin trigger neurotransmitter
release?. Annu Rev Biochem 2008, 77:615-641.
5. Malsam SK, Kreye S, Söllner TH: Membrane fusion: SNAREs and regulation.
Cell Mol Life Sci 2008, 65:2814-2832.
6. Gustavsson N, Han W: Calcium-sensing beyond neurotransmitters:
functions of synaptotagmins in neuroendocrine and endocrine
secretion. Biosci Rep 2009, 29:245-259.

27.

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.

Perin MS, Fried VA, Mignery GA, Jahn R, Südhof TC: Phospholipid binding
by a synaptic vesicle protein homologous to the regulatory region of
protein kinase C. Nature 1990, 345:260-263.
Sutton RB, Davletov BA, Berghuis AM, Südhof TC, Sprang SR: Structure of
the first C2 domain of synaptotagmin I: a novel Ca2+/phospholipidbinding fold. Cell 1995, 80:929-938.
Sutton RB, Ernst JA, Brunger AT: Crystal structure of the cytosolic C2A-C2B
domains of synaptotagmin III: implications for Ca2+-independent SNARE
complex interaction. J Cell Biol 1999, 147:589-598.
Nalefski EA, Falke JJ: The C2 domain calcium-binding motif: structural and
functional diversity. Protein Sci 1996, 5:2375-2390.
Jiménez JL, Smith GR, Contreras-Moreira B, Sgouros JG, Meunier FA,
Bates PA, Schiavo G: Functional recycling of C2 domains throughout
evolution: a comparative study of synaptotagmin, protein kinase C and
phospholipid C by sequence, structural and modelling approaches. J Mol
Biol 2003, 333:621-639.
Cho W, Stahelin RV: Membrane binding and subcellular targeting of C2
domains. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006, 1761:838-849.
Pfam database. http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/family/C2.
Fuson KL, Montes M, Robert JJ, Sutton RB: Structure of human
synaptotagmin 1 C2AB in the absence of Ca2+ reveals a novel domain
association. Biochemistry 2007, 46:13041-13048.
Chicka MC, Hui E, Liu H, Chapman ER: Synaptotagmin arrests the SNARE
complex before triggering fast, efficient membrane fusion in response
to Ca2+. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2008, 15:827-835.
Paddock BE, Streigel AR, Hui E, Chapman ER, Reist NE: Ca2+-dependent,
phospholipid-binding residues of synaptotagmin are critical for
excitation-secretion coupling in vivo. J Neurosci 2008, 28:7458-7466.
von Poser C, Ichtchenko K, Shao X, Rizo J, Südhof TC: The evolutionary
pressure to inactivate. A subclass of synaptotagmins with an amino acid
substitution that abolishes Ca2+ binding. J Biol Chem 1997,
272:14314-14319.
Rickman C, Craxton M, Osborne S, Davletov B: Comparative analysis of
tandem C2 domains from the mammalian synaptotagmin family.
Biochem J 2004, 378:681-686.
Bhalla A, Chicka MC, Chapman ER: Analysis of the synaptotagmin family
during reconstituted membrane fusion: uncovering a class of inhibitory
isoforms. J Biol Chem 2008, 283:21799-21807.
Zhang Z, Bhalla A, Dean C, Chapman ER, Jackson MB: Synaptotagmin IV: a
multifunctional regulator of peptidergic nerve terminals. Nat Neurosci
2009, 12:163-171.
Dean C, Liu H, Dunning F, Chang PY, Jackson MB, Chapman ER:
Synaptotagmin-IV modulates synaptic function and long-term
potentiation by regulating BDNF release. Nat Neurosci 2009, 12:767-776.
Littleton JT, Bellen HJ, Perin MS: Expression of synaptotagmin in
Drosophila reveals transport and localization of synaptic vesicles to the
synapse. Development 1993, 118:1077-1088.
Chowdhury D, Travis GH, Sutcliffe JG, Burton FH: Synaptotagmin I and 1B4
are identical: implications for Synaptotagmin distribution in the primate
brain. Neurosci Lett 1995, 190:9-12.
Craxton M, Goedert MG: Alternative splicing of synaptotagmins involving
transmembrane exon skipping. FEBS Lett 1999, 460:417-422.
Burke RD, Osborne L, Wang D, Murabe N, Yaguchi S, Nakajima Y: Neuronspecific expression of a synaptotagmin gene in the sea urchin
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus. J Comp Neurol 2006, 496:244-251.
Cnops L, Hu TT, Broeck Vanden J, Burnat K, Bergh Van Den G, Arckens L:
Age- and experience-dependent expression of dynamin I and
synaptotagmin I in cat visual system. J Comp Neurol 2007, 504:254-264.
Adolfsen B, Saraswati S, Yoshihara M, Littleton JT: Synaptotagmins are
trafficked to distinct subcellular domains including the postsynaptic
compartment. J Cell Biol 2004, 166:249-260.
Mittelsteadt T, Seifert G, Alvárez-Barón E, Steinhäuser C, Becker A, Schoch S:
Differential mRNA expression patterns of the synaptotagmin gene
family in the rodent brain. J Comp Neurol 2009, 512:514-528.
Craxton M: Genomic analysis of synaptotagmin genes. Genomics 2001,
77:43-49.
Craxton M: Synaptotagmin gene content of the sequenced genomes.
BMC Genomics 2004, 5:43.
HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee. http://www.genenames.org.
Mouse Genome Informatics. http://www.informatics.jax.org.

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

33. Craxton M: Evolutionary genomics of plant genes encoding N-terminalTM-C2 domain proteins and the similar FAM62 genes and
synaptotagmin genes of metazoans. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:259.
34. Schapire AL, Voigt B, Jasik J, Rosado A, Lopez-Cobollo R, Menzel D, Salinas J,
Mancuso S, Valpuesta V, Baluska F, Botella MA: Arabidopsis synaptotagmin
1 is required for the maintenance of plasma membrane integrity and
cell viability. Plant Cell 2008, 20:3374-3388.
35. Yamazaki T, Kawamura Y, Minami A, Uemura M: Calcium-dependent
freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis involves membrane resealing via
synaptotagmin SYT1. Plant Cell 2008, 20:3389-3404.
36. Südhof TC: Synaptotagmins: why so many?. J Biol Chem 2002,
277:7629-7632.
37. Schapire AL, Valpuesta V, Botella MA: Plasma membrane repair in plants.
Trends Plant Sci 2009, 14:645-652.
38. Fitch WM: Homology a personal view on some of the problems. Trends
Genet 2000, 16:227-231.
39. Koonin EV: Orthologs, Paralogs, and Evolutionary Genomics. Annu Rev
Genet 2005, 39:309-338.
40. Liao BY, Zhang J: Null mutations in human and mouse orthologs
frequently result in different phenotypes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008,
105:6987-6992.
41. Studer RA, Robinson-Rechavi M: How confident can we be that orthologs
are similar but paralogs differ?. Trends Genet 2009, 25:210-216.
42. Lynch M: The origins of genome architecture Sinauer Associates, Sunderland,
MA 2007.
43. Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P: Molecular biology
of the cell Garland Science, New York, NY 2008.
44. Koonin EV: Evolution of genome architecture. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009,
41:298-306.
45. Koonin EV: Darwinian evolution in the light of genomics. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, 37:1011-1034.
46. DOE Joint Genome Institute. http://www.jgi.doe.gov.
47. King N, Westbrook MJ, Young SL, Kuo A, Abedin M, Chapman J,
Fairclough S, Hellsten U, Isogai Y, Letunic I, Marr M, Pincus D, Putnam N,
Rokas A, Wright KJ, Zuzow R, Dirks W, Good M, Goodstein D, Lemons D,
Li W, Lyons JB, Morris A, Nichols S, Richter DJ, Salamov A, Sequencing JG,
Bork P, Lim WA, Manning G, Miller WT, McGinnis W, Shapiro H, Tjian R,
Grigoriev IV, Rokhsar D: The genome of the choanoflagellate Monosiga
brevicollis and the origin of metazoans. Nature 2008, 451:783-788.
48. Tordai H, Nagy A, Farkas K, Bányai L, Patthy L: Modules, multidomain
proteins and organismic complexity. FEBS J 2005, 272:5064-5078.
49. Koonin EV: The biological big bang model for the major transitions in
evolution. Biol Direct 2007, 2:21.
50. Srivastava M, Begovic E, Chapman J, Putnam NH, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Kuo A, Mitros T, Salamov A, Carpenter ML, Signorovitch AY, Moreno MA,
Kamm K, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Shapiro H, Grigoriev IV, Buss LW,
Schierwater B, Dellaporta SL, Rokhsar DS: The Trichoplax genome and the
nature of placozoans. Nature 2008, 454:955-960.
51. Putnam NH, Srivastava M, Hellsten U, Dirks B, Chapman J, Salamov A,
Terry A, Shapiro H, Lindquist E, Kapitonov VV, Jurka J, Genikhovich G,
Grigoriev IV, Lucas SM, Steele RE, Finnerty JR, Technau U, Martindale MQ,
Rokhsar DS: Sea anemone genome reveals ancestral eumetazoan gene
repertoire and genomic organization. Science 2007, 317:86-94.
52. National Center for Biotechnology Information. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov.
53. UCSC Genome Bioinformatics. http://genome.ucsc.edu.
54. Kent WJ: BLAT–the BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome Res 2002,
12:656-664.
55. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25:3389-3402.
56. Staden R: The Staden sequence analysis package. Mol Biotechnol 1996,
6:109-117.
57. Corpet F: Multiple sequence alignment with hierarchical clustering.
Nucleic Acids Res 1988, 16:10881-10890.
58. EMBL-EBI. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw2/.
59. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23:2947-2948.

Page 20 of 21

60. FlyBase Genetic nomenclature for Drosophila melanogaster. http://flybase.
org/static_pages/docs/nomenclature/nomenclature3.html.
61. WormBase UserGuide:Nomenclature. http://www.wormbase.org/wiki/
index.php/UserGuide:Nomenclature.
62. Zebrafish Nomenclature Guidelines. http://zfin.org/zf_info/nomen.html.
63. Sprague J, Bayraktaroglu L, Clements D, Conlin T, Fashena D, Frazer K,
Haendel M, Howe D, Mani P, Ramachandran S, Schaper K, Segerdell E,
Song P, Sprunger B, Taylor S, Van Slyke C, Westerfield M: The Zebrafish
Information Network: the zebrafish model organism database. Nucleic
Acids Res 2006, 34:D581-D585.
64. Xenbase. http://www.xenbase.org/common.
65. Bowes JB, Snyder KA, Segerdell E, Gibb R, Jarabek C, Noumen E, Pollet N,
Vise P: Xenbase: a Xenopus biology and genomics resource. Nucleic Acids
Res 2008, 36:D761-D767.
66. Nomenclature for naming loci, alleles, linkage groups, and
chromosomes to be used in poultry genome publications and
databases. http://projects.roslin.ac.uk/chickmap/nomenclature.html.
67. Min SW, Chang WP, Südhof TC: E-Syts, a family of membranous Ca2
+-sensor proteins with multiple C2 domains. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007,
104:3823-3828.
68. Church DM, Goodstadt L, Hillier LW, Zody MC, Goldstein S, She X, Bult CJ,
Agarwala R, Cherry JL, DiCuccio M, Hlavina W, Kapustin Y, Meric P,
Maglott D, Birtle Z, Marques AC, Graves T, Zhou S, Teague B, Potamousis K,
Churas C, Place M, Herschleb J, Runnheim R, Forrest D, Amos-Landgraf J,
Schwartz DC, Cheng Z, Lindblad-Toh K, Eichler EE, Ponting CP: Lineagespecific biology revealed by a finished genome assembly of the mouse.
PLoS Biol 2009, 7:e1000112.
69. Tree families database. http://www.treefam.org.
70. Ruan J, Li H, Chen Z, Coghlan A, Coin LJ, Guo Y, Hériché JK, Hu Y,
Kristiansen K, Li R, Liu T, Moses A, Qin J, Vang S, Vilella AJ, Ureta-Vidal A,
Bolund L, Wang J, Durbin R: TreeFam: 2008 Update. Nucleic Acids Res 2008,
36:D735-D740.
71. Han W, Rhee JS, Maximov A, Lao Y, Mashimo T, Rosenmund C, Südhof TC:
N-glycosylation is essential for vesicular targeting of synaptotagmin 1.
Neuron 2004, 41:85-99.
72. Kanno E, Fukuda M: Increased plasma membrane localization of Oglycosylation-deficient mutant of synaptotagmin I in PC12 cells. J
Neurosci Res 2008, 86:1036-1043.
73. Ferguson GD, Vician L, Herschman HR: Synaptotagmin IV: biochemistry,
genetics, behavior, and possible links to human psychiatric disease. Mol
Neurobiol 2001, 23:173-1185.
74. Inoue S, Imamura A, Okazaki Y, Yokota H, Arai M, Hayashi N, Furukawa A,
Itokawa M, Oishi M: Synaptotagmin XI as a candidate gene for
susceptibility to schizophrenia. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet
2007, 144B:332-340.
75. Kaufmann D, Kenner O, Nurnberg P, Vogel W, Bartelt B: In NF1, CFTR, PER3,
CARS and SYT7, alternatively included exons show higher conservation
of surrounding intron sequences than constitutive exons. Eur J Hum
Genet 2004, 12:139-149.
76. Gustavsson N, Lao Y, Maximov A, Chuang JC, Kostromina E, Repa JJ, Li C,
Radda GK, Südhof TC, Han W: Impaired insulin secretion and glucose
intolerance in synaptotagmin-7 null mutant mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008, 105:3992-3997.
77. Gustavsson N, Wei SH, Hoang DN, Lao Y, Zhang Q, Radda GK, Rorsman P,
Südhof TC, Han W: Synaptotagmin-7 is a principal Ca2+ sensor for Ca2+
-induced glucagon exocytosis in pancreas. J Physiol 2009, 587:1169-1178.
78. Fukuda M, Kanno E, Mikoshiba K: Conserved N-terminal cysteine motif is
essential for homo- and heterodimer formation of synaptotagmins III, V,
VI, and X. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:31421-31427.
79. Tomes CF: Molecular mechanims of membrane fusion during acrosomal
exocytosis. Spermatology Nottingham: Nottingham University PressRoldan
ERS, Gomendio M 2007, 65:275-292.
80. Olesen C, Nyeng P, Kalisz M, Jensen TH, Møller M, Tommerup N, Byskov AG:
Global gene expression analysis in fetal mouse ovaries with and without
meiosis and comparison of selected genes with meiosis in the testis. Cell
Tissue Res 2007, 328:207-221.
81. Fukuda M, Sagi-Eisenberg R: Confusion in the nomenclature of
synaptotagmins V and IX which is which?. Calcium Binding Proteins 2008,
3:1-4.

Craxton BMC Genomics 2010, 11:37
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/37

82. Maximov A, Shin OH, Liu X, Südhof TC: Synaptotagmin-12, a synaptic
vesicle phosphoprotein that modulates spontaneous neurotransmitter
release. J Cell Biol 2007, 176:113-1124.
83. Jahn JE, Coleman WB: Re-expression of tumorigenicity after attenuation
of human synaptotagmin 13 in a suppressed microcell hybrid cell line.
Int J Oncol 2008, 32:441-449.
84. Quintero-Rivera F, Chan A, Donovan DJ, Gusella JF, Ligon AH: Disruption of
a synaptotagmin (SYT14) associated with neurodevelopmental
abnormalities. Am J Med Genet A 2007, 143:558-563.
85. Han KH, Lee UY, Jang YS, Cho YM, Jang YM, Hwang IA, Ghee JY, Lim SW,
Kim WY, Yang CW, Kim J, Kwon OJ: Differential regulation of B/K protein
expression in proximal and distal tubules of rat kidneys with ischemiareperfusion injury. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2007, 292:F100-F106.
86. Morris NJ, Ross SA, Neveu JM, Lane WS, Lienhard GE: Cloning and
preliminary characterization of a 121 kDa protein with multiple
predicted C2 domains. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999, 1431:525-530.
87. Fukuda M, Yamamoto A: Assay of the Rab-binding specificity of rabphilin
and Noc2: target molecules for Rab27. Methods Enzymol 2005,
403:469-481.
88. Mahoney TR, Liu Q, Itoh T, Luo S, Hadwiger G, Vincent R, Wang ZW,
Fukuda M, Nonet ML: Regulation of synaptic transmission by RAB-3 and
RAB-27 in Caenorhabditis elegans. Mol Biol Cell 2006, 17:2617-2625.
89. Kotake K, Ozaki N, Mizuta M, Sekiya S, Inagaki N, Seino S: Noc2, a putative
zinc finger protein involved in exocytosis in endocrine cells. J Biol Chem
1997, 272:29407-29410.
90. Handley MT, Burgoyne RD: The Rab27 effector Rabphilin, unlike
Granuphilin and Noc2, rapidly exchanges between secretory granules
and cytosol in PC12 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008,
373:275-281.
91. Orita S, Sasaki T, Naito A, Komuro R, Ohtsuka T, Maeda M, Suzuki H,
Igarashi H, Takai Y: Doc2: a novel brain protein having two repeated C2like domains. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1995, 206:439-448.
92. Fukuda M, Mikoshiba K: Doc2gamma, a third isoform of double C2
protein, lacking calcium-dependent phospholipid binding activity.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000, 276:626-632.
93. Orita S, Naito A, Sakaguchi G, Maeda M, Igarashi H, Sasaki T, Takai Y:
Physical and functional interactions of Doc2 and Munc13 in Ca2
+-dependent exocytotic machinery. J Biol Chem 1997, 272:16081-16084.
94. DiAntonio A, Parfitt KD, Schwarz TL: Synaptic transmission persists in
synaptotagmin mutants of Drosophila. Cell 1993, 73:1281-1290.
95. Nonet ML, Grundahl K, Meyer BJ, Rand JB: Synaptic function is impaired
but not eliminated in C. elegans mutants lacking synaptotagmin. Cell
1993, 73:1291-1305.
96. Geppert M, Goda Y, Hammer RE, Li C, Rosahl TW, Stevens CF, Südhof TC:
Synaptotagmin I: a major Ca2+ sensor for transmitter release at a
central synapse. Cell 1994, 79:717-727.
97. Poopatanapong A, Teramitsu I, Byun JS, Vician LJ, Herschman HR, White SA:
Singing, but not seizure, induces synaptotagmin IV in zebra finch song
circuit nuclei. J Neurobiol 2006, 66:1613-1629.
98. Wong JL, Koppel DE, Cowan AE, Wessel GM: Membrane hemifusion is a
stable intermediate of exocytosis. Dev Cell 2007, 12:653-659.
99. Katsuyama Y, Matsumoto J, Okada T, Ohtsuka Y, Chen L, Okado H,
Okamura Y: Regulation of synaptotagmin gene expression during
ascidian embryogenesis. Dev Biol 2002, 244:293-304.
100. Imai JH, Meinertzhagen IA: Neurons of the ascidian larval nervous system
in Ciona intestinalis: I. Central nervous system. Comp Neurol 2007,
501:316-334.
101. Imai JH, Meinertzhagen IA: Neurons of the ascidian larval nervous system
in Ciona intestinalis: II. Peripheral nervous system. Comp Neurol 2007,
502:335-352.
102. Matsumoto J, Katsuyama Y, Ohtsuka Y, Chen L, Lemaire P, Okamura Y:
Functional analysis of synaptotagmin gene regulatory regions in two
distantly related ascidian species. Dev Growth Differ 2008, 50:543-552.
103. Mathews EA, Mullen GP, Crowell JA, Duerr JS, McManus JR, Duke A,
Gaskin J, Rand JB: Differential expression and function of synaptotagmin
1 isoforms in Caenorhabditis elegans. Mol Cell Neurosci 2007, 34:642-652.
104. Reenan RA: Molecular determinants and guided evolution of speciesspecific RNA editing. Nature 2005, 434:409-413.
105. Lv J, Yang Y, Yin H, Chu F, Wang H, Zhang W, Zhang Y, Jin Y: Molecular
determinants and evolutionary dynamics of wobble splicing. Mol Biol
Evol 2009, 26:1081-1092.

Page 21 of 21

106. Dinger ME, Pang KC, Mercer TR, Mattick JS: Differentiating protein-coding
and noncoding RNA: challenges and ambiguities. PLoS Comput Biol 2008,
4:e1000176.
107. Fukuda M, Mikoshiba K: A novel alternatively spliced variant of
synaptotagmin VI lacking a transmembrane domain. Implications for
distinct functions of the two isoforms. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:31428-31434.
108. Nakhost A, Houeland G, Blandfor VE, Castellucci VF, Sossin WS: Differential
regulation of transmitter release by alternatively spliced forms of
synaptotagmin I. J Neurosci 2003, 23:6238-6244.
109. Bagalá C, Kolev V, Mandinova A, Soldi R, Mouta C, Graziani I, Prudovsky I,
Maciag T: The alternative translation of synaptotagmin 1 mediates the
non-classical release of FGF1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003,
310:1041-1047.
110. Nakhost A, Houeland G, Blandford VE, Castellucci VF, Sossin WS:
Identification and characterization of a novel C2B splice variant of
synaptotagmin I. J Neurochem 2004, 89:354-363.
111. Monterrat C, Boal F, Grise F, Hémar A, Lang J: Synaptotagmin 8 is
expressed both as a calcium-insensitive soluble and membrane protein
in neurons, neuroendocrine and endocrine cells. Biochim Biophys Acta
2006, 1763:73-81.
112. Gauthier BR, Duhamel DL, Iezzi M, Theander S, Saltel F, Fukuda M, WehrleHaller B, Wollheim CB: Synaptotagmin VII splice variants alpha, beta, and
delta are expressed in pancreatic beta-cells and regulate insulin
exocytosis. FASEB J 2008, 22:194-206.
113. de Godoy LM, Olsen JV, Cox J, Nielsen ML, Hubner NC, Fröhlich F,
Walther TC, Mann M: Comprehensive mass-spectrometry-based proteome
quantification of haploid versus diploid yeast. Nature 2008,
455:1251-1254.
114. Burré J, Volknandt W: The synaptic vesicle proteome. J Neurochem 2007,
101:1448-1462.
115. Cox HD, Thompson CM: Purification and proteomic analysis of synaptic
vesicles. Methods Mol Biol 2008, 432:259-274.
116. Signorovitch AY, Dellaporta SL, Buss LW: Molecular signatures for sex in
the Placozoa. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:15518-15522.
117. Pearse VB, Voigt O: Field biology of placozoans (Trichoplax): distribution,
diversity, biotic interactions. Integrative and Comparative Biology 2007,
47:677-692.
118. Marlow HQ, Srivastava M, Matus DQ, Rokhsar D, Martindale MQ: Anatomy
and development of the nervous system of Nematostella vectensis, an
anthozoan cnidarian. Develop Neurobiol 2009, 69:235-254.
119. Denes AS, Jékely G, Steinmetz PRH, Raible F, Snyman H, Prud’homme B,
Ferrier DEK, Balavoine G, Arendt D: Molecular architecture of annelid
nerve cord supports common origin of nervous system centralization in
bilateria. Cell 2007, 129:277-288.
120. Hill DS, Savage RM: Evolution, development and ecology of Capitella sp.
I: a waxing model for polychaete studies. Annelids in modern biology
Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & SonsShain DH 2009, 88-115.
121. Meyer NP, Seaver EC: Neurogenesis in an annelid: characterisation of
brain neural precursors in the polychaete Capitella sp. I. Dev Biol 2009,
335:237-252.
122. Howe D, Costanzo M, Fey P, Gojobori T, Hannick L, Hide W, Hill DP, Kania R,
Schaeffer M, St Pierre S, Twigger S, White O, Yon Rhee S: Big data: The
future of biocuration. Nature 2008, 455:47-50.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-37
Cite this article as: Craxton: A manual collection of Syt, Esyt, Rph3a,
Rph3al, Doc2, and Dblc2 genes from 46 metazoan genomes - an open
access resource for neuroscience and evolutionary biology. BMC
Genomics 2010 11:37.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
