<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Phylogeny and evolution of life-history strategies in the Sycophaginae non-pollinating fig wasps (Hymenoptera, Chalcidoidea)</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-178"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Astrid Cruaud"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Phylogeny and evolution of life-history strategies
in the Sycophaginae non-pollinating fig wasps
(Hymenoptera, Chalcidoidea)
Cruaud et al.
Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178 (22 June 2011)

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Phylogeny and evolution of life-history strategies
in the Sycophaginae non-pollinating fig wasps
(Hymenoptera, Chalcidoidea)
Astrid Cruaud1*, Roula Jabbour-Zahab1, Gwenaëlle Genson1, Finn Kjellberg2, Noppol Kobmoo2, Simon van Noort3,
Yang Da-Rong4, Peng Yan-Qiong4, Rosichon Ubaidillah5, Paul E Hanson6, Otilene Santos-Mattos7,
Fernando HA Farache8, Rodrigo AS Pereira8, Carole Kerdelhué1 and Jean-Yves Rasplus1

Abstract
Background: Non-pollinating Sycophaginae (Hymenoptera, Chalcidoidea) form small communities within
Urostigma and Sycomorus fig trees. The species show differences in galling habits and exhibit apterous, winged or
dimorphic males. The large gall inducers oviposit early in syconium development and lay few eggs; the small gall
inducers lay more eggs soon after pollination; the ostiolar gall-inducers enter the syconium to oviposit and the
cleptoparasites oviposit in galls induced by other fig wasps. The systematics of the group remains unclear and only
one phylogeny based on limited sampling has been published to date. Here we present an expanded phylogeny
for sycophagine fig wasps including about 1.5 times the number of described species. We sequenced
mitochondrial and nuclear markers (4.2 kb) on 73 species and 145 individuals and conducted maximum likelihood
and Bayesian phylogenetic analyses. We then used this phylogeny to reconstruct the evolution of Sycophaginae
life-history strategies and test if the presence of winged males and small brood size may be correlated.
Results: The resulting trees are well resolved and strongly supported. With the exception of Apocrytophagus, which
is paraphyletic with respect to Sycophaga, all genera are monophyletic. The Sycophaginae are divided into three
clades: (i) Eukoebelea; (ii) Pseudidarnes, Anidarnes and Conidarnes and (iii) Apocryptophagus, Sycophaga and Idarnes.
The ancestral states for galling habits and male morphology remain ambiguous and our reconstructions show that
the two traits are evolutionary labile.
Conclusions: The three main clades could be considered as tribes and we list some morphological characters that
define them. The same biologies re-evolved several times independently, which make Sycophaginae an interesting
model to test predictions on what factors will canalize the evolution of a particular biology. The ostiolar gallinducers are the only monophyletic group. In 15 Myr, they evolved several morphological adaptations to enter the
syconia that make them strongly divergent from their sister taxa. Sycophaginae appears to be another example
where sexual selection on male mating opportunities favored winged males in species with small broods and
wingless males in species with large broods. However, some species are exceptional in that they lay few eggs but
exhibit apterous males, which we hypothesize could be due to other selective pressures selecting against the reappearance of winged morphs.

* Correspondence: cruaud@supagro.inra.fr
1
INRA-UMR Centre de Biologie et de Gestion des Populations, CBGP, (INRA/
IRD/CIRAD/Montpellier SupAgro), Campus international de Baillarguet, CS
30016, 34988 Montferrier-sur Lez, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Cruaud et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

Background
In many animal species, males that compete for females
may adopt alternative reproductive tactics. These tactics
translate in many cases into discontinuous variation in
male morphology, behaviour or life history [1]. Male
dimorphism or polymorphism is common in species in
which sexual selection is strong [2,3] and takes place in a
variety of taxonomic groups such as insects (e.g. bees and
wasps [4,5], damselflies [6], earwigs [7], dung-beetles [8]);
other invertebrates (e.g. spiders [9], opiliones [10], mites
[11], amphipods [12] and nematodes [13]) and vertebrates
[14,15].
Among these groups, fig wasp is a well known model to
study male polymorphism [16-25]. Intense sexual selection
in fig wasps has lead to competing males evolving exaggerated morphologies to mate, thereby enhancing their reproductive success [26]. Beside winged males that tend to look
similar to winged females, wingless males of fig wasps exhibit at least five different morphs [27]. In some cases males
are so different from females that they were initially
described as different species or even genera [28]. Wingless
males engage in lethal combat for access to females
[16,29,30], and consequently exhibit also considerable morphological diversity [20,25], whereas winged males disperse
to mate with females outside the syconium.
Fig wasps are a polyphyletic assemblage of Chalcidoidea
(and few braconids) that develop in the inflorescences of
fig trees (Moraceae, Ficus). They are subdivided into pollinating fig wasps that belong to the family Agaonidae (but
see [31,32]) and non-pollinating fig wasps (NPFW) that
comprise, among others, five unrelated subfamilies strictly
associated with Ficus: Otitesellinae, Sycoecinae, Sycoryctinae, Epichrysomallinae and Sycophaginae [33].
NPFW are associated with almost all the ca 750 Ficus
species worldwide. They form rich communities of interacting species (up to 36) that differ among regions of the
world and among groups of Ficus. The genus Ficus is
characterized by its unique enclosed inflorescence, the
syconium, which is an urn-shaped receptacle that contains
tens to thousands flowers. Most species of NPFW oviposit
from outside the syconium but some species enter receptive syconia through a narrow tunnel called the ostiole
and oviposit in the flowers from inside the syconium. The
biology of NPFW are poorly known and few detailed studies have reported reliable observations. Among these five
groups of fig wasps, the subfamily Sycophaginae stand out
as the most diverse in terms of male morphologies, biology
and galling habits as well as timing of oviposition.
Taxonomy, diversity and distribution of sycophagine fig
wasps

For a long time, Sycophaginae was considered to be the
only subfamily of NPFW [33-35]. The classification and

Page 2 of 15

the taxonomic limits of the group have been modified
several times. Sycophaginae have been classified as a
subfamily of Torymidae [35-38], or of Agaonidae [33].
Presently, they are not assigned to a family [39] and
their phylogenetic position within Chalcidoidea remains
unknown [40].
The subfamily Sycophaginae, in its modern sense, is well
defined by two apomorphies: 1) the presence of grooves
framing the scutellum (precisely the scutellar-axillar complex bears straight or incurved axillular grooves and transverse frenal grooves, Figure 1A, B &1D) [41]; 2) the
structure of the gastral tergite 8 (exhibiting a posterior
margin deeply, sinuately A-like, with small, sclerotized,
thumbnail-like medial flap (epipygium) and with a peglike cercus arising from the membrane on either side of
the epipygium, Figure 1L) [40].
Presently, Sycophaginae comprises 6 genera and 52
described species (Figure 2, Table 1): Anidarnes Bouček (3
described species), Apocryptophagus Ashmead (19), Eukoebelea Ashmead (2), Idarnes Walker (22), Pseudidarnes
Girault (2) and Sycophaga Westwood (4). A new genus,
associated with fig trees of section Conosycea in the Oriental region has recently been discovered by A.C. and J.Y.R.
Hereafter, this new genus will be referred as Conidarnes
nomem provis. Idarnes is subdivided into three speciesgroups, one of which (incerta species group) strongly
differs morphologically from the others [42,43].
Extrapolating from our sampling of several hundred species of Ficus species the total diversity of the Sycophaginae
could reach 700 species worldwide. Consequently, more
than 80% of the species of Sycophaginae probably await
description (Figure 2). The subfamily occurs in all tropical
regions of the world and is associated with two unrelated
subgenera of Ficus, namely Urostigma and Sycomorus
[44,45] (Table 1). More precisely, Neotropical Idarnes and
Anidarnes wasps develop in Ficus of section Americana
(subgenus Urostigma), Australasian Eukoebelea are strictly
associated with Ficus section Malvanthera (subgenus
Urostigma), Oriental Conidarnes are associated with section Conosycea (subgenus Urostigma); while Apocryptophagus and Sycophaga species are associated with the fig
trees of the subgenus Sycomorus, with the exception of
two species of Apocryptophagus found on F. orthoneura
(subgenus Urostigma, section Urostigma) in Southern
China during this study.
Only a few species-level phylogenies of Sycophaginae
have been published so far, mostly on Papuan Apocryptophagus [46,47] and Neotropical Idarnes [48]. A recent
study by Cruaud et al. [45] reconstructed the historical
biogeography of Sycophaginae and proposed a first
hypothesis based on 55 species. However, the authors
focused neither on the taxonomy of the group nor on
the evolution of the life-history strategies.

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

Page 3 of 15

Figure 1 Morphological features of the Sycophaginae. Mesosoma female: A. Eukoebelea, B. Apocryptophagus. D Anidarnes. E. Sycophaga. Head
female: G. Apocryptophagus, H. Anidarnes, J. Sycophaga, K. Eukoebelea. Tibial spurs female Sycophaga: C. Fore leg, F. Hind leg. Dorsal habitus of
male. I. Apocryptophagus. Tergum 8 and epipygium female. L. Apocryptophagus.

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

Page 4 of 15

Figure 2 Number of species of Sycophaginae estimated, described and included in the present study (logarithmic scale).

Biology of sycophagine fig wasps

Sycophaginae use chemical mediation to locate fig trees
[49]. Up to 6 species of Sycophaginae can be found on
the same Ficus species [50-55]. In most cases, these
small communities are structured by the development of
the syconium, the timing of oviposition (before, during
or after pollination) and the feeding habits of the wasps
(gallers vs. cleptoparasites) [50,51,56]. The biology of
sycophagine NPFW remains poorly known and extremely difficult to ascertain. For some species, trophic status is inferred by oviposition behaviour and biology
remains suspected.
Five different ecological groups of species can be
recognized [57,58] (Table 1 Figure 3). Hereafter, the size
of the wasps in defining the groups is always given relative to the size of the other fig wasp species, including
the pollinator(s), associated with the same species of
Ficus. This is also true for the length of the ovipositor
which is given relative to the ovipositor length of the
other fig wasp species associated with this specific Ficus

(ie longer, shorter or same length; measurements taken
with a reticule under a microscope). Consequently, a
large gall-inducer within one fig wasp guild (associated
to one fig tree species) could be smaller than the smaller
fig wasp associated with another Ficus species. Even if
few exceptions occur, the size of the fig wasps associated
with one Ficus species is globally correlated to the size
of the syconium, the smaller the syconium is, the smaller the flowers and the fig wasps are.
Group 1. The large gall-inducers

This group contains wasps much larger than the cooccurring pollinators. They exhibit relatively shorter and
thicker ovipositor (shorter than their body length) than
other Sycophaginae ovipositing in the same syconia.
They oviposit through the syconium wall seven to 12
days before pollination (data on one species of the
Idarnes incerta species group [19] and two species of
Apocryptophagus [21,59]). The number of galls per syconium is variable [60]. However, the published data
showed that there is a good correlation between large

Table 1 Taxonomy, distribution and life-history stategies of sycophagine fig wasps
Genera

Host Ficus subgenus Distribution
(sub)section

Oviposition timing

Ovipositor length

Gall
size

Male
morphology

Anidarnes

Urostigma Americana

Neotropical

Before pollination (group 1) shorter than body length

Large Winged

Eukoebelea

Urostigma
Malvanthera

Australasian

After pollination (group 5)

equal or longer than body
length

Small Winged/
Wingless

Conidarnes

Urostigma Conosycea

Oriental

Before & during pollination
(groups 1 & 3)

shorter than body length

Large Winged

Idarnes group
incerta

Urostigma Americana

Neotropical

Before pollination (group 1) shorter than body length

Large Winged

Idarnes group
flavicollis

Urostigma Americana

Neotropical

After pollination (group 2)

longer than body length

Small Wingless

Idarnes group
carme

Urostigma Americana

Neotropical

After pollination (group 4)

longer than body length

Small Wingless

Apocryptophagus Sycomorus&Urostigma
Urostigma

Afrotropical + Oriental
+ Australasian

Before & After pollination
(groups 1, 2, 4 & 5)

Shorter, equal to or longer
than body length

Small Wingless

Pseudidarnes

Urostigma
Malvanthera

Australasian

Before pollination (group 1) shorter than body length

Large Winged

Sycophaga

Sycomorus

Afrotropical

During pollination (group 3) shorter than body length

Small Wingless

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

Page 5 of 15

Figure 3 Ecological groups of sycophagine NPFW. The five ecological groups are depicted on the growth curve of a Sycomorus fig. The
arrows show the timing of oviposition of the different ecological groups of Sycophaginae.

galls and small brood size (i.e. the mean number of conspecific sycophagine wasps developing per syconium
[61-63]).
The large gall-inducers induce large galls that protrude into the syconium cavity and can occupy nearly
the entire volume of the syconium [63]. There is no
documentation of any such large wasps possessing an
ovipositor as long as that of small gall-inducers ovipositing on the same syconium. This suggests that this group
is biologically homogeneous. This ecology occurs within
several genera: Anidarnes (all species), Conidarnes
(most), Pseudidarnes (all), Idarnes incerta species group
(all) and Apocryptophagus (a few).

to have relatively small brood size (e.g. Apocryptophagus
fusca [54]. These species frequently exhibit different ovipositor lengths relative to their body size [65]. They
belong to the genus Apocryptophagus (most, experimental demonstration for two species [23]) and to the Idarnes
flavicollis group (possibly all, experimental demonstration for one species [19]). Experimental demonstration
consisted of introductions of females into bagged syconia
and determining if wasps could develop independently of
the presence of other fig wasps. This experiments ascertained the ability of these sycophagine wasps to induce
galls.

Group 2. The small gall-inducers

This group contains species - about the same size as the
co-occurring pollinators - that enter the syconia through
the ostiole to oviposit, just like the pollinators do. Sycophaga sycomori drives its ovipositor along and not
through the style of the flower (short or long-styled) and
generally deposits one egg into the embryo sac [66]. They
frequently occur in the syconia and have relatively large
brood sizes [52,66]. The Afrotropical genus Sycophaga
and possibly also one undescribed oriental species of
Conidarnes (JYR, pers. obs.) belong to this group. Ostiolar gallers are apparently absent from the Neotropics.

These smaller wasps (about the same size than the cooccuring pollinators), exhibit medium to long and thin
ovipositor (longer than body length). They oviposit into
the fig flowers a few days before fig pollination (direct
demonstration for A. testacea [23]) or during fig pollination (direct demonstration for A. fusca [23]) and induce
galls about the same size as those of the pollinator. At
least one species of Idarnes is known to insert its ovipositor through the stigma and the style, and deposit its eggs
between the inner integument and the nucellus [50], in
this sense their oviposition is similar to that of the pollinators (although they oviposit from the outside). This
type of gall-inducer occurs in many syconia at medium
to high numbers and there are often many species of
wasps per fig tree species. Available data on this group
are still scarce but on average their brood sizes are medium to large [52,54,62,64], although some species appear

Group 3. The ostiolar gall-inducers

Group 4. The cleptoparasites

In the fig wasp literature the terms “inquiline” [67] and
“cleptoparasite” [57,68] are sometimes used loosely as
synonyms. Here we follow Gordh and Headrick (2001)
[69] who defined the two words differently: an inquiline
is a species that lives as a “guest” of another species but
does not harm the host species. This happens in

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

Cynipid wasps in which the development of the inquiline in a host gall is not always lethal to the gall inducer
[70]. A cleptoparasite is a parasite that preferentially
attacks a gall already parasitized by another species of
parasite. Consequently, cleptoparasites have always
strong detrimental effect on the reproductive success of
their host. Here we use the term “cleptoparasites” to
refer to several groups of Sycophaginae for which detrimental effects on the reproductive success of the pollinators have been observed [52,53]. As we have no direct
evidence of sycophagine species developing as a strict
parasite of another wasp larvae, the term “parasitoid” is
not used here.
This fourth group is composed of smaller wasps (about
the size of the co-occurring pollinators) that exhibit relatively longer ovipositor compared to other Sycophaginae
occurring in the same fig trees (in average the ovipositor is
much longer than the body length). They lay eggs one to
three weeks after pollination (Idarnes, [50]). In the few
documented cases, these wasps oviposit in galls induced
by other fig wasp species and containing mostly larva of
the pollinator (sometimes also of NPFW) [54,65,67]. They
insert their ovipositor through the gall pericarp (Idarnes
carme group), deposit their egg inside the embryo sac and
the larva consumes the endosperm as well as the gallmaker larva [50]. These species have relatively large brood
size [64]. At least in one species, when the parasitic pressure is high, the wasps (Idarnes) can oviposit in developing
seeds and produce small males [67]. These wasps belong
to the genus Apocryptophagus (some, direct demonstration for A. agraensis [23]) and to Idarnes carme group (all,
observation of timing of oviposition for one species [19]).
Group 5. The late “gall-inducers”

Some species groups generally recognized as gall-inducers oviposit after fig pollination. It is difficult to understand how these wasps that oviposit well after pollination
could be gall-inducers. Indeed female flowers wither
rapidly after pollination [24] suggesting that they can no
longer be galled. Further, space constraints due to the
tight internal flower packing resulting from ovule growth
following pollination, probably prohibit new galls from
developing [19]. Hence these species are probably cleptoparasites, parasitoids of the gall-maker larva or even
hyperparasitoids [71]. They are abundant and, for the few
studies published, seem to have relatively large brood size
[52]. Nevertheless, for conservative reasons we will call
them late gall-inducers, pending further biological data.
The members of this group belong to the genera Eukoebelea (all ?) and Apocryptophagus (some species [20]).
Male wingedness

Sycophaginae exhibit extreme male polymorphism (Table
1). Some species-groups or genera have only winged males
(Idarnes incerta group, Anidarnes, Conidarnes), some have

Page 6 of 15

dimorphic males (both winged and apterous individuals cooccur in the same syconia, e.g. Eukoebelea and Pseudidarnes), whereas the others have only wingless males (Sycophaga, Apocryptophagus, other groups of Idarnes).
Hamilton [72] proposed that sexual selection on male
mating opportunities favored winged males in NPFW
species with small broods and wingless males in species
with large broods. Indeed, in species with large broods,
females develop in syconia with conspecific males and
mate before dispersal. Consequently, most mating
opportunities are preempted by the apterous males particularly adapted to crawl between the flowers and mate
within the syconium cavity. In contrast, in species with
small broods, most females emerge into the syconium
cavities in the absence of conspecific males, and winged
males that are able to leave their natal syconium enjoy
most mating opportunities [61].
Aims of the study

As mentioned above, sycophagine are ecologically diverse
and show some of the most extreme examples of male
dimorphism among fig wasps. Therefore, they appear to
be good candidates to test Hamilton’s hypothesis predicting that the presence of winged males and small brood
size may be correlated. In this paper we employ multiple
genetic loci, extensive taxon sampling over all known genera, and several different analytical approaches to discuss
the generic delimitation and reconstruct the evolutionary
history of sycophagine fig wasps. We then use this phylogeny to reconstruct the evolution of sycophagine life-history strategies (galling habits/brood size and male
polymorphism) based on information compiled from our
own observations and several literature sources
[50-54,60,61,63,65,73-76]. In this context, we propose
hypotheses that could explain the observed male dimorphism within sycophagine fig wasps.

Results
Sequence data

The final matrix contained 73 ingroup species and 4 outgroups, represented by 145 individuals and 4267 bp (COI
+Cytb = 2231 bp, EF = 516 bp, 28S stems = 933 bp, 28S
loops = 587 bp). Of these, 2307 bp were variable and
1984 bp were parsimony informative. Alignment of exons
revealed no indels. For all partitions the GTR+I+G was
determined as the best-fitting model by MrAIC.
Phylogenetic analysis

ML and Bayesian analyses produced similar topologies.
We chose to map node support values (PP and BP) on
the Bayesian topology (Figures 4, 5). The topology was
well resolved and higher-level relationships are similar
to those postulated in a previous study [45]. The tree
provided strong support for most relationships within

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

Page 7 of 15

Figure 4 Phylogram of relationships among Sycophaginae and the five outgroup taxa. Bayesian posterior probabilities ≥ 0.95 and
likelihood bootstrap values ≥ 65 are indicated above branches.

Sycophaginae. In all analyses, the subfamily was recovered as monophyletic with strong supports. With the
exception of Apocryptophagus, which was paraphyletic
with respect to Sycophaga, all genera were recovered as
monophyletic with strong support.
Sycophaginae were divided in three well-supported
clades: (i) the Australasian Eukoebelea; (ii) a clade

comprising the Australasian Pseudidarnes, the Neotropical Anidarnes and the Oriental Conidarnes and (iii) a
clade clustering Apocryptophagus and Sycophaga from
the Old World and the Neotropical Idarnes. In all analyses, Eukoebelea was sister to all other Sycophaginae
(PP 1.0, BP 99) and Pseudidarnes was basal to Anidarnes+Conidarnes (PP 0.99, BP 100).

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

Page 8 of 15

Figure 5 Phylogram of relationships among Sycophaginae and the five outgroup taxa (continued). Bayesian posterior probabilities ≥ 0.95
and likelihood bootstrap values ≥ 65 are indicated above branches.

Within the genus Idarnes, all three recognized species
groups (namely incerta, flavicollis and carme) were
recovered as monophyletic with strong support (PP
1.00, BP 100). The Idarnes carme group was basal to a
clade clustering the Idarnes incerta and flavicollis
groups (PP 1.00, BP 100).
Within the Apocryptophagus /Sycophaga clade,
the internodes were short, making the recovery of

unambiguous phylogenetic information difficult. The
basal node was a polytomy of four groups: (i) Apocryptophagus species associated with section Sycocarpus; (ii
and iii) two continental Asiatic species that are respectively associated with F. oligodon and F. orthoneura and
(iv) all the remaining Apocryptophagus and all Sycophaga species. The first group was recovered basal to
the other 3 groups but this relationship was only

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

supported in the Bayesian reconstruction (PP 0.96, BP
65). In the fourth group, the remaining Apocryptophagus
and the Sycophaga species were distributed in five wellsupported clades with no firmly established order of
branching: (i) the Apocryptophagus species associated
with Adenosperma fig trees (PP 1.00, BP 100); (ii) one
Apocryptophagus species associated with F. prostata; (iii)
a group including A. agraensis and A. spinitarsus, two
cleptoparasites associated with F. racemosa and F. variegata respectively; (iv) a small group of Apocryptophagus
species associated with F. variegata and F. nodosa; (v) a
large and well supported clade (PP 0.99, BP 99) of Apocryptophagus and Sycophaga species exclusively associated with monoecious Sycomorus fig trees. Clade (v)
was further subdivided into four groups: (i) the Afrotropical Apocryptophagus species with extremely long ovipositors associated with F. sur, F. vallis-choudae and
F. sycomorus; (ii) an Apocryptophagus species with a
long ovipositor associated with F. sur; (iii) a well supported clade grouping two species of early gallers,
namely A. gigas associated with F. sycomorus and F.
mucuso and A. stratheni associated with F. racemosa;
(iv) a polytomy of three groups comprising A. testacea
and A. fusca which were sister species; a well supported
clade including all Sycophaga species; and a well supported and fully resolved clade grouping all species of
Apocryptophagus from Madagascar and the Mascarene
islands.
Evolution of life history strategies

For the two studied traits (galling habits/brood size and
male polymorphism), the character states of the ancestor
of Sycophaginae remain ambiguous in both parsimony and
likelihood reconstructions (Figure 6). The likelihood difference between winged and unwinged morphs of males is
not significant (proportional likelihoods of 0.84 and 0.15,
respectively). Whatever the ancestral state, aptery and
wingedness evolved several times independently.
The ancestral biology of Sycophaginae is also ambiguous. Large gall-inducers, laying eggs in the syconium
before pollination, medium-sized gall-inducers ovipositing during pollination or late gall-inducers ovipositing
after pollination were equiprobable (proportional likelihoods of 0.21, 0.39 and 0.18, respectively). The ancestor
of the clade Idarnes + Apocryptophagus/Sycophaga was a
medium sized gall-inducer that oviposited from outside
at the same time as the pollinator (proportional likelihood of 0.87). Entrance through the ostiole appeared
once and the ancestor was a medium-sized gall-inducer
ovipositing from the outside during pollination (proportional likelihoods of 0.85). Cleptoparasitism appeared
independently in the Idarnes carme group and in the
genus Apocryptophagus. In both cases this new biology
evolved from medium-sized gallers that oviposit from the

Page 9 of 15

outside of the syconium during pollination (proportional
likelihoods of 0.86 and 0.95 respectively). The ability to
develop large galls before pollination, whatever the ancestral biology, appeared at least four times independently
(twice within Apocryptophagus) illustrating the lability of
such biology.

Discussion
Sycophaginae phylogeny

We employed multiple genetic loci, extensive taxon
sampling, and several different analytical approaches to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of the Sycophaginae. The resulting topology is well resolved and provides
strong support for most notable relationships within the
subfamily. Our phylogeny generally agrees with a recent
molecular study using more limited taxon sampling
[45]. Therefore, we propose to lay the foundation for a
revised classification of the subfamily.
Our analyses highlight three main clades that could be
treated as tribes: (i) the Australasian Eukoebelea; (ii) the
Australasian Pseudidarnes, the Neotropical Anidarnes
and the Oriental Conidarnes and (iii) the Old World
Apocryptophagus and Sycophaga, and the Neotropical
Idarnes.
Our phylogeny strongly suggests Eukoebelea as the basal
taxon within Sycophaginae. This is corroborated by several
morphological characters: 1) the linear notauli without
transverse crenulation (Figure 1A), 2) the absence of a
well-delimitated supraclypeal area (Figure 1K), 3) both
palpi (maxillary and labial) one-segmented, 4) the propodeal spiracles separated from the fore margin of the propodeum (Figure 1A) and 5) a long pronotum.
The phylogenetic reconstruction gives strong support
for a Pseudidarnes + Anidarnes + Conidarnes clade, an
alliance that has never been proposed by any of the previous taxonomic studies (but see [45]). This group is
however well defined and characterized by 1) the deep
and transversely crenulated notauli, axillular and frenal
grooves (Figure 1D), all of them conspicuous; 2) the
antennae inserted high on the face (Figure 1H); 3) the
dorsellum conspicuous (Figure 1D); 4) the clypeal margin bilobed (Figure 1H).
Idarnes and Apocryptophagus/Sycophaga are sister taxa.
This clade is difficult to define morphologically due to the
morphological adaptations exhibited by the ostiolar Sycophaga and by the morphological characters of the Idarnes
incerta species group. However, the group is characterized
by at least some of the following characters: 1) short pronotum (except in ostiolar Sycophaga) (Figure 1B), 2)
notauli deep and transversely crenulated (Figure 1B)
(except in ostiolar Sycophaga, Figure 1E), 3) furcal pit
enclosed within the mesosternum, 4) the clypeal margin
straight or emarginated (Figure 1G) and 5) labial palpi twosegmented.

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

Page 10 of 15

Figure 6 Patterns of evolution of galling habits and male morphology. Branch color reflects the most parsimonious ancestral area for that
branch. Character states with significant proportion of total likelihood are indicated at the main nodes (likelihood threshold = 2.0).
Reconstructions were performed using the ML-topology.

Anidarnes and Idarnes are never recovered in a single
clade, which means that communities associated with
Neotropical fig trees comprise two unrelated genera of
Sycophaginae. Therefore, Sycophaginae communities
associated with Americana fig trees in South America
could be the result of two independent colonisations
(see [45]).
Anidarnes is recovered as monophyletic. However, the
inference of intra generic relationships requires more
extensive sampling. Idarnes is monophyletic and the
incerta group is deeply nested within the genus. Consequently and despite clear morphological differentiation
from the two other species groups that share more characters, the incerta group does not represent a distinct
genus as suggested by Rasplus and Soldati [43].
Females of Sycophaga are strongly differentiated and
exhibit several apomorphies, such as a flattened and elongated head (Figure 1J), a short fore tibiae bearing teeth

(Figure 1C), numerous spurs on the hind tibia (Figure
1F) and an absence of any sculpture on the mesosoma
(Figure 1E). All these characters probably evolved as
adaptations for crawling through the ostiole and make
them easy to identify. A phylogeny based on morphological characters of females would probably support Sycophaga and Apocryptophagus as distinct lineages.
However, in all our analyses, Sycophaga makes Apocryptophagus paraphyletic, with strong support. This result
based on a molecular approach is corroborated by male
morphology (Figure 1I). Indeed, males of Apocryptophagus and Sycophaga cannot be separated on tangible morphological characters. They exhibit a unique suite of
synapomorphies (Figure 1): 1) the long peritremata of the
abdominal spiracles (Figure 1I) that prevent the entry of
water contained in the cavity of mature Sycomorus syconia into the tracheae and allow respiration [77,78], 2) the
flat scape of the antenna and 3) the rectangular head

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

(Figure 1I). Therefore, as already suggested by Bouček
[33], we propose to consider Apocryptophagus as a junior
synonym of Sycophaga (syn. nov). Hereafter, all Apocryptophagus species will be named under Sycophaga.
Evolution of life history strategies

Our analyses show that the two investigated traits (galling habits/brood sizes and male polymorphism) are evolutionarily dynamic (Figure 6). Although the ancestral
states for the whole subfamily cannot be firmly established, we highlight some interesting results.
Based on currently accepted biology of extant species,
the ancestor of Sycophaginae was probably a galler. However, if Eukoebelea species were in fact cleptoparasites, as
suggested in the introduction, then the feeding regime of
the ancestor would be ambiguous. During sycophagine
diversification, the same biologies re-evolved several
times independently in distantly related lineages. Indeed,
the ability to induce large galls evolved at least four times
independently (Anidarnes + Pseudidarnes + Conidarnes
clade, Idarnes incerta group and some Apocryptophagus
species). Cleptoparastism evolved independently in
Idarnes and Apocryptophagus. However, biological observations are missing for many sycophagine species and we
cannot discard the possibility that cleptoparasitism also
appeared in some other clades (four-five times if late gallers are in fact cleptoparasites). Clearly, more direct studies of larval ecology through the dissection of galls,
observation of larval habits or experimental introductions
and exclusions are needed. Life history strategies including whether sycophagine species are gallers or parasitic
on other fig wasp larvae have only been demonstrated for
few species based on field observations and experimental
introductions (e.g. [50,52,54]. However, even careful
experimental introductions and exclusions have limitations. For example, it is not possible to discriminate
between species that oviposit early in the host galls and
mostly feed on plant rather than insect tissue and wasps
that oviposit later (once the gallmaker larva is fully developed) and mostly feed on insect tissue.
The ability to enter the syconia through the ostiole
appeared only once (one lineage of Sycophaga, in our
extended definition of the generic limits). Given that sycophagine fig wasps probably originated 50-40 Ma and following the Sycophaga stem group estimates from Cruaud
et al. [45] (20-10 Ma), this biology took about 30 Ma to
evolve. In the next 15 Ma, females evolved several morphological adaptations to crawl through the bracts that
make their morphology strongly divergent from their sister
lineages (see previous paragraph for details). It is noteworthy that one undescribed species of Conidarnes could
also be an ostiolar gall-inducer. However, this hypothesis
is based only on the external morphology of the species
(JYR, pers. obs.) and needs to be confirmed by further

Page 11 of 15

field observations. Confirmation of this hypothesis would
imply that the ability to enter the syconia appeared twice
independently.
The evolutionary lability of male morphology is typical
of traits that experience strong sexual selection, and has
also been described for horns in scarabaeid beetles [79].
Within the sycophagines, winged and wingless morphs are
distinguished not just by whether they have wings, but
also by their behaviour (winged males can disperse outside
the syconia whereas wingless males can fight and compete
for females within the syconia) and important morphological differences. Winged males resemble their conspecific
females closely, but wingless males are so divergent in
form that they have repeatedly, and mistakenly, been classified in different taxa. They exhibit large mandibles, flattened head with small eyes and have fused mesosoma
segments (Figures 4, 5). The occurrence of winged males,
wingless males or both is highly labile across the phylogeny and closely related species can be monomorphic for
opposite wing morphologies. For example, species in the
Idarnes incerta group have winged males whereas all other
Idarnes species produce apterous males. This polymorphism has also been observed in other groups such as aphids
[80], ants [5] and parasitoid wasps [81] and suggests lability in the developmental processes leading to morph
determination.
Our analyses indicate positive evolutionary correlations between large gall types/small brood sizes and
winged males (Anidarnes + Pseudidarnes + Conidarnes
clade and Idarnes incerta group all belonging to group 1
(Figure 6), a result that was previously reported for
other NPFWs [61] and supports Hamilton’s hypothesis
[72]. Pseudidarnes minerva is the only exception known
to date [61]. This Australian species associated with
Malvanthera fig trees has both polymorphic males
(wingless and winged morphs) and small broods. The
wingless males do not fight, but dig a hole and and
enter galls containing females to mate. This peculiar
behaviour could explain why male polymorphism is
retained in this species. In contrast, our analyses reveal
that species with large brood size tend to produce wingless males.
We could not ascertain the ancestral morph. The proportional likelihood of aptery (0.84) is higher than the likelihood of the winged condition (0.15) but the difference is
not significant. Therefore two scenarios can be proposed:
1) a basal loss of winged morphs and their later re-evolution and 2) a winged ancestor and the independent and
recurrent losses of the winged morph in several lineages.
In both cases, winged or wingless morph reappearance
would be linked with galling strategy. It is noteworthy that
the few Apocryptophagus species that produce large galls
long before the pollinators (e.g. A. gigas and A. stratheni,
some species associated with Sycomorus fig trees) exhibit

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

wingless males only. These species have not re-evolved
winged morphs even at very low densities [60]. This interesting result could be explained by other selective pressures that strongly counterselect the re-appearance of
winged morphs. In particular, the presence of liquid in the
syconia could explain why the males remain apterous.
Indeed, in fig trees belonging to the Sycomorus subgenus,
the cavity of the syconia can be filled with watery liquid
during the interforal and male phases of the syconium
development. Consequently, males emerge from their galls
at a time when the galls are still covered by a thin film of
liquid and literally swim between the galls during their
search for mates [77]. Complementary explanations may
include the large size of Sycomorus syconia in terms of
numbers of flowers compared to that of other species
groups hosting Sycophaginae. This could allow a higher
number of large galls to develop within a single syconium
[82], increasing the brood size of the species.

Conclusions
The resulting trees from our phylogenetic analyses are
mostly well resolved and highly supported. Therefore, we
provide here an accurate phylogenetic framework that can
be used in comparative evolutionary and ecological studies
using Sycophaginae as a model system. Additional work is
still needed on Sycophaginae phylogenetics. Indeed, our
sampling represents only 10% of the estimated biodiversity
of the group. Moreover, the relationships within Sycophaga (in our extended definition of the generic limits) are
still somewhat uncertain. We also show that life history
strategies of Sycophaginae are evolutionary labile, such
that distantly related taxa share similar galling habits and
vice-versa. The reconstruction of patterns of evolution of
male polymorphism between or within the Sycophaginae
genera suggests a lability in the developmental processes
underlying the male morphology determination. Moreover, we show that winged males are favored in species
that induce few galls within the syconia and wingless
males are favored in species with large brood sizes. However, our results have to be taken with caution given that
our inferences are based on a few number of studies dealing with sycophagine biology. Some species appear exceptional in that they apparently induce few galls but exhibit
apterous males, which we hypothesize could be due to
other factors that strongly select against the re-appearance
of winged morphs (presence of liquid in the syconium,
large number of flowers, etc). Untangling the full diversity
of the biology of Sycophaginae will involve a tremendous
amount of field work. What we have put forward here are
a series of propositions on what is the biology of the species and how it evolved. Though preliminary in nature and
although some propositions might be challenged by future
work, this is the first proposal on how the biology of a
group of non pollinating fig wasps diversified. Even within

Page 12 of 15

the current, limited, state of knowledge, we can firmly
claim that we observe surprisingly abundant cases of
repeated independent evolution of similar biologies. The
Sycophaginae thus constitute an interesting model to test
predictions on what factors will canalize the evolution of
particular biologies and morphs.

Methods
Taxonomic and gene sampling

We expanded the sampling of our previous study [45] and
included 73 ingroup species, 93% of which were represented by two individuals. All known genera of Sycophaginae as well as most species-groups were represented
totaling about 1.5 times the number of described species
(Additional file 1 Table S1, Figure 2). As phylogenetic relationships within Chalcidoidea are still unresolved, closer
and more distant relatives were included as outgroups
[83]. Five species belonging to the genera Ceratosolen
(Agaonidae), Odontofroggatia (Epichrysomallinae),
Ficomila (Eurytomidae) and Megastigmus (Torymidae)
were used. All material was collected alive and fixed in
95% ethanol. Each time destructive extraction was used,
vouchers were selected among specimens sampled from
the same fig tree and the same syconium after carefull
identification. Vouchers are deposited at CBGP, Montferrier-sur-Lez, France. A high definition image library of
vouchers was also constructed, using EntoVision Premium
Portable Imaging System, to allow future identification of
specific taxa and traceability of our results (see Figures 4,
5 for examples). In the present study we combined one
nuclear protein-coding gene (F2 copy of elongation factor1a, EF-1a), two mitochondrial protein-coding genes (Cytochrome oxydase I, COI and Cytochrome b, Cytb) and 28S
rRNA (D2-D3 and D4-D5 expansion regions). Extraction,
PCR and sequencing protocols follow [45]. Both strands
for each overlapping fragment were assembled using the
sequence editing software Geneious v3.7 [84]. All the
sequences were deposited in GenBank (Additional file 1,
Table S1).
Phylogenetic analyses

Protein-coding genes (COI, Cytb, EF) were aligned using
ClustalW 1.81 [85] with default gap opening, extension
and substitution costs. For confirmation, alignments
were translated to amino acids using MEGA version 4
[86]. Alignment of sequences encoding rRNA was based
on secondary structure models [87,88] using the terminology developed by Kjer [89] and Gillespie et al.[90].
The structural model of rRNA fragments and alignment
details follow Cruaud et al. [91].
Because our dataset comprised protein-coding genes
and rRNA, we performed partitioned analyses implementing separate nucleotide substitution models for
subsets of the data more likely to have experienced

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

similar evolutionary processes (mitochondrial genes, EF
and rRNA stems and loops). Best fitting model for each
partition was identified using the Akaike information
criterion [92] as implemented in MrAIC.pl 1.4.3[93].
Phylogenetic trees were estimated using maximum likelihood (ML) and Bayesian methods and all the analyses
were conducted on a 150 cores Linux Cluster at CBGP.
We performed ML analyses and associated bootstrapping using the MPI-parallelized RAxML 7.0.4. [94].
GTRCAT approximation of models was used for ML
boostrapping [94] (1000 replicates). Bootstrap percentage (BP) > 95% was considered as strong support and a
BP < 70% as weak.
Bayesian analyses were conducted using a parallel version of MrBayes v. 3.1.1. (Huelsenbeck & Ronquist, 2001).
We assumed across-partition heterogeneity in model parameters by considering the parameter m. Parameter values
for the model were initiated with default uniform priors
and branch lengths were estimated using default exponential priors. To improve mixing of the cold chain and avoid
it converging on local optima, we used Metropolis-coupled
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), with each run
including a cold chain and three incrementally heated
chains. The heating parameter was set to 0.02 in order to
allow swap frequencies from 20% to 70%. We ran two
independent runs of 10 million generations. All values
were sampled every 1000 generations. For the initial determination of burn-in, we examined the plot of overall
model likelihood against generation number to find the
point where the likelihood started to fluctuate around a
constant value. The points sampled prior to convergence
of the chains were then discarded. We used a range of
MCMC convergence and good mixing diagnostics following Cruaud et al.[91]. The results were based on the
pooled samples from the stationary phases of the two
independent runs. Posterior probabilities (PP) > 0.95 were
considered as strong support.

Page 13 of 15

reconstructions using Mesquite 2.73 [95]. All reconstructions were performed on the ML topology. ML
reconstructions were conducted using a single-rate Mk
likelihood model for discrete morphological characters
[96], which assumes that any particular change is
equally probable. ML takes branch lengths into account
and allows quantifying the uncertainty associated with
each reconstructed ancestral state [97]. The likelihood
decision threshold, i.e. the minimum difference in likelihood between the best and the next best state needed
for assigning a state to a node was set to 2.0 [97].

Additional material
Additional file 1: Table S1. List of Sycophaginae and outgroup
species included in this study. Voucher numbers, taxonomic
information, host Ficus species, locality data and GenBank accession
numbers for each sequenced fragment. More information is available
from the authors upon request.

Acknowledgements
“To our friend Jean-Noël Labat, professor at MNHN Paris, France, who
guided us during our first trip in Madagascar in 1996 and died too young”
JYR and CK.
We thank Dominique Strasberg (La Réunion, France) and William Ramirez
(San José, Costa Rica) for contributing samples. We also thank all our guides
in Borneo, Sulawesi, Papua Barat and Gabon, especially Jaman, Lary and
Mado. We also thank Alexandre Dehne Garcia and Arnaud Estoup (CBGP,
Montpellier) for their help with cluster computers and John Heraty and
James Munroe (University of California, Riverside) for their advice on
alignment and their provision of alignment framework for Chalcidoidea.
Special thanks to Emmanuelle Jousselin (CBGP, Montpellier) for valuable
discussion and help. Financial support was provided by grants from the ANR
(National Research Agency) that supports the ‘NiceFigs’ and “BioFigs”
projects, led by Martine Hossaert-McKey (CNRS, Montpellier, France) and Lien
Siang Chou (National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan), Biota/Fapesp (04/
10299-4) and CNPq (302769/2008-0) that support R.A.S.P., a fellowship
FAPESP grant (07/06054-4) to F.H.A.F. and an NRF grant GUN 61497 to S.v.N.
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their careful read and thoughtful
comments on previous version of this article.
Author details
INRA-UMR Centre de Biologie et de Gestion des Populations, CBGP, (INRA/
IRD/CIRAD/Montpellier SupAgro), Campus international de Baillarguet, CS
30016, 34988 Montferrier-sur Lez, France. 2CNRS-UMR Centre d’Ecologie
Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, CEFE, 1919 route de Mende, 34293 Montpellier
Cedex 5, France. 3Natural History Division, South African Museum, Iziko
Museums of Cape Town, PO Box 61, Cape Town 8000, South Africa. 4Key
Laboratory of Tropical Forest Ecology, Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical
Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 88 Xuefu Road, 650223 Kunming,
Yunnan, China. 5Entomology Laboratory, Zoology Division (Museum
Zoologicum Bogoriense). Center Research for Biology, LIPI, Gedung
Widyasatwaloka Jl. Raya Jakarta-Bogor, Km 46, Cobinong 16911, Bogor,
Indonesia. 6Escuela de Biología. Universidad de Costa Rica. A.P. 2060 San
Pedro de Montes de Oca. San José, Costa Rica. 7Instituto Nacional de
Pesquisa da Amazônia, av Andre Araujo 2936, 69060-001, Manaus, Amazonas,
Brazil. 8Depto de Biologia/FFCLRP-USP, Av. Bandeirantes, 3900, 14040-901 Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
1

Evolution of life-history strategies

We compiled information on galling habits/brood size and
male polymorphism of each sampled species from several
literature sources [50-54,60,61,63,65,73-76] and from few
unpublished observations made by us. We considered
three different states for male polymorphism: 0: winged; 1:
dimorphic (both winged and wingless males); 2: apterous.
We used five different states to describe the biology of the
Sycophaginae: 0: large gallers laying eggs in the syconium
before pollination; 1: small-sized gallers ovipositing during
pollination; 2: small-sized gallers ovipositing after pollination (late “gall-inducers”); 3: ostiolar galler ovipositing during the pollination and 4: cleptoparasites ovipositing long
after pollination.
To infer the evolution of life-history strategies, we
conducted Maximum Parsimony and ML ancestral state

Authors’ contributions
AC, CK and JYR designed the research. All the authors provided material or
data. SvN, RU, RASP and JYR identified the wasps. FK and JYR identified the
Ficus species. GG and RJZ performed and coordinated fig wasp DNA
sequencing. AC and JYR performed the analyses. AC and JYR wrote the

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

manuscript, with major comments from FK, PEH and CK. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 16 February 2011 Accepted: 22 June 2011
Published: 22 June 2011
References
1. Gross MR: Alternative reproductive strategies and tactics: diversity within
sexes. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 1996, 11:92-98.
2. Shuster SM, Wade MJ: Mating Systems and Strategies. Princeton, New
Jersey: Princeton University Press; 2003.
3. Andersson M: Sexual Selection. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
Press; 1994.
4. Danforth BN: The morphology and behavior of dimorphic males in Perdita
portalis (Hymenoptera, Andrenidae). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 1991, 29(4):235-247.
5. Oettler J, Suefuji M, Heinze J: The evolution of alternative reproductive
tactics in male Cardiocondyla ants. Evolution 2010, 64(11):3310-3317.
6. Romo-Beltran A, Macias-Ordonez R, Cordoba-Aguilar A: Male dimorphism,
territoriality and mating success in the tropical damselfly, Paraphlebia
zoe Selys (Odonata: Megapodagrionidae). Evol Ecol 2009, 23(5):699-709.
7. Tomkins JL, Brown GS: Population density drives the local evolution of a
threshold dimorphism. Nature 2004, 431(7012):1099-1103.
8. Emlen DJ, Hunt J, Simmons LW: Evolution of sexual dimorphism and
male dimorphism in the expression of beetle horns: Phylogenetic
evidence for modularity, evolutionary lability, and constraint. Am Nat
2005, 166(4):S42-S68.
9. Vanacker D, Vanden Borre J, Jonckheere A, Maes L, Pardo S, Hendrickx F,
Maelfait JP: Dwarf spiders (Erigoninae, Linyphiidae, Araneae): good
candidates for evolutionary research. Belg J Zool 2003, 133(2):143-149.
10. Buzatto BA, Requena GS, Lourenco RS, Munguia-Steyer R, Machado G:
Conditional male dimorphism and alternative reproductive tactics in a
Neotropical arachnid (Opiliones). Evol Ecol 2011, 25(2):331-349.
11. Radwan J, Klimas M: Male dimorphism in the bulb mite, Rhizoglyphus
robini: fighters survive better. Ethol Ecol Evol 2001, 13(1):69-79.
12. Conlan KF: Male dimorphism and delay in sexual development in the
colonial amphipod Jassa - response to sexual selection by inference. Am
Zool 1987, 27(4):A35-A35.
13. Ainsworth R: Male dimorphism in 2 new species of nematode
(Pharyngodonidae, Oxyurida) from new-zealand lizards. J Parasitol 1990,
76(6):812-822.
14. Corl A, Davis AR, Kuchta SR, Comendant T, Sinervo B: Alternative mating
strategies and the evolution of sexual size dimorphism in the sideblotched lizard, Uta stansburiana: a population-level comparative
analysis. Evolution 2010, 64(1):79-96.
15. Hurtado-Gonzales JL, Uy JAC: Intrasexual competition facilitates the
evolution of alternative mating strategies in a colour polymorphic fish.
BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10.
16. Greeff J, van Noort S, Rasplus J-Y, Kjellberg F: Dispersal and fighting in
male pollinating fig wasps. C R Biol 2003, 326:121-130.
17. Murray MG: Environmental constraints on fighting in flightless male fig
wasps. Anim Behav 1989, 38:186-193.
18. Bean D, Cook J: Male mating tactics and lethal combat in the
nonpollinating fig wasp Sycoscapter australis. Anim Behav 2001,
62:535-542.
19. Herre EA, West SA, Cook JM, Compton SG, Kjellberg F: Fig-associated
wasps: pollinators and parasites, sex-ratio adjustment and male
polymorphism, population structure and its consequence. In The
Evolution of Mating Systems in Insects and Arachnids. Edited by: Choe JC,
Crespi BJ. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 1997:226-239.
20. Jousselin E, van Noort S, Greeff JM: Labile male morphology and
intraspecific male polymorphism in the Philotrypesis fig wasps. Mol
Phylogenet Evol 2004, 33:706-718.
21. Moore JC, Pienaar J, Greeff JM: Male morphological variation and the
determinants of body size in two Otiteselline fig wasps. Behav Ecol 2004,
15(5):735-741.
22. Pienaar J, Greeff JM: Different male morphs of Otitesella pseudoserrata fig
wasps have equal fitness but are not determined by different alleles.
Ecol Lett 2003, 6(4):286-289.
23. Niu LM, Hu HY, Huang DW, Fu YG, Peng ZQ: Brood size: a major factor
influencing male dimorphism in the non-pollinating fig wasp Sycobia sp.
Ecol Entomol 2009, 34(6):696-701.

Page 14 of 15

24. Moore JC, Obbard DJ, Reuter C, West SA, Cook JM: Male morphology and
dishonest signalling in a fig wasp. Anim Behav 2009, 78:147-153.
25. Cook JM: Alternative mating tactics and fatal fighting in male fig wasps.
In Insect Evolutionary Ecology. Edited by: Fellowes MDE, Holloway GJ, Rolff J.
Royal Entomological Society; 2005:83-109.
26. Frank JH: Weapons and fighthing in fig wasps. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution 1987, 2(9):259-260.
27. Murray MG: Comparative morphology and mate competition of flightless
male fig wasps. Anim Behav 1990, 39:434-443.
28. Mayr G: Feigeninsecten. Verhandlungen der Zoologisch-Botanischen
Gesellschaft in Wien 1885, 35:147-250.
29. Cook JM, Bean D: Cryptic male dimorphism and fighting in a fig wasp.
Anim Behav 2006, 71:1095-1101.
30. Reinholdt K: Influence of male relatedness on lethal combat in fig wasps:
a theoretical analysis. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 2003,
270(1520):1171-1175.
31. Jousselin E, Rasplus JY, Kjellberg F: Shift to mutualism in parasitic lineages
of the fig/fig wasp interaction. Oikos 2001, 94:287-294.
32. Peng YQ, Duan Z-B, Yang DR, Rasplus JY: Co-occurrence of two Eupristina
species on Ficus altissima in Xishuangbanna, SW China. Symbiosis 2008,
45:9-14.
33. Bouček Z: Australasian Chalcidoidea (Hymenoptera): a biosystematic
revision of genera of fourteen families, with a reclassification of species.
Wallingford, Oxon, UK: CAB International; 1988.
34. Walker F: Notes on Chalcidiae. Part 3. Torymidae and Chalcididae. 1871,
37-54.
35. Wiebes JT: The structure of the ovipositing organs as a tribal character in
the Indo-Australian Sycophaginae Torymidae (Hymenoptera,
Chalcidoidea). Zoologische Mededelingen 1966, 41:151-159.
36. Hill DS: Figs (Ficus spp.) and fig-wasps (Chalcidoidea). J Nat Hist 1967,
1(3):413-434.
37. Joseph KJ: A proposed revision of the classification of the fig insects of
the families Agaonidae and Torymidae (Hymenoptera). Proceedings of the
Royal Entomological Society of London (B) 1964, 33(3/4):63-66.
38. Wiebes JT: A short history of fig wasps research. Gardens’ Bulletin
Singapore 1976, 29:207-232.
39. Rasplus JY, Kerdelhué C, Le Clainche I, Mondor G: Molecular phylogeny of
fig wasps (Hymenoptera). Agaonidae are not monophyletic. Compte
Rendu de l’Académie des Sciences de Paris 1998, 321:517-527.
40. Grissell EE: Toryminae (Hymenoptera: Chalcidoidea: Torymidae): a
redefinition, generic classification and annotated world catalogue of
species. Memoirs on Entomology, International 1995, 2:1-470, .
41. Gibson GAP: Family Agaonidae. In Hymenoptera of the world: An
identification guide to families. Edited by: Goulet H, Huber JT. Ottawa:
Agriculture Canada Publication; 1993:610-614.
42. Boucek Z: The genera of chalcidoid wasps from Ficus fruit in the New
World. J Nat Hist 1993, 27:173-217.
43. Rasplus JY, Soldati L: Familia Agaonidae. In Introducción a los Hymenoptera
de la Región Neotropical. Edited by: Fernández F, Sharkey M. Instituto
Humboldt and Sociedad Colombiana de Entomología; 2007:683-698.
44. Rønsted N, Weiblen GD, Cook JM, Salamin N, Machado CA, Savolainen P:
60 million years of co-divergence in the fig-wasp symbiosis. Proc R Soc
Biol Sci Ser B 2005, 272:2593-2599.
45. Cruaud A, Jabbour-Zahab R, Genson G, Couloux A, Yan-Qiong P, Da
Rong Y, Ubaidillah R, Pereira RAS, Kjellberg F, Van Noort S, et al: Out-ofAustralia and back again: the worldwide historical biogeography of nonpollinating fig wasps (Hymenoptera: Sycophaginae). J Biogeogr 2011,
38:209-225.
46. Silvieus SI, Clement WL, Weiblen GD: Cophylogeny of figs, pollinators,
gallers and parasitoids. In Specialization, speciation, and radiation: the
evolutionary biology of herbivorous insects. Edited by: Tilmon KJ. Berkeley,
California: University of California Press; 2008:225-239.
47. Weiblen GD, Bush GL: Speciation in fig pollinators and parasites. Mol Ecol
2002, 11:1573-1578.
48. Marussich WA, Machado CA: Host-specificity and coevolution among
pollinating and nonpollinating New World fig wasps. Mol Ecol 2007,
16(9):1925-1946.
49. Proffit M, Schatz B, Borges RM, Hossaert-McKey M: Chemical mediation and
niche partitioning in non-pollinating fig-wasp communities. J Anim Ecol
2007, 76(2):296-303.

Cruaud et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:178
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/178

50. Elias LG, Menezes AO, Pereira RAS: Colonization sequence of nonpollinating fig wasps associated with Ficus citrifolia in Brazil. Symbiosis
2008, 45(1-3):107-111.
51. Kerdelhué C, Rasplus JY: Non-pollinating Afrotropical fig wasps affect the
fig-pollinator mutualism in Ficus within the subgenus Sycomorus. Oikos
1996, 75:3-14.
52. Kerdelhué C, Rossi JP, Rasplus JY: Comparative community ecology
studies on Old World figs and fig wasps. Ecology 2000, 81(10):2832-2849.
53. West SA, Herre EA: The ecology of the New World fig-parasitizing wasps
Idarnes and implications for the evolution of the fig-pollinator
mutualism. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 1994,
258:67-72.
54. Wang RW, Zheng Q: Structure of a fig wasp community: temporal
segregation of oviposition and larval diets. Symbiosis 2008, 45(13):113-116.
55. Nazareno AG, da Silva RBQ, Pereira RAS: Fauna of hymenoptera in Ficus
spp. (Moraceae) in the Central Amazon, Brazil. Iheringia Ser Zool 2007,
97(4):441-446.
56. Compton SG, Rasplus JY, Ware AB: African fig wasp parasitoid
communities. In Parasitoid community ecology. Edited by: Hawkins BA,
Sheehan W. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1994:323-348.
57. Cook JM, Rasplus J-Y: Mutualists with attitude: coevolving fig wasps and
figs. Trends Ecol Evol 2003, 18(5):241-248.
58. Cook JM, Segar ST: Speciation in fig wasps. Ecol Entomol 2010, 35:54-66.
59. Peng Y-Q, Yang DR, Duang ZB: The population dynamics of a nonpollinating figwasp on Ficus auriculata, at Xishuangbanna, China. J Trop
Ecol 2005, 21:581-585.
60. Godfray HC: Virginity in haplodiploid populations: a study on fig wasps.
Ecol Entomol 1988, 13:283-291.
61. Cook JM, Compton SG, Herre EA, West SA: Alternative mating tactics and
extreme male dimorphism in fig wasps. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B 1997, 264:747-754.
62. West SA, Herre EA: Partial local mate competition and the sex ratio: a
study on non-pollinating fig wasps. J Evol Biol 1998, 11:531-548.
63. Bronstein JL: Natural history of Anidarnes bicolor (Hymenoptera:
Agaonidae), a galler of the Florida strangling fig (Ficus aurea). Fla
Entomol 1999, 82(3):454-461.
64. Pereira RAS, Prado AP: Non-pollinating wasps distort the sex ratio of
pollinating fig wasps. Oikos 2005, 110(3):613-619.
65. Yang C-Y, Wang R-W, Zhao G-F, Yang D-R: Diet of non pollinating wasps
and their impact on the stability of fig-pollinator wasp mutualism. Zool
Res 2005, 26(4):379-385.
66. Galil J, Dulberger R, Rosen D: The effects of Sycophaga sycomori L. on the
structure and development of the syconia of Ficus sycomorus L. New
Phytol 1970, 69:103-111.
67. Pereira RA, Teixeira SD, Kjellberg F: An inquiline fig wasp using seeds as a
resource for small male production: a potential first step for the
evolution of new feeding habits? Biol J Linn Soc 2007, 92(1):9-17.
68. Abdurahiman UC, Joseph KJ: Cleptoparasitism of the fig wasps
(Torymidae: Chalcidoidea) in Ficus hispida L. Entomon 1978, 3:181-186.
69. Gordh G, Headrick DH: A Dictionary of Entomology. New York. Oxon: CABI;
2001.
70. Ács Z, Challis R, Bihari P, Blaxter M, Hayward A, Melika G, Csóka G, Pénzes P,
Pujade-Villar J, Nieves-Aldrey JL, et al: Phylogeny and DNA barcoding of
inquiline oak gallwasps (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae) of the Western
Palaearctic. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2010.
71. Compton SV, van Noort S, Mcleish M, Deeble M, Stone V: Sneaky African
fig wasps that oviposit through holes drilled by other species. African
Natural History 2009.
72. Hamilton WD: Wingless and fighting males in fig wasps and other
insects. In Sexual selection and reproductive competition in insects. Edited by:
Blum MS, Blum NA. London: Academic Press; 1979:167-220.
73. Ansari MH: The process of egg laying in Idarninae (Chalcidoidea:
Hymenoptera). Indian J Entomol 1967, 29:380-384.
74. Baker CF: A study of caprification in Ficus nota. Philippine Journal of
Science (D) 1913, 8:63-83.
75. Bronstein JL: The non-pollinating wasp fauna of Ficus pertusa:
exploitation of a mutualism? Oikos 1991, 61(2):175-186.
76. West SA, Herre EH, Windsor DM, Green RS: The ecology and evolution of
the New World non-pollinating fig wasp communities. J Biogeogr 1996,
23:447-458.

Page 15 of 15

77. Compton SG, McLaren FAC: Respiratory adaptations in some male fig
wasps. Proceedings of the Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van
Wetenschappen (C) 1989, 92:57-71.
78. Ramirez WB: Breathing adaptations of males in fig gall flowers
(Hymenoptera: Agaonidae). Rev Biol Trop 1996, 44/45(3/1):277-282.
79. Emlen DJ, Marangelo J, Ball JB, Cunningham CW: Diversity in the weapons
of sexual selection: horn evolution in the beetle genus Onthophagus
(Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae). Evolution 2005, 59:1060-1084.
80. Brisson JA: Aphid wing dimorphisms: linking environmental and genetic
control of trait variation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B
2010, 365:605-616.
81. Matthews RW, Gonzalez JM, Matthews JR, Deyrup LD: Biology of the
parasitoid Melittobia (Hymenoptera: Eulophidae). Annu Rev Entomol 2009,
54:251-266.
82. Kjellberg F, Jousselin E, Bronstein JL, Patel A, Yokoyama J, Rasplus JY:
Pollination mode in fig wasps: the predictive power of correlated traits.
Proc R Soc Biol Sci Ser B 2001, 268:1113-1121.
83. Gibson GAP, Heraty JM, Woolley JB: Phylogenetics and classification of
Chalcidoidea and Mymarommatoidea - a review of current concepts
(Hymenoptera, Apocripta). Zool Scr 1999, 28(1-2):87-124.
84. Geneious v3.7. [http://www.geneious.com/].
85. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson JT: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignement through
sequence weighting, position specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22:4673-4680.
86. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
87. Gillespie JJ, Johnston JS, Cannone JJ, Gutell RR: Characteristics of the
nuclear (18S, 5.8S, 28S and 5S) and mitochondrial (12S and 16S) rRNA
genes of Apis mellifera (Insecta: Hymenoptera): structure, organization
and retrotransposable elements. Insect Mol Biol 2006, 15:657-686.
88. Gillespie JJ, Munro JB, Heraty JM, Yoder MJ, Owen AK, Carmichael AE: A
secondary structural model of the 28S rRNA expansion segments D2
and D3 for chalcidoid wasps (Hymenoptera: Chalcidoidea). Mol Biol Evol
2005, 22(7):1593-1608.
89. Kjer KM: Use of rRNA secondary structure in phylogenetic studies to
identify homologous positions: an example of alignment and data
presentation from the frogs. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 1995,
4:314-330.
90. Gillespie J, Cannone J, Gutell R, Cognato A: A secondary structural model
of the 28S rRNA expansion segments D2 and D3 from rootworms and
related leaf beetles (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae; Galerucinae). Insect Mol
Biol 2004, 13(5):495-518.
91. Cruaud A, Jabbour-Zahab R, Genson G, Cruaud C, Couloux A, Kjellberg F,
van Noort S, Rasplus J-Y: Laying the foundations for a new classification
of Agaonidae (Hymenoptera: Chalcidoidea), a multilocus phylogenetic
approach. Cladistics 2010, 26(4):359-387.
92. Aikake H: Information theory and an extension of the maximum
likelihood principle. In Second international symposium on information
theory. Edited by: Petrov PN, Csaki F. Akad. Kiado, Budapest; 1973:267-281.
93. Nylander JAA: MrAIC.pl. Program distributed by the author. Upssala:
Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala University;, 1.4.3 2004.
94. Stamatakis A: Phylogenetic models of rate heterogeneity: A High
Performance Computing Perspective. International Parallel and Distributed
Processing Symposium (IPDPS 2006), Rhodes Island, Greece 2006, 8.
95. Maddison WP, Maddison DR: Mesquite: a modular system for
evolutionary analysis. 2008 [http://mesquiteproject.org].
96. Lewis PO: A likelihood approach to estimating phylogeny from discrete
morphological character data. Syst Biol 2001, 50:913-925.
97. Pagel M: The maximum likelihood approach to reconstructing ancestral
character states of discrete characters on phylogenies. Syst Biol 1999,
48:612-622.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-178
Cite this article as: Cruaud et al.: Phylogeny and evolution of life-history
strategies in the Sycophaginae non-pollinating fig wasps (Hymenoptera,
Chalcidoidea). BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:178.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
