<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Normalization and centering of array-based heterologous genome hybridization based on divergent control probes</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-183"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Brian J Darby"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Normalization and centering of array-based
heterologous genome hybridization based on
divergent control probes
Brian J Darby1, Kenneth L Jones1,2, David Wheeler1 and Michael A Herman1*

Abstract
Background: Hybridization of heterologous (non-specific) nucleic acids onto arrays designed for model-organisms
has been proposed as a viable genomic resource for estimating sequence variation and gene expression in nonmodel organisms. However, conventional methods of normalization that assume equivalent distributions (such as
quantile normalization) are inappropriate when applied to non-specific (heterologous) hybridization. We propose
an algorithm for normalizing and centering intensity data from heterologous hybridization that makes no prior
assumptions of distribution, reduces the false appearance of homology, and provides a way for researchers to
confirm whether heterologous hybridization is suitable.
Results: Data are normalized by adjusting for Gibbs free energy binding, and centered by adjusting for the median
of a common set of control probes assumed to be equivalently dissimilar for all species. This procedure was
compared to existing approaches and found to be as successful as Loess normalization at detecting sequence
variations (deletions) and even more successful than quantile normalization at reducing the accumulation of false
positive probe matches between two related nematode species, Caenorhabditis elegans and C. briggsae. Despite
the improvements, we still found that probe fluorescence intensity was too poorly correlated with sequence
similarity to result in reliable detection of matching probe sequence.
Conclusions: Cross-species hybridizations can be a way to adapt genome-enabled tools for closely related nonmodel organisms, but data must be appropriately normalized and centered in a way that accommodates
hybridization of nucleic acids with diverged sequence. For short, 25-mer probes, hybridization intensity alone may
be insufficiently correlated with sequence similarity to allow reliable inference of homology at the probe level.

Background
Many organisms that are important components of most
ecosystems are understudied at the genetic level because
they lack useful genome-enabled resources. Hybridization of nucleic acids from non-model organisms onto
DNA microarrays designed for closely related modelorganisms has been used as a potential alternative to
building genomic resources for each species of interest.
A variety of platforms and objectives in contemporary
applications of heterologous ("cross-species”) hybridizations, but the recurring challenge for each platform is to
measure the effect of sequence dissimilarity on
* Correspondence: mherman@ksu.edu
1
Ecological Genomics Institute, Division of Biology, Kansas State University,
Manhattan, KS 66506, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

hybridization between the probes being used and the
nucleic acids of the species being hybridized. For example, Gilad et al. [1] tested hybridization efficiency of
microarrays spotted with amplicons from four primate
species (including human) and showed that increasing
sequence divergence resulted in reduced hybridization
efficiency. Similarly, an array of expressed sequence tags
(ESTs) from African cichlid fish (Astatotilapia burtoni)
was used to test the validity of gene expression analysis
on a variety of related teleost fish [2]. The number of
spots (probe features) that were able to demonstrate differential gene expression decreased with increasing phylogenetic distance. The microarrays were subsequently
used to assess gene expression from swordtail (Xiphophorus nigrensis) [3], which was estimated to be at the
far edge of what was considered phylogenetically close

© 2011 Darby et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

enough to be reliable for cross-species hybridization on
the cichlid arrays. Similar arrays developed from zebrafish (Danio) ESTs have been used with coral reef fish
(Pomacentrus) cDNA [4]. In situ synthesized oligonucleotide arrays are an alternative to spotted cDNA
microarrays and commonly used when the species of
interest is closely related to a model organism for which
a commercially designed chip is already available. For
expression studies, it is common to screen probes for
sequence conservation by first hybridizing heterologous
gDNA, and secondly assessing gene expression by hybridizing experimental cDNA and analyzing only the
accepted probes [5]. This strategy has been applied to
examine gene expression of various genera of Brassicaceae on an array containing Arabidopsis thaliana
probes, [5-7], expression of banana genes on a rice array
[8], expression of horse genes on an array containing
human probes [9], and expression of goat genes using a
bovine array [10].
The preparation of heterologous hybridization data for
analysis is problematic because probe binding is a result
of multiple factors, including binding free-energy, selffolding, dimerization, and, importantly, sequence similarity or divergence [11]. Traditional approaches to analyzing heterologous hybridization data largely follow the
techniques of array-based comparative genome hybridization (aCGH ) [12-14], which is the hybridization of
gDNA to con-specific arrays for the detection of chromosomal or copy-number variations. These techniques
can include local regression normalization and quantile
normalization. However, the conventional normalization
procedures designed for aCGH have the potential to
result in the false appearance of homology if the probe
signals from cross-species hybridizations violates the
underlying assumptions of uniform statistical distributions due to sequence divergence. Several methods have
been proposed to ‘screen’ probes and reduce the potential for false positives [15]: 1) accept only probes of a
certain hybridization fluorescence threshold or overall
intensity [5,16], 2) match probes from a reference genome to that of the target genome and only analyze
probes of a certain sequence similarity [17], or 3) normalize the entire dataset using a suite of known conserved genes [18,19]. However, the significant challenge
with normalizing intensity data based on conserved
genes is that genes evolve at different rates for different
lineages. Many non-model organisms have such little
genomic sequence data known that identifying sets of
genes with conserved sequences amongst a group of
species is unreliable, if not impossible. We propose a
normalization and centering approach that relies on universally diverged (non-conserved) probes and does not
make any prior assumptions about the distribution of
probe signal intensities.

Page 2 of 10

Our initial objective in this study was to identify probes
with conserved sequences that could be used as potential
primer sites to allow amplification and subsequent cloning of orthologous genes of interest. Traditional normalization techniques led to numerous false positive matches,
so we developed an algorithm for normalizing and centering intensity data of heterologous hybridization of
gDNA for when the sequence divergence of species being
used is unknown and a set of conserved genes is unreliable of impractical. Our approach uses built-in “control”
probes from a plant (Arabidopsis thaliana) and a bacterium (Bacillus subtilis) that are available on the commercial Caenorhabditis elegans tiling array from Affymetrix®
and assumed to be equivalently diverged from all nematode species used here (from the family Rhabditidae and
Cephalobidae). This procedure is most applicable to oligonucleotide microarrays with universally diverged “control” features (e.g. from a different phylum or, preferably,
domain than the target species) that have been hybridized with single dye-labeled gDNA of a related, but heterologous, species. The approach is tested for sensitivity
and specificity using two isolates of C. elegans, one isolate
of C. briggsae (for which the full genome sequence is
available), and five other nematode species with little to
no known sequence data beyond small subunit ribosomal
RNA gene sequences (Figure 1). These nematodes are
reasonable candidates for the study of genomic responses
to environmental perturbation due to their ease of study
in laboratory conditions and their phylogenetic proximity
to the model species C. elegans. Furthermore, the species
we selected all co-occur on the Konza Long-Term Ecological Research station [20], so it would be likely that
researchers might wish to attempt heterologous array
hybridization with a similar suite of nematodes. They
represent the bacterial-feeding nematodes from the tallgrass prairie biome [21] and perform key ecosystem services such as regulating bacterial turnover and nutrient
cycling in soil environments [22,23]. Renn et al. [2] suggested that heterologous hybridization is most successful
when the species are diverged by less than 10 MYA, but
also estimated that the approach could be used on species separated by as much as ~65 MYA. Dating of the
molecular divergence between these nematode species is
inexact due to the lack of a robust and informative fossil
record, but estimates of divergence time between C. elegans and C. briggsae has been narrowed down to 80-110
MYA following full genome sequencing [24]. Therefore,
the two species from the family Cephalobidae (Acrobeloides sp. and Chiloplacus sp.) are so far diverged from C.
elegans that they can serve as a negative control, while
species within the family Rhabditidae (Oscheius tipulae,
Oscheius sp. FVV-2, and Mesorhabditis sp.) serve as the
species of interest to demonstrate the viability of this
approach.

Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

Page 3 of 10

Oscheius tipulae KS585
Oscheius sp.
Oscheius tipulae
Oscheius sp. FVV-2 KS555
Oscheius sp.
Oscheius dolichuroides
Rhabditis myriophila
Oscheius sp.
Rhabditis myriophila
Oscheius insectivora
Rhabditella sp.
Rhabditella axei
Rhabditella axei
Pellioditis marina
Pellioditis mediterranea
Rhabditis terricola
Rhabditis sp. KS594
Pellioditis typica
Rhabditis blumi
Rhabditis rainai
Haemonchus similis
Haemonchus contortus
Ostertagia ostertagi
Otostrongylus sp.
Cruznema sp.
Cruznema sp.
Cruznema sp.
Cruznema sp.
Cruznema tripartitum
Choriorhabditis dudichi
Caenorhabditis sp.
Caenorhabditis briggsae AF16
Caenorhabditis remanei
Caenorhabditis elegans N2
Caenorhabditis elegans CB4856
Caenorhabditis sp.
Caenorhabditis drosophilae
Caenorhabditis sonorae
Protorhabditis sp.
Protorhabditis sp.
Rhabditoides inermis
Teratorhabditis palmarum
Teratorhabditis synpapillata
Mesorhabditis spiculigera
Parasitorhabditis sp.
Mesorhabditis sp. KS587
Mesorhabditis sp.
Mesorhabditis sp.
Mesorhabditis anisomorpha
Crustorhabditis scanica
Distolabrellus veechi
Distolabrellus veechi
Pelodera teres
Rhabditoides regina
Rhabditoides inermiformis
Acrobeloides sp. KS586
Chiloplacus sp. KS584
0.1
Figure 1 Phylogeny of study species. 18s ribosome RNA (small subunit) phylogeny of nematode species included in this study (in bold, red
font), in comparison to 49 other species from the family Rhabditidae. Acrobeloides and Chiloplacus (from the family Cephalobidae) are used as
outgroups.

Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

Page 4 of 10

Methods
gDNA and Hybridization conditions

Strains used for hybridization included Caenorhabditis
elegans (N2, C. elegans (CB4856), C. briggsae (AF16),
and five species isolated from Konza Prairie, Riley
County, Kansas (US): Oscheius tipulae (KS585) [Genbank:HQ130502], Oscheius sp. FVV-2 (KS555) [Genbank:HQ130503], Mesorhabditis sp. (KS587) [Genbank:
HQ130505], Acrobeloides sp. (KS586) [Genbank:
HQ130506], Chiloplacus sp. (KS584) [Genbank:
HQ130507]. Genomic DNA was isolated from each species by phenol-chloroform extraction, labelled and
hybridized onto the GeneChip® C. elegans Tiling 1.0R
Array according to manufacturer’s specification using
two chips per species representing biological replicates.
Arrays were imaged on GeneChip ® Scanner 3000-7G
and data extracted with GeneChip® Operating Software
(GCOS) and analyzed using Tilling Analysis Software
(TAS). Raw and processed data has been submitted to
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus [GEO:GSE23667].
Analysis

Raw background-subtracted probe intensities were
accessed from Affymetrix ® Tiling Analysis Software
(TAS). Subsequent analyses were performed in Statistical Analysis Software, Release 9.1.3 (SAS Institute, Cary,
NC, USA). Our approach utilizes “control” probes that
are standard features of the Affymetrix C. elegans tiling
chip that correspond to sequences in the Arabidopsis
thaliana and Bacillus subtilis genomes. These features
are used in gene expression studies to calibrate intensity
with transcript concentration and to estimate 5’ and 3’
end bias, but are otherwise unused in genome hybridization. Probe-specific normalization was performed by
first quantifying the relationship between log e -transformed probe intensity (ln(ic,s)) of control probes c from
species s and thermodynamic binding affinity ΔG 37
(Gibb’s free energy estimate, according to the nearest
neighbour thermodynamic model of SantaLucia [25]):
ln(ic,s ) = βc,s ∗

G37 + α + e

(1)

where a is the intercept and e the error term
(assumed to be normally distributed). We assume that
gDNA from all nematode species was equally dissimilar
from these control probes, therefore subtle differences
in the relationship between binding efficiency of control
probes to thermodynamic binding affinity most likely
represents chip to chip variation. The resulting model
parameters from (1) were used to normalize probe p
from each species s to its final adjusted intensity (AI):
AI = ln(ip,s ) - (βc,s ∗

G37 ) − median(c, s)

(2)

where the median intensity (median(c,s)) of all control
probes c from species s was used as a phase shift to center all control probes around zero.
To characterize the relationship between probe intensity and the percent similarity, we make use of a dataset
of candidate genes with potential ecologically relevant
roles in nematode survival [26]. We selected 49 of the
candidate genes of interest that had only one putative
ortholog and confirmed that this suite of genes came
from all six chromosomes (I: 3, II: 3, III, 6, IV: 8, V: 18,
X: 11) with a group GC content (min: 40.1%, mean:
47.4%, max: 65.8%) that was representative of all probes
in exon regions (43% ± 9.2 SD). We then aligned each
probe from the C. elegans chip to its respective position
in the C. briggsae homolog and computed the number
of identical nucleotides.

Results and Discussion
Conventional data transformation

We initially analyzed the hybridization data using a
conventional aCGH approach that included quantile
normalization [12,13], scaling on a per-array basis to a
common mean (500 intensity units), and a waveletbased smoothing of 50-bp bandwidth to ‘de-noise’ the
data and accentuate regions of dissimilarity, or copynumber deviations, from baseline [14]. At first inspection, this conventional aCGH analysis resulted in
probes of high signal intensity (comparable to that of
C. elegans N2) for even non-Caenorhabditis species,
especially around exonic regions (Figure 2D). However,
attempts to amplify orthologous genes using PCR primers based on the exonic probes of high signal intensity (relative to C. elegans) were unsuccessful. It is
possible that the greater probe intensity of exonic
regions is not due to sequence similarity but to binding affinity, because probes in exon regions had a
higher average GC-content (43% ± 9.2 SD) relative to
probes in intron or intragenic regions (34% ± 10.4 SD).
Thus, we hypothesized that quantile normalization of
cross-species hybridization has the potential to result
in the appearance of reliable data, but may in fact be a
misleading representation of false positive probe
matches due to artifacts during the data transformation process. Furthermore, smoothing can artificially
inflate the intensity value of low-intensity probes that
are adjacent to high intensity probes. Finally, the mean
or median of heterologous hybridizations is naturally
expected to be lower than homologous hybridizations
because fewer sequences are perfect matches. Scaling
all arrays to a common mean (or median) inflates nonspecific hybridization intensity relative to specific
hybridization intensity.

Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

Page 5 of 10

Figure 2 Normalizing and centering probe intensity data. Data transformation steps used to normalize and center data from A) initial raw
probe intensity, to B) adjusted for thermodynamic binding affinity (ΔG37 ), to C) centering of median control probes, in comparison to D)
quantile normalization. Data are graphed for Caenorhabditis elegans N2 (blue), C. elegans CB4856 (green), C. briggsae (red), and nonCaenorhabditis species (black), but note that quantile normalized signals (D) are relative to homologous hybridization, so no data for N2 is
shown. Left column: signals from control probes only (from Arabidopsis thaliana and Bacillus subtilis sequences); right column: signals from exon
probes only.

Alternate normalization and centering

To address the need for analyzing heterologous hybridization data with species for which the true genome-wide
sequence similarity was unknown, we developed an
alternative, probe-level normalization and centering. If
normalization results in normally (or near normally) distributed probe intensities, the only remaining variability

is likely to be predominantly random experimental
error. The purpose of centering is to ensure that equivalent baseline hybridization is centered on a single common value. The raw probe intensity values (and
statistical distribution) of loge-transformed control were
nearly, but not exactly, similar between all chips (Figure
2A). After adjustment for the relationship between

Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

probe intensity and thermodynamic binding affinity
(Figure 3), both target and control probes were uncentered, but normally distributed (Figure 2B). Finally, all
probes were phase shifted to bring the median control

Page 6 of 10

probe intensity to zero (Figure 2C). The result was that
target probes from two Caenorhabditis elegans isolates
averaged greater than zero (indicating specific binding
signal), but the target probes from non-Caenorhabditis

Figure 3 Thermodynamics of non-specific probe binding. The relationship between control probe intensity and thermodynamic binding
affinity (ΔG37 ) for each species tested that was used in the probe-level normalizing procedure. A) Caenorhabditis elegans N2, B) C. elegans
CB4856, C) C. briggsae, D) Mesorhabditis sp., E) Oscheius tipulae, F) Oscheius sp. FVV-2, G) Acrobeloides sp., H) Chiloplacus sp.

Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

species were centered near zero (indicating lack of specific binding). However, not all genes evolve at the same
rates and it is possible that some genes within the genomes of the non-Caenorhabditis species are conserved
and bind specifically to the C. elegans probes. If the
average (normalized and centered) signal of all exon
probes for a particular gene is significantly greater than
zero, such a gene could reasonably be considered to be
“conserved”. As can be expected, the number of genes
whose full set of exon probes average greater than zero
decreases with increasing phylogenetic distance from C.
elegans N2 (C. elegans CB4856: 17,399, C. briggsae
AF16: 410, Oscheius tipulae KS585: 66, Oschieus sp.
FVV-2 KS555: 61, Mesorhabditis sp. KS587: 41, Acrobeloides sp. KS586: 35, Chiloplacus sp. KS584: 30; t-test
with Bonferroni correction for multiple tests). This was
a first indication that sequence conservation in nonCaenorhabditis species may be too limited to permit
detection of conserved regions.
Test of sensitivity with con-specific hybridization

To confirm that our normalization and centering
approach was as capable of detecting conspecific variations as traditional normalization approaches, we were
able to visually confirm 121 out of the 131 previously
published deletions in C. elegans CB4856 [27]. To illustrate a representative case, Figure 4 shows a decrease in
the ratio of probe values surrounding niDf94 (V), a deletion of 3-kb of sequences in CB4856 (partially deleting

Figure 4 Confirmation of hybridization sensitivity. The ratio of
C. elegans CB4856 to C. elegans N2 probe intensity values (following
probe-level normalization and centering) in relation to the niDf94(V)
deletion variant (of chromosome V), which overlaps two
uncharacterized genes in the N2 genome, C49G7.1 and D1065.3a.
The dip in probe intensity ratios below 1.0 is representative for the
other 141 deletion variants previously identified [21].

Page 7 of 10

the C49G7.1 and D1065.3 genes) that are present in N2.
The few deletions we did not observe are likely due to
small differences in genome coverage or different probe
lengths (25 vs. 50) between the two platforms used.
Test of specificity with cross-species hybridization

Our initial objective of designing primers from suitable
probes would involve identifying probes of conserved
sequence as indicated by a fluorescence signal of significant intensity relative to that of known homologous
binding from C. elegans. In order to do this we computed the ratio of each probe’s signal intensity relative
to that of C. elegans for each heterologous test species.
We assumed that any ‘threshold’ ratio used to define a
putatively homologous probe match could result in false
positive matches, so we took advantage of the fully
sequenced C. briggsae genome to define a signal intensity ratio that would minimize the rate of incorrectly
identified sequence matches. We expected two major
sources of variability in the intensity of C. briggsae
gDNA hybridized to C. elegans, 1) multiple occurrences
of the same probe sequence within either the C. elegans
or C. briggsae genome, and 2) sequence divergence
between the two species. First, we computed the number of times that each 25-mer probe sequence occurred
in the C. elegans and C. briggsae genomes (Figure 5A).
As expected, probe intensity from C. elegans gDNA was
positively related to frequency, while probe intensity of
C. briggsae gDNA was generally unaffected (Figure 5B).
Although many probes occur multiple times in the C.
briggsae genome, it is a small portion of the over three
million probes on the array and does not have a large
effect on the overall results. Next, we determined the
nucleotide similarity at each corresponding probe position between C. elegans and C. briggsae for 49 single
copy genes, identified in a previous study as being
potentially important for survival in different bacterial
environments. Quantile normalization resulted in poor
discrimination of true positive probe matches (Figure
6A) and a relative high false positive rate at all potential
signal intensity ratios (Figure 6B). Our alternate normalization and centering improved the discrimination of
true perfect match probes (Figure 6C), and lowered the
ratio of false-matches to perfect-matches at some
threshold ratios (Figure 6D). Although the values resulting from quantile normalization and from our proposed
normalization and centering are comparable, they are
not necessarily on equivalent scales. For example, selecting a signal intensity ratio from quantile normalization
of 0.6 detects 14 true positive matches, but results in
over 155 false positive mismatches. A ratio of 1.1 from
our proposed alternative normalization and centering
based on universally diverged control probes also detects
14 true positive matches, but results in only 34

Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

Figure 5 Effect of multiple-copy probes on binding intensity.
A) Comparison of probe frequency found in C. elegans and C.
briggsae genomes. B) Probe intensity of C. elegans (blue) and C.
briggsae (red) gDNA related to probe frequency in C. elegans
genome.

mismatches. Despite an over 4.5-fold reduction, the ultimate false positive detection rate is still high.

Conclusions
Cross-species hybridization has been proposed as a way
to adapt genome-enabled tools developed for model
organisms to closely related non-model relatives. However, we (present work) and others [18,19] have shown
that the data must be appropriately normalized and centered to control for sequence divergence. Ultimately, we
found that probe intensity alone was a poor predictor of
sequence similarity and can result in false inferences of
homology. Our findings largely support the recent
results of Machado and Renn [18] who also found that
the ability to detect genes decreased below 90%
sequence identity between three species of Drosophila.
The major difference in our approach is that Machado
and Renn normalize based on the 100 or 1000 most
conserved genes (assumed to be equivalently similar for
all species of interest), while we propose normalizing
and centering based on control, non-target probes
(assumed to be equivalently dissimilar for all species

Page 8 of 10

tested). Both approaches appear to be valid for their
respective purposes, but our approach might be more
applicable in the absence of enough genomic sequence
data to identify an a priori set of conserved genes. The
lack of universally dissimilar probes on the spotted chip
of Machado and Renn [18] prevent us from applying
our technique on their data, and the lack of genomic
sequence data amongst our species prevent us from
applying their technique on our data. However, we can
nonetheless predict that the microarrays printed with
PCR products ~500 bp long [18] are likely to be more
sensitive and specific to their targets than the 25-mer
probes used in the Affymetrix platform presented here.
Single mismatches may have a more adverse affect on
the binding of short, 25-bp probes, than long, ~500 bp
probes. Hybridization of gDNA onto microarrays is currently the standard technique to validate probes on gene
chips for expression analysis in cross-species applications. One commonly used procedure [5] hybridizes heterologous gDNA from a non-model organism onto an
existing 25-mer GeneChip® designed for a model organism and masks all probe sets except those with at least
one probe feature whose hybridization intensity is above
a predefined threshold intensity. Our analysis suggests
that, either with or without probe-level normalization
and centering, a large number of non-specific control
probes can still have a relatively high hybridization
intensity compared to specific probes (Figure 2A).
Furthermore, even if the threshold intensity were set
relative to target genome hybridization, we show that a
significant fraction of probe features at all threshold
intensities could likely be false-positives. Thus, we fear
that a cross-species hybridization algorithm to mask
chips for gene expression may still permit a large number of false positive probe sets into the analysis. It is for
this reason that studies utilizing cross-species hybridization for microarray gene expression profiles must be
especially diligent with replication and validation. For
example, Pavlidis et al. [28] found that a minimum of
five biological replicates generated stable gene expression profiles. Unfortunately, recent studies using crossspecies hybridization on microarrays with short probes
either include no replication or insufficiently validate
their microarray results with qPCR [8,9]. We suggest
that cross-species microarray hybridizations introduce a
degree of uncertainty beyond what is typical for conspecific hybridizations, and thus require more robust
quality control measures than would be normally
adopted for con-specific hybridization.
Genomic DNA controls are essential to ensure the
most reliable interpretation of heterologous hybridization applications, such as gene expression profiles. Our
strategy for normalization and centering of cross-species
array data is meant to be used to identify reliable probe

Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

Page 9 of 10

Figure 6 Heterologous probe binding of Caenorhabditis briggsae. A) Quantile-normalized C. briggsae probe intensity (relative to C. elegans
N2) as a function of probe similarity (nucleotide matches out of 25 from all probes of the 49 candidate genes with one putative ortholog). B)
Accumulation of false (<22), true (25), and semi-true (>23, >24) positive probe matches at threshold ratios below 1.3 from previous panel (Figure
6A). Note that no threshold ratio is available to distinguish a greater number of semi-true positive (>23 nt) than false (<22) matches. C) and D)
As in A) and B), but for alternative normalized and centered probe signal intensities proposed here. Red lines in B and D represent the ratio of
mismatch probes (<25 nt) to perfect match probes (= 25 nt).

intensity values that could be utilized in downstream
applications, such as finding regions of sequence similarity or for gene expression analysis. Our method is
not necessarily meant to be used as a normalization
procedure per se, although we could imagine that such
an approach could be developed based on the analyses
presented here. One such approach would be first to
build universal control probe sets into the microarray of
interest using random oligonucleotides or sequences
derived from universally diverged taxa such as prokaryotes for eukaryotic arrays or vice-versa. Secondly,
hybridize both homologous genomic DNA (from the
species used to design the array) and heterologous
(from the species of interest) genomic DNA onto the
arrays being used (either dual-labelled mixtures onto
the same chip or single-labelled pools onto separate
chips) to compare probe intensity using the “control”
based normalization and centering approach presented

here. Finally, test the mean signal of a gene’s exon
probes against “zero” (with an appropriate correction
for multiple comparisons). Only those genes whose
complement of exon probes are statistically greater than
zero can be considered “conserved” enough for use.
Based upon our analyses, the number of these “conserved” genes decreases rapidly with phylogenetic distance and suggests that for distantly related taxa nonarray based approaches might be more appropriate and
cost effective.
Acknowledgements
We thank Mandar Deshpande for assistance with hybridization protocol and
imaging and the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center for providing the
Caenorhabditis strains. This work was supported by NSF grant EF-0723862 to
MAH. Thanks also to Ted Morgan, two anonymous reviewers, and the
members of the Ecological Genomics Institute at Kansas State University for
discussions and helpful comments on the manuscript, and the Gene
Expression Facility at Kansas State University for use of the facility.

Darby et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:183
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/183

Author details
1
Ecological Genomics Institute, Division of Biology, Kansas State University,
Manhattan, KS 66506, USA. 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
Authors’ contributions
KLJ designed the project and carried out the hybridizations, BJD performed
the analysis and drafted the manuscript, DW directed the analysis and
assisted in interpretation of data, MAH participated in project design, and
coordination of the project, and helped draft the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 16 September 2010 Accepted: 21 May 2011
Published: 21 May 2011
References
1. Gilad Y, Rifkin SA, Bertone P, Gerstein M, White KP: Multi-species
microarrays reveal the effect of sequence divergence on gene
expression profiles. Genome Research 2005, 15(5):674-680.
2. Renn S, Aubin-Horth N, Hofmann H: Biologically meaningful expression
profiling across species using heterologous hybridization to a cDNA
microarray. BMC Genomics 2004, 5(1):42.
3. Cummings ME, Larkins-Ford J, Reilly CRL, Wong RY, Ramsey M,
Hofmann HA: Sexual and social stimuli elicit rapid and contrasting
genomic responses. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
2008, 275(1633):393-402.
4. Kassahn KS, Caley MJ, Ward AC, Connolly AR, Stone G, Crozier RH:
Heterologous microarray experiments used to identify the early gene
response to heat stress in a coral reef fish. Molecular Ecology 2007,
16(8):1749-1763.
5. Hammond J, Broadley M, Craigon D, Higgins J, Emmerson Z, Townsend H,
White P, May S: Using genomic DNA-based probe-selection to improve
the sensitivity of high-density oligonucleotide arrays when applied to
heterologous species. Plant Methods 2005, 1(1):10.
6. Hammond JP, Bowen HC, White PJ, Mills V, Pyke KA, Baker AJM,
Whiting SN, May ST, Broadley MR: A comparison of the Thlaspi
caerulescens and Thlaspi arvense shoot transcriptomes. New Phytologist
2006, 170(2):239-260.
7. Morinaga SI, Nagano AJ, Miyazaki S, Kubo M, Demura T, Fukuda H, Sakai S,
Hasebe M: Ecogenomics of cleistogamous and chasmogamous flowering:
genome-wide gene expression patterns from cross-species microarray
analysis in Cardamine kokaiensis (Brassicaceae). Journal of Ecology 2008,
96(5):1086-1097.
8. Davey M, Graham N, Vanholme B, Swennen R, May S, Keulemans J:
Heterologous oligonucleotide microarrays for transcriptomics in a nonmodel species; a proof-of-concept study of drought stress in Musa. BMC
Genomics 2009, 10(1):436.
9. Graham NS, Clutterbuck AL, James N, Lea RG, Mobasheri A, Broadley MR,
May ST: Equine transcriptome quantification using human GeneChip
arrays can be improved using genomic DNA hybridisation and probe
selection. The Veterinary Journal 2010, 186(3):323-327.
10. Faucon F, Rebours E, Bevilacqua C, Helbling JC, Aubert J, Makhzami S,
Dhorne-Pollet S, Robin S, Martin P: Terminal differentiation of goat
mammary tissue during pregnancy requires the expression of genes
involved in immune functions. Physiol Genomics 2009, 40(1):61-82.
11. Pozhitkov A, Noble PA, Domazet-Loso T, Nolte AW, Sonnenberg R,
Staehler P, Beier M, Tautz D: Tests of rRNA hybridization to microarrays
suggest that hybridization characteristics of oligonucleotide probes for
species discrimination cannot be predicted. Nucleic Acids Research 2006,
34(9).
12. Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA, Astrand M, Speed TP: A comparison of
normalization methods for high density oligonucleotide array data
based on variance and bias. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(2):185-193.
13. Irizarry RA, Bolstad BM, Collin F, Cope LM, Hobbs B, Speed TP: Summaries
of Affymetrix GeneChip probe level data. Nucl Acids Res 2003, 31(4):e15.
14. Hsu L, Self SG, Grove D, Randolph T, Wang K, Delrow JJ, Loo L, Porter P:
Denoising array-based comparative genomic hybridization data using
wavelets. Biostat 2005, 6(2):211-226.
15. Bar-Or C, Czosnek H, Koltai H: Cross-species microarray hybridizations: a
developing tool for studying species diversity. Trends in Genetics 2007,
23(4):200-207.

Page 10 of 10

16. Degletagne C, Keime C, Rey B, de Dinechin M, Forcheron F, Chuchana P,
Jouventin P, Gautier C, Duchamp C: Transcriptome analysis in non-model
species: a new method for the analysis of heterologous hybridization on
microarrays. BMC Genomics 2010, 11(1):344.
17. Bar-Or C, Bar-Eyal M, Gal T, Kapulnik Y, Czosnek H, Koltai H: Derivation of
species-specific hybridization-like knowledge out of cross-species
hybridization results. BMC Genomics 2006, 7(1):110.
18. Machado H, Renn S: A critical assessment of cross-species detection of
gene duplicates using comparative genomic hybridization. BMC
Genomics 2010, 11(1):304.
19. Renn S, Machado H, Jones A, Soneji K, Kulathinal R, Hofmann H: Using
comparative genomic hybridization to survey genomic sequence
divergence across species: a proof-of-concept from Drosophila. BMC
Genomics 2010, 11(1):271.
20. Jones KL, Todd TC, Wall-Beam JL, Coolon JD, Blair JM, Herman MA:
Molecular Approach for Assessing Responses of Microbial-Feeding
Nematodes to Burning and Chronic Nitrogen Enrichment in a Native
Grassland. Molecular Ecology 2006, 15(9):2601-2609.
21. Todd TC, Powers TO, Mullin PG: Sentinel nematodes of land-use change
and restoration in tallgrass prairie. Journal of Nematology 2006,
38(1):20-27.
22. Freckman DW: Bacterivorous Nematodes and Organic-Matter
Decomposition. Agriculture Ecosystems & Environment 1988, 24(1-3):195-217.
23. Ferris H, Bongers T: Nematode Indicators of Organic Enrichment. Journal
of Nematology 2006, 38(1):3-12.
24. Stein LD, Bao Z, Blasiar D, Blumenthal T, Brent MR, Chen N, Chinwalla A,
Clarke L, Clee C, Coghlan A, et al: The Genome Sequence of
Caenorhabditis briggsae: A Platform for Comparative Genomics. PLoS Biol
2003, 1(2):e45.
25. SantaLucia J: A unified view of polymer, dumbbell, and oligonucleotide
DNA nearest-neighbor thermodynamics. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1998, 95(4):1460-1465.
26. Coolon JD, Jones KL, Todd TC, Carr BC, Herman MA: Caenorhabditis
elegans Genomic Response to Soil Bacteria Predicts EnvironmentSpecific Genetic Effects on Life History Traits. PLoS Genetics 2009, 5(6):
e1000503.
27. Maydan JS, Flibotte S, Edgley ML, Lau J, Selzer RR, Richmond TA, Pofahl NJ,
Thomas JH, Moerman DG: Efficient high-resolution deletion discovery in
Caenorhabditis elegans by array Comparative Genomic Hybridization.
Genome Research 2007, 17(3):337-347.
28. Pavlidis P, Li Q, Noble WS: The effect of replication on gene expression
microarray experiments. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(13):1620-1627.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-183
Cite this article as: Darby et al.: Normalization and centering of arraybased heterologous genome hybridization based on divergent control
probes. BMC Bioinformatics 2011 12:183.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
