<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1475-9292-2-16.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease

BioMed Central

Open Access

Editorial

Towards a framework for the evolutionary genomics of
Kinetoplastids: what kind of data and how much?
Alberto MR Dávila*1 and Julius Lukeš2
Address: 1Lab. de Biologia Molecular de Tripanosomatídeos, Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz.
Av. Brasil 4365, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil. 21045-900 and 2Institute of Parasitology, Czech Academy of Sciences and Faculty of Biology, University
of South Bohemia, Branišovská 31, 37005 Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic
Email: Alberto MR Dávila* - davila@fiocruz.br; Julius Lukeš - jula@paru.cas.cz
* Corresponding author

Published: 28 October 2003
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2:16

Received: 30 July 2003
Accepted: 28 October 2003

This article is available from: http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/16
© 2003 Dávila and Lukeš; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in
all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
The current status of kinetoplastids phylogeny and evolution is discussed in view of the recent
progresses on genomics. Some ideas on a potential framework for the evolutionary genomics of
kinetoplastids are presented.

Editorial
In this journal, the concept of species are presented by
Wendy Gibson [1] and Hooman Momen [2] while Michel
Tibayrenc [3] reviews the evolution and variability of
Trypanosoma cruzi. Veronique Hannaert and collaborators
[4] provide a comprehensive review on the evolution of
energy metabolism in Kinetoplastida and Austin Hughes
and Helen Piontkivska [5] discuss the controversial issue
of the monophyletic versus paraphyletic status of the
genus Trypanosoma. The latter authors concluded that the
markers used to date failed to provide a consistent answer
about the origin of trypanosomes. The arguments for the
use of more protein-based sequences and a larger number
of species are admirable. However, some important questions remain: which genes and how many are needed?
Which other species should be selected and how many
should be explored?
Generally, a limited number of genes available for a large
number of taxa is sufficient for most phylogenetic studies.
However, in order to resolve the relationships among
closely related species and strains, and to better understand their origin, the availability of a set of evolutionary
informative genes would certainly be useful. The ribosomal (r)RNA genes (18S, 5S, SL) still dominate the field,

while only a few informative protein-coding genes have
been described. The identification and choice of individual genes or gene families is sometimes difficult and less
cost-effective when compared with high throughput
sequencing initiatives [6]. This observation makes us to
reflect about the need to discover new candidate genes for
the study of kinetoplastid evolution. According to Podlipaev (2000, 2001) [7,8], from the 10 trypanosomatid
genera [9], those (six) associated with insects have so far
received little attention or have been "neglected" compared to species with an impact on human health. The
same is true for all bodonids.
Still, Trypanosomatina flagellates are in the forefront
among kinetoplastids, since several species (T. cruzi, T.
brucei and Leishmania major) will have their genomes completely sequenced within the next few months. While the
recent start of genome projects for L. braziliensis, L. infantum, T. vivax and T. congolense is very welcome, it is worth
noticing that all the above mentioned species belong to
only two (Trypanosoma and Leishmania) of the 20 kinetoplastid genera, showing the stark under-representation of
the other genera in the sequencing initiative.

Page 1 of 3
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/16

Table 1: Survey of kinetoplastid sequences available in the
Genbank.

Nucleotides
Trypanosomatina
Trypanosoma
Leishmania
Crithidia
Herpetomas
Phytomonas
Leptomonas
Blastocrithidia
Wallaceina
Endotrypanum
Bodonina
Bodo
Trypanoplasma
Cryptobia
Dimastigella
Rhynchomonas
Perkinsiella
Rhynchobodo
Cruzella
Ichthyobodo
Parabodo
Procryptobia

Proteins

139667
29777
163
137
112
55
12
10
9

3695
2945
206
15
12
23
7
3
5

64
22
14
9
6
6
3
3
2
2
1

12
24
5
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

A casual search in the Entrez division of NCBI showed that
although virtually omnipresent in nature, leptomonads
and phytomonads have only dozens of entries, a mere
trickle when compared with 139667 and 29777 entries
for Trypanosoma and Leishmania, respectively (see Table 1).
It is clear from the pattern of data available that efforts
should be focused on obtaining more sequences from the
"non-Leishmania" and "non-Trypanosoma" kinetoplastids.
Centering on one "representative" or "model" species for
each of the underepresented genera Bodo, Trypanoplasma
and Cryptobia would certainly be both worthwile and
rewarding.
Having a genome fully sequenced is an expensive initiative (although the cost per base is decreasing annually,
rendering the whole genome sequencing efforts increasingly cost-effective), then centering the resources on EST
(expressed sequence tags) projects to explore the transcriptome of some species would be certainly helpful for
the comparative "transcriptomics" of kinetoplastids. It
has been demonstrated that EST projects are relatively
cheap when compared with whole genome shotgun strategies, with the advantage that a kinetoplastid EST project
would provide with the coding sequences that would be
of great help for evolutionary genomics. As an example, it
would be particularly interesting to know more about the
evolution and polymorphism of kinetoplastid-specific
genes associated with metabolic pathways or even mark-

ers for typing. On the other hand, a potential disadvantage of the EST approach would be that one could not
unequivocally evaluate the gene loss and genome structure because only a part of the genome would be surveyed.
However, studies on gene and protein content, orthologs
and paralogs would be perfectly allowed. Another advantage of having the transcriptome of other trypanosomatids sequenced would be the usefulness of such sequences
for the annotation of the T. cruzi, L. major and T. brucei
genomes. The sequencing consortia for these three species
have been reporting a high number (sometimes >70 %) of
orphan genes during the annotation process [10,11]. New
data from other trypanosomatids may help to discover
which of them are real "orphans" and/or species-specific
genes, and which ones are genes confined to
Kinetoplastida.
An important issue towards the exploration of the transcriptome of kinetoplastids outside Trypanosomatina is
the choice of "model species". These "models" would be
used to get insights into the evolution of bizarre structures
and processes so far mostly described in Trypanosoma and
less so in Leishmania. One proposal could be the study of
the evolution of VSGs, as well as complex proteins
involved in RNA editing or trans-splicing. A comparative
approach has recently proved to be useful for our understanding of how the complex kinetoplast DNA network
may have evolved [12]. The "models" should be members
of major kinetoplastid clades in the current phylogenetic
trees [13] that grow in reasonable densities in simple culture media, preferably axenic. Bodo saltans may be a good
model, because it branches off on the border between
bodonids and trypanosomatids, and is an ecologically
important free-living species of potentially world-wide
distribution. Its sole disadvantage is the growth with
feeder bacteria. As far as we know, the only bodonid that
grows in an axenic medium is Trypanoplasma borreli, a parasite of marine and freshwater fish, another potential candidate. The final proposed candidate is Diplonema
papillatum, since it grows axenically in simple media to
high densities. Moreover, it would be an excellent outgroup for kinetoplastids, since it represents the most
related group and likely shares with them numerous
peculiarities.
Inferring from the recently unveiled diversity of extremely
small eukaryotes [14], one would predict that a great
diversity of kinetoplastids is still to be discovered. Perhaps
an enthusiastic overestimate, some discuss the existence
of a great trypanosomatid biodiversity in insects alone
[15]. Recent surveys have found new species in ocean
depths [16,17] or unexpected niches [18]. One of the
approaches used for the discovery of these new eukaryote
taxa is culture-independent-survey by PCR (ciPCR), which
has also helped to double the number of prokaryotic

Page 2 of 3
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2

phyla [19]. This approach would be particularly interesting in a search for difficult-to-cultivate Kinetoplastida. For
such a survey, a number of known conserved markers/
genes would be needed for the design of PCR-based assays
and, unfortunately, that is not possible with the limited
data currently available. There may be some requirements
for choosing the markers since according to Charlebois
and collaborators [20] protein-coding regions are usually
less universal, more difficult to PCR-amplify and often
shorter and less information-rich than the rRNA genes.
Possible discrepancies between the rRNA- and proteinbased trees can be avoided by choosing informative and
unbiased genes and by constructing trees on the basis of
concatenated alignments. Whole-genome trees are
becoming popular given the availability of a large number
of bacterial genomes in the databases, however, for the
near future, it is not going to be an option for non-pathogenic kinetoplastids and in general for eukaryotes because
of the size of their genomes. New technologies for
sequencing large genomes and cheaper costs per base
could, in the future, facilitate that approach even for
protozoans.
It seems that with the available genomics approaches,
there are now more chances to map the real diversity of
kinetoplastids in nature, and explore their fascinating
biology, evolution and "roots".

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/16

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.
19.
20.

El-Sayed NM and Donelson JE: A survey of the Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense genome using shotgun sequencing. Mol Biochem
Parasitol 1997, 84(2):167-78.
Porcel BM, Tran AN, Tammi M, Nyarady Z, Rydaker M, Urmenyi TP,
Rondinelli E, Pettersson U, Andersson B and Aslund L: Gene survey
of the pathogenic protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi. Genome Res
2000, 10(8):1103-7.
Lukeš J, Guilbride DL, Votýpka J, Zíková A, Benne R and Englund PT:
Kinetoplast DNA network: evolution of an improbable
structure. Eukaryot Cell 2002, 1(4):495-502.
Simpson AGB, Lukeš J and Roger AJ: The evolutionary history of
kinetoplastids and their kinetoplasts. Mol Biol Evol 2002,
19:2071-2083.
Massana R, Guillou L, Diez B and Pedros-Alio C: Unveiling the
organisms behind novel eukaryotic ribosomal DNA
sequences from the ocean. Appl Environ Microbiol 2002,
68(9):4554-8.
Stevens JR: One million insects – a lot of parasites? Trends
Parasitol 2001, 17:119-120.
Atkins MS, Teske AP and Anderson OR: A survey of flagellate
diversity at four deep-sea hydrothermal vents in the Eastern
Pacific Ocean using structural and molecular approaches. J
Eukaryot Microbiol 2000, 47(4):400-11.
Lopez-Garcia P, Philippe H, Gail F and Moreira D: Autochthonous
eukaryotic diversity in hydrothermal sediment and experimental microcolonizers at the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2003, 100(2):697-702.
Dyková I, Fiala I, Lom J and Lukeš J: Perkinsiella amoebae-like
endosymbionts of Neoparamoeba spp, relatives of the kinetoplastid Ichthyobodo. Europ J Protistol 2003, 39:37-52.
DeLong EF and Pace NR: Environmental diversity of bacteria
and archaea. Syst Biol 2001, 50(4):470-8.
Charlebois RL, Beiko RG and Ragan MA: Microbial phylogenomics: Branching out. Nature 421(6920):217. 2003 Jan 16

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to Wendy Gibson, Sergei Podlipaev and Hooman
Momen for their comments on the manuscript, however, all mistakes and
wrong interpretations remain ours.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.

Gibson W: Species concepts for trypanosomes: from morphological to molecular definitions? Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease
2003, 2(10):.
Momen H: Concepts of species in trypanosomatids. Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2(13):.
Tibayrenc M: Genetic subdivisions within Trypanosoma cruzi
(Discrete Typing Units) and their relevance for molecular
epidemiology and experimental evolution. Kinetoplastid Biology
and Disease 2003, 2(12):.
Hannaert V, Bringaud F, Opperdoes FR and Michels PAM: Evolution
of energy metabolism and its compartmentation in
Kinetoplastida. Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2(11):.
Hughes AL and Piontkivska H: Molecular Phylogenetics of
Trypanosomatidae: Contrasting Results from 18S rRNA and
Protein Phylogenies. Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2(15):.
Dávila AMR, Majiwa PAO, Grisard EC, Aksoy S and Melville SE: Comparative genomics to uncover the secrets of tsetse and livestock-infective
trypanosomes.
Trends
Parasitol
2003,
19(10):436-439.
Podlipaev S: The more insect trypanosomatids under studythe more diverse Trypanosomatidae appears. Int J Parasitol
2001, 31(5–6):648-52.
Podlipaev S: Insect trypanosomatids: the need to know more.
Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 2000, 95(4):517-22.
Vickerman K: Order Kinetoplastida Honigberg, 1963. In: An Illustrated Guide to the Protozoa Volume 2. Secondth edition. Edited by: Lee
JJ, Leedale GF, Bradbary P. Society of Protozoologists, USA;
2000:1159-1180.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 3 of 3
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
