<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Estimating enrichment of repetitive elements from high-throughput sequence data</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2010 11:R69. doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-6-r69"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Daniel S Day"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

METHOD

Open Access

Estimating enrichment of repetitive elements
from high-throughput sequence data
Daniel S Day1,2, Lovelace J Luquette2, Peter J Park1,2,3, Peter V Kharchenko2,3*

Abstract
We describe computational methods for analysis of repetitive elements from short-read sequencing data, and
apply them to study histone modifications associated with the repetitive elements in human and mouse cells. Our
results demonstrate that while accurate enrichment estimates can be obtained for individual repeat types and
small sets of repeat instances, there are distinct combinatorial patterns of chromatin marks associated with major
annotated repeat families, including H3K27me3/H3K9me3 differences among the endogenous retroviral element
classes.
Background
Recent progress in high-throughput sequencing platforms has led to widespread utilization of short-read
sequencing measurements for functional characterization of genomes. Application of high-throughput
sequencing to chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIPseq) profiling has been particularly successful, owing to
its high signal-to-noise ratio, a higher genome coverage,
and better spatial accuracy compared to the established
microarray alternative [1]. The ChIP-seq technique has
already been used to assess binding patterns of numerous transcription factors, histone modifications, and variants across large mammalian genomes [2-4]. It is also
being employed by large-scale functional profiling
efforts, such as the ENCODE (Encyclopedia of DNA
Elements) project [5,6].
The processing of the ChIP-seq data involves alignment of the reads to the genome, followed by evaluation
of the read density patterns to identify regions of statistically significant enrichment that indicate presence of
the queried epitope. A number of computational methods have been proposed for such analysis [7-9]. However, these methods typically utilize only the reads for
which a unique alignment to the reference can be
obtained. Positions corresponding to non-unique (repetitive) sequences are masked, as specific binding at these
loci cannot be assessed [10].

* Correspondence: peter.kharchenko@post.harvard.edu
2
Center for Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, 275 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA

The functional properties of the repetitive sequences,
however, are of significant biological interest. The repetitive elements comprise significant fractions of eukaryotic genomes, including more than half of the human
genome. These elements play important roles in structural organization of the chromosome, gene regulation,
and the evolutionary dynamics of the genome [11-14].
Recent studies have shown that some repetitive elements contain evolutionarily conserved transcription
factor binding sites and most likely participate in the
regulation of specific genes [15,16]. However, activation
of many repetitive elements, such as endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), can be deleterious to gene regulation
and has been linked to a number of diseases [17,18]. To
guard against harmful effects of insertions and rearrangements associated with the presence of transposable
elements, the organisms have evolved a variety of
defense strategies, including epigenetic mechanisms
mediated by RNA interference, DNA methylation, and
histone modifications [19,20]. Assessment of the epigenetic states associated with the repetitive elements is
therefore of particular interest.
Here, we describe computational methods for enrichment analysis of the repetitive elements, taking advantage of the increased coverage of those elements made
possible by high-throughput sequencing. For the microarray platforms, such analysis posed a number of serious
difficulties, since the presence of probes with high
degrees of sequence homology and large variations in
copy numbers led to increased signal intensity range
and cross-hybridization. Earlier studies have therefore

© 2010 Day et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

relied on directed ChIP using primers designed to
amplify canonical repeat sequences - prototypical
sequences, usually representing a consensus sequence of
a known repeat type [21-23].
The developed methods include an improved
approach for estimating read enrichment associated with
annotated repeat types, and a novel phylogenetic
approach for general analysis of enrichment in
sequences with a high degree of sequence identity.
While sequencing data have been used previously to
estimate average enrichment for major repeat families
[4,24], such analysis was based only on the canonical
repeat sequences. The genome-wide coverage of sequencing data provides information about repetitive
sequences beyond that captured by the canonical
sequences, and our method, which incorporates
sequence variations on those canonical sequences,
results in a more than ten-fold increase in the number
of sequence reads utilized for repeat sequence analysis.
We note that the current analysis is focused on known
repetitive elements, and does not attempt to identify
novel repetitive sequences.
We apply these methods to analyze histone modifications in human and mouse cells. Our results illustrate
that informative enrichment estimates can be obtained
for specific repeat types and, in many cases, for small
groups of individual repeat instances. We find that
sequences associated with many known repeat families
exhibit distinct combinatorial patterns of chromatin
marks. While we focus on ChIP-seq data, this analysis
framework can be extended to analysis of copy number
variation and other applications.

Results
Incorporating ambiguously and uniquely mapped reads

Earlier studies have examined enrichment estimates for
a given repeat type based on the reads mapping to the
canonical sequence of that repeat [4,24]. Since the
assembled genome incorporates instances of most annotated repeat types, we can also take into account the
reads that map into the repeat instance body or boundary regions (Figure 1). These unique alignments are possible because of the mutations that have accumulated
within individual repeat sequences, and the unique
sequences of flanking repeats. In the other cases, the
mapping remains ambiguous. In estimating the average
enrichment for a particular repeat type, however, a read
with multiple potential alignments can be taken into
account if all of the regions to which it aligns belong to
the instances of the same repeat type (Figure 1; see
Materials and methods). It is important to note that the
methods described in this section estimate an average
enrichment for a set of homologous repeat sequences,
and do not provide information about the variability of

Page 2 of 12

Figure 1 Aggregating reads for repeat type enrichment
estimation. To increase the accuracy, the enrichment estimate
combines reads mapping to the canonical repeat sequence and
reads mapping to the body or boundaries of the repeat instances
incorporated into the genome assembly. The calculation utilizes
reads that align to multiple positions in the genome, if all such
positions belong to the instances of the same repeat type. Reads
aligning to more than one repeat type are excluded.

enrichment within the set. The resulting estimates may,
for instance, be driven by a small subset of sequences
belonging to a given repeat type. Because the number of
copies for a given repeat type is typically unknown and
can vary between cells, the enrichment calculations rely
on input sequencing to normalize the read counts associated with each repeat (see Materials and methods).
To compare different methods for estimating repeat
enrichment, we have employed data on several histone
methylation marks in mouse embryonic stem (mES)
cells measured by Mikkelsen et al. [4]. We first compared the enrichment estimates based on the reads mapping to canonical repeat sequences with the estimates
based on the reads mapping to repeat instances and
associated boundary regions. The incorporation of the
instance-mapped reads leads to the expected improvement in the ability to resolve enrichment estimates
(Table 1). For instance, the alignment of mES cell histone H3 ChIP reads to the canonical repeat sequences
leaves 57% of repeat types without any uniquely-associated reads (70% with less than 10 reads). Combining
reads mapping to both canonical and repeat instance
sequences increases the number of utilized reads
approximately 10-fold, leaving only 4% of repeat types
without any reads (20% with less than 10 reads). Consequently, predictions on combined read counts result in
several fold increase in the number of repeat types for
which a statistically significant level of H3K9me3 enrichment or depletion can be established.
To assess the agreement between canonical and
instance-based enrichment estimates, we have selected
repeat types for which statistically significant enrichment
or depletion can be established based on the canonical
sequences (using a 0.05 P-value threshold) and determined how often the confidence intervals of canonical
and instance-based enrichment estimates overlap
(Table 2; see Tables S1 and S2 and Figure S1 in

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

Page 3 of 12

Table 1 Combining reads mapping to canonical and instance sequences improves ability to resolve enrichment levels
Canonical

Instance

Combined

150,377

1,270,497

1,498,796

Fraction of repeat types with 0 input reads

0.57

0.05

0.04

Fraction of repeat types with less than 10 input reads

0.71

0.20

0.20

Fraction of repeat types with significant enrichment or depletion

0.20

0.69

0.69

Fraction of repeat types with CI less than 1

0.14

0.57

0.57

Median size of the CI

14.67

0.63

0.58

Mean size of the CI

9.25

1.87

1.77

Total number of input reads utilized

Using mES H3K9me3 data, the table shows that incorporating reads mapping to the repeat instances allows enrichment estimates to be provided for a large
number of repeat types for which canonical sequence alone is not sufficient. CI refers to a 95% confidence interval.

Additional file 1 for other significance thresholds).
While the agreement varies slightly for different histone
marks, canonical and instance estimates are consistent
in approximately 70% of the cases. We will therefore
evaluate enrichment using combined canonical and
instance sequences, since this allows utilization of a significantly greater portion of available reads and, consequently, provides more informative estimates.
The read mapping procedure (Figure 1) guarantees to
select reads that can be uniquely associated with repeat
sequences belonging to a single repeat type. However, as
detection of repeat instances in the genome assemblies is a
challenging problem, there are typically sequences within
the genome that have a high degree of sequence identity
with a given repeat type, yet are not included among the
list of annotated instances of that repeat type. If such
sequences are not representative of a given repeat type in
terms of their biological characteristics, their inclusion
could bias downstream analysis. On the other hand, exclusion of all reads that may potentially originate from outside of the annotated repeat instances can significantly
reduce the number of reads that can be utilized. For example, a single occurrence of a full repeat outside of the
annotated instances would lead to exclusion of most consensus sequence reads from the analysis of that repeat
type. The RepeatMasker software [25], utilized here for
annotating the repeat instances, will normally recognize a
full copy of a repeat, preventing such an extreme scenario.
The sequences outside of the annotated instance set,
therefore, tend to be fragmented portions of the repeats
that pass below RepeatMasker thresholds.

To assess the impact of un-annotated repeat instances,
we have implemented a masking procedure that
excludes reads that can be mapped outside of the annotated repeat instances (see Materials and methods). For
the majority of the repeat types, such masking reduces
the number of mapped reads by less than 10%; however,
in several cases over 80% of the reads are masked
(Figure S2 in Additional file 1). The exclusion of such
reads, however, has very little impact on the overall
enrichment estimates, with less than 1% of the repeat
types showing statistically significant differences (Table
S3 in Additional file 1).
The ability to distinguish the reads originating from
repeat types with a high degree of sequence identity
relies on stringent selection criteria that eliminate
ambiguously mapped reads. The alterations of the read
sequences due to the presence of sequencing errors or
SNPs may, therefore, lead to some erroneous read associations. To characterize the frequency of such misassociations, we have assessed false positive mapping
rates, simulating SNP and sequencing error incorporation based on empirically observed frequencies (see
Materials and methods). We find that for 99% of the
repeat types, the false positive rate due to SNP effects is
below 0.029%, and 2.8% for the sequencing errors (Figure S3 in Additional file 1). While the contribution of
such errors to the enrichment estimates depends on the
individual dataset, the low false positive rates suggest
that even four- to five-fold enrichment observed at
some of the significantly enriched repeats will not result
in the substantial enrichment magnitude at other repeat

Table 2 Agreement between enrichment estimates based on reads mapping to canonical and instance sequences
H3K27me3 H3K36me3 H3K4me3 H3K9me3 H4K20me3

RNA Pol II

Fraction of repeat types with intersecting canonical and instancebased CIs

0.84

0.93

0.84

0.93

0.92

0.63

Average ratio of canonical and instance-based CI sizes

25.6

24.5

25.9

22.5

22.1

20.0

Using mES data for different chromatin marks, the table shows the fraction of repeat types for which estimates based on canonical and instance read counts
were statistically consistent. Only repeat types for which the canonical confidence interval (CI) did not include 0 (that is, significant enrichment was detected)
were considered in the analysis. The canonical and instance-based estimates are typically consistent for 70% of the repeat types; however, instance-based
estimates provide, on average, much smaller confidence intervals.

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

types. Furthermore, the contribution of sequencing
errors, estimated here based on the Illumina 1G error
profile, is expected to be lower for the current and
future sequencing platforms.
Phylogenetic analysis of enrichment

In general, a read lacking unique alignment can only be
utilized for estimating average enrichment for a set of
sequences that contain all potential alignments of that
read. The approach described in the previous section
employs sets of repetitive sequences classified by the
RepeatMasker software as belonging to one of the types
annotated in the Repbase database [26]. While such
classification groups repeats by sequence similarity,
some repeat types often share common sequence and
may be hard to distinguish based on the reads available
in the dataset. Combining similar repeat types into a
single group typically allows utilization of additional
reads, providing more precise enrichment estimates at
the expense of repeat type granularity.

Page 4 of 12

To address a general problem of estimating read
enrichment for repetitive sequences, we propose a phylogenetic approach in which enrichment is evaluated
using a hierarchy most informative of a particular
dataset. An optimal phylogeny would at each step partition a set of sequences in a way that maximizes the
number of reads with alignments unique to a single
partition. Since the computational cost of such a topdown partitioning approach appears to be prohibitive,
we have instead implemented a greedy algorithm, constructing phylogeny from the bottom up by iteratively
grouping sequences with the highest read set similarity
(see Materials and methods). The results of such analysis are visualized as a tree with branch lengths representing the amount of uniquely aligned reads gained at
each step, and colors denoting the enrichment estimates (Figure 2a).
A portion of the repeat enrichment phylogeny constructed for the mES H3K9me3 ChIP data is shown in
Figure 2b. The fragment contains repeat types

Figure 2 Phylogenetic analysis of repeat enrichment patterns. (a) Aiming to provide most informative estimates of repeat enrichment that
can be attained for a given dataset, repeats are organized into a phylogenetic tree on the basis of read set similarity to maximize the number
of uniquely assignable reads that can be used for enrichment estimation. The estimates are illustrated on the resulting tree branches using
colors. The nodes of the tree represent sets of repetitive sequences. The gray labels show the fraction of total number of ChIP reads that map to
a given set of sequences (node) that can be associated uniquely. The tree is constructed in a way that maximizes the number of additional
uniquely associated reads gained at each step. For instance, considering repeats A and B together allows 1,000 uniquely associated ChIP reads to
be to utilized for enrichment estimation, even though the sum of the reads uniquely associated with repeat A and repeat B separately is 600.
The 400 additional reads are those that map to both A and B repeats, but do not map to any other repeats (in the same way the discarded
read in Figure 1 maps to both C and D). The length of each branch corresponds to the number of the unique reads gained using a log scale
when collapsing sequences of the descendant nodes into a single set. The statistical significance of the observed enrichment or depletion is
shown as a Z-score (green numbers). Large positive Z-score values denote statistically significant enrichment (Z-score of 3.1 corresponds to a Pvalue of 10-3), and negative values correspond to significant depletion. The Z-score magnitude is capped at 10. (b) A fragment of the
enrichment phylogeny of the Repbase repeat types for H3K9me3 enrichment in mES cells. The example illustrates grouping of repeats from ERVK class, all of which, with the exception of RLTR19-int, are highly enriched for the H3K9me3 modification. Additional examples are shown in
Figure S4 of Additional file 1. (c) A small fragment of H3K9me3 enrichment phylogeny for the individual instances of the intracisternal A particle
(IAP) interspersed repeats (IAPEz-int). The fragment clusters instances located within a specific region on chromosome X due to a high degree of
sequence identity between them. While the lack of discriminating sequences precludes evaluation of each instance individually, considering
nearly identical instances together allows the demonstration of statistically significant enrichment of this localized group of instances or the
H3K9me3 mark in mES cells. LTR, long terminal repeat.

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

significantly enriched for the H3K9me3 mark, including
active intracisternal A particle (IAP) long terminal
repeat (LTRs) and early transposons (ETn). The
approach progressively groups closely related repeat
types based on the gain of reads that can be uniquely
associated for the combined groups. For instance, the
initial steps group IAP LTRs 1 and 1a (bottom of Figure
2b). When considered individually, a total of 1,991 and
1,758 reads can be uniquely associated with IAP LTR1
and 1a, respectively. Considering these two repeat types
together allows a total of 5,664 uniquely associated
reads to be used. The extra 1,915 reads gained were previously omitted as they could originate from either IAP
LTR1 or 1a (but not any other repeat type, analogous to
the omitted C and D common read illustrated in Figure
1). These repeat types are then considered together with
IAP LTR2 variants (2, 2a, 2b) to provide an average
enrichment estimate for the entire subfamily of repeats.
Examples of fragments illustrating enrichment phylogenies of other well-known LTR subfamilies and short
interspersed nuclear element (SINE) repeats are shown
in Figure S4 of Additional file 1. The high Z-score
values and the notable branch lengths of the leaf nodes
illustrate that the H3K9me3 dataset can distinguish
these Repbase types sufficiently well to provide informative enrichment estimates for each individual type. For
instance, the analysis shows that the RLTR19-int repeats
(an ERV-K class interspersed LTR) are significantly
depleted of the H3K9me3 mark, even though they share
reads with the highly enriched set of interspersed ETn
repeats.
The phylogenetic methods can be used to analyze
enrichment among very similar sequences, such as multiple integrated copies of the same type of transposable
element. A section of the mES H3K9me3 enrichment
phylogeny for interspersed instances of the IAP repeat
IAPEZ-int is shown in Figure 2c. The cluster groups
particularly similar instances located on chromosome X.
The high degree of sequence identity does not allow
evaluation of the enrichment of each individual instance;
however, statistically significant enrichment of
H3K9me3 can be demonstrated for small groups of
these nearly identical chromosome X repeat instances.
Examining instance enrichment phylogenies for a number of additional ERV repeat types, we find that such
clusters are typical for repeat types with high average
enrichment (IAPEy, IAPLTR3, GLN). Complete enrichment phylogenies for these and other repeat types can
be browsed on the authors’ website [27].
Repeat enrichment across mouse cell lines

To examine the combinatorial patterns of repeat enrichment in mES cells, we have clustered Repbase repeat
types by their maximum likelihood enrichment estimates

Page 5 of 12

(MLEs) for several histone methylation marks associated
with transcriptional activation (H3K4me3, H3K36me3),
and repression (H3K27me3, H3K9me3, H4K20me3) [4].
The enrichment estimates were calculated relative to the
histone H3 background, using combined canonical and
instance-mapped reads, masking reads that originated
from outside of the annotated repeat regions. A number
of prominent clusters of repeat types with similar
patterns of enrichment can be seen from this overview
analysis (Figure 3a).

Figure 3 Repeat enrichment patterns in mouse cell lines. (a)
Combinatorial patterns of repeat enrichment in mES cells. The
repeat types (rows) were clustered according to the MLE
enrichment in different marks (disregarding depletion; see Materials
and methods), with red colors corresponding to enrichment, and
blue colors corresponding to depletion. Repeat types that do not
show statistically significant enrichment or depletion are shown in
white. Prominent sets of repeat types are highlighted on the lefthand side (1 to 4; see text). The bottom part of the plot is omitted
as it contains repeats devoid of enrichment in any examined
modifications. See Figure S5 in Additional file 1 for a complete,
magnified view showing all the repeat type labels. (b) An enlarged
view of a portion of set 1, illustrating ERV1/ERV-K repeats enriched
for H3K9me3 and H4K20me3. (c) A portion of set 2 showing
enrichment for H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 at tRNA repeats.

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

Repeat types from set 1 are marked by increased average methylation in H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 marks
(Figure 3b). The set is composed almost completely
(93%) of the endogenous retroviral repeats. The majority
(66%) of these repeats belong to the ERV-K family,
which is significantly over-represented within the set
(corrected hypergeometric P-value < 1e-10). These
include IAP LTRs, a particularly active family of retrovirus-like transposable elements that is expressed in
early mouse embryos [28]. This pattern of methylation
of IAP repeats is in agreement with the original analysis
of the data [4] and other experimental assessments [23].
It should be noted, however, that earlier work in mES
cells [22] did not observe H3K9me3 enrichment of
IAPs. Set 1 also includes early transposon (ETn/MusD)
repeats, mouse mammary tumor virus LTRs, and a
number of unclassified or putative ERV-K repeat types.
In addition to the ERV-K family, set 1 also contains
key members of the ERV1 family, including MuRRS
(murine retroviral-related sequences), MuRV-Y (murine
repeated virus on Y chromosome), MuLV (type C murine leukemia virus) and LTR-IS (insertion elements)
repeat types. It does not, however, include members of
the MER4 subfamily of ERV1 (medium reiterated repeat
family 4), which are devoid of both H3K9me3 and
H4K20me3 enrichment. To ensure that the H4K20me3
enrichment estimates cannot be attributed to utilization
of H3 background, we have verified that the observed
patterns are maintained when normalized using wholecell extract data from a mouse embryonic fibroblast
(MEF) cell line (Figure S6 in Additional file 1).
The members of the third ERV class (ERV-L) are notably absent from set 1. Instead, these repeat types are overrepresented within set 3, which is marked by enrichment
in tri-methylation of H3 Lys27 (H3K27me3). Both ERV-L
and ERVL-MaLR LTR families are over-represented
within the set (P-values of 0.04 and 7e-6, respectively). Set
4, a cluster of repeats marked by the tri-methylation of H3
Lys36 (H3K36me3), a mark typically associated with transcriptional elongation, is composed primarily of the SINE
repeats (P-value < 1e-10), including nearly all types of Alu,
B2 and ID subfamilies.
The analysis shows a number of expected enrichment
patterns. As observed by earlier studies, the major and
minor satellite repeats are enriched for H3K9me3
[4,22,23,29,30]. The majority of the tRNA repeat types
show strong enrichment in the H3K4me3 mark associated with active transcription (set 2, Figure 3c). Some
tRNA repeats are also enriched for H3K27me3 or
H3K36me3. Since the provided methods evaluate repeat
enrichment by pooling signal from all repeat instances
of that type, the enrichment for both marks does not
necessarily indicate that they are present at the same
genomic position. Similarly, enrichment for H3K4me3

Page 6 of 12

and H3K9me3 observed for some of the LTR repeats in
set 1 (Figure 3a) is unlikely to be found simultaneously
on the same physical loci. The most abundant family of
repeats, long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs),
does not show a uniform pattern of enrichment, with
only HAL1-3A repeats occurring within H3K27me3enriched set 3.
Next, we have compared patterns of histone modifications observed in the mES cells with those found in
MEF and neural progenitor (NP) cells (Figure 4). The
three cell types show distinct patterns of repeat enrichment, with the differences being particularly striking in
the case of the NP cells. The large degree of variation of
histone methylation levels between different mouse cell
lines has been shown in earlier studies [22], and the
widespread reduction of H3K9me3 levels across major
repeat families has been noted in the original analysis of
these data [4].
We find that most repeat types from mES set 1 maintain statistically significant H3K9me3 enrichment in
MEF cells, but show clear absence of H3K9me3 modification in NP cells. Among all examined repeat types,
only telomeric and major (gamma) satellite repeats exhibit significant levels of H3K9me3 enrichment across all
three cell types. Similarly, the H3K36me3 mark is maintained at most SINE repeat types from set 4 in MEF
cells but is lost in NP cells. NP cells, however, do maintain significant H3K4me3 enrichment in many tRNA
repeats (set 2). Most repeats from set 3 maintain
H3K27me3 enrichment in MEF cells, with only a small
fraction of those repeats showing significant H3K27me3
enrichment in NP cells. An additional set of repeat
types that acquires H3K27me3 enrichment in NP cells
(Figure 4, orange bar) is composed primarily of LTRs
(75%). As in the case of H3K27me3-enriched repeat
types in mES cells, this new set shows significant overrepresentation of ERV-L repeats (P-value < 1e-4).
The mES enrichment estimates utilize H3 background,
whereas MEF and NP estimates are normalized using
whole-cell extract data. To ensure that the chromatin
changes described above cannot be attributed to the
normalization differences, we have repeated the analysis
normalizing mES ChIP data using whole-cell extract
data from MEF cells, and find that the choice of background does not affect the observed chromatin state
differences (Figure S8 in Additional file 1).
Repeat enrichment patterns in human CD4+ T cells

To examine the patterns of repeat-associated chromatin
profiles in human cells, we have utilized an extensive set
of histone methylation marks measured by Barski et al.
in CD4+ T cells [3]. The dataset interrogates 20 lysine
and arginine methylations of histone tails, the H2A.Z histone variant, RNA polymerase II and CTCF binding sites.

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

Page 7 of 12

Figure 4 Comparison of histone modification profiles in mES, neuronal progenitor and mouse embryonic fibroblast cells. The repeat
types were clustered based on their enrichment profiles across four different histone marks in three cells, so that the order of repeat types is
the same for each histone methylation mark shown. Green bars mark major clusters of enrichment, with numbers corresponding to mES clusters
from Figure 3a. The orange bar marks a set of repeats, composed predominantly of LTRs, that acquires H3K27me3 in NP cells. See Figure S7 in
Additional file 1 for a complete plot.

It does not, however, provide an input control measurement, which is imperative for normalization of the signal
associated with the repetitive elements. We therefore
estimated enrichment values using repeat-type specific
distributions of scaled read counts (see Materials and
methods; Figure 5a). Such calculations are based on the
assumption that, for a given repeat type, most of the
measured chromatin marks will not exhibit statistically
significant enrichment levels, and will instead provide a
normalized base-level that would ordinarily be assessed

using the input measurements. While this method cannot
be used to establish statistically significant depletion, it
allows identification of repeat types that exhibit significant enrichment in some of the examined marks.
The combinatorial patterns of resulting repeat enrichment estimates are shown in Figure 5b. As in the analysis of the mouse data, we find that repeats belonging to
the same family frequently exhibit a common pattern of
histone modifications. In this way, 92% of Alu repeat
types belong to a cluster distinguished by statistically

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

Page 8 of 12

Figure 5 Repeat enrichment patterns in human CD4+ T cells. (a) To normalize read counts in the absence of input sequencing data, the
enrichment values were estimated relative to other marks using distributions of enrichment coefficients observed for each repeat type (see
Materials and methods). The plot shows enrichment coefficients for various chromatin marks for the HSAT6 repeat. H3K9me3 and H4K20me3
deviate from the nominal levels exhibited by most of the marks in a statistically significant way. (b) Similar to Figure 3a, the repeat types were
clustered according to their combined enrichment estimates across measured chromatin marks. Part of the plot containing no enrichment
clusters is omitted (see Figure S9 in Additional file 1 for a complete plot). Repeat families over-abundant within major clusters are labeled on the
plot. (c) Enlarged view of the tRNA-dominated cluster located at the top of the plot shown in (b).

significant enrichment in H3K4me1, in contrast to
earlier observations of widespread enrichment for
H3K9me2 in Alu repeats [31]. All of the SVA repeats
show enrichment in H4K20me1 and H2BK5me1. As
expected, all five types of satellite repeats are enriched
for H4K20me3, with HSAT6 (Figure 5a) and HSAT III
and I also enriched for H3K9me3 [32]. Similarly, the
snRNAs appear within the clusters marked by RNA
polymerase II binding, and the majority of tRNA repeats
show enrichment in H3K4me3 (Figure 5c).
The repeats from the ERV1 family comprise most of
the types in disjoint clusters marked by H3K9me3,
H3K9me2 and H2A.Z enrichment. ERV1 repeats are
also over-represented (P-value = 8e-4) within a set
defined by H3K79me3, which also contains more than
half of all ERV-K repeat types (P-value = 8e-8). In contrast, the repeats types belonging to the ERV-L family
show a distinct enrichment in H3K27me2 modification.

Discussion
The substantial amount of sequence divergence found
both between and within specific repeat types, combined

with knowledge of the genomic integration context of
many repeat instances, allows estimation of enrichment
patterns unique to individual repeat types, small sets of
highly homologous repetitive elements, and in some
cases individual repeat instances. The developed phylogenetic method provides a way to examine enrichment
at multiple levels of such a hierarchy, starting with small
sets of repetitive elements grouped according to their
similarity in the context of the current data. The
method uses a greedy algorithm in an attempt to derive
a phylogenetic tree that provides the most informative
enrichment estimates. Such a heuristic approach does
not guarantee optimality; however, direct optimization
carries prohibitive computational costs. Alternative phylogenetic trees can also be derived - for example, based
on input reads or different distance metrics. We find,
however, that the utilized distance measure provides a
straightforward assessment of how similar two sequence
sets appear in terms of the reads being analyzed.
For the standard classification of repetitive sequences
defined by Repbase types, we show that the inclusion of
reads associated with known repeat instances can lead

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

to an order-of-magnitude increase in the number of
usable reads, allowing identification of statistically significant enrichment for many more additional repeat types.
Despite independently derived enrichment estimates,
our analysis of repeat enrichment in multiple histone
marks illustrates that, within both mouse and human
cells, there are specific chromatin states associated with
larger repeat families.
Some of these patterns, such as common enrichment
of different tRNA repeat types for marks associated with
active transcription, are expected given the functional
roles of these loci. Other signatures may be attributed
to the genomic context. For example, H3K4me1 enrichment common to human Alu repeats is likely to reflect
the strong bias of Alu repeats to reside within GC-rich,
gene-dense regions where such methylation is typically
found [3,12,33]. Chromatin signatures shared by different types of interspersed transposable elements may also
be a consequence of silencing mechanisms targeting
these repeat families. This is likely to be the case for the
histone methylation patterns observed for the ERV
families.
The analysis of mouse data illustrates two distinct histone modification patterns by ERV repeats. While the
repeats belonging to ERV-K and ERV1 subfamilies
appear within the cluster enriched for H3K9me3 and
H4K20me3 modifications [4,23,34], repeats from the
ERV-L and ERVL-MaLR families are instead enriched for
H3K27me3. Both patterns are characteristic of repressive
chromatin state but are established by two different
mechanisms: one associated with constitutive heterochromatin [35,36] and the other with Polycombmediated silencing of euchromatic domains [37]. Studies
of mES mutants deficient for the Suv39 h histone methyltransferase have noted that decreased H3K9me3 levels in
the repetitive elements were accompanied by a marked
increase in H3K27me3 enrichment, suggesting potential
functional compensation of the two mechanisms [21].
The difference between silencing mechanisms is consistent with earlier studies of IAP ERV-K and ERV-L
retrotransposons. They showed that even though both
types of repeats are actively transcribed following global
DNA demethylation at the two-cell stage, the ERV-L
transcripts and IAP silencing do not occur at the same
stage [28]. The ERV-L transcripts decline significantly
by the eight-cell stage whereas IAP silencing is only
apparent at the blastocyst stage. It is tempting to speculate that ERV-L silencing would not be tied to DNA remethylation [23]; however, DNA methylation has been
found for both ERV-L and ERV-K repeats [38,39].
The disparity between ERV-L and the other two
classes of ERVs can also be seen in the analysis of the
human data, where ERV-L repeats show enrichment in
H3K27me2, while ERV1 and ERV-K repeat types are

Page 9 of 12

marked by di- and tri-methylation of H3K9, H2A.Z and
H3K79me3. Such similarity is surprising given the significant differences in transposition rates, the presence
of active transposable elements between the two organisms, as well as the amount of variation seen among
different types of mouse cells [12,13].
Many of the identified chromatin enrichment patterns
recapitulate results of earlier studies (see Table S4 in
Additional file 1 for details). This includes well-established enrichment for heterochromatic marks in satellite
repeats [4,22,23,29,30], or enrichment of H3K9me3 in
ERV1/ERVK classes of repeats [4,23,34]. Similarly, our
comparison of the histone modification patterns of repetitive elements between three mouse cell types confirms
widespread differences noted previously [4], which are
particularly striking in the case of NP cells. An earlier
study by Martens et al. [22] examined histone methylation levels of select repetitive elements in mES and MEF
cells, and mES cells transformed with retinoic acid.
While their results also indicate extensive variation
between cell types, there is notable disagreement in the
estimated levels of enrichment. These include the
absence of H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 in the IAP repeats
of MEF cells, and an overall lack of concordance of
these two modifications across examined repeat types
and cell lines.
While the exact mechanisms involved in silencing of
diverse repeat families remain to be elucidated, it is
clear that chromatin state plays an important role in
suppressing activity of ERVs and other transposable elements. The presented methods allow isolation of the
signal associated with specific sets of repetitive elements,
which enables analysis of chromatin state and its variation across different repeat types. Further evaluation of
epigenetic marks associated with the repetitive elements
will be important, especially given potential involvement
of transposable elements in disease [18,40]. To facilitate
such analyses, the methods proposed in this work were
implemented as a web application, allowing for estimation of enrichment of annotated repeat types and visualization of enrichment phylogenies. In addition to
analysis of ChIP-seq data, the developed methods can
be used in the context of other types of high-throughput
sequencing experiments, most notably for analysis of
copy-number variation of repetitive sequences from
comparative genomic sequencing data [41].

Materials and methods
Associating reads with annotated repeat types

A read was associated with a particular repeat type if it
satisfied the following criteria: 1, the read aligned to a
single or multiple locations within the canonical
sequence of that repeat type, or annotated instances of
that repeat type within the genome, incorporating 13 bp

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

Page 10 of 12

(half of read length) genomic sequences flanking the
annotated instances; 2, no alignment of such or better
quality to canonical or instance sequences associated
with any other annotated repeat types could be
obtained. An optional masking procedure, designed to
exclude reads potentially originating from un-annotated
repeat types, added a third requirement: 3, no alignment
of such or better quality to any portion of the genome
assembly that is not associated with the annotated
instances of that repeat type could be obtained.
The set of annotated repeat types was taken from the
Repbase database [26]. The repeat instances were determined based on the RepeatMasker scan (default parameters, as provided at [25]). The procedure was
implemented using modified SeqMap [42] and bwa [43]
aligners, in combination with custom repeat assembly
files. The combined repeat assembly file contained a single FASTA entry for each repeat type as defined in the
Repbase database. The sequence of each entry is composed of the canonical repeat sequence concatenated
with all instance sequences identified by the default
RepeatMasker scan, separated by spacer blocks of 80 ‘N’
characters. Similarly, the canonical repeat assembly contained only canonical repeat sequences, and the instanceonly repeat assembly contained only sequences identified
by the RepeatMasker. The aligner (SeqMap and bwa)
implementation was modified to record the number of
reads that map, possibly more than once, only to a single
FASTA entry corresponding to a specific repeat type.
When utilizing masking option (condition 3), reads that
could be aligned to the regions outside of the RepeatMasker-detected instances were excluded from the analysis.
The mm9 assembly was used for mouse data, the hg18
assembly for human data. In all analyses, only alignments
with at most one mismatch were admitted.
Dataset size estimation

The effective size of the dataset was estimated as the
number of reads that map at least once to the genome
assembly or canonical repeat sequences.
Estimation of enrichment coefficients

The 95% confidence interval (CI) of the fold-enrichment
ratio was based on a Poisson model with non-informative Bayesian prior [44]. Specifically, the MLE was determined as:
^

=

C ( s + 1 / 2)
S (c + 1 / 2)

(1)

where s is the number of signal (ChIP) reads mapping
to a given repeat type, c is the number of control reads,
S is the size of the signal dataset, and C is the size of

the control dataset. The confidence interval bounds
were calculated as ⎡ (1 −  / 2 ) ,  ( / 2 )⎤ , where:
⎣
⎦

 ( x ) =  ⋅ F ⎡ x, 2 ( s + 1 / 2 ) , 2 ( c + 1 / 2 ) ⎤
⎣
⎦
^

(2)

F being the F-distribution, and a = 0.05. The estimation of enrichment in mES cells was done relative to the
histone H3 data; whole-cell extract data was used for
MEF and NPC cell types.
Comparison of enrichment estimates

Enrichment estimates were compared as a ratio of two
binomial proportions, adjusted for the dataset size. The
ratio confidence intervals were calculated using a noniterative approximate Bayesian method proposed by
Price and Bonett [45].
Visualization

To explore combinatorial patterns of enrichment (Figures 3, 4 and 5), the repeat types were clustered according to the MLE estimates. Enrichment values of repeats
that do not show statistically significant enrichment
(based on 95% CI) were set to 0. The clustering was
determined using the Ward method [46], using only
positive enrichment values (treating all negative values
corresponding to depletion as 0).
Estimation of mis-alignment rates

The sequencing error rates were estimated from the
H3K9me3 ChIP data, based on the mismatches observed
when aligning the data to the reference genome assembly.
The error frequencies were estimated for each position of
the 32-bp reads (ranging from 5.4e-3 in the first position
to 1.0e-2 in the last), and mismatch frequencies were estimated for each pair of nucleotides. To estimate the false
positive and false negative rates of alignment in the repeat
analysis, the repeat assembly was sampled using the error
model described above, with 100-fold coverage. Analogous
100-fold sampling was performed to analyze the effect of
SNPs, using an SNP frequency of 8.3e-5 (chromosome 1,
5-Mbp average observed SNP rate [47]).
Relative normalization for human data

As the utilized human CD4+ T-cell ChIP-seq experiments from Barski et al. [3] did not include an input
measurement, we have estimated enrichment of each
repeat type based on the assumption that most of the
21 measured marks should not be enriched in each
given repeat. Enrichment estimates were determined by
first calculating the percentage of ChIP reads aligned to
a repeat type relative to the side of the signal data set.
Then, for each repeat type, the percentage ratios calculated for the 21 chromatin marks were used to create a

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

Gaussian distribution. To reduce the effect of the outliers, five marks with the highest percentage ratios were
omitted in the estimation of the Guassian.
The distributions did not show significant outliers
with low percentage ratios. This is expected since the
reduction of the read ratios associated with significant
depletion would be necessarily smaller in magnitude
than the background percentage ratio for a given repeat,
and is likely to be smaller than the variation of the
background percentage ratio between different ChIP
measurements due to the presence of significant enrichment elsewhere in the genome. Furthermore, none of
the examined marks are known to show high genomewide levels of enrichment, and are therefore not
expected to show a high magnitude of depletion.
To account for variation stemming from small read
counts, each percentage ratio was sampled 100 times
based on the Beta distribution. The parameters of the
Gaussian distribution were then determined using all
percentage ratios, and used to calculate enrichment
Z-scores for each chromatin mark.
Phylogenetic analysis of enrichment

The phylogenetic trees (Figure 2) were constructed
using bottom-up clustering, starting with the leaves.
Each node of the tree corresponds to a set of repetitive
sequences. The trees represent a hierarchical grouping
of repetitive elements into successively larger sets. The
leaves represent initial sets of sequences: Repbase repeat
types in the case of Figure 2b; individual instances of
MMERGLN repeats in the case of Figure 2c. The
enrichment estimates for each set are calculated based
on the reads that can be uniquely associated with that
set (see conditions 1 and 2 above). In deriving phylogenetic trees for a set of repeat instances (Figure 2c),
reads mapping to repeat sequences outside of the considered instance set were discarded.
The trees were constructed using the neighbor-joining
method. The distance between nodes (sets of sequences)
was determined as a ratio of reads shared by the two sets
to the total number of reads aligning to both sets. The
trees shown here were calculated using ChIP data. For a
given node, the branch length was calculated as a number
of uniquely assignable reads in a given node that were
not unique in the descendant nodes. The branches were
colored according to the enrichment MLE.
Availability

To facilitate analysis of enrichment patterns in repetitive
regions by other groups, we have implemented the developed methods in a web application. The implementation
allows processing of simple ChIP-control paired or more
extensive datasets for a variety of organisms. The application can be accessed on the authors’ website [48].

Page 11 of 12

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary figures and tables. A combined set
of supplementary figures and tables referenced in the manuscript.

Abbreviations
bp: base pair; ChIP: chromatin immunoprecipitation; CI: confidence interval;
ERV: endogenous retrovirus; ETn: early transposon; IAP: intracisternal A
particle; LTR: long terminal repeat; MEF: mouse embryonic fibroblast; mES:
mouse embryonic stem cell; MLE: maximum likelihood estimate; NP: neural
progenitor; SINE: short interspersed nuclear element; SNP: single nucleotide
polymorphism.
Author details
1
Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 2Center for Biomedical Informatics, Harvard
Medical School, 275 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
3
Informatics Program at Children’s Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.
Authors’ contributions
PVK designed the study; PVK and DSD implemented the algorithms; LJL
developed the web applications; PVK wrote the manuscript with the help of
PJP and DSD.
Received: 16 January 2010 Revised: 15 June 2010
Accepted: 28 June 2010 Published: 28 June 2010
References
1. Park PJ: ChIP-seq: advantages and challenges of a maturing technology.
Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10:669-680.
2. Chen X, Xu H, Yuan P, Fang F, Huss M, Vega VB, Wong E, Orlov YL,
Zhang W, Jiang J, Loh YH, Yeo HC, Yeo ZX, Narang V, Govindarajan KR,
Leong B, Shahab A, Ruan Y, Bourque G, Sung WK, Clarke ND, Wei CL,
Ng HH: Integration of external signaling pathways with the core
transcriptional network in embryonic stem cells. Cell 2008, 133:1106-1117.
3. Barski A, Cuddapah S, Cui K, Roh TY, Schones DE, Wang Z, Wei G,
Chepelev I, Zhao K: High-resolution profiling of histone methylations in
the human genome. Cell 2007, 129:823-837.
4. Mikkelsen TS, Ku M, Jaffe DB, Issac B, Lieberman E, Giannoukos G, Alvarez P,
Brockman W, Kim TK, Koche RP, Lee W, Mendenhall E, O’Donovan A,
Presser A, Russ C, Xie X, Meissner A, Wernig M, Jaenisch R, Nusbaum C,
Lander ES, Bernstein BE: Genome-wide maps of chromatin state in
pluripotent and lineage-committed cells. Nature 2007, 448:553-560.
5. Birney E, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Dutta A, Guigo R, Gingeras TR,
Margulies EH, Weng Z, Snyder M, Dermitzakis ET, Thurman RE, Kuehn MS,
Taylor CM, Neph S, Koch CM, Asthana S, Malhotra A, Adzhubei I,
Greenbaum JA, Andrews RM, Flicek P, Boyle PJ, Cao H, Carter NP,
Clelland GK, Davis S, Day N, Dhami P, Dillon SC, Dorschner MO, Fiegler H,
et al: Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1% of the
human genome by the ENCODE pilot project. Nature 2007, 447:799-816.
6. Celniker SE, Dillon LA, Gerstein MB, Gunsalus KC, Henikoff S, Karpen GH,
Kellis M, Lai EC, Lieb JD, MacAlpine DM, Micklem G, Piano F, Snyder M,
Stein L, White KP, Waterston RH: Unlocking the secrets of the genome.
Nature 2009, 459:927-930.
7. Ji H, Jiang H, Ma W, Johnson DS, Myers RM, Wong WH: An integrated
software system for analyzing ChIP-chip and ChIP-seq data. Nat
Biotechnol 2008, 26:1293-1300.
8. Kharchenko PV, Tolstorukov MY, Park PJ: Design and analysis of ChIP-seq
experiments for DNA-binding proteins. Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26:1351-1359.
9. Zhang Y, Liu T, Meyer CA, Eeckhoute J, Johnson DS, Bernstein BE,
Nussbaum C, Myers RM, Brown M, Li W, Liu XS: Model-based analysis of
ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biol 2008, 9:R137.
10. Rozowsky J, Euskirchen G, Auerbach RK, Zhang ZD, Gibson T, Bjornson R,
Carriero N, Snyder M, Gerstein MB: PeakSeq enables systematic scoring of
ChIP-seq experiments relative to controls. Nat Biotechnol 2009, 27:66-75.

Day et al. Genome Biology 2010, 11:R69
http://genomebiology.com/content/11/6/R69

11. Kidwell MG, Lisch DR: Transposable elements and host genome
evolution. Trends Ecol Evol 2000, 15:95-99.
12. Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K,
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, Funke R, Gage D, Harris K, Heaford A,
Howland J, Kann L, Lehoczky J, LeVine R, McEwan P, McKernan K,
Meldrim J, Mesirov JP, Miranda C, Morris W, Naylor J, Raymond C, Rosetti M,
Santos R, Sheridan A, Sougnez C, et al: Initial sequencing and analysis of
the human genome. Nature 2001, 409:860-921.
13. Waterston RH, Lindblad-Toh K, Birney E, Rogers J, Abril JF, Agarwal P,
Agarwala R, Ainscough R, Alexandersson M, An P, Antonarakis SE,
Attwood J, Baertsch R, Bailey J, Barlow K, Beck S, Berry E, Birren B, Bloom T,
Bork P, Botcherby M, Bray N, Brent MR, Brown DG, Brown SD, Bult C,
Burton J, Butler J, Campbell RD, Carninci P, et al: Initial sequencing and
comparative analysis of the mouse genome. Nature 2002, 420:520-562.
14. Feschotte C: Transposable elements and the evolution of regulatory
networks. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:397-405.
15. Bourque G, Leong B, Vega VB, Chen X, Lee YL, Srinivasan KG, Chew JL,
Ruan Y, Wei CL, Ng HH, Liu ET: Evolution of the mammalian transcription
factor binding repertoire via transposable elements. Genome Res 2008,
18:1752-1762.
16. Wang T, Zeng J, Lowe CB, Sellers RG, Salama SR, Yang M, Burgess SM,
Brachmann RK, Haussler D: Species-specific endogenous retroviruses
shape the transcriptional network of the human tumor suppressor
protein p53. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:18613-18618.
17. Moyes D, Griffiths DJ, Venables PJ: Insertional polymorphisms: a new lease
of life for endogenous retroviruses in human disease. Trends Genet 2007,
23:326-333.
18. Colmegna I, Garry RF: Role of endogenous retroviruses in autoimmune
diseases. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2006, 20:913-929.
19. Slotkin RK, Martienssen R: Transposable elements and the epigenetic
regulation of the genome. Nat Rev Genet 2007, 8:272-285.
20. Maksakova IA, Mager DL, Reiss D: Keeping active endogenous retrovirallike elements in check: the epigenetic perspective. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008,
65:3329-3347.
21. Peters AH, Kubicek S, Mechtler K, O’Sullivan RJ, Derijck AA, Perez-Burgos L,
Kohlmaier A, Opravil S, Tachibana M, Shinkai Y, Martens JH, Jenuwein T:
Partitioning and plasticity of repressive histone methylation states in
mammalian chromatin. Mol Cell 2003, 12:1577-1589.
22. Martens JH, O’Sullivan RJ, Braunschweig U, Opravil S, Radolf M, Steinlein P,
Jenuwein T: The profile of repeat-associated histone lysine methylation
states in the mouse epigenome. EMBO J 2005, 24:800-812.
23. Dong KB, Maksakova IA, Mohn F, Leung D, Appanah R, Lee S, Yang HW,
Lam LL, Mager DL, Schubeler D, Tachibana M, Shinkai Y, Lorincz MC: DNA
methylation in ES cells requires the lysine methyltransferase G9a but
not its catalytic activity. EMBO J 2008, 27:2691-2701.
24. Rosenfeld JA, Wang Z, Schones DE, Zhao K, DeSalle R, Zhang MQ:
Determination of enriched histone modifications in non-genic portions
of the human genome. BMC Genomics 2009, 10:143.
25. RepeatMasker. [http://www.repeatmasker.org].
26. Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Pavlicek A, Klonowski P, Kohany O, Walichiewicz J:
Repbase Update, a database of eukaryotic repetitive elements. Cytogenet
Genome Res 2005, 110:462-467.
27. Examples of repeat enrichment phylogenies on the authors’ website.
[http://compbio.med.harvard.edu/kharchenko/repeats/].
28. Svoboda P, Stein P, Anger M, Bernstein E, Hannon GJ, Schultz RM: RNAi
and expression of retrotransposons MuERV-L and IAP in preimplantation
mouse embryos. Dev Biol 2004, 269:276-285.
29. Guenatri M, Bailly D, Maison C, Almouzni G: Mouse centric and pericentric
satellite repeats form distinct functional heterochromatin. J Cell Biol 2004,
166:493-505.
30. Peters AH, O’Carroll D, Scherthan H, Mechtler K, Sauer S, Schofer C,
Weipoltshammer K, Pagani M, Lachner M, Kohlmaier A, Opravil S, Doyle M,
Sibilia M, Jenuwein T: Loss of the Suv39 h histone methyltransferases
impairs mammalian heterochromatin and genome stability. Cell 2001,
107:323-337.
31. Kondo Y, Issa JP: Enrichment for histone H3 lysine 9 methylation at Alu
repeats in human cells. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:27658-27662.
32. Lehnertz B, Ueda Y, Derijck AA, Braunschweig U, Perez-Burgos L, Kubicek S,
Chen T, Li E, Jenuwein T, Peters AH: Suv39h-mediated histone H3 lysine 9
methylation directs DNA methylation to major satellite repeats at
pericentric heterochromatin. Curr Biol 2003, 13:1192-1200.

Page 12 of 12

33. Medstrand P, van de Lagemaat LN, Mager DL: Retroelement distributions
in the human genome: variations associated with age and proximity to
genes. Genome Res 2002, 12:1483-1495.
34. Maksakova IA, Zhang Y, Mager DL: Preferential epigenetic suppression of
the autonomous MusD over the nonautonomous ETn mouse
retrotransposons. Mol Cell Biol 2009, 29:2456-2468.
35. Bannister AJ, Zegerman P, Partridge JF, Miska EA, Thomas JO, Allshire RC,
Kouzarides T: Selective recognition of methylated lysine 9 on histone H3
by the HP1 chromo domain. Nature 2001, 410:120-124.
36. Richards EJ, Elgin SC: Epigenetic codes for heterochromatin formation
and silencing: rounding up the usual suspects. Cell 2002, 108:489-500.
37. Boyer LA, Plath K, Zeitlinger J, Brambrink T, Medeiros LA, Lee TI, Levine SS,
Wernig M, Tajonar A, Ray MK, Bell GW, Otte AP, Vidal M, Gifford DK,
Young RA, Jaenisch R: Polycomb complexes repress developmental
regulators in murine embryonic stem cells. Nature 2006, 441:349-353.
38. Walsh CP, Chaillet JR, Bestor TH: Transcription of IAP endogenous
retroviruses is constrained by cytosine methylation. Nat Genet 1998,
20:116-117.
39. Liang G, Chan MF, Tomigahara Y, Tsai YC, Gonzales FA, Li E, Laird PW,
Jones PA: Cooperativity between DNA methyltransferases in the
maintenance methylation of repetitive elements. Mol Cell Biol 2002,
22:480-491.
40. Howard G, Eiges R, Gaudet F, Jaenisch R, Eden A: Activation and
transposition of endogenous retroviral elements in hypomethylation
induced tumors in mice. Oncogene 2008, 27:404-408.
41. Chiang DY, Getz G, Jaffe DB, O’Kelly MJ, Zhao X, Carter SL, Russ C,
Nusbaum C, Meyerson M, Lander ES: High-resolution mapping of copynumber alterations with massively parallel sequencing. Nat Methods
2009, 6:99-103.
42. Jiang H, Wong WH: SeqMap: mapping massive amount of
oligonucleotides to the genome. Bioinformatics (Oxford) 2008,
24:2395-2396.
43. Li H, Durbin R: Fast and accurate short read alignment with BurrowsWheeler transform. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1754-1760.
44. Robert MP, Douglas GB: Estimating the ratio of two Poisson rates.
Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 2000, 34:345-356.
45. Price RM, Bonett DG: Confidence intervals for a ratio of two independent
binomial proportions. Stat Med 2008, 27:5497-5508.
46. Ward JH: Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function. J Am
Stat Assoc 1963, 58:236.
47. Frazer KA, Eskin E, Kang HM, Bogue MA, Hinds DA, Beilharz EJ, Gupta RV,
Montgomery J, Morenzoni MM, Nilsen GB, Pethiyagoda CL, Stuve LL,
Johnson FM, Daly MJ, Wade CM, Cox DR: A sequence-based variation
map of 8.27 million SNPs in inbred mouse strains. Nature 2007,
448:1050-1053.
48. Repeat Enrichment Web Application. [http://compbio.med.harvard.edu/
repeats/].
doi:10.1186/gb-2010-11-6-r69
Cite this article as: Day et al.: Estimating enrichment of repetitive
elements from high-throughput sequence data. Genome Biology 2010 11:
R69.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
