<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolution of xyloglucan-related genes in green plants</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-341"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Luiz Eduardo V Del Bem"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Evolution of xyloglucan-related genes in green
plants
Luiz Eduardo V Del Bem1*, Michel GA Vincentz1,2*

Abstract
Background: The cell shape and morphology of plant tissues are intimately related to structural modifications in
the primary cell wall that are associated with key processes in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation. The
primary cell wall is composed mainly of cellulose immersed in a matrix of hemicellulose, pectin, lignin and some
structural proteins. Xyloglucan is a hemicellulose polysaccharide present in the cell walls of all land plants
(Embryophyta) and is the main hemicellulose in non-graminaceous angiosperms.
Results: In this work, we used a comparative genomic approach to obtain new insights into the evolution of the
xyloglucan-related enzymatic machinery in green plants. Detailed phylogenetic analyses were done for enzymes
involved in xyloglucan synthesis (xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolase, a-xylosidase, b-galactosidase, b-glucosidase
and a-fucosidase) and mobilization/degradation (b-(1®4)-glucan synthase, a-fucosyltransferases,
b-galactosyltransferases and a-xylosyl transferase) based on 12 fully sequenced genomes and expressed sequence
tags from 29 species of green plants. Evidence from Chlorophyta and Streptophyta green algae indicated that part
of the Embryophyta xyloglucan-related machinery evolved in an aquatic environment, before land colonization.
Streptophyte algae have at least three enzymes of the xyloglucan machinery: xyloglucan transglycosylase/
hydrolase, b-(1®4)-glucan synthase from the celullose synthase-like C family and a-xylosidase that is also present
in chlorophytes. Interestingly, gymnosperm sequences orthologs to xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolases with
exclusively hydrolytic activity were also detected, suggesting that such activity must have emerged within the last
common ancestor of spermatophytes. There was a positive correlation between the numbers of founder genes
within each gene family and the complexity of the plant cell wall.
Conclusions: Our data support the idea that a primordial xyloglucan-like polymer emerged in streptophyte algae
as a pre-adaptation that allowed plants to subsequently colonize terrestrial habitats. Our results also provide
additional evidence that charophycean algae and land plants are sister groups.

Background
The cell shape and morphology of all plant tissues are a
consequence of cell division and expansion throughout
the plant’s life cycle. Structural modifications in the primary cell wall (PCW) are key processes in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation. The PCW is a
complex dynamic structure that shows spatial and temporal variability in composition and organization. Cell
shape, size, and cell-cell adhesion are processes that rely
on the coordinated action of enzymes involved in the
synthesis, deposition, reorganization and selective
* Correspondence: lev.del.bem@gmail.com; mgavince@unicamp.br
1
Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Universidade Estadual
de Campinas (UNICAMP), CP 6010, CEP 13083-875, Campinas, SP, Brazil
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

disassembly of cell wall components. The ability to
selectively modify the wall architecture is a major part
of many processes such as cell growth, organ abscission,
vascular differentiation, fruit softening and the response
to pathogens [1-3].
The PCW consists primarily of cellulose immersed in
a matrix of hemicellulose, pectin, lignin and some
structural proteins [4,5]. Xyloglucan (XyG) is a wellcharacterized hemicellulose polysaccharide present in
the cell walls of all spermatophytes [6]. Xyloglucan has
also recently been found in the cell walls of non-vascular and seedless vascular plants [7]. XyG can also be
stored as a reserve in cotyledons of many eudicots, such
as nasturtium [8,9], Tamarindus indica [10], Copaifera
langsdorffii [11] and Hymenaea courbaril [12].

© 2010 Del Bem and Vincentz; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

Page 2 of 17

Figure 1 Schematic representation of Xyloglucan (XyG) structure and related enzymatic activities. An oligosaccharide of XyG (XXFG) is
represented. b-(1-4)-glucan synthase produce the glucan backbone, a-Xylosyl Tranferase (XXT) acts on transfer xylose residues to the main
backbone, b-Galactosyl Tranferase transfers galactose residue to xylose and a-Fucosyl Transferase transfer fucose residue to galactose. Xyloglucan
Transglycosylase/Hydrolase (XTH) acts on hydrolysis of XyG oligosaccharides and/or XyG transglycosylation. a-Xylosidase removes the xylose
residues, b-Galactosidase removes the galactose, a-fucosidase removes the fucose and b-Glucosidase mobilizes glucose monosaccharide from
the main glucan backbone.

Xyloglucans have a main b-D-(1®4)-glucan backbone
(denoted as G) generally branched with a(1®6)-linked
D-xylopyranosyl (denoted as X) or b-D-galactopyranosyl
(1®2)-D-xylopyranosyl residues (denoted as L). The presence of terminal fucosyl a-L-(1®2) units linked to branching b-D-galactosyl residues (denoted as F; for an example
see Figure 1 and for nomenclature of XyG oligosaccharides
see [13]) is the main difference between seed reserve XyG
and structural XyG from the PCW of eudicot tissues [14].
Two main substitution patterns (XXXG and XXGG)
occur in storage and structural eudicot XyG, although
oligosaccharides containing five or six repeats (XXXXG
and XXXXXG) have also been found in the XyG of seeds
from the tropical tree Hymenaea courbaril ([15,16]). The
archetypical seed XyG of Tamarindus indica consists of
XXXG, XXLG, XLXG and XLLG in a molar ratio of
1.4:3:1:5.4, respectively. However, these polysaccharides
are not identical among plant groups. For example, the
moss Physcomitrella patens and the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha synthesize XXGGG- and XXGG-type
XyGs, respectively, with side chains that contain a b-Dgalactosyluronic acid and a branched xylosyl residue. In
contrast, hornworts synthesize XXXG-type XyGs that are
structurally homologous to the XyGs synthesized by
many seed-bearing and seedless vascular plants [7].
XyG is degraded in vivo by five hydrolases: b-galactosidase, a-xylosidase, b-glucosidase, xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolase (XTH) and a-fucosidase (Figure 1;
[17,18]). Although the machinery involved in XyG
degradation is relatively well-characterized [17], important details of the biosynthesis of this hemicellulose
remain poorly understood. A number of enzymes participate in XyG biosynthesis, including b-(1®4)-glucan
synthase, a-fucosyltransferases, b-galactosyltransferases
and a-xylosyltransferases (Figure 1; [19]). Recently, only

two genes for a-xylosyltransferases (XXT1 and XXT2)
were found to be essential for the biosynthesis of XyG
in Arabidopsis [20]. The double-mutant xxt1/xxt2 lacks
detectable XyG and has aberrant root hairs, but is viable
and has almost normal development. This finding challenges conventional models for the functional organization of PCW components [20].
An evolutionary analysis of the XyG-related machinery
could provide new insights into the origin of this polymer during plant evolution, as well as information on
the context in which it occurred. This knowledge could
help to explain the role of XyG in plant adaptive features. In this work, we describe a comprehensive evolutionary analysis of the multigenic families of glycosyl
hydrolases (b-galactosidase, a-xylosidase, b-glucosidase,
XTH and a-fucosidase) and transferases (b-(1®4)-glucan synthase, a-fucosyltransferases, b-galactosyltransferases and XXT) involved in the biosynthesis,
modification and degradation of XyG (Figure 1). Our
results indicate that the XyG machinery is present in all
embryophytic genomes and possibly emerged from the
last common ancestor of the streptophytes (Charophyta
algae + embryophytes). This inference suggests that the
essential enzymes involved in XyG biosynthesis and
turnover originated before land colonization by plants.
This conclusion indicates that XyG is more than just a
structural and mechanical molecule. Our data also provide additional evidence that streptophyte algae and
land plants (Embryophyta) are sister groups.

Results and Discussion
Identification and phylogenetic analysis of XyG-related
genes in green plant genomes

In order to identify genes related to XyG synthesis
(b-(1®4)-glucan synthase, a-fucosyltransferases,

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

b-galactosyltransferases and a-xylosyltransferases) and
mobilization/modification (b-galactosidase, a-xylosidase,
b-glucosidase, XTH, a-fucosidase; Figure 1) in green
plants, we used previously characterized protein sequences
as queries to perform blast searches using a self-employed
algorithm (Additional File 1; see Methods for a complete
list of the protein sequences used as queries). We also generated a sequence database containing the complete predicted proteomes and transcriptomes for 12 species
(Viridiplantae 1.0 containing 365,187 protein sequences
and Viridiplantae_nt 1.0 containing 403,380 EST
sequences, respectively), including angiosperms (eudicots
and monocots), seedless tracheophytes (Lycophyta), nonvascular plants (Bryophyta), and green algae (Chlorophyta). In addition, searches were also run against an EST
database (ViridiESTs 1.0 containing 402,770 assembled
EST sequences) that included sequences belonging to 29
species from taxonomic groups lacking complete genome
information, such as basal and non-eudicot/monocot
angiosperms, gymnosperms (Pinophyta, Cycadophyta,
Ginkgophyta and Gnetophyta), seedless Tracheophyta
(Pterydophyta), non-vascular plants (Marchantiophyta)
and Streptophyta algae.
Using this strategy, we identified 862 XyG-related genes
that included 293 XTH sequences, 133 b-galactosidases,
53 b-glucosidases, 24 a-xylosidases, 91 b-(1®4)-glucan
synthases, 79 a-fucosyltransferases, 108 b-galactosyltransferases and 45 XXTs. We found two evolutionarily unrelated clusters of XyG-related a-fucosidase, one containing
22 sequences homologous to Arabidopsis ATFXG1
(At1g67830 - TAIR; [18]) and the other containing 14
sequences homologous to Lilium longiflorum EBM II
(BAF85832 - GenBank; [21]). ESTs with less than 40% of
the protein-based query coverage were excluded.
The relationships between genes can be represented
as a system of homologous families that include
orthologs and paralogs [22]. Orthologs are genes in
different species that evolved from a common ancestral gene through speciation whereas paralogs are
genes sharing a common ancestral gene that duplicated within the genome [23]. Orthologs normally
retain their original function during evolution whereas
paralogs can evolve new functions that may or may
not be related to the original one. Consequently, the
identification of orthologs is critical for the reliable
prediction of gene functions in newly sequenced genomes. This identification is equally important for phylogenetic analysis because interpretable phylogenetic
trees can generally be constructed only within sets of
orthologs [23,24]. A complete list of orthologs is also
a prerequisite for meaningful comparisons of genome
organization [22].
The possible groups of orthologs (PoGOs) were established by using two phylogenetic analyses that involved

Page 3 of 17

the amino acid sequences. The first analysis was based
on the p-distance (number of differences/number of
aligned residues) and PAM 001 matrix [25] and used
the neighbor-joining tree building method (NJ; [26])
while the second analysis was based on the maximum
likelihood (ML; [27]). We also sought for shared derived
ancestral intron positions in Arabidopsis (eudicot), sorghum (monocot), Selaginella (Lycophyte) and Physcomitrella (Bryophyte) since this information was useful in
inferring the evolutionary relationships between homologous groups. The results for intron positions generally
agreed with the phylogenetic analysis (data not shown).
This combination of analyses yielded a comprehensive
evolutionary profile of the enzymes involved in XyG
synthesis and turnover. In the following sections, we
present evidence that the complete set of enzymes
involved in XyG synthesis and mobilization is present
among all embryophytic lineages and that some of them
emerged within streptophytes (XTH and b-(1®4)-glucan synthase) and chlorophyte algae (a-xylosidase).
XTH originated in the last common ancestor of
streptophytes, before land colonization, and was
amplified through several lineage-specific events in
embryophytes

Two hundred and ninety-three XTH homologous
sequences were identified among green plants. Phylogenetic analysis of these sequences resulted in 21 PoGOs
and a group of paralogs among streptophytes (A to V in
Figure 2; Additional File 2; Additional File 3). While no
XTH sequence was found among the four complete
genomes of green algae (chlorophytes), at least two land
plant XTH founder genes were identified in the last
common ancestor of streptophytes (PoGOs U and V in
Figure 2). One of these genes was represented by
CvXTH1 (previously identified as Chara2 [28]) from
Chara vulgaris (class Charophyceae). This ancestral
gene persisted in all streptophyte lineages and was
represented by the single PoGO V (Figure 2). The other
founder gene is represented by PoGO U (Figure 2), that
integrates the CpXTH1 gene in the charophyte alga
Closterium peracerosum (class Zygnemophyceae) and
consisted exclusively of XTH sequences from marchantiophyte and streptophyte algae. PoGO U most likely
gave rise to 19 PoGOs and a group of paralogs (group K
in Figure 2). These PoGOs and paralogs included all
previously reported Arabidopsis, rice, and poplar XTH
genes (Figure 2; [6,29,30]). Since molecular and morphological data suggest that streptophyte algae are sister
groups of land plants [31,32], and since liverworts such
as Marchantia are the most basal embryophytes [33], it
is plausible that PoGO U-related orthologs have been
lost in bryophytes and tracheophytes (Figure 2). PoGO
U and the homologous group that emerged from it were

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

Page 4 of 17

Figure 2 Evolutionary profile of XTH in green plants. Phylogenetic tree showing XTH PoGOs in green plants. The topology was obtained by
Neighbor-Joining method with genetic distances calculated by p-distance. The bootstrap values higher than 50% are shown for 1000 replicates
along with Maximum-likelihood (ML) aLRT values higher than 0.50 (in the figure [NJ/ML]). Each triangle represents a PoGO and the amount of
sequences belonging to each PoGO is proportional to triangles’ size. The number of genes by species is given (At - Arabidopsis thaliana, Gm Glycine max, Pt - Populus trichocarpa, Vv - Vitis vinifera, Os - Oryza sativa, Sb - Sorghum bicolor, Sm - Selaginella moellendorffii, Pp - Physcomitrella
patens patens, Ot - Ostreococcus tauri, Ol - Ostreococcus lucimarinus, Vc - Volvox carteri, Cr - Chalmydomonas reinhardtii). Outgroup is formed by
fungus sequences. Accession numbers for all genes in the tree are described in Additional File 3 and the detailed tree is shown in Additional
File 2. * - No genes found within a PoGO that lacks genomic information, only ESTs. ( ) - Given number of different species within a PoGO.

defined as Group I while the homologous genes from
PoGO V were identified as Group II (Figure 2).
Together, these results indicate that PoGOs U and V
share a common origin, which implies that the first XTH
gene duplication and maintenance occurred before land
colonization by plants. This conclusion is supported by
the detection of XyG in all groups of land plants [7] and
the presence of XyG transglycosylation activity in the
charophyte alga Chara vulgaris [28]. Thus, XTH apparently originated after the divergence of chlorophyte and
streptophyte algae. XyG was therefore probably absent in
the more ancestral Viridiplantae lineages represented by
chlorophyte algae and emerged as a new cell wall component in streptophytes. Since chlorophyte algae occur

mainly in salt-water wheres streptophyte algae are mainly
fresh-water, we suggest that XyG provided a selective
advantage in the colonization of fresh-water habitats. In
addition, the ability of XyG to confer mechanical strength
[20] may have been particularly advantageous in allowing
streptophytes to colonize terrestrial habitats. Successful
land colonization by plants has apparently been limited
to a sister lineage of streptophyte algae that gave rise to
all embryophyte groups [32]. These conclusions provide
additional support for the suggestion that the acquisition
of XyG by streptophyte algae was an important factor in
land colonization [34].
The PoGOs in Group I consisted of genes from all
major embryophyte lineages. PoGOs A, F, and O that

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

contained XTH genes from the marchantiophyte Marchantia polymorpha (liverwort) and PoGO B that contained bryophyte (moss) XTH genes appeared to have
emerged from four genes in the last common ancestor
of embryophytes (Figure 2). Thus, up to four ancestral
XTH genes were related to early non-vascular land
plants that were present at least 475 million years ago
(based on the current fossil record) [35]. This conclusion supports the notion that gene duplication in the
XTH family and its resulting selective advantages is an
ancient phenomenon among land plant lineages.
A striking feature of Group I was the extensive amplification of XTH genes among angiosperms, i.e., 33
genes in Arabidopsis, 34 in soybean, 35 in poplar, 19 in
grape, 30 in rice, and 32 in sorghum, all of which were
distributed among 17 PoGOs (Figure 2). However, differential patterns of amplification and/or gene losses
were observed among land plants. For instance, PoGOs
B, D, and O were present among eudicots but were not
detected in monocots (Figure 2). The presence of bryophyte and lycophyte XTH genes in PoGO B, gymnosperm XTHs in PoGO D, and embryophyte XTH genes
in PoGO O indicates that gene losses from these
PoGOs occurred specifically in the monocot lineage
(Figure 2). On the other hand, PoGOs G, R, and S were
restricted to monocots (Figure 2), which suggests that
these groups emerged after the divergence of eudicots
and monocots. Although the abundance of XTH genes
in the rice genome [30] was initially considered unusual
because of the small content of XyG in the PCW of
most grasses [4,14], XyG can account for up to 10% of
the wall mass in grass tissues during growth [36] and
XTH activity may be more important for grasses than
previously thought [30,37].
PoGO L and the set of paralogs genes that formed
Group K were restricted to bryophytes whereas PoGO P
was restricted to gymnosperms. The simplest explanation for this is that these lineage-specific acquisitions
may be related to functional specialization and/or novelties. These lineage-specific differences suggest that distinct patterns of selective pressure acted on the XTH
genes in different lineages, and may partly explain the
differential abundance of XyG, i.e., 10-20% of the PCW
dry weight in eudicots compared to <5% in graminaceous monocots [4,14,38,39]) and the different patterns
of XyG substitution and structure, e.g., presence of
galacturonic acid in bryophyte and marchantiophyte
XyG [7].
PoGO N contained Arabidopsis proteins encoded by
At-XTH31 and At-XTH32, which are involved exclusively in XyG hydrolysis and lack transglycosylation
activity [6]. XTH with exclusively hydrolytic activity may
have derived from transglycosylating proteins as a new
feature of angiosperms [6]. However, this conclusion

Page 5 of 17

may need to be reevaluated in the light of the data presented here. Indeed, sequences from several taxonomic
groups of flowerless seed plants (pinophytes, gnetophytes and cycadophytes; Figure 2) were included in
PoGO L, suggesting that XTHs with exclusively hydrolytic activity emerged at least in the last common ancestor
of the spermatophytes. This inference is further supported by the occurrence of hydrolytic activity in fast
growing tissues such as meristems (Arabidopsis; [40]) or
during specific developmental stages such as germinating seeds (tomato; [41]) or in physiological processes
such as the mobilization of endosperm reserves (Hymenaea courbaril; [17,42]), all of which are key phenomena
in seed plants and originated at least 300 million years
ago, as suggested by the cycadophytes fossil record [43].
The moss Physcomitrella genome contained 30 XTH
genes, a number comparable to that found in angiosperms (33 in Arabidopsis and 30 in rice). This elevated
number of genes may reflect lineage-specific genome
duplications in mosses [44]. Of these 30 genes, 27 were
classified in Group I and three in Group II (Figure 2),
and could be divided into six PoGOs and a paralog
group (Group K, Figure 2). Two of these groups, PoGO
L and the paralog group K, were bryophyte-specific
while the other five PoGOs (A, B, F, O and V) were
shared by tracheophytes (Figure 2; Additional File 3).
The emergence of these lineage-specific XTH genes in
bryophytes could be related to the presence of a specific
type of XyG containing b-D-galactosyluronic acid and a
branched xylosyl residue [7] that is not shared with tracheophytes [7,37].
The vascular seedless Selaginella had only 16 XTH
genes (14 in Group I and two in Group II) that were
divided into seven PoGOs conserved among other tracheophyte lineages (Figure 2). All Selaginella XTH
genes occurred in PoGOs shared by angiosperms. The
retention of these genes by angiosperms suggests that
the early set of tracheophyte XTH genes was conserved
in higher taxa, whereas the basic XyG pattern of XXXG
emerged in hornworts and is shared by all tracheophytes
[7,37]. The appearance of PoGOs C and E in Selaginella
suggested that the last common ancestor of tracheophytes carried at least two additional XTH genes when
compared to the last common ancestor of embryophytes
(Figure 2). If each PoGO shared between different
lineages is considered to be representative of founder
genes then during their evolution the number of green
plant XTHs gradually expanded from two ancestral
genes in streptophyte algae to five in early embryophytes
(Physcomitrella - Bryophyta), seven in early tracheophytes (Selaginella - Lycophyta), and 18 in angiosperms
(eudicots and monocots). This increasing number of
PoGOs suggests an important role for XyG in the evolution from non-vascular land plants to angiosperms.

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

The genes in PoGO V have not previously been
reported to be XTH, perhaps because the model plant
Arabidopsis lacks genes in this PoGO. Indeed, PoGO V
included genes from all other complete embryophyte
genomes and also M. polymorpha and the charophyte
alga C. vulgaris (Figure 2; Additional File 3). A C. vulgaris cDNA sequence encoding a protein encompassing
the main XTH catalytic site (DEIDFEFLG) has been isolated and may correspond to the XyG transglycosylation
activity identified in growing tissues of this alga [28]. As
in angiosperms, the C. vulgaris transglycosylase activity
may be involved in adjustment of the PCW during
growth [28].
We also searched for genes similar to XTH in animal
and fungus genomes. Although no proteins similar to
XTH were identified in the animal genomes, we found
three glycosyl hydrolases in the complete Saccharomyces
cerevisiae genome (Utr2 - NP_010874, Crr1p NP_013314 and Crh1p - NP_011705; GenBank) and five
in Aspergillus nidulans (XP_662119, XP_664552,
XP_660657, XP_658537 and XP_661518; GenBank) that
were similar to plant XTHs (Additional File 2). When
these fungus sequences were analyzed together with
those for XTHs from all groups of plants they formed
an outgroup (Figure 2). The high bootstrap support
(86%) suggested a possible single origin for these fungi
hydrolases. However, it is unclear whether these fungus
genes share a common ancestor with streptophytes
XTHs or whether the similarity merely reflects functional convergence from an ancestral eukaryotic glycosyl
hydrolase.
b-Galactosidase genes are present in eukaryotes and
were notably amplified during the evolution of land
plants

One hundred and thirty-three non-redundant b-galactosidase genes were identified in the embryophyte lineages
analyzed. These b-galactosidase genes were organized
into 10 PoGOs that were divided into two homologous
groups (Figure 3A; Additional File 4). Group I contained
only PoGO J composed of animal, plant and fungus
genes (Figure 3A; Additional File 5). On the other hand,
Group II contained nine PoGOs present exclusively in
plants (Figure 3A; Additional File 5). The presence in
PoGO J of genes from all major eukaryotic lineages suggested that the plant-specific b-galactosidases in Group
II must have derived from PoGO J after the divergence
of plants from the fungus/animal lineage. PoGO J can
therefore be considered to be representative of the
ancestral b-galactosidase gene. Remarkably, all embryophytes had a single gene, except for Physcomitrella,
which had two, possibly because of moss-specific genome duplication (Figure 3A; Additional File 5). In contrast, the b-galactosidases genes of Group II showed

Page 6 of 17

significant duplication events during plant evolution.
b-Galactosidases from the non-vascular plants Physcomitrella (a bryophyte) and Marchantia (a marchantiophyte) and the vascular seedless Selaginella were
restricted to PoGO F, indicating that this PoGO most
probably emerged from PoGO J (Group I) genes in the
last common ancestor of embryophytes (Figure 3A).
PoGOs C and E formed part of the b-galactosidase
genes from gymnosperms and angiosperms, indicating
that these PoGOs probably emerged from PoGO F in
the last common ancestor of spermatophytes. PoGOs A,
B, G, H, and I apparently emerged exclusively in angiosperms (Figure 3A; Additional File 5). However, the lack
of a complete genome for gymnosperms means that the
presence of genes belonging to this series of PoGOs in
flowerless seed plants cannot be discarded.
PoGO D consisted exclusively of gymnosperm EST
sequences from pinophytes, gnetophytes, and ginkgophytes. Based on the tree topology, the PoGO D genes
probably emerged from PoGO C after the divergence of
angiosperms and gymnosperms (Figure 3A). An alternative hypothesis is that these genes were selectively lost
in the angiosperm lineage.
No b-galactosidase-coding genes were detected in
Chlorophyta algae. This situation may reflect the loss of
these genes from the Chlamydomonas, Volvox, Ostreococcus tauri and O. lucimarinus genomes, possibly
because of the lack of selective pressure to maintain
these enzymes.
Land plant b-glucosidases active on XyG form two
PoGOs: an ancestral one shared by all embryophytes and
a derived one restricted to angiosperms

By using the protein sequence of the well characterized
Tropaeolum majus (eudicot) b-glucosidase (CAA07070 GenBank; [45]) as a query in our pipeline (Additional
File 1) we identified 53 non-redundant plant sequences
that were classified into two PoGOs (A and B; Figure
3B; Additional File 6; Additional File 7). PoGO A
included the Tropaeolum b-glucosidase and genes from
all major embryophyte lineages (Figure 3B). PoGO A
also contained four Arabidopsis paralog genes (Additional File 7) coding for proteins characterized as XyG
hydrolytic b-glucosidases present in apoplastic fluid [46].
The genes in PoGO B probably emerged from PoGO A
and were detected exclusively among angiosperms (Figure 3B). Arabidopsis had four paralogs genes in PoGO B
(Additional File 7) that are arranged in tandem in chromosome 3 whereas rice had a single gene (Additional
File 7). Functional characterization of the PoGO B genes
is still lacking.
No gene similar to XyG-active b-glucosidase was
detected in the genomes of green algae, fungi or animals. Surprisingly, we found very similar sequences in

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

Page 7 of 17

Figure 3 Evolutionary profiles of b-galactosidase (A), XyG-active b-glucosidase (B) and a-xylosidase (C) genes in green plants. The
topologies were obtained by Neighbor-Joining method with genetic distances calculated by p-distance. The bootstrap values higher than 50%
are shown for 1000 replicates along with Maximum-likelihood (ML) aLRT values higher than 0.50 (in the figure [NJ/ML]). Accession numbers for
all genes in the trees are described in Additional File 5 for b-galactosidase, Additional File 7 for b-glucosidase and Additional File 9 for axylosidase. The detailed trees are shown in Additional File 4 for b-galactosidase, Additional File 6 for b-glucosidase and Additional File 8 for axylosidase. The tree containing the 100 first blastp hits of AtXYL1 is shown in Additional File 10.

some bacterial species. However, phylogenetic analysis
of the evolutionary relationship between our set of plant
b-glucosidases and the two most similar bacterial
sequences (YP_001634696 from Chloroflexus aurantiacus and YP_001108596 from Saccharopolyspora erythraea; GenBank; Additional File 6) was inconclusive,
although it is possible that these bacterial genes may
share a common origin with plant XyG-active b-glucosidases. Several explanations could account for this scenario. First, the ancestral genes may have survived only
in bacteria and streptophytes, having been lost in the
fungal/metazoan group and in Viridiplante from chlorophytes. Second, these b-glucosidases could have a bacterial origin and were transmitted horizontally from the
ancestral cyanobacterial endosymbiont, which gave rise
to chloroplasts, to earlier Viridiplantae, but were specifically lost in chlorophytes. Third, the similarity between
the plant XyG-active b-glucosidase and bacterial genes

may simply be a case of convergent evolution from distinct ancestral hydrolases.
Plant a-xylosidase emerged before the divergence
between chlorophyte and streptophyte algae and is
evolutionarily related to eukaryote a-glucosidases

At least 24 sequences significantly similar to the wellcharacterized a-xylosidase AtXYL1 from Arabidopsis
(At1g68560; [47]) and Tropaeolum majus (CAA10382 GenBank; [48]) were identified in the Viridiplantae species (Figure 3C). These genes were grouped into a single
set of homologous sequences that were further organized into three PoGOs, of which PoGO A was spermatophyte-specific and PoGO B was restricted to
angiosperms (Figure 3C; Additional File 8; Additional
File 9). These two PoGOs probably emerged from
PoGO Proto AB (Figure 3C; Additional File 8; Additional File 9) that includes genes from more ancestral

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

land plants such as Physcomitrella (seven genes), and
Selaginella (one gene) (Additional File 9). Finally, PoGO
Proto AB included genes from the green algae Chlamydomonas and Volvox (Figure 3C; Additional File 8;
Additional File 9). Unexpectedly, the Prasinophyceae
algae Ostreococcus tauri and O. lucimarinus had no
genes in PoGO Proto AB, suggesting that a-xylosidase
genes were specifically lost in these organisms after
their divergence from other Viridiplantae lineages.
An interesting feature of a-xylosidases was the extensive gene duplication in the Physcomitrella genome,
which contained at least 12 genes compared to three in
Arabidopsis and a single gene in Selaginella (Figure 3C;
Additional File 9). This greater number of genes suggests that a-xylosidase gene duplication and fixation in
these basal embryophytes may have conferred some
selective advantage possibly related to the ecological role
of mosses. A plausible explanation for the evolutionary
development of a-xylosidase could be that a single
ancestral gene in green algae (represented by PoGO
Proto AB) eventually gave rise to spermatophyte-specific
PoGO A and angiosperm-specific PoGO B (Figure 3C).
To improve our understanding of the origin of plant
a-xylosidases, we extended our analysis to all genes that
shared any similarity with the query sequences from
Arabidopsis and Tropaeolum (e-value < e-4), including
sequences obtained from searches against bacteria and
the fungal/metazoan group (Additional File 10). In Arabidopsis, the genes most closely related to a-xylosidases
were a-glucosidases RSW3 (radial swelling 3;
At5g63840), which shared 27% identity with AtXYL1
(245 out of 903 amino acids; e-value = 1e- -81 ), and
HGL1 (heteroglycan glucosidase 1; AT3G23640), which
shared 33% identity with AtXTYL1 (185 out of 559
amino acids; e-value = 6e-79 ). A phylogenetic analysis
that integrated a-xylosidase homologues and RSW3 and
HGL1 homologues from green plants with the most closely related corresponding sequences from fungi, animals and bacteria (Additional File 10) showed that the
RSW3 and HGL1 genes formed a single PoGO within
plants. The HGL1 PoGO included genes from embryophytes and the most similar non-plant sequences were
from bacteria. No genes from fungi or animals were
included in the HGL1 PoGO. The RSW3 PoGO
included genes from all Viridiplantae lineages, including
the Prasinophyceae algae O. tauri and O. lucimarinus.
rsw3 is a temperature-sensitive mutant of Arabidopsis
that has radially swollen roots and a deficiency in cellulose deposition. RSW3 is thought to process N-linked
glycans in the endoplasmatic reticulum, as part of the
quality control pathway to ensure correct protein folding
[49]. In our analysis, the RSW3 gene shared high similarity with the catalytic a-subunit of fungal and animal
glucosidase II. Together, these findings suggest that the

Page 8 of 17

plant-specific a-xylosidase involved in XyG mobilization
evolved from an ancestral eukaryotic a-glucosidase
gene, represented here by RSW3 PoGO (Additional File
10). This finding also supports the idea that neofunctionalization could be the main process responsible for the
switch in substrate specificity from a-glucosidase to
a-xylosidase during the evolution of glycosyl hydrolases.
XyG b-(1®4)-glucan synthase belongs to the celulose
synthase-like C gene family present in streptophyte algae

Ninety-one genes (threshold of e-04) related to the Arabidopsis celulose synthase-like (CSL) gene AtCSLC4
(At3g28180) encoding a b-(1®4)-glucan synthase [19]
were identified by searching the Viridiplantae database.
The threshold of e-04 used to define significant similarity
throughout this study allowed the recovery of genes that
formed the CSL C [50,51] and CSL A [51] groups, as
well as a group of chlorophyte genes that behaved as an
outgroup to CSL C and CSL A in our analysis (Figure
4A; Additional File 11; Additional File 12). This finding
supports the suggestion that CSL C and CSL A resulted
from a duplication event of an ancestral green plant
gene present in chlorophytes, and agrees with a recently
published report [51]. This ancestral gene is represented
in our analysis by PoGO H, which contained a single
copy in each of the green algae genomes analyzed (Volvox, Chlamydomonas, O. tauri and O. lucimarinus; Figure 4A; Additional File 12).
Based on an analysis of complete genomes from land
plants and chlorophyte algae, Yin et al. [51] concluded
that the CSL C and CSL A groups were the products of
an ancestral gene duplication in earlier embryophytes.
This conclusion may have to be re-evaluated since, as
shown here, CSL C included a gene from the streptophyte alga Chara globularis (Charophyta), indicating
that this group emerged before land colonization by
plants (Figure 4A). These data raise the interesting possibility that the gene duplication event that resulted in
CSL A and CSL C had occurred in early streptophytes.
A recent work [52] has detected a XyG-like polymer
containing glucose and xylose in the streptophyte algae
Spirogyra (Class Zygnematophyceae). In contrast, Popper and Fry [53] reported the absence of XyG in the cell
walls of charophycean algae such as Chara, Nitella,
Coleochaete and Klebsormidium. Although these partially contradictory results indicate that more research is
needed to understand the composition of the PCW in
streptophyte algae, it seems plausible that the CLS C
gene from C. globularis could be involved in the synthesis of a XyG-like polymer, as occurs in Spirogyra.
Members of CLS A (AtCSLA9 [At5g03760 - PoGO
D], AtCSLA2 [At5g22740 - PoGO E] and AtCSLA7
[At2g35650 - PoGO F]) have b-mannan synthase activity when expressed in S2 Drosophila cells supplied

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

Page 9 of 17

Figure 4 Evolutionary profiles of b-glucan synthase (A) and XXT (B) genes in green plants. A: CSL C (b-glucan synthase) and CSL A (bmannan and b-glucomannan synthases) PoGOs. The topologies were obtained by Neighbor-Joining method with genetic distances calculated
by p-distance. The bootstrap values higher than 50% are shown for 1000 replicates along with Maximum-likelihood (ML) aLRT values higher than
0.50 (in the figure [NJ/ML]). Accession numbers for all genes in the trees are described in Additional File 12 for b-Glucan Synthase and
Additional File 14 for XXT. The detailed trees are shown in Additional File 11 for b-Glucan Synthase and Additional File 13 for XXT.

with GDP-mannose [54]. Interestingly, the proteins
encoded by these three genes were also able to produce b-glucomannan when supplied with GDP-mannose and GDP-glucose, and unexpectedly AtCSLA9
(PoGO D) produced b-glucan when supplied with
GDP-glucose; this latter activity is believed to be the
main function of CSL C. Thus, it appears that CSL A
can synthesize at least three different polymers, bmannan, b-glucomannan and b-glucan. Conversely, to
date, only a single activity (b-glucan synthesis) has
been described for CSL C members. These observations raise the question of which activity is performed
by the ancestral PoGO H members in chlorophytes.
Only mannans, glucoronic acids, mannuronic acids
and 3-O-methyl rhamnose have been detected in the
cell walls of chlorophytes [55], thus supporting the
view that b-mannan synthase is the basic or primordial
activity of the plant CSL A and C ancestral group
represented by chlorophyte PoGO H [37,51]. This
conclusion further supports the hypothesis that the
specific b-glucan synthase activity used in XyG synthesis emerged from mixed activity (b-mannan/b-

glucomannan/b-glucan synthase) proteins in the course
of streptophyte evolution.
The CSL C group included five genes from Arabidopsis, poplar and rice, 12 from soybean, four from grape,
three from sorghum, two from Selaginella and seven
from Physcomitrella. The group was further divided into
four PoGOs (A, B, C, and Proto AB; Figure 4A). PoGOs
A and B included angiosperm genes whereas PoGO C
was restricted to eudicots. PoGO A included the Arabidopsis AtCSLC4 gene that was shown to encode a b(1®4)-glucan synthase involved in XyG biosynthesis
[19]. PoGO Proto AB included Selaginella, Physcomitrella and C. globularis genes, with the angiosperm
PoGOs A and B probably resulting from the duplication
of an original PoGO Proto AB gene within the angiosperm lineage.
The CSL A group included genes from all embryophyte lineages. The genes in this group were divided
into five additional PoGOs (D, E, Proto DE, F and G;
Figure 4A). PoGO D was spermatophyte-specific but
lacked genes from monocots, which suggests these
genes were specifically lost in the monocot lineage.

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

PoGO D included Arabidopsis AtCSLA9, the protein
product of which has important b-mannan synthase
activity, as well as b-glucomannan and b-glucan
synthase activities [54]. PoGO E, which is more closely
related to PoGO D, was restricted to angiosperms and
included Arabidopsis AtCSLA2, which has prevalent bmannan synthase activity and b-glucomannan synthase
activity, but almost no b-glucan synthase activity. PoGO
Proto DE, which contained sequences from Selaginella
and Physcomitrella, was considered as an outgroup to
PoGOs D and E (Figure 4A). This finding suggested that
PoGOs D, E and Proto DE had a common origin in the
last common embryophyte ancestor. PoGO F was
restricted to angiosperms and contained Arabidopsis
AtCSLA7, which has mainly b-mannan synthase activity
and lacks b-glucan synthase activity [54]. PoGO F had
an apparent Arabidopsis-specific gene duplication pattern that resulted in seven paralogs whereas the grape,
soybean, sorghum and rice genomes possess a single
gene. The relevance of these lineage-specific gene duplication events remains to be investigated. Another
striking feature of the CSL A group was the monocotspecific PoGO G.
Based on the evidence presented here, we conclude
that XyG-specific b-glucan synthases in CSL C evolved
from an ancestral b-mannan synthase represented by
PoGO H, the ancestral group of the CSL C and A
families. The presence of CSL C genes in charophytes is
strong evidence that XyG emerged prior to the colonization of land by early embryophytes. This conclusion
agrees with the recent detection of XyG in the cell walls
of Charophycean algae [37].
a-Xylosyltransferases (XXT) are present in all land plant
lineages but absent from chlorophyte algae

An analysis of 45 XXT genes resulted in the recognition
of two homologous groups among embryophyte XXTs
(Groups I and II in Figure 4B). Group I was the most
ancient and included PoGO Proto A that contained
genes from Marchantia (Marchantiophyta), Physcomitrella (Bryophyta) and Selaginella (Lycophyta), and
PoGO A that included Selaginella, gymnosperm and
angiosperm genes (Figure 4B; Additional File 13; Additional File 14). We suggest that PoGO A emerged from
Proto A by gene duplication in the last common ancestor of tracheophytes. PoGO A included the Arabidopsis
XXT1 and XXT2 genes [20]. The xxt1/xxt2 double
mutant lacks detectable XyG, but the only apparent
phenotypes associated with these mutations were aberrant root hair development, slow growth, and a slightly
smaller stature at maturity [20]. This result challenges
the conventional model for the structure of the PCW in
eudicot and non-graminaceous monocots, which states
that XyG is the principal load-bearing structure

Page 10 of 17

[4,14,56-60]. In the light of this traditional PCW model
a plant lacking XyG would not be viable or at least
would have a very deleterious phenotype, which apparently is not the case, at least in Arabidopsis.
Group II contains Arabidopsis XXT5 (At1g74380),
which participates in XyG synthesis [61]. xxt5 exhibits a
phenotype similar to that described for the xxt1/xxt2
double mutant and consists of short root hairs with
bubble-like extrusions at the tip. In addition, the main
root cell morphology was altered in the xxt5 mutant
and the level of XyG was reduced. Unexpectedly,
although XXT5 was expressed in the xxt1/xxt2 double
mutant no XyG was detected in these mutants, possibly
indicating an epistatic effect whereby the activity of
either XXT1 or XXT2 is required before XXT5 can act
[20]. It will be interesting to evaluate whether the
Group I XXTs of other species have this type of epistatic effect on genes in Group II.
Two types of evolutionarily unrelated plant a-fucosidases
are active against XyG oligosaccharides

Two genes were found to encode XyG-active a-fucosidases: the Arabidopsis gene AtFXG1 (At1g67830; [18]),
which belongs to the largely unknown GDSL-motif
lipase/hydrolase family protein (Figure 5A; Additional
File 15; Additional File 16) and the Lilium longiflorum
gene EBM II (BAF85832 - GenBank; [21]; Figure 5B;
Additional File 16). Interestingly, these proteins shared
no similarity with each other (e-value = 8.3) and were
therefore evolutionarily unrelated but converged functionally to fulfill a similar enzymatic activity.
The Arabidopsis genes most closely related to AtFXG1
(Additional File 15; Additional File 16) lacked any functional information, and we will therefore focus here on the
PoGO that included AtFXG1 (PoGO A; Figure 5A). PoGO
A contained another Arabidopsis gene, At3g26430, and
included genes from other angiosperms, as well as gymnosperm ESTs, which lead to the conclusion that this
group emerged in the last common ancestor of the Spermatophyta. To extend our understanding of the evolutionary origin of AtFXG1 homologues in plants, we performed
a broader phylogenetic analysis (Additional File 15) that
encompassed the first 100 blast hits obtained with an
AtFXG1-encoded protein sequence query run against the
Viridiplantae 1.0 dataset using an e-value threshold of e-4
(see Methods). This analysis identified PoGOs 1 and 2
that emerged before angiosperm divergence (Additional
File 15). These two PoGOs included Selaginella (PoGOs 1
and 2) and Physcomitrella (PoGO 2) with angiosperm
genes, which suggests that they emerged at least in the last
common ancestor of tracheophytes and land plants,
respectively. No gene similar to AtFXG1 was detected in
chlorophytes, suggesting that hydrolases of this type were
restricted to embryophyte lineages. Based on the tree

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

Page 11 of 17

Figure 5 Evolutionary profiles of a-fucosidase type I (A), a-fucosidase type II (B), a-fucosyltransferase (C) and b-galactosyltransferase
(D) genes in green plants. A: Arabidopsis AtXYL1 orthologs. B: Lilium longiflorum EBM II orthologs. C: Arabidopsis Mur2 orthologs. D: Arabidopsis
Mur3 orthologs. The topology was obtained by Neighbor-Joining method with genetic distances calculated by p-distance. The bootstrap values
higher than 50% are shown for 1000 replicates along with Maximum-likelihood (ML) aLRT values higher than 0.50 (in the figure [NJ/ML]).
Accession numbers for all genes in the trees are described in the following Supplemental Tables: A and B - Additional File 16, C - Additional File
18 and 18D - Additional File 20. The detailed trees are shown in the following Additional Files: A - Additional File 15, C - Additional File 17 and
17D - Additional File 19.

topology shown in Additional File 15, it is likely that
PoGO A XyG-active a-fucosidases emerged from
PoGO a. The functional characterizations of genes from
PoGOs a and b should improve our understanding of the
diversification of a-fucosidase from GDSL-motif lipase/
hydrolase family protein.
Lilium longiflorum EBM II homologues among green
plants formed a single PoGO (PoGO B; Figure 5B; Additional File 16) that was unrelated to the GDSL-motif

lipase/hydrolase gene family. PoGO B arose at least in
the last common ancestor of embryophytes. Arabidopsis
had a single gene in PoGO B (At4g34260) that was
recently confirmed to encode a protein with XyG afucosidase activity (AtFuc95A; [62]). Green algae genomes contained no genes similar to PoGO B members,
suggesting that a-fucosidases homologous to EBM II are
limited to land plants, in a manner similar to AtFXG1
homologues.

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

a-Fucosyltransferases orthologs to Mur2 are present
among spermatophytes and share similarity with
uncharacterized embryophyte genes

To determine the evolutionary profile of XyG a-fucosyltransferase in plants we used the protein encoded by the
functionally characterized Arabidopsis Mur2 gene
(At2g03220; [63]) as a query. This strategy identified 82
possible Mur2 homologous genes among embryophytes
(Additional File 17). Because there is little functional
information for this family, we will limit our discussion
to PoGO A, which contains Mur2 and includes genes
from angiosperms and gymnosperms (Figure 5C; Additional File 18).
The presence of gymnosperm sequences suggested
that PoGO A must have emerged in the last common
ancestor of spermatophytes. This finding agreed with
the presence of fucosylated XyG exclusively among spermatophytes [55]. Since the Arabidopsis mur2 mutant
contains <2% of wild-type fucosylated XyG [63] it is
likely that the protein encoded by Mur2 is the principle
activity responsible for the transfer of fucosyl residues to
XyG. In contrast, the Arabidopsis genome contains
another set of nine genes that share high similarity with
Mur2 (Additional File 17), of which eight paralogs are
present in PoGO A (Figure 5C; Additional File 18). The
role played by these genes remains unclear and it will
be interesting to understand the genetic interaction
between these genes and Mur2.
b-Galactosyltransferases emerged in early land plants and
share similarity with an extensive group of poorly
characterized genes in green plants

The protein sequence of the well characterized b-galactosyltransferase gene Mur3 (At2g20370) from Arabidopsis [64] was used as a query to search for homologous
genes among green plants. Madson et al. [64] showed
that Mur3 has sequence similarity to animal exostosins,
which are proteins involved in biosynthesis of the extracellular matrix. Our search revealed 191 genes that were
possibly homologous to Mur3, none of which has been
functionally characterized (Additional File 19). Within
this extensive group of genes, several from chlorophytes
(27 from Chlamydomonas, 16 from Volvox, three from
O. tauri and two from O. lucimarinus) could represent
the ancestral exostosin-like genes in plants (Additional
File 19) from which the XyG galactosyltranferase activity
probably evolved.
Functional information about this large family is
restricted to Mur3, which is included in the embryophyte-specific PoGO A (Figure 5D; Additional File 20).
Mur3-encoded protein acts specifically on the third
xylose residue in the XXXG core structure of XyG,
implying that other related enzymes transfer the galactosyl residues to the second xylose residue [64]. The

Page 12 of 17

candidate genes associated with the latter activity in
Arabidopsis must be At2g29040, At4g13990 and
At2g32750, which are the genes most closely related to
Mur3 (Figure 5D).

Conclusions
The comparative genomic analysis of enzymes involved
in XyG synthesis and turnover described here has provided a few key conclusions about the evolution of this
polymer in green plants. Evidence from non-XyG-bearing chlorophyte and streptophyte green algae indicates
that part of the embryophyte XyG-related machinery
(XTH, b-[1®4]-glucan synthase from the CSL C family
and a-xylosidase) evolved in an aquatic environment,
before land colonization by plants. This conclusion
agrees with a recent report by Sørensen et al. [37] who
used a combination of monosaccharide linkage analysis,
CoMPP and immunolabeling to detect XyG in the PCW
of some Charophycean algae, including Charales, Coleochaetales, and Zygnematales. Although Popper and Fry
[53] detected no XyG in the cell wall of streptophyte
algae such as Chara, Nitella, Coleochaete and Klebsormidium, the presence of an XyG-like polymer containing glucose and xylose was also reported in the alga
Spirogyra (a streptophyte from the Class Zygnematophyceaes; [52]). In addition, XyG endotransglycosylase
(XTH) activity has been detected in growing tissues of
Chara [28]. Together, these observations suggest that in
Charophycean algae a XyG-like polymer may be part of
the PCW structure and that the mechanism by which
hemicellulose is transglycosylated to adapt the PCW to
cellular growth is conserved among streptophytes.
Streptophyta algae have at least three enzymes
involved in XyG synthesis and turnover that are homologous to those of embryophytes, namely, XTH, b(1®4)-glucan synthase and a-xylosidase (Figure 6).
Homologous of a-xylosidase are present in Chlorophyta
algae that completely lack XyG. Overall, our findings
support the idea that a primordial XyG-like polymer
emerged before land colonization by plants. The selective advantage conferred by this polymer may have been
related to cell-cell attachment features within streptophytes multicellular algae rather than to mechanical
structure [52]. Once the land was colonized, XyG was
definitively incorporated into the PCW, as exemplified
by the presence of XyG in basal land plants [7].
Our evolutionary data highlight the great functional
plasticity of XyG glycosyl hydrolases (GHs) and XyG
glycosyl transferase (GTs) in the course of green plant
evolution. For example, a-xylosidase activity possibly
emerged from a-glucosidase, b-(1®4)-glucan synthasespecific enzymes possibly emerged from enzymes with
b-mannan activity, and a-fucosidase type I possibly
emerged from the GDSL-motif lipase/hydrolase family.

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

Page 13 of 17

Figure 6 Evolutionary model of XyG-related genes emergence in Viridiplantae kingdom. The model shows the ancient origins we could
trace back of each XyG-related gene families and the major events of XyG evolution in plants. XyG-like (containing only glucose and xylose)
emerged in streptophytes algae, XyG (containing glucose, xylose, and galactose) emerged in early embryophytes and the fucosylated XyG
emerged in the last common ancestor of spermatophytes. (*) indicates the possible origins of the ancestral genes that gave rise to
Spermatophytes a-Fucosyl Transferase (Mur2 orthologs) and a-Fucosylase type I (AtXYL1 orthologs). GH - Glycosyl Hydrolases and GT - Glycosyl
Transferases.

There was a positive correlation between the number
of founder genes in XyG-related gene families, defined
by the number of PoGOs, and the growing complexity
of the PCW. For instance, the number of PoGOs involving XTH sequences from streptophyte algae was limited to two but increased to 12 PoGOs shared amongst
eudicots and monocots (Figure 2). Overall, the higher
number of PoGOs found to include angiosperm
XyG-related genes compared to other plant groups was
probably related to the high degree of specialization
(expression pattern and/or functional novelties) among
gene copies in angiosperm species.
In contrast, there was no clear correlation between the
gene copy numbers of XyG GHs and GTs and the
amount of XyG in PCW. For example, the moss Physcomitrella, as well as rice and sorghum (i.e, graminaceous
monocots), in which XyG accounts for <5% of the PCW
dry-weight, had 30, 30 and 32 XTH genes, respectively,
a number similar to that observed in eudicots (33 in
Arabidopsis, 35 in poplar and soybean) in which XyG
accounts for 10-20% of the PCW dry-weight. We speculate that remodeling of the PCW by the selective turnover and transglycosylation of XyG may be important,
even for species with low amounts of XyG.
The role of XyG in embryophyte PCW remains
unclear, although recent work has shown that Arabidopsis mutant plants with undetectable XyG have an almost
normal development [20]. More research is needed to
improve our knowledge of the mechanical structure of
the PCW and the relationships among its components.

Our data suggest that the colonization of land by
plants was marked by a notable increase in the sophistication of the machinery required for XyG biosynthesis
and turnover when compared to the pathways present
in Streptophyta algae. This finding suggests that complex systems involving several enzymes may evolve in a
stepwise manner, with each new step providing some
selective advantage, as seen in the galactosylation of
embryophyte XyG and fucosylation of spermatophyte
XyG (Figure 6). XTHs with exclusively hydrolytic activity emerged by the neofunctionalization of an enzyme
with mixed activity (transglycosylase/hydrolase) in the
last common ancestor of spermatophytes. Finally, our
data provide additional evidence to support the idea
that Streptophyta algae and land plants are sister groups
because they share XyG-related enzymes (XTH and CLS
C) that are not present in chlorophytes (Figure 6).

Methods
Green plant sequence datasets

We generated a dataset of green plant proteins (Viridiplantae 1.0) that included 365,187 protein sequences
from several completed genomes (Arabidopsis thaliana,
version 7.0 - http://www.arabidopsis.org; Populus trichocarpa, version 1.1 - http://genome.jgi-psf.org/poplar/
poplar.home.html; Glycine max, version 0.1 - http://
www.phytozome.net/soybean.php; Oryza sativa, version
5.0 - http://www.tigr.org/tdb/e2k1/osa1/pseudomolecules/info.shtml; Sorghum bicolor, version 1.4 - http://
genome.jgi-psf.org/Sorbi1/Sorbi1.home.html; Selaginella

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

moellendorffii, version 1.0 - http://genome.jgi-psf.org/
Selmo1/Selmo1.home.html; Physcomitrella patens
patens, version 1.1 - http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Phypa1_1/
Phypa1_1.home.html; Volvox carteri, version 1.0 http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Volca1/Volca1.home.html;
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, version 3.0 - http://genome.jgi-psf.org/chlre3/chlre3.home.html; Ostreococcus
lucimarinus, version 2.0 - http://genome.jgi-psf.org/
Ost9901_3/Ost9901_3.home.html and Ostreococcus
tauri, version 2.0 - http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Ostta4/
Ostta4.home.html.
In addition, 402,770 assembled ESTs from Adiantum
capillus-veneris (7,715), Amborella trichopoda (6,649),
Ceratodon purpureus (1,044), Ceratopteris richardii
(4,492), Chamaecyparis obtusa (4,061), Closterium peracerosum (1,716), Cryptomeria japonica (9,098), Cycas
rumphii (4,335), Ginkgo biloba (4,178), Gossypium hirsutum (70,667), Liriodendron tulipifera (7,087), Marchantia polymorpha (10,721), Nuphar advena (8,144), Persea
americana (6,700), Physcomitrella patens patens
(45,149), Picea abies (5,204), Picea engelmannii × glauca
(14,201), Picea glauca (49,412), Picea sitchensis (25,425),
Pinus pinaster (13,067), Pinus taeda (78,873), Populus
trichocarpa (31,082), Pseudotsuga menzienssi (12,074),
Saruma henryi (6,956), Selaginella lepidophylla (2,861),
Taiwania cryptomerioides (778), Tortula ruralis (7,689)
and Welwitschia mirabilis (6,680) were downloaded
from the TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies Database
[65] and pooled to form the ViridiEST 1.0 database.
Identification of XyG-related genes

To identify XTH, a-xylosidase, b-galactosidase, bglucosidase, a-fucosidase, b-(1®4)-glucan synthase, afucosyltransferases, b-galactosyltransferases and XXT we
ran Blast [66] searches against Viridiplantae 1.0 and ViridiEST 1.0. We also performed online Blast searches
against the genomic sequences of complete plant genomes using the NCBI http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/,
Phytozome http://www.phytozome.net/ and JGI Eukaryotic Genomes http://genome.jgi-psf.org/ databanks to
ensure an exhaustive search. However, no protein
sequences were incorporated from the genomic
sequence searches if they were not already present in
predicted proteomes of the different genome initiatives.
The amino acid sequences of previously reported
genes were used as queries. For XTH queries we used
33 A. thaliana [29] and 29 O. sativa [30] proteins. For
b-galactosidase we used 17 A. thaliana and 15 O. sativa
proteins [67]. For XyG-active b-glucosidase we used the
well-characterized Tropaeolum majus b-glucosidase
(CAA07070 - GeneBank; [45]) as the query. For a-xylosidases we used queries from A. thaliana (AtXYL1,
At1g68560 - TAIR; [47]) and T. majus (CAA10382 -

Page 14 of 17

GeneBank; [48]). For a-fucosidase we used the protein
sequences encoded by AtFXG1 (At1g67830 - TAIR;
[18]) and EBM II (BAF85832 - GeneBank; [21]) from A.
thaliana and Lilium longiflorum, respectively. For b(1®4)-glucan synthase we used the protein sequence
encoded by CSLC4 from A. thaliana [19]. For afucosyltransferases the query was the AtFUT1 (Mur2
[63]). For b-galactosyltransferases we used the protein
encoded by Mur3 (At2g20370) from Arabidopsis as the
query [68]. For XXT we used the Arabidopsis genes
XXT1 (At3g62720; [20]), XXT2 (At4g02500; [20]) and
XXT5 [61].
The complete bioinformatics pipeline that was
designed to perform similarity searches and used to produce non-redundant nucleotide and amino acid
sequence data-sets is detailed in Additional File 1. We
developed two programs used in the pipeline: BTF
(“Blast to Fasta”) and ETTool (“ESTs Translator Tool”).
BTF reads the Blast results, and places the resulting subjects in a Fasta file. ETTool reads the tblastn results of
protein queries against EST databases and selects only
the blocks of amino acids that aligned between the
queries and EST subjects; these blocks were transferred
to a Fasta file.
Phylogenetic analysis

The amino acids sequences were aligned with ClustalW
[69] using the default parameters and then adjusted
manually. All phylogenetic analyses were done using
MEGA4.0 [70]. Phylogenetic distance tree topologies
were obtained by the neighbor-joining method [26] with
distances calculated by the PAM 001 distance matrix
[25] and p-distances using 1000 bootstrap replicates.
Maximum likelihood analyses were done in PhyML 3.0
[27] using the LG substitution model and an LTR statistical test [27]. All sequences used in this study are available upon request.
Identification of possible groups of orthologs (PoGOs)

The detailed evolutionary analysis of XyG-related gene
families allowed the identification of PoGOs. A PoGO
was defined by the following criteria: (1) members of a
PoGO were assumed to have a monophyletic origin,
indicated by a bootstrap support greater than 50%; (2) a
PoGO possessed at least one representative gene from
A. thaliana and/or O. sativa, assuming that the putative
complete set of genes for these organisms had been
identified. In the case of a PoGO being restricted to
some lineage, e.g., mosses or gymnosperms, the presence of sequences from at least two species of the
same lineage in this PoGO was required.; and (3) the
inferred phylogeny should be consistent with the known
phylogeny of plant species [71].

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

Page 15 of 17

Additional material

were calculated using p-distance. Bootstrap values higher than 50% are
shown.

Additional file 1: Bioinformatics search protocol. The pipeline was
used in construction of non-redundant protein data-sets. The arrows
with asterisks represent manually conducted processes. The e-value
cutoffs were 1e-4 for Blastp and tBlastn. Our own programs (BTF and
ETTool, both written in JAVA®) were developed for this protocol
(available upon request). False positives from B1 and B2 protein sets
were eliminated from the alignment by visual confrontation with
reference sequences. A NJ tree was generated using B3 and B4 sets
together with reference sequences. Redundant sequences and alternative
splicing isoforms were eliminated by manual inspection of resulting tree.
The final non-redundant protein data-sets obtained were used in our
analyses.

Additional file 14: XXT Possible Groups of Orthologs (PoGOs) in
green plants. Classification of XXT PoGOs by taxonomic ranking and the
complete list of gene IDs.

Additional file 2: Detailed phylogenetic analysis of XTH gene family
in green plants. PoGOs names and color scheme are the same of
Figure 2. The topology was inferred by Neighbor-Joining (NJ) method
with 1000 bootstraps replicates and the genetic distances were
calculated using p-distance. Bootstrap values higher than 50% are shown.

Additional file 16: a-fucosidase I and II Possible Groups of
Orthologs (PoGOs) in green plants. Classification of a-fucosidase I and
II PoGOs by taxonomic ranking and the complete list of gene IDs.

Additional file 15: Detailed phylogenetic analysis of a-fucosidase
type I gene family in green plants. AtFXG1 (At1g67830) PoGO is
marked (Figure 5A). The topology was inferred by NJ method with 1000
bootstraps replicates and the genetic distances were calculated using pdistance. Bootstrap values higher than 50% are shown. This analysis
allowed identification of PoGOs 1 and 2 which integrate Selaginella and
Physcomitrella genes, suggesting that they emerged at least in the last
common ancestor of land plants and represent the ancestral groups. The
function of these enzymes is largely unknown.

Additional file 17: Detailed phylogenetic analysis of afucosyltransferases in green plants. Arabidopsis Mur2 PoGO is marked
(Figure 5C). The topology was inferred by NJ method with 1000
bootstraps replicates and the genetic distances were calculated using pdistance. Bootstrap values higher than 50% are shown. Mur2 are present
among spermatophytes and share similarity with uncharacterized gene
from Physcomitrella and Selaginella, suggesting that the genes that gave
rise to Mur2 orthologs emerged in early land plants.

Additional file 3: XTH Possible Groups of Orthologs (PoGOs) in
green plants. Classification of XTH PoGOs by taxonomic ranking and the
complete list of gene IDs.
Additional file 4: Detailed phylogenetic analysis of b-galactosidase
gene family in green plants. PoGOs names and color scheme are the
same of Figure 3A. The topology was inferred by NJ method with 1000
bootstraps replicates and the genetic distances were calculated using pdistance. Bootstrap values higher than 50% are shown.

Additional file 18: a-fucosyltransferase Possible Groups of
Orthologs (PoGOs) in green plants. Classification of afucosyltransferase PoGOs by taxonomic ranking and the complete list of
gene IDs.

Additional file 5: b-galactosidase Possible Groups of Orthologs
(PoGOs) in green plants. Classification of b-galactosidase PoGOs by
taxonomic ranking and the complete list of gene IDs.

Additional file 19: Detailed phylogenetic analysis of bgalactosyltransferases in green plants. Arabidopsis Mur3 PoGO is
marked (Figure 5D). The topology was inferred by NJ method with 1000
bootstraps replicates and the genetic distances were calculated using pdistance. Bootstrap values higher than 50% are shown. Several genes
from chlorophytes (27 from Chlamydomonas, 16 from Volvox, three from
Ostreococcus tauri, and two from O. lucimarinus) could represent the
ancestral plant exostosin-like genes from which the XyG galactosyl
tranferase activity probably evolved. This analysis includes animal
exostosin.

Additional file 6: Detailed phylogenetic analysis of b-glucosidase
gene family in green plants. Description: PoGOs names and color
scheme are the same of Figure 3B. The topology was inferred by NJ
method with 1000 bootstraps replicates and the genetic distances were
calculated using p-distance. Bootstrap values higher than 50% are shown.
Additional file 7: b-glucosidase Possible Groups of Orthologs
(PoGOs) in green plants. Classification of b-glucosidase PoGOs by
taxonomic ranking and the complete list of gene IDs.
Additional file 8: Detailed phylogenetic analysis of a-xylosidase
gene family in green plants. PoGOs names and color scheme are the
same of Figure 3C. The topology was inferred by NJ method with 1000
bootstraps replicates and the genetic distances were calculated using pdistance. Bootstrap values higher than 50% are shown.
Additional file 9: a-xylosidase Possible Groups of Orthologs
(PoGOs) in green plants. Classification of a-xylosidase PoGOs by
taxonomic ranking and the complete list of gene IDs.
Additional file 10: Phylogenetic analysis of a-xylosidase related
homologous groups in Eukaryotes and Bacteria. All sequences
analyzed were selected using AtXYL1 from Arabidopsis (At1g68560) as
query in blast searches with e-value cutoff of e-4. The topology was
inferred by NJ method with 1000 bootstraps replicates and the genetic
distances were calculated using p-distance. Bootstrap values higher than
50% are shown.
Additional file 11: Detailed phylogenetic analyses of CSL-A and
CSL-C (b-Glucan Synthase) gene families in green plants. PoGOs
names and color scheme are the same of Figure 4A. The topology was
inferred by NJ method with 1000 bootstraps replicates and the genetic
distances were calculated using p-distance. Bootstrap values higher than
50% are shown.
Additional file 12: CSL C (b-glucan synthase) and CSL A Possible
Groups of Orthologs (PoGOs) in green plants. Classification of CSL C
and A PoGOs by taxonomic ranking and the complete list of gene IDs.
Additional file 13: Detailed phylogenetic analysis of a-xylosyl
transferase (XXT) gene family in green plants. PoGOs names and
color scheme are the same of Figure 4B. The topology was inferred by
NJ method with 1000 bootstraps replicates and the genetic distances

Additional file 20: b-galactosyltransferase Possible Groups of
Orthologs (PoGOs) in green plants. Classification of bgalactosyltransferase PoGOs by taxonomic ranking and the complete list
of gene IDs.

Abbreviations
CSL: cellulose synthase-like; ESTs: expressed sequence tags; GH: glycosyl
hydrolase; GT: glycosyl transferase; ML: maximum likelihood; NJ: neighbor
joining; PCW: primary cell wall; PoGO: possible group of orthologs; XTH:
xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolase; XyG: xyloglucan; XXT: a-xylosyl
transferase.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Dr. Harry Brumer (Stockholm, Sweden) and Dr.
Pedro Coutinho (Marseille, France) for kindly provide poplar XTH’s sequences
and to Guilherme F. de Mello (Campinas, Brazil) for bioinformatics
collaboration in development of in-house tools used in this study. All green
plant images in Figure 6 were taken from the internet http://www.wikipedia.
org, except for the Selaginella (Lycophyta) pictured by LEV Del Bem. This
work was supported by “Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São
Paulo” (FAPESP) and “Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível
Superior” (CAPES).
Author details
Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Universidade Estadual
de Campinas (UNICAMP), CP 6010, CEP 13083-875, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
2
Departamento de Biologia Vegetal, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade
1

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), CP 6109, CEP 13081-970, Campinas, SP,
Brazil.
Authors’ contributions
LEVDB idealized the research, performed all the analysis and wrote the
manuscript. MGAV is a group leader, has intellectual input in all presented
results and conclusions and manuscript elaboration. Both authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Received: 1 May 2010 Accepted: 5 November 2010
Published: 5 November 2010
References
1. Fry SC: Cross-linking of matrix polymers in the growing cell walls of
angiosperms. Annual Review of Plant Physiology, Palo Alto 1986, 37:165-186.
2. Carpita N, McCann M: The cell wall. In Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of
Plants. Edited by: Buchanan BB, Gruissem W, Jones RL. American Society of
Plant Physiologists, Rockville, Maryland; 2000:52-108.
3. Albert M, Werner M, Proksch P, Fry SC, Kaldenhoff R: The cell wallmodifying xyloglucan endotransglycosylase/hydrolase LeXTH1 is
expressed during the defence reaction of tomato against the plant
parasite Cuscuta reflexa. Plant Biol (Stuttg) 2004, 6(4):402-407.
4. Carpita NC, Gibeaut DM: Structural models of primary cell walls in
flowering plants: consistency of molecular structure with the physical
properties of the walls during growth. Plant Journal 1993, 3(1):1-30.
5. Cosgrove DJ: Relaxation in a high-stress environment: the molecular
bases of extensible cell walls and cell enlargement. Plant Cell 1997,
9(7):1031-1041.
6. Baumann MJ, Eklöf JM, Michel G, Kallas AM, Teeri TT, Czjzek M, Brumer H:
Structural evidence for the evolution of xyloglucanase activity from
xyloglucan endo-transglycosylases: biological implications for cell wall
metabolism. Plant Cell 2007, 19(6):1947-1963.
7. Peña MJ, Darvill AG, Eberhard S, York WS, O’Neill MA: Moss and liverwort
xyloglucans contain galacturonic acid and are structurally distinct from
the xyloglucans synthesized by hornworts and vascular plants.
Glycobiology 2008, 18(11):891-904.
8. Edwards M, Dea IC, Bulpin PV, Reid JS: Purification and properties of a
novel xyloglucan-specific endo-(1-4)-beta-D-glucanase from germinated
nasturtium seeds (Tropaeolum majus L.). J Biol Chem 1986,
261(20):9489-9494.
9. Edwards M, Bowman YJ, Dea IC, Reid JS: A beta-D-galactosidase from
nasturtium (Tropaeolum majus L.) cotyledons. Purification, properties,
and demonstration that xyloglucan is the natural substrate. J Biol Chem
1988, 263(9):4333-4337.
10. Reis D, Vian B, Darzens D, Roland JC: Sequential patterns of intramural
digestion of galactoxyloglucan in tamarind seedlings. Planta 1987,
170(1):60-73.
11. Buckeridge MS, Rocha DC, Reid JSG, Dietrich SMC: Xyloglucan structure
and post-germinative metabolism in seeds of Copaifera langsdorfii from
savanna and forest populations. Physiologia Plantarum (Copenhagen) 1992,
86:145-151.
12. Tiné MAS, Cortelazzo AL, Buckeridge MS: Xyloglucan mobilisation in
cotyledons of developing plantlets of Hymenaea courbaril L.
(Leguminosae-Caesalpinoideae). Plant Science 2000, 154(2):117-126.
13. Fry SC, York WS, Albersheim P, Darvill A, Hayashi T, Joseleau JP, Kato Y,
Lorences EP, Maclachlan GA, McNeil M, Mort AJ, Reid JSG, Seitz HU,
Selvendran RR, Voragen AGJ, White AR: An unambiguous nomenclature
for xyloglucan-derived oligosaccharides. Physiologia Plantarum 1993,
89(1):1-3.
14. Hayashi T: Xyloglucans in the Primary Cell Wall. Annual Review of Plant
Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 1989, 40:139-168.
15. Buckeridge MS, Crombie HJ, Mendes CJ, Reid JS, Gidley MJ, Vieira CC: A
new family of oligosaccharides from the xyloglucan of Hymenaea
courbaril L. (Leguminosae) cotyledons. Carbohydr Res 1997,
303(2):233-237.
16. Tiné MAS, Silva CO, de Lima DU, Carpita NC, Buckeridge MS: Fine structure
of a mixed-oligomer storage xyloglucan from seeds of Hymenaea
courbaril. Carbohydrate Polymers 2006, 66(4):444-454.
17. Santos HP, Purgato E, Mercier H, Buckeridge MS: The Control of Storage
Xyloglucan Mobilization in Cotyledons of Hymenaea courbaril L. Plant
Physiology 2004, 135:287-299.

Page 16 of 17

18. De La Torre F, Sampedro J, Zarra I, Revilla G: AtFXG1, an Arabidopsis Gene
Encoding alpha-L-Fucosidase Active against Fucosylated Xyloglucan
Oligosaccharides. Plant Physiology 2002, 128:247-255.
19. Cocuron JC, Lerouxel O, Drakakaki G, Alonso AP, Liepman AH, Keegstra K,
Raikhel N, Wilkerson CG: A gene from the cellulose synthase-like C family
encodes a {beta}-1,4 glucan synthase. PNAS 2007, 104:8550-8555.
20. Cavalier DM, Lerouxel O, Neumetzler L, Yamauchi K, Reinecke A, Freshour G,
Zabotina OA, Hahn MG, Burgert I, Pauly M, Raikhel NV, Keegstra k:
Disruption of two Arabidopsis thaliana xylosyltransferase genes results in
plants deficient in xyloglucan, a major primary cell wall component.
Plant Cell 2008, 20:1519-1537.
21. Ishimizu T, Hashimoto C, Takeda R, Fujii K, Hase S: A Novel 1,2-LFucosidase Acting on Xyloglucan Oligosaccharides is Associated with
Endoß-Mannosidase. Journal of Biochemistry 2007, 142(6):721-729.
22. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 1997, 278:631-637.
23. Fitch WM: Homology a personal view on some of the problems. Trends
Genet 2000, 16:227-31.
24. Thornton JW, DeSalle R: Gene family evolution and homology: genomics
meets phylogenetics. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2000, 1:41-73.
25. Dayhoff MO, Schwartz RM, Orcutt BC: A model of evolutionary change in
proteins. Atlas of protein sequence and structure 1978, 5(suppl 3):345-351.
26. Saitou N, Nei M: The neighbor-joining method: a new method for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 1987, 4(4):406-25.
27. Guindon S, Gascuel O: PhyML - A simple, fast, and accurate algorithm to
estimate large phylogenies by maximum likelihood. Systematic Biology
2003, 52(5):696-704.
28. Van Sandt VST, Stieperaere H, Guisez Y, Verbelen JP, Vissenberg K: XET
Activity is Found Near Sites of Growth and Cell Elongation in
Bryophytes and Some Green Algae: New Insights into the Evolution of
Primary Cell Wall Elongation. Annals of Botany 2007, 99(1):39-51.
29. Rose JKC, Braam J, Fry SC, Nishitani K: The XTH family of enzymes
involved in xyloglucan endotransglucosylation and endohydrolysis:
current perspectives and a new unifying nomenclature. Plant and Cell
Physiol 2002, 43(12):1421-1435.
30. Yokoyama R, Rose JKC, Nishitani K: A surprising diversity and abundance
of xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolases in rice: Classification and
expression analysis. Plant Physiology 2004, 134(3):1088-1099.
31. Karol KG, McCourt RM, Cimino MT, Delwiche CF: The closest Living
Relatives of Land Plants. Science 2001, 294(5550):2351-2353.
32. Becker B, Birger M: Streptophyte algae and the origin of embryophytes.
Annals of Botany 2009, 103(7):999-1004.
33. Boisselier-Dubayle MC, Lambourdière J, Bischler H: Molecular phylogenies
support multiple morphological reductions in the liverwort subclass
Marchantiidae (Bryophyta). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2002, 24:66-77.
34. Sørensen I, Domozych D, Willats WGT: How have plant cell walls evolved?
Plant Physiology 2010, 153:366-372.
35. Wellman CH, Osterloff PL, Mohiuddin U: Fragments of the Earliest Land
Plants. Nature 2003, 425:282-285.
36. Gibeaut DM, Pauly M, Bacic A, Fincher GB: Changes in cell wall
polysaccharides in developing barley (Hordeum vulgare) coleoptiles.
Planta 2005, 221:729-738.
37. Penning BW, Hunter CT III, Tayengwa R, Eveland AL, Dugard CK, Olek AT,
Vermerris W, Koch KE, McCarty DR, Davis MF, Thomas SR, McCann MC,
Carpita NC: Genetic Resources for Maize Cell Wall Biology. Plant
Physiology 2009, 151:1703-1728.
38. Fry SC: The structure and functions of xyloglucan. J Exp Bot 1989, 40:1-11.
39. O’Neill MA, York WS: The composition and structure of plant primary cell
walls. In The Plant Cell Wall. Edited by: Rose JKC. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press;
2003:1-54.
40. Grandjean O, Vernoux T, Laufs P, Belcram K, Mizukami Y, Traas J: In vivo
analysis of cell division, cell growth, and differentiation at the shoot
apical meristem in Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell 2004, 16:74-87.
41. Pinto LVA, Da Silva EAA, Davide AC, Mendes De Jesus VA, Toorop PE,
Hilhorst HWM: Mechanism and Control of Solanum lycocarpum Seed
Germination. Annals of Botany 2007, 100:1175-1187.
42. Brandão AD, Del Bem LEV, Vincentz M, Buckeridge MS: Expression pattern
of four storage xyloglucan mobilization-related genes during seedling
development of the rain forest tree Hymenaea courbaril L. Journal of
Experimental Botany 2009, 60:1191-1206.

Del Bem and Vincentz BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:341
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/341

43. Norstog KJ, Nicholls TJ: The biology of the Cycads. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, New York; 1997, 363.
44. Rensing SA, Ick J, Fawcett JA, Lang D, Zimmer A, Van de Peer Y, Reski R: An
ancient genome duplication contributed to the abundance of metabolic
genes in the moss Physcomitrella patens. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:130.
45. Crombie HJ, Chengappa S, Hellyer A, Reid JSG: A xyloglucan
oligosaccharide-active, transglycosylating beta-D-glucosidase from the
cotyledons of nasturtium (Tropaeolum majus L) seedlings–purification,
properties and characterization of a cDNA clone. Plant Journal 1998,
15(1):27-38.
46. Iglesias N, Abelenda JA, Rodiño M, Sampedro J, Revilla G, Zarra I: Apoplastic
glycosidases active against xyloglucan oligosaccharides of Arabidopsis
thaliana. Plant Cell Physiol 2006, 47(1):55-63.
47. Sampedro J, Sieiro C, Revilla G, González-Villa T, Zarra I: Cloning and
Expression Pattern of a Gene Encoding an alpha-Xylosidase Active
against Xyloglucan Oligosaccharides from Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology
2001, 126:910-920.
48. Crombie HJ, Chengappa S, Jarman C, Sidebottom C, Reid JSG: Molecular
characterisation of a xyloglucan oligosaccharide-acting alpha-Dxylosidase from nasturtium (Tropaeolum majus L.) cotyledons that
resembles plant ‘apoplastic’ alpha-D-glucosidases. Planta 2002,
214(3):406-413.
49. Burn JE, Hurley UA, Birch RJ, Arioli T, Cork A, Williamson RE: The cellulosedeficient Arabidopsis mutant rsw3 is defective in a gene encoding a
putative glucosidase II, an enzyme processing N-glycans during ER
quality control. Plant J 2002, 32:949-960.
50. Richmond TA, Somerville CR: The cellulose synthase superfamily. Plant
physiology 2000, 124(2):495-498.
51. Yin Y, Huang J, Xu Y: The cellulose synthase superfamily in fully
sequenced plants and algae. BMC Plant Biology 2009, 9:99.
52. Ikegaya H, Hayashi T, Kaku T, Iwata K, Sonobe S, Shimmen T: Presence of
xyloglucan-like polysaccharide in Spirogyra and possible involvement in
cell-cell attachment. Phycological Research 2008, 56(3):216-222.
53. Popper ZA, Fry SC: Primary cell wall composition of bryophytes and
charophytes. Ann Bot 2003, 91:1-12.
54. Liepman AH, Nairn CJ, Willats WGT, Sørensen I, Roberts AW, Keegstra K:
Functional genomic analysis supports conservation of function among
cellulose synthase-like A gene family members and suggest diverse
roles of mannans in plants. Plant Physiol 2007, 143:1881-1893.
55. Sarkar P, Bosneaga E, Auer M: Plant cell walls throughout evolution:
towards a molecular understanding of their design principles. Journal of
Experimental Botany 2009, 60(13):3615-3635.
56. Fry SC, Miller JK: Toward a working model of the growing plant cell wall:
Phenolic cross-linking reactions in the primary cell walls of dicotyledons.
In Plant Cell Wall Polymers: Biogenesis and Degradations. Edited by: Lewis
NG, Paice MG. ACS Symposium series 299, American Chemical Society,
Washington, DC; 1989:33-46.
57. McCann MC, Roberts K: Architecture of the primary cell wall. In The
Cytoskeletal Basis of Plant Growth and Form. Edited by: Lloyd CW. Academic
Press, New York; 1991:109-129.
58. Passioura JB, Fry SC: Turgor and cell expansion: beyond the Lockhard
equation. Aust Plant Physiol 1992, 19:565-576.
59. Veytsman BA, Cosgrove DJ: A model of cell wall expansion based on
thermodynamics of polymer networks. Biophysical journal 1998,
75(5):2240-2250.
60. Somerville C, Bauer S, Brininstool G, Facette M, Hamann T, Milne J,
Osborne E, Paredez A, Persson S, Raab T, Vorwerk S, Youngs H: Toward a
Systems Approach to Understanding Plant Cell Walls. Science 2004,
306(5705):2206-2211.
61. Zabotina OA, van de Ven WT, Freshour G, Drakakaki G, Cavalier D,
Mouille G, Hahn MG, Keegstra K, Raikhel NV: Arabidopsis XXT5 gene
encodes a putative alpha-1,6-xylosyltransferase that is involved in
xyloglucan biosynthesis. Plant Journal 2008, 56(1):101-15.
62. Léonard R, Pabst M, Bondili JS, Chambat G, Veit C, Strasser R, Altmann F:
Identification of an Arabidopsis gene encoding a GH95 alpha1,2fucosidase active on xyloglucan oligo- and polysaccharides.
Phytochemistry 2008, 69(10):1983-1988.
63. Vanzin GF, Madson M, Carpita NC, Raikhel NV, Keegstra K, Reiter WD: The
mur2 mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana lacks fucosylated xyloglucan
because of a lesion in fucosyltransferase AtFUT1. PNAS 2002,
99(5):3340-3345.

Page 17 of 17

64. Madson M, Dunand C, Li X, Vermab R, Vanzin GF, Caplanb J, Shouea DA,
Carpita NC, Reiter WD: The MUR3 Gene of Arabidopsis Encodes a
Xyloglucan Galactosyltransferase That Is Evolutionarily Related to Animal
Exostosins. The Plant Cell 2003, 15:1662-1670.
65. Childs KL, Hamilton JP, Zhu W, Ly E, Cheung F, Wu H, Rabinowicz PD,
Town CD, Buell CR, Chan AP: The TIGR Plant Transcript Assemblies
database. Nucleic Acids Research 2007, , 35 Database: D846-51.
66. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schäffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
67. Ahn YO, Zheng M, Bevan DR, Esen A, Shiu SH, Benson J, Peng HP, Miller JT,
Cheng CL, Poulton JE, Shih MC: Functional genomic analysis of
Arabidopsis thaliana glycoside hydrolase family 35. Phytochemistry 2007,
68(11):1510-1520.
68. Tedman-Jones JD, Lei R, Jay F, Fabro G, Li X, Reiter WD, Brearley C,
Jones JDG: Characterization of Arabidopsis mur3 mutations that result in
constitutive activation of defence in petioles, but not leaves. The Plant
Journal 2008, 56(5):691-703, (13).
69. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Research 1994, 22(22):4673-80.
70. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Molecular Biology and
Evolution 2007, 24:1596-1599.
71. Vincentz M, Bandeira-Kobarg C, Gauer L, Schlogl P, Leite A: Evolutionary
pattern of angiosperm bZIP factors homologous to the maize Opaque2
regulatory protein. J Mol Evol 2003, 56:105-116.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-341
Cite this article as: Del Bem and Vincentz: Evolution of xyloglucanrelated genes in green plants. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:341.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
