<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Genome sequence of the stramenopile Blastocystis, a human anaerobic parasite</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29. doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-3-r29"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="France Denoeud"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

RESEARCH

Open Access

Genome sequence of the stramenopile
Blastocystis, a human anaerobic parasite
France Denoeud1†, Michaël Roussel2,3†, Benjamin Noel1, Ivan Wawrzyniak2,3, Corinne Da Silva1, Marie Diogon2,3,
Eric Viscogliosi4,5,6,7, Céline Brochier-Armanet8,9, Arnaud Couloux1, Julie Poulain1, Béatrice Segurens1,
Véronique Anthouard1, Catherine Texier2,3, Nicolas Blot2,3, Philippe Poirier2,3, Geok Choo Ng10, Kevin SW Tan10,
François Artiguenave1, Olivier Jaillon1, Jean-Marc Aury1, Frédéric Delbac2,3, Patrick Wincker1*, Christian P Vivarès2,3*
and Hicham El Alaoui2,3*

Abstract
Background: Blastocystis is a highly prevalent anaerobic eukaryotic parasite of humans and animals that is
associated with various gastrointestinal and extraintestinal disorders. Epidemiological studies have identified
different subtypes but no one subtype has been definitively correlated with disease.
Results: Here we report the 18.8 Mb genome sequence of a Blastocystis subtype 7 isolate, which is the smallest
stramenopile genome sequenced to date. The genome is highly compact and contains intriguing rearrangements.
Comparisons with other available stramenopile genomes (plant pathogenic oomycete and diatom genomes)
revealed effector proteins potentially involved in the adaptation to the intestinal environment, which were likely
acquired via horizontal gene transfer. Moreover, Blastocystis living in anaerobic conditions harbors mitochondria-like
organelles. An incomplete oxidative phosphorylation chain, a partial Krebs cycle, amino acid and fatty acid
metabolisms and an iron-sulfur cluster assembly are all predicted to occur in these organelles. Predicted secretory
proteins possess putative activities that may alter host physiology, such as proteases, protease-inhibitors,
immunophilins and glycosyltransferases. This parasite also possesses the enzymatic machinery to tolerate oxidative
bursts resulting from its own metabolism or induced by the host immune system.
Conclusions: This study provides insights into the genome architecture of this unusual stramenopile. It also
proposes candidate genes with which to study the physiopathology of this parasite and thus may lead to further
investigations into Blastocystis-host interactions.

Background
Blastocystis sp. is one of the most frequent unicellular
eukaryotes found in the intestinal tract of humans and
various animals [1]. This anaerobic parasite was first
described by Alexeieff at the beginning of the 20th
century [2]. For a long time, the taxonomy of Blastocystis
was controversial. Despite the application of molecular
phylogenetic approaches, it was only recently that
* Correspondence: pwincker@genoscope.cns.fr; christian.vivares@univbpclermont.fr; hicham.el_alaoui@univ-bpclermont.fr
† Contributed equally
1
Genoscope (CEA) and CNRS UMR 8030, Université d’Evry, 2 rue Gaston
Crémieux, 91057 Evry, France
2
Clermont Université, Université Blaise Pascal, Laboratoire Microorganismes:
Génome et Environnement, BP 10448, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Blastocystis sp. was unambiguously classified within the
stramenopiles [3-5]. This eukaryotic major lineage, also
called Heterokonta, encompasses very diverse organisms
(unicellular or multicellular, heterotrophic or photosynthetic) such as slime nets, diatoms, water moulds and
brown algae [6]. One important characteristic of stramenopiles is the presence during the life cycle of a stage
with at least one flagellum permitting motility. It is
important to note that Blastocystis sp. does not possess
any flagellum and is the only stramenopile known to
cause infections in humans [4]. For the organism isolated
from human fecal material, Brumpt suggested the
name Blastocystis hominis [7]. However, as the species
B. hominis is difficult to establish, we use the term
‘Blastocystis sp.’ to designate any subtype observed in

© 2011 Denoeud et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

humans. Blastocystis sp. is the most frequent protozoa
reported in human fecal samples [8], with a worldwide
distribution [9-13] and a prevalence ranging between 30
and 60% in some developing countries [1]. In addition,
infection with Blastocystis sp. appears to be common and
more severe in immunocompromised or hemophilic
patients [9,14,15]. The presence of Blastocystis representatives has also been reported in a variety of mammals,
birds, reptiles, and even insects [16-18]. Blastocystis sp.
exhibits extensive genetic diversity, and on the basis of
molecular analysis of the small subunit RNA gene, ten
distinct subtypes (ST1 to ST10) have been identified
from primates (including humans), other mammals and
birds [17]. Some arguments support zoonotic transmission to humans, including the high prevalence of ST1 to
ST3 in humans and other mammals [17] and the experimental transmission of different human genotypes to
chickens, rats and mice [19,20].
The life cycle of Blastocystis sp. remains elusive,
although different morphological forms have been
described, including vacuolar, granular, amoeboid and
cysts. Recently, Tan [1] suggested a life cycle with the
cyst as the infectious stage. After ingestion of cysts, the
parasite may undergo excystation in the gastrointestinal
tract and may develop into a vacuolar form that divides
by binary fission. The following stage could be either
the amoeboid form or the granular form. Then, encystation may occur during passage along the colon before
cyst excretion in the feces. Therefore, Blastocystis sp.
lives in oxygen-poor environments and is characterized
by the presence of some double-membrane surroundedorganelles showing elongate, branched, and hooked
cristae [21] called mitochondria-like organelles (MLOs)
[22]. These cellular compartments contain a circular
DNA molecule and have metabolic properties of both
aerobic and anaerobic mitochondria [23,24].
Blastocystis sp. has been reported as a parasite causing
gastro- and extra-intestinal diseases with additional persistent rashes, but a clear link of subtypes to the symptomatology is not well established [11]. Other studies
have shown that the parasite can be associated with irritable bowel syndrome [20,25] or inflammatory bowel
disease [26]. Thus, the pathogenic role of Blastocystis sp.
as the primary cause of enteric symptoms is dubious.
Therefore, it is important to search for other molecular
markers for an epidemiologically integrated study [17].
Here we report the complete genome sequence of a subtype 7 isolate from a Singaporean patient [GenBank:
CABX01000000]. Its comparison with the two other
available stramenopile genome sequences (that is,
Phytophthora sojae, a plant pathogenic oomycete, and
Thalassiosira pseudonana, a free diatom) allows us to
highlight some genome-specific features of Blastocystis
to understand how this parasite evolved within

Page 2 of 16

environmental constraints, but also provides a better
knowledge of its metabolic and physiological capacities,
such as the functioning and the role of MLOs and the
arsenal produced to interact or to counter immune
defense systems of its host.

Results and discussion
General features of the Blastocystis genome

The genome of a Blastocystis subtype 7 was resolved by
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, and 15 chromosomic
bands have been characterized. The final assembled
sequence is distributed in 54 scaffolds and the deduced
genome is 18.8 Mb in size (16.5-fold sequence coverage),
which is much smaller than plant parasite stramenopiles
(Phytophthora infestans, 240 Mb; P. sojae, 95 Mb; Phytophthora ramorum, 65 Mb) and also smaller than free
stramenopiles (Phaeodactylum tricornutum, 27.4 Mb;
T. pseudonana, 34.5 Mb). The reference annotation of
the Blastocystis subtype 7 genome contains 6,020 genes,
covering about 42% of the genome (Table 1). The average
number of exons per gene is 4.6 for multiexonic genes
and 929 genes are monoexonic. Compaction in this parasite genome is reflected by the short length of the intergenic regions (1,801 bp), the relatively low repeat
coverage (25%) and, more strikingly, by the very short
size of introns, with a sharp length distribution of around
32 nucleotides (Figure S1 in Additional file 1). A total of
38 rDNA units organized in transcriptional units, including a small subunit rRNA gene, a 5.8S rRNA gene, and a
large subunit rRNA gene in a 5’-3’ orientation, have been
detected in the genome. The sizes of the small subunit,
the large subunit and the 5.8S rRNA gene are 1.8 kb,
2.45 kb and 0.44 kb, respectively. Some units are tandemly duplicated, up to four copies on scaffold 18, and
some may also be localized in subtelomeric regions, as
revealed by a co-mapping of telomeric sequences and
rDNA subunits at scaffold 6 and 9 extremities. These two
scaffolds could correspond to entire chromosomes. Due
to the sequencing method, some units are incomplete
(either truncated or lacking genes). The alignment of 20
complete small subunit rRNA genes shows polymorphism between copies, which is also the case for 29 large
subunit rRNA gene copies.
The number of genes in Blastocystis (6,020) is reduced in
comparison with other stramenopiles (P. infestans, 17,797;
P. sojae, 19,027; P. ramorum, 15,743; P. tricornutum,
10,402; T. pseudonana, 11,776). Surprisingly, a large portion of genes were probably duplicated since 404 clusters
of paralogous protein-coding genes were identified, containing 1,141 genes, that is, 19% of Blastocystis genes (see
Material and methods). Excluding the large multigenic
families (up to 32 genes with a histone-fold domain and 20
genes with a 4Fe-4S ferredoxin domain), most of the duplicated genes are present in only two copies (Figure S2 in

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

Page 3 of 16

Table 1 General features of Blastocystis sp. subtype 7
Mean length

Median length

Total length (Mb)

Genes

Number
6,020

1,299

1,397

7.82

42%

Exons

24,580

280

150

6.88

37%

Introns

18,560

50.5

31

0.94

5%

-

1,801

4,092

10.9

58%

2,730

1,747

2,862

4.8

25%

Intergenic
Repeats

Additional file 1). As described in other organisms [27,28],
the duplicated genes are more conserved than single copy
genes in Blastocystis sp. Indeed, they have more orthologs
(defined as best reciprocal hit (BRH); see Materials and
methods) and display higher similarities with their orthologs (Figure S3 in Additional file 1). They also tend to
display higher expression levels than single copy genes
(Figure S4 in Additional file 1).
We investigated whether these gene duplications could
have arisen from a whole genome duplication (WGD) or
smaller scale segmental duplications. WGD, the duplication of the entire genome by polyploidization, has been
shown to have played a key role in the evolutionary
history of several animal and plant lineages [27,29-31].
Segmental duplications occur continually by several
mechanisms that can duplicate parts of genes, entire
genes, or several adjacent genes. These mechanisms
include unequal crossing over, or gene conversion, and
tandem duplication [32-34]. We were able to identify
320 blocks of duplicated genes, that is, paralogous segments of several adjacent genes (see Materials and
methods), some of which are very large (up to 100 kb),
suggesting a WGD. These blocks cover about 39% of
the genome (7.3 out of 18.8 Mb) representing 38% (5.15
out of 13.65 Mb) of the unrepeated fraction of the genome. As shown in Figure 1, each scaffold is a mosaic of
blocks of homology with several other scaffolds: scaffolds cannot be grouped by pairs as would be expected
from a recent WGD. Additionally, some segments are
present in more than two copies in the genome (they
appear in black in Figure 1), suggesting that segmental
duplications are likely to have played a role in the
current duplication pattern. However, the duplicated
blocks are not often on the same scaffold, nor in tandem, which rules out the tandem duplication model.
The comparison of paralogous copies shows surprisingly
high nucleic acid identity rates: on average, 99% in coding regions, 98.4% in untranslated regions, and 97.8% in
introns and intergenic regions. Interestingly, those
values are homogeneous among all paralogous blocks,
suggesting that all blocks were duplicated at the same
time.
Two hypotheses could explain the origin of these duplicated blocks. First, the duplicates may have arisen from a
whole genome duplication that took place recently (since

Percentage of genome (18.8 Mb)

the copies are still very similar) and was followed by
rapid genome rearrangements and losses of gene copies.
The high homology between gene copies could also
result from a high rate of homogenization through gene
conversion driven by the high frequency of rearrangements. The frequent rearrangements in the Blastocystis
lineage are probably also the reason why no extensive
synteny could be detected between Blastocystis sp. and
other stramenopiles. Second, the duplicates could also
have occurred through segmental duplications (favored
by the high rate of rearrangements), although the relatively uniform divergence between copies is more symptomatic of a single event and would imply a burst of
segmental duplications during a short period or a very
high rate of homogenization by recombination. The intriguing pattern of gene duplications, likely caused by the
high rate of rearrangements in the Blastocystis genome,
makes it impossible to determine which scenario is the
most likely. It could be interesting to sequence other subtypes to determine whether the high rate of recombination (loss of synteny) and the pattern of duplications
observed in subtype 7 is a common feature within this
lineage.
Endosymbiotic and horizontal gene transfers in
Blastocystis sp

Phylogenetic analyses revealed two genes of possible
cyanobacterial origin in the genome of Blastocystis,
those encoding phosphoglycerate kinase [GenBank:
CBK20833] and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase
[GenBank:CBK22626] (Figure S5 in Additional file 1).
It is important to notice that 6-phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase-encoding genes have been identified in
non-photosynthetic protists such as Heterolobosea (not
shown). This was interpreted as secondary horizontal
gene transfer (HGT) from photosynthetic eukaryotes
to Heterolobosea [35,36].
The presence of plastids in various photosynthetic stramenopile lineages (for example, diatoms, chrysophytes,
raphidophytes) was interpreted as a secondary endosymbiosis that occurred between a red algae and the ancestor
of these groups. By contrast, the evolutionary meaning of
the lack of plastids in some heterotrophic stramenopile
lineages (for example, oomycetes, bicosoesids) is still
under discussion: does it indicate secondary losses of the

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

Page 4 of 16

1
0
1

2

3

4
6

5

8

7

10

9

11

13

12

16

15

14

18

17

21

19

23

22

20

24

25

0

3

6

9

12

15

18

22

27

1

4

7

10

13

16

19

24

28

2

5

8

11

14

17

21

25

30

Several scaffolds

Figure 1 Blocks of duplicated genes in the Blastocystis sp. genome. For each scaffold (from 0 to 25), the duplicated blocks are displayed
with colors corresponding to the scaffolds where the paralogous blocks are located (on scaffolds 0 to 19, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30). Below each
scaffold, the repeat density is displayed as a grey scale: 0% (white) to 100% (black) repeats in 10-kb windows.

plastid acquired by the ancestor of all stramenopiles? Or
does it reflect the fact that the secondary endosymbiosis
at the origin of stramenopile plastids did not occur in
their common ancestor but after the divergence of
heterotrophic lineages [37]? The presence of genes of
cyanobacterial origin in Blastocystis supports the first
hypothesis even if we can not rule out possible recent
acquisitions of genes of chloroplastic origin from photosynthetic eukaryotes as in the case of Heterolobosea.
HGT is important in evolution as an adaptive mechanism of microbial eukaryotes to environmental conditions
[38,39] and is known to play an important role in stramenopiles. For instance, iron is a limiting nutrient in surface
waters for diatoms. Therefore, the likely acquisition of

ferritin by HGT from bacteria has permitted some species to acquire this nutrient from the environment [40].
This is also the case for the diatom Phaeodactylum, in
which nitrogen metabolism, cell wall silification, DNA
replication, genome repair and recombination processes
have been shaped by HGT [40,41]. HGT seems also to
play an important role in oomycetes since it may be
involved in osmotrophy. Genes involved in absorbing
products of degradation of complex nutrients were predicted to be candidates for fungi-to-oomycete HGT [42].
By analyzing the set of predicted genes in Blastocystis sp.
that are homologous to bacterial or archaeal genes, we
identified 133 candidates for HGT (Table S3 in Additional file 2). In most cases, our phylogenetic analyses

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

confirm the bacterial origin of these genes even if they
were not sufficiently resolved to allow the precise identification of the donor, suggesting that these HGT events
were ancient and/or that the corresponding genes are
rapidly evolving in the genome of Blastocystis sp. Interestingly, in a few cases, even when the transferred gene
is of bacterial origin, the Blastocystis sp. copy is closely
related to homologues found in pathogenic and/or
anaerobic eukaryotes, suggesting that HGT between
eukaryotes has played a key role in these organisms too
(Figure S6 in Additional file 1).
Some of the genes that originated from HGT possess
functions that lead to a better understanding of how this
lineage emerged. Three are homologous to the bacterial
major facilitator transporter (MFS_1), the first two being
nearly identical, and therefore resulting from a recent
gene duplication event. MFS proteins form a large and
diverse group of secondary transporters, which facilitate
the transport across membranes of a variety of substrates,
including ions, sugar phosphates, drugs, neurotransmitters, nucleosides, amino acids and peptides [43]. Two
Blastocystis MFS genes have closely related homologues
in some pathogenic eukaryotes like the Alveolata Perkinsus marinus or fungi such as Gibberella zeae and Verticillium albo atrum, suggesting an acquisition from bacteria
followed by HGT between these eukaryotes (Figure S6f
in Additional file 1). However, the phylogeny resolution
is too low to precisely identify the bacterial donor of
these genes. The presence of MSF proteins in Blastocystis
sp. may confer the ability to absorb nutrients from the
environment to this parasite, particularly in the intestinal
lumen or when attacking host tissues. We have also
found different HGT genes harboring alcohol deshydrogenase, short-chain dehydrogenase and oxidoreductase
domains (Table S3 in Additional file 2) that may be
involved in specific fermentations that remain to be characterized. Some of them are closely related to homologues found in anaerobic eukaryotes like Trichomonas
vaginalis and Entamoeba histolytica (Figure S6b in Additional file 1) or in the bacteria Legionella pneumophila or
Parachlamydia acanthamoebae, which infect or are associated with amoeba [44,45]. These enzymes may increase
the range of Blastocystis sp. metabolic abilities to produce
energy in anaerobic environments, as has been observed
in Giardia lamblia and E. histolytica [46,47].
Several genes acquired by HGT may participate in the
adhesion of the parasite to the host tissues. Indeed, 26
genes (Table S3 in Additional file 2) encode proteins
containing the IPR008009 domain, which is often associated with immunoglobulin domains, a conserved core
region of an approximately 90-residue repeat found in
several hemagglutinins and other cell surface proteins.
Among these 26 Blastocystis sp. proteins, some also
contain the IPR015919 domain, which characterizes

Page 5 of 16

cadherins, a family of adhesion molecules that mediate
Ca2+-dependent cell-cell adhesion. Homologous genes
are also found in some beta-Proteobacteria or Acidobacteria, but the sequences are very divergent and
our phylogenetic analysis did not, therefore, allow firm
identification of the bacterial donor. Some hydrolaseencoding genes could also result from the transfer from
bacteria to Blastocystis sp. One of them possesses an
esterase-lipase (IPR013094) domain (Table S3 in Additional file 2) and may participate in the degradation of
host tissue during infection. The closest homologues of
this gene are found in the fungus Botryotinia fuckeliana,
in Firmicutes and Actinobacteria (Figure S6d in
Additional file 1).
Overall, these HGT genes may have allowed flexibility
in genome expression, enabling the successful adaptation of Blastocystis sp. to digestive environments
through genes encoding proteins that could be involved
in osmotrophy (MFS), energy metabolism (dehydrogenases) and adhesion.
Circular genome, predicted proteome and metabolic
pathways of the MLOs

Although it lives in anaerobic or microaerophilic conditions, Blastocystis sp. harbors MLOs that present both
mitochondrial and hydrogenosomal features [24]. We
recently reported that Blastocystis sp. MLOs contain a
circular genome, including genes encoding 10 of the 20
complex I subunits, but they lack all genes encoding
cytochromes, cytochrome oxidases and ATP synthase
subunits [24], unlike mitochondrial DNA from other
sequenced stramenopiles, such as Phytophthora sp. [48].
The MLO genome of the Blastocystis subtype 7 is a circular molecule 29,270 bp in size. Two other MLO genomes were then sequenced from isolates belonging to
other subtypes [49]: a subtype 1, represented by Blastocystis Nand II, with a 27,719 bp genome; and a subtype
4, represented by Blastocystis DMP/02-328, with a
28,382 bp genome. In addition to sequence conservation, these three genomes have many similarities. Their
A+T content is around 80%, their gene density is higher
than 95% and all three encompass 45 genes: 27 ORFs,
16 tRNAs and 2 rRNA genes. The ORFs consist of
NADH subunits, ribosomal proteins and proteins with
no similarity in the databases. The synteny between the
three MLO genomes is highly conserved: gene order is
strictly the same among the three genomes [24,49].
Through the analysis of a Blastocystis EST database,
Stechmann et al. [23] have identified 110 potential proteins associated with mitochondrial pathways, such as
the oxidative phosphorylation chain, tricarboxylic acid
(TCA) cycle, Fe/S cluster assembly, and amino acid and
fatty acid metabolisms. Nonetheless, approximately half
of these proteins have an incomplete amino terminus

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

due to EST data, making it difficult to confirm mitochondrial import by algorithms. To clarify the metabolic
characteristics of these puzzling organelles, we used data
from the whole genome sequence in order to establish
the in silico proteome of Blastocystis MLOs. For this
purpose, a computational approach based on two different prediction algorithms (MitoProt and MitoPred) for
mitochondrial-import proteins was chosen (see Materials and methods for more details). This approach predicted 365 MLO proteins (Table S6 in Additional file 3)
whereas Stechmann et al. [23] predicted only 110 proteins. Among these 365 proteins, 299 were predicted to
have an amino-terminal extension involved in mitochondrial import, suggesting that an alternative system
might exist for the 66 remaining proteins. Of the 299
proteins, 41 remain as ‘hypothetical protein’ with
unknown function and 31 have no homologues in public
databases, which raises the question of the existence of
undiscovered metabolic processes within these intriguing organelles (Table S6 in Additional file 3). The
other proteins are involved in classical mitochondrial
core functions, such as oxidative phosphorylation,
amino acid metabolism, fatty acid oxidation, iron-sulfur
cluster assembly, and mitochondrial import system. Several proteins involved in the translocase of the outer
mitochondrial membrane (TOM complex), the translocase of the inner membrane (TIM complex), and the
presequence translocase-associated motor (PAM complex), which perform protein transport into the matrix,
were identified. Interestingly, the two essential subunits
of the mitochondrial processing peptidase heterodimer
(MPP a/b), essential for the cleavage of the targeting
peptide, were also found [50].
Our analyses revealed that MLOs probably have three
ways to make acetyl-CoA from pyruvate, supported by
the presence of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex,
pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase and pyruvate:NADP+
oxidoreductase (an amino-terminal pyruvate:ferredoxin
oxidoreductase domain fused to a carboxy-terminal
NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase domain) (Figure 2).
Euglena gracilis mitochondria include this feature,
which provides adaptability to various oxygen levels
[51], and this might be to a lesser extent the case for
Blastocystis sp. We have also identified the 20 subunits
of the Blastocystis sp. MLO complex I (ten are encoded
by the MLO genome and ten by nuclear genes). The
four nuclear-encoded subunits of the mitochondrial
respiratory chain complex II were detected and this
complex could function in two ways (via succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate reductase) [52]. We did not identify any genes encoding complexes III and IV subunits
or ATP synthase. However, we have found components
of the TCA cycle, which was shown to be involved with
complex II (fumarate reductase) in fumarate respiration

Page 6 of 16

in parasitic helminths [52]. Interestingly, we identified a
gene encoding a terminal oxidase, called alternative oxidase (AOX), which could be the terminal electron
acceptor of complexes I and II (Figure 2), allowing adaptation to oxygen stress and maintaining the NADH/
NAD balance, as has been suggested for Cryptosporidium parvum [53,54]. These data raise questions about
the electron acceptor when complex II has succinate
dehydrogenase or fumarate reductase activity, the quinone used in this process and the role of the proton
gradient.
We also revealed proteins that can be grouped into
essential mitochondrial pathways, like the Fe/S cluster
assembly. More precisely, we have identified 11 enzymes
(6 of which have predicted mitochondrial import signals), composing the iron-sulfur cluster system responsible for the assembly of mitochondrial Fe/S proteins [55],
such as the cysteine desulfurase Nfs1, the scaffold protein Isu1, frataxin, and the P-loop NTPase Ind1, which
is required for the assembly of complex I (Figure 2). We
also highlighted some proteins involved in mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis type II [56], beta oxidation of
fatty acids and amino acid metabolism (Table S6 in
Additional file 3).
Taken together, our data confirm the mitochondrial nature of the Blastocystis sp. MLO. The oxygen-poor environment may have driven the selection of these unique
organelles, which seemingly represent an intermediate
situation between anaerobic mitochondria and hydrogenosomes, arguing for multiple situations arising during organelle evolution. It remains now to describe the metabolism
occurring in these unusual organelles more precisely.
Secretome and virulence factors

The persistence of Blastocystis sp. in the host may be
due, to some extent, to its ability to override the
response of the immune system and to adhere and survive within the intestinal tissue. Manipulation of the
host might be facilitated by molecules released at the
interface between the host and the parasite [57].
Accordingly, the study of the predicted secretome of
Blastocystis sp. is of particular interest. With SIGNALP
3.0, 307 proteins were predicted to be secretory, of
which 46 had no sequence similarity in the public nr
databases. By sequence homology, 170 proteins that
could play a role in host-parasite relationships were
selected and submitted to PSORTII for extracellular
location. Finally, 75 putative secreted proteins have been
classified by putative functions, some of which may have
a direct connection with pathogenicity (proteases, hexose digestion enzymes, lectins, glycosyltransferases and
protease inhibitors; Table S4 in Additional file 2).
Blastocystis can secrete members of the immunophilin
family, characterized by peptidyl-propyl cis-trans

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

Page 7 of 16

Figure 2 In silico reconstruction of metabolic pathways of Blastocystis sp. mitochondria-like organelles. The proteins are predicted from
the combined analysis of MitoProt and MitoPred algorithms. Proteins with a predicted amino-terminal extension are outlined by a solid black
line, and protein complexes for which mitochondrial presequences for only some of the subunits have been predicted are outlined by a dashed
black line. The pathways in purple represent: (1) the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl-CoA by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDH),
pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFO) or pyruvate:NADP oxidoreductase (PNO); (2) acetyl-CoA is then converted to acetate by acetate:
succinate CoA transferase (ASCT) and may allow production of ATP (3). Pyruvate may follow routes that potentially use complexes I and II to
produce succinate (and propionate) and certainly participate in maintaining the redox balance. The pathways in green and burgundy
correspond to amino acid metabolism and fatty acid metabolism, respectively. Pathways for the assembly of iron-sulfur proteins are represented
in blue, and proteins involved in mitochondrial import machinery in orange. Enzymes that may play a role in protection against oxidative stress
are indicated in pink (superoxide dismutase (SOD), alternative oxidase (AOX), glutathione reductase (GR) and gluthathione peroxidase (GPx)); the
role of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH) remains to be determined. Abbreviations: 1, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; 2, 3-oxoacyl-ACP
synthase; 3, 3-oxoacyl-ACP reductase; 4, 2-enoyl-ACP reductase; 5, methylmalonyl-CoA mutase; 6, methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase; 7, propionylCoA carboxylase; AAC, ATP/ADP translocator; ACP, acyl carrier protein; ALAT, alanine aminotransferase; BC-AAT, branched-chain amino acid
aminotransferase; C I, complex I; ECH, enoyl-CoA hydratase; [Fe]-Hyd, [Fe]-hydrogenase; FRD/SDH, fumarate reductase/succinate dehydrogenase
activity of complex II; FUM, fumarase; HCDH, 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase; HICH, 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase; HID, 3hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase; LC-ACS, long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase; MDH, malate dehydrogenase; OMC, oxoglutarate/malate carrier
protein; Pyr C, pyruvate carboxylase; SCS, succinyl-CoA synthetase; SOD, superoxide dismutase.

isomerase activity and disulfide isomerases (Figure 3;
Table S4 in Additional file 2). These proteins have key
roles in protein folding, but it has also been established
that they can have moonlighting functions. In bacteria,
they have evolved adhesive properties for the host [58]
but they can also modulate host leukocyte function and
induce cellular apoptosis [59]. A cyclophilin-like protein
from the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii is
directly involved in host-parasite crosstalk, as it can

modulate protective Th1 responses through its binding
to the chemokine receptor CCR5 [60]. It is unclear what
role these proteins play in Blastocystis sp., but this illustrates a range of functions for cell stress proteins in
host-pathogen interactions.
Sugar-binding proteins have an important role
through a conserved carbohydrate-recognition domain
that could interact with host cell receptors. Such proteins have been characterized in other parasites [61] and

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

Figure 3 Secretory proteins and virulence factors identified in
the Blastocystis sp. subtype 7 potentially involved in host
interaction. Blastocystis sp. may release cysteine proteases, which
could be processed by legumain. These proteases may attack
intestinal epithelium together with other hydrolases, such as
glysoside hydrolases. Protease inhibitors, some of which have been
predicted to be secreted, could act on host proteases (digestive
enzymes or proteases involved in the immune response). Some as
yet uncharacterized secondary metabolites produced by polyketide
synthase (PKS) identified in the genome could also participate in
host intestinal symptoms. Adhesive candidate proteins (proteins
with an immunoglobulin Ig domain) have been found. Finally, drugresistant isolates of the parasite could be explained by the presence
of multidrug resitance (MDR) proteins. Lightning bolts indicate
potential toxic effects.

it is interesting to note that some sugar-binding proteins
are able to inhibit Th1- and Th2-mediated inflammation
[62,63]. Moreover, some specific sugar-binding proteins
are also able to suppress regulatory T cells [64]. The
binding of these proteins is dependent on their specific
sugar motifs, which can be added to N- or O-linked glycans by glycosyltransferases. One carbohydrate-binding
protein and eight glycosyltransferases (Table S4 in Additional file 2) have been predicted to be secreted. All
these enzymes could allow cross-linking of Blastocystis
sp. sugar-binding proteins to host cell receptors.
The parasite likely uses hydrolases to attack host tissues. Fucosidase, hexosaminidase and polygalacturonase
have been identified in the predicted secretome and may
participate in this process by degrading host glycoproteins (Figure 3; Table S4 in Additional file 2). Proteases
have been proposed to be involved in diverse processes,
such as host cell invasion, excystation, metabolism,
cytoadherence or other virulence functions. A correlation
between a high level of protease activity and the virulence
of the intestinal parasite E. histolytica was proven by
McKerrow et al. [65]. Indeed, cysteine proteases degrade
extracellular matrix proteins, cleave immunoglobulin A
and G, and are thought to be responsible for the cytopathic effect of different pathogens against in vitro cultured cells [66]. Interestingly, Blastocystis sp. proteolytic

Page 8 of 16

enzymes are also able to degrade human secretory immunoglobulin A [67]. All the major classes of proteolytic
enzymes were identified in the genome data, including
serine, aspartic, and cysteine proteases and metalloproteases. Among the 66 proteases identified, 18 are predicted to be secreted by the parasite (Table S4 in
Additional file 2). Within the protease family, cysteine
protease-encoding genes are the most represented in
Blastocystis sp. genome and 96% of the proteins encoded
by these genes are predicted to be secreted. Among the
cysteine proteases we have found five legumains and
eight cathepsins; three cathepsins B contain the
IPR015643 domain, which is only present in Blastocystis
sp. compared to the other stramenopiles. The IPR015643
domain corresponds to the peptidase C1 cathepsin B
domain and has a cysteine type peptidase activity, which
was also found in pathogenic protozoa (Leishmania sp.
and Trypanosoma sp.) [66]. Cysteine proteases are
usually secreted in their inactive form and must be
matured, having a prosegment that prevents hydrolysis
during protease trafficking and storage. This maturation
might result from the activity of the same protease or
another, such as asparaginyl endopeptidase (also called
legumain) [68]. This endopeptidase cleaves peptide
bonds carboxy-terminal to asparagine residues, and may
be involved in processing and activating both cathepsins
L and B. Legumains have been predicted in the secretome of Blastocystis sp. (Table S4 in Additional file 2)
and could be involved in protease processing (Figure 3).
As an alternative role, secreted Blastocystis sp. legumains
could also participate with other effectors in the alteration of the host intestine [69]. Indeed, it has been shown
that legumain can degrade fibronectin, an extracellular
matrix glycoprotein [70].
Genes coding for protease inhibitors are also present in
the Blastocystis sp. genome, and some are predicted to be
secreted. Release of protease inhibitors may weaken the
host response as described in nematodes [71]. Blastocystis
sp. encodes three protease inhibitors: cystatin, type1proteinase inhibitor and endopeptidase inhibitor-like
protein (Table S4 in Additional file 2). Type1-proteinase
inhibitor is similar to chymotrypsin inhibitor, which is
known to inactivate intestinal digestive enzymes (trypsin
and chymotrypsin) as in Ascaris suum [72], thus protecting
the parasite against non-specific digestive defenses. Cystatin, also called stefin, was described in Fasciola gigantica
[73] and shown to inhibit mammalian cathepsin B, cathepsin L and other cysteine proteases, including parasite
ones. In Blastocystis sp., secreted cystatin could participate
in the regulation of parasitic cysteine protease activities.
Cystatin can also potentially inhibit host proteases involved
in MHC II antigen processing and presentation, including
the key enzyme asparaginyl endopeptidase [74] and cathepsin S, the mammalian legumain [73].

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

Interestingly, a putative type I polyketide synthase
(PKS) gene was also found in the Blastocystis sp.
genome, potentially originating from HGT. PKS and
non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) synthesize
metabolites like simple fatty acids, but also a myriad of
chemical structures that possess important pharmacological activities and environmental impact, such as toxins,
antibiotics or antimicrobials. Type I PKS was formerly
known only from bacteria and fungi, but recently homologous genes were also discovered in some protists [75].
According to the Database for NRPS and PKS [76], the
Blastocystis sp. PKS gene possesses the three essential
domains, and three other domains: dehydratase, ketoacyl
reductase, and enoyl reductase domains. The presence
of these additional domains would permit this organism
to synthesize both reduced polyketides and fatty acids.
Domain comparison with other type I PKSs suggests
that Blastocystis sp. PKS is similar to type I PKS from
the ascomycete Cochliobolus heterostrophus, a maize
pathogen that produces T toxin [77], a polyketide molecule that disturbs mitochondria by binding a protein of
the inner mitochondrial membrane. Searching polyketide-related metabolites in the secretome of Blastocystis
sp. would be of interest in order to identify molecules
that could have effects on the host (Figure 3).
Antioxidant system and multi drug resistance

Like other anaerobic organisms, Blastocystis sp. has to
eliminate reactive oxygen species such as superoxide
anions (O2.-), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and hydroxyl
radicals (HO.) resulting from metabolism. In addition,
this microorganism has to cope with the oxidative burst
imposed by host immune cell effectors (release of O2.subsequently processed to give additional reactive
oxygen species). For these reasons, to protect against
oxidative injury, Blastocystis species have developed an
efficient battery of antioxidant enzymes (Table S5 in
Additional file 2). The first lines of defense against
oxygen damage are superoxide dismutases (SODs), a
family of metalloproteins catalyzing the dismutation of
O 2 .- to form H 2 O 2 and oxygen. Genome annotation
revealed the presence of two genes encoding SODs
(SOD1 and SOD2) that exhibit sequence characteristics
of dimeric iron-containing SODs [78] and likely protect
the cytosol and MLOs, respectively, against O2.-. Catalase and ascorbate peroxidase are subsequently able to
remove H 2 O 2 generated by SODs as well as by
NADPH-dependent oxidase. However, genes encoding
catalase and ascorbate peroxidase have not been identified in Blastocystis sp. nor in many unicellular parasites,
including trypanosomatids and Plasmodium falciparum.
Additional enzymes, glutathione peroxidase (Gpx) and
thioredoxin-dependent peroxidase (commonly known as
peroxyredoxin (Prx)) are able to reduce H2O2 to water

Page 9 of 16

as well as other substrates, such as hydroperoxides and
peroxinitrite. In most eukaryotes, both enzymes obtain
their reducing equivalents from two redox systems, the
glutathione (GSH) and the thioredoxin (Trx) systems,
respectively. Like P. falciparum [79], Blastocystis sp.
cells possess a complete GSH synthesis pathway: the
genes encoding g-glutamylcysteine synthetase, glutathione synthetase (eu-GS group) and a functional
GSH/Gpx (nonselenium Gpx belonging to the PHGpx
group)/glutathione reductase system have been identified and both Gpx and glutathione reductase are probably located in the MLO. This nearly ubiquitous redox
cycle is replaced by the trypanothione system in trypanosomatids [80]. Blastocystis sp. also contains genes
encoding the proteins of the Trx/thioredoxin reductase
(TrxR)/Prx system. Indeed, two genes encode small proteins homologous to Trx: one cytosolic and another
most likely located in the MLO (Table S5 in Additional
file 2). Trx is itself reduced by TrxR and three genes
encoding cytosolic TrxR have been identified in Blastocystis sp. These proteins clearly belong to the high
molecular weight (designated H-TrxR) group of
enzymes and are similar to metazoan enzymes, including
those of Homo sapiens and Drosophila melanogaster,
and to those of the apicomplexan protozoa Plasmodium,
Toxoplasma, and Cryptosporidium [81]. Interestingly, in
contrast to apicomplexan H-TrxRs, two of the H-TrxR
enzymes of Blastocystis are predicted to possess a redox
active center in the carboxy-terminal domain composed
of a selenocysteine (a rare amino acid encoded by the
opal codon TGA, which is not recognized as a stop
codon) at the penultimate position and its neighboring
cysteine residue as in metazoan enzymes (selenoprotein
type H-TrxR). This strongly suggests the presence of the
Se-Cys insertion machinery (SECYS elements) in Blastocystis sp. Genes encoding another type of TrxR with low
molecular weight (designated L-TrxR) have been identified
in parasitic protozoa such as Trichomonas, Entamoeba,
and Giardia but not in the genome of Blastocystis sp.
These data reinforce the assumption of the exclusive
occurrence of either L-TrxR or H-Trxr in genomes and of
some disadvantages of possessing both types of TrxR [81].
In Blastocystis sp., at least 11 highly similar gene copies
encoding predicted cytosolic Prxs have been found that
clearly belong to the typical 2-Cys class of Prx. Whether
sequence polymorphism of these enzymes is potentially
correlated with diversified expression or even function
remains to be explored. Another gene encoding a typical
2-Cys Prx, likely located in the MLO, has been identified
in this parasite. Interestingly, like the homologous
sequence of another stramenopile, P. infestans, this
latter protein is fused to Trx with a WCGKC motif. As
described above, Blastocystis sp. possesses a whole array of
antioxidant enzymes protecting both the cytosol and

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

MLO. As shown in Table S5 in Additional file 2, these
enzymes have distinct phylogenetic origins and most of
them probably originate from prokaryote HGT. These
antioxidant proteins attract attention in unicellular parasites as they have important functions in host-parasite
interactions and constitute new drug targets for the design
of inhibitors. Indeed, genetic approaches have undoubtedly
shown that some anti-oxidant enzymes are essential for
the survival of different parasitic species [82-86].
Some genes coding for multi-drug resistance pump
proteins have also been discovered in the Blastocystis sp.
genome. There are two classes of multi-drug resistance
genes: the first class corresponds to proteins that are
energized by ATP hydrolysis; the second class includes
proteins that mediate the drug efflux reaction with a
proton or sodium ion gradient. Among the first class, 24
ABC transporter genes were found. In eukaryotes the
main physiological function of ABC transporters is the
export of endogenous metabolites and cytotoxic compounds [87] and eight families of ABC transporters
(ABC A to H) have been identified. The Blastocystis sp.
ABC transporters are included in four of these eight
families (five in family A, six in family B, six in family C,
three in family F, and four not in any class). The A
family is involved in lipid trafficking, and the F family in
DNA repair and gene regulation. The other two families
are more interesting [87], since in protozoan parasites
(Leishmania spp., Trypanosoma spp., Plasmodium spp.)
transporters belonging to the B and C families confer
resistance to drugs. Metronidazole-resistant strains of
Blastocystis sp. could have arisen through the action of
these multi-drug resistance proteins (Figure 3).

Conclusions
We have provided the first genome sequence of a Blastocystis sp. subtype, which could serve in comparative
genomics studies with other subtypes to provide clues
to clarify how these protozoans develop pathogenicity in
some humans. Analysis of this genome has revealed
original traits of this lineage compared to other stramenopiles (free living and plant pathogens). Aerobic
respiration has been lost, Blastocystis sp. instead having
the MLO, an anaerobic organelle, which should advance
our understanding of organelle evolution as the Blastocystis sp. MLO seems to be unique among organelles
(Figure 2) but remains to be biochemically characterized. Some genes may have been gained through HGT,
which may participate in essential functions for an
intestinal parasite (adhesion, energy production). These
genes probably have facilitated adaptation to intestinal
environments. The Blastocystis sp. secretome has been
predicted and this has permitted the identification of
candidate proteins that could degrade host tissues in

Page 10 of 16

order to provide nutrients. Putative secretory proteins
that can interfere with non-specific and specific host
defense systems have also been found, enabling Blastocystis sp. to survive within this hostile environment
(Figure 3). These putative secretory proteins are of particular interest as they may interact directly with host
tissue and could help in understanding the host-parasite
interactions and could also be used as markers to distinguish between non-pathogenic and pathogenic isolates.
If their functions are essential, they could also be used
to develop future vaccine formulations. The antioxidant
proteins offer interesting therapeutic targets as they
might be important for the parasite in fighting oxidative
bursts. In summary, the deciphering of the Blastocystis
sp. genome will contribute to the study of interactions
between this parasite and its host at a post-genomic
scale and pave the way for deciphering the host-parasite
interactome. Finally, the ‘Blastocystis sp. story’ is reminiscent of the amoeba pathogenicity story where two
morphologically indistinguishable species have different
pathogenic potential [88], and this genome will help in
the development of typing tools for the characterization
of pathogenic isolates.

Materials and methods
Genome sequencing

The Blastocystis sp. genome was sequenced using a
whole genome shotgun strategy. All data were generated
by paired-end sequencing of cloned inserts using Sanger
technology on ABI3730xl sequencers. Table S1 in Additional file 2 gives the number of reads obtained per
library. All reads were assembled with Arachne [89]. We
obtained 157 contigs that were linked into 54 supercontigs. The contig N50 was 297 kb, and the supercontig
N50 was 901 kb (Table S2 in Additional file 2).
Genome annotation
Construction of the training set

A set of 300 gene models from a preliminary annotation
run was selected randomly, among those that were validated by Blastocystis sp. cDNAs (that is, with every
intron confirmed by at least one cDNA and no exon
overlapping a cDNA intron) to create a clean Blastocystis
sp. training set. This training set was used to train gene
prediction algorithms and optimize their parameters.
Repeat masking

Most of the genome comparisons were performed with
repeat masked sequences. For this purpose, we searched
and masked sequentially several kinds of repeats: known
repeats and transposons available in Repbase with the
Repeat Masker program [90], tandem repeats with the
TRF program [91], ab initio repeat detection with
RepeatScout [92], rDNA by BLATing [93] 189 rDNAs

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

Page 11 of 16

Full-length-enriched cDNA libraries were constructed
from Blastocystis sp. vacuolar forms using a SV total
RNA isolation system (Promega France, Charbonnières,
France) for RNA extraction. RNA quality and quantity
were estimated using the Agilent bioanalyser with the
RNA 6000 Nano LabChip ® Kit. The clones were
sequenced on the 5’ end, producing 34,470 useful reads.
We were able to align 33,685 cDNA sequences to the
Blastocystis sp. genome assembly with the following
pipeline: after masking of polyA tails, the sequences
were aligned with BLAT on the assembly and all
matches with scores within 99% of the best score were
extended by 5 kb on each end, and realigned with the
cDNA clones using the EST2genome software [98].

Exons predicted by ab initio software (that is, GeneWise and EST2genome) were used as coding segments.
Introns predicted by GeneWise and EST2genome were
used as intron segments. Intergenic segments were created from the span of each mRNA using a negative score
(coercing GAZE not to split genes). Predicted repeats
were used as intron and intergenic segments to avoid
prediction of genes coding proteins in such regions.
The whole genome was scanned to find signals (splice
sites and start and stop codons). Additionally, transcript
stop signals were extracted from the ends of mRNAs
(polyA tail positions).
Each segment extracted from software output that predicts exon boundaries (like GeneWise, Exonerate or ab
initio predictors) was used by GAZE only if GAZE chose
the same boundaries. Each segment or signal from a given
program was given a value reflecting our confidence in the
data, and these values were used as scores for the arcs of
the GAZE automaton. All signals were given a fixed score,
but segment scores were context sensitive: coding segment
scores were linked to the percentage identity of the alignment; intronic segment scores were linked to the percentage identity of the flanking exons. A weight was assigned
to each resource to further reflect its reliability and
accuracy in predicting gene models. This weight acts as
a multiplier for the score of each information source,
before processing by GAZE. When applied to the entire
assembled sequence, GAZE predicted 4,798 gene models.
Since the resource of expressed sequences in stramenopiles is limited, and some gene-free ‘holes’ appeared in
gene-dense regions, we suspected that some genes had
been missed by the annotation pipeline because of a lack
of support.

Stramenopile ESTs

Additional gene models

A collection of 410,069 public mRNAs from the stramenopile clade (276,208 downloaded from the National
Center for Biotechnology Information plus 43,932 and
80,929 ESTs downloaded from the Joint Genome Institute for diatoms and Ectocarpus, respectively) were first
aligned with the Blastocystis sp. genome assembly using
BLAT [93]. To refine BLAT alignment, we used EST2genome [98]. Each significant match was chosen for an
alignment with EST2genome. BLAT alignments were
made using default parameters between translated genomic and translated ESTs.

With the assumption that not all genes in Blastocystis
sp. have EST support, we developed the following strategy to recuperate additional gene models. Ab initio
(SNAP and GeneID) predictions that did not overlap
GAZE gene models were selected and aligned to
UniProt sequences. Predictions that had significant hits
(coverage ≥90%; e-value ≤10-5) were tagged as potential
coding genes and randomly chosen genes were successfully verified by RT-PCR using the Access RT-PCR system (Promega France, Charbonnières, France). The final
proteome composed of 6,020 gene models was obtained
by adding 1,222 supplementary models to the 4,798
genes from the first GAZE output.

sequences (downloaded from GenBank), and telomeric
repeats by searching ‘CCCTAA’ patterns in the scaffolds
with the BLAST2 algorithm.
GeneWise

The UniProt [94] database was used to detect conserved
genes between Blastocystis sp. and other species. As
GeneWise [95] is time greedy, the UniProt database was
first aligned with the Blastocystis sp. genome assembly
using BLAT [93]. Subsequently, we extracted the genomic regions where no protein hit had been found by
BLAT and realigned Uniprot proteins with more permissive parameters. Each significant match was then
refined using GeneWise in order to identify exon/intron
boundaries.
GeneID and SNAP

GeneID [96] and SNAP [97]ab initio gene prediction
software were trained on 300 genes from the training
set.
Blastocystis sp. cDNAs

Integration of resources using GAZE

All the resources described here were used to automatically build Blastocystis sp. gene models using GAZE
[99]. Individual predictions from each of the programs
(that is, GeneID, SNAP, GeneWise, EST2genome) were
broken down into segments (coding, intron, intergenic)
and signals (start codon, stop codon, splice acceptor,
splice donor, transcript start, transcript stop).

Identification of orthologous genes

We identified orthologous genes with three species: Cyanidioschyzon merolae [100], P. sojae [49] and T. pseudonana
[101]. Each pair of predicted genes was aligned with the
Smith-Waterman algorithm, and alignments with a score

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

Page 12 of 16

An all-against-all comparison of Blastocystis sp. proteins
was performed using the Smith-Waterman algorithm
implemented in the Biofacet package [102]. BRHs were
identified as follows: two genes, A and B, are the BRH if
B is the best match for gene A and A for gene B. The distribution of percentage identities among the pairs of
BRHs is displayed in Figure S7 in Additional file 1. The
distribution is widespread except for the abundant class
of genes sharing ≥90% of identity, which represents 48%
of all pairs of paralogs. We investigated this apparently
recent gene duplication by selecting all pairs of genes
sharing ≥90% identity over ≥50% of the length of the
shortest protein (not only BRHs), which gave 1,917 gene
pairs corresponding to 1,141 genes scattered in 404 gene
families (19% of Blastocystis sp. genes). The number of
counterparts per gene is displayed in Figure S2 in Additional file 1. Additionally, blocks of paralogous genes, or
so-called duplicated blocks, were identified by clustering
the 1,917 gene pairs. The clustering was performed by
single linkage clustering using the Euclidian distance
between genes, and independently of gene orientation.
Those distances were calculated with the gene index on
each scaffold rather than the genomic position, including
only the genes with paralogs. The minimal distance
between two paralogous genes was set to 5 and the minimal number of genes in a cluster was set to 4 (two pairs
of paralogous genes; Figure S8 in Additional file 1).

species were discarded. The evolutionary origin of the
candidate genes was then investigated using phylogenetic
approaches (Figure S6 in Additional file 1). For each
gene, homologues were retrieved from the protein nr
database using Blastp (default parameters, except for the
max-target-sequences threshold, which was fixed at 500).
The sequences were aligned using Muscle 3.6 [104]
(default parameters). The resulting alignments were
visually inspected and manually refined using the MUST
software [105]. Ambiguously aligned regions were
removed prior to phylogenetic analysis.
Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree reconstructions
were carried out on the remaining positions using
PhyML [106] with the Le and Gascuel (LG) model [106]
with a gamma correction (four discrete classes, an estimated alpha parameter) to take into account evolutionary rate variation among sites. Tree robustness was
estimated by a non-parametric bootstrap approach using
PhyML and the same parameters with 100 replicates of
the original dataset. Bayesian phylogenetic trees were
also reconstructed using MrBayes version 3.1.2 [107].
We used a mixed model of amino acid substitution and
a gamma distribution (four discrete categories plus a
proportion of invariant sites) to take into account site
rate variation. MrBayes was run with four chains for
1 million generations and trees were sampled every 100
generations. To construct the consensus tree, the first
1,500 trees were discarded as ‘burn-in’. The candidates
with clear eukaryotic origin were then discarded. This
process provided 133 candidate genes (Table S3 in
Additional file 2). These candidates contain a high proportion of monoexonic genes (39%) compared to the
average number of monoexonic genes in Blastocystis sp.
(approximately 15%).

Identification of candidate horizontal gene transfers

Protein domain analysis

Blastocystis sp. proteins were blasted [103] (blastx)
against the protein nr database with the parameters
‘-f 100 -X 100 -e 0.00001 -E 2 -W 5’, and the best hits
were retained using the following criteria: for BLAST
scores greater than 200, all hits with a score greater than
90% of the best score were retained; and for BLAST
scores lower or equal to 200, all hits with a score greater
than 80% of the best score were retained. Then, the proteins with all their best hits in bacteria or archaea were
retained as candidates that had potentially arisen from
HGT. Other criteria for the blastx comparison were
tested (such as W = 3) but we observed no significant difference in the results after the subsequent filters. Candidates with some of their best hits in stramenopiles in
addition to bacteria were also retained since some HGTs
may be shared between stramenopiles, and genes for
which orthologs were identified in non-stramenopile

InterProScan [108] was run against all C. merolae,
P. sojae, T. pseudonana and Blastocystis sp. proteins.
Matches that fulfilled the following criteria were retained:
match tagged as ‘true positive’ by InterProScan (status =
T); match with an e-value ≤10-1. A total of 2,305 InterPro
domains (with IPR number) were found in Blastocystis
sp., which corresponds to 4,096 proteins.

higher than 300 (BLOSUM62, gapo = 10, gape = 1) were
retained. Orthologs were defined as BRHs, that is, two
genes, A from genome GA and B from genome GB, were
considered orthologs if B is the best match for gene A in
GB and A is the best match for B in GA.
Identification of paralogous genes and duplicated blocks

Functional annotation
Enzyme annotation

Enzyme detection in predicted Blastocystis sp. proteins
was performed with PRIAM [109], using the PRIAM
July 2006 Enzyme release. A total of 428 different EC
numbers, corresponding to enzyme domains, are associated with 1,140 Blastocystis sp. proteins. Therefore,
about 19% of Blastocystis sp. proteins contain at least
one enzymatic domain.

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

Page 13 of 16

Association of metabolic pathways with enzymes and
Blastocystis sp

Potential metabolic pathways were deduced from EC
numbers using the KEGG pathway database [110]. Links
between EC numbers and metabolic pathways were
obtained from the KEGG website. Using this file and
the PRIAM results, 906 (of the 1,140) Blastocystis sp.
proteins were assigned to 201 pathways.
Identification of putative proteins imported within the MLOs

The whole proteome was scanned by two algorithms
aimed at predicting proteins imported to mitochodria;
MitoProt [111], which predicts mitochondrial-targeting
sequences, and MitoPred [112], which predicts nuclearencoded mitochondrial proteins based on Pfam domains
(animal/yeast database). After manual processing and
using a script, only protein sequences with a score above
0.5 and 85% for MitoProt and MitoPred, respectively,
were selected. This output file was then used in a KEGG
Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) with the bi-directional best hit method [113] in order to automatically
generate KEGG pathways. Because protein domain annotations did not always provide sufficient information
(PRIAM July 2006 Enzyme release), a BLAST comparison
against the non-redundant database was conducted.
Secretome prediction using SignalP 3.0 and pSORTII

Prediction of secreted proteins is based on the analysis of
amino-terminal secretory signal sequences (SignalP 3.0)
followed by the selection of proteins predicted as extracellular by pSORTII. Each of the proteins was individually submitted to SignalP 3.0 for analysis with the
following parameters: organism set to eukaryotes, output
short format and protein sequence truncation after the
first 50 amino acids. Results of SignalP 3.0 were exported
to a temporary file, and identification of signal peptides
was accomplished by parsing the results of the hidden
Markov model analysis conducted by SignalP 3.0. Proteins with secretory signals were retained and analyzed
on the basis of possible function in host-parasite interactions. These last ones were also analyzed using PSORT II
[114], and those having a best hit as ‘extracellular’ were
selected. The SignalP threshold value for secretory signal
peptide prediction was set at 0.5 as determined for previous analyses [115] and the best hit was chosen for the
PSORTII analysis. The predicted secretory proteins were
then annotated as functional protein families.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Genome organization of Blastocystis sp. (introns,
numbers of counterparts per gene, genome structure, and so on)
and phylogenetic trees illustrating horizontal gene transfer events
from prokaryotic donors to Blastocystis sp. and candidate genes for
endosymbiotic gene transfers of chloroplastic origin.

Additional file 2: Sequencing overview and assembly metric data,
and the identification of horizontal gene transfer, secretory protein
and antioxidant protein candidates.
Additional file 3: Proteins putatively imported in the mitochondrialike organelle.

Abbreviations
bp: base pair; BRH: best reciprocal hit; EST: expressed sequence tag; Gpx:
glutathione peroxidase; GSH: glutathione; HGT: horizontal gene transfer;
KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; MFS: major facilitator
transporter; MLO: mitochondria-like organelle; NRPS: non-ribosomal peptide
synthase; ORF: open reading frame; PKS: polyketide synthase; Prx:
peroxyredoxin; SOD: superoxide dismutase; TCA: tricarboxylic acid; Trx:
thioredoxin; TrxR: thioredoxin reductase; WGD: whole genome duplication.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank François Enault (Université Blaise Pascal) for SignalP
3.0 analysis, David G Biron (Université Blaise Pascal) and Susan Cure
(Genoscope, Evry) for manuscript reading, comments and English
corrections.
Author details
Genoscope (CEA) and CNRS UMR 8030, Université d’Evry, 2 rue Gaston
Crémieux, 91057 Evry, France. 2Clermont Université, Université Blaise Pascal,
Laboratoire Microorganismes: Génome et Environnement, BP 10448, F-63000
Clermont-Ferrand, France. 3CNRS, UMR 6023, LMGE, F-63177 Aubière, France.
4
Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, F-59019
Lille Cedex, France. 5Inserm U1019, F-59000 Lille Cedex, France. 6CNRS UMR
8402, F-59021 Lille Cedex, France. 7University Lille-Nord de France, F-59000
Lille Cedex, France. 8Laboratoire de chimie bactérienne (CNRS UPR9043),
Institut de Microbiologie de la Méditerrannée, 31 chemin Joseph Aiguier,
13402 Marseille, France. 9Université de Provence, Aix-Marseille I, 3 place
Victor Hugo, 13331 Marseille, France. 10Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular
Parasitology, Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, 5 Science Drive 2, 117597
Singapore.
1

Authors’ contributions
FDen, PW, CPV and HEA conceived and designed the experiments. MR, IW,
JP, GCN, BS, BN, CDS, AC and HEA performed the experiments. MR, IW, MD,
CT, BN, EV, CBA, FDen, VA, FA, JMA, OJ, KSWT, FDel, PW and HEA analyzed
the data. FDen, MR, IW, EV, CBA, FDel, CPV and HEA wrote the paper. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 25 October 2010 Revised: 4 January 2011
Accepted: 25 March 2011 Published: 25 March 2011
References
1. Tan KS: New insights on classification, identification, and clinical
relevance of Blastocystis spp. Clin Microbiol Rev 2008, 21:639-665.
2. Alexeieff A: Sur la nature des formations dites “kystes de Trichomonas
intestinalis“. CR Soc Biol 1911, 71:296-298.
3. Silberman JD, Sogin ML, Leipe DD, Clark CG: Human parasite finds
taxonomic home. Nature 1996, 380:398.
4. Arisue N, Hashimoto T, Yoshikawa H, Nakamura Y, Nakamura G,
Nakamura F, Yano TA, Hasegawa M: Phylogenetic position of Blastocystis
hominis and of stramenopiles inferred from multiple molecular
sequence data. J Eukaryot Microbiol 2002, 49:42-53.
5. Hoevers JD, Snowden KF: Analysis of the ITS region and partial ssu and
lsu rRNA genes of Blastocystis and Proteromonas lacertae. Parasitology
2005, 131:187-196.
6. Patterson DJ: The diversity of eukaryotes. Am Nat 1999, 154:S96-S124.
7. Brumpt E: Blastocystis hominis n. sp. et formes voisines. Bull Soc Pathol
Exot 1912, 5:725-730.

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

8.

9.

10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.
29.
30.

Windsor JJ, Macfarlane L, Hughes-Thapa G, Jones SK, Whiteside TM:
Incidence of Blastocystis hominis in faecal samples submitted for routine
microbiological analysis. Br J Biomed Sci 2002, 59:154-157.
Stark D, van Hal S, Marriott D, Ellis J, Harkness J: Irritable bowel syndrome:
a review on the role of intestinal protozoa and the importance of their
detection and diagnosis. Int J Parasitol 2007, 37:11-20.
Rivera WL: Phylogenetic analysis of Blastocystis isolates from animal and
human hosts in the Philippines. Vet Parasitol 2008, 156:178-182.
Souppart L, Moussa H, Cian A, Sanciu G, Poirier P, El Alaoui H, Delbac F,
Boorom K, Delhaes L, Dei-Cas E, Viscogliosi E: Subtype analysis of
Blastocystis isolates from symptomatic patients in Egypt. Parasitol Res
2010, 106:505-511.
Marciano MG, Takizawa H, Falavigna DLM, Gomes ML: Enteroparasitosis
and their ethnographic relationship to food handlers in a tourist and
economic center in Paraná, southern Brazil. Rev Inst Med trop S Paulo
2009, 51:31-35.
Souppart L, Sanciu G, Cian A, Wawrzyniak I, Delbac F, Capron M, Dei-Cas E,
Boorom K, Delhaes L, Viscogliosi E: Molecular epidemiology of human
Blastocystis isolates in France. Parasitol Res 2009, 105:413-421.
Cirioni O, Giacometti A, Drenaggi D, Ancarani F, Scalise G: Prevalence and
clinical relevance of Blastocystis hominis in diverse patient cohorts. Eur J
Epidemiol 1999, 15:389-393.
Lucia JF, Aguilar C, Betran A: Blastocystis hominis colitis in a haemophilic
patient as a cause of lower gastrointestinal bleeding. Haemophilia 2007,
13:224-225.
Stenzel DJ, Boreham PF: Blastocystis hominis revisited. Clin Microbiol Rev
1996, 9:563-584.
Stensvold CR, Suresh GK, Tan KS, Thompson RC, Traub RJ, Viscogliosi E,
Yoshikawa H, Clark CG: Terminology for Blastocystis subtypes - a
consensus. Trends Parasitol 2007, 23:93-96.
Wong KH, Ng GC, Lin RT, Yoshikawa H, Taylor MB, Tan KS: Predominance
of subtype 3 among Blastocystis isolates from a major hospital in
Singapore. Parasitol Res 2008, 102:663-670.
Iguchi A, Ebisu A, Nagata S, Saitou Y, Yoshikawa H, Iwatani S, Kimata I:
Infectivity of different genotypes of human Blastocystis hominis isolates
in chickens and rats. Parasitol Int 2007, 56:107-112.
Boorom KF, Smith H, Nimri L, Viscogliosi E, Spanakos G, Parkar U, Li LH,
Zhou XN, Ok UZ, Leelayoova S, Jones MS: Oh my aching gut: irritable
bowel syndrome, Blastocystis, and asymptomatic infection. Parasit Vectors
2008, 1:40.
Zierdt CH: Blastocystis hominis-past and future. Clin Microbiol Rev 1991,
4:61-79.
Nasirudeen AMA, Eu-Hian Y, Singh M, Tan KSW: Metronidazole induces
programmed cell death in the protozoan parasite Blastocystis hominis.
Microbiology 2004, 150:33-43.
Stechmann A, Hamblin K, Perez-Brocal V, Gaston D, Richmond GS, van der
Giezen M, Clark CG, Roger AJ: Organelles in Blastocystis that blur the
distinction between mitochondria and hydrogenosomes. Curr Biol 2008,
18:580-585.
Wawrzyniak I, Roussel M, Diogon M, Couloux A, Texier C, Tan KS, Vivares CP,
Delbac F, Wincker P, El Alaoui H: Complete circular DNA in the
mitochondria-like organelles of Blastocystis hominis. Int J Parasitol 2008,
38:1377-1382.
Windsor JJ: Blastocystis hominis and Dientamoeba fragilis: neglected
human protozoa. The Biomedical Scientist 2007, 64:524-527.
al-Tawil YS, Gilger MA, Gopalakrishna GS, Langston C, Bommer KE: Invasive
Blastocystis hominis infection in a child. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1994,
148:882-885.
Jaillon O, Aury JM, Brunet F, Petit JL, Stange-Thomann N, Mauceli E,
Bouneau L, Fischer C, Ozouf-Costaz C, Bernot A, Nicaud S, Jaffe D, Fisher S,
Lutfalla G, Dossat C, Segurens B, Dasilva C, Salanoubat M, Levy M, Boudet N,
Castellano S, Anthouard V, Jubin C, Castelli V, Katinka M, Vacherie B,
Biémont C, Skalli Z, Cattolico L, Poulain J, et al: Genome duplication in the
teleost fish Tetraodon nigroviridis reveals the early vertebrate protokaryotype. Nature 2004, 431:946-957.
Davis JC, Petrov DA: Preferential duplication of conserved proteins in
eukaryotic genomes. PLoS Biol 2004, 2:E55.
Wolfe KH, Shields DC: Molecular evidence for an ancient duplication of
the entire yeast genome. Nature 1997, 387:708-713.
Semple C, Wolfe KH: Gene duplication and gene conversion in the
Caenorhabditis elegans genome. J Mol Evol 1999, 48:555-564.

Page 14 of 16

31. Vision TJ, Brown DG, Tanksley SD: The origins of genomic duplications in
Arabidopsis. Science 2000, 290:2114-2117.
32. Sankoff D: Gene and genome duplication. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2001,
11:681-684.
33. Bailey JA, Gu Z, Clark RA, Reinert K, Samonte RV, Schwartz S, Adams MD,
Myers EW, Li PW, Eichler EE: Recent segmental duplications in the human
genome. Science 2002, 297:1003-1007.
34. Wolfe KH, Li WH: Molecular evolution meets the genomics revolution.
Nat Genet 2003, 33(Suppl):255-265.
35. Andersson JO, Roger AJ: A cyanobacterial gene in nonphotosynthetic
protists - an early chloroplast acquisition in eukaryotes?. Curr Biol 2002,
12:115-119.
36. Maruyama S, Misawa K, Iseki M, Watanabe M, Nozaki H: Origins of a
cyanobacterial 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase in plastid-lacking
eukaryotes. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:151.
37. Archibald JM: The puzzle of plastid evolution. Curr Biol 2009, 19:R81-88.
38. Keeling PJ, Palmer JD: Horizontal gene transfer in eukaryotic evolution.
Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9:605-618.
39. Andersson JO: Horizontal gene transfer between microbial eukaryotes.
Methods Mol Biol 2009, 532:473-487.
40. Keeling PJ: Functional and ecological impacts of horizontal gene transfer
in eukaryotes. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2009, 19:613-619.
41. Bowler C, Allen AE, Badger JH, Grimwood J, Jabbari K, Kuo A, Maheswari U,
Martens C, Maumus F, Otillar RP, Rayko E, Salamov A, Vandepoele K, Beszteri B,
Gruber A, Heijde M, Katinka M, Mock T, Valentin K, Verret F, Berges JA,
Brownlee C, Cadoret JP, Chiovitti A, Choi CJ, Coesel S, De Martino A, Detter JC,
Durkin C, Falciatore A, et al: The Phaeodactylum genome reveals the
evolutionary history of diatom genomes. Nature 2008, 456:239-244.
42. Richards TA, Dacks JB, Jenkinson JM, Thornton CR, Talbot NJ: Evolution of
filamentous plant pathogens: gene exchange across eukaryotic
kingdoms. Curr Biol 2006, 16:1857-1864.
43. Law CJ, Maloney PC, Wang DN: Ins and outs of major facilitator
superfamily antiporters. Annu Rev Microbiol 2008, 62:289-305.
44. Berger P, Papazian L, Drancourt M, La Scola B, Auffray JP, Raoult D: Amebaassociated microorganisms and diagnosis of nosocomial pneumonia.
Emerg Infect Dis 2006, 12:248-255.
45. Embley TM, van der Giezen M, Horner DS, Dyal PL, Foster P: Mitochondria
and hydrogenosomes are two forms of the same fundamental
organelle. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2003, 358:191-201, discussion
201-192.
46. Field J, Rosenthal B, Samuelson J: Early lateral transfer of genes encoding
malic enzyme, acetyl-CoA synthetase and alcohol dehydrogenases from
anaerobic prokaryotes to Entamoeba histolytica. Mol Microbiol 2000,
38:446-455.
47. Nixon JE, Wang A, Field J, Morrison HG, McArthur AG, Sogin ML, Loftus BJ,
Samuelson J: Evidence for lateral transfer of genes encoding ferredoxins,
nitroreductases, NADH oxidase, and alcohol dehydrogenase 3 from
anaerobic prokaryotes to Giardia lamblia and Entamoeba histolytica.
Eukaryot Cell 2002, 1:181-190.
48. Martin FN, Bensasson D, Tyler BM, Boore JL: Mitochondrial genome
sequences and comparative genomics of Phytophthora ramorum and P.
sojae. Curr Genet 2007, 51:285-296.
49. Perez-Brocal V, Clark CG: Analysis of two genomes from the
mitochondrion-like organelle of the intestinal parasite Blastocystis:
complete sequences, gene content, and genome organization. Mol Biol
Evol 2008, 25:2475-2482.
50. Chacinska A, Koehler CM, Milenkovic D, Lithgow T, Pfanner N: Importing
mitochondrial proteins: machineries and mechanisms. Cell 2009,
138:628-644.
51. Hoffmeister M, van der Klei A, Rotte C, van Grinsven KW, van Hellemond JJ,
Henze K, Tielens AG, Martin W: Euglena gracilis rhodoquinone:ubiquinone
ratio and mitochondrial proteome differ under aerobic and anaerobic
conditions. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:22422-22429.
52. Tielens AG, Rotte C, van Hellemond JJ, Martin W: Mitochondria as we
don’t know them. Trends Biochem Sci 2002, 27:564-572.
53. Putignani L, Tait A, Smith HV, Horner D, Tovar J, Tetley L, Wastling JM:
Characterization of a mitochondrion-like organelle in Cryptosporidium
parvum. Parasitology 2004, 129:1-18.
54. Henriquez FL, Richards TA, Roberts F, McLeod R, Roberts CW: The unusual
mitochondrial compartment of Cryptosporidium parvum. Trends Parasitol
2005, 21:68-74.

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

55. Lill R: Function and biogenesis of iron-sulphur proteins. Nature 2009,
460:831-838.
56. Hiltunen JK, Schonauer MS, Autio KJ, Mittelmeier TM, Kastaniotis AJ,
Dieckmann CL: Mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis type II: more than just
fatty acids. J Biol Chem 2009, 284:9011-9015.
57. Corrales RM, Sereno D, Mathieu-Daude F: Deciphering the Leishmania
exoproteome: what we know and what we can learn. FEMS Immunol
Med Microbiol 2010, 58:27-38.
58. Bell A, Monaghan P, Page AP: Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases
(immunophilins) and their roles in parasite biochemistry, host-parasite
interaction and antiparasitic drug action. Int J Parasitol 2006, 36:261-276.
59. Henderson B: Cell stress proteins as modulators of bacteria - host
interactions. Novartis Found Symp 2008, 291:141-154, discussion 154-149,
221-144.
60. Golding H, Aliberti J, King LR, Manischewitz J, Andersen J, Valenzuela J,
Landau NR, Sher A: Inhibition of HIV-1 infection by a CCR5-binding
cyclophilin from Toxoplasma gondii. Blood 2003, 102:3280-3286.
61. Klion AD, Donelson JE: OvGalBP, a filarial antigen with homology to
vertebrate galactoside-binding proteins. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1994,
65:305-315.
62. Toscano MA, Commodaro AG, Ilarregui JM, Bianco GA, Liberman A,
Serra HM, Hirabayashi J, Rizzo LV, Rabinovich GA: Galectin-1 suppresses
autoimmune retinal disease by promoting concomitant Th2- and T
regulatory-mediated anti-inflammatory responses. J Immunol 2006,
176:6323-6332.
63. Katoh S, Ishii N, Nobumoto A, Takeshita K, Dai SY, Shinonaga R, Niki T,
Nishi N, Tominaga A, Yamauchi A, Hirashima M: Galectin-9 inhibits CD44hyaluronan interaction and suppresses a murine model of allergic
asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007, 176:27-35.
64. Kubach J, Lutter P, Bopp T, Stoll S, Becker C, Huter E, Richter C,
Weingarten P, Warger T, Knop J, Müllner S, Wijdenes J, Schild H, Schmitt E,
Jonuleit H: Human CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells: proteome analysis
identifies galectin-10 as a novel marker essential for their anergy and
suppressive function. Blood 2007, 110:1550-1558.
65. McKerrow JH, Sun E, Rosenthal PJ, Bouvier J: The proteases and
pathogenicity of parasitic protozoa. Annu Rev Microbiol 1993, 47:821-853.
66. Klemba M, Goldberg DE: Biological roles of proteases in parasitic
protozoa. Annu Rev Biochem 2002, 71:275-305.
67. Puthia MK, Vaithilingam A, Lu J, Tan KS: Degradation of human secretory
immunoglobulin A by Blastocystis. Parasitol Res 2005, 97:386-389.
68. Dalton JP, Brindley PJ, Donnelly S, Robinson MW: The enigmatic
asparaginyl endopeptidase of helminth parasites. Trends Parasitol 2009,
25:59-61.
69. Wu B, Yin J, Texier C, Roussel M, Tan KS: Blastocystis legumain is localized
on the cell surface, and specific inhibition of its activity implicates a prosurvival role for the enzyme. J Biol Chem 2010, 285:1790-1798.
70. Morita Y, Araki H, Sugimoto T, Takeuchi K, Yamane T, Maeda T,
Yamamoto Y, Nishi K, Asano M, Shirahama-Noda K, Nishimura M, Uzu T,
Hara-Nishimura I, Koya D, Kashiwagi A, Ohkubo I: Legumain/asparaginyl
endopeptidase controls extracellular matrix remodeling through the
degradation of fibronectin in mouse renal proximal tubular cells. FEBS
Lett 2007, 581:1417-1424.
71. Hartmann S, Lucius R: Modulation of host immune responses by
nematode cystatins. Int J Parasitol 2003, 33:1291-1302.
72. Martzen MR, Peanasky RJ: Ascaris suum: biosynthesis and isoinhibitor
profile of chymotrypsin/elastase isoinhibitors. Exp Parasitol 1985,
59:313-320.
73. Tarasuk M, Vichasri Grams S, Viyanant V, Grams R: Type I cystatin (stefin) is
a major component of Fasciola gigantica excretion/secretion product.
Mol Biochem Parasitol 2009, 167:60-71.
74. Manoury B, Gregory WF, Maizels RM, Watts C: Bm-CPI-2, a cystatin
homolog secreted by the filarial parasite Brugia malayi, inhibits class II
MHC-restricted antigen processing. Curr Biol 2001, 11:447-451.
75. Smith S, Tsai SC: The type I fatty acid and polyketide synthases: a tale of
two megasynthases. Nat Prod Rep 2007, 24:1041-1072.
76. Database for NRPS and PKS. [http://www.nii.res.in/searchall.html].
77. Yang G, Rose MS, Turgeon BG, Yoder OC: A polyketide synthase is
required for fungal virulence and production of the polyketide T-toxin.
Plant Cell 1996, 8:2139-2150.
78. Wintjens R, Noel C, May AC, Gerbod D, Dufernez F, Capron M, Viscogliosi E,
Rooman M: Specificity and phenetic relationships of iron- and

Page 15 of 16

79.
80.
81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.
89.

90.
91.
92.
93.
94.

95.
96.
97.
98.
99.

100.

101.

102.
103.

manganese-containing superoxide dismutases on the basis of structure
and sequence comparisons. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:9248-9254.
Muller S: Redox and antioxidant systems of the malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum. Mol Microbiol 2004, 53:1291-1305.
Muller S, Liebau E, Walter RD, Krauth-Siegel RL: Thiol-based redox
metabolism of protozoan parasites. Trends Parasitol 2003, 19:320-328.
Hirt RP, Muller S, Embley TM, Coombs GH: The diversity and evolution of
thioredoxin reductase: new perspectives. Trends Parasitol 2002,
18:302-308.
Krnajski Z, Gilberger TW, Walter RD, Cowman AF, Muller S: Thioredoxin
reductase is essential for the survival of Plasmodium falciparum
erythrocytic stages. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:25970-25975.
Krieger S, Schwarz W, Ariyanayagam MR, Fairlamb AH, Krauth-Siegel RL,
Clayton C: Trypanosomes lacking trypanothione reductase are avirulent
and show increased sensitivity to oxidative stress. Mol Microbiol 2000,
35:542-552.
Plewes KA, Barr SD, Gedamu L: Iron superoxide dismutases targeted to
the glycosomes of Leishmania chagasi are important for survival. Infect
Immun 2003, 71:5910-5920.
Wilkinson SR, Horn D, Prathalingam SR, Kelly JM: RNA interference
identifies two hydroperoxide metabolizing enzymes that are essential to
the bloodstream form of the african trypanosome. J Biol Chem 2003,
278:31640-31646.
Piacenza L, Alvarez MN, Peluffo G, Radi R: Fighting the oxidative assault:
the Trypanosoma cruzi journey to infection. Curr Opin Microbiol 2009,
12:415-421.
Sauvage V, Aubert D, Escotte-Binet S, Villena I: The role of ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) proteins in protozoan parasites. Mol Biochem Parasitol
2009, 167:81-94.
Pinilla AE, Lopez MC, Viasus DF: [History of the Entamoeba histolytica
protozoan]. Rev Med Chil 2008, 136:118-124.
Jaffe DB, Butler J, Gnerre S, Mauceli E, Lindblad-Toh K, Mesirov JP, Zody MC,
Lander ES: Whole-genome sequence assembly for mammalian genomes:
Arachne 2. Genome Res 2003, 13:91-96.
Chen N: Using RepeatMasker to identify repetitive elements in genomic
sequences. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics 2004, Chapter 4, Unit 4 10.
Benson G: Tandem repeats finder: a program to analyze DNA sequences.
Nucleic Acids Res 1999, 27:573-580.
Price AL, Jones NC, Pevzner PA: De novo identification of repeat families
in large genomes. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(Suppl 1):i351-358.
Kent WJ: BLAT - the BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome Res 2002,
12:656-664.
Bairoch A, Apweiler R, Wu CH, Barker WC, Boeckmann B, Ferro S,
Gasteiger E, Huang H, Lopez R, Magrane M, Martin MJ, Natale DA,
O’Donovan C, Redaschi N, Yeh LS: The Universal Protein Resource
(UniProt). Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:D154-159.
Birney E, Durbin R: Using GeneWise in the Drosophila annotation
experiment. Genome Res 2000, 10:547-548.
Parra G, Blanco E, Guigo R: GeneID in Drosophila. Genome Res 2000,
10:511-515.
Korf I: Gene finding in novel genomes. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:59.
Mott R: EST_GENOME: a program to align spliced DNA sequences to
unspliced genomic DNA. Comput Appl Biosci 1997, 13:477-478.
Howe KL, Chothia T, Durbin R: GAZE: a generic framework for the
integration of gene-prediction data by dynamic programming. Genome
Res 2002, 12:1418-1427.
Nozaki H, Takano H, Misumi O, Terasawa K, Matsuzaki M, Maruyama S,
Nishida K, Yagisawa F, Yoshida Y, Fujiwara T, Takio S, Tamura K, Chung SJ,
Nakamura S, Kuroiwa H, Tanaka K, Sato N, Kuroiwa T: A 100%-complete
sequence reveals unusually simple genomic features in the hot-spring
red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae. BMC Biol 2007, 5:28.
Armbrust EV, Berges JA, Bowler C, Green BR, Martinez D, Putnam NH,
Zhou S, Allen AE, Apt KE, Bechner M, Brzezinski MA, Chaal BK, Chiovitti A,
Davis AK, Demarest MS, Detter JC, Glavina T, Goodstein D, Hadi MZ,
Hellsten U, Hildebrand M, Jenkins BD, Jurka J, Kapitonov VV, Kröger N,
Lau WW, Lane TW, Larimer FW, Lippmeier JC, Lucas S, et al: The genome
of the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana: ecology, evolution, and
metabolism. Science 2004, 306:79-86.
GenomeQuest. [http://www.gene-it.com].
Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.

Denoeud et al. Genome Biology 2011, 12:R29
http://genomebiology.com/content/12/3/R29

Page 16 of 16

104. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced
time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
105. Philippe H: MUST, a computer package of Management Utilities for
Sequences and Trees. Nucleic Acids Res 1993, 21:5264-5272.
106. Guindon S, Dufayard JF, Lefort V, Anisimova M, Hordijk W, Gascuel O: New
algorithms and methods to estimate maximum-likelihood phylogenies:
assessing the performance of PhyML 3.0. Syst Biol 2010, 59:307-321.
107. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
108. Zdobnov EM, Apweiler R: InterProScan - an integration platform for the
signature-recognition methods in InterPro. Bioinformatics 2001,
17:847-848.
109. Claudel-Renard C, Chevalet C, Faraut T, Kahn D: Enzyme-specific profiles
for genome annotation: PRIAM. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31:6633-6639.
110. Kanehisa M, Goto S, Kawashima S, Nakaya A: The KEGG databases at
GenomeNet. Nucleic Acids Res 2002, 30:42-46.
111. MITOPROT. [http://ihg2.helmholtz-muenchen.de/ihg/mitoprot.html].
112. MITOPRED. [http://bioapps.rit.albany.edu/MITOPRED/].
113. KEGG Automatic Annotation Server. [http://www.genome.jp/kaas-bin/
kaas_main].
114. PSORT II Prediction. [http://psort.ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp/form2.html].
115. Nagaraj SH, Gasser RB, Ranganathan S: Needles in the EST haystack: largescale identification and analysis of excretory-secretory (ES) proteins in
parasitic nematodes using expressed sequence tags (ESTs). PLoS Negl
Trop Dis 2008, 2:e301.
doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-3-r29
Cite this article as: Denoeud et al.: Genome sequence of the
stramenopile Blastocystis, a human anaerobic parasite. Genome Biology
2011 12:R29.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
