<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>BLAST-EXPLORER helps you building datasets for phylogenetic analysis</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:8. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-8"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Alexis Dereeper"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Dereeper et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/8

SOFTWARE

Open Access

BLAST-EXPLORER helps you building datasets for
phylogenetic analysis
Alexis Dereeper1,2, Stephane Audic1, Jean-Michel Claverie1, Guillaume Blanc1*

Abstract
Background: The right sampling of homologous sequences for phylogenetic or molecular evolution analyses is a
crucial step, the quality of which can have a significant impact on the final interpretation of the study. There is no
single way for constructing datasets suitable for phylogenetic analysis, because this task intimately depends on the
scientific question we want to address, Moreover, database mining softwares such as BLAST which are routinely
used for searching homologous sequences are not specifically optimized for this task.
Results: To fill this gap, we designed BLAST-Explorer, an original and friendly web-based application that combines
a BLAST search with a suite of tools that allows interactive, phylogenetic-oriented exploration of the BLAST results
and flexible selection of homologous sequences among the BLAST hits. Once the selection of the BLAST hits is
done using BLAST-Explorer, the corresponding sequence can be imported locally for external analysis or passed to
the phylogenetic tree reconstruction pipelines available on the Phylogeny.fr platform.
Conclusions: BLAST-Explorer provides a simple, intuitive and interactive graphical representation of the BLAST
results and allows selection and retrieving of the BLAST hit sequences based a wide range of criterions. Although
BLAST-Explorer primarily aims at helping the construction of sequence datasets for further phylogenetic study, it
can also be used as a standard BLAST server with enriched output. BLAST-Explorer is available at http://www.
phylogeny.fr

Background
The reconstruction of phylogenetic trees from molecular
sequences has become a routine task not only for specialists involved in molecular evolution or systematics
but also for biologists working on their favourite gene/
protein family or annotating new genome sequences.
The growing interest for phylogenetic information has
stimulated the emergence of new integrated, userfriendly software that produce robust trees using sophisticated methods while remaining accessible to non-specialists. Developers concentrated most of their effort on
improving the speed, accuracy and versatility of the
algorithms proposed for reconstructing phylogenetic
trees from user-defined sets of homologous (ancestrally
related) sequences. However, albeit choosing a good
initial sequence dataset is crucial to the validity of

* Correspondence: blanc@igs.cnrs-mrs.fr
1
Information Génomique & Structurale - CNRS-UPR2589, Institut de
Microbiologie de la Méditerranée - IFR 88, 163 Avenue de Luminy, 13009
Marseille, France

subsequent phylogenetic analyses, this step has been largely overlooked in recent software developments.
There is no single way for constructing datasets suitable for phylogenetic analysis, because this task intimately
depends on the scientific question we want to address.
For example, biologists may be concerned by the taxonomic range of sequences, reduction of long-branch
attraction effect, presence of paralogues, orthologues,
pseudo-genes and/or multi-domain proteins, etc. Failure
in the constitution of datasets can lead to draw incorrect
conclusion from phylogenetic studies. Tools have been
specifically designed to distinguish between orthologous
and paralogous in genome/proteome datasets [1] and
expressed sequence tag datasets [2,3], but they not
always the most convenient for punctual analyses.
A frequent scenario in research is a biologist having a
particular sequence of interest in hands that needs to
find other sequences that are related to it in sequence
databases to create a phylogenetic tree. The Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) [4] is the most widely
used set of programs for this purpose, primarily owing

© 2010 Dereeper et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Dereeper et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/8

to its speed of execution. However, the information presented in the traditional BLAST output is not optimized
for selecting and retrieving items for further phylogenetic study. For example the ranking of the identified
matches in function of the alignment scores do not
reflect accurately the evolutionary distances between the
query and matching sequences (subject sequences). This
is mainly because the BLAST scoring scheme has bias
favouring hits that have smaller or no gaps (keep hits as
single, long, high-scoring local alignments) over hits
with long gaps (provoke the split of hits in multiple,
short, low-scoring local alignments). Furthermore,
BLAST results only show the levels of divergence
between the query sequence and each of the individual
matches but not between pairs of matching sequences.
Yet this information is important when one wants to
control sequence diversity in the phylogenetic dataset (e.
g., avoiding over-sampling of sequences arising from the
same taxon). Many features of individual alignments are
useful for sampling homologous sequences (e.g., alignment coverage, level of similarity, etc) but their organization and accessibility across the BLAST result page do
not facilitate their interpretation.
To fill this gap, we created BLAST-Explorer. This
web-based resource combines a fast parallelized BLAST
search with a suite of tools that allows an interactive
exploration of the BLAST results and the easy selection
of a suitable subset of homologous sequences. The traditional BLAST output is entirely reformatted to highlight
phylogeny-relevant information and augmented with
new features not provided by BLAST (taxonomy information, multiple alignments and similarity trees).
BLAST hits can be selected either individually or in
bulk using various criterions. Selected items can then be
imported locally as fasta-formated sequences or passed
to one of the phylogenetic tree reconstruction pipelines
available on the Phylogeny.fr platform [5].

Implementation
Initial BLAST search

Blast searches are parallelized on an in-house 25-node
Linux cluster (50 CPUs) and accept either proteins or
nucleic acids as query. Searches can be done using the
BLASTP (protein against protein database) or BLASTN
(nucleotides against nucleotide database) algorithms.
The TBLASTN (amino-acids against a 6-frames translated nucleotides database) and BLASTX (translated
nucleotides against a protein database) algorithms are
also proposed but in this case, subsequent analyses (i.e.,
similarity tree and multiple sequence alignment) are carried out at the protein level. The use of TBLASTX is
not proposed because its output is not manageable in
subsequent post-processing (e.g., alignments in overlapping non-coding reading frames). Protein and nucleotide

Page 2 of 6

sequence databases are updated at monthly interval. The
parallelization of the Blast searches is done as follows: in
a first step, each compute node aligns the query
sequence against a distinct subdivision of the selected
sequence database using the specified BLAST program.
Then the resulting hit sequences on each node are gathered together in a smaller database which is searched
again in a second BLAST run for formatting the final
output. In each BLAST run, the effective size of the
generic database (i.e., NR, NT, etc.) is specified using
the -z flag to allow accurate calculation of the alignment
E-value.
BLAST output post-processing

The Blast output is parsed to collect various features
(scores, pairwise alignments, sequence annotations,
sequence identification numbers, e-values). For each hit,
taxonomic information (species and lineage) is retrieved
from a weekly updated local copy of the NCBI Taxonomy database ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/. The
Blast output is entirely redesigned such that the information most relevant to phylogenetic analysis becomes
easily accessible. Menu panels and images of the similarity tree and tiling diagrams (see below) are also
included.
Construction of the similarity tree

This tool provides a phylogenetic-oriented graphical display of the BLAST results. First, a pseudo multiplesequence alignment (MSA) of the query and BLAST hit
sequences is created by parsing the standard BLAST output: individual BLAST-aligned hit sequences are piled up
by positioning each residue relative to its homologue in
the query sequence (high scoring pairs [HSP] stacking).
Multiple non-overlapping HSPs for a same hit are concatenated; regions of the hit sequence not aligned with the
query sequence are substituted with gaps. When duplicated domains are present in the hit sequence, each
repeat unit produces a HSP with the homologous region
in the query sequence. In this case, only the repeat unit
contained in the highest scoring pair is included in the
MSA (i.e., repeated domains with lower alignment scores
are not considered in the alignment). Although pseudo
MSAs may be less accurate than MSAs created by conventional programs (i.e., ClustalW, Muscle, etc.), we
chose this option because it is much faster for large datasets (up to 5000 hit sequences).
This pseudo MSA is passed to ClustalW, which produces a similarity (p-distance) tree using the “-tree”
option. This tree is built with the neighbor-joining
method, using either all sites of the alignment or gapfree sites only, depending on the user choice. A picture
of the similarity tree is generated by the TreeDyn program, using the “reporting annotations” functions for
color-coding. This image is incorporated into the new
HTML Blast output together with a map of embedded

Dereeper et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/8

Javascript actions allowing the mouse-click selection of
hits.
Implementation

The Blast Explorer web interface and scripts are implemented in CGI/Perl. The interactive web page is powered by the Javascript and AJAX technologies. The
HTML pages are best viewed on a 19-inches (or larger)
screen.

Results and discussion
Running BLAST-Explorer

The entry page of BLAST-EXPLORER is a simplified
BLAST form that receive a single fasta-formated query
sequence as input and allows (i) the selection of
BLASTN, BLASTP, TBLASTN, or BLASTX [4] as an
alignment algorithm, (ii) the selection of a sequence
database (Genbank NT for nucleotides; Genbank Non
Redundant Protein, Ensembl, PDB, RefSeq, Uniprot and
Swissprot for proteins), (iii) the selection of a BLAST EValue threshold and (iv) the option of filtering out lowcomplexity sequence segments. BLAST searches report
a maximum of 5,000 hits.
Small scale selection mode

By default, the result page only shows the top-100 scoring BLAST hits, while the remaining hits are kept in
memory and can be activated using the large-scale selection tools (next section). Small-scale selection tools only
apply on the top-100 scoring BLAST hits. The central
tool in this mode is the sequence similarity tree that
provides an approximate picture of the phylogenetic
relationships between the query and the top BLAST hits
(Fig. 1A). BLAST hits are renamed according to the species name. The similarity tree is documented with metainformation including hit description (Fig. 1B), alignment coverage (Fig. 1C), taxonomy-based coloring (Fig.
1D). The tree image allows a navigation across the
BLAST result page (clicking on an alignment coverage
bar [Fig. 1C] leads to the corresponding pairwise alignment [Fig. 1E]), gives access to the database record (by
clicking on the hit name), as well as to the selection of
individual hits (check-boxes) or in bulk (by clicking on
internal branches).
A dropdown menu (Fig. 1F) gives access to additional
small-scale selection tools:
o The top-panel shows the number of gap-free sites
in the BLAST-reconstructed multiple-alignment of
selected sequences (see supplementary data). This
number is dynamically updated when BLAST hits
are added or removed from the selection.
o The “score histogram” tool shows the BLAST
score values ranked in decreasing order. A score
threshold can be applied by clicking on the histogram (e.g., Fig. 1G).

Page 3 of 6

o Two “Update tree” options allow redrawing the
similarity tree by setting the appropriate number of
top-scoring BLAST hits or using a user-defined
sequence selection. The tree is generated by combining ClustalW [6] and TreeDyn [7] using either all
sites of the BLAST-reconstructed multiple-alignment
or gap-free sites only (N.B., the initial tree is computed using all sites).
o The “Add sequences to tree” option allow incorporating up to five external sequences (supplied by
users) into the current hit sequence selection. The
similarity tree is then recalculated to show the phylogenetic position of the external sequences relative
to the BLAST hit sequences.
At the end of the selection process, selected sequences
can be imported in fasta format ("get selected sequence”
button) or passed to one of the phylogenetic reconstruction pipelines available on the phylogeny.fr platform [5]
("One click mode” or “Advanced mode” buttons).
Large-scale selection mode

In the large-scale selection mode, several tools allow the
sampling of homologous sequences among the entire set
of BLAST hits (including those that are not shown in
the top-100 BLAST subset) using global criterions. They
are grouped in a dedicated panel (Fig. 1H) and comprise:
o A pull-down menu that allows changing the evalue threshold on BLAST hits
o Buttons showing the distributions of the BLAST
hits according to three BLAST alignment statistics
(i.e., BLAST scores, percentage of similarity, and
alignment coverage). Bulk selection among the
BLAST hits can then be done by selecting intervals
of the distribution histogram.
o The “selection on taxonomy” tool enabling the
selection of BLAST hits according to their taxonomic rank (e.g., Fig. 1I). The taxonomic information is presented as a hierarchical graph allowing
users to adjust the level of details that is relevant to
their needs.
Following the application of the selection rules, the
result page (i.e., the similarity tree and individual pairwise alignments) is updated to account for changes in
the list of the top-100 best BLAST.
Comparison with existing software

Several existing BLAST post-processors combine BLAST
searches with automated phylogenetic analysis of the
BLAST hits. However most of them do not pursue the
same goal and therefore differ in the nature of the
results. Also, the functionalities proposed to interact
with the results vary greatly. Some of the applications

Dereeper et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/8

Page 4 of 6

Figure 1 BLAST-Explorer main interface. BLAST-Explorer main interface showing the similarity tree (A), hit descriptions (B), a coverage diagram
representing the alignment of the hit sequences on the query (C), the taxonomy color code (D), individual BLAST pairwise alignments (E), the
small-scale (F) and large-scale (H) selection tool panels. The “Score histogram” tool (G) and “Selection on taxonomy” tool (I) are given as
examples.

Dereeper et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/8

allow filtering of the BLAST hits before phylogenetic
reconstruction, others do not.
Phylogena is a standalone application for phylogenetic
annotation of unknown sequences [8] and implements
an automated intelligent filtering of BLAST hits before
phylogenetic reconstruction. In contrast with BLASTExplorer, the hit filtering method is optimized for
sequence annotation and do not enable interactive and
progressive refinement of the sequence dataset. Furthermore Phylogena does not allow retrieving the selected
sequences for external analysis.
Phylogenie is also a standalone application for automated phylome generation and analysis [9]. Because the
principal force of Phylogenie is to automatically produce
a large number of phylogenetic analyses in batch, it
does not allow interactive filtering of BLAST hits before
phylogenetic reconstruction. Phylogenie is a commandline driven pipeline, requiring at least some familiarity
with UNIX and command line tools.
Phyloblast [10] and the NCBI BLAST server [11] are
two web services that have the most in common with
BLAST-Explorer. They produce an enriched BLAST
output and allow selection of hits using various criterions. The Phyloblast server is apparently no longer
maintained. Phyloblast only allowed comparing a protein
sequence against a protein database using BLASTP
whereas BLAST-Explorer allows nucleotide/nucleotide,
protein/protein and translated nucleotide/protein comparisons. Tools for selecting hits before phylogenetic
reconstruction are less versatile than those proposed by
BLAST-Explorer (selection based on species names and
sequence description). The NCBI BLAST service also
provides several tools for selecting and retrieving matching sequences from the BLAST output; a distance tree
of the BLAST hits can also be calculated. Here again
the hit selection tools are more limited than in BLASTExplorer (simple check boxes beside sequence descriptions). Furthermore the image of the distance tree does
not allow interactive selection of the BLAST hits. This
makes selection on phylogenetic criterion less
straightforward.
The principal strength of BLAST-Explorer is the flexibility of the sequence selection process and the richness
of the information displayed on screen. However,
BLAST-Explorer does not propose pre-defined automated methods of hit selection such as for example in
Phylogena. Rather, BLAST hit selection is multi-dimensional and mainly human-driven though an interactive
graphical interface in order to respond to a wide range
of sequence selection strategies. Another feature that
differentiates BLAST-Explorer from other software is
that it is entirely web-based. Thus no installation on
personal computer and no regular update of the
sequence databases are required.

Page 5 of 6

The BLAST-Explorer output includes a phylogenetic
representation of the BLAST hits (i.e., the similarity
tree) that aims at helping in the hit selection process. It
is important to note that this tree is not optimized for
phylogenetic accuracy. Rather, we opted for a fast tree
reconstruction strategy that is however sufficiently
robust for providing an approximate phylogenetic position of the BLAST hits. Thus we advise users to use
external specialized software if they want to improve or
confirm the accuracy of the phylogenetic tree.
Finally, it is important to note that in some phylogenetic aspect, the the importance is a correct distinction
between orthologous and paralogous sequences

Conclusions
BLAST-Explorer provides a simple, intuitive and interactive graphical representation of the BLAST results
that can greatly help biologists in building their
sequence datasets prior to phylogenetic studies.
Availability and requirements
• Project name: BLAST-Explorer
• Project home page: http://www.phylogeny.fr
(direct link: http://www.phylogeny.fr/version2_cgi/
one_task.cgi?task_type=blast).
• Operating system(s): Platform independent
• Programming language: Perl/CGI, javascript
• Other requirements: best viewed on a 19-inches
(or larger) screen
• Any restrictions to use by non-academics: None
Acknowledgements
This project was supported by fundings from the ‘Réseau National des
Génopoles’ (RNG), “Infrastructures en Biologie Santé et Agronomie” (GISIBISA). and CNRS.
Author details
Information Génomique Structurale - CNRS-UPR2589, Institut de
Microbiologie de la Méditerranée - IFR 88, 163 Avenue de Luminy, 13009
Marseille, France. 2Current Address: INRA - UMR 1097, DIA-PC “Diversité et
adaptation des Plantes Cultivées”, 2 Place P. Viala, 34060 Montpelllier France.
1

Authors’ contributions
AD carried out most of the programming work and drafted the manuscript.
SA participated in the programming. JMC participated in the design and
coordination of the project and drafted the manuscript. GB conceived of the
study, and participated in its design and coordination, participated in the
programming and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Received: 25 August 2009
Accepted: 12 January 2010 Published: 12 January 2010
References
1. Chen F, Mackey AJ, Vermunt JK, Roos DS: Assessing performance of
orthology detection strategies applied to eukaryotic genomes. PLoS One
2007, 2(4).

Dereeper et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/8

Page 6 of 6

2.

Ebersberger I, Strauss S, von Haeseler A: HaMStR: Profile hidden markov
model based search for orthologs in ESTs. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2009,
9(1):157.
3. Schreiber F, Pick K, Erpenbeck D, Worheide G, Morgenstern B: OrthoSelect:
a protocol for selecting orthologous groups in phylogenomics. BMC
Bioinformatics 2009, 10(1):219.
4. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
5. Dereeper A, Guignon V, Blanc G, Audic S, Buffet S, Chevenet F, Dufayard JF,
Guindon S, Lefort V, Lescot M, et al: Phylogeny.fr: robust phylogenetic
analysis for the non-specialist. Nucl Acids Res 2008, , 36 Web Server:
W465-469.
6. Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ: CLUSTAL W: improving the
sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through
sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix
choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994, 22(22):4673-4680.
7. Chevenet F, Brun C, Banuls AL, Jacq B, Christen R: TreeDyn: towards
dynamic graphics and annotations for analyses of trees. BMC
Bioinformatics 2006, 7:439.
8. Hanekamp K, Bohnebeck U, Beszteri B, Valentin K: PhyloGena–a userfriendly system for automated phylogenetic annotation of unknown
sequences. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(7):793.
9. Frickey T, Lupas AN: PhyloGenie: automated phylome generation and
analysis. Nucl Acids Res 2004, 32(17):5231-5238.
10. Brinkman FSL, Wan I, Hancock REW, Rose AM, Jones SJ: PhyloBLAST:
facilitating phylogenetic analysis of BLAST results. Oxford Univ Press
2001, 17:385-387.
11. Wheeler DL, Barrett T, Benson DA, Bryant SH, Canese K, Chetvernin V,
Church DM, DiCuccio M, Edgar R, Federhen S: Database resources of the
national center for biotechnology information. Nucleic acids research 2007,
, 35 Database: D5.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-8
Cite this article as: Dereeper et al.: BLAST-EXPLORER helps you building
datasets for phylogenetic analysis. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:8.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

BioMedcentral

</pre>
</body>
</html>
