<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2180-2-33.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Microbiology
BMC Microbiology
2002,
2

Research article

BioMed Central

Open Access

x

Colony shape as a genetic trait in the pattern-forming Bacillus
mycoides
Carmen Di Franco1, Elena Beccari*2, Tiziana Santini1, Giuseppe Pisaneschi2
and Giorgio Tecce1
Address: 1Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Università La Sapienza, P. le A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy and 2Centro di Studio per
gli Acidi Nucleici CNR, c/o Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Università La Sapienza, P. le A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy
E-mail: Carmen Di Franco - carmen.difranco@uniroma1.it; Elena Beccari* - elena.beccari@uniroma1.it; Tiziana Santini - tarxien@tin.it;
Giuseppe Pisaneschi - giuseppe.pisaneschi@uniroma1.it; Giorgio Tecce - veniero@katamail.com
*Corresponding author

Published: 13 November 2002
BMC Microbiology 2002, 2:33

Received: 31 July 2002
Accepted: 13 November 2002

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33
© 2002 Di Franco et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This article is published in Open Access: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: Bacillus mycoides Flügge, a Gram-positive, non-motile soil bacterium assigned to
Bacillus cereus group, grows on agar as chains of cells linked end to end, forming radial filaments
curving clock- or counter-clockwise (SIN or DX morphotypes). The molecular mechanism causing
asymmetric curving is not known: our working hypothesis considers regulation of filamentous
growth as the prerequisite for these morphotypes.
Results: SIN and DX strains isolated from the environment were classified as B. mycoides by
biochemical and molecular biology tests. Growth on agar of different hardness and nutrient
concentration did not abolish colony patterns, nor was conversion between SIN and DX
morphotypes ever noticed. A number of morphotype mutants, all originating from one SIN strain,
were obtained. Some lost turn direction becoming fluffy, others became round and compact. All
mutants lost wild type tight aggregation in liquid culture. Growth on agar was followed by
microscopy, exploring the process of colony formation and details of cell divisions. A region of the
dcw (division cell wall) cluster, including ftsQ, ftsA, ftsZ and murC, was sequenced in DX and SIN
strains as a basis for studying cell division. This confirmed the relatedness of DX and SIN strains
to the B. cereus group.
Conclusions: DX and SIN asymmetric morphotypes stem from a close but not identical genomic
context. Asymmetry is established early during growth on agar. Wild type bacilli construct mostly
uninterrupted filaments with cells dividing at the free ends: they "walk" longer distances compared
to mutants, where enhanced frequency of cell separation produces new growing edges resulting in
round compact colonies.

Background
Bacteria growing on agar plates display a variety of colony
forms called "patterns" or "morphotypes" [1,2]. Colony
pattern, an important taxonomic element for early micro-

biologists, is the first step of differentiation occurring in a
population of individuals otherwise identical. Advantages
stemming from multicellularity and patterned growth in
bacteria are several: increased proliferation due to easier
Page 1 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

diffusion of positive growth signals and from coordination of biochemical activities; access to nutrients that
could not be reached by single individuals and collective
defense against adverse conditions [3].
Formation of bacterial colonies was analyzed by mathematical models as an example of complexity in open systems. Variables such as cyclic production of
chemoattractants and chemorepellents, due to the
amount of available nutrients or waste, were considered.
Long range chemical signalling such as quorum sensing
and production of secreted wetting fluid, all contribute to
form the final colony shape [4].
One example of bacterial colony with a sort of "differentiation" is that of the well studied filamentous bacterium
Streptomyces: it is made by rarely septated substrate hyphae
and by an aerial mycelium divided into compartments,
each producing a spore [5,6].
The colony shape starting from one or a few cells is usually
symmetric but exceptions are found: asymmetric growth
of bacteria produces chiral and vortex forms of the colony
as in Paenibacillus dendritiformis[7]. Asymmetry at the macroscopic level results from chirality of flagella of this bacillus [4,8]. A multiple mutant of Bacillus subtilis also
produces macrofibers with right or left-handed supercoiling. This interesting phenomenon is not due to handedness of moving flagella, but to twisting of cells that do not
completely separate one from the other after septum formation [9,10]. Rudner et al. [2] suggested that emergence
of patterns in B. subtilis cultures was due to other grampositive bacteria co-existing, in very low amounts, with B.
subtilis strains. These symbionts are distinguished into tipsplitting, chiral and spiral-vortex growing and belong to
group I bacilli, as grouped by Priest [11], named B. alvei,
B. macerans, B. popillae (now included into the genus
Paenibacillus) and B. circulans.
Colonies of a soil bacillus were perhaps the first to attract
attention of microbiologists for their peculiar asymmetric
hairy shape, made by bundles of filaments curving clockor counterclockwise even if coming from the same species, as biochemical and physical properties indicated.
The elaborated chiral colony pattern belongs to Bacillus
mycoides, first described by Flügge in 1886. The author
called the species "mycoides" due to fungal-like growth
on agar plates of these rod bacilli as chains of cells forming filaments projecting radially and curving to the left or
to the right. The molecular basis of the turn direction of
filaments was puzzling for observers and chirality of these
colonies was regarded as a procaryotic example of the diffuse asymmetry of organs in the animal and plant world.
Gause [12] compared the physiology of dextral and sinistral strains finding that they shared metabolic properties,

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

with some exceptions, for instance the ability to hydrolyze
sucrose. He reported no conversion between dextral and
sinistral orientations. Hypothesis was advanced that turn
direction of filaments could be a consequence of an asymmetric distribution of the elastic structures of the cell wall,
inducing twisting of the growing filaments upon unequal
pressure of the internal turgor on the external envelope.
After these early studies, very little new data about the subject appeared.
We wanted to revisit the problem of how asymmetry is established in B. mycoides studying genetics of colony formation. The aim was to understand the molecular
mechanism leading to the onset of the asymmetric morphotype. DX and SIN strains were isolated from the environment since the Type B. mycoides strain that we first
obtained from a culture collection (Bacillus cereus var. mycoides, Institute Pasteur #6452) had lost colony turn direction. The two forms of B. mycoides were characterized by
biochemical and molecular biology assays that confirmed
their classification.
Given similarity of colony shape, except for curving direction, the expectation was to find a common genetic background for the two morphotypes, with one or more sets of
different genes, specifying the left or the right-handed curvature. On the contrary, the experiments described below,
that evidenced different ribotyping and numerous base
differences in the "housekeeping" dcw genic and intergenic regions sequenced, made clear that the left and righthanded strains did not stem from the same genome.
Therefore we concentrated on the common genetic basis
essential for constructing the hairy colony, that is filament
making, looking for mutants of this character.

Results
Strains
We started by isolating B. mycoides strains from the wild. A
soil sample from the Department garden was diluted into
sterile water and plated on agar plates. Among colonies of
several microorganisms, filamentous colonies as described for B. mycoides[12,13] were found. Most displayed
projections curving to the left hand (SIN), as seen from
the bottom of agar plates, and fewer to the right hand
(DX). Since colonies are in general observed from the bottom of the agar plate, due to vapor fuzziness under the lid,
the names (DX-dextral and SIN-sinistral) were given to
colonies seen in this way. On the agar surface the opposite
is visible, that is DX filaments are curving counter-clockwise and SIN clockwise. Isolated single colonies were inoculated in liquid and solid media and two strains were
selected for study. Colonies of the two forms are shown in
Fig. 1.

Page 2 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

Figure 1
Colonies of Bacillus mycoides environmental strains. Colonies are formed by bacillar cells linked end to end in filaments
running as bundles with a genetically determined curvature direction. At the left, DX, with projections curving clockwise and at
the right, SIN96, with opposite curvature. Colonies are named as they are seen from bottom of the plate. Strains were grown
at room temperature for 30 h on 1.5% agar TS plates. Scale bar = 1 cm.

Positioning of the Petri dish at different angles towards
the bench top did not change colony geometry of the
strains. Experiments were conducted to see if curvature direction could be modified by a reduced gravity (microgravity). For this purpose colonies were grown on agar
Petri dishes subjected to conditions of simulated microgravity, tied to the revolving plane of a three-dimensional
clinostat. No modification of the colony patterns was observed (unpublished results).

Figure 2
PCR amplification of a band diagnostic for Bacillus
cereus group. Total DNA of a panel of Gram-positive bacilli
was amplified with primers producing a 749 bp band (arrow)
specific for members of B. cereus group, according to Daffonchio et al. [15]. (a) B. subtilis strain BD366, as a negative control, (b) B. mycoides SIN, (c) B. mycoides DX, (d) B. mycoides
NRRL NRS-273T, (e) B. pseudomycoides NRRL B-617T, (f) B.
thuringiensis BGSC 4D1, (g) B. cereus var. mycoides Pasteur
6452. M: EcoRI-HindIII digested phage λ DNA.

Since we were dealing with environmental isolates, we
used the RAPD (Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA)
test to confirm by a molecular marker that strains belonged to B. cereus group. This group is composed by B.
cereus, B. thuringiensis, B. anthracis and B. mycoides[14]. Total DNA was amplified from our isolates and from B. mycoides NRRL NRS 273T, B. pseudomycoides NRRL B-617T, B.
thuringiensis BGSC 4D1, B. cereus Pasteur 6452 and B. subtilis BD366 (as a negative control), using the same primers. Primers had been designed as diagnostic for B. cereus
group and negative for a panel of Bacilli[15]. We found the
expected specific 749 bp band in all strains, except for B.
subtilis (Fig. 2).
Biochemical features of the new isolates were analyzed,
along with B. mycoides Type strain, with the API50CH test

Page 3 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

(bioMerieux) that monitors 50 different enzymatic reactions using sugars as substrates. SIN and DX enzymatic activities were in the range indicated by the test for B.
mycoides. A few minor differences of color intensity between SIN and DX were in the variability range reported
for B. mycoides species (not shown). As in the case of the
strains studied by Gause [12] our SIN strain was unable to
hydrolyze sucrose.
Several growth conditions were tested to check for colony
morphotype stability. Different liquid and solid media
(see Materials and Methods) all supported growth of the
isolated strains and their specific colony pattern. Media at
pH values ranging from 4.0 to 9.0 were tested: up to pH
5.0 the strains are unable to grow, nor do they resume
growth when transferred to standard conditions. At pH
5.6 and over they can grow, the preferred range being between 6 and 8.5.
Temperature range for DX and SIN growth was also analyzed. Both divide from 6°C to 37°C, with an optimum at
26–28°C. 38°C exert a bactericidal effect on DX, but not
on SIN, which can survive, though not divide, up to 42°C,
some cells being able to restart growth at lower temperature. Temperature over 35°C is deleterious for colony
shape: both DX and SIN reduce filament length and at
37°C no turn direction is observed.
In liquid media the typical morphology of SIN and DX is
an aggregated phenotype: bacilli form small round
clumps when well agitated and a single big clump when
kept still. The surrounding liquid is clear and the aggregates can be disrupted only by very vigorous vortexing
(Fig. 3).
The SIN and DX strains were analyzed for the presence of
natural plasmids: two were found in SIN, 9.2 and 3.5 kb
in length, while DX harboured 4 plasmids, 13.8, 10.5,
10.0, and 3.3 kb long. The smallest plasmids of the two
strains were cloned and sequenced (EMBL acc.#AJ243967
and AJ272266). They belong to rolling circle replicating
plasmids commonly found in Gram-positive bacilli. Regions homologous to single-strand and double-strand origins of replication (ss-ori and ds-ori) of B. cereus group
plasmids are present. Open reading frames showing similarity to Rep and Mob proteins of many bacteria are
present in both plasmids in the same position and orientation [16].
A derivative of SIN called SIN96, which lost the larger
plasmid but kept wild type morphotype, was the starting
strain for the search of morphotype mutants.

Figure 3
Mutant B. mycoides SIN strains loose aggregation in
liquid culture. Wild type strains (left) grow forming aggregated clumps absent in mutants (right).

Morphotypes of the SIN strain
The first spontaneous mutant was a SIN strain that lost
turn direction of the filaments on agar plates and aggregation in liquid culture (Fig. 3). Similar non-aggregated
morphotypes appeared at enhanced frequency by culturing in liquid with Novobiocin, a drug used to cure strains
of the endogenous plasmids [17]. Morphotypes were
found to fall into two main types: colonies with no turn
direction of macroscopic protrusions, but still rhizoidal
(that we define "cotton-like" due to their fluffy appearance), and colonies with a round and compact shape, similar to those of B. cereus. One example is SINett, followed
by light and electron microscopy during colony formation. Other mutants, occurring only once during screening, were: CIC, which neither lost aggregation in liquid
culture, nor turn direction of the filaments, but had shorter and thicker trunks and CAD, no more rhizoidal, with
reduced adherence to agar (Fig. 4). SIN96, with wild type
morphotype, is in the center of Fig. 4 and some morphotype mutants at the periphery. All were inoculated at the

Page 4 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

Figure 4
Colony mutants derived from SIN96 strain. Strains
were grown on 1.5% agar medium for 50 hours at 25°C. The
colony in the center is SIN96, with wild type morphotype
and mutants at the periphery: 1) SINett, 2) CAD, 3) CIC, 4–
6) cotton-like colonies.

same time with the same cell numbers. The reduced degree of space colonization of the mutants compared to
wild type is apparent. Closer inspection showed that apparently similar mutants differ one from the other, mostly
among cotton-like colonies, as shown in Fig. 5.
Mutant colonies were checked for ribosomal DNA EcoRI
restriction pattern (ribotyping) to ascertain strain lineage
and lack of gross genomic rearrangements. Location of ribosomal clusters inside the genome gives a reproducible
pattern of restriction bands which is useful to trace single
colonies as belonging to the same strain [2]. EcoRI digested total DNA was hybridized to a synthetic oligonucleotide chosen in the very conserved part of 16S rDNA of
group I Bacilli [18]. In Fig. 6, ribotyping of several Bacillus
strains shows that they differ for many bands, while all of
the mutant colonies derived from SIN96 maintain the parental pattern.
Formation of colonies on agar
With the help of an optic microscope we could follow colony formation starting from one or a few cells seeded on
agar plates. Figures 7, 8 and 9 show a series of pictures
which depict colony formation of wild type SIN and DX
strains and of the SIN mutant with round compact colonies, SINett. We examined large numbers of colonies during growth and the examples in the panels reflect the
typical pattern of each strain.

Figure 5
Colony mutants. a) SINett, b) CIC with shorter and
thicker trunks, c-d-e-f) cotton like-mutants with different
texture and color. Scale bar = 1 cm.

Wild type SIN is shown in Fig. 7. A lag period of 1–4 hours
usually follows seeding of single colony forming units:
here, a filament containing a few cells is visible after about
two hours (Fig. 7/2). In this colony a ramification, due to
a new cell growing from a splitting of the filament, and an
angle appeared (shown by arrows in Fig. 7/2). These were
the reference points that, by remaining at the same mutual
distance, made clear that growth was due to division of
the edge cells only. In fact, the number of cells remains the
same inside the central structure (see insets of Fig. 7/4 and
7/5). After 5 hours (Fig. 7/6) a curvature appears at both
edges, typically turning clockwise. At later times new filaments running parallel to the previous ones arise at breakage points between two adjacent cells. Others start at an
angle with the founder filament and expand towards empty spaces. After 10 hours many filaments run in parallel
with the main trunk and new curly trunks are present on
the plate.

Page 5 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

Colony formation of these two wild type strains follows
the rule of leaving the initial location on the agar surface
towards a centrifugal direction, mostly by division of the
outer cells.
The mutant SINett behaves differently (Fig. 9). At first
cells divide in a linear array like the wild type, but, after a
short time, cells internal to the string divide creating tensions that make cell edges detach one from the other and
form ruptures that become new growing edges. The process is repeated again and again, to fill all of the space close
to the founder filament until it is completely covered. No
growth occurs at the outer cells of the first filament which
remain at about the same distance. The cells that remain
outside the growing mass are often subjected to autolysis,
leaving the colony borders without projections (Fig. 10).

Figure 6
Ribotyping in Bacillus strains. A blot of EcoRI digested
total DNA was hybridized by a probe specific for an evolutionarily conserved region of 16S rRNA. Various members of
the B. cereus group show different patterns: lane 1, B.
mycoides ATCC 6462T; lane 2, B. mycoides DX; lane 3, B. pseudomycoides NRRL B-617T; lane 4, B. mycoides NRRL NRS-273;
lane 5, B. thuringiensis BGSC 4D; lane 6, B. mycoides SIN.
Mutant strains all derived from SIN96, with identical patterns: lane 7, B. mycoides SINett; lane 8, CAD; lane 9, CIC;
lane 10–13 cotton-like mutants.

Fig. 8 shows a DX colony. As for SIN, the filament grows
from the edges, that both curve counterclockwise. The first
ramification occurs at later times (Fig. 8/5). Insets show
one mode of rupture formation: a filament following the
upper ramification first bends and then breaks forming
two growing points that eventually duplicate the founder
filament and the ramification. In Fig. 8/6 additional ramifications appear and the circle is formed with more than
one filament (see insets). In Fig. 8/7 many filaments follow the road opened by the founder filament and many
lateral filaments emerge. After 16 hours (Fig. 8/8) the initial shape of the founder filament is still recognizable, together with new big trunks with the strain specific
curvature. In Fig. 8/9, at 72 hours, the plate surface is completely covered.

Scanning electron microscopy
B. mycoides colonies on agar were observed also at the
scanning electron microscope. SIN96, with wild type morphotype, is shown in Fig. 11. Migration of many filaments
out of the colony mass is apparent at low magnification in
Fig. 11a. Details of the same region are shown in b, c, d, e,
f. Cells at the growing edge move in two different ways.
Some cross one over the other following independent
routes (11 b) while others converge along the way (11c).
Filaments can join and then separate, resembling motorway junctions (Fig. 11d). No twisting of filaments one
around the other, nor of cells around their axis is visible,
even at high magnification (Fig. 11e and 11f).

Morphology of the mutant SINett on agar is shown in Fig.
12. The shape of an entire colony, made by filaments
forming parallel wavy bundles around the colony center,
is visible in Fig. 12a. Details of the same colony are in panels 12b, 12c, 12d: filaments contain cells completely separated one from the other, much more frequently than in
wild type colonies. Some minicells are present. The basic
structure of the mutant is a filamentous organization as in
the wild type, even though these round compact colonies
appear at the macroscopic level similar to those of non-filamentous bacteria.
B. mycoides dcw gene cluster
The genes coding for the proteins assembling at the division site of bacillar cells are mostly clustered, together
with those specifying enzymes for the synthesis of peptidoglycan. The cluster dcw (division cell wall) is well conserved among bacilli with respect to gene order [19]. Very
little is known about B. mycoides at the genomic level:
knowledge of the genes involved in fundamental steps of
cell division appears as a necessary base for studying the
processes of colony assembly. We therefore started to
characterize the dcw cluster in DX and SIN strains.

Page 6 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

Figure 7
Growth of SIN on agar as seen at the light microscope. Starting from 3 cells (1) the filament grows by division of the
cells at both edges (2,3,4,5). The ramification and angle, pointed by arrows in (2), remain at the same distance in the following
stages confirming growth at the periphery. In (6) the curvature specific for the strain is apparent at both ends. New filaments
start from rupture points, running along the first filament (7) and projecting outside. Insets show enlargements of the region
pointed by arrows in panel 2. In (8), advanced stage of colony formation: the structure is enriched by many filaments, becoming
as in Fig. 1 after 24 hours. Scale bar: 1–4 = 100µm; 5–8 = 500 µm.

Page 7 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

Figure 8
Growth of DX on agar as seen at the light microscope. The filament starting from 3 cells in (1) grows at the periphery
(2, 3) and in (4) the specific curvature appears at both ends when the filament is still unique. In (5) the first ramification occurs,
enlarged in insets that show duplication and rupture of the filament. In (6) the circle is closed and insets show the rapid cell
progression at the closure point. In (7) many lateral ramifications emerge. In (8) these ramifications converge in a few big
trunks displaying the specific curvature. In (9) the final shape of the colony is shown. Scale bar: 1–4 = 100 µm; 5–8 = 500 µm; 9
= 1 cm.

Page 8 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

Figure 9
Growth of SINett on agar as seen at the light microscope. In this SIN mutant a bent appears at an early stage of colony
formation (1) and a double rupture occurs (2). From these ruptures 3 parallel filaments start growing (3). In (4) new ruptures
in the upper filament appear. In (5–6) many filaments aggregate in bundles covering the central part of the starting filament.
Note that magnification is the same in these 6 figures. In (7) the colony covers almost all of the central space. In (8–9) the final
shape is shown. Several layers of cells are superimposed. They appear more evident in (9) where the picture was taken with a
filter. Scale bar: 1–6 = 20 µm, 7–9 = 100 µm.

Page 9 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

plasmid SIN-HPS9 (not shown). It is made by the union
of the shuttle vector HPS9, carrying two antibiotic resistances [23] with the smallest 3.4 kb cryptic plasmid of the
SIN strain, pBMY1 [16]. Efficiency however was very low
and needs to be further improved.

Discussion

Figure 10
Autolysis of filaments. Magnifications of two details of Fig.
9/7, showing degradation of filaments remaining outside the
colony mass.

Due to high conservation of the main protein of the cluster, FtsZ, in bacteria and even in eukaryotic chloroplasts
[20] we could design forward and reverse degenerate oligonucleotides inside two regions of the protein with
maintained amino acid sequences. Amplification by PCR
of total DNA of DX and SIN strains gave a DNA fragment
whose sequence had high homology to the corresponding
region of B. anthracis ftsZ gene (sequences provided by TIGR, The Institute for Genomic Research). Homology was
such that we could subsequently design oligonucleotides
based on B. anthracis genome for chromosome walking
upstream and downstream of the ftsZ sequence first determined.
Fig. 13 shows comparison of DX and SIN amino acid sequences along four genes, ftsQ, ftsA, ftsZ and murC. DNA
spacer sequences (not shown) between genes are less conserved than coding sequences. In particular the spacer that
separates ftsZ from murC is much longer in the SIN strain
compared to DX and to B. anthracis. The same spacer region was analyzed in B. mycoides Type ATCC 6462 strain
and in B. pseudomycoides Type B617 strain [21]. The ATCC
6462 Type strain is 100% identical even along this spacer
to DX, once more confirming classification of the strain.
The more divergent was found to be B. pseudomycoides,
whose colonies are very similar to those of B. mycoides DX,
with the same direction of filament curvature. The lower
similarity at the gene sequence level confirms a greater genetic distance of this species from the other members of B.
cereus group [14].
Transformation
For every genetic approach the possibility to transform
strains with DNA is essential. Many protocols of protoplast transformation and of electroporation were tested
on our environmental strains with no success. With a few
modifications of the Macaluso protocol [22] two strains,
SINV6 and Ett, were transformed with the recombinant

In the present study variant morphotypes of B. mycoides
SIN strain were collected in search for mutant gene/s coding for the chiral colony shape. Colonies were found that
lost the peculiar wild type shape made of filaments aggregating in bundles with the same final curvature: some acquired a cotton-like appearance; others made round
compact colonies; one became less adherent to the agar
surface. The new morphotypes were not seen to revert to
wild type during several transfers on agar media. All of
them lost ability to form aggregates in liquid culture: cells
detached easily one from the other and grew in suspension conferring turbidity to the medium.
The observation that mutant morphotypes fall into several different classes strongly suggests that many genes are
involved in the process of colony shape formation. We explored the possibility that a genetic determinant could be
carried by a plasmid, but strains fully cured of the two
cryptic plasmid of the SIN strain maintained wild type
morphotype, ruling out this hypothesis.
We compared the sequence of ftsQ, ftsA, ftsZ and murC of
wild type SIN with that of the SINett mutant, whose morphotype with round colonies is the most altered, but not
a single nucleotide was changed, indicating that mutations affect other genes, probably regulator genes.
It is interesting that mutant morphotypes were able to colonize a reduced territory area compared to wild type: presumably territory conquest must be crucial for a soil
inhabitant to reach new nutrients in natural environments. Possibly this trait is under selective pressure and
positively selected for. Consistent with the hypothesis of
filamentous growth as an adaptation to search for nutrients we noticed an increased colony diameter of SIN
strains when grown on media with low nutrient concentration (unpublished observation). Determination of the
growth curves in wild type and mutant strains put into evidence that mutants were not negatively affected for the
time needed to duplicate, which was found to be similar
if not identical during logarithmic growth. On the contrary, mutants were found to persist in the logarithmic period for a longer time during culture in liquid media,
resulting in an increased mass compared to wild type
strains (unpublished results).
Peculiarities of colony formation were followed by light
and scanning electron microscopy. In wild type strains,

Page 10 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

Figure 11
Scanning electron microscopy of wild type SIN colony on agar plate. Bacilli form filaments expanding on agar towards
periphery, leaving wide empty spaces (a). Trunks fuse proceeding together, or separate. Details of the same picture show pioneer filaments proceeding independently (b), going in parallel (c), fusing and separating (d). High magnifications (25–30.000 X)
of the SIN cells show no twisting of the structures of the external cell wall (e-f).

Page 11 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

Figure 12
Scanning electron microscopy on agar of the mutant SINett. In (a) the entire colony at 9 hours. At variance with wild
type, all bundles turn towards the colony center. (b) shows frequent cell separations along the filaments; (c-d) show the presence of minicells (indicated by arrows).

cells move away from the colony center as single filaments
or as bundles. Single filaments can leave a bundle and
join other bundles. When filaments coming from differ-

ent directions meet, they may converge, or alternatively
cross one over the other continuing along their route. We

Page 12 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

This is an essential preliminary step towards the possibility of transforming and complementing the null mutation
with wild type long DNA sequences, in search for the
gene/s guiding the turn direction morphotype. For this
purpose we are now working to increase the very low
transformation efficiency of our strains.

Conclusions
Figure 13
Sequence conservation. Translated ORFs of a region of
the "division cell wall" cluster of B. mycoides SIN are compared to those of other Bacillus cereus group members. Numbers indicate percent of identical amino acids in the ORFs.

do not see twisting of one filament around another as in
the case of the B. subtilis macrofiber-forming mutant [9].
Mutant strains also form bundles of filaments, but, instead of leaving the mass, they turn all together back towards the colony center. It is unlikely that a repelling
substance, secreted by wild type strains, may be the driving force for cells to spread away from the colony mass
since this in contrast with the formation of bundles. We
rather hypothesize a greater "independence" of wild type
strains from growth substances released from the mass of
bacteria. This would permit colonization of empty spaces
where no such substances are present. Moreover the
strong aggregation that wild type strains show in liquid
culture is a consequence of the tight head to head contact
of cells after division, probably due to a molecular "glue"
or to incomplete separation of the cells after septation.
Other attracting forces, like side by side cell stickiness, are
present also in mutants, as seen on agar where they form
parallel wavy bundles. However this kind of attraction is
weak, since mutant cells easily separate in liquid culture
mostly as single units.
Very little is known about B. mycoides at the genetic level.
Our soil isolates of DX and SIN share metabolic traits,
such as the ability to metabolize substrates, with the exception of sucrose hydrolysis. Genomic organization is
not the same, as estimated from ribotyping and plasmid
content. At the gene sequence level, as determined for
some genes of the division and cell wall cluster, DX and
SIN strains appear very close, but not identical. Nucleotide and amino acid sequences are more similar in these
two strains than with the ones of the close B. anthracis and
B. cereus species. The FtsZ sequence of B. pseudomycoides is
the most divergent, confirming a greater phylogenetic distance of this species from the other members of the group
[21].
As for the molecular mechanism underlying asymmetry of
the colony, we obtained mutants that lost this character.

Bacillus mycoides forms colonies with cells linked end to
end into filaments curving clock-or counterclock-wise. Aggregation in liquid media and chiral configuration on
agar, but not organization into filaments, is lost in colony
mutants. Analysis at the light and scanning electron microscope during colony formation shows that in wild type
strains it is the outer cell of filaments that preferentially divides. In the mutant strain Ett, cells internal to the filament divide, causing breakage points which become new
edges for cell division, occuring mostly close to the colony
center. It is regulation of cell separation that appears modified in mutants, changing wild type ability to form long
filaments invading large spaces. Environmental DX and
SIN strains were found similar, but not identical, in the
genes coding for FtsQ, FtsA, FtsZ and MurC, indicating
that they do not stem from the same genome.

Methods
Isolation of B. mycoides strains
A soil sample was collected and suspended in sterile water. Aliquots were plated on agar plates. Selected colonies
with filamentous growth in the clockwise or counterclockwise direction, SIN and DX, were passed for several generations in liquid and solid media. Routine cultures were on
Trypton soya or LB [24], liquid or agar (15 g/L agar). Bacillus cereus selective medium, Brain heart infusion, Blood
agar, Muller Hinton were also occasionally utilized: these
media were from OXOID (Unipath Hampshire)
RAPD screening
The environmental strains were tested by PCR amplification of total DNA with primers producing a 749 bp fragment diagnostic for the Bacillus cereus group [15]. 10 ng
total DNA was amplified for 35 cycles (1 min at 94°C, 1
min at 45°C, 2 min at 72°C) with primers 5'-ACTGGCTAATTATGTAATG-3' and 5'-ATAATTATCCATTGATTTCG-3' in 25 µl final volume containing 2.5 µl 10X buffer
(Perkin-Elmer), 200 µM each dNTP, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1.0
µM primers and 1.5 U. AmpliTaq polymerase (Perkin-Elmer), covered with 50 µl mineral oil. Samples were analyzed
on 1% agarose gels in TBE buffer [24].
API 50 CH strip test
Liquid cultures of SIN and DX were analyzed with the bioMerieux API 50 CH test strips in parallel with liquid cultures of B. mycoides and B. pseudomycoides[21] (strains
NRRL NRS-273 and NRRL B-617T respectively, kindly

Page 13 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

provided by L. K. Nakamura, Dept. of Agriculture, Peoria
IL).
DNA isolation and ribotyping
Bacterial pellets were lysed in 0.1 M EDTA, 0.1 M Tris-HCl
pH 9.0, 1% SDS at 65°C for 1 hour. The viscous solution
was made 1 M K-acetate, incubated 30 min in ice and centrifuged. Supernatant was precipitated with 0.7 volumes
isopropanol and washed twice with 80% ethanol. DNA
was digested with EcoRI, electrophoresed on 0.8 % agarose in TBE and blotted to Amersham Hybond N+. The filter was hybridized with a 20 mer oligonucleotide with the
sequence 5' GAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAGG 3', from the
conserved 16S region of the group I bacilli (B. cereus, B.
thuringiensis, B. anthracis, B. mycoides), 5'-end labelled
with 32P-γATP and polynucleotide kinase.
Preparation of B. mycoides plasmids
Cultures were grown to the mid-log phase (A 600 nm = 0.4)
in LB at 30°C and cells pelleted, washed with isotonic
buffer and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C with light shaking
in sol. A (20% sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM
NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mg/ml lysozyme, 100 µg/ml
DNase free RNase). Cells were treated at room temperature with 0.2 N NaOH, 1% SDS for about 10 min. The solubilized cell content was neutralized with 5 M K-acetate
pH 4.8 and after 30 min at 0°C the supernatant cleared by
centrifugation and nucleic acids precipitated with 0.7 vol.
isopropanol. The pellet was washed with 80% ethanol, resuspended in TE and run on a 0.8% agarose gel with supercoiled plasmids (BRL) as reference M.W. markers.
Curing techniques
Two different methods were employed for inducing loss
of the plasmids of the SIN strain. High temperature: cells
were plated in Petri dishes with agar (0.8 g/l) in LB and incubated 8–18 hr at 37°C. Treatment with Novobiocin
[17]: cells were treated in liquid LB at 30°C for 48–72 hr
with 0.2 µg/ml of Novobiocin (Sigma), with daily changes of the antibiotic containing medium.
Light microscopy
An inverted Zeiss Axiovert 25 and a digital camera Nikon
Coolpix 990 were used for colony observations.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

glass coverslips like the colonies, with shorter dehydration
times. Samples were examined in a Hitachi (Tokio, Japan)
S-570 scanning electron microscope.
Sequencing
Oligonucleotides for starting FtsZ sequencing in SIN and
DX were designed inside two very conserved amino acid
tracts of the FtsZ protein [20]. Nucleotide sequences of
these regions in B. halodurans, B. subtilis, L. lactis and B. anthracis (from TIGR) were considered for synthesising two
degenerated primers: Zdir, 5' AAAGTWATCGGTGTCGGCGGWGGC 3' and Zrev, 5' CRGAAATMCCTTGAACMCCTTGRCG 3'. 200 ng of total DNA from DX and SIN were
amplified in 50 µl mix, containing 1.5 mM Mg, 0.2 mM
dNTP, 0.8 mM primers, 5 units of Amplitaq (Perkin Elmer). Conditions were: 5 min at 95°C; 30 cycles: 1 min
94°C, 1 min 65°C, 1 min 72°C. PCR products were purified from agarose gels by the Concert™ Rapid Gel Extraction System (Gibco BRL) and sequenced by M-Medical
sequencing service. For further sequencing, 20 bp oligonucleotides were synthesized based on DX and SIN sequences and on B. anthracis unfinished whole genome
sequence – preliminary sequence data was obtained from
The Institute for Genomic Research website at [http://
www.tigr.org] – and used in pCR reactions as above.
When primers did not work on B. mycoides DX and SIN
DNA, they were made degenerated in the third base when
complementary to a coding B. anthracis sequence.
Transformation
We followed the protocol by Macaluso et al. [22] with the
following modifications: cells in the exponential growth
phase were used; electroporation cuvettes were 0.2 cm instead of 0.4 cm wide, at 100-Ohm instead of 5-Ohm;
growth in non-selective medium after electroporation was
extended to 3 hours and growth in selective liquid medium was for 5 days. Recombinant plasmid SIN-HPS9 used
for transformation was obtained by inserting NdeI digested pBMy1 [16] into the unique NdeI site of the shuttle
vector pHSP9 [23]. The recombinant plasmid was amplified in Bacillus subtilis BD366 (BGSC-1E6). Less than 200
B. mycoides transformants were obtained per microgram
DNA.

Authors' Contributions
Scanning electron microscopy
Colonies of SIN and DX, grown for a few hours at room
temperature on the surface of 1.5% agar LB plates, were
fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer as
minute square pieces. Samples were rinsed with buffer
and postfixed in 1% OsO4 in Zetterquist buffer for 5
hours. After washing in buffer, they were dehydrated by
passage for 30 min each through a graded ethanol series.
After critical point drying, samples were coated with gold.
Samples from liquid cultures were fixed and postfixed on

CDF carried out isolation and characterization of wild
type and mutant strains and microscopy. EB did manuscript writing and sequencing: both designed the experiments. GP did sample preparations and gave a basic
technical support. TS worked at the project as a graduate
student. GT conceived the study and participated in design of the project and coordination. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Page 14 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2002, 2

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/2/33

Sequences

18.

GenBank accession numbers for SIN and DX sequences
are AY129554 and AY129555.

19.

Acknowledgements

20.

This work was supported by funds from University "La Sapienza" of Rome,
from Centro di Studio per gli Acidi Nucleici CNR (Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche) and from ASI (Agenzia Spaziale Italiana). L. K. Nakamura of
Department of Agriculture, Peoria IL, kindly sent us B. mycoides and B. pseudomycoides Type strains. D. L. Zeigler, BGSC Director, Department of Biochemistry, Columbus OH., provided us with B. subtilis and B. thuringiensis
strains. We thank Fioretta Palombi for helpful advice and discussion and
Quinto Giustiniani for SEM preparations: both are in the Dipartimento di
Istologia ed Embriologia Medica, Facoltà di Medicina, Università "La Sapienza". Roberto Gargamelli produced photographic reproductions. Preliminary sequence data of the unfinished B. anthracis genome was obtained from
TIGR, The Institute for Genomic Research, website at [http://www.tigr.org].

21.
22.
23.

24.

Van de Peer Y, Chapelle S, De Wachter R: A quantitative map of
nucleotide substitution rates in bacterial rRNA. Nucleic Acids
Res 1996, 24:3381-3391
Tamames J, Gonzales-Moreno M, Mingorance J, Valencia A, Vicente
M: Bringing gene order into bacterial shape. Trends in Genetics
2001, 17:124-126
Osteryoung KW, Vierling E: Conserved cell and organelle division. Nature 1995, 376:473-4
Nakamura LK: Bacillus pseudomycoides sp. nov. Int J Syst Bacteriol
1998, 48:1031-1035
Macaluso A, Mettus AM: Efficient transformation of Bacillus
thuringiensis requires nonmethylated plasmid DNA. J Bacteriol
1991, 173:1353-1356
Haima P, van Sinderen D, Schotting H, Bron S, Venema G: Development of a beta-galactosidase alpha-complementation system for molecular cloning in Bacillus subtilis. Gene 1990, 86:6369
Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T: Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press C.S.H., New York
1989

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.
13.
14.
15.

16.

17.

Shapiro JA: The significance of bacterial colony patterns. BioEssays 1995, 17:597-607
Rudner R, Martsinkevich O, Leung W, Jarvis ED: Classification and
genetic characterization of pattern forming Bacilli. Molecular
Microbiology 1998, 27:687-703
Shapiro JA: Thinking about bacterial populations as multicellular organisms. Annu Rev Microbiol 1998, 52:81-104
Ben-Jacob E, Levine H: The artistry of nature. Nature 2001,
409:985-986
Seo JW, Ohnishi Y, Hirata A, Horinouchi S: ATP-binding cassette
transport system involved in regulation of morphological differentiation in response to glucose in Streptomyces griseus. J
Bacteriol 2002, 184:91-103
Nodwell JR, Yang M, Kuo D, Losick R: Extracellular complementation and the identification of additional genes involved in
aerial mycelium formation in Streptomyces coelicolor. Genetics
1999, 151:569-584
Tcherpakov M, Ben-Jacob E, Gutnick DL: Paenibacillus dendritiformis sp. nov., proposal for a new pattern-forming species
and its localization within a phylogenetic cluster. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1999, 49(1):239-46
Ben-Jacob E, Cohen I, Gutnick DL: Cooperative organization of
bacterial colonies: from genotype to morphotype. Annu Rev
Microbiol 1998, 52:779-806
Mendelson NH: Helical growth of Bacillus subtilis: a new model
of cell growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1976, 73:1740-1744
Mendelson NH, Morales D, Thwaites JJ: The mechanism responsible for 2-dimensional pattern formation in bacterial macrofiber populations grown on solid surfaces: fiber joining and
the creation of exclusive zones. BMC Microbiology 2002, 2:1-11
Priest FG: Systematics and ecology of Bacillus. In Bacillus subtilis and other Gram-positive bacteria: physiology, biochemistry and molecular genetics. AL Sonenshein, Washington (Edited
by: Hoch TA, Losick R) DC: American Society for Microbiology Press 1993,
3-16
Gause GF: Some physiological properties of dextral and of sinistral forms in Bacillus mycoides flügge. Biol Bull Woods Hole, MA
1939, 76:448-465
Nakamura LK, Jackson MA: Clarification of the taxonomy of Bacillus mycoides. Int J Syst Bacteriol 1995, 45:46-49
Turnbull PCB: Definitive identification of Bacillus anthracis – a
review. J Appl Microbiol 1999, 87:237-240
Daffonchio D, Borin S, Frova G, Gallo R, Mori E, Fani R, Sorlini C: A
randomly amplified polymorphic DNA marker specific for
the Bacillus cereus group is diagnostic for Bacillus anthracis.
Appl Environ Microbiol 1999, 65:1298-1303
Di Franco C, Pisaneschi G, Beccari E: Molecular analysis of two
rolling circle replicating cryptic plasmids, pBMYdx and
pBMY1, from the soil Gram-positive Bacillus mycoides. Plasmid
2000, 44:280-284
Ruiz-Barba JL, Piard JC, Jimenez-Diaz R: Plasmid profiles and curing of plasmids in Lactobacillus plantarum strains isolated
from green olive fermentations. J Appl Bacteriol 71(5):417-21

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 15 of 15
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
