<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Hemelipoglycoprotein from the ornate sheep tick, dermacentor marginatus: structural and functional characterization</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4. doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-4"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jarmila Dupejova"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

RESEARCH

Open Access

Hemelipoglycoprotein from the ornate sheep tick,
Dermacentor marginatus: structural and functional
characterization
Jarmila Dupejova1, Jan Sterba1,2*, Marie Vancova1,2, Libor Grubhoffer1,2*

Abstract
Background: Tick carrier proteins are able to bind, transport, and store host-blood heme, and thus they function
also as antioxidants. Nevertheless, the role of carrier proteins in ticks is not fully understood. Some of them are
found also in tick males which do not feed on hosts to such an extent such as females (there are differences in
male feeding in different tick species) and thus they are not dealing with such an excess of heme; some of the
carrier proteins were found in salivary glands where the processing of blood and thus release of heme does not
occur. Besides, the carrier proteins bind relatively low amounts of heme (in one case only two molecules of heme
per protein) compared to their sizes (above 200 kDa).
The main aim of this study is the biochemical characterization of a carrier protein from the ornate sheep tick
Dermacentor marginatus, hemelipoglycoprotein, with emphasis on its size in native conditions, its glycosylation and
identification of its modifying glycans, and examining its carbohydrate-binding specificity.
Results: Hemelipoglycoprotein from D. marginatus plasma was purified in native state by immunoprecipitation and
denatured using electroelution from SDS-PAGE separated plasma. The protein (290 kDa) contains two subunits with
molecular weights 100 and 95 kDa. It is glycosylated by high-mannose and complex N-glycans HexNAc2Hex9,
HexNAc2Hex10, HexNAc4Hex7, and HexNAc4Hex8. The purified protein is able to agglutinate red blood cells and has
galactose- and mannose-binding specificity. The protein is recognized by antibodies directed against plasma
proteins with hemagglutination activity and against fibrinogen-related lectin Dorin M from the tick Ornithodoros
moubata.
It forms high-molecular weight complexes with putative fibrinogen-related proteins and other unknown proteins
under native conditions in tick plasma. Feeding does not increase its amounts in male plasma. The
hemelipoglycoprotein was detected also in hemocytes, salivary glands, and gut. In salivary glands, the protein was
present in both glycosylated and nonglycosylated forms.
Conclusion: A 290 kDa hemelipoglycoprotein from the tick Dermacentor marginatus, was characterized. The
protein has two subunits with 95 and 100 kDa, and bears high-mannose and complex N-linked glycans. In
hemolymph, it is present in complexes with putative fibrinogen-related proteins. This, together with its
carbohydrate-binding activity, suggests its possible involvement in tick innate immunity. In fed female salivary
glands, it was found also in a form corresponding to the deglycosylated protein.

Background
Ticks are obligate ectoparasites of mammals, birds, and
reptiles which feed only on blood of their hosts. Blood
provides a rich source of nutrients needed for processes
* Correspondence: sterbaj@paru.cas.cz; liborex@paru.cas.cz
1
Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, Branisovska 31, CZ-37005
Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

associated with development to the next life-stage and
egg production. During the digestion of the blood, erythrocytes are lysed and heme is released. As ticks do
not possess the ability to synthesize heme [1], they utilize the host-blood heme. For this reason, as well as to
neutralize the toxic effects of free heme, ticks use carrier
proteins which bind and store it. Their nomenclature is

© 2011 Dupejova et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

not uniform and the proteins are called different names;
some of them are described below.
Hemelipoglyco-carrier proteins (CP) are the most
abundant proteins in the hemolymph [2,3]. The best
studied are the CPs in hard ticks, Dermacentor variabilis
[4] and Rhipicephalus microplus [2]. Hemelipoprotein
(HeLp), carrier protein isolated from R. microplus, has
molecular weight of about 354 kDa and consists of two
subunits with 103 kDa and 92 kDa. It occurs mainly in
hemolymph of adult tick stages in concentrations of
around 50 mg/ml and is one of the most abundant
hemolymph proteins. This molecule is able to bind
heme in the ratio of two moles of heme to one mole of
native HeLp and contains 3% carbohydrates, and 33%
lipids [2]. HeLp carbohydrates contain mainly mannose
which comprises more than 90% of all carbohydrates
present in HeLp which corresponds to glycans found in
ticks [[5], unpublished results]. The protein contains
also neutral lipids, phospholipids, cholesterol esters, and
cholesterol oleate. Labeling of HeLp with 55Fe showed
that this protein participates in heme transportation
from hemolymph into ovaries during oogenesis [2].
Another CP, hemelipoglyco-carrier protein (DvCP),
found in hemolymph of both male and female ticks D.
variabilis, shows a significant sequence homology with
HeLp [4-7]. DvCP has a molecular weight of 210 kDa
and has two subunits with molecular weight of 98 kDa
and 92 kDa. Similarly to HeLp, DvCP contains lipids
and carbohydrates [4]. DvCP was localized to fat body,
salivary glands, ovary, and muscles of partially fed
females [3].
The role of carrier-proteins in ticks is not fully understood. Some of them are found also in males which
engorge a more limited volume of blood and thus are
dealing with lower amounts of heme [4]. Moreover, the
carrier protein persisted in D. variabilis males hemolymph in higher concentrations and for a longer period
of time after detachment as compared to tick females
[4]. Thus, it is possible that these proteins play also
roles other than transport and storage of the heme.
In the current study, hemelipoglycoprotein (HLGP)
from the hemolymph of the tick D. marginatus, closely
related to DvCP, was isolated and characterized by electrophoretic and blotting techniques, surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) and MALDI-TOF/TOF (Matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization-Time-of-flight/Time-offlight) and ESI-FT-ICR (Electrospray ionization-Fouriertransform ion cyclotron resonance) mass spectrometry
analysis. The molecular weight of the protein and its
subunits, N-linked glycans modifying the protein, and
carbohydrate-binding specificity were determined. The
protein was also recognized by antibodies directed
against Dorin M, a fibrinogen-related lectin from
Ornithodoros moubata [8], and sera raised against

Page 2 of 10

hemagglutination activity of the D. marginatus
hemolymph.

Methods
Ticks

Unfed and partially-fed (further referred to as “unfed”
and “fed”) females and males of the tick Dermacentor
marginatus were obtained from the tick facility of the
Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Academy
of Sciences of the Czech Republic in České Budějovice.
After metamorphosis, males and females were separated
and kept in glass vials in wet chambers at 26°C until
feeding/plasma and tissue preparation. Females and
males were allowed to feed on laboratory guinea pigs
for 6 days.
Plasma and tissue preparation

Hemolymph was collected after cutting off a part of
tick’s anterior leg with fine scissors. The hemolymph
from 8 to 10 ticks (approx. 10-15 μl and 5 μl for unfed
and fed ticks, respectively) was collected directly into 50
μl of 0.9% NaCl containing protease inhibitors (Pierce,
Thermo Fisher, Rockford, IL). The solution was centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min at 100 g to pellet the hemocytes. The resulting supernatant was then clarified at
23000 g for 20 min and both the plasma and hemocyte
fractions were stored at -20°C.
Gut and salivary glands were dissected from partiallyfed females, thoroughly washed in phosphate-buffered
saline, pH 7.4 (PBS) to remove possible contamination,
and organs from five ticks were homogenized with 300
μl PBS for 2 minutes at frequency of 30 Hz in TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Hombrechtikon, Switzerland) and stored
at -70°C.
SDS-PAGE and Blue Native/SDS-PAGE electrophoresis

For SDS-PAGE, plasma samples were diluted 1:5 in PBS,
mixed with loading buffer with or without reducing
agent dithiothreitol (Fermentas, Thermo Fisher, Vilnius,
Lithuania) and heated for 5 min at 95°C. SDS-PAGE
was performed on 4-17.5% gradient gels [9] in MiniPROTEAN electrophoresis system (Bio-Rad, Hercules,
CA). Gels were stained with PageBlue Protein Staining
Solution (Fermentas). Approximately 5 μg proteins were
loaded in the case of tick plasma and hemocytes, while
15 μg of tick gut and salivary gland proteins were
applied.
In the case of BN-PAGE/SDS-PAGE, samples were
mixed with 5% glycerol and 0.01% Ponceau S and separated on native gradient gel (3.5% stacking, 6-13% separating gel) [10] together with native protein molecular
weight standards (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in
Mini-PROTEAN electrophoresis system. Gels were
stained with PageBlue Protein Staining Solution or used

Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

for second dimension of 2 D electrophoresis. For the
second dimension, the BN-PAGE separated proteins
were used for Tris-Tricine SDS-PAGE [10]. Briefly, 12%
separating gel was prepared, gel strips from BN-PAGE
were incubated for 1 h in cathode buffer (0.1 M Tris,
0.1 M Tricine, 0.1% SDS, pH 8.25), inserted above the
separating gel and overlaid with 4% stacking gel. Electrophoresis was performed for about 2.5 hours at a current limit of 50 mA using anode buffer (0.1 M Tris,
0.0225 M HCl, pH 8.9) and cathode buffer [10]. The
separated proteins were stained with PageBlue Protein
Staining Solution.
Electroelution of HLGP

Electroelution was performed using ElutaTube™Protein,
DNA and RNA Extraction and Dialysis Kit (Fermentas).
Bands corresponding to HLGP were cut out of the gel,
placed into ElutaTube vial with electrophoresis running
buffer (0.025 M Tris, 0.192 M glycine, 0.1% SDS), and
placed in the supporting tray in the electrophoresis tank
with running buffer. Electroelution ran for 3 hours at
100 V. Samples were precipitated by four volumes of
acetone, pelleted, the precipitated proteins were airdried, and dissolved in water with resulting concentration of approximately 0.5 mg/μl.
Anti-HLGP and anti-HA polyclonal serum preparation

Mice were housed in the Animal facility of the Institute
of Parasitology, Biology Center of the ASCR in České
Budějovice in plastic cages with sawdust bedding. Pellet
diet and water were supplied ad libitum and mice were
handled in accordance with the Animal Act of the
Czech Parliament.
D. marginatus plasma proteins were separated by SDSPAGE and stained with PageBlue Protein Staining Solution (Fermentas). HLGP bands (corresponding to approximately 50 μg of protein) were cut out and homogenized
with 240 μl PBS (1×). Incomplete Freund’s adjuvant was
added in a 1:1 ratio and 80 μl of this solution was subcutaneously injected to BALB/c mice. Immunization was
repeated 3× every 14 days by subcutaneous injection of 80
μl of this solution. Blood sera were collected 14 days after
the last immunization. Sera were supplemented with glycerol (1:1), aliquoted and stored at -20°C.
Anti-hemagglutination activity (anti-HA) serum was
prepared as described elsewhere [11]. 20 μl of tick
hemolymph was added to 50 μl of 2% suspension of
mouse red blood cells. After 1 h incubation, the hemagglutinated cells were washed, resuspended in 200 μl of
PBS, and 50 μl of the mixture was injected into mice.
The immunization was repeated three times every 14
days. Blood sera were collected 14 days after the last
immunization. Sera were supplemented with glycerol
(1:1), aliquoted and stored at -20°C.

Page 3 of 10

Immunoblotting

The electrophoretically separated proteins were transferred to PVDF membrane [12] for 1 hour at 20 V. The
PVDF membrane was washed in PBS, cut into strips,
and incubated for 1 hour in 5% skim powdered milk in
PBS. Strips were then incubated for 1 hour in mouse
anti-HLGP or anti-HA serum, washed with PBS-Tween
20 (0,05% Tween 20 in PBS) and incubated with goat
anti-mouse antibody conjugated with alkaline phosphatase (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) in 5% milk.
After incubation, strips were washed with PBS-Tween
20 and PBS. Reaction was developed in alkaline phosphatase-staining solution (Vector Laboratories) and after
the development of sufficient signal it was stopped by
washing the strips several times in Milli-Q water.
Schiff staining and lectinoblotting of HLGP

Electroeluted HLGP was separated by SDS-PAGE and
electroblotted to PVDF membrane. The presence of glycosylation was detected with DIG Glycan Detection Kit
(Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany) and the
glycan types modifying the HLGP were identified using
DIG Glycan Differentiation Kit (Roche Applied Science)
utilizing lectins SNA, GNA, DSA, PNA, and MAA II,
conjugated with digoxigenin.
Membrane strips for Schiff staining were washed with
PBS, the glycoproteins were oxidized by 10 mM sodium
periodate in 0.1 M sodium acetate buffer, pH 5.5 at
room temperature for 20 minutes, washed in PBS, and
incubated with DIG-3-O-succinyl-ε-aminocaproic acid
hydrazide in sodium acetate buffer for 1 hour at room
temperature. After three washes in Tris-buffered saline,
pH 7.5 (TBS, 0.05 M Tris, 0.15 M NaCl) the strips were
blocked in blocking solution (provided by the manufacturer and diluted 1:9 in TBS) for 1 hour at room temperature, washed in TBS, incubated with anti-DIG
antibodies conjugated with alkaline phosphatase in the
blocking solution for 1 hour at room temperature,
washed with TBS, and finally, the color reaction was
developed in BCIP/NBT solution in 0.1 M Tris, 0.05 M
MgCl2, 0.1 M NaCl, pH 9.5. The reaction was stopped
by thorough washing in Milli-Q water.
For lectinoblotting, the membrane strips were washed
in TBS and blocked in blocking solution for 1 hour at
room temperature. Next, the strips were washed in TBS
and in TBS supplemented with 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM
MgCl2, 1 mM MnCl2, and incubated in the supplemented TBS with the individual DIG-conjugated lectins for
minimum 1 hour at room temperature. The strips were
washed again in TBS, incubated with anti-DIG antibodies conjugated with alkaline phosphatase in the blocking solution for 1 hour at room temperature, washed
with TBS, and the color reaction was developed as
described above.

Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

Enzymatic deglycosylation

Electroeluted HLGP was deglycosylated using glycosidases Endo H (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) or
PNGase F (New England Biolabs) and PNGase A (Roche
Applied Science) under reducing and non-reducing conditions. For deglycosylation using PNGase A/F under
reducing conditions, 68 μl of electroeluted HLGP was
mixed with 10 μl denaturation buffer (5% SDS, 0.4 M
DTT) and heated on 95°C for 10 min. The solution was
mixed with 10 μl 0.5 M sodium phosphate, pH 7.4, 10
μl Nonident P-40, 0.5 μl PNGase A, 0.5 μl PNGase F,
and 1 μl Milli-Q water.
For deglycosylation using Endo H under reducing conditions, 68 μl of electroeluted HLGP was mixed with 10
μl denaturation buffer (5% SDS, 0.4 M DTT) and heated
on 95°C for 10 min. The solution was mixed with 10 μl
0.5 M sodium citrate, pH 5.5, 2 μl Endo H, and 10 μl
Milli-Q water. Deglycosylation under non-reducing conditions was performed similarly with the denaturation
step to be omitted. Deglycosylation reactions were performed overnight at 37°C. All reactions were performed
in duplicates.
N-linked glycans from HLGP and D. marginatus
hemolymph were prepared from reduced and alkylated
electroeluted proteins, which were digested by trypsin
(Roche Applied Science) in PBS, overnight at 37°C. The
peptides were purified using C18 spin columns (Harvard
Apparatus, Holliston, MA), vacuum-dried and deglycosylated as described above using a mixture of PNGase A
and PNGase F to ensure the release of all N-glycans.
The released glycans were purified using a combination
of C18 and active-charcoal spin columns (Harvard
Apparatus) [13]. N-glycans preparation and their subsequent MS analysis were performed in duplicates.
Solid-phase permethylation of N-glycans for MS analysis

PNGase A/F-released glycans were vacuum dried, resuspended in 5 μl of water, and 70 μl of dimethylformamide and 25 μl of methyl iodide were added. The
mixture was applied onto NaOH beads (Sigma-Aldrich)
in spin-columns (Harvard Apparatus), incubated for 15
minutes, and the columns were centrifuged for 1 minute
at 1500 × G. 25 μl of methyl iodide was added to the
solution, again applied onto NaOH beads, incubated for
15 minutes, and centrifuged [13]. Next, the beads were
washed with acetonitrile, centrifuged, and the solutions
were pooled. The permethylated glycans were recovered
by liquid/liquid extraction with chloroform and washing
with 0.5 M NaCl and HPLC-grade water. Finally, the
glycans were vacuum dried.
Immunoprecipitation

50 μl of D. marginatus hemolymph plasma, diluted 1:5
in 0.9% NaCl, was mixed with 1 μl of 1% Tween 20 in

Page 4 of 10

PBS, 5 μl of protease inhibitors (Pierce), and with 444 μl
of PBS. The mixture was incubated with 5 μl of antiHA/anti-HLGP serum at 4°C overnight. 10 μl of magnetic Dynabeads with Protein G (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA) were added into the solution and incubated 45 min
at room temperature. The beads were then washed sixtimes in 0.01% Tween 20 in PBS. HLGP was eluted
using elution buffer containing primary amines (MicroLink Protein Coupling Kit, Pierce). Immunoprecipitation
experiments were performed three-times with similar
results.
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR)

Quantitative measurement of interactions between
HLGP and carbohydrates was performed on BiaCore
3000 instrument (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK)
(National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Michaela
Wimmerová and Lenka Malinovská, Masaryk University,
Brno, Czech Republic). A chip with immobilized monosaccharides (a-D-galactose on channel 1, a-D-mannose/
a-L-fucose on channel 2, a-D-mannose on channel 3,
and a-L-fucose on channel 4) was used. 15 μl of samples were injected on the chip and the response of individual channels was monitored at a flow-rate of 5 μl/
min. Dilutions of the samples as well as samples containing EDTA (25 mM) were injected for complementary experiments. Both experiments with and without
EDTA were performed in duplicates.
Hemmaglutination assay

The determination of hemagglutination activity (HA)
was performed in 96-well U-shaped microtitration plates
by serial two-fold dilution of 50 μl samples in 50 μl of
0.15 M NaCl [9]. Next, 50 μl of 2% (v/v) suspension of
mouse erythrocytes in 0.15 M NaCl was added to each
well. The titer of HA was evaluated after 1 h incubation
at room temperature and expressed as the reciprocal
value of the last sample dilution causing visible
agglutination.
Mass spectrometry

Purified HLGP or gel slices containing HLGP were trypsinized according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Roche Applied Science) and subjected to LC-MS analysis. Peptides were separated by HPLC on C18 silica
(Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) using acetonitrile gradient (580%) as a mobile phase and analyzed by FT-ICR mass
spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The obtained data were
compared to Acari non-redundant and Swiss-Prot databases using Mascot (a proprietary identification program, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) using strict criteria.
The permethylated glycans were spotted on matrixassisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) plate with
2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid and analyzed on 4800

Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) in positive-ion mode. The
data were converted to mzXML format and further analyzed by mMass [14] and Glycoworkbench [15] software.
Mass spectrometric analyses were performed in National
Center for Glycomics and Glycoproteomics, Indiana
University, Bloomington, IN, USA (Benjamin F. Mann,
William R. Alley, Jr., and Milos V. Novotny).

Results
HLGP detection and identification in D. marginatus
hemolymph

Putative lectin molecules in the hemolymph of the tick
Dermacentor marginatus were detected using sera and
antibodies recognizing similar molecules in tick species.
The sera used were directed against HA of the hemolymph of D. marginatus tick in addition to antibodies
recognizing Dorin M protein, a lectin from the hemolymph of the tick Ornithodoros moubata. Several putative carbohydrate-binding proteins with molecular
weight around 37 kDa, 79 kDa, 80 kDa, and a highmolecular protein with molecular weight of approximately 290 kDa were identified in non-reduced hemolymph (Figure 1A). The reactivity of antibodies differed
for these proteins and the 290 kDa molecule was the
only one, recognized by all the antibodies.
The bands containing all four proteins were excised
from the SDS-PAGE gel and mass spectrometric analyzes (ESI-FT-ICR MS) were performed. Although the
three low molecular weight proteins were not identified,
the 290 kDa protein (asterisk, Figure 1A) was identified
as hemelipoglycoprotein (HLGP) related to hemelipoglyco-carrier protein (CP) from D. variabilis. The amino
acid sequence coverage was 10.2% and 4.0% (see Additional File 1; Table S1 and Additional File 2; Table S2,
respectively) for hemelipoglycoprotein precursor 1 and 2
of the homologous HLGP from D. variabilis,
respectively.
Next, polyclonal antibodies against this protein were
raised. The following immunoblot analysis showed that
the anti-HLGP antibodies recognized the 290 kDa protein under non-reducing conditions and two subunits
with molecular weights of 95 and 100 kDa under reducing conditions (data not shown).
Isolation of HLGP

Further, HLGP was isolated from the plasma under both
native and denaturing conditions. Native protein was
purified using immunoprecipitation with Protein G
coupled to magnetic beads and anti-HLGP serum (see
Additional File 3; Figure S1; asterisk). The denatured
protein was isolated from electrophoretically separated
hemolymph by cutting out the HLGP protein from the
gel and its subsequent electroelution (see Additional File

Page 5 of 10

3; Figure S1; asterisk). In both cases, the purification of
HLGP was successful.
Characterization of HLGP

To assess the molecular weight of the protein under
native conditions, blue native-PAGE and subsequent
SDS-PAGE of tick plasma were performed. The results
show that HLGP (arrow, Figure 2A) is part of a highmolecular weight complex together with some other
proteins which have not been identified yet (Figure 2A).
Under native conditions, the complex has size of
approximately 450 kDa (arrow, Figure 2B). However,
some of these proteins are recognized by antibodies
directed against tick lectins and HA (data not shown).
Schiff staining of HLGP showed, that the protein is
indeed glycosylated (Figure 3A, lane 2). The glycan moieties were further analyzed by lectin-affinity staining.
Terminal mannose-specific GNA lectin and Gal-b(1-4)GlcNAc-specific DSA lectin showed strong binding to
HLGP (Figure 3A, lanes 4,5), a(2-6)-linked sialic acidspecific SNA lectin stained HLGP weakly (Figure 3A,

Figure 1 Identification of putative FReD proteins in D.
marginatus plasma and detection of HLGP in tick tissues.
Molecular weights of standard proteins are depicted. A)
Immunoblotting of non-reduced electrophoretically separated D.
marginatus plasma proteins. 1 - D. marginatus plasma proteins,
stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, 2 - immunostaining of plasma
proteins using antibodies against HA of D. marginatus hemolymph
serum, 3 - immunostaining of plasma proteins by anti-Dorin M
antibodies. B) Immunoblotting of HLGP in D. marginatus tissues
using mouse polyclonal anti-HLGP serum. 1 - fed female plasma, 2 unfed female plasma, 3 - fed male plasma, 4 - unfed male plasma, 5
- fed female hemocytes, 6 - unfed female hemocytes, 7 - fed male
hemocytes, 8 - unfed male hemocytes, 9 - fed female gut, 10 - fed
female salivary glands. * marks the position of native glycosylated
HLGP, # marks the deglycosylated form of HLGP.

Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

Page 6 of 10

Figure 2 2 D and native electrophoreses of plasma proteins
and HLGP. A) Blue native/SDS-PAGE 2 D electrophoretic separation
of D. marginatus plasma proteins, stained by Coomassie Brilliant
Blue (CBB). BN-PAGE separated plasma proteins are showed above
the gel and acrylamide gradients are depicted above the gel (native
electrophoresis) and on the right side (SDS-PAGE electrophoresis).
HLGP is marked with an arrow. B) Blue native PAGE of D.
marginatus plasma proteins, stained by CBB. 1 - native molecular
weight standard, 2 - tick plasma. Complex of HLGP with other
proteins is marked with an arrow.

lane 3), while Gal-b(1-3)-GalNAc and a(2-3)-linked sialic acid-specific lectins PNA and MAA did not give
positive reaction (data not shown). These results suggest
the presence of N-glycans of hybrid and complex type
with terminal mannose, galactose or sialic acid. DSA
lectin binding to HLGP can indicate the presence of Oglycans, too.
The proportion of the glycan part of the molecule was
determined from deglycosylation reactions of HLGP.
Enzymes Endo H and the mixture of PNGase A/F were
used to cleave off the N- glycans. Anti-HLGP serum
detected two proteins with 250 kDa and 290 kDa in
both PNGase A/F (Figure 3B, lane 3) and Endo H treated purified native HLGP (Figure 3B, lane 4). As these
endoglycosidases work under native conditions with a
slower reaction rate, the larger protein (asterisks) presumably represents the glycosylated form and the 250
kDa protein (hashes) the deglycosylated form of the protein. Thus, the size of the N-glycan moieties was estimated to approximately 40 kDa.
MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis of PNGase A/F released,
permethylated N-glycans from purified HLGP provided
the information on their masses and composition. The
MS spectra showed presence of high-mannose structures HexNAc 2 Hex 9 and HexNAc 2 Hex 10 (ion m/z
2396.7 and 2600.8, respectively) and complex glycans
HexNAc 4 Hex 7 and HexNAc 4 Hex 8 (m/z 2477.8 and
2684, respectively) (Figure 4A). Composition of the glycan structures was confirmed by MS/MS analysis (data
not shown). Spectra contained also contaminating series
of hexose ions and of O-glycans (e.g. ion m/z 1707, not
marked in the figure), present also in other tick samples

Figure 3 HLGP is a glycosylated protein. Molecular weights of
standard proteins are depicted. A) Schiff staining and lectin staining
of electrophoretically separated and electroblotted purified HLGP. 1
- tick plasma proteins, stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, 2-5
electroblotted HLGP staining. 2 - Schiff staining, 3 - SNA lectin
staining, 4 - GNA lectin staining, 5 - DSA lectin staining of purified
HLGP. Positive reaction in Schiff staining confirms the presence of
glycans on HLGP. Types of glycans identified by positive reactions in
lectinoblotting are described in text. B) Immunodetection of
deglycosylated purified HLGP using anti-HLGP serum. 1,3,4 - nonreduced electroeluted HLGP and 2,5,6 - reduced electroeluted HLGP
stained with anti-HLGP serum. Samples in lanes 3 and 5 were
deglycosylated using Endo H, samples in lanes 4 and 6
deglycosylated using PNGase A/F. * - native glycosylated HLGP, # deglycosylated form of HLGP.

such as salivary glands, gut, hemolymph, ovaria, or
whole tick homogenates (unpublished results). For comparison, N-glycans from D. marginatus hemolymph
were also analyzed. All four glycan structures, identified
in HLGP samples, were present also in hemolymph

Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

Page 7 of 10

Figure 5 HLGP is a carbohydrate-binding protein - HA and SPR.
A) Hemagglutination activity of purified HLGP. C - negative control
(no hemagglutination activity), H - serial two-fold dilution of
electroeluted HLGP. Hemagglutination activity is visible in dilutions
2× to 16×. B) Carbohydrate-binding specificity of purified HLGP
assessed by SPR on a chip with four channels arranged sequentially
as galactose-fucose/mannose-mannose-fucose. Red line corresponds
to signal from the channel with immobilized galactose, green to
channel with immobilized fucose and mannose, blue to channel
with immobilized mannose and purple to channel with immobilized
fucose. The fucose/mannose channel contained half amount of the
corresponding carbohydrates and serves as control. Lines
correspond to SPR response in real-time (not normalized for the
sequential flow through channels). Galactose showed the strongest
binding by HLGP, some binding was observed also for mannose.
Fucose was not recognized by the protein.
Figure 4 Mass spectra of N-glycans from the purified HLGP
and from D. marginatus hemolymph. A) MALDI-TOF spectrum of
enzymatically released N-glycans from HLGP. Four peaks
corresponding to s HexNAc2Hex9 (m/z 2396.7), HexNAc2Hex10 (m/z
2600.8), HexNAc4Hex7 (m/z 2477.8), and HexNAc4Hex8 (m/z 2684)
are marked. Three more peaks are visible corresponding to
contaminating series of hexoses and O-glycans (not labeled). B)
MALDI-TOF spectrum of enzymatically released N-glycans from D.
marginatus hemolymph. A range of glycan structures was identified,
namely high-mannose type glycans HexNAc2Hex3 to HexNAc2Hex10
(m/z 1171.3, 1375.4, 1783.6, 1987.7, 2191.8, 2395.9, 2599.9) and
complex fucosylated and non-fucosylated glycans such as
HexNac3Hex3 (m/z 1416.5), HexNAc2Hex4dHex1 (m/z 1549.5),
HexNAc2Hex5dHex1 (m/z 1753.6). Again, contaminants were present
in the sample - series of hexoses as well as O-glycans (not labeled).

(Figure 4B). Other hemolymph protein N-glycans were
identified as high-mannose type ranging from HexNAc2Hex3 to HexNAc2Hex8 (m/z 1171.3, 1375.4, 1783.6,
1987.7, 2191.8) and fucosylated and non-fucosylated
complex type glycans such as HexNac 3 Hex3 (1416.5),
HexNAc 2 Hex 4 dHex 1 (1549.5), HexNAc 2 Hex 5 dHex 1
(1753.6). Also in this case, a series of hexoses as well as
O-glycans were present in the sample (Figure 4B).
In accordance with the presence of hemagglutination
activity (HA) in hemolymph (unpublished results), the
purified HLGP demonstrated HA (Figure 5A). The inhibition of HA with monosaccharides was not performed
due to low amounts of sample available and thus the

carbohydrate specificity was addressed by surface plasmon resonance experiments. A chip with channels with
immobilized galactose, fucose, and mannose was used.
The channel with immobilized fucose and mannose
(half amounts) was used as a control of bindingresponse. The experiment showed binding specificity of
the purified HLGP towards galactose (Figure 5B). HLGP
showed also a weak binding-specificity towards mannose
as seen from comparison of the signal from the mannose channel and the control fucose/mannose channel
(Figure 5B). The binding of HLGP to carbohydrates was
inhibited by EDTA (data not shown).
Tissue distribution

The presence of HLGP in tick tissues was determined
by immunoblotting. In addition to plasma, hemocytes
(as the cellular component of hemolymph) from both
fed and unfed females and males, fed female salivary
glands (to investigate the presence of HLGP in salivary
glands and possibly also in saliva), and gut were
investigated.
In all samples, anti-HLGP serum detected the same
protein with the same molecular weight (Figure 1B).
While amount of the protein was similar in both
females and males, regardless of blood-feeding, HGLP
was present in higher amounts only in hemocytes from

Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

fed female tick. In males, the amount of HLGP did not
increase during the blood-feeding.
Interestingly, in the salivary glands (Figure 1B, lane
10), the anti-HLGP serum detected two forms of this
protein, corresponding in size to the glycosylated (asterisk) and the deglycosylated (hash) forms (compare with
Figure 3B, lanes 3,4).

Discussion
This work was aimed towards the characterization of
hemelipoglycoprotein, the most abundant protein of tick
hemolymph. To date, only one function of the protein
has been identified - the binding and storage of heme
[2,4]. Surprisingly, in our work, the protein was recognized by antibodies, which were directed against the
first isolated tick lectin Dorin M [8] but also sera against
the hemagglutination activity of the hemolymph of ticks
D. marginatus and I. ricinus. Hemagglutination activity
(HA) is an ability of some proteins to bind carbohydrates on red blood cells and thus to form clusters. HA
is a typical characteristic of lectins, proteins with the
ability of specific recognition of specific carbohydrates
and their reversible binding. Antibodies raised against
HA of tick hemolymph recognize proteins which bind
red blood cells in this manner and potentially also proteins, which form tight complexes with them. AntiDorin M antibodies, on the other hand, react more specifically with proteins containing FReD domain or lectins (unpublished results).
All the used antibodies detected similar proteins in
hemolymph; one of the putative lectin molecules with
the molecular weight of 290 kDa (with two subunits of
86 and 90 kDa) was identified as hemelipoglycoprotein
(HLGP). The theoretical masses of the subunits for the
HLGP from D. variabilis, based on convertase cleavage,
are 85 and 93 kDa for HLGP precursor (GenBank accession No. EEC1882) and 79 and 92 kDa for HLGP precursor 2 (GenBank accession No. EEC17915) [16] which
clearly corresponds with our results for D. marginatus
protein. The molecular weight of the protein is similar
to other tick hemelipoglycoproteins or carrier proteins
(another name of the protein) whose size ranges from
200 kDa to 365 kDa [2,4]. The proteins, described by
these authors, contained two subunits of 92 and 98 or
92 and 103 kDa.
Hemelipoglycoproteins contain the N-terminal lipoprotein domain, a domain of unknown function, and the
von Willebrand domain type D, but they do not contain
the fibrinogen-related domain, nor any other known lectin domain; moreover, hemelipoglycoproteins are not
phylogenetically related to FReD proteins [17]. On the
other hand, the N-terminal lipoprotein domain is proposed to have carbohydrate, lipid, and metal-binding
properties [16]. The N-terminal lipoprotein domain

Page 8 of 10

shares high similarity with vitellogenins from insects
and other arthropods and the carbohydrate-binding specificity of vitellogenin was showed for example in the
Colorado beetle hemolymph (Leptinotarsa decemlineata)
[18]. The lipoprotein domain of the DvCP from D. variabilis is similar also to vitellogenin from fish of the
genus Branchiostoma, which also shows hemagglutination activity and carbohydrate-binding ability [19].
HLGP and the other proteins recognized by the antiHA antibodies in the D. marginatus hemolymph form a
high-molecular weight complex under native conditions
(Figure 2A, B). Thus, in the process of anti-HA antibodies preparation, HLGP could be co-purified with proteins with lectin activity. This can explain the anti-HA
antibodies binding to HLGP; however, this fact does not
explain the binding of anti-Dorin M antibodies to the
protein. The structure of HLGP, FReD-containing proteins, and Dorin M are not known and HLGP does not
show any similarity to FreD proteins on the primary
structure level. However, recognition of HLGP by antiHA and anti-Dorin M antibodies, together with carbohydrate-binding SPR studies suggest, that HLGP shares
similar epitopes with the lectin domains of the FReDcontaining proteins and that HLGP is structurally,
rather than sequentially, similar to lectins/FReD-containing proteins.
The electroeluted and native purified HLGP were able
to bind to immobilized monosaccharides in SPR experiments or to hemagglutinate red blood cells (Figure 5A,
B). This corresponds to hemagglutination experiments
performed on hemolymph from D. marginatus (unpublished results) as well as from other ticks [8,17,20]. The
diminished carbohydrate-binding activity in the presence
of EDTA (data not shown) suggests dependency on calcium (divalent) cations, which corresponds to calcium
dependence of HA of crayfish plasma vitellogeninrelated protein [21] and sea urchin vitellogenin [22].
FReD-containing proteins are present in vertebrates
and in invertebrates. They were described as humoral
factors of innate immunity which are able to recognize
PAMPs (pathogen-associated molecular patterns); their
other functions include participation in regulation of
embryo development or in cell adhesion. Donohue and
colleagues [16] and Maya-Monteiro and colleagues [2]
suggest also other possible roles of carrier proteins in
the ticks apart from the heme-storage and prevention of
oxidative stress. Our finding of HLGP participation in a
high-molecular weight complex with other putative
FReD-containing proteins, the presence of two forms of
HLGP in tick salivary glands, and its carbohydrate-binding properties point to some other, yet undiscovered,
roles of the protein.
HLGP from D. marginatus is modified by N-glycans as
was showed by Schiff staining and lectin affinity staining

Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

Page 9 of 10

(Figure 3A). PNGase A/F and Endo H endoglycosidases
decreased the size of HLGP by 40 kDa under native
conditions (Figure 3B). The reactivity of HLGP with lectins DSA, GNA, and SNA indicated the presence of Nglycans with terminal mannose, terminal a(1-4)-linked
galactose and a(2-6)-linked sialic acid. On the other
hand, the absence of binding by the MAA II and PNA
lectins suggested the absence of a(2-3)-linked sialic acid
and of terminal a(1-3)-linked galactose. The subsequent
mass spectrometric analysis of permethylated N-glycans
from the purified HLGP revealed the presence of four
different glycan moieties. Two were high-mannose type
containing two N-acetylhexosamines and nine and ten
hexose molecules, and the other two were complex glycans comprising four HexNAcs and seven and eight
hexoses, possibly with terminal galactoses. Thus, the
mass spectrometric analysis confirmed the results from
lectin-affinity staining. Similar glycans were found also
in other tick glycoprotein with identified glycans, Dorin
M from Ornithodoros moubata [5]. In Dorin M, two
high-mannose glycans and a core-fucosylated structure
were identified.
Surprisingly, core-fucosylated N-glycans were not
found in HLGP, even though their presence was confirmed in D. marginatus hemolymph (Figure 4B) and
they are the most abundant type of glycans found in
tick saliva and salivary glands (Ixodes ricinus, unpublished results). The role of core-fucosylation and protein-specific fucosylation in ticks will be one of the
exciting problems of tick glycobiology and physiology.
HLGP has been detected in several tissues of the tick hemolymph, hemocytes, gut, and the protein in both
glycosylated and non-glycosylated form also in salivary
glands. Previously, HLGP was immunolocalized inside
the gut cells, on their surface, as well as inside the salivary duct and epithelium cells of salivary glands (unpublished results). Its presence was shown in these tissues
also in other ticks and in different life stages of ticks
[3,4]. Furthermore, HLGP is present in salivary glands
of D. marginatus in two forms, one of them corresponding in size to the non-glycosylated form of the hemolymph (glycosylated) protein, the other to the
hemolymph protein. While Gudderra and colleagues [3]
showed, that DvCP in the salivary glands of D. variabilis
does not contain heme in its molecule, the presence of
two forms of the protein was not described to date elsewhere. The role of HLGP in tick saliva is not clear nor
is the importance of the glycosylation of HLGP or the
other tick salivary proteins for the tick feeding.

glycosylated, bearing high-mannose and complex type
glycans without core-fucose. Nevertheless, core-fucosylated glycans are abundant in hemolymph. Hemelipoglycoprotein forms a complex with fibrinogen-related
proteins in hemolymph. It shows carbohydrate-binding
activity, which is divalent cations-dependent. Moreover,
the protein is present in two forms in fed female salivary
glands and one of these forms corresponds to the deglycosylated protein. Altogether, these findings suggest also
other roles of the protein in ticks different from its
heme-binding function. Due to the carbohydrate-binding
activity, one of the possibilities is the involvement of
hemelipoglycoprotein in innate immunity processes.

Conclusion
A heme-carrier protein from the hemolymph of the
ornate sheep tick Dermacentor marginatus, hemelipoglycoprotein, was characterized. The protein is N-

Authors’ contributions
JD conducted electrophoreses, blotting experiments, HA assay, and
participated in SPR experiments, JD and JS participated in anti-HLGP and
anti-tick HA sera preparation and in HLGP purification, JS and MV performed
mass spectrometry and analysis of data, MV performed tick tissue

Additional material
Additional File 1: Tryptic fragments identified in
hemelipoglycoprotein precursor [Dermacentor variabilis], coverage
10.2%. Mass:178646, Score:12286, Queries matched: 244.
Additional File 2: Tryptic fragments identified in
hemelipoglycoprotein precursor 2 [Dermacentor variabilis],
coverage 4%. Mass:171972, Score: 707, Queries matched: 12.
Additional File 3: Purification of HLGP. Molecular weights of standard
proteins are depicted. A) Immunoprecipitation of HLGP from D.
marginatus hemolymph. 1 - Immunostaining of non-reduced HLGP in
tick plasma, 2,3 - immunostaining of immunoprecipitated non-reduced
HLGP. B) Electroelution of electrophoretically separated HLGP from D.
marginatus plasma. SDS-PAGE separated proteins stained with Coomassie
Brilliant Blue. 1 - non-reduced plasma proteins, 2 - non-reduced
electroeluted HLGP. * marks the position of native glycosylated HLGP, #
marks the deglycosylated form of HLGP.

Abbreviations
AP: alkaline phosphatase; CP: carrier proteins; dHex: deoxyhexose; DSA:
Datura stramonium agglutinin; FReD: fibrinogen-related domain; FReP:
fibrinogen-related protein; GNA: Galanthus nivalis agglutinin; HA:
hemagglutination activity; Hex: hexose; HexNAc: N-acetyl hexosamine; HLGP:
hemelipoglycoprotein; MAA: Maackia amurensis agglutinin; PAMP: pathogenassociated molecular pattern; SNA: Sambucus nigra agglutinin; SPR: surface
plasmon resonance.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the
Czech Republic (6007665801, LC06009), Grant Agency of the Academy of
Sciences of Czech Republic (KJB600960906), and the Student Grant Agency
of the University of South Bohemia (SGA2008/017, SGA2009/017). We thank
Milos V. Novotny, Benjamin F. Mann, and William R. Alley, Jr. for the MS
analysis, Michaela Wimmerova and Lenka Malinovska for the SPR analysis,
Jan Lopatar for help with manuscript preparation, Jan Erhart for the work
with ticks, Lenka Bucinska for tick dissection, and Lenka Stifterova for help
with hemagglutination assays and immune sera preparation.
Author details
Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, Branisovska 31, CZ-37005
Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic. 2Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre
of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Branisovska 31, CZ-37005
Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.

1

Dupejova et al. Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:4
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/4

preparation and participated in their analysis, LG co-ordinated the
experiments, all authors participated in the design of experiments,
manuscript preparation, and they approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 15 October 2010 Accepted: 7 January 2011
Published: 7 January 2011
References
1. Braz GRC, Coelho HSL, Masuda H, Oliveira PL: A missing metabolic
pathway in the cattle tick Boophilus microplus. Curr Biol 1999, 9:703-706.
2. Maya-Monteiro CM, Daffre S, Logullo C, Lara FA, Alves EW, Capurro ML,
Zingali R, Almeida IC, Oliveira PL: HeLp, a heme lipoprotein from the
hemolymph of the cattle tick, Boophilus microplus. J Biol Chem 2000,
275:36584-36589.
3. Gudderra NP, Sonenshine DE, Apperson CS, Roe RM: Tissue distribution
and characterization of predominant hemolymph carrier proteins from
Dermacentor variabilis and Ornithodoros parkeri. J Insect Physiol 2002,
48:161-170.
4. Gudderra NP, Neese PA, Sonenshine DE, Apperson CS, Roe RM:
Developmental profile, isolation, and biochemical characterization of a
novel lipoglycoheme-carrier protein from the American dog tick,
Dermacentor variabilis (Acari: Ixodidae) and observation on a similar
protein in the soft tick, Ornithodoros parkeri (Acari: Argasidae). Insect
Biochem Mol Biol 2001, 31:299-311.
5. Man P, Kovář V, Štěrba J, Strohalm M, Kavan D, Kopáček P, Grubhoffer L,
Havlíček V: Deciphering Dorin M glycosylation by mass spectrometry. Eur
J Mass Spectrom 2008, 14:345-354.
6. Gudderra NP, Sonenshine DE, Apperson CS, Roe RM: Hemolymph proteins
in ticks. J Insect Physiol 2002, 48:269-278.
7. Maya-Monteiro CM, Alves LR, Pinhal N, Abdalla DSP, Oliveira PL: HeLp, a
heme-transporting lipoprotein with an antioxidant role. Insect Biochem
Mol Biol 2004, 34:81-87.
8. Kovář V, Kopáček P, Grubhoffer L: Isolation and characterization of Dorin
M, a lectin from plasma of the soft tick Ornithodoros moubata. Insect
Biochem Mol Biol 2000, 30:195-205.
9. Laemmli UK: Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the
head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 1970, 227:680-685.
10. Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H: Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc 2006,
1:418-428.
11. Grubhoffer L, Kovář V: Arthropod lectins: affinity approaches in the
analysis and preparation of carbohydrate binding proteins. In Techniques
in Insect Immunology FITC-5. Edited by: Wiesner A, Dunphy GG, Marmaras
VJ, Morishima I, Sugumaran M, Yamakawa M. Fair Haven, New Jersey: SOS
Publications; 1998:47-57.
12. Towbin H, Staehlin T, Gordon J: Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from
polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets: procedure and some
applications. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1979, 76:4350-4354.
13. Alley WR Jr, Madera M, Mechref Y, Novotny MV: Chip-based reversedphase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry of permethylated Nlinked glycans: A potential methodology for cancer-biomarker discovery.
Anal Chem 2010, 82:5095-5106.
14. Strohalm M, Hassman M, Košata B, Kodíček M: mMass data miner: an open
source alternative for mass spectrometric data analysis. Rapid Commum
Mass Spectrom 2008, 22:905-9.
15. Ceroni A, Maass K, Geyer H, Geyer R, Dell A, Haslam SM: GlycoWorkbench:
A tool for the computer-assisted annotation of mass spectra of glycans.
J Prot Res 2008, 7:1650-1659.
16. Donohue KV, Khalil SM, Mitchell RD, Sonenshine DE, Roe RM: Molecular
characterization of the major hemelipoglycoprotein in ixodid ticks. Insect
Mol Biol 2008, 17:197-208.
17. Sterba J, Dupejova J, Fiser M, Golovchenko M, Rudenko N, Grubhoffer L:
Identification and characterization of lectins in several tick species
[abstract]. FEBS J 2009, 276:88.
18. Stynen D, De Loof A: Sugar binding properties of the vitellogenic
proteins in the Colorado beetle, demonstrated by hemagglutination and
precipitation experiments. Rouxs Arch Dev Biol 1982, 191:159-162.
19. Zhang S, Sun Y, Pang Q, Shi X: Hemagglutinating and antibacterial
activities of vitellogenin. Fish & Shellfish Immun 2005, 19:93-95.

Page 10 of 10

20. Kibuka-Sebitosi E: Potential role of lectins in ticks: Rhipicephalus
appendiculatus and Rhipicephalus pulchellus (Acari: Ixodidae). Syst Appl
Acarol 2006, 21:1-15.
21. Hall M, Wang R, van Antwerpen R, Sottrup-Jensen L, Söderhäll K: The
crayfish plasma clotting protein: A vitellogenin-related protein
responsible for clot formation in crustacean blood. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA
1999, 965:1965-1970.
22. Cervello M, Arizza V, Cammarata M, Matranga V, Parrinelo N: Properties of
sea urchin coelomocyte agglutinin. Ital J Zool 1996, 63:353-356.
doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-4
Cite this article as: Dupejova et al.: Hemelipoglycoprotein from the
ornate sheep tick, Dermacentor marginatus: structural and functional
characterization. Parasites & Vectors 2011 4:4.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
