<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>A nosocomial transmission of crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever to an attending physician in north kordufan, Sudan</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Virology Journal 2011, 8:303. doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-303"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Afraa T Elata"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Elata et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:303
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/303

RESEARCH

Open Access

A nosocomial transmission of crimean-congo
hemorrhagic fever to an attending physician in
north kordufan, Sudan
Afraa T Elata1, Mubarak S Karsany2, Rehab M Elageb2, Marwa A Hussain1, Kamal H Eltom1, Mustafa I Elbashir3 and
Imadeldin E Aradaib1*

Abstract
Background: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF), a tick-borne disease caused by Crimean-Congo
hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV), is a member of the genus Nairovirus in the family Bunyaviridae. Recently, CCHFV
has been reported as an important emerging infectious viral pathogen in Sudan. Sporadic cases and multiple CCHF
outbreaks, associated with nosocomial chain of transmission, have been reported in the Kordufan region of Sudan.
Aims: To confirm CCHF in an index patient and attending physician in North Kordufan region, Sudan, and to
provide some information on virus genetic lineages.
Methods: Antibody captured ELISA, reverse transcription PCR, partial S segment sequences of the virus and
subsequent phylogenetic analysis were used to confirm the CCHFV infection and to determine the virus genetic
lineages.
Results: CCHF was confirmed by monitoring specific IgM antibody and by detection of the viral genome using RTPCR. Treatment with oral ribavirin, replacement with fluid therapy, blood transfusion and administration of platelets
concentrate resulted in rapid improvement of the health condition of the female physician. Phylogenetic analysis
of the partial S segment sequences of the 2 CCHFV indicates that both strains are identical and belong to Group III
virus lineage, which includes viruses from Africa including, Sudan, Mauritania, South Africa and Nigeria.
Conclusion: Further epidemiologic studies including, CCHFV complete genome analysis and implementation of
improved surveillance are urgently needed to better predict and respond to CCHF outbreaks in the Kordufan
region, Sudan.

Introduction
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF), caused by
Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV), is a
viral zoonotic disease with a high mortality rate in
humans. CCHFV can be transmitted to humans by bites
of Ixodid ticks or by contact with blood, bodily fluids or
tissue from viraemic livestock and infected humans [1].
CCHFV is one of the rare hemorrhagic fever viruses
capable of inducing nosocomial outbreaks in hospitals
with resource-poor setting and person to person
* Correspondence: aradaib@yahoo.com
1
Molecular Biology Laboratory (MBL), Department of Clinical Medicine,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Khartoum, P.O. Box 32 Khartoum
North, Sudan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

transmission is not uncommon [2,3]. CCHF is a public
health problem in many regions of the world including
the Sudan [4-13]. In remote areas and rural hospitals of
Kordufan, Sudan, diagnosis of the disease is primarily
based on clinical presentation. The laboratory diagnosis
of CCHF includes the serological tests for the detection
of immunoglobulin M and immunoglobulin G antibodies and molecular-based technique such as conventional and real-time RT-PCR for detection of the viral
genome [5,14,15].
In the past few years, CCHFV has been reported as an
important emerging infectious viral pathogen in Sudan.
We reported on nosocomial outbreak of CCHF in
Alfulah Rural Hospital, West Kordufan. Two virus
strains designated Al-fulah 3 and 4 (GenBank accession

© 2011 Elata et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Elata et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:303
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/303

Nos.GQ862371-2) were identified as etiologic agents of
the nosocomial outbreak [4]. We have also reported on
an outbreak in Donkup village, Abyei District, South
Kordufan [5]. Despite the fact that the Alfulah and
Abyei strains belong to group III genetic lineage of
CCHFV they are genetically distinct from each other
and were identified as unique strains of the Sudanese
CCHFV. Abyei and Alfulah virus strains are considered
to be responsible for the emergence of the disease in
Western and Southern region of Kordufan [4,5]. However, CCHF has never been reported in North Kordufan.
In February, 2010, an index patient from Lagawa District, Southern Kordufan, Sudan, was admitted to
Lagawa Rural Hospital, with an acute hemorrhagic illness. Lagawa District is approximately 50 Kilometers
from Alfulah, the origin of the first CCHF outbreak in
Sudan. The index patient is a 60-years-old male who
was admitted with clinical presentation of an acute febrile hemorrhagic illness. The symptoms included rapid
onset of fever, headache, nausea, vomiting of blood, and
bloody diarrhea. The source of infection was suspected
to have been the result of consumption of raw liver of
an infected sheep. He complained of high grade fever,
chills, headache, epistaxis, vomiting of blood and bloody
diarrhea. He had taken anti-malarial medication at
home without improvement. The patient was then
transferred to Kadogli Hospital, the referral hospital for
the State of Southern Kordufan, approximately 200 kilometers from Lagawa District. As the medical facilities in
Kadogli Hospital are limited, his health condition deteriorated very rapidly and thus the patient sought additional health care at Elobied Hospital, the capital of
North Kordufan State. At Elobied Hospital, the patient
was subjected to medical examination by the attending
physician on Saturday, 20/02/2010 and was provided
medical care by nurse. Clinical investigations were conducted and blood samples were collected after which
the patient was referred to Khartoum for further medical care. The patient was taken care of at the hospital
and he survived the infection and discharged from the
hospital in a good health.
On Tuesday, 23/02/2010, the attending physician
developed high grade fever, backache, vertigo and she
became hypoglycemic. She received medical care and
nursing by her mother and sister. A few days later, her
sister had onset of a disease which did not progress
beyond mild fever. Blood films from the index patient
and the physician were malaria positive with high parasitemia. Treatment with an antimalarial drug did not result
in any improvement. Thus, the attending physician was
isolated and strict barrier nursing was implemented on
the suspicion of viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF). On
Saturday 27/02/2010, the health condition of the physician deteriorated very rapidly and she developed massive

Page 2 of 7

vaginal bleeding, which lasted after 12 days. She also
developed renal insufficiency. The serum urea and creatinine levels were as high as 135 mg/dL and 13 mg/dL,
respectively. Blood platelets count was as low as 9 x103/
μl. Treatment with oral ribavirin at a dose rate of 500 mg
4 times a day for 5 days, compensation with four vials of
blood and administration of platelets concentrate
resulted in rapid improvement of her health condition
one week later. The blood platelets counts increased dramatically to 169 × 103 /μl. She was discharged from the
hospital on Tuesday 16/3/2010 in a good health condition with platelets count of 252 × 103 /μl.
In the present investigation, we report on a nosocomial transmission of CCHF to an attending physician in
North Kordufan as a result of medical referral of an
infected patient, who is resident of Lagawa District,
South Kordufan. Rapid diagnosis allows proper management of the disease during outbreak settings. In addition, molecular characterization of the virus provides
information on the virus genetic lineages, which subsequently provides a more detailed understanding of the
movement of virus strains in Kordufan region and in
Sudan at large [4].

Materials and methods
Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever Case Definition

The case definition used for identification of Crimean
Congo hemorrhagic fever patients included hemorrhagic
manifestations (ecchymosis, petechia, epistaxis, hematemesis, and hemorrhagic enteritis as reflected by bloody
diarrhoea), and one or more of the following symptoms:
Fever, severe headache, joint pain, chills, and nausea.
Ethical clearance and informed consent

Blood samples were collected from the two acute
hemorrhagic fever (HF) patients in clean, sterile vacutainers. Samples were collected as part of routine diagnostic testing. Ethical clearance was obtained from the
Ministry of Health of Sudan and informed consent from
all patients was provided through an ethical clearance
form, which permitted use of the samples for diagnostic
and research purposes. In addition to being used for
routine malaria screening, blood was allowed to clot,
and sera were separated and sent to the Division of Virology, National Medical Health Laboratory, Khartoum,
Sudan, for serological diagnostic screening. Extracted
RNAs from serum samples were provided to the Molecular Biology Laboratory, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Khartoum for conventional RT-PCR
amplification and subsequent sequencing.
Serology and Molecular Diagnostic

Virus isolation attempts were not conducted as the cultivation of CCHFV requires high laboratory

Elata et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:303
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/303

containments (biosafety level 4), a facility which is
restricted to a few laboratories in Africa. Therefore,
identification of the virus was solely dependent on serology and conventional RT-PCR amplification, using primers targeting the S segment of the Al-fulah strain of
CCHFV (Genbank accession number GQ862371), followed by direct sequencing of the PCR ampilicon. Serologic tests were conducted to screen the sera for
CCHFV antibodies as determined by detection of IgM
using antibody capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) kits from Biological Diagnostic Supplies
Limited (South Africa).
Design of primers

It is well documented that CCHFV small (S) RNA genome segment, which codes for viral nucleoprotein (NP)
and non-structural protein, has the less variable nucleotide sequences among cognate genes of CCHFV strains
[16]. Thus, selection of the primers was based on a
highly conserved fragment of the S RNA segment of
Sudan, Alfulah-4 strain (GenBank accession number
GQ862371). The primers were designed based on multiple sequence alignment of several published sequences
of the gene using BioEidit software (Carlsbad, CA,
USA). A forward primer CCHF1 (5): CTG CTC TGG
TGG AGG CAA CAA (3) and a reverse primer CCHF2
(5): TGG GTT GAA GGC CAT GAT GTA T (3) were
used to amplify a 452-bp primary PCR product. An
internal pair of forward primer CCHFn1 (5): AGG TTT
CCG TGT CAA TGC AAA (3) and a reverse primer
CCHFn2 (5): TTG ACA AAC TCC CTG CAC CAG T
(3) were used to amplify a 207-bp nested PCR product.
Reverse transcription (RT) Polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR) amplification

A single-tube RT-PCR assay was carried out for CCHFV
RNAs amplification basically as described previously
[17]. Briefly, a standard 50 μl reaction mixture contained
in final concentration of 1 × enzyme mix reaction buffer, 5.0 μl of 10 mM dNTP mix, 5.0 μl of 25 mM Mg
Cl 2 , 5.0 U enzyme mix, 2.0 μl of 20 picomole of each
primers (CCHF1 and CCHF2), 5.0 μl of target RNA,
were used. The total volume was brought to 50.0 μl
using RNase free water. Target genes were amplified in
low-profile 0.2 ml tube (MJ Research, California, USA).
Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) and Dengue virus RNA
templates were used as negative controls. Thermal profiles were performed on a Techne PHC-2 thermal cycler
(Techne, Princeton, NJ). The thermal cycling profiles
were started with 30-min incubation at 50°C for reverse
transcription of the CCHFV RNA templates into cDNA
copies. The PCR tubes were then incubated at 95°C for
15 min to destroy the excess amount of RT enzyme and
to activate the Taq DNA polymerase. The synthesized

Page 3 of 7

cDNA copies in the PCR tubes were subjected to 40
cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 1 min, annealing at
56°C for 30 sec and extension at 72°C for 45 sec, and a
final incubation at 72°C for 10 min.
Nested RT-PCR amplification

For nested amplification, reaction mixtures similar to
those of RT-PCR were used, except that 2 μl of the primary PCR products were used as a template DNA for
PCR amplification. The thermal cycling profiles were
started with an initial denaturation at 95°C for 5-min,
and the PCR tubes were subjected to 40 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 1 min, annealing at 56°C for 30 sec
and extension at 72°C for 45 sec, and a final incubation
at 72°C for 10 min. Following amplification, 10 μl from
each PCR amplification product were loaded onto 2%
agarose gel and electrophoresed at 80 volts for 1 h. The
gels were stained with ethidium bromide, and a UV
light source was used to visualize the primary and the
nested PCR products.
Sequence analysis and phylogenetic relationship

The 452-bp primary PCR products were purified using
QIAquick PCR purification Kit (QIAgen, Germany) and
sent for sequencing in a commercial company (Seqlab,
Göttingen, Germany). Resulted sequences were edited
using BioEdit software and the Basic Local Alignment
Search Tool (BLAST) of NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology Information, Bethesda, MD) and used to
confirm the identity of the generated sequences in the
GenBank nucleotide database. The sequences were then
aligned with the corresponding S-segment of known
CCHFV strains from Sudan, other African countries,
Asia, middle and far east, and Eastern Europe. Phylogenetic tree was constructed using PAUP version 4.0 software packgae (Sinauer Associates, Inc., Sunderland, MA,
USA). The name of the virus strain, country of origin
and the GenBank accession numbers were given for
each sequence.

Results
Serologic studies

In the present study, serological attempts to diagnose
CCHF in acute phase sera sampled during the first 3
days post-infection (pi) from both patients were largely
unsuccessful. However, positive IgM antibodies to
CCHFV were detected in subsequent blood samples
drawn from the attending physician at day 7 pi.
Reverse-transcription (RT) polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR)

Application of the reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay, to acute phase sera
sampled during the first 3 days pi from both suspected

Elata et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:303
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/303

Page 4 of 7

HF patients resulted in amplification of a primary 452
bp PCR product (Figure 1). The second round of nested
RT-PCR amplification produced a 207 bp PCR product
specific for CCHFV S segment (Figure 2). No amplification products were detected for RNAs from closely
related viral hemorrhagic fever viruses including Rift valley fever virus (RVFV), Dengue virus, total nucleic acid
extracts from uninfected Vero cells, and sera from noninfected patients (Figure 3).

The sequences from the primary 452-bp PCR products
were determined by BLAST/FASTA (http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov) and phylogenetic analysis. The sequences
were edited and assembled using Lasergene software
3.57 (DNASTAR, Madison, WI, USA). The partial Ssegment of Lagawa strain showed 99% homology with
Sudan- Alfulah strain-3. Phylogenetic tree was constructed using PAUP version 4.0 software (Sinauer
Associates, Inc., Sunderland, MA, USA) to investigate
the relationship between Lagawa CCHFV strain and
other known CCHFV strains identified globally. The
phylogenetic analysis placed this virus strain in Group
III virus lineage, which includes virus strains from
across Africa including Sudan, Mauritania, South Africa
and Nigeria (Figure 4). The partial S-segment sequence
was submitted to the GenBank under accession number
HQ829854.

Discussion
Multiple Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus
(CCHFV) variants and strains, associated with CCHF
outbreaks, have recently been reported in Alfulah, Western Kordufan [4] and in Abyei, Southern Kordufan of

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

5

500 bp

Figure 2 Visualization of the nested 207-bp PCR products from
the primary 452-bp PCR products

Sequence analysis and phylogenetic relationship

MW 1

MW

5

Sudan [5]. However, CCHF has never been reported in
North Kordufan. In this study, a nosocomial transmission of CCHF has been reported in an attending physician in North Kordufan as a result of medical referral of
an infected patient from an endemic area in Lagawa
District, South Kordufan. In the present study, rapid
diagnosis of the disease was achieved using conventional
nested RT-PCR. The nested RT-PCR assay could be
used for detection of CCHFV in a simple laboratory setting. In addition, the assay detected the multiple
CCHFV strains identified, so far, in Sudan. The first
RT-PCR round of amplification would be sufficient for
detection of CCHFV in sera sampled during acute phase
of the disease, as the titer of the virus is usually high
during this period, which allows for molecular characterization studies without initial amplification of the
virus in cell culture. However, the second round of
nested amplification may only be required, at later stage
of the disease, when the concentration of the virus in
sera or tissue samples is very low. The well characterized primers designed from a highly conserved region of
the S-segment RNA would be expected to detect the
African CCHFV variants in group III virus lineage and
would probably detect the remaining CCHFV from
other virus lineages.
The source of the infection of the index patient was
considered to be the result of consumption of raw sheep

1000 bp
MW

500 bp

1

2

3

4

5

1000 bp
500 bp

Figure 1 Visualization of the primary 452-bp CCHFV PCR
product on ethidium bromide-stained agarose gel from 1.0 pg
of RNA of Sudanese isolates of CCHFV variants. Lane MW:
molecular weight marker (100 bp DNA ladder); Lane 1: Alfulah strain
(positive control); Lane 2: Abyei strain; Lane 3-4: RNA extracted from
sera of the index patient and the attending physician (Lagawa
strains); Lane 5: RNA extracted from sera of healthy non infected
person.

Figure 3 Specificity of the nested CCHFV RT-PCR for detection
of CCHFV RNA. Lane MW: molecular weight marker (100 bp DNA
ladder); Lane 1: Alfulah strain (positive control); Lane 2: RVFV RNA;
Lane 3: Dengue virus RNA; Lane 4-5: RNA extracted from sera of
healthy non infected persons.

Elata et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:303
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/303

Page 5 of 7

Figure 4 Phylogenetic relationship of Sudan-Lagawa strains of CCHFV. Partial S segment sequences of the virus strains were aligned with
other CCHFV strains from Sudan, different African regions, the Middle and Far East, Asia, and Eastern Europe. Sequeces were analyzed with the
Lasergene 3.57 software package (DNASTAR, Madison, WI, USA). Phylogenetic tree was constructed using PAUP version 4.0 (Sinauer Associates,
Inc., Sunderland, MA, USA). Bootstrap values were calculated from analysis of 500 replicates of the data set, and values greater than 50% are
indicated at the appropriate nodes. Each CCHFV sequence is designated by the name of the strain, country of origin. The GenBank accession
numbers are given for each CCHFV isolate. The two Lagawa strains from Sudan (Sudan Lagawa1 and 2-2010) are highlighted in red color for
clarity (GenBank accession number (HG829854). Brace indicates group III virus genetic lineage (16).

liver. In certain areas of Sudan, the social habit of consumption of raw offals of cattle and raw livers of sheep
with bile and spices is not uncommon, which serves as
a means of transmission of various communicable diseases [18] and CCHF is not an exception. It is noteworthy that seasonality for CCHFV infection is quite
evident and usually coincides with the influx of sheep
from rural areas and villages to towns and major cities
on certain religious occasions [2]. Under these circumstances, the animal attendants typically live in close contact with their animals. This will increase the risk of
acquiring CCHFV infection through direct contact with
infected animals or ticks.
Taking into consideration the identification of multiple virus variants and strains in human cases from
Alfulah (2010) and Abyei districts of Kordufan region
(2011), in addition to the two CCHF cases mentioned in
the present study, it is likely that these CCHFV strains or
variants have been actively circulating in Western Sudan,
yet undetected for decades. In fact, sporadic cases and
outbreaks of acute febrile hemorrhagic illnesses compatible with CCHF have long been observed in Kordufan
region for several past decades, but the virus was not

identified until very recently [4]. Given the fact that most
of CCHF sporadic cases and outbreaks occur in villages
and remote areas, together with combined unfamiliarity
of the Sudanese physicians with clinical signs and symptoms of CCHFV infections, it is most likely that CCHF
cases can easily pass unreported or misdiagnosed. Currently, CCHF is not considered in the differential diagnosis of acute hemorrhagic illness in Sudan.
In Sudan, fever of unknown etiology is not uncommon, but malaria is usually considered to be the primary cause [19]. The first line of treatment in the
hospitals focused primarily on prescription of antimalarial medication but without improvement. Findings of this study illustrate that malaria positive result
does not necessarily eliminates the possibility of coinfection with other viral hemorrhagic fever agents.
Interestingly enough, both patients were malaria positive as is the case with Alfulah and Abyei CCHF outbreaks [4,5]. Currently we do not have an explanation
for the association of malaria and CCHF positive cases.
Therefore, physician should consider CCHF in their
differential diagnosis when dealing with malaria cases
in CCHF areas of endemicity.

Elata et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:303
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/303

In the present study, we confirmed that cluster of two
cases was due to CCHFV as determined by RT-PCR and
serology. Clearly, the disease is becoming endemic in
most areas of Kordufan region of Sudan. The two
CCHFV strains involved are identical and belonged to
group III virus lineage as determined by the S segment
partial sequences and subsequent phylogenetic analysis
[16]. The name Lagawa strain was initially proposed for
this CCHFV strain. The partial S segment sequence of
Lagawa strain, described in this study, shows 99%
homology to Alfulah strain (GenBank accession number
GQ862371) previously described by Aradaib et al., [4]. It
is suggested that whole genome of this CCHFV strain
be sequenced to obtain better information on the virus
and the possibility of genetic reassortment and/or
recombination events [8,20,21].
The CCHFV is susceptible to ribavirin in vitro but there
is no controlled study evaluating oral versus intravenous
ribavirin in treating infected patients. However, few studies
have evaluated oral ribavirin. Oral ribavirin, at a dose rate
of 200 mg twice daily for 5 days, is the recommended
dosage for post-exposure prophylaxis [22]. In the present
study, prescription of oral ribavirin, at a dose rate of 500
mg 4 times a day for 5 days, and administration of platelets concentrate resulted in rapid improvement of the
health condition of the physician. Intravenous compensation with blood, platelets concentrate and fluid therapy
(dextrose and saline), augmented oral ribavirin therapy as
demonstrated by dramatic increase in blood platelets
counts. The treatment resulted in improved health condition of the female physician.
In conclusion, this study highlights the need to include
CCHF in the differential diagnosis, when fever with
hemorrhagic tendencies is observed in clinical centers
and hospitals in the Kordufan region, Sudan. The frequent occurrence of sporadic cases and multiple CCHF
outbreaks, and the risks these cases pose for medical staff
in resource-poor health care facilities, necessitates the
need for improved surveillance programs and prevention
measures for this important viral disease in Sudan.
Acknowledgements
This study was made possible by the invaluable assistance provided by the
medical staff at Elobied Hospital, State of North Kordufan, Sudan. The
authors would like to thank Dr. Moawia M. Mukhtar and Dr. Sahar M. Bakhiet
for assistance with phylogenetic analysis. We would also like to thank Dr.
Stuart T. Nichol, Center for Disease Control (CDC), Atlanta, USA, for his
continuous support and encouragement and to Mr. Abdall M. Fadl Elmoula
for technical assistance. This study received financial support from the
Directorate of Scientific Research and Cultural Relations, University of
Khartoum, Sudan.
Author details
1
Molecular Biology Laboratory (MBL), Department of Clinical Medicine,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Khartoum, P.O. Box 32 Khartoum
North, Sudan. 2Division of Virology, National Public Health Laboratory,

Page 6 of 7

Federal Ministry of Health, Republic of the Sudan. 3Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Khartoum, Sudan.
Authors’ contributions
ATME optimized the nested polymerase chain reaction-based detection
assay; MSK designed the study and prepared the draft manuscript; RME
processed the clinical samples and perform the viral RNA extraction; MAH
conducted examination of clinical cases and clinical presentation of CCHF
cases; KHT preparation and editing of nucleic acid sequences of the virus
strain; MIE designed the experiment; IEA designed the experiment and
prepared the final manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 12 April 2011 Accepted: 15 June 2011
Published: 15 June 2011
References
1. Ergonul O: Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever. Lancet Infect Dis 2006,
203-214.
2. Burney MI, Ghafoor A, Saleen M, Webb PA, Casals J: Nosocomial outbreak
of viral hemorrhagic fever caused by Crimean hemorrhagic fever-Congo
virus in Pakistan, January 1976. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1980, 29:941-947.
3. Gurbuz Y, Sencan I, Ozturk B, Tutuncu E: A case of nosocomial
transmission of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever from patient to
patient. Int J Infect Dis 2009, 13:105-107.
4. Aradaib IE, Erickson BR, Mustafa ME, Khristova ML, Saeed NS, Elageb RM,
Nichol ST: Nosocomial Outbreak of Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever,
Sudan. Emerging Infect Dis 2010, 16:837-839.
5. Aradaib IE, Erickson BR, Karsany ME, Khristova ML, Elageb RM,
Mohamed MEH, Nichol ST: Multiple Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever
virus strains are associated with disease outbreaks in Sudan, 2008-2009.
PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2011, 5(5):e1159.
6. Avsic-Zupanc T: Epidemiology of Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever in
the Balkans. In Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever: A Global Perspective.
Edited by: Ergonul OWCA. Dordrecht, Springer; 2007:75-88.
7. Ahmeti S, Raka L: Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever in Kosova: a fatal
case report. Virol J 2006, 3:85.
8. Hewson R, Chamberlain J, Mioulet V, Lloyd G, Jamil B, Hasan R, Gmyl A,
Gmyl L, Smirnova SE, Lukashev A, Karganova G, Clegg C: Crimean-Congo
haemorrhagic fever virus: sequence analysis of the small RNA segments
from a collection of viruses world wide. Virus Res 2004, 102:185-189.
9. Luby S, Ahmed AJ, Zaidi N, Khan AJ, Mirza S, McCormick J, Fisher-Hoch S:
Outbreak of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever in Quetta, Pakistan:
contact tracing and risk assessment. Trop Med Int Health 1998, 3:878-882.
10. Khan AS, Maupin GO, Rollin PE, Noor AM, Shurie HH, Shalabi AG, Wasef S,
Haddad YM, Sadek R, Ijaz K, Peters CJ, Ksiazek TG: An outbreak of CrimeanCongo hemorrhagic fever in the United Arab Emirates, 1994-1995. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 1997, 57:519-525.
11. Rodriguez LL, Maupin GO, Ksiazek TG, Rollin PE, Khan AS, Schwarz TE,
Lofts RF, Smith JF, Noor AM, Peters CJ, T. Nichol ST: Molecular
investigation of a multisource outbreak of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic
fever in the United Arab Emirates. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1997, 57:512-518.
12. Schwarz TF, Nitschko H, Jager G, Nsanze G, Longson G, Pugh RN,
Abraham AK: Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever in Oman. Lancet 1995,
346:230.
13. Vesenjak-Hirjan J, Punda-Polic V, Dobe M: Geographical distribution of
arboviruses in Yugoslavia. J Hyg Epidemiol Microbiol Immunol 1991,
35:129-140.
14. Schwarz TF, Nsanze H, Longson M, Nitschko M, Gilch S, Shurie S, Ameen A,
Zahir AR, Acharya UG, Jager G: Polymerase chain reaction for diagnosis
and identification of distinct variants of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic
fever virus in the United Arab Emirates. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1996,
55:190-6.
15. Duha D, Saksida A, Petrovec M, Dedushaj I, Avˇsiˇc-ˇZupanc T: Novel onestep real-time RT-PCR assay for rapid and specific diagnosis of CrimeanCongo hemorrhagic fever encountered in the Balkans. Journal of Virol
Methods 2006, 133:175-179.

Elata et al. Virology Journal 2011, 8:303
http://www.virologyj.com/content/8/1/303

Page 7 of 7

16. Deyde VM, Khristova ML, Rollin PE, Ksiazek TG, Nichol ST: Crimean-Congo
hemorrhagic fever virus genomics and global diversity. J Virol 2006,
80:8834-8842.
17. Aradaib IE, Mohamed MEH, Abdallaa MAA: single-tube RT-PCR for rapid
detection and differentiation of some African isolates of palyam
serogroup orbiviruses. Journal of Virol Methods 2009, 161:70-74.
18. Abu Salma AA: Meat hygiene in the Sudan: Public health implications of
edible offals. MVSc thesis Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Khartoum, Sudan; 1995.
19. Nashed NWJ, Olson JG, Tigani AE: Isolation of Batai virus (Bunyaviridae,
Bunyavirus) from the blood of suspected malaria patients in Sudan. Am
J Trop Med Hyg 1993, 48:676-681.
20. Burt FJ, Paweska JT, Ashkettle B, Swanepoel R: Genetic relationship in
southern African Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus isolates:
evidence for occurrence of reassortment. Epidemiol. Infect 2009,
137:1302-1308.
21. Lukashev AN: Evidence for recombination in Crimean-Congo
hemorrhagic fever virus. J Gen Virol 2005, 86:2333-2338.
22. Whitehouse CA: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever. Antiviral Res 2004,
64:145-160.
doi:10.1186/1743-422X-8-303
Cite this article as: Elata et al.: A nosocomial transmission of crimeancongo hemorrhagic fever to an attending physician in north kordufan,
Sudan. Virology Journal 2011 8:303.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
