<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2164-11-147 1..13</title>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Conservation and divergence of known
apicomplexan transcriptional regulons
Kobby Essien1,2, Christian J Stoeckert Jr2,3*

Abstract
Background: The apicomplexans are a diverse phylum of parasites causing an assortment of diseases including
malaria in a wide variety of animals and lymphoproliferation in cattle. Little is known about how these varied
parasites regulate their transcriptional regulons. Even less is known about how regulon systems, consisting of
transcription factors and target genes together with their associated biological process, evolve in these diverse
parasites.
Results: In order to obtain insights into the differences in transcriptional regulation between these parasites we
compared the orthology profiles of putative malaria transcription factors across species and examined the
enrichment patterns of four binding sites across eleven apicomplexans.
About three-fifths of the factors are broadly conserved in several phylogenetic orders of sequenced apicomplexans.
This observation suggests the existence of regulons whose regulation is conserved across this ancient phylum.
Transcription factors not broadly conserved across the phylum are possibly involved in regulon systems that have
diverged between species. Examining binding site enrichment patterns in light of transcription factor conservation
patterns suggests a second mode via which regulon systems may diverge - rewiring of existing transcription factors and their associated binding sites in specific ways. Integrating binding sites with transcription factor conservation patterns also facilitated prediction of putative regulators for one of the binding sites.
Conclusions: Even though transcription factors are underrepresented in apicomplexans, the distribution of these
factors and their associated regulons reflect common and family-specific transcriptional regulatory processes.

Background
The apicomplexans are a phylum of about 5000 protozoan organisms that parasitize almost all animals [1].
Despite sharing three invasion-related organelles, collectively called the apical complex, these organisms are
diverse and pursue a wide variety of lifestyles that result
in varied diseases of medical and veterinary importance.
Plasmodium species are malaria-causing mosquitoborne parasites. Theileria species are tick-transmitted
parasites that cause lymphoproliferative diseases in cattle. Cryptosporidium species do not require a vector and
are spread from host-to-host causing cryptosporidiosis,
an acute diarrheal disease in mammals.
Sequencing and subsequent analysis of the human
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum revealed that
the parasite has few known or putative transcription
* Correspondence: stoeckrt@pcbi.upenn.edu
2
Center for Bioinformatics, University of Pennsylvania, 1420 Blockley Hall, 423
Guardian Drive, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA

factors [2,3]. A similar dearth of transcription factors
has been observed in other apicomplexans [4,5]. Even
with the discovery of the existence of a family of about
26 AP2 transcription factors in these parasites [6], compared to other single-celled eukaryotes such as yeast,
apicomplexans still have a paucity of DNA-binding transcription factors.
In their analysis of Plasmodium noncoding regions,
Imamura and colleagues identified three putative binding sites in rodent parasites [7]. We recently, described
seven putative transcription factor binding sites that
were conserved in at least two Plasmodium species [5].
Three of these binding sites were broadly conserved
across human, primate and rodent malaria parasites.
Other work has described the conservation of binding
sites across Theileria [8] and Cryptosporidium species
[9]. These results have raised the question of how
broadly conserved the control of transcription is across
apicomplexans. Specifically, is transcriptional control

© 2010 Essien and Stoeckert; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

largely conserved across apicomplexans or are transcription factors and their binding sites in promoters of target genes only conserved between closely related subsets
of apicomplexans?
Differences in transcriptional control are thought to
contribute to species diversity [10]. High throughput
genomics approaches have highlighted divergence of
known binding sites of conserved transcription factors
in related yeast species [11] and between human and
mouse [12]. It has been noted that the P. falciparum
AP2 transcription factor PF14_0633 and its Cryptosporidium parvum ortholog, cgd2_3490, likely regulate different sets of genes [13]. The nucleotide word
TGCATGCA, identical to the PF14_0633 binding site, is
overrepresented in all sequenced apicomplexan genomes
except Theileria [14,15]. This suggests that the diversification principles at work in apicomplexa may be similar
to those at work in other eukaryotes.
Despite belonging to the same phylum, apicomplexans
are characterized by a striking amount of diversity.
Members of the blood-invading haemosporidian order
of parasites include the mosquito-transmitted Plasmodium species that cause malaria. Even though Theileria
species also invade red blood cells, they belong to the
piroplasmid order of apicomplexans and are transmitted
by ticks and mostly cause lymphoproliferative diseases
in cattle. Then there are Toxoplasma and Neospora both
of which fall in the eucoccidioridian order and do not
require a host and exhibit very little cell tropism. The
issue of whether these parasites modulate their transcriptional control to pursue such extremely diverse lifestyles and inhabit distinct niches remains largely
unexplored.
In this work, we examined the conservation of putative Plasmodium falciparum transcription factors across
apicomplexans. We discover that disparate subsets of
apicomplexans likely have different sets of transcription
factors suggesting divergence in the complements of factors present in these species. Additionally, our analysis
reveals that about three-fifths of putative Plasmodium
falciparum transcription factors have an ortholog in at
least one non-Plasmodium apicomplexan. Enrichment
analysis of previously identified promoter binding sites
across species also suggests large-scale differences in
transcriptional control in disparate apicomplexans. None
of four transcriptional regulons considered in detail
were conserved across all apicomplexa. However, the
conservation of two regulons spanned blood-invading
phylogenetic orders within the phylum. By matching the
conservation profiles of putative transcription factors
with the enrichment profiles of binding sites we were
able to predict candidate transcription factors for a previously partially characterized ribosomal regulon. Finally,
by integrating the conservation analysis of transcription

Page 2 of 13

factors with the enrichment analysis of binding sites we
detected two possible mechanisms via which regulons
may be modified in these parasites.

Results
In its simplest form, a transcriptional system for a regulon can be reduced to three components: a transcription
factor, the set of target genes or regulon identifiable by
an upstream binding site that is bound by the transcription factor, and the biological process connected to the
regulon. We pursue complementary approaches to
assess whether regulons differ between apicomplexans.
The first approach entails determining whether transcription factors from the most widely studied apicomplexan, P. falciparum, are conserved in other
apicomplexans. In the second approach, we seek to
determine whether four previously experimentally characterized transcription factor binding sites from P. falciparum and P. berghei are conserved (enriched)
upstream of similar genes in different parasites.
Conservation patterns of putative P. falciparum
transcription factors

The well-known diversity of lifestyles of disparate apicomplexans as well as the age of the phylum (700-900
million years [16]) led us to hypothesize that significant
differences exist in the sets of transcription factors present in each species. To test this hypothesis we generated a list of putative P. falciparum transcription factors
by identifying all P. falciparum proteins containing
known DNA-binding domains and examined the conservation patterns of these proteins across three disparate sets of apicomplexans (Figure 1). We limit
ourselves to domains possibly involved in sequence-specific DNA-binding, consequently our list of predicted P.
falciparum transcription factors (Additional File 1) is
smaller than the list of transcription associated proteins
assembled by Coulson and colleagues in their comparison of transcriptional control between P. falciparum
and other eukaryotes [3].
To establish true orthology between two genes, one
would have to perform a phylogenetic study and
demonstrate that a pair of genes descended from a common ancestor. This would be followed up with biological validation that the two genes do in fact have the
same function in each of the two species. However
detailed studies of that nature are not available for most
apicomplexan genes. Consequently, we considered putative orthologs established by two commonly utilized
methods i) orthology prediction via reciprocal best
BLAST hits (RBH) between species and ii) orthology
prediction obtained from OrthoMCL, which couples
reciprocal best BLAST hits with protein clustering and
offers additional refinements to orthology prediction

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

Page 3 of 13

Figure 1 Conservation patterns of putative Plasmodium falciparum transcription factors. Orthologs predicted via reciprocal best BLAST hits
(RBH) are indicated with light blue and those predicted by OrthoMCL are indicated with purple. 42.24% of the transcription factors do not have
orthologs in non-Plasmodium apicomplexans demonstrating order-level specificity of transcriptional networks. ** The figure does not incorporate
RBH information for non-apicomplexans. It does however include the associated orthology information for OrthoMCL.

including detecting co-orthologs and accounting for
genome-wide base composition biases [17].
Initial analyses using the reciprocal best BLAST hits
(RBH) method for ortholog identification revealed that
not all transcription factors are conserved across the
apicomplexan phylum (Figure 1). In order to make
stronger claims about the conservation (or lack thereof)
of transcription factors, we reran the analyses using data
from OrthoMCL. In all subsequent analyses, we rely on
OrthoMCL for ortholog predictions because of the
aforementioned advantages that OrthoMCL has over the
reciprocal best BLAST hits approach.

Analysis of putative transcription factors by
OrthoMCL revealed that essentially all P. falciparum
predicted transcription factors have orthologs in at least
one other Plasmodium species (haemosporidians) (Figure 1). However, only 57.76% of P. falciparum predicted
factors have an ortholog in at least one non-Plasmodium apicomplexan (piroplasms and eucoccidioridians).
To determine whether transcription factors from other
apicomplexans also have similar numbers of orthologs
in P. falciparum, we predicted transcription factors in
other apicomplexans using the methodology used for
predicting P. falciparum transcription factors. We then

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

checked for the presence of orthologs of these factors in
P. falciparum. On average, 94.13% of primate-infecting
P. vivax and P. knowlesi factors are conserved in P. falciparum, as are 78.91% of the factors from the rodent
malaria parasites P. berghei and P. yoelii. The piroplasms
T. annulata and T. parva have on average 33.44% of
their predicted factors present in P. falciparum while
the eucoccidioridians T. gondii and N. caninum have
only 15.42%. Finally, C. parvum has 28.57% of its predicted factors present in P. falciparum. Lists of the predicted transcription factors in the other species are
presented in Additional File 1.
The level of conservation of transcription factors
between P. falciparum and the non-Plasmodium species
was surprising given the age of the phylum. In an
examination of fungus-specific predicted transcriptional
regulators it was noted that the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, which are separated by 400-600 million
years of evolution [18], share only 15% of fungal-specific
regulators [19]. While we cannot directly compare data
from the aforementioned yeast study to ours as different
criteria for factor prediction were utilized, we did not
expect to see extremely high levels of conservation
among the parasite species under consideration as they
belong to a phylum estimated to be 700-900 million
years old [16].
Assessing conservation of P. falciparum merozoite
invasion, ookinete stage, ribosomal gene, and sporozoite
stage regulons across apicomplexan species

We further tested the hypothesis that transcriptional
regulons differ significantly between apicomplexans by
examining whether transcription factor binding sites
were conserved (enriched) upstream of the same sets of
genes in eleven apicomplexan species. Hits or targets of
a transcription factor were identified as those genes with
a high confidence instance of the associated binding site
in their 2000 bp upstream region (for details see Figure
2 and Methods).
We examined the conservation of regulons associated
with four binding sites in particular (Figure 3). We
focus on these sites as they are well described in the literature. De Silva and colleagues used protein binding
microarrays (PBM) to show that the first and third sites
in Figure 3 are bound by the AP2 transcription factor
PF14_0633 [13,20] and PFF0200c [13] respectively (the
functionality of the third site had been previously established by Voss et al. [21]). The transcription factor binding to the second site is unknown but the functionality
of the site has been determined via deletion assays by
Militello et al. [22]. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and electromobility shift assays (EMSA),
Yuda et al. [23] recently confirmed PF-O

Page 4 of 13

(PB000572.01.0) as the transcription factor for the
fourth site.
For each of the four binding sites, a regulon was identified as conserved in a species if its known experimentally-associated transcription factor (See Figure 3) was
present (as an ortholog) in the species and hits for the
site have statistically significant overlap (enrichment)
with the set of genes expected to be regulated by the
site (expected regulon).
Cell invasion regulon

Conservation of enrichment of the merozoite cell invasion binding site in Plasmodium species and T. annulata only suggests a divergence in this system among
members of the phylum (Figure 4). Curiously, the cell
invasion binding site was not conserved in T. parva and
B. bovis. Generally, the trend of p-values suggests a
greater extent of enrichment in T. parva and B. bovis
than in T. gondii, N. caninum and C. parvum.
We examined the conservation pattern of the cell
invasion site’s known regulator across sequenced apicomplexans. The AP2 transcription factor PFF0200c had
orthologs in Plasmodium species, the two Theilerias and
Babesia suggesting that the factor is conserved across
the aforementioned species (Figures 1 and 4). Conservation of the factor in all the piroplasms with enrichment
for the site in only one of the three piroplasms suggests
partial conservation of the regulon in piroplasms. The
lack of significant enrichment p-values and absence of
PFF0200c orthologs in T. gondii, N. caninum and C.
parvum suggests that this regulon is not conserved in
eucoccidioridians.
Ookinete regulon

The ookinete is an invasive stage of Plasmodium parasites within the mosquito. Enrichment for the ookinete
binding site is seen only in Plasmodium species. The
orthology analysis suggested that the factor is conserved
in all Plasmodium species (Figure 4).
Ribosomal regulon

The G-box binding site is not enriched upstream of
ribosomal genes across all sequenced apicomplexans.
This binding site is generally conserved upstream of
ribosomal genes in Plasmodium species, the two Theilerias and B. bovis (Figure 4). As in the case of the cell
invasion and ookinete sites, this ribosomal binding site
is not conserved in T. gondii, N. caninum and C.
parvum.
The transcription factor associated with the G-box has
not been identified so its orthology pattern could not be
assessed. As seen in Figure 1, eight putative transcription factors have similar orthology patterns as the
G-box - absent in all the three eucoccidioridians and

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

Page 5 of 13

Figure 2 Assessing conservation (enrichment) of binding sites across species. a. The best instance of the binding site being studied (one
of the four in Figure 3) is identified upstream of each gene in the genome. b. The binding site is then permuted 100 times to generate 100
random sites with the same base composition as the real binding site. c. The best instance of each permuted site in the regions upstream of
each gene is located in the same genome. d. The distribution of scores for the real site is compared to that of the permuted sites and score at
the top one percentile of permuted sites is used as a cutoff for identifying high confidence hits for the real site. e. A p-value is computed
representing the statistical significance of the overlap between genes whose upstream regions have hits for the real site and the list of genes in
the process expected to be regulated by the site. f. The enrichment analysis (steps a-e) is repeated in all genomes and enrichment p-values are
compared across species.

present in some haemosporidians and some piroplasms.
Any of these eight proteins (Additional File 2) may be
negative or positive regulators of G-box associated ribosomal genes. One of the eight the proteins, AP2 protein
PFF0200c, was ruled out as a regulator for these genes
as it binds to the cell invasion site identified by De Silva
et al. [13] and is also not enriched upstream of ribosomal genes in any of the species considered (Table S6 in
Additional File 3). Additionally, another of the eight
proteins is predicted to be a CAAT-binding factor
(Additional File 2) consequently, it too is unlikely to
bind to the G-box.
To further explore the possibility that the remaining
six proteins regulate the ribosomal genes in question,
we compared the expression patterns of these candidate

regulators to those of ribosomal genes with G-box hits
(these high confidence putative G-box hits are
presented in Additional File 4). Of these six, two are
positively correlated with the average profile of G-box
associated ribosomal genes and the other four are negatively correlated (Additional File 2). The protein with
the highest positive correlation (r = 0.651) and hence
the highest-ranking candidate positive regulator is the
C2H2 zinc finger protein PFC0690c. The protein with
the highest negative correlation (r = -0.838) and hence
the highest-ranking candidate negative regulator is the
AP2 protein PF11_0442. Figure 5 shows that the average profile of the G-box associated ribosomal proteins
lags the profiles of both these high-ranking candidate
regulators.

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

Page 6 of 13

Figure 3 Transcription factor binding sites considered in this study. The functional contexts considered in the study are highlighted in blue.
The transcription factor for the site, if known, and key publications are also presented.

Sporozoite regulon

This regulon is conserved only in Plasmodium species
suggesting that its role in these species is quite specific
(Figure 4). Its associated regulator PF14_0633 has orthologs in all other Plasmodium species and C. Parvum.
A putative model of ribosomal gene regulation in
apicomplexans

In our earlier analysis of ribosomal genes, we observed
that the G-box was not enriched upstream of T. gondii,
N. caninum and C. parvum ribosomal genes. The binding site associated with P. falciparum sporozoite genes
has been independently implicated in the regulation of
T. gondii ribosomal genes [24]. We tested the hypothesis
that this same binding site is enriched upstream of ribosomal genes in N. caninum, which is closely related to
T. gondii, and to C. parvum which though separate
from all the other apicomplexans considered is classed
together with T. gondii and N. caninum as an

eucoccidioridian. This hypothesis was found to be true
in N. caninum but not in C. parvum (p-values of 0.010
and 0.960 respectively). The TRP-1 putative binding site
identified by Van Poppel and colleagues upstream of T.
gondii ribosomal genes [24] is also associated with N.
caninum ribosomal genesbut not C. parvum ones (pvalues of 1.7*10-19 and 0.202). The sequence logo of the
TRP-1 site is ‘starred’ with yellow in Figure 6.
These results enable us to begin assembling a model
describing the regulation of ribosomal genes in apicomplexans (Figure 6). In most Plasmodium species, Theileria and Babesia these genes are possibly regulated by
one of six candidate regulators mentioned earlier and
presented in Additional File 2 (or their respective orthologs in the appropriate species) and the G-box binding
site originally identified in P. falciparum. In T. gondii
and the related parasite N. caninum these same genes
are regulated by a factor similar to the P. falciparum
AP2 transcription factor PF14_0633 and the site

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

Page 7 of 13

Figure 4 Conservation of the four regulons. Regulons have generally diverged across the apicomplexan phylum but genera-related
conservation patterns are evident. This table presents enrichment p-values for each of the four regulons (rows) in each of the eleven species
studied (columns). Species names (column headings) are abbreviated as presented in Table 1. Significant enrichment p-values are given in
boldface. If the known factor for a particular regulon is conserved in a species (as determined in earlier analysis of conservation of patterns of
putative transcription factors) we highlight the cell for that entry in light blue.

Figure 5 Comparison of the expression of two putative G-box regulators and average expression of putative targets. The highestranking candidate positive regulator, PFC0690c, has a correlation of 0.651 with the set of ribosomal genes with high confidence G-box hits (n =
11). The highest-ranking negative regulator, PF11_0442, has a correlation of -0.838 with these same genes. In both cases, the expression of these
putative targets lags that of the candidate regulators.

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

Page 8 of 13

Figure 6 The ribosomal regulon system in apicomplexans. a) Enrichment p-values of three binding sites upstream of ribosomal genes. Stars
are color-coded to represent the three transcription factor binding sites at the bottom of the image. The G-box, sporozoite and TRP-1 sites are
‘starred’ with green, purple and yellow respectively. b) Schematic phylogeny of apicomplexan species considered. Stars below a particular species
indicate that the corresponding binding site likely regulates ribosomal genes in that particular species.

originally associated with P. falciparum sporozoite genes
together with the TRP-1 site identified by Van Poppel
and colleagues [24].

Discussion
In this work we take advantage of the availability of eleven apicomplexan genomes to examine the conservation
of transcriptional regulons in parasites. We compared the
conservation profiles of predicted Plasmodium transcription factors in disparate apicomplexans to obtain a regulator-centric view of differences in regulons. We also
focus on regulon systems associated with four Plasmodium binding sites and compare and contrast the conservation of these regulons within the Plasmodium genus
and in other apicomplexans. Overall, we note large-scale
differences in the regulation of regulons as determined
by different sets of putative transcription factors in these
species. Additionally, in our analysis of binding sites, we
note that even when a site is conserved in a particular
species, it may be rewired to control a new regulon.

Additionally, when orthologs of predicted transcription
factors from other apicomplexans were sought in P. falciparum we noted that generally the further away evolutionarily a species was from P. falciparum the smaller
the number of detected orthologs. This suggests that
over large evolutionary distances the regulators that
direct regulons are generally not conserved.
P. falciparum transcription factors that have orthologs
in non-Plasmodium apicomplexans raise the interesting
possibility that some transcription factors may be
broadly conserved across apicomplexans. These factors
may be involved in ancient apicomplexan transcriptional
networks. Such factors include TATA-binding proteins
and CAAT-box binding transcription factors which are
well known general transcription factors, some of which
have orthologs in species outside the apicomplexan phylum. These broadly conserved transcription factors also
contain Myb, C2H2 zinc finger and AP2 transcription
factors which may be involved in core processes a little
more specialized than those regulated by TATA-binding
and CAAT-binding transcription factors.

Conservation and divergence of transcription factors

About three-fifths of Plasmodium falciparum predicted
transcription factors are conserved in at least one of the
other non-Plasmodium apicomplexans considered.

Conservation of the cell invasion and ookinete regulons

Analysis of the Plasmodium falciparum cell invasion
and Plasmodium berghei ookinete transcription factor

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

binding sites suggests that their associated regulons are
conserved across Plasmodium species. Interestingly, the
cell invasion site was observed to be enriched upstream
of Theileria annulata cell invasion genes as well but not
those of the related parasites Theileria parva and
Babesia bovis.
The transcription factor associated with the cell invasion site is conserved in all the Plasmodium species
and all the piroplasms considered. It is possible that
the cell invasion regulon has diverged in T. parva and
B. babesia and the conserved transcription factor has
been rewired to serve other regulatory purposes. Alternatively, the lack of enrichment of the cell invasion
site in T. parva and B. bovis may reflect the low number of piroplasm genes with orthologs to known Plasmodium falciparum cell invasion genes (Table S1 in
Additional File 3). Efforts to better annotate piroplasm
genes will likely provide more comprehensive lists of
invasion genes specific to these organisms. It will be
interesting to determine whether these species-specific
invasion genes are also under the control of the P. falciparum invasion binding site or another binding site
altogether.
The cell invasion binding site, which we demonstrated
was conserved in all Plasmodium species, is utilized in
additional exclusive ways in P. falciparum. A combination of affinity purification and mass spectrometry has
been used by Voss and colleagues to validate the cell
invasion binding site, which they refer to as SPE2, in the
upstream regions of a subset of P. falciparum var genes
[21]. Var genes are important parts of the pathways that
P. falciparum uses to evade the human immune system.
Var genes are specific to P. falciparum so the presence
of the cell invasion site in var gene upstream regions is
a species-specific innovation.
In contrast to the cell invasion binding site, the ookinete site is conserved only in Plasmodium species (Figure 4). In this case, the factor is conserved across all
Plasmodium species, with no conservation observed in
any of the piroplasms.
Transcriptional regulation of ribosomal genes in
apicomplexans

Plasmodium species and the piroplasms share a ribosomal gene regulon. In addition to controlling ribosomal
genes, the binding site associated with this regulon is
suspected to control other trophozoite-specific metabolic processes [25]. The observation that Theileria species possess a binding site similar to the G-box binding
site identified in P. falciparum was first made by Guo
and Silva [8]. We show that upstream of ribosomal
genes, the G-box is conserved across five Plasmodium
species and three piroplasms but not in the three eucoccidioridian species considered.

Page 9 of 13

The regulation of ribosomal genes illustrates the complexity of transcriptional rewiring in apicomplexans (Figure 6). The G-box was conserved in Plasmodium species
and piroplasms but not in eucoccidioridians. Upstream
regions of ribosomal genes in the eucoccidioridians, T.
gondii and N. caninum, are enriched for the binding site
that was originally associated with Plasmodium sporozoite genes and a second site, TRP-1, that is not
enriched upstream of the orthologous genes in the other
apicomplexans. Interestingly, none of the three aforementioned ribosomal gene binding sites are enriched
upstream of C. parvum’s ribosomal genes implying the
existence of disparate but yet unknown transcription
factor binding sites for this parasite’s ribosomal genes.
Divergence of the binding sites governing ribosomal
gene regulation despite the core and conserved nature
of these genes in species is not unprecedented. The
upstream regions of Saccharomyces cerevisiae ribosomal
genes are enriched for the RAP1 binding site but this
particular site is not enriched in the upstream regions of
the corresponding genes in Schizosaccharomyces pombe
[26]. While both S. cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces
pombe have copies of the RAP1 transcription factor, the
S. cerevisiae copy has a transactivation domain that the
Schizosaccharomyces pombe copy lacks suggesting that
the factor and its corresponding site are rewired
together. Additionally, the upstream regions of mitochondrial ribosomal genes in yeast species exhibiting a
preference for aerobic respiration are enriched for the
RGE transcription factor binding site while no enrichment is seen upstream of the same genes in yeast species with a preference for anaerobic respiration [27].
Evolution of a sporozoite regulon via rewiring of binding
sites

A phylogenetic order-specific system is involved in sporozoite gene regulation in Plasmodium species. This suggests that systems governing the control of sporozoite
gene expression differ between Plasmodium species on
one hand and the rest of the apicomplexans on the
other.
The binding site originally associated with the Plasmodium sporozoite regulon described above has different
roles in other apicomplexans suggesting that it illustrates a case where a system evolves by rewiring of sites
in different species. Specifically, the site is enriched
upstream of ribosomal genes in the two eucoccidioridians T. gondii and N. caninum. Additionally, others
have suggested that the transcription factor associated
with the site is in fact conserved in all apicomplexans
and also that this factor is associated with different sets
of genes in Plasmodium falciparum and Cryptosporidium parvum [13]. It is worth noting that this factor is
likely multifunctional even in Plasmodium species, as it

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

has been demonstrated to be active in Plasmodium red
blood cell and sporozoite stages [13,28].
A role for adaptive evolution in the conservation patterns
of transcriptional regulons in apicomplexans?

Differences in the conservation of putative transcription
factors and known binding sites suggest that regulons
have diverged between apicomplexan species. A natural
question that arises from the results of this study is
whether the observed differences are the result of neutral or adaptive evolution.
Under the neutral evolutionary scenario, over evolutionary time, orthologous transcription factors have
accumulated so many mutations, albeit neutral ones,
that though their functions may remain the same they
are no longer identifiable as orthologs by computational
means.
While experimental evidence for adaptive changes in
transcription factors is not available for apicomplexans,
there is computational evidence to suggest that such
adaptation is highly likely. In higher eukaryotes, coding
regions of transcription factors have been observed to
diverge more quickly than those of genes involved in
housekeeping processes like metabolism [29]. In a study
of five Plasmodium species we noted that Plasmodium
transcription factors and parasite lifestyle-associated
genes might behave similarly as they have less constrained coding regions (higher dN/dS or rates of nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site to
synonymous substitutions per synonymous site) than
other groups of genes [30].
The cell invasion, ookinete and sporozoite binding
sites all have some Plasmodium-specific conservation
patterns. Though instances of these sites are present
in all the apicomplexan species considered, they all
have sets of genes involved in a biological process or
lifecycle stage whose upstream regions are enriched
for these sites in Plasmodium species only (in the case
of the cell invasion site we see association in one of
the three piroplasms as well). The ribosomal genes
have a specific binding site for Plasmodium species
and piroplasms and another set of binding sites for T.
gondii and N. caninum. Such changes in regulons are
not unprecedented. In a similar study of yeast species
separated by 420-600 million years of evolution only
one out of forty-two regulons was conserved across
fourteen species considered. Additionally, more
distantly related yeast species shared fewer binding
sites [31].
The lack of conservation of binding sites in all apicomplexans could result from neutral evolution - over
700-900 millions years of apicomplexan evolution a
remarkable amount of drift is expected in the upstream
regions of distantly related parasites.

Page 10 of 13

Alternatively, these regulon systems might be evolving
adaptively in response to genus-related lifestyle and
environmental differences. This is possible given that all
the binding sites considered were correlated with specific genera or groups of genera within the phylum. However, further work is necessary to distinguish between
these two scenarios. Probabilistic methods exist for
examining the types of selection, if any, on binding sites
within closely related organisms - yeast species (20 million years of separation) and fly species (10 million years
of separation) - however these methods require high
quality alignments [32,33] which are not easy to generate for the distantly related apicomplexans in our study.

Conclusions
In this work, we demonstrate the power of comparative
genomics in shedding light on transcriptional regulation in
non-model genomes with little prior knowledge. We integrate eleven apicomplexan genomes with observations
from high-throughput regulation studies and highlight different modes of transcriptional regulon modification.
While transcription factors are underrepresented in these
parasites it appears that these species use the few factors
they have in phylogenetic order-specific ways. As more
annotation, expression data and results from experimental
studies of transcription factors in these parasites become
available it will be possible to develop a more global perspective of transcriptional differences, and their functional
consequences if any, in these important parasites.
Methods
Orthology

Orthologs were predicted via two methods. The first
method is referred to as the reciprocal best BLAST hits
(RBH) approach. Under the RBH framework, orthologs
were determined by identifying reciprocal best BLAST
hits between various apicomplexans. An E-value cutoff
of 10-5 was utilized. OrthoMCL implements a more rigorous approach for the identification of orthologs.
OrthoMCL first identifies reciprocal best BLAST hits
between species and reciprocal ‘better’ BLAST hits
within species. It utilizes an E-value cutoff of 10-5. Markov Clustering (MCL) is then used to better define the
orthology and paralogy relationships between proteins
from the resulting graph of BLAST E-values [17,34].
Orthologs were primarily obtained during the course
of this work from two runs (versions 2.1 and 3.0) of
OrthoMCL-DB [17] kindly provided by Deborah Pinney.
OrthoMCL version 2.1 covering 89 genomes was used
for the identification of orthologous apicomplexan
upstream regions. The Babesia bovis genome is currently not included in OrthoMCL-DB so P. falciparum B. bovis orthologs were obtained from a separate run of
the OrthoMCL algorithm kindly provided by Kuo and

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

Page 11 of 13

colleagues [16]. For more comprehensive analysis of
orthologous transcription factors, OrthoMCL version 3.0
covering 128 genomes was used for the transcription
factor orthology analysis. In one case, OrthoMCL 3.0
did not identify any haemosporidian orthologs for a P.
falciparum factor (MAL8P1.153), but examination of
syntenic regions revealed that orthologs do in fact exist
in the two other primate malaria parasites. Apicomplexan orthologs for the 45 P. falciparum predicted
transcription factors are presented in Additional File 5.
Identification of putative transcription factors

Known DNA-binding domains [3,35] were obtained from
version 23.0 of the Protein families database (Pfam) [36].
Hidden Markov Model representations of these domains
were scanned against apicomplexan proteomes to identify putative transcription factors. A protein is defined as
containing a domain if its E-value exceeds the domainspecific Pfam-defined gathering threshold. The gathering
threshold of a specific Pfam Markov Model is the
sequence-based cutoff at which the Pfam curators
“gather” sequences to include in that Markov Model. 45
putative transcription factors were identified in P. falciparum. The predicted transcription factors in each of the
apicomplexans are presented in Additional File 1.
Transcription factor binding sites

The G-box position weight matrix (PWM) was constructed from the original sequences discovered by Militello and colleagues [22]. The sporozoite and cell
invasion PWMs were constructed from the sequences
used to generate the P. falciparum versions of the
respective motifs from earlier work from our lab [5]. In
their paper [23], Yuda and colleagues did not provide
the raw individual ookinete binding sites necessary for
constructing a PWM. Consequently, we ran the motif
finder MEME (version 4.2.0) [37] on the upstream

regions of the ookinete genes reported by Yuda et al. to
identify the ookinete PWM.
Expected regulons

The sporozoite regulon consisted of a set of genes
maximally expressed in sporozoites as determined in
previous publications [30,38]. The ribosomal regulon
consisted of a set of genes annotated as being part of
the ribosome (GO:0005840) using Gene Ontology
annotation obtained from PlasmoDB on 10/19/2008.
As the Gene Ontology has very few P. falciparum
genes annotated as being involved in cell invasion, the
cell invasion regulon consisted of genes obtained from
an integrated clustering of Gene Ontology terms and
expression data [39]. The ookinete regulon consisted
of the set of genes found to be maximally expressed in
ookinetes extracted from the study by Vontas and colleagues [40].
Assessment of binding site conservation

The best scoring instance of a particular binding site in
the region 2000 bp upstream of each gene (or up until
the nearest upstream gene if that was closer) in a genome
of interest was identified using PWM_SCAN with the
‘stage 2’ option which uses the percentile of the observed
score between the minimum and maximum achievable
by the matrix as a hit score [41]. The average length of
intergenic regions in the five Plasmodium species considered is 1476.58 bp (computed from data in [42,43]). By
limiting our analyses to a maximum upstream length of
2000 bp, on average, we capture most of the entire intergenic regions in these species and give some extra allowance for longer upstream regions. Given that most of the
binding sites were originally discovered in Plasmodium
species and also for consistency we anchored the maximum lengths of upstream regions in non-Plasmodium
species at 2000 bp as well.

Table 1 Apicomplexan genomes utilized in this paper
Abbr.

Species

Version

Genome Status

Source

Primary reference

Number of genes

Number of available
upstream regions

Cp

Cryptosporidium parvum

02/23/2007

13X

Tg

Toxoplasma gondii

07/23/2008

ToxoDB

CryptoDB

[44]

3886

3875

8155

Nc

Neospora caninum

08/05/2008

ToxoDB

8120

5761

5746

Bb

Babesia bovis

04/10/2008

8X

GenBank

Tp

Theileria parva

07/30/2005

Complete

GenBank

[45]

3671

3657

[46]

4035

Ta

Theileria annulata

07/29/2005

8X

GeneDB

4025

[4]

3793

3786

Pf

Plasmodium falciparum

06/28/2007

Complete

PlasmoDB

[2]

5460

5456

Pk

Plasmodium knowlesi

02/22/2007

8X

GeneDB

[47]

5161

4762

Pv

Plasmodium vivax

09/11/2007

Complete

GenBank

[5]

5390

5342

Pb

Plasmodium berghei

02/27/2006

4X

PlasmoDB

[43]

12365

10238

Py

Plasmodium yoelii yoelii

09/10/2002

5X

PlasmoDB

[48]

8075

7603

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

To identify a score cutoff for high scoring hits in a particular genome, the position weight matrix (PWM) of
each site was permuted 100 times to obtain 100 random
copies of that site, each with the same base composition
as the original site. These 100 permuted sites were also
used to scan the upstream genomic regions. Two distributions were then created, one consisting of the scores of
the actual site and the other, a background distribution,
consisting of the scores of the all the permuted sites. The
score at the top one percentile of distinct scores in the
background distribution was used as a cutoff for high
confidence hits of the actual site. Next, the overlap
between genes with high confidence hits of the site in
their upstream regions and the set of genes expected to
be regulated by the site was assessed by estimating the
probability of obtaining the observed amount of overlap
(enrichment) by random chance using the hypergeometric distribution. The above procedure was repeated in
each genome of interest for the particular site (using the
same permuted instances of the site) and the p-values
from the hypergeometric distribution were compared
across species to assess conservation. The procedure is
explained pictorially in Figure 2.
Hypergeometric statistics were computed using the
phyper function in the R statistical language. In computing the hypergeometric statistics we used the total number of predicted genes rather than the total number of
available upstream regions as the total set size. Genes
on short contigs may not have upstream regions or may
have unrealistically short upstream regions. By utilizing
the total number of genes as the total set size in the
hypergeometric computation we are being overly conservative and improved annotation resulting in new
upstream regions may improve p-values. We exclude
upstream regions less than 10 bp - see Table 1 for total
numbers of available upstream regions.
Overlap (enrichment) statistics for the cell invasion,
ribosomal/G-box and sporozoite sites are given in
Tables S1, S2 and S3 respectively (all in Additional File
3). We also assessed the ribosomal genes for enrichment
with the sporozoite site and the TRP-1 site discovered
by Van Poppel and colleagues [24]. The overlap statistics for these two sets of analyses are in Tables S4 and
S5 respectively in Additional File 3.
Additional file 1: Putative transcription factors in apicomplexan
proteomes. This file contains Pfam-predicted transcription factors in the
apicomplexan species considered in this paper. It has multiple sheets.
Each sheet has two columns - the first of which specifies a DNA-binding
domain and the second a protein predicted to contain that domain. The
sheets are labelled according to the species abbreviations described in
Table 1.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11147-S1.XLS ]

Page 12 of 13

Additional file 2: Putative transcription factors with similar
orthology profiles to the G-box binding site. This file contains the
putative transcription factors whose orthology profiles are similar to that
of the G-box. Their DNA-binding domains and correlation to the average
expression profile of the putative G-box associated ribosomal genes
(Additional File 4) are also given.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11147-S2.XLS ]
Additional file 3: Data used for computing binding site enrichment
statistics. Contains labelled supplementary tables presenting the data
used to compute the binding site enrichment p-values for the various
regulons.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11147-S3.PDF ]
Additional file 4: Ribosomal genes with high confidence G-box hits
in their 2000 bp upstream regions. This file contains the ribosomal
genes with high confidence G-box hits in their 2000 bp upstream
regions (data used to construct Figure 5). The file has two columns - the
first specifies gene names and the second states gene annotation
obtained from PlasmoDB.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11147-S4.XLS ]
Additional file 5: Orthologs of the putative P. falciparum
transcription factors. This file contains orthologs (one species per
column) of each the putative P. falciparum transcription factors. ‘NA’
implies that an ortholog was not detected in a particular species.
Columns are labelled according to the species abbreviations described in
Table 1. The two MAL8P1.153 orthologs identified by syntenic
examination are highlighted in red.
Click here for file
[ http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1471-2164-11147-S5.XLS ]

Acknowledgements
We thank Omar Harb, Lucia Peixoto, David Roos, Larry Singh and Sridhar
Hannenhalli for useful feedback; Deborah Pinney, Wei Li and Vishal Nayak for
help in locating various genomic datasets; Chih-Horng Kuo for providing us
with a Babesia-including OrthoMCL clustering.
This work was funded by NIH R01 AI058515 to CJS.
The Neospora caninum genome sequencing project was funded by BBSRC
(UK) and was sequenced at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute (WTSI) in
Cambridge (UK) in collaboration with University of Liverpool (UK). We wish
to thank the WTSI Pathogen Genomics group and the sequencing
operations staff for sequencing and making the annotated version of the
assembled Neospora caninum genome sequence data publicly available via
GeneDB and ToxoDB.
Author details
1
Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, 240 Skirkanich
Hall, 210 South 33rd Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. 2Center
for Bioinformatics, University of Pennsylvania, 1420 Blockley Hall, 423
Guardian Drive, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. 3Department of
Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie
Boulevard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
Authors’ contributions
KE: conceived and designed analyses, performed analyses and drafted the
manuscript. CJS: conceived and designed analyses and assisted in drafting
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 25 May 2009
Accepted: 3 March 2010 Published: 3 March 2010

Essien and Stoeckert BMC Genomics 2010, 11:147
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/147

References
1. Roos DS: Themes and Variations in Apicomplexan Parasite Biology.
Science 2005, 309:72-73.
2. Gardner MJ, Hall N, Fung E, White O, Berriman M, et al: Genome sequence
of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Nature 2002,
419:498-511.
3. Coulson RM, Hall N, Ouzounis CA: Comparative Genomics of
Transcriptional Control in the Human Malaria Parasite Plasmodium
falciparum. Genome Res 2004, 14:1548-1554.
4. Pain A, Renauld H, Berriman M, Murphy L, Yeats CA, et al: Genome of the
Host-Cell Transforming Parasite Theileria annulata Compared with T.
parva. Science 2005, 309:131-133.
5. Carlton JM, Adams JH, Silva JC, Bidwell SL, Lorenzi H, et al: Comparative
genomics of the neglected human malaria parasite Plasmodium vivax.
Nature 2008, 455:757-763.
6. Balaji S, Babu MM, Iyer LM, Aravind L: Discovery of the principal specific
transcription factors of Apicomplexa and their implication for the
evolution of the AP2-integrase DNA binding domains. Nucl Acids Res
2005, 33:3994-4006.
7. Imamura H, Persampieri JH, Chuang JH: Sequences conserved by selection
across mouse and human malaria species. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:372.
8. Guo X, Silva J: Properties of non-coding DNA and identification of putative
cis-regulatory elements in Theileria parva. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:582.
9. Mullapudi N, Lancto CA, Abrahamsen MS, Kissinger JC: Identification of
putative cis-regulatory elements in Cryptosporidium parvum by de novo
pattern finding. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:13.
10. King MC, Wilson AC: Evolution at two levels in humans and
chimpanzees. Science 1975, 188:107-116.
11. Borneman AR, Gianoulis TA, Zhang ZD, Yu H, Rozowsky J, et al: Divergence
of Transcription Factor Binding Sites Across Related Yeast Species.
Science 2007, 317:815-819.
12. Odom DT, Dowell RD, Jacobsen ES, Gordon W, Danford TW, et al: Tissuespecific transcriptional regulation has diverged significantly between
human and mouse. Nat Genet 2007, 39:730-732.
13. De Silva EK, Gehrke AR, Olszewski K, Leon I, Chahal JS, et al: Specific DNAbinding by Apicomplexan AP2 transcription factors. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 2008, 105:8393-8398.
14. Bankier AT, Spriggs HF, Fartmann B, Konfortov BA, Madera M, et al:
Integrated Mapping, Chromosomal Sequencing and Sequence Analysis
of Cryptosporidium parvum. Genome Res 2003, 13:1787-1799.
15. Ling K, Rajandream M, Rivailler P, Ivens A, Yap S, et al: Sequencing and
analysis of chromosome 1 of Eimeria tenella reveals a unique segmental
organization. Genome Res 2007, 17:311-319.
16. Kuo C, Wares JP, Kissinger JC: The Apicomplexan Whole-Genome
Phylogeny: An Analysis of Incongruence among Gene Trees. Mol Biol Evol
2008, 25:2689-2698.
17. Chen F, Mackey AJ, Stoeckert CJ, Roos DS: OrthoMCL-DB: querying a
comprehensive multi-species collection of ortholog groups. Nucl Acids
Res 2006, 34:D363-D368.
18. Beltrao P, Trinidad JC, Fiedler D, Roguev A, Lim WA, et al: Evolution of
Phosphoregulation: Comparison of Phosphorylation Patterns across
Yeast Species. PLoS Biol 2009, 7:e1000134.
19. Coulson RMR, Ouzounis CA: The phylogenetic diversity of eukaryotic
transcription. Nucl Acids Res 2003, 31:653-660.
20. Lindner SE, De Silva EK, Keck JL, Llinás M: Structural Determinants of DNA
Binding by a P. falciparum ApiAP2 Transcriptional Regulator. J Mol Biol
2009, 395:558-567.
21. Voss TS, Kaestli M, Vogel D, Bopp S, Beck H: Identification of nuclear
proteins that interact differentially with Plasmodium falciparum var
gene promoters. Mol Microbiol 2003, 48:1593-1607.
22. Militello KT, Dodge M, Bethke L, Wirth DF: Identification of regulatory elements
in the Plasmodium falciparum genome. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2004, 134:75-88.
23. Yuda M, Iwanaga S, Shigenobu S, Mair GR, Janse CJ, et al: Identification of
a transcription factor in the mosquito-invasive stage of malaria
parasites. Mol Microbiol 2009, 71:1402-1414.
24. Van Poppel NFJ, Welagen J, Vermeulen AN, Schaap D: The Complete Set
of Toxoplasma Gondii Ribosomal Protein Genes Contains Two
Conserved Promoter Elements. Parasitology 2006, 133:19-31.
25. Young J, Johnson J, Benner C, Yan SF, Chen K, et al: In silico discovery of
transcription regulatory elements in Plasmodium falciparum. BMC
Genomics 2008, 9:70.

Page 13 of 13

26. Tanay A, Regev A, Shamir R: Conservation and evolvability in regulatory
networks: the evolution of ribosomal regulation in yeast. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2005, 102:7203-7208.
27. Ihmels J, Bergmann S, Gerami-Nejad M, Yanai I, McClellan M, et al: Rewiring
of the Yeast Transcriptional Network Through the Evolution of Motif
Usage. Science 2005, 309:938-940.
28. Menard R, Heussler V, Yuda M, Nussenzweig V: Plasmodium preerythrocytic stages: what’s new?. Trends in Parasitology 2008, 24:564-569.
29. Lopez-Bigas N, De S, Teichmann S: Functional protein divergence in the
evolution of Homo sapiens. Genome Biology 2008, 9:R33.
30. Essien K, Hannenhalli S, Stoeckert CJ: Computational Analysis of
Constraints on Noncoding Regions, Coding Regions and Gene
Expression in Relation to Plasmodium Phenotypic Diversity. PLoS ONE
2008, 3:e3122.
31. Gasch AP, Moses AM, Chiang DY, Fraser HB, Berardini M, et al: Conservation
and Evolution of Cis-Regulatory Systems in Ascomycete Fungi. PLoS
Biology 2004, 2:e398.
32. Doniger SW, Fay JC: Frequent gain and loss of functional transcription
factor binding sites. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3:e99.
33. Moses AM, Pollard DA, Nix DA, Iyer VN, Li X, et al: Large-scale turnover of
functional transcription factor binding sites in Drosophila. PLoS Comput
Biol 2006, 2:e130.
34. Li L, Stoeckert CJ, Roos DS: OrthoMCL: identification of ortholog groups
for eukaryotic genomes. Genome Res 2003, 13:2178-2189.
35. Zupicich J, Brenner SE, Skarnes WC: Computational prediction of
membrane-tethered transcription factors. Genome Biol 2001, 2:
RESEARCH0050-0050.6.
36. Finn RD, Tate J, Mistry J, Coggill PC, Sammut SJ, et al: The Pfam protein
families database. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D281-D288.
37. Bailey TL, Elkan C: Fitting a mixture model by expectation maximization to
discover motifs in biopolymers. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 1994, 2:28-36.
38. Jeffares DC, Pain A, Berry A, Cox AV, Stalker J, et al: Genome variation and
evolution of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Nat Genet
2007, 39:120-125.
39. Zhou Y, Young JA, Santrosyan A, Chen K, Yan SF, et al: In silico gene
function prediction using ontology-based pattern identification.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21:1237-1245.
40. Vontas J, Siden-Kiamos I, Papagiannakis G, Karras M, Waters AP, et al: Gene
expression in Plasmodium berghei ookinetes and early oocysts in a coculture system with mosquito cells. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology
2005, 139:1-13.
41. Levy S, Hannenhalli S: Identification of transcription factor binding sites
in the human genome sequence. Mamm Genome 2002, 13:510-514.
42. Carlton JM, Angiuoli SV, Suh BB, Kooij TW, Pertea M, et al: Genome
sequence and comparative analysis of the model rodent malaria
parasite Plasmodium yoelii yoelii. Nature 2002, 419:512-519.
43. Hall N, Karras M, Raine JD, Carlton JM, Kooij TWA, et al: A Comprehensive
Survey of the Plasmodium Life Cycle by Genomic, Transcriptomic, and
Proteomic Analyses. Science 2005, 307:82-86.
44. Abrahamsen MS, Templeton TJ, Enomoto S, Abrahante JE, Zhu G, et al:
Complete Genome Sequence of the Apicomplexan, Cryptosporidium
parvum. Science 2004, 304:441-445.
45. Brayton KA, Lau AOT, Herndon DR, Hannick L, Kappmeyer LS, et al:
Genome sequence of Babesia bovis and comparative analysis of
apicomplexan hemoprotozoa. PLoS Pathog 2007, 3:1401-1413.
46. Gardner MJ, Bishop R, Shah T, de Villiers EP, Carlton JM, et al: Genome
sequence of Theileria parva, a bovine pathogen that transforms
lymphocytes. Science 2005, 309:134-137.
47. Pain A, Bohme U, Berry AE, Mungall K, Finn RD, et al: The genome of the
simian and human malaria parasite Plasmodium knowlesi. Nature 2008,
455:799-803.
48. Carlton JM, Angiuoli SV, Suh BB, Kooij TW, Pertea M, et al: Genome
sequence and comparative analysis of the model rodent malaria
parasite Plasmodium yoelii yoelii. Nature 2002, 419:512-519.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-147
Cite this article as: Essien and Stoeckert: Conservation and divergence
of known apicomplexan transcriptional regulons. BMC Genomics 2010
11:147.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
