<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Antibody isotype analysis of malaria-nematode co-infection: problems and solutions associated with cross-reactivity</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Immunology 2010 11:6. doi:10.1186/1471-2172-11-6"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Karen J Fairlie-Clarke; Tracey J Lamb; Jean Langhorne; Andrea L Graham; Judith E Allen"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Antibody isotype analysis of malaria-nematode
co-infection: problems and solutions associated
with cross-reactivity
Karen J Fairlie-Clarke1*, Tracey J Lamb2, Jean Langhorne3, Andrea L Graham1,4, Judith E Allen1

Abstract
Background: Antibody isotype responses can be useful as indicators of immune bias during infection. In studies of
parasite co-infection however, interpretation of immune bias is complicated by the occurrence of cross-reactive
antibodies. To confidently attribute shifts in immune bias to the presence of a co-infecting parasite, we suggest
practical approaches to account for antibody cross-reactivity. The potential for cross-reactive antibodies to influence
disease outcome is also discussed.
Results: Utilising two murine models of malaria-helminth co-infection we analysed antibody responses of mice
singly- or co-infected with Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi and Nippostrongylus brasiliensis or Litomosoides
sigmodontis. We observed cross-reactive antibody responses that recognised antigens from both pathogens
irrespective of whether crude parasite antigen preparations or purified recombinant proteins were used in ELISA.
These responses were not apparent in control mice. The relative strength of cross-reactive versus antigen-specific
responses was determined by calculating antibody titre. In addition, we analysed antibody binding to periodatetreated antigens, to distinguish responses targeted to protein versus carbohydrate moieties. Periodate treatment
affected both antigen-specific and cross-reactive responses. For example, malaria-induced cross-reactive IgG1
responses were found to target the carbohydrate component of the helminth antigen, as they were not detected
following periodate treatment. Interestingly, periodate treatment of recombinant malaria antigen Merozoite Surface
Protein-119 (MSP-119) resulted in increased detection of antigen-specific IgG2a responses in malaria-infected mice.
This suggests that glycosylation may have been masking protein epitopes and that periodate-treated MSP-119 may
more closely reflect the natural non-glycosylated antigen seen during infection.
Conclusions: In order to utilize antibody isotypes as a measure of immune bias during co-infection studies, it is
important to dissect antigen-specific from cross-reactive antibody responses. Calculating antibody titre, rather than
using a single dilution of serum, as a measure of the relative strength of the response, largely accomplished this.
Elimination of the carbohydrate moiety of an antigen that can often be the target of cross-reactive antibodies also
proved useful.

Background
The geographical and socio-economic distribution of
malaria overlaps with areas in which a number of helminth parasites are also endemic. It is the norm in these
areas for co-infection to occur and a growing body of
literature reflects this [1-12]. The influence of co-infection on the immune response may result in either
* Correspondence: Karen.Fairlie-Clarke@ed.ac.uk
1
Institutes of Evolution, Immunology and Infection Research, School of
Biological Sciences, King’s Buildings, University of Edinburgh, West Mains
Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3JT, UK

exacerbation or amelioration of disease [13-15]. It is
therefore crucial to understand the host-parasite relationship in the context of multiple infections, if vaccine
design and drug administration programmes are to be
managed effectively [16]. Animal models accurately
reflect many pathological aspects of malaria-helminth
co-infection with regard to impact on disease outcome
and also provide the opportunity to further examine
immunological mechanisms in detail [17-20].
We previously undertook an investigation to assess the
impact of a pre-existing chronic nematode infection on

© 2010 Fairlie-Clarke et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

malaria-related pathology, utilising the rodent malaria
Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi (Pcc) and the rodent
filarial nematode Litomosoides sigmodontis (Ls) [21]. We
found that co-infected mice (Pcc-Ls), particularly those
that did not have blood microfilaremia, had exacerbated
immunopathology. This was associated with increased
interferon-gamma (IFN-g) responsiveness but was independent of Pcc parasitemia [21]. One of the primary
objectives in our previous malaria-nematode co-infection studies was to gather antigen-specific T-cell data to
determine whether nematode infection could alter the
cytokine bias of the Pcc-specific T lymphocyte response
towards Th1 and conversely, whether a potent Th1
response could alter the Th2 bias of the nematode-specific response.
Cytokine production by antigen specific T-cells can be
difficult to assess during malaria, due to immune suppression associated with the peak of infection and apoptosis of splenocytes [22]. Additionally, the complex
nature of the target antigen (Pcc-infected red blood
cells) is a further complicating factor. Thus, gathering
antigen-specific T-cell data remains a technical challenge of studying immunity to malaria particularly in
human studies where there is the additional challenge of
obtaining and maintaining lymphocytes in the field.
Here we focus on the dissection and interpretation of
parasite antigen-specific antibody responses as an alternative to T-cell analysis. Antibodies of the IgG2a isotype
are mainly produced by B cells in response to IFN-g in
mice [23-25] whereas the Th2 cytokine IL-4 switches B
cells to produce IgG1 [24,26]. Although the generation
of IgG1 as a marker for Th2 cells is less definitive than
IgG2a as a marker of a Th1-type response, the ratio of
IgG1 to IgG2a provides a powerful indicator of immune
bias [27-30]. Measurement of antibodies can also be
achieved with smaller sample volumes and poses fewer
technical challenges than T-cell recall assays. Furthermore, antibody analysis can provide information on the
fuller history of infection as it reflects cumulative immunological activity, whereas cytokine responses of T-cells
are an ex-vivo ’snapshot’ that can more readily be
altered by changes in the timing of sampling both in
vivo and in vitro. Antibody analyses of co-infected animals might therefore provide evidence of overall Th1Th2 cell cross-regulation even when cytokine analyses
may not.
In addition to their use as indicators of cytokine bias
during infection, antibody isotypes have direct functional
relevance to disease severity in helminth-malaria coinfection. Antibodies are absolutely required for the
ultimate clearance of malaria parasites [31]. In mice,
antibodies of the cytophilic isotype IgG2a have been
shown to recognise infected erythrocytes [32] and facilitate their destruction by phagocytes [33]. Similarly, in

Page 2 of 12

humans IgG1 and IgG3 are associated with enhanced
parasite clearance [34]. If helminth co-infection alters
antibody class-switching and consequently the production of malaria-specific cytophilic antibodies then the
resolution of malaria infection may be affected. Indeed,
co-infection with the gastro-intestinal nematode Heligomosoides polygyrus reduced Pcc-specific IgG2a responses
and resulted in exacerbated malaria parasitemia [18].
There are also important implications for vaccine efficacy and administration. For example, immunisation
that protected mice from malaria failed to do so in mice
that also harboured a nematode infection [35].
In this study, the characterisation of antibody isotype
responses as an indicator of cytokine bias during coinfection has proved unexpectedly challenging due to the
production of cross-reactive antibodies induced by single-species infection. To establish the real effect of coinfection on the Th1/Th2 immune bias from non-specific
reactivity to antigen we needed to determine how robust
the cross-reactive responses were in comparison to the
antigen-specific. We demonstrate that a combination of
calculating antibody titre, from a dilution series of test
sera, and periodate treatment of the parasite antigens can
control for most cross-reactivity. The magnitude and
robustness of some cross-reactivity, however merits
further investigation to explore the potential function of
these responses during co-infection.

Methods
Hosts, parasites and experimental infection

Specific pathogen free, 8-10 week old female BALB/c
mice (Harlan, UK) were maintained in individually ventilated cages on diet 41b ad lib in a 12 h:12 h light-dark
cycle. All experiments were carried out in accordance
with the animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986, and
were approved by the UK Home Office inspectorate and
institutional review committee.
Pcc clone AS was originally isolated from thicket rats
(Thamnomys rutilans) and was cloned by serial dilution
and passage [36]. Parasites were recovered from frozen
blood stabilates by passage through donor mice. Experimental parasite inoculations were prepared from donor
mice by diluting blood in calf serum solution (50% heatinactivated foetal calf serum, 50% Ringer’s solution [27
mM KCl, 27 mM CaCl2, 0.15 M NaCl, 20 units heparin
per mouse]). Each mouse received 0.1 ml of inoculum
intraperitoneally (i.p) corresponding to an infective dose
of 1 × 106 or 1 × 105 parasitized red blood cells (RBC),
depending on the experiment. An inoculum of naïve
RBC was given as a control for erythrocyte proteins.
The filarial nematode Ls was maintained by cyclical
passage between gerbils (Meriones unguiculatus) and
mites (Ornithonyssus bacoti) as described previously
[37]. Infection was initiated by subcutaneous (s.c)

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

injection of 25 infective (L3) larvae. For co-infection
experiments in which the influence of malaria on
chronic nematode infection was addressed, 1 × 106 Pcc
parasitized RBC were introduced i.p on Day 60 of an
established Ls infection and mice were sacrificed on day
20 post-Pcc infection, as described previously [21].
Whole blood was collected from the brachial artery and
serum recovered after clotting at room temperature.
Nb worms were maintained by serial passage through
Sprague-Dawley rats. L3 larvae were obtained by culturing the faeces of infected rats at 26°C for a minimum of
5 days [38]. For acute nematode-malaria co-infection,
infection was initiated by s.c injection of 200 infective
(L3) larvae on the same day that Pcc was introduced by
inoculation i.p of 1 × 105 parasitized RBC. Mice were
sacrificed on Day 20 post-infection under terminal
anaesthesia. Whole blood was collected from the brachial artery and was separated using Sera Sieve (Hughes
& Hughes Ltd).
Antigens

Two malaria antigens were used in this study: a recombinant protein and a crude antigen homogenate prepared from parasitized erythrocytes. The recombinant
Merozoite Surface Protein-119 (MSP-119) was originally
sequenced, cloned and expressed from Pcc AS clone, as
described previously [39]. In brief, the MSP-119 nucleotide sequence was inserted into Pichia pastoris vector
pIC9K and protein expression carried out in Pichia pastoris strain SMD1169. This antigen was used in ELISA
at a concentration of 1 μg/ml.
The crude malaria homogenate - lysed Pcc parasitized
red blood cell extract (pRBC) - was prepared from whole
blood of mice with a parasitemia in excess of 20%. Mice
were bled by cardiac puncture with a heparinised syringe
and blood stored at -80°C prior to 3 rounds of freezethaw to lyse the parasitized red blood cells. The lysed
cells were sonicated, on ice, twice for 30 sec at 10 Amp
and centrifuged at 16060 g for 10 min. The supernatant
was stored at -80°C. Similarly, a naïve red blood cell
extract (nRBC) was prepared as a control for RBC proteins; responses to this antigen amongst infected mice
were indistinguishable from naïve (data not shown). In
the Ls experiments this antigen was used in ELISA at 0.5
μg/ml and in the Nb experiments at 5 μg/ml.
Ls and Nb extracts (LsA and NbA) were prepared by
homogenisation of adult nematodes in PBS. The somatic
extracts were centrifuged at 1000 g for 20 mins and the
pellet discarded. The extract was stored at -20°C. LsA
was used in ELISA at 0.5 μg/ml and NbA at 5 μg/ml.
Antibody detection

ELISA was used to measure antigen-specific IgG antibodies in the serum of nematode-infected, Pcc-infected or

Page 3 of 12

co-infected mice. In the Pcc-Ls study, sera were added
in a serial dilution 1/100 - 1/400 and a dilution was
then chosen whereby all samples fell in the linear range
of the curve; for IgG1, a dilution of 1/200 and for IgG2a
1/100. For the subsequent Pcc-Nb study, serum samples
were added in a serial dilution 1/50 - 1/819200. Antibody titres were calculated as the reciprocal of the
greatest dilution at which optical density (O.D) was
greater than the mean plus 3 standard deviations of the
O.D values observed for control mouse sera at 1/200
dilution.
Antibody responses to MSP-119, pRBC, NbA or LsA
were determined for IgG isotypes IgG1, IgG2a, and
IgG3. 96 well maxisorp immunoplates (Nunc) were
coated at 4°C overnight with either recombinant or
crude antigens at the concentrations indicated (see Antigens section) in 0.06 M carbonate buffer (0.04 M
NaHCO3, 0.02 M NaCO3, pH9.6) in a final volume of
50 μl per well. Non-specific binding was blocked with
5% FCS in carbonate buffer (200 μl/well) for 2 hours at
37°C. Wells were washed three times in Tris buffered
saline with 0.1% Tween (TBST) after each step. Serum
samples were added in serial dilutions as indicated using
TBST as a diluent, in a final volume of 75 μl per well
and incubated for 2 hours at 37°C. Isotype specific
detection antibodies were diluted in TBST in a final
volume of 50 μl per well. For IgG1, HRP conjugated
goat anti-mouse IgG1 (Southern Biotech 1070-05) was
used at 1/6000, HRP conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG2a
(Southern Biotech 1080-05) at 1/4000 and HRP conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG3 (Southern Biotech 1100-05)
was used at 1/1000. Plates were incubated for 1 hour at
37°C. An additional wash in distilled water was carried
out before developing with ABTS peroxide substrate
(Insight Biotechnology), 100 μl per well, at room temperature for 20 minutes. O.D was read at 405 nm using
a spectrophotometer.
Polyclonal IgE levels were determined by sandwich
ELISA. 96 well maxisorp immunoplates (Nunc) were
coated overnight at 4°C with 100 μl of IgE capture antibody (2 μg/ml; clone R35-72 Pharmingen) diluted in
carbonate buffer. Plates were blocked with 5% non-fat
skimmed milk in carbonate buffer for 2 hr at 37°C.
Plates were washed 5 × in TBST before addition of sera
at 1/10 and 1/20 dilutions in a final volume of 50 μl/
well and left overnight at 4°C. For the standard curve
two- fold serial dilutions of purified mouse IgE, 
monoclonal isotype standard (Pharmingen) were used.
After 5 washes in TBST, 100 μl of biotinylated detection
antibody (2 μg/ml; clone R35-118 Pharmingen) diluted
in TBST with 5% FCS was added and plates left at 37°C
for 90 mins. Plates were washed 5 × in TBST prior to
incubation with ExtrAvidin peroxidase (SIGMA), diluted
1:8000 in TBST with 0.5% FCS, for 30 mins at 37°C.

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

After a final wash in distilled water, plates were developed with 100 μl TMB microwell peroxidase substrate
system (Insight Biotechnology Ltd) and read at 650 nm.
In order to determine the extent to which carbohydrate or protein moieties contributed to the antibody
response the antigens were pre-treated with periodate.
Antigen-specific IgG1, IgG2a and IgG3 antibodies were
measured in response to antigens treated with periodate.
The ELISA was carried out as detailed for the Nb coinfection experiment with untreated antigens but the
following additional steps were included after blocking
with 5% FCS: carbonate buffer, prior to sample addition.
TBST wash (×3) was followed by the addition of 10 mM
sodium (meta) periodate diluted in 50 mM sodium acetate in a final volume of 100 μl/well. Plates were incubated at 37°C for 1 hour and then washed in 50 mM
sodium acetate. To stop the activity of periodate, 100 μl
of 50 mM sodium borohydride solution was added to
each well.
Statistical Analysis

General linear statistical models allowed us to frame and
test questions such that we could determine whether
differences in infection status and/or presence of carbohydrate antigen explained the observed variation in antibody responses. For more detailed explanation of the
statistical methods employed see Grafen and Hails [40].
Infection status and treatment with periodate (or not)
were included as categorical factors and their ability to
predict antibody response was formally evaluated via
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). The serial dilution of
sera in an ELISA produces ordinal data, which were
log10 transformed prior to analysis to ensure the data
were approximately normally distributed, in accordance
with the requirements of linear models. Analyses were
carried out using the statistical package JMP 5.1 (SAS).
The maximal model was fitted first and minimal models
were obtained by sequentially removing non-significant
terms (P-value > 0.05), beginning with interactions.
Finally, whenever a factor was significant (P < 0.05), an
All Pairs Tukey post-hoc test was carried out to identify
which groups of mice differed significantly in antibody
induction, with respect to infection status or periodate
treatment.

Results
Antibody isotype responses are skewed by malaria-filaria
co-infection but cross-reactivity confounds data
interpretation

We had previously used a model of Pcc-nematode coinfection in which Pcc is introduced into mice with preexisting chronic Ls infection to investigate the dynamics
of infection with regard to parasitological outcome and
cytokine bias [21]. In the Pcc-Ls model the peak of

Page 4 of 12

malaria parasitemia was controlled by day 10 and
resolved by day 14 post Pcc-infection. For this study, we
envisaged that analysis of the antibody isotype response
from these mice would provide a method to rapidly and
quantitatively assess immune bias. We thus asked
whether we could use antibody isotype ELISA for IgG2a
and IgG1 to address whether nematode infection would
skew the Th1 cell response to Pcc to a more Th2 cell
biased response. Conversely, we wished to address
whether the powerful Th1 cell response induced by
malaria would have the capacity to alter an established
IgG1 response to a nematode infection. As is common
practice in many studies [41-48], especially with large
sample sizes as in this study, the ELISAs were performed with a fixed serum concentration derived from
the linear point in a dilution series.
As expected from previous studies [49-51], we were
able to detect an IgG1 response against LsA in Ls mice.
Co-infected (Pcc-Ls) mice also produced LsA-specific
IgG1, but it was reduced in magnitude compared to the
Ls mice (Fig 1Ai). Thus co-infection with Pcc appeared
to down-regulate the anti-Ls specific IgG1 response. It
also appeared that responses in Pcc-Ls mice were further
biased toward a Th1 cell response through the induction
of IgG2a to LsA (Fig 1Aii). Also as expected [32,52], Pcc
mice mounted highly biased Th1-cell responses as indicated by the predominance of Pcc (pRBC)-specific IgG2a
over IgG1 (Fig 1B). Once again, Pcc-Ls mice appeared to
alter this bias by increasing the amount of pRBC-specific
IgG1 in comparison to the Pcc mice (Fig 1Bi).
At first glance, the results strongly suggested that the
isotype and hence cytokine bias of each single-species
infection was significantly impacted by co-infection. In
support of this, polyclonal IgE was highest in Ls mice
and absent in Pcc mice with Pcc-Ls mice exhibiting an
intermediate level (Fig. 1C) although Pcc-Ls mice did
not differ statistically from Ls mice in this polyclonal
analysis. However, it was apparent that Pcc mice were
exhibiting sizable antibody responses to LsA (X1 in Fig
1Aii) and conversely Ls mice were exhibiting strong
antibody responses to pRBC (X2 in Fig 1Bi). Western
blot analysis confirmed that these Ls-induced cross-reactive responses were directed against the parasite rather
than the RBC (data not shown). We thus had to ask
whether the shift away from LsA-specific IgG1 toward
IgG2a responses in the Pcc-Ls mice was due to the
influence of IFN-g on the Ls-induced response or simply
reflected the presence of cross-reactive Pcc-induced
IgG2a responses to LsA. Conversely, was the apparent
increase in pRBC-specific IgG1 responses in Pcc-Ls mice
due to Ls-induced antibodies that cross-reacted with
infected red blood cells? Because serum titres had not
been determined in this study, we could not assess the
relative strength of cross-reactive versus antigen-specific

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

Page 5 of 12

Figure 1 Antibody isotype responses in infection and co-infection with Litomosoides sigmodontis and malaria. Mice were infected with 25
Ls L3 larvae on day 0 and/or 106 Pcc-infected RBCs on day 60 post-Ls infection. Serum antibody responses measured by ELISA at day 80 post-Ls infection
to (A) Ls antigen (LsA) and (B) crude Pcc infected RBC antigen (pRBC). Th2 isotype IgG1 is shown in (Ai) and (Bi) whilst the Th1 associated isotype IgG2a
is shown in (Aii) and (Bii). Grey bars represent control mice, black bars represent Pcc mice, white bars the Ls mice and the chequered bars co-infected
mice (Pcc-Ls). The letter X highlights those responses that are cross-reactive. Groups not connected by the same letter denote pairs that are significantly
different according to Tukey’s Pairwise analysis while those that share the same letter do not differ significantly. (C) Polyclonal IgE responses. Black
squares represent Ls mice, white squares represent Pcc mice and grey squares represent co-infected (Pcc-Ls) mice. White circles indicate control animals.
Data shown in A & B are compiled from 3 experiments (control mice n = 13, Ls mice n = 37, Pcc mice n = 14, Pcc-Ls mice n = 41).

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

responses. Our observation that there was significant
cross-reactivity at the sera dilution tested thus confounded our ability to interpret any changes in immunological bias during Pcc-Ls co-infection.
Cross-reactive antibody responses are also observed
during malaria-Nippostrongylus brasiliensis co-infection

In order to address the utility of antibody isotype
responses further, we embarked on co-infection experiments with Pcc and the nematode Nb. Because Pc-Nb is
an acute model, whereby the nematode is cleared by day
7 and the peak of malaria parasitemia is controlled by
day 10, the antibody data could be collected after only
20 days of co-infection, a more practical time frame
than the 80 days required for the Pcc-Ls experiments.
This also allowed us to address whether our observations of antibody cross-reactivity were a more general
feature of Pcc-nematode infection. Given the apparent
cross-reactivity observed at a fixed dilution of sera in
the Pcc-Ls ELISA we used endpoint titres derived from
a serial dilution (1:50 - 1:819200) in the Pcc-Nb assays
to address whether this readout would overcome crossreactivity problems. To determine if the specificity of
the assay could be improved with the use of recombinant antigens we also included the malaria protein,
MSP-119 [39] not available to us for the Ls studies.
The antibody responses we observed on Day 20 of
Pcc-Nb co-infection (Fig 2) paralleled those we had seen
in the Pcc-Ls experiments at Day 80. For example, as
seen in Fig 2Aiii, Nb mice made IgG1 biased responses
against NbA, and responses in Pcc-Nb mice were intermediate between Nb and Pcc mice. In addition, Pcc
mice mounted a strong MSP-1 19 -specific IgG2a
response that was reduced in Pcc-Nb mice (Fig 2Bi). As
before, levels of polyclonal IgE in Pcc-Nb mice were
intermediate (data not shown). We again observed
cross-reactivity, whereby Nb mice mounted detectable
IgG1 and IgG2a responses to both recombinant and
crude malaria antigens (indicated by X1&2 in Fig 2A and
X4&5 in Fig 2B, respectively). The magnitude of the Nbinduced IgG2a cross-reactive response is particularly
striking with titres against crude and recombinant
malaria antigens reaching 2500 and 200 respectively.
Similarly, Pcc mice mounted responses to NbA (X 3 in
Fig 2A and X6 in Fig 2B). It is important to note that
these titres although low are markedly greater than
background responses (mean plus 3 standard deviations
of serum responses from control mice), which are represented as zero on the y-axis. The immune bias that is
apparent in serum antibody isotype responses is fully
supported by cytokine responses in the lymph nodes of
Pcc-Nb infected mice as we have recently described [53].
Of interest, no cross-reactivity was observed at the Tcell level.

Page 6 of 12

Cross-reactive IgG1 responses of malaria-infected mice to
NbA are lost at higher dilutions but IgG2a responses
remain

The analysis of both Pcc-Ls and Pcc-Nb co-infection
indicates that the issue of cross-reactivity is a factor
investigators are likely to routinely encounter. Determining the qualitative and quantitative aspects of the crossreacting antibody responses are not only important for
the practical analysis of immune deviation but could be
of real biological relevance during co-infection.
As expected, antibody responses were biased, in terms
of isotype, by infection status. The bias in isotype due to
a particular infection (Th2 associated IgG1 induced during Nb infection, for example) was extended to non-specific antigens, as seen in the IgG1 response of Nb mice
to both MSP-1 19 and pRBC (X 1 and X 2 in Fig 2Ai +
2Aii). However, Pcc-specific IgG2a titres in Pcc mice
were significantly higher than the cross-reactive
response induced in Nb mice (Fig 2Bi). Thus, although
Nb mice made cross-reactive IgG2a responses, these
were no longer detectable with increasing dilution of
sera (Fig 2Bi). In this case capitalising on the differences
in strength of antigen-specific and cross-reactive
responses clarified interpretation of immune bias in coinfected mice. Similarly, IgG1 responses to NbA were
significantly higher in Nb mice than the cross-reactive
response induced by Pcc mice (Fig 2Aiii). However, titre
of Pcc-induced cross-reactive IgG2a to NbA did not differ significantly from Nb mice (X6 in Fig 2Biii).
We can conclude from this analysis that cross-reactive
IgG1 responses to NbA were only detectable at dilutions
less than 1:100 and thus higher dilutions may be used to
avoid cross-reactivity when assessing antigen-specific
antibody isotype profiles for the purpose of interpreting
immune bias. However, increasing sera dilution did not
always overcome the cross-reactivity observed, as IgG2a
responses to NbA in Pcc mice were still observed at
1:2500. This cross-reactivity warrants further investigation, as it is likely to be important biologically. Indeed
even cross-reactive responses detectable only at high
serum concentrations may still have functional relevance
in vivo.
Cross-reactivity appears to lie predominantly with
carbohydrate epitopes and can be largely eliminated by
periodate treatment

Antibody cross-reactivity in a broad range of systems
can be attributed to reactivity with carbohydrate determinants [54,55]. Additionally, the IgG3 isotype is often
associated with recognition of carbohydrates [56] and
we observed cross-reactive IgG3 antibody responses
during Pcc-Nb co-infection (Fig. 3). Nb mice mounted
IgG3 responses to both MSP-119 and pRBC antigens,
achieving titres of 200 and 3200 respectively (Fig 3Ci

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

Page 7 of 12

Figure 2 Antibody isotype responses in infection and co-infection with Nippostrongylus brasiliensis and malaria. Mice were infected with
200 Nb L3 larvae and/or 105 Pcc-infected RBCs on day 0. Serum antibody titres (A) IgG1 (B) IgG2a to recombinant Pcc antigen MSP-119 (i), crude
Pcc antigen (pRBC) (ii) and crude Nb antigen (NbA) (iii) were measured at day 20 post-infection for 8 mice per infection group. Black bars
represent the Pcc mice, white bars the Nb mice and the chequered bars the co-infected mice (Pcc-Nb). Antibody titres are shown on the y-axis
and represent the reciprocal of the greatest dilution at which O.D was greater than the mean plus 3 standard deviations of the O.D values
observed for control mouse sera at a 1/200 dilution. The letter X highlights those responses that are cross-reactive. Groups not connected by the
same letter denote pairs that are significantly different according to Tukey’s Pairwise analysis.

and 3Cii). Pcc mice mounted similar cross-reactive IgG3
responses to NbA (Fig 3Ciii). We thus chose to assess
whether cross-reactivity in our Pcc-Nb co-infection system could be overcome by periodate treatment of the
parasite antigens. Periodate oxidises carbohydrate to
aldehydes, thus disrupting carbohydrate epitopes, which
allowed us to distinguish if cross-reactive responses target the carbohydrate or protein moiety of an antigen.
This could be of particular importance where detection
of cross-reactive responses was not overcome by
increasing serum dilution. In addition to clarifying the
interpretation of shifts in immune bias, determining
whether induction of specific isotype responses is driven
by protein or carbohydrate recognition has important
implications for vaccine design and diagnostic serology.
For the pRBC and MSP-119 antigens, periodate treatment did not significantly affect recognition by IgG1
antibodies (P ≥ 0.7). Periodate treatment of NbA

however, significantly reduced anti-NbA IgG1 titres
across all infection groups (Fig 3Aiii), suggesting common recognition of a carbohydrate moiety. In particular,
the cross-reactive recognition of NbA, by IgG1 antibodies from Pcc mice, was ablated (X7 in Fig 3Aiii).
Treatment of MSP-119 antigen with periodate resulted
in a significant increase in IgG2a detected in sera from
Pcc-Nb mice. Detection of IgG2a in singly-infected mice
also followed this trend but was not statistically significant (Fig 3Bi). These results suggest recognition of a
protein epitope on the recombinant antigen previously
masked by glycosylation. Plasmodium species lack the
glycosyltransferases required for any glycosylation other
than attachment of GPI anchors [57,58]. However, inappropriate glycosylation of the recombinant protein can
occur in the Pichia expression system [57]. The increase
in protein-specific responses, following periodate treatment of the recombinant antigen (MSP-119), may thus

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

Page 8 of 12

Figure 3 Antibody responses to protein epitopes in infection and co-infection with Nippostrongylus brasiliensis and malaria. The
parasite antigens used in ELISA were pre-treated with periodate to disrupt carbohydrate epitopes, in order to determine if cross-reactive
responses target the carbohydrate or protein moiety of an antigen. Mice were infected with 200 Nb L3 larvae and/or 105 Pcc-infected RBCs on
day 0. Serum antibody titres (y-axis) were measured at day 20 post-infection for 8 mice per infection group and represent the reciprocal of the
greatest dilution at which O.D was greater than the mean plus 3 standard deviations of the O.D values observed for control mouse sera at 1/200
dilution. Antibody isotypes (A) IgG1 (B) IgG2a (C) IgG3 to recombinant Pcc antigen MSP-119 (i), crude Pcc antigen (pRBC) (ii) and crude Nb antigen
(NbA) (iii) before (-) and after (+) treatment with periodate are shown. Black bars represent Pcc mice, white bars the Nb mice and the chequered
bars the co-infected (Pcc-Nb) mice. (*) denotes pairs which are significantly different according to Tukey’s pairwise analysis.

reflect the response to the natural non-glycosylated
parasite protein seen during infection. IgG2a recognition
of periodate treated pRBC antigen was enhanced in sera
from Pcc mice, though not in the Pcc-Nb or Nb mice
(Fig 3Bii). This suggests the cross-reactive IgG2a
response is not targeting carbohydrates, which could
potentially be conserved amongst parasite antigens.
For NbA, it was only after treatment with periodate
that differences amongst infection groups become

apparent, whereby significantly greater amounts of
(cross-reactive) IgG2a antibodies were detected in Pcc
mice in comparison to Nb mice (X8 in Fig 3Biii). Thus,
the Pcc-induced cross-reactive IgG2a response to NbA
(X6 in Fig 2Biii) that was not lost with serial dilution
was also maintained following periodate treatment (X8
in Fig 3Biii). In contrast, the Nb-specific IgG2a response
appears to target carbohydrate as periodate treatment
reduced recognition of NbA in both Nb and Pcc-Nb

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

mice (Fig 3Biii) although only statistically significant in
the Pcc-Nb mice. This may indicate that atypical Th1type responses to helminth antigens are driven by
carbohydrate.
Disruption of carbohydrates via periodate treatment
significantly affected the recognition of Pcc antigens by
IgG3 antibodies. In particular, recognition of periodate
treated pRBC was reduced in serum from all mice that
had experienced Pcc infection; this was most evident in
the Pcc-Nb mice (Fig 3Cii). The recognition of periodate
treated MSP1- 19 was also significantly reduced in Pcc
mice (Fig 3Ci). The more pronounced reduction in IgG3
response to the treated pRBC antigen may reflect the
greater proportion of carbohydrate components in this
crude antigen preparation in comparison to the single
recombinant protein.

Discussion
Antibody analysis should be able to provide critical
information on changes in cytokine bias due to co-infection. This is particularly important in human studies
where serum may be the only reagent available for
immunological analysis. Whilst we acknowledge that
there is a need to confirm the relationship between splenic or serum cytokines and antibody responses in coinfection if this strategy is to be used in human studies,
our focus is on the interpretation of antigen-specific
Th1/Th2 bias based on antibody isotype, which was
complicated by cross-reactivity in the two co-infection
models studied here. It is worth noting that cross-reactive responses were observed regardless of whether
recombinant or crude antigens were used. We primarily
address technical strategies that will enable us, and
others, to draw conclusions regarding the influence of a
co-infecting parasite on immune bias using serum antibodies. However, the functional implications of crossreactive responses are also discussed.
Murine models that aim to dissect the real effect of a
co-infecting parasite on immune bias must use large
numbers of animals to detect significant differences in
antigen-specific responses between single and dual
infection. Thus for antibody analysis of the large sample
size (see legend Fig 1 for details) in our Pcc-Ls study of
co-infection we chose a fixed serum concentration, previously determined to fall within the linear range of the
dilution curve. Although this saved time and reagents,
in retrospect, it provided insufficient information for
our purposes: it did not allow us to distinguish the relative strengths of cross-reactive versus antigen-specific
responses.
When antibody titres were calculated in the Pcc-Nb
study, we were able to determine whether apparent
alterations in antibody isotype profile on co-infection
were due to actual changes in parasite-specific responses

Page 9 of 12

or reflected a cross-reactive response. For example,
determining that cross-reactive IgG2a antibody titres in
Nb mice (X4 in Fig 2Bi) were significantly lower than
the antigen-specific response of Pcc mice meant that
cross-reactivity was unlikely to influence the titre
observed in Pcc-Nb mice. This allowed us to conclude
that the reduction in Th1 type antibody in Pcc-Nb mice
was probably due to suppression of Pcc-specific Th1
responses by nematode infection. Further to this, had
we not calculated titre and relied on optical density data
derived from a single dilution of sera we may not have
observed the difference between Pcc and Pcc-Nb mice
and thus incorrectly concluded that there was no effect
of co-infection on Th1 responses. Similarly, analysis of
antibody titre enabled us to detect the reduction in antiNbA IgG1 antibody in Pcc-Nb mice (Fig 2Aiii), which
suggests a Pcc-mediated bias toward a Th1 cell
response. In other cases, cross-reactivity was observed
even at high dilutions with Pcc mice achieving IgG2a
titres equivalent to or greater than Nb mice (X6 in Fig
2Biii). In this case, calculation of titre did not help to
unravel potential cytokine influences and the enhanced
IgG2a response in co-infected mice may be due to
increased Th1 cytokines during co-infection and/or the
presence of cross-reactive antibody (Fig 2Biii).
Nematode surface antigens and the excretory/secretory products from these parasites are heavily glycosylated [59]. Similarly, Plasmodium species express
glycoconjugates on their surface and have abundant glycophosphatidylinositol anchors [60]. In other co-infection systems cross-reactive epitopes have been shown to
derive from carbohydrate structures [61]. The sensitivity
of the carbohydrate component of an antigen to periodate treatment [59] has been beneficial in interpreting
our results. In particular, treatment of Pcc antigens
demonstrated that cross-reactive nematode-induced
IgG3 responses were largely attributed to the carbohydrate component. Interestingly, periodate treatment also
reduced apparent cross-reactivity by exposure of protein
epitopes, previously masked by carbohydrate, which
enhanced the detection of antibodies from mice that
had been exposed to the antigen during infection (e.g.,
anti-pRBC in Fig 3Bii). This allowed us to conclude that
levels of anti-pRBC IgG2a antibody in Pcc-Nb mice are
solely induced by the Pcc parasite. Further to this, detection of cross-reactive protein-specific antibodies enabled
responses, previously indistinguishable in magnitude
between singly-infected groups, to be differentiated. For
example, periodate treatment of NbA enhanced detection of Pcc induced cross-reactive IgG2a antibodies (X8
in Fig 3Biii) whilst the antigen-specific response of Nb
mice was ablated. This indicates that the level of Nbspecific IgG2a observed in Pcc-Nb mice is due to Pcc
driving a cross-reactive IgG2a Th1 type response.

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

We have demonstrated that the use of serial dilutions
and periodate treatment of the parasite antigens can
help overcome cross-reactivity for the purposes of analysing and interpreting Th1/Th2 cell immune bias.
However, some ‘true’ cross-reactivity remained (i.e. Pccinduced IgG2a responses to NbA (Fig 2Biii/Fig 3Biii)),
and the induction of these antibodies has important
implications with regard to biological function. For
example the immune responses to nematode infection
are typically characterised by a Th2 type (IgG1)
response, as we observed for Nb-induced responses to
the nematode antigen (NbA). The propensity for Pcc
mice to induce atypical IgG2a antibody isotypes to
nematode antigen is likely due to the malaria parasite
promoting Th1 cytokines in the environment where the
antibody response is established [45]. The biological
consequences of the Pcc driven IgG2a response to the
nematode antigen and the less pronounced IgG1
response of Nb mice to Pcc antigens remain to be investigated. In Trichuris muris infection, manipulation of the
immune environment to a Th1 type setting, characterised by elevated IgG2a and IFNg, was shown to
enhance chronicity of this intestinal helminth [62]. Pccinduced IgG2a to nematode antigens may thus have real
consequences in terms of disease outcome. Effects of
nematode co-infection on the malaria parasite are also
evident; Pcc-Nb mice have reduced levels of malaria
parasitemia in comparison to Pcc mice [53] and it is
interesting to consider the possibility that cross-reactive
IgG2a antibodies induced by the nematode infection
may act in concert with the antigen-specific response to
control malaria parasites. The potential for cross-reactive responses to have a functional role during infection
raises the intriguing possibility that their production is a
deliberate strategy of the host to combat diverse parasites [63]. To fully understand the relative contribution
of cross-reactive antibodies in parasite control would
require passive antibody transfer experiments.
Although schistosome parasites are phylogenetically
distinct from nematodes, helminth co-infection studies
that investigate Schistosoma mansoni provide evidence
that cross-reactivity is relevant in other co-infection
systems and can have a strong impact on disease
severity. Naus et al [43] report the induction of crossreactive IgG3 antibodies that recognise both Plasmodium falciparum and S. mansoni antigens. Pierrot et al
extended this study, identifying the S. mansoni antigen
(SmLRR) that is recognised by both malaria and S.
mansoni singly-infected hosts. Interestingly, as we
observed in our Pcc-Nb model of co-infection, the two
infections induce different antibody isotypes to antigen:
cross-reactive malaria driven IgG3 and helminth driven
IgG4 [45]. In areas co-endemic for these two parasites,
exposure to malaria and subsequent induction of the

Page 10 of 12

cross-reactive IgG3 response seems to increase the risk
of developing hepatosplenomegaly in schistosome
infected individuals [44].

Conclusions
In summary, our data illustrate that whilst cross-reactivity may confound observations of interest, it can largely
be overcome by a combination of increasing sera dilution and pre-treatment of antigens with periodate.
Adopting such strategies will enable antibody isotypes to
be used as an indicator of cytokine bias and clarify
interpretation of when Th1-Th2 cell shifts have
occurred as a result of co-infection. Arising from this
analysis is the opportunity to dissect antigen-specific
from cross-reactive responses and thus obtain information pertaining to the relative strength of these
responses and recognition of carbohydrate versus protein epitopes. This will provide the foundation on which
to base more detailed characterisation of the antibody
responses during co-infection in order to investigate
their functionality.
Abbreviations
Ls: (Litomosoides sigmodontis); Nb: (Nippostrongylus brasiliensis); Pcc:
(Plasmodium chabaudi chabaudi); LsA: (Litomosoides sigmodontis crude
antigen); NbA: (Nippostrongylus brasiliensis crude antigen); pRBC: (Pcc
parasitized red blood cell crude antigen); MSP-119: (Merozoite Surface Protein
-119); RBC: (Red Blood Cell); Th: (T helper); pi: (post-infection).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the MRC-UK, the BBSRC (grant BB/C508734/1 to
JEA and ALG, and fellowship BB/D01977X/1 to ALG) and the European
Commission (grant ICA4-CT1999-10002).
We thank A. McDonald and D. Cavanagh for their helpful comments and R.
Maizels and Y. Harcus for providing us with Nb infective larvae. In addition,
we thank the animal house staff for husbandry.
Author details
1
Institutes of Evolution, Immunology and Infection Research, School of
Biological Sciences, King’s Buildings, University of Edinburgh, West Mains
Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3JT, UK. 2Current address: School of Biological Sciences,
The University of Reading, Reading, Berks RG6 6UB, UK. 3Division of
Parasitology, National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway Mill Hill,
NW7 1AA, UK. 4Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
Authors’ contributions
KFC participated in the design of the study, conducted the Pcc-Nb
experiments and immunoassays, performed the statistical analysis and
helped to draft the manuscript. TL conducted the Pcc-Ls experiments and
immunoassays. JL provided recombinant MSP-119. ALG conceived of the
study and participated in its design, was involved in all co-infection
experiments and helped to draft the manuscript. JEA also conceived of the
study, participated in its design and helped to draft the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the manuscript.
Received: 16 September 2009
Accepted: 17 February 2010 Published: 17 February 2010
References
1. Hartgers FC, Obeng BB, Kruize YC, Dijkhuis A, McCall M, Sauerwein RW,
Luty AJ, Boakye DA, Yazdanbakhsh M: Responses to malarial antigens are
altered in helminth-infected children. J Infect Dis 2009, 199:1528-35.

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

Yatich NJ, Yi J, Agbenyega T, Turpin A, Rayner JC, Stiles JK, Ellis WO,
Funkhouser E, Ehiri JE, Williams JH, Jolly PE: Malaria and intestinal
helminth co-infection among pregnant women in Ghana: prevalence
and risk factors. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2009, 80:896-901.
NJ Faye B, Tine RC, Lô AC, Gaye O: [Interaction between malaria and
intestinal helminthiasis in Senegal: influence of the carriage of intestinal
parasites on the intensity of the malaria infection]. Bulletin de la Societe
pathologie exotique 2008, 101:391-394.
Mwangi TW, Bethony JM, Brooker S: Malaria and helminth interactions in
humans: an epidemiological viewpoint. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2006,
100:551-70.
Piessens WF, Hoffman SL, Ratiwayanto S, Piessens PW, Partono F,
Kurniawan L, Marwoto HA: Opposing effects of filariasis and chronic
malaria on immunoregulatory T lymphocytes. Diagn Immunol 1983,
1:257-60.
Guderian RH, Anselmi M, Beck BJ, Mackenzie CD, Williams JF, Proano JR,
Cooper PJ: The effect of antimalarial chloroquine therapy and
prophylaxis on concurrent infection with Onchocerca volvulus in
Ecuador. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1991, 85:634-8.
Ghosh SK, Yadav RS: Naturally acquired concomitant infections of
bancroftian filariasis and human plasmodia in Orissa. Indian J Malariol
1995, 32:32-6.
Ravindran B, Sahoo PK, Dash AP: Lymphatic filariasis and malaria:
concomitant parasitism in Orissa, India. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1998,
92:21-3.
Chadee DD, Rawlins SC, Tiwari TS: Short communication: concomitant
malaria and filariasis infections in Georgetown, Guyana. Trop Med Int
Health 2003, 8:140-3.
Nacher M, Singhasivanon P, Yimsamran S, Manibunyong W,
Thanyavanich N, Wuthisen R, Looareesuwan S: Intestinal helminth
infections are associated with increased incidence of Plasmodium
falciparum malaria in Thailand. J Parasitol 2002, 88:55-8.
Booth M, Vennervald BJ, Kenty L, Butterworth AE, Kariuki HC, Kadzo H,
Ireri E, Amaganga C, Kimani G, Mwatha JK, Otedo A, Ouma JH, Muchiri E,
Dunne DW: Micro-geographical variation in exposure to Schistosoma
mansoni and malaria, and exacerbation of splenomegaly in Kenyan
school-aged children. BMC Infect Dis 2004, 4:13.
Le Hesran JY, Akiana J, Ndiaye el HM, Dia M, Senghor P, Konate L: Severe
malaria attack is associated with high prevalence of Ascaris
lumbricoides infection among children in rural Senegal. Trans R Soc Trop
Med Hyg 2004, 98:397-9.
Lyke KE, Dicko A, Dabo A, Sangare L, Kone A, Coulibaly D, Guindo A,
Traore K, Daou M, Diarra I, Sztein MB, Plowe CV, Doumbo OK: Association
of Schistosoma haematobium infection with protection against acute
Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Malian children. Am J Trop Med Hyg
2005, 73:1124-30.
Sokhna C, Le Hesran JY, Mbaye PA, Akiana J, Camara P, Diop M, Ly A,
Druilhe P: Increase of malaria attacks among children presenting
concomitant infection by Schistosoma mansoni in Senegal. Malar J 2004,
3:43.
Spiegel A, Tall A, Raphenon G, Trape JF, Druilhe P: Increased frequency
of malaria attacks in subjects co-infected by intestinal worms and
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2003,
97:198-9.
Hotez PJ, Molyneux DH, Fenwick A, Ottesen E, Ehrlich Sachs S, Sachs JD:
Incorporating a rapid-impact package for neglected tropical diseases
with programs for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria. PLoS Med 2006, 3:
e102.
Helmby H, Kullberg M, Troye-Blomberg M: Altered immune responses in
mice with concomitant Schistosoma mansoni and Plasmodium chabaudi
infections. Infect Immun 1998, 66:5167-74.
Su Z, Segura M, Morgan K, Loredo-Osti JC, Stevenson MM: Impairment of
protective immunity to blood-stage malaria by concurrent nematode
infection. Infect Immun 2005, 73:3531-9.
De Souza JB, Williamson KH, Otani T, Playfair JH: Early gamma interferon
responses in lethal and nonlethal murine blood-stage malaria. Infect
Immun 1997, 65:1593-8.
Yoshida A, Maruyama H, Kumagai T, Amano T, Kobayashi F, Zhang M,
Himeno K, Ohta N: Schistosoma mansoni infection cancels the
susceptibility to Plasmodium chabaudi through induction of type 1
immune responses in A/J mice. Int Immunol 2000, 12:1117-25.

Page 11 of 12

21. Graham AL, Lamb TJ, Read AF, Allen JE: Malaria-filaria coinfection in mice
makes malarial disease more severe unless filarial infection achieves
patency. J Infect Dis 2005, 191:410-21.
22. Ahvazi BC, Jacobs P, Stevenson MM: Role of macrophage-derived nitric
oxide in suppression of lymphocyte proliferation during blood-stage
malaria. J Leukoc Biol 1995, 58:23-31.
23. Collins JT, Dunnick WA: Germline transcripts of the murine
immunoglobulin gamma 2a gene: structure and induction by IFNgamma. Int Immunol 1993, 5:885-91.
24. Paul WE, Brown M, Hornbeck P, Mizuguchi J, Ohara J, Rabin E, Snapper C,
Tsang W: Regulation of B-lymphocyte activation, proliferation, and
differentiation. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1987, 505:82-9.
25. Else KJ, Finkelman FD: Intestinal nematode parasites, cytokines and
effector mechanisms. Int J Parasitol 1998, 28:1145-58.
26. Purkerson JM, Isakson PC: Interleukin 5 (IL-5) provides a signal that is
required in addition to IL-4 for isotype switching to immunoglobulin (Ig)
G1 and IgE. J Exp Med 1992, 175:973-82.
27. Li BW, Rush A, Zhang SR, Curtis KC, Weil GJ: Antibody responses to Brugia
malayi antigens induced by DNA vaccination. Filaria J 2004, 3:1.
28. Arnold H, Bumann D, Felies M, Gewecke B, Sorensen M, Gessner JE,
Freihorst J, von Specht BU, Baumann U: Enhanced immunogenicity in the
murine airway mucosa with an attenuated Salmonella live vaccine
expressing OprF-OprI from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Infect Immun 2004,
72:6546-53.
29. Taylor JM, Ziman ME, Fong J, Solnick JV, Vajdy M: Possible Correlates of
Long-Term Protection against Helicobacter pylori following Systemic or
Combinations of Mucosal and Systemic Immunizations. Infect Immun
2007, 75:3462-9.
30. Da’Dara AA, Skelly PJ, Walker CM, Harn DA: A DNA-prime/protein-boost
vaccination regimen enhances Th2 immune responses but not
protection following Schistosoma mansoni infection. Parasite Immunol
2003, 25:429-37.
31. von der Weid T, Honarvar N, Langhorne J: Gene-targeted mice lacking B
cells are unable to eliminate a blood stage malaria infection. J Immunol
1996, 156:2510-6.
32. Cavinato RA, Bastos KR, Sardinha LR, Elias RM, Alvarez JM, d’Imperio
Lima MR: Susceptibility of the different developmental stages of the
asexual (schizogonic) erythrocyte cycle of Plasmodium chabaudi
chabaudi to hyperimmune serum, immunoglobulin (Ig)G1, IgG2a and F
(ab’)2 fragments. Parasite Immunol 2001, 23:587-97.
33. Mota MM, Brown KN, Holder AA, Jarra W: Acute Plasmodium chabaudi
chabaudi malaria infection induces antibodies which bind to the
surfaces of parasitized erythrocytes and promote their phagocytosis by
macrophages in vitro. Infect Immun 1998, 66:4080-6.
34. Roussilhon C, Oeuvray C, Muller-Graf C, Tall A, Rogier C, Trape JF,
Theisen M, Balde A, Perignon JL, Druilhe P: Long-term clinical protection
from falciparum malaria is strongly associated with IgG3 antibodies to
merozoite surface protein 3. PLoS Med 2007, 4:e320.
35. Su Z, Segura M, Stevenson MM: Reduced Protective Efficacy of a BloodStage Malaria Vaccine by Concurrent Nematode Infection. Infection and
Immunity 2006, 74:2138-2144.
36. Beale GH, Carter R, Walliker D: Genetics. Rodent Malaria London, Academic
PressKillick-Kendrick R, Peters W 1978, 213-245.
37. Diagne M, Petit G, Liot P, Cabaret J, Bain O: The filaria Litomosoides galizai
in mites; microfilarial distribution in the host and regulation of the
transmission. Ann Parasitol Hum Comp 1990, 65:193-9.
38. Lawrence RA, Gray CA, Osborne J, Maizels RM: Nippostrongylus
brasiliensis: cytokine responses and nematode expulsion in normal and
IL-4-deficient mice. Exp Parasitol 1996, 84:65-73.
39. Hensmann M, Li C, Moss C, Lindo V, Greer F, Watts C, Ogun SA, Holder AA,
Langhorne J: Disulfide bonds in merozoite surface protein 1 of the
malaria parasite impede efficient antigen processing and affect the in
vivo antibody response. Eur J Immunol 2004, 34:639-48.
40. Grafen A, Hails R: Modern Statistics for the Life Sciences. Oxford University
Press 2007.
41. Tetsutani K, Ishiwata K, Ishida H, Tu L, Torii M, Hamano S, Himeno K,
Hisaeda H: Concurrent infection with Heligmosomoides polygyrus
suppresses anti-Plasmodium yoelii protection partially by induction of
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) Treg in mice. Eur J Immunol 2009, 39(10):2822-30.
42. Miller CM, Smith NC, Ikin RJ, Boulter NR, Dalton JP, Donnelly S:
Immunological interactions between 2 common pathogens, Th1-

Fairlie-Clarke et al. BMC Immunology 2010, 11:6
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2172/11/6

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.
55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

inducing protozoan Toxoplasma gondii and the Th2-inducing helminth
Fasciola hepatica. PLoS One 2009, 4:e5692.
Naus CW, Jones FM, Satti MZ, Joseph S, Riley EM, Kimani G, Mwatha JK,
Kariuki CH, Ouma JH, Kabatereine NB, Vennervald BJ, Dunne DW:
Serological responses among individuals in areas where both
schistosomiasis and malaria are endemic: cross-reactivity between
Schistosoma mansoni and Plasmodium falciparum. J Infect Dis 2003,
187:1272-82.
Mwatha JK, Jones FM, Mohamed G, Naus CW, Riley EM, Butterworth AE,
Kimani G, Kariuki CH, Ouma JH, Koech D, Dunne DW: Associations
between anti-Schistosoma mansoni and anti-Plasmodium falciparum
antibody responses and hepatosplenomegaly, in Kenyan schoolchildren.
J Infect Dis 2003, 187:1337-41.
Pierrot C, Wilson S, Lallet H, Lafitte S, Jones FM, Daher W, Capron M,
Dunne DW, Khalife J: Identification of a novel antigen of Schistosoma
mansoni shared with Plasmodium falciparum and evaluation of different
cross-reactive antibody subclasses induced by human schistosomiasis
and malaria. Infect Immun 2006, 74:3347-54.
Remoue F, Diallo TO, Angeli V, Herve M, de Clercq D, Schacht AM,
Charrier N, Capron M, Vercruysse J, Ly A, Capron A, Riveau G: Malaria coinfection in children influences antibody response to schistosome
antigens and inflammatory markers associated with morbidity. Trans R
Soc Trop Med Hyg 2003, 97:361-4.
Mutapi F, Ndhlovu PD, Hagan P, Woolhouse ME: Anti-schistosome
antibody responses in children coinfected with malaria. Parasite Immunol
2000, 22:207-9.
Rodriguez M, Terrazas LI, Marquez R, Bojalil R: Susceptibility to
Trypanosoma cruzi is modified by a previous non-related infection.
Parasite Immunol 1999, 21:177-85.
Marechal P, Le Goff L, Hoffman W, Rapp J, Oswald IP, Ombrouck C,
Taylor DW, Bain O, Petit G: Immune response to the filaria Litomosoides
sigmodontis in susceptible and resistant mice. Parasite Immunol 1997,
19:273-9.
Le Goff L, Martin C, Oswald IP, Vuong PN, Petit G, Ungeheuer MN, Bain O:
Parasitology and immunology of mice vaccinated with irradiated
Litomosoides sigmodontis larvae. Parasitology 2000, 120(Pt 3):271-80.
Lawrence RA, Allen JE, Osborne J, Maizels RM: Adult and microfilarial
stages of the filarial parasite Brugia malayi stimulate contrasting
cytokine and Ig isotype responses in BALB/c mice. J Immunol 1994,
153:1216-24.
Su Z, Stevenson MM: IL-12 is required for antibody-mediated protective
immunity against blood-stage Plasmodium chabaudi AS malaria
infection in mice. J Immunol 2002, 168:1348-55.
Hoeve MA, Mylonas KJ, Fairlie-Clarke KJ, Mahajan SM, Allen JE, Graham AL:
Plasmodium chabaudi limits early Nippostrongylus brasiliensis-induced
pulmonary immune activation and Th2 polarization in co-infected mice.
BMC Immunol 2009, 10:60.
Paschinger K, Fabini G, Schuster D, Rendic D, Wilson IB: Definition of
immunogenic carbohydrate epitopes. Acta Biochim Pol 2005, 52:629-32.
Xu BX, Powell MR: Carbohydrate epitopes are responsible for antibody
cross-reactivity in Trypanosoma cruzi-infected mice. J Parasitol 1991,
77:808-10.
Snapper CM, McIntyre TM, Mandler R, Pecanha LM, Finkelman FD, Lees A,
Mond JJ: Induction of IgG3 secretion by interferon gamma: a model for
T cell-independent class switching in response to T cell-independent
type 2 antigens. J Exp Med 1992, 175:1367-71.
von Itzstein M, Plebanski M, Cooke BM, Coppel RL: Hot, sweet and sticky:
the glycobiology of Plasmodium falciparum. Trends Parasitol 2008,
24:210-8.
Mendonca-Previato L, Todeschini AR, Heise N, Previato JO: Protozoan
parasite-specific carbohydrate structures. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2005,
15:499-505.
Dell A, Haslam SM, Morris HR, Khoo KH: Immunogenic glycoconjugates
implicated in parasitic nematode diseases. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999,
1455:353-62.
McConville MJ, Ferguson MA: The structure, biosynthesis and function of
glycosylated phosphatidylinositols in the parasitic protozoa and higher
eukaryotes. Biochem J 1993, 294(Pt 2):305-24.
van Remoortere A, Bank CM, Nyame AK, Cummings RD, Deelder AM, van
Die I: Schistosoma mansoni-infected mice produce antibodies that crossreact with plant, insect, and mammalian glycoproteins and recognize

Page 12 of 12

the truncated biantennaryN-glycan Man3GlcNAc2-R. Glycobiology 2003,
13:217-25.
62. Else KJ, Finkelman FD, Maliszewski CR, Grencis RK: Cytokine-mediated
regulation of chronic intestinal helminth infection. J Exp Med 1994,
179:347-51.
63. Fairlie-Clarke KJ, Shuker DM, Graham AL: Why do adaptive immune
responses cross-react?. Evolutionary Applications 2009, 2(1):122-131.
doi:10.1186/1471-2172-11-6
Cite this article as: Fairlie-Clarke et al.: Antibody isotype analysis of
malaria-nematode co-infection: problems and solutions associated with
cross-reactivity. BMC Immunology 2010 11:6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
