<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2180-3-22.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Microbiology

BioMed Central

Open Access

Research article

Functional profiling of mercuric reductase (mer A) genes in biofilm
communities of a technical scale biocatalyzer
Andreas DM Felske*, Wanda Fehr, Björg V Pauling, Harald von Canstein and
Irene Wagner-Döbler
Address: GBF (German Research Center for Biotechnology), Division of Microbiology, Mascheroder Weg 1, D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany
Email: Andreas DM Felske* - Andreas@bacrex.com; Wanda Fehr - wanda.fehr@web.de; Björg V Pauling - bjoerg.pauling@web.de; Harald von
Canstein - hari@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp; Irene Wagner-Döbler - iwd@gbf.de
* Corresponding author

Published: 27 October 2003
BMC Microbiology 2003, 3:22

Received: 05 September 2003
Accepted: 27 October 2003

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22
© 2003 Felske et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: Bacterial mercury resistance is based on enzymatic reduction of ionic mercury to
elemental mercury and has recently been demonstrated to be applicable for industrial wastewater
clean-up. The long-term monitoring of such biocatalyser systems requires a cultivation independent
functional community profiling method targeting the key enzyme of the process, the merA gene
coding for the mercuric reductase. We report on the development of a profiling method for merA
and its application to monitor changes in the functional diversity of the biofilm community of a
technical scale biocatalyzer over 8 months of on-site operation.
Results: Based on an alignment of 30 merA sequences from Gram negative bacteria, conserved
primers were designed for amplification of merA fragments with an optimized PCR protocol. The
resulting amplicons of approximately 280 bp were separated by thermogradient gelelectrophoresis
(TGGE), resulting in strain specific fingerprints for mercury resistant Gram negative isolates with
different merA sequences. The merA profiling of the biofilm community from a technical biocatalyzer
showed persistence of some and loss of other inoculum strains as well as the appearance of new
bands, resulting in an overall increase of the functional diversity of the biofilm community. One
predominant new band of the merA community profile was also detected in a biocatalyzer effluent
isolate, which was identified as Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The isolated strain showed lower mercury
reduction rates in liquid culture than the inoculum strains but was apparently highly competitive in
the biofilm environment of the biocatalyzer where moderate mercury levels were prevailing.
Conclusions: The merA profiling technique allowed to monitor the ongoing selection for better
adapted strains during the operation of a biocatalyzer and to direct their subsequent isolation. In
such a way, a predominant mercury reducing Ps. aeruginosa strain was identified by its unique
mercuric reductase gene.

Background
Phylogenetic profiling of microbial communities based
on sequence specific separation of phylogenetic marker
genes (mainly the 16S rRNA gene or the 16S-23S ribos-

omal intergenic spacer region) is widely used in microbial
ecology to study changes in community diversity in
response to environmental parameters or experimental
perturbations. However, physiological traits are often
Page 1 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

dispersed across the phylogenetic tree, and so conclusions
regarding the processes driven by the microbes in question cannot be drawn. Functional gene profiling has the
potential to provide information about the functional
diversity of microbial populations with respect to a key
enzyme of interest, and therefore should be much more
meaningful. There are only very few reports of functional
community profiling so far, two recent examples being
the pufM gene of photosynthetic marine bacteria in a permanently frozen Antarctic lake [1] and the amoA gene of
ammonia oxidizers in soil [2]. Engineered systems contain enriched specialized populations which have often
been subject to prolonged selection pressure and should
therefore provide especially good applications for functional community profiling.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

nation of mercury resistance levels is not straightforward,
since media composition and inoculum density have a
large influence. Moreover, especially at low mercury concentrations, tolerance mechanisms for mercury can play a
role besides enzymatic mercury reduction (e.g. unspecific
adsorption to cell surface components; indirect reduction
by cell metabolites; [14,15]) Since active mercury reduction in microorganisms is performed only by the mercuric
reductase enzyme [16] encoded in the conserved merA
gene, a more straightforward way to identify the abundant
mercury reducers within the biofilm community was feasible, which was independent of cultivation. Here we
report the development of a community profiling method
for merA and its application to monitor changes in the
functional diversity of mercury reducing biofilm
communities.

Recently a new process for remediation of mercury contaminated wastewater has been developed [3] and demonstrated in technical scale [4]. It is based on the
microbial mercury resistance (mer) operon [5–8]. Mercury
resistant bacteria were immobilized on inert carrier material within a packed bed bioreactor and shown to remove
up to 99 % of incoming ionic mercury from raw industrial
wastewater by reducing it to elemental mercury which
accumulated outside of the bacterial cells in the carrier
material [3]. The process was scaled up to a biocatalyzer
volume of 1000 L and demonstrated for 8 months at a
chloralkali factory, where it was highly efficient and stable
against fluctuations in inflow parameters inherent to the
production process [4,9,10]. The key enzyme of this process is the mercuric reductase, encoded by the merA gene.
Profiling the diversity of merA genes in the bioreactor
community allows to focus directly on that part of the
microbial community relevant for the process. Since the
concentrations of mercury ions in the wastewater were
rather high (4.3 mg L-1 on average), microorganisms not
having a detoxification mechanism were not able to survive in the bioreactor. For this particular example therefore one would expect the merA profile to give a fairly
complete picture of the most abundant members of the
microbial community present.

Primer Design and PCR protocol for merA
Conserved primers for the merA gene of Gram negative
bacteria and a PCR protocol for amplification of merA
from a diverse mixture of Proteobacterial merA genes were
developed based on a sequence alignment of 30 merA
sequences from Gram negative bacteria. Suitable priming
regions could not be identified for Gram-positives due to
their high merA sequence variability. For Gram-negatives,
the end part of the sequence, coding for the reaction
center, could be used for primer design. Two highly conserved regions in a distance of more than 200 bp were
identified. However, the region of identical nucleotide
sequences was only 10 bp long. Degenerate primers are
prone to produce band multiplication on TGGE. Therefore, ambiguous nucleotide positions were eliminated in
the following way: Where the primer target sequence
showed a C or T, the primer got a complementary G, since
this can also bind to T. Accordingly, where the primer target sequence showed a A or G, the primer got a complementary T, since this can also bind to G. To reduce the
probability for mismatches with unknown merA
sequences, relatively low annealing temperatures were
applied.

Previous culture independent analyses of the biocatalyzer
system were based upon phylogenetic markers like the
16S rRNA gene [4,9] or the internal transcribed spacer
region between 16S and 23S (RISA, [10–13]). However,
any information on the mercury resistance of individual
community members relied on their isolation and subsequent physiological characterization, a tedious approach
which can be very biased. In the biocatalyzer studied here
[10] the more abundant effluent isolates have been identified by comparing their RISA fingerprints to the community fingerprint. These isolates were tested for their
mercury resistance levels and shown to grow on plates
containing up to 10 mg HgCl2 per liter. However, determi-

Primer annealing temperatures were tested between 46.6
and 63.8°C. Some merA genes could not be amplified
using annealing temperatures above 50°C, while others
required more than 55°C (Fig. 1). The latter may have
been caused by interactions with non-target genomic
DNA of the respective strains. The high GC content of the
merA sequences (average of 64%) may have played a role
as well. Thus, the PCR protocol consisted of an initial
high-temperature (59–55°C) annealing touch down step
to amplify sequences requiring high annealing temperatures (e.g. Spi3, Ibu8) followed by a subsequent low-temperature annealing step (46°C). In such a way it was
possible to amplify the merA fragment from all Gram-neg-

Results

Page 2 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

Figure
merAr PCR annealing temperature (between 46°C and 64°C) on merA amplification efficiency with primers GC-merAf and
Effect of1
Effect of PCR annealing temperature (between 46°C and 64°C) on merA amplification efficiency with primers GC-merAf and
merAr. The ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels show different annealing temperature dependencies for merA PCR products of representative isolates. (1) Ps. putida KT2442::mer73 [29] had its optimum al low annealing temperature; (2) P. putida
Spi4 and most other strains tested worked best at medium annealing temperature; (3) P. stutzeri Ibu8 failed at low annealing
temperatures but worked well at high temperatures.

Figure GC-merAf and merAr on an ethidium bromide-stainedand cloned mer operons using an optimized PCR protocol with
primers 2
Amplification of merA fragments from mercury resistant strains agarose gel
Amplification of merA fragments from mercury resistant strains and cloned mer operons using an optimized PCR protocol with
primers GC-merAf and merAr on an ethidium bromide-stained agarose gel. On the left hand, environmental isolates (black),
biocatalyzer inoculum strains (violet) and the main invader (red) are shown. On the right hand, merA-containing vectors kindly
provided by M. Osborn [14] are shown. For strain identification of inoculum strains and invader see Fig. 5; environmental isolates were Klebsiella sp. Spi5; P. putida Elb5; Citrobacter freundii Bro62; Sphingomonas sp. Spi7.

Page 3 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

yielded nevertheless a distinct band on TGGE (Fig. 3).
Strain Spi7 has been identified as a Sphingomonas sp. (Alphaproteobacteria)[17], and thus has no close phylogenetic relationship to the strains with sequenced merA
genes which were used for primer design. Interestingly,
the other two aberrant PCR reactions also occurred with
genera other than Pseudomonas: Spi5 has been identified
as a Klebsiella sp. and Bro62 as Citrobacter freundii [10].

Figure on a merA amplicons (primers
merAr) 3 ofsilver-stained TGGE gel GC-merAf and
Separation
Separation of merA amplicons (primers GC-merAf and
merAr) on a silver-stained TGGE gel. All strains showed
clearly distinguishable merA-TGGE fingerprints. See Fig. 5 for
strain identification. M, mix of PCR products from all eight
strains.

ative isolates in the same PCR reaction. Using this protocol, all Pseudomonas strains (Spi3, Spi4, Elb2, Elb5,
Kon12, Ibu8, Spi11, Bro12) and the mercury resistance
transposons and plasmids used as controls showed one
clear amplicon of approximately 280 bp length without
any side products (Fig. 2). One strain (Bro62) showed a
second, larger amplicon. Two strains (Spi5 and Spi7) had
aberrant fragment lengths, possibly caused by variations
in the sequence and length of the merA gene. For example,
strain Spi7 had an amplicon of. >400 bp length which

merA-TGGE fingerprints of mercury resistant isolates
Amplicons generated by the merA specific PCR were separated on TGGE gels. Every strain tested yielded one dominant band with a migration behavior different from that
of all other strains (Fig. 3). Thus, strain specific merA fingerprints were obtained. Often one or two secondary
bands were present which were always following the primary band like a shadow. This indicated a non-linear
melting order of the molecule down to the GC-clamp during TGGE migration, likely due to the partially high GC
content. In some cases (Elb2, Spi4, Spi3) weak side bands
at varying distance to the primary band were found which
may have been caused by amplification errors during early
phases of the PCR reaction which were subsequently
amplified further and thus yielded separate bands on
TGGE.
Analysis of the merA sequences of the inoculum strains
To obtain complete sequences for the merA genes of the
inoculum strains and several strong mercury reducing bioreactor isolates, a large set of partly overlapping primers
was used (Fig. 4, Table 1), some of which binding in conserved genes outside of merA. After sequencing of the various amplified fragments, the complete merA genes were
assembled and aligned. Fig. 5 shows a phylogenetic tree
for the 30 published merA sequences used for the design
of the conserved merA-TGGE primers as well as for the six
Pseudomonas sp. used as inoculum for the technical scale
biocatalyzer (Kon12, Ibu8, Spi4, Elb2, Spi3, Spi11), the
isolate Sphingomonas sp. Spi7 (not used as an inoculum
strain) and the invading strain P. aeruginosa Bro 12 (see
below).

Figure 4
of primers (arrowheads) of a typical broad-spectrum mercury resistance operon of Gram-negative bacteria and the location
Schematic representationused for amplification of merA
Schematic representation of a typical broad-spectrum mercury resistance operon of Gram-negative bacteria and the location
of primers (arrowheads) used for amplification of merA. The merA stretch used for TGGE analysis is marked orange. R, regulator protein merR; OP, operator/promotor region and start of transcription; T, periplasmic transport protein merT; P, membrane bound transport protein merP; A, mercuric reductase merA; B, mercuric lyase merB; D, regulatory protein merD.

Page 4 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

Table 1: Primer sequences for sequencing of merA genes and for merA-TGGE.

mer primers

Direction

T1
P1
A1
A5
A7
A9
A10
D1

Forward
Forward
Forward
Reverse
Reverse
Forward
Reverse
Reverse

GC-merAf
merAr

Forward
Reverse

Nucleotide sequence (5' to 3')
primers used for sequencing
GTCTGGATCGGCAACTTGA
GGCTATCCGTCCAGCGTCAA
ACCATCGGCGGCACCTGCGT
ACCATCGTCAGGTAGGGGACCAA
TGGCGCATTGACAGTBGACCC
GAAYTGGATCCAGACGGCKG
GATCATGATCTTGGACGGCACACA
TCATGGCAAACTCTCCGC
TGGE primers (GC-clamp in italics)
CCCGCCGCCCCGCCCGCCGCCCCGCCCCGCCGCCCGCCTTGGAGAACGTGC
ACGTCCTTGGTGAAGGTCTG

The overall similarity between these merA sequences is
very high. Since the mer operon is often located on transposable elements or plasmids, it is not surprising to find
merA genes from phylogenetically distant organisms to be
highly related, e.g. the mercuric reductase genes from
pMER327, Tn5057 and Tn5053 are identical, although
they were found in P. fluorescens, E. coli and Xanthomonas
sp., respectively.
However, in accordance with the results from the merATGGE fingerprints, every strain investigated here had a
sequence distinct from that of all other strains and from
published sequences. The inoculum strain Spi3 carried a
mercuric reductase very closely related to the one of
Tn501 (517 of 527 amino acids identical, 95.7 % DNA
sequence identity, Fig. 5). The strains Ibu8 and Kon12
showed a very close relationship to a mercuric reductase
from plasmid pDU1358 (97.5 and 99.0 % nucleotide
identity, respectively). The merA sequences of strains Elb2
and Spi4 were more distantly related to pDU1358 (91.1
and 93.9 % nucleotide identity). Strain Spi11 had a
remote similarity to a mercuric reductases from E. coli
plasmids (<80 % nucleotide identity). The strain Ps. aeruginosa Bro12, which became predominant during
biocatalyzer operation, had the lowest similarity to
already known mercuric reductases (around 70 % nucleotide identity). Only 402 nucleotides, resp. 133 amino
acids could be identified for Bro12 because the mer-specific sequencing primers showed a low coverage in this
case.
Sequence analysis of the merA genes of the inoculum
strains for the binding region of the merA-TGGE primers
showed that three strains carried a possibly critical mismatch in the primer binding site at the second position of
the 3'-end of the forward primer (T instead of G). However, these strains (Spi3, Spi4, Elb2) showed no indication

for reduced amplification efficacy. Strain Spi3 even
required annealing temperatures above 55°C.
Functional profiling of mercury reducing biofilms
Amplification of merA from mercury reducing biofilm
communities of the technical scale biocatalyzer yielded
clear fingerprints after separation by TGGE (Fig. 6A,6B).
Bands from five of the six inoculum strains (Elb2, Spi4,
Ibu8, Kon12, Spi3) could be identified on day 1, strain
Spi11 was not detectable. This was probably due to its low
abundance in the inoculum caused by problems with cultivation (Wagner-Döbler, personal comm.). During the
following 224 days of pilot plant operation, large changes
in the merA fingerprints were observed. Spi4 and Elb2
were never again detected. The relative abundance of Spi3,
which was a dominant component of the inoculum, gradually decreased to below detection. Bands representing
the merA genes from Ibu8 and Kon12 were detected up to
the end of operation at varying intensities. In addition to
the merA amplicons from the inoculum strains, additional
bands were observed on the merA-TGGE fingerprints,
especially after day 127. Thus, the initial diversity of 5
merA bands on day1 increased to 7 – 8 merA bands during
the later phase of pilot plant operation. The strongest
additional band (designated "?" in Fig. 6A) was already
weakly present on day 1 and became the predominant
merA gene of the biofilm community throughout the
operating period.
Phylogenetic versus functional profiling of mercury
reducing biofilms
In Fig. 6, the results from the merA-TGGE functional community profiling (Fig. 6A,6B) can be compared to the
results of a phylogenetic profiling of the same community
DNA which was based on the ribosomal intergenic spacer
region (RISA, [10]) (Fig. 6C). In both community fingerprints, the invading strain Bro12 is identified as the prePage 5 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

Figure 5
Phylogenetic relationship between merA genes of Gram-negative bacteria
Phylogenetic relationship between merA genes of Gram-negative bacteria. The tree was based on an alignment of 30 published
and eight newly determined nucleic acid sequences of merA genes and calculated with the maximum likelihood algorithm. Bootstrap values above 65 % are given at the branching points. The bar indicates one nucleotide exchange per ten nucleotide positions. EMBL accession numbers are given after the names. Inoculum strains are shown in violet, Ps. aeruginosa Bro12 is the
invading strain identified on the basis of its band in the merA community profile.

Page 6 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

Figure 6
Community profiles of merA amplicons from a technical scale biocatalyzer over 224 days of operation at a chloralkali factory
Community profiles of merA amplicons from a technical scale biocatalyzer over 224 days of operation at a chloralkali factory. A,
Silver-stained TGGE gel with DNA of separated merA PCR products of biofilm samples. The numbers on the top of the lanes
indicate the days since operation started. Bro12 indicates the merA PCR product amplified from genomic DNA of Ps. aeruginosa
Bro12. Most inoculum strains (lane 1), disappeared and returned from time to time. The predominant signal at position (?) did
not belong to any inoculum strain, but was identical to that of the invader Ps. aeruginosa Bro12. B, below is a schematic representation of the identified signals. Different colors represent different strains. C, at the bottom are the corresponding RISA
results of the rrn-intergenic spacer region, displayed with a corresponding color code (N.A. = not analyzed).

Page 7 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

dominant organism. Moreover, with both methods Elb2
and Spi4 could only be detected on day 1, and the inoculum strain Spi11 could not be refound at all. Differences
between the two profiling methods became apparent for
the other strains. The merA-TGGE approach detected
bands for Ibu8, Kon12 and Spi3 in most samples. However, the RISA method completely missed Kon12, while
Ibu8 appeared sometimes almost as abundant as Bro12.
The detection of Spi3 was in agreement among both
methods for most samples with the exception of day 1,
where according to the merA TGGE the biocatalyzer community appeared to be dominated by Ps. putida Spi3,
while it was only a minor component on the RISA fingerprint. In the coming months, the number of detectable
strains dropped to 2–4 strains with RISA, but was around
4–8 strains for the merA TGGE fingerprint. Several new
bands appeared temporarily, indicating a succession of
strains and an increase in diversity of merA amplicons in
the technical scale biocatalyzer. Especially from day 127
on, the diversity of merA increased for approximately two
months before Bro12 regained dominance. This temporary increase in diversity was not visible with RISA.
Identification of the dominant merA signal
Effluent bacteria from the biocatalyzer were enumerated
using the spread plate technique and their mercury resistance levels determined on media containing mercury
[10]. Fingerprints using the merA-TGGE PCR were generated from mercury resistant isolates and compared to
merA-TGGE community fingerprints. The fingerprint of
one predominant isolate (Bro12) matched with the most
prominent band (designated as '?' in Fig. 6A) in the merA
community profile. Partial sequencing of the 16S rRNA
gene of Bro12 revealed 99.6 % sequence identity to Ps.
aeruginosa [10,12]. This identification was supported by a
typical bluish-gray color zone around aged colonies. The
latter should be due to excretion of pyocyanin, which is
very characteristic for Ps. aeruginosa [18].

Discussion
Primer design and diversity of merA sequences
The mercuric reductase-specific PCR-TGGE was based on
the selection of wobble nucleotides at ambiguous
sequence positions and a touch-down PCR protocol
allowing amplification of merA sequences with low and
high temperature optimum in the same PCR reaction. It
was a useful tool to obtain specific merA fingerprints from
Gram-negative bacteria and was applicable to monitor
their functional diversity in complex microbial communities. The Gram-positive bacteria had to be excluded from
this study since only few mercuric reductases are known
for them, and they are quite different from those of Gramnegative bacteria [14] and highly diverse among themselves [19]. However, Gram-positives have never been
observed as prominent mercury reducers in the biocata-

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

lyzer studied here [10]. The primer design was based on
30 mercuric reductase sequences from the EMBL database,
and the PCR gave a product with all tested mercury resistant isolates. These isolates were later shown to have merA
genes which were highly similar, but not identical to the
previously published sequences. Some of the investigated
mercury resistant strains considerably extended the
known range of sequence variations of mercuric reductases among Gram-negatives, especially the new isolates
Sphingomonas sp. Spi7 and P. aeruginosa Bro12.
Comparison between functional (merA-TGGE) and
phylogenetic (RISA) community profiling
Both merA-TGGE and RISA have their limitations and
biases. The merA-TGGE suffered from the difficult PCR
and the much higher risk of primer mismatch. With RISA,
the equality of amplification efficacy was impaired by the
highly variable length of the products. Hence, both techniques can only be considered as semi-quantitative. However, for the mercury reducing biofilms investigated here,
phylogenetic [10] and functional community profiling
methods yielded largely similar results. The same inoculum strains were detected with both methods (with the
exception of Kon12), although their relative abundance
suggested by band intensities differed between RISA and
merA-TGGE community fingerprints. The carrier of the
predominant merA gene in the biofilm, Pseudomonas aeruginosa Bro12, was identified as a predominant member of
the community based on RISA as well. Invaders were also
detected with both methods, although the merA-TGGE
appeared to be more sensitive. The concordance between
phylogenetic and functional profiling of biofilm communities from the biocatalyzer shown here further supports
the conclusion drawn already previously [10] that the
presence of toxic mercury in the industrial wastewater
entering the system at a high flow rate exerted a continuous selective pressure which allowed only mercury resistant bacteria to maintain high population densities.
Consequently, the performance of the biocatalyzer was
not impaired by the observed succession of strains, neither in small laboratory reactors nor in the technical scale
reactor.
The origin of the intruders
Toxic mercuric loads, for instance released by volcanic
activity [20], have been present on earth since the beginning of life and therefore, bacteria have evolved
mechanisms of resistance to several different chemical
mercury forms. Such bacteria can be found across a wide
range of Gram-negative and Gram-positive genera and
from diverse natural and man-made environments. The
genes of the mer operon are not always located on the bacterial chromosome but are often found on transposons
and plasmids, adding to the mobility of mercury resistance genes between species. Hence, mercury resistance is

Page 8 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

ubiquitous, even in environments without notable mercury loads [14]. Every environment in contact with the
biocatalyzer, especially the air, may therefore introduce
hitherto unknown mercury reducers [21]. The waste water
itself was not likely to have been a source of mercuryresistant invaders. Originating from the electrolysis cells,
it was virtually carbon- and nitrogen-free, temporarily carried a massive load of chlorine and the pH approximated
2. Consequently, no bacteria could be enriched from the
waste water. It is unlikely that the invading strains arrived
through the outflow, because the water current was very
fast (a few 1000 L h-1) and the outlet of the biocatalyzer
was an overflow, thus backwards growth of bacteria was
not possible. Invasion of environmental bacteria might
however have occurred via the broth tank or the neutralization tank, which were both in prolonged contact with
air.
Mercury resistance in biofilms
The predominant mercury reducer in the biocatalyzer,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Bro12, showed slow growth and a
medium mercury reduction rate in pure liquid culture
tests compared to the inoculum strains [12]. Apparently,
the assumption that the best biocatalyzer strain should
have the highest mercury reduction rate in liquid media
did not hold true. Since the Hg2+ concentration in the biocatalyzer inflow was fluctuating around a mean of 4.2 mg
L-1 and extreme inflow concentrations occurred only
rarely and were short-lived [10], Bro12 may indeed have
been well adapted to the prevailing Hg2+ concentration in
the system. During mercury peaks the strain Bro12 may
also have been protected by the still persisting and active
community of highly resistant inoculum strains [12]. In
addition, however, resistance to heavy metal stress (copper, lead, or zinc) has been shown to be up to 600 times
higher for Ps. aeruginosa cells forming biofilms than in
planktonic cells due to the buffering effect of the extracellular polymeric substance produced in the biofilm [22]. A
similar effect might be expected in the case of mercury.
The species Ps. aeruginosa is present in many aquatic habitats [23], but also represents an opportunistic pathogen
which frequently forms biofilms [24,25]. Such biofilms
are comprised of thick EPS (extracellular polysaccharide
substance) matrices which protect the cells effectively
from antibiotics and disinfectants, and may also buffer
the toxicity of Hg2+ in the biocatalyzer environment investigated here [22].

Conclusion
Molecular monitoring of a key functional gene within a
bacterial community is clearly favorable even if its members are culturable. Changing culturability and media
selectivity may massively bias the results of cultivation
based analyses. Functional profiling of the merA gene
from technical biofilms showed a microbial community

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

similar to the one identified on the basis of the ribosomal
RNA gene interspacer region, confirming the presence of a
strong selective pressure exerted by mercury toxicity. By
linking the molecular data back to pure cultures we were
able to identify and isolate the dominant mercury
reducing strain from the technical scale biocatalyzer based
on its unique mercuric reductase gene. Strain Ps. aeruginosa Bro12 showed slow growth and medium mercury
resistance in liquid media, but was apparently extremely
well adapted to the biofilm environment in the
biocatalyzer.

Methods
Biocatalyzer sampling and DNA extraction
The biocatalyzer contained 1,000 L of pumice granules
covered by a microbial biofilm and maintained in a
closed vessel as specified previously [4]. The waste water
entering the system typically contained a mercury load of
2 – 10 mg L-1 with a mean concentration of 4.2 mg L-1 and
up to 50 g L-1 chloride and approximately 6 mg L-1oxygen.
The efflux of the biocatalyzer passed an activated carbon
filter which removed remaining mercury both by physical
adsorption and by microbial reduction. The system was
inoculated with six strains, four were Pseudomonas putida
(Spi3, Spi4, Kon12, Elb2), one Pseudomonas stutzeri
(Ibu8), and one Pseudomonas fulva (Spi11) as described
previously [10]. In the following eight months of operation, solid samples were taken from the lowest accessible
horizon of the biocatalyzer, close to the inflow (approximately 30 cm above the bottom). Sampling was done
with a hollow sampling lancet picking approximately 4
cm3 of the pumice granules. Biofilms were removed from
the carrier surface by vigorous mixing in 2 ml NaCl solution (15 g L-1). Then, DNA was extracted using guanidium
thiocyanate as described previously [26].
Sequencing of merA genes
Total cellular genomic DNA was isolated from 1 ml of
overnight cultures of the involved mercury reducing
strains grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) broth at 30°C using
the Nucleospin C+T Extraction Kit (Macherey-Nagel,
Düren, Germany). The merA region was PCR-amplified
using alternative primer pairs that were designed after
alignment of all available Gram negative mer operon
sequences from the EMBL database with ClustalW. To
compensate for possible primer failures on unknown
merA sequences, several specific primers were used outside
the merA gene. Primer sequences are listed in Table 1, the
corresponding location of the priming sites in the mer
operon is depicted in Fig. 4.

The amplification reactions were performed in a total volume of 50 µl by using a thermal cycler (Mastercycler personal, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The PCR reaction
mixture contained 1 × Qiagen PCR Master Mix (QIAGEN,

Page 9 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

Germany), 1 µl of template DNA and 0.5 µM of each
primer. The PCR protocol consisted of a pre-denaturation
step at 94°C for 1 min; 30 cycles of 94°C for 15 s, 56°C
for 30 s, and an extension step at 68°C for 4.5 min. Positive PCR products were sequenced by the GATC BIOTEC
AG (Konstanz, Germany) with the common enzymatic
Sanger method using ABI 3700 sequencing instruments
and the same primers as before. The obtained sequences
were assembled to complete merA sequences and submitted to EMBL with accession numbers AJ418049AJ418057.
Phylogenetic analyses
The phylogenetic tree for merA sequences was constructed
with the ARB package using the implemented Phylip software [27]. The tree was based on 30 nucleic acid
sequences downloaded from the EMBL database and 7
additional sequences determined here. The tree was calculated with the maximum likelihood tool. Bootstrap values
were presented next to the branching points if they were
above 65%.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

providing DNA of several archaetypical merA genes. This work was supported by a grant from a European Communities EC project QLK3-199901213. ADMF was supported by a grant from the European Communities
EC project BACREX (QLK3-2000-01678).

References
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.
7.

The mercuric reductase-specific PCR and TGGE
Amplification was performed with a GeneAmp System
9700 (PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA) using an
initial touchdown PCR step of 10 cycles of 94°C for 10 s,
59–55°C for 20 s and 68°C for 20 s, afterwards continuing with 45 cycles of 94°C for 10 s, 46°C for 20 s and
68°C for 20 s. The PCR reactions (20 µl) contained 10
mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 5% DMSO (v/v), 50 mM KCl, 3
mM MgCl2, 100 µM each of dATP, dCTP, dGTP, and dTTP,
0.4 µM of forward primer GC-merAf and reverse primer
merAr, 0.5 units of recombinant Taq DNA polymerase
(LifeTechnologies, Paisley, UK), and 1 µl template. The
PCR products usually approximated 280 bp and were separated on a TGGE Maxi System (Biometra, Göttingen, Germany) against a temperature gradient of 36 – 51°C. A prerun of 10 min at 10 V to allow gradient stabilization was
followed by a 3.5 h electrophoresis at 400 V. The TGGE gel
was a 0.8 mm-polyacrylamide gel (6% w/v acrylamide,
0.1% w/v bis-acrylamide, 8 M urea, 20% v/v formamide,
2% v/v glycerol) with 1 × MN buffer (20 mM MOPS, 10
mM NaOH). Silver staining was used to visualize the DNA
bands [28].

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.
16.

Author's contributions
ADMF wrote the manuscript, developed the method and
carried out the PCR-TGGE monitoring analysis. WF and
BVP amplified and sequenced merA genes. HvC did the
biofilm sampling, DNA extraction and isolation of effluent bacteria. IWD designed and advised the project and
significantly contributed to the manuscript preparation.

Acknowledgements
A big 'Thank You' to Ying Li, Harald von Canstein and Johannes Leonhäuser
for running the biocatalysers. We gratefully acknowledge Mark Osborn for

17.

18.
19.

Karr EA, Sattley WM, Jung DO, Madigan MT and Achenbach LA:
Remarkable diversity of phototrophic purple bacteria in a
permanently frozen Antarctic lake. Appl Environ Microbiol 2003,
69:4910-4914.
Avrahami S, Liesack W and Conrad R: Effects of temperature and
fertilizer on activity and community structure of soil ammonia oxidizers. Environ Microbiol 2003, 5:691-705.
von Canstein H, Li Y, Timmis KN, Deckwer WD and Wagner-Dobler
I: Removal of mercury from chloralkali electrolysis wastewater by a mercury-resistant Pseudomonas putida strain. Appl
Environ Microbiol 1999, 65:5279-5284.
Wagner-Döbler I, von Canstein H, Li Y, Timmis KN and Deckwer WD: Removal of mercury from chemical wastewater by microorganisms in technical scale. Environ Sci Technol 2000,
34:4628-4634.
Summers AO and Lewis E: Volatilization of mercuric chloride by
mercury-resistant plasmid-bearing strains of Escherichia
coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J
Bacteriol 1973, 113:1070-1072.
Brown NL, Camakaris J, Lee BT, Williams T, Morby AP, Parkhill J and
Rouch DA: Bacterial resistances to mercury and copper. J Cell
Biochem 1991, 46:106-114.
Liebert CA, Hall RM and Summers AO: Transposon Tn21, flagship of the floating genome. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1999,
63:507-522.
Ji G and Silver S: Bacterial resistance mechanisms for heavy
metals of environmental concern. J Ind Microbiol 1995, 14:61-75.
Wagner-Dobler I, Lunsdorf H, Lubbehusen T, von Canstein HF and Li
Y: Structure and species composition of mercury-reducing
biofilms. Appl Environ Microbiol 2000, 66:4559-4563.
von Canstein H, Li Y, Leonhauser J, Haase E, Felske A, Deckwer WD
and Wagner-Dobler I: Spatially oscillating activity and microbial succession of mercury-reducing biofilms in a technicalscale bioremediation system. Appl Environ Microbiol 2002,
68:1938-1946.
von Canstein H, Li Y and Wagner-Dobler I: Long-term performance of bioreactors cleaning mercury-contaminated wastewater and their response to temperature and mercury
stress and mechanical perturbation. Biotechnol Bioeng 2001,
74:212-219.
von Canstein H, Kelly S, Li Y and Wagner-Dobler I: Species diversity improves the efficiency of mercury-reducing biofilms
under changing environmental conditions. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2002, 68:2829-2837.
Canstein HF, Li Y, Felske A and Wagner-Dobler I: Long-Term Stability of Mercury-Reducing Microbial Biofilm Communities
Analyzed by 16S-23S rDNA Interspacer Region
Polymorphism. Microb Ecol 2001, 42:624-634.
Osborn AM, Bruce KD, Strike P and Ritchie DA: Distribution,
diversity and evolution of the bacterial mercury resistance
(mer) operon. FEMS Microbiol Rev 1997, 19:239-262.
Barkay T: Mercury Cycle. Encyclopedia of Microbiology 2000,
3:171-181.
Fox B and Walsh CT: Mercuric reductase. Purification and
characterization of a transposon-encoded flavoprotein containing an oxidation-reduction-active disulfide. J Biol Chem
1982, 257:2498-2503.
von Canstein HF, Li Y, Felske A and Wagner-Dobler I: Long-term
stability of mercury-reducing microbial biofilm communities
analyzed
by
16S-23S
rDNA
interspacer
region
polymorphism. Microb Ecol 2001, 42:624-634.
Reyes EA, Bale MJ, Cannon WH and J.M. Matsen: Identification of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa by pyocyanin production on Tech
agar. J Clin Microbiol 1981, 13:456-458.
Hart MC, Elliott GN, Osborn AM, Ritchie DA and Strike P: Diversity
amongst Bacillus merA genes amplified from mercury
resistant isolates and directly from mercury polluted soil.
FEMS Microbiol Ecol 1998, 27:73-84.

Page 10 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Microbiology 2003, 3

20.

21.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2180/3/22

Brunke M, Deckwer WD, Frischmuth A, Horn JM, Lunsdorf H, Rhode
M, Rohricht M, Timmis KN and Weppen P: Microbial retention of
mercury from waste streams in a laboratory column containing merA gene bacteria. FEMS Microbiol Rev 1993,
11:145-152.
Felske A, Pauling BV, von Canstein HF, Li Y, Lauber J, Buer J and Wagner-Dobler I: Detection of small sequence differences using
competitive PCR: molecular monitoring of genetically
improved, mercury-reducing bacteria. Biotechniques 2001,
30:142-148.
Teitzel GM and Parsek MR: Heavy Metal Resistance of Biofilm
and Planktonic Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Appl Environ Microbiol
2003, 69:2313-2320.
Penna VT, Martins SA and Mazzola PG: Identification of bacteria
in drinking and purified water during the monitoring of a typical water purification system. BMC Public Health 2002, 2:13-13.
Hoiby N, Krogh Johansen H., Moser C, Song Z, Ciofu O and Kharazmi
A: Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the in vitro and in vivo biofilm mode of growth. Microbes Infect 2001, 3:23-35.
Szewzyk U, Szewzyk R, Manz W and Schleifer KH: Microbiological
safety of drinking water. Annu Rev Microbiol 2000, 54:81-127.
Pitcher DG, Saunders NA and Owen RJ: Rapid extraction of bacterial genomic DNA with guanidium thiocyanate. Lett Appl
Microbiol 1989, 8:151-156.
Felsenstein J: PHYLIP -- Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2). Cladistics 1989, 5:164-166.
Sanguinetti CJ, Dias Neto E and Simpson AJG: Rapid silver staining
and recovery of PCR products separated on polyacrylamide
gels. Biotechniques 1994, 17:915-919.
Horn JM, Brunke M, Deckwer WD and Timmis KN: Pseudomonasputida strains which constitutively overexpress mercury
resistance for biodetoxification of organomercurial
pollutants. Appl Environ Microbiol 1994, 60:357-362.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 11 of 11
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
