<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Discrimination of different species from the genus Drosophila by intact protein profiling using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010 10:95. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-95"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Ralph Feltens"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Discrimination of different species from the
genus Drosophila by intact protein profiling using
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
mass spectrometry
Ralph Feltens1,2*, Renate Görner2, Stefan Kalkhof2, Helke Gröger-Arndt2, Martin von Bergen2

Abstract
Background: The use of molecular biology-based methods for species identification and establishing phylogenetic
relationships has supplanted traditional methods relying on morphological characteristics. While PCR-based
methods are now the commonly accepted gold standards for these types of analysis, relatively high costs, timeconsuming assay development or the need for a priori information about species-specific sequences constitute
major limitations. In the present study, we explored the possibility to differentiate between 13 different species
from the genus Drosophila via a molecular proteomic approach.
Results: After establishing a simple protein extraction procedure and performing matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry (MS) with intact proteins and peptides, we could show that most of the
species investigated reproducibly yielded mass spectra that were adequate for species classification. Furthermore, a
dendrogram generated by cluster analysis of total protein patterns agrees reasonably well with established
phylogenetic relationships.
Conclusion: Considering the intra- and interspecies similarities and differences between spectra obtained for
specimens of closely related Drosophila species, we estimate that species typing of insects and possibly other
multicellular organisms by intact protein profiling (IPP) can be established successfully for species that diverged
from a common ancestor about 3 million years ago.

Background
Taxonomical classification of species on the basis of
phenotypic differences and similarities has been performed since the days of Linnaeus. In more recent
times, cladistics have come to the fore and, with the
advent of molecular biology, started to increasingly supplant the use of morphological criteria for discrimination of phenotypically similar species or species of
uncertain ancestry. In the last decades, DNA sequencing
and PCR-based methods have been used increasingly to
unlock the phylogenetic information hidden in the genomes of diverse organisms, leading also to the barcode
of life initiative [1-4]. However, there is no ‘magic’
* Correspondence: ralph.feltens@ufz.de
1
Department of Dermatology, Venerology and Allergology, Medical Faculty
of the Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany

standard assay in existence that can be used to identify
any given species. Instead, for most species that are to
be analyzed, sequence information has to be obtained
first, based upon which a PCR assay may be established.
Despite these constraints as well as significant setup and
operating costs, PCR assays have become the gold standard for species typing and other applications, due to
their specificity, reproducibility and sensitivity.
During the last decade, however, there has been an
increasing number of reports in which proteomic instead
of genomic data has been used to successfully discriminate between different microorganisms at the genus, species and sometimes even at the subspecies level [5-7]. In
these studies, enabled by recent developments in mass
spectrometry, microorganisms have been identified by a
combination of MALDI time-of-flight (TOF) MS and an
advanced statistical analysis. Furthermore, identification

© 2010 Feltens et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

of microorganisms by MS has started to become a commonplace method, which is reflected by diverse companies providing dedicated hard- and software solutions as
well as comprehensive databases of reference spectra for
robust, automated data recording and analysis [8,9]. Generally, cultured microorganisms are subjected to a simple,
acid-based protein extraction, followed by mixing of the
resulting sample with a suitable aromatic acid serving as
a matrix (for review, see [10]). Samples are spotted onto
a target plate, and after proteins and peptides have
co-crystallized with the matrix upon drying, spectra can
be recorded directly from the precipitate by laser desorption ionization and time-of-flight MS. Detected masses
(m/z values) are typically in the range of 1000 - 20 000
Da, but strongly depending on the matrix, with sinapinic
acid most frequently used in order to obtain an increased
number and intensity of signals with m/z values ≥ 5000.
Mass accuracy in the recorded range is generally high,
allowing the detection of a single (nonisobaric) amino
acid substitution within a protein. For determining the
identity of an unknown species, it is necessary to record
spectra from reference samples first. However, no further
taxon-specific, a priori data are needed, as there is principally no need to establish the identities of the proteins in
the peak pattern.
A complementary approach to this procedure is the
peptide mass fingerprinting or shotgun mass mapping
(SMM). Here, peptides obtained by tryptic digestion of
the sample, which may be either a protein extract or a
whole organism, are subjected to MALDI-MS analysis.
Though a spectrum generated in this way will differ from
an IPP spectrum by the smaller size of the observable
peptides, m/z values normally ranging from 500 - 5000,
analysis and comparison of peak patterns obtained in this
way are essentially performed in the same manner [11].
The use of SMM with its somewhat more laborious sample preparation may be justified in cases where gathering
of additional sequence information and detection of specific proteins by MS/MS is desired, for which IPP is principally not suited. A general prerequisite for this
approach, though, is the availability of a more or less
complete genomic dataset for the respective species.
In summary, MALDI-MS possesses a number of potential advantages over other species typing methods, such as
PCR or antibody-based approaches. Sample preparation is
comparably simple and requires only little hands-on time.
It does not rely on taxon-specific and cost-intensive consumables, does not require genetic information about the
organisms that are being investigated and the straightforward workflow can easily be standardized and automated.
Moreover, only short measurement times are required,
and reference spectra for further species can be added to
existing databases at any time. Mass spectrometric identification of microorganisms has been applied successfully in

Page 2 of 15

taxonomical research, but also in other settings, such as
clinical, food, and environmental microbiology, and it has
been tested for rapid distinction between highly pathogenic Bacillus anthracis and closely related, but less dangerous species [12-14]. Besides bacteria, MS has also been
successfully used for the typing of cyanobacteria and dermatophytes of different genera and species [15-17]. We
have recently adapted the methodology for the identification of eucaryotic algae from the genus Prototheca, and a
sophisticated approach for distinguishing between metabolically competent species within a microbial consortium
has been developed, where isotopically labeled salts
(15N-ammonium) or substrate (13C-benzene) were used to
generate species- and isotope-specific protein patterns,
enabling the identification of the metabolically active species [18,19].
Some recent studies have already indicated the possibility to use MS-based methods for the discrimination
of more complex, metazoan species such as insects. For
example, mass fingerprints of neuropeptides from specimens of the insect order Mantophasmatodea revealed
the potential of this approach to differentiate between
different species [20]. More recently, a report has been
published that showed that it is possible to detect single
amino acid substitutions in orthologous neuropeptides
from different Drosophila species by MALDI-TOF MS,
while another study described the use of MS/MS to
obtain sequence information from neuropeptides of
about 60 different species from ancient insect taxa, and
using the detected sequence variations for a preliminary
correlation with established genealogy [21,22]. These
approaches, however, relied on previous organ preparation by dissection of the specimens, and inference of
phylogenetic relations was dependent on determination
of accurate amino acid sequences by tandem mass
spectrometry.
The extensive number of examples clearly demonstrates the feasibility of MS for typing of organisms.
However, to our knowledge, there has been no attempt
to establish species identity of small metazoans based on
total (extractable) protein content. Thus, the aim of this
study was to provide a proof-of-principle that species
discrimination employing intact protein profiling (IPP)
by mass spectrometry can also be applied to intact specimens of a multicellular organism such as the fruit fly.
For this purpose, protein extracts from whole, single
specimens representing 13 different species of Drosophila were prepared, purified and subjected to IPP. The
resulting mass spectra were processed and evaluated by
principal component analysis (PCA) as well as cluster
analysis which showed that most species could be discriminated from each other unambiguously by their peptide and protein patterns. Interestingly, evolutionary
relationships between several of the fly species were

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

reflected by these patterns, with flies having diverged
more recently from a common ancestor yielding more
similar spectra.

Methods
Chemicals

All chemicals and solvents used were of pro analysis quality and purchased from Sigma (Taufkirchen, Germany) or
Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). High purity water was
obtained by an Ultra Clear UV plus system from SG
GmbH (Barsbüttel, Germany).
Culturing of Drosophila

Culture bottles containing 12 different Drosophila species as well as a larger number of D. melanogaster specimens stored in 70% ethanol were a gift from Gunter
Reuter, Department of Developmental Genetics, MartinLuther-University Halle-Wittenberg (Table 1). The flies
were reared on standard medium at ambient temperature and periodically harvested by immobilizing them at
-20°C for about 30 min before transferring them directly
to 70% ethanol. Storage was carried out at ambient temperature; after several weeks, flies were transferred to
-20°C for longer storage periods.
Protein extracts and tryptic digestion

Male and female flies from D. melanogaster in ethanol
were sorted prior to sample preparation. For protein
extraction, flies were transferred into reaction tubes and
placed in a vacuum centrifuge for 30 to 60 min to
remove residual liquid. Depending on fly size (D. yak.,
D. tei., D. ere. and D. nov. were classified as being relatively small), 50 or 70 μl of 6 M urea in 50 mM Tris/
HCl, pH 6.8 and approx. 50 or 70 mg of glass beads,
respectively, were added to the tubes. Lysis was
performed in a bead mill (TissueLyser II, Qiagen) for
2 × 15 min at 30 Hz at ambient temperature. After a
Table 1 Drosophila species used in this study
Drosophila Species

Abbreviation

D. yakuba

D. yak.

D. funebris

D. fun.

D. lummei

D. lum.

D. teissieri

D. tei.

D. erecta

D. ere.

D. novamexicana
D. melanogaster

D. nov.
D. mel.

D. mauritiana

D. mau.

D. ananassae

D. ana.

D. virilis

D. vir.

D. hydei

D. hyd.

D. pseudoobscura

D. po.

D. miranda

D. mir.

Page 3 of 15

short centrifugation, supernatants were recovered and
subjected to two consecutive centrifugation steps at
14,000 rpm to remove insoluble debris. Proteins were
purified from 10 μl of the supernatants by reversed
phase chromatography using ZipTip C18 ® pipette tips
(Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions,
and stepwise elution was performed with 5 μl of 60%
and 90% ACN containing 0.1% TFA. Corresponding eluates were pooled; protein concentrations were determined using the DC Protein Assay according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad, Munich,
Germany).
For peptide mass spectra, a protein extract was prepared from 3 male and 3 female D. mel. specimens in 100
mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) containing 8 M urea.
40 μl aliquots from the homogenate were left untreated
(sample A) or subjected to acetone precipitation (sample
B) or ZipTipC18® purification (stepwise, 4 × 10 μl; sample
C), followed by vacuum drying. Both protein pellets were
dissolved in 20 μl of the same buffer. Reduction and alkylation of the samples were carried out by addition of 1 μl
1 M DTT in 100 mM ABC (sample A: 2 μl) and incubation for 1 h at ambient temperature, followed by addition
of 20 μl 200 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ABC (sample
A: 40 μl) and another incubation for 1 h at ambient temperature. After addition of 4 μl 1 M DTT (sample A:
8 μl), samples were incubated for 1 h at ambient temperature. The samples were diluted with 60 μl (sample A:
120 μl) of 100 mM ABC, and 5 μl (sample A: 10 μl)
50 ng/μl trypsin in 100 mM ABC were added. Digests
were carried out overnight at 37°C and stopped by addition of 1 μl (sample A: 2 μl) formic acid. Peptides were
purified using ZipTipC18® pipette tips, but using solutions
containing 0.1% formic acid instead of TFA. Eluted peptides were vacuum dried and stored at -20°C.
MALDI-TOF MS

One microliter aliquots of the protein solutions were
spotted onto ground steel MALDI targets (Bruker Daltonics), and mixed with 1 μl sinapinic acid (SA) matrix
directly on the target plate. The MALDI matrix solution
was prepared as saturated SA in 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/
0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were allowed to
dry for several minutes before MALDI-TOF MS measurements were performed. IPP (intact protein profiling)
spectra were obtained on an MALDI-TOF/TOF mass
spectrometer (Ultraflex III™, using FlexControl software
Vs. 3.0; Bruker Daltonics). The instrument was operated
at pulse rates of 100 Hz; pulse ion extraction delay was
set to 400 ns. Measurements were carried out in positive
reflector mode using an acceleration voltage of 25.0
(ion source 1) and 21.85 (ion source 2) kV. Lens voltage
was 9.5 kV, reflector voltages were 26.3 and 13.7 kV.
Mass spectra were recorded in the m/z range between

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

1.8 and 17 kDa. ACTH/CLIP 1-17 (2094.09 Da), ACTH/
CLIP 18-39 (2466.20 Da), somatostatin 28 (3148.47 Da),
insulin (5734.52 Da), ubiquitin I (8565.76 Da) and cytochrome c (12360.97 Da) were used as external calibrants,
enabling a mass accuracy of generally better than 200
ppm. At least 10 000 individual laser shots were added
for each spectrum.
ESI MS/MS

For identification of proteins from D. mel., vacuumdried peptides (samples A, B and C) were resuspended
in 20 μl 3% methanol containing 0.1% formic acid. Peptides from 8 μl of each sample were then separated by
reversed phase nano-HPLC-chip technology (LC1100
series, Agilent Technologies, Paolo Alto, California; column: Zorbax 300SB-C18, 3.5 μm, 150 × 0.075 mm; eluent: 0.1% formic acid, 3-55% methanol; gradient:
90 min). The chip was online-coupled to a 3D ion trap
mass spectrometer (MSD TRAP XCT mass spectrometer, Agilent Technologies) as described elsewhere
[23]. Database searches were conducted using the MS/
MS ion search of Mascot against all Drosophila entries
(and, as a control, all entries) of the non-redundant
NCBI database with the following parameters: specific
trypsin digestion, up to one missed cleavage; fixed and
variable modifications: carbamidomethyl (Cys) and oxidation (Met), respectively; peptide and fragment tolerances: ± 1.2 Da and ± 0.8 Da, respectively, and peptide
charges: +1, +2 and +3 [24]. Proteins were defined as
unambiguously identified if in at least one of the three
samples the Mowse score was higher than 100 and at
least 2 different peptides (p < 0.05) could be assigned.
MALDI-MS peak detection and peak matrix generation

MALDI-MS spectra were analyzed using FlexAnalysis
(Vs. 3.0, Bruker Daltonics). For the m/z ranges 1.8 to
3.5 kDa, 3.5 to 7.0 kDa and 7.0 to 15 kDa, peak detection of average peptide masses using the centroid algorithm was carried out separately, using optimized
baseline correction (TopHat), Gaussian smoothing and
detection (S/N between 1 and 1.5) parameters for the
different parts of the spectra. From the MALDI-MS data
files, peak lists were extracted as text files using the software UltraMassList [25]. Peak lists covering the full m/z
range were assembled in Excel, and peak intensities normalized against the respective median value. From all
125 spectra, a peak matrix was generated using the software MS-Screener [26]. Peak binning was performed
with a precision of 500 ppm, and the resulting matrix
exported to a text file. Transposition of columns to
rows (and vice versa) was performed using the corresponding function of the freely available software PAST
[27]. For revisions of the peak matrix, described in the

Page 4 of 15

following section, the sorting and calculation functions
of Excel were used.
Peak matrix analysis by clustering

From the raw peak matrix, rare peaks (less than 4
occurrences in total) were removed and a preliminary
analysis was performed. Using PAST, pairwise spectra
similarities using Dice (or Sørensen) coefficients were
calculated according to DS = 2 M/(2 M+N), with M for
the number of matching peaks and N for the total number of peaks being present in just one spectrum. This
was followed by clustering using the unweighted pairgroup average method. Bootstrapping analysis with the
number of replicates (N) set to 1000 was performed.
Additionally, the Dice similarity matrix was transferred
from PAST to Excel using copy and paste and saved as
a text file. From this, a heatmap was obtained by opening the file in Framework and saving the graphical output [28]. Dendrograms were colored and assembled
alongside their corresponding heatmaps using
CorelDraw.
For stringent clustering, peaks were selected that were
rated for their ability to distinguish between different species. First, the number of occurrences OSp for any given
peak was determined in every group of spectra from each
species Sp. For species where more than eight spectra
were present (e.g. X spectra), peak occurrence was normalized by a factor of 8/X (a maximal number of 8 for any
peak indicating its presence in all spectra from the respective species). Peaks occurring less than 2.6 times in spectra
from any given species were removed from the analysis.
Then, two score values s1 and s2 for individual peaks were
calculated for each species with s1 = 4 - |O sp - 4| and
s2 = 32 - |(Osp - 8)2 - 32|; for both types of score, values of
zero indicate peaks being present or absent in all spectra.
Overall scores S1 and S2 for a given peak were calculated
as the sum of individual scores s1 or s2 over all species.
Using different cutoff values for the two types of score and
testing the resulting datasets in cluster analysis, we were
not able to determine the superiority of one method over
the other, and therefore settled on a combination of
both methods. Only peaks having scores of S1 < 5.0 and
(S2)0.5 < 6.5 were used for the final species-discriminating
cluster analysis (208 different peaks in total). Dendrogram
and heatmap were generated as described above.
Peak matrix analysis by principal components

For principal component analyses, the peak matrix was
first converted into a binary matrix by substitution of
intensity values with ones or zeros using PAST. In order
to compensate to a small extent for the different peak
numbers in different spectra, values were furthermore
normalized by the Euclidean length of the row vectors

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

(using the ‘row normalize length’ command), and principal component analysis was performed with the peak
matrix containing all spectra as well as spectra from
subsets of several species.

Results
A simple protein extraction protocol was established,
using a bead mill for homogenizing fly specimens and
the denaturing conditions of 6 M urea for efficient solubilization of proteins. Weight of vacuum-dried flies,
depending on the considerable size differences between
the respective species, varied between 0.3 and 1 mg
(exact values were difficult to determine with our standard lab equipment), and extractable amount of protein
was around 50 μg for a fly of average size. Performing
purification from the homogenate by reversed phase
chromatography (C18 matrix) in a stepwise fashion while
taking care to not exceed the column’s binding capacity
of approximately 5 μg, it was principally possible to
recover more than 90% of the protein. Thus, about 100
μl eluate containing up to 50 μg protein could be

Page 5 of 15

obtained from one fly, with about 250 nl containing a
sufficient amount of protein (i.e. ~125 ng) to obtain several well-resolved MALDI-MS IPP spectra from one single sample spot on the target plate.
Using protein extracts prepared from 128 individual
Drosophila specimens from 13 different species, 128 IPP
spectra could be recorded via MALDI-MS. A large number of individual peptide and protein peaks was routinely detected in each spectrum. In the m/z range
between 1.8 and 15 kDa, 168 to 390 peaks were found,
with an average of 236 peaks/spectrum. Upon visual
inspection, flies from the same species generally yielded
similar spectra, but showed distinct patterns when compared to spectra from other species. A section of six
exemplary spectra from two different Drosophila species
is shown in Fig. 1. Repeating of MALDI-MS measurements using the same protein preparation invariably
yielded nearly identical spectra (as judged by visual
inspection, data not shown).
An initial analysis of the peak patterns from the 128
spectra using hierarchical clustering turned up three

Figure 1 Comparison of six MALDI-MS spectra, 3.3 to 4.6 kDa. The upper three spectra (red) were obtained with three different flies from D.
ananassae, whereas the lower three (blue) were from different (female) D. melanogaster specimens. Peaks detected by FlexAnalysis are indicated
for two representative spectra. Peaks highlighted in green were used for stringent species discrimination in the generation of the final
dendrogram (Fig. 4).

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

spectra that did not show significant similarity to any
other spectrum (D_ere_10, D_mau_4, D_mau_6). Cutoff
criterion was a value of DS < 0.25; the remaining 125
spectra displayed a Dice similarity coefficient of 0.45 or
larger to at least one of other spectra in the dataset.
Therefore, these three spectra were excluded from the
dataset for the following analyses.
An unbiased cluster analysis (i.e. without data preprocessing based on information about species affiliation)
using the remaining 125 spectra yielded the dendrogram
and the similarity matrix shown in Fig. 2. For comparison, a schematic representation of established phylogenetic relationships is outlined in the upper part of the
same figure, black lines indicating congruence with the
dendrogram from the cluster analysis. For generation of
the schematic tree, taxonomic data was retrieved from
Flybase and The Database on Taxonomy of Drosophilidae [29,30]. The spectra from eight species (D. nov., D.
vir., D. hyd., D. ere., D. mel., D. yak. and D. ana.) were
united in a single cluster each, allowing unambiguous
differentiation of the respective species from all other
species present. The two species D. po. and D. mir.
could clearly be separated from all other species, however, complete distinction between spectra from these
two species was not achieved. One spectrum from
D. fun. clustered together with all spectra from D. lum.,
thus precluding complete discrimination of these two
species from each other. Furthermore, two of the ten
spectra obtained for D. tei. were assigned to a cluster
containing several spectra from D. mau., allowing for
the unequivocal distinction of this species from all other
species except for D. mau. D. mau. was the species
which showed the strongest spectral heterogeneity, even
after removal of the two spectra that, together with one
spectrum from D. ere., were deemed unsuitable for analysis due to their high dissimilarity to any other spectrum in the dataset. This heterogeneity is reflected by
an average D S of 0.43 within this group of spectra,
whereas Ds within groups of spectra from other species
(excluding the two spectra from D. tei. and the one
from D. fun. that were assigned to the clusters of different species) are between 0.49 (D. yak.) and 0.63 (D. vir.;
median D s over all species without D. mau.: 0.52).
Visually, this low degree of similarity can be inspected
in the heatmap representation of the D S values; the
region corresponding to the pairwise similarity coefficients of D. mau. spectra has been outlined by a white
square.
Results from a principal component analysis of all 125
spectra are shown in Fig. 3A. Upon visual inspection of
the scatter plot, straightforward discrimination between
the subgenera Drosophila (c; five groups outlined in the
range from -0.1 to -0.5 and 0.15 to -0.3, components 1
and 2, respectively) and Sophophora is possible, and

Page 6 of 15

within the Sophophora group, between the species
groups melanogaster (d; 6 species, positive values for
component 1) and obscura (b; two species, high in the
upper left quadrant). Using only spectra from the subgenus Drosophila, discrimination between the more closely
related species D. hyd., D. nov. and D. vir. could be
achieved (Fig. 3C; magenta, blue and light blue 95%
concentration ellipses, respectively); and discrimination
between D. ere., D. mel. and D. ana. (Fig. 3D; red, black
and yellow 95% concentration ellipses, respectively) was
likewise possible when only spectra from the respective
melanogaster species group where used for the analysis.
However, complete distinction between the two species
D. po. and D. mir. from the obscura species group was
not possible; the two dotted, almost touching ellipses
outlining the regions of the corresponding spectra represent 50% concentration values (corresponding to a s of
just 1.2; Fig. 3B). Likewise, for further discrimination
between closely related species, the presence of other
spectra proved to be detrimental in this type of analysis.
We tried to achieve a more stringent separation of the
different Drosophila species by selecting peaks that
showed a species-specific occurrence or absence. For
this, peaks were selected that were either present in or
absent from all, or at least most, spectra of a given species, and which showed this discriminating behavior for
all different species under investigation. Mathematically,
for any given species an individual (best) score value
of zero was assigned whenever the peak occurred in all
spectra or in no spectrum, and the total score
for the respective peak was calculated as the sum of these
individual scores over all species. Conversely, the highest
(worst) species-specific scores were assigned/obtained
whenever a peak occurred in 50% of spectra (s1(O sp =
4.0)) or 30% of spectra (s2(Osp = 2.3)) for a given species.
While the scoring value s1 assigns a linearly changing
value for intermediate occurrences, the scoring value s2
assumes a nonlinear significance, rating a peak occurring,
for example, in 70% of the spectra to be a potentially better discriminator than a peak being absent from 70% of
the spectra (s2 = 5.8 vs. 31.4, respectively). Selecting
approximately 200 peaks using a combination of both
scoring parameters, we were able to establish a good discrimination between most Drosophila species (Fig. 4).
While generally repeating the results from the unbiased
clustering, complete separation between D. po. and D.
mir., as well as between male and female D. mel., was
now achieved. However, two spectra from D. tei. still
clustered with the somewhat heterogeneous group of
spectra from D. mau., and still one spectrum from
D. fun. did not group together with all other spectra from
the same species. Instead, it continued to display some
similarity to the group of spectra from D. lum., though
now appearing as an outlier.

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

Page 7 of 15

Figure 2 Results from unbiased cluster analysis. 125 spectra from flies of 13 different species were clustered using Dice coefficients. A color
(heatmap) representation of the pairwise similarity (Dice) coefficients is shown in the lower part of the figure, the white square outlining the
cluster of D. mauritiana spectra. Above this, clustering of individual spectra, color-coded according to species, are shown in a dendrogram.
Percentages of bootstrapping replicates supporting the location of individual nodes are indicated. On top of this, a second dendrogram
indicating the phylogeny of the different species is shown.

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

A

Page 8 of 15

B

0. 3

b

0. 2

0.5

0. 1

-0. 4

-0. 3

-0. 2

-0. 1

0.1

0. 2

0. 3

-0.1

0.4

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

0.3

C

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.2
Component 2

c

-0.5

-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0.1

0.2

0.3

-0.1

-0.2

0.1

-0.3

-0.4

d
-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0.1

0.2

0.3

-0.5

0.4

D

0.36

0.24

0.12

-0.1
-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

-0.12

-0.24

-0.2

-0.36

-0.48

Component 1

-0.6

Figure 3 Scatterplots from unbiased PCAs using 125 spectra from flies of 13 different species. Species-specific color-coding corresponds
to that shown in Fig. 2. Spectra belonging to one species are outlined by a convex shape or an ellipse. A: PCA containing all spectra, with 95%
concentration ellipses for three subgenera/species groups. B: PCA using only spectra from D. pseudoobscura and D. miranda, with 50%
concentration ellipses. C: PCA performed with spectra from the subgenus Drosophila but without D. pseudoobscura and D. miranda, with 95%
concentration ellipses. D: PCA of the spectra from the subgenus Sophophora, with 95% concentration ellipses.

In an attempt to identify some of the proteins present
in the purified Drosophila extracts used for obtaining the
MALDI mass spectra, nano-high-performance liquid
chromatography (nano-HPLC) electrospray ionization
(ESI) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was performed using tryptic digests of total protein preparations
from D. mel. From the three different samples, a total of
eighteen proteins could be identified unambiguously
(sample A: 15, sample B: 11, sample C: 9; most proteins
were found in more than one sample), the majority stemming from muscle tissue (myosin heavy chain, regulatory
light chain, troponin T, tropomyosin 1 & 2, actin
and flightin) and from mitochondria (ATP sythase subunits alpha & beta, voltage dependent anion channel).
Two proteins from the glycolysis pathway (fructosebisphosphate aldolase and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase 1), drosocrystallin, retinin, cuticular

protein 49Ae, lethal (1), neuropeptide-like 2 and ejaculatory bulb-specific protein 2 were identified as well. As a
control, we performed a search against the complete
NCBI non-redundant database using the same identification criteria. The same set of Drosophila proteins was
identified, whereas no additional hits indicating the presence of proteins from other species (bacteria, plants,
fungi) in the sample were obtained.

Discussion
Insects stored in 70% ethanol were used in this study.
These conditions largely ensure protein insolubility and
thus minimal loss in the case of damaged samples
[31,32]. Furthermore, as they constitute a simple and
inexpensive standard method for sterile short- and longtime storage of arthropod specimens and have proved to
be compatible with downstream mass spectrometry

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

Page 9 of 15

Figure 4 Results from cluster analysis using 208 selected peaks. For further information, please refer to the legend of Fig. 2.

applications, insects from already existing collections
may be subjected to this type of analysis. This may open
the door to peakcoding projects based on proteomic
data, thus offering an alternative to DNA barcoding analyses. The higher cost-efficiency in comparison to
DNA-based approaches becomes more paramount in
large-scale projects such as the screening of Culicoides
species in Western Europe, in which tens of thousands

of specimens collected from the wild have to be examined for carrying the blue tongue virus [33]. With the
now common occurrence of morphologically very similar invading and endemic Culicoides species, a high
throughput-compatible method is needed for quick and
reliable discrimination between different species. In this
context, DNA-based identification methods for insects
and possibly also virus may be complemented and, at a

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

later stage, even replaced by the more inexpensive typing via MALDI-MS. Of note, the nucleic acid extraction
protocol includes a lysis step based on the chaotropic
properties of a guanidinium salt, which we found to be
completely compatible with our protein extraction and
purification method (see below) when substituting this
salt for urea. Therefore, it should be possible to establish
and compare DNA- and protein-based species typing
methods in parallel, using extracts from the same
specimens.
After extraction of peak tables from the recorded
spectra and assigning their m/z values to a matrix, pairwise spectra similarities were calculated using the Dice
algorithm. This method was selected because with an
average of about 230 peaks/spectrum and a total of
more than 2300 different peaks in the matrix, for any
given spectrum more than 90% of the fields in the
matrix contained a zero, indicating the absence of the
respective peak. As common absences are disregarded
when calculating the Dice coefficient, assignment of
high similarities to spectra on the basis of peak absences
is prevented. Furthermore, the Dice coefficient puts
more weight on joint occurrences than on disparities,
somewhat compensating for the higher probability of a
limited number of randomly distributed peaks within a
matrix containing a majority of empty cells (i.e. containing zeros) to generate mismatches than to display common occurrences between any two spectra. One possible
weakness of the algorithm is that it does not take into
account the peak intensities, but transforms the data
into a binary (absence-presence) format instead. This
might have resulted in an undervaluation of prominent
peaks which represent more abundant proteins with an
inherently more reliable appearance within the spectra.
However, since the algorithm for calculation of the Czekanowski index as the parameter for quantitative analysis was not an integral part of our software tools, we
were not able to address this concern.
Using Dice coefficients and without incorporating any
a priori knowledge about species affiliation, we carried
out a clustering analysis of the 125 spectra. Separation
at the species level or, for D. po. and D. mir., at least at
the level of the species subgroup, was achieved for most
of the spectra. However, the spectra from D. mau. clustered into two related but separate groups, one of which
comprised also two spectra from D. tei. This fact is indicative of significant spectral heterogeneity within this
species. Furthermore, results from the bootstrap analysis
indicate that the positions of the top nodes of these two
groups with probability values of 41 and 47% are much
less conclusive than those for most other species that
are usually in the range of 95 to 100%. Since bootstrapping is based on repeated analyses with an informationreduced dataset, we suspect that this somewhat erratic

Page 10 of 15

behavior reflects a strong dependence on a very limited
number of species-specific peaks. The spectral heterogeneity is also visible in the heatmap representation of the
similarity coefficients, where the region corresponding
to pairwise comparisons of the spectra from D. mau.,
outlined by the white square, is less distinctly defined
and its colors closer to those of background values than
corresponding square regions representing the clusters
of other species.
Using principal component analysis (PCA) as a different, independent method to evaluate the peak matrix,
we found that distinction between different subgenera,
species groups and also individual species was principally possible. PCA surmises the existence of correlated
variables (i.e. peaks), and tries to reduce the complexity
of the dataset by substituting them by a limited number
of components. However, the analysis yielded 19 principal components with Eigenvalues > 1 (Kaiser criterion);
and 14 principal components are still needed to explain
just 50% of the data variance (data not shown). Thus, it
is not surprising that in a graphical representation based
on only two components, albeit with the largest Eigenvalues (accounting for 9.2% + 7.2% = 16.5% of total variance), complete distinction of all species was not
possible (Fig. 3A). Reduced datasets containing less species and using the two strongest principal components
in each case, however, allowed for an increasingly better
separation of spectra from different species (Fig. 3C and
3D). Actually, when using peak matrices of spectra from
only two species, complete pairwise separation by PCA
as judged by non-overlapping 95% concentration ellipses
(area defined by axes lengths of 2.4 times standard
deviation) in the scatterplots was possible for most species (data not shown). One notable exception was the
incomplete separation of D. po. and D. mir. seen in Fig.
3B. Here, the ellipses were calculated using a relaxed
criterion, outlining an area of just 50% probability.
Another exception was the incomplete discrimination of
male and female D. mel. (not shown). Pairwise distinction between D. tei. and D. yak. or D. mel. and between
D. fun. and D. lum. by non-overlapping concentration
ellipses was possible only when either the spectra
D_tei_2, D_tei_3 and D_fun_5, whose correct assignment had already proved to be problematic in the cluster analysis, were excluded from the PCA or the
distinction criterion was relaxed to 90% probability.
Concentration ellipses containing 95% of spectra from
D. mau. showed a minor overlap (which was not
observed at the 90% level) with the corresponding
ellipses of D. ere. and D. mel., possibly again owing to
their spectral diversity (not shown). Of note, grouping
of D. ana. with the other species from the melanogaster
species group and clustering of D. fun. and D. hyd.
within the Drosophila subgenus is much better

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

supported by PCA (Fig. 3A, and scatterplots including
principal component 3, not shown) than it is in the
cluster analysis, where group similarities are only around
0.2 and the locations of the respective nodes are supported with only 48% to 62% probability by bootstrapping analysis.
In summary, principal component analysis can be used
to discriminate between different species with results
comparable to those achieved by cluster analysis. One
limitation of PCA is that the number of different species
that can be separated in one analytical run should not
be larger than two, since an increasing complexity of
the dataset is not compatible with reduction to and graphical representation by only two principal components.
Broader relationships between different species groups
and subgenera may be established consecutively by a
successive increase in the number of species and iterated analysis of the dataset. However, in order to avoid
the cumbersomeness of this approach, we decided to
rely on cluster analysis for further data evaluation.
Next, we investigated if it would be possible to identify
species-specific peaks that might be used for direct and
unambiguous discrimination of the corresponding species from all other species. We searched the peak matrix
and found that this approach yielded specific m/z values
for only six of the 13 species. Signals with m/z values of
2657.8, 7361.5 and 7625.6 Da were reliable markers for
D. ana., m/z values of 6635.0 and 10972.2 Da were specific for D. ere., m/z values of 11600.9, 11770.8 and
11786.5 specific for D. vir., and D. hyd., D. nov. and
D. yak. showed one specific peak each at 10097.1,
4556.5, or 11265.7 Da, respectively. 35 additional, species-specific peptides could be assigned to these and
three more species (D. mau., D. fun. and D. tei.), but
these were found only between 50% and 90% of the
time in the recorded spectra, making them less reliable
markers. For the remaining four species, no specific
peptides occurring in at least 50% of the spectra were
found. Expanding our search for discriminating peaks,
we identified and incorporated 29 additional peptides
that appeared at least 50% of the time in more than one
(but not all) species. However, using all 75 peaks
selected so far, complete discrimination between all thirteen species could still not be achieved, as five spectra
clustered together with spectra from different species,
and separation of the spectra from D. mir. and D. po.
was also not possible.
Not satisfied with this result, we decided to pursue a
less straightforward approach and to identify peptides
essential for species discrimination by assigning score
values to all of the more than 2000 different peaks in
the dataset. This time, we also tried to achieve separation between male and female D. mel. specimens by formally treating those as two different species. As the

Page 11 of 15

dataset was now reduced to about 200 different peaks
(see additional file 1), bootstrapping support for the
location of parent nodes was slightly decreased for some
species in the cluster analysis (Fig. 4). Especially parent
nodes for D. tei. and D. fun. showed reductions in probability from 100% down to 84% and 87%, respectively.
This effect can probably be attributed to the three nonconforming spectra D_tei_2, D_tei_3 and D_fun_5 being
present during score assignment, causing the removal of
otherwise species-specific peaks. Phylogenetic relationships observed in the initial cluster analysis were only
partially retained in the new dendrogram. The obscura
species group and D. ana. apparently switched positions,
the former now clustering correctly within the Sophophora subgenus, the latter, however, now appearing as
an outlier within the Drosophila subgenus and D. hyd.
now showing a somewhat higher similarity to D. fun.
than to the cluster of the other species from the virilisrepleta radiation.
On the other hand, due to selection of species-specific
peaks for cluster analysis, intra-species similarity values
were generally improved and similarity differences
between groups of different species more pronounced,
an effect that can be seen clearly when comparing the
dendrograms from Fig. 2 and Fig. 4 and which is also
reflected by the enhanced color contrast between intraspecies and inter-species similarity fields in the new
heatmap. Complete separation between D. mir. and
D. po. and between male and female flies from D. mel.
was now achieved as well, albeit with the relatively low
reliability indicated by the bootstrapping scores. Spectra
from D. lum. clustered more homogenously, while the
aberrant spectrum D_fun_5 was relegated to an outlier
position. Clustering for D. mau. was also improved; all
spectra now merging in the same tree, even though the
two aberrant spectra from D. tei. were still present.
Similarity values and bootstrapping results, however,
still indicate significant heterogeneity with only a limited
number of common, discriminating peaks in the spectra
from this species, a fact that is also reflected by the coloring of the corresponding region in the heatmap representation of the pairwise D S values (white square in
Fig. 4). The reason for this spectral heterogeneity
remains unknown, since an endemic (i.e. island-confined) species like D. mau. is generally not highly polymorphic [34,35]. However, previous investigations of
D. mau. have found an unexpectedly high degree of
polymorphism in several genes [36]. Since not much is
known about the identities of the observed peaks in the
mass spectra, it may also be possible that the corresponding peptides constitute a subset of the proteome
that may have been subject to selection pressures, such
as sexual selection or particular immunological challenges, which favored the emergence of polymorphisms

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

at an unexpectedly high level [37-40]. In order to confirm such a possibility, though, comprehensive genetic
analyses will have to be performed.
Most peaks detected and used for comparing the different species have m/z values of less than 10 kDa and
thus actually represent a part of the peptidome rather
than the proteome [41]. The full complement of proteins cannot be detected by MALDI-MS, due to several
reasons. For once, the use of chaotropic agents such as
urea in the extraction buffer does not guarantee complete solubilisation of all proteins present; especially for
insects, it has been shown that proteins such as chitinbinding class 4 proteins can be resistant to extraction by
conventional means [42,43]. Owing to the selectivity of
the ionization process and, similar important, to the
limits of current ion detectors, MALDI-MS itself
strongly favors proteins and peptides smaller than 20
kDa, with some dependence upon the matrix being used
[44]. Furthermore, the method possesses a limited sensitivity, the dynamic range for protein detection covering
about 2 to 3 orders of magnitude. As the range of cellular protein expression is postulated to span more than 6
orders of magnitude, only the most abundant proteins
will be detected [45]. There is a multitude of known and
postulated peptides and smaller proteins that may be
responsible for the peak patterns observed in our spectra, such as cytoplasmic and mitochondrial ribosomal
proteins (for D. mel., there are 26 with predicted sizes
between 10 and 15 kDa and 11 more smaller ones) and
several nucleic acid binding proteins [46-48]. Such small
peptides are well suited for both reversed phase chromatography and MALDI-MS, and they have been used for
diverse analytical and diagnostic purposes [49]. Furthermore, multiple families of bioactive peptides with antimicrobial, immunomodulatory or hormone-like
activities have been discovered in Drosophila and other
insects, ranging in size from less than 1 kDa to more

Page 12 of 15

than 20 kDa, which may account for a substantial number of the peaks observed in our IPP spectra [50-52].
As there is always the possibility that the collection of
endogenous peptides and smaller proteins becomes
dominated by a variable number of breakdown products
from larger proteins, especially in the case of less well
preserved specimens, peak patterns may become irreproducible. Thus, in some instances, it may be preferable to
rely on larger, abundantly expressed proteins as biomarkers for species identification, which after (optional)
removal of the peptide fraction can be fragmented by
tryptic proteolysis to generate MALDI-MS compatible
peptides for a specific and possibly more reproducible
SMM spectrum [53,54]. Possible candidate proteins for
this type of analysis with molecular weights ranging from
20 (flightin) up to more than 200 kDa (myosin heavy
chain) are the muscle-specific and mitochondrial proteins
that we have detected using ESI MS/MS.
Some proteins with masses below 20 kDa were also
identified in the MS/MS shotgun approach, but their
predicted masses could not be assigned to specific peaks
in the IPP spectra obtained by MALDI-MS. One notable
exception was the ejaculatory bulb-specific protein
(PEB) 2 [GenBank NM_079142], which is postulated to
be expressed in the male reproductive tract as part of
the seminal fluid, but in contrast to the larger PEB 1,
has not been observed before at the protein level [55].
Its theoretical molecular weight of 4977.6 Da (average
mass, protonated, mature peptide without signal
sequence) fits very well to the average m/z of 4977.7 Da
of a peak found in spectra of specimens from D. mel. As
the peak is present in all spectra from male flies but
missing in spectra from female flies, this correspondence
seems to confirm the peaks’ identity (Fig. 5).
Differentiation of spectra from D. po. and D. mir.
proved to be most challenging in our study, which can
probably be accounted for by the fact that these two

Figure 5 Putative PEB2 from D. melanogaster at 4977.7 Da. Ten spectra shown in green were obtained from male specimens, red spectra
derived from 10 female flies.

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

species with an evolutionary distance of less than 2 Mio
years represented the most closely related ones in our
dataset [56]. On the other hand, evolutionary distances
of about 3 to 4 Mio years, as they have been established
for D. mau. vs. D. mel. and D. tei. vs. D. yak., seem to
have led to a sufficient accumulation/number of alterations in the peptide expression patterns to allow for differentiation between related species [56,57,36].

Conclusion
In multiple previous studies, the suitability of mass spectrometry for analyzing phylogenetic relationships
between different species of microorganisms has been
firmly established (see references given above). Furthermore, there have been several reports of using peptide
and protein masses, sometimes in conjunction with
chromatographic retention times, for the classification
of venoms from scorpions, large spiders and snakes
[58-66]. Recently, two reports have been published that
demonstrated the possibility of detecting single amino
acid substitutions in neuropeptides via MALDI-MS as
well as their usefulness for phylogenetic analyses of
insects [21,22]. These approaches, however, relied on
organ preparation by dissection of the specimens and
the establishing of amino acid sequence information by
tandem mass spectrometry for construction of a cladogram. This procedure is time-consuming, requires
expertise and is basically not practical when analyzing
small insects or when analyses have to be performed in
a high-throughput format.
Here, we attempted to establish species identity of
small metazoans based on total (extractable) protein
content using a simple protein extraction procedure.
We have demonstrated for the first time that it is feasible to generate reproducible and well-resolved IPP spectra from whole insects via MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry. Furthermore, we have shown that these
spectra can be used to differentiate between different
species from the same genus, as long as these species
are not too closely related. This straightforward
approach with its potential for automation and adaptation for high throughput applications may be of interest
in all cases where morphological differences are difficult
to determine and the experience of a professional taxonomist is presently needed for species identification.
Additional file 1: Peak. Formatted tables containing peaks from the 125
IPP MALDI-MS spectra as detected by FlexAnalysis and binned using the
software MS-Screener. The first worksheet contains all peaks except for
those occurring less than three times; the following worksheets show the
successive processing as outlined under Methods. The two worksheets
labeled with the identifier ‘Exported’ contain the datasets used for
generation of heatmaps and dendrograms shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 4.

Page 13 of 15

Abbreviations
MALDI: matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization; ESI: electrospray
ionization; TOF: time-of-flight; MS: mass spectrometry; MS/MS: tandem mass
spectrometry; IPP: intact protein profiling; PCA: principal component analysis;
SMM: shotgun mass mapping
Acknowledgements
Culture vials containing live specimens of the different Drosophila species as
well as a substantial number of ethanol preserved D. melanogaster flies were
kindly provided by Gunter Reuter, Institute of Genetics, Martin-LutherUniversity, Halle, Germany. Jayaseelan Murugaiyan introduced RF to the suite
of software tools used in this study. This work was supported by a joint
grant from the European Fund for Regional Development and the Free State
of Saxony (EFRE Project 13413), and by a grant from the German Research
Foundation (DFG; TR67 Subproject Z4).
Author details
1
Department of Dermatology, Venerology and Allergology, Medical Faculty
of the Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany. 2Department of Proteomics,
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany.
Authors’ contributions
RF and RG planned and performed the experimental work; SK assisted in
data analysis of MS/MS spectra. RF performed data analysis and drafted the
manuscript. HGA was responsible for Drosophila maintenance and specimen
collection. MvB was responsible for study design and contributed to writing
and revision of the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final
version of the manuscript
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 16 October 2009 Accepted: 7 April 2010
Published: 7 April 2010
References
1. The Barcode of Life Initiative. [http://www.barcoding.si.edu].
2. Folmer O, Black M, Hoeh W, Lutz R, Vrijenhoek R: DNA primers for
amplification of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I from
diverse metazoan invertebrates. Mol Mar Biol Biotechnol 1994, 3:294-9.
3. Hebert PD, Cywinska A, Ball SL, deWaard JR: Biological identifications
through DNA barcodes. Proc Biol Sci 2003, 270(1512):313-21.
4. Stoeckle M: Taxonomy, DNA, and the Bar Code of Life. Bioscience 2003,
53(9):796-7.
5. Holland RD, Wilkes JG, Rafii F, Sutherland JB, Persons CC, Voorhees KJ,
Lay JO Jr: Rapid identification of intact whole bacteria based on spectral
patterns using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization with time-offlight mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 1996, 10:1227-32.
6. Krishnamurthy T, Ross PL, Rajamani U: Detection of pathogenic and
nonpathogenic bacteria by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 1996,
10:883-8.
7. Claydon MA, Davey SN, Edwards-Jones V, Gordon DB: The rapid
identification of intact microorganisms using mass spectrometry. Nat
Biotechnol 1996, 14(11):1584-6.
8. Sauer S, Freiwald A, Maier T, Kube M, Reinhardt R, Kostrzewa M, Geider K:
Classification and identification of bacteria by mass spectrometry and
computational analysis. PLoS One 2008, 3(7):e2843.
9. Freiwald A, Sauer S: Phylogenetic classification and identification of
bacteria by mass spectrometry. Nat Protoc 2009, 4(5):732-42.
10. Fenselau C, Demirev PA: Characterization of intact microorganisms by
MALDI mass spectrometry. Mass Spectrom Rev 2001, 20(4):157-71.
11. Schmidt F, Fiege T, Hustoft HK, Kneist S, Thiede B: Shotgun mass mapping
of Lactobacillus species and subspecies from caries related isolates by
MALDI-MS. Proteomics 2009, 9(7):1994-2003.
12. Ryzhov V, Hathout Y, Fenselau C: Rapid characterization of spores of
Bacillus cereus group bacteria by matrix-assisted laser desorptionionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Appl Environ Microbiol 2000,
66(9):3828-34.

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

13. Elhanany E, Barak R, Fisher M, Kobiler D, Altboum Z: Detection of specific
Bacillus anthracis spore biomarkers by matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass
Spectrom 2001, 15(22):2110-6.
14. Castanha ER, Fox A, Fox KF: Rapid discrimination of Bacillus anthracis from
other members of the B. cereus group by mass and sequence of “intact”
small acid soluble proteins (SASPs) using mass spectrometry. J Microbiol
Methods 2006, 67(2):230-40.
15. Erhard M, von Döhren H, Jungblut P: Rapid typing and elucidation of new
secondary metabolites of intact cyanobacteria using MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry. Nat Biotechnol 1997, 15(9):906-9.
16. Fastner J, Erhard M, von Döhren H: Determination of oligopeptide
diversity within a natural population of Microcystis spp. (cyanobacteria)
by typing single colonies by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionizationtime of flight mass spectrometry. Appl Environ Microbiol 2001, 67:5069-76.
17. Erhard M, Hipler UC, Burmester A, Brakhage AA, Wöstemeyer J:
Identification of dermatophyte species causing onychomycosis and
tinea pedis by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Exp Dermatol 2008,
17:356-61.
18. von Bergen M, Eidner A, Schmidt F, Murugaiyan J, Wirth H, Binder H,
Maier T, Roesler U: Identification of harmless and pathogenic algae of the
genus Prototheca by MALDI-MS. Proteomics Clin Appl 2009, 3(7):774-84.
19. Jehmlich N, Schmidt F, Taubert M, Seifert J, von Bergen M, Richnow HH,
Vogt C: Comparison of methods for simultaneous identification of
bacterial species and determination of metabolic activity by proteinbased stable isotope probing (Protein-SIP) experiments. Rapid Commun
Mass Spectro 2009, 23(12):1871-8.
20. Predel R, Roth S, Neupert S, Picker M: New insect order
Mantophasmatodea: species differentiation by mass fingerprints of
peptide hormones? J Zool Syst Evol Res 2005, 43(2):149-156.
21. Wegener C, Gorbashov A: Molecular evolution of neuropeptides in the
genus Drosophila. Genome Biol 2008, 9(8):R131.
22. Roth S, Fromm B, Gäde G, Predel R: A proteomic approach for studying
insect phylogeny: CAPA peptides of ancient insect taxa (Dictyoptera,
Blattoptera) as a test case. BMC Evol Biol 2009, 9:50.
23. Jehmlich N, Schmidt F, von Bergen M, Richnow HH, Vogt C: Protein-based
stable isotope probing (Protein-SIP) reveals active species within anoxic
mixed cultures. Isme J 2008, 2(11):1122-33.
24. MatrixScience, Mascot. [http://www.matrixscience.com].
25. Weeks ME, Sinclair J, Jacob RJ, Saxton MJ, Kirby S, Jones J, Waterfield MD,
Cramer R, Timms JF: Stress-induced changes in the Schizosaccharomyces
pombe proteome using two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis,
mass spectrometry and a novel integrated robotics platform. Proteomics
2005, 5(6):1669-85.
26. Schmidt F, Schmid M, Jungblut PR, Mattow J, Facius A, Pleissner KP:
Iterative data analysis is the key for exhaustive analysis of peptide mass
fingerprints from proteins separated by two-dimensional
electrophoresis. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2003, 14(9):943-56.
27. Hammer Ø, Harper DAT, Ryan PD: PAST: Paleontological Statistics
Software Package for Education and Data Analysis. Palaeontologia
Electronica 2001, 4(1):9.
28. Framework, public version 1.2, software by H. Wirth. [http://izbifs.izbi.unileipzig.de/~wirth].
29. Tweedie S, Ashburner M, Falls K, Leyland P, McQuilton P, Marygold S,
Millburn G, Osumi-Sutherland D, Schroeder A, Seal R, Zhang H, FlyBase
Consortium: FlyBase:enhancing Drosophila Gene Ontology annotations.
Nucleic Acids Research 2009, 37:D555-D559.
30. The Database on Taxonomy of Drosophilidae, compiled by Gerhard
Baechli. [http://www.taxodros.uzh.ch/].
31. Englard S, Seifter S: Precipitation techniques. Methods Enzymol 1990,
182:285-300.
32. Zellner M, Winkler W, Hayden H, Diestinger M, Eliasen M, Gesslbauer B,
Miller I, Chang M, Kungl A, Roth E, Oehler R: Quantitative validation of
different protein precipitation methods in proteome analysis of blood
platelets. Electrophoresis 2005, 26(12):2481-9.
33. Meiswinkel R, van Rijn P, Leijs P, Goffredo M: Potential new Culicoides
vector of bluetongue virus in northern Europe. Vet Rec 2007,
161(16):564-5.
34. Hilton H, Kliman RM, Hey J: Using hitchhiking genes to study adaptation
and divergence during speciation within the Drosophila melanogaster
species complex. Evolution 1994, 48:1900-1913.

Page 14 of 15

35. Caccone A, Moriyama EN, Gleason JM, Nigro L, Powell JR: A molecular
phylogeny for the Drosophila melanogaster subgroup and the problem
of polymorphism data. Mol Biol Evol 1996, 13(9):1224-32.
36. Kliman RM, Andolfatto P, Coyne JA, Depaulis F, Kreitman M, Berry AJ,
McCarter J, Wakeley J, Hey J: The population genetics of the origin and
divergence of the Drosophila simulans complex species. Genetics 2000,
156(4):1913-31.
37. Tsaur SC, Ting CT, Wu CI: Sex in Drosophila mauritiana: a very high level
of amino acid polymorphism in a male reproductive protein gene,
Acp26Aa. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18(1):22-6.
38. Lazzaro BP, Sceurman BK, Clark AG: Genetic basis of natural variation in
D. melanogaster antibacterial immunity. Science 2004, 303(5665):1873-6.
39. Sackton TB, Lazzaro BP, Schlenke TA, Evans JD, Hultmark D, Clark AG:
Dynamic evolution of the innate immune system in Drosophila. Nat
Genet 2007, 39(12):1461-8.
40. Morales-Hojas R, Vieira CP, Reis M, Vieira J: Comparative analysis of five
immunity-related genes reveals different levels of adaptive evolution in
the virilis and melanogaster groups of Drosophila. Heredity 2009,
102(6):573-8.
41. Schulz-Knappe P, Schrader M, Zucht HD: The peptidomics concept. Comb
Chem High Throughput Screen 2005, 8:697-704.
42. Tellam RL, Wijffels G, Willadsen P: Peritrophic matrix proteins. Insect
Biochem Mol Biol 1999, 29(2):87-101.
43. Campbell PM, Cao AT, Hines ER, East PD, Gordon KH: Proteomic analysis of
the peritrophic matrix from the gut of the caterpillar, Helicoverpa
armigera. Insect Biochem Mol Biol 2008, 38(10):950-8.
44. Hortin GL: The MALDI-TOF mass spectrometric view of the plasma
proteome and peptidome. Clin Chem 2006, 52:1223-1237.
45. Tyers M, Mann M: From genomics to proteomics. Nature 2003,
422(6928):193-7.
46. Dieckmann R, Helmuth R, Erhard M, Malorny B: Rapid classification and
identification of Salmonellae at the species and subspecies levels by
whole-cell matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass
spectrometry. Appl Environ Microbiol 2008, 74(24):7767-78.
47. Pineda FJ, Antoine MD, Demirev PA, Feldman AB, Jackman J,
Longenecker M, Lin JS: Microorganism identification by matrix assisted
laser/desorption ionization mass spectrometry and model-derived
ribosomal protein biomarkers. Anal Chem 2003, 75:3817-3822.
48. Ryzhov V, Fenselau C: Characterization of the protein subset desorbed by
MALDI from whole bacterial cells. Anal Chem 2001, 73:746-750.
49. Hu L, Ye M, Jiang X, Feng S, Zou H: Advances in hyphenated analytical
techniques for shotgun proteome and peptidome analysis - a review.
Anal Chim Acta 2007, 598:193-204.
50. Imler JL, Bulet P: Antimicrobial peptides in Drosophila: structures,
activities and gene regulation. Chem Immunol Allergy 2005, 86:1-21.
51. Baggerman G, Cerstiaens A, De Loof A, Schoofs L: Peptidomics of the
larval Drosophila melanogaster central nervous system. J Biol Chem 2002,
277(43):40368-74.
52. Verleyen P, Baggerman G, D’Hertog W, Vierstraete E, Husson SJ, Schoofs L:
Identification of new immune induced molecules in the haemolymph of
Drosophila melanogaster by 2D-nanoLC MS/MS. J Insect Physiol 2006,
52(4):379-88.
53. Warscheid B, Jackson K, Sutton C, Fenselau C: MALDI analysis of Bacilli in
spore mixtures by applying a quadrupole ion trap time-of-flight tandem
mass spectrometer. Anal Chem 2003, 75(20):5608-17.
54. Warscheid B, Fenselau C: A targeted proteomics approach to the rapid
identification of bacterial cell mixtures by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization mass spectrometry. Proteomics 2004, 4(10):2877-92.
55. Takemori N, Yamamoto MT: Proteome mapping of the Drosophila
melanogaster male reproductive system. Proteomics 2009, 9(9):2484-93.
56. Russo CAM, Takezaki N, Nei M: Molecular phylogeny and divergence
times of Drosophilid Species. Mol Biol Evol 1995, 12(3):391-404.
57. Hey J, Kliman RM: Population genetics and phylogenetics of DNA
sequence variation at multiple loci within the Drosophila melanogaster
species complex. Mol Biol Evol 1993, 10(4):804-22.
58. Dyason K, Brandt W, Prendini L, Verdonck F, Tytgat J, du Plessis J, Müller G,
Walt van der J: Determination of species-specific components in the
venom of Parabuthus scorpions from southern Africa using matrixassisted laser desorption time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Rapid
Commun Mass Spectrom 2002, 16(8):768-73.

Feltens et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:95
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/95

Page 15 of 15

59. Nascimento DG, Rates B, Santos DM, Verano-Braga T, Barbosa-Silva A,
Dutra AA, Biondi I, Martin-Eauclaire MF, De Lima ME, Pimenta AM: Moving
pieces in a taxonomic puzzle: venom 2D-LC/MS and data clustering
analyses to infer phylogenetic relationships in some scorpions from the
Buthidae family (Scorpiones). Toxicon 2006, 47(6):628-39.
60. Escoubas P, Célérier ML, Nakajima T: High-performance liquid
chromatography matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-offlight mass spectrometry peptide fingerprinting of tarantula venoms in
the genus Brachypelma: chemotaxonomic and biochemical applications.
Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 1997, 11(17):1891-9.
61. Escoubas P, Chamot-Rooke J, Stöcklin R, Whiteley BJ, Corzo G, Genet R,
Nakajima T: A comparison of matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight and liquid chromatography electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry methods for the analysis of crude tarantula venoms in the
Pterinochilus group. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 1999, 13(18):1861-8.
62. Escoubas P, Corzo G, Whiteley BJ, Célérier ML, Nakajima T: Matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry and highperformance liquid chromatography study of quantitative and
qualitative variation in tarantula spider venoms. Rapid Commun Mass
Spectrom 2002, 16(5):403-13.
63. Stöcklin R, Mebs D, Boulain JC, Panchaud PA, Virelizier H, Gillard-Factor C:
Identification of snake species by toxin mass fingerprinting of their
venoms. Methods Mol Biol 2000, 146:317-35.
64. Fry BG, Wickramaratna JC, Hodgson WC, Alewood PF, Kini RM, Ho H,
Wüster W: Electrospray liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry
fingerprinting of Acanthophis (death adder) venoms: taxonomic and
toxinological implications. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 2002,
16(6):600-8.
65. Fry BG, Wüster W, Ryan Ramjan SF, Jackson T, Martelli P, Kini RM: Analysis
of Colubroidea snake venoms by liquid chromatography with mass
spectrometry: evolutionary and toxinological implications. Rapid
Commun Mass Spectrom 2003, 17(18):2047-62.
66. Creer S, Malhotra A, Thorpe RS, Stöcklin RS, Favreau PS, Hao Chou WS:
Genetic and ecological correlates of intraspecific variation in pitviper
venom composition detected using matrix-assisted laser desorption
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) and isoelectric
focusing. J Mol Evol 2003, 56(3):317-29.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-95
Cite this article as: Feltens et al.: Discrimination of different species
from the genus Drosophila by intact protein profiling using matrixassisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry. BMC Evolutionary
Biology 2010 10:95.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
