<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Activation of violaxanthin cycle in darkness is a common response to different abiotic stresses: a case study in Pelvetia canaliculata</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-181"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Beatriz Fernández-Marín"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Activation of violaxanthin cycle in darkness is
a common response to different abiotic stresses:
a case study in Pelvetia canaliculata
Beatriz Fernández-Marín*, Fátima Míguez, José María Becerril and José Ignacio García-Plazaola

Abstract
Background: In the violaxanthin (V) cycle, V is de-epoxidized to zeaxanthin (Z) when strong light or light
combined with other stressors lead to an overexcitation of photosystems. However, plants can also suffer stress in
darkness and recent reports have shown that dehydration triggers V-de-epoxidation in the absence of light. In this
study, we used the highly stress-tolerant brown alga Pelvetia canaliculata as a model organism, due to its lack of
lutein and its non-photochemical quenching independent of the transthylakoidal-ΔpH, to study the triggering of
the V-cycle in darkness induced by abiotic stressors.
Results: We have shown that besides desiccation, other factors such as immersion, anoxia and high temperature
also induced V-de-epoxidation in darkness. This process was reversible once the treatments had ceased (with the
exception of heat, which caused lethal damage). Irrespective of the stressor applied, the resulting de-epoxidised
xanthophylls correlated with a decrease in Fv/Fm, suggesting a common function in the down-regulation of
photosynthetical efficiency. The implication of the redox-state of the plastoquinone-pool and of the differential
activity of V-cycle enzymes on V-de-epoxidation in darkness was also examined. Current results suggest that both
violaxanthin de-epoxidase (VDE) and zeaxanthin-epoxidase (ZE) have a basal constitutive activity even in darkness,
being ZE inhibited under stress. This inhibition leads to Z accumulation.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that V-cycle activity is triggered by several abiotic stressors even when they
occur in an absolute absence of light, leading to a decrease in Fv/Fm. This finding provides new insights into an
understanding of the regulation mechanism of the V-cycle and of its ecophysiological roles.

Background
The violaxanthin (V) cycle, described in plants and green
and brown algae (Müller et al. 2001), consists of the
light-driven de-epoxidation of V to form antheraxanthin
(A) and then zeaxanthin (Z), and the epoxidation of Z
back to V in darkness. The first reaction is catalyzed by
violaxanthin deepoxidase (VDE), an enzyme that, for its
activation, requires the acidic pH that results from
photosynthetic proton pumping [1]. De-epoxidation of V
to A + Z enhances and modulates the rate of thermal dissipation of the excess of excitation energy [2]. The biophysical mechanism by which this process occurs is still
a matter of debate [3-7]. This process can be monitored
by the decrease in chlorophyll a fluorescence yield, the
* Correspondence: beatriz.fernandezm@ehu.es
Department of Plant Physiology and Ecology, University of the Basque
Country (UPV/EHU), Apdo 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain

so-called non-photochemical quenching (NPQ).
Although light has been considered to be a requisite for
the activation of VDE in all organisms studied until now,
studies performed with non-natural systems have suggested that artificial induction of V de-epoxidation in
darkness may be possible. In isolated thylakoids of lettuce, the dark-induction of the Z-dependent quenching
of chlorophyll fluorescence mediated by external ATP
supplies has been shown [8]. In Arabidopsis mutants
lacking a chloroplast NAD Kinase, an accumulation of
high levels of Z was observed in darkness [9]. More
recently, Z accumulation in darkness has been observed
in natural, cold-acclimated oak leaves [10] while several
papers have confirmed that the de-epoxidation of V can
be induced under natural conditions by desiccation
[11,12], irrespective of the illumination of photosynthetic
tissues.

© 2011 Fernández-Marín et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

In green algae and plants, apart from the presence of
A + Z, a trans-thylakoidal proton gradient (ΔpH) is
required to obtain the highest NPQ [2]. In brown algae,
however, the generation of NPQ depends exclusively on
the operation of the V-cycle, whereas acidic pH is only
required to activate VDE [13]. The direct dependence of
NPQ on Z and the lack of lutein, another carotenoid
that contributes to NPQ [14], greatly facilitate the study
of the functions and operation of the V-cycle, becoming
brown algae excellent model species in such studies.
Among brown seaweeds, Pelvetia canaliculata is one of
the most stress-tolerant species. It forms the highest band
on the shore above Fucus spiralis and is very desiccationtolerant, surviving for more than 7 days out of water [15],
when it can lose up to 96% of its water content [16]. The
unique desiccation tolerance ability of this species seems
to rely on a symbiosis with the endophytic fungus: Mycosphaerella acophylli (Ascomycetes) [17]. But besides dehydration, the emersion of intertidal algae is associated with
other stressors such as high temperatures that can damage
their tissues [18]. Strong light is also a stress factor that
intertidal algae have to deal with. A very recent paper has
reported that P. canaliculata acclimates very quickly to
high radiations based on an efficient carotenoids composition [19]. Furthermore, the high V-cycle pool size of
P. canaliculata seems to be associated with its strong tolerance to abiotic stresses [20].
Since an increasing number of evidences support the
dark operation of V-cycle under some environmental conditions, but its physiological role and regulation remains
unknown, P. canaliculata has been used as a model species in this paper to provide further insights into this
mechanism. Specifically, we have determined whether
environmental factors, other than light, may trigger the
activation of the V-cycle. Three environmental factors that
this highly stress-tolerant species can eventually encounter
during its lifespan have been studied in the absence of
light: desiccation that occurs when thalli are exposed to
air for a long time, and supraoptimal temperature and
anoxia that occur at low tide when oxygen is depleted
from the small intertidal pools. The second aim of this
work was to verify whether the pool of A + Z, formed
after VDE activation in darkness, is involved in the regulation of photochemical efficiency in the same way as the
pool of A + Z, generated by high irradiance. This paper
not only aims to gain an understanding of this protective
mechanism, but also to look more deeply into the functioning and environmental role of the V-cycle.

Methods

Page 2 of 11

hemisphere. Adult thalli were collected from the Northern coast of Spain. Before any analysis, samples were covered with a tissue soaked in seawater and kept in
darkness at room temperature and 100% Relative Humidity (RH), during 12 h, to allow V-cycle relaxation. For all
the experiments, the last apical bifurcation of the thalli
was used, since this is the most active part and that
which is most directly exposed to desiccation.
Experimental treatments

The thalli collected as previously described were
exposed to different experimental treatments, as follows:
• Illumination

Samples over a tissue moistened with seawater were
directly exposed to sunlight (Photon Flux Density -PFDof 1500 µmol m-2 s-1), for 15 or 60 min, and continuously
remoistened with seawater to avoid desiccation. After light
treatment, the thalli were maintained wet in darkness (to
allow V-cycle re-epoxidation) for another 60 min.
• Desiccation

Samples were incubated in the dark for 24 h in glass
hermetic chambers, containing a NaCl saturated solution (75% Relative Humidity -RH-). Rehydration was
begun by directly spilling seawater over the thalli. Samples were then kept over a tissue wet with seawater and
at 100% RH to allow recovery.
• Desiccation of pre-illuminated thalli

Bifurcated thalli, of which one of the branches was covered
with aluminium foil, were exposed to sunlight for 15 min
and then put into a hermetic chamber to start desiccation
treatment as previously described.
• High temperature

Thalli were incubated in darkness at 32°C during 23 h,
and then transferred to 17°C for 29 h further as recovery.
To avoid desiccation, thalli were placed over a tissue wet
with seawater and in a controlled atmosphere at 100%
RH. As a control a second set of samples was maintained
in darkness at 17°C and 100% RH.
• Immersion

Thalli were submerged in darkness in seawater in 2 mL
volume vials for 10 and 24 h.
• Anaerobiosis

Thalli were incubated in darkness during 1, 6 and 17 h, in
closed vacutainers in which the air was replaced by N2
gas. For controls, some samples were kept in vacutainers
containing air. After the treatment, the samples were
incubated in open vacutainers during 4 h to allow reoxygenation of tissues. During the incubations, all samples
remained covered with a seawater-moistened tissue to
avoid dehydration.

Plant material

Pelvetia canaliculata (L.) Decn. et Thur. (also called
channelled wrack) is a brown seaweed of the Fucaceae
family distributed on the cold shores of the northern

Metabolic inhibitors

Since the acidification of lumen generated by the proton
pumping of the ETC carriers in parallel to electron

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

transport is required for the de-epoxidation of V, a set
of inhibitors affecting either the activity of V-cycle
enzymes, the transthylakoidal pH or the redox-state of
the PQ pool, were infiltrated in samples that were then
desiccated in darkness (as described above). Thalli were
infiltrated with different concentrations of metabolic
inhibitors dissolved in seawater with 1% ethanol to facilitate the dilution. For the infiltration, thalli were placed
into vacutainers containing 5 mL of inhibitor solutions.
By removing the air with a 50 mL syringe 5 times, a
vacuum was created. After infiltration, samples were
incubated into the solution for 1 h. Controls were treated with seawater and 1% ethanol following the same
infiltration protocol. After inhibitor treatments, samples
were either desiccated as described above or maintained
hydrated. The following inhibitors (all from SigmaAldrich, Spain) were used:
• Dithiothreitol (DTT)

inhibits the enzyme VDE [21]. It was applied at a concentration of 5 mM.

Page 3 of 11

camera that produced images of 12-bit resolution. The
instrument is driven by the FluorCam software package
(FluorCam 7). First, images of the dark-adapted fluorescence level, F0, were determined using non-actinic measuring flashes provided by super-bright light emitting
diodes (LEDs). Next, an 800 ms duration pulse of saturating light radiation (2000 µmol photon m-2 s-1) generated
by a halogen lamp was given to measure the maximum
fluorescence level, Fm. The Maximal Photochemical Efficiency of Photosystem II (Fv/Fm) was calculated as (FmF0)/Fm. Pixel value images of the Fv/Fm were displayed
as a false colour code ranging from blue (0.1) through
green and yellow to red (0.9). The Fv/Fm was calculated
for each pixel and then averaged for the total area of
each sample. The NPQ was not measured because
volume contractions associated with desiccation impedes
the obtention of comparable Fm (reference Fm’) and Fm’
(actual Fm’). Thus, the decrease in Fv/Fm associated with
sustained thermal dissipation was used as a proxy of
NPQ.

• Salicyl-adoxime (SA)

inhibits the ZE activity [22]. It was applied at a concentration of 5 mM.
• Ammonium chloride (NH4Cl)

uncouples the transthylakoidal-ΔpH [13] by sequestering
H + in the lumen. It was applied at a concentration of
100 mM.
• 2,5-Dibromo-6-isopropyl-3-methyl-1,4-benzoquinone
(DBMIB)

avoids the oxidation of PQ by residing at the Q0 site of
the cytochrome b6f complex [23]. It was applied at a concentration of 25 µM.
• Dichlorophenyl dimethylurea (DCMU)

avoids the reduction of PQ by blocking the electron
flow from PS II [24]. It was applied at a concentration
of 10 µM.
• n-Propyl-gallate (n-PG)

blocks the chlororespiratory oxidation of PQ mediated
by the enzyme plastid terminal oxidase (PTOX) [25]. It
was applied at a concentration of 1 mM.
• Far red (FR)

a modulated light of l >700 nm provided by an halogen
lamp with a FR filter was applied during all the desiccation of FR-treated thalli to maintain the PQ oxidized
due to the induction of the PS I.
Chlorophyll a fluorescence analysis

Fluorescence of chlorophyll a was measured with an imaging fluorometer (Handy FluorCam, P.S.I., Brno, Czech
Republic, http://www.psi.cz), as described in [26]. Images
of photochemical efficiency were captured before and
immediately after each treatment in the thalli that were
previously dark-adapted for at least 5 min. Fluorescence
was detected by a high-sensitivity charge coupled device

Chromatographic analysis

For pigment analysis, samples were immediately frozen in
liquid N2 and stored at -80°C until use. Frozen samples
were homogenized with a Tissue Tearor Homogenizer
(Model 395, Dremel, Mexico) in pure acetone solution
buffered with CaCO3. The extracts were centrifuged at
16100 g for 20 min, and supernatants were filtered with
0.2 mm PTFE filters (Teknokroma, Spain). Pigment
separation was performed by HPLC with a reverse phase
C18 column (Waters Spherisorb ODS1, 4.6 × 250 mm,
Massachusetts, USA), following the method of [27], with
the modifications described in [28]. During processing in
the HPLC, samples were maintained at 4ºC in a refrigerated compartment. Identification and quantification was
carried out with a photodiode array (PDA) detector.
Retention times and conversion factors for pigments were
the same as described by [27,28] The relative de-epoxidation state of the xanthophyll cycle pigments was estimated
by the ratio (A + Z)/(V + A + Z) and represented by the
abbreviation AZ/VAZ.
Statistics

A one-way ANOVA was used to test for differences in
AZ/VAZ and Fv/Fm values in response to light, desiccation, immersion and anoxia treatments, after Chochran’s
test to check for the homogeneity of variances. A Duncan
post-hoc test was performed to discriminate among different times and treatments. When necessary, data were logtransformed. The Mann-Whitney U test was used for
non-normal data. A linear regression was used to analyse
the relationship between AZ/VAZ and Fv/Fm. Calculated
p-values, coefficients and regression lines are indicated on

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

Page 4 of 11

the figures whenever significant at a = 0.05. All analyses
were performed using the SPSS 17.0 statistical package.

Results
V-cycle operation upon illumination in Pelvetia
canaliculata

The usual operation of the violaxanthin cycle (V-cycle)
induced by light was ascertained for P. canaliculata.
When exposed to sunlight, violaxanthin (V) was quickly
de-epoxidised to antheraxanthin (A) and zeaxanthin (Z),
this being 60% the fraction of the VAZ pool converted
to A + Z in 30 min (Figure 1). During the exposure to
darkness, Z and A were slowly re-epoxidised back to V,
closing the cycle. Throughout the entire process, Fv/Fm
followed an inverse pattern to AZ/VAZ, reaching the
maximum value when AZ/VAZ was almost zero. Both
parameters (Fv/Fm and AZ/VAZ) were negatively correlated (see insert in Figure 1).
V-cycle and dehydration

After verifying its regular activity under light, the Vcycle operation of P. canaliculata was analyzed in the
absence of light during a dehydration-rehydration treatment (Figure 2), as described in the materials and methods section. During dehydration, and despite the
darkness, V was de-epoxidised into A + Z, and the

Figure 1 De-epoxidation index of V-cycle (close cyrcles) and
variations in Fv/Fm (open triangles) during light-darkness
treatment. Each point represents the mean ± SE (n = 5). Capital
letters above circles show significant differences in the AZ/VAZ
among times (P < 0.05). Small letters above triangles represent
significant differences in the Fv/Fm among times (P < 0.05).
Correlation between AZ/VAZ and Fv/Fm is shown in the inset
(Pearson’s correlation coefficient; r = 0.74).

Figure 2 De-epoxidation index of V-cycle and variations in Fv/
Fm during a dehydration-rehydration treatment in darkness.
Dehydration (Dh) was performed at 75% RH for 24 h. V-cycle deepoxidation index is represented by closed bars and Fv/Fm by open
bars. Each bar represents the mean ± SE (n = 5). Letters above bars
indicate significant differences for AZ/VAZ (A, B and C) and for Fv/
Fm (a, b, c) along treatment (P < 0.05).

reverse reaction occurred after rehydration with
seawater. As observed during the light experiment
(Figure 1), the lowest Fv/Fm value was concomitant
with the highest AZ/VAZ level (Figure 2).
To verify whether A + Z produced during dehydration
may have different roles than that synthesised under
light conditions, a new test was performed to compare
their influence on Fv/Fm. For this purpose, samples of
P. canaliculata were exposed to sunlight for 15 minutes,
while half of each thallus was protected from light (with
aluminium foil). After this light/darkness pre-treatment,
all samples were dehydrated in the absence of light, as
described previously. The illumination of the thalli
increased the AZ/VAZ ratio to 0.53 ± 0.03. After dehydration, this index remained constant (0.50 ± 0.03) in
pre-illuminated samples (Figure 3b, open bars) and
increased to the same extent (0.46 ± 0.05) in non preilluminated thalli (Figure 3b, close bars). It should be
pointed out that this A + Z was induced by light in the
former, whereas it was generated in darkness during
dehydration in the latter. The Fv/Fm reflected the
changes on the de-epoxidation index of the V-cycle
(Figure 3c): at the beginning of the experiment, Fv/Fm
was significantly higher in dark-adapted samples than in
pre-illuminated thalli, but during dehydration it
decreased considerably, reaching the same value as in
pre-illuminated thalli (Figure 3a,c).
Supraoptimal temperature

The effect of high temperature on the V-cycle was analyzed in thalli incubated in darkness at 32°C (Figure 4).
After 6 h of incubation, heat-treated samples showed a
significant increase in the AZ/VAZ ratio, which further

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

Page 5 of 11

Figure 3 De-epoxidation index of V-cycle and Fv/Fm variations during dark-dehydration after light or darkness pre-treatment. In (a) it
is shown a fluorescence imaging of thalli before (left) and after dehydration (right). Before dehydration, the right branch of each thallus had
been exposed to sun, and the left one had been maintained in darkness. The de-epoxidation index of the V-cycle (b) and Fv/Fm (c) are shown
before (t0) and after dark-dehydration (Dh) of pre-darkened (closed bars) and pre-illuminated samples (open bars). Each bar represents the mean
± SE (n = 5). Letters above bars indicate significant differences among treatments (P < 0.05).

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

Page 6 of 11

Figure 5 De-epoxidation index of V-cycle (close circles) and Fv/
Fm variations (open triangles) during immersion into seawater
in darkness. Each symbol represents the mean ± SE (n = 5). Letters
above bars indicate significant differences for AZ/VAZ (A, B and C)
and for Fv/Fm (a, b, c) among immersion times (P < 0.05).

increased at 23 h (Figure 4a). In parallel, the Fv/Fm
decreased throughout the incubation until it reached
values of around 0.2 (Figure 4b). In contrast to that
observed for desiccation (Figure 2), the return of treated
samples to control conditions (17°C) did not reverse the
initial values of AZ/VAZ nor of Fv/Fm.

Samples covered with a tissue moistened with seawater were dark-incubated in sealed vials within a N 2atm (anoxic atmosphere), while controls were incubated
in the same way, but within an air atmosphere. Incubation in anoxia induced the de-epoxidation of a V-cycle
(Figure 6a). Under these conditions, one hour was
enough to induce a slight, but significant, increase in
the AZ/VAZ ratio. After 6 h, it became 12-fold higher
than in the controls and after 17 h of incubation, AZ/
VAZ increased to values in the range of those reached
under high irradiance (compare Figure 6a and Figure 1).
In a parallel manner to the increases in AZ/VAZ, Fv/Fm
underwent a progressive decrease that after 17 h under
a N2-atm, was significantly different from what occurred
in the control (Figure 6b). After 17 h of incubation,
treated samples were transferred to an air atmosphere
to allow the re-oxygenation of thalli. After 4 h in an air
atmosphere, the de-epoxidation of the V-cycle was
reverted, and AZ/VAZ decreased to values below 0.2
(Figure 6a), while Fv/Fm recovered considerably,
although it remained below the control value.

V-cycle and anoxia

Fv/Fm and V-cycle

Being an intertidal, desiccation-tolerant alga that grows
high up on the shore, it has been demonstrated that
long, frequent immersions are detrimental for P. canaliculata. The activity of the V-cycle was monitored during
a long immersion of 24 h in darkness (Figure 5). Surprisingly, despite the absence of light, V was de-epoxidised to A and Z after 10 h of immersion. After
disregarding the possibility of any changes in the pH of
the water (data not shown) due to respiration, as the
factor that induced V-cycle de-epoxidation during
immersion, the effects of anoxic conditions were tested
separately.

The relationship between AZ/VAZ and Fv/Fm was
tested for all treatments (high light, dark-dehydration,
dark-immersion, dark-anoxia and dark-incubation at
high temperature) to verify whether A + Z formed in
darkness fits the same regression as that shown in the
Figure 1 inset or not and to elucidate if, consequently,
this A + Z plays the same role as A + Z formed under
light. As shown in Figure 7, irrespective of the treatment, the de-epoxidation of V was highly correlated
with Fv/Fm in thalli of P. canaliculata (Pearson’s correlation coefficient; r = 0.906; and r = 0.855 when data
from the high-temperature treatment were included). In

Figure 4 De-epoxidation index of V-cycle (a) and Fv/Fm
variations (b) during incubation at 32°C in darkness. Control
samples incubated in darkness at 17°C are represented with closed
symbols. Treated samples are shown as open symbols. Each symbol
represents the mean ± SE (n = 5). Asterisks show significant
differences between control and treatment (P < 0.05).

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

Figure 6 De-epoxidation index of V-cycle (a) and Fv/Fm
variations (b) during dark-incubation of thalli in a N2atmosphere (anoxic atmosphere) and subsequent recovery in
air (re-oxygenation). Control samples continuously maintained in
oxygenated conditions are represented with closed symbols.
Treated samples are shown as open symbols. Each symbol
represents the mean ± SE (n = 5). Asterisks show significant
differences between control and treatment (P < 0.05).

addition, there was a strong relationship between AZ/
VAZ and Fv/Fm (Figure 7; linear regression model, r2 =
0.833, P < 0.001; and r 2 = 0.731, P < 0.01 when data
from the high temperature treatment were included).

Page 7 of 11

Figure 7 The relationship of AZ/VAZ and Fv/Fm in Pelvetia
canaliculata. The data from the different experiments in this work
are included: sun light exposition (open circles), dark-dehydration
(close circles), dark-immersion (close squares), dark-incubation in
anoxia (close triangles), dark-incubation at high temperature (close
diamonds). Each point represents the mean (n = 5). The fit (r2 =
0.833) to a linear regression model (solid line) and the 95%
confidence intervals (dashed lines) are presented (regression is
significant at P <0.001). Although showed in the figure, data from
the high temperature-treatment were excluded for the regression
analysis since it induced irreversible damage on thalli.

the effect of SA was specially noticeable in hydrated
samples in which the AZ/VAZ resulted more than 200fold higher than in hydrated controls (0.921 ± 0.026
compared to 0.020 ± 0.011). Contrasting with this, the
uncoupling of the transthylakoidal-ΔpH by NH 4 Cl
did not induce any significant change on the AZ/VAZ
(Figure 8).

Unravelling the common mechanism of V-cycle activation
in darkness

Trying to look more deeply into the biochemical
mechanism that triggers the de-epoxidation of V in
darkness upon such different stresses, three groups of
inhibitors were employed. The first (DTT and SA)
affected V-cycle enzymes, the second (NH 4 Cl)
uncoupled the transthylakoidal-ΔpH and the third (nPG, DCMU, DBMIB and FR) altered the redox state of
the plastoquinone-pool (PQ-pool). The effect of these
inhibitors on the AZ/VAZ was tested in thalli of P.
canalicualta desiccated in darkness. The DTT brought
about a complete inhibition of Z formation during
desiccation (Figure 8). The SA, by contrast, led to a
strong increase in Z accumulation in darkness. Although
after desiccation, the SA-treated samples showed a AZ/
VAZ level 30% higher than in the controls (Figure 8),

Figure 8 Effects of V-cycle inhibitors (DTT and SA),
transthylakoidal-ΔpH uncoupler (NH4Cl) and agents involved in
the redox state of PQ (DBMIB, DCMU, n-PG, FR) on the deepoxidation of V during dehydration in darkness. Hydrated
samples incubated at 100% RH are represented by close bars. The AZ/
VAZ after dehydration in darkness is represented by open bars. Each
bar represents the mean ± SE (n = 5). Letters above bars indicate
significant differences for AZ/VAZ among treatments (P < 0.05).

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

The third group of inhibitors, acting over the redox
state of the PQ pool, had no effect on the hydrated samples and little or no effect on the AZ/VAZ level reached
after desiccation (Figure 8). Specifically, when compared
with desiccated controls far red (FR) and DBMIB had no
effect, DCMU induced a slight decrease and n-PG
induced a slight increase on the AZ/VAZ level reached
after dehydration.

Discussion
Photosynthetic organisms living in the intertidal zone need
to be able to withstand sudden changes in their environmental factors (such as temperature, salinity, light and
desiccation) associated with alternating periods of emergence and submergence. In fact, on rocky shores, seaweed
species grow in differentiated horizontal belts characterised by specific levels of light and temperature stresses
[29]. Light, influenced not only by the daily course of solar
irradiance but also by the tidal range, is one of the most
variable and limiting factors for intertidal species. Consequently, seaweeds have developed a set of photoprotective
mechanisms that allow them to adjust the amount of light
absorbed by their photosynthetic apparatus, thus optimizing its use when light limits photosynthesis, and developing fast photoprotective responses under the effect of
photoinhibitory light intensities. Algae possess different
photoprotective mechanisms, such as the adjustment of
chloroplast orientation [30]; repair mechanisms [31]; the
accumulation of UV-absorbing phenolic compounds [32];
or the xanthophyll cycles-related dissipation of the excess
of absorbed light energy. The last of these mechanisms is
the more flexible and rapid, being crucial for the prevention of photoinhibitory damage. In P. canaliculata, the Vcycle pool size is considerably higher than in other brown
algae, as corresponds to its position in the uppermost
intertidal belt [20]. In addition, it has been demonstrated
that this species develops high, non-photochemical
quenching (NPQ) when exposed to high irradiance [20].
As shown in Figure 1, light-induced de-epoxidation
reverted after the onset of darkness, confirming the complete operation of the V-cycle in this species.
García-Mendoza and Colombo-Pallota [13], have
recently described that the brown alga Macrocystis pyrifera
lacks the initial quenching of fluorescence shown for vascular plants [2], which is associated with the transthylakoidal-ΔpH. As a result, this species shows a direct and linear
relationship between the V-cycle de-epoxidation ratio and
the NPQ, which does not occur in vascular plants in
which the initial NPQ component (qE) is developed due
to the ΔpH, independently of V-cycle de-epoxidation.
Similarly, a linear negative correlation was found between
AZ/VAZ and Fv/Fm (Figure 1, inset), which implies a
decrease in photochemical efficiency, mainly dependent
on the V-cycle operation.

Page 8 of 11

As previously demonstrated for other phototrophs,
such as ferns and chlorolichens [11,12], in P. canaliculata
the V-cycle operation can be induced solely by dehydration, independently of light (Figure 2). Furthermore,
dehydration triggered the de-epoxidation of V and the
down-regulation of Fv/Fm to the same extent as illumination did (Figures 1 and 2). To clarify the similarities
between light- and dehydration-induced V-cycle activities, a separate experiment was performed in which each
branch of the same thalli were either exposed to light or
kept in darkness, and subsequently dehydrated in darkness (thereby generating a branch in which A + Z formation was triggered by light and another branch in which
this formation was induced by dehydration). As shown in
Figure 3, Fv/Fm decreased to the same extent irrespective
of the origin of V de-epoxidation, suggesting that A + Z
play the same regulatory role when their formation is
induced either by light or by dehydration.
Emersion frequently favours overheating, which
damages temperate algae [18]. When Pelvetia thalli were
exposed to 32°C, the heat treatment induced an increase
in A + Z but the AZ/VAZ reached was lower than that
reached after any other treatment, i.e., dehydration (Figure
2), immersion (Figure 5), or anoxia (Figure 6). The
decrease in Fv/Fm was notably larger than that observed
for the same level of de-epoxidation in other treatments
(note the outlayer point in Figure 7). Besides, the decrease
in Fv/Fm and the increase in AZ/VAZ were not reversible
after treatment had ceased, indicating that the stress was
probably beyond the lethal threshold for a cool water
macroalga. Indeed, for other species it has been recently
shown that moderate heat stress can affect thylakoid reactions greatly [33].
Besides desiccation and high temperature, periodic
hypoxic episodes in intertidal pools may be detrimental
for the photosynthetic organisms of those habitats
[34,35], especially at night (when no photosynthetic production of oxygen can counteract respiration). Astonishingly, immersion (Figure 5) or anoxia followed by reoxygenation in an absence of light (Figure 6), induced the
same effects on the V-cycle and Fv/Fm as did dehydration-rehydration or light-darkness cycles. The activation
of VDE by immersion may be due to the cellular acidification induced by the release of respiratory CO2, or by
fermentative metabolism [36], but this hypothesis seems
unlikely because of the intrathylakoidal location of this
enzyme.
Considering the unlikelihood of that hypothesis, the
acidification of lumen due to chlororespiration would
become a mechanism to take into account. Essentially,
during chlororespiration, the plastid terminal oxidase
(PTOX) may oxidize plastoquinol (PQH2) by transferring
electrons to oxygen [37] and at the same time, the pumping of protons towards the lumen would take place [38],

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

providing the lumenal acidic pH required for the VDE
activation. Several authors have described the activation
of the chlororespiratory pathway by anoxia [39,40].
Although the accumulation of de-epoxidized xanthophylls under chlororespiratory conditions was never
observed in green algae [41], chlororespiration has been
recently proposed as the mechanism responsible for the
dark activation of the diadinoxanthin cycle in diatoms
under anoxic conditions [40]. Apart from anoxia, Brüggemann and co-workers have recently proposed chlororespiration as the mechanism responsible for the AZ/VAZ
increase observed during the dark incubation of some
winter-acclimated oaks at room temperature [10]. Both
these examples suggest that chlororespiration may represent a plausible explanation for the activation of V deepoxidation showed by P. canaliculata in darkness. This
may be the case of desiccating or overheated tissues, but
under anoxia, it is unlikely that PTOX would be able to
oxidize PQH2 due to the absence of the electron acceptor
(oxygen), even when it is considered that under these
conditions the PQ pool should be over-reduced [42].
Furthermore, the inhibition of PTOX by n-PG did not
block the de-epoxidation of V-cycle pigments that
occurred in darkness during desiccation (Figure 8). This
result indicates that another mechanism, other than the
PTOX-mediated oxidation of PQ, may be responsible for
the generation of the transthylakoidal-ΔpH needed for
the VDE activation. Nevertheless, the fact that Z accumulation during desiccation of samples in darkness was
unaltered by the application of the uncoupler NH 4 Cl
(Figure 8) led us to consider an alternative explanation
for the de-epoxidation of V in darkness.
It is sometimes thought that under strong light conditions only VDE is activated whereas only ZE works at
night or under low light conditions. Nevertheless, ZE
activity seems to be constitutive [43]. The complete deepoxidation of V induced in darkness by SA (Figure 8),
together with the inhibition of V de-epoxidation induced
by DTT, suggests that also VDE activity is constitutive,
even in darkness. In the absence of light, Z accumulation
is not observed under non-stressful conditions because
ZE prevents its accumulation. However, the inhibition of
ZE induced by stress would lead to the de-epoxidation of
most of V, and to the consequent increase in the protective Z. Since ZE requires molecular oxygen as second
substrate an NADPH as cofactor, both molecules may
limit the ZE activity [43]. The underlying mechanism
responsible for such inhibition is unknown, but it may be
associated with the availability of NADPH, as has been
shown in Arabidopsis mutants lacking a chloroplastic
NAD Kinase [9]. In these mutants, ZE reduces its activity
due to the reduced availability of its cofactor NADPH.
Consequently, these plants accumulate high amounts of
Z even in low light [9].

Page 9 of 11

Conclusions
In this study it has been shown that, irrespective of the
nature of the factor inducing V de-epoxidation, resultant
A + Z molecules always contribute to the down-regulation of photochemical efficiency. In fact, when AZ/VAZ
values against Fv/Fm for all the experiments reported
here were plotted in the same regression, a significant
linear dependence was observed between them, irrespective of the stress factor (Figure 7). This observation provides a physiological meaning for the reported dark
activation of the V-cycle, but also opens the question
about the role and adaptive values of this trait. All the
experimental evidence [4] supports the theory that VDE
activation requires an acidic pH, which is typically generated by light-induced proton pumping, but the dark
accumulation of Z requires a different explanation,
probably associated with the down-regulation of ZE
activity. Although the molecular basis of ZE down-regulation remains unclear, there is some evidence that
phosphorylation reactions might be involved in this
[22,44,45].
Considering the emerging number of stressors that
lead to Z formation in darkness, and the multiple protective roles of this xanthophyll in membrane stabilization [46,47], in the prevention of the reactive oxygen
species (ROS) generation [48,49] and in the scavenging
of ROS [50], it seems that, more than being a biochemical curiosity, V de-epoxidation in darkness must represent a very important and finely-regulated protective
mechanism. The wide occurrence of V-cycle activity in
darkness in terms of phylogenetic groups [51] and in
terms of inducing factors (as shown in this work) may
imply that this is a common response to most stressors
that has been conserved tenaciously during the evolution, to protect thylakoid membranes and photosynthetic machinery under hazardous conditions even when
these occur in the dark.
Abbreviations
A: antheraxanthin; DBMIB: Dibromo isopropyl methyl benzoquinone; DCMU:
Dichlorophenyl dimethylurea; DTT: dithiothreitol; Fv/Fm: maximal
photochemical efficiency of the PS II; HT: high temperature; NPQ: nonphotochemical quenching; n-PG: n-propyl-gallate; PTOX: plastid terminal
oxidase; R: rehydration; RH: relative humidity; SA: salicyl-adoxime; V:
violaxanthin; V-cycle: violaxanthin cycle; VDE: Violaxanthin de-epoxidase; Z:
zeaxanthin.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science
[BFU 2010-15021] and by the Basque Government [UPV/EHU-GV IT-299-07].
BFM received a fellowship from the Basque Government.We thank Brian
Webster for english revision.
Authors’ contributions
BFM and JIGP designed and performed the experiments. FM and BFM
carried out the HPLC analyses. JIGP, BFM and FM analyzed fluorescence. JMB
BFM and JIGP performed the experiments with inhibitors and the statistical
analysis. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

Received: 9 July 2011 Accepted: 26 December 2011
Published: 26 December 2011
References
1. Saga G, Giorgietti A, Fufezan C, Giacometti GM, Bassi R, Morosinotto T:
Mutation analysis of violaxanthin de-epoxidase identifies substratebinding sites and residues involved in catalysis. J Biological Chemistry
2010, 285:23763-23770.
2. Müller P, Li XP, Niyogi KK: Non-Photochemical quenching. A response to
escess light energy. Plant Physiol 2001, 125:1558-1566.
3. Holt NE, Zigmantas D, Valkunas L, Li XP, Niyogi KK, Fleming GR: Carotenoid
cation formation and the regulation of photosynthetic light harvesting.
Science 2005, 307:433-436.
4. Ruban AV, Berera R, Ilioaia C, van Stokkum IHM, Kennis JTM, Pascal AA, van
Amerongen H, Robert B, Horton P, van Grondelle R: Identification of a
mechanism of photoprotective energy dissipation in higher plants.
Nature 2007, 450:575-578.
5. Ahn TK, Avenson TJ, Ballottari M, Cheng YC, Niyogi KK, Bassi R, Fleming GR:
Architecture of a charge-transfer state regulating light harvesting in a
plant antenna protein. Science 2008, 320:794-797.
6. Holzwarth AR, Miloslavina Y, Nilkens M, Jahns P: Identification of two
quenching sites active in the regulation of photosynthetic light-harvesting
studied by time-resolved fluorescence. Chem Phys Lett 2009, 483:262-267.
7. Müller M, Lambrev P, Reus M, Wientjes E, Croce R, Holzwarth AR: Singlet
energy dissipation in photosystem II light-harvesting complex does not
involve energy transfer to carotenoids. Chem Phys Lett 2010,
11:1289-1296.
8. Gilmore AM, Yamamoto HY: Dark induction of zeaxanthin dependent
nonphotochemical fluorescence quenching mediated by ATP. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1992, 89:1899-1903.
9. Takahasi H, Watanabe A, Tanaka A, Hashida S, Kawai-Yamada M, Sonoike K,
Uchimiya H: Chloroplast NAD Kinase is essential for energy transduction
through the xanthophyll cycle in photosynthesis. Plant Cell Physiol 2006,
47:1678-1682.
10. Brüggemann W, Bergmann M, Nierbauer KU, Pflug E, Schmidt C, Weber C:
Photosynthesis studies on European evergreen and deciduous oaks
grown under Central European conditions: II. Photoinhibitory and lightindependent violaxanthin de-epoxidation and down regulation of
photosystem II in evergreen, winter-acclimated European Quercus taxa.
Trees 2009, 23:1091-1100.
11. Fernández-Marín B, Balaguer L, Esteban R, Becerril JM, García-Plazaola JI:
Dark induction of the photoprotective xanthophyll cycle in response to
dehydration. J Plant Physiol 2009, 166:1734-1744.
12. Fernández-Marín B, Becerril JM, García-Plazaola JI: Unravelling the roles of
desiccation-induced xanthophyll cycle activity in darkness: a case study
in Lobaria pulmonaria. Planta 2010, 231:1335-1342.
13. García-Mendoza E, Colombo-Pallotta MF: The giant kelp Macrocystis
pyrifera presents a different nonphotochemical quenching control than
higher plants. New Phytol 2007, 173:526-536.
14. Pogson BJ, Niyogi KK, Della-Pena D: Altered xanthophylls composition
adversely affects chlorophyll accumulation and non-photochemical
quenching in Arabidopsis mutants. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1998,
95:13324-13329.
15. Pfetzing J, Stengel DB, Cuffe MM, Savage AV, Guiry MD: Effects of
temperature and prolonged emersion on photosynthesis, carbohydrate
content and growth of the brown intertidal alga Pelvetia canaliculata.
Botanica Marina 2000, 43:399-407.
16. Schonbeck MW, Norton TA: Drought-hardening in the upper limits of
fucoid algae on the shore. J Ecol 1979, 67:687-696.
17. Hudson HJ: Fungal Biology Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1992.
18. Collén J, Davison IR: Stress tolerance and reactive oxygen metabolism in
the intertidal red seaweeds Mastocarpus stellatus and Chondrus crispus.
Plant Cell Environ 1999, 22:1143-1151.
19. Hupel M, Lecointre C, Meudec A, Poupart N, Gall EA: Comparison of
photoprotective responses to UV radiation in the brown seaweed
Pelvetia canaliculata and the marine angiosperm Salicornia ramosissima.
J Exp Marine Biol Ecol 2011, 401:36-47.
20. Harker M, Berkaloff C, Lemoine Y, Britton G, Young AJ, Duval JC, Rmiki NE,
Rousseau B: Effects of high light and desiccation on the operation of the
xanthophyll cycle in two marine brown algae. Europ J Phycol 1999,
34:35-42.

Page 10 of 11

21. Yamamoto HY, Komite L: The effects of dithiothreitol on violaxanthin deepoxidation and absorbance changes in the 500-nm region. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1972, 267:538-543.
22. Xu CC, Jeon YA, Hwang HJ, Lee CH: Suppression of zeaxanthin
epoxidation by chloroplast phosphatase inhibitors in rice leaves. Plant
Sci 1999, 146:27-34.
23. Roberts AG, Kramer DM: Inhibitor “Double occupancy” in the Q0 pocket
of the chloroplast cytochrome b6f complex. Biochem 2001,
40:13407-13412.
24. Graan T: Evidence for a dual function of the herbicide-binding D1protein in photosystem-II. FEBS Letters 1986, 205:296-274.
25. Josse EM, Alcaraz JP, Labouré AM, Kuntz M: In vivo characterization of a
plastid terminal oxidase (PTOX). Europ J Biochem 2003, 270:3787-3794.
26. Nedbal L, Soukupova J, Kaftan D, Whitmarsh J, Trtilek M: Kinetic imaging of
chlorophyll fluorescence using modulated light. Photosynth Res 2000, 66:3-12.
27. García-Plazaola JI, Becerril JM: A rapid HPLC method to measure lipophilic
antioxidants in stressed plants: simultaneous determination of
carotenoids and tocopherols. Phytochem Anal 1999, 10:307-313.
28. García-Plazaola JI, Becerril JM: Seasonal changes in photosynthetic
pigments and antioxidants in beech (Fagus sylvatica) in a Mediterranean
climate: implications for tree decline diagnosis. Aust J Plant Physiol 2001,
2:225-32.
29. Rodrigues MA, Santos CPD, Yoneshigue-Valentin Y, Strbac D, Hall DO:
Photosynthetic light response curves and photoinhibition of the deep
water Laminaria abyssalis and the intertidal Laminaria digitata
(Phaeophyceae). J Phycol 2000, 36:97-106.
30. Nultsch W, Pfau J, Rüffer U: Do correlation exist between chromatophore
arrangement and photosynthetic activity in seaweeds? Marine Biol 1981,
62:111-117.
31. Häder DP, Lebert M, Sinha RP, Barbieri ES, Helbling EW: Role of protective
repair mechanisms in the inhibition of photosynthesis in marine
macroalgae. Photochem Photobiol Sci 2002, 1:809-814.
32. Connan S, Deslandes E, Gall EA: Influence of day-night and tidal cycles on
phenol content and antioxidant capacity in three temperate intertidal
brown seaweeds. J Exp Marine Biol Ecol 2007, 349:359-369.
33. Zhang R, Cruz JA, Kramer DM, Magallanes-Lundback ME, DellaPenna D,
Sharkey TD: Moderate heat stress reduces the pH component of the
transthylakoid proton motive force in light-adapted, intact tobacco
leaves. Plant Cell Environ 2009, 32:1538-1547.
34. Peckol P, Rivers JS: Physiological responses of the opportunistic
macroalgae Cladophora vagabunda (L.) van den Hoek and Gracilaria
tikvahiae (McLachlan) to environmental disturbances associated with
eutrophication. J Exp Marine Biol Ecol 1995, 190:1-16.
35. Pulido C, Borum J: Eelgrass (Zostera marina) tolerance to anoxia. J Exp
Marine Biol Ecol 2010, 385:8-13.
36. Summers JE, Ratcliffe RG, Jackson MB: Anoxia tolerance in the aquatic
monocot Potamogeton pectinatus: absence of oxygen stimulates
elongation in association with an unusually large Pasteur effect. J Exp
Bot 2000, 51:1413-1422.
37. Peltier G, Cournac L: Chlororespiration. Annu Rev Plant Biol 2002,
53:523-550.
38. Rumeau D, Peltier G, Cournac L: Chlororespiration and cyclic electron flow
around PSI during photosynthesis and plant stress response. Plant Cell
Environ 2007, 30:1041-1051.
39. Haldimann P, Strasser RJ: Effects of anaerobiosis as probed by the
polyphasic chlorophyll a fluorescence rise kinetic in pea (Pisum sativum
L.). Photosynth Res 1999, 62:67-83.
40. Cruz S, Goss R, Wilhelm C, Leegood R, Horton P, Jakob T: Impact of
chlororespiration on non-photochemical quenching of chlorophyll
fluorescence and on the regulation of the diadinoxanthin cycle in the
diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana. J Exp Bot 2010, 62:509-519.
41. Goss R, Jakob T: Regulation and function of xanthophyll cycle-dependent
photoprotection in algae. Photosynth Res 2010, 106:103-122.
42. Wright AH, DeLong JM, Gunawardena A, Prange RK: The interrelationship
between the lower oxygen limit, chlorophyll fluorescence and the
xanthophyll cycle in plants. Photosynth Res 2011, 107:223-235.
43. Jahns P, Latowski D, Strzalka K: Mechanism and regulation of the
violaxanthin cycle: the role of antenna proteins and membrane lipids.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2009, 1787:3-14.
44. Ebbert V, Adams WW, Mattoo AK, Sokolenko B, Demmig-Adams B: Upregulation of a photosystem II core protein phophatase inhibitor and

Fernández-Marín et al. BMC Plant Biology 2011, 11:181
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/11/181

45.

46.
47.

48.
49.

50.

51.

Page 11 of 11

sustained D1 phophorylation in zeaxanthin-retaining, photoinhibited
needles of overwintering Douglas fir. Plant Cell Environ 2005, 28:232-240.
Rokka A, Aro EM, Herrmann RR, Andersson B, Vener AV: Dephosphorylation
of photosystem II reaction center proteins in plant photosynthetic
membranes as an immediate response to abrupt elevation of
temperature. Plant Physiol 2000, 123:1525-1535.
Havaux M: Carotenoids as membrane stabilizers in chloroplasts. Trends
Plant Sci 1998, 3:147-151.
Kostecka-Gugala A, Latowski D, Strzalka K: Thermotropic phase behaviour
of alpha-dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine multibilayers is influenced to
various extents by carotenoids containing different structural features–
evidence from differential scanning calorimetry. Biochem Biophys Acta
2003, 1609:193-202.
Ruban AV, Johnson MP: Xanthophylls as modulators of membrane
protein function. Arch Biochem Biophys 2010, 504:78-85.
Betterle N, Ballottari M, Hienerwadel R, Dall’Osto L, Bassi R: Dynamics of
zeaxanthin binding to the Photosystem II monomeric antenna protein
Lhcb6 (CP24) and modulation of its photoprotection properties. A
Biochim Biophys 2010, 504:67-77.
Havaux M, Dall’Osto L, Bassi R: Zeaxanthin has enhanced antioxidant
capacity with respect to all other xanthophylls in Arabidopsis leaves and
functions independent of binding to PS II antennae. Plant Physiol 2007,
145:1506-1520.
Fernandez-Marín B, Míguez F, Becerril JM, García-Plazaola JI: Dehydrationmediated activation of the xanthophyll cycle in darkness: is it related to
desiccation tolerance? Planta 2011, doi: 10.1007/s00425-011-1420-1.

doi:10.1186/1471-2229-11-181
Cite this article as: Fernández-Marín et al.: Activation of violaxanthin
cycle in darkness is a common response to different abiotic stresses: a
case study in Pelvetia canaliculata. BMC Plant Biology 2011 11:181.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
