<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The UlaG protein family defines novel structural and functional motifs grafted on an ancient RNase fold</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-273"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Francisco J Fernandez"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
The UlaG protein family defines novel structural
and functional motifs grafted on an ancient
RNase fold
Fernandez et al.
Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273 (26 September 2011)

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

The UlaG protein family defines novel structural
and functional motifs grafted on an ancient
RNase fold
Francisco J Fernandez1*, Fernando Garces2, Miguel López-Estepa1, Juan Aguilar3, Laura Baldomà3, Miquel Coll4,5,
Josefa Badia3 and M Cristina Vega1*

Abstract
Background: Bacterial populations are highly successful at colonizing new habitats and adapting to changing
environmental conditions, partly due to their capacity to evolve novel virulence and metabolic pathways in
response to stress conditions and to shuffle them by horizontal gene transfer (HGT). A common theme in the
evolution of new functions consists of gene duplication followed by functional divergence. UlaG, a unique
manganese-dependent metallo-b-lactamase (MBL) enzyme involved in L-ascorbate metabolism by commensal and
symbiotic enterobacteria, provides a model for the study of the emergence of new catalytic activities from the
modification of an ancient fold. Furthermore, UlaG is the founding member of the so-called UlaG-like (UlaGL)
protein family, a recently established and poorly characterized family comprising divalent (and perhaps trivalent)
metal-binding MBLs that catalyze transformations on phosphorylated sugars and nucleotides.
Results: Here we combined protein structure-guided and sequence-only molecular phylogenetic analyses to
dissect the molecular evolution of UlaG and to study its phylogenomic distribution, its relatedness with present-day
UlaGL protein sequences and functional conservation. Phylogenetic analyses indicate that UlaGL sequences are
present in Bacteria and Archaea, with bona fide orthologs found mainly in mammalian and plant-associated Gramnegative and Gram-positive bacteria. The incongruence between the UlaGL tree and known species trees indicates
exchange by HGT and suggests that the UlaGL-encoding genes provided a growth advantage under changing
conditions. Our search for more distantly related protein sequences aided by structural homology has uncovered
that UlaGL sequences have a common evolutionary origin with present-day RNA processing and metabolizing MBL
enzymes widespread in Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. This observation suggests an ancient origin for the UlaGL
family within the broader trunk of the MBL superfamily by duplication, neofunctionalization and fixation.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that the forerunner of UlaG was present as an RNA metabolizing enzyme in the
last common ancestor, and that the modern descendants of that ancestral gene have a wide phylogenetic
distribution and functional roles. We propose that the UlaGL family evolved new metabolic roles among bacterial
and possibly archeal phyla in the setting of a close association with metazoans, such as in the mammalian
gastrointestinal tract or in animal and plant pathogens, as well as in environmental settings. Accordingly, the major
evolutionary forces shaping the UlaGL family include vertical inheritance and lineage-specific duplication and
acquisition of novel metabolic functions, followed by HGT and numerous lineage-specific gene loss events.

* Correspondence: franfdez@cib.csic.es; cvega@cib.csic.es
1
Structural and Quantitative Biology Department, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040 Madrid, Spain
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2011 Fernandez et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

Background
Bacteria can evolve complex virulence mechanisms and
metabolic pathways by gene duplication and functional
divergence of one of the copies [1,2], with the ancestral
copy retaining the original function, and by shuffling these
entire pathways by horizontal gene transfer (HGT) [3,4].
Indeed, gene duplication has been presented as a major
driving force behind evolutionary change [1,2], with 70%
and 90% of duplicated domains found in bacteria and
eukaryotic organisms, respectively [5]. However, the relative impact of gene duplication and HGT in the generation
of genetic diversity and their role in adaptation is still
under debate [3]. The opposite process of gene loss has
been hypothesized to favor the evolution of prokaryotes
under intermittent selective pressures (coupled to the
regain of function in the form of cryptic genes, such as
those involved in b-glucoside degradation found in most
natural isolates of E. coli) [6,7]. Other examples of gene
loss occur in response to lifestyle adaptations like the dramatic genome reduction of obligate host-associated bacteria such as Mycoplasma and Buchnera [8], or to allow
for more efficient replication in free-living microorganisms
like in the marine free-living bacteria Prochlorococcus and
Pelagibacter [9,10]. The prevalence of HGT in bacteria,
especially in multi-species ecological communities such as
those in the human gastrointestinal tract, plays an essential
role in generating genetic variation in addition to gene
duplication and gene loss [11]. HGT events are crucial for
the dissemination of beneficial functional traits between
bacterial communities especially when these are under
strong selection pressure, as is the case for virulence factors among pathogenic bacteria [12,13].
A number of protein folds have been extensively re-used
during evolution for the emergence of novel functions,
including metallo-b-lactamase (MBL) [14], triose-phosphate isomerase (TIM) [15,16], and Rossmann fold scaffolds [15], in particular in the context of metabolism,
which plays a crucial role in bacterial adaptation as shown
by the massive expansion of metabolic superfamilies since
the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) [17]. One of
the underlying reasons for the success of these folds in
acquiring new functions is that they hold a wide active site
that can accommodate complex and multiple substrates
simultaneously and the presence of many surrounding
loops, modifications of which can alter the chemical and
catalytic properties of the protein, its substrate/product
profile, or cofactor-binding properties. MBLs provide an
important source of versatile catalysts that have an ancient
evolutionary origin and a widespread phylogenomic distribution across Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya [14]. The
central role of MBLs in both cellular and metabolic housekeeping functions as well as in the rapid spread of multidrug resistant pathogens calls for a better understanding

Page 2 of 22

of the evolutionary mechanisms by which novel functions
evolve from an archetypical protein fold.
UlaG, a recently characterized MBL sequence with a
novel function and unique sequence and structural
features [18,19], is a protein encoded by a gene from the
L-ascorbate utilization (ula) regulon of Enterobacteria
[20]. The ula regulon consists of two divergently transcribed units (Additional file 1). The first is the ulaG
cistron that encodes the L-ascorbate 6-phosphate lactonase (UlaG) involved in the conversion of L-ascorbate 6phosphate to L-gulonate 6-phosphate in the catabolism
of L-ascorbate [18] (Additional file 2). The second unit
comprises the ulaABCDEF operon. Genes ulaABC
encode the transmembrane phosphotransferase system
(PTS) responsible for the uptake of L-ascorbate from the
medium in the form of L-ascorbate 6-phosphate. The
structural genes ulaD (3-keto-L-gulonate 6-phosphate
decarboxylase), ulaE (L-xylulose 5-phosphate 3-epimerase), and ulaF (L-ribulose 5-phosphate 4-epimerase), act
sequentially on the product of UlaG to convert it to Dxylulose 5-phosphate, an intermediate of the pentose
phosphate pathway (Additional file 2). The ula regulon is
under transcriptional control of ulaR, located upstream
to ulaG. Expression of the structural genes of the ula
regulon is controlled by changes in the quaternary architecture of UlaR, a DeoR-family repressor, which, in the
absence of extracellular L-ascorbate, represses transcription of the regulon by binding DNA as a homotetrameric
complex to four operator sequences (Additional file 1).
The availability of L-ascorbate triggers transcriptional
activation by binding of the inducer molecule L-ascorbate
6-phosphate to UlaR, thereby leading to its concomitant
conversion to a DNA-free dimeric complex that can no
longer maintain a repressed state [21].
Of the L-ascorbate catabolic genes, only the catalytic
activity of the ulaG gene product has not been confidently
assigned on the basis of sequence homology, and it was
not until last year [18] that the activity of UlaG was established experimentally. In addition, the determination of
the crystal structure of UlaG at 2.6-Å resolution [18] corroborated sequence-based predictions that the fold was
similar to Zn2+-dependent hydrolases of the MBL superfamily while simultaneously revealing several unforeseen
properties (Figure 1A-E). First, the UlaG fold resembles
that of MBL RNases with additional conspicuous adaptations to its new functional role in L-ascorbate catabolism
(Figure 1B and 1C). Second, it is the first characterized
Mn2+-dependent MBL (Figure 1D). And, third, UlaG has a
distinctive oligomeric structure (a hexamer) that had not
been previously described for MBLs (Figure 1E). Prompted
by these unusual properties of UlaG, which suggested that
the ancestral RNase fold of this protein had been subjected
to extensive modifications in order to acquire new

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

Page 3 of 22

Figure 1 Structure and sequence motifs of the founding member of the UlaG protein family, E. coli L-ascorbate 6-phosphate
lactonase. A. Primary sequence of UlaG decorated with structural (from the Mn2+-loaded crystal structure, PDB 2wym) and functional
annotations. Sequence segments not visible in the experimental electron density are shaded in gray. Secondary structure elements are shown as
background colors, red (a-helices) and green (b-strands), and labeled from a1-a14 and bA-bN. Residues that form part of interaction surfaces are
in bold and underlined. Finally, residues that directly (or indirectly) contribute to the Mn2+-binding site are marked with a star on a yellow
background. B. Monomer structure of UlaG determined by X-ray crystallography at 2.6-Å resolution (PDB 2wym). Dashed lines represent missing
loops in electron density (residues shaded in gray in A). C. Surface representation of the monomer where the interfacing residues are shown in
light orange and are mapped onto the surface. D. Mn2+-binding site of UlaG. Side chains of residues from the coordination sphere are shown as
sticks in atom colors and liganded Mn2+ ion in violet. E. Hexameric arrangement characteristic of the biologically active UlaG enzyme viewed
along the threefold molecular symmetry axis.

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

catalytic activity and regulatory mechanisms in a completely different ecological scenario [15], we set out an indepth study to characterize the protein family founded by
UlaG. In this study we present the molecular evolution of
the UlaG protein family, its phylogenomic distribution,
and genome context, and we construct an evolutionary
pathway from the ancestral RNase fold to present-day
UlaG-like proteins in prokaryotic organisms.

Results
Phylogenetic analysis

Sequence similarity searches with E. coli UlaG primary
sequence [Genbank:P39300] against a database of nonredundant protein sequences revealed that proteins with
sequence identity greater than 50%, and therefore possibly homologous to UlaG, are present in bacterial genomes belonging to three eubacterial phyla across several
classes and families (Figure 2; Additional files 3 and 4).
Bacterial lineages containing at least one potential UlaG
homolog, or UlaG-like (UlaGL) sequence, include

Page 4 of 22

families from the divisions Proteobacteria (Enterobacteriaceae genera Escherichia, Salmonella, Shigella, Citrobacter, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Yersinia, Providencia,
Actinobacillus, Haemophilus, Mannheimia, and Pasteurella; Vibrionales genera Vibrio and Photobacterium);
Firmicutes (Clostridiales genus Clostridium; Ruminococcaceae genera Anaerotruncus, Ruminococcus, and
Epulopiscium; Lactobacillales genera Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, and Streptococcus) and Actinobacteria (Coriobacteriaceae Atopobium). These genera
include commensal and symbiotic bacteria, opportunistic pathogens, and pathogenic bacteria that colonize the
mammalian gastrointestinal tract (GIT), oral mucosa,
genitourinary tract, as well as bacteria found in environmental reservoirs such as soil and water.
Comparison of unrooted phylogenetic trees constructed from curated multiple sequence alignments of
UlaGL sequences (Figure 3; Additional files 5, 6 and 7)
with the known phylogeny of Proteobacteria and Grampositive bacteria [22-24] allows us to tentatively place

Figure 2 Multiple sequence alignment of UlaGL protein sequences among bacteria. Multiple sequence alignment of E. coli UlaG (E. coli;
top sequence) against six divergent UlaGL sequences from Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. In descending order, sequences included
are putative L-ascorbate 6-phosphate lactonases from Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhi str. CT18 (NP_458816); Klebsiella
pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae MGH 78578 (YP_001338203); Clostridium botulinum B str. Eklund 17B (YP_001887453); Yersinia intermedia ATCC
29909 (ZP_046368); Vibrio cholerae V51 (ZP_04919573); Streptococcus pyogenes MGAS315 (NP_663946); and Atopobium vaginae DSM 15829
(ZP_039469). Pairwise sequence identities are larger than 50% for all sequences in the multiple sequence alignment. Characteristic motifs of the
metallo-b-lactamase protein fold are shown underlined on top of the alignment, and absolutely conserved catalytic aspartate and histidine
residues within these motifs are marked underneath the alignment as red or blue squares, respectively. Residues involved in intersubunit
contacts are boxed.

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

Page 5 of 22

Figure 3 Bayesian inference tree of UlaGL orthologs from 330 aligned amino acid positions. The consensus tree was produced with
FigTree from the last 9,500 trees representing 950,000 stationary generations. Bayesian inference posterior probability (BIPP) and maximumlikelihood bootstrap percentage (MLBP) are indicated on nodes. Only branches with > 0.50 BIPP support are labeled with BIPP and MLBP. The
SDSF at the end of the MrBayes run was 0.008. The scale bar below the tree shows the evolutionary distance expressed as substitutions per site.
Taxon names are prefixed with their NCBI GI numbers. The underlined taxa are shown in the representative alignment (Figure 2). Nexus
alignment files are available from the authors on request.

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

the last common ancestor around the radiation of the
Firmicutes from the common branch that would later
split into Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria. Interestingly, the first radiation event in the phylogenetic tree of
the UlaG homologs coincides with the emergence of
class B3 b-lactamases, prior to the split of Proteobacteria
from Gram-positive bacteria [25]. This observation is
consistent with the proposed evolutionary origin of
MBL sequences without b-lactamase activity from an
ancient, essential protein, such as an RNA-processing
enzyme [14,25].
The analysis of the UlaGL gammaproteobacterial subtree (a tree containing solely gammaproteobacterial
sequences) and its comparison to the corresponding
species tree (Additional file 8) using the Shimodaira-Hasegawa test supports a model of near exclusive vertical transmission (p = 1.0 at 5% confidence level). In contrast,
neither the Firmicutes nor the Actinobacteria branches are
completely orthologous groups. The Actinobacteria, represented by Atopobium spp., appears interspersed between
proteobacterial and Firmicutes lineages, while the Firmicutes branches contain sequences from enterobacterial
species (e.g., Yersinia spp., Dickeya spp., and Mannheimia
spp.). The incongruent placement of enterobacterial
sequences within Gram-positive clades indicates that some
HGT events between enterobacteria and bacteria from
other taxonomic groups within these categories have
occurred. This possibility has already been proposed for
the MBL superfamily [25]. These observations suggest a
far more recent origin for ulaGL in the common ancestor
to Vibrionales, Enterobacteriales and Pasteurellales. In this
scenario, the absence of an UlaGL protein in distantly
related Gammaproteobacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas, Xanthomonas or Xylella) would be a natural consequence of the
ulaGL birth after the split of their common ancestor. In
addition, the current distribution of ulaGL within Firmicutes/Actinobacteria would require only a very reduced
number of HGT events with an enterobacterial species as
donor and a Gram-positive bacterium as recipient. A case
in point is the presence of Pasteurella and Mannheimia
UlaGL nested inside the Clostridium and Streptococcus
clades; this tree topology can be explained by one HGT
event from a Pasteurelalles ancestor to the common
ancestor of (Clostridiales + Streptococcales) or several later
HGT events to each individual recipient lineage.
For most prokaryotic species, we have identified a single UlaG homolog per genome (Additional file 3). Indeed,
we detected only 4 species with more than one UlaG
homolog (above an E-value threshold of 1 × 10-10). This
finding thus indicates the existence of paralogous
sequences in restricted cases. Three such species are
eubacterial, including Epulopiscium sp. ‘N.t. morphotype
B’ (2 paralogs), Dickeya zeae Ech159 (2 paralogs), and
Sebaldella termitidis (2 paralogs), and one is archeal,

Page 6 of 22

Haloterrigena turkmenica DSM 5511 (3 paralogs). In
Epulopiscium sp. ‘N.t. morphotype B’ the two sequences
(gi|168333356 and gi|168333915) are annotated as
hypothetical proteins, and the first sequence lacks similarity to the first 18 amino acids of UlaG, thus the
N-terminal hexamerization motif has been weakened or
abolished. The two paralogous sequences of Dickeya zeae
Ech1591 (ref|YP_003003802.1 and gb|ACT06323.1) are
also listed as hypothetical proteins. In contrast, the
UlaGL paralogs in S. termitidis are annotated as L-ascorbate 6-phosphate lactonases and are part of a near complete operon duplication. Except for sequencing or
annotation error, the two UlaGL sequences in S. termitidis share 100% sequence identity, which is consistent
with a very recent duplication event.
Although RNA processing enzymes did not appear to
have generally been captured by a sequence-only search,
at least one such sequence was present in iteration 1 of
PSI-BLAST. It corresponds to a putative mRNA 3’-end
processing factor from the Crenarcheota Pyrobaculum
islandicum DSM 4184. The length of the alignment is
limited (about 100 residues) but in this limited length it
contains 33% sequence identity and 48% similarity, and
contains similarity to the amino-acid stretch spanning
96-182, a region that includes the central portion of the
active site and adjacent elements. This degree of
sequence conservation places this hit slightly above the
twilight zone of hard-to-establish similarity, and, in conjunction with the structural homology to MBL RNases,
provides further evidence of a distant evolutionary relation of the UlaG family with MBL RNases.
Finally, we detected a series of sequences corresponding
to the romA gene encoding for a multi-drug resistance
membrane protein and bearing some degree of sequence
homology to UlaG. However, the low sequence identity
(always below the 30% identity threshold; best hits had
18% identity, 35% similarity, and 350-360 aligned residues,
with a bit score of 327 and a E-value of 10-87) makes this
link less reliable. However, it is not inconceivable that the
UlaG and the RomA proteins had an ancient common
ancestor and that their markedly different functions arose
by divergence over a very long evolutionary time.
Conservation of UlaG features among orthologous
sequences

UlaG has several distinctive motifs that confer its characteristic structure and support its catalytic activity and
that are expected to be conserved among putative orthologous sequences. Aside from the metal-binding motif
and the presence of long loops over the active site, presumably for substrate binding and assisting catalysis,
which are also found in more distantly related MBLs, the
most conspicuous features of UlaG are found in its
amino (N) and carboxy (C) termini. The N terminus

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

spans thirty residues and folds as three consecutive ahelices (Figure 1A and 1B). Helices a1 and a2 form a
mostly positively charged extended arm that inserts into
a complementary, negatively charged valley made from
helix a3, thereby suggesting that the conservation of this
oligomerization motif requires the conservation of the
complementary features of helices a1-a2 and a3. Truncations of the two first a-helices a1 and a2 are expected
to weaken the greatest contact area between adjacent
UlaG subunits and, accordingly, would destabilize a putative hexameric complex. Likewise, though less dramatically, C-terminal truncations deleting residues 331-340,
located immediately after the last a-helix, a14, would be
expected to remove contact area residues and therefore
compromise the oligomeric structure. Indeed, of all the
180 bona fide UlaG orthologs only in Shigella dysenteriae
Sd197 the N-terminal helices a1-a2 are lacking. The
only other orthologous sequence with an incomplete N
terminus, Mannheimia haemolytica PHL213 UlaG,
appears to lack helix a1. However, it is uncertain whether
the apparent loss is reliable or caused by a sequencing
artifact. Interestingly, the presence of additional N-terminal residues is observed more often than the loss of the
N-terminal helical motif. In 53 out of 180 sequences
(29.4%), the N terminus contains additional residues
when compared to the E. coli UlaG reference sequence.
Of these, 15 sequences (28%) have N-terminal extensions
longer than 5 residues (the longest having 31 amino
acids) and most (14 or 92%) have not lost a methionine
residue at the reference position of Met-1. Since all these
sequences are uncharacterized, it is still unclear whether
the predicted initiation codon is used or whether the
reference reading frame is used instead. In support of the
correct assignment of the predicted initiation codons, virtually all these sequences contain 1-3 lysine residues,
which might play a similar role to the two lysine residues
in helix a1.
The C-terminal end of E. coli UlaG contains elements
essential for the oligomerization and for organization of
the channel-like architecture of the hexameric molecule
(Figure 1, A, 1C and 1E). Residues 285-354 encompass
helices a12 and a13, loop bM-bN, and a 10-amino-acid
stretch following helix a14, all of which include interface
residues. Helix a13 occupies a central location in the
UlaG molecule and is hypothesized to provide further
stabilization to the quaternary structure by the interactions it makes with the symmetrical helices in the other
subunits. The crucial role of the C terminus is underlined
by the fact that only three sequences among the orthologous set show considerable deviations from the consensus sequence. Two of these sequences (cattle pathogenic
Escherichia coli O157:H7 str. FRIK2000 and FRIK966)
lack a stretch from helix a14 to the C terminus, apparently as a result of the mutation of a tryptophan TGG

Page 7 of 22

codon (Trp-323 in E. coli UlaG) to a stop TAG codon.
The third sequence, from Salmonella enterica subsp.
enterica serovar Typhi str. E98-2068, has specifically lost
the ten amino-acid residues involved in intersubunit contacts while it has retained helix a14 as well as the last 7
amino acids.
Highest variable regions among closely related sequences

Among highly similar regions, for example, across different E. coli strains, single amino-acid substitutions tend to
be conservative substitutions of small hydrophobic or
polar uncharged residues in or preceding b-strands,
including positions in the neighborhood of the active site.
This observation is not surprising since small hydrophobic
residues in b-strands frequently have structural support
roles that do not cause changes in function. As for ahelices, for example, Met-301 in a13 is conservatively
replaced by an isoleucine residue in Shigella flexneri UlaG,
where it is the only amino-acid change along the entire
length of the sequence. In this particular case, the side
chain of Met-301 points to the solvent channel in the middle of the UlaG hexamer and is unlikely to carry any critical functional role in stability or catalysis.
Inspection of hyper-variable regions between closely
related enterobacterial sequences shows that most of the
variation does cluster in two a-helices, a5 (spanning residues 145-154) and a7 (262-271). In both cases, the mutations are conservative and should not disrupt the
structural elements surrounding them. The a5 helix is
fully exposed and its C terminus establishes helix-helix
dipolar interactions with the short a1 helix. In contrast,
a7 is part of the second largest interface in the quaternary structure of UlaG, where it forms part of two symmetrical a-helical bundles with an extensive surface
interaction.
As soon as sequence identity falls below 80%, substitutions appear in and around the active site and metalbinding loops, suggesting that there might be shifts in
substrate specificity or reactivity. In UlaG homologous
sequences found in various Clostridium sp. including
human pathogenic strains with less than 80% sequence
identity (74-76%), all metal-binding ligands are conserved
against a background of mostly conservative, evenly distributed mutations. This indicates that the overall structure has been preserved despite the possibility that the
active site loops accumulated enough changes to have
shifted in substrate specificity.
Phylogenetic analysis of prokaryotic halophilic UlaGL

The closest non-eubacterial UlaGL sequences are present
in Archaea from Euryarcheota and display 26% sequence
identity (42% similarity) with the top aligned UlaGL
sequences (Figure 4A; Additional files 9, 10 and 11).
These archeal sequences appear to be restricted to

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

Page 8 of 22

Figure 4 Horizontal gene transfer of UlaGL genes to halophilic Archea. A. Alignment of UlaGL sequences from halophilic archea, along with
two reference sequences (E. coli UlaG, and the halophilic bacterium Acetohalobium arabaticum). B. Bayesian consensus tree of the same
sequences in A, with E. coli UlaG as the outgroup. Bayesian inference posterior probability (BIPP) and maximum-likelihood bootstrap percentage
(MLBP) are indicated on nodes. Only branches with > 0.50 BIPP support are labeled with BIPP and MLBP. The SDSF at the end of the MrBayes
run was 0.007. The scale bar below the tree shows the evolutionary distance expressed as substitutions per site. Taxon names are prefixed with
their NCBI GI numbers. Nexus alignment file is available from the authors on request.

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

several extremophilic species of the Halobacteriaceae
family (Figure 4), including organisms such as Haloterrigena turkmenica DSM 5511, Haloquadratum walsbyi
DSM 16790, Halorhabdus utahensis DSM 12940, Natronomonas pharaonis DSM 2160, Halogeometricum borinquense DSM 11551, Halobacterium sp. NRC-1,
Halobacterium salinarum R1, Haloferax volcanii DS2,
Halomicrobium mukohataei DSM12286, Natrialba
magadii ATCC 43099, Halorubrum lacusprofundi ATCC
49239, Halalkalicoccus jeotgali B3, and Haloarcula marismortui ATCC 43049. This severely restricted ecological
distribution of the archeal UlaGL sequences suggests that
the most parsimonious evolutionary scenario for their
origin is an HGT event from a eubacterial species. In
support of this hypothesis, the eubacterial halobacterium
Acetohalobium arabaticum DSM 5501, which thrives
under similar environmental conditions as the Halobacteriaceae, shares with this family the same protein
sequence, which shows a similar degree of conservation
with the cluster of UlaGL sequences (24-26%). Furthermore, phylogenetic trees reconstructed from alignments
of the archeal sequences and the E. coli and A. arabaticum UlaGL sequences provide support for a tight clustering in the origin and diversification of the halophilic
archeal UlaGL sequences, with multiple duplication
events in various lineages (including Haloterrigena turkmenica, Halobacterium salinarum, and Haloharcula
marismortui) (Figure 4B; Additional file 12). In agreement with the proposal that these archeal UlaGL
sequences are functionally unrelated to the remaining
eubacterial UlaGLs, they all conserve a core sequence
spanning approximately 275 residues that lacks two critical regions for UlaG oligomerization, the N-terminal
a1-a2 motif and a13 (the central channel helix) and bMbN, as well as 20-amino-acid segment of the loop bC-b4
following catalytic motif I (Figure 1 and 4A). The absence
of the extreme N- and C-terminal sequences that are
involved in shaping the characteristic hexameric structure of UlaG, suggests that the haloextremophile
sequences, both archeal and eubacterial, do not assemble
into hexameric structures.
Conservation of the ula regulon structure and genomic
context

It has been proposed that the organization of genes into
operons is the main reason for conservation of adjacency
in prokaryotic genomes [26]. The genomic context can
provide insight into function, since functionally related
genes tend to be contiguous and co-transcribed in bacteria [22]. Accordingly, we searched the genomes that
encode proteins with significant sequence identity to
UlaG (putative orthologs, with sequence identity greater
than 55%) to study whether the homologous gene was
part of a similar regulon structure to that found in E. coli.

Page 9 of 22

As a straightforward method, we first searched for UlaR
homologous proteins whose respective genes would be
adjacent to those encoding the corresponding UlaG
homologs. Indeed, a ulaR homologous gene was found
adjacent to each ulaG homologous gene in all Gramnegative and Gram-positive genomes examined except
for the phylogenetically-isolated Fusobacterium Sebaldella termitidis ATCC 33386 [27] and Streptococcus spp.,
where a gene encoding a BglG transcription regulator
was found next to the respective ulaG instead of ulaR
encoding a DeoR-family repressor (Figure 5). Proteins
belonging to the BglG family are bacterial RNA-binding
regulatory proteins that control the expression of genes
and operons required for the utilization of specific carbohydrates [28]. Furthermore, the ulaABCDEF unit was
found in all cases in spite of the observation of various
species-specific gene rearrangements, insertions and
losses (Figure 5). These modifications, together with
sequence divergence between the orthologous pair genes,
cause the exact nature of the metabolic pathway catalyzed by the homologous ulaDEF units to become
blurred with evolutionary divergence. The greatest conservation in operon structure and genomic context was
found among the mammalian-associated Enterobacteria,
both in the symbiotic intestinal microbiota as in human
pathogens such as Klebsiella pneumoniae and Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhi, with the E. coli ula regulon representing the reference sequence. Thus, the type ula regulon (Figure 5; Additional file 1) contains adjacent ulaR
and ulaG genes and the ulaABCDEF operon, which is
transcribed from the opposite strand. This cluster is
flanked on its 5’ end by hypothetical proteins of the CP457 prophage region and on its 3’ end by genes encoding
proteins of unknown function (e.g., DUF1471) and by the
genes coding for ribosomal subunit proteins (e.g., rpsF,
for the 30S ribosomal subunit protein S6). In closely
related Enterobacteria some of these contiguous genes
are transcribed in the same direction as ulaG or ulaABCDEF, with no intervening gene on the complementary strand, and they are conserved in multiple species
(Figure 5, Additional file 1). These genes encode proteins
with various functions but their physical proximity does
not appear to bear any functional relevance to the utilization of L-ascorbate 6-phosphate. Among the enterobacterial genomes analyzed, only Edwardsiella ictaluri
breaks this trend with its ula regulon flanked by genes
encoding a hypothetical membrane protein and an nfuAencoding Fe/S biogenesis protein.
A second group with a conserved operon structure
includes genomes of Gram-negative Proteobacteria with
diverse lifestyles, such as the environmental Aeromonadales bacterium Tolumonas auensis, the deep-sea Photobacterium profundum, the plant pathogen Dickeya zeae
(the causative agent of soft rot in maize), and the human

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

Page 10 of 22

Figure 5 Genome context of UlaG in bacterial genomes. True orthology between similar sequences often requires conservation of the
gene’s genomic context, especially in the context of gene clusters encoding for signal transduction cascades or metabolic pathways. The
genome context around ulaG-like genes in >100 bacterial genomes (including many genomes from human symbiotic bacteria and pathogens)
was examined. For clarity, only a representative set of consistent genomic arrangements is shown. Arrows represent the gene order and
orientation of the transcription of each per species. Dashed lines connecting arrows represent larger intergenic spaces accommodating
transcription regulatory sequences. Relevant taxonomic groupings are shown.

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

pathogens Yersinia spp., Haemophilus spp., and Vibrio
cholerae. These microorganisms possess ula regulons
that share various characteristics, such as a two-subunit
PTS transporter wherein the large subunit (UlaAB)encoding gene is equivalent to a gene fusion of ulaA and
ulaB (Figure 5). In this group it is common to observe a
gene rearrangement whereby the ulaE or ulaF genes (or
both) are inserted between or next to the ulaR and ulaG
cistrons (e.g., H. ducreyi); insertions of an unrelated gene
encoding a Cof-like hydrolase are also common (e.g., Y.
intermedia). Since these additional genes are to be cotranscribed from a different transcriptional unit than the
remaining structural genes, their regulatory control
might become less constrained and therefore freer to be
fine-tuned in response to the metabolic pressures of the
bacterium. Another shared feature is the completely
unrelated genomic contexts among all these bacteria,
although their ula regulons tend to be bracketed by
genes encoding enzymes involved in sugar metabolism
(e.g., transaldolases and transketolases in T. auensis, amylose in V. cholerae), redox cofactor biosynthesis (e.g.,
menaquinone and phylloquinone in H. ducreyi), and
transcription factors (e.g., D. zeae, V. cholera).
In Y. intermedia, the ula regulon is flanked on either
side by what appears to be N-terminally truncated genes
corresponding to a transposase B (65 residues)/integrase
(44 residues) enzyme pair; in Y. enterocolitica, the corresponding orthologs have been conserved in full length,
and for example Y. enterocolitica integrase gene encodes a
450-amino-acid polypeptide that has 97% identity with the
44-residue (predicted) polypeptide in Y. intermedia. The
flanking transposase/integrase cassette suggests that the
ula regulon is part of a still mobile metabolic island (or
islet) in Y. enterocolitica [4], whereas in Y. intermedia the
mobility may have been abrogated by partial gene deletion.
In addition, the finding of a syntenic association between
the ula regulon and a nearby tRNA gene (yinte0001_t290)
in Y. intermedia lends further support to the hypothesis
that the Y. intermedia ula regulon belongs to an ancient
mobile DNA segment [4].
While in Gram-negative bacteria the ulaR/ulaG cistrons
are transcribed co-directionally, in all Gram-positive bacteria that we have analyzed one of the following applies:
(1) ulaR and ulaG are transcribed divergently, with ulaG
being the first structural gene upstream of the PTS transporter genes (e.g., Atopobium vaginae, Enterococcus faecium, Catonella morbi, Clostridium botulinum); this is the
most common scenario, and is similar in Gram-negative
bacteria, with ulaG-ulaA intergenic distances from 250500 bp; (2) ulaR and ulaG are co-transcribed along with
the rest of structural genes (Lactobacillus casei); in this
case, ulaG-ulaCAB intergenic distance shrinks to 5-45 bp,
as is expected for genes co-transcribed in the same
operon; or (3) ulaR coding the DeoR-type regulator is

Page 11 of 22

absent, having been replaced by a bglG gene encoding a
550-amino-acid residue BglG transcription factor containing two PRD (PTS regulatory domain) domains and an
Arc repressor DNA-binding domain (Streptococcus spp.).
In the latter case bglG is always co-transcribed with ulaG
and comes immediately preceding (S. pyogenes) or following it (S. pneumoniae).
We also detected at least four duplicated DNA segments
among the multi-species ula regulons examined (Figure
5). The first two cases (P. profundum ulaR and a C. morbi
gene coding for an uncharacterized hypothetical protein
that is found after ulaF) involve a single gene duplication
event which, after divergence, retain about 60% sequence
identity and are co-localized within the operon next to
each other on the same strand, and therefore may both be
functional in the context of L-ascorbate 6-phosphate
degradation. A third case is found in Y. intermedia, where
the ula regulon lacks a gene for UlaF; instead, two ORFs
(yinte0001_31020 and yinte0001_18310) appear to have
arisen by gene duplication from an ancestral ulaF gene
but these are located in genomic loci far apart from the
ula regulon and from one another. Given that the rest of
the operon has been conserved, it is plausible that the
UlaF-like encoded proteins complement the function lost
from the ula regulon. Finally, the most dramatic duplication event was observed in S. termitidis, where the entire
regulon (except the gene for the repressor) seems to have
undergone a duplication event, the result of which was
two reversely transcribed copies. Despite being a Gramnegative bacterium, the ula regulon of S. termitidis lacks
an ulaR orthologous gene; instead, it contains a BglGencoding gene, similar to that found in Streptococcus spp.
Several gene insertions might have occurred since the
whole-operon duplication event because the inserted
genes were not affected by the duplication; inserted genes
include those encoding a sulfatase, a Cof-like hydrolase,
and several autotransporters.
In summary, the structure of the ula regulon has been
considerably conserved across Gram-negative and Grampositive bacteria despite various species-specific gene rearrangements, fusions, duplications, insertions, and deletions. Although it is not possible to establish beyond
doubt that the specific functions of each of the genes in
the ula regulon are strictly conserved throughout evolution, the conservation of sequence and operon structure
suggests a common functional role for these genes in the
catabolism of phosphorylated sugars, mainly L-ascorbate
6-phosphate, via the pentose phosphate pathway.
Gene loss

In addition to gene duplication, the selective loss of
genes in evolving lineages contributes to the diversification of gene inventories [29]. The role of gene loss in
the molecular evolution of a protein family within a set

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

of closely related genomes can be gauged by comparing
the species tree with phylogenies constructed from available protein sequence data. If the existence of an ancestral gene and its vertical transmission to evolving
lineages can be stated confidently, then the absence of
the gene in a particular descendent lineage can be
explained as a gene loss event. In this case, the gene
tree will logically lack the particular branch in the
species tree where gene loss has occurred. Based on
well-documented reports [29], gene loss is generally
attributed to negative selection processes that increase
the genome’s fitness by reducing its size and eliminating
dispensable genes. In the case of ulaGL, we first compared our protein tree (Figure 3) with published species
trees of Gammaproteobacteria [22,23], which provided
evidence for differential loss of ulaGL across several
genera. For example, in the enteric Yersinia, some species have lost ulaGL (e.g., Y. pestis) while others
(Y. intermedia and Y. ruckeri) have retained it. The
same pattern of species-specific gene loss is apparent
within most genera, like Vibrio and Pasteurella. An
extreme case includes both highly specialized bacteria
(like the endosymbionts Buchnera and Wigglesworthia)
and more distantly related gammaproteobacterial genera
(Shewanella, Pseudomonas, Xylella, and Xanthomonas),
the genomes of which do not have a detectable ulaGL.
This absence may respond to either a lack of ulaGL in
the gammaproteobacterial ancestor, or to its presence
but subsequent loss due to negative selection pressures.
With the possible exception of the Firmicutes (which
are better represented in the UlaGL phylogeny), the presence of ulaGL in a limited set of Gram-positive bacteria from diverse and distantly related phyla such as
Actinobacteria, Fusobacteria and Spirochaetes likely
reflects gene loss. Within the Firmicutes, the presence of
UlaGL in several abundant genera (e.g., Clostridium,
Streptococcus, Lactobacillus, and Enterococcus) has many
exceptions at the species level that are best interpreted
as gene loss events. For example, even though C. butyricum, C. botulinum, and C. perfringens all possess an
ulaGL gene, most other Clostridium spp. do not, including important human pathogens as C. difficile, C. tetani
or C. sordellii. It therefore appears that ulaGL has been
retained only in particular Gram-positive genomes
where it may contribute a fitness advantage.
In all cases analyzed (either Proteobacteria or Grampositive bacteria), loss of ulaGL was always associated
with the complete loss of the ula regulon, indicating
that the functions conferred by the ula genes are highly
coordinated.
Structural homology

As we have previously discussed [18], the structure of
E. coli UlaG strongly resembles RNA-processing enzymes

Page 12 of 22

of the MBL superfamily and yet their sequence identity is
very low (14-18%) (Figure 6). Among these, the closest
structural homologs found by SSM PDBeFold [30]
include Zn2+-dependent RNases that catalyze phosphodiester cleavages in tRNA or mRNA substrates and
recognize the three-dimensional structure of their RNA
substrates. This group of enzymes includes the premRNA 3’-end-processing endonuclease (PDB ID code
2i7t) [31], tRNA maturase RNase Z (PDB ID code 1y44)
[32], and the ElaC homolog of Bacillus anthracis, a putative ribonuclease (PDB ID code 1zkp) (unpublished) (Figure 6). The number of aligned residues across all
detectable structural homologs was 186 over 13 secondary structure elements, with an overall root mean-square
deviation (r.m.s.d.) of 2.1 Å and an overall Q-score of
0.26. The pattern of conserved secondary structure elements consists of the b-sheet core (12 b-strands), except
for the two last flanking b-strands (bN in E. coli UlaG)
and the C-terminal helix (b14 in E. coli UlaG). Not unexpectedly, the hexamerization motifs in E. coli UlaG are
missing from this conserved core. Further to the global
similarity, the RNase Z enzymes appear to show strong
similarity to UlaG at the level of the active site configuration and metal coordination sphere, thereby suggesting
active-site conservation of the essential features that support hydrolytic activity in both enzyme classes. The similarities observed are remarkable since these RNases come
from very broad phylogenetic origins, such as pre-mRNA
3’-end-processing endonuclease (human) and tRNA
maturase RNase Z (bacteria). As noted above, the first
iteration of PSI-BLAST with E. coli UlaG as the query
had already identified with low scores (24% coverage, Evalue 0.048, 35% identity over 90 residues) the putative
mRNA 3’-end processing factor of the Crenarcheote Pyrobaculum spp. (P. arsenicum and P. islandicum), thus
indicating a significant remaining sequence similarity
despite enormous divergence.
To find more ancient relatives of UlaG among MBL
RNases, we used a structure-guided sequence alignment
to construct a profile Hidden Markov (HMM) model
[33] to probe the complete non-redundant protein
sequence database. Because of the current scarcity of
UlaGL protein structures, the number of sequences present in the HMM alignment was necessarily low (6). The
search with the HMM pattern retrieved 3929 sequences
with a score better than 1 × 10-10, which included many
sequences already identified by sequence-only searches
as well as others from bacterial, archeal, and eukaryotic
genomes. Apart from putative lactonases and hydrolases,
the search found many sequences for RNase Z, YhfI,
AtsA/ElaC, ATP-binding PhnP proteins, lipoate-protein
ligase B, aryl- and glycolsulfatases, lipoyl/octanoyl transferases, cAMP phosphodiestarases, tRNA 3’ processing
enzymes, tRNA endonucleases, and the multidrug

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

Page 13 of 22

Figure 6 Origin of UlaGL from an ancient MBL RNase sequence. A. Structures of E. coli UlaG (PDB code 2wym, left), tRNA maturase RNase Z
(PDB code 1y44, center) and B. anthracis ElaC homolog (PDB code 1zkp, right), with the conserved core domain shown in gray. Unique
structural features are highlighted in green (UlaG), blue (1y44), and violet (1zkp). The Mn2+ ion (violet) in UlaG and the Zn2+ ions (orange) in the
two RNases are shown as spheres. B. Multiple sequence alignment of UlaGL sequences (E. coli UlaG on top) and related RNase Z sequences
obtained by structure-guided sequence searching and manual correction of the resultant alignments.

resistance protein RomA. More than 25% of the
sequences were annotated as conserved hypothetical, predicted, or unnamed products, and many of the annotations were not curated (i.e. generated by automatic,
database annotation). Despite the poor characterization
of most of these sequences, it becomes evident that the
descendants of the ancestral sequence from which modern ulaG-like genes originated have a very broad phylogenomic distribution covering Bacteria, Archaea and
Eukarya. The HMM searches suggest that the UlaGL
sequences in eukaryotic organisms have roles mostly in
RNA processing whereas in bacteria, a greater diversity
of metabolic and functional roles is appreciable.
Furthermore, the recently determined structure of a
MBL from Brucella melitensis subsp. abortus (PDB ID
3md7 and structures thereof) (unpublished) has revealed a
monomeric enzyme with an Mn2+-dependent active site

similar to UlaG and in contrast to the Zn2+ ligand found
in all other RNases. However, this enzyme represents a
mixed case since it has only a marginally higher sequence
identity with the above RNases (21%) than with UlaG
(15%). Superposition of the two active sites (not shown)
shows that the empty metal site in UlaG is occupied by a
second Mn2+ ion in the B. melitensis enzyme with a markedly different conformation of the liganded residues. In
particular, the two bridging aspartates Asp90 and Asp188
(Asp121 and Asp226 in UlaG) adopt rotamers that bring
the carboxylates closer to the Mn2+ (site Zn2) ion by 0.6-1
Å, and two histidine residues in the coordination sphere of
the second Mn2+ in the B. melitensis enzyme (site Zn1) are
either in a distinct conformation (His88, His119 in UlaG)
or have no equivalent in UlaG (His170). The closest residue to His170 in UlaG is Asp184 (2.5 Å between Ca
atoms), which is the last amino acid before an extensively

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

disordered loop spanning residues 185-204. Only His228
in UlaG has no clear counterpart in the B. melitensis
enzyme and could in principle play the role of His170;
however, the 4.5-Å gap between the corresponding side
chains renders this scenario unlikely. The B. melitensis
structure was solved in the presence of various nucleoside
monophosphates (GMP and AMP) that show a similar
binding mode, characterized by the nucleotide phosphate
buried deep within the metal center of the enzyme and
establishing most of the stabilizing interactions, while the
ribose moiety and, even less so, the guanine/adenine base,
are more loosely bound. Given the chemical and structural
similarities of L-ascorbate 6-phosphate with the ribose of
GMP and AMP, and the fact that UlaG uses cyclic nucleotide analogs, we hypothesize that L-ascorbate 6-phosphate
binds to UlaG in a similar orientation as GMP. This binding mode would position the substrate between the two
long loops that are disordered in the UlaG structure, thus
raising the possibility of an induced fit mechanism to
occur upon substrate binding.
Taken together, structure-based sequence and HMM
pattern searches and structure superpositions confirm
the evolutionary relationship of the Mn 2+ -dependent
UlaG family and an ancient family of Zn 2+ -dependent
MBLs with RNase activity. Intriguingly, the recently
solved structure of a second Mn2+-dependent MBL (from
B. melitensis) lends further support to the notion that
Mn2+ was present in the ancestral RNase or in a wider
branch of RNase/metabolic enzymes.
Modeling UlaGL protein structures

Given the remarkable primary sequence conservation
among many UlaGL proteins encoded by the human
microbiome, including proteins from recognized human
pathogens, we set out to model the hexameric structures
of several representative sequences. The chosen set of protein sequences included S. enterica serovar Typhi, C. botulinum, Y. intermedia, S. pyogenes, and A. vaginae. All of
these proteins share clear sequence patterns corresponding to the oligomerization motifs (Figures 1 and 2), suggesting that their structures will follow the hexameric
architecture revealed by the two crystal structures available
for UlaGL proteins [18]. Modeling was carried out with
two well-established algorithms (see Methods section) and
outcomes were inspected for consistency between the two
methods. As controls, modeling of each original crystal
structures (PDB ID 2wym and 3bv6) with one another
converged to models that were essentially identical to the
experimentally determined structure (within r.m.s.d. of 0.3
Å). Many sequence changes were conservative and did not
generate geometric or electrostatic alterations in the modeled structures. Alterations of this nature might have indicated potential problems with the models. On the
contrary, buried surface area (BSA) and other geometric

Page 14 of 22

and energetic statistics showed that the modeled structures were capable of forming native interaction surfaces.
For example, the average BSA for the largest and second
largest interface for the comparative models were, respectively, 4500 Å2 and 1250 Å2, which compare well with the
BSA for the same interfaces from the crystallographic fulllength models (4000 Å2 and 1350 Å2). Splayed-apart views
of the contact surfaces for the modeled structures are
shown in Figure 7 and further analyses are described in
Additional files 13 and 14.
Prediction of metal ligands

Prediction of the metal ligand for a particular MBL on the
basis of primary sequence and structure alone is errorprone. This is because the same set of protein residues can
bind more than one metal in similar or different coordination spheres, but also because the identity of metal ions
that can bind into an active site of a particular protein
depends, at least in part, on cellular regulatory mechanisms for metal ion homeostasis [34]. To date, four metal
ions are known to bind to UlaGL enzymes, including Mn2
+
, Co2+, Zn2+, and Fe3+. For the first three (Mn2+, Co2+,
and Zn2+ ) there is strong biochemical and biophysical
experimental support [18]. However, the binding of Fe3+ is
so far backed only by its presence in an unpublished crystal structure (PDB ID 3bv6), and therefore its biochemical
relevance will require a more extensive characterization.
In E. coli UlaG, experimental evidence ranks Mn2+ and
Co2+ as potential binders, since they display similar binding profile and both facilitate catalysis on L-ascorbate 6phosphate, and singles out Zn2+ as a potential competitive
inhibitor of catalytic activity. Interestingly, under the cited
experimental conditions E. coli UlaG does not bind Fe3+
[18]. Collectively, this indicates that the UlaGL family proteins may be able to charge their active site with a broad
selection of divalent and trivalent metal ions, thereby suggesting that these perform both carboxyl and phosphoryl
ester hydrolysis as well as redox reactions. This versatility
in metal selection fits nicely with the expected adaptability
of the MBL scaffold fold to catalytically transform a wide
range of biologically relevant nutrient molecules.

Discussion
The recent determination of the X-ray crystal structure of
E. coli UlaG, the first enzyme of the anaerobic catabolic
pathway of L-ascorbate in Enterobacteria, has brought to
light a novel fold type of the MBL superfamily [18]. This
sequence and its associated structural features defines a
new UlaGL family in the Uniprot database (http://www.
uniprot.org) [35]. Much remains unknown about its phylogenetic origin, its evolutionary relatedness to RNA processing enzymes, and the potential plasticity of the structural
elements that configure UlaG. In order to increase our
understanding of the UlaG family we sought to study its

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

Page 15 of 22

Figure 7 Surface mapping of intersubunit contacts for modeled UlaGL structures. A. Ribbon of an UlaGL hexameric structure in chain
colors. B. Splayed-apart surface representation for a monomer of each modeled structure, shown with mapped intersubunit contacts in the
same chain colors as in A.

phylogenetics and the consequences of the colocalization
of the corresponding gene with genes coding proteins
associated with the ula regulon. Here, we have retrieved
and analyzed a set of near 200 bacterial and archeal
sequences with detectable homology to UlaG and that we
have denominated the UlaGL family.
A first set of closely homologous sequences prevails in
related Gram-negative bacteria from the Gammaproteobacteria that include species from the orders Enterobacteriales, Vibrionales and Pasteurellales. Many, if not all,
of these sequences come from bacteria from the mammalian microbiome and also from human, animal, and plant
pathogens. Given their relatively high amino acid
sequence identity (> 60%) and the likely presence of a
shared genomic context homologous to genes in the ula
regulon, the UlaG homologs constitute plausible orthologous sequences. Even relatively distant bacteria such as

V. cholerae, an obligate anaerobe and human pathogen,
conserves the ula regulon structure and has sequence
identity to E. coli UlaG above 65% (Figure 2, Additional
file 3), in addition to sharing the same structural scaffold
with an r.m.s.d. of 1.5 Å for nearly the entire length of
the two proteins. This strong pattern of conservation of
the sequence and structure of both the structural genes
and the regulatory sequences of the ula regulon across
Gammaproteobacteria is in agreement with the evolution
of Enterobacteria, and indicates that these sequences are
of ancient origin [36-38] and under strong purifying
(negative) selection [3]. Assuming vertical transmission
of ulaGL among the Gammaproteobacteria, the lack of
ulaGL along certain genera and species (e.g. Y. pestis and
C. tetani lack the ula regulon) indicates a selective loss of
the ulaGL gene present in the ancestor to those lineages,
or absence in the ancestor followed by acquisition from a

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

distant source in several lineages. Given that HGT
between closely related species is rare [29] and the congruence of the gene tree with the species tree for gammaproteobacterial genomes, the first scenario, involving
gene loss of an ancestral gene, appears more likely to
have played a significant role in shaping the phylogenomics distribution of the UlaGL family.
A second set of homologous UlaGL sequences are found
in Gram-positive bacteria (mostly Firmicutes and Actinobacteria), again mainly among symbiotic and pathogenic
mammalian-associated bacteria. A syntenic association
between ulaGL genes and an adjacent ulaR-like gene is
also strongly conserved in Gram-positive bacterial genomes, although in Streptococcus spp. the ulaR-encoding
DeoR repressor appears to have been substituted by a
gene coding a more complex BglG-family transcription
factor, which has two PRD (PTS regulatory domains) and
an Arc DNA-binding domain. While the defining features
of the ula regulon are conserved among Gram-negative
and Gram-positive bacteria, there are numerous speciesspecific gene rearrangements and insertions, and even
whole operon duplications, which might play adaptive
roles in the particular lifestyle and metabolic requirements
of each species. Thus, the plasticity of the ula regulon
structure is in agreement with previous reports that suggest that gene sequences are generally more conserved
than the gene organization within an operon, with the
possible exception of genes encoding physically associated
polypeptide chains, which tend to have a higher propensity
to remain clustered [22].
The conservation of genomic context about the putative
ulaGL regulons/operons within closely related species
indicates a similar functionality in carbohydrate/vitamin
metabolism. Indeed, the presence of sequences of prophage origin flanking the ula regulon in several enterobacterial species and the flanking transposase/integrase genes
found in Yersinia spp. are a strong indication of the coherent function as well as the potential for the lateral transfer
of the entire regulon, and are consistent with the HGT
events from an enterobacterial donor to Gram-positive
recipients apparent from the reconstructed molecular evolution of ulaGL (Figure 3). When larger evolutionary distances are considered, the genomic context becomes far
less conserved. For example, for more distantly related
Gram-negative species such as Escherichia spp. and Yersinia spp. the genome location of the ula regulons is
unrelated.
Most interestingly, the combination of structural and
sequence homology searches help delineate a complete
phylogenetic tree of UlaG-related sequences with a
broader scope than any individual approach might
achieve. A first feature of such a tree is a core of bacterial sequences that share a closely related functionality in
L-ascorbate 6-phosphate (or a similar metabolite)

Page 16 of 22

metabolism and which span Gram-negative and Grampositive bacteria with diverse lifestyles (commensal,
symbiotic, pathogenic, or free living). Although true
orthology is a plausible scenario between UlaGL
sequences with > 55% sequence identity with the E. coli
reference sequence, at this stage we cannot exclude that
in some organisms the ula operon was dedicated to the
catabolism of other, related metabolites, such as a different hexose phosphate. Subtle changes in the active site
might change the identity of the bound metal or the catalytic side chains, thereby modifying substrate specificity
and/or reaction selectivity. Furthermore, the environment of the microorganism and its metal homeostasis
[34] constrains the possible substrates, in addition to
creating selection pressures in favor of particular metabolic outcomes. Therefore, the question of the specific
function, among the relatively narrow set of choices
compatible with the phylogenetic analysis, of the ula
operon in each organism should be addressed in a species-specific fashion.
The combination of sequence searches with structural
information has allowed the restoration of the distant evolutionary history of UlaGL proteins, whereby the most
prominent feature is the relatedness of modern metabolic
UlaGL enzymes with the widespread RNase Z essential
enzyme. This relation strongly suggests that the forerunner to the modern UlaGL sequences was an RNase that
was present in the last common ancestor of Eubacteria,
Archea, and Eukarya. Key differences between these two
protein families are the acquisition by UlaGL of N- and/or
C-terminal sequences governing their quaternary architectures and the presence of multiple insertions/deletions in
the loops that extend over the active site. The abstraction
of the conserved sequence-structure features between
UlaGL and RNase Z permits the reconstruction of even
more distant (diverged) phylogenetic relationships of
UlaGL with Zn2+-dependent hydrolases and oxidorreductases. The latter enzymes have previously been noted, on
the basis of strict structure conservation, to form an independent lineage loosely termed class B3 b-lactamases and
distinct from class B1+B2 b-lactamases [14]. Although
structure-based profiles and sequence alignments were
required to reliably establish the evolutionary relatedness
between UlaGL and RNase Z, it is interesting to consider
that the accumulation of high-quality sequencing data for
many different species made it possible to retrieve at least
one RNase Z sequence on iteration 1 (and later iterations)
from sequence-only searches of E. coli UlaG using PSIBLAST. This sequence is from the Crenarcheota Pyrobaculum spp., with E-score of 1 × 10-4, 24% sequence identity and 40% sequence similarity (over 201 amino-acid
residues). Another putative homologous sequence that
appears in PSI-BLAST searches but whose reliability has
not been assessed owing to a lack of a crystal structure is

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

the membrane protein RomA, which participates in multidrug efflux. Interestingly, RomA from diverse pathogenic
bacteria appears repeatedly in PSI-BLAST searches with
scores that are marginally better to those of Pyrobaculum
spp. RNase Z (E-score 7 × 10-4, 25% sequence identity,
41% sequence similarity, over 269 amino-acid residues).
Finally, direct structure comparison will be required to
establish that UlaGL and RomA transporters share a common ancestor and to rule out other possible scenarios for
the sequence similarity observed.
Some structural features of UlaG stand in stark contrast with the overall fold plan of MBL RNA-processing
enzymes, including the oligomerization motifs and the
presence and location of putative substrate-binding elements. This distant homology detected only at the structural level allows us to put forward a hypothesis
whereby the ancient fold type of MBLs, possibly devoted
to an essential function in relation to RNA processing,
has been duplicated and modified to accommodate new
substrate specificities and new reactivities. Indeed, UlaG
still retains measurable phosphodiesterase activity
toward cyclic nucleotides as a side reaction [18].
Our phylogenetic analysis of the UlaGL family has
allowed the definition of the structural and sequence features constituting the UlaGL fold and that differentiate it
from other related MBLs. Since these features are derived
in part from the available crystal structures and in part
from systematic sequence searches, they have predictive
power for comparative modeling for sequences from
unknown structure. Indeed, most UlaGL close homologs
can be confidently modeled (Figure 7). Our modeling
exercise has confirmed that the distinctive hexameric
complex is well conserved. The buried surface areas, surface complementary, and number of interface interactions are no less indicative of a strong interaction than
for the two reference structures. Further details on the
modeled sequences and evidence that the structures
could exist as hexameric complexes are given in Additional files 13 and 14. No attempt was made to model
sequences that did not have identities above 50% and for
which the similarity did not extend along the complete
length of the protein sequence.
The structure-guided phylogenetic analysis that we
have performed shows that the diversity of sequences
related evolutionarily to UlaG is much greater than previously anticipated. UlaGLs are present in several bacterial lineages, from mammalian symbionts to free-living
marine bacteria, and are found even among archeal and
eukaryotic sequences. By combining available crystal
structures with molecular evolution methods we have
provided solid support to the idea that the modern
UlaGL family of carbohydrate and vitamin metabolism
originated from an ancient RNA processing enzyme by
the addition of N and C-terminal oligomerization motifs

Page 17 of 22

and the specialization of its active site. The spread of
UlaGL (along the ula regulon) among symbiotic and
pathogenic bacteria by HGT, which is supported by our
Bayesian and maximum likelihood tree reconstructions,
suggests that UlaGL may have conferred a growth advantage under some environmental and community pressures. Finally, the analysis presented here, combined with
future ones gathered from all sequence and structure
data that will be generated, will afford a better understanding of the UlaGL family and, by extension, of other
subfamilies of the wide MBL trunk of sequence space.

Conclusions
The emergence of new functions from pre-existing folds
by gene duplication and divergence of the new copy represents an enormous source of genetic variation in prokaryotic genomes, which is further expanded by HGT and
genomic rearrangement events. The gene encoding UlaG
in commensal and symbiotic enterobacteria of the human
gastrointestinal tract is an example of the result of an
ancient gene duplication event from a gene which may
have had an essential RNA metabolizing function in the
last common ancestor of Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya.
Our phylogenetic analyses, based both on sequence-only
and structure-guided multiple sequence alignments, provide solid support for this hypothesis, and reveal a greater
phylogenetic distribution for genes encoding UlaGL than
previously anticipated, including the possibility of multiple
independent gene duplications along bacterial and archeal
lineages, as well as of lineage-specific gene loss. On the
basis of these analyses, we propose that the ancestral
RNase-encoding gene adopted its new metabolic role in
the context of L-ascorbate metabolism by grafting both N
and C-terminal motifs onto the RNase scaffold while
extensively modifying the active-site loops responsible for
binding the metal and substrate(s) and exerting the catalytic function(s). This scenario, i.e. the creation of new functions by modification of the extremes and critical
functional loops in the core of a pre-existing MBL domain,
as well as by selection of a more suitable metal ion (an
aspect frequently overlooked in MBL enzymes in favor of
an assumed Zn2+ metal center), might provide clues as to
the parts of an MBL protein sequence that can accommodate most variation and therefore represent important
determinants of, for example, the generation of new antibiotic resistance mechanisms.
Methods
Generation of the UlaGL sequence data sets

In order to restrict the initial phylogenetic analysis to the
set of core UlaG orthologs, we searched the NCBI nr database with BLASTP [39] applying an E-value < 1 × 10-10
and a match length > 75% of the query length (265 amino
acids). Of the 220 sequences found to fulfill the E-value

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

criterion, 91% or 201 sequences had an aligned length
greater than 265 residues. This last criterion proved crucial to prune sequences that retained homology to the
core MBL domain while having lost several UlaG characteristic features, such as the 20-amino-acid residue Nterminal and the C-terminal oligomerization motifs. The
201 single copy genes that met these homology criteria
were further trimmed on the basis of sequence identity
(sequences with > 50% sequence identity were retained)
and pruned from duplicated sequences; the resultant
group, containing 175 sequences, was used for phylogenetic reconstruction. Concatenated sequences of these 175
genes were aligned using ClustalX v. 10.0.2 [40] or Muscle
v. 3.6 [41] and Gblocks v. 0.91b [42] was applied to edit
the alignment to remove gaps and poorly aligned regions.
The final alignment contained 333 aligned amino acid
characters of the original 415 (80%).
We then sought to find more distantly related UlaGL
sequences by searching the NCBI protein and nucleotide
sequence databases for fully sequenced genomes (December 2008) using either PSI-BLAST (BLASTP v. 2.2.24+,
non-redundant protein databases, 1000 maximum target
sequences, profile-inclusion threshold of expected Evalue 0.005, four iterations) or tBLASTn (translated
nucleotide databases) from the NCBI Blast2 interface
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) [39]. After the
initial sequence collection, the full NCBI database was
probed with individual UlaG homologous sequences to
enhance the chances of Finding sequences related to particularly divergent MBLs and to better define the range
of organisms containing these proteins. Sequences were
aligned with ClustalX or Muscle with default alignment
parameters and unnecessary gaps and poorly aligned
regions were pruned with Gblocks. The subset of archeal
UlaGL homologs were selected from the original multispecies alignment, re-aligned to emphasize archeal-specific sequence features, and prune with Gblocks for phylogenetic purposes. The archeal UlaGL alignment had 264
aligned amino acid characters from 17 taxa.
To retrieve even more distant UlaGL sequences, we
first constructed a structure-based sequence alignment
using the superimposed homologous structures identified with PDBeFold [30] (see below) and used this alignment, with 5 sequences and 232 aligned amino acid
residues, as seed for the calculation with HMMER v. 3.0
(http://hmmer.org/) of a profile hidden Markov model
(HMM) [33]. This HMM profile was then queried
against the NCBI nr database with default parameters to
retrieve sequences with significant similarity to the profile HMM. For a representative subset of 30 RNase Z
sequences identified by HMMER with high E-values (<
1-10) we built a pruned multiple sequence alignment as
described above (Figure 6).

Page 18 of 22

A complete listing of bacterial sequences, taxonomy,
accession numbers and their sequence identities with
respect to E. coli UlaGL is provided as Additional file 3.
The complete sequence sets and corresponding alignments are provided as Additional files 4, 5 and 6, and 9,
10 and 11.
Phylogenetic tree generation

Maximum likelihood (ML) and Bayesian Inference (BI)
phylogenetic analysis were carried out with RAxML v.
7.0.4. [43] and MrBayes v. 3.1.2 [44], respectively, using
the concatenated multi-species alignment files for the
complete UlaGL bacterial orthologous sequences (Figure
3), the archeal homologous sequences (Figure 5), and
the distant MBL RNase Z alignment (Figure 8). RAxML
was run with the PROTCATWAG model, with 100
bootstrap replicates. Bayesian consensus trees were generated with MrBayes using amino acid substitution rates
and state frequencies fixed to the WAG parameters
[45]. A uniform (0.0, 200.0) prior was assumed for the
shape parameter of the gamma distribution of substitution rates [46], an unconstrained exponential prior with
rate 10.0 for branch lengths, and all labeled topologies
were a priori equally probable. Four independent
MCMC analyses were run, each with one cold chain
and three heated chains, with the incremental heating
schema implemented in MrBayes (l= 0.2). Convergence
was assumed after the topology of the samples from the
two cold chains had reached an average standard deviation of split frequencies (SDSF) of less than 0.01 (after
5,032,000 generations). The resulting trees were drawn
with FigTree (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/).
No significant changes in the topology of the trees were
observed when comparing the RaxML and MrBayes
results, although differences in statistically unsupported
regions of the trees were common.
In addition to the complete bacterial UlaGL tree, a
tree containing a set of gammaproteobacterial species
was generated with Tree-Puzzle v. 5.2 [47] using established methods [22,23]. The congruence between the
UlaGL tree and the species tree was assessed by the Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH) [48] test as implemented in the
same software package.
All phylogenetic trees are provided as Additional files
7, 8 and 12.
Genomic context

Genomic context was retrieved from the Entrez database
[49], where records were available, or via the CDS
records with the NCBI genome entry. Transcription
orientation was consulted with EnsemblBacteria (http://
bacteria.ensembl.org/) or the Genome Reviews tool
(http://www.genomereviews.ebi.ac.uk/).

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

Page 19 of 22

Figure 8 Sequence alignment of UlaGL/RNase Z homologs. Multiple sequence alignment of E. coli UlaG and homologous RNase Z
sequences from selected Bacteria and Archea, with secondary structure overlaid above. Residues in contact with Mn2+ in E. coli UlaG are
indicated with gray asterisks, and key histidine and aspartate residues in MBL conserved motifs I-V are marked with orange and purple asterisks,
respectively.

Structural comparisons and modeling

Structural homologs of UlaG were found with PDBeFold
[30] using the crystal structures of apo- and Mn2+-loaded
E. coli UlaG (PDB ID 2wyl and 2wym, respectively) [18]
with default cut-off parameters (70% identity of secondary structure in the target and the query) as search
probes. Modeling of homologous hexameric UlaGL
structures were performed with MODELLER-9v8 [50]
and Rosetta v. 3.2 [51,52] using customized python
scripts and pair-wise sequence alignments extracted from
the multiple sequence alignments used for phylogenetic

analyses (see above). In MODELLER-9v8, 100 models
were generated using the standard ‘automodel’ with additional symmetry restraints to keep similar conformations
for each chain of the hexamer. The models were assessed
using Z-DOPE, a normalized atomic distance-dependent
statistical potential based on known protein structures.
The Z-DOPE scores ranged from -1.11 to -1.62, where a
score less than -1 indicates a ‘reliable’ model (i.e., 80% of
its Ca atoms are within 3.5 Å of their correct positions).
Hexameric models with the best Z-DOPE scores were
subjected to loop refinement of the residues involved in

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

the oligomerization motifs (Figure 1). For each loop, 50
models were generated using the ‘loop’ routine of MODELLER (with additional symmetry restraints, as above).
The final loop conformations were then selected based
on their Z-DOPE scores. Finally, the best models were
subjected to side chain refinement using SCWRL4 [53].
Although some post side chain refinement models had
worse Z-DOPE scores than unrefined models, they exhibited better stereochemistry (Additional file 13) and are
therefore likely to be more accurate than the unrefined
models. The Z-DOPE scores for the final refined hexameric models ranged from -1.20 to -1.68. Not surprisingly, the control hexameric crystal structures (PDB
codes 2wym and 3bv6) received the best scores (-2.10
and -1.84, respectively). Stereochemistry was assessed
using MolProbity [54]. In addition, for each hexamer
model, the interfaces were evaluated with ModTie, a residue contact statistical potential derived from binary
domain interfaces in known structures (Additional file
13) [55]. Interface Z scores that are less than -2 indicate a
‘possible’ surface. The interfaces of all hexamers scored
lower than -2, and the scores were not appreciably correlated with the percent identity to the template structures.
The analysis of surface area and shape complementarity
(Additional file 14), as well as all figures showing structures and superpositions, were carried out with PISA [56]
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/prot_int/pistart.html) and
PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org/).

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Genetic organization and transcriptional
direction of the utilization of L-ascorbate (ula) regulon in Escherichia coli
and encoded structural genes.
Additional file 2: Figure S2. Catabolism of L-ascorbate 6-phosphate in
enterobacteria and established catalytic activity of E. coli UlaG.
Additional file 3: Table S1. Sequences included in the phylogenetic
analyses.
Additional file 4: Bacterial UlaGL sequences. FASTA file containing the
complete set of bacterial UlaGL sequences.
Additional file 5: Filtered multiple sequence alignment of bacterial
UlaGL sequences. Multiple sequence alignment of bacterial UlaGL
sequences in FASTA format prior to Gblocks filtering.
Additional file 6: Unfiltered multiple sequence alignment of
bacterial UlaGL sequences. Multiple sequence alignment of bacterial
UlaGL sequences in FASTA format after Gblocks filtering, used for
phylogenetic reconstruction.
Additional file 7: Phylogenetic tree of bacterial UlaGL. Majority rule
consensus tree of bacterial UlaGL sequences calculated with MrBayes
and RAxML (used to prepare Figure 3). Nodes are labeled with BIPP
(Bayesian inference posterior probability) and MLBP (maximum-likelihood
bootstrap percentage).
Additional file 8: Gammaproteobacterial species tree used for
comparison with UlaGL tree. Phylogenetic tree constructed from a set
of representative Gammaproteobacteria species that encode UlaGL, used
for the evaluation of potential HGT events between related
gammaproteobacterial species. Internal nodes are labeled with

Page 20 of 22

maximum-likelihood branch length support (MLBL). Tree was calculated
with Tree-Puzzle v. 5.2
Additional file 9: Archeal UlaGL sequences. FASTA file containing the
set of archeal UlaGL sequences.
Additional file 10: Unfiltered multiple sequence alignment of
archeal UlaGL sequences. Multiple sequence alignment of archeal
UlaGL sequences in FASTA format prior to Gblocks filtering.
Additional file 11: Filtered multiple sequence alignment of archeal
UlaGL sequences. Multiple sequence alignment of archeal UlaGL
sequences in FASTA format after Gblocks filtering, used for phylogenetic
reconstruction.
Additional file 12: Phylogenetic tree of archeal UlaGL. Majority rule
consensus tree of archeal UlaGL sequences (using two eubacterial
sequences as outgroups) calculated with MrBayes and RAxML (used to
prepare Figure 5). Nodes are labeled with BIPP (Bayesian inference posterior
probability) and MLBP (maximum-likelihood bootstrap percentage).
Additional file 13: Table S2. Homology modeling, interfaces, and
geometry validation of UlaGL homology models generated with
MODELLER-9v8.
Additional file 14: Table S3. Analysis of buried contact area by PISA of
reference structures and homology models generated with MODELLER-9v8.

List of abbreviations
(BSA): buried surface area; (GIT): gastrointestinal tract; (HGT): horizontal gene
transfer; (HMM): Hidden Markov model; (MBL): Metallo-beta-lactamase; (r.m.s.
d.): root mean-square deviation; (TIM): Triose phosphate isomerase; (ula):
utilization of L-ascorbate; (UlaGL): UlaG-like.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation
(MICINN) (grants PET2008_0101, BIO2009-11184 and BFU2010-22260-C02-02
to MCV, grant BFU2010-22260-C02-01 to LB, and grants BFU2008-02372/BMC
and CSD2006-00023 to MC), the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC)
(grant PIE-2008-20I056 to MCV), and the Generalitat de Catalunya (grant
2009SGR-1309 to MC). FJF and MLE were supported by the MICINN grant
PET2008-0101 and a fellowship (ME-517217) from the Spanish Ministry of
Education, respectively. MLE acknowledges the support of the Ph.D. program
in Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biomedicine of the Universidad
Complutense de Madrid (UCM). The authors thank the Galicia
Supercomputing Center (CESGA) for the provision of computational support.
Author details
1
Structural and Quantitative Biology Department, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040 Madrid, Spain. 2Genome
Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, BN1
9RQ, UK. 3Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Institut de
Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Facultat de Farmàcia,
Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. 4Institut de Biologia
Molecular de Barcelona (IBMB-CSIC), Barcelona Science Park, Baldiri Reixac 10,
08028 Barcelona, Spain. 5Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB
Barcelona), Barcelona Science Park, Baldiri Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
Authors’ contributions
FJF performed most structural and phylogenetic analyses and edited the
manuscript. FG and MLE participated in the structural analysis. JA, LB, MC
and JB edited the manuscript. MCV conceived and designed the overall
study, supervised all analyses and wrote the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 21 June 2011 Accepted: 26 September 2011
Published: 26 September 2011
References
1. Lynch M, Conery JS: The evolutionary fate and consequences of
duplicate genes. Science 2000, 290(5494):1151-1155.

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.

11.

12.
13.
14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.

24.

25.
26.

Ohno S: Evolution by Gene Duplication. Heidelberg, Germany: SpringerVerlag; 1970.
Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP: Horizontal gene transfer and the
evolution of transcriptional regulation in Escherichia coli. Genome Biol
2008, 9(1):R4.
Juhas M, van der Meer JR, Gaillard M, Harding RM, Hood DW, Crook DW:
Genomic islands: tools of bacterial horizontal gene transfer and
evolution. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2009, 33(2):376-393.
Chothia C, Gough J, Vogel C, Teichmann SA: Evolution of the protein
repertoire. Science 2003, 300(5626):1701-1703.
Hall BG, Xu L: Nucleotide sequence, function, activation, and evolution of
the cryptic asc operon of Escherichia coli K12. Mol Biol Evol 1992,
9(4):688-706.
Olson MV: When less is more: gene loss as an engine of evolutionary
change. Am J Hum Genet 1999, 64(1):18-23.
Moran NA: Microbial minimalism: genome reduction in bacterial
pathogens. Cell 2002, 108(5):583-586.
Marais GA, Calteau A, Tenaillon O: Mutation rate and genome reduction
in endosymbiotic and free-living bacteria. Genetica 2008, 134(2):205-210.
Giovannoni SJ, Tripp HJ, Givan S, Podar M, Vergin KL, Baptista D, Bibbs L,
Eads J, Richardson TH, Noordewier M, et al: Genome streamlining in a
cosmopolitan oceanic bacterium. Science 2005, 309(5738):1242-1245.
Xu J, Mahowald MA, Ley RE, Lozupone CA, Hamady M, Martens EC,
Henrissat B, Coutinho PM, Minx P, Latreille P, et al: Evolution of symbiotic
bacteria in the distal human intestine. PLoS Biol 2007, 5(7):e156.
Schmidt MA: LEEways: tales of EPEC, ATEC and EHEC. Cell Microbiol 2010,
12(11):1544-1552.
Jackson RW, Johnson LJ, Clarke SR, Arnold DL: Bacterial pathogen
evolution: breaking news. Trends in genetics: TIG 2011, 27(1):32-40.
Bebrone C: Metallo-beta-lactamases (classification, activity, genetic
organization, structure, zinc coordination) and their superfamily. Biochem
Pharmacol 2007, 74(12):1686-1701.
Ma BG, Chen L, Ji HF, Chen ZH, Yang FR, Wang L, Qu G, Jiang YY, Ji C,
Zhang HY: Characters of very ancient proteins. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2008, 366(3):607-611.
Vega MC, Lorentzen E, Linden A, Wilmanns M: Evolutionary markers in the
(beta/alpha)8-barrel fold. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2003, 7(6):694-701.
Ranea JA, Sillero A, Thornton JM, Orengo CA: Protein superfamily
evolution and the last universal common ancestor (LUCA). J Mol Evol
2006, 63(4):513-525.
Garces F, Fernandez FJ, Montella C, Penya-Soler E, Prohens R, Aguilar J,
Baldoma L, Coll M, Badia J, Vega MC: Molecular architecture of the Mn2
+-dependent lactonase UlaG reveals an RNase-like metallo-betalactamase fold and a novel quaternary structure. J Mol Biol 2010,
398(5):715-729.
Garces F, Fernandez FJ, Perez-Luque R, Aguilar J, Baldoma L, Coll M, Badia J,
Vega MC: Overproduction, crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis
of the putative L-ascorbate-6-phosphate lactonase UlaG from
Escherichia coli. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun 2008,
64(Pt 1):36-38.
Campos E, Baldoma L, Aguilar J, Badia J: Regulation of expression of the
divergent ulaG and ulaABCDEF operons involved in LaAscorbate
dissimilation in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 2004, 186(6):1720-1728.
Garces F, Fernandez FJ, Gomez AM, Perez-Luque R, Campos E, Prohens R,
Aguilar J, Baldoma L, Coll M, Badia J, et al: Quaternary structural
transitions in the DeoR-type repressor UlaR control transcriptional
readout from the L-ascorbate utilization regulon in Escherichia coli.
Biochemistry 2008, 47(44):11424-11433.
Price MN, Arkin AP, Alm EJ: The life-cycle of operons. PLoS Genet 2006,
2(6):e96.
Lerat E, Daubin V, Moran NA: From gene trees to organismal phylogeny
in prokaryotes: the case of the gamma-Proteobacteria. PLoS Biol 2003,
1(1):E19.
Gupta RS: Protein phylogenies and signature sequences: A reappraisal of
evolutionary relationships among archaebacteria, eubacteria, and
eukaryotes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1998, 62(4):1435-1491.
Aravind L: An evolutionary classification of the metallo-beta-lactamase
fold proteins. In Silico Biol 1999, 1(2):69-91.
Moreno-Hagelsieb G, Trevino V, Perez-Rueda E, Smith TF, Collado-Vides J:
Transcription unit conservation in the three domains of life: a
perspective from Escherichia coli. Trends Genet 2001, 17(4):175-177.

Page 21 of 22

27. Harmon-Smith M, Celia L, Chertkov O, Lapidus A, Copeland A, Glavina Del
Rio T, Nolan M, Lucas S, Tice H, Cheng JF, et al: Complete genome
sequence of Sebaldella termitidis type strain (NCTC 11300). Stand
Genomic Sci 2010, 2(2):220-227.
28. Hubner S, Declerck N, Diethmaier C, Le Coq D, Aymerich S, Stulke J:
Prevention of cross-talk in conserved regulatory systems: identification
of specificity determinants in RNA-binding anti-termination proteins of
the BglG family. Nucleic acids research 2011.
29. Demuth JP, Hahn MW: The life and death of gene families. Bioessays 2009,
31(1):29-39.
30. Krissinel E, Henrick K: Secondary-structure matching (SSM), a new tool for
fast protein structure alignment in three dimensions. Acta Crystallogr D
Biol Crystallogr 2004, 60(Pt 12 Pt 1):2256-2268.
31. Mandel CR, Kaneko S, Zhang H, Gebauer D, Vethantham V, Manley JL,
Tong L: Polyadenylation factor CPSF-73 is the pre-mRNA 3’-endprocessing endonuclease. Nature 2006, 444(7121):953-956.
32. de la Sierra-Gallay IL, Pellegrini O, Condon C: Structural basis for substrate
binding, cleavage and allostery in the tRNA maturase RNase Z. Nature
2005, 433(7026):657-661.
33. Eddy SR: A probabilistic model of local sequence alignment that
simplifies statistical significance estimation. PLoS computational biology
2008, 4(5):e1000069.
34. Waldron KJ, Robinson NJ: How do bacterial cells ensure that
metalloproteins get the correct metal? Nat Rev Microbiol 2009, 7(1):25-35.
35. consortium U: The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic
Acids Res 2010, 38(Database issue):D142-148.
36. Rajewsky N, Socci ND, Zapotocky M, Siggia ED: The evolution of DNA
regulatory regions for proteo-gamma bacteria by interspecies
comparisons. Genome Res 2002, 12(2):298-308.
37. Teichmann SA, Babu MM: Gene regulatory network growth by
duplication. Nat Genet 2004, 36(5):492-496.
38. Lozada-Chavez I, Janga SC, Collado-Vides J: Bacterial regulatory networks
are extremely flexible in evolution. Nucleic Acids Res 2006,
34(12):3434-3445.
39. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
40. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, et al: Clustal W and
Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics 2007, 23(21):2947-2948.
41. Edgar RC: MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(5):1792-1797.
42. Castresana J: Selection of conserved blocks from multiple alignments for
their use in phylogenetic analysis. Mol Biol Evol 2000, 17(4):540-552.
43. Stamatakis A: RAxML-VI-HPC: maximum likelihood-based phylogenetic
analyses with thousands of taxa and mixed models. Bioinformatics 2006,
22(21):2688-2690.
44. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(12):1572-1574.
45. Whelan S, Goldman N: A general empirical model of protein evolution
derived from multiple protein families using a maximum-likelihood
approach. Mol Biol Evol 2001, 18(5):691-699.
46. Yang Z: Maximum-likelihood estimation of phylogeny from DNA
sequences when substitution rates differ over sites. Mol Biol Evol 1993,
10(6):1396-1401.
47. Schmidt HA, Strimmer K, Vingron M, von Haeseler A: TREE-PUZZLE:
maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis using quartets and parallel
computing. Bioinformatics 2002, 18(3):502-504.
48. Shimodaira H, Hasegawa M: Multiple comparisons of log-likelihoods with
applications to phylogenetic interference. Mol Biol Evol 1999,
16:1114-1116.
49. Maglott D, Ostell J, Pruitt KD, Tatusova T: Entrez Gene: gene-centered
information at NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35(Database issue):D26-31.
50. Eswar N, Eramian D, Webb B, Shen MY, Sali A: Protein structure modeling
with MODELLER. Methods Mol Biol 2008, 426:145-159.
51. Kaufmann KW, Lemmon GH, Deluca SL, Sheehan JH, Meiler J: Practically
useful: what the Rosetta protein modeling suite can do for you.
Biochemistry 2010, 49(14):2987-2998.
52. Kim DE, Chivian D, Baker D: Protein structure prediction and analysis
using the Robetta server. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(Web Server issue):
W526-531.

Fernandez et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011, 11:273
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/11/273

Page 22 of 22

53. Krivov GG, Shapovalov MV, Dunbrack RL Jr: Improved prediction of protein
side-chain conformations with SCWRL4. Proteins 2009, 77(4):778-795.
54. Davis IW, Leaver-Fay A, Chen VB, Block JN, Kapral GJ, Wang X, Murray LW,
Arendall WB, Snoeyink J, Richardson JS, et al: MolProbity: all-atom contacts
and structure validation for proteins and nucleic acids. Nucleic acids
research 2007, 35(Web Server issue):W375-383.
55. Davis FP, Braberg H, Shen MY, Pieper U, Sali A, Madhusudhan MS: Protein
complex compositions predicted by structural similarity. Nucleic acids
research 2006, 34(10):2943-2952.
56. Krissinel E, Henrick K: Inference of macromolecular assemblies from
crystalline state. J Mol Biol 2007, 372(3):774-797.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-273
Cite this article as: Fernandez et al.: The UlaG protein family defines
novel structural and functional motifs grafted on an ancient RNase fold.
BMC Evolutionary Biology 2011 11:273.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
