<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title> </title>
<meta name="Subject" content=" "/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content=" "/>
<meta name="Creator" content=" "/>
<meta name="Producer" content=" "/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

METHODOLOGY

Open Access

Targeted electroporation of defined lateral
ventricular walls: a novel and rapid method to
study fate specification during postnatal forebrain
neurogenesis
María E Fernández1, Simona Croce1, Camille Boutin2, Harold Cremer2 and Olivier Raineteau1*

Abstract
Background: Postnatal olfactory bulb (OB) neurogenesis involves the generation of granule and periglomerular
cells by neural stem cells (NSCs) located in the walls of the lateral ventricle (LV). Recent studies show that NSCs
located in different regions of the LV give rise to different types of OB neurons. However, the molecular
mechanisms governing neuronal specification remain largely unknown and new methods to approach these
questions are needed.
Results: In this study, we refine electroporation of the postnatal forebrain as a technique to perform precise and
accurate delivery of transgenes to NSCs located in distinct walls of the LV in the mouse. Using this method, we
confirm and expand previous studies showing that NSCs in distinct walls of the LV produce neurons that invade
different layers of the OB. Fate mapping of the progeny of radial glial cells located in these distinct LV walls reveals
their specification into defined subtypes of granule and periglomerular neurons.
Conclusions: Our results provide a baseline with which future studies aiming at investigating the role of factors in
postnatal forebrain neuronal specification can be compared. Targeted electroporation of defined LV NSC
populations will prove valuable to study the genetic factors involved in forebrain neuronal specification.

Background
Because of its persisting neurogenesis throughout life,
the olfactory bulb (OB) is a region of particular interest
to study the development and continuous remodeling of
neuronal circuits.
Granule cells and periglomerular (PG) cells are the
two main classes of OB inhibitory interneurons that
continue to be generated after birth from stem cells
located in the subventricular zone (SVZ). The peak of
granule cell production occurs during the first postnatal
week [1]. PG interneurons can be divided into different
subtypes based on their expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) or of the calcium binding proteins calretinin
(CR) or calbindin (CB) [2]. These populations of PG
interneurons have different temporal origins, with birth
* Correspondence: raineteau@hifo.uzh.ch
1
Brain Research Institute, University of Zürich/ETHZ, CH-8057 Zürich,
Switzerland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

of dopaminergic (TH+) neurons predominating during
embryonic development, and birth of interneurons
expressing CR predominating in adult stages [3]. At
early postnatal stages, however, the three subtypes of
PG interneurons are produced in equal quantities [3].
Recent studies have revealed continuity in the development of forebrain germinal zones, with many regions
of the embryonic neuroepithelium (that is, the medial
and lateral ganglionic eminence as well as the pallium)
contributing to the adult SVZ [4]. In agreement with
their distinct developmental origin, the lateral ventricle
(LV) walls contain progenitor populations that are
biased to acquire defined OB neuronal fates [4-6]. This
early specification appears to reflect an intrinsic property of the cells, as defined by ectopic transplantation
experiments [5,6].
Together, these observations raise important questions
on the plastic potential of SVZ progenitors as well as on
the transcriptional regulation of neuronal specification

© 2011 Fernández et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

in the postnatal OB. Unraveling the transcriptional cues
acting in the specification of OB interneurons necessitates the establishment of new techniques that would
allow rapid and accurate manipulation of single or multiple genes in defined regions of the LV. Electroporation
has recently appeared as an efficient means to deliver
transgenes into resident NSCs of the postnatal and, to a
lesser extent, of the adult forebrain [7-9]. This technique
has rapidly become the method of choice to manipulate
gene expression in NSCs of the postnatal forebrain, permitting the study of factors influencing the maintenance
of SVZ neural stem cell (NSC) pools [10], the control of
newborn neuron differentiation [11], and the survival of
migrating neuroblasts [12].
Here we refine and improve the electroporation technique by showing that it can be accurately and reproducibly used to target transgene delivery to specific walls
of the LV. Furthermore, we fate map the progeny of

Page 2 of 12

radial glial cells (RGC); the perinatal neural stem cells)
located in distinct walls of the postnatal LV, providing a
baseline with which future studies aiming at investigating the role of factors in neuronal specification can be
compared.

Results
Spatial accuracy of electroporation using electrodes of
different diameters

We first compared the efficiency of transfection and the
spatial distribution of electroporated cells using tweezer
electrodes of 5 or 10 mm diameter placed on both sides
of the animal head (Figure 1A).
For this, we assessed the number of RGCs expressing
GFP 1 day after the electroporation of a GFP-encoding
plasmid (Figure 1B); throughout the rostro-caudal extent
of the LV. For the analysis, one out of every three sections from the most rostral portion of the LV (that is,

Figure 1 Electroporation efficiency using electrodes of different sizes. (A) Schematic representation of the position and size (10 mm and 5
mm) of the electrodes used in the first part of this study. Only the positive pole is represented. (B) Representative example of electroporated
radial glial cells (RGCs) expressing high levels of GFP at 1 day post-electroporation. The right panel shows a higher magnification of the region
surrounded by the dotted box. Only cells with clear RGC morphology, that is, with an end foot contacting the ventricle surface and a main
apical process, were counted. DAPI (blue) was used as a nuclear counterstain. (C,D) Measurements of the electroporated area (C) and of the
number of electroporated RGCs (D) when 10-mm (filled bar) or 5-mm (hatched bars) diameter electrodes were used. Please refer to Materials
and methods and Additional file 1 for experimental details. Note that the use of smaller electrodes does not improve the precision of
electroporation (that is, did not decrease the electroporated area size), but tend to decrease the number of electroporated cells. Error bars
represent standard error of the mean. Scale bars: 50 μm and 10 μm in (B) (left and right panels, respectively). LV, lateral ventricle.

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

before the ventricle opens) up to the emergence of the
dentate gyrus was considered, representing approximately 1.25 mm of tissue. On each section, the brain
and ventricle outlines were drawn using the Neurolucida
software (mbf Bioscience Williston, Vermont, USA
Additional file 1). Next, the position of GFP+ RGCs
(Figure 1B) was superimposed on the drawings, and a
line defining the extension of the electroporated area
was added (Additional file 1). A three-dimensional
representation of the drawing was generated using Neurolucida explorer, allowing accurate measurement of the
electroporated area and a three-dimensional reconstruction to be made (Figure 2B).
Using this approach, we found that lateral electroporation using a 10- or 5-mm diameter electrode resulted in
comparable electroporated areas (Figure 1C; 0.64 ± 0.09
mm2 and 0.55 ± 0.17 mm2, respectively, P = 0.64). However, the number of electroporated RGCs was approximately halved when 5-mm diameter tweezer electrodes
were used, although this difference was not statistically
significant (Figure 1D; 47 ± 12 versus 104.4 ± 47, n = 5
animals, P = 0.27).
Together, these initial observations indicate that the
use of tweezer electrodes with a smaller diameter does
not increase the spatial accuracy of electroporation of
the LV. Furthermore, larger electrodes allow the transfection of a higher number of cells. The use of 10-mm
electrodes was therefore preferred and used for all subsequent experiments.
Efficient electroporation of the distinct LV walls

In light of recent studies showing the contribution of
distinct LV walls to OB neurogenesis [4,5], we next
tested if transgenes could be accurately delivered to
defined walls of the LV by electroporation.
Tweezer electrodes were placed on both sides of pups’
heads, and the positive electrode was differentially
oriented to target the distinct walls of the LV (Figure
2A). The efficiency of transfection as well as the transfected area was measured 1 day post-electroporation
(dpe), as explained above. All electrode positions
resulted in efficient electroporation of RGCs in large
areas of the LV (Figure 2B; Additional files 2, 3 and 4,
which show rotating three-dimensional reconstructions
of the electroporated area obtained with the three electrode positions). However, we could observe differences
between the experimental groups regarding the respective sizes of the electroporated areas. Dorsal electroporation resulted in the smallest electroporated area (0.53
mm2 ± 0.12), followed by the septal (0.65 mm2 ± 0.12),
and lateral electroporation (1.16 mm 2 ± 0.22) (Figure
2C).
Analysis of the total number of GFP+ RGCs revealed
that dorsal electroporation resulted in the largest

Page 3 of 12

number of electroporated RGCs (620 ± 140 GFP+ cells),
while septal electroporation resulted in the electroporation of 316 ± 24 cells and lateral electroporation
resulted in the smallest number of electroporated cells
(173 ± 54 GFP+ cells) (Figure 2D).
To assess the accuracy of the targeted electroporation,
we analyzed the dorso-ventral distribution of the electroporated cells by counting the number of GFP+ RGCs
in five subregions, including the lateral, dorsal and septal walls of the LV (Figure 3A). We found that dorsal
electroporation resulted in an almost exclusive targeting
of cells in the dorsal region (98.5 ± 0.6% of the total
amount of cells; Figure 3A,C). Lateral electroporation
resulted in the targeting of the great majority of cells in
the lateral wall (91.8 ± 3.8%; Figure 3A,D), and septal
electroporation targeted 85.3 ± 5.6% of cells in the septal wall (Figure 3A,E). While the position of the electrodes to target the lateral and septal walls was very
ventral, it is worth noting that a greater proportion of
electroporated cells was found in the most dorsal
regions of these walls (Figure 3A,C-E). Analysis of the
rostro-caudal distribution of the GFP+ cells showed that
dorsal and lateral electroporation resulted in a higher
number of electroporated cells in the caudal regions of
the periventricular zone, while septal electroporation
resulted in GFP+ cells more evenly distributed throughout the rostro-caudal axis of the LV walls (Figure 3B-E).
Thus, reproducible specific targeting of each wall of
the ventricle can be achieved with a minimal contamination of the other walls by varying the positioning of the
electrodes around the head of the pup.
Fate of electroporated cells located in defined lateral
ventricle walls

RGCs generate committed neuroblasts that migrate to
the OB where they locally differentiate into different
subtypes of interneurons [13]. Two types of interneurons continue to be produced postnatally in the OB: PG
cells located in the glomerular layer (GL), and granule
neurons distributed throughout the mitral cell layer,
internal plexiform layer and granule cell layer (GCL).
We used targeted electroporation to analyze the contribution of RGCs located in the different walls of the
LV to the generation of diverse subpopulations of OB
interneurons. First, we analyzed at 21 dpe the distribution of GFP+ cells in five defined layers in the OB (the
peduncle, inner GCL, outer GCL, mitral cell layer/internal plexiform layer and GL).
Results show clear changes in the distribution of the
newly born neurons depending on their site of origin
(Figure 4). Whereas RGCs located in the lateral wall
generated mostly granule neurons (95.3 ± 1.3%), the
septal wall generated almost exclusively PG neurons
(88.8 ± 3.9%). Animals that were electroporated in the

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

Page 4 of 12

Figure 2 Electroporation efficiency using different electrode locations. (A) Schematic representation of the location of the electrodes used
in the second part of this study. Only the positive pole is represented. Note the very ventral location of the tweezer-electrode cathode to target
the lateral and septal wall of the lateral ventricle (LV), with no transfection of the dorsal wall. (B) Representative three-dimensional reconstruction
illustrating the location and extent of the electroporated area after electroporation (EPO) with the electrode position shown in (A). Gray contours,
brain; white contours, lateral ventricle; green contours, area containing electroporated cells. (C,D) Measurements of the electroporated area (C)
and of the number of electroporated RGCs (D) obtained with the three electrode positions tested. Error bars represent standard error of the
mean. *P < 0.05 as determined by unpaired t-test.

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

Page 5 of 12

Figure 3 Targeted electroporation of defined lateral ventricle wallS. (A) Quantification of the percentage of GFP+ RGCs in subregions of
the LV following lateral, dorsal and septal electroporation. Note the efficient targeting of distinct LV walls with different positioning of the
electrodes. The most ventral regions of the lateral and septal LV walls, however, show lower numbers of electroporated cells. Error bars represent
standard error of the mean. (B) Quantification of the percentage of GFP+ RGCs at defined rostro-caudal levels of the LV. (C-E) Representative
overviews of the distribution of electroporated (GFP+, green) cells at two rostro-caudal levels of the LV (that is, Bregma 1.4 mm and 0.2 mm).
DAPI (blue) was used as a nuclear counterstain. Scale bars: 1 mm. Ctx, cortex; EPO, electroporation; Sp, septum; Str, striatum.

dorsal wall showed an intermediate picture, with 32.2 ±
3.4% of the GFP+ cells becoming PG neurons, while
67.5 ± 3.5% acquired a granule cell fate. Among the
three groups of animals, only those electroporated in
the lateral wall generated a significant population of
deep granule cells, that is, cells in the inner GCL (30.92
± 2.70% versus 2.90 ± 1.51% versus 0.58 ± 0.52% in the
lateral, dorsal and septal wall electroporated groups,
respectively; P < 0.001). Very few GFP+ cells were found
in the peduncle (0.69 ± 0.41%, 0.38 ± 0.24% and 0.87 ±
0.78% arising from the lateral, dorsal and septal wall
electroporated groups, respectively), indicating that most
cells have reached their final location at this late time
point.
These results establish that, at the perinatal stage,
RGCs located in the dorsal wall of the LV give rise preferentially to neurons that populate the outer layers of
the OB, while RGCs situated in the lateral wall produce
neurons that remain in deeper layers of the OB. At this
age, the septal wall almost exclusively gives rise to neurons in the GL.

Second, we studied the specification of the progeny of
electroporated cells in the GL of the OB. Distinct nonoverlapping populations of PG interneurons can be
identified using the markers CR, TH and CB (Figure
5A-C). Again, clear differences in the subtypes of PG
neurons generated by defined walls of the LV were
observed (Figure 5D-E). Whereas only few GFP+ neurons generated by the lateral wall of the LV acquired a
CR+ phenotype (1.3 ± 1.3%), this number increased for
dorsal (29.5 ± 2.5%) and septal wall (59.1 ± 4.7%) electroporated animals (Figure 5D). A preferential dorsal
origin was observed for TH+ neurons, with 31.3 ± 4.9%
of GFP+ neurons originating from the dorsal wall of the
LV acquiring this marker, while only 18.3 ± 4.5% and
0.9 ± 0.6% of GFP+ neurons originating in the dorsal
and septal wall, respectively, expressed this marker (Figure 5E). Similarly, CB fate acquisition was mostly
observed for neurons originating from the lateral wall
(12.3 ± 2.4%), while only 5.1 ± 1.5% and 3.9 ± 2.3% of
GFP+ neurons originating in the dorsal and septal wall,
respectively, expressed this marker (Figure 5F). It should

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

Page 6 of 12

Figure 4 Radial glial cells located in defined walls of the postnatal lateral ventricle produce neurons that migrate to distinct layers of
the olfactory bulb. (A,B) Quantification of the percentage of GFP+ newborn neurons in defined layers of the OB at 21 dpe. The OB layers are
illustrated in (B). Error bars represent standard error of the mean. (C-E) Representative overviews of the distribution of newborn neurons in the
OB of laterally, dorsally, and septally electroporated animals. DAPI (blue) was used as a nuclear counterstain. Scale bars: 100 μm. GCL, granule cell
layer; EPO, electroporation; GL, glomerular layer; iPL, internal plexiform layer; MCL, mitral cell layer.

be noted, however, that the percentage of newborn neurons acquiring CB expression remained very low compared to those acquiring TH or CR expression.
We next investigated if differential specification of
granule CR+ neurons by defined LV walls paralleled
that of PG neurons. The generation of granule cell subtypes by distinct LV walls was less clear than for PG
neurons. Thus, whereas only 4.2 ± 2.2% of the granule
cells generated from the lateral wall of the LV were CR
+, larger numbers of CR+/GFP+ granule cells were generated from the dorsal and septal walls of the LV (17.9
± 3.9% and 16.4 ± 5.5%, respectively; Figure 6).
Together, these results demonstrate a clear linkage
between the regionalization of NSCs in the LV and the
location and specification of their progeny in the OB.
Thus, defined NSCs populations can be efficiently targeted by electroporation, allowing the genetic study of
neuronal specification in the postnatal forebrain.

Discussion
Over the past years, postnatal electroporation has
become an important tool to manipulate gene

expression in OB neural precursor cells. In this study
we further refine this method by showing that plasmid
delivery can be achieved with a high degree of accuracy
and minimal variability in the lateral, dorsal and septal
walls of the perinatal LV. Furthermore, we show that
neurons produced from these distinct regions migrate to
different OB layers and acquire defined subtype-specific
markers. This approach therefore provides optimal readouts for rapidly exploring molecular cues, and in particular transcriptional factors involved in the
establishment of LV organization as well as in the specification of different cell types in the postnatal forebrain.
Our results show that postnatal electroporation led to
efficient plasmid delivery into RGCs independently of
the area targeted. Decreasing the size of the electrodes
resulted in less GFP+ RGCs with no gain in precision.
Successfully transfected RGCs could be readily identified
because of their unique morphological characteristics,
that is, an end foot contacting the LV wall and an apical
process extending to the brain surface. Previous studies
have described in detail the phylogeny of RGCs and
their involvement in the generation of astrocytes,

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

Page 7 of 12

Figure 5 Radial glial cells located in defined walls of the lateral ventricle specify distinct periglomerular neuron subtypes. (A-C)
Representative immunostainings for the three neuronal subtype markers CR (A), TH (B), and CB (C). For all markers, a low magnification overview
with DAPI as a nuclear counterstain is shown (left panel), as well as confocal pictures showing higher magnifications of GFP+ neurons positive
for the three markers (right panels). (D-F) Quantification of the percentage of newborn neurons (that is, GFP+) expressing CR (D), TH (E) or CB
(F), which derived from the lateral (red), dorsal (gray) or septal (blue) LV walls. Error bars represent standard error of the mean. *P < 0.05; **P <
0.01; ***P < 0.001; determined by unpaired t-test. Scale bars: 50 μm, 30 μm and 10 μm in the left, middle and right panels, respectively. CB,
calbindin; CR, calretinin; EPO, electroporation; TH, tyrosin hydroxylase.

oligodendrocytes and neurons at different developmental
and postnatal stages [13-15]. At 21 dpe, RGCs from all
LV walls of the LVs gave rise to numerous neurons in
the OB. They differed, however, in their capacity to generate astrocytes and oligodendrocytes that remained in
the vicinity of the corresponding LV walls, with mostly
dorsal and septal wall RGCs giving rise to both cell
populations (data not shown), in agreement with a previous study [14]. Thus, in addition to studying neuronal
specification, targeted electroporation of the LV walls
may allow the study of the molecular cues governing
astrogenesis and oligodendrogenesis in the postnatal
forebrain.
Targeted electroporation of distinct LV walls revealed
clear differences in the spatial origin of granule cell subtypes. Granule cells of the OB can be classified by the
position of their cell body in the GCL [16]. Those that
have a cell body located in the innermost region of the
GCL (that is, deep granule cells) present dendritic
arborizations that ramify in the deep external plexiform
layer, while those of superficial granule cells arborize in
the most superficial part of the external plexiform layer,

resulting in a preferential modulation of mitral and
tufted cell activity, respectively [6,17]. Interestingly,
these distinct granule cell subtypes show distinct rates
of turnover after birth [18]. Our results show that, at
postnatal day 2, most granule cells derive from the lateral and dorsal LV walls, with only a very small fraction
of cells deriving from the septal wall. Moreover, we
report a clear spatial relationship between the ventrodorsal origin of granule cells in the LV and their migration to deep and superficial regions of the GCL. These
results add to a previous study reporting that deep granule cells were produced by the posterior LV, while
superficial granule cells were preferentially generated
from the anterior LV [6]. Importantly, the rostro-caudal
distribution of the GFP+ cells in the LV was comparable
between the dorsally and laterally electroporated groups
in our study, and cannot therefore account for our
results.
In contrast to granule cells, the proportion of cells
specifying PG neurons was higher for RGCs located in
the dorsal and septal LV walls. The contribution of the
most anterior region of the septal LV wall to PG neuron

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

Page 8 of 12

Figure 6 Radial glial cells located in defined walls of the lateral ventricle produce distinct granule neuron subtypes. (A-C)
Representative immunostainings for CR expression in the GCL of animals electroporated in the lateral (A), dorsal (B) or septal (C) walls of the LV.
For all groups, a low magnification overview (left panel) as well as a higher magnification of the underlined region (right panel) are presented.
DAPI (blue) was used as a nuclear counterstain. (D) Quantification of the percentage of newborn granule cells (GFP+) expressing CR that derived
from the lateral (red), dorsal (gray) or septal (blue) LV walls. Error bars represent standard error of the mean. *P < 0.05 as determined by unpaired
t-test. Scale bars: 50 μm and 10 μm in the left and right panels, respectively. CR, calretinin; EPO, electroporation.

production has previously been reported [5]. The targeting of large caudal areas of the septal LV wall in our
study, together with the large number of newborn neurons observed at 21 dpe in the OB, suggest that the contribution of this LV wall to early postnatal OB
neurogenesis is larger than previously thought.
Subpopulations of PG interneurons are defined by
their expression of the three non-overlapping markers
CR, CB and TH [2,19]. In neonatal animals, fate mapping of progenitor cells expressing Dlx1/2-Cre have
shown the generation of an equal proportion of PG neurons expressing these three markers [3]. In regard to

these previous findings, the proportion of PG CB+ neurons labeled by electroporation (<10% of the newborn
GL interneurons) might appear surprisingly low. This
discrepancy might result from a low rate of transfection
of the population of RGCs giving rise to this subtype of
interneuron. Indeed, previous studies suggest that CB+
PG interneurons originate in the ventral most region of
the LV [5], a region that shows a low rate of transfection as revealed by our three-dimensional reconstructions of the electroporated area. This low rate of
transfection might be due to weaker diffusion of the
plasmid to this narrow ventricular region. In agreement

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

with previous studies [4,5], our results show that these
three subtypes of PG interneurons largely originate from
distinct LV walls. Thus, a greater proportion of RGCs
from the lateral LV generate CB+ neurons, while those
from the dorsal and septal wall preferentially generate
TH+ and CR+ neurons, respectively. The very marked
contribution of the septal wall to CR+ PG neurogenesis
is likely to occur only at the perinatal age, as this LV
region is not known to be neurogenic at later stages,
while the birth of CR+ PG cells persists well into adulthood [3]. It is also interesting to note that whereas the
majority of the PG neurons originating from the septal
wall of the LV acquired a CR+ phenotype, only less
than 20% of the few granule cells generated from the
same region acquired expression of this marker. These
results therefore suggest dissociation between the transcriptional regulation of CR+ phenotype acquisition by
granule cells and PG cells.
Efficient genetic manipulation of NSCs in defined
walls of the LV can be achieved by several approaches.
Thus, the use of specific Cre mouse lines - Gsh2 and
Emx1 - allow the targeting of NSCs located in the lateral and dorsal walls of the LV, respectively [4,20].
Transduction of discrete populations of RGCs by injection of an AAV-Cre to their apical processes also efficiently targets cells in defined walls of the LV [5,14].
We show here that targeted electroporation of the LV
walls represents a viable alternative to these techniques,
and offer a number of advantages. First, electroporation
does not necessitate the breeding of particular mice
strains or production of viral particles. Second, electroporation allows the concomitant manipulation of single
or multiple genes, as previously demonstrated [8].
Finally, both shRNA or overexpression plasmids can be
used [11], therefore offering opportunities for concomitant loss and gain-of-function studies. It should be mentioned, however, that this technique is unlikely to be
suitable to study forebrain neurogenesis in the adult
intact forebrain. At this late stage, electroporation only
rarely targets neural stem cells (<1%) ([7] and our own
observations), preventing the thoughtful quantification
of defined lineages that might be targeted by
electroporation.

Conclusions
The vast possibilities that the approach presented here
offers will prove to be of crucial help for unraveling the
transcriptional codes acting in OB neuron specification
in the postnatal forebrain. Many transcription factors Dlx2, Pax6, Sp8, ER81, Neurog2, Tbr2, Gsh2, Emx1, and
Mash1 - have been shown to be expressed in the walls
of the LV with diverse degrees of spatial distribution
[4,21-24]. Among these transcription factors, only the
functions of Dlx2 and Pax6 in postnatal OB neuron

Page 9 of 12

specification have been thoroughly assessed [25-27].
Targeted electroporation of the LV walls will prove to
be useful to further explore the role of these transcription factors in the specification of postnatally generated
OB neurons.

Materials and methods
Plasmid preparation

A pCX-GFP plasmid (kind gift of X Morin, ENS, Paris)
coding for enhanced GFP under control of a chicken bactin promoter and a cytomegalovirus enhancer was
purified using the Qiagen EndoFree Plasmid Maxi Kit,
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. (Qiagen,
Valencia, California, USA) Final plasmid preparation
was made by re-suspending DNA in sterile phosphatebuffered saline at a concentration of 5 μg/μl. Fast green
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) was added as
contrasting agent at a final concentration of 1% to assess
accuracy of the intraventricular injections.
Postnatal electroporation

All experiments were performed in agreement with the
Canton of Zurich veterinary office guidelines. All mice
used in this study were of the CD1 strain (Swiss mice).
Electroporation of RGCs lining the LV was performed
in postnatal-day-2 mice (P2), as described previously [8].
Briefly, following anesthesia by hypothermia, postnatalday-2 pups were fixed on a custom made support plate
placed in a stereotaxic rig. Injections were performed at
the midpoint of a virtual line connecting the eye with
the cranial landmark Lambda as visualized by a light
source. Plasmid solution (1.5 μl) was injected at a depth
of 2 mm from the skull surface using a Hamilton syringe equipped with a 34G needle.
The accuracy of the injection could be monitored by
the filling of the injected ventricle by the dark solution.
Only successfully injected mice were subjected to 5 electrical pulses (95 V, 50 ms, separated by 950 ms intervals) using the ECM 830 BTX electroporator (Harvard
Apparatus, Holliston, Massachusetts, USA) and tweezer
electrodes coated with conductive gel (Signa gel, Parker
Laboratories, Fairfield, New Jersey, USA). Two different
sizes of electrodes (5 and 10 mm diameter; BTX Tweezertrodes, Harvard Apparatus) were used. After electroporation, mice were placed in an incubator at 37°C until
they fully recovered, before being returned to their
mother.
Tissue processing

Animals were sacrificed 1 or 21 dpe. Following fixation
with 4% paraformaldehyde, brains were washed in TBS
and embedded in 3% agarose in TBS (Tris-buffered saline). Sections were cut using a vibratome (Leica) at 50
μm for the 1-dpe forebrains and 30 μm for the OBs of

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

adult mice, and collected as a series of three or eight,
respectively. For the 1-dpe forebrains, one of every three
sections was serially mounted on gelatine-coated slides
and stored at 4°C until stained. All other sections were
collected in 24-well plates in 0.1 M PB (phosphate buffer) for immunostaining. For long-term storage, OB sections were transferred to an antifreeze solution (25%
glycerol, 25% ethylenglycol and 50% 0.1 M PB) and
stored at -20°C until they were processed.
Immunohistochemistry

For animals sacrificed at 1 dpe, the native GFP fluorescence was very intense, and no GFP signal enhancing
immunostaining was required. For animals sacrificed at
21 dpe, immunostaining against GFP was performed
and combined with other markers (as detailed in Table
1). All immunostainings were performed on free-floating
sections. Sections were washed three times in 0.1 M PB
for 5 minutes. Blocking and permeabilization were
achieved by incubating the sections for 2 hours in 0.1 M
PB, with 0.4% TitronX-100 (PB-Tx) and 5% heat inactivated normal horse serum in 0.1 M PB at room temperature. Afterwards, primary antibody incubations were
performed in PB-Tx 3% horse serum at 4°C overnight
(please refer to Table 1 for a complete list of antibodies
and dilutions). After three washes, incubation with species-matched secondary antibodies was performed for 2
hours at 4°C in PB-Tx with 3% horse serum. GFP signal
was amplified using a biotin-conjugated secondary antibody against the GFP primary antibody. The Streptavidin Alexa 488 complex, which binds to biotin, was then
incubated together with the nuclear stainings. Sections
were counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI, Sigma) and Topro3 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA) and coverslipped with antifading mounting

Page 10 of 12

medium (Vectashield, Vector Labs, Burlingame, California, USA).
Analysis

To analyze the distribution of the electroporated cells in
the LV and the newly generated neurons in the OB,
mosaic pictures were acquired at 20 × (NA 0.5) on an
epifluorescent Leica DM5500 microscope equipped with
a motorized stage.
Co-localization of markers was analyzed on a Leica
SPE - II confocal microscope equipped with a 40 ×
objective (NA 1.25)
All the analyses were conducted using Neurolucida
and Neurolucida Explorer softwares (mbf Bioscience).
For counting the number and analyzing the distribution
of electroporated cells in defined walls of the LV, a
minimum of five animals for each condition were used
throughout. An average of nine sections was analyzed
for each brain from the most rostral portion of the LV
(that is, before the opening of the ventricles) up to the
emergence of the dentate gyrus. To compare the distribution and phenotypes of newborn neurons originating
from distinct LV walls, a minimum of five animals per
condition were analyzed from two independent litters.
Distribution of newborn neurons in the OB was analyzed by counting a minimum of 60 GFP+ cells per animal. Expression of neuronal subtype-specific markers
(CR, CB, TH) was analyzed in a minimum of 35 PG and
40 granule cells per animal, selected randomly from an
average of eight sections covering the entire OB rostrocaudal extent.
All data are expressed as mean ± standard error of the
mean. P-values were determined using unpaired t-test
(Prism 5, GraphPad Software, La Jolla, California). Each
animal is equivalent to n = 1.

Table 1 Antibodies used in this study
Antibody

Species

Concentration

Source (catalogue number)

Primary
aCB

Rabbit

1:5,000

Swant (D-28K)

aCR

Rabbit

1:2,000

Swant (7699/4)

aGFP

Chicken

1:1,000

Abcam (Ab13970)

aTH

Mouse

1:500

Biot. achicken

Donkey

1:1,000

aMouse Alexa 555

Donkey

1:1,000

Invitrogen (A31570)

aRabbit Alexa 555
aStreptavidin Alexa 488

Donkey
Donkey

1:1,000
1:500

Invitrogen (A31572)
Invitrogen (532354)

Millipore (MAB 318)

Secondary

Swant (Marly, Fribourg, Switzerland).
Abcam (Cambridge, County of Cambridgeshire, UK).
Millipore (Billerica, Massachusetts, USA).
Jackson (West Grove, Pennsylvania, USA).
Invitrogen (Carlsbad, California, USA).

Jackson (703-065-155)

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

Page 11 of 12

Additional material
5.
Additional file 1: Figure S1: Illustration of the experimental
procedure for the determination of the electroporated area and the
number of electroporated cells. One out of every three sections was
serially mounted on gelatine-coated slides. (A) The brain and ventricle
outlines were drawn using the Neurolucida software (mbf Bioscience). (B,
D) Next, the position of GFP+ RGCs (B) was superimposed on the
drawings, and a line defining the extension of electroporated area was
added (D). (C) A three-dimensional representation of the drawing was
generated using Neurolucida explorer, allowing accurate measurement of
the electroporated area and a three-dimensional reconstruction. (B’,D’)
Higher magnification views of the ventricles shown in (B,D), respectively.
Additional file 2: Video 1: Rotating three-dimensional
reconstruction of a laterally electroporated brain. The first rotations
show the brain contours (grey) and the lateral ventricle contour (white).
Then, the electroporated area is superimposed (green).
Additional file 3: Video 2: Rotating three-dimensional
reconstruction of a dorsally electroporated brain. The first rotations
show the brain contours (grey) and the lateral ventricle contour (white).
Then, the electroporated area is superimposed (green).
Additional file 4: Video 3: Rotating three-dimensional
reconstruction of a septally electroporated brain. The first rotations
show the brain contours (grey) and the lateral ventricle contour (white).
Then, the electroporated area is superimposed (green).

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
Abbreviations
CB: calbindin; CR: calretinin; dpe: days post-electroporation; GCL: granule cell
layer; GFP: green fluorescent protein; GL: glomerular layer; LV: lateral
ventricle; NSC: neural stem cell; OB: olfactory bulb; PG: periglomerular; RGC:
radial glial cell; SVZ: subventricular zone; TH: tyrosine hydroxylase.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Dr Kasum Azim for critical reading of the manuscript.
María E Fernández is supported by a Grant from the Swiss National Found
(31003A_127082).
Author details
1
Brain Research Institute, University of Zürich/ETHZ, CH-8057 Zürich,
Switzerland. 2IBDML,13288 Marseille, France.
Authors’ contributions
MEF, SC and OR carried out the experimental work. CB and HC contributed
reagents and expertise for the electroporation experiments. OR conceived of
the study. MEF, CB and OR wrote the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
21.
Received: 12 January 2011 Accepted: 5 April 2011
Published: 5 April 2011
References
1. Hinds JW: Autoradiographic study of histogenesis in the mouse olfactory
bulb. I. Time of origin of neurons and neuroglia. J Comp Neurol 1968,
134:287-304.
2. Panzanelli P, Fritschy JM, Yanagawa Y, Obata K, Sassoe-Pognetto M:
GABAergic phenotype of periglomerular cells in the rodent olfactory
bulb. J Comp Neurol 2007, 502:990-1002.
3. Batista-Brito R, Close J, Machold R, Fishell G: The distinct temporal origins
of olfactory bulb interneuron subtypes. J Neurosci 2008, 28:3966-3975.
4. Young KM, Fogarty M, Kessaris N, Richardson WD: Subventricular zone
stem cells are heterogeneous with respect to their embryonic origins

22.

23.

24.

25.

and neurogenic fates in the adult olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 2007,
27:8286-8296.
Merkle FT, Mirzadeh Z, Alvarez-Buylla A: Mosaic organization of neural
stem cells in the adult brain. Science 2007, 317:381-384.
Kelsch W, Mosley CP, Lin CW, Lois C: Distinct mammalian precursors are
committed to generate neurons with defined dendritic projection
patterns. PLoS Biol 2007, 5:e300.
Barnabe-Heider F, Meletis K, Eriksson M, Bergmann O, Sabelstrom H,
Harvey MA, Mikkers H, Frisen J: Genetic manipulation of adult mouse
neurogenic niches by in vivo electroporation. Nat Methods 2008,
5:189-196.
Boutin C, Diestel S, Desoeuvre A, Tiveron MC, Cremer H: Efficient in vivo
electroporation of the postnatal rodent forebrain. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:
e1883.
Chesler AT, Le Pichon CE, Brann JH, Araneda RC, Zou DJ, Firestein S:
Selective gene expression by postnatal electroporation during olfactory
interneuron nurogenesis. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e1517.
Belkhadir Y, Durbak A, Wierzba M, Schmitz RJ, Aguirre A, Michel R, Rowe S,
Fujioka S, Tax FE: Intragenic suppression of a trafficking-defective
brassinosteroid receptor mutant in Arabidopsis. Genetics 2010,
185:1283-1296.
Boutin C, Hardt O, de Chevigny A, Coré N, Goebbels S, Seidenfaden R,
Bosio A, Cremer H: NeuroD1 induces terminal neuronal differentiation in
olfactory neurogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:1201-1206.
Platel JC, Dave KA, Gordon V, Lacar B, Rubio ME, Bordey A: NMDA
receptors activated by subventricular zone astrocytic glutamate are
critical for neuroblast survival prior to entering a synaptic network.
Neuron 2010, 65:859-872.
Anthony TE, Klein C, Fishell G, Heintz N: Radial glia serve as neuronal
progenitors in all regions of the central nervous system. Neuron 2004,
41:881-890.
Ventura RE, Goldman JE: Dorsal radial glia generate olfactory bulb
interneurons in the postnatal murine brain. J Neurosci 2007, 27:4297-4302.
Merkle FT, Tramontin AD, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla A: Radial glia
give rise to adult neural stem cells in the subventricular zone. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:17528-17532.
Orona E, Rainer EC, Scott JW: Dendritic and axonal organization of mitral
and tufted cells in the rat olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 1984,
226:346-356.
Orona E, Scott JW, Rainer EC: Different granule cell populations innervate
superficial and deep regions of the external plexiform layer in rat
olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol 1983, 217:227-237.
Imayoshi I, Sakamoto M, Ohtsuka T, Takao K, Miyakawa T, Yamaguchi M,
Mori K, Ikeda T, Itohara S, Kageyama R: Roles of continuous neurogenesis
in the structural and functional integrity of the adult forebrain. Nat
Neurosci 2008, 11:1153-1161.
Parrish-Aungst S, Shipley MT, Erdelyi F, Szabo G, Puche AC: Quantitative
analysis of neuronal diversity in the mouse olfactory bulb. J Comp Neurol
2007, 501:825-836.
Kohwi M, Petryniak MA, Long JE, Ekker M, Obata K, Yanagawa Y,
Rubenstein JL, Alvarez-Buylla A: A subpopulation of olfactory bulb
GABAergic interneurons is derived from Emx1- and Dlx5/6-expressing
progenitors. J Neurosci 2007, 27:6878-6891.
Brill MS, Ninkovic J, Winpenny E, Hodge RD, Ozen I, Yang R, Lepier A,
Gascón S, Erdelyi F, Szabo G, Parras C, Guillemot F, Frotscher M, Berninger B,
Hevner RF, Raineteau O, Götz M: Adult generation of glutamatergic
olfactory bulb interneurons. Nat Neurosci 2009, 12:1524-1533.
Waclaw RR, Allen ZJ, Bell SM, Erdelyi F, Szabo G, Potter SS, Campbell K: The
zinc finger transcription factor Sp8 regulates the generation and
diversity of olfactory bulb interneurons. Neuron 2006, 49:503-516.
Liu F, You Y, Li X, Ma T, Nie Y, Wei B, Li T, Lin H, Yang Z: Brain injury does
not alter the intrinsic differentiation potential of adult neuroblasts. J
Neurosci 2009, 29:5075-5087.
Parras CM, Galli R, Britz O, Soares S, Galichet C, Battiste J, Johnson JE,
Nakafuku M, Vescovi A, Guillemot F: Mash1 specifies neurons and
oligodendrocytes in the postnatal brain. EMBO J 2004, 23:4495-4505.
Hack MA, Saghatelyan A, de Chevigny A, Pfeifer A, Ashery-Padan R,
Lledo PM, Gotz M: Neuronal fate determinants of adult olfactory bulb
neurogenesis. Nat Neurosci 2005, 8:865-872.

Fernández et al. Neural Development 2011, 6:13
http://www.neuraldevelopment.com/content/6/1/13

Page 12 of 12

26. Kohwi M, Osumi N, Rubenstein JL, Alvarez-Buylla A: Pax6 is required for
making specific subpopulations of granule and periglomerular neurons
in the olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 2005, 25:6997-7003.
27. Brill MS, Snapyan M, Wohlfrom H, Ninkovic J, Jawerka M, Mastick GS,
Ashery-Padan R, Saghatelyan A, Berninger B, Gotz M: A dlx2- and pax6dependent transcriptional code for periglomerular neuron specification
in the adult olfactory bulb. J Neurosci 2008, 28:6439-6452.
doi:10.1186/1749-8104-6-13
Cite this article as: Fernández et al.: Targeted electroporation of defined
lateral ventricular walls: a novel and rapid method to study fate
specification during postnatal forebrain neurogenesis. Neural
Development 2011 6:13.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
