<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Perceptions of environmental changes and Lethargic crab disease among crab harvesters in a Brazilian coastal community</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34. doi:10.1186/1746-4269-7-34"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content="Crab harvesters; mangrove; ecological knowledge; Lethargic Crab Disease"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Angélica MS Firmo"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Firmo et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/34

JOURNAL OF ETHNOBIOLOGY
AND ETHNOMEDICINE

RESEARCH

Open Access

Perceptions of environmental changes and
Lethargic crab disease among crab harvesters in
a Brazilian coastal community
Angélica MS Firmo1*, Mônica MP Tognella1, Walter LO Có2, Raynner RD Barboza3 and Rômulo RN Alves3

Abstract
Background: Lethargic Crab Disease (LCD) has caused significant mortalities in the population of Ucides cordatus
crabs in the Mucuri estuary in Bahia State, Brazil, and has brought social and economic problems to many crabharvesting communities that depend on this natural resource. The present work examined the perceptions of
members of a Brazilian crab harvesting community concerning environmental changes and the Lethargic Crab
Disease.
Methods: Field work was undertaken during the period between January and April/2009, with weekly or biweekly
field excursions during which open and semi-structured interviews were held with local residents in the
municipality of Mucuri, Bahia State, Brazil. A total of 23 individuals were interviewed, all of whom had at least 20
years of crab-collecting experience in the study region. Key-informants (more experienced crab harvesters) were
selected among the interviewees using the “native specialist” criterion.
Results: According to the collectors, LCD reached the Mucuri mangroves between 2004 and 2005, decimating
almost all crab population in the area, and in 2007, 2008 and 2009 high mortalities of U. cordatus were again
observed as a result of recurrences of this disease in the region. In addition to LCD, crabs were also suffering great
stock reductions due to habitat degradation caused by deforestation, landfills, sewage effluents, domestic and
industrial wastes and the introduction of exotic fish in the Mucuri River estuary. The harvesting community was
found to have significant ecological knowledge about the functioning of mangrove swamp ecology, the biology of
crabs, and the mass mortality that directly affected the economy of this community, and this information was
largely in accordance with scientific knowledge.
Conclusions: The study of traditional knowledge makes it possible to better understand human interactions with
the environment and aids in the elaboration of appropriate strategies for natural resource conservation.
Keywords: Crab harvesters, mangrove, ecological knowledge, Lethargic Crab Disease

Background
Mangrove forests are highly productive ecosystems
found along the coast of Brazil that provide valuable
resources such as timber, medicinal products, natural
dyes, fish, crustaceans, and mollusks, as well as environmental services [1-6]. Brachyura crabs are a major economic resource for the coastal dwellers of northeastern
* Correspondence: angelicascaldaferri@yahoo.com.br
1
Departamento de Ciências Agrárias e Biológicas, Programa de Pós
Graduação em Biodiversidade Tropical (Ecologia), Universidade Federal do
Espírito Santo - UFES, São Mateus, Brazil
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Brazil, as either subsistence economic items or for direct
consumption. The main species commercialized are blue
land crabs (Cardisoma guanhumi (Latreille, 1825), callinectes crabs (Callinectes spp.), and mangrove land crabs
(Ucides cordatus Linnaeus, 1763). The mangrove land
crab is the most heavily harvested species, and therefore
of particular relevance to people living in the surrounding mangrove areas [7].
Ucides cordatus inhabits in individual burrows about
120 cm deep that are dug under mangrove trees [8].
Studies undertaken in northern Brazil have determined
that adult mangrove crabs have few natural predators,

© 2011 Firmo et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Firmo et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/34

but these included the crab-eating raccoon (Procyon
cancrivorous (Cuvier, 1798), monkeys, and hawks [9].
High predation pressure is exerted on U. cordatus by
humans, however, who harvest this species for direct
consumption [10] and principally for commercialization.
The harvesting of U. cordatus has significant socioeconomic importance in northeastern Brazil and involves
many local residents who benefit both directly and
indirectly from commerce involving this species [7,11].
Massive mortalities of U. cordatus have been reported
by crab harvesters and biologists since 1997 throughout
northeastern Brazil, from Ceará to Espírito Santo State
[12,13] that have decimated local stocks (reaching 84%
reductions, according to interviews with crab-harvesters)
[7]. This mortality has generated considerable concern
among specialists in regards to resulting environmental
and socioeconomic impacts [7].
Many investigations were undertaken to determine the
causative agent of this mass mortality, until Boeger et al
[12] conclude that the causative agent as an Exophiala
species of fungus. This disease, which is specific to the
crab species Ucides cordatus, is the first known disease
caused by a fungus in crustaceans [14]. Due to the fact
that numerous symptoms were shared by many crabs in
areas with high mortality rates, such as lethargy, deficient motor control, and an incapacity to return to an
upright position, this disease was given the name
Lethargic Crab Disease (LCD) [15].
Decreases in crustacean populations have created
social problems in the communities surroundings mangrove areas and seriously affected the economic welfare
of the poor people who depended upon crab harvesting
for their livelihood. The life of crab harvesters is intimately linked to ecological processes and cycles, and
their daily work with other natural resources has helped
them develop harvesting strategies that maximize their
crab harvesting efficiency. The understanding these local
residents have of the ecology of U. cordatus is an important factor in the use of this natural resource [11,16],
and the present research sought to characterize the traditional knowledge of these crab harvesters regarding
environmental changes in the mangrove forests of the
Mucuri River estuary, Bahia State, in northeastern Brazil
and regarding Lethargic Crab Disease in the same
region.

Methods
Study area

The present research was carried out in the mangrove
estuary of Mucuri River located in the municipality of
Mucuri, Bahia State, in northeastern Brazil (17°51’00” 18°05’17” S and 39°33’14"- 40°00” W) (Figure 1). The
entire area of influence of the Mucuri River is contained

Page 2 of 9

within the Costa Dourada Permanent Protection Area,
under control of the Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Natural Resources - IBAMA (Figure 2). The
estuary contains large extensions of mangrove forests,
islands, and islets (these latter formed by sandy-clayloam banks). The most common trees found in the
mangrove forests are Rhizophora mangle, Avicennia germinans, Avicennia schaueriana, and Laguncularia racemosa [17].
Data collection and analyses

Our research was undertaken between January and
April/2009, with weekly or biweekly field excursions. A
community meeting was held with crab harvesters
before initiating the actual fieldwork to inform them
about the aims of our study, our research methods, and
to solicit their participation in the investigations. Qualitative methods were used to obtain information about
environmental changes that have occurred in the mangrove forest, crab harvesting, and the local perception of
Lethargic Crab Disease. We did not adopt a formal
approach using interview consent forms, due to the
poor level of organization within the fishing community
and the high illiteracy rate.
Open and semi-structured interviews were conducted
with 23 people, and additional interviewees were chosen
by using the “snowball technique” [18,19], based on
information provided by local specialists. Interviews
were conducted on a one-on-one basis. Key-informants
(more experienced crab harvesters) were selected from
among the interviewees using the criterion of “native
specialists” - people who consider themselves, and are
considered by the community, as culturally competent
in this area [20,21].
All of the interviewees harvested crabs as their main
economic activity (active or retired) and had at least 20
years of experience in the study region. Each collector
was interviewed individually, time limit for the interviews (which generally lasted between 1 and 3 hours
each). Interviews consisted of asking crab harvesters
about two subjects: A) to describe the community’s perception of its relationship to the mangrove forests (to
determine their views of the degradation and conservation of the mangrove forests and the management of
natural resources); B) to describe the community’s perception of the Lethargic Crab Disease and the socioeconomic problems resulting from it. These questions were
presented to the crab harvesters using a standardized
questionnaire with 16 questions; the details of the interviews were recorded manually and/or by using a voice
recorder. The transcriptions were made with a full
awareness of the need to be faithful to the interviewees
manner of expression.

Firmo et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/34

Page 3 of 9

Figure 1 Map of the Mucuri River estuary, Bahia state, Brazil.

The interviews were always preceded by the interviewer’s identification with a brief explanation about the
purpose of work and an informed consent and permission for publication of the images were given by those
interviewed. Other techniques used included direct
observations (accompanying the crab harvesters

individually during their daily activities) and “guided
tours” - two integrate the researchers and interviewees
and to experience their routine activities in their natural
environment.
In addition to the interviews with the crab harvesters,
an ethno-mapping of the Mucuri River estuary mangrove

Firmo et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/34

Figure 2 Aerial view of Mucuri River estuary and the
municipality of Mucuri.

forests was undertaken using aerial photographs and
maps instead of illustrations and drawings made by the
crab harvesters. This mapping examined the perceptions
of local informants concerning the locations of local natural resources [22], as we asked them to identify the different areas of the mangrove forests (and to correctly
name them) and to indicate which areas were most
affected by the crab disease and the most vulnerable
environments.

Results
Perceptions of environmental changes

When asked about their relationships with the mangrove forests, the interviewees reported being directly
linked with those environments and they considered the
estuary to be one of the most important features in
their lives - especially since their economic survival was
almost completely dependent on crab harvesting. Nineteen of the interviewees reported that they appreciated
(were proud of) their profession as crab harvesters and
that they intended to continue in that occupation. All of
them, however, reported that the mass mortality that
had decimated the crab stocks in the Mucuri River estuary was making it almost impossible to continue in their
profession. Many crab harvesters were very unhappy
with the situation and doubted their ability to continue
working there if the land crab stocks were not restored.
When asked about how to best protect the mangrove
forests and the mangrove land crabs, the interviewees
gave different responses. Some replied that they would
like to act as monitors to prohibit capture during the
reproductive period, while others stated that people
should stop destroying the mangrove forests and restore
the environment, and avoid polluting the river estuary.
All of the crab harvesters appeal for financial support

Page 4 of 9

from the government so that they could afford to stop
gathering crabs during their reproductive and ecdysis
periods. Financial support is in fact provided to fishermen and crab harvesters in Brazil during the animals’
reproductive periods; however, the crab harvesters in
this particular municipality do not have any registered
association so they cannot receive any financial support.
All of the interviewees affirmed that before the
appearance of the disease they were only authorized to
capture Ucides cordatus more than 6.0 cm. In Brazil,
harvesting mangrove land crab is regulated by Normative Instruction n° 34 of March 24, 2003 issued by the
Instituto Brasileiro do Meio Ambiente e dos Recursos
Naturais Renováveis (IBAMA), which prohibits taking
female crabs during the period between December 1
and May 31, or capturing males or females less than 6.0
cm long.
The interviewees reported that they were able to distinguish males from females by their tracks at the burrow entrances. The fishermen call the female crabs
‘candurua’ (a corruption of the word for ‘female kangaroo’ in informal Brazilian Portuguese) because they
carry their egg masses on their abdomens. The
females do not have any hair on their legs and leave
deep thin tracks at the burrow entrances; the hairy
legs of males leave relatively wide and shallow tracks
(Figure 3).
All of the interviewees reported that harvesting mangrove land crabs was their only (or principal) economic
activity. Only one interviewee reported harvesting blue
land crabs (Cardisoma guanhumi) as well as mangrove
land crab, and two crab harvesters were also fishermen.
Among the interviewees, 21 said that they did not have
any other economic activity besides crab gathering.
When asked about the collection techniques they used

Figure 3 Collector showing the size and sexual dimorphism of
the land crab species (Ucides cordatus).

Firmo et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/34

Page 5 of 9

Perceptions of Lethargic Crab Disease

Figure 4 Crab collector demonstrating an arm collection
technique: the gatherers put their entire arms in the mud in
order to catch the crab of their burrows.

for capturing mangrove land crabs, all of the interviewees
claimed to use the manual collection technique. This
technique requires putting one’s entire arm into the burrow and grabbing the animal by the dorsal portion of its
carapace (Figure 4) and then pulling it out in a lateral
position. Only one interviewee reported using a curved
iron tool to pull the crab from its burrow.
There is another technique called “redinha” used in
crab harvesting that employs in amorphous mass of thin
plastic mesh that is placed at the mouth of the burrow
to entangle the crabs and facilitate their capture. This
technique is considered predatory (and illegal) by the
crab harvesters because it indiscriminately traps adults
and juveniles, males and ovigerous females; these snares
are often lost and can cause the death of other crabs as
they pollute the mangrove area.
Consequently, crab harvesters are well aware of the
use of “redinhas” in the region, although none of the
interviewees claimed to use them. When asked about
the best period for collecting crabs all of the interviewees indicated that the summer and reproductive season
were best (between December and March). The crabs all
leave their burrows during this period to copulate and
are easily captured as they lose their defensive and
directional instincts.
All of the interviewees also felt that the exotic fish
being farmed in the Mucuri River estuary (e.g. Tucunaré
peacock bass (Cichla sp.) and the African sharpthooth
catfish (Clarias gariepinus) were related to the decreases
in crab populations. The crab harvesters said that these
fish were introduced into ponds along the Mucuri River
and that they often escape to the estuary during floods,
where they feed on crab larvae, thus diminishing crab
populations.

When asked about diseases that could be causing massive
crap die offs, the interviewees all confirmed that they
knew about the disease currently affecting the crustacean.
They stated that there is currently a mortality rate of
approximately 50% when compared to the period just
prior to the arrival of the disease. Interestingly, none of
the crab harvesters knew the official name of this disease.
According to most of the interviewees (about 70%),
the disease first appeared in the Mucuri River estuary
between September and October/2004 and resulted in
very high mortality rates in 2005, and all of the crab
harvesters said that the disease was still affecting the
area. This was confirmed by the authors during the field
work phase of this project, as many did mangrove land
crabs were found, while others presented clinical signs
of LCD. The crab harvesters reported that only small
and young crabs could be found in the area. They also
stated that there were large die offs of U. cordatus in
2007, 2008 and 2009 as a result of recurrences of this
disease in the region.
According to the interviewees, there are periods with
high mortality rates and others in which the disease
relents a bit and crab populations increase.
Regarding the clinical signs noted by the crab harvesters, all of them cited lethargy, differences in colors and
textures of the internal organs in infected individuals,
and the presence of foam coming from the crustacean’s
mouth region. According to the crab harvesters, animals
contaminated by LCD appear “dirty”, which is notable,
for even though they live in the mud the crustaceans
always appear groomed and clean; the crabs also lose
their reflexes and will remain still with their eyes and
claws drooping (Figure 5). An interesting phenomenon
reported by all of the interviewees was that the disease

Figure 5 Ucides cordatus specimen captured probably
presenting the signs of LCD disease.

Firmo et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/34

leads to changes in the behavior of the mangrove land
crabs, and they show exaggerated defensive behaviors,
staying inside their burrows for long periods of time and
covering their tunnels even though they were not undergoing ecdysis. When asked to identify the areas of the
Mucuri River estuary that were most affected by the disease and that had the highest mortality rates, the interviewees indicated the areas closest to a paper factory that
was discharging its wastes in the river (Figure 6).
The major (or only) economic resource of many local
families is provided by crab harvesting, and since these
people did not receive any assistance that could minimize
the economic shock resulting from the scarcity of crabs,
significant socioeconomic impacts were felt. Many crab
harvesters were unhappy with their current situation and
indicated that they would consider abandoning the profession if the stocks of mangrove land crabs did not
rebound. Another problem that arose after the appearance of LCD was the noncompliance with environmental
laws that regulate crab harvesting activities. The fishermen pointed out that it was no longer possible to find
crabs larger than the legal limit of 6.0 cm; they also noted
that it was impossible to respect the reproductive season
of the crab (when the animals were more available).
Many crab harvesters reported that previously to the
outbreak of the disease they could harvest between 75
and 100 crabs in a single day, but this number was drastically reduced to 25 crabs a day with the appearance of
LCD. The crab harvesters are well aware that this situation may lead to even greater decreases in crab populations, but they cite their need to survive.

Discussion
In terms of the relationships of crab harvesters with the
mangrove swamp, we were able to diagnose a direct link

Figure 6 Crab collector showing the internal organ of a dead
crab presumably by lethargic crab disease.

Page 6 of 9

between the estuary and the survival of the local human
populations. This relationship was very evident in the
present study, as it had been in other previous field
investigations [7,23,24]. Most of the crab harvesters
built their lives around coastal areas, estuaries and mangroves, and the knowledge passed to them by their
ancestors, together with their own experiences, helped
them to work and survive in mangrove swamps and to
be recognized as members of a traditional population.
Diegues [25] noted that knowledge about the cycles and
dynamics of nature that have been passed down from
generation to generation represent one of the principal
components that characterize the traditional communities and allows these people to develop and use effective resource management strategies.
We noted in this study that crab harvesters differentiate between male and female mangrove land crabs. This
finding was similar to that of other authors [26] who
studied environmental perceptions among crab harvesters in Paraiba State in northeastern Brazil - which suggests that this information is endemic to traditional
coastal communities throughout the country. This type
of information is very important in terms of the conservation of mangrove land crabs, as this species is subjected to high predation pressure rates and the
harvesting of females is pivotal to maintaining viable
crab populations. If this behavior were recognized and
encouraged, the fishermen would become partners to
state and federal agencies in public conservation
policies.
Regional studies should be undertaken to better orient
governmental institutions in adopting conservation programs and regulations. This type of orientation could be
very important as only mature males can currently be
captured - and this will alter the proportions of males
and females and leads to sexually unbalanced populations. Accordingly, studies focused on separate regions
could examine male and female captures in different
portions to determine optimal management and conservation techniques for this crustacean.
Regarding the local knowledge of the LCD disease
affecting U. cordatus, most interviewees reported being
aware of this disease, although none of them could
name it. Interestingly, while the interviewees could not
name the disease that was infecting the crabs in the
region, all of them could identify the major clinical
symptoms of LCD. This inability to correctly name the
disease is almost certainly due to the fact that it was
only recognized and named by Boeger et al [15] (in
reference to the lethargy demonstrated by infected crustaceans). These authors provided robust evidence suggesting that LCD is caused by an anamorph fungus and
phylogenetic analyses have confirmed the diagnosis of
the LCD fungus as an ascomycete (fungus of the

Firmo et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/34

phylum Ascomycota), and they suggest a close relationship with members of the subphylum Pezizomycotina.
Direct cultures of tissue from sick crabs, and subsequent
isolation and purification, have identified the causative
agent as an Exophiala species of fungus that affects the
tissues and/or the hemal lacunae of the epidermis, connective tissue, hepatopancreas, heart, thoracic ganglion
and associated nerve fibers, gills, and intestines [12].
Orélis-Ribeiro et al [27], fulfilling the rigorous Koch
postulates, concluded that the Exophiala cancerae species is the causative agent of LCD. His results support
that the fungal agent is pathogenic and upheld the
hypothesis of Boeger et al [12,15] that associated this
fungus with LCD and the mass die offs of crabs.
High rates of crab mortality were first noted in Brazil
in 1997 and precipitated profound alterations in coastal
communities that depended on this crustacean resource
[7]. The mangrove swamps in the states of Bahia and
Pernambuco suffered reductions of 84% and 97.6% in
their U. cordatus stocks respectively. These reductions
were directly associated with the massive die offs that
seriously affected local fishing communities and led to
social and economic problems in the region. In addition
to LCD, crab stocks are also being impacted by habitat
degradation as mangrove areas forests are subjected to
deforestation and detrimental activities such as carciniculture and waste and garbage disposal [28]. This view
is reinforced by other authors [7] who reported that U.
cordatus harvesters in northeastern Brazil associated the
occurrence of LCD with pesticide use in sugar cane
plantations near mangrove forests. But there is still considerable uncertainty surrounding the origin and dissemination of this disease.
According to a report published by the Goiamun
Institute [29,30], technical visits/field studies were
undertaken in mangrove forests in the municipalities of
Nova Viçosa and Mucuri (Bahia State, Brazil) to follow
the evolution of this disease and the massive die offs of
mangrove land crabs. This report indicated that no burrows of adult or sub-adult crabs could be found, leading
to the conclusion that crabs in these age classes were
heavily affected. These results are in agreement with the
observations of the interviewees in the present study, as
they only reported encountering small crabs, probably
young ones. Schmidt [30] study the effects of one LCD
event on U. cordatus in southern Bahia, and observed
that most of the crabs left their burrows before dying
and that individuals of all size classes were affected,
although the larger animals, occupying zones that were
more heavily flooded, appeared to be most affected by
the mass die offs - and the greatest reductions in population density occurred in zones occupied by the mangrove tree Rhizophora mangle, indicating that the
causative agent was in some way associated with water.

Page 7 of 9

These observations lead us to presume a greater vulnerability of adult crabs to this disease, or that some
aspect of the infectious chain is more relevant in adult
crustaceans.
Mangrove land crab populations do not disappear
completely, leading scientists to conclude that some
individuals are naturally resistant to the disease.
Researchers likewise observed that other crab species
(such as Goniopsis sp., Uca spp., and the blue land crab
Cardisoma guanhumi) were not affected by the disease.
As most of the interviewees only harvested U. cordatus,
we could not confirm this particular aspect of the
disease.
The defensive behavior of crabs presenting clinical
signs of LCD was highlighted by all of the interviewees.
This behavioral change was characterized by the animals
covering their burrows and staying in them for long periods of time. This behavior was also reported by
Schmidt [30], who reported massive mortality rates in
U. cordatus populations in the mangrove forests of Caravelas, Bahia State, Brazil. Based on these observations,
it is possible to conclude that these behavioral changes
are associated with avoidance of exposure to predators,
as the crabs are much more vulnerable when manifesting clinical signs of LCD.
Many crab harvesters reported environmental changes
associated with the introduction of exotic animal species
into the estuary, and exotic fish species are known to
affect the structure and functioning of aquatic environments [31]. The introduction of exotic fish species can
cause many ecological changes affecting biodiversity
through biological mechanisms such as hybridization
and disease [32] and could, in this particular case, have
contributed to crab mortality.
When asked which areas of the Mucuri River estuary
mangrove forests were most affected by the disease and
presented the highest crab mortality rates, the interviewees indicated sites close to the effluent pipes of a
paper factory - leading the crab harvesters to associate
the death of the crustaceans with the discharged waste.
We must stress, however, that this is the point of view
of the crab harvesters, and the direct cause of the disease affecting the Mucuri River estuary mangrove land
crabs has yet to be fully determined.
Traditional knowledge can be critical to establishing
sound policies regulating the sustainable exploitation of
natural resources [7,11]. Brazilian governmental offices
responsible for environmental monitoring and for controlling U. cordatus harvesting have not made a practice
of considering local ecological knowledge - which could
explain the generally low effectiveness of their policies
[33]. The perceptions of local populations can and
should be used in formulating the policies of regulatory
agencies. The contributions of these communities are

Firmo et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/34

essential to the sustainable management of local
resources, and need to be incorporated into decision
making processes.

Page 8 of 9

3.

4.

Conclusions
Additional ethnoecology and ethnobiology studies of
Ucides cordatus are needed, for the folk knowledge
retained by traditional communities concerning the natural resources they come into contact with on a daily
basis can benefit efforts to conserve and preserve regional biodiversity [7,11,21,24,25,33-42].
U. cordatus gatherers have developed an intimate
knowledge of the natural history of this species. The
unique nature of this local knowledge demonstrates the
need for considering input from these populations in
the implementation of management plans of coastal
mangrove ecosystems, and for understanding local crab
stocks and their population dynamics. This kind of
information can be used for establishing extractive
reserves, for delimiting the harvest season, and for
establishing protected areas where animal species can
safely reproduce and maintain their stocks.
It has become evident that efforts directed towards the
preservation of native species should employ gradual
and integrated approaches, coupled with monitoring of
the communities involved, and these communities must
be inserted into programs of environmental education
and social assistance.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Fernando Firmo and Valéria Scaldaferri for their help on
handling with the local crab collectors and for their guided tours within the
mangrove forests of Mucuri River. We are also grateful to Breno Salgado and
Roy Funch for translating this work into English.
Author details
1
Departamento de Ciências Agrárias e Biológicas, Programa de Pós
Graduação em Biodiversidade Tropical (Ecologia), Universidade Federal do
Espírito Santo - UFES, São Mateus, Brazil. 2Departamento de Biologia,
Associação Educacional de Vitória - AEV, Vitória, Brazil. 3Departamento de
Biologia, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Biológicas (Zoologia)
Universidade Estadual da Paraíba - UEPB, Paraíba, Brazil.
Authors’ contributions
AMSF - Writing of the manuscript, literature survey and interpretation; AMSF,
MMPT, WLOC, RRDB and RRNA - Ethnozoological data, literature survey and
interpretation; AMSF and MMPT - Analysis of taxonomic aspects. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 1 July 2011 Accepted: 16 November 2011
Published: 16 November 2011

15.

16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

24.

25.
References
1. Rocha MSP, Mourão JS, Souto MSW, Barboza RRD, Alves RRN: O Uso dos
Recursos Pesqueiros no Estuário do Rio Mamanguape, Estado da
Paraíba, Brasil. Interciencia 2008, 33:903-909.
2. Nishida AK, Nordi N, Alves RRN: Mollusk Gathers of Northeast Brazil:
Gathering Techniques and Productivity. Human Ecology 2006, 34:133-145.

26.

Nishida AK, Nordi N, Alves RRN: The lunar-tide cycle viewed by crustacean
and mollusc gatherers in the State of Paraiba, Northeast Brazil and their
influence in collection attitudes. Journal of Ethnobiology and
Ethnomedicine 2006, 2:1-12.
Nishida AK, Nordi N, Alves RRN: Molluscs production associated to lunartide cycle: a case study in Paraíba State. Journal of Ethnobiology and
Ethnomedicine 2:1-6.
Rosa IL, Alves RRN, Bonifacio KM, Mourão JS, Osorio FM, Oliveira TPR,
Nottingham MC: Fishers’ knowledge and seahorse conservation in Brazil.
Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2005, 1:1-15.
Walters BB, Rönnbäck P, Kovacs JM, Crona B, Hussain SA, Badola B,
Jurgenne HP, Barbier E, Dahdouh-Guebas F: Ethnobiology, socioeconomics and management of mangrove forests: a review. Aquatic
Botany 2008, 89:220-236.
Alves RRN, Nishida AK: Aspectos socioeconômicos e formas de percepção
ambiental dos catadores de caranguejo-uçá Ucides cordatus cordatus
(L. 1763) (Decapoda, Brachyura) do estuário do rio Mamanguape.
Interciencia 2003, 28:36-43.
Branco JO: Aspectos bioecológicos do caranguejo Ucides cordatus
(Linnaeus, 1763) (Crustacea: Decapoda) do manguezal de Itacorubi,
Santa Catarina, Brasil. Arquivos de Biologia e Tecnologia 1993, 36:133-148.
Koch V: Epibenthic production and energy flow in the Caeté mangrove
estuary, North Brazil. PhD thesis Bremen University; 1999.
Diele K: Life history and population structure of the exploited mangrove
crab Ucides cordatus (L.) (Decapoda:Brachyura) in the Caeté estuary,
North Brazil. PhD thesis Bremen University; 2000.
Alves RRN, Nishida AK: A ecdise do caranguejo-uçá, Ucides cordatus
(Crustacea, Decapoda, Brachyura) na visão dos caranguejeiros.
Interciencia 2002, 27:110-117.
Boeger WA, Pie MR, Vicente V, Ostrensky A, Hungria D, Castilho GG:
Histopathology of the mangrove land crab Ucides cordatus (Ocypodidae)
affected by lethargic crab disease. Diseases of Aquatic Organisms 2007,
78:73-81.
Ribeiro RO: Doença do Caranguejo Letárgico: Desvendando questões
etiológicas, epidemiológicas e de Saúde Pública. Curitiba. Dissertação
Mestrado Universidade Federal do Paraná, Centro de Ciências Biológicas e
da Saúde, Programa de Pós-graduação em Ciências Biológicas
(Microbiologia, Parasitologia e Patologia Básica); 2008.
Boeger WA, Pie MR: Montando o quebra cabeça. Revista do GIA 2006,
1:34-36.
Boeger WA, Pie MR, Ostrensky A, Patella L: Lethargic crab disease:
multidisciplinary evidence supports a mycotic etiology. Memórias do
Instituto Oswaldo Cruz 2005, 100:161-167.
Maneschy MC: Ajuruteua, uma comunidade pesqueira ameaçada. UFPA
University Press, Belém, Brazil; 1995.
CEPEMAR: Monitoramento do Manguezal de Mucuri/BA. Technical Report
Press. Vitória, Brazil; 1998.
Bailey KD: Typologies and Taxonomies: An Introduction to Classification
Techniques. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 1996,
47:328-329.
Bailey KD: Methods of social research. 4 edition. New York: The Free Press;
1982.
Hays TE: An Empirical Method for the Identification of Covert Categories
in Ethnobiology. American Ethnologist 1976, 3:489-507.
Marques JGW: Pescando Pescadores: etnoecologia abrangente no baixo
São Francisco Alagoano. NUPAUB São Paulo Press; 1995.
Boissiere M, Basuki I, Koponen P, Wan M, Sheil D: Biodiversity and local
perceptions on the edge of a conservation area, Khe Tran Village,
Vietnam. Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) Press; 2006.
Marques JGW: A fauna medicinal dos índios Kuna de San Blas (Panamá)
e a hipótese da universalidade zooterápica [abstract]. Anais da 46a
Reunião Anual da SBPC 1994, 324.
Nordi N, Nishida AK, Alves RRN: Effectiveness of Two Gathering
Techniques for Ucides cordatus in Northeast Brazil: Implications for the
Sustainability of Mangrove Ecosystems. Human Ecology 2009, 37:121-127.
Diegues ACS: O Mito Moderno da Natureza Intocada Hicitec São Paulo Press;
1998.
Alves RRN, Nishida AK, Hernandez MIM: Environmental perception of
gatherers of the crab ‘caranguejo-ucá’ (Ucides cordatus, Decapoda,
Brachyura) affecting their collection attitudes. Journal of Ethnobiology and
Ethnomedicine 2005, 1:10.

Firmo et al. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011, 7:34
http://www.ethnobiomed.com/content/7/1/34

Page 9 of 9

27. Orélis-Ribeiro R, Boeger WA, Vicente VA, Chammas M, Ostrensky A: Fulfilling
Koch’s postulates confirms the mycotic origin of Lethargic Crab Disease.
Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 2011, 99:601-608.
28. Ecotuba: Plano de ação para o caranguejo uçá em Canavieiras.
Canavieiras Press, Brazil; 2006.
29. Vieira JC: Laudo técnico pericial sobre a mortandade de caranguejo uçá
em Nova Viçosa e Mucuri/BA. Instituto de Desenvolvimento Humano e
Ambiental - Goiamum, 2005, in press.
30. Schmidt AJ: Estudo da dinâmica populacional do caranguejo-uçá, Ucides
cordatus cordatus (Linnaeus, 1763) (Crustacea-Decapoda-Brachyura) e
dos efeitos de uma mortalidade em massa desta espécie em
manguezais do Sul da Bahia. Dissertação Mestrado Instituto Oceanográfico
da Universidade de São Paulo, Centro de Oceanografia Biológica; 2008.
31. Lodge DM: Biological invasions: lessons for ecology. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 1993, 8:133-137.
32. Mack RN, Simberloff DD, Lonsdale WM, Evans H, Clout MN, Bazzazz F: Biotic
invasions: causes, epidemiology, global consequences and control. Issues
in Ecology 2000, 5:1-20.
33. Nordi N: O processo de comercialização do caranguejo-uçá (Ucides
cordatus) e seus reflexos nas atividades de coleta. Revista Nordestina de
Biologia 1995, 10:39-45.
34. Nordi N: A captura do caranguejo-uçá (Ucides cordatus) durante o
evento reprodutivo da espécie: o ponto de vista dos caranguejeiros.
Revista Nordestina de Biologia 1994, 9:41-47.
35. Nordi N: Time allocation and energy expenditure related to crab
gathering activity. Ciência e Cultura 1997, 49:136-139.
36. Alves AG, Souza RM: Etnoecologia de um ambiente estaurino no
nordeste do Brasil: Conhecimento dos “mariscos” (Mollusca:Bivalvia) por
mulheres no Canal de Santa Cruz [abstract]. Anais do MANGROVE 2000,
85.
37. Rodrigues AMT, Branco EJ, Saccardo AS, Blankensteyn A: A explotação do
caranguejo Ucides cordatus (Decapoda: Ocypodidae) e o processo de
gestão participativa para normatização da atividade na região SudesteSul do Brasil. Boletim do Instituto de Pesca 2000, 26:63-78.
38. Passos CA, Di Beneditto APM: Captura comercial do caranguejo-uçá,
Ucides cordatus (L., 1763), no Manguezal de Gargaú, RJ. Biotemas 2005,
18:223-231.
39. Costa-Neto EM: Implications and applications of folk zootherapy in the
State of Bahia, Northeastern Brazil. Sustainable Development 2004,
12:161-174.
40. Machado D: Catadoras de caranguejo e saberes tradicionais na
conservação de manguezais da Amazônia brasileira. Estudos Feministas
2007, 15:485-490.
41. Mendonça JT, Pereira ALC: Avaliação das capturas de caranguejo-uçá
Ucides cordatus no município de Iguape, litoral sul de São Paulo, Brasil.
Boletim do Instituto de Pesca 2009, 35:169-179.
42. Carvalho HRL, Igarashi MA: A utilização do forjo na captura do caranguejo
uçá (Ucides cordatus) na comunidade de Tapebas em Fortaleza - CE.
Biotemas 2009, 22:69-74.
doi:10.1186/1746-4269-7-34
Cite this article as: Firmo et al.: Perceptions of environmental changes
and Lethargic crab disease among crab harvesters in a Brazilian coastal
community. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 2011 7:34.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
