<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Myxosporean hyperparasites of gill monogeneans are basal to the Multivalvulida</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220. doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-220"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Mark A Freeman"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

RESEARCH

Open Access

Myxosporean hyperparasites of gill monogeneans
are basal to the Multivalvulida
Mark A Freeman1* and Andrew P Shinn2

Abstract
Background: Myxosporeans are known from aquatic annelids but parasitism of platyhelminths by myxosporeans
has not been widely reported. Hyperparasitism of gill monogeneans by Myxidium giardi has been reported from
the European eel and Myxidium-like hyperparasites have also been observed during studies of gill monogeneans
from Malaysia and Japan.
The present study aimed to collect new hyperparasite material from Malaysia for morphological and molecular
descriptions. In addition, PCR screening of host fish was undertaken to determine whether they are also hosts for
the myxosporean.
Results: Heavy myxosporean infections were observed in monogeneans from two out of 14 fish and were
detected from a further five fish using specific PCRs and pooled monogenean DNA. Positive DNA isolates were
sequenced and were from a single species of myxosporean. Myxospore morphology was consistent with Myxidium
with histozoic development in the parenchymal tissues of the monogenean. Simultaneous infections in the fish
could not be confirmed microscopically; however, identical myxosporean DNA could be amplified from kidney,
spleen and intestinal tract tissues using the specific PCR. Small subunit (SSU) rDNA for the myxosporean was
amplified and was found to be most similar (92%) to that of another hyperparasitic myxosporean from a gill
monogenean from Japan and to numerous multivalvulidan myxosporeans from the genus Kudoa (89-91%).
Phylogenetic analyses placed the hyperparasite sequence basally to clades containing Kudoa, Unicapsula and
Sphaerospora.
Conclusions: The myxosporean infecting the gill monogenean, Diplectanocotyla gracilis, from the Indo-Pacific
tarpon, Megalops cyprinoides, is described as a new species, Myxidium incomptavermi, based on a histozoic
development in the monogenean host and its phylogenetic placement.
We have demonstrated for the first time that a myxosporean hyperparasite of gill monogeneans is detectable in
the fish host. However, myxospores could not be isolated from the fish and confirmation was by PCR alone. The
relationship between the myxosporean infection in gill monogeneans and the presence of parasitic DNA in fish is
not yet fully understood. Nonetheless, myxospores with a Myxidium-like morphology, two of which we have shown
to be phylogenetically related, have now been reported to develop in three different gill monogeneans, indicating
that myxosporeans are true parasites of monogeneans.

Background
Myxosporean parasites are commonly found infecting
numerous fish species, proliferating in different target
organs and tissues where distinctive myxospores
develop. Known myxosporean life cycles involve a second obligate host, typically a free-living annelid worm,
* Correspondence: mark@um.edu.my
1
Institute of Biological Sciences & Institute of Ocean and Earth Sciences,
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 50603 Malaysia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

where morphologically dissimilar actinospores are produced, which are infectious to the fish host, thus completing the life cycle. Myxosporeans are also known to
infect non-fish vertebrate hosts such as amphibians, reptiles, waterfowl and insectivorous mammals [1-4], all of
which result in characteristic myxospore production, but
whose life cycles are unknown. A single report has
shown the myxospore phase of development in an invertebrate, where Kudoa sp. was found in the muscles of
the arm of the giant octopus Paroctopus dofleini [5].

© 2011 Freeman and Shinn; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

However, myxospore development has never been
reported from annelid hosts and only actinospores are
produced.
Myxidium Bütschli, 1882 is a large genus of over 200
mostly coelozoic myxosporeans, infecting various vertebrate hosts such as fish, amphibians and reptiles [6].
They have a polyphyletic distribution within myxosporean phylogenetics [4], but are not currently represented
in the multivalvulidan clade. Multivalvulidan myxosporeans represent the marine order Multivalvulida Shulman, 1959 that are predominantly histozoic and infect
the musculature of marine fishes [6]. Whipps et al. [7]
used rDNA sequence data and simplified the group,
which currently contains two families, Trilosporidae
Shulman, 1959 and Kudoidae Meglitsch, 1960. The Trilosporidae have three polar capsules and three shell
valves and are considered to be the basal group of the
order. The Kudoidae now accommodate all marine myxosporeans with four or more shell valves and polar capsules and contain over 70 described species. The
multivalvulidans are important parasites that can have a
considerable negative impact on the condition of farmed
marine finfish and commercial fisheries [8]. Kudoa spp.
have also been linked to, and may be the cause of, gastroallergic symptoms in humans after ingestion of
Kudoa-infected fish products in Europe and Japan
[9,10]. The multivalvulidans are the only large group of
myxosporeans for which no life cycle or definitive host
data is available.
Hyperparasitism of platyhelminths by myxosporeans is
not common. Myxosporeans from the genus Fabespora
have been reported from the tegument and parenchyma
of digenean trematodes [11,12]. Hyperparasitism by
Myxidium giardi has also been reported in the gill
monogenean Pseudodactylogyrus bini from the European
eel Anguilla anguilla [13]. Myxosporean hyperparasites
have also been observed during studies of the gill monogeneans from coastal fish in Malaysia and Japan. However, infections by these myxosporeans only became
apparent after samples had been permanently mounted;
therefore complete descriptions of the spores were not
possible [14]. In all the above cases, platyhelminths are
parasitic in brackish water fish, serious pathology results
in the monogeneans and the myxosporean infections
cannot be detected in the host fish.
The Indo-Pacific tarpon, Megalops cyprinoides
(Broussonet, 1782), (Order Elopiformes: tarpons and
tenpounders) inhabits tropical coastal and brackish
waters of the Indo-Pacific, migrating between the open
sea and inland rivers and mangroves [15]. Elopiformes
are related to, but do not resemble, eels and like eels,
they spawn at sea producing leptocephalic larvae that
later migrate inland [16]. Megalops cyprinoides are frequently netted in the mangroves and coastal waters of

Page 2 of 11

Malaysia, commonly 20-30 cm in length, but are not
highly prized as food fish.
In the present study, gill monogeneans from M. cyprinoides are examined for the presence of hyperparasitic
myxosporeans in order to complete morphological
descriptions and DNA analyses.

Methods
Collection and sampling of fish and Monogenea

Megalops cyprinoides were collected directly from local
fishermen and from fish markets on Langkawi Island,
Peninsular Malaysia. Fish were examined fresh on the
day of purchase. Gill arches were removed and viewed
with a dissecting microscope (Olympus SZ4045), monogenean parasites were isolated with forceps and a fine
glass pipette, slide-mounted with a coverslip and viewed
using a portable phase contrast compound microscope
(Nikon YS2-H). Visibly infected monogeneans (those
confirmed to have myxospores present internally) were
either removed from the slide and used for individual
DNA extraction or disrupted by squashing to release
fresh myxospores for photography. Visibly uninfected
monogeneans were removed from the slides, pooled for
each fish, and fixed in 95% ethanol for DNA analysis.
Digital images of infected monogeneans and fresh myxospores were taken in the field using a Dino-eye microscope eye-piece camera (DinoLite, Dutech Scientific,
Malaysia) and DinoCapture software version 3.3.0.16
(AnMo Electronics Corporation, Taiwan). Myxospores
were described following the guidelines of Lom & Arthur
[17]. After photography of released myxospores, cover
slips were removed, slides air dried and later stained with
Diff-Quik®. Due to time constraints, some gill monogeneans from heavily infected fish were not all individually
observed with the compound microscope. Instead, they
were removed from the gills, a sub-sample used for
microscopy, the remainder pooled from each fish and
fixed in 95% ethanol for the DNA analysis. During the
monogenean removal process each gill arch was carefully
examined for the presence of myxosporean gill cysts and
signs of other parasitic infections, and a sample of gill tissue was taken for the DNA analysis. During a final sampling trip, a fish confirmed as having a gill monogenean
with a visible myxosporean infection (fish 2 see below)
was dissected and numerous tissue samples (gill, kidney,
gall bladder, bile, liver, spleen, intestine, stomach, heart
and brain) were taken for the DNA analysis.
All fish were also fully dissected and examined for
gross signs of infection or abnormalities in the internal
organs. In addition, the kidney, gall bladder and contents, intestine, brain, heart and chamber blood, liver
and spleen were carefully investigated for the presence
of myxosporean infections using tissue stamps or
squashes and phase contrast microscopy.

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

DNA preparation and analyses

DNA extractions were performed using a GeneMATRIX
DNA extraction kit (EURx Poland) following the manufacturer’s tissue protocol. Myxosporean SSU rDNA was
amplified using the universal primer 18e [18] and the
myxosporean primers and PCR conditions described by
Freeman et al. [19] with the temperature profile: initial
denaturation 95°C for 4 min, 35 cycles of denaturation
94°C for 30 sec, annealing 55°C for 45 sec, extension 72°
C for 1 min, followed by a 7 min terminal extension at
72°C. Additional specific primers, Bu-F 5’ GGT CAA
TGT ATT TGG ACG TCG 3’ and Bu-R 5’ TGA CTC
CGG TTG TCT CTC TAA G 3’ were designed for the
hyperparasitic myxosporean from the initial sequence
reads, in order to amplify 720 bp of the SSU using the
same PCR conditions as described above. DNA was also
amplified from an infected monogenean; using the primer pair C1 and D2 [20] to amplify the D1-D2 domains
of the large subunit ribosomal DNA (LSU rDNA) to
assist in any future studies with the molecular identification of infected gill monogeneans.
DNA sequencing was conducted using BigDyeTM
Terminator Cycle Sequencing chemistry utilising the
same oligonucleotide primers that were used for the original PCRs and was performed on all PCR positive samples. Both directions of each amplicon were sequenced
for all products and compared to sequences available in
the GenBank databases using nucleotide-nucleotide
BLAST searches [21] to verify a myxosporean origin.
Contiguous sequences were constructed manually using
CLUSTAL_X [22] and BioEdit [23]. CLUSTAL_X [22]
was used for the alignment of the SSU rDNA sequences
of 57 myxozoan taxa (see additional file 1, S1) with the
settings for gap opening/extension penalties being
adjusted manually to achieve optimum alignments.
Regions of ambiguous sequence alignments were manually edited using the BioEdit sequence alignment editor
[23].
Phylogenetic analyses were performed using the maximum likelihood methodology in PhyML [24] with the
general time-reversible (GTR) substitution model
selected (gamma shape parameter = 0.520 and the proportion of invariant = 0.128) and 100 bootstrap repeats,
and Bayesian inference (BI) analyses using MrBayes v.
3.0 [25]. Models of nucleotide substitution were evaluated for the data using MrModeltest v. 2.2 [26]. The
most parameter-rich evolutionary model based on the
AIC was the GTR+I+G model of evolution. Therefore,
the settings used for the analysis were nst = 6, with the
gamma-distributed rate variation across sites and a proportion of invariable sites (rates = invgamma) with optimal parameters estimated from the data (gamma shape
parameter uniformly distributed on the interval (0.00,
200.00), with the proportion of invariable sites uniformly

Page 3 of 11

distributed on the interval (0.00, 1.00) and gamma distribution approximated using 4 categories). The priors
on state frequency were left at the default setting (Prset
statefreqpr = dirichlet (1,1,1,1)). Posterior probability
distributions were generated using the Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) method with four chains being
run simultaneously for 1,000,000 generations. Burn in
was set at 2500 and trees were sampled every 100 generations making a total of 7500 trees used to compile
the majority rule consensus trees.
In accordance with section 8.6 of the ICZN’s International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, copies of this
article are deposited at the following five publicly accessible libraries: Natural History Museum, London, UK;
American Museum of Natural History, New York, USA;
Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France;
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia; Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Results
Gill monogeneans were collected from fourteen M.
cyprinoides ranging in size from 12 to 32.5 cm in fork
length (FL). The number of monogeneans collected
from each fish ranged from 3 to over 100, twelve additional fish had no gill monogeneans present. Two individual monogeneans, from different fish (subsequently
referred to as: fish 1 FL 23 cm, total of 20 monogeneans
collected; fish 2 FL 32.5 cm, total of 50 monogeneans
collected), could be detected with visible myxosporean
infections. One was removed (fish 1) intact for DNA
analysis and the other (fish 2) disrupted to release myxospores for photography and later stained for submission as type material.
Identification of monogenean host

The infected monogenean from fish 2, after being flattened (Figure 1a), could be accurately identified as
Diplectanocotyla gracilis Yamaguti, 1953. This identification was based on consistent features in the morphology
and size of the haptoral sclerites as reported in Lim &
Gibson [27] (all measurements in μm). Specifically, the
two dorsal anchors lacking root processes, anchor base
triangular, slightly crenulated; anchor inner length 31.5
(31-32), outer length 44 (43-45). Two ventral anchors
with two prominent root processes; anchor inner length
37 (37), outer length 48.5 (48-49), outer root 6.5 (6.5)
long and at 90° to the inner root 15 (15) long. The medial spine on the inner edge of the inner root of the ventral anchor, however, was not observed on either of the
two ventral anchors, their position being obscured by
the position of the ventral and dorsal bars overlying
them. The two bifurcated dorsal bars measured 48 (4650) long × 18 (17-19) wide, with a 13.5 (12-15) long,
blunt-ended protrusion arising at a 45° (35°-55°) angle

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

Page 4 of 11

A
S

S

B

C

Figure 1 Histozoic myxosporean, Myxidium incomptavermi n. sp., infecting the gill monogenean Diplectanocotyla gracilis. A) Flattened
monogenean showing no internal organ definition, with myxospores (S) released from the body cavity, bar = 200 μm. Inset) fine detail of the
haptoral sclerites, bar = 50 μm. B) spores released from ruptured parenchymal tissues (white arrow) with numerous spores packed inside the
worm (black arrow), bar = 10 μm. C) Higher magnification of myxospores revealing a typical Myxidium morphology, bar = 10 μm. A further
figure plate of air-dried spores is available from the additional file 2 S2.

to the longitudinal axis of the 36 (32-40) long lanceolate
portion of the bar. The two, open v-shaped ventral bars
measured 51 (51) long, marked by a small, medial projection on the posterior edge; proximally lanceolate
where they articulate with the ventral anchor; distal,
medial orientated, ends of the two bars approximately
triangular, the terminal part of which is slightly lobed.
Description of myxosporean hyperparasite and host
pathology

Myxospore morphology was consistent with that of
Myxidium, fusiform, sometimes slightly sigmoid, with
pointed ends where opposing tear-shaped polar capsules

are located (Figure 1b-c, Figure 2 & additional file 2,
S2). The spore valves appeared smooth, without noticeable striations or ornamentation and the sutural line
was inconspicuous. Mature spores (n = 20) measured
11.62 μm (11.27-11.75) in length, 4.92 μm (4.19-5.56)
wide, polar capsule (PC) length 2.89 μm (2.43-3.27) PC
width 1.96 (1.81-2.09). The polar filament had two,
occasionally three turns and a sporoplasm with a single
nucleus was discernable between the polar capsules in
some spores. Development was histozoic in the parenchymal tissues of the monogenean host. Developing stages
were not observed, but numerous paired spores were
seen in the parenchymal tissues.

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

Figure 2 Line drawings of three actual fresh spores of
Myxidium incomptavermi n. sp. demonstrating minor variations
observed between the morphologies. Typically spores are
fusiform with a slight sigmoid curve and pointed ends where
opposing tear-shaped polar capsules are located. The polar filament
had two, occasionally three turns (not shown) and a sporoplasm
with a single nucleus was discernable between the polar capsules
in some spores. The spore valves are smooth and the sutural line is
inconspicuous. Bar = 5 μm.

Infected monogeneans showed marked pathological
changes, having poor internal structure definition, with
areas of parenchymal tissues packed with myxospores
(Figure 1a). The precise location of spores and extent of
infection in the worms could not be fully determined
due to the lack of internal structures in the specimens,
but they were observed in the region anterior to the
haptoral peduncle in the area occupied by the posterior
vitellaria and the termini of the caecae. Histological and
TEM data will assist future similar studies to answer
outstanding questions about development and tissue
location.
Ribosomal DNA amplification and sequencing and
phylogenetic analyses

The SSU rDNA for the hyperparasitic myxosporean was
successfully amplified and sequenced from the single
visibly infected monogenean from fish 1. Identical myxosporean DNA was also amplified and sequenced from
the pooled gill monogeneans in seven out of 14 fish
(50%), which included the two fish with visibly infected
monogeneans. The contiguous novel myxosporean
sequence of 1702 base pairs has been submitted to GenBank under the accession number GQ368246. A partial
LSU rDNA sequence (922 bp) from the gill monogenean
from fish 1 has also been deposited in GenBank under
the accession number JN254760.
A nucleotide BLAST search of the novel myxosporean
sequence revealed that the most similar sequences available in the databases are a Myxidium sp. hyperparasite

Page 5 of 11

sequence (GQ368245) isolated from gill monogeneans
in Japan [14] with a 92% identity, followed by several
Kudoa spp. isolated from marine fish, with similarities
between 89-91%. The partial LSU rDNA sequence from
the monogenean D. gracilis was most similar to Diplectanum grouperi (DQ054820) from the same family,
Diplectanidae, with an 88% identity. The new myxosporean described from the parenchyma of D. gracilis ex M.
cyprinoides is named as Myxidium incomptavermi n. sp.
Phylogenetic analyses of alignments of 57 myxozoan
taxa using maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference
analysis produced trees with the same basic topologies
(Figure 3), apart from small differences in branch
lengths and support values. Myxidium incomptavermi
grouped towards the base of the multivalvulidan clade
together with the monogenean hyperparasite sequence
Myxidium sp. from Japan, and were both basal to the
clade containing Unicapsula spp. The grouping of this
clade was fully supported in both analyses (100/1.0)
from the rest of the taxa in the tree. The placement of
other myxosporean taxa and the overall tree topology
was as expected, with Myxidium confirmed as being
polyphyletic throughout the phylogeny in both the marine and freshwater groups.
Myxosporean infections in the fish host

Examination of each gill arch from the 14 fish during
monogenean removal revealed that no lesions or cysts
were present on the gill filaments or cartilage. The only
abnormality found was the presence of the copepod Lernanthropus sp. (family Lernanthropidae) on six of the
14 fish (43%). PCR of the gill filaments taken from the
14 fish, using the specific primer pair Bu-F/Bu-R, were
negative, apart from a very faint band present in fish 2,
which is known to have harboured infected monogeneans. Extensive tissue sampling was also performed on
fish 2 during the final sampling trip and positive PCR
results (good PCR bands at the expected size of 720 bp),
using Bu-F/Bu-R, were obtained for kidney, spleen,
intestine and stomach. Faint bands were just visible for
gill, liver and brain; but gall bladder wall, bile contents
and heart muscle were negative. The 720 bp amplicons
from kidney, spleen, intestine and stomach were successfully sequenced and matched 100% with the myxosporean sequence obtained from infected gill
monogeneans.
During fish dissections, no myxospores corresponding
to the morphology of M. incomptavermi were found.
However, two other myxosporeans, morphologically distinct from M. incomptavermi, were discovered, one
from the kidney and one from the gall bladder. Partial
SSU rDNA data has been obtained for these two myxosporeans, which are both dissimilar from that of M.
incomptavermi and do not share phylogenetic affinities

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

0.1

Page 6 of 11

Tetracapsuloides bryosalmonae
Myxidium scripta
Myxidium cuneiforme
FW
Zschokkella sp. SA
Zschokkella parasiluri
Zschokkella icterica
FW Myxidium clade
Myxidium truttae
-/Zschokkella nova
Myxidium hardella
Myxidium chelonarum
Myxobolus squamalis
75/1.0
Myxobolus cerebralis
Myxobolus lentisuturalis
Myxobolus
Myxobolus cultus
clade
69/1.0
Myxobolus bibullatus
Myxobolus pellicides
Myxobolus hungaricus
Myxobilatus gasterostei
FW urinary clade
Zschokkella sp. AH
Myxidium giardi
Myxidum lieberkuehni
M. Lieberkuehni clade
Sphaerospora oncorhynchi
Auerbachia pulchra
Marine
Coccomyxa jirilomi
Zschokkella mugilis
Ellipsomyxa gobii
Marine Myxidium
Myxidium gadi
clade
Myxidium bergense
Zschokkella sp. IE
Sinuolinea phyllopteryxa
Myxidium incurvatum
Latyspora scomberomori
Zschokkella lophii
Zschokkella sp. IF
Parvicapsula minibicornis
MUC
Sphaerospora testicularis
Parvicapsula asymmetrica
Gadimyxa atlantica
Ceratomyxa auerbachi
-/Ceratomyxa labracis Cerato
81/1.0
Ceratomyxa sparusaurati
Enteromyxum leei
Enteromyxum scophthalmi
Enteric clade
Enteromyxum fugu
-/.95
Myxidium sp. MF (Japan)
Myxidium (Monogenea)
Myxidium incomptavermi
Kudoa iwatai
55/Kudoa ovivoragi
Kudoa thyrsites
53/.89
Multivalvulidan
Kudoa permulticapsula
-/clade
Kudoa crumena
Kudoa hypoepicardialis
Kudoa amamiensis
+
Sphaerospora sp.
Sphaerospora spp.
Sphaerospora dicentrarchi
Unicapsula sp.
Unicapsula pflugfelderi

Figure 3 Maximum likelihood phylogeny of myxozoan SSU rDNA sequence alignments of 57 taxa (2331 characters). Non-parametric
bootstrap values and Bayesian inference posterior probabilities are shown at the nodes. Bold branches lead to a node with a high bootstrap
support of ≥ 95 and a Bayesian posterior probability of ≥ 0.98. Nodes with a bootstrap support of < 50 and a Bayesian posterior probability of <
0.95 were considered not supported and are represented with a dash. The upper green boxed section contains freshwater (FW) species which
includes 4 main clades: freshwater Myxidium, Myxobolus, urinary and M. lieberkuehni. The lower grey boxed section contains the marine species,
which includes 5 main clades: marine Myxidium, marine urinary clade (MUC), Ceratomyxa (Cerato), enteric and multivalvulidan (including the
bivalvulids Sphaerospora spp. (dashed line)), and the newly placed sequential lineages, Myxidium spp. from gill monogeneans (dashed red line) at
the base of the multivalvulidan clade. Accession numbers for the taxa used can be found in additional file 1, S1.

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

with the multivalvulidan group. These data will be published in a separate manuscript.
Taxonomic summary and type material

Class Myxosporea Bütschli, 1881
Order Bivalvulida Shulman, 1959
Suborder Variisporina Lom et Noble, 1984
Family Myxidiidae Thélohan, 1892
Genus Myxidium Bütschli, 1882
Myxidium incomptavermi n. sp. (with morphological
characters of the genus)
Type host (Monogenea): Diplectanocotyla gracilis
Yamaguti, 1953
Fish host (Actinopterygii): Megalops cyprinoides
(Broussonet, 1782), Indo-Pacific tarpon
Type locality: Coastal waters of Langkawi Island,
Peninsular Malaysia
Site of infection: Parenchymal tissues of monogenean
host. Detected by PCR only in certain fish tissues (kidney, spleen, intestinal tract)
Etymology (Latin): incompta refers to the poor morphological condition of heavily infected monogeneans
Type material: Two DiffQuik stained pertex mounted
type slides of Myxidium incomptavermi n. sp. from
Diplectanocotyla gracilis (Monogenea: Diplectanoidea)
(ex Megalops cyprinoides Broussonet, 1782) collected
from Langkawi, Malaysia have been deposited in the
Natural History Museum (NHM), London with the following registration numbers (NHMUK) 2011.200 and
2011.201. In addition a CD of images of fresh and fixed
spores has been deposited to the NHM collection.

Discussion

Page 7 of 11

water sparid fish [11,12]. The spores of Fabespora spp.
are morphologically distinct from those in the present
study, having blunt ends with elongated valves perpendicular to a prominent central transverse sutural line.
Sporogony in M. incomptavermi may proceed in a
similar manner to that of M. lieberkuehni, as paired
spores can be seen inside infected worms [14], but when
released no disporous plasmodia are found. In urinary
bladder infections of M. lieberkuehni, numerous large
plasmodia are found where pairs of spores are contained
within a pansporoblast [28]. This type of development
could take place in myxosporean-infected monogeneans,
where large polysporous plasmodia form that contains
paired spores. Indeed, unexplained large ‘corpuscles’
were described from Myxidium-infected gill monogeneans on the European eel by Aguilar et al. [13] that
could represent such structures. However, pansporoblast
formation has not been reliably observed during multivalvulidan sporogony [29] and histological studies will
need to be undertaken on infected monogeneans to verify this possibility.
The vast majority of Myxidium spp. are coelozoic
parasites, but M. incomptavermi is histozoic in the
monogenean host. Molecular data has shown that M.
incomptavermi is also present in certain fish tissues,
however, as spores have never been observed it has not
been possible to locate and evaluate its development
within the fish host.
Due to its histozoic development within the monogenean host and differences in either spore morphology or
rDNA sequence data to other Myxidium spp. infecting
gill monogeneans, a new species, M. incomptavermi is
described for this novel myxosporean hyperparasite.

Spore morphology, development and identification

Myxospore morphology of M. incomptavermi is similar
to that of the type species for the genus, Myxidium lieberkuehni. However, spores of M. lieberkuehni are larger
(20 × 6 μm) with longitudinal striations and they are
coelozoic in the renal system of the pike, Esox lucius, in
Europe and North America [6]. Myxidium giardi has
been described as hyperparasitic in a gill monogenean
from the European eel, A. anguilla, but the spores are
smaller (9 × 5.5 μm) than those of M. incomptavermi
and have numerous prominent longitudinal ridges [28].
In addition, SSU rDNA sequence data exists for both M.
lieberkuehni and M. giardi, confirming that they are different (Figure 3). The undescribed hyperparasitic Myxidium sp. from gill monogeneans of Platycephalus sp. in
Japan [14] is phylogenetically related to M. incomptavermi (Figure 3), but the sequences are only 92% similar
and they infect different hosts from different geographical locations. Fabespora vermicola and Fabespora sp. are
myxosporean hyperparasites of the tegument and parenchymal tissues of digenean trematodes in brackish

Prevalence and pathogenicity of Myxidium incomptavermi

Isolating visibly infected live gill monogeneans in the
field was challenging and only two fish could be confirmed to harbour such worms. However, a subsequent
PCR study of pooled monogenean DNA revealed that
50% of fish (7/14) had monogeneans with the myxosporean present. The majority of gill monogeneans (a subsample from heavily infected fish) were individually
examined using a compound microscope, but in most
cases infections with the myxosporean were not visibly
detected. Heavily infected worms (Figure 1a) were relatively easy to identify as their appearance was noticeably
different, but the vast majority of specimens examined
microscopically appeared to be uninfected. From the
PCR results it is clear that some of the monogeneans
that were examined must have been infected with the
myxosporean, suggesting that infections were probably
at an early stage before spores had developed and any
gross pathology was detectable. The relative lack of visibly infected monogeneans from those examined may

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

indicate that the myxosporean causes serious pathology
in the worm resulting in rapid mortality. However, the
relative abundance of monogeneans from the two fish
with observed hyperparasitism was not noticeably low
(fish 1, 20 monogeneans collected; fish 2, 50 monogeneans collected) compared to other fish.
The relative scarcity of visibly myxosporean-infected
platyhelminthes has also been noted in other studies.
When F. vermicola was originally sampled, Overstreet
[11] examined 71 fish from various Mississippi estuaries
and only found the hyperparasite in three fish. Similarly,
Aguilar et al. [13] only found hyperparasitism in one of
323 eels. But, what appears to be more notable is the
number of infected individuals that were found in a fish
that had the hyperparasite. Overstreet [11] examined 34
trematodes from a fish with infected worms and found
9 (26.5%) with mature spores, whilst Aguilar et al. [13]
detected mature spores in 30% of the P. bini from the
single eel and described unknown ‘corpuscles’ in 100%
of P. bini sampled from same eel. Thus, it appears that
although the overall prevalence of the hyperparasite may
be extremely low, or hard to detect microscopically in a
given fish population, the number of infected individuals
from a fish with the hyperparasite present can be relatively high. In spite of the fact that myxosporean infections were not observed in the fish by Overstreet [11] or
Aguilar et al. [13], the fish would appear to play a significant role in the presence of the infection in the worms
in both cases.
In the present study, DNA from M. incomptavermi
was indeed amplified from various fish tissues from a
fish known to harbour a visibly infected monogenean.
But, despite very careful examination of the same tissues, no myxospores of M. incomptavermi could be
found in the fish. If gill monogeneans become infected
by feeding on a myxosporean-infected fish then it would
seem likely that the transfer of infection was via the gill
epithelium. However, D. gracilis has not been reported
to blood-feed [27] and no evidence of host blood or
haematin was observed inside the monogeneans during
this study, and gill filaments from the fish in this study
were either negative or only very faintly positive, when
tested with the specific PCR, especially when compared
to other internal tissues. This suggests that the monogeneans do not become infected by simply feeding from
the mucus and gill epithelia of an infected fish. It is possible that monogeneans might ingest sporoplasms that
have been released from marine actinospores on the gill
surface, before they enter the fish host. However, infection in the monogeneans is histozoic and not restricted
to a superficial development in the anterior digestive
organ where fish material would be present, if it was
required for development to take place. In addition,
myxospores are not detectable in the fish host implying

Page 8 of 11

that complete development may not occur in the fish,
making it a dead-end host with no transmission potential for the myxosporean. Therefore, an alternative scenario could be that the fish has little to do with the
infection or the transmission of the myxosporean parasite, but is simply being exposed to the same actinospore stages of this parasite. Occurrence in the bloodfiltering tissues like kidney and spleen, as well as in the
gastrointestinal tract supports this idea. The fish is
exposed and the parasite can penetrate the integument,
but development in the fish is stopped, the monogeneans simply become infected by grazing released sporoplasms on the gill surface.
Currently, the relationship between the fish and the
monogenean and the dynamics of the myxosporean
infection are not fully understood. Nevertheless, myxospores with a Myxidium-like morphology have been
reported to develop in three different gill monogeneans
infecting three different host fish (Table 1). DNA data
exists for two of these myxosporean hyperparasites and
they are phylogenetically related. In the third case, from
European eels infected with two species of Pseudodactylogyrus, clear host specificity was observed, where one
species, P. bini, was found to have a high prevalence of
infection with the myxosporean and the other, P. anguillae, was completely uninfected. These facts confirm that
gill monogeneans are true hosts for myxosporeans, but
it remains to be clarified how this is related to infections
in the fish.
Molecular phylogenetics

The SSU rDNA of M. incomptavermi was relatively
short at 1702 bases, but is consistent with phylogenetically related multivalvulidan taxa. In the phylogenetic
analyses, irrespective of the tree-building methodology
used, M. incomptavermi is consistently and robustly
located at the base of the multivalvulidan clade together
with the hyperparasitic Myxidium sp. from gill monogeneans from Japan.
Although support for the grouping of the multivalvulidan clade was very robust in both analyses (100/1.0), M.
incomptavermi occupies a single poorly supported
branch in the trees. Therefore, additional sequence data
from other hyperparasitc myxosporeans, such as Fabespora, may help to confirm this location at the base of
the multivalvulidan clade, and alternative gene data for
M. incomptavermi and other bivalvulid taxa in the multivalvulidan group, such as certain Sphaerospora spp.,
will help to clarify the evolution of the Kudoidae myxospore form.
Myxidium giardi as a hyperparasite of eel monogeneans

Aguilar et al. [13] reported the presence of Myxidium
spores in the gill monogenean P. bini from the

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

Page 9 of 11

Table 1 Hyperparasitic myxosporean infections of platyhelminthes
Myxosporean
(reference)

Host
platyhelminth

Host fish/
habitat
sampled from

Pathology to platyhelminth

Developmental stages in
platyhelminth,
Sporogony

Myxosporean
observed in the fish
host

Myxidium
incomptavermi
n. sp.
(present
study)

Diplectanocotyla
gracilis
gill monogenean

Megalops
cyprinoides
(Indo-Pacific
tarpon)
Brackish/
mangroves
Langkawi,
Malaysia

Marked pathology, parenchymal
tissues packed with spores.

Paired spores observed in
parenchymal tissues. Likely
polysporous within a
pansporoblast

Not observed despite
careful screening; but
amplified via PCR

Myxidium
giardi
(doubtful ID)
[13]

Pseudodactylogyrus
bini
gill monogenean

Not mentioned, but numerous
‘corpuscles’ and spores are
always present, replacing
monogenean tissues.

Not described, but corpuscles
of differing sizes were present
and only in hyperparasitised
individuals.

Myxidium giardi was not
found in the eel with
hyperparasitic
myxosporeans

Myxidium sp.
[14]

Haliotrema sp.
gill monogenean

Anguilla
anguilla
(European eel)
River in
Northwest
Spain.
Platycephalus
sp.
(flathead)
Brackish water,
Lake Hamana,
Japan

Marked pathology, parenchymal
tissues packed with spores.

Paired spores observed in
parenchymal tissues. Likely
polysporous within a
pansporoblast

Not found, despite
careful screening

Histozoic trophozoites, in
parenchymal cells and in the
integument.
Disporous.

Not found, despite
careful screening

Monosporous in the tegument,
and generally disporous in the
parenchymal tissues.

Not found

Fabespora
vermicola
[11]

Fabespora sp.
[12]

Crassicutis
Archosargus
Highly pathogenic, necrosis of
probatocephalus the gonads leads to a total loss
archosargi
of fecundity.
(sheepshead
intestinal digenean
seabream)
Estuarine, East
USA.
Allopodocotyle
Sparus aurata Sporogonic stages present within
chrysophrii
(gilthead
the tegument and parenchymal
intestinal digenean
seabream)
tissues cause tissue damage.
Brackish water
lagoon and
Mediterranean
coast

European eel A. anguilla in Spain, and concluded that it
was M. giardi as this is a common gill myxosporean
found in A. anguilla. In their paper, it is not possible to
determine detailed spore morphology from the figures,
however the spores they show in Figure 1C appear to be
more bluntly rounded and are approximately L 6 × W
3.5 μm and not spindle-shaped and L 9 × W 5.5 μm as
described for M. giardi [28]. From 323 eels examined,
they only found the hyperparasitic Myxidium in gill
monogeneans from a single eel, where myxospores were
observed in 30% of P. bini individuals but were absent
from P. anguillae present on the gills of the same eel. In
addition, M. giardi, which had a 95% prevalence
amongst the eels sampled, was not detected in the eel
with the hyperparasitic Myxidium. Aguilar et al. [13]
also described unknown, variable sized objects (40-265
μm) they termed ‘corpuscles’ that were present inside all
P. bini samples from the single eel that harboured the
hyperparasite, but were absent from all other specimens
of P. bini from the 322 other eels and were also absent
in P. anguillae from the eel with hyperparasites. As no
myxospores were observed in the corpuscles they

concluded that they were probably not parasitic in origin, but clearly had a strong association with the hyperparasitic condition in P. bini. We believe that the
Myxidium spores observed in P. bini were most likely
not M. giardi, but an unknown Myxidium myxosporean
infecting P. bini. Furthermore, we suggest that the corpuscles are a developmental stage that could represent
large developing plasmodia or pansporoblasts that will
mature to contain numerous, potentially paired, spores.
In addition, this Myxidium sp. has shown strong host
specificity as no P. anguillae individuals were infected in
the same eel, suggesting that it is most likely not an
accidental infection of M. giardi in gill monogeneans.
Myxidium giardi is currently the only species of Myxidium, from over 200 described species, where the life
cycle has been experimentally demonstrated, having aurantiactinomyxon-type actinospores in an oligochaete
host [30], confirming that gill monogeneans are not a
typical host and not required in the life cycle. Furthermore, in the phylogenetic analyses, M. giardi is robustly
positioned in the freshwater urinary clade (Figure 3) and
is phylogenetically distant to the Myxidium-like

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

hyperparasites of monogeneans that group at the base of
the multivalvulidan clade.
Similarities in myxosporean hyperparasitism of
platyhelminths and platyhelminths as hosts for the
Myxozoa

Some interesting aspects appear to be shared among the
five examples of myxosporean hyperparasitism of platyhelminths known to date (Table 1). Firstly, the fact that
all the fish hosts studied (Anguilla, Archosargus, Megalops, Platycephalus, and Sparus) were sampled from
coastal, brackish or estuarine environments. Secondly,
that myxospores of the same morphology have never
been observed in any of the fish hosts that harbour the
infected platyhelminths. Thirdly, evidence of myxosporean development exists in all examples and subsequent
pathological changes in the worms are reported in all
cases.
As brackish water environments represent the transition between freshwater and the oceans, it remains possible that fish platyhelminths have somehow been
involved in the radiation of the Myxozoa between the
two environments, and currently available DNA data
does place the known myxosporeans of monogeneans as
basal lineages of one of the main marine clades. In evolutionary terms, the brackish water environment can be
seen as a key location where myxosporeans established
oligochaete worms as hosts and facilitated their subsequent radiation into freshwater [31]. Therefore, it is possible that other such evolutionary significant events
occurred in this transitional environment between marine and freshwater.
It is odd that myxospores have never been isolated
from the fish hosts in all known cases to date (Table 1),
but can be found in relatively large numbers in heavily
infected platyhelminths. It is possible that sites of infection in fish were simply overlooked or that mature
spores rarely develop and the infection is somewhat
latent. In contrast, in the worms, serious pathology
results, which could suggest a more recent association.
Overstreet [11] considered that F. vermicola had evolved
from a piscine-inhabiting ancestor but again despite
numerous attempts was never successful in finding the
myxosporean parasite in the fish host.
Myxosporeans are known to infect an extremely wide
range of both vertebrate and invertebrate groups. Therefore, it is not surprising that monogeneans and other
platyhelminth parasites of fish can also act as hosts. The
life cycles of marine myxosporeans are under represented compared to the freshwater group, and little or
no data on invertebrate or non-fish hosts are currently
available for the majority of genera with no data available for those of the Multivalvulida. In known marine
myxosporean life cycles, the fish host harbours the

Page 10 of 11

myxospore stage and the invertebrate host the actinospore stage. Complete development of the hyperparasitic
Myxidium may occur within the platyhelminth or
another invertebrate may be required.

Conclusions
Heavy myxosporean infections causing serious pathology
in the gill monogenean, D. gracilis were rarely observed.
But sub-clinical infections, only detectable using PCR,
were found in monogeneans from 50% of fish sampled.
Morphology of mature spores in heavily infected worms
was typical of Myxidium, but development was histozoic
in the parenchymal tissues of the monogenean. Simultaneous infections in the fish could not be confirmed
microscopically despite extensive dissections; however,
the parasite DNA could be amplified from kidney, spleen,
intestine and stomach samples from fish known to harbour heavily infected monogeneans, suggesting that the
fish could be involved in the life cycle of the myxosporean. However, it is also possible that fish are accidental
or dead-end hosts and have little to do with the transmission of the myxosporean and are simply exposed to the
same actinospores in similar quantities. This could result
in the successful penetration of the sporoplasm into fish
tissues; hence the PCR detection in blood-filtering and
excretory tissues, but no resulting infection or myxospore
development occurs. The later scenario may suggest that
the monogenean has more recently evolved as a host for
the myxosporean parasite, and the serious pathology
observed in infected platyhelminths would support this
theory of a more recent association.
SSU rDNA for the hyperparasite was successfully
amplified and found to be most similar to another hyperparasitic Myxidium sp. also isolated from gill monogeneans. Phylogenetic analyses robustly placed both of
these hyperparasitic myxosporean sequences at the base
of the marine multivalvulidan clade. Although Myxidium
spp. are known to be distributed in a polyphyletic manner throughout myxosporean phylogenetics, they are currently absent from the multivalvulidan order. Therefore,
it is very interesting that the Myxidium parasites from
gill monogeneans have been phylogenetically placed as
sequential taxa, basally to the multivalvulidan order in
our analyses. This suggests that the Multivalvulida may
have radiated from a Myxidium spore form.
The true relationships between the myxosporean
infections in gill monogeneans and host fish are not yet
fully understood. However, myxospores with a Myxidium-like morphology, some of which we have shown
to be phylogenetically related, have now been reported
to develop in three different monogeneans. This suggests that these myxosporeans are true parasites of gill
monogeneans and not just accidental infections of fishinfecting species.

Freeman and Shinn Parasites & Vectors 2011, 4:220
http://www.parasitesandvectors.com/content/4/1/220

Due to the histozoic development and the novel
monogenean host, a new species, Myxidium incomptavermi is described for this myxosporean hyperparasite.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supplementary data (S1). 56 additional myxosporean
taxa used in the phylogenetic analyses with accession numbers.
Additional file 2: Supplementary data (S2). Air-dried unstained spores
of Myxidium incomptavermi n. sp., bar = 10 μm.

Acknowledgements
This study was supported by a University of Malaya HIR grant No: UMC/625/
1/HIR/027. Sincere thanks go to the two anonymous reviewers whose
comments significantly improved this manuscript and to Stephen Atkinson
who has made it possible to view and download myxozoan conference
posters from the website http://myxozoa.org/, references 10 & 14.
Author details
Institute of Biological Sciences & Institute of Ocean and Earth Sciences,
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 50603 Malaysia. 2Institute of Aquaculture,
University of Stirling, Stirling FK9 4LA, UK.
1

Authors’ contributions
MAF sampled the fish, isolated the gill monogeneans, photographed and
measured the fresh myxospores. APS identified the monogeneans and made
line drawing of the myxospores. MAF performed the molecular study and
drafted the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final version of
the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 2 October 2011 Accepted: 24 November 2011
Published: 24 November 2011
References
1. Friedrich C, Ingolic E, Freitag B, Kastberger G, Hohnmann V, Skofitsch G,
Neumaister U, Kepka O: A myxozoan-like parasite causing xenomas in the
brain of the mole Talpa europaea L., 1758. Parasitol 2000, 121:438-492.
2. Eiras JC: An overview on the myxosporean parasites in amphibians and
reptiles. Acta Parastol 2005, 50:267-275.
3. Dyková I, Tyml T, Fialaand I, Lom J: New data on Soricimyxum fegati
(Myxozoa) including analysis of its phylogenetic position inferred from
the SSU rRNA gene sequence. Folia Parasitol 2007, 54:272-276.
4. Bartholomew JL, Atkinson SD, Hallett SL, Lowenstine LJ, Garner MM,
Gardiner CH, Rideout BA, Keel MK, Brown JD: Myxozoan parasitism in
waterfowl. Int J Parasitol 2008, 38:1199-1207.
5. Yokoyama H, Masuda K: Kudoa sp. (Myxozoa) causing a post-mortem
myoliquefaction of North-Pacific octopus Paroctopus dofleini
(Cephalopoda: Octopodidae). Bul Eur Ass Fish Pathol 2001, 21:266-268.
6. Lom J, Dyková I: Myxozoan genera: definition and notes on taxonomy,
life-cycle terminology and pathogenic species. Folia Parasitol 2006,
53:1-36.
7. Whipps CM, Grossel G, Adlard RD, Yokoyama H, Bryant MS, Munday BL,
Kent ML: Phylogeny of the Multivalvulidae (Myxozoa: Myxosporea) based
on comparative ribosomal DNA sequence analysis. J Parasitol 2004,
90:618-622.
8. Moran JDW, Whitaker DJ, Kent ML: A review of the myxosporean genus
Kudoa Meglitsch, 1947. And its impact on the international aquaculture
industry and commercial fisheries. Aquaculture 1999, 172:163-196.
9. Martínez de Velasco G, Rodero M, Cuéllar C, Chivato T, Mateos JM,
Laguna R: Skin prick test of Kudoa sp. antigens in patients with
gastrointestinal and/or allergic symptoms related to fish ingestion.
Parasitol Res 2008, 103:713-715.

Page 11 of 11

10. Yokoyama H, Grabner D, Shirakashi S, Kinami R: Kudoa septempunctata
(Myxozoa: Multivalvulida) from the trunk muscle of cultured olive
flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) causing food poisoning of humans. VIII
International Symposium of Fish Parasites (ISFP), Viña del Mar, Chile,
September 26-30, 2009 185[http://iats161.iats.csic.es/~patolog2/files/posters/
yokoyama_etal_ISFP2011-kudoa.pdf].
11. Overstreet RM: Fabespora vermicola sp. n., the first myxosporidian from a
platyhelminth. J Parasitol 1976, 62:680-684.
12. Siau Y, Gasc C, Maillard C: Premières observations ultrastructurales d’une
myxosporide appartenant au genre Fabespora, parasite de trématode.
Protistologica 1981, 17:131-137.
13. Aguilar A, Aragort W, Álvarez MF, Leiro JM, Sanmartín M: Hyperparasitism
by Myxidium giardi Cépède 1906 (Myxozoa: Myxosporea) in
Pseudodactylogyrus bini (Kikuchi, 1929) Gussev, 1965 (Monogenea:
Dactylogyridae), a parasite of the European eel Anguilla anguilla L. Bul
Eur Ass Fish Pathol 2004, 24:287-292.
14. Freeman MA, Yoshinaga T, Ogawa K, Lim LHS: Myxidium-like myxosporean
hyperparasites of gill monogeneans are basal multivalvulidans. Proc 14th
EAFP Meeting, Prague, September 14-19, 2009 273[http://iats161.iats.csic.es/
~patolog2/files/posters/freeman_etal_EAFP2009-hyperparasitism.pdf].
15. Shen KN, Chang CW, Iizuka Y, Tzeng WN: Facultative habitat selection in
Pacific tarpon Megalops cyprinoides as revealed by otolith Sr:Ca ratios.
Mar Ecol Prog Ser 2009, 387:255-263.
16. Tsukamoto Y, Okiyama M: Growth during the early life-history of the
Pacific tarpon Megalops cyprinoides. Japan J Ichthyol 1993, 39:379-386.
17. Lom J, Arthur JR: A guideline to the preparation of species descriptions
in Myxosporea. J Appl Ichthyol 1989, 6:107-116.
18. Hillis DM, Dixon MT: Ribosomal DNA: molecular evolution and
phylogenetic inference. Quart Rev Biol 1991, 66:411-453.
19. Freeman MA, Yokoyama H, Ogawa K: Description and phylogeny of
Ceratomyxa anko sp. n. and Zschokkella lophii sp. n. from the Japanese
anglerfish, Lophius litulon (Jordan). J Fish Dis 2008, 31:921-930.
20. Wu XY, Zhu XQ, Xie MQ, Li AX: The radiation of Haliotrema (Monogenea:
Dactylogyridae: Ancyrocephalinae): molecular evidence and explanation
inferred from LSU rDNA sequences. Parasitology 2006, 132:1-10.
21. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ: Basic local alignment
search tool. J Mol Biol 1990, 215:403-410.
22. Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Plewniak F, Jeanmougin F, Higgins DG: The
CLUSTAL-X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence
alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucl Acids Res 1997, 24:4876-4882.
23. Hall TA: BioEdit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and
analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser 1999,
41:95-98.
24. Guindon S, Dufayard JF, Lefort V, Anisimova M, Hordijk W, Gascuel O: New
Algorithms and Methods to Estimate Maximum-Likelihood Phylogenies:
Assessing the Performance of PhyML 3.0. Syst Biol 2010, 59:307-21.
25. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19:1572-1574.
26. Nylander JAA, Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP, Nieves-Aldrey JL: Bayesian
phylogenetic analysis of combined data. Syst Biol 2004, 53:47-67.
27. Lim LHS, Gibson DI: Diplectanocotyla Yamaguti, 1953 (Monogenea:
Diplectanoidea) from Megalops cyprinoides (Broussonet) (Teleosti:
Megalopidae) off Peninsular Malaysia. System Parasitol 2007, 67:101-117.
28. Lom J, Dyková I: Myxosporidia (Phylum Myxozoa). Protozoan parasites of
fishes. Development in Aquaculture and Fisheries Science 1992, 26:159-235.
29. Morris DJ, Adams A: Sporogony of Tetracapsuloides bryosalmonae in the
brown trout Salmo trutta and the role of the tertiary cell during the
vertebrate phase of myxozoan life cycles. Parasitology 2008,
135:1075-1092.
30. Benajiba MH, Marques A: The alternation of actinomyxidian and
myxosporidian sporal forms in the development of Myxidium giardi
(parasite of Anguilla anguilla) through oligochaetes. Bul Eur Ass Fish
Pathol 1993, 13:100-103.
31. Picon-Camacho SM, Holzer AS, Freeman MA, Morris DJ, Shinn AP:
Myxobolus albi n. sp. (Myxozoa) from the gills of the common goby
Pomatoschistus microps Krøyer (Teleostei: Gobiidae). J Eukaryot Microbiol
2009, 56:421-427.
doi:10.1186/1756-3305-4-220
Cite this article as: Freeman and Shinn: Myxosporean hyperparasites of
gill monogeneans are basal to the Multivalvulida. Parasites & Vectors
2011 4:220.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
