<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Ordered structure of the transcription network inherited from the yeast whole-genome duplication</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-77"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Diana Fusco, Luigi Grassi, Bruno Bassetti, Michele Caselle, Marco Cosentino Lagomarsino"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Fusco et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Ordered structure of the transcription network
inherited from the yeast whole-genome
duplication
Research article

Diana Fusco1,2, Luigi Grassi3, Bruno Bassetti1,4, Michele Caselle3,5 and Marco Cosentino Lagomarsino*1,6

Abstract
Background: Gene duplication, a major evolutionary path to genomic innovation, can occur at the scale of an entire
genome. One such "whole-genome duplication" (WGD) event among the Ascomycota fungi gave rise to genes with
distinct biological properties compared to small-scale duplications.
Results: We studied the evolution of transcriptional interactions of whole-genome duplicates, to understand how they
are wired into the yeast regulatory system. Our work combines network analysis and modeling of the large-scale
structure of the interactions stemming from the WGD.
Conclusions: The results uncover the WGD as a major source for the evolution of a complex interconnected block of
transcriptional pathways. The inheritance of interactions among WGD duplicates follows elementary "duplication
subgraphs", relating ancestral interactions with newly formed ones. Duplication subgraphs are correlated with their
neighbours and give rise to higher order circuits with two elementary properties: newly formed transcriptional
pathways remain connected (paths are not broken), and are preferentially cross-connected with ancestral ones. The
result is a coherent and connected "WGD-network", where duplication subgraphs are arranged in an astonishingly
ordered configuration.
Background
An organism can respond to internal and environmental
cues by the coordinated activation of large sets of genes
through transcriptional regulation. This process can be
described as a complex "network" of interactions, connecting binding sites of regulatory proteins (transcription
factors, TFs) to regulatory DNA regions of their target
genes [1]. Achieving an understanding of the evolutionary forces that shape the architecture of this network is
fundamental for contemporary biology, where large-scale
functional genomic data are increasingly accessible
experimentally.
In particular, gene duplication is among the most widespread mechanisms for evolutionary genomic innovations [2,3]. Duplication gives rise to the widespread
existence of gene families, where members share a common ancestor. Gene duplication can occur with different
functional consequences [4,5] at the scale of a single gene
* Correspondence: diana.fusco@duke.edu
1

Università degli Studi di Milano, Dip. Fisica. Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

or a medium-sized genomic segment, but also of a whole
genome [3,6-8]. Specifically, the rare but revolutionary
events of whole-genome duplication (WGD) are believed
to be very important for the transition to complex organisms [6,9]. Duplicate genes that persist in multiple copies
may diverge by differentiation of sequence and function.
This process is affected by factors including pathway
redundancy and modularity, as well as dosage of gene
expression.
As a consequence, gene duplication is also an important mechanism for the shaping of complex regulatory
networks (which have to "manage" the repertoire of genes
available to a genome) during evolutionary growth of a
genome. The analysis of the currently available transcriptional network topologies from functional genomics
experiments [10-13] has considerably increased our
insight into network architecture and evolution, both on
local and global scales. However, previous results have
rarely been able to isolate general rules, which might
potentially underly changes in the regulatory interactions
after a duplication event, or which could describe the

© 2010 Fusco et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Fusco et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77

consequences of interaction changes on the fate of duplicate genes [14].
Here, we report a case where some general rules appear
to emerge. We adopted a mathematical/physical
approach to the systematic analysis of the topological
properties of a transcription network after a WGD, considering the yeast S. cerevisiae. For this species, the transcription network topology is known and has been
explored to a considerable extent [1]. Studies of comparative genomics demonstrated that S. cerevisiae arose from
an ancient WGD [7,15-17], that occurred 100-150 million
years ago. The evolutionary history of individual genes is
well mapped [4,18]. Our method is based on elementary
"duplication subgraphs", relating ancestral interactions
with newly formed ones following duplications of known
age.

Methods
We used the set of transcriptional regulatory interactions
of yeast compiled by Balaji and coworkers [11], consisting
of4441 nodes (genes) and 12899 regulatory links assembled from the results of genetic, biochemical and ChlPchip experiments.
Strictly speaking, in order to detect the fate of ancestral
transcription factor-target interaction pairs after duplications, one would need data on the transcriptional network of the pre-duplication ancestor of S.cerevisiae.
Clearly this data is not directly available. However, based
on some simple assumptions, we can reconstruct an
approximation of the pre-duplication network as a superposition of regulatory interactions among duplicated
genes.
The standard way to perform this analysis [10,13,19] is
to consider the distribution of interactions across homology classes, i.e., classes of network nodes which have a
likely common ancestor. In our case, since we need to
examine specifically the WGD and compare its effect to
small-scale duplications, it is necessary to have additional
information regarding the duplication date of paralogs.
For this scope, we made use of the paralogue definitions
from the Fungal Orthogroups Database v1.1 http://
www.broadinstitute.org/regev/orthogroups/, which gives
the orthogroup assignments for all predicted proteincoding genes across 23 Ascomycete fungal genomes.
These data are built through a phylogenetic reconstruction of yeasts, and thus allow to estimate duplication
dates [4]. More specifically, ref. [4] defines nine age
groups divided into three pre-WGD, five post-WGD and
a group of WGD duplicates. While the size of the duplication age groups varies greatly, this does not affect our
study, as we consider normalized observables or scores
against a null model. For most of our analyses, we
regrouped the nine duplicate classes into post-WGD,
WGD, and pre-WGD. Most of our attention was devoted

Page 2 of 9

to the pre-WGD to WGD transition. Overall, we considered 438 WGD pairs (of which 26 were TF pairs) and 363
non-WGD pairs (of which 28 involve TFs.)
We estimated the ancestral networks by consecutive
collapses of paralogous nodes inside the yeast transcription network (Fig. 1), adopting a conservative model
where a link is considered to be present in the ancestral
network each time an interaction is present between any
of the collapsed nodes (for an estimate of link loss by
rewiring of interactions see also [13]).
We analyzed the network structures emerging from
each duplication age in terms of the "duplication subgraph" (DS) that can be defined to emerge from each link
of the ancestral network (see Fig. 1). Duplication subgraphs can be visualized as colors on the edges of the
ancestral (collapsed) network. Fig. 1 classifies DSs by
symmetry, connectivity and number of links, assigning to
each a color and a greek letter, in order to help in the discussion of the results.

Results
The right panel of Fig. 1 summarises most of the results
that will be quantified in the following. It represents the
network formed by all duplication subgraphs for which at
least one extra interaction has been inherited after the
WGD (i.e. the DSs with at least two links, visualized as
colors on the links of the ancestral network). We will refer
to this structure as the "WGD network". This network
includes only about 5.5% of the ancestral network links. It
is essentially made up of a large single connected feedforward component, where DSs are arranged in an ordered
and hierarchical configuration (note for example that red
links tend to be upstream of blue ones). Fig. 1 classifies
DSs in classes by link number and symmetry: ζ type DSs,
with one link, make up 94.51% of the network, two-linked
red (β, 1.1%) and blue (γ, 4.2%) DSs are heavily dominant
on the rest. The occurrences of the other DSs are α
0.041%, δ 0.049%, 0.066%.
Correlations of conserved interactions after duplications of
TF-target pairs are conveniently represented in terms of
Duplication Subgraphs

So far, we have introduced duplication subgraphs merely
as a data structure. However, focusing on the pre-WGD
to WGD transition, we have found that these entities are
in some sense a necessary representation of the data. The
simplest model for the retention of regulatory links after
gene duplications assumes that the conservation of different links is independent [14,19]. However, while this
approach can be successful in the case of (nondirected)
protein interaction networks [14,20,21], this model of
independent evolution appears insufficient to reproduce
the empirical occurrence of the different WGD DSs. In
terms of parameters, an independent model would con-

Fusco et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77



Page 3 of 9









Figure 1 The WGD transcription network of yeast. Top-left panel: cartoon of the duplication-divergence model. Following a duplication, TF binding sites of duplicate promoters are initially identical. Evolution can retain memory of this initial condition, producing links in the network with consistent statistical patterns compared to homology classes [10,19]. Mid-left panel: scheme of all the possible DSs originating from an ancestral
interaction. DSs are listed by number of links and node degree; DSs that are identical except for exchanges of the duplicate copies are grouped together, as 'old' and 'new' nodes cannot be distinguished in WGD. Each group is associated to a color and a greek letter. Bottom-left panel: scheme of
the analysis procedure. First, the nodes of each duplication age class in the network and corresponding links are collapsed, in order to estimate the
ancestral network. Subsequently, the DSs associated to each ancestral link to annotate the links. This operation is a coloring of the links, where each
color corresponds to a DS. Fully disconnected η-type DSs are ignored. Right panel: the yeast "WGD network" of all nontrivial DSs (having two or more
links). Although ζ type DSs, which make up 94.51% of the network, are not represented, the network is strikingly connected. Red (β, 1.1%) and blue (γ,
4.2%) DSs are heavily dominant. Furthermore, links of the same color are clustered and arranged in a hierarchical fashion (where red precedes blue).
The occurrence of the other DSs is: α0.041%, δ 0.049%, ε 0.066%.

tain at most four probabilities of link conservation (See
Additional File 1, Section 1), but these probabilities and
their products generally do not reproduce the empirical
occurrence of DSs.
An alternative description that can be useful to adopt
assigns conservation probabilities to edges and to the
number of nodes conserved in a duplication subgraph.
This is parametrically equivalent to the description in
terms of duplication subgraphs, assuming that the nodes
that remain isolated are eventually lost. In the following,
we will mainly use the duplication subgraph framework,

as it gives a simple view of correlations between adjacent
duplicated interactions, useful for modeling the process.
The duplication subgraphs stemming from the WGD are
nontrivially distinct from those emerging from small-scale
duplications

On the other hand, the pattern of abundance of duplication subgraphs (and thus the necessity to represent data
in terms of duplication subgraphs) is very specific of the
WGD, and small-scale duplications behave quite differently. In order to show this, we compared the different
duplication age classes, both in terms of the relative

Fusco et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77

Page 4 of 9

abundance of DSs, and in terms of their overrepresentation with respect to the standard random model that
shuffles homology classes (without mixing transcription
factors and targets [10]). Fig. 2 and Additional File 1,
Tables S2 to S5 resume the results of the two analyses.
Fig. 2 also contains a duplication subgraph legend that
can be used as a reference to interpret most of the results
that will follow.
The analysis of absolute abundance shows that the
occurrence of every DS, normalized by the number of
duplicated links, is WGD-specific. In particular, the
WGD produced a larger number of γ subgraphs and of
other DSs involving duplicate transcription factors. In
terms of overrepresentation compared to the random
model, all DSs are more enriched in the WGD than in
pre- and post-WGD duplications. Considering the WGD
and non-WGD sets collectively confirms this result
(Additional File 1, Tables S2 to S5). This random null
model compensates for the different number of duplicated TFs in the different duplication age groups, and in
particular among WGD versus non-WGD duplicates. In
particular, Additional File 1, Tables S2 to S5 show a
higher statistical abundance of duplication subgraphs
involving crosstalk between ancestral and newly-formed
interactions involving WGD duplicates.
Note that all duplication subgraphs (and in particular
the duplication subgraph of four links) are a construction
that in the case of the WGD-produced duplications, corresponds to a single event where the TF and its target

were duplicated at the same time. Outside the WGD, all
the duplication subgraphs are accessible only to a series
of successive small-scale duplications (belonging to the
same age group in our analysis) of TFs and their targets.
Thus, Fig 2 and Additional File 1, Tables S2 to S5 strictly
compare the results of two different evolutionary processes, and show that they yield different results.
It has been empirically demonstrated [22] that the
number of common regulatory inputs of paralogous proteins decays with age since the duplication event (measured by sequence similarity of paralogs). While the age
resolution in our study is coarser and this observation is
related to duplication subgraphs in a complex way, the
finding can be reconciled with Fig. 2 by the fact that the
fraction of β-type duplication subgraphs roughly decays
with duplication age in non-WGD paralogs, when all
post-WGD paralogs, which correspond to a short evolutionary time compared to the other age groups, are considered as one point (see Additional File 1, Table S1).
One-shot duplication-divergence model based on
duplication subgraphs

Fig. 1 suggests that DSs have an ordered configuration in
the collapsed network representing the ancestral preWGD interactions. In other words, the clustered links of
the same color and hierarchical distribution of red and
blue links would be rarely observed if the coloring of
these links were not correlated. In order to probe the significance of this observation, we designed a "one-shot"

D.S./ D.E.

α
ε
δ

0,01



0

0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2

Z-score of DS abundance

Dup. Subgraphs / Dup. Edges

60

β
γ

1

β
γ
α
ε
δ

50
40
30
20
10
0

0

Post-WGD

WGD

Pre-WGD

Duplication Age Groups
RECENT

ANCIENT

-10

Post-WGD

WGD

Pre-WGD

Duplication Age Groups
RECENT

ANCIENT

Figure 2 The DSs stemming from the WGD are significantly different from those emerging from small-scale duplications. Left panel: absolute
abundance of DSs (normalized by the total number of duplicated edges, i.e. DSs with two or more links) plotted as a function of duplication age. For
this analysis all the duplication age classes of ref. [4] were employed. We have plotted α-, δ- and ε- type DSs on a separate graph (upper left panel)
because of the difference in scale. Central panel: plot of the relative DSs abundance with respect to a null model shuffling homology classes vs. duplication age. We considered the Z-score of DS abundance for the grouped pre-WGD, post-WGD and WGD duplication age classes. Both plots show
that the trends of DS abundance are distinct for the WGD. Right panel: duplication subgraph legend.

Fusco et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77

WGD duplication subgraphs form a connected network

The empirical WGD network, formed by all nontrivial
DSs, is made of one large connected component and very
few small ones. Using the one-shot duplication model, we
considered the probability, in a random realization, that
the WGD network formed by all nontrivial DSs has an
equally dominant connected component (Fig. 3). We performed this test on the transcription factor WGD network (shown in Additional File 1, Figure S1), whose
largest connected component is made of 41 (out of 48)
DSs. This subnetwork constitutes the essential part of the
WGD network, as only transcription factors can send out
links. Our test indicates that the connectedness of the
WGD network is significant (P-value 0.001 or less), which
in fact justifies the notion of the WGD network itself.
WGD duplication subgraphs have an uneven distribution in
the hierarchical and feedback components of the network

Duplication subgraphs of different kinds have different
roles in the network. In order to show this, we divided the
ancestral (collapsed) network into hierarchical components (see the cartoon in Fig. 4 and refs. [13,19]); we then
estimated the enrichment of DSs in each component after
the WGD with respect to our null model.
The central component is the feedback "core", i.e., the
set of links involved in feedback loops, which we find to
be enriched in all nontrivial DSs. The rest of the network

NORMALIZED OCCURRENCE

S. cerevisiae
Randomized

0,15
0,1
0,05
0
0

8

16

24

# CONNECTED COMPONENTS
IN WGD NETWORK

NORMALIZED OCCURRENCE

duplication-divergence model, where each link of the
ancestral (collapsed) network is assigned a random duplication subgraph (i.e. is colored with prescribed probability). The basic entities of the model are thus individual
duplication subgraphs, corresponding to ancestral regulatory interactions colored by the fate they followed during the WGD. This approach assumes a single collective
duplication move as in a previous model by Presser and
coworkers [14] and is not concerned with asymptotic
properties as were other models present in the literature
[20]. As illustrated in Fig. 3, this procedure is equivalent
to a random coloring of the network links, where each
color corresponds to a duplication subgraph. In particular, we assigned the empirical probabilities of producing
each DS to the ancestral edges, so that randomized colorings would conserve the occurrence of each duplication
subgraph.
Note that this model is very different from the standard
null model shuffling homology classes that was used in
the evaluation of DS occurrence [10,19]. The latter is
designed to test the hypothesis that a given local network
structure (a transcription factor -target interaction)
stems from duplication, while the one-shot model probes
the randomness of the distribution of duplication-inherited structures across the network, corresponding to colorings of the ancestral network.

Page 5 of 9

0,08

S. cerevisiae
Randomized

0,06
0,04
0,02
0
0

16

32

48

SIZE OF LARGEST
CONNECTED COMPONENT
IN WGD NETWORK

Figure 3 One-shot WGD network duplication model and connected structure of the transcription-factor WGD network. Top
panel: in order to test for significant large-scale structures in the organization of duplication subgraphs in the network, we employed a oneshot network WGD (null) model, assigning to each ancestral edge a
random duplication subgraph with probability equal to its empirical
frequency. The model can be described as a random coloring of the
ancestral (collapsed) network links. Middle and bottom panel: significance of the connectedness of the transcription-factor WGD network
scored by the one-shot model. For each one of 4000 model realizations, we considered the histogram of the number of connected components (middle plot) and of the size of the largest connected
component (bottom plot) of the network involving transcription-factor DSs with two or more links), and compared it to the empirical case.
Networks containing a single large connected component as in the
empirical one are very infrequent in the random model (P-value 0.001
for number, 5E-4 for size of connected components).

Fusco et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77

Page 6 of 9

U PSTREAM

D UPLICATION
S UBGRAPH

•α
•β
•γ
•δ
•
•ζ

C ORE

Z- SCORE
−0.17
4.97
−1.72
−0.18
−0.21
−0.71

Z- SCORE
−0.5
−0.41
3.39
0.09
−0.55
−2.70

Z- SCORE
6.23
2.85
2.45
2.65
2.20
−4.53

S ELF -

REGION

•α
•β
•γ
•δ
•
•ζ

D OWNSTREAM

T REE - LIKE

D UPLICATION
S UBGRAPH

LINKS

U PSTREAM
+ C ORE

Z- SCORE
−0.93
−0.88
−7.88
−1.02
−1.18
7.68

Z- SCORE
−0.10
−0.54
0.88
−0.11
15.13
−2.22

Z- SCORE
5.39
4.87
1.33
2.24
1.83
−4.32

Figure 4 Duplication subgraphs are organized hierarchically in the WGD network. See the duplication subgraph legend in Fig. 2. Left panel:
scheme of the hierarchical organization of the ancestral network's links. The numbers refer to the links found in each component. The "core" is the
component formed by the set of links involved in feedback loops. The rest of the network is made up of feed-forward, tree-like components that are
placed upstream or downstream of the core, or run "beside" it by connecting roots to leaves. Right panel: distribution of DSs in the hierarchical components of the network, scored by the WGD one-shot null model. The feedback core is enriched with all nontrivial DSs, the upstream part with α and
β DSs, and the downstream part with γ DSs.

is made up of feed-forward, tree-like components. The
component upstream of the core (containing input nodes
or "roots") is enriched in type β DSs, while the downstream component (containing target nodes or "leaves") is
enriched in γ DS. Finally, the component running
"beside" the core connecting roots to leaves is enriched in
the trivial ζ-type DS. Interestingly, self regulators are
enriched in ε DS, confirming previous results [13]
obtained with a different model.
Neighbouring duplication subgraphs are highly correlated

Finally, we used the one-shot model to probe the correlated occurrence of DSs of different types on the ancestral
network (Fig 5). Neighbouring links in the ancestral network can be of three kinds: first, two links may emerge
from the same node (adjacent outgoing). In this case, we
find a marked preference for the same DS in both outgoing links, explaining the observed "patches" of the same
color in the WGD network (Fig. 1). This correlation
among adjacent outgoing links can be explained by individual duplicated transcription factors inheriting links
which connect them to a correlated set of targets. Second,
two links can point to the same node (adjacent incoming).
Adjacent incoming links tend to be two β DSs, creating a
feed-forward subgraph with four nodes and four links
(resembling an ε-type DS). Interestingly, this pattern
gives full cross-connectivity between the ancestral and
the duplicate pathways. Third, two links can be arranged
head to tail (consecutive). Many consecutive links consist
of a β DSs upstream of a γ, again maintaining full cross-

PAIR

ζ ←→ζ
ζ ←→β
ζ ←→γ
β ←→β
β ←→γ
γ ←→γ

A DJACENT
I NCOMING
Z- SCORE
0.68
−4.19
0.68
25.64
−1.49
−1.32

A DJACENT
O UTGOING
Z- SCORE
25.81
−0.45
−56.19
44.53
−25.27
157.1

C ONSECUTIVE
PAIR

ζ −→ζ
ζ −→β
ζ −→γ
β −→ζ
β −→β
β −→γ
γ −→ζ
γ −→β
γ −→γ

Z- SCORE
2.49
−36.48
−7.32
34.25
−8.83
33.81
0.47
−10.51
3.09

Figure 5 Adjacent duplication subgraphs are correlated. Neighbouring relationships between links in the ancestral network can be of
three kinds: (i) two links emerge from the same node (adjacent outgoing), (ii) two links point to the same node (adjacent incoming), (iii) two
links are arranged head to tail (consecutive). The tables contain correlation significance scores measured with the WGD one-shot model for
the co-occurrence of neighbour DSs of type ζ, β, and γ in the ancestral
network. The significantly co-occurring pairs indicate that adjacent
outgoing links tend to generate equal DSs (see Additional File 1, Fig.
S2.) Adjacent incoming links preferentially produce two γ DSs, and
consecutive links are significantly enriched in β DSs upstream of γ subgraphs; both configurations maintain full crosstalk between ancestral
and newly formed pathways. See the duplication subgraph legend in
Fig. 2.

Fusco et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77

connectivity between ancestral and newly formed pathways. Moreover, this interaction displays a defined
upstream-downstream hierarchy of DSs, which can also
be observed in Fig. 1. We also tested explicitly whether
the connectivity of pathways was maintained by the
resulting DSs, or in other words whether transcriptional
pathways could be broken after duplication, finding that
connectivity is maintained with very high significance.
(Additional File 1, Tables S6 to S8).
In summary, this analysis shows very characteristic patterns for neighbouring DSs, which are related to their
observed ordered and hierarchical distribution within the
network. We found significant enrichment of two β subgraphs for adjacent incoming interactions, of two γ DSs
for adjacent outgoing links, and of β – γ pairs for consecutive interactions (see Additional File 1, Fig. S2 to visualize the interactions resulting from these correlations).
This reflects an important underlying trend of WGD evolution, namely the preferential cross-connectivity of newly
formed regulatory pathways with ancestral ones.
General rules of whole transcription-network duplications,
and links to spin models

The above result points to the question of whether at
least some of the observed global ordering and hierarchical properties of WGD duplication subgraphs could
emerge from the local correlation patterns of DSs. Biologically this would correspond to the hypothesis that the
network organization can be seen by individual duplicate
nodes only through their neighbours. From the modeling
viewpoint, answering the above question requires transforming the one-shot network duplication model from a
statistical tool to a positive (or predictive) model. In physical terms, the model is essentially a spin model, where
spins, or colors representing DSs, are placed on links of
the ancestral network.
While the one-shot null model is purely entropic, a
variant can be introduced where the spins or colors interact with nearest neighbours through the network nodes
(non-local interactions can also be considered, corresponding to different biological hypotheses). One major
problem compared to conventional spin models is that
there are three kinds of possible nearest neighbour interactions, corresponding to the possible arrangement of
neighbouring links in the ancestral network. Notably,
these interactions also correspond to three different
effective interaction networks. For example, if only consecutive interactions are considered, the effective interaction network would treat all links connecting a root to a
leaf as independent. For this reason, a simple spin model
including consecutive interactions only cannot explain
the empirical arrangement of DSs.
While many questions remain open concerning the
inference of general duplication rules from this modeling

Page 7 of 9

approach, we have devised a simple model as proof of
principle that the observed ordered behavior can be
reproduced as the equilibrium state. In particular, the
model considers only ζ, β and γ DSs, interacting through
two coupling constants corresponding to sequential and
adjacent interactions, plus two global external fields to
constrain the magnetizations. Such a model, simulated
with a straightforward Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm, gives spin configurations that are much closer to
the empirical observations compared to the uncoupled
one-shot model; furthermore, the resulting equilibrium
state shows the correct hierarchy and order (see text in
Additional File 1, Section 5, and Additional File 1, Table
S9).

Discussion
We have shown that a WGD transcription network is a
well-defined entity to study, as the network structure that
emerges from this duplication event is connected and
coherent. A simple quantitative picture of the process
based on statistical independence of duplicated interactions is unsatisfactory in this context. Notably, the same
independence hypothesis has proven to be successful in
the context of protein interaction networks [14,20,21].
We can speculate that the reason for this could be a
higher simplicity in protein-interaction with respect to
transcriptional pathways. The failure of a simple model of
independent link conservation obviously does not preclude the possibility that more sophisticated model variants using the hypothesis of independence (such as
introducing an asymmetry between 'fast' versus 'slow'
evolving nodes as in ref. [21]) might be useful to describe
the system. On the other hand, the elements that form
the WGD transcription network are very conveniently
represented by duplication subgraphs, which can be visualized as colors on the edges of the ancestral network.
The pattern of occurrence of DSs is hierarchical and
highly correlated, and is distinct from the pattern seen for
small-scale duplications.
The observation that DSs containing transcription factor nodes are more abundant and statistically enriched in
the WGD is consistent with the previously reported
abundance of WGD-duplicate transcription factors [23].
However, our findings go far beyond previous observations. First, we disentangle the multiplicity of possible
structures formed by duplicate transcription factors. Second, we dissect location and distribution of the emergent
WGD DSs. WGD duplication subgraphs are preferentially found in the network core, which is enriched for
cell-cycle associated genes [13,24]; further, they are differentially distributed in the feed-forward regions
upstream and downstream of the core. While a thorough
functional analysis of the WGD transcription factor network was beyond our scopes, it could be useful to exam-

Fusco et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77

Page 8 of 9

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77

ine the regulatory pathways for all the known important
functions developed by the WGD such as fermentation
and anaerobic respiration in more detail.
The connectedness of transcriptional pathways emerging from the WGD, and the fact that DSs are found preferentially in the higher complexity regions of the
ancestral network, could be related to the so-called "dosage-balance" hypothesis [4,23,25,26]. This hypothesis
states that the only way to replicate a complex connected
pathway would be to replicate it entirely, since any duplication of a single or a few nodes would at least initially
render it unusable by creating an imbalance in the node
stoichiometry. As a consequence, only global duplications
(e.g., WGD) are likely to succeed. For example, it is wellknown that in yeast, polyploidy is at least initially better
tolerated than aneuploidy [6,27,28].
However, why do the emerging pathways also seem to
maximize the crosstalk with ancestral ones? This fact is
independent from the previous, and constitutes another
central finding of the analysis. The WGD created unusually many "cross-talk" links connecting duplicated pathways to each other and unusually few crosstalk-free linear
pathways. The observation is motivated by the high
occurrence of the ε-type duplication subgraph compared
to the a pattern (Additional File 1, Table S2), but also by
the high occurrence of side-by-side adjacent duplication
subgraphs with β-β and γ-γ patterns (which are given in
Fig. 5 and can be visualized in Additional File 1, Figure
S2). The observation is also related to a previously
reported enrichment of "bi-fan" arrays in the network of
whole-genome duplicates [12]. One possible interpretation of this is that the emergent pathways largely encode
for regulatory redundancy [5,23]. We can also hypothesize that this feature has to do with the fact that the transcriptional pathways emerging from the WGD emerged
to regulate newly-formed metabolic pathways, to be used
in alternative to the ancient ones [29,30], giving rise to
the need for some sort of combinatorial cross-exclusion
of the alternative metabolic genes to activate. The same
hypothesis should predict enhanced combinatorial regulation of WGD duplicates, which could possibly be tested
by a direct large-scale promoter sequence analysis. Further verification of the same hypothesis can be sought by
combined analysis of metabolic and transcriptional plasticity after the yeast WGD. To our knowledge, previous
observations are compatible with these speculations [11].
Finally, while in this work we have used the one-shot
network duplication model mainly as a statistical tool, the
simple patterns we have found can be used as the basis
for a possible positive, or predictive, model. We have
given a proof of principle of such a model, and we are
currently exploring in more depth the possible phenomenology and implications, and the possibility of testing the

predictions by analysing different whole-genome duplications.

Additional material
Additional file 1 The file contains additional details and results on the
statistical analysis and the spin model described in this work.
Abbreviations
WGD: whole-genome duplication; TF: transcription factor; DS: duplication subgraph;
Authors' contributions
MCL designed and performed research, and wrote the paper. MC, BB, LG and
DF designed and performed research. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank M.J. Lercher, A. Carbone, H. Isambert, G. Fischer, A.
McLysaght, F. Devaux for useful discussions and/or critical reading of this manuscript. We also thank F. Garue and D. Cora for help with the analysis.
Author Details
1Università degli Studi di Milano, Dip. Fisica. Via Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy,
2Duke University, Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, North
Building, 470 Research Drive, Durham NC 27708, USA, 3Università degli Studi di
Torino, Dip. Fisica Teorica, Via Giuria 1, 10125 Torino, Italy, 4I.N.F.N. Milano, Via
Celoria 16, 20133 Milano, Italy, 5I.N.F.N. Torino, Via Giuria 1, 10125 Torino, Italy
and 6Genomic Physics Group, FRE 3214 CNRS "Microorganism Genomics" and
University Pierre et Marie Curie, 15 rue de l'École de Médecine, 75006, Paris,
France
Received: 12 January 2010 Accepted: 3 June 2010
Published: 3 June 2010
BMC is an Open Access from:BioMed Central Ltd.the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
© 2010 Fuscoavailable article distributed under
This article is Biology 2010, 4:77
Systems et al; licensee http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77

References
1. Babu Madan M, Luscombe NM, Aravind L, Gerstein M, Teichmann SA:
Structure and evolution of transcriptional regulatory networks. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol 2004, 14:283-291.
2. Ohno S: Evolution by gene duplication. London, UK: Allen and Unwin;
1970.
3. Conant GC, Wolfe KH: Turning a hobby into a job: how duplicated genes
find new functions. Nat Rev Genet 2008, 9(12):938-950.
4. Wapinski I, Pfeffer A, Friedman N, Regev A: Natural history and
evolutionary principles of gene duplication in fungi. Nature 2007,
449(7158):54-61.
5. Makino T, Hokamp K, McLysaght A: The complex relationship of gene
duplication and essentiality. Trends Genet 2009, 25(4):152-155.
6. Otto SP: The evolutionary consequences of polyploidy. Cell 2007,
131(3):452-62.
7. Dujon B, Sherman D, Fischer G, Durrens P, Casaregola S, Lafontaine I,
Montigny JD, Marck C, Neuvglise C, Talla E, Goffard N, Frangeul L, Aigle M,
Anthouard V, Babour A, Barbe V, Barnay S, Blanchin S, Beckerich JM, Beyne
E, Bleykasten C, Boisram A, Boyer J, Cattolico L, Confanioleri F, Daruvar AD,
Despons L, Fabre E, Fairhead C, Ferry-Dumazet H, Groppi A, Hantraye F,
Hennequin C, Jauniaux N, Joyet P, Kachouri R, Kerrest A, Koszul R, Lemaire
M, Lesur I, Ma L, Muller H, Nicaud JM, Nikolski M, Oztas S, OzierKalogeropoulos O, Pellenz S, Potier S, Richard GF, Straub ML, Suleau A,
Swennen D, Tekaia F, Wsolowski-Louvel M, Westhof E, Wirth B, ZeniouMeyer M, Zivanovic I, Bolotin-Fukuhara M, Thierry A, Bouchier C, Caudron
B, Scarpelli C, Gaillardin C, Weissenbach J, Wincker P, Souciet JL: Genome
evolution in yeasts. Nature 2004, 430(6995):35-44.
8. Koszul R, Fischer G: A prominent role for segmental duplications in
modeling eukaryotic genomes. C R Biol 2009, 332(2-3):254-266.
9. McLysaght A, Hokamp K, Wolfe KH: Extensive genomic duplication
during early chordate evolution. Nat Genet 2002, 31(2):200-204.
10. Babu MM, Teichmann SA: Gene regulatory network growth by
duplication. Nature Genetics 2004, 36:492-496.

Fusco et al. BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/4/77

11. Balaji S, Babu MM, Iyer LM, Luscombe NM: Comprehensive analysis of
combinatorial regulation using the transcriptional regulatory network
of yeast. Comprehensive analysis of combinatorial regulation using the
transcriptional regulatory network of yeast 2006, 360:213-27.
[Comprehensive analysis of combinatorial regulation using the
transcriptional regulatory network of yeast]
12. Ward JJ, Thornton JM: Evolutionary models for formation of network
motifs and modularity in the Sac-charomyces transcription factor
network. PLoS Comput Biol 2007, 3(10):1993-2002.
13. Sellerio AL, Bassetti B, Isambert H, Cosentino Lagomarsino M: A
comparative evolutionary study of transcription networks. The global
role of feedback and hierachical structures. Mol Biosyst 2009,
5(2):170-179.
14. Presser A, Elowitz MB, Kellis M, Kishony R: The evolutionary dynamics of
the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein interaction network after
duplication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(3):950-954.
15. Wolfe KH, Shields DC: Molecular evidence for an ancient duplication of
the entire yeast genome. Nature 1997, 387(6634):708-13.
16. Kellis M, Birren B, Lander E: Proof and evolutionary analysis of ancient
genome duplication in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature
2004, 428(6983):617-24.
17. Dietrich FS, Voegeli S, Brachat S, Lerch A, Gates K, Steiner S, Mohr C,
Pohlmann R, Luedi P, Choi S, Wing RA, Flavier A, Gaffney TD, Philippsen P:
The Ashbya gossypii Genome as a Tool for Mapping the Ancient
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Genome. Science 2004, 304(5668):304-307.
18. Byrne KP, Wolfe KH: The Yeast Gene Order Browser combining curated
homology and syntenic context reveals gene fate in polyploid species.
Genome Res 2005, 15(10):1456-61.
19. Cosentino Lagomarsino M, Jona P, Bassetti B, Isambert H: Hierarchy and
feedback in the evolution of the Escherichia coli transcription network.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104(13):5516-20.
20. Evlampiev K, Isambert H: Conservation and topology of protein
interaction networks under duplication divergence evolution. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(29):9863-9868.
21. Evlampiev K, Isambert H: Modeling protein network evolution under
genome duplication and domain shuffling. BMC Syst Biol 2007, 1:49.
22. Maslov S, Sneppen K, Eriksen KA, Yan KK: Upstream plasticity and
downstream robustness in evolution of molecular networks. BMC Evol
Biol 2004, 4:9.
23. Guan Y, Dunham MJ, Troyanskaya OG: Functional Analysis of Gene
Duplications in Saccharomyces cere visiae. Genetics 2007,
175(2):933-943.
24. Jeong J, Berman P: On cycles in the transcription network of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. BMC Syst Biol 2008, 2:12.
25. Papp B, Pl C, Hurst LD: Dosage sensitivity and the evolution of gene
families in yeast. Nature 2003, 424(6945):194-197.
26. Aury JM, Jaillon O, Duret L, Noel B, Jubin C, Porcel BM, Sgurens B, Daubin V,
Anthouard V, Aiach N, Arnaiz O, Billaut A, Beisson J, Blanc I, Bouhouche K,
Cmara F, Duharcourt S, Guigo R, Gogendeau D, Katinka M, Keller AM,
Kissmehl R, Klotz C, Koll F, Moul AL, Lepre G, Malinsky S, Nowacki M,
Nowak JK, Plattner H, Poulain J, Ruiz F, Serrano V, Zagulski M, Dessen P,
Btermier M, Weissenbach J, Scarpelli C, Schchter V, Sperling L, Meyer E,
Cohen J, Wincker P: Global trends of whole genome duplications
revealed by the ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia. Nature 2006,
444(7116):171-178.
27. Storchova Z, Kuffer C: The consequences of tetraploidy and aneuploidy.
J Cell Sci 2008, 121(Pt 23):3859-3866.
28. Torres EM, Sokolsky T, Tucker CM, Chan LY, Boselli M, Dunham MJ, Amon
A: Effects of aneuploidy on cellular physiology and cell division in
haploid yeast. Science 2007, 317(5840):916-924.
29. Conant G, Wolfe K: Increased glycolytic flux as an outcome of whole
genome duplication in yeast. Mol Sys Biol 2007, 3(129):.
30. Maslov S, Krishna S, Pang TY, Sneppen K: Toolbox model of evolution of
prokaryotic metabolic networks and their regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2009, 106(24):9743-9748.
doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-77
Cite this article as: Fusco et al., Ordered structure of the transcription network inherited from the yeast whole-genome duplication BMC Systems Biology 2010, 4:77

Page 9 of 9

</pre>
</body>
</html>
