<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Insights into metazoan evolution from alvinella pompejana cDNAs</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-634"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Nicolas Gagnière"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Insights into metazoan evolution from alvinella
pompejana cDNAs
Nicolas Gagnière1, Didier Jollivet2,3, Isabelle Boutet2,3, Yann Brélivet1, Didier Busso1, Corinne Da Silva4,
Françoise Gaill5, Dominique Higuet6, Stéphane Hourdez2,3, Bernard Knoops7, François Lallier2,3,
Emmanuelle Leize-Wagner8, Jean Mary2,3, Dino Moras1, Emmanuel Perrodou1, Jean-François Rees7,
Béatrice Segurens4, Bruce Shillito6, Arnaud Tanguy2,3, Jean-Claude Thierry1, Jean Weissenbach4, Patrick Wincker4,
Franck Zal2,3, Olivier Poch1, Odile Lecompte1*

Abstract
Background: Alvinella pompejana is a representative of Annelids, a key phylum for evo-devo studies that is still
poorly studied at the sequence level. A. pompejana inhabits deep-sea hydrothermal vents and is currently known
as one of the most thermotolerant Eukaryotes in marine environments, withstanding the largest known chemical
and thermal ranges (from 5 to 105°C). This tube-dwelling worm forms dense colonies on the surface of
hydrothermal chimneys and can withstand long periods of hypo/anoxia and long phases of exposure to hydrogen
sulphides. A. pompejana specifically inhabits chimney walls of hydrothermal vents on the East Pacific Rise. To
survive, Alvinella has developed numerous adaptations at the physiological and molecular levels, such as an
increase in the thermostability of proteins and protein complexes. It represents an outstanding model organism for
studying adaptation to harsh physicochemical conditions and for isolating stable macromolecules resistant to high
temperatures.
Results: We have constructed four full length enriched cDNA libraries to investigate the biology and evolution of
this intriguing animal. Analysis of more than 75,000 high quality reads led to the identification of 15,858 transcripts
and 9,221 putative protein sequences. Our annotation reveals a good coverage of most animal pathways and
networks with a prevalence of transcripts involved in oxidative stress resistance, detoxification, anti-bacterial
defence, and heat shock protection. Alvinella proteins seem to show a slow evolutionary rate and a higher
similarity with proteins from Vertebrates compared to proteins from Arthropods or Nematodes. Their composition
shows enrichment in positively charged amino acids that might contribute to their thermostability. The gene
content of Alvinella reveals that an important pool of genes previously considered to be specific to Deuterostomes
were in fact already present in the last common ancestor of the Bilaterian animals, but have been secondarily lost
in model invertebrates. This pool is enriched in glycoproteins that play a key role in intercellular communication,
hormonal regulation and immunity.
Conclusions: Our study starts to unravel the gene content and sequence evolution of a deep-sea annelid,
revealing key features in eukaryote adaptation to extreme environmental conditions and highlighting the proximity
of Annelids and Vertebrates.

* Correspondence: lecompte@igbmc.fr
1
Department of Structural Biology and Genomics, Institut de Génétique et
de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), CERBM F-67400 Illkirch, France;
INSERM, U596, F-67400 Illkirch, France; CNRS, UMR7104, F-67400 Illkirch,
France; Faculté des Sciences de la Vie, Université de Strasbourg, F-67000
Strasbourg, France
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2010 Gagnière et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

Background
Annelids, commonly known as segmented worms, are
typical triploblastic coelomate animals belonging to the
Protostomes. Annelids, and especially polychaetous
annelids, are important systems for understanding evolution and development in animals (for recent reviews,
see [1,2]). Fossil records [3], as well as comparative morphology studies [4], suggested that the urbilaterian (the
last common ancestor of bilateral symmetric animals)
may have resembled annelids. Although such an
assumption is difficult to verify, it is widely accepted
that polychaetes exhibit many ancestral traits in their
body plan and embryonic development [5].
Despite this long history as evo-devo model organisms, polychaete annelids, and more generally Lophotrochozoan representatives, are still poorly represented in
sequence databases. Sequencing projects have mainly
focused on Deuterostomes (Chordates and Echinoderms) and Ecdysozoa, i.e. molting Protostomes including arthropods and nematodes [6]. The recent
enlargement and diversification of the sequencing project panel has played a decisive role in obtaining a more
realistic picture of animal evolution. For instance, the
analysis of genomic loci in the marine polychaete Platynereis dumerilii has revealed the intron-rich nature of
annelid genes [7]. More recently, the genome of a bilaterian sister group, the cnidarian sea anemone Nematostella vectensis, has proved to be more complex than
expected, with a gene repertoire, exon-intron structure,
and large-scale gene linkage more similar to vertebrates
than to flies or nematodes [8].
Among polychaete annelids, Alvinella pompejana [9],
the “Pompeii worm”, has attracted attention since it is
currently considered to be one of the most thermotolerant eukaryotes on Earth, withstanding the largest known
chemical and thermal ranges (from 5 to 105°C) [10-12].
This tube-dwelling worm forms dense colonies on the
surface of hydrothermal chimneys and can withstand
long periods of hypo/anoxia and long phases of exposure to hydrogen sulphides [13]. A. pompejana specifically inhabits chimney walls of hydrothermal vents on
the East Pacific Rise [14,15]. It often co-occurs with
Alvinella caudata, a very closely related species, and can
be found in variable proportions according to the chemical conditions. The chimney walls are characterised
by high flows of vent fluid, and therefore the highest
temperatures for vent metazoans (temperatures usually
range between 25 and 60°C, with exceptional bursts up
to 105°C [10,11,13]), as well as high concentrations of
potentially toxic compounds (e.g. H2S). The thermotolerance of alvinellid worms has been confirmed by
laboratory observations of Paralvinella sulfincola thermotaxis [16]. To survive, Alvinella has developed

Page 2 of 15

numerous adaptations at the physiological and molecular levels, such as an increase in the thermostability of
proteins and protein complexes [17-22]. As such, A.
pompejana constitutes a precious source of thermostable proteins and macromolecular complexes of eukaryotic origin for the biochemical, biophysical or
structural characterisation of proteins of fundamental or
biomedical relevance. It has been selected as a model
organism for structural studies by the Structural Proteomics IN Europe 2 (SPINE2) initiative. The pertinence of
the model is confirmed by the recent study of the superstable superoxide dismutase recombinant protein [23].
The crystal structure at 0.99 Å resolution reveals
anchoring interaction motifs in loops and termini,
accounting for the enhanced stability of the A. pompejana protein compared to its human ortholog.
Here, we report the construction, sequencing and analysis of four full-length enriched cDNA libraries of A.
pompejana. One of these libraries has been constructed
from complete animals after removal of the dorsal tegument, which harbours an episymbiont community of
Epsilonproteobacteria [24]. The other three libraries
have been prepared from distinct tissues: the gills
located at the anterior part of the animal and oriented
towards the outside of the tube, the ventral tissues and
the posterior region. This latter includes the pygidium
and the subterminal growth zone of the animal where
cell proliferation takes place. These three tissues, radically different with respect to their physiological roles,
have been chosen in order to improve the transcriptome
coverage. They also represent samples along the anteroposterior axis of A. pompejana since it has been
reported that the body of the animal experiences a temperature gradient, the posterior part of A. pompejana
being exposed to higher temperatures [10,12].
Analysis of the cDNA sequences allowed the determination of 9,221 putative protein sequences that were
annotated using a new integrative functional annotation
pipeline. The observed abundance of transcripts related
to oxidative stress resistance, detoxification, anti-bacterial defence and heat shock protection, as well as the
compositional bias detected in the protein sequences,
may contribute to the adaptation of the Pompeii worm
to its challenging habitat. From an evolutionary perspective, our analysis reveals striking similarities between
Annelids and Deuterostomes, both in terms of sequence
conservation and gene repertoires that raise interesting
issues concerning the nature of the Bilaterian ancestor.

Results and discussion
cDNA libraries, EST assembly and cDNA characterization

Four non normalized libraries enriched in full length
cDNA were constructed, with an average insert size of

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

Page 3 of 15

Table 1 Summary of A. pompejan a cDNA libraries and assemblies
CloneMiner
Whole animal
Initial chromatograms
Clean sequences
3’ poly(A) (%)
Mean length (bp)
Unigenes after assembly

Oligo-capping
Pygidium

Ventral tissue

Global assembly
Gills

20,549

36,648

16,411

26,569

100,177

19,739 (96%)

25,419 (69%)

12,871 (78%)

18,105 (68%)

76,134 (76%)

1,599 (8%)

3,156 (12%)

5,465 (43%)

1,467 (8%)

11,687 (15%)

633

610

720

776

674

5,425

8,682

2,831

3,760

15,858

Contigs

1,365

2,327

917

1,193

4,993

Singletons
Contig mean length (bp)

4,060
993

6,355
951

1,914
852

2,567
931

10,865
1,017

2.5-3 Kb. The first library was prepared using whole
adult individuals while the others were constructed from
dissected tissues: gills, ventral tissue, and pygidium. A
total of 100,177 chromatograms were processed by our
semi-automated assembly pipeline (see Methods). 76%
of the initial raw sequences fulfil our stringent quality
criteria, and have a mean length of 674 bp (Table 1).
The percentage of sequences exhibiting a poly(A) tail
ranges between 8 and 12% in the different libraries,
except in the ventral tissue library in which 42% of the
sequences contain a poly(A) tail. The sequences were
submitted to the EST section of the EMBL database
under accession numbers FP489021 to FP539727 and
FP539730 to FP565142.
The assembly of the 76,134 selected sequences (12.4
Mb) was performed by CAP3 using stringent parameters
to avoid misassembly problems such as creation of chimeric contigs or combination of paralogs. We performed a global assembly of all sequences as well as a
separate assembly for each library (Table 1). The global
assembly yielded 4,993 contigs and 10,865 singlets
(15,858 unigene sequences). Contig size ranges from
2 to 7,845 reads with a mean of 13 and a median of 3
(see Additional file 1, Figure S1). The average length of
contigs is 1,017 bp. Taking into account our conservative approach, each contig and singlet of this assembly
ideally represents a unique version of an expressed gene,
i.e. paralogs, divergent alleles or splicing variants should
not coalesce into the same contig.
The 15,858 unique sequences from the global assembly were analysed using two independent methods
(ESTScan and a similarity-based approach) to determine
the boundaries of the CoDing Sequences (CDS) and
UnTranslated Regions (UTR). A total of 9,221 coding
regions was obtained, including 2,932 complete CDS.
The complete CDS lengths range from 90 nt to 2,694 nt
with a mean of 540 nt (see the distribution of the corresponding protein lengths in Additional file 2, Figure S2).
The mean GC content in the CDS is 46.2%. As previously observed in eukaryotic mRNAs [25-27], the
mean GC content in A. pompejana is higher for the

5’UTR (45.7%) than for the 3’UTR (39.7% without poly
(A) tail) and is comparable to the value previously
observed in Annelids (43.7% and 34.1% respectively,
data compiled from UTRdb [28]).
A. pompejana genes undergo a neutral evolutionary
process?

To investigate the evolutionary model driving the GC
content in A. pompejana, an in-depth GC analysis was
performed on the 84 almost complete mRNA coding for
ribosomal proteins, including 15 genes expressed at low
levels associated with the mitochondrial ribosome, and a
set of genes with mid-to-high expression associated with
the nuclear ribosome. The analysis shows that the GC3
content of CDS (0.481 ± 0.075) was significantly higher
than the overall GC content of CDS (0.422 ± 0.029) and
both UTR regions (0.389 ± 0.051; pairwise t-test, p <
0.0001). Unexpectedly, the GC3 was found to be constant, regardless of the length of the coding regions (F =
0.92, p-value = 0.341), even though a significant positive
relationship exists between the cDNA length and its
level of transcription (F = 18.18, p-value = 5 10-5) when
estimated from the number of gene repeats in cDNA
libraries. This number ranges from one (mt S proteins)
to 223 copies (P0). Another striking result was the non
linear evolution of the GC3 content of ribosomal protein transcripts with the level of gene expression. Both
GC3 (CDS) and GC (UTRs) contents rapidly increased
with the number of copies until they reached a plateau
at a threshold value of c.a. 25-30 copies (see Additional
file 3, Figure S3). The GC3 and GC content asymptotic
values of CDS and UTR were close to 0.55 and 0.40,
respectively. The correlation was significant (coding
regions: F = 9.41, p-value = 0.003), although it was not
significant when the mt ribosomal-protein genes were
removed from the dataset. Analysis of codon usage in
the ribosomal set revealed that eight of the most frequent codons are terminated by C or G (Phe, Leu, Tyr,
His, Gln, Asn, Lys and Glu), seven by A or T (Ser, Pro,
Thr, Asp, Cys, Arg, Gly) and three by two equallyfrequent codons (Ile, Val and Ala). The search of

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

optimal (Fop) codons using the factorial multivariate analysis tool in the CodonW software indicated that 7 ATended codons (TTA, CTA, ATA, TTT, AGT, GAA and
TCA) were clearly associated with low-expressed mitochondrial ribosomal genes (first axis, inertia = 9.95% of the
whole variance: data not shown). Five GC-ended codons
(TAC, GCG, ATC, AAG, GCC) and CGT (Arg) were positioned at the other extremity of the first axis but without a
clear relationship with the level of expression.
In general, synonymous codon usage biases are
explained by two alternative but non exclusive models: a
neutral mutational-bias and a selective model [29]. The
expectation of the mutational-bias model corresponds to
a positive relationship between the base composition of
synonymous sites and their neighbouring silent sites (i.e.
UTR and/or introns). In agreement with this model, we
found a positive correlation between the GC3 and the
GC(UTR), suggesting that both GC classes are evolving
in the same way. The selective model postulates a coevolution between synonymous codon usage and the
abundance of tRNA to optimize the translation efficiency (notion of ‘optimal’ codons). According to EyreWalker [30], selection maximizes the speed of the translation and minimizes the costs of proofreading, resulting
in a codon usage correlated with the expression level
and the mRNA length. Such correlations have been
observed in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis [31] but not
in Vertebrates [29]. In A. pompejana, there is no correlation between the GC3 and the level of gene expression
within the set of nuclear ribosomal genes used. Even if
differences were observed when considering the level of
ribosomal gene expression, this was mainly due to the
presence of two distinct sets of ribosomal protein genes
(i.e. mitochondrial ribosome versus nuclear ribosome).
Such a result also held for the Fop codons since no
clear gradient of expression was found among the
nuclear ribosomal genes along the first axis of the COA
although the preferred AT-ended codons were clearly
associated with the mitochondrial ribosomal genes.
Additionally, no correlation was found between GC3
and cDNA length. Thus, there is no evidence for a
selective process acting on silent sites although extended
analyses on GC content bias over the genome and the
whole transcriptome [32] are clearly necessary to validate the predominance of the neutral model in A.
pompejana.
Integrative functional annotation

The 7,353 protein sequences from the global assembly
that exhibit homology in the protein databases were
analysed using a new integrative functional annotation
pipeline (Gagnière et al., manuscript in preparation).
The originality of this pipeline lies in the exploitation of
the evolutionary context of the protein sequences based

Page 4 of 15

Table 2 Overview of the annotation results
Level 1 annotations

Number of proteins (%)

Proteins with homologs

7,353 (100%)

Pfam-A domains

4,767 (65%)

Gene Ontology

5,949 (81%)

GO Biological Process

5,072 (69%)

GO Cellular Component

4,530 (62%)

GO Molecular function

5,601 (76%)

Text mining definition

4,611 (63%)

Enzyme classification
EC level 4 (X.X.X.X)

1,243 (17%)
1,180 (16%)

Annotated proteins
Level 2 annotations

6,252 (85%)
Number of networks

KEGG pathways

345

Mapped pathways

202

Coverage > 50%

82

STRING subnetworks

385

Mapped subnetworks
Coverage > 50%

264
63

on a clustered Multiple Alignment of Complete
Sequences (MACS) [33]. The sequences are thus analysed in the framework of the overall family and subfamily, allowing a reliable propagation of sequence
annotations in conserved regions. Thanks to this novel
pipeline, 6,252 (85.0%) of the 7,353 protein sequences
with homology were annotated with either a text mining
definition, an EC number, Pfam-A domains or a Gene
Ontology term (Table 2).
This primary annotation was used to map the A. pompejana query proteins to the networks of the KEGG and
EMBL STRING databases. The reconstructed metabolic
pathways and interaction networks constitute an integrative second level annotation which is essential to the
study of the biological processes at work in A. pompejana. Among the 345 metabolic reference pathways of
the KEGG database, 82 pathways (40.6%) have been
populated by A. pompejana proteins at a level greater
than 50% (in terms of number of distinct enzymes).
Since the reference pathways are highly redundant (several enzymes can catalyse the same reaction), the A.
pompejana cDNA appear to provide a good coverage of
a large panel of metabolic pathways. Common pathways
such as glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, citrate cycle, purine
and pyrimidine metabolism are functionally complete or
almost complete. More specific pathways are also well
represented, such as androgen and estrogen metabolism
or steroid biosynthesis, as illustrated in Additional file 4,
Figure S4. 3,582 A. pompejana proteins (48.1%) have
also been mapped to human networks in the STRING
database, which were first cut into smaller sub-networks
(see methods). 68.8% of these human sub-networks were
populated by at least one A. pompejana ortholog.

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

In the absence of a complete annotated genome of a
close relative of A. pompejana and considering the
diversity of genome size reported in polychaete annelids
(from 58 Mb to 7 Gb [34], A. pompejana being intermediate with 675 Mb [35] for 32 chromosome pairs
[36]), we cannot estimate the coverage of our cDNA
libraries. However, the mapping of A. pompejana proteins on KEGG metabolic pathways and on STRING
networks emphasizes the broad coverage of our cDNA
databases and provides an integrative framework for the
interpretation of A. pompejana’s proteome features.
A. pompejana database and website

The sequences and annotation features are stored in a
relational database [37] that maintains fine grained
information about (i) the library origin of each clone,
(ii) the nucleic sequences and their phred quality values,
(iii) the different assemblies and their associated parameters, (iv) the predicted protein sequences and (v) all
the results of the annotation process.
The data are accessible via a user-friendly web interface. To allow intuitive querying of the database and
convivial data visualisation, we developed dedicated
tools, ranging from trace visualization to the interactive
display of the alignment of A. pompejana protein

Page 5 of 15

sequences and their families (Figure 1). Two modules
are available for querying the database: a homology
search module using NCBI BLAST and a module for
performing full-text searches of all annotations. Subsets
of relevant data can then be selected from the search
results for display purposes. Different views are available: (1) nucleic cDNA sequence, (2) EST trace and sixframe translation, (3) contig schematic representation,
(4) Consed-like [38] contig alignment view, (5) MACSIMS annotated protein alignment with customisable
features display, (6) integrative view of the annotation
process (text mining definition, EC number, Gene
Ontology, Pfam-A domains, KEGG pathway mapping,
EMBL STRING mapping).
Adaptation to hypoxia, oxidative stress and heavy metals

As an endemic species of the hydrothermal vent ecosystem colonizing the chimney walls, A. pompejana has to
deal with very variable conditions that are the result of
a chaotic mixing of vent fluid (350°C, anoxic, CO2- and
sulphide-rich) and deep-sea water (2°C, mildly hypoxic).
In this environment, oxygen and CO2 concentrations,
pH and sulphide levels vary quickly and over a wide
range. These challenging environmental conditions seem
to be reflected in the highly expressed gene pool

Figure 1 Screenshots of the Alvinella website illustrating some of the visualisation tools.

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

Page 6 of 15

Table 3 Highly expressed genes in A. pompejana libraries
Access

Fonction

Reads*

TERA04282 Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (EC 1.9.3.1)

7845

TERA02741 Hypothetical protein

2029

TERA02189 Hypothetical protein

917

TERA02142 Hypothetical protein

879

TERA03177 Actin

533

TERA00344 Extracellular globin (Haemoglobin A2 chain
precursor)

524

TERA02067 Hypothetical protein

424

TERA00650 Hypothetical protein

422

TERA03305 Intracellular haemoglobin

386

TERA00833 Extracellular haemoglobin (Haemoglobin B2 chain
precursor)

370

TERA00205 Extracellular haemoglobin linker L1
TERA03100 Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 5A (EC 1.9.3.1)

349
344

TERA00354 Cytochrome b

338

TERA04769 Hypothetical protein

335

TERA00845 Extracellular haemoglobin (Haemoglobin B1 chain
precursor)

322

TERA02090 Hypothetical protein

304

TERA01907 Small heat shock protein (sHSP)

295

TERA02261 Myosin essential light chain

285

TERA01929 Hypothetical protein

275

TERA00421 Extracellular haemoglobin linker L3
TERA03231 Glutathione peroxidase

267
264

TERA01189 Hypothetical protein

263

TERA02903 Hypothetical protein

258

TERA01828 Tropomyosin

232

TERA00984 Hypothetical protein

230

TERA02160 Elongation factor 1-alpha

218

TERA01465 Peptidoglycan recognition protein

200

*The last column indicates the number of reads in the global assembly.

detected using two complementary indicators: the size
of the cDNA clusters (in terms of the number of reads)
(Table 3) and the abundance of transcripts corresponding to a PFAM-A domain (Figure 2). Domains involved
in protein-protein or protein-DNA/RNA interactions are
particularly abundant (calcium-binding domain EF-hand,
WD-40 repeat, RNA recognition motif RRM_1,
ankyrin...), as frequently observed in studies of eukaryotic transcriptomes [39-41]. The highly expressed genes
also include genes encoding extracellular structural proteins, such as collagen, as well as cytoskeleton proteins
(actin, myosin, tropomyosin, calponin, tubulin, troponin). More interestingly, most abundant transcripts
encompass genes clearly linked to oxygen homeostasis,
oxidative stress resistance, detoxification and to a lesser
extent, antibacterial defense and heat shock protection.
Considering the stress of depressurization, dramatic
temperature decrease, and the general trauma endured
by animals during sampling, the transcript abundance
should be interpreted cautiously. A more detailed

analysis using species-specific oligo microarrays on a set
of specimens from an isobaric collection would be
required to safely deduce the precise role of a given
gene in the environmental response of the worm. Nevertheless, highly expressed genes related to environment
provide interesting clues about general aspects of the
worm adaptation.
Among these genes, the most important fraction corresponds to proteins from the respiratory chain and
three main types of hemoglobins (Hb) reported in Alvinellidae, namely a non-circulating cytoplasmic globin,
the extracellular giant annelid hexagonal bilayer HBLHb of the vascular system and the circulating intracellular Hb found in the coelomic fluid (for a review, see
[42]). The abundance of Hbs in A. pompejana and their
high oxygen affinities [43] may be determinant in the
respiratory adaptation to hypoxic/anoxic environments.
Interestingly, the set of highly expressed genes includes
several “hypothetical proteins” (Table 3). They exhibit
sequence segments with a biased residue composition
and have no significant similarity with known proteins,
except in some cases for low complexity regions. One of
these specific proteins, TERA02189, belongs to a family
of proteins that is highly conserved in A. pompejana. A
comparative proteomics study [44] revealed that three
members (TERA02082, TERA02935 and TERA08242) of
this family are differentially expressed depending on the
oxygen concentration. These oxygen-responsive genes
represent potential candidates that may contribute to
oxygen homeostasis.
Despite the hypoxia encountered in its environment,
the Pompeii worm can be subject to exogenous oxidative stress [45]. High levels of ferrous iron and sulphide
have been reported to favour the formation of reactive
sulphide species (RSS), an analog to ROS. This is in
agreement with the high level of expression observed for
the major antioxidative enzymes in A. pompejana: Mn
and Cu/Zn superoxide dismutases, peroxiredoxins, glutathion peroxidases (GPX), thioredoxin. Interestingly, no
catalase cDNA was detected in our set. Although we
cannot exclude the existence of a catalase gene (possible
low expression of this gene), the absence of cDNA in
our sample suggests that H2O2 formation might not be
the most common mechanism of detoxification. An earlier study [45] also questioned the presence of catalase
in Paralvinella grasslei, a close relative of A. pompejana.
The authors suggested that alternative H2O2-scavengers, such as antioxidant osmolytes or other enzymes
might replace the catalase activity. Indeed, taking into
account the diversity and level of expression of glutathione peroxidases and peroxiredoxins in A. pompejana, SOD-derived H2O2 could be degraded by
peroxidases rather than by catalases as suggested by
Dixon and colleagues [46].

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

Page 7 of 15

Figure 2 The 30 most frequent PFAM-A domains identified in A. pompejana protein sequences. The Y-axis indicates the total number of
reads encoding proteins with this domain. We used a logarithmic scale for representation constraints. Bars are coloured according to functional
role categories: respiration, oxidative stress and/or detoxification in blue, protein-protein or protein-DNA/RNA interactions in green, structural
proteins in red, anti-bacterial defence in orange and others in grey.

In addition to hypoxia and oxidative stress, A. pompejana has to deal with large amounts of heavy metals.
Invertebrates possess a variety of cellular detoxification
pathways that reduce the concentrations of potentially
toxic metals circulating in the blood (reviewed in [47]).
These pathways include metal binding by cysteine-rich
proteins known as metallothioneins, followed by their
elimination through the lysosomal endomembrane system. We detected a single EST coding for a metallothionein-like protein in our library suggesting that
involvement of metallothioneins is not the major detoxication process. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that the pool of highly expressed genes of unknown
function contains genes coding for new metallothioneinlike proteins, since the pool of unknown genes appears
to be enriched in cysteine-rich proteins. Another alternative for heavy metal detoxication is the intracellular
sequestration in specific vacuoles producing solid granules [47]. This would be in agreement with the presence
of arsenic, zinc and copper detected in A. pompejana
epidermal cells [48] and the production of a large
amount of iron-containing granules by A. pompejana
mucocytes [49]. Finally, rhodanese also appears to be
preponderant among the highly expressed genes.

Rhodanese can perform a variety of roles (reviewed in
[50]), including the modulation of general detoxification
processes and the maintenance of redox homeostasis.
Thermo-adaptive features in amino-acid composition

As one of the most thermotolerant eukaryotes known to
date, the Pompeii worm clearly provides a unique model
for the study of adaptation to high temperature in this
domain of life. Its thermal regime generally fluctuates
between 25 and 60°C, with exceptional bursts up to 105°
C [11,13]. These high and variable temperatures require
adaptations at the physiological and molecular levels,
even though we are far from the optimal temperature
range reported in hyperthermophilic prokaryotes. At the
molecular level, several studies have revealed the higher
thermostability of A. pompejana proteins and complexes
compared to their orthologs from other eukaryotes
[17-23]. We thus investigated the composition of A.
pompejana proteins and found a biased composition
compared to their orthologs from 5 major Metazoa
lineages (Vertebrates, Arthropods, Nematodes, Platyhelminthes, Cnidaria) (Additional file 5, Figure S5). The
amino acid composition differed significantly among
taxa (Homogeneity statistic: c2 = 0.01153 G = 0.01153).

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

A. pompejana exhibits the highest proportion of charged
amino acids (nearly 25.5%): a characteristic also shared
by the cnidarian N. vectensis (25.4%). This is mainly due
to an increase of the positively-charged amino acids
lysine and arginine (12.6%). This excess of charged residues may enhance protein stability in thermophilic
eukaryotes, notably by increasing salt-bridges, if they
can interact with negatively-charged residues. This
would be in keeping with the structural analysis of the
superoxide dismutase of A. pompejana [23], suggesting
that extra salt-bridged interactions may be involved in
the superstability of this protein.
In prokaryotes, thermoadaptive molecular features
appear to be multiple and variable [51-56]. Berezovsky
and Shakhnovich [55] suggested two distinct evolutionary strategies to conciliate these conflicting observations.
In prokaryotes with an ancestral thermophilic character
(e.g. Archaea such as Pyrococcus), proteins may be significantly more compact and more hydrophobic than
their mesophilic counterparts. Conversely, organisms
that recently colonized a hot environment such as the
bacteria Thermotoga maritima, may have evolved under
a more ‘’sequence-based’’ mechanism of thermostability.
In this latter case, a few charged amino acid replacements or amino acid deletions increased occurrences of
hydrogen bonds and inter-subunit electrostatic interactions or decreased the length of surface loops respectively. The enrichment in charged residues detected in
A. pompejana suggests that the sequence-based mechanism of thermostability reported to hold in Thermotoga
may also apply to A. pompejana. However, the molecular basis of eukaryotic thermotolerance is probably more
complex than that of the bacterial/archaeal domains,
and additional studies are needed to decipher the molecular basis of thermostability in A. pompejana. These
may include massive structural comparisons between A.
pompejana proteins and mesophilic orthologs, as well as
in-depth comparisons of amino acid compositions
between close relatives of A. pompejana since thermoadaptive features are often masked by a background of
evolutionary sequence divergence.
Proximity between Annelids and Vertebrates

Contradictory results have been obtained in wholegenome based phylogenetic studies that favour either the
classical “Coelomata hypothesis” positioning Nematodes
and Plathyhelminthes as early branching clades [57,58] or
the new animal phylogeny dividing Protostomes in Ecdysozoa (including Arthropods and Nematodes) and
Lophotrochozoa (including Annelids, Molluscs and Platyhelminthes) [8]. To address the evolutionary relationships
between A. pompejana and other animals, we first investigated the phylogenetic position of A. pompejana using a
pool of 76 ribosomal proteins. A phylogenetic tree

Page 8 of 15

reconstruction was performed on the concatenation of
the corresponding multiple alignments using MrBayes
(Figure 3). The obtained topology, together with a maximum parsimony analysis (data not shown), supports the
phylogenetic tree proposed by Aguinaldo et al., with the
exception of Schistosoma japonicum (Platyhelminthes)
that clustered within the Ecdysozoa represented by
Arthropods and Nematodes, rather than Lophotrochozoa
(represented by Molluscs and Annelids).
Compared to other Protostomes used in this study,
the annelids A. pompejana and Lumbricus rubellus and
the mollusc Argopecten irradians show relatively small
branch lengths. Thus, the slow evolutionary rate previously observed in diverse species of the polychaete
lineage [6,7] seems also to hold in A. pompejana, despite
its challenging habitat. In contrast, fast evolutionary
rates are observed in the parasitic worms Schistosoma or
Caenorhabditis, that might lead to a long-branch attraction artefact between these two lineages in the present
analysis and partly explain the contradictory results
obtained in whole-genome based phylogenetic studies.
Differences in the rate of evolution are reflected in the
mean percent identity between orthologs observed in a
pool of 556 unambiguous ortholog families (86,727 positions without gaps) conserved in 6 major Metazoa
lineages (Table 4). A. pompejana, Homo sapiens and N.
vectensis exhibit high sequence conservation relative to
S. japonicum or C. elegans while D. melanogaster
appears intermediate. Thus, the proximity between
annelid and Vertebrate sequences previously reported
for proteins from the polychaete Platynereis dumerilii
[7] is now observable at a larger scale and can be partly
extended to Cnidaria.
Differential gene losses

The proximity between Alvinella, Vertebrates and Cnidaria discussed above is also observable in the gene
repertoire of the Pompeii worm. Only 135 protein
families present in A. pompejana are specific to Protostomes. Among them, only 13 are conserved in all the
Arthropod, Nematode and Platyhelminthe representative
species, illustrating the prevalence of differential gene
losses in Protostomes. Moreover, only 5 proteins in our
dataset are specific to Annelids and Platyhelminthes. As
we only have access to the proteome of a parasitic Platyhelminthe, this apparent split may actually be the consequence of massive gene losses in Schistosoma linked to
its parasitic lifestyle. This illustrates the urgent need for
the sequencing of complete genomes from free-living
species of Platyhelminthes, and more generally from
diverse representatives of Lophotrochozoa, in order to
identify the relationships and synapomorphies unifying
the Spiralia (Annelids and Molluscs) and Platyhelminthes within Lophotrochozoa. Considering the high

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

Page 9 of 15

Figure 3 Bayesian phylogeny of Metazoa. The analysis was performed on a concatenation of 76 ribosomal protein family alignments, with
Saccharomyces cerevisiae as the outgroup. The scale bar indicates the expected number of amino acid substitutions per aligned position. All
nodes were resolved in 100% of the sampled topologies from the Bayesian analysis, except the node indicated by a square (support value of
96%).

proportion of A. pompejana “specific” genes (20%), these
genomes would be especially valuable for the discrimination of genes that are truly specific to Alvinellidae
(and possibly linked to environmental adaptation) and
those that are in fact shared by other lineages of
Lophotrochozoa.
In contrast to the small sets of proteins specific to
Protostomes, 203 A. pompejana proteins belong to
Table 4 Mean percent identities between orthologous
protein sequences of Metazoa
Ap
Alvinella pompejana (Ap)

Hs

Dm

Ce

Sj

Nv

100,0

Homo sapiens (Hs)

65,9

100,0

Drosophila melanogaster (Dm)

62,7

61,7

100,0

Caenorhabditis elegans (Ce)

56,3

55,3

55,1

Schistosoma japonicum (Sj)

57,7

56,0

54,8

51,0

100,0

Nematostella vectensis (Nv)

65,1

64,5

60,8

54,9

55,3

100,0
100,0

families or superfamilies specific to Deuterostomes. This
Deuterostomia-set is significantly enriched in glycoproteins (34 proteins out of 203) that play a key role in
many biological processes, in particular intercellular
communication and adhesiveness, hormonal regulation,
or immunity. For instance, the protein TERA08399
belongs to the superfamily of secreted cysteine rich factors and its N-terminal domain sequence exhibits the
idiosyncratic features of the IGFBP (Insulin-Like Growth
Factor Binding Protein) family reported to be vertebrate-specific [59]. Another noteworthy result is the
enrichment in proteins containing an epidermal growth
factor (EGF)-like domain that is frequently found in the
extracellular part of membrane-bound proteins or in
proteins known to be secreted. In addition, the Deuterostomia-set is enriched in proteins involved in the
I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB cascade or in death-domain
containing proteins that can be involved in the regulation of apoptosis and inflammation or linked to innate

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

immunity. This includes close homologs of the CRADD
and DEDD/DEDD2 protein families (TERA03000 and
TERA04373, respectively) that play a role in the stressinduced apoptosis signalling pathway and are important
mediators for death receptors [60,61]. If we exclude the
possibility of horizontal gene transfer, these genes
encoding important functions previously considered as
specific novelties of Deuterostomes were in fact already
present in the Bilaterian ancestor and were subsequently
lost in Ecdysozoa and Platyhelminthe model species or
diverged beyond recognition in the representative species of Ecdysozoa and Platyhelminthes used in our
study.
In addition to this Deuterostomia-set, 147 A. pompejana protein families are specifically present in both
Deuterostomes and Cnidaria, while 32 are specifically
found in both Cnidaria and at least one Protostome.
These 147 families present in the last common ancestor
of the Eumetazoa may also have been lost in the Ecdysozoa and Platyhelminthe representatives. Interestingly,
this set exhibits an enrichment in the selenium binding
function. Notably, it includes the ortholog of the selenoprotein N involved in the regulation of oxidative stress
and calcium homeostasis [62]. Differential gene losses in
Ecdysozoa are also observed for more ancestral genes.
For instance, the Pompeii worm possesses orthologs of
the component of the phagocytic NADPH oxidase
(Nox) (gp91phox and p22phox) and of some of its regulatory proteins (p47phox, p67phox) that play a critical
role in innate immunity of Deuterostomes. p47phox and
p22phox genes are present in the Cnidaria N. vectensis
and the unicellular choanoflagellate M. brevicollis, but
are absent in several lineages of ecdysozoans including
Drosophila and Caenorhabditis.
Indeed, with the multiplication of genome and EST
sequencing projects in invertebrates, many “vertebrate
novelties” have been shown to be present in Cnidaria
and/or Placozoa, but lost in the canonical model Protostomes, i.e. D. melanogaster and C. elegans [8,63-66].
There is now an increasing body of evidence supporting
the prominent role of lineage-specific losses in animal
evolution (for a review, see [1]), especially in Protostomes. The present analysis suggests that massive losses
are not a shared trait of the Protostomes, since genes
involved in major metazoan functions are retained in A.
pompejana, a Lophotrochozoan representative. However,
we cannot exclude that losses exist in Annelids and/or
Molluscs. For instance, no enzyme involved in urea
excretion has been identified in the Alvinella database, as
expected from previous studies reporting an incomplete
or non-functional urea cycle in a number of annelid species (loss of the citrulline-arginine segment, see [67]).
Genes are not the only genome features differentially
lost in the course of Metazoan evolution, as suggested

Page 10 of 15

by a study of genomic regions of the Polychaete Platynereis dumerilii that revealed intron-rich genes in Annelids [7]. According to the authors’ estimates, two-thirds
of human introns would have been present in the bilaterian ancestor and retained in Annelids, while lost in
the insect and Nematode genomes. The hypothesis of
an intron-rich Bilaterian ancestor (discussed in [68]) has
been extended to the ancestor of Metazoa through the
examination of the exon-intron structure of Nematostella and Trichoplax genes [8,66]. Thus, the emerging
picture of evolution is one of a complex ancestor of
Metazoa, with a gene toolkit and a gene structure closer
to those of extant Vertebrates and Annelids than to
model Ecdysozoa. This contradicts the intuitive view of
a linear evolution, from simple ancestral networks to
more complex ones in Vertebrates, although it is in line
with several studies suggesting a reductive evolution
from a complex community of ancestors as a general
trend in the evolution of life (see [69] and references
therein).

Conclusions
The construction and sequencing of four non normalized cDNA libraries from A. pompejana, one of the
most thermotolerant eukaryotes known to date, resulted
in 15,858 unique cDNA sequences and 9,221 annotated
protein sequences. As indicated by the pathways and
interaction networks mapped, our cDNA libraries provided a good coverage of the A. pompejana gene repertoire. Our analysis revealed that, apart from housekeeping genes, most abundant annotated transcripts
were directly related to adaptation to the challenging
physico-chemical conditions encountered by A. pompejana, in particular hypoxia, oxidative stress and heavy
metals. In addition to these annotated genes, we also
detected an important pool of unknown, specific and
highly expressed genes that represent valuable targets
for the study of A. pompejana adaptation. We also
detected a compositional bias that may enhance protein
thermostability in this eukaryote facing an extreme and
variable thermal regime.
From an evolutionary perspective, our analyses support the new animal phylogeny and seem to indicate a
slow evolutionary rate in A. pompejana despite its challenging environmental conditions. Moreover, we found
that an important pool of ancestral genes involved in
major metazoan functions are lost in other representatives of Protostomes but retained in A. pompejana, suggesting that massive losses are not a shared trait of the
Protostomes. Sequence conservation together with
ancestral gene retention identified a surprising proximity
between A. pompejana and Deuterostomes. This makes
A. pompejana thermostable proteins outstanding models
for the study of human protein targets.

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

Special attention has been paid to making the
sequences, assembly and annotations accessible via a
user-friendly web site. They represent a significant contribution to the successful exploitation of A. pompejana
proteins in the future annotation of genomes from
annelids and related phyla and will hopefully stimulate
future research on metazoan evolution and adaptation.

Methods
cDNA libraries and EST sequencing

A. pompejana samples were collected during the Biospeedo 2004 oceanographic cruise on the south East
Pacific Rise at latitudes ranging from 14°S to 21°33S (25
individuals of which 6 were dissected on board). Animals were collected with the telemanipulated arm of
Nautile in insulated boxes (4-5°C), recovered at atmospheric pressure but dissected a few minutes after being
recovered onboard in RNALater stabilization and
storage solution. All individuals and/or tissues were conserved in liquid nitrogen. Four non-normalized and fulllength-enriched cDNA libraries were constructed at the
CNS Genoscope. One was prepared from 6 whole animals while the others were constructed from specific tissues: gills (5 individuals), ventral tissue (5 individuals)
and pygidium (3 individuals). The whole animal and
pygidium libraries were constructed with the CloneMiner cDNA construction kit (Invitrogen), which is
designed to construct cDNA libraries without the use of
traditional restriction enzyme cloning methods. This
technology combines the action of SuperscriptII reverse
Transcriptase with the Gateway Technology. Singlestranded mRNA was converted into double stranded
cDNA containing attB sequences on each end. Through
site-specific recombination, attB-flanked cDNA was
cloned directly into attP-containing donor vector by
homologue recombination. The gill and ventral tissues
libraries were prepared using the oligo-capping
approach. Full length RNAs were enriched by the action
of the bacterial alkaline phosphatase to digest 5’uncapped mRNAs. A 30-mer 5’ oligo was linked using
T4 RNA ligase after removing the 5’cap using Tobacco
acid pyrophosphatase. The first strand cDNA was
primed with an oligo(dT)-SfI primer and double
stranded using specific 5’ and 3’ primers and amplified
by PCR. The PCR SfI-digested cDNA products were size
selected to exclude fragments smaller than 1 kb and
then linked into pME18S-FL3 DraIII-digested vector. A
total of 100,177 different clones were sequenced.
EST filtering, assembly and clustering

We developed a semi-automatic pipeline (TCL scripts)
to manage and process the data, from the chromatograms to the assembled sequences. The raw SCF chromatogram files were clipped with respect to quality,

Page 11 of 15

repeats, and vector content. Quality clipping was based
on phred [70,71] quality values: a window of size 20 bp
was slid through the quality files from both sides, and
the clip positions (left/right) were determined by the
first window position with a phred-value above a threshold of 13. Vector masking was performed by cross_match against the UniVec database [72] and the
pME18S and pDONR222 vector sequences. Masked
sequences were cleaned from empty vector sequences
and short sequences (<100 nt) were filtered out. To
avoid misassembly, 5’ poly(A) and 3’ poly(T) sequence
boundaries were masked using a 20/25 nt sliding window (in-house TCL script).
The EST assembly was performed using cap3 [73]
with default parameters, with the exception of ‘overlap
percent identity cutoff’ (-p) and ‘clipping range’ (-y)
parameters set to 90% and 30 nt, respectively. The
assembly was performed independently on each library
as well as on the full complement of sequences.
cDNA characterization

Complete and partial CoDing Sequences (CDS) were
determined from assembled sequences using two independent approaches, similarity and ab initio prediction.
Contig and singleton sequences were compared to protein sequences of the UniprotKB [74] and PDB [75]
databases using BLASTX [76]. Coding frames were
deduced from BLASTX best hit alignments (E-value ≤
1e-05). Then, the CDS were created by extending the
matching region in both 5’ and 3’ directions to the end
of the cDNA sequence or a stop codon. If a stop codon
was encountered in the 5’end, the first ATG codon following this stop codon was chosen as the initiation
codon. When a frameshift was detected in the cDNA
sequence, the translation of the incriminated region was
replaced by masking symbols.
In parallel, we used ESTScan [77] to detect CDS.
Since no large set of coding and noncoding sequences
of annelids or molluscs are available for training, we
used the H. sapiens model. In order to optimise a
threshold for the ESTScan score, we established the distribution of sequences with or without homology
according to ESTScan cut-off values. By setting an optimal cut-off value ≥ 200, we obtained a specificity of 70%
and a sensitivity of 66%. To be considered as complete,
a CDS must start with an initiation codon and end with
a stop codon. Additionally, for CDS sequences deduced
from BLASTX, the protein sequence must cover at least
80% of the best BLASTX hit.
The GC content study on mRNA encoding ribosomal
proteins was performed for 84 almost complete cDNA
(including 15 mitochondrial cDNA). The GC content
was plotted against the number of repeats and subsequently tested with several regression models (linear,

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

exponential, logarithmic and power) using the software
SigmaPlot. The model that best fitted the dataset was a
power function (y = ax+b). A search of optimal (Fop)
codons was performed using a multifactorial correspondence analysis (CoA) of codon usage implemented in
the CodonW software [78,79].

Page 12 of 15

with Nc the ratio between the number of A and B
shared nodes and the number of nodes in the smaller
sub-network. These criteria help to preferentially fuse
highly related sub-networks, while avoiding low consistency sub-networks that would otherwise agglomerate
weakly related sub-networks. The final sub-networks
were visualized using Cytoscape [87].

Integrative functional annotation

MACS [33] protein alignments were generated with the
PipeAlign [80] toolkit. Integrative annotation was based
on the MACSIMS [81] and GOAnno [82] software frameworks. MACSIMS divides the multiple alignments
into subfamilies according to conservation patterns. It
then validates or corrects functional and structural
information mined from public databases before propagation to the query sequence. Pfam-A [83] annotations
are extracted from MACSIMS. GOAnno provides Gene
Ontology [84] annotations for the query, after analysis
of the GO terms obtained for the query subfamily. In
addition to these programs, we have developed new
software (Gagniere et al., manuscript in preparation) to:
(1) generate a text mining functional definition from
close orthologs, (2) generate a consensus Enzyme Commission number from close orthologs, (3) map the
annotated proteins to the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes) pathways [85] and the EMBL
STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting
Genes/Proteins) database [86].
The mapping of A. pompejana proteins to the STRING
database was performed by retrieving data for the closest
human Uniprot homolog. This homolog was then used
to search the STRING database using different identifiers
(Uniprot ID, Uniprot Ensembl, RefSeq and Genome
Reviews accession numbers and gene names in this
order). If no STRING homolog was found using this textual search, a BLASTP search was performed on STRING
human protein sequences and the first best hit (E-value ≤
1e-05) was chosen. Then, STRING networks were built
(combined score cut-off ≥ 0.9) and sub-networks were
extracted by retrieving level 1 neighbours for each protein. These small sub-networks were scored by the Ratio
of consistency (Rc), defined as the ratio between the
observed number of sub-network edges (protein-protein
interactions) and the maximum theoretical number of
edges. Rc will be high in sub-networks exhibiting a high
level of intra sub-network interactions. In contrast, a low
ratio indicates large sub-networks with few intra subnetwork interactions. In order to reduce the set of subnetworks, two sub-networks A and B were fused if they
matched the following criteria:
1 − ( 1 − Nc ) × ( 1 − RcA ) × ( 1 − RcB ) ≥ 0.7
Nc ≥ 0.5

Functional enrichment

The functional annotation clustering tool in the DAVID
[88] software was used to study the the sets of differentially conserved genes. For each set, the closest homologs of the A. pompejana proteins from a given species
(depending on the set under study) were processed
against the background of this species. Enrichment with
a P-value ≤ 0.01 was considered to be significant.
Phylogeny and molecular evolution

Phylogenetic reconstruction was performed on 17
model taxa covering the main eukaryotic lineages (choanoflagellate: 1, cnidaria: 1, platyhelminthe: 1, nematod:
2, arthropod: 2, lophotrochozoa: 3 including A. pompejana, chordate: 6). The tree was rooted with the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The phylogenetic tree and
rates of amino acid substitution for each branch were
inferred on a concatenated alignment of 76 ribosomal
protein families using MrBayes 3 [89] under the WAG
model.
Both observed and simulated amino-acid frequencies
associated with the orthologous set of protein coding
regions (65167 amino acids) were obtained using the
codeML package of the software PaML v3.14 [90] and
the ‘universal’ genetic code. Amino-acid alignments
were validated manually, concatenated and exported in
a PHYLIP format using the software Se-AL v2.0 [91].
Regions containing gaps, misalignments or uncertainties
were excluded from the analysis. PAML analyses were
performed using a reference tree previously obtained
from the ProML package of PHYLIP 3.68 [92] for the 9
taxa, using the JTT model of amino-acid substitutions.
Amino acid frequencies were calculated using the aaML
package (aadist = ‘equal’, with the jones.dat matrix) and
standard deviations of frequencies were obtained from
100 rearrangements (bootstrap) of the dataset. This
allowed us to estimate the proportion of hydrophobic,
positively-charged and negatively-charged amino acids
associated with the translated sequences across taxa,
and to calculate hydrophobicities using the hydrophobic
index based on the OMH scale of Sweet & Eisenberg
[93]. This index is known to take into account the ability of an amino acid to be replaced by another during
the course of evolution.

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

Comparative genomics

Sequences were compared to the Uniprot database using
BlastP and classified according to the taxonomy of their
hits. Taxonomic groups taken into account include at
least one species with a complete proteome represented
in Uniprot: Deuterostomia, Nematoda, Arthropoda, Platyhelminthes, Cnidaria, other Metazoa, Choanoflagellida,
“protists” (Alveolata, Diplomonadida, Cryptophyta, Entamoebidae, Euglenozoa, Mycetozoa, Parabasalidea, Rhodophyta and Stramenopiles), Viridiplantae, Fungi, other
Eukaryota, Prokaryotes and Viruses. Hits obtained in
Annelids or Mollusca were ignored. When all BlastP
hits (E-value ≤ 1e-05)) of an A. pompejana protein were
restricted to a unique taxon (with the exception of
Annelids and Molluscs), this protein was considered to
be specific to this taxon and Annelids (and potentially
Molluscs).
Alvinella database and website

The database is managed by the PostgreSQL relational
database management system and is backed-up on a
weekly basis. The Alvinella website uses an Apache
HTTP server and PHP5 and was built from scratch
using the Smarty template engine, the ADOdb database
abstraction library and the phpGACL generic access
control list library.
Database accession numbers

The sequences have been submitted to the EST section
of the EMBL database under accession numbers
FP489021 to FP539727 and FP539730 to FP565142.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Size distributions of contigs in the global
assembly.
Additional file 2: Figure S2. Distribution of complete protein lengths.
Additional file 3: Figure S3. GC content and expression level of
ribosomal genes.
Additional file 4: Figure S4. Example of Alvinella proteins mapped on a
KEGG pathway.
Additional file 5: Figure S5. Amino acid composition across model
taxa.

Acknowledgements
We wish to acknowledge Julie Thompson for a critical reading of the
manuscript and Marc Robinson-Rechavi for fruitful discussions. We would
also like to thank the Bioinformatics Platform of Strasbourg and the
Structural Biology and Genomics Platform for their assistance during this
work. We thank the crew and pilots of the RV L’Atalante and the DSV
Nautile for their assistance and technical support during the cruise
BioSpeedo’04 for collecting animals and Florence Pradillon for sending
preliminary samples helping in the present studies. This work was supported
by institutional funds from INSERM, CNRS and UDS, by European
Commission funding through the SPINE2-COMPLEXES project LSHG-CT-2006031220 and by ANR-05-BLAN-0407 grant.

Page 13 of 15

Author details
1
Department of Structural Biology and Genomics, Institut de Génétique et
de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), CERBM F-67400 Illkirch, France;
INSERM, U596, F-67400 Illkirch, France; CNRS, UMR7104, F-67400 Illkirch,
France; Faculté des Sciences de la Vie, Université de Strasbourg, F-67000
Strasbourg, France. 2CNRS, UMR 7144, Adaptation et Diversité en Milieu
Marin, Station Biologique de Roscoff, 29682, Roscoff, France. 3UPMC
Université Paris 6, Station Biologique de Roscoff, 29682, Roscoff, France.
4
Genoscope - Centre National de Séquençage, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux
CP5706 91057 Evry cedex, France. 5CNRS Institut Ecologie et Environnement
(INEE), 3 rue Michel-Ange, 75794, Paris cedex 16, France. 6UPMC Université
Paris 6, UMR 7138, Systématique, Adaptation et Evolution, Campus de
Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France. 7Université Catholique de Louvain, Laboratoire
de Biologie Cellulaire, Institut des Sciences de la vie, Croix du sud 5, B-1348,
Louvain-la-neuve, Belgium. 8UMR 7177 CNRS-UDS, LDSM2 Institut de Chimie
de Strasbourg, 1 rue Blaise Pascal -BP 296 R8, 67008 Strasbourg cedex,
France.
Authors’ contributions
DJ, FG, DH, BK, FL, ELW, DM, JFR, BS, JCT, FZ, OP and OL were founding
members of the project. FZ provided biological samples. BS, CDS, JW and
PW were involved in the construction and sequencing of cDNA libraries. NG,
YB, DB, EP replicated the cDNA libraries. NG, OP and OL carried out the
sequence assembly and annotation, the database and website construction,
the gene expression studies and the phylogenetic and comparative
genomics analyses. DJ carried out the GC and codon analyses. DJ and NG
performed the search for thermo-adaptive features in amino-acids
composition. IB, SH, BK, JM and AT analysed genes involved in adaptation to
extreme environment. NG, DJ, AT, JM, OP and OL wrote the paper. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 9 February 2010 Accepted: 16 November 2010
Published: 16 November 2010
References
1. De Robertis EM: Evo-devo: variations on ancestral themes. Cell 2008,
132(2):185-195.
2. McDougall C, Hui JH, Monteiro A, Takahashi T, Ferrier DE: Annelids in
evolutionary developmental biology and comparative genomics. Parasite
2008, 15(3):321-328.
3. Morris SC: The Crucible of Creation: The Burgess Shale and the Rise of
Animals. Oxford University Press; 1998.
4. Arendt D, Nubler-Jung K: Inversion of dorsoventral axis? Nature 1994,
371(6492):26.
5. Irvine SM, Martindale MQ: Cellular and molecular mechanisms of
segmentation in annelids. Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 1996,
7(4):593-604.
6. Aguinaldo AM, Turbeville JM, Linford LS, Rivera MC, Garey JR, Raff RA,
Lake JA: Evidence for a clade of nematodes, arthropods and other
moulting animals. Nature 1997, 387(6632):489-493.
7. Raible F, Tessmar-Raible K, Osoegawa K, Wincker P, Jubin C, Balavoine G,
Ferrier D, Benes V, de Jong P, Weissenbach J, et al: Vertebrate-type intronrich genes in the marine annelid Platynereis dumerilii. Science 2005,
310(5752):1325-1326.
8. Putnam NH, Srivastava M, Hellsten U, Dirks B, Chapman J, Salamov A,
Terry A, Shapiro H, Lindquist E, Kapitonov VV, et al: Sea anemone genome
reveals ancestral eumetazoan gene repertoire and genomic
organization. Science 2007, 317(5834):86-94.
9. Desbruyeres D, Laubier L: Alvinella pompejana gen. sp. now., aberrant
Ampharetidae from East Pacific Rise hydrothermal vents. Oceanol Acta
1980, 3:267-274.
10. Cary SC, Shank T, Stein J: Worms bask in extreme temperatures. Nature
1998, 391(6667):545-546.
11. Chevaldonné P, Desbruyeres D, Childress JJ: Some like it hot... and some
even hotter. Nature 1992, 359(6396):593-594.
12. Le Bris N, Zbinden M, Gaill F: Processes controlling the physico-chemical
micro-environments associated with Pompeii worms. Deep-Sea Research
Part I-Oceanographic Research Papers 2005, 52(6):1071-1083.
13. Le Bris N, Gaill F: How does the annelid Alvinella pompejana deal with
an extreme hydrothermal environment? ReViews in Environmental Science
and BioTechnology 2007, 6:102-119.

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

14. Desbruyeres D, Chevaldonné P, Alayse AM, Jollivet D, Lallier FH, JouinToulmond C, Zal F, Sarradin PM, Cosson R, Caprais JC, et al: Biology and
ecology of the Pompeii worm (Alvinella pompejana Desbruyères and
Laubier), a normal dweller of an extreme deep-sea environment: A
synthesis of current knowledge and recent developments. Deep-sea
research 1998, 45(1-3):383-422.
15. Pradillon F, Zbinden M, Mullineaux LS, Gaill F: Colonisation of newlyopened habitat by a pioneer species, Alvinella pompejana (Polychaeta:
Alvinellidae), at East Pacific Rise vent sites. Marine Ecology-Progress Series
2005, 302:147-157.
16. Girguis PR, Lee RW: Thermal preference and tolerance of alvinellids.
Science 2006, 312(5771):231.
17. Dahlhoff E, Somero GN: Pressure and temperature adaptation of cytosolic
malate dehydrogenases of shallowand deep-living marine invertebrates:
evidence for high body temperatures in hydrothermal vent animals.
Journal of Experimental Biology 1991, 159:473-487.
18. Jollivet D, Desbruyeres D, Ladrat C, Laubier L: Evidence for differences in
the allozyme thermostability of deep-sea hydrothermal vent polychaetes
(Alvinellidae): a possible selection by habitat. Marine Ecology Progress
Series 1995, 123:125-136.
19. Burjanadze TV: New analysis of the phylogenetic change of collagen
thermostability. Biopolymers 2000, 53:523-528.
20. Sicot FX, Mesnage M, Masselot M, Exposito JY, Garrone R, Deutsch J, Gaill F:
Molecular adaptation to an extreme environment: origin of the thermal
stability of the pompeii worm collagen. J Mol Biol 2000, 302(4):811-820.
21. Piccino P, Viard F, Sarradin PM, Le Bris N, Le Guen D, Jollivet D: Thermal
selection of PGM allozymes in newly founded populations of the
thermotolerant vent polychaete Alvinella pompejana. Proc Biol Sci 2004,
271(1555):2351-2359.
22. Henscheid KL, Shin DS, Cary SC, Berglund JA: The splicing factor U2AF65 is
functionally conserved in the thermotolerant deep-sea worm Alvinella
pompejana. Biochim Biophys Acta 2005, 1727(3):197-207.
23. Shin DS, Didonato M, Barondeau DP, Hura GL, Hitomi C, Berglund JA,
Getzoff ED, Cary SC, Tainer JA: Superoxide dismutase from the eukaryotic
thermophile Alvinella pompejana: structures, stability, mechanism, and
insights into amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Mol Biol 2009,
385(5):1534-1555.
24. Grzymski JJ, Murray AE, Campbell BJ, Kaplarevic M, Gao GR, Lee C, Daniel R,
Ghadiri A, Feldman RA, Cary SC: Metagenome analysis of an extreme
microbial symbiosis reveals eurythermal adaptation and metabolic
flexibility. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(45):17516-17521.
25. Pesole G, Grillo G, Larizza A, Liuni S: The untranslated regions of
eukaryotic mRNAs: structure, function, evolution and bioinformatic tools
for their analysis. Brief Bioinform 2000, 1(3):236-249.
26. Zhang L, Kasif S, Cantor CR, Broude NE: GC/AT-content spikes as genomic
punctuation marks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101(48):16855-16860.
27. Bechtel JM, Wittenschlaeger T, Dwyer T, Song J, Arunachalam S,
Ramakrishnan SK, Shepard S, Fedorov A: Genomic mid-range
inhomogeneity correlates with an abundance of RNA secondary
structures. BMC Genomics 2008, 9:284.
28. Mignone F, Grillo G, Licciulli F, Iacono M, Liuni S, Kersey PJ, Duarte J,
Saccone C, Pesole G: UTRdb and UTRsite: a collection of sequences and
regulatory motifs of the untranslated regions of eukaryotic mRNAs.
Nucleic Acids Res 2005, , 33 Database: D141-146.
29. Duret L: Evolution of synonymous codon usage in metazoans. Current
Opinion in Genetics & Development 2002, 12(6):640-649.
30. Eyre-Walker A: Synonymous codon bias is related to gene length in
Escherichia coli: selection for translational accuracy? Mol Biol Evol 1996,
13(6):864-872.
31. Duret L, Mouchiroud D: Expression pattern and, surprisingly, gene length
shape codon usage in Caenorhabditis, Drosophila, and Arabidopsis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96(8):4482-4487.
32. dos Reis M, Wernisch L: Estimating translational selection in eukaryotic
genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2009, 26(2):451-461.
33. Lecompte O, Thompson JD, Plewniak F, Thierry J, Poch O: Multiple
alignment of complete sequences (MACS) in the post-genomic era. Gene
2001, 270(1-2):17-30.
34. Animal Genome Size Database. [http://www.genomesize.com].
35. Bonnivard E, Catrice O, Ravaux J, Brown SC, Higuet D: Survey of genome
size in 28 hydrothermal vent species covering 10 families. Genome 2009,
52(6):524-536.

Page 14 of 15

36. Dixon DR, Jolly MT, Vevers WF, Dixon LRJ: Chromosomes of Pacific
hydrothermal vent invertebrates: towards a greater understanding of
the relationship between chromosome and molecular evolution. Journal
of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 2009, 90:15-31.
37. Alvinella pompejana website. [http://alvinella.igbmc.fr/Alvinella/].
38. Gordon D: Viewing and editing assembled sequences using Consed. Curr
Protoc Bioinformatics 2003, Chapter 11, Unit11 12.
39. Udall JA, Swanson JM, Haller K, Rapp RA, Sparks ME, Hatfield J, Yu Y, Wu Y,
Dowd C, Arpat AB, et al: A global assembly of cotton ESTs. Genome Res
2006, 16(3):441-450.
40. Pavy N, Paule C, Parsons L, Crow JA, Morency MJ, Cooke J, Johnson JE,
Noumen E, Guillet-Claude C, Butterfield Y, et al: Generation, annotation,
analysis and database integration of 16,500 white spruce EST clusters.
BMC Genomics 2005, 6:144.
41. Karim N, Jones JT, Okada H, Kikuchi T: Analysis of expressed sequence
tags and identification of genes encoding cell-wall-degrading enzymes
from the fungivorous nematode Aphelenchus avenae. BMC Genomics
2009, 10:525.
42. Hourdez S, Weber RE: Molecular and functional adaptations in deep-sea
hemoglobins. J Inorg Biochem 2005, 99(1):130-141.
43. Hourdez S, Lallier FH, De Cian MC, Green BN, Weber RE, Toulmond A: Gas
transfer system in Alvinella pompejana (Annelida polychaeta,
Terebellida): functional properties of intracellular and extracellular
hemoglobins. Physiol Biochem Zool 2000, 73(3):365-373.
44. Mary J, Rogniaux H, Rees JF, Zal F: Response of Alvinella pompejana to
variable oxygen stress: a proteomic approach. Proteomics
10(12):2250-2258.
45. Marie B, Genard B, Rees J, Zal F: Effect of ambient oxygen concentration
on activities of enzymatic antioxidant defences and aerobic metabolism
in the hydrothermal vent worm, Paralvinella grasslei. Marine Biology 2006,
150:273-284.
46. Dixon D, Dixon L, Shillito B, Gwynn J: Background and induced levels of
DNA damage in PaciWc deep-sea vents polychaetes: the case for
avoidance. Cahier de Biologie Marine 2002, 43:333-336.
47. Ahearn GA, Mandal PK, Mandal A: Mechanisms of heavy-metal
sequestration and detoxification in crustaceans: a review. J Comp Physiol
B 2004, 174(6):439-452.
48. Gaill F, Halpern S, Quintana C, Desbruyeres D: Presence intracellulaire
d’arsenic et de zinc assocides au soufre chez une Polychete des sources
hydrothermales. C R Acad Sci III 1984, 298:331-335.
49. Vovelle J, Gaill F: Données morphologiques, histochimiques et
microanalytiques sur I’élaboration du tube organominéral d’Alvinella
pompejana, Polychète des sources hydrothermales, et leurs implications
phylogénétiques. Zool Scripta 1986, 15(1):33-43.
50. Cipollone R, Ascenzi P, Visca P: Common themes and variations in the
rhodanese superfamily. IUBMB Life 2007, 59(2):51-59.
51. Vogt G, Woell S, Argos P: Protein thermal stability, hydrogen bonds, and
ion pairs. J Mol Biol 1997, 269(4):631-643.
52. Haney PJ, Stees M, Konisky J: Analysis of thermal stabilizing interactions
in mesophilic and thermophilic adenylate kinases from the genus
Methanococcus. J Biol Chem 1999, 274(40):28453-28458.
53. Szilagyi A, Zavodszky P: Structural differences between mesophilic,
moderately thermophilic and extremely thermophilic protein subunits:
results of a comprehensive survey. Structure 2000, 8(5):493-504.
54. Nishio Y, Nakamura Y, Kawarabayasi Y, Usuda Y, Kimura E, Sugimoto S,
Matsui K, Yamagishi A, Kikuchi H, Ikeo K, et al: Comparative complete
genome sequence analysis of the amino acid replacements responsible
for the thermostability of Corynebacterium efficiens. Genome Res 2003,
13(7):1572-1579.
55. Berezovsky IN, Shakhnovich EI: Physics and evolution of thermophilic
adaptation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102(36):12742-12747.
56. Robinson-Rechavi M, Alibes A, Godzik A: Contribution of electrostatic
interactions, compactness and quaternary structure to protein
thermostability: lessons from structural genomics of Thermotoga
maritima. J Mol Biol 2006, 356(2):547-557.
57. Wolf YI, Rogozin IB, Koonin EV: Coelomata and not Ecdysozoa: evidence
from genome-wide phylogenetic analysis. Genome Res 2004, 14(1):29-36.
58. Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311(5765):1283-1287.

Gagnière et al. BMC Genomics 2010, 11:634
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/11/634

59. Vilmos P, Gaudenz K, Hegedus Z, Marsh JL: The Twisted gastrulation
family of proteins, together with the IGFBP and CCN families, comprise
the TIC superfamily of cysteine rich secreted factors. Mol Pathol 2001,
54(5):317-323.
60. Alcivar A, Hu S, Tang J, Yang X: DEDD and DEDD2 associate with caspase8/10 and signal cell death. Oncogene 2003, 22(2):291-297.
61. Tinel A, Tschopp J: The PIDDosome, a protein complex implicated in
activation of caspase-2 in response to genotoxic stress. Science 2004,
304(5672):843-846.
62. Lescure A, Rederstorff M, Krol A, Guicheney P, Allamand V: Selenoprotein
function and muscle disease. Biochim Biophys Acta 2009,
1790(11):1569-1574.
63. Hughes AL, Friedman R: Differential loss of ancestral gene families as a
source of genomic divergence in animals. Proc Biol Sci 2004, 271(Suppl
3):S107-109.
64. Zmasek CM, Zhang Q, Ye Y, Godzik A: Surprising complexity of the
ancestral apoptosis network. Genome Biol 2007, 8(10):R226.
65. Miller DJ, Hemmrich G, Ball EE, Hayward DC, Khalturin K, Funayama N,
Agata K, Bosch TC: The innate immune repertoire in cnidaria–ancestral
complexity and stochastic gene loss. Genome Biol 2007, 8(4):R59.
66. Srivastava M, Begovic E, Chapman J, Putnam NH, Hellsten U, Kawashima T,
Kuo A, Mitros T, Salamov A, Carpenter ML, et al: The Trichoplax genome
and the nature of placozoans. Nature 2008, 454(7207):955-960.
67. Natesan S, Jayasundaramma B, Ramamurthi R, Reddy SR: Presence of a
partial urea cycle in the leech, Poecilobdella granulosa. Experientia 1992,
48(8):729-731.
68. Roy SW: Intron-rich ancestors. Trends Genet 2006, 22(9):468-471.
69. Glansdorff N, Xu Y, Labedan B: The last universal common ancestor:
emergence, constitution and genetic legacy of an elusive forerunner.
Biol Direct 2008, 3:29.
70. Ewing B, Hillier L, Wendl MC, Green P: Base-calling of automated
sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res 1998,
8(3):175-185.
71. Ewing B, Green P: Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using
phred. II. Error probabilities. Genome Res 1998, 8(3):186-194.
72. The Univec database. [http://www.phrap.org/phrap_documentation.html].
73. Huang X, Madan A: CAP3: A DNA sequence assembly program. Genome
Res 1999, 9(9):868-877.
74. consortium U: The universal protein resource (UniProt). Nucleic Acids Res
2008, , 36 Database: D190-195.
75. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H,
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000,
28(1):235-242.
76. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA, Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W,
Lipman DJ: Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein
database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 1997, 25(17):3389-3402.
77. Lottaz C, Iseli C, Jongeneel CV, Bucher P: Modeling sequencing errors by
combining Hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(Suppl 2):
ii103-112.
78. CodonW. [http://sourceforge.net/projects/codonw].
79. Peden JF: Analysis of codon usage. Phd thesis University of Nottingham;
1999.
80. Plewniak F, Bianchetti L, Brelivet Y, Carles A, Chalmel F, Lecompte O,
Mochel T, Moulinier L, Muller A, Muller J, et al: PipeAlign: A new toolkit for
protein family analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 2003, 31(13):3829-3832.
81. Thompson JD, Muller A, Waterhouse A, Procter J, Barton GJ, Plewniak F,
Poch O: MACSIMS: multiple alignment of complete sequences
information management system. BMC Bioinformatics 2006, 7:318.
82. Chalmel F, Lardenois A, Thompson JD, Muller J, Sahel JA, Leveillard T,
Poch O: GOAnno: GO annotation based on multiple alignment.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21(9):2095-2096.
83. Finn RD, Mistry J, Schuster-Bockler B, Griffiths-Jones S, Hollich V,
Lassmann T, Moxon S, Marshall M, Khanna A, Durbin R, et al: Pfam: clans,
web tools and services. Nucleic Acids Res 2006, , 34 Database: D247-251.
84. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT, et al: Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 2000,
25(1):25-29.
85. Okuda S, Yamada T, Hamajima M, Itoh M, Katayama T, Bork P, Goto S,
Kanehisa M: KEGG Atlas mapping for global analysis of metabolic
pathways. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36(Web Server issue):W423-426.

Page 15 of 15

86. von Mering C, Jensen LJ, Kuhn M, Chaffron S, Doerks T, Kruger B, Snel B,
Bork P: STRING 7–recent developments in the integration and prediction
of protein interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, , 35 Database: D358-362.
87. Cline MS, Smoot M, Cerami E, Kuchinsky A, Landys N, Workman C,
Christmas R, Avila-Campilo I, Creech M, Gross B, et al: Integration of
biological networks and gene expression data using Cytoscape. Nat
Protoc 2007, 2(10):2366-2382.
88. Dennis G Jr, Sherman BT, Hosack DA, Yang J, Gao W, Lane HC, Lempicki RA:
DAVID: Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery.
Genome Biol 2003, 4(5):P3.
89. Ronquist F, Huelsenbeck JP: MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference
under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 19(12):1572-1574.
90. Yang Z: PAML: a program package for phylogenetic analysis by
maximum likelihood. Comput Appl Biosci 1997, 13(5):555-556.
91. Se-Al. [http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/seal/].
92. Felsenstein J: PHYLIP - Phylogeny Inference Package (Version 3.2).
Cladistics 1989, 5:164-166.
93. Sweet RM, Eisenberg D: Correlation of sequence hydrophobicities
measures similarity in three-dimensional protein structure. J Mol Biol
1983, 171(4):479-488.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-634
Cite this article as: Gagnière et al.: Insights into metazoan evolution
from alvinella pompejana cDNAs. BMC Genomics 2010 11:634.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
