<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The rhizome of Reclinomonas americana, Homo sapiens, Pediculus humanus and Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondria</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2011, 6:55. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-55"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Kalliopi Georgiades"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

RESEARCH

Open Access

The rhizome of Reclinomonas americana, Homo
sapiens, Pediculus humanus and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae mitochondria
Kalliopi Georgiades and Didier Raoult*

Abstract
Background: Mitochondria are thought to have evolved from eubacteria-like endosymbionts; however, the origin
of the mitochondrion remains a subject of debate. In this study, we investigated the phenomenon of chimerism in
mitochondria to shed light on the origin of these organelles by determining which species played a role in their
formation. We used the mitochondria of four distinct organisms, Reclinomonas americana, Homo sapiens,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and multichromosome Pediculus humanus, and attempted to identify the origin of each
mitochondrial gene.
Results: Our results suggest that the origin of mitochondrial genes is not limited to the Rickettsiales and that the
creation of these genes did not occur in a single event, but through multiple successive events. Some of these
events are very old and were followed by events that are more recent and occurred through the addition of
elements originating from current species. The points in time that the elements were added and the parental
species of each gene in the mitochondrial genome are different to the individual species. These data constitute
strong evidence that mitochondria do not have a single common ancestor but likely have numerous ancestors,
including proto-Rickettsiales, proto-Rhizobiales and proto-Alphaproteobacteria, as well as current alphaproteobacterial
species. The analysis of the multichromosome P. humanus mitochondrion supports this mechanism.
Conclusions: The most plausible scenario of the origin of the mitochondrion is that ancestors of Rickettsiales and
Rhizobiales merged in a proto-eukaryotic cell approximately one billion years ago. The fusion of the Rickettsiales
and Rhizobiales cells was followed by gene loss, genomic rearrangements and the addition of alphaproteobacterial
elements through ancient and more recent recombination events. Each gene of each of the four studied
mitochondria has a different origin, while in some cases, multichromosomes may allow for enhanced gene
exchange. Therefore, the tree of life is not sufficient to explain the chimeric structure of current genomes, and the
theory of a single common ancestor and a top-down tree does not reflect our current state of knowledge.
Mitochondrial evolution constitutes a rhizome, and it should be represented as such.
Reviewers: This article was revised by William Martin, Arcady Mushegian and Eugene V. Koonin.

Background
Mitochondria are thought to have evolved from eubacteria-like endosymbionts [1]. The origin of the mitochondrion has been widely studied but remains a
subject of debate. In general, ancestors of the Alphaproteobacteria subgroup are thought to be the progenitors
of mitochondria [2,3]. Indeed, molecular phylogenomic
* Correspondence: didier.raoult@gmail.com
Unité de Recherche en Maladies Infectieuses Tropical Emergentes (URMITE)
CNRS-IRD UMR 6236-198, Université de la Méditerranée, Faculté de
Médecine La Timone, 27, Bd Jean Moulin, 13385, Marseille cedex 5, France

analyses of whole mitochondrial proteins rooted mitochondria among the Alphaproteobacteria [4-6]. However, the identity of the organism most related to
eukaryotic mitochondria and the placement of the mitochondrial tree branch are contested [7], even though it
has been argued that the closest relatives to mitochondria are organisms in the order of Rickettsiales [8].
Nevertheless, the relationship of mitochondria to
Rickettsiales has been challenged based on phylogenomic studies that have demonstrated a close relationship of mitochondria to Rhodospirillum rubrum [4].

© 2011 Georgiades and Raoult; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

Page 2 of 16

Furthermore, other studies have linked mitochondria to
Rhizobiales and Rhodobacterales [6]. Finally, a recent
study demonstrated the significant role of other bacteria
outside the order of Rickettsiales in the formation of
mitochondria and the occurrence of genome chimerism
[9]. All of this evidence allows us to consider the possibility that mitochondria of different organisms may not
have originated from the same ancestor and that mitochondria may contain elements with different origins.
In our study, we wished to investigate the phenomenon of chimerism in mitochondria to shed light on
the origin of these organelles by determining which
species played a role in mitochondria formation. We
used the mitochondria of four distinct organisms,
Reclinomonas americana, Homo sapiens, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Pediculus humanus, and
attempted to identify the origin of each gene. Then,
with the obtained results, we attempted to reconstruct
the genealogical tree of the four studied types of mitochondria, which led us to a reconstruction of the mitochondria rhizome.

Results
Phylogenetic analyses and mosaic structure

In every phylogenetic gene tree for each of the four
types of mitochondria, we searched for the mitochondrion’s sister taxa and classified the sister taxa in categories according to the bootstrap values obtained. For
the Reclinomonas americana mitochondrion, four genes
have a group of Rickettsiales as a sister taxon, with a
bootstrap value greater than 95. Four other genes also
have Rickettsiales as a sister taxon, but with bootstrap
values less than 95. Only one gene has Rhizobiales as a
sister taxon, with a bootstrap value equal to 100,
whereas six other genes with Rhizobiales as a sister
taxon have bootstrap values less than 95. Finally, eight
genes have other Alphaproteobacteria as sister taxa,
with bootstrap values varying from 94 to 22 (Table 1).
In conclusion, 25% of the Reclinomonas americana
mitochondrial genes have Rickettsiales as a sister taxon,
50% of which have a bootstrap value greater than 95,
and 21.8% of the genes have Rhizobiales as a sister
taxon, with only one bootstrap value greater than 95

Table 1 Sister taxa of Reclinomonas americana mitochondrion genes
Sister taxon Rickettsiales/Rhizobiales bootstrap > 95
Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

Ribosomal protein L2

Rickettsia prowazekii/Rhizobiales

99

RNA polymerase beta

Rickettsiales

100

RNA polymerase beta’

Rickettsiales (Ehrlichia canis; E. ruminantium)

99

Succinate ubiquinone oxidoreductase 2

Rickettsiales (Ehrlichia canis)

100

ATP transporter ATP binding

Rhizobiales (Mesorhizobium opportunistum; M. loti)

100

Sister taxon Rickettsiales/Rhizobiales bootstrap < 95
Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

Ribosomal protein L20

Rickettsiales

65

Ribosomal protein L27

Rickettsiales (Ehrlichia species)

32

Ribosomal protein L14

Rickettsiales (Rickettsia prowazekii, R. typhi, Pelagibacter ubique)

21

TatC translocase

Rickettsiales (Pelagibacter ubique)

21

Ribosomal protein S1

Rhizobiales

52

Ribosomal protein S4
Ribosomal protein S14

Rhizobiales (Starkeya novella)
Rhizobiales

46
38

NADH deshydrogenase subunit 1

Rhizobiales (O. anthropi; R. rubrum; R. palustris)

57

NADH deshydrogenase subunit 8

Rhizobiales (O. anthropi; R. rubrum; R. palustris; R. sphaeroides)

88

Haem biosynthesis

Rhizobiales (O. anthropi; R. rubrum; R. palustris; R. sphaeroides)

38

Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

Ribosomal protein S2
Ribosomal protein S7

Group Alphaproteobacteria
Group Alphaproteobacteria

94
69

ABC transporter C subunit

Group Alphaproteobacteria

40

Ribosomal protein L11

Group Alphaproteobacteria

11

Ribosomal protein L6

Betaproteobacteria

47

Elongation factor Tu

Granulibacter bethesdensis

41

Ribosomal protein L16

Parvularcula bermudensis

38

Ribosomal protein S19

Maricaulis maris

22

Sister taxon other Alphaproteobacteria

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

Page 3 of 16

(see additional file 1: Reclinomonas americana mitochondrial phylogenies).
For the H. sapiens mitochondrion, one gene was
found to cluster with Rickettsiales, Ehrlichia canis and
E. chaffeensis, with a bootstrap value equal to 90, and
two other genes were identified to be sister taxa of Pelagibacter ubique (bootstrap value < 90). Eight other genes
clustered with Rhizobiales species (bootstrap values <
90) (Table 2). Finally, 72% of the H. sapiens mitochondrial genes were found to be related to Rhizobiales
genes (see additional file 2: Homo sapiens mitochondrial
phylogenies).
For the Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrion,
five genes have Rickettsiales species as a sister taxon
(bootstrap value > 95), and two have Rhizobiales as a
sister taxon, one Ochrobactrum anthropi and Brucella
species and one Azorhizobium caulinodans (bootstrap
value = 95). Twenty-nine other genes have bootstrap
values less than 90 on the node of the mitochondrion
with its sister taxa, of which 12 are Rickettsiales and
18 are Rhizobiales. Finally, six other genes have other
Alphaproteobacteria as sister taxa (bootstrap value <
90) (Table 3). To summarize, 46% of the S. cerevisiae
mitochondrial gene trees present Rhizobiales as a
mitochondrial sister taxon, of which 11% have a bootstrap value greater than 95, and 43.5% present Rickettsiales as a mitochondrial sister taxon, with 29%
having a bootstrap value greater than 95 (see additional file 3: Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial
phylogenies).
For Pediculus humanus, three genes have Rickettsiales
species as sister taxa (bootstrap value > 95), 11 genes
also have Rickettsiales as sister taxa, but with bootstrap
values less than 95, whereas four other genes have Rhizobiales as sister taxa (bootstrap value < 95). Finally,
eight genes have other Alphaproteobacteria as sister

taxa (Table 4). In short, 51.75% of the P. humanus mitochondrial gene trees present Rickettsiales as a mitochondrion sister taxon, of which 11% have bootstrap values
greater than 95, and 14.8% have Rhizobiales as a sister
taxon (see additional file 4: Pediculus humanus mitochondrial phylogenies).
For the four analyzed types of mitochondria, not all
genes gave interpretable BLAST matches or phylogenies;
in some cases, the BLAST search gave hits with very
low e-values and coverage percentages, or the topologies
were too difficult to analyze. We therefore focused on
the most robust results to draw conclusions. The use of
phylogenies to identify horizontal transfers has been
demonstrated to cause interpretation problems [10,11].
Furthermore, Alphaproteobacteria are thought to be
mosaics, and they are known to have undergone multiple gene transfers [12]. We therefore checked for such
ancestral transfers in the species found as mitochondrial
sister taxa, and we found only two cases of previous
gene transfers: the ribosomal protein L6 of R. americana
was gained by Betaproteobacteria, whereas the aconitate
hydratase protein of S. cerevisiae was gained by Gammaproteobacteria (see additional file 5: Previous horizontal
gene transfers in Alphaproteoabacteria). However, none
of the other phylogenies demonstrated any ancestral
transfers. The proportion of mosaicism in ancestors
such as rickettsial species is statistically inferior to the
proportion of mosaicism in R. americana, H. sapiens
and S. cerevisiae mitochondrial genomes (p = 0.049; p <
0.0001; and p = 0.073, respectively) (Figure 1). Moreover, the pan-genome of Rickettsia species is mostly
composed of specific genes, and lateral gene transfer
(LGT) events occupy a very small place in the pan-genome (Figure 2). Therefore, all of the identified transfers
in this study took place directly in the mitochondrial
genomes.

Table 2 Sister taxa of the Homo sapiens mitochondrion genes.
Sister taxon Rickettsiales
Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

NADH deshydrogenase subunit 6

Rickettsiales (Ehrlichia canis/E. chaffeensis)

90

Cytochrome c oxidase I

Pelagibacter ubique

53

NADH deshydrogenase subunit 3

Pelagibacter ubique

23

Sister taxon Rhizobiales
Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

NADH deshydrogenase subunit 1
NADH deshydrogenase subunit 4

Group Rhizobiales (Rhodospirillales)
Group Rhizobiales

92
88

ATP synthase F0 subunit 6

Beijerinckia indica

65

ATP synthase F0 subunit 8

Bradyrhizobium sp.

40

NADH deshydrogenase subunit 4L

Rhodospirillum centenum

37

Cytochrome c oxidase II

Group Rhizobiales

36

Cytochrome c oxidase III

Azospirillum sp./R. bellii/R. canadensis

17

NADH deshydrogenase subunit 2

Mitochondrion outgroup of Rhizobiales

-

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

Page 4 of 16

Table 3 Sister taxa of Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrion genes
Sister taxon Rickettsiales/Rhizobiales bootstrap > 95
Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

Cytochrome beta

group Rickettsiales

99
99

MutS

Rickettsia bellii

Glutamyl-tRNA amidotransferase

Orientia tsutsugamushi

99

tRNA-delta
isopentepyrophosphatetransferase

Pelagibacter ubique/Alphaproteobacteria

99

Maturase

group Rickettsiales/Parvibaculum lavamentivorans

98

Tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase

Ochrobactrum anthropi/Brucella species

99

Helicase

Azorhizobium caulinodans/Xanthobacter autotrophicus

99

Sister taxon Rickettsiales/Rhizobiales bootstrap < 90
Genes
Sister taxon

Bootstrap

Ubiquinol cytochrome C

group Rickettsiales

86

Elongation factor G

group Rickettsiales

72

Ribosomal protein L2

Wolbachia endosymbiont of Drosophila

72

Seryl-tRNA synthetase

Ehrlichia canis/Wolbachia/Orientia species

71

Cysteine desulfurase

Rickettsia bellii/Magnetospirillum magneticum

67

Prolyl-tRNA synthetase

group Rickettsiales (Anaplasma spp.)

52

Thioredoxin reductase
Endonuclease

42
37

Pyruvate deshydrogenase

Pelagibacter ubique
Pelagibacter ubique/Rhodopseudomonas palustris/Azorhizobium caulinodans/Xanthobacter
autotrophicus
Anaplasma phagocytophilium

30

Cytochrome beta

Anaplasma phagocytophilium

29

Ribosomal protein L3

Rickettsia felis

18

Arginyl-tRNA synthetase

Rhodobacter sphaeroides

88

Ribosomal protein S2

Bartonella tribocorum

85

Elongation factor Tu

Sinorhizobium japonicum

82

Ribosomal protein S12

Rhodospirillum rubrum

80

DnaK
Succinyl-CoA synthetase

group Rhizobiales (dont R. palustris)
Azospirillum sp.

71
66

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase

Rhodospirillum rubrum

59

DnaK

Sinorhizobium meliloti/Sinorhizobium medicae/Mesorhizobium loti

49

Enoyl-CoA hydratase

Bartonella henselae/grahamii/tribocorum

49

DEAD box

Rhodospirillum rubrum

48

Oli1p

Rhodospirillum rubrum

40

Glutathione oxidoreductase

Rhodospirillum centeum/Magnetospirillum magneticum

35

GroEL
Formate tetrahydrofolate ligase

Rhizobium etli
group Methylobacteria

35
30

Dihydrolipoamide

Rhodobacter sphaeroides/Rhodobacter capsulatus

16

Sister taxon other Alphaproteobacteria bootstrap < 90
Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

Fumarate hydratase

Ruegeria sp.

82

Deshydrogenase

Geobacter sp./Acetobacter sp.

81

Reverse transcriptase

Sphingomonas wittichii/Novosphingobium aromaticivorans

46

Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase
5-aminolevulinate

Ruegeria pomeroyi
Gluconobacter oxydans

30
26

Sco1

Caulobacter crescentus; C.segnis/Beijerinckia indica

23

Aconitate hydratase

Gammaproteobacteria

60

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

Page 5 of 16

Table 4 Sister taxa of Pediculus humanus mitochondrion genes
Sister taxon Rickettsiales/Rhizobiales bootstrap > 95
Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

Cytochrome oxidase beta

Rickettsia canadensis; R. akari; R. rickettsii

99

Ribosomal protein S5

Pelagibacter ubique

99

Cox3

Rickettsiales (Ehrlichia canis; Neorickettsia sennetsu; Neorickettsia risticii)

95

Sister taxon Rickettsiales/Rhizobiales bootstrap < 95
Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

Nad4
tRNA-tyrosine

N. sennetsu/N. risticii
Pelagibacter ubique

93
91

Cox1

Pelagibacter ubique

90

NADH deshydrogenase 3

Rickettsiae

89

Nad2

Rhodobacter sphaeroides

89

Ribosomal protein L22

Orientia tsutsugamushi

75

Ribosomal protein L19

Ehrlichia spp.

73

Ribosomal protein S2

Wolbachia spp.

66

Ribosomal protein S16
Ribosomal protein S14

Wolbachia spp.
Wolbachia spp.

61
55

ATP synthase

Rhizobium leguminosarum

54

Nad3

Rhodopsirillum centenum/Azospirillum sp.

54

ATP synthase F0

Rickettsiales (Neorickettsia, Wolbachia, Anaplasma, Ehrlichia)

51

Cytochrome oxidase 2

Wolbachia endosymbionts of Drosophila and Culex

48

Ribosomal protein L13

Liberibacter asiaticus

44

Sister taxon other Alphaproteobacteria
Genes

Sister taxon

Bootstrap

Intermediate peptidase

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

99

Nad5

Gluconacetobacter diazotrophicus

77

Nd1

Magnetospirillum magneticum

75

Ribosomal protein L24

Hirschia baltica

66

Ribosomal protein L17

Geobacter sulfureducens

61

Ribosomal protein L27

Nitrobacter

46

Cytochrome oxidase su 1

Xanthobacter autotrophicus

40

tRNA-glycine

Acidiphilium cryptum

32

Using the evidence from these phylogenies, we represented the resulting mosaic structure of each of the four
types of mitochondria (Figure 3). Each gene is represented with a colored line according to its origin. This
visualization demonstrates the mosaic structure of mitochondria, which seem to be mostly composed of Rickettsiales and Rhizobiales genes, whereas some
alphaproteobacterial elements appear to have been
added more recently in the evolutionary time scale.
However, this structure is not stable, and topologies
were not always robust. Therefore, the question emerges
of whether mitochondria are the outcome of genomic
fusions or recombination events.
Recombination events

Hotspots of repeat elements may constitute regions of
genomic recombination events. Therefore, we first
looked for possible repeat elements in the genomes of

the four types of mitochondria. In the R. americana
mitochondrion, we found very few repeat elements
around an Alphaproteobacteria-originated gene region.
In the human mitochondrion, we identified four hotspots of repeat elements, whereas in the S. cerevisiae
mitochondrion, we only identified one repeat element
(Figure 3). The P. humanus genome is still incomplete,
so we were not able to use it to identify repeat elements.
Next, we used the Recombination Analysis Tool (RAT)
to identify possible recombination events in the genomes of the four types of mitochondria. The software
did not reveal any recombination events for H. sapiens
and S. cerevisiae mitochondria. In contrast, for R. americana, we identified four genes obtained via recombination events. The ribosomal protein L16 recombined with
a sequence from Parvularcula bermudensis, a marine
alphaproteobacterium; the ribosomal proteins L14 and
L27 recombined with sequences from Pelagibacter

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

Page 6 of 16

34 % LGT

R. felis

84.6 % LGT
12 % LGT

R. americana

H. sapiens

23.6 % LGT

31.8 % LGT
Chlamydiae
Bacteroidetes
Delta- proteobacteria
Beta- proteobacteria

S. cerevisiae

P. humanus

Gamma- proteobacteria
Wolbachia
Orientia
Rickettsia canadensis
Typhus Group
Eukaryota
Rickettsia bellii
ORFans

Rickettsiales

TOTAL

Rhizobiales
alpha-proteobacteria
beta-proteobacteria
undetermined
TOTAL

Figure 1 Percentage of LGT in Rickettsia felis and mitochondrial genomes. The different origins of genes are represented by different
colored circles.

ubique of the order of Rickettsiales; and finally, succinate
ubiquinone oxidoreductase recombined with the
sequence of another member of the Rickettsiales order,
Ehrlichia canis (see additional file 6: Recombination
events). There is synteny conservation between the
regions around the ribosomal L16 proteins of P. bermudensis and the mitochondrion. In the mitochondrial
genome, the ribosomal protein L16 is found in a region
that contains four other ribosomal proteins (L2, S19, S3

and L14). These proteins are also found in the P. bermudensis genome near the L16 ribosomal protein
sequence and are in the same order. Similar synteny
conservation is also observed for the ribosomal protein
L14 of the mitochondrion and of P. ubique. The L14
sequence is found near the L16, L5 and S14 ribosomal
proteins in the mitochondrion, which are also found in
the region close to the ribosomal protein L14 in P. ubique. The ribosomal proteins L14 and L16 are found on

Figure 2 Rickettsia species pan-genome. The core genome (701 genes) is represented in blue, LGT (22 genes) in yellow and unique genes
(4726 genes) in pink.

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

Reclinomonas americana mitochondrion

Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrion

Homo sapiens mitochondrion

Pediculus humanus mitochondrion

Figure 3 Mosaic structure of the four studied types of
mitochondria. Each colored line represents a gene. Colors vary
according to the original species (red and pink for Rickettsiales; blue
and sky-blue for Rhizobiales). Dark colors represent stable topologies.
Arrows show the positions of repeat elements.

each side of a repeat element in the mitochondrial genome. The locations of the ribosomal protein L27 and
succinate ubiquinone oxidoreductase, however, do not
demonstrate synteny conservation either with P. ubique
or E. canis. For P. humanus, the program identified four
recombination events: the ribosomal protein L22 recombined with Orientia tsutsugamushi Ikeda, the S2 and the
S16 with Wolbachia species and finally the ribosomal
protein L13 with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. No synteny
conservation was observed (see additional file 6: Recombination events).
Divergence time and the creation of mitochondria

We estimated the approximate divergence time of the
recombined species and the times when genes were
most likely introduced into the genomes of the four studied types of mitochondria using 16S rRNA and gene
sequence phylogenies and an estimated evolutionary
rate of 1-2% per 50 million years. Rickettsiales and Rhizobiales most likely diverged 1.5 billion years ago (BYA).
Their fusion probably created the first mitochondrion
approximately 1 BYA. The R. americana mitochondrion
also contains genes that were likely acquired 500-600
million years ago (MYA) from proto-Rickettsiae, protoEhrlichia, proto-Wolbachia, proto-Rhodobiaceae and
proto-Bradyrhizobiaceae species. More genes were
added later, between 30-90 MYA, from current rickettsial species and current Rhizobiales. All elements from
other Alphaproteobacteria were added recently, approximately 40-70 MYA (Figure 4). The Homo sapiens mitochondrion contains mostly Rhizobiales genes obtained
between 500-600 MYA, while three genes of Rickettsiales origin were in place much earlier, approximately

Page 7 of 16

1 BYA. The P. humanus mitochondrion contains mostly
Rickettsiales genes, some of which were in place in the
very beginning of the creation of mitochondrion, while
others were added later around 300-500 MYA. It also
contains some Rhizobiales and other alpha-proteobacterial genes, which were added more recently, around
40-90 MYA. Finally, the S. cerevisiae mitochondrion
contains primarily Rhizobiales genes that were gained
500-600 MYA, but it also contains some alpha-proteobacterial elements that were added later, approximately
40-90 MYA. As for the genes of Rickettsiales origin,
most of them were added recently from current rickettsial, Anaplasma, oriential and Ehrlichia species, whereas
some of these genes are older and were derived from
ancestral Rickettsiales species (Figure 4).

Discussion
It is thought that mitochondria originated through an
endosymbiotic event that occurred between the protoRickettsiales and a proto-eukaryotic cell during the early
stages of eukaryotic evolution [13-15]. Molecular phylogenomic analyses of mitochondrial proteins place mitochondria in the alphaproteobacterial subdivision,
whereas several reconstructions place mitochondria specifically in the Rickettsiaceae family [16-20] or even at
the root of the Rickettsiales order [8]. It has also been
proposed that Rickettsiae and mitochondria shared a last
common ancestor that was probably a parasite of protoeukaryotic cells [21]. Even though most studies have
argued that mitochondria are closely related to the Rickettsiales order, recent studies of the mitochondrion of
the green algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii have proposed that most of the species’ mitochondrial protein
sister taxa are members of the Rhizobiales and the Rhodobacterales rather than the Rickettsiales order [6]. It
has also been proposed that the mitochondrial ancestor
is a mix of different eubacterial genes, some of which
are still conserved in alphaproteobacterial genomes [22].
Furthermore, a recent study using the Saccharomyces
cerevisiae mitochondrion demonstrated that a certain
chimerism of bacterial genomes occurred during the formation of mitochondria [9].
We wanted to go a step further and investigate the
phenomenon of mosaicism in mitochondria, revisit the
idea of a common ancestor and try to understand the
origin of the mitochondrion, with the ultimate goal of
building a genealogical tree for mitochondria. Our
results demonstrate a true mosaic structure that is different for each of the four studied types of mitochondria. Indeed, the origin of the mitochondrial genes does
not seem to be limited to the Rickettsiales. Quite often,
as in the study of Atteia et al. [6], mitochondrial protein
sister taxa are members of the Rhizobiales. Moreover, in
some cases, and especially in the case of Reclinomonas

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

Page 8 of 16

Figure 4 The rhizome of mitochondria. The origin of each gene is represented along with the time scale of the species divergence. Dark blue
and red arrows are for sister taxa with high bootstrap values, and light blue and pink arrows for sister taxa with low bootstrap values. Green
arrows are for sister taxa from the Alphaproteobacteria subgroup. Colors on the time scale coincide with the emergence of the corresponding
colored species.

americana mitochondria, other Alphaproteobacteria
were found to be protein sister taxa. Our data suggest
that the genomes of a Rickettsiales and a Rhizobiales
ancestor likely merged during the first endosymbiotic
event in a proto-eukaryotic cell approximately one billion years ago. This fusion coincides with the rise of
eukaryotes and mitochondria. Mitochondria were created as a mosaic and later incorporated more elements
through lateral gene transfer (LGT) or recombination
events from other Alphaproteobacteria (Figure 5). The
use of four types of mitochondria from four different
organisms (protozoa, yeast, louse, humans) allowed us
to demonstrate that the mitochondria of different organisms are composed of different elements and have different genealogical trees. The sister taxa of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and human mitochondrial proteins are mostly members of Rhizobiales, whereas the
sister taxa of R. americana mitochondrial proteins are
mostly members of Rickettsiales. There are additional

alphaproteobacterial elements in the S. cerevisiae mitochondrion than in the three other types of mitochondria. In addition, we detected some recent
recombination events in R. americana and in P. humanus mitochondria, mostly involving Rickettsiales. Indeed,
using the louse mitochondrion allowed us to demonstrate how the mitochondria creation model is not fixed
and that the mitochondria were not created through a
single event. The mitochondrial genome of P. humanus
is fragmented into 18 mini-chromosomes. This event
likely took place after the emergence of the mitochondrion through a series of events involving the excision
and rejoining of fragments over a long period of time
[23].
The high degree of genetic transfer into eukaryotic
genomes from bacteria may seem surprising. However,
the Wolbachia paradigm confirms this mode of recombinogenic genome creation. Comparative genomic studies have provided evidence for progressive LGTs from

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

Page 9 of 16

Eukaryota

TODAY

Other alpha- protoebacterial
elements added

Eukaryota

Mitochondrion

1 BYA

Genomes fusion

Proto- eukaryote
Rhizobiales

1,5 BYA

Rickettsiales

Endosymbiotic event

Figure 5 The creation of mitochondria. Rhizobiales and Rickettsiales ancestors diverged approximately 1.5 billion years ago. They both found
themselves in a proto-eukaryote after an endosymbiotic event one billion years ago. Genome fusion took place, creating mitochondria and
eukaryotes. Mitochondria evolved further by acquiring new elements from other Alphaproteobacteria. Rhizobiales are represented in blue,
Rickettsiales in red and other Alphaproteobacteria in green.

Wolbachia to arthropods, insects and nematodes, and
transfers involve nearly the entire Wolbachia genome
[24-26]. Other cases are observed in human genomes, as
Trypanosoma cruzi sequences have integrated into
human genomes [27], and HHV6 sequences were also
found integrated in patient genomes and were even
transmitted to descendants [28]. Finally, a recent study
supported a scenario in which Myxococcales may have
contributed key metabolic genes to the first eukaryotes
[22]. Moreover, a recent analysis indicates both homologous and non-homologous recombination between the
minichromosomes in the mitochondria of the human
body louse [29]. It has therefore already been demonstrated that LGT and recombination events are possible,
and it may be easy to transfer sequences from microorganisms infecting eukaryotic cells continuously over
such a long period of time.
The creation of mitochondria may not have occurred
as a single event but as multiple successive events. Some

of these events are very old and constitute the basis of
each species’ mitochondria. These events were followed
by events that are more recent and by the addition of
elements originating from current species. The times at
which elements were added and the parental species of
each gene in mitochondrial genomes are not the same
for different species. These data constitute strong evidence that mitochondria do not have a single common
ancestor, but probably have numerous ancestors comprising proto-Rickettsiales, proto-Rhizobiales, and protoAlphaproteobacteria, as well as current alphaproteobacterial species. Mitochondrial genomes have also undergone genome reduction. The gene loss of the
mitochondria of different organisms is more or less
abundant and has resulted from the transfer of genes to
the host nucleus and from the irreversible loss of redundant genes [30,31]. The observation that mitochondrial
genomes vary enormously in size and gene content suggests that gene transfer might be dependent on

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

environmental conditions. Indeed, a large portion of
mitochondrial genes have been transferred to the
nucleus; however, it is difficult to identify mitochondriatargeted genes encoded in the nuclear genomes. Bioinformatic analyses have been uncharacteristically unsuccessful in estimating the number of nuclear genes that
code for mitochondrial proteins [32]. It is thought that
there are approximately 1200 such genes in the human
genome. This difficulty led to our decision to not
include other mitochondria-targeted genes encoded in
the nucleus. Nevertheless, the R. americana mitochondrion contains the least derived mitochondrial genome
with the largest coding capacity and is therefore representative of the ancestral mitochondrion [33].

Conclusions
The most plausible scenario of the origin of the mitochondrion is that ancestors of Rickettsiales and Rhizobiales merged in a proto-eukaryotic cell approximately
one billion years ago and that this fusion was followed
by probable gene loss, genomic rearrangements and the
addition of alphaproteobacterial elements through
ancient (500-600 MYA) and more recent (30-90 MYA)
recombination events and LGTs. Mitochondrial evolution constitutes a rhizome (Figure 4). The tree of life
(TOL) is not sufficient to explain the chimeric structure
of current genomes. The TOL and Darwin’s theory on
the common descent of species are contradicted by
more and more evidence from genomic analyses, suggesting that there are no two genomes with a similar
history [34,35]. This theory is striking in the case of
mitochondria and, in particular, when looking at the
case of the multichromosome mitochondrion of P.
humanus. This multichromosomal situation clearly
demonstrates that mitochondria do not have a stable or
unique form; therefore, the history of their evolution
cannot be the same. This likelihood is also supported by
the fact that they do not have the same number of
genes. Gene loss and transfer events to the nucleus were
not the same for the mitochondria of different organisms. For the first time, we present evidence that the
common ancestor theory is likely incorrect, even in the
case of organelles such as mitochondria. Indeed, the
sources of mitochondrial genes were not the same
between different organisms. Some elements were established quite early during the evolution of mitochondria
(approximately one billion years ago), while others were
added much later, after the divergence of the different
rickettsial species (Figure 5). Moreover, recombination
and gene exchange events occur so often in all organisms and to such an extent that it seems absolutely
plausible that an elevated rate of such events took place
in mitochondria as well, especially when we consider

Page 10 of 16

their long existence of approximately 1 BY, which gave
them the opportunity to recombine, rearrange and
shape their genomes in various ways. In the case of
organelles, genealogical trees better represent these multiple origins of the genomic repertoire of mitochondria.
Unfortunately, the reconstruction of the rhizome has its
limits. We are able to detect signals from two of three
ancestral generations, and based on these signals, we
have suggested scenarios that retrace history back a couple of billion years, but after a certain point, the signals
are no longer detectable, and the accurate determination
of the gene repertoire of ancestors is not possible. However, there is sufficient evidence to track evolution quite
far and to pose the following idea: if even organelles
such as mitochondria are mosaics, then the theory of a
single common ancestor and a top-down tree do not
reflect our current state of knowledge.

Methods
Sequence similarity search

We analyzed the sequences of the 67 protein-coding
genes of the Reclinomonas americana mitochondrion,
the 13 protein-coding genes of the human mitochondrion, the 110 mitochondria-related proteins of Pediculus humanus (37 internal mitochondrial genes found on
18 mini-chromosomes and 73 nuclear genes) and a total
of 91 mitochondria-related proteins (both internal to
mitochondria and nuclear genes) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae that gave matches to 5 alphaproteobacterial species (Rickettsia prowazekii, Rhodospirillum rubrum,
Rhodopseudomonas palustris, Rhodobacter sphaeroides
and Ochrobactrum anthropi) in the study of Abhishek et
al. (2011) [9] using a BLASTP search. Each gene
sequence of the identified sister taxa of the mitochondria was blasted against the redundant NR database to
identify any previous LGTs in Alphaproteobacteria. All
results were filtered using an e-value cut-off of 10-15.
Phylogenetic analyses

All of the best matches for each of the mitochondrial
(and sister taxa) proteins in each of the four organisms
were used to construct Maximum Likelihood (ML) phylogenetic trees. Alignments were performed with ClustalX2 [36], and trees were constructed and visualized
using Mega4 [37]. Bootstrap values were computed for
all trees using 100 replications. Trees were then classified according to the bootstrap value obtained at the
mitochondrion/sister taxon node. The percentage of
LGTs was calculated for each of the four mitochondria,
and the information on R. felis was retrieved from the
study of Merhej et al., 2011 [35]. A c2 statistical test
was performed to determine possible significant
differences.

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

Evidence for recombination events

To identify possible recombination events, we first
searched for repeat elements in the three mitochondrial
genomes using the REPuter tool [38]. We also used the
RAT [39] on each protein sequence to detect potential
recombination events.
Divergence time calculation

The divergence time of recombined species was calculated using 16S rRNA phylogenies and the molecular
clock option of the Mega4 program, assuming a relatively constant rate of evolution of 1 to 2% per 50 million years [40,41].

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer’s report 1

William Martin, Institut of Botanic III, Heinrich-HeineUniversity, Düsseldorf
Reviewer 1

This paper examines individual gene phylogenies in an
attempt to examine the origin of mitochondria. It comes
in the wake of a much more thorough study by Stephen
Giovannoni’s group (Thrash et al., Phylogenomic evidence for a common ancestor of mitochondria and the
SAR11 clade, Scientific Reports Volume: 1, Article number: 13 DOI: doi:10.1038/srep00013) but taxon sampling
is not the main problem with this paper. The problem is
the interpretation of the the results. The authors find,
like Abishek et al., 2011 (ref 9) and many of us over the
last 10 years or so have found, that different mitochondrial genes do not trace to the same source in phylogenetic trees. Georgiades and Raoult interpret that as
evidence to indicate that mitochondria acquired different genes from different sources, and that is probably
how many folks would have interpreted such results 15
or so years ago. But what Georgiades and Raoult forget
to mention is that their interpretation is very one-sided
(and to some extent upside-down-and-backwards): they
assume 1) that all of the lateral transfer occurred from
different bacteria to mitochondria (and to the nucleus in
the case of their reanalysis of Abishek’s data) and 2)
that the free-living prokaryotes from which these genes
are presumed to have been donated never undergo lateral transfer of genes. That is excruciatingly unlikely,
considering what we know about LGT among prokaryotes. Free-living prokaryotes undergo LGT all the time.
[If the authors need a reference for that, there are the
700 papers that cited WF Doolittle Science 1999 or the
1100 papers that cited Ochman et al., Nature 2000.]
And they did at the time that mitochondria arose too
(1.5 Ga at least; Javaux et al., Nature 2001). The result
of LGT among free-living relatives of mitochondria (and
chloroplasts) prior to and subsequent to the origins of
those organelles is that genes brought in to the

Page 11 of 16

eukaryotic lineage by the mitochondrion might now
look in a phylogenetic tree as if they had been brought
in by a different lineage. I have been making that point
since 1999 (1-8).
1. Martin W: Mosaic bacterial chromosomes–a challenge en route to a tree of genomes. BioEssays 21:99104 (1999).
2. Rujan T, Martin W: How many genes in Arabidopsis come from cyanobacteria? An estimate from 386
protein phylogenies. Trends Genet. 17:113-120 (2001).
3. Schnarrenberger C, Martin W: Evolution of the
enzymes of the citric acid cycle and the glyoxylate cycle
of higher plants: A case study of endosymbiotic gene
transfer. Eur. J. Biochem. 269:868-883 (2002).
4. Martin W, Rujan T, Richly E, Hansen A, Cornelsen
S, Lins T, Leister D, Stoebe B, Hasegawa M, Penny D:
Evolutionary analysis of Arabidopsis, cyanobacterial, and
chloroplast genomes reveals plastid phylogeny and thousands of cyanobacterial genes in the nucleus. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 99:12246-12251 (2002).
5. Esser C, Ahmadinejad N, Wiegand C, Rotte C,
Sebastaini F, Gelius-Dietrich G, Henze K, Kretschmann
E, Richly E, Leister D, Bryant D, Steel MA, Lockhart PJ,
Penny D, Martin W: A genome phylogeny for mitochondria among a-proteobacteria and a predominantly
eubacterial ancestry of yeast nuclear genes. Mol. Biol.
Evol. 21:1643-1660 (2004).
6. Esser C, Martin W, Dagan T: The origin of mitochondria in light of a fluid prokaryotic chromosome
model. Biol. Lett. 3:180-184 (2007).
7. Deusch O, Landan G, Roettger M, Gruenheit N,
Kowallik KV, Allen JF, Martin W, Dagan T: Genes of
cyanobacterial origin in plant nuclear genomes point to
a heterocyst-forming plastid ancestor. Mol. Biol. Evol.
25:748-761 (2008).
8. Atteia A, Adrait A, Brugière S, van Lis R, Tardif M,
Deusch O, Dagan T, Kuhn L, Gontero B, Martin W,
Garin G, Joyard J, Rolland N: A proteomic survey of
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii mitochondria sheds new
light on the metabolic plasticity of the organelle and on
the nature of the alpha-proteobacterial mitochondrial
ancestor. Mol. Biol. Evol. 29:1533-1548 (2009).
And it seems now that folks are beginning to get it,
for example as in: Richards TA, Archibald JM (2011)
Gene transfer agents and the origin of mitochondria.
Curr Biol 21: R112-R114. But the point is not obvious,
so I will explain a bit more. And none of this is to say
that Georgiades and Raoult should cite my papers, it is
just to substantiate the point: The ancestor of mitochondria lived at least 1.5 billion years ago, and it possessed
in its chromosome(s) a specific collection of genes – by
becoming an endosymbiont and an organelle it became
cut off from standard gene flow with free-living bacteria
(just like Buchnera, Wolbachia or Rickettsia become cut

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

off). Hence the origin of mitochondria was a sampling
process of one genome’s worth of ancient eubacterial
gene diversity (making no statement about the size of
that genome). The closest relatives of the mitochondrial
ancestor living 1.5 billion years ago (1/3 of earth’s age
ago) had about the same collection of genes, but over
time they donated some to other lineages and collected
some from yet other lineages, etc. etc. etc. and on the
bottom line we do not know exactly how much gene
transfer among free-living prokaryotes went on, but we
know it was a lot! After all, modern alphaproteobacterial
genomes are highly chimaeric themselves, and it is silly
to expect that any modern bacterium should possess
exactly the same collection of genes as the ancestor of
mitochondria possessed. For example, a collection of 82
alphaproteobacterial genomes contains 27,810 gene
families (excluding singletons) (9), the proteobacteria
harbour 74667 families (9). Those genes were not all
present in the “last common ancestor” of alphaproteobacteria (or proteobacteria, respectively), otherwise its
genome would have been too big to be true (the Genome of Eden problem). We have to accept that genes
really are on the move across prokaryote genomes over
time and we know the mechanisms (transformation,
transduction, conjugation, gene transfer agents). That
does not make the orign of mitochondria easier to
reconstruct, but it does mean that if we are to allow lateral gene transfer into the issue at the origin of mitochondria, as Georgiades and Raoult laudably are doing,
we have to consider known mechanisms (LGT among
prokaryotes) first (please), before we start making radical
claims about lateral transfers to mitochondrial genomes.
9. Kloesges T, Martin W, Dagan T: Networks of gene
sharing among 329 proteobacterial genomes reveal differences in lateral gene transfer frequency at different
phylogenetic depths. Mol. Biol. Evol. 28: 1057-1074
(2011).
Overall, the situation is not that dire. Yes, mitochondria are chimaeric, because the ancestor of mitochondria
was chimaeric. But the simple observation that all mitochondrial genes are still a subset of the Reclinomonas
gene set indicates in the most straightforward manner
that mitochondria have gone genome reduction in evolution, not gene acquisition. So the figure that Georgiades and Raoult present here is wrong (though pretty),
but the observations upon which it is based remain
valid. It is just that gene transfers among prokaryotes
(my model) explains both Georgiades and Raoult findings as well as chmiaerism among prokaryotes, where as
their model only accounts for mitochondrial chimaerism
while assuming (and actually demanding) that free-living
prokaryotes have been immune to LGT. If they want a
picture of this issue that is constructed via calculations

Page 12 of 16

by a computer rather than drawn by hand as an artist’s
impression (like I did in ref. 1, 1999), see (10).
10. Dagan T, Martin W: Getting a better picture of
microbial evolution en route to a network of genomes.
Phil. Trans Roy. Soc. Lond. B 364: 2187-2196 (2009).
With thanks for your patience and trusting that you will
understand my points here and rewrite the paper
accordingly and reinterpret the observations to obtain a
less radical inference about mitochondrial history, I
remain with my best regards,
Yours sincerely
Bill Martin
Authors’ response

Thank you for the time and energy you spent giving us
such beautiful and interesting remarks, which we took
under consideration. It is true that, in the first version,
we did not think about considering previous LGTs in
Alphaproteobacteria. Therefore, in the revised version, we
looked for LGTs by re-BLASTing all the sequences of the
mitochondria sister taxa against NR and building phylogenies including the hits of these BLASTS. However, no
previous LGTs were detected except for two cases, for
which ancestors acquired genes before the mitochondria
did. These cases include the ribosomal protein L6, which
seems to have been transferred to the alphaproteobacterium Methylibium petroleiphilum from Betaproteobacteria, and the aconitate hydratase protein that was
passed over to some members of the Rickettsiales from
Gammaproteobacteria (Lines: 125-139; 320-323; 325).
None of the other phylogenies revealed a previous acquisition of genes by ancestors. The idea of mosaicism in
ancestral genomes is interesting, but even if rickettsial
genomes are chimerical, they are not as chimerical as
mitochondria. The proportion of mosaicism in R. Americana (34%), H. sapiens (84.6%) and S. cerevisiae (31.8%)
mitochondria is statistically more elevated than the proportion of mosaicism in Rickettsia species (12%) (See
Figure 1;Lines: 125-139; 329-332). Moreover, in a recent
study identifying LGT events in rickettsial species, we
identified very small numbers of such events (6) in current rickettsial species [42]. LGTs and recombination
events are not rare, and it is easy for organisms to
exchange sequences continuously over different periods of
time. Mitochondria appeared approximately 1 BYA; it is
therefore plausible that such events occurred very often
in mitochondrial genomes (Lines: 247-255).
Mitochondrial genome reduction was also considered
and included in the revised version. The gene loss of
mitochondria of different organisms is more or less abundant and resulted from the transfer of genes to the host
nucleus and the irreversible loss of redundant genes
[24,25](Lines: 263-276). There are two possible

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

hypotheses on the creation of mitochondria: either
sequences were rearranged and exchanged after the
emergence of mitochondria by fusion of the ancestors of
Rickettsiales and Rhizobiales that merged in a protoeukaryotic cell or current mitochondrial genes were
gained by mitochondrial ancestors and were selected
before the emergence of mitochondria. Our evidence
demonstrates the first scenario (Lines: 279-283; 287292; 294-301).
Finally, by adding the Pediculus humanus mitochondrion in the revised version (Lines: 32-33; 43-44; 79; 80;
82; 115-121; 154-155; 174-177; 190-194; 314-316), we
clearly demonstrate that there is not a unique ancestral
model that is fixed and rigid. The mitochondrial genome
of P. humanus is fragmented into 18 mini-chromosomes.
In some cases, multichromosomes may allow for
enhanced gene exchange. This event likely took place
after the emergence of the mitochondrion through a series
of events involving the excision and rejoining of fragments over a long period of time (Lines: 50; 237-242).
Reviewer’s report 2

Arcady Mushegian, Department of Bioinformatics, Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri,
USA.

Page 13 of 16

genomic analyses, suggesting that there are no two genomes with a similar history” (Line: 286).
Reviewer 2

and “For the first time, we present evidence that the
common ancestor theory is incorrect, even in the case
of organelles such as mitochondria” (I see no earth-shattering evidence to that effect in this study, as I will try
to point out below).
Authors’ response

This was rephrased as the following: “For the first time,
we present evidence that the common ancestor theory is
likely incorrect, even in the case of organelles such as
mitochondria”(Line: 293).
Reviewer 2

The main device used by the authors is phylogenetic trees
of protein families which have as their members select
mitochondria-encoded and nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins from three eukaryotic species. The selection
of these proteins is inconsistent between a protist, yeast
and human: why only mitochondria-encoded proteins are
used in the case of human and protest mitochondria,
whereas only in yeast this is supplemented with mitochondria-targeted genes encoded in the nuclear genome?

Reviewer 2

Authors’ response

The authors ask: which representative of Alphaproteobacteria may have given rise to mitochondria? Their
answer is that there were multiple round of acquisition
of mitochondrial genes from different Alphaproteobacteria ("rhizosphere” of ancient eukaryotes), with recombinational gene replacement and lineage-specific loss of
mitochondrial genes, so that the mitochondrial genomes
(plus nucleus-encoded mitochondrial proteins) of present-day eukaryotic lineages are the patchwork of old
and new genes, mixed in different proportions and
going back to different (but still mostly alphaproteobacterial) ancestors. These ideas are interesting, but I do
not think that the data presented by the authors actually
support their case that well. Certainly, in the Discussion,
the authors are carried away with the statements such
as “The TOL and Darwin’s theory on the common descent of species is contradicted by more and more evidence from genomic analyses, suggesting that there are
not two genes with a similar history” (I see plenty of
evidence in the genomic data that many pairs of genes
have very similar history, and surely there may be some
pairs with the identical history)

Unfortunately, it is not easy to identify mitochondria-targeted genes encoded in nuclear genomes. Indeed, bioinformatic analyses have been uncharacteristically
unsuccessful in estimating the number of nuclear genes
that code for mitochondrial proteins (estimates range
from 349-2,897 in different species) [27]. It is thought
that are approximately 1200 such genes in the human
genome. We only completed our Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial database with such genes because our
study was initially inspired by the study by Abhishek et
al., 2011 [9], in which S. cerevisiae mitochondria-targeted genes encoded in the nuclear genomes were used.
We were also able to use the mitochondria-targeted
genes of Pediculus humanus that are annotated in the
NCBI database. On the other hand, the Reclinomonas
americana mitochondrion contains the least-derived
mitochondrial genome with the largest coding capacity
and encodes 97 genes [32](Lines: 263-276).

Authors’ response

This statement was rephrased as the following: “The TOL
and Darwin’s theory on the common descent of species
are contradicted by more and more evidence from

Reviewer 2

The other inconsistency is manifest when we compare
the trees for various protein families. Most of these
trees contain proteins from different subsets of Alphaproteobacteria: many trees have no representatives from
Rickettsiales, even when it is known that these species
have the proper orthologs (e.g., many ribosomal proteins), some have no representatives from Rhizobiales,
etc. I suspect that this is an artefact of “filtering the

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

BLASTP results” by E-value of 10^-15, for which there
cannot be good scientific justification. I trust that the
authors would agree with me that the statement “the
nearest tree neighbor of an eukaryotic mitochondrial
protein comes from a taxon other than Rickettsiales”
makes little sense when a bona fide ortholog of the
eukaryotic protein exists in Rickettsiales but has not
been included into the alignment from which the tree
was inferred.
Authors’ response

We consider an e-value of 10-15 to be stringent enough to
obtain reliable alignments and homologs. In Abhishek’s
study [9], an e-value cut-off of 10-22 was used.
Reviewer 2

Even with these quite substantial technical shortcomings, a look at the Tables 1, 2, 3 displays a quite strong
trend that seems to argue against the authors’ interpretation. Namely, when the partition with a mitochondrial
protein in it has strong statistical support, the neighbor
is usually from Rickettsiales or, less commonly, from
Rhizobiales; and when the neighbor is from another
clade of Alphaproteobacteria, the partition tends to be
supported weakly. This, in my opinion, is good evidence
that the overwhelming majority of mitochondrial genes
comes from the Rickettsiales clade. This signal will
probably be stronger when more consistent collection of
homologs will be analyzed.
Authors’ response

This explanation could be a possibility; however, we
know that when bootstraps are not significant, adding
some species into the phylogeny will result in a more elevated bootstrap. The weak bootstrap values could also
be due to many recombination events that were not
showcased in our study.
Reviewer 2

Another comment has to do with the evolutionary timing. The authors cite the time of split between Rickettsiales and Rhizobiales of 1.5 BYA. Incidentally, this
same time point is considered by many authors to be
the lower bound of the eukaryote age, based on the fossil record; indeed, eukaryotes may be even older. But if
both dates are correct, then there were no separate
clades of Rickettsiales and Rhizobiales at the time of the
eukaryote origin, only the common alphaproteobacterial
ancestor. In this case, the “patchiness” of mitochondria
is even less, as distinction between the present-day rickettsial and rhizobial neighbors is moot (and the difference
should be screened for parallel evolution, branch attraction artefacts, etc). This is not to say that there was no
introgression and replacement of mitochondrial genes
(whether mitochondria-encoded or nuclear) by later
rounds of horizontal transfer from bacteria - by the way,

Page 14 of 16

not only Alphaproteobacteria, and indeed the search for
mitochondrial genes transferred from more distant
lineages could be a good way to develop this theme. But
currently, the evidence is probably just not there.
Authors’ response

Eukaryotes emerged at about the same time as mitochondria after the first endosymbiotic event which took
place between 1.5 and 1 BYA, not earlier. During that
time, Rickettsiales and Rhizobiales diverged. As for other
LGTs, that point was taken under consideration in the
revised version (see Reviewer 1).
Reviewer’s report 3

Eugene V. Koonin, NCBI, NLM, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20894, USA.
Reviewer 3

In this provocative article, Georgiades and Raoult propose a ‘rhizome’ scenario of mitochondrial genome evolution according to which “The most plausible scenario
of the origin of the mitochondrion is that ancestors of
Rickettsiales and Rhizobiales merged in a proto-eukaryotic cell approximately one billion years ago”. Beyond any
question, this is a provocative and novel suggestion.
Moreover, I should note that the rhizome (perhaps,
more precisely, network or web) of prokaryote evolution
is generally valid beyond doubt. It is no exaggeration to
maintain that any prokaryote genome is a palimpsest of
multiple gene exchange, replicon fusion and recombination events. More specifically, however, I think the
authors of this paper are missing two key points.
First, exactly because each prokaryote genome is a
complex chimera, it is impossible to accurately reconstruct the gene repertoire of the alpha-proteobacterial
ancestor of the mitochondrion. Genomes of modern
alpha-proteobacteria are extremely poor guides for such
a reconstruction. This point is very clearly demonstrated
and emphasized in the important paper by Esser, Martin
and Dagan (Esser C, Martin W, Dagan T. The origin of
mitochondria in light of a fluid prokaryotic chromosome
model. Biol Lett. 2007 Apr 22;3(2):180-4). Thus, the chimeric character of the mitochondrial genome is quite
likely to be accounted for by the mosaicism of the
ancestral alpha-proteobacterial genome.
Authors’ response

We are fully aware of the limits of such a reconstruction,
and we do criticize these limits in our Discussion. We are
able to detect signals from two of three ancestral generations, and based on these signals, we suggested scenarios
that retrace history for a couple of billion years, but after a
certain point, the signals are no longer detectable, and an
accurate determination of the gene repertoire of ancestors
is not possible (Lines: 302-306). The case of previous LGTs

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

in Alphaproteobacteria was taken under consideration in
the revised version (See Reviewer 1). Furthermore, as discussed in our response to Reviewer 1, the mosaicism of rickettsial species is significantly lower than the mosaicism of
mitochondria (See Figure 1, Reviewer 1). Moreover, when
we look in the pan-genome of Rickettsia, it is obvious that
even though there are some LGT events in their genomes,
they are really not very numerous; the biggest portion of the
Rickettsia pan-genome is composed of specific genes (Figure
2) (Lines: 125-139).
Reviewer 3

In addition, it is well known that after the endosymbiosis numerous genes from the endosymbiont have been
relocated to the host nuclear genome. Although this set
of genes is difficult to delineate precisely, there is reasonable confidence regarding the transfer of several
hundred genes, so these genes necessarily have to be
taken into account in any reconstruction of mitochondrial genome evolution. Thus, in my view, the rhizome
scenario of mitochondrial evolution, however interesting, runs afoul of the Occam razor.

Page 15 of 16

Additional file 3: Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial
phylogenies.
Additional file 4: Pediculus humanus mitochondrial phylogenies.
Additional file 5: Previous horizontal gene transfers in
Alphaproteobacteria.
Additional file 6: Recombination events in the Reclinomonas
americana and Pediculus humanus mitochondria.

List of abbreviations
RAT: Recombination analysis tool; BYA: billion years ago; MYA: million years
ago; LGT: lateral gene transfers; TOL: tree of life; ML: maximum likelihood.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Christelle Forzales for her help with Figure 2.
Authors’ contributions
DR designed the research project. KG performed the genomic analysis and
analyzed the data. KG and DR wrote the paper. RD revised the paper. All
authors read and approved the final version.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 12 July 2011 Accepted: 20 October 2011
Published: 20 October 2011

Authors’ response

Indeed, delineating the set of mitochondria-targeted
nuclear genes is very difficult, which is why we were not
able to identify them in R. americana or H. sapiens
mitochondria (see Reviewer 2).
We are convinced that parsimony is essential, but the
simplest way of explaining mosaicism is not to say that
an endosymbiont acquired a great proportion of genes
from its ancestor but rather that mitochondria continued
to evolve by integrating exogenous sequences. The fragmented chromosome of the P. humanus mitochondrion,
used in our revised version, is the best evidence showing
the progressive evolution of mitochondria over a long
period of time, even though such a series of events is not
parsimonious [23](Lines 237-242).
Recent evidence has shown that exogenous sequences
from Trypanosoma cruzi and the HHV6 virus were also
integrated into the human genome, thus demonstrating a
continuous chimeric formation. Furthermore, if such
events are visible in such a short timescale as in the
human genome, we do not see why it would not be visible in something as old as mitochondria (Lines: 247253; 294-301). If we consider a post-Darwinian model of
evolution, mosaicism is the simplest explanation and
therefore most likely the correct one according to Occam’s
razor.

Additional material
Additional file 1: Reclinomonas americana mitochondrial
phylogenies.
Additional file 2: Homo sapiens mitochondrial phylogenies.

References
1. Gray MW, Doolittle WF: Has the endosymbiont hypothesis been proven?
Microbiol Rev 1982, 46:1-42.
2. Gray MW, Burger G, Lang BF: Mitochondrial evolution. Science 1999,
309:1242-1245.
3. Embley TM, Martin W: Eukaryotic evolution changes and challenges.
Nature 2006, 440:623-630.
4. Esser C, Ahmadinejad N, Wiegand C, Rotte C, Sebastiani F, Gelius-Dietrich G,
Henze K, Kretschmann E, Richly E, Leister D, Bryant D, Steel MA, Lockhart PJ,
Penny D, Martin W: A genome phylogeny for mitochondria among αproteobacteria and a predominantly eubacterial-ancestry of yeast
nuclear genes. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:1643-1660.
5. Esser C, Martin W: Supertrees and symbiosis in eukaryote genome
evolution. Trends Microbiol 2007, 15:435-437.
6. Atteia A, Adrait A, Brugiere S, Tardif M, van Lis R, Deusch O, Dagan T,
Kuhn L, Gontero B, Martin W, Garin J, Joyard J, Rolland N: A proteomic
survey of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii mitochondria sheds light on the
metabolic plasticity of the organelle and on the nature of the
alphaproteobacterial mitochondrial ancestor. Mol Biol Evol 2009,
26:1533-1548.
7. Wu M, Sun LV, Vamathevan J, Riegler M, Deboy R, Brownlie JC, McGraw EA,
Martin W, Esser C, Ahmadinejad N, Wiegand C, Madupu R, Beanan MJ,
Brinkac LM, Daugherty SC, Durkin AS, Kolonay JF, Nelson WC, Mohamoud Y,
Lee P, Berry K, Young MB, Utterback T, Weidman J, Nierman WC, Paulsen IT,
Nelson KE, Tettelin H, O’Neill SL, Eisen JA: Phylogenomics of the
reproductive parasite Wolbachia pipentis wMel: a streamlined genome
over-run by mobile genetic elements. Plos Biol 2004, 2:e69.
8. Fitzpatrick DA, Creevey CJ, McInerney JO: Genome phylogenies indicate a
meaningful alpha-proetoabacterial phylogeny and support a grouping
of the mitochondria with the Rickettsiales. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:74-85.
9. Abhishek A, Bavishi A, Bavishi A, Choudhary M: Bacterial genome
chimearism and the origin of mitochondria. Can J Microbiol 2011, 57:49-61.
10. Rujan T, Martin W: How many genes in Arabidopsis come from
cyanobacteria? An estimate from 386 protein phylogenies. Trends Genet
2001, 17:113-120.
11. Martin W: Mosaic bacterial chromosomes - a challenge en route to a
tree of genomes. BioEssays 1999, 21:99-104.
12. Kloesges T, Martin W, Dagan T: Networks of gene sharing among 329
proteobacterial genomes reveal differences in lateral gene transfer
frequency at different phylogenetic depths. Mol Biol Evol 2011,
28:1057-1074.

Georgiades and Raoult Biology Direct 2011, 6:55
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/6/1/55

13. Andersson SG, Karlberg O, Canback B, Kurland CG: On the origin of
mitochondria: a genomics perspective. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
2003, 358:165-179.
14. Cavalier-Smith T: The phagotrophic origin of eukaryotes and
phylogenetic classification of protozoa. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2002,
52:297-354.
15. Cavalier-Smith T: Only six kingdoms of life. Proc Biol Sci 2004,
271:1251-1262.
16. Yang D, Oyaizu Y, Oyaizu H, Olsen GJ, Woese CR: Mitochondrial origins.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985, 82:4443-4447.
17. Olsen GJ, Woese CR, Overbeek R: The winds of evolutionary change:
breathing new life into microbiology. J Bacteriol 1994, 176:1-6.
18. Viale A, Arakaki AK: The chaperone connection to the origins of the
eukaryotic organelles. FEBS Lett 1994, 341:146-151.
19. Gray MW, Spencer DF: In Evolution of microbial life. Edited by: Roberts DM,
Sharp PM, Alderson G, Collins M. Cambridge University Press; 1996:.
20. Sichertz-Ponten T, Kurland CG, Andersson SGE: A phylogenetic analysis of
the cytochrome-b and cytochrome c oxidase I genes supports an origin
of mitochondria from within the Rickettsiaceae. Biochim Biophys Acta
1998, 1365:545-551.
21. Emelyanov VV: Rickettsiaceae, Rickettsia-like endosymbionts and the
origin of mitochondria. Biosc Rep 2001, 21:1-17.
22. Schluter A, Ruiz-Trillo I, Pujol A: Phylogenomic evidence for a myxococcal
contribution to the mitochondrial fatty acidbeta-oxidation. Plos One
2011, 6(7):e21989..
23. Shao R, Kirkness EF, Barker SC: The single mitochondrial chromosome
typical of animals has evolved into 18 minichromosomes in the human
body louse, Pediculus humanus. Genome Res 2009, 19:904-912.
24. Hotopp JCD, Clark ME, Oliveira DCSG, Foster JM, Fischer P, Munoz
Torres MC, Giebel JD, Kumar N, Ishmael N, Wang S, Ingram J, Nene RV,
Shepard J, Tomkins J, Richards S, Spiro DJ, Ghedin E, Slatko BE, Tettelin H,
Werren JH: Widespread lateral gene transfers from intracellular bacteria
to multicellular eukaryotes. Science 2007, 317:1753-1756.
25. Saridaki A, Bourtzis K: Wolbachia: more than just a bug in insects’
genitals. Curr Opin Microbiol 2010, 13:67-72.
26. Renvoise A, Merhej V, Georgiades K, Raoult D: Rickettsiales: insights into
manipulators of eukaryotic cells. Trends Mol Med 2011.
27. Hecht MM, Nitz N, Araujo PF, Sousa AO, de Cássia Rosa A, Gomes DA,
Leonardecz D, Teixeira ARL: Inheritance of DNA transferred from
American trypanosomes to human hosts. Plos One 2010, 5:e9181.
28. Hall CB, Caserta MT, Schnabel K, Shellay LM, Marino AS, Carnahan JA:
Chromosomal integration of human herpesvirus 6 is the major mode of
congenital human herpesvirus 6 infection. Pediatrics 2008, 122:513-520.
29. Shao R, Barker SC: Chimeric mitochondrial minichromosomes of the
human body louse, Pediculus humanus: evidence for homologous and
non-homologous recombination. Gene 2011, 473:36-43.
30. Adams KL, Palmer JD: Evolution of mitochondrial gene content: Gene
loss and transfer to the nucleus. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 29:380-395.
31. Timmis JN, Ayliffe MA, Huang CY, Martin W: Endosymbiotic gene transfer:
organelle genomes forge eukaryotic chromosomes. Nature Rev 2004,
5:123-135.
32. Minorsky PV: The hot and the classic. Plant Physiol 2003, 132:726-727.
33. van der Giezen M, Tovar J: Degenerate mitochondria. EMBO reports 2005,
6:525-530.
34. Raoult D: The post-Darwinist rhizome of life. The Lancet 2010, 375:104-105.
35. Merhej V, Notredame C, Royer-Carenzi M, Pontarotti P, Raoult D: The
rhizome of life: the sympatric Rickettsia felis paradigm demonstrates
random transfer of sequences. Mol Biol Evol 2011, MBE -11 - 0060.R2.
36. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP, Chenna R, McGettigan PA,
McWilliam H, Valentin F, Wallace IM, Wilm A, Lopez R, Thompson JD,
Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
2007, 23:2947-2948.
37. Tamura K, Dudley J, Nei M, Kumar S: MEGA4: Molecular Evolutionary
Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol Biol Evol 2007,
24:1596-1599.
38. Kurtz S, Choudhuri JV, Ohlebusch E, Schleiermacher C, Stoye J, Giegerich R:
REPuter: The manifold applications of repeat analysis on a genomic
scale. Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:4633-4642.
39. Etherington GJ, Dicks J, Roberts IN: Recombination Analysis Tool (RAT): a
program for the high-throughput detection of recombination.
Bioinformatics 2005, 21:278-281.

Page 16 of 16

40. Ochman H, Elwyn S, Moran NA: Calibrating bacterial evolution. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:12638-12643.
41. Ogata H, Audic S, Audiffren-Renesto P, Fournier PE, Barbe V, Samson D,
Roux V, Cossart P, Weissenbach J, Claverie JM, Raoult D: Mecanisms of
evolution in Rickettsia conorii and R. prowazekii. Science 2001,
293:2093-2098.
42. Georgiades K, Merhej V, El Karkouri K, Raoult D, Pontaroti P: Gene gain and
loss events in Rickettsia and Orientia species. Biol Direct 2011, 6:6.
doi:10.1186/1745-6150-6-55
Cite this article as: Georgiades and Raoult: The rhizome of Reclinomonas
americana, Homo sapiens, Pediculus humanus and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae mitochondria. Biology Direct 2011 6:55.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
