<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1475-9292-2-10.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease

BioMed Central

Open Access

Review

Species concepts for trypanosomes: from morphological to
molecular definitions?
Wendy Gibson*
Address: School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1UG, UK
Email: Wendy Gibson* - w.gibson@bristol.ac.uk
* Corresponding author

Published: 28 October 2003
Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2:10

Received: 13 June 2003
Accepted: 28 October 2003

This article is available from: http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/10
© 2003 Gibson; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all media
for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
The way species and subspecies names are applied in African trypanosomes of subgenera
Trypanozoon and Nannomonas is reviewed in the light of data from molecular taxonomy. In subgenus
Trypanozoon the taxonomic importance of pathogenicity, host range and distribution appear to have
been inflated relative to actual levels of genetic divergence. The opposite is true for subgenus
Nannomonas, where current taxonomic usage badly underrepresents genetic diversity. Data from
molecular characterisation studies are revealing a growing number of genotypes, which may
represent distinct taxa. Unfortunately few of these genotypes are yet supported by sufficient
biological data to be recognized taxonomically. But we may be missing fundamental epidemiological
information, because of our inability to distinguish these trypanosomes in host blood
morphologically or in tsetse by their developmental cycle. Molecular taxonomy has led the way in
identifying these new genotypes and now offers the key to elucidating the biology of these
organisms.

The concept of a species
In our daily lives we are surrounded by animals and plants
that belong to distinct and quite clearly demarcated species. Even little children know that dogs and cats, or
apples and pears, are different, and so we come to expect
that different species should look different. Yet there is no
biological imperative dictating this. To paraphrase an
eminent entomologist, the stripes on the legs of mosquitoes are not there for the taxonomist's benefit to facilitate
the identification of different species. On the other hand,
there may be striking phenotypic variations between individuals of the same species, as exemplified by dogs and
other domestic species, that are considered to have no taxonomic relevance.
Taxonomy is traditionally based on morphological differences, but identification of species by morphology is not

without pitfalls. How do taxonomists decide what level of
morphological difference defines a species? Biologists
believe in the concept that (eukaryote) species are defined
by the ability of individuals to mate and produce viable
and fertile offspring. In practice, this is never actually put
to the test in the majority of cases. Instead, a taxonomist
with expert knowledge of the group of organisms, extrapolates from detailed information on a few species to make
judgements on the group as a whole. The key taxonomic
characters defining species will vary from group to group.
Unfortunately, the biological species concept offers no
guidance on the taxonomy of asexually reproducing
organisms.
How does taxonomy based on molecular characters fit
into this conceptual framework? Underlying molecular
taxonomy is the idea that non-interbreeding populations

Page 1 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/10

Table 1: Characteristics of species within subgenus Trypanozoon See text for explanation.
Species

Distribution

Host range

Transmission

Pleomorphic

Differentiation to
procyclics

Kinetoplast DNA
Maxicircles

Trypanosoma
brucei

Tropical
Africa

Trypanosoma
evansi

North Africa,
Asia, S.
America

Wild &
domestic
mammals
Camels,
horses, dogs,
bovids

Trypanosoma
equiperdum

Cosmopolitan

Horses

Heterogeneous
minicircles

Homogeneous
minicircles

Tsetse – cyclical
transmission

+

+

+

+

-

Bloodsucking
flies –
mechanical
transmission
Transmitted via
copulation

-

-

-

-

+

-

-

+/-

-

+

will diverge genetically. Therefore genetically similar individuals belong to the same species. The difficulty arises in
determining what level of similarity defines a species, and
just how long ago the event took place that separated 2
lineages. Just as with morphological characters, it takes
expert knowledge of the extent of variation within and
between known species in the group of organisms to
make a judgement on what level of difference constitutes
a new species. Again the key taxonomic characters (genes)
used for each group of organisms may differ, and even
when the same gene is used, for example the 18S ribosomal RNA gene, different levels of variation may prove
significant in defining species.
So much for theory – how does this work in practice? It is
illuminating to compare taxonomic ideas for two subgenera of African tsetse-transmitted trypanosomes. In subgenus Trypanozoon, taxonomy has been based largely on
pathogenicity, distribution and host range. How do these
criteria compare to observed levels of genetic divergence?
For subgenus Nannomonas, data from molecular characterisation studies are revealing a growing number of distinct genotypes. Does each of these genotypes represent a
distinct biological entity and does it matter?

Species in subgenus Trypanozoon
It is generally accepted that subgenus Trypanozoon is
divided into 3 species: Trypanosoma brucei, T. evansi and T.
equiperdum, with T. brucei further subdivided into 3 subspecies defined by pathogenicity, distribution and host
range [1]. Bloodstream form trypanosomes of the 3 species are morphologically indistinguishable, save for the
occurrence of short-stumpy forms in T. brucei. Confusingly, the trait of pleomorphism can be lost in laboratory
isolates of T. brucei, and they then become indistinguishable from the monomorphic species, T. evansi and T.
equiperdum.

At the functional level pleomorphism reflects the ability
of T. brucei to develop in its vector, the tsetse fly, and this
is in turn dependent on possession of a complete and
functional set of genes for mitochondrial operation. The
mitochondrial genome is contained in the maxicircle
DNA of the kinetoplast of T. brucei, together with the set
of minicircle-encoded genes necessary for editing the
maxicircle transcripts so they can be correctly translated.
These features define T. brucei, and their absence defines
T. evansi and T. equiperdum (Table 1). Neither T. evansi or
T. equiperdum is cyclically transmitted by tsetse (although
tsetse potentially could transmit T. evansi mechanically),
and indeed, neither species is capable of cyclical development. T. evansi lacks a mitochondrial genome and its kinetoplast contains only a homogeneous set of minicircles.
The few isolates of T. equiperdum examined also have
missing kinetoplast DNA. One Chinese strain of T.
equiperdum had maxicircles just over half the size of those
of T. brucei and homogeneous minicircles like T. evansi
[2]. Two other laboratory strains of T. equiperdum also had
homogeneous minicircles; one had full-size and one
reduced size maxicircles [3,4]. Examination of nuclear
DNA polymorphisms by isoenzymes, RFLP, karyotype,
minisatellite or phylogenetic analysis has shown no obvious differences between T. evansi, T. equiperdum and T.
brucei [2,5–8]
In a sense then, T. evansi and T. equiperdum can both be
regarded as natural mutants of T. brucei. Do they deserve
separate species status? Arguably yes, because both satisfy
the biological species definition above of non-interbreeding populations. Since genetic exchange in T. brucei takes
place during cyclical development in the tsetse fly [9], this
excludes participation of either T. evansi or T. equiperdum.

Subspecies of Trypanosoma brucei
Trypanosoma brucei consists of 3 morphologically indistinguishable subspecies, all of which started as full species
[1]. The demotion to subspecies came about after recogniPage 2 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/10

Table 2: Characteristics of subspecies and subgroups within Trypanosoma brucei See text for explanation
Subspecies

Distribution

Host range

Transmission

Trypanosoma brucei brucei

Tropical Africa

Trypanosoma brucei
rhodesiense
Trypanosoma brucei
gambiense Group 1
Trypanosoma brucei
gambiense Group 2

East Africa

Wild & domestic
mammals, not humans
Humans, wild & domestic
mammals
Humans, wild & domestic
mammals
Humans, wild & domestic
mammals

West & Central
Africa
Ivory Coast

Growth in rodents

Genetic variability

Presence of SRA gene

Tsetse

Fast

+++

-

Morsitans group
tsetse
Palpalis group
tsetse
Palpalis or
morsitans group
tsetse?

Fast

++

+

Slow

+

-

Fast

++

-

tion that the biological differences between the 3 species
were not that significant and could mostly be explained
by host range variation and geographical distribution
(Table 2). Molecular evidence has not changed that view
for T. b. brucei and T. b. rhodesiense. These 2 subspecies
share the same range of genetic polymorphisms [8,10–13]
and have been demonstrated to interbreed in the laboratory [14]. Most compellingly, it has now been demonstrated that T. b. brucei and T. b. rhodesiense can differ by as
little as the expression of a single gene [15–17]. In fact
there is a greater level of genetic variation between different T. b. brucei isolates than between T. b. brucei and T. b.
rhodesiense [13,18,19].

the SRA gene, which confers human infectivity on T. b.
rhodesiense [15,17,25,26], but whereas T. b. gambiense
group 1 shows solid resistance to human serum, human
serum resistance in T. b. gambiense group 2 varies with parasite passage as in T. b. rhodesiense [27].
We already know that T. b. gambiense group 1 isolates have
a restricted range of genetic polymorphisms and the
smallest genomes within the T. brucei species complex
[20,28]. But what level of divergence does this represent?
Perhaps a genome-wide comparison of T. b. gambiense
group 1 and T. b. brucei will provide an answer.

Species in subgenus Nannomonas
The majority of T. b. gambiense isolates form a homogeneous group (group 1) that stands apart from the rest of the
T. brucei group, because of its restricted range of genetic
polymorphisms and limited antigenic repertoire [20–24].
It is clear that there is a much greater genetic distance
between T. b. gambiense group 1 and other T. brucei subspecies than between T. b. brucei and T. b. rhodesiense. T. b.
gambiense group 1 conforms to the classical concept of T.
b. gambiense as a slow growing parasite in experimental
rodents in contrast to the typically fast growing T. b. brucei/T. b. rhodesiense phenotype. If T. b. gambiense group 1 is
genetically isolated, there may be a case for reinstating it
as the species T. gambiense. But several questions need to
be answered first.
Importantly, can T. b. gambiense group 1 undergo genetic
exchange with T. b. brucei? These experiments are not easy,
because T. b. gambiense group 1 is not readily transmitted
through the morsitans group flies, which are commonly
kept as laboratory colonies. It is unlikely that T. b. gambiense group 2 isolates represent genetic hybrids of T. b. gambiense group 1 and T. b. brucei, although they have the
human infectivity of the former and the virulence and fly
transmissibility of the latter. T. b. gambiense group 2 isolates shared only a single microsatellite marker with sympatric group 1 isolates [8]. T. b. gambiense groups 1 and 2
are also unlikely to have the same mechanism of human
serum resistance. We know that neither group possesses

Trypanosomes of subgenus Nannomonas are defined by
their developmental cycle in the tsetse fly, which involves
the midgut and proboscis. As bloodstream forms these
trypanosomes are the smallest of the Salivaria, but there is
considerable morphological variation, both in dimensions (length and maximum width), and in features such
as body shape, prominence of the undulating membrane
and presence of a free flagellum [1]. Coupled with variation in host range and pathogenicity, this morphological
variation led to the description of many species and variants in the past. However, these fine distinctions were
later disregarded and traditionally subgenus Nannomonas
is split into 2 species: Trypanosoma congolense, which has a
wide range of ungulate hosts, and T. simiae, for which pigs
are regarded as the most important host [1]. This simplifies clinical diagnosis: if you find a small trypanosome in
the blood of a sick ox, goat or sheep, it will be T. congolense, while in pigs with acute trypanosomiasis it will be T.
simiae.
This simple picture may be set to change. A number of
hitherto cryptic subgroups have been discovered by
molecular characterisation during the past 20 years or so.
Only one of these has been described in sufficient detail
to warrant acceptance as a new species, T. godfreyi [29].
Molecular characterisation reveals that T. congolense is
divided into 3 subgroups, savannah, forest and kilifi (or
Kenya coast), while the T. simiae group comprises T. simiae
Page 3 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/10

Table 3: Characteristics of species and genotypes within subgenus Nannomonas. See text for explanation
Species

Genotype

Distribution

Host range

Transmission – recorded
high prevalence

Growth in
rodents

Satellite DNA
repeat size

KDNA
minicircle size

Miniexon
repeat size

Trypanosoma
congolense

savannah

Tropical
Africa

morsitans, palpalis and fusca
groups

+

369 bp

850 bp

760 – 1500 bp

forest

West &
Central Africa
East Africa

Wide range of
ungulates & other
mammals
Pigs, goats. cattle,
dogs, Other?
Cattle, sheep, goats.
Not pigs Other?

palpalis group

+

~350 bp

850 bp

~800 bp

morsitans group

+

368 bp

700 bp

~600 bp

Suids

Morsitans, palpalis and fusca
groups
morsitans and fusca groups
morsitans and fusca groups

-

521 bp

900 bp

630 bp

-

~540 bp
373 bp

800, 750 bp

508 bp
~500 bp

kilifi or
Kenya
coast
Trypanosoma
simiae
tsavo
Trypanosoma
godfreyi

Tropical
Africa
East Africa
Tropical
Africa

Suids
Suids

and T. simiae tsavo (Table 3) [29–35]. Each subgroup possesses a unique satellite DNA sequence, and these
sequences have been exploited for the development of
specific DNA probes and PCR tests [36–39]. The ability to
identify these subgroups accurately opens the way for systematic studies of their host range, distribution, pathogenicity, etc. The satellite DNA repeats are sensitive tools
for identification, because they are highly reiterated in the
genome, forming the bulk of the minichromosomes. The
equivalent satellite DNA repeat of T. brucei is conserved
throughout subgenus Trypanozoon [40,41]. This suggests
either that the satellite repeats evolve very rapidly in subgenus Nannomonas compared to subgenus Trypanozoon, or
that divergence between subgroups in subgenus Nannomonas is greater than that between subdivisions in subgenus Trypanozoon.
Few attempts have been made to assess the level of genetic
divergence within subgenus Nannomonas. Total DNA
hybridisation showed that T. congolense savannah and kilifi subgroups were only distantly related compared to species within subgenus Trypanozoon [42]. A survey of nuclear
and kinetoplast DNA polymorphisms in 5 species/subgroups (T. congolense savannah, forest and kilifi, T. simiae,
T. godfreyi) revealed differences in the size of miniexon
repeats and kDNA minicircles and maxicircles (Table 3)
[43]. In this study, the most closely related trypanosomes
were T. congolense savannah and forest [43], which share
71% similarity in satellite DNA sequence compared to an
average 40–45% similiarity in the rest of the subgenus
[44]. The T. congolense kilifi subgroup was as divergent
from other T. congolense subgroups as from T. simiae or T.
godfreyi [43]. The gene for the major surface glycoprotein,
glutamate and alanine rich protein or GARP, is well conserved among T. congolense subgroups; the amino acid
sequences of T. congolense savannah and forest strains differed by 4–5%, compared to about 16% from kilifi
subgroup [45]. More divergent GARP genes have also
been identified in T. simiae and T. godfreyi [46]. In agree-

ment with the variation seen in GARP genes, phylogenetic
analysis based on the 18S ribosomal RNA gene divides
subgenus Nannomonas into 2 major clades: (1) T. congolense savannah, forest and kilifi subgroups, (2) T. simiae,
T. godfreyi and T. simiae tsavo (previously designated T.
congolense tsavo [31,34]. The absolute nucleotide differences between 18S ribosomal RNA genes in subgenus
Nannomonas are larger than those in subgenus Trypanozoon [34].
In summary, there is compelling molecular evidence of far
greater levels of genetic divergence within subgenus Nannomonas compared to subgenus Trypanozoon. However,
biological criteria to support these "molecular taxa" are
scarce. The inability of several of these trypanosomes to
grow in experimental rodents has precluded the isolation
of bloodstream forms from mammalian hosts or tsetse
mouthparts in the field, so host range and distribution
data are incomplete (Table 3). The use of PCR identification of tsetse infections has led to recognition that some
of these new genotypes are extremely widespread and
prevalent in the field, e.g. [47–51]. What contribution do
these trypanosomes make to livestock disease? Are these
various genotypes responsible for assumed "strain" differences in drug response, virulence or fly transmission
dynamics? Can these new genotypes be correlated with
the old morphological criteria and species designations?
We really need the biology to catch up with the molecular
taxonomy to answer these questions.

Conclusions
There is no consistency in the way species and subspecies
names are applied in subgenera Trypanozoon and Nannomonas. In subgenus Trypanozoon the taxonomic importance of pathogenicity, host range and distribution appear
to have been inflated relative to actual levels of genetic
divergence. Taking all evidence into account, it is arguable
that T. b. gambiense group 1 should be reinstated as the

Page 4 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2

species T. gambiense, leaving T. b. rhodesiense and T. b. gambiense group 2 as host range variants of T. b. brucei.

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/10

14.
15.

In comparison, current taxonomic usage badly underrepresents diversity in subgenus Nannomonas. Data from
molecular characterisation are revealing a growing
number of genotypes, which may represent distinct taxa.
Unfortunately few of these genotypes are yet supported by
sufficient biological data to be recognized taxonomically.
But we may be missing fundamental epidemiological
information, because of our inability to distinguish these
trypanosomes in host blood morphologically or in tsetse
by their developmental cycle. Molecular taxonomy has
led the way in identifying these new genotypes and now
offers the key to elucidating the biology of these
organisms.

16.
17.

18.

19.
20.

Competing interests
None declared.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Hoare CA: The Trypanosomes of Mammals. Oxford, Blackwell Scientific Publications; 1972.
Lun ZR, Brun R and Gibson WC: Kinetoplast DNA and molecular karyotypes of Trypanosoma evansi and T. equiperdum
from China. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 1992, 50:189-196.
Riou G and Saucier J: Characterization of the molecular components in kinetoplast-mitochondrial DNA of Trypanosoma
equiperdum. Comparative study of dyskineto-plastic and
wild strains. Journal of Cell Biology 1979, 82:248-263.
Frasch A, Hajduk S, Hoeijmakers J, Borst P, Brunel F and Davison J:
The kinetoplast DNA of Trypanosoma equiperdum. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1979, 607:397-410.
Gibson WC, Wilson AJ and Moloo SK: Characterisation of
Trypanosoma (Trypanozoon) evansi from camels in Kenya
using isoenzyme electrophoresis. Research in Veterinary Science
1983, 34:114-118.
Masiga DK and Gibson WC: Specific probes for Trypanosoma
(Trypanozoon) evansi based on kinetoplast DNA mini-circles. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 1990, 40:279-284.
Stevens JR, Noyes H, Dover GA and Gibson WC: The ancient and
divergent origins of the human pathogenic trypanosomes,
Trypanosoma brucei and T-cruzi. Parasitology 1999,
118:107-116.
Biteau N, Bringaud F, Gibson W, Truc P and Baltz T: Characterization of Trypanozoon isolates using a repeated coding
sequence and microsatellite markers. Molecular and Biochemical
Parasitology 2000, 105:185-201.
Jenni L, Marti S, Schweizer J, Betschart B, Lepage RWF, Wells JM, Tait
A, Paindavoine P, Pays E and Steinert M: Hybrid formation
between African trypanosomes during cyclical transmission.
Nature 1986, 322:173-175.
Tait A, Barry JD, Wink R, Sanderson A and Crowe JS: Enzyme variation in Trypanosoma brucei spp. II. Evidence for T. b.
rhodesiense being a set of variants of T. b. brucei. Parasitology
1985, 90:89-100.
Hide G, Buchanan N, Welburn S, Maudlin I, Barry JD and Tait A:
Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense: characterisation of stocks
from Zambia, Kenya, and Uganda using repetitive DNA
probes. Experimental Parasitology 1991, 72:430-439.
Hide G, Cattand P, Le Ray D, Barry DJ and Tait A: The identification of Trypanosoma brucei subspecies using repetitive
DNA sequences. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 1990,
39:213-226.
Gibson WC, Marshall T.F. de C. and Godfrey DG: Numerical analysis of enzyme polymorphism: a new approach to the epidemiology and taxonomy of trypanosomes of the subgenus
Trypanozoon. Advances in Parasitology 1980, 18:175-246.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.
31.

32.
33.
34.

Gibson WC: Analysis of a genetic cross between Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense and T. b. brucei. Parasitology 1989,
99:391-402.
De Greef C, Imberechts H, Matthyssons G, Van Meirvenne N and
Hamers R: A gene expressed only in serum-resistant variants
of Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense. Molecular and Biochemical
Parasitology 1989, 36:169-176.
Gibson W: Will the real Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense
please step forward? Trends Parasitol. 2002, 18:486-490.
Xong VH, Vanhamme L, Chamekh M, Chimfwembe CE, Van den
Abbeele J, Pays A, Van Meirvenne N, Hamers R, De Baetselier P and
Pays E: A VSG expression site-associated gene confers resistance to human serum in Trypanosoma rhodesiense. Cell 1998,
95:839-846.
Godfrey DG, Baker RD, Rickman LR and Mehlitz D: The distribution, relationships and identification of enzymic variants
within the subgenus Trypanozoon. Advances in Parasitology 1990,
29:1-74.
Mathieu-Daude F and Tibayrenc M: Isozyme variability of
Trypanosoma brucei s.l.: genetic, taxonomic, and epidemiological significance. Experimental Parasitology 1994, 78:1-19.
Dero B., Zampetti-Bosseler, F., Pays, E., Steinert, M.: The genome
and the antigen gene repertoire of Trypanosoma brucei
gambiense are smaller than those of T. b. brucei. Molecular and
Biochemical Parasitology 1987, 26:247-256.
Gibson WC: Will the real Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
please stand up? Parasitology Today 1986, 2:255-257.
Godfrey DG and Kilgour V: Enzyme electrophoresis in characterising the causative organism of Gambian trypanosomiasis. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
1976, 70:219-224.
Paindavoine P, Zampetti-Bosseler F, Coquelet H, Pays E and Steinert
M: Different allele frequencies in Trypanosoma brucei brucei
and Trypanosoma brucei gambiense populations. Molecular
and Biochemical Parasitology 1989, 32:61-72.
Paindavoine P., Pays, E., Laurent, M., Geltmeyer, Y., Le Ray, D., Mehlitz, D., Steinert, M.: The use of DNA hybridisation and numerical taxonomy in determining relationships between
Trypanosoma brucei stocks and subspecies. Parasitology 1986,
92:31-50.
Radwanska M, Chamekh M, Vanhamme L, Claes F, Magez S, Magnus
E, De Baetselier P, Buscher P and Pays E: The serum resistanceassociated gene as a diagnostic tool for the detection of
Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 2002,
67:684-690.
Gibson W, Backhouse T and Griffiths A: The human serum resistance associated gene is ubiquitous and conserved in
Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense throughout East Africa.
Infection, Genetics and Evolution 2002, 1:207-214.
Mehlitz D, Zillmann U, Scott CM and Godfrey DG: Epidemiological
studies on the animal reservoir of gambiense sleeping sickness. III. Characterisation of Trypanozoon stocks by isoenzymes and sensitivity to human serum. Tropenmedizin und
Parasitologie 1982, 33:113-118.
Kanmogne G.D., Bailey, M., Gibson, W.: Wide variation in DNA
content among Trypanosoma brucei ssp. isolates. Acta Tropica
1997, 63:75-87.
McNamara JJ, Mohammed G and Gibson WC: Trypanosoma (Nannomonas) godfreyi sp. nov. from tsetse-flies in The Gambia:
biological and biochemical characterization. Parasitology 1994,
109:497-509.
Majiwa P.A.O., Masake, R.A., Nantulya, V.N., Hamers, R., Matthyssons, G.: Trypanosoma congolense: identification of two
karyotypic groups. EMBO Journal 1985, 4:3307-3313.
Majiwa PAO, Maina M, Waitumbi JN, Mihok S and Zweygarth E:
Trypanosoma (Nannomonas) congolense: molecular characterisation of a new genotype from Tsavo, Kenya. Parasitology
1993, 106:151-162.
Young CJ and Godfrey DG: Enzyme polymorphism and the distribution of Trypanosoma congolense isolates. Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 1983, 77:467-481.
Gashumba JK: Two enzymically distinct groups of Trypanosoma congolense. Research in Veterinary Science 1986, 40:411-412.
Gibson WC, Stevens JR, Mwendia CMT, Makumi JN, Ngotho JM and
Ndung'u JM: Unravelling the phylogenetic relationships of
African trypanosomes of suids. Parasitology 2001, 122:625-631.

Page 5 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease 2003, 2

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

40.

41.

42.
43.
44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.
51.

http://www.kinetoplastids.com/content/2/1/10

Knowles G,, Betschart B,, Kukla BA,, Scott JR, and Majiwa PAO:
Genetically discrete populations of Ifrom livestock on the
Kenyan Coast. Parasitology 1988, 96:461-474.
Masiga DK, McNamara JJ and Gibson WC: A repetitive DNA
sequence specific for Trypanosoma (Nannomonas) godfreyi.
Veterinary Parasitology 1996, 62:27-33.
Gibson WC, Dukes P and Gashumba JK: Species-specific DNA
probes for the identification of trypanosomes in tsetse. Parasitology 1988, 97:63-73.
Majiwa PAO and Webster P: A repetitive DNA sequence distinguishes Trypanosoma simiae from T. congolense. Parasitology
1987, 95:543-598.
Kukla BA, Majiwa PAO, Young CJ, Moloo SK and Ole-Moiyoi OK:
Use of species-specific DNA probes for the detection and
identification of trypanosome infections in tsetse flies. Parasitology 1987, 95:1-26.
Sloof P, Bos JL, Konings AFJM, Menke HH, Borst P, Gutteridge WE
and Leon W: Characterisation of satellite DNA in Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma cruzi. Journal of Molecular Biology
1983, 167:1-21.
Gibson WC and Borst P: Size-fractionation of the small chromosomes of Trypanozoon and Nannomonas trypanosomes
by pulsed field gradient gel electrophoresis. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 1986, 18:127-140.
Majiwa PAO, Hamers R, Van Meirvenne N and Matthyssens G: Evidence for genetic diversity in Trypanosoma (Nannomonas)
congolense. Parasitology 1986, 93:291-304.
Garside LH and Gibson WC: Molecular characterisation of
trypanosome species and subgroups within subgenus
Nannomonas. Parasitology 1995, 111:301-312.
Masiga DK, Smyth AJ, Hayes PJ, Bromidge TJ and Gibson WC: Sensitive detection of trypanosomes in tsetse flies by DNA
amplification. International Journal for Parasitology 1992, 22:909-918.
Asbeck K, Ruepp S, Roditi I and Gibson W: GARP is highly conserved among Trypanosoma congolense Savannah, Forest
and Kilifi subgroups. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 2000,
106:303-306.
Asbeck K, Kurath U, Roditi I and Gibson W: Trypanosoma (Nannomonas) simiae and T. (N.) godfreyi have genes encoding
glutamic acid and alanine-rich proteins. Mol Biochem Parasitol,
2003, In press
Masiga D.K., McNamara, J.J., Laveissiere, C., Truc, P., Gibson, W.C.:
A high prevalence of mixed trypanosome infections in tsetse
flies in Sinfra, Cote d'Ivoire detected by DNA amplification.
Parasitology 1996, 112:75-80.
Majiwa PAO and Otieno LH: Recombinant DNA probes reveal
simultaneous infection of tsetse flies with different trypanosome species. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 1990,
40:245-254.
Nyeko JHP, Ole-Moiyoi OK, Majiwa P, Otieno LH and Ociba PM:
Characterisation of trypanosome isolates from cattle in
Uganda using species-specific DNA probes reveals predominance of mixed infections. Insect Science and Its Application 1990,
11:271-280.
Lehane MJ, Msangi AR, Whitaker CJ and Lehane SM: Grouping of
trypanosome species in mixed infections in Glossina
pallidipes. Parasitology 2000, 120:583-592.
Woolhouse ME, Hargrove JW and McNamara JJ: Epidemiology of
trypanosome infections of the tsetse fly Glossina pallidipes in
the Zambezi Valley. Parasitology 1993, 106:479-485.

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 6 of 6
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
