<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Environment sensing and response mediated by ABC transporters</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Genomics 2011, 12:S8. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-S1-S8"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Sarah E Giuliani"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

RESEARCH

Open Access

Environment sensing and response mediated
by ABC transporters
Sarah E Giuliani1, Ashley M Frank1, Danielle M Corgliano1, Catherine Seifert1, Loren Hauser2, Frank R Collart1*

Abstract
Background: Transporter proteins are one of an organism’s primary interfaces with the environment. The
expressed set of transporters mediates cellular metabolic capabilities and influences signal transduction pathways
and regulatory networks. The functional annotation of most transporters is currently limited to general classification
into families. The development of capabilities to map ligands with specific transporters would improve our
knowledge of the function of these proteins, improve the annotation of related genomes, and facilitate predictions
for their role in cellular responses to environmental changes.
Results: To improve the utility of the functional annotation for ABC transporters, we expressed and purified the set
of solute binding proteins from Rhodopseudomonas palustris and characterized their ligand-binding specificity. Our
approach utilized ligand libraries consisting of environmental and cellular metabolic compounds, and fluorescence
thermal shift based high throughput ligand binding screens. This process resulted in the identification of specific
binding ligands for approximately 64% of the purified and screened proteins. The collection of binding ligands is
representative of common functionalities associated with many bacterial organisms as well as specific capabilities
linked to the ecological niche occupied by R. palustris.
Conclusion: The functional screen identified specific ligands that bound to ABC transporter periplasmic binding
subunits from R. palustris. These assignments provide unique insight for the metabolic capabilities of this organism
and are consistent with the ecological niche of strain isolation. This functional insight can be used to improve the
annotation of related organisms and provides a route to evaluate the evolution of this important and diverse
group of transporter proteins.

Background
Bacterial transport proteins have an essential role in
mediating the uptake and efflux of small molecules with
the environment and the efflux of large molecules to the
outer surface of the cell [1]. These proteins comprise a
heterogeneous group representative of their diverse
functional and cellular roles. Transporter proteins are
clustered into approximately 600 different families based
on the transporter classification system [2] that incorporates both phylogenetic and functional information. This
system effectively organizes transporters to the superfamily or family level, but provides very limited insight
into the specific ligands which are transported by these
proteins. This lack of specific functional information
limits our ability to link cellular metabolic capabilities
* Correspondence: fcollart@anl.gov
1
Biosciences Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60490, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

with environmental signaling molecules or nutrients and
generate predictive models for cellular response to
environmental changes. Certainly, improved methods
for functional characterization of ligands associated with
the genomic set of transporters (transportome, [3])
would provide critical insight into cellular capabilities
for utilizing environmental nutrients and extruding toxic
compounds.
To evaluate the impact of improved functional annotation of transporter proteins, we applied a high
throughput screening method for identification of protein-ligand interactions to map ligands with transporter
proteins. As many transport-associated proteins are integral membrane proteins, we used solute binding subunits of the ABC transporter family as surrogates for
determining specificity of these transporters. This
approach was validated for a set of bacterial ABC transporters [4] and provided valuable insight into this

© 2011 Giuliani et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

biologically relevant class of proteins. The family of ABC
transport systems is widely distributed in all three kingdoms of life and can transport a variety of substrates
such as metals, small ions, mono- and oligosaccharides,
peptides, amino acids, iron-siderophores, polyamines
and vitamins. In bacteria, ABC uptake transporters typically consist of a combination of a solute binding, two
integral membrane, and two ATPase subunits. ABC
efflux pumps are thought to lack the traditional functionality associated with the solute binding subunit, but
the associated proteins sometimes form larger complexes with membrane fusion proteins [ i.e. the HlyD
subfamily proteins, transporter classification 8.A.1.3.1,
[2] and Outer Membrane Factors (transporter classification 1.B.17 [2]].
In bacteria, the number of ABC type transport systems
is generally related to genome size with approximately
2-5% of the genome encoding components of the ABC
family transporters [5]. However some soil bacteria contain a relatively high number of these transporters
representing 40-70% of the all transporter proteins
encoded in the genome. These are essential for the utilization of environmental nutrients and may reflect the
competitive aspect of nutrient acquisition in the soil
environment. To evaluate functional diversity of these
systems, we examined the transport capabilities for Rhodopseudomonas palustris, a metabolically versatile bacterium commonly found in soils and water. This
organism has the ability to produce hydrogen, fix carbon
dioxide, and biodegrade organic pollutants and plantderived material. The R. palustris CGA009 strain contains ~ 500 transport proteins representing most major
transporter classes. Included in this set are ABC transporter clusters and individual components identified by
the TransportDB [6] that comprise approximately 87
distinct functional units. The ABC transporter gene set
is comprised of ~350 genes representing a significant
fraction (~41%) of the genome apportioned to transport
capability. This organism has a diverse metabolic repertoire and characterization of the ABC transporter capabilities would provide useful insight into the metabolic
and cellular capacity to utilize environmental nutrients
and to extrude toxic compounds of this and related
organisms.

Results

Page 2 of 14

attributes such as genome context and protein sequence
features. The prototypical periplasmic binding protein
with a predicted periplasmic signal sequence comprised
the majority of the target set. Seven targets did not have
readily identifiable signal peptides or an N-terminal helical region (possible membrane anchor) but were included
in the set based on either genome context suggesting the
protein was part of an ABC transporter gene cluster
(RPA1395, 2112, 2359, 2308, 4164) or from sequence
homology predicting a periplasmic binding protein (PBP)
domain (RPA4686, 1389, 3707). RPA3707 is annotated as
a “nitrate transporter component nrtA” and categorized
as an ATPase by TransportDB. Though it is part of an
operon with the gene RPA3706, coding for a putative
two-component response regulator antitermination factor
NasT, it has a conserved PBP domain and thus was
included in this target set. The experimental target set
included several proteins having signal peptides or Nterminal helices which were predicted to be associated
with efflux pumps. Three genes annotated as membrane
fusion proteins (RPA0681, 1648 and 4088) are specific for
efflux pumps and generally believed not to influence substrate specificity. These were included in the ligand
screen on the basis of a recent study demonstrating
metal-induced conformational changes in the ZneB protein which were suggested to indicate an active role of
membrane fusion proteins in efflux resistance systems
[7]. The addition of these targets to the study efflux
pump associated proteins resulted in a total of 108 candidate binding proteins (BP’s) targeted for the protein production and ligand screening protocols.
Interestingly, of the 108 candidate BP’s, 21 were not
clustered with an integral membrane and ATPase subunits (Additional file 1 and TransportDB) based on either
proximity in genome and/or functional annotation (predicted substrate) from sequence homology. There were
72 total gene clusters having at least one representative
of each ABC transporter component; of these, 9 transporters were associated with 2 SBP’s, 1 was associated
with 3 SBP’s, 61 had one associated SBP. Four additional
gene clusters were each indicated by associating one
SBP with either an integral membrane or an ATPase
subunit. One transporter (RPA2039) was predicted to
have a fused integral membrane and solute binding subunits in a single polypeptide but was not included in the
final list.

Target protein selection

The genome set of 105 candidate solute binding proteins
(SBP’s) of ABC transporters in R. palustris were selected
for production and functional characterization by ligand
screening (see Additional file 1 for a list of ABC transporter proteins considered for this study). Most of the
targets were extracted from TransportDB but the set was
supplemented by our internal bioinformatic analysis of

Protein production and characterization

One technical goal of this study was to benchmark the
ability to clone, express and purify the genomic set of
ABC transporter-associated solute binding proteins from
R. palustris by applying a dual-vector expression strategy
in the context of a high-throughput protein production
process. The success rate for protein production steps

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

Page 3 of 14

Figure 1 Experimental outcome from cloning to functional screening for the set of ABC transporter binding proteins from R. palustris.

(Fig. 1) is higher than reported for other typical genome
scale productions experiments with bacterial proteins
[8,9]. The working target set of 107 genes representing
99% of the total target set were those successfully amplified via PCR and annealed into a vector for heterologous
expression in E. coli. The relatively high levels for production of soluble proteins are consistent with other
studies on this family of proteins [10-12]. Overall, greatest attrition for cloned targets was associated with
obtaining soluble protein; of the total target set, 97%
expressed, but only 87% and 71% were soluble at small
scale and large scale, respectively. All but two scaled
soluble proteins were successfully purified and screened
in the FTS assay. The final size of the screened set (69%
of all targets or 75 proteins) is sufficient to provide a
comprehensive assessment of the utility of the screening
approach and provide insight into the nature of transport capabilities for this organism. Finally, ligand assignment was made to approximately 45% of the total
protein set, which corresponds to 48 proteins or about
64% of the proteins assayed.
Development of ligand library

The diversity of environmental and metabolic small
molecule compounds is exemplified by the 16,000 biological compounds reported in KEGG database of known
mapped metabolic pathways and cellular processes [13].
It is not currently possible to screen the complete set of
candidate small molecule libraries but several strategies

were invoked to enhance the ability to identify cognate
ligands for the set of R. palustris binding proteins. One
approach targeted common classes for all organisms
(metals, vitamins, amino acids, peptides, and polyamines) and incorporated ligands known to bind this
type of proteins. Another strategy examined the genome
context of the transporter genes as these genes often
cluster with known enzymes and could give an indication of metabolic capacity linked to transport. For example, select aromatic acid compounds such as benzoic
acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid and p-coumaric acid were
added to the SBP library, given knowledge of the ability
of R. palustris to degrade aromatic acid compounds and
the presence of a suite of genes involved in the degradation of benzoate and hydroxybenzoate (3, 4). Results
from initial binding outcomes of preliminary screens
revealed the need to expand this class of ligands to
probe binding specificity for similar compounds. A scan
of the literature identified other similar aromatic acid
compounds derived from plant lignin synthesis or
breakdown such as m-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, cinnamic acid, syringic acid, quinic acid, benzylformic acid,
and acetosyringone. Similarly, in response to assay
detection of proteins’ affinity to benzoic acid, a set of
related aromatic compounds was added, including salicylic acid, benzamide, benzylaldehyde, methylvanillate,
phenylacetate, and others (5, 6).
Clearly, various practical limitations prevent screening
of all desired ligands, such as reagent unavailability,

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

insolubility, toxicity, expensiveness, or incompatibility
with the fluorescent dye in the assay. Despite this, an
attempt was made to include at least one representative
ligand for various categories of chemicals for which
there is a known physiological or metabolic function in
bacteria or which occurs naturally in the soil or freshwater environment of R. palustris. Ligand categories in
the library were delineated by grouping compounds with
similar chemical structure, resulting in about 33 distinct
categories (Additional file 2).
Mapping ligand and binding proteins in R. palustris

The fluorescence-based thermal shift assay was used in a
microwell plate format to identify candidate binding
ligands for a majority of the 108 ABC transporter candidate binding proteins (Table 1). Although a binding functionality is often inferred by the NCBI annotation, the
screen was conducted in an unbiased manner in that
each protein was screened against the bulk of the ligand
library irrespective of the inferred function. In our analysis, a chemical was considered a “binding ligand” if the
calculated ΔTm (relative to the Tm without ligand) was 2°
C or greater. The 2° C ΔT m significance threshold is
based on previous studies [4] for this family of proteins
as well as a qualitative assessment of the observed variation for proteins between the various assays (individual
ligand screens, pooled screens, and replicates). Multiple
binding ligands were observed for some proteins and in
most cases these ligands exhibited similar chemical properties such that a general ligand binding category could
be assigned. For summation purposes, a maximum of
four ligands (selected on the basis of highest ΔTm ) is
listed for each target in Table 1 with the complete binding data available as additional material (for a complete
list of binding ligands see Additional file 3).
Ligand binding profiles for various proteins screened
in the FTS assay were linked to additional evidence
which corroborated the functional assignments, including genome context, literature descriptions for potential
transport roles in metabolic pathways, and sequence
homology with known PDB structures of ligand-bound
proteins. A “High” data verification assignment indicates
the FTSA ligand binding result is supported by good
quality data and by two or more external sources of
functional validation (literature, genome context, annotation/description, PDB homology, etc.). A “Moderate”
data verification assignment indicates the FTSA ligand
binding result is supported by one external source of
functional validation while a “Low” data verification
assignment indicates simply high confidence FTSA
ligand-mapping data.
The outcome of this screening approach is the identification of specific roles for transporter SBP’s. The spectrum of ligands mapped to the transporter binding

Page 4 of 14

proteins include common functionalities associated with
many bacterial organisms as well as specific capabilities
linked to the ecological niche that provide insight into
the extraordinary metabolic diversity of R. palustris. The
experimental results are reviewed as a summary of
ligand-binding events observed for general ligand categories followed by an evaluation of the biological relevance for specific assignments.
Metal binding proteins

Metal binding was observed for eight proteins in the
FTSA screen. This group represents a heterogeneous mix
annotated as solute binding (RPA0860, RPA0884,
RPA1385, RPA2410, and RPA4686), efflux pump associated (RPA0681 and RPA4088), or hypothetical
(RPA4236) proteins. One protein in this cluster
(RPA0860) was predicted as a metal binding protein by
TransportDB (Table 1). For the most part, the predicted
annotation was either nonspecific or inconsistent with
the outcome of the FTSA screens. Two proteins
(RPA0860 and RPA4686) were stabilized by copper,
nickel, or zinc although the degree of stabilization was
different. The RPA0860 protein shared domain conservation with the TroA superfamily of periplasmic metal
binding proteins that share a distinct fold and metal
binding properties. This protein is homologous
(e-value = 1 × 10 -35 ) to a predicted periplasmic Zn 2+
binding protein PsaA from Streptococcus pneumoniae.
The crystal structure of this protein has been determined
with bound zinc [14,15] and alignment of the RPA0860
protein sequence to this protein demonstrates good conservation of the residues for metal binding. Gene
RPA4686 is not part of an ABC transporter operon, but
its protein exhibits a similar metal binding profile as
observed for the RPA0860 protein. The RPA4686 protein
shares sequence similarity to several categories of periplasmic binding proteins but does not contain a recognizable periplasmic signal sequence. Although we
observed specific stabilization of the protein with metal
ions, there is little corroborative evidence to support the
metal binding function or the association of this protein
with a specific ABC transporter cluster.
The RPA0884 protein exhibited specific stabilization
in the presence of Fe(III)/citrate and is a part of an ABC
transporter cluster (Additional file 1). The genomic
region adjacent to this transporter cluster contains several genes involved in the utilization of iron. The
RPA0875 gene is annotated as a ferrocheletase, an
enzyme that is present in most prokaryotes which catalyzes the insertion of ferrous iron into protoporphyrin
IX to form protoheme IX (heme) [16]. The gene encoding the RPA0891 protein is annotated as the ferredoxincontaining subunit of a glutamate synthase complex.
The RPA1385 protein, which was incorrectly annotated as being a putative phosphonate transport system

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

SBP, was shown to have a high affinity for binding vanadate. R. palustris is a nitrogen fixing bacteria and has
been shown to utilize a vanadium nitrogenase (V-nitrogenase) as a metabolic alternative when molybdenum is
limited in the environment [17]. The vanadium nitrogenase of Azotobacter vinelandii has been reported to
catalyze both CO and N2 reductions and thus may provide a potential link between the evolution of carbon
and nitrogen cycles [18]. Prior to this research, the cyanobacterium Anabaena variabilis (which also contains a
V-nitrogenase) was the only organism know to contain
a defined high-affinity vanadate transport system [18].
In R. palustris, genes RPA1381-1386 are annotated as
components of a vanadate nitrogen fixation system
based on homology to other similar proteins. However,
in R. palustris, initial homology search approaches were
unsuccessful in attempts to identify the high-affinity
vanadate transport system. Subsequent annotation
efforts have proposed vanadate transport for this system
as inferred from substantial homology to ABC transporter genes in the same cluster in A. vinelandii. However,
this update has not been successfully reflected in the
current NCBI or JGI annotation lists. Our ligand mapping approach experimentally identifies the RPA1385
protein as the vanadate SBP gene for this ABC transport
system. This finding not only identifies a key component
of the vanadate nitrogenase fixation pathway for this
organism, but may also confirm a proposed hypothesis
for the presence of this system in R. palustris which
suggests that vanadate transport systems have evolved at
least twice from dissimilar ancestral genes [19].
Several other screened proteins were identified as
metal binding proteins but little independent experimental evidence is available to support the functional
assignments. The proteins encoded by the RPA2410 and
RPA4236 genes exhibited stabilization by Cu+2 and Zn
+2
, respectively. Both proteins are part of a transporter
cluster but there is little independent experimental evidence to support the functional assignments. The
RPA0681 and RPA4088 genes are members of the HlyD
family (membrane fusion protein, MFP superfamily) and
are annotated as efflux pump components that link the
ABC transporter in the plasma membrane with a pore
in the outer membrane. Other MFP subfamilies specifically interact with other efflux pumps families such as
the major facilitator superfamily (MFS) and resistance/
nodulation/cell division (RND) family.
Binding proteins for aromatic compounds

Six proteins demonstrated binding to aromatic compounds as their primary ligand interaction. This activity
was observed for five SBP’s (RPA0668, RPA0985,
RPA1789, RPA4029, and RPA4648) and an efflux pump
associated protein (RPA3790). Binding profiles of the
SBP’s group further segregated this activity on the basis

Page 5 of 14

of proteins that bound benzene compounds with a single carboxyl group (RPA0668, RPA0985, and RPA4029)
verses two proteins (RPA1789 and RPA4648) that
bound benzene compounds with a propenoid side chain
(3 carbons) rather than a single carboxyl group. The
ligand profiles indicated that specificity was based on
similar chemical structures for lignin degradation products such as benzoic acid and p-coumaric acid (Figure
2). In particular, RPA0668 (hbaE) displayed high affinity
binding (ΔT m = 17 °C) to benzoic acid and closely
related derivatives, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, salicylate, and
benzaldehyde. The gene for this SBP is clustered with
ABC transporter genes (hbaEFGHI) and localized
between two well-known operons (bad and hba) for
enzymes which are involved in the initiation of benzoic
acid and 4-hydroxybenzoic acid anaerobic degradation
via CoA ligation [20]. The FTS assay data is the first
experimental validation demonstrating the involvement
of this ABC transporter, via its associated SBP specificity, in the uptake and metabolism of benzoic acid and
other aromatics.
Several other proteins exhibited specific binding of
aromatic ligands and in several cases the ligand binding
profiles were consistent with metabolic capabilities
inferred from the R. palustris genome sequence. This
organism contains several gene clusters implicated in
the biodegradation of aromatic compounds [21]. Most
notable are genes annotated to be involved in protocatechuate degradation (RPA4695-RPA4703, phenylacetate
degradation (RPA1723, RPA1724, and RPA3765-3768),
homoprotocatechuate degradation (RPA3755-RPA3762),
and homogentisate degradation (RPA4670-RPA4675).
The catalytic specificity of these enzymes has not been
experimentally verified, but the metabolic capability generally overlaps with the observed transport profile.
Most notably, two SBP’s, RPA0985 and RPA4029,
exhibited very high stabilization with 4-hydroxybenzoic
acid having ΔTm’s of 29.5 and 17 °C respectively. Comparison of these two sequences using ClustalW revealed
an overall significant identity (43%) and similarity (21%)
of globally aligned residues. This is contrasted with
alignments of RPA0985 and each of the other proteins
in this group, where percent identity was less than 25%.
In addition, alignment percent identity values displayed
a significant positive correlation (R2 = 0.69) to the average T m shift for the primary shared ligand between
RPA0985 and each of the other five proteins. This suggests that there are homologous residues specific to
ligand binding which discriminate even between ligands
with similar structures (eg. benzoate and 4-hydroxybenzoate). Further structural studies are needed to differentiate between those residues specific for ligand
binding and the general sequence signatures shared by
periplasmic solute binding proteins. Overall, the FTS

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

Page 6 of 14

Figure 2 Identification of solute-binding proteins in R. palustris which bind aromatic compounds. A graph of the Tm shifts between
protein with and without ligand displays six Solute-Binding Proteins which showed significant and specific stabilization with various structurally
related aromatic compounds known as breakdown products of lignin in the soil environment.

assay seems to be a good screening tool for determining
relative affinities of a protein to similar ligands as well
as comparing similar proteins with the same ligand, as
demonstrated with this aromatic ligand-binding set of
proteins.
Additionally, one protein bound p-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, and cinnamic acid with good affinities (Figure 2).
The gene encoding this SBP (RPA1789) is located on the
opposite strand but near an ABC transporter operon containing 3 genes: one containing an integral membrane
subunit (RPA1793), and one containing an ATPase subunit (RPA1791) , and one containing fused integral membrane and ATPase subunits (RPA1792). Two genes which
are in close proximity and on the same strand as the SBP
encode the enzymes p-coumaric acid-CoA ligase
(RPA1787) and p-coumaroyl hydratase/lyase (RPA1786).
These enzymes have been predicted to catalyze the first
two catabolic steps of p-coumaric acid degradation [22].
Previously, microarray transcriptome profiling and quantitative proteomics measurements were performed with
R. palustris cells grown on p-coumaric acid, benzoic acid
or succinic acid as the sole carbon source. These studies
reported significantly increased protein abundances for
the two enzymes and correlating increases with the ABC
transporter SBP and ATPases for p-coumaric acid verses
benzoic acid or succinic acid conditions. Based on this
and the FTS assay data, we propose the function for this
transporter is uptake of p-coumaric acid and related
compounds in the environment. Additional evidence to
support the function of this cluster includes a MarR transcriptional regulator (RPA1794) which shares a putative
bidirectional promoter with the three gene ABC operon
and may regulate the cluster; a phenylacetic acid degradation related protein (RPA1780); a 4-hydroxybenzoate
hydroxylase (RPA1781) and a TrapT family transporter

operon (RPA1782-4) that are known to transport
carboxylates.
Results of FTSA-determined aromatic acid binding
profiles for these 6 proteins are consistent with the
knowledge that R. palustris grows well anaerobically and
aerobically on cinnamic acid, ferulic acid, and 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, and anaerobically only on benzaldehyde,
benzoic acid, and DL-mandelic acid, among other substrates tested [23]. Various substrates included in the
FTSA ligand library but reported not to support R. palustris growth were ethyl-vanillic acid (methyl form in
library), phenol, quinic acid, salicylic acid, shikimic acid
and syringic acid. In light of this, it is interesting to note
that assumed transport of a compound based on SBP/
ligand interaction such as that of salicylic acid with proteins RPA0668, RPA0985 and RPA3790 may not necessarily be correlated with an organism’s ability to grow on
that chemical. Still, this proposed suite of six ABC transporters for uptake of aromatic compounds in R. palustris
expands the known list of bacterial ABC transporters
which interact with aromatic compounds. The only
family listed in the Transporter Classification Database
http://www.tcdb.org that uptakes aromatic-type compounds is the Taurine Uptake Transporter (TauT) Family
(3.A.1.17), including the aromatic sulfonate porter,
SsuABC, of Pseudomonas putida and the phthalate
uptake system, OphFGH, of Burkholderia capacia[24].
Other literature suggests homologous aromatic compound transport roles of branched-chain amino acid ABC
transporters in aromatic pollutant-degrading bacteria,
though without experimental confirmation [25]. Aromatic
compounds are more commonly transported by proteins
from other families which are secondary carrier-type
facilitators. Most are in the major facilitator superfamily
(MFS) including the Metabolite: H+ Symporter Family,

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

the Aromatic Acid:H+ symporter (AAHS) Family, the
Anion:Cation Symporter (ACS) Family, and the Putative
Aromatic Compound/Drug Exporter (ACDE) Family.
Additional families are the Aromatic Acid Exporter
(ArAE) Family, the Hydroxy/Aromatic Amino Acid Permease (HAAAP) Family, and the Benzoate:H+ Symporter
(BenE) Family.
Lipid-binding proteins

Many proteins exhibited stabilization by the addition of
small molecule lipids as a primary function in the FTS
assay. Seventeen periplasmic binding proteins shifted in
the FTS assay with either medium/long-chain dicarboxylic acid’s (3 targets), medium/long-chain fatty acids
(2 targets) or both (13 targets) (Table 2). There are at
least three possible interpretations for these ligand-protein observations: 1) the lipid binding profile represents
the functional role of the protein, 2) the binding is
representative of an analog or cognate ligand, or 3) the
association is the consequence of a nonspecific interaction. At this stage, it is not possible to define the nature
of the interaction of most of the lipid-binding proteins
in this study. However, some assignments can be corroborated by additional experimental studies and other
assignments provide insight for refinement of binding studies or validation by alternative experimental
approaches.
In particular, three SBP’s, RPA3725, RPA3724 and
RPA3723, were examined more closely, since they are
clustered in the genome with ABC transporter genes.
RPA3725 was assayed but did not bind any ligand.
RPA3724 and RPA3723 displayed different binding profiles for various fatty acids (FA’s) and dicarboxylic acids
(DA’s). Binding profiles indicate that the two SBP’s
together potentially function with the transporter to
uptake a broad range of substrates having similar structures. This cluster of ABC transporter genes is adjacent
to the pimFABCDE operon, the only identified operon
to encode all enzymes for b-oxidation of fatty acids &
dicarboxylic acids [26]. Enzymes in this metabolic pathway degrade medium chain DA’s (pimelate and longer)
to glutaryl CoA and acetyl CoA. The pimFABCDE
operon genes are required for optimum anaerobic
growth on DA’s and are induced aerobically with C7C14 DA’s and C8 FA. The pimA gene encodes acyl CoA
ligase, which catalyzes the initial step of substrate activation with CoA. PimA ligase catalytic activity was characterized to have a broad substrate range for DA’s and
FA’s. SBP profiles for DA’s correlate significantly to
pimA ligase substrate preference (Fig. 3), which suggests
that the likely function of this ABC transporter is broad
range substrate uptake for degradation with these
enzymes. This makes sense in the context of soil bacteria, since a significant source of environmental fatty
acids and dicarboxylic acids is degradation products of

Page 7 of 14

suberin and cutin [27] which are major lipid constituents of plants.
The functional implication of remaining lipid-binding
profiles is not immediately obvious. ABC transporters
are involved in the transport and localization of lipids
and their derivatives to the cytoplasm, periplasm and
outer membrane as a consequence of anabolic and catabolic processes [28,29]. The transport of simple and
complex phospholipids and glycolipids is mediated by
ABC transporters, and these complexes are important
for both the synthesis and recycling of cell wall components and membrane components [30,31]. However
these lipid moieties are complex and for many outer
membrane lipids the molecular form is species dependent. The current library contained only simple lipids
and did not reflect the true complexity of the cellular
lipid reservoir. In this context, it is reasonable to assume
that some of the binding events observed in this system
mimic components of the biological ligands. Delineation
of the binding specificity will require expansion of the
current screening library to increase representation of
biologically relevant ligands and inclusion of additional
experimental validation methods.
Amino acid binding proteins

Three proteins (RPA2499, RPA2628, and RPA3810)
were identified as amino acid binding proteins via the
FTS screening (Table 1). This observation is consistent
with the assigned annotation and the general functional
prediction of TransportDB (Table 2). The set of binding
proteins specific for amino acids provide transport capabilities for seven of the individual amino acids. The
genes encoding the RPA2628 (PBP), RPA2629 and
RPA2630 (integral membrane subunits) (methionine/
cysteine/histidine) are orthologs of a verified amino acid
transporter in Rhizobium leguminosarum[32]. They are
also localized in a cluster of 10 ABC transporter proteins containing four periplasmic binding proteins (three
screened by FTS assay, Additional file 1) and RPA2628
was the only protein with specific ligand binding. The
characterized set of binding proteins reflects an emphasis on maintenance of sulfate and nitrogen stores.
RPA2499, annotated as an arginine binding protein, is
adjacent to an “amidase” gene. Asparagine has a N:C
ratio of 2:4, which makes it an efficient molecule for the
storage and transport of nitrogen.
Phosphate/phosphonate binding proteins

Four proteins displayed stabilization with phosphate or
phosphonates when screened using the FTS assay
(Table 1). RPA0058 and RPA4780 exhibited specific
stabilization by glycerol-3-phosphate and phosphate,
respectively (Table 1). For both screened proteins, the
assigned annotation and predicted substrate were in
agreement and consistent with the experimental FTS
assay. The RPA0699 and RPA0720 proteins had similar

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

1.6
1.3
1.0
0.6
0.3

*

**

0.0

**

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

**

**

*

0.0

Ligase activity ( mole min -1 mg -1)

2.0

Ligase activity ( mole min -1 mg -1)

Page 8 of 14

Figure 3 Comparison of binding and enzyme activity profiles for selected proteins in or adjacent to the pimFABCDE operon. The left
ordinate represents increased stabilization increment (ΔTm) for the RPA3724 and RPA3723 binding proteins obtained in the presence of the
indicated ligands relative to that obtained in the absence of ligands. Data represented is for dicarboxylic acid concentrations of 1000 µM assayed
with 10 µM protein and fatty acid concentrations of 40 µM assayed with 4 µM protein. Theright ordinate represents the activity of PimA ligase
with dicarboxylic acid and fatty acid substrates as reported in the literature[26]. (*) Indicates protein was not tested with the respective ligand.
Name abbreviations for fatty acids and C6-C10 dicarboxylic acids lack “acid” for brevity, while abbreviations for C11-C14 dicarboxylic acids are:
undec , undecanedioic acid; dodec, dodecanedioic acid; tridec, tridecanedioic acid; tetradec, tetradecanedioic acid.

binding profiles and were stabilized by the addition of
2-aminoethylphosphonic acid, glycerol-3-phosphate,
and phosphate. This observation is consistent with the
assigned annotation for the RPA0699 protein and the
general functional prediction of TransportDB (Table 2).
Urea and polyamine binding proteins

Urea and Polyamine content in cells is regulated by biosynthesis, degradation and transport. In Escherichia coli,
there are two polyamine uptake systems, namely spermidine-preferential (PotABCD) and putrescine-specific
(PotFGHI), which belong to the family of ATP binding
cassette transporters. Similar to the E. coli protein,
RPA2014, predicted to bind polyamines such as putrescine, spermine and spermidine, indeed shifted with
putrescine preferentially over spermine (Table 1, spermidine was not assayed). The putative associated transporter subunits are elsewhere in the genome, annotated as
potH (RPA4159) and potI (RPA4158) for the two integral membrane subunits and RPA4160 for the ATPase

subunit. This SBP is an example of common occurrence
in bacteria where “orphan” SBP’s are separated in the
genome from the functionally associated transporter
genes [33]. The SBP protein sequence is 51% identical
to the E. coli putrescine binding protein (PotF) with
solved structure in the PDB (1A99) and 38% identical to
the E. coli spermidine binding protein (PotD) with
solved structure in the PDB (1POT). Analysis of the
respective ligands, putrescine and spermidine, in the
binding sites for PotF and PotD reveal 7 key residues
which confer specificity [34,35]. In PotF, these are Trp
37, Ser 38, Ser 85, Glu 185, Trp 244, Asp 247, Asp 278.
All residues are identical or very similar in RPA2014 to
PotF. PotF does not bind to spermidine or spermine due
to two residues (Asp247 and Ser38) which affect N1
rigidity of the polyamine and are predicted to prevent
the fit of longer compounds in the binding site. In
PotD, one residue, corresponding to Asp247, is absent,
resulting in more flexibility and space in the binding site

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

for ligands longer than putrescine. Though these two
residues (Asp247 and Ser38) are conserved in RPA2014
sequence, spermine still binds this protein with low affinity in the FTS assay. Based on these results, RPA2014
definitely plays a part in putrescine uptake, and may
also transport spermine and spermidine, but further
binding studies are needed to verify this observation.
Comparison and analysis of predicted and experimental
annotation for R. palustris SBPs

Despite fairly specific ligand predictions for most target
proteins, only 11 of the 75 (14%) screened targets in the
FTS assay exhibited binding consistent with the functional descriptions inferred from sequence homology or
local genome context. These included proteins which
bind urea (RPA1250, 3669), phosphate (RPA4780), sulfate (RPA0750), polyamine (RPA2014), nickel(II)
(RPA2666), glycerol-3-phosphate (RPA0058), benzoate
and related lignin monomers (RPA0668), di, tri, and
oligo-peptides (RPA1218, RPA3691), metal cations
(RPA0860, RPA0681), and phosphonic acid (RPA0699)
(Table 2).
The remaining 37 targets with FTS assay ligand
assignments displayed binding to a variety of compounds not predicted from sequence-based homology.
Interestingly, very few of the 22 non-matching targets
annotated as branched-chain amino acid or amide binding proteins (COG0683) exhibited a thermal shift with
leucine, isoleucine, valine or short chain amides. Instead,
these proteins bound combinations of other amino acids
and/or various fairly hydrophobic compounds such as
aromatic acids, medium to long-chain saturated fatty
acids and/or dicarboxylic acids. Notably, 14 proteins
bound ligands from more than one category and 9 of
these were specific for dicarboxylic acids and fatty acids
of similar structures. Only one protein, RPA3810, shifted
primarily with amino acids with preferences for alanine,
glycine and serine, and detectable but low affinity for
leucine (Tables 2 and Additional file 3).
The other 15 targets were sorted into a variety of
descriptive categories defined by COG numbers, as
these designations are associated with fairly specific
ligand classes for SBPs. A smaller set of 5 targets annotated as binding “nitrate, sulfate, thiamine, taurine and
sulfonates” (COG0715) displayed specific affinity for
compounds with multiple carboxylic acids and/or amino
groups such as asparagine, malate, citrate, guanine, and
thiamine. Uniquely represented in COG0687 (spermine/
putrescine/polyamine) and COG3221 (phosphate/phosphonate) were RPA4648 and RPA1385 which bound
p-coumaric acid and vanadate, respectively, instead of
the predicted ligand classes. Also, single targets in each
of the categories, COG0747 (di- or oligopeptides),
COG0614 (Fe+3 siderophores, iron, cobalamine, hemin),

Page 9 of 14

COG0834 (lysine/arginine/ornithine), and COG1653
(sugar/maltose/trehalose, glycerol-3-phosphate), displayed affinity for long chain fatty acids, phosphates/
phosphonates, metal cations, and peptides, respectively.
Four proteins, assigned to either COG0845 or COG1463
as being associated with efflux of drugs, proteins, or
organic toxic solvents exhibited moderate Tm shifts with
aromatic compounds, zinc(II) and nickel(II).
There were 27 targets screened which did not bind
any ligand in the FTS assay (Additional file 1). Ligand
categories which were present in the assay’s library were
indicated in the descriptions for 18 of these proteins
including phosphate, iron, branched-chain amino acid,
peptides, sulfonates, molybdate, and sugars or glycerol3-phosphate. Since the ligand descriptions are fairly
broad, it is likely that the specific representative library
ligands in these categories are not the actual physiological ligands for these SBP’s, a situation remedied by
expansion of the ligand library. Finally, nine targets had
only general annotation as a “extracellular ligand-binding receptor”, “periplasmic solute binding” or “conserved
hypothetical” protein, and are the most difficult to characterize without additional empirical data. Given the ~
27 to 33 ligand categories present in the library, reflecting probable ligands from both predicted and experimental annotation, ~20 (66%) of these were represented
in the positive functional assignments determined by the
FTS assay. Predicted ligand categories likely to be identified but were not represented at all in screened target
ligand profiles were nitrate and taurine/sulfonic acids.

Discussion
There have been few experimental studies that characterize the transporter specificity on a genome scale and
this study represents the first genome wide approach for
the experimental characterization of ABC transporter
proteins. The ligand screening approach identified binding ligands for 48 binding proteins associated with the
set of ABC transporters. The overall ligand binding profile reflects the metabolically diversity of R. palustris and
is consistent with characterized or inferred cellular
metabolic capabilities as well as nutrient characteristics
of the ecological niche. The FTS screen identified several binding proteins associated with transport of aromatic compounds and fatty and dicarboxylic acids.
These capabilities are aligned with the characteristic of
the isolation site, the subsurface layer of a forest litter
pool, and the encoded genomic metabolic capabilities to
enable utilization of structurally diverse compounds
derived from degradation of plant material [21]. In
many cases, these transporter complexes are co-located
with clusters of genes associated with the biodegradation
of aromatic compounds and fatty acids. The binding
profiles for the aromatic transporters will provide a

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

foundation for characterization of the substrate preference of the uncharacterized enzymes associated with
aromatic compound degradation.
The FTS screen identified ligands and binding proteins associated with core cellular requirements of environmental organisms that reflect transport capabilities
for metals, sulfate, phosphate, amino acids, peptide, and
polyamines. For many of the solute binding proteins,
the ligand binding assignments were supported by bioinformatic analyses or by the ability of the protein to bind
chemically related ligands. Experimental observations
that identified binding proteins for glycerol-3-phosphate,
phosphate, sulfate, and peptides were consistent with
sequence based predictions based on the original annotation or TransportDB. There was less overlap for
experimental observations and sequence base predictions of metal, polyamine, vitamin, and amino acid binding proteins. The experimental screen confirmed some
of the inferred binding properties but in other cases
contradicted the assignment or provided a specific
ligand assignment in place of a general prediction. This
is not surprising in view of the limited number of binding proteins that have been characterized using biochemical or genetic methods. There are only a few
categories of ligand binding proteins that have been
experimentally characterized. Most of these studies
examined a single or limited number of potential ligands
and were not designed to examine the spectrum of the
natural ligand diversity. This class of proteins also represents a challenge for specific functional annotation.
Structural studies of this solute binding protein superfamily demonstrate these proteins generally exhibit a
structure where two globular domains are connected by
a hinge region that allows flexibility for “opened” and
“closed” states [5]. The hinge region is variable in length
and structure which influences the binding characteristics of the protein [36]. Particular residues in the binding sight are involved in ligand specificity, though rarely
is there a large contiguous conserved sequence pattern
that can be correlated to the binding site of an unknown
protein without 3-D structural evidence or comparison
to a homologous protein structure. Our results show
many transporter solute binding proteins in R. palustris
CGA009 are incorrectly annotated and suggest that
functional characterization based on sequence analysis
cannot be exclusively relied upon to predict biologically
relevant and specific ligands. Given the best of predictions, there is still disparity between expected and
experimentally determined function. As a case in point,
the outcome for the three SBP’s, RPA3723, RPA3724
and RPA3725 varied greatly. While the former two proteins bound various fatty acids and dicarboxylic acids,
RPA3725 did not bind any ligand. This is surprising,
since these three genes are all very closely related and

Page 10 of 14

form a cluster that is specific to the Rhodopseudomonas
and Bradyrhizobium clade. The protein sequence for
RPA3725 is 71% identical to RPA3724 and 60% identical
to RPA3723. The protein-ligand interactions identified
in this study will enable improvement of sequence-based
predictions and provide a basis for expanding our
knowledge of transporter functionality.
The results for this genome set illustrate some of the
limitations of the current system for functional characterization of these proteins and indicate areas to
improve the scope of functional characterization.
Approximately 74% of the genome set of solute binding
proteins entered the functional screening component
but candidate ligands were identified for only 64% of
the screened proteins. These proteins were extensively
dialyzed and exhibited thermal melting suggestive of a
properly folded protein structure. Although we eliminate
some attrition due to loss of function or protein-ligand
co-purification, the disparity between the number of
screened proteins and functional assignments is largely
a reflection of the limited representation of the ligand
library. In addition, some of the experimentally observed
interactions represent noncognate ligand binding. The
selection of chemicals for the screening library was not
directed towards representation of binding proteins
associated with efflux transporters [37], synthesis of cellular structures [31], or recycling of cellular biomolecules [38].

Conclusions
This study provides experimental functional characterization for ABC transporter solute binding proteins from
R. palustris. The ligand binding profiles and number of
transport proteins specific for aromatic compounds is
consistent with ecological and laboratory studies which
demonstrate the capabilities of this organism for the utilization of plant degradation products such as ligninderived aromatic compounds. The results of this study
also provide important biological insight for the metabolic capabilities and environment fitness of this organism. This functional insight can be used to improve the
annotation of related organisms and provides a route to
evaluate the evolution of this important and diverse
group of transporter proteins.
Methods
Target staging

Coding sequences for all ABC transporter associated
solute-binding proteins (SBP’s) were extracted from the
JGI Integrated Microbial Genomes page for Rhodopseudomonas palustris CGA009 and the protein sequences
were characterized using the SignalP[39,40] and
TMHMM [41] algorithms to identify hydrophobic
sequence features and guide the selection of clonable

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

regions. The peptides specified by cloned target
sequences excluded predicted N-terminal signal peptide
sequences and any overlapping N-terminal trans-membrane helices. Predicted N-terminal cleavage sites were
manually adjusted for input into an automated primer
design tool (http://tools.bio.anl.gov:8000/bioJAVA/jsp/
PeriplasmicProteinDesign/index.html) that uses the predicted cleavage information derived from SignalP 3.0 to
automatically generate amplification primers for the
mature (cleaved) form of the protein.
Gene cloning, protein expression and purification

The E. coli cloning and expression approach employed
96-well plate-based methods and parallel expression
strategies [42]. Target genes were PCR amplified from
genomic DNA (ATCC: Rhodopseudomonas palustris
CGA009 # BAA-98D-5) using a KOD HiFi DNA polymerase reaction (Novagen) combined with a touchdown
PCR program designed for the GeneAmp PCR System
9700 thermocycler machine (Applied Biosystems). The
50 µl reaction was enhanced for GC-rich genomic DNA
by addition of 2.5% DMSO based on previous studies
[43]. Amplification products included appended 5’ and
3’ ligation independent cloning (LIC) sites to enable
simultaneous cloning in multiple vectors. To optimize
protein solubility outcome for predicted periplasmic
proteins, an initial set of 48 genes were cloned in parallel by a LIC method [44] into a two expression vectors,
pMCSG7 and pBH31. While pMCSG7 expresses protein
in the cytoplasm, pBH31 is used for periplasmic protein
expression. Both vectors append an N-terminal hexahistidine (6x-His) fusion tag and TEV protease cleavage
recognition sequence between the fusion tag and
the target protein. Additionally, pBH31 codes for an
N-terminal PelB leader sequence which is cleaved off
during transport through the inner membrane into the
periplasm [45]. Only 8 of 48 clones from the initial set
were better expressed in pBH31; thus the remainder of
the SBP target set was cloned only into pMCSG7 vector.
Each target was characterized for amplification, expression, and solubility using 96-well plate assays and highdensity gel formats for denaturing gel analysis of proteins [46]. Targets were scored as positive for expression
and solubility if a detectable fusion protein of the correct molecular weight was observed on gels stained with
Coomassie-based Simply Blue Safestain (Invitrogen).
Targets scored as positive for solubility were sequence
verified prior to purification and screening.
Clones expressing soluble proteins were scaled to 500
ml cultures and purified using standard affinity chromatography Ni-NTA bead (Qiagen) purification methods
using a combination of the automated AKTA system
(GE-Healthcare) as previously described [47] and parallel manual methods. All purified proteins retained the

Page 11 of 14

6x-His tag, since previous investigation of the effect of
the tag on the outcome of ligand binding detection
revealed insignificant tag interference for this class of
proteins [4]. The purified proteins were dialyzed for buffer exchange into an assay-compatible buffer, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen [48], and stored at -80 °C until
the assay. Protein concentrations were initially determined by measuring absorbance at l280 using UV-spectrophotometry then verified and assessed for purity by
comparison with a BSA standard using SDS-PAGE
denaturing gel electrophoresis and Simply Blue Safestain
for protein visualization. Once thawed, proteins were
stored at 4 °C and used within two weeks.
Fluorescence-based thermal shift assay
Assay reaction components and set-up

An environmentally sensitive dye, SYPRO orange (Invitrogen, #S6650), was used at 5x concentration in all
assays. Proteins were diluted to a standard concentration
of either 5 or 10 µM, and screened with either 500 or
1000 µM ligand, respectively, to maintain an optimized
100x ratio of ligand to protein concentrations.
Absolute values for protein and ligand concentration
did not significantly affect the outcomes of a particular
reaction as long as the ligand to protein ratio was consistent. The conclusion was derived by analysis of a set
of five positive control proteins with experimentally
characterized values (ΔT m ) for ligand stabilization.
These targets were screened at both 5 µM protein with
500 µM ligand and 10 µM protein with 1000 µM ligand.
The screening results indicated no significant difference
(≤ 2 °C) in Tm shifts between reactions having different
component concentrations but the same ligand to protein concentration ratio (data not shown). Test screens
also indicated that this ratio is needed for optimal sensitivity for ligand binding detection. Exceptions to the
standard 100x ratio were for reactions containing fatty
acid ligands. These more hydrophobic compounds
exhibited characteristic melt curves having fluorescence
values higher than buffer background when screened
with the dye at standard ligand concentrations. Reactions containing fatty acids were optimized to 40 µM
ligand and 4 µM protein (10x ligand to protein concentration ratio) which decreased ligand background to
minimal values, yet still enabled reasonably sensitive
detection of ligand binding. Though high ligand background melt curve fluorescence was present for 500 µM
or 1000 µM fatty acids, this did not always interfere
with Tm shift interpretation in these reactions, especially
for C8-C14 ligands. Thus, data for both 100x and 10x
ligand-to-protein concentration ratios were collected
and reported for targets which bound fatty acids
(Additional file 3). Accordingly, T m shift values displayed dependence on ligand concentration and are

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

proportionally lower for 10x ratios. All protein and
SYPRO orange dilutions resulted in final assay buffer
concentrations of 100 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pH
7.5 in a standard 20 µl reaction volume. Reaction
volume was 40 µl only if ligands used in the reaction
were soluble as concentrated stocks in 100% DMSO and
not aqueous buffer. Ligands in DMSO were added for a
final reaction concentration of 2% DMSO.
Assay instrumentation, standard program parameters, data
analysis

FTS assays were performed using two different quantitative PCR instruments. Initially, the first half of the target
set produced was screened using an Mx4000 multiplex
quantitative PCR instrument (Stratagene) that enabled
thermal manipulations and dye fluorescence detection
based on a previously published method [49]. Parameters employed were the same as those previously specified for program set-up and data analysis [4]. The
remaining targets were screened using the more
advanced LightCycler ® 480 Real Time PCR System
(Roche). This enabled higher density, higher-throughput
data collection by acquiring 30 points per degree over a
70 °C temperature range, decreasing assay time to 20
minutes, and allowing assay setup and program execution to be independent of plate configuration. Optimized
run protocol parameters were defined in a “Protein
Melt” program for 1 cycle using “Melting Curve” analysis mode (Table 3). Assay reactions were performed in
96-well, white PCR plates (Axygen, #PCR-96-FLT-W or
Roche, #04729692001) and wells were capped using
optical 8x-strip caps (Axygen, #PCR-2CP-RT-C) or optical sealing film (Roche, #04729692001). The instrument
software monitors the fluorescence in real time, creating
an output protein melting curve graph of temperature
(°C) vs. fluorescence. Data was displayed and analyzed
using the software’s “Tm calling” analysis option, which
allows computation of the derivative curve displayed as
temperature vs. –(d/dT) of the raw melt curve fluorescence values. From the derivative curve, the protein
melting temperature midpoint (Tm) was selected as the
temperature corresponding to the minimum fluorescence value. The difference in shifts in melting temperatures (Δ T m , °C) between a protein with and without
ligand indicated a change in the protein stability; positive Δ T m for protein-ligand combinations was interpreted as potential ligand binding. Values for Tm’s and
Δ Tm’s and were calculated objectively via an automated
algorithm using Microsoft Excel software and raw data
exported from the instruments.
To verify that using different instruments for the complete target set minimally affected the outcomes for
ligand binding detection, a set of 10 positive control
proteins with known ligands and Δ Tm’s were screened
with their respective ligands under identical reaction

Page 12 of 14

conditions in both quantitative PCR instruments (data
not shown). Comparison of Tm values for protein alone
indicated an average difference of 3 °C higher Tm’s for
reactions in the LightCycler®480 instrument versus the
Mx4000 instrument. However, the difference between
Δ Tm values generated on the two instruments for reactions containing protein and ligand was less than 1 °C.
This indicates a systematic increase in all values of the
protein melting profiles generated by the LightCycler®480 instrument, which does not significantly affect
the computed Δ T m values for comparable reactions
with a specific target protein. Thus, the absolute Δ Tm
values are independent of the two instruments utilized
for this study.
Assay screening method

Proteins were screened using a two-step approach: an
initial screen against all pools of ligands followed by a
deconvolution analysis to determine individual ligand
binding. Proteins displaying positive shifts of melting
temperature midpoint (Δ Tm) with certain pools in the
initial screen were screened again with the pool and also
with each individual ligand present in that pool to identify specific binding ligands. Most proteins were
screened against all relevant pools to provide an equal
opportunity for all proteins to bind all ligands. Proteins
assigned to the various COG categories 0683, 0834,
0687, 0715, which were functionally characterized prior
to expansion of the ligand library, are exceptions. All
reactions in which pooled or individual ligands stabilized
protein were independently duplicated, and averages of
the duplicate Δ Tm values were reported. The maximum
variability associated with each data point derived from
averaged data of duplicate reactions was consistently
less than 2 °C. In each plate experiment, negative control reactions were run for each protein with no ligand,
for buffer only, and 5x SYPRO orange dye only. Fluorescence values for dye and buffer control reactions displayed no significant background thermal melting
pattern compared to protein; thus, background was not
subtracted from experimental fluorescence values since
this correction did not affect Tm values. Tm values for
all proteins were dependent on the buffer content, and
for some proteins, the Tm value for a defined concentration differed significantly between reactions with and
without 2% DMSO. In these cases, both Tm values were
reported. All protein-only Tm’s reported are an average
of two of more replicates.
In the FTS assay, false negatives are expected if
the native ligand is present but not detected. This can
possibly result from loss of native protein structure,
undetected ligand insolubility/instability, or the ligand–
to-protein concentration ratio is too low to compensate
for a low affinity binding or small protein/ligand complex stabilization. In the case of protein stability, 2 of

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

27 targets tested (RPA3961 and RPA0048) but with no
ligand binding outcome did not display a clear thermal
melt curve with fluorescent dye. These proteins may
have been partially denatured prior to the assay, but
were not repurified and retested. The remaining 25 targets were considered properly folded since a clear melt
curve was reproducibly generated from fresh samples
and the protein-only T m value was consistent across
replicates.
Ligand stocks and ligand pools preparation

Individual ligands were dissolved in either buffer containing 100 mM HEPES and 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5 (1x
Standard HEPES) or 100% DMSO, depending on solubility, and stored at 4°C. Exceptions were guanine and
hypoxanthine, which dissolved in 1x Standard HEPES
buffer at pH 10, and diaminopimelate, which dissolved
in 1x Standard HEPES buffer at pH 1.5. These ligands
were added to the assay so that the final amount of
buffer at nonstandard pH was 2%. The cysteine stock
solution contained equimolar amounts of DTT to prevent oxidation during storage and assay. All ligands
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich-Fluka-Supelco,
except Putrescine (MP Biomedicals), oleic acid (EMD
Biosciences), histidine (Novabiochem), cysteine (J. T.
Baker); anhydrous sodium thiosulfate, D(+)-maltose,
D-xylose, and iron(III) chloride (Fisher Scientific); disodium molybdate dehydrate and cupric chloride dihydrate (Mallinckrodt); and tryptone digest, anhydrous
glucose and anhydrous sodium phosphate (American
Bioanalytical). Ligand pools included no more than 10
ligands each and were developed systematically based
on ligand chemical classification and/or compatible
solubility for ease of high-throughput screening (Additional file 2).
Ligands were considered to be stable if they were
soluble in HEPES buffer or 100% DMSO at room temperature and pH 7.5. Many ligands demonstrated significant binding to more than one test protein indicating
consistent, reproducible solution stability in the assay,
or were previously assayed with positive control proteins
(eg. amino acids). Ligands suspect of potential insolubility were those dissolved in 100% DMSO, which were
added to the assay reaction as only 2% DMSO in
HEPES buffer. No direct measurement was made to verify solubility in these cases except qualitative observation
of precipitation or discoloration. All DMSO ligands were
added to the reaction last and immediately before performing thermal denaturation to minimize insolubility.
Ligand concentration in the standard reaction was 100fold more than protein concentration to ensure reasonable detection of binding even for protein/ligand pairs
with lower affinity.

Page 13 of 14

Additional material
Additional file 1: Summary of ABC Binding Protein Features and
Screening Outcome. The file provides a list of the genome set of
105 candidate solute binding proteins from R. palustris that were
examined in this study linked to the screening outcome for the FTA
assay. The table includes the Gene Locus Tag, COG ID and the
associated ATPase and/or membrane permease ABC transporter
proteins. The transporter components are organize by their
genome proximity to the solute binding protein and may not
necessary be functionally related.
Additional file 2: Composition of the Ligand Library Used for
Screening with the FTS Method.
Additional file 3: Ligand profiles for all solute binding proteins
screened in the FTS assay. A list of all protein:ligand interaction
observed using the FTS method.

Acknowledgements
The submitted manuscript has been created by UChicago Argonne, LLC,
Operator of Argonne National Laboratory (“Argonne”). Argonne, a U.S.
Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory, is operated under
Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The U.S. Government retains for itself,
and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable
worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare derivative works,
distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by
or on behalf of the Government.
This article has been published as part of BMC Genomics Volume 12
Supplement 1, 2011: Validation methods for functional genome annotation.
The full contents of the supplement are available online at http://www.
biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12?issue=S1.
Author details
1
Biosciences Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60490, USA.
2
Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831,
USA.
Authors’ contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: FC, SG, AF. Performed the
experiments: SG, AF, CS, DC. Analyzed the data: FC, SG, AF. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: FC LH . Wrote the paper: FC, SG, LH.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 15 June 2011
References
1. Yen MR, Choi J, Saier MH Jr.: Bioinformatic analyses of transmembrane
transport: novel software for deducing protein phylogeny, topology, and
evolution. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2009, 17:163-176.
2. Saier MH Jr., Yen MR, Noto K, Tamang DG, Elkan C: The Transporter
Classification Database: recent advances. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:
D274-278.
3. Mauchline TH, Fowler JE, East AK, Sartor AL, Zaheer R, Hosie AH, Poole PS,
Finan TM: Mapping the Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021 solute-binding
protein-dependent transportome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006,
103:17933-17938.
4. Giuliani SE, Frank AM, Collart FR: Functional assignment of solute-binding
proteins of ABC transporters using a fluorescence-based thermal shift
assay. Biochemistry 2008, 47:13974-13984.
5. Davidson AL, Dassa E, Orelle C, Chen J: Structure, function, and evolution
of bacterial ATP-binding cassette systems. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2008,
72:317-364, table of contents.
6. Ren Q, Chen K, Paulsen IT: TransportDB: a comprehensive database
resource for cytoplasmic membrane transport systems and outer
membrane channels. Nucleic Acids Res 2007, 35:D274-279.

Giuliani et al. BMC Genomics 2011, 12(Suppl 1):S8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2164/12/S1/S8

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

De Angelis F, Lee JK, O’Connell JD 3rd, Miercke LJ, Verschueren KH,
Srinivasan V, Bauvois C, Govaerts C, Robbins RA, Ruysschaert JM, et al:
Metal-induced conformational changes in ZneB suggest an active role
of membrane fusion proteins in efflux resistance systems. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2010, 107:11038-11043.
Graslund S, Nordlund P, Weigelt J, Hallberg BM, Bray J, Gileadi O, Knapp S,
Oppermann U, Arrowsmith C, Hui R, et al: Protein production and
purification. Nat Methods 2008, 5:135-146.
Savitsky P, Bray J, Cooper CD, Marsden BD, Mahajan P, Burgess-Brown NA,
Gileadi O: High-throughput production of human proteins for
crystallization: The SGC experience. J Struct Biol 2010, 172:3-13.
Muller A, Thomas GH, Horler R, Brannigan JA, Blagova E, Levdikov VM,
Fogg MJ, Wilson KS, Wilkinson AJ: An ATP-binding cassette-type cysteine
transporter in Campylobacter jejuni inferred from the structure of an
extracytoplasmic solute receptor protein. Mol Microbiol 2005, 57:143-155.
Oh BH, Pandit J, Kang CH, Nikaido K, Gokcen S, Ames GF, Kim SH: Threedimensional structures of the periplasmic lysine/arginine/ornithinebinding protein with and without a ligand. J Biol Chem 1993,
268:11348-11355.
Sun YJ, Rose J, Wang BC, Hsiao CD: The structure of glutamine-binding
protein complexed with glutamine at 1.94 A resolution: comparisons
with other amino acid binding proteins. J Mol Biol 1998, 278:219-229.
Kanehisa M, Goto S, Kawashima S, Okuno Y, Hattori M: The KEGG resource
for deciphering the genome. Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32:D277-280.
Lawrence MC, Pilling PA, Epa VC, Berry AM, Ogunniyi AD, Paton JC: The
crystal structure of pneumococcal surface antigen PsaA reveals a metalbinding site and a novel structure for a putative ABC-type binding
protein. Structure 1998, 6:1553-1561.
Loisel E, Jacquamet L, Serre L, Bauvois C, Ferrer JL, Vernet T, Di Guilmi AM,
Durmort C: AdcAII, a new pneumococcal Zn-binding protein
homologous with ABC transporters: biochemical and structural analysis.
J Mol Biol 2008, 381:594-606.
Dailey HA, Dailey TA, Wu CK, Medlock AE, Wang KF, Rose JP, Wang BC:
Ferrochelatase at the millennium: structures, mechanisms and [2Fe-2S]
clusters. Cell Mol Life Sci 2000, 57:1909-1926.
Oda Y, Samanta SK, Rey FE, Wu L, Liu X, Yan T, Zhou J, Harwood CS:
Functional genomic analysis of three nitrogenase isozymes in the
photosynthetic bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris. J Bacteriol 2005,
187:7784-7794.
Lee CC, Hu Y, Ribbe MW: Vanadium nitrogenase reduces CO. Science
2010, 329:642.
Pratte BS, Thiel T: High-affinity vanadate transport system in the
cyanobacterium Anabaena variabilis ATCC 29413. J Bacteriol 2006,
188:464-468.
Egland PG, Pelletier DA, Dispensa M, Gibson J, Harwood CS: A cluster of
bacterial genes for anaerobic benzene ring biodegradation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1997, 94:6484-6489.
Larimer FW, Chain P, Hauser L, Lamerdin J, Malfatti S, Do L, Land ML,
Pelletier DA, Beatty JT, Lang AS, et al: Complete genome sequence of the
metabolically versatile photosynthetic bacterium Rhodopseudomonas
palustris. Nat Biotechnol 2004, 22:55-61.
Pan C, Oda Y, Lankford PK, Zhang B, Samatova NF, Pelletier DA,
Harwood CS, Hettich RL: Characterization of anaerobic catabolism of pcoumarate in Rhodopseudomonas palustris by integrating
transcriptomics and quantitative proteomics. Mol Cell Proteomics 2008,
7:938-948.
Harwood CS, Gibson J: Anaerobic and aerobic metabolism of diverse
aromatic compounds by the photosynthetic bacterium
Rhodopseudomonas palustris. Appl Environ Microbiol 1988, 54:712-717.
Chang HK, Dennis JJ, Zylstra GJ: Involvement of two transport systems
and a specific porin in the uptake of phthalate by Burkholderia spp.
J Bacteriol 2009, 191:4671-4673.
Lykidis A, Perez-Pantoja D, Ledger T, Mavromatis K, Anderson IJ,
Ivanova NN, Hooper SD, Lapidus A, Lucas S, Gonzalez B, Kyrpides NC: The
complete multipartite genome sequence of Cupriavidus necator
JMP134, a versatile pollutant degrader. PLoS One 2010, 5:e9729.
Harrison FH, Harwood CS: The pimFABCDE operon from
Rhodopseudomonas palustris mediates dicarboxylic acid degradation
and participates in anaerobic benzoate degradation. Microbiology 2005,
151:727-736.

Page 14 of 14

27. Wallis JG, Browse J: Lipid biochemists salute the genome. Plant J 2010,
61:1092-1106.
28. Nagao K, Kimura Y, Mastuo M, Ueda K: Lipid outward translocation by
ABC proteins. FEBS Lett 2010, 584:2717-2723.
29. Pohl A, Devaux PF, Herrmann A: Function of prokaryotic and eukaryotic
ABC proteins in lipid transport. Biochim Biophys Acta 2005, 1733:29-52.
30. Malinverni JC, Silhavy TJ: An ABC transport system that maintains lipid
asymmetry in the gram-negative outer membrane. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 2009, 106:8009-8014.
31. Sperandeo P, Deho G, Polissi A: The lipopolysaccharide transport system
of Gram-negative bacteria. Biochim Biophys Acta 2009, 1791:594-602.
32. Walshaw DL, Poole PS: The general L-amino acid permease of Rhizobium
leguminosarum is an ABC uptake system that also influences efflux of
solutes. Mol Microbiol 1996, 21:1239-1252.
33. Thomas GH: Homes for the orphans: utilization of multiple substratebinding proteins by ABC transporters. Mol Microbiol 2010, 75:6-9.
34. Igarashi K, Ito K, Kashiwagi K: Polyamine uptake systems in Escherichia
coli. Res Microbiol 2001, 152:271-278.
35. Sugiyama S, Matsuo Y, Maenaka K, Vassylyev DG, Matsushima M,
Kashiwagi K, Igarashi K, Morikawa K: The 1.8-A X-ray structure of the
Escherichia coli PotD protein complexed with spermidine and the
mechanism of polyamine binding. Protein Sci 1996, 5:1984-1990.
36. Berntsson RP, Smits SH, Schmitt L, Slotboom DJ, Poolman B: A structural
classification of substrate-binding proteins. FEBS Lett 2010, 584:2606-2617.
37. Fernandez-Recio J, Walas F, Federici L, Venkatesh Pratap J, Bavro VN,
Miguel RN, Mizuguchi K, Luisi B: A model of a transmembrane drug-efflux
pump from Gram-negative bacteria. FEBS Lett 2004, 578:5-9.
38. Lee M, Zhang W, Hesek D, Noll BC, Boggess B, Mobashery S: Bacterial
AmpD at the crossroads of peptidoglycan recycling and manifestation
of antibiotic resistance. J Am Chem Soc 2009, 131:8742-8743.
39. Bendtsen JD, Nielsen H, von Heijne G, Brunak S: Improved prediction of
signal peptides: SignalP 3.0. J Mol Biol 2004, 340:783-795.
40. Emanuelsson O, Brunak S, von Heijne G, Nielsen H: Locating proteins in
the cell using TargetP, SignalP and related tools. Nat Protoc 2007,
2:953-971.
41. Sonnhammer EL, von Heijne G, Krogh A: A hidden Markov model for
predicting transmembrane helices in protein sequences. Proc Int Conf
Intell Syst Mol Biol 1998, 6:175-182.
42. Zerbs S, Frank AM, Collart FR: Bacterial systems for production of
heterologous proteins. Methods Enzymol 2009, 463:149-168.
43. Choi JS, Kim JS, Joe CO, Kim S, Ha KS, Park YM: Improved cycle
sequencing of GC-rich DNA template. Exp Mol Med 1999, 31:20-24.
44. Stols L, Gu M, Dieckman L, Raffen R, Collart FR, Donnelly MI: A new vector
for high-throughput, ligation-independent cloning encoding a tobacco
etch virus protease cleavage site. Protein Expr Purif 2002, 25:8-15.
45. Donnelly MI, Zhou M, Millard CS, Clancy S, Stols L, Eschenfeldt WH,
Collart FR, Joachimiak A: An expression vector tailored for large-scale,
high-throughput purification of recombinant proteins. Protein Expr Purif
2006, 47:446-454.
46. Dieckman LJ, Zhang W, Rodi DJ, Donnelly MI, Collart FR: Bacterial
expression strategies for human angiogenesis proteins. J Struct Funct
Genomics 2006, 7:23-30.
47. Lin CT, Moore PA, Auberry DL, Landorf EV, Peppler T, Victry KD, Collart FR,
Kery V: Automated purification of recombinant proteins: combining
high-throughput with high yield. Protein Expr Purif 2006, 47:16-24.
48. Deng J, Davies DR, Wisedchaisri G, Wu M, Hol WG, Mehlin C: An improved
protocol for rapid freezing of protein samples for long-term storage.
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 2004, 60:203-204.
49. Niesen FH, Berglund H, Vedadi M: The use of differential scanning
fluorimetry to detect ligand interactions that promote protein stability.
Nat Protoc 2007, 2:2212-2221.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-12-S1-S8
Cite this article as: Giuliani et al.: Environment sensing and response
mediated by ABC transporters. BMC Genomics 2011 12(Suppl 1):S8.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
