<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Giant lobelias exemplify convergent evolution</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2010 8:3. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-3"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Thomas J Givnish"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Givnish BMC Biology 2010, 8:3
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/3

COMMENTARY

Open Access

Giant lobelias exemplify convergent evolution
Thomas J Givnish*
Abstract
Giant lobeliads on tropical mountains in East Africa and Hawaii have highly unusual, giant-rosette growth forms
that appear to be convergent on each other and on those of several independently evolved groups of Asteraceae
and other families. A recent phylogenetic analysis by Antonelli, based on sequencing the widest selection of lobeliads to date, raises doubts about this paradigmatic example of convergent evolution. Here I address the kinds of
evidence needed to test for convergent evolution and argue that the analysis by Antonelli fails on four points.
Antonelli’s analysis makes several important contributions to our understanding of lobeliad evolution and geographic spread, but his claim regarding convergence appears to be invalid. Giant lobeliads in Hawaii and Africa
represent paradigmatic examples of convergent evolution.
Commentary
Many of us were inspired, at an early age, by Hedberg
[1] and Carlquist [2] describing the bizarre, unbranched
shrubs with massive leaf rosettes that dominate equatorial alpine zones in many parts of the world. Such plants
share a highly unusual climate - ‘summer every day,
winter every night’ [1] - and a highly unusual growth
form characterized by large woody stems, extensive
water-storage tissue in the stem pith and large leaves
that persist on the stem after they die and, while alive,
often curl around the terminal bud at night or impound
rainwater surrounding that bud. These traits appear to
be adaptations to nightly frosts, insulating vulnerable
buds and water-storage tissue from a few hours of low
temperatures, facilitating relatively rapid growth away
from the ground where the highest diurnal fluctuations
in temperature occur and providing moisture to permit
photosynthesis during morning droughts when the sun
is up but the ground still frozen [3-5]. These rosette
shrubs - belonging to the families Asteraceae, Lobeliaceae, Valerianaceae and Bromeliaceae - appear to be
striking manifestations of convergent evolution, of the
independent acquisition of similar adaptations to similar
environments by members of distantly related lineages.
This story became even more remarkable when it
was later confirmed, by phylogenetic analyses of DNA
sequences [6-8], that rosette shrubs had evolved independently at least three times in Asteraceae alone,
* Correspondence: givnish@wisc.edu
Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA

including Dendosenecio of tribe Senecioneae on the
volcanoes of tropical East Africa, Espeletia of tribe
Heliantheae subtribe Melampodiinae in the northern
Andes, and the silverswords (Arygyroxiphium) of tribe
Heliantheae subtribe Madiinae of the Hawaiian Islands.
DNA sequences - especially of non-coding regions
with little or no possible selective value - have an
advantage for analysing phylogenetic relationships
among species invading extreme environments and/or
undergoing adaptive radiation on islands or island-like
habitats. In such situations, morphology is likely to
often be a poor guide to ancestral relationships, given
the strong selection on members of different (but perhaps closely related) lineages to converge in form and
physiology in an extreme habitat, and on members of a
given lineage to diverge from each other after invading
a new area [9].
Like Asteraceae, Lobeliaceae (about 1200 species) is
composed primarily of herbaceous plants from temperate and subtropical areas. However, in Lobelia and
several closely related genera, woodiness has evolved in
> 450 species, and ‘giant’ pachycaulous rosette shrubs
grow in alpine areas and subalpine bogs of East Africa,
South Asia, Polynesia, Hawaii and the Brazilian Shield
and in semi-arid areas of Chile; unbranched or sparsely
branched species with somewhat more slender stems
occur in montane forests in these areas and the Andes.
Hedberg and Carlquist suggested that giant woody
lobeliads from high elevations in East Africa and
Hawaii were convergent on Afroalpine Dendrosenecio,
Andean Espeletia, and Hawaiian Argyroxiphium.

© 2010 Givnish; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Givnish BMC Biology 2010, 8:3
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/3

Carlquist [10,11] argued that these giant rosettes and
related woody species in both areas evolved ultimately
from herbaceous ancestors, while Mabberley [12,13]
instead argued that the pachycaul habit was primitive,
with giant rosette shrubs and allied woody species with
more slender stems forming a single worldwide lineage, with high-elevation species being derived from
less specialized forms at mid elevations and with herbaceous Lobelia being derived independently from different woody sublineages. To complicate matters
further, several botanists had proposed that the endemic Hawaiian lobeliads were not all closely related to
each other but, instead, represented the product of up
to five long-distance dispersal events (see review by
Givnish et al. [14]).
Over the past 16 years, several groups have attempted
to use molecular data to analyse relationships and patterns of adaptive evolution and geographic diversification among giant woody lobeliads and allied species.
Knox et al. [15] used plastid DNA restriction-site data
to show that woody tetraploid species of Lobelia and
related genera from East Africa, Hawaii, Polynesia, the
Bonin Islands, South Asia and Chile formed a clade and
that they were derived from herbaceous ancestors. Knox
and Palmer [16] used plastid DNA sequences to show
that the giant and woody species of Lobelia from East
Africa formed a clade, with the exception of a few Brazilian species derived via trans-Atlantic dispersal. Their
phylogeny implied that the most specialized, giantrosette shrubs of the Afroalpine zone (for example,
Lobeliaceae deckenii, L. rhynchopetalum, L. telekii, L.
wollastonii) evolved from ancestral, unbranched mid-elevation species with more slender stems, similar to present-day L. giberroa - supporting one of Mabberley’s
proposals. Givnish et al. [14] used plastid sequence data
to show that the Hawaiian woody lobeliads are monophyletic; that they colonized the Hawaiian archipelago
13.0 to 13.6 million years ago, based on independent
calibrations based on the ages of islands to which present-day species are restricted or the ages of fossil
Asterales; that the giant species of Lobelia sect. Galeatella of subalpine bogs and grasslands are apparently
derived from mid-elevation ancestors with more slender
stems, similar to those of present-day Clermontia, Cyanea and Delissea; and that their closest relatives are the
woody lobeliads of East Africa, Polynesia/Bonin Islands
and South Asia.
Antonelli [17] has now addressed several of these
same questions - and, most notably, the question of
whether giant woody lobeliads are the product of convergent evolution or are instead all closely related - in a
new phylogenetic study based on the most comprehensive set of lobeliads sequenced to date (101 spp.). This
investigation has much to recommend it. First, it

Page 2 of 4

documents an ‘Out of Africa’ scenario for the origin of
Lobeliaceae, based on the large number of small annual
herbs native to Africa that form a grade just above the
basal node of the family. Second, it confirms the
hypothesis advanced by Knox et al. [15] that woody
lobeliads evolved from herbaceous ancestors. Third, it
confirms and extends findings by Knox, Givnish and
their colleagues that lobeliads have repeatedly dispersed
across the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, with the new
data supporting additional movements to the Neotropics, various parts of Oceania and southeast Asia. The
production of thousands of dust-like, wind-dispersed,
seeds by most lobeliads doubtless accounts for most of
these long-distance dispersal events. Calibration of
Antonelli’s molecular phylogeny against fossils and various geologic milestones to form a timeline of lobeliad
evolution (see also [14]) excludes continental drift as a
possible explanation for these disjunctions. Fourth,
based on an excellent sampling of genera and geographic regions occupied, Antonelli provides the first
nearly complete view of geographic diversification across
the family. A major finding is the SCBL clade (Siphocampylus, Centropogon, Burmeistera, Lysipomia), which
comprises half the family and is endemic to the Neotropics. This clade is especially diverse in the northern
Andes, which has undergone massive uplift over the
past 10-20 million years and may, in so doing, have driven high rates of speciation in several other plant groups
(for example, Espeletia, Fuchsia, Bromeliaceae: Tillandsioideae, Rubiaceae) [18-22]. The SCBL clade is
embedded in a broader New World clade, including
taxa from North America, the Caribbean, Central America and temperate Chile, as well as a few taxa representing long-distance dispersal events to the Pacific and
Asia. This New World clade is sister to the clade consisting of the Old World woody lobeliads; strong support for the latter confirms the clade sister to and
including L. nicotianifolia found by Givnish et al. [14].
Further investigation of the New World clade should
pay rich dividends, given its extraordinary diversity of
growth forms and geographic distributions, and what
appear to be independent origins of the woody habit in
the Caribbean (for example, L. portorescensis, L. vivaldii), temperate Chile (for example, L. polyphylla), and
the montane Neotropics (for example, Burmeistera,
Centropogon).
Finally, and surprisingly, Antonelli uses his phylogeny
to argue that the giant woody lobeliads of Hawaii and
East Africa are not examples of convergent evolution.
This is, to me, a baffling claim - and yet one that Antonelli clearly feels is vitally important, given that ‘testing’
this claim forms the frame for his entire paper. This
claim, I will now show, cannot be supported by the data
and rationale provided.

Givnish BMC Biology 2010, 8:3
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/3

There are four fundamental flaws in Antonelli’s claim.
First, his definition of convergence for giant lobeliads is
overly restrictive and sets up a straw man:
’These results confidently show that lobelioid species
commonly called “giant” are very closely related and
have not developed their giant form from herbaceous ancestors independently...According to some
early authors [Hedberg, Fries & Fries, Mabberley],
convergence from herbaceous plants into tall treelets
would have occurred independently in different
mountain systems in response to similar tropical
alpine climates consisting of nightly frosts and rapid
temperature fluctuations.’
Why restrict convergence on the giant habit to those
cases in which herbs were the immediate ancestors?
Would convergence on that highly distinctive growth
form be any less convergence if the ancestral form were
not herbaceous, but some other life form instead?
Obviously, no. One of the ‘early’ authors whom Antonelli cites is Mabberley [12]. Not only does Mabberley
not speak of an herbaceous ancestor, he outlines a
hypothesis in which the ancestral taxa from which giant
forms adapted to high elevations in the tropics are
derived from less specialized woody species; in which
herbaceous species occasionally evolve from woody species; and, most importantly, in which all African, Hawaiian and South Asian woody lobeliads are considered
part of Lobelia section Rhychopetalum. More broadly,
almost all authors positing specific ancestors for the
Hawaiian lobeliads named only woody species (see [14]).
In sum, Antonelli’s artful restriction of convergence on
the giant growth form to only those cases with different
herbaceous ancestors is overly restrictive and logically
unnecessary, and does not correspond to the historical
use of the idea by most authors, including those actively
working on the African and Hawaiian lobeliads today
(see [14-16]). Antonelli, in using this inappropriate definition, also chose to ignore the conclusions of Mabberley, who had - in the absence of molecular data pointed to the independent origins of giant lobeliads in
Africa and Hawaii from closely related woody
progenitors.
Second, Antonelli’s phylogeny lacks sufficient resolution to evaluate whether giant species from Hawaii and
Africa (or elsewhere) form a clade or not. While he
found that woody species from Africa, South Asia, Polynesia, and the Bonin and Hawaiian Islands form a clade
- consistent with findings by Givnish et al. [14] and
Knox et al. [15] - Antonelli’s phylogeny has a seven-way
polytomy that prevents assessment of relationships
among the different geographic groups and, for the African and Hawaiian taxa, of relationships within such

Page 3 of 4

groups. Claiming that the African and Hawaiian giant
lobeliads are not convergent simply because they ‘all
derive from a single ancestor’ is meaningless. All monocots share a single ancestor. However, does this mean
that more than 20 apparent origins of fleshy fruits and
of net venation [23] are not, in fact, independent? No.
Among such origins are intercalated many groups with
the capsular fruits and parallel venation ancestral to
monocots, allowing the inference that monophyletic
groups characterized by fleshy fruits or net venation
represent independent origins. So, too, with woody lobeliads - only a minority of species have the giant growth
form adapted to tropical alpine conditions, and detailed
analyses of phylogenetic relationships within the Hawaiian taxa show that they are restricted to Lobelia sect.
Galeatella and are embedded deep inside the Hawaiian
clade, with non-giant woody species forming the
remainder of that clade [14]. Similarly, in East Africa
the alpine lobelias with the most extreme giant-rosette
growth-forms are embedded in a broader group containing less extreme forms [16]. There is no doubt, given
the description of the giant growth form by Antonelli,
the specific species illustrated, and the thermal adaptive
values he ascribes to the growth form, that he meant to
restrict the usage of ‘giant’ to alpine and subalpine giant
rosettes and not apply it more broadly to species with
more slender stems, found in forests at lower elevations.
Third, it is misleading for Antonelli - in reconstructing ancestral character-states - to have overlaid all
growth forms on the phylogeny except the very giantrosette growth form whose independent origin(s) nominally are being assessed. Reconstruction of a nanophanerophyte (tree or treelet < 3 m tall) as the ancestor of
the N4 clade says nothing about the distribution of origin(s) of the giant-rosette form within that clade. Overlaying the giant-rosette growth-form and reconstructing
its ancestral occurrence is vital for any evaluation of
evolutionary convergence.
Finally, in assessing the possibility of evolutionary convergence or stasis - of whether a particular trait has
evolved independently in different lineages under similar
ecological conditions, been maintained under such conditions and/or lost upon invasion of different conditions
- it is equally vital to overlay such conditions on a phylogeny and reconstruct their ancestral states. This was
not done by Antonelli, but should be considered best
practice. Indeed, where possible, a formal analysis of
correlated evolution of growth forms and environments
should be conducted (for example, see [23]). Givnish et
al. [14] showed that the ancestral environments of the
giant species of Lobelia sect. Galeatella were alpine and
subalpine bogs in Hawaii.
Thus, while Antonelli [17] has made fundamental contributions to our understanding of lobeliad evolution, I

Givnish BMC Biology 2010, 8:3
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/3

must take exception to his claim that African and
Hawaiian giant lobeliads are not examples of convergent
evolution. Manifestly, they are strikingly similar to the
independently evolved species of Dendrosenecio in
Africa, Espeletia in South America, and Argyroxiphium
in Hawaii and both groups of giant lobeliads also represent independent origins from woody ancestors. All of
these groups share a distinctive tropical-alpine climate,
as well as several distinctive morphological traits. Many
of the latter have been demonstrated to be of adaptive
value in tropical-alpine climates. Therefore, the giant
lobeliads represent examples - indeed, paradigmatic
examples - of convergent evolution.
There remains the deeper question of whether origins
judged independent, based on the preceding criteria, are
truly independent. Might there be some developmental
pathway or pattern of genetic variation in a broader
lineage that makes the repeated origin of a particular
trait more likely? Only detailed genetic studies can
reveal whether the same genes and/or pathways are
tapped in ‘independent’ origins. Such investigations have
shown, for example, that melanic pelage has evolved in
wholly different ways in rock pocket mice on black lava
flows in Arizona versus New Mexico [24].
Future studies of lobeliad evolution could benefit from
two new approaches that could foster research by the
community as a whole. First, broad-scale phylogenetic
studies should incorporate far more sequence data, to
help resolve many of the very short branches in the
lobeliad phylogeny (for example, those involving the
divergences of the clades from Hawaii, Polynesia, the
Bonin Islands and South Asia [14]). With next-generation DNA sequencing becoming cheaper and more
powerful almost monthly, it should soon be possible to
sequence whole-plastid genomes for scores of species.
Eric Knox (personal communication) has such plans for
several lobeliad genera and my colleagues and I hope to
sequence plastomes for representatives of all Hawaiian
genera in the immediate future. Second, it would be
extremely helpful to sequence the entire genome of at
least one lobeliad, to facilitate studies on the genetic
basis for the extraordinary range of variation in several
ecological significant traits seen across the family or in
smaller groups (for example, fleshy fruits versus capsular
fruits with wind-dispersed seeds; succulent versus nonsucculent stems; insect- versus bird-pollinated flowers).
A growing cadre of lobeliad ecologists and evolutionary
biologists, and the broader evolutionary community,
would greatly benefit from such studies.
Received: 2 January 2010
Accepted: 14 January 2010 Published: 14 January 2010

Page 4 of 4

References
1. Hedberg O: Features of Afroalpine Plant Ecology. Uppsalla: Almqvist &
Wiksen 1964.
2. Carlquist S: Hawaii - a Natural History. New York: Natural History Press
1970.
3. Hedberg I, Hedberg O: Tropical-alpine life-forms of vascular plants. Oikos
1979, 33:297-307.
4. Meinzer F, Goldstein G: Adaptations for water and thermal balance in
Andean giant rosette plants. On the Economy of Plant Form and Function
New York: Cambridge University PressGivnish TJ 1985, 381-411.
5. Smith AP, Young TP: Tropical alpine plant ecology. Ann Rev Ecol Syst 1987,
18:137-158.
6. Baldwin BG, Kyhos DW, Dvorak J: Chloroplast DNA evolution and adaptive
radiation in the Hawaiian silversword alliance. Ann Mo Bot Gard 1990,
77:99-109.
7. Knox EB, Palmer JD: The origin of Dendrosenecio within the Senecioneae
(Asteraceae) based on chloroplast DNA evidence. Amer J Bot 1995,
82:1567-1573.
8. Rauscher JT: Molecular phylogenetics of the Espeletia complex
(Asteraceae): evidence from nrDNA ITS sequences on the closest
relatives of an Andean adaptive radiation. Amer J Bot 2002, 89:1074-1084.
9. Givnish TJ: Adaptive radiation of plants on islands: classical patterns,
molecular data, new insights. Evolution on Islands New York: Oxford
University PressGrant P 1998, 281-304.
10. Carlquist S: A theory of paedomorphosis in dicotyledonous woods.
Phytomorphology 1962, 12:30-45.
11. Carlquist S: Further concepts in ecological wood anatomy, with concepts
on recent work in wood anatomy and evolution. Aliso 1980, 9:499-553.
12. Mabberley DJ: The giant lobelias: pachycauly, biogeography, ornithophily
and continental drift. New Phytol 1975, 74:365-374.
13. Mabberley DJ: On Dr. Carlquist’s defense of paedomorphosis. New Phytol
1982, 90:751-755.
14. Givnish TJ, Millam KC, Mast AR, Patterson TB, Theim TJ, Hipp AL, Henss JM,
Smith JF, Wood KR, Sytsma KJ: Origin, adaptive radiation and
diversification of the Hawaiian lobeliads (Asterales: Campanulaceae).
Proc R Soc B 2009, 276:407-416.
15. Knox EB, Downie SR, Palmer JD: Chloroplast genome rearrangements and
the evolution of giant lobelias from herbaceous ancestors. Mol Biol Evol
1993, 10:414-430.
16. Knox EB, Palmer JD: Chloroplast DNA evidence on the origin and
radation of the giant lobelias in Eastern Africa. Syst Bot 1998, 23:109-149.
17. Antonelli A: Have giant lobelias evolved several times independently?
Life form shifts and historical biogeography of the cosmopolitan and
highly diverse subfamily Lobelioideae (Campanulaceae). BMC Biology
2009, 7:82.
18. Gentry AH: Neotropical floristic diversity: phytogeographical connections
between Central and South America, Pleistocene climatic fluctuations, or
an accident of the Andean orogeny?. Ann Mo Bot Gard 1982, 69:557-593.
19. Berry PE: A systematic revision of Fuchsia sect. Quelusia (Onagraceae).
Ann Mo Bot Gard 1989, 76:532-584.
20. Young KR, Ulloa CU, Luteyn JL, Knapp S: Plant evolution and endemism in
Andean South America: an introduction. Bot Rev 2002, 68:4-21.
21. Givnish TJ, Millam KC, Berry PE, Sytsma KJ: Phylogeny, adaptive radiation,
and historical biogeography of Bromeliaceae inferred from ndhF
sequence data. Monocots: Comparative Bology and Eolution - Poales
Claremont: Rancho Santa Ana Botanical GardenColumbus JT, Friar EA, Porter
JM, Prince LM, Simpson MG 2007, 26.
22. Antonelli A, Nylander AA, Persson C, Sanmartin I: Tracing the impact of
Andean uplift on Neotropical plant evolution. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA
2009, 106:749-9754.
23. Givnish TJ, Pires JC, Graham SW, McPherson MA, Prince LM, Patterson TB,
Rai HS, Roalson ER, Evans TM, Hahn WJ, et al: Repeated evolution of net
venation and fleshy fruits among monocots in shaded habitats confirms
a priori predictions: evidence from an ndhF phylogeny. Proc Roy Soc Lond
B 2005, 272:1481-1490.
24. Hoekstra HE, Nachman MW: Different genes underlie adaptive melanism
in different populations of rock pocket mice. Mol Ecol 2003, 12:1185-1194.
doi:10.1186/1741-7007-8-3
Cite this article as: Givnish: Giant lobelias exemplify convergent
evolution. BMC Biology 2010 8:3.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
