<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Data hosting infrastructure for primary biodiversity data</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12:S5. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-S15-S5"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Anthony Goddard"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

RESEARCH

Open Access

Data hosting infrastructure for primary
biodiversity data
Anthony Goddard1*, Nathan Wilson2, Phil Cryer3, Grant Yamashita4

Abstract
Background: Today, an unprecedented volume of primary biodiversity data are being generated worldwide, yet
significant amounts of these data have been and will continue to be lost after the conclusion of the projects
tasked with collecting them. To get the most value out of these data it is imperative to seek a solution whereby
these data are rescued, archived and made available to the biodiversity community. To this end, the biodiversity
informatics community requires investment in processes and infrastructure to mitigate data loss and provide
solutions for long-term hosting and sharing of biodiversity data.
Discussion: We review the current state of biodiversity data hosting and investigate the technological and
sociological barriers to proper data management. We further explore the rescuing and re-hosting of legacy data,
the state of existing toolsets and propose a future direction for the development of new discovery tools. We also
explore the role of data standards and licensing in the context of data hosting and preservation. We provide five
recommendations for the biodiversity community that will foster better data preservation and access: (1)
encourage the community’s use of data standards, (2) promote the public domain licensing of data, (3) establish a
community of those involved in data hosting and archival, (4) establish hosting centers for biodiversity data, and
(5) develop tools for data discovery.
Conclusion: The community’s adoption of standards and development of tools to enable data discovery is
essential to sustainable data preservation. Furthermore, the increased adoption of open content licensing, the
establishment of data hosting infrastructure and the creation of a data hosting and archiving community are all
necessary steps towards the community ensuring that data archival policies become standardized.

Introduction
Today, an unprecedented volume of primary biodiversity
data are being generated worldwide [1], yet significant
amounts of this data have been and will continue to be
lost after the conclusion of the projects tasked with collecting them [2]. Gray et al. [3] make a distinction
between ephemeral data, which, once collected, can
never be collected again, and stable data, which can be
recollected. The extinction of species, habitat destruction and related loss of rich sources of biodiversity make
ephemeral a significant amount of data that have historically been assumed to be stable. Whether the data
are stable or ephemeral, however, poor record keeping
and data management practices nevertheless lead to loss
* Correspondence: agoddard@mbl.edu
1
Center for Library and Informatics, Woods Hole Marine Biological
Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

of data [4]. As a result, biodiversity data collected today
are as endangered as the species they represent. There
are also important questions of access to and interpretation of the data. Inaccessible data are effectively lost
until they are made accessible. Moreover, data that are
misrepresented or easily misinterpreted can result in
conclusions that are even more inaccurate than those
that would be drawn if the data were simply lost.
Although it is in the best interest of all who create
and use biodiversity data to encourage best practices to
protect against data loss, the community still requires
additional effective incentives to participate in a shared
data environment and to help overcome existing social
and cultural barriers to data sharing. Separated silos of
data from disparate groups presently dominate the current global infrastructure for biodiversity data. There are
some examples of projects working to bring the data
out of those silos and to encourage sharing between the

© 2011 Goddard et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

various projects. Examples include the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) data portal [5] and the
Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) [6]. Each of them works to
bring together data from their partners [7,8] and makes
those data available through their application programming interfaces (APIs). In addition, there are projects,
including ScratchPads [9] and LifeDesks [10], that allow
taxonomists to focus on their area of expertise while
automatically making the data they want to share available to the larger biodiversity community.
Although there is a strong and healthy mix of platforms and technologies, there remains a gap in standards and processes, especially for the ‘long tail’ of
smaller projects [11]. In analyzing existing infrastructure, we see that large and well-funded projects predictably have more substantial investments in
infrastructure, making use of not only on-site redundancy, but also remote mirrors. Smaller projects, on the
other hand, often rely on manual or semi-automated
data backup procedures with little time or resources for
comprehensive high availability or disaster recovery
considerations.
It is therefore imperative to seek a solution to this
data loss and ensure that data are rescued, archived and
made available to the biodiversity community. Although
there are broad efforts to encourage the use of best
practices for data archiving [12-14], citation of data
[15,16] and curation [17] as well as large archives that
are focused on particular types of biology-related data,
including sequences [18-20], ecosystems [21] and observations (GBIF) species descriptions (EOL), none of these
efforts are focused on the long-term preservation of biodiversity data. To this end the biodiversity informatics
community requires investment in trustworthy processes
and infrastructure to mitigate data loss [22] and needs
to provide solutions for long-term hosting and storage
of biodiversity data. We propose the construction of
Biodiversity Data Hosting Centers (BDHCs), which are
charged with the task of mitigating the risks presented
here by the careful creation and management of the
infrastructure necessary to archive and manage biodiversity data. As such, they will provide a future safeguard
against loss of biodiversity data.
In laying out our vision of BDHCs, we begin by categorizing the different kinds of biodiversity data that
are found in the literature and in various datasets. We
then lay out some features and capabilities that BDHC
should possess, with a discussion of standards and best
practices that are pertinent to an effective BDHC.
After a discussion of current tools and approaches for
effective data management, we discuss some of the
technological and cultural barriers to effective data
management and preservation that have hindered the
community. We end with a series of recommendations

Page 2 of 14

for adopting and implementing data management/preservation changes.
We acknowledge that biodiversity data range widely,
both in format and in purpose. Although some authors
carefully restrict the use of the term ‘data’ to verifiable
facts or sensory stimuli [23], for the purposes of this
article we intend a very broad understanding of the
term covering essentially everything that can be represented using digital computers. Although not all biodiversity data are in digital form, we restrict our
discussion here to digital data that relate in some way to
organisms. Usually the data are created to serve a specific purpose, ranging from ecosystem assessment to species identification to general education. We also
acknowledge that published literature is a very important existing repository for biodiversity data, and every
category of biodiversity data we discussed may be published in the traditional literature as well as more digitally accessible forms. Consequently, any of the data
discussed here may have relevant citations that are
important for finding and interpreting the data. However, given that citations have such a rich set of standards and supporting technologies, they will not be
addressed here as that would distract from the primary
purpose of this paper.
Categories of data and examples

We start this section with a high-level discussion of the
types of data and challenges related specifically to biodiversity data. This is followed by a brief review of various
types of existing Internet-accessible biodiversity data
sources. Our intent is not to be exhaustive, but rather
to demonstrate the wide variety of biodiversity data
sources and to point out some of the differences
between them. The choice of sites discussed is based on
a combination of the authors’ familiarity with the particular tools and their widespread use.
Most discussions of the existing data models for
managing biodiversity data are either buried in what
documentation exists for specific systems, for example,
the Architectural View of GBIF’s Integrated Publishing
Toolkit (IPT) [24] or, alternatively, the data model is
discussed in related informally published presentations,
for example John Doolan’s ‘Proposal for a Simplified
Structure for EMu’ [25]. One example of a data model
in the peer-reviewed literature is Rich Pyle’s Taxonomer
[26] system. However, this is again focused on a particular implementation of a particular data model for a particular system.
Raw observational data are a key type of biodiversity
data and include textual or numeric field notes, photographs, video clips, sound files, genetic sequences or any
other sort of recorded data file or dataset based on the
observation of organisms. Although the processes

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

involved in collecting these data can be complex and
may be error prone, these data are generally accepted as
the basic factual data from which all other biodiversity
data are derived. In terms of sheer volume, raw observational data are clearly the dominant type of data.
Another example is nomenclatural data. These data are
the relationships between various names and are thus
very compact and abstract. Nomenclatural data are generally derived from a set of nomenclatural codes (for
example, the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature [27]). Although the correct application of these
codes in particular circumstances may be a source of
endless debate among taxonomists, the vast majority of
these data are not a matter of deep debate. However,
descriptions of named taxa, particularly above the species level, are much more subjective, relying on both the
historical literature and fundamentally on the knowledge
and opinions of their authors. Digital resources often do
a poor job of acknowledging, much less representing,
this subjectivity.
For example, consider a system that records observations of organisms by recording the name, date, location
and observer of the organism. Such a system can conflate objective, raw observational data with a subjective
association of that data with a name based on some
poorly specified definition of that name. Furthermore,
most of the raw observational data are then typically
discarded because the observer fails to record the raw
data that they used to make the determination or
because the system does not provide a convenient way
to associate raw data, such as photographs, with a particular determination. Similarly, the person making the
identification typically neglects to be specific about what
definition of the name they intend. Although this example raises a number of significant questions about the
long-term value of such data, the most significant issues
for our current purpose relate to combining data from
multiple digital resources. The data collected and the
way that different digital resources are used are often
very different. As a result it is very important to be able
to reliably trace the origin of specific pieces of data. It is
also important to characterize and document the various
data sources in a common framework.
Currently, a wide variety of biodiversity data are available through digital resources accessible through the
Internet. These range from sites that focus on photographs of organisms from the general public such as
groups within Flickr [28] to large diverse systems
intended for a range of audiences such as EOL [6] to
very specialized sites focused on the nomenclature of a
specific group of organisms, such as Systema Dipterorum [29] or the Index Nominum Algarum [30]. Other
sites focused on nomenclature include the International
Plant Names Index [31], Index Fungorum [32] and the

Page 3 of 14

Catalog of Fishes [33]. Several sites have begun developing biodiversity data for the semantic web [34] including
the Hymenoptera Anatomy Ontology [35] and TaxonConcept.org [36]. In addition, many projects include
extensive catalogs of names because names are key to
bringing together nearly all biodiversity data [37]. Examples include the Catalog of Life [38], WoRMs [39], ITIS
[40] and ION [41]. Many sources for names, including
those listed above, are indexed through projects such as
the Global Names Index [42] and uBio [43].
Some sites focus on curated museum collections (for
example, Natural History Museum, London [44], and
the Smithsonian Institution [45], among many others).
Others focus on descriptions of biological taxa ranging
from original species descriptions (the Biodiversity Heritage Library [46] and MycoBank [47]), up-to-date technical descriptions (FishBase [48], the Missouri Botanical
Garden [49], and the Atlas of Living Australia [50]), and
descriptions intended for the general public (Wikipedia
[51] and the BBC Wildlife Finder [52]).
As described above, identifications are often conflated
with raw observations or names. However, there are a
number of sites set up to interactively manage newly
proposed identifications. Examples include iSpot [53],
iNaturalist [54], ArtPortalen.se [55] and Nationale Databank Flora en Fauna [56], which accept observations of
any organisms, and sites with more restricted domains,
such as Mushroom Observer [57], eBird [58] or BugGuide [59]. The GBIF data portal provides access to
observational data from a variety of sources, including
many government organizations. Many sites organize
their data according to a single classification that reflects
the current opinions and knowledge of the resource
managers. Examples of such sites whose classifications
come reasonably close to covering the entire tree of life
are the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI) taxonomy [60], the Tree of Life Web [61], the
Catalog of Life [38], the World Registry of Marine Species (http://www.marinespecies.org/), and the Interim
Register of Marine and Nonmarine Genera [62]. EOL
[6] gathers classifications from such sources such and
allows the user to choose a preferred classification for
accessing its data. Finally, some sites, such as TreeBase
[63] and PhylomeDB [64], focus on archiving computer
generated phylogenies based on gene sequences.

Features of biodiversity data hosting centers
Most of the key features of a BDHC are common to the
general problem of creating publicly accessible, longterm data archives. Obviously, the data stored in the
systems are distinctive to the biodiversity community,
such as images of diagnostic features of specific taxa.
However, the requirements to store images and the
standards used for storing them are widespread. In

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

addition, significant portions of the data models, and
thus communication standards and protocols, are distinctive to the biodiversity community. For example, the
specific types of relationships between images, observations, taxon descriptions and scientific names.
Government, science, education and cultural heritage
communities, among others, are faced with many of the
same general challenges that face the biodiversity informatics community when it comes to infrastructure and
processes to establish long-term preservation and access
of content. The NSF DataNet Program [65] was created
with this specific goal in mind. The Data Conservancy
[66] and the DataOne Project [67], both funded by
DataNet, are seeking to provide long-term preservation,
access and reuse for their stakeholder communities. The
US National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration [68] is actively exploring guidelines for archiving
environmental and geospatial data [69]. The wider
science and technology community has also investigated
the challenges of preservation and access of scientific
and technical data [70]. Such investigations and projects
are too great to cover in the context of this paper. However, every effort should be made by the biodiversity
informatics community to build from the frameworks
and lessons learned by those who are tackling these
same challenges in areas outside biodiversity.
The primary goal of BDHCs is to substantially reduce
the risk of loss of biodiversity data. To achieve this goal
they must take long-term data preservation seriously.
Fortunately, this need is common to many other areas
of data management and many excellent tools exist to
meet these needs. In addition to the obvious data storage requirements, data replication and effective metadata management are the primary technologies required
to mitigate against the dangers of data loss.
Another key feature of BDHCs is to make the data
globally available. Although any website is, in a sense,
globally available, the deeper requirements are to make
that availability reliable and fast. Data replication across
globally distributed data centers is a well-recognized
approach to making data consistently available across
the world.
Finally, the use and promotion of standards is a key
feature for BDHCs. Standards are the key component to
enabling effective, scalable data transfer between independently developed systems. The key argument for
standards in BDHCs is that they reduce the need for a
set of systems that need to communicate with each
other to create a custom translator between each pair of
systems. Everyone can aim at supporting the standards
rather than figuring out how to interoperate with everyone else on a case by case basis. If the number of
players is close to the number of standards, then there
is no point in standardizing. If each player has its own

Page 4 of 14

‘standard’, then the total amount of work that has to be
done by community goes up as the square of the number of players (roughly speaking, an N2 problem, with N
being the number of players). If, however, some community standards are used, the amount of work for the
community is N×S (with S being the number of standards used in the community). As S approaches N,
there is no point in standardizing, but as S becomes
much less than N, the total amount of support required
by the community to deal with accounting for the various standards decreases. A full account of standards
and their importance to robust technical systems is
beyond the scope of this article. However, we accept
that the use of standards to facilitate data preservation
and access is very important for BDHCs. In this context,
we present a general overview of common standards
used in biodiversity systems in the next section.

Tools, services and standards
Here we summarize some of the tools, services, and
standards that are used in biodiversity informatics projects. Although an exhaustive list is beyond the scope of
this article, we attempt to present tools that are widely
known and used by most members of the community.
Tools for replicating data

TCP/HTTP protocols allow simple scripting of command-line tools, such as wget or curl, to transfer data.
When this is not an option and there is access via a
login shell such as OpenSSH, other standard tools can
be used to replicate and mirror data. Examples of these
are rsync, sftp and scp.
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) file-sharing includes technologies
such as BitTorrent [71], which is a protocol for distributing large amounts of data. BitTorrent is the framework for the BioTorrents project [72], which allows
researchers to rapidly share large datasets via a network
of pooled bandwidth systems. This open sharing allows
one user to collect pieces of the download from multiple
providers, increasing the efficiency of the file transfer
while simultaneously providing the downloaded bits to
other users. The BioTorrents website [73] acts as a central listing of datasets available to download and the BitTorrent protocol allows data to be located on multiple
servers. This decentralizes the data hosting and distribution and provides fault tolerance. All files are then integrity checked via checksums to ensure they are identical
on all nodes.
Tools for querying data providers

OpenURL [74] provides a standardized URL format that
enables a user to find a resource they are allowed to
access via the provider they are querying. Originally
used by librarians to help patrons find scholarly articles,

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

it is now used for any kind of resource on the internet.
The standard supports linking from indexed databases
to other services, such as journals, via full-text search of
repositories, online catalogs or other services. OpenURL
is an open tool and allows common APIs to access data.
The Biodiversity Heritage Library (BHL)’s OpenURL
resolver [75] is an API that was launched in 2009 and
continues to offer a way for data providers and aggregators to access BHL material. Any repository containing
citations to biodiversity literature can use this API to
determine whether a given book, volume, article and/or
page is available online through BHL. The service supports both OpenURL 0.1 and OpenURL 1.0 query formats, and can return its response in JSON, XML or
HTML formats, providing flexibility for data exchange.
Tools for metadata and citation exchange

OAI-PMH (Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting, usually referred to as simply OAI) [76]
is an established protocol to provide an application
independent framework to harvest metadata. Using
XML over HTTP, OAI harvests metadata descriptions
of repository records so that servers can be built using
metadata from many unrelated archives. The base
implementation of OAI must support metadata in the
Dublin Core format (a metadata standard for describing
a wide range of networked resources), but support for
additional representations is available. Once an OAI service is initially harvested, future harvests will check only
for new or changed records, making it an efficient protocol and one that is easily set up as a repetitive task
that runs automatically at regular intervals.
CiteBank [77] is an open access repository for biodiversity publications published by the BHL that allows
sharing, categorizing and promoting of citations. Citations are harvested from resources via the OAI-PMH
protocol, which seamlessly deals with updates and
changes from remote providers. Consequently, all data
within CiteBank is also available to anyone via OAI,
thus creating a new discovery node. Tools are available
that allow users to upload individual citations of whole
collections of bibliographies. Open groups may be
formed around various categories and can assist in moderating and updating citations.
Tools for data exchange

LOCKSS (Lots of Copies Keep Stuff Safe) [78] is an
international community program, based at Stanford
University Libraries, that uses open source software and
P2P networking technology to map a large, decentralized and replicated digital repository. Using off-theshelf hardware and requiring very little technical expertise, the system preserves an institution’s content while
providing preservation for other content - a virtual

Page 5 of 14

shared space where all nodes in the network support
each other and sustain authoritative copies of the original content. LOCKSS is OAIS (Open Archival Information System) [79] compliant and preserves all genres
and formats of web content to preserve both the historical context and the intellectual content. A described
‘LOCKSS box’ collects content from the target sites
using a web crawler similar to the ones that search
engines use to discover content. It then watches those
sites for changes, allows the content to be cached on
the box so as to facilitate a web proxy or cache of the
content in case the target system is ever down and has a
web-based administration panel to control what is being
audited, how often and who has access to the material.
DiGIR (Distributed Generic Information Retrieval)
[80] is a client/server protocol for retrieving information
from distributed resources. Using HTTP to transport
Darwin Core XML between the client and server, DiGIR
is a set of tools to link independent databases into a single, searchable virtual collection. Although it was initially targeted to deal only with species data, it was later
expanded to work with any type of information and was
integrated into a number of community collection networks, in particular GBIF. At its core, DiGIR provides a
search interface between many dissimilar databases
using XML as a translator. When a search query is
issued, the DiGIR client application sends the query to
each institution’s DiGIR provider, which is then translated into an equivalent request that is compatible with
the local database. Thus the response can deal with the
search even though the details of the underlying database are suppressed, thus allowing a uniform virtual
view of the contents on the network. Network speed
and availability were major concerns of the DiGIR system; nodes would time out before requests could be
processed, resulting in failed queries. The functionality
of DiGIR was superceded by the Tapir protocol.
BioCASE (The Biological Collection Access Service
for Europe) [81] “is a transnational network of biological
collections”. BioCASE provides access to collection and
observational databases by providing an XML abstraction layer in front of a database. Although its search,
retrieval and framework is similar to DiGIR, it is nevertheless incompatible with DiGIR. BioCASE uses a
schema based on the Access to Biological Collections
Data (ABCD) schema [82].
TAPIR is a current Taxonomic Database Working
Group (TDWG) standard that provides an XML API
protocol for accessing structured data. TAPIR extends
features of BioCASE and DiGIR by making a more generic method of data interchange. The TAPIR project is
run by a task group that oversees the development. The
XML request and response for access can be stored in a
distributed database. TAPIR combines and extends

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

Page 6 of 14

features of BioCASE and DiGIR to create a more generic means for sharing data. A task group oversees the
maintenance of the software as well as the protocol’s
standard.
Although DiGIR providers are still available, their
numbers have diminished since its inception and now
number around 260 [83]. BioCASE, meanwhile, has
approximately 350 active nodes [84]. TAPIR is being
used as the primary collection method by GBIF, who
continue to maintain and add functionality to the project.
Institutions such as the Missouri Botanical Garden host
all three services (DiGIR, BioCASE and TAPIR) to allow
ongoing open access to their collections. Many projects
will endeavor to maintain legacy tools for as long as there
is demand. This support is helpful for systems that have
already invested in legacy tools, but it is important to
promote new tools and standards to ensure their adoption as improvements in tools and standards are made. In
so doing, there needs to be a clear migration path from
legacy systems to the new one.

Linking multiple clusters of Hadoop servers globally
would present biodiversity researchers with a community utility. GBIF developers have already worked extensively with Hadoop in a distributed computing
environment, so much of the background research into
the platform and its application to biodiversity data has
been done. In a post entitled ‘Hadoop on Amazon EC2
to generate Species by Cell Index’ [89], GBIF generated
a ‘species per cell index’ map of occurrence data across
an index of the entire GBIF occurrence record store,
where each cell represented an area of one degree latitude by one degree longitude. This map consisted of
over 135 million records. This was processed using 20
Amazon EC2 instances running Linux, Hadoop and
Java. This map generation was completed in 472 seconds and was used to show that processing tasks could
be parsed out over many Hadoop instances to come up
with a unified result. Because Hadoop runs in Java it is
very simple to provision nodes and link them together
to form a private computing network.

Distributed computing

Standards used in the biodiversity community

Infrastructure as a service

The biodiversity community uses a large range of datarelated standards ranging from explicit data file formats,
to extensions to metadata frameworks, to protocols. Larger data objects such as various forms of media,
sequence data or other types of raw data are addressed
by standardized data file formats, such as JPEG [90],
PNG [91], MPEG [92] and OGG [93]. For more specific
forms of data, standards are usually decided by the organization governing that data type. The Biodiversity
Information Standards [94] efforts are intended to
address the core needs for biodiversity data. The metadata standard Darwin Core [95] and the related GBIFdeveloped Darwin Core Archive [96] file format, in particular, address most of the categories of data discussed
above. The current Darwin Core standard is designed to
be used in XML documents for exchanging data and is
the most common format for sharing zoological data. It
is also worth noting that the Darwin Core Archive file
format is explicitly designed to address the most common problems that researchers encounter in this space,
but not necessarily all of the potential edge cases that
could be encountered in representing and exchanging
biodiversity data.
The TAPIR [97] standard specifies a protocol for
querying biodiversity data stores and, along with DiGIR
and BioCASE, provides a generic way to communicate
between client applications and data providers. Biodiversity-specific standards for data observations and descriptions are also being developed. For example, the EnvO
[98] standard is an ontology similar to Darwin Core that
defines a wide variety of environments and some of
their relationships.

Cloud infrastructure services provide server virtualization environments as a service. When a user requires a
number of servers to store data or run processing tasks,
they simply rent computing resources from a provider,
who provides the resources from a pool of available
equipment. From here, virtual machines can be brought
online and offline quickly, with the user paying only for
the actual services used or resources consumed. The
most well known implementation of this is the Amazon
Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) [85].
Distributed processing

Using common frameworks to share processing globally
enables researchers to use far more computing power
than had been previously possible. By applying this additional computing power, projects can leverage techniques such as data mining to open up new avenues of
exploration in biodiversity research. After computational
targets are selected, individual jobs are distributed to
processing nodes until all work is completed. Connecting disparate system only requires a secure remote connection, such as OpenSSH [86], over the internet.
Apache Hadoop [87] is a popular open source project
from Yahoo that provides a Java software framework to
support distributed computing. Running on large clusters of commodity hardware, Hadoop uses its own distributed file system (HDFS) to connect various nodes
and provides resilience against intermittent failures. Its
computational method, map/reduce [88], passes small
fragments of work to other nodes in the cluster and
directs further jobs while aggregating the results.

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

Community acceptance of standards is an ongoing
process and different groups will support various ones
at different times. The process for determining a biodiversity specific standard is generally organized by the
Biodiversity Information Standards community (organized by TDWG) centered on a working group or mailing list and often has enough exposure to ensure that
those with a stake in the standard being discussed will
have an opportunity to comment on the proposed standard. This process ensures that standards are tailored to
those who eventually use them, which further facilitates
community acceptance. Nomenclatural codes in taxonomy, for example, are standardized, and members of
this discipline recognize the importance of these
standards.

Barriers to data management and preservation
Technological barriers

We distinguish between technological and social/cultural barriers to effective data sharing, management and
preservation. Technological barriers are those that are
primarily due to devices, methods and the processes and
workflows that use those devices and methods. Social/
cultural barriers are those that arise from both explicit
and tacit mores of the larger community as well as procedures, customs and financial considerations of the
individuals and institutions that participate in the data
management/preservation.
The primary technological cause of loss of biodiversity
data is the poor archiving of raw observations. In many
cases raw observations are not explicitly made or they
are actively deleted after more refined taxon description
information has been created from them. The lack of
archival storage space for raw observations is a key
cause of poor archiving, but simply having a policy of
keeping everything is not scalable. At minimum there
should be strict controls governing what data are
archived. There also must to be a method for identifying
data that either are not biodiversity-related or have little
value for future biodiversity research. Lack of access to
primary biodiversity data can be due to a lack of technical knowledge by the creators of the data regarding how
to digitally publish them, and often this is caused by a
lack of funding to support publication and long-term
preservation. In cases in which data do get published,
there remain issues surrounding maintenance of those
data sources. Hardware failures and format changes can
result in data becoming obsolete and inaccessible if consideration is not given to hardware and file format
redundancy.
Another primarily technological barrier to the access
and interpretation of biodiversity data is that much of
the key literature is not available digitally. Projects such
as the BHL are working to address this problem. BHL

Page 7 of 14

has already scanned approximately 30 million pages of
core biodiversity literature. The project estimates that
there are approximately 500 million total pages of core
biodiversity literature. Of that, 100 million are out of
copyright and are waiting to be scanned by the project.
Interoperability presents a further technological barrier to data access and interpretation. In many cases primary biodiversity data cannot be easily exchanged
between a source system and a researcher’s system. The
standards discussed here help to address this problem,
but must be correctly implemented in both the source
and destination systems.
Finally, there is no existing general solution for userdriven feedback mechanisms in the biodiversity space.
Misinterpretation of biodiversity data is largely the result
of incomplete raw observations and barriers to the propagation of data. The process of realizing that two raw
observations refer to the same taxon (or have some
more complex relationship) takes effort, as does the propagation of that new data. To be successful, such a system would need to be open to user-driven feedback
mechanisms that allow local changes for immediate use,
which propagate back to the original source of the data.
Much of this data propagation could be automated by a
wider adoption of standards and better models for the
dynamic interchange and caching of data.
Social and cultural barriers

The social and cultural barriers that cause data loss are
well known and not specific to biodiversity data [99]. In
addition to outright, unintentional data loss, there are
well known social barriers to data sharing. Members of
the scientific community can be afraid to share data
since this might allow other scientists to publish
research results without explicitly collaborating with or
crediting the original creator(s) of the data. One
approach for addressing this concern is forming data
embargoes, in which the original source data are rendered unavailable for a specified period of time relative
to its original collection or subsequent publication. In
addition, there are no clear standards for placing a value
on biodiversity data. This results in radically different
beliefs about the value of such data, and in extreme
cases can lead scientists to assert rights over data with
expensive or severely limited licensing terms.
The financial cost of good archiving and the more
general cost of hardware needed, software development
and the cost of data creation are all other forms of
social barriers to the preservation of biodiversity data
[100]. The cost of creating new raw observations continues to drop, but some types of raw observational data
are still extremely expensive or otherwise difficult to
acquire, especially if significant travel or field work are
required to create the data. Similarly, access to museum

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

specimens or living organisms can be crucial to accurately interpreting existing data. There are efficient
mechanisms to facilitate such access within the academic sphere, but for scientists outside of the academic
world this can be a significant barrier to creating more
meaningful data.
Overcoming these barriers will require effective
incentives. Ultimately the advantages of having shared,
centralized access to the data should serve as its own
incentive. This has already happened for genetic
sequence data as reflected by the widespread adoption
of GenBank [18]. In comparison, biodiversity data have
a much greater historical record than sequence data
and more importantly a set of legacy conventions that
were largely created outside of the context of digital
data management. As a result, investment in accurately
modeling these conventions and providing easy-to-use
interfaces for processing data that conform to these
conventions is likely to have greater return in the long
run. Providing more direct incentives to the data creators could be valuable as way to get the process
started.
Legal and mandatory solutions

Major US grant funding organizations including the
National Institutes of Health [101] and the National
Science Foundation [102] are now requiring an up-front
plan for data management, including data access and
archiving as part of every grant proposal. The National
Science Foundation is taking steps to ensure that data
from publicly funded research are made public [103].
Such policies, although designed to ensure that data are
more accessible, have implications for data archiving.
Mandatory data archiving policies are likely to be very
effective in raising awareness of issues surrounding data
loss and archiving. However, such policies are neither
strictly necessary to ensure widespread adoption of data
archiving best practices, nor are they a sufficient solution on their own. Adoption of these policies will assist
in ensuring that a project’s data are available and
archivable.

Recommendations and discussion
Here we recommended five ways in which the community can begin to implement the changes required for
sustainable data preservation and access: (1) Encourage
the community’s use of data standards, (2) promote the
public domain licensing of data, (3) establish a community of those involved in data hosting and archival, (4)
establish hosting centers for biodiversity data, and (5)
develop tools for data discovery.
We prioritize recommendations here from short-term
(immediate to 1 year), medium-term (1 to 5 years), to
long-term (5 or more years). There is inter-dependency

Page 8 of 14

between the recommendations, as having completed one
recommendation will make it easier to pursue others.
1. Short-term: encourage community use of data
standards

The biodiversity community must work in the short
term with associations such as the TDWG standards
body to strongly promote biodiversity standards in data
transfer, sharing and citation. Key players, such as data
providers, must ensure that they work to adopt these
standards as a short-term priority and encourage other
projects to follow suit. The adoption of standards is
paramount to the goal of achieving sustainable data preservation and access and paves the way for interoperability between datasets, discovery tools and archiving
systems [104]. The processes for standards establishment and community acceptance need to be as flexible
and inclusive as possible, to ensure the greatest adoption
of standards. Therefore, an open, transparent and easily
accessible method for participating in the standards process is important to ensure that standards meet the
community’s needs. An interesting example is the use of
unique identifiers. Popular solutions in the biodiversity
community include GUIDs [105], URLs [106] and LSIDs
[107]. This debate has not resolved on a single agreedon standard and it is not clear that it ever will. Therefore, it is important that BDHCs support all such systems, most likely through an internally managed
additional layer of indirection and replication of the
sources when possible.
2. Short-term: promote public domain licensing of
content

To minimize the risk of loss, biodiversity data, including
the images, videos, classifications, datasets and databases, must all be replicable without asking permission
of any rights holders associated with that data. Such
data must be placed under as liberal a license as possible
or, alternatively, placed into the public domain. This
position should be adopted in the short term by existing
data providers. To avoid long-term issues, these licenses
should allow additional data replication without seeking
permission from the original rights holders. A variety of
appropriate licenses are available from Creative Commons [108]. ‘Non-commercial’ licenses should be
avoided if possible because this makes it more difficult
for the data to be shared and used by sites that may
require commercial means to support their projects. In
these cases, an open, ‘share-alike’ license that prevents
the end user from encumbering the data with exclusive
licenses should be used.
Open source code should be stored in both an online
repository, such as github [109] or Google code [110],
and mirrored locally at a project’s institution for

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

redundancy. Making open source code publicly available
is an important and often overlooked step for many projects and must be encouraged by funders, not only for
the sake of community involvement in a project, but to
allow others to maintain and further develop the software should a project’s funding conclude. The use of
open source software to support the hosting and development of biodiversity informatics tools and projects
should also be encouraged by funders. Using commonplace, open source software lowers the barrier to entry
for collaborators, further increasing the chances of a
project being maintained after funding has ended.
3. Short-term: develop data hosting and archiving
community

Encouraging the use of standards and data preservation
practices to the wider biodiversity community requires
an investment in training resources. In the short term,
the community, including projects, institutions and
organizations such as GBIF and TDWG, should establish online resources to familiarize researchers with the
process of storing, transforming and sharing their data
using standards, as well as with the concepts of data
preservation and data hosting. Such resources may
include screen casts, tutorials and white papers. Even
better, intensive, hands-on training programs have proven to be effective in educating domain experts and
scientists in technical processes, as can be seen in
courses such as the Marine Biology Laboratory’s Medical Informatics course, which teaches informatics tools
to medical professionals [111]. Funders and organizations such as GBIF should encourage the establishment
of such courses for biologists and others working in biodiversity. Partners in existing large-scale informatics
projects, such as those of the Encyclopedia of Life or
the Biodiversity Heritage Library, as well as institutions
such as GBIF regional nodes, would be well placed with
the expertise and resources to host such courses. An
alternative hands-on method that has been effective is
to embed scientists within informatics groups [112].
For hosts of biodiversity data, technical proficiency is
important for any information technology project and
data archiving and sharing are concepts that most systems engineers are capable of facilitating. Understanding
the need for knowledge transfer, a communal group
that is comfortable with email and mailing lists is critical for a project’s success. Communication between the
group can be fostered via the use of open/public wiki, a
shared online knowledge base that can be continuously
edited as the tools, approaches and best practices
change.
Community input and crowd-sourcing. Crowd-sourcing [113] is defined as the process of taking tasks that
would normally be handled by an individual and

Page 9 of 14

opening them up to a larger community. Allowing community input into biodiversity datasets via comments,
direct access to the data, adding to the data or deriving
new datasets from the original data are all powerful
ways of enhancing the original dataset and building a
community that cares about and cares for the data.
Wikipedia, which allows users to add or edit definitions
of any article, is an example of a successful model on a
large scale. In the case of biodiversity, there has been
success with amateur photographers contributing their
images of animals and plants and amateur scientists
helping to identify various specimens. Crowd-sourcing is
particularly notable as a scalable approach for enhancing
data quality. Community input can also work effectively
to improve the initial quality of the data and associated
metadata [114].
In 2008, the National Library of Australia, as part of
the Australian Newspapers Digitization Program
(ANDP) and in collaboration with Australian state and
territory libraries, enabled public access to selected outof-copyright Australian newspapers. This service allows
users to search and browse over 8.4 million articles
from over 830,000 newspapers dating back to 1803.
Because the papers were scanned by Optical Character
Recognition (OCR) software, they could be searched.
Although OCR works well with documents that have
consistent typefaces and formats, historical texts and
newspapers fall outside of this category, leading to less
than perfect OCR. To address this, the National Library
opened up the collection of newspapers to crowd-sourcing, allowing the user community the ability to correct
and suggest improvements to the OCR text. The volunteers not only enjoyed the interaction, but also felt that
they were making a difference by improving the understanding of past events in their country. By March 2010
over 12 million lines of text had been improved by
thousands of users. The ongoing results of this work
can be seen on the National Library of Australia’s Trove
site [115]. Biodiversity informatics projects should consider how crowd-sourcing could be used in their projects and see this as a new way of engaging users and
the general public.
Development community to enable biodiversity
sharing. A community of developers that have experience with biodiversity standards should be identified
and promoted to assist in enabling biodiversity
resources to join the network of BDHC. In general
these developers should be available as consultants for
funded projects and even included in the original grant
applications. This community should also consider a
level of overhead funded work to help enable data
resources that lack a replication strategy to join the network. A working example of this can be found in tasks
groups such as the GBIF/TDWG joint multimedia

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

resources task group, which is working to evaluate and
share standards for multimedia resources relevant to
biodiversity [116].
Industry engagement. Industry has shown, in the
case of services such as Amazon’s Public Dataset project
[117] and Google’s Public Data Explorer [118], that
there is a great benefit in providing users with access to
large public datasets. Even when access to a public dataset is simple, working with that dataset is often not as
straightforward. Amazon provides a way for the public
to interact with these datasets without the onerous
groundwork usually required. Amazon benefits in this
relationship by selling its processing services to those
doing the research. Engaging industry to host data and
provide access methods provides tangible benefits to the
wider biodiversity informatics community, in terms of
its ability to engage users in developing services on top
of the data, with dramatically lower barriers to entry
than traditional methods, and from data archival or
redundancy perspectives.
4. Medium-term: establish hosting centers for biodiversity
data

Key players, such as institutions with access to appropriate infrastructure, should act in the medium term to
establish biodiversity data hosting centers (BDHCs).
BDHCs would mostly probably evolve out of existing
projects in the biodiversity data community. These centers will need to focus on collaborative development of
software architectures to deal with biodiversity-specific
datasets, studying the lifecycle of both present and
legacy datasets. Consideration should be made for these
data centers to be situated in geographically dispersed
locations to provide an avenue for load sharing of data
processing and content delivery tasks as well as physical
redundancy. By setting up mechanisms for sharing
redundant copies of data in hosting centers around the
world, projects can take advantage of increased processing power, whereby the project distributes their computing tasks to other participating nodes, allowing
informatics teams to more effectively use their infrastructure at times when it would otherwise be
underused.
When funding or institutional relationships do not
allow mutual hosting and sharing of data, and as a stop
gap before specialized data hosting centers become
available, third party options should be sought for the
backup of core data and related code. By engaging the
services of online, offsite backup services, data backup
can be automated simply and at a low cost when compared with the capital expense of backup hardware
onsite.
When mutual hosting and serving of data is possible,
geographically separated projects can take advantage of

Page 10 of 14

the low latency and high bandwidth available when data
are served from a location local to the user. For example, a project in Europe and a project in Australia who
both serve each other’s data will serve both projects’
data from the closest respective location, reducing bandwidth and latency complications when accessing the
data. The creation of specialized data archival and hosting centers, centered on specific data types, would provide for specialized archival of specific formats. For
example, with many projects hosting DwC archive files
within a central hosting center, the center could provide
services to maintain the data and keep it in a current
and readable format. By providing this service to a large
quantity of data providers, the costs to each provider
would be significantly lower than if the data provider
were to maintain these formats alone. Such centers
would host both standardized, specific formats and provide for a general data store area for raw data that are
yet to be transformed into a common format.
In establishing data hosting infrastructure, the community should pay attention to existing efforts in data
management standards and hosting infrastructure, such
as those being undertaken by the DataONE project, and
find common frameworks to build biodiversity data specific solutions.
Geographically distributed processing. The sheer
size of some datasets often makes it difficult to move
data offsite for processing and makes it difficult to conduct research if these datasets are physically distant
from the processing infrastructure. By implementing
common frameworks to access and process these data,
the need to run complex algorithms and tools across
slow or unstable internet connections is reduced. It is
assumed that more researchers would access data than
would have the resources to implement their own storage infrastructure for the data. Therefore it is important for projects to consider the benefits of placing
common processing frameworks on top of their data
and providing API access to those frameworks in order
to provide researchers who are geographically separated
from the data access to higher speed processing.
Data snapshots. Data hosting centers should track
archival data access and updates in order to understand
data access patterns. Given the rapid rate of change in
datasets, consideration needs to be given to the concept
of ‘snapshotting’ data. In a snapshot, a copy of the state
of a dataset is captured at any particular time. The main
dataset may then be added to, but the snapshot will
always remain static, thereby providing a revision history
of the data. An example use case for snapshotting a
dataset is an EOL species page. Species pages are dynamically generated datasets comprising user submitted
data and aggregated data sources. As EOL data are
archived and shared, species pages are updated and

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

modified. Being able to retrieve the latest copy of a dataset may not be as important as retrieving an earlier version of the same dataset, especially if relevant data have
been removed or modified. Archival mechanisms need
to take snapshotting into consideration to ensure that
historical dataset changes can be referenced, located and
recovered. This formalized approach to data stewardship
makes the data more stable and, in turn, more valuable.
Data and application archiving. Although some data
exist in standardized formats (for example xls, xml and
DwC), others are available only through application-specific code, commonly a website or web service with
non-standardized output. Often, these services will store
datasets in a way that is optimized for the application
code and is unreadable outside the context of this code.
Whether data archiving on its own is a sustainable
option or whether application archiving is also required
needs to be considered by project leaders. Applications
that serve data should have a mechanism to export
these data into a standard format. Legacy applications
that do not have the capability to export data into a
standard format need to be archived alongside the data.
This can be in a long-term offline archive, where the
code is simply stored with the data, or in an online
archive where the application remains accessible alongside the data. In both cases, BDHC need to store application metadata, such as software versions and
environment variables, both of which are critical to
ensuring that the application can be run successfully
when required. Re-hosting applications of any complexity can be a difficult task as new software deprecates features in older versions. One solution that BDHC should
consider is the use of virtual machines, which can be
customized and snapshotted with the exact environment
required to serve the application. However, such solutions should be seen as a stop-gap. It should be emphasized that a focus on raw data portability and
accessibility is the preferred solution where possible.
Replicate indexes. Online data indexes, such as those
from GBIF and from the global names index, provide a
method for linking online data to objects, in this
instance to names. Centrally storing the index enables
users to navigate through the indexes to the huge datasets in centralized locations. These data are of particular
value to the biodiversity data discovery process as well
as being generally valuable for many types of biodiversity research. It is recommended that these index data
be replicated widely, and mirroring these indexes should
be a high priority when establishing BDHC.
Tailored backup services. Given the growing quantity
of data and informatics projects, there is scope for
industry to provide tailored data management and
backup solutions to the biodiversity informatics community. These tools can range from hosting services to

Page 11 of 14

online data backup. These services would be designed to
deal with biodiversity-related data specifically. By tailoring solutions to the various file formats and standards
used in the biodiversity informatics community, issues
such as format obsolescence can be better managed. For
example, when backing up a mysql file or DarwinCore
archive file, metadata associated with that file can be
stored in the backup. Such metadata could include the
version of DarwinCore or mysql or the date of file creation. These data can be later used when migrating formats in the event of a legacy format becoming obsolete.
Such migrations would be difficult for a large number of
small projects to consider, so by centralizing this process a greater number of projects will have access to
such migrations and therefore the associated data.
5. Long-term: develop data discovery tools

The abundance of data made available for public consumption provides a rich source for data-intensive
research applications, such as automated markup, text
extraction, machine learning, visualizations and digital
‘mash-ups’ of the data [119]. As a long-term goal for the
GBIF secretariat and nodes, as well as biodiversity informatics projects, this process should be encouraged as a
natural incentive. Three such uses of these applications
are in geo-location, taxon finding and text-mining.
Services for extracting information. By extracting
place names or geographic coordinates from a dataset,
geo-location services can provide maps of datasets and
easily combine these with maps of additional datasets,
providing mapping outputs such as Google Earth’s [120]
kmz output. Taxon finding tools can scan large quantities of text for species names, providing the dataset with
metadata describing which taxa are present in the data
and the location within the data in which each taxon
can be found. Using natural language processing, automated markup tools can analyze datasets and return a
structured, marked-up version of the data. uBio RSS
[121] and RSS novum are two tools that offer automated
recognition of species names within scientific and media
RSS feeds. By identifying data containing species names,
new datasets and sources of data can be discovered.
Further development of these tools and integration of
this technology into web crawling software will pave the
way for automated discovery of online biodiversity data
that might benefit from being included in the recommended network of biodiversity data stores. The development of web services and APIs on top of datasets and
the investment in informatics projects that harvest and
remix data should all be encouraged, both as a means to
enable discovery within existing datasets and as an
incentive for data owners to publish their data publicly.
GBIF, funding agencies and biodiversity informatics projects should extend existing tools while developing and

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

promoting new tools that can be used to enable data
discovery. The community should develop a central registry of such tools and, where practical, provide hosting
for these tools at data hosting centers.
Services to enable data push. As new data are published, there is a lag between the publication time and
the harvesting of this data by other services, such as
EOL or Google. Furthermore, even after articles are
published, data are in most cases available only in
HTML format, with the underlying databases rendered
inaccessible. Development of services to allow new data
to be ‘pushed’ to online repositories should be investigated, as this would make the new data available for
harvesting by data aggregation services and data hosting
centers. Once the data are discovered they can then be
further distributed via standardized APIs, removing this
burden from the original data provider.
Once data aggregators discover new data, they should
cache the data and include them in their archival and
backup procedures. They should also investigate how
best to recover the content provided by a content provider should the need arise. The EOL project follows this
recommended practice and includes this caching functionality. This allows EOL to serve aggregated data
where the source data are unavailable, while at the same
time providing the added benefit of becoming a redundant back-up of many projects’ data. This is an invaluable resource should a project suffer catastrophic data
loss or go offline.

Conclusion
As the biodiversity data community grows and standards
development and access to affordable infrastructure is
made available, some of the above-mentioned challenges
will be met in due course. However, the importance of
the data and the real risk of data loss suggest that these
challenges and recommendations must be faced sooner
rather than later by key players in the community. A
generic data hosting infrastructure that is designed for a
broader scientific scope than biodiversity data may also
have a role in access and preservation of biodiversity
data. Indeed, the more widespread the data becomes,
the safer it will be. However, the community should
ensure that the infrastructure and mechanisms it uses
are specific enough to biodiversity datasets that they
meet both the short-term and long-term needs of the
data and community. As funding agencies requiring data
management plans becomes more widespread, the biodiversity informatics community will become more
attuned to the concepts discussed here.
As the community evolves to take a holistic and collective position on data preservation and access, it will
find new avenues for collaboration, data discovery and
data re-use, all of which will improve the value of their

Page 12 of 14

data. The community needs to recognize and proactively encourage this evolution by developing a shared
understanding of what is needed to ensure the preservation of biodiversity data and then acting on the
resulting requirements. We see the recommendations
laid out in this paper as a step towards that shared
understanding.
Acknowledgments
This article has been published as part of BMC Bioinformatics Volume 12
Supplement 15, 2011: Data publishing framework for primary biodiversity
data. The full contents of the supplement are available online at http://www.
biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12?issue=S15. Publication of the supplement
was supported by the Global Biodiversity Information Facility.
Author details
1
Center for Library and Informatics, Woods Hole Marine Biological
Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA. 2Encyclopedia of Life, Center for
Library and Informatics, Woods Hole Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods
Hole, MA 02543, USA. 3Center for Biodiversity Informatics (CBI), Missouri
Botanical Garden, St Louis, MO 63119, USA. 4Center for Biology and Society,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 15 December 2011
References
1. Scholes RJ, Mace GM, Turner W, Geller GN, Jürgens N, Larigauderie A,
Muchoney D, Walther BA, Mooney HA: Towards a global biodiversity
observing system. Science 2008, 321:1044-1045.
2. Güntsch A, Berendsohn WG: Biodiversity research leaks data. Create the
biodiversity data archives! In Systematics 2008 Programme and Abstracts,
Göttingen 2008. Göttingen: Göttingen University Press;Gradstein SR, Klatt S,
Normann F, Weigelt P, Willmann R, Wilson R 2008:.
3. Gray J, Szalay AS, Thakar AR, Stoughton C, Vandenberg J: Online Scientific
Data Curation, Publication, and Archiving. 2002 [http://research.microsoft.
com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?id=64568].
4. Whitlock MC, McPeek MA, Rausher MD, Rieseberg L, Moore AJ: Data
archiving. Am Nat 2010, 175:145-146.
5. Global Biodiversity Information Facility Data Portal. [http://data.gbif.org].
6. Encyclopedia of Life. [http://eol.org].
7. GBIF: Data Providers. [http://data.gbif.org/datasets/providers].
8. Encyclopedia of Life: Content Partners. [http://eol.org/content_partners].
9. ScratchPads. [http://scratchpads.eu].
10. LifeDesks. [http://www.lifedesks.org/].
11. Heidorn PB: Shedding light on the dark data in the long tail of science.
Library Trends 2008, 57:280-299.
12. Digital Preservation Coalition. [http://www.dpconline.org].
13. Library of Congress Digital Preservation. [http://www.digitalpreservation.
gov].
14. Image Permanence Institute. [https://www.imagepermanenceinstitute.org].
15. The Dataverse Network Project. [http://thedata.org].
16. DataCite. [http://datacite.org].
17. Digital Curation Centre. [http://www.dcc.ac.uk].
18. GenBank. [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/].
19. DNA Data Bank of Japan. [http://www.ddbj.nig.ac.jp].
20. European Molecular Biology Laboratory Nucleotide Sequence Database.
[http://www.ebi.ac.uk/embl].
21. The US Long Term Ecological Research Network. [http://www.lternet.edu/
].
22. Klump J: Criteria for the trustworthiness of data-centres. D-Lib Magazine
2011, doi:10.1045/january2011-klump.
23. Zins C: Conceptual approaches for defining data, information, and
knowledge. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology 2007, 58:479-493.

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

24. IPT Architecture PDF. [http://code.google.com/p/gbif-providertoolkit/
downloads/detail?name=ipt-architecture_1.1.pdf&can=2&q=IPT
+Architecture].
25. Doolan J: Proposal for a Simplified Structure for Emu.[http://www.
kesoftware.com/downloads/EMu/UserGroupMeetings/2005%20North%
20American/john%20doolan_SimplifiedStructure.pps].
26. Pyle R: Taxonomer: a relational data model for managing information
relevant to taxonomic research. PhyloInformatics 2004, 1:1-54.
27. International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (Vienna Code) adopted by
the seventeenth International Botanical Congress Vienna, Austria, July
2005. Ruggell, Liechtenstein: Gantner Verlag;McNeill J, Barrie F, Demoulin V,
Hawksworth D, Wiersema, J 2006:.
28. Flickr. [http://flickr.com].
29. Systema Dipterorum. [http://diptera.org].
30. Index Nominum Algarum Bibliographia Phycologica Universalis. [http://
ucjeps.berkeley.edu/INA.html].
31. International Plant Names Index. [http://ipni.org].
32. Index Fungorum. [http://indexfungorum.org].
33. Catalog of Fishes. [http://research.calacademy.org/ichthyology/catalog].
34. Berners-Lee T, Hendler J, Lassila O: The Semantic Web. Sci Am 2001, 29.
35. Hymenoptera Anatomy Ontology. [http://hymao.org].
36. TaxonConcept. [http://lod.taxonconcept.org].
37. Patterson DJ, Cooper J, Kirk PM, Remsen DP: Names are key to the big
new biology. Trends Ecol Evol 2010, 25:686-691.
38. Catalogue of Life. [http://www.catalogueoflife.org].
39. World Register of Marine Species. [http://marinespecies.org].
40. Integrated Taxonomic Information System. [http://itis.gov].
41. Index to Organism Names. [http://organismnames.com].
42. Global Names Index. [http://gni.globalnames.org].
43. uBio. [http://ubio.org].
44. Natural History Museum Collections. [http://nhm.ac.uk/research-curation/
collections].
45. Smithsonian Museum of Natural History: Search Museum Collection
Records. [http://collections.nmnh.si.edu].
46. Biodiversity Heritage Library. [http://biodiversitylibrary.org].
47. Myco Bank. [http://www.mycobank.org].
48. Fishbase. [http://fishbase.org].
49. Missouri Botanical Garden. [http://mobot.org].
50. Atlas of Living Australia. [http://ala.org.au].
51. Wikipedia. [http://wikipedia.org].
52. BBC Nature Wildlife. [http://bbc.co.uk/wildlifefinder].
53. iSpot. [http://ispot.org.uk].
54. iNaturalist. [http://inaturalist.org].
55. Artportalen. [http://artportalen.se].
56. Nationale Databank Flora en Fauna. [https://ndff-ecogrid.nl/].
57. Mushroom Observer. [http://mushroomobserver.org].
58. eBird. [http://ebird.org].
59. BugGuide. [http://bugguide.net].
60. National Center for Biotechnology Information Taxonomy. [http://ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy].
61. Tree of Life Web Project. [http://tolweb.org].
62. Interim Register of Marine and Nonmarine Genera. [http://www.obis.org.
au/irmng/].
63. TreeBASE. [http://treebase.org].
64. PhylomeDB. [http://phylomedb.org].
65. Sustainable Digital Data Preservation and Access Network Partners
(DataNet). [http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=503141].
66. Data Conservancy. [http://www.dataconservancy.org].
67. DataONE. [http://dataone.org].
68. National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
[http://noaa.gov].
69. Preliminary Principles and Guidelines for Archiving Environmental and
Geospatial Data at NOAA: Interim Report by Committee on Archiving
and Accessing Environmental and Geospatial Data at NOAA. USA:
National Research Council; 2006.
70. Hunter J, Choudhury S: Semi-automated preservation and archival of
scientific data using semantic grid services. In Proceedings of the Fifth IEEE
International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid - Volume 01
(CCGRID ‘05). Volume 1. Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society;
2005:160-167.
71. Bittorrent. [http://www.bittorrent.com/].

Page 13 of 14

72. Langille MGI, Eisen JA: BioTorrents: a file sharing service for scientific
data. PLoS ONE 2010, 5:e10071[http://www.plosone.org/article/info:doi/
10.1371/journal.pone.0010071].
73. BioTorrents. [http://www.biotorrents.net/faq.php].
74. OpenURL. [http://www.exlibrisgroup.com/category/sfxopenurl].
75. BHL OpenURL Resolver Help. [http://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/
openurlhelp.aspx].
76. Open Archives Initiative. [http://www.openarchives.org/].
77. CiteBank. [http://citebank.org/].
78. LOCKSS. [http://lockss.stanford.edu/lockss/Home].
79. OAIS. [http://lockss.stanford.edu/lockss/OAIS].
80. Distributed Generic Information Retrieval (DiGIR). [http://digir.sourceforge.
net].
81. Biological Collection Access Services. [http://BioCASE.org].
82. ABCD Schema 2.06 - ratified TDWG Standard. [http://www.bgbm.org/
tdwg/CODATA/Schema/].
83. The Big Dig. [http://bigdig.ecoforge.net].
84. List of BioCASE Data Sources. [http://www.BioCASE.org/whats_BioCASE/
providers_list.cfm].
85. Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2). [http://aws.amazon.com/
ec2/].
86. OpenSSH. [http://www.openssh.com/].
87. Apache Hadoop. [http://hadoop.apache.org/].
88. Dean J, Ghemawat S: MapReduce: simplified data processing on large
clusters. OSDI’04: Sixth Symposium on Operating System Design and
Implementation 2004 [http://labs.google.com/papers/mapreduce.html].
89. Hadoop on Amazon EC2 to generate Species by Cell Index. [http://
biodivertido.blogspot.com/2008/06/hadoop-on-amazon-ec2-to-generate.
html].
90. Joint Photographic Experts Group. [http://jpeg.org].
91. W3C Portable Network Graphics. [http://w3.org/Graphics/PNG/].
92. Moving Picture Experts Group. [http://mpeg.chiariglione.org/].
93. Vorbis.com. [http://www.vorbis.com/].
94. Biodiversity Information Standards (TDWG). [http://www.tdwg.org].
95. Darwin Core. [http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/].
96. Darwin Core Archive Data Standards. [http://www.gbif.org/informatics/
standards-and-tools/publishing-data/data-standards/darwin-core-archives/].
97. TAPIR (TDWG Access Protocol for Information Retrieval). [http://www.
tdwg.org/activities/tapir].
98. Environmental Ontology. [http://environmentontology.org].
99. Kabooza Global backup survey: About backup habits, risk factors,
worries and data loss of home PCs. 2009 [http://www.kabooza.com/
globalsurvey.html].
100. Hodge G, Frangakis E: Digital Preservation and Permanent Access to
Scientific Information: The State of the Practice. 2004 [http://www.dtic.
mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?Location=U2&doc=GetTRDoc.pdf&AD=ADA432687].
101. National Institutes of Health. [http://www.nih.gov/].
102. National Science Foundation. [http://nsf.gov/].
103. Scientists Seeking NSF Funding Will Soon Be Required to Submit Data
Management Plans. [http://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?
cntn_id=116928&org=NSF&from=news].
104. Harvey CC, Huc C: Future trends in data archiving and analysis tools. Adv
Space Res 2003, 32:347-353, doi: 10.1016/S0273-1177(03)90273-0.
105. Leach P, Mealling M, Salz R: A universally unique identifier (UUID) URN
namespace. 2005 [http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt].
106. Uniform Resource Locators (URL). Berners-Lee T, Masinter L, McCahill M
1994 [http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1738.txt].
107. OMG Life Sciences Identifiers Specification. [http://xml.coverpages.org/lsid.
html].
108. Creative Commons. [http://creativecommons.org].
109. GitHub. [https://github.com].
110. Google Code. [http://code.google.com].
111. Bennett-McNew C, Ragon B: Inspiring vanguards: the Woods Hole
experience. Med Ref Serv Q 2008, 27:105-110.
112. Yamashita G, Miller H, Goddard A, Norton C: A model for bioinformatics
training: the marine biological laboratory. Brief Bioinform 2010, 11:610-615,
doi:10.1093/bib/bbq029.
113. Howe J: Crowdsourcing: Why the Power of the Crowd Is Driving the
Future of Business. Random House Business 2008.
114. Hsueh P-Y, Melville P, Sindhwani V: Data quality from crowdsourcing: a
study of annotation selection criteria. Proceedings of the NAACL HLT

Goddard et al. BMC Bioinformatics 2011, 12(Suppl 15):S5
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/12/S15/S5

115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.

Page 14 of 14

Workshop on Active Learning for Natural Language Processing.
Computational Linguistics 2009, 27-35[http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=1564131.1564137].
National Library of Australia’s Trove. [http://trove.nla.gov.au/].
GBIF/TDWG Multimedia Resources Task Group. [http://www.keytonature.
eu/wiki/MRTG].
Public Data Sets on Amazon Web Services. [http://aws.amazon.com/
publicdatasets/].
Google Public Data Explorer. [http://google.com/publicdata].
Smith V: Data Publication: towards a database of everything. BMC
Research Notes 2009, 2:113.
Google Earth. [http://earth.google.com].
uBIo RSS. [http://www.ubio.org/rss].

doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-S15-S5
Cite this article as: Goddard et al.: Data hosting infrastructure for
primary biodiversity data. BMC Bioinformatics 2011 12(Suppl 15):S5.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
