<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>The evolution and functional repertoire of translation proteins following the origin of life</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010, 5:15. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-15"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Aaron D Goldman, Ram Samudrala, John A Baross"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

Open Access

RESEARCH

The evolution and functional repertoire of
translation proteins following the origin of life
Research

Aaron D Goldman*1,2, Ram Samudrala1 and John A Baross2,3

Abstract
Background: The RNA world hypothesis posits that the earliest genetic system consisted of informational RNA
molecules that directed the synthesis of modestly functional RNA molecules. Further evidence suggests that it was
within this RNA-based genetic system that life developed the ability to synthesize proteins by translating genetic code.
Here we investigate the early development of the translation system through an evolutionary survey of protein
architectures associated with modern translation.
Results: Our analysis reveals a structural expansion of translation proteins immediately following the RNA world and
well before the establishment of the DNA genome. Subsequent functional annotation shows that representatives of
the ten most ancestral protein architectures are responsible for all of the core protein functions found in modern
translation.
Conclusions: We propose that this early robust translation system evolved by virtue of a positive feedback cycle in
which the system was able to create increasingly complex proteins to further enhance its own function.
Reviewers: This article was reviewed by Janet Siefert, George Fox, and Antonio Lazcano (nominated by Laura
Landweber)
Background
Proteins are the primary functional biomolecules of life.
Protein synthesis is directed by translating the genetic
code from informational RNA molecules. The RNA
world hypothesis proposes that a simple RNA-only
genetic system preceded the modern one. In the RNA
world model, RNA genes direct the synthesis of functional RNA molecules rather than proteins [1]. This system may have arisen from robust protometabolic
networks [2] and probably remained dependent on inorganic catalysts [3,4] and short prebiotic peptides [5] to
complement the limited functional capacity of RNA.
Early analyses of bacterial and archaeal genomes showed
that genes and gene clusters associated with transcription
and translation are indeed highly conserved while DNA
replication is not [6,7].
The onset of protein translation allowed RNA genes to
exert a greater degree of biochemical control by encoding
the synthesis of functional proteins. The modern transla* Correspondence: adg1000@u.washington.edu
1

Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Box 357242, Seattle,
WA, 98195, USA

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

tion system reflects this history as one of the few metabolic processes dominated by RNA [8-10]. An amino acid
sequence is encoded on messenger RNA (mRNA) and
translated to protein by transfer RNA (tRNA). The ensuing peptide elongation is catalyzed by functional RNAs in
the ribosome (rRNA).
Several lines of evidence suggest that the onset of protein translation predated the establishment of the DNA
genome [5,11]. The synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides,
for example, was probably not achievable under prebiotic
conditions and thus required enzymatically catalyzed
ribonucleotide reduction [5,12]. In contrast, the prebiotic
syntheses of both ribonucleotides [13] and amino acids
[14] can occur without catalysis from biological enzymes.
We note that many progressions for the origin of the
genetic system have been proposed [15], however the
strongest evidence supports the model described above
(and illustrated in Figure 1).
The modern translation system relies on proteins to
carry out several key functions. Ribosomal proteins play
an important role in supporting ribosome structure and
promoting translation. GTP-hydrolyzing regulatory factors help direct the initiation, elongation, and completion

© 2010 Goldman et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

Page 2 of 12

Figure 1 A popular model for the development of the genetic system. The RNA world hypothesis proposes that the first genetic system involved
informational RNA molecules that encoded the synthesis of modestly functional RNA molecules [1]. Protein translation developed during this period
leading to the RNA-protein world. Finally, protein enzymes produced deoxyribonucleotides through ribonucleotide reduction. The availability of deoxyribonucleotides led to the establishment of the DNA genome and the modern genetic system [5].

of translation [16,17]. Proteins are also required to charge
tRNA molecules with the appropriate amino acid [18]
and adjust their binding affinity to the ribosome [19].
Here we examine the early evolution of these proteins by
a survey of conserved structural architectures.
Modern proteins are composed of one or more architectural folds that can function and evolve independently
[20]. Protein and RNA fold modules are highly conserved
in evolution [21,22]. In contrast, the evolutionary convergence of two unrelated lineages toward a common fold is
thought to be rare [23]. Convergent evolution attributable
to functional similarities has been observed at the level of
local structural motifs, but in these cases the original
overall fold architecture is maintained [24]. Thus, nonhomologous proteins that share a common structural topology will most likely represent an ancient evolutionary
relationship that is too distant to be detected by sequence
similarity [25]. Recent work by Wang et al. [26] established a phylogeny of protein fold architectures based on
the distribution of these folds across all completed
genomes. We apply ancestry values derived from this
phylogeny to the experimentally determined fold architectures present in translation proteins.

Results and discussion
Structural evolution of translation proteins

We first observed and compared the structural evolution
of three functional categories of translation proteins:
translation regulatory proteins, ribosomal proteins, and
tRNA-related proteins. For a given functional category,
protein folds and their respective phylogenetic ancestries
were identified through a combination of data from the
Gene Ontology database (GO) [27], the ASTRAL database [28], and the Molecular Ancestry Network database
(MANET) [29]. These data are available as additional
online material (Additional file 1).
We observed the structural evolution of each category
of translation proteins by calculating its fold expansion as
a function of ancestry value. Nonredundant sets of all
folds found in all proteins were created for each category.
The phylogenetic ancestry value of each fold was calculated by Wang et al. [26] as the number of nodes from
that fold to the root node divided by the number of nodes
from the most recent fold to the root node. The ancestry
value can be considered a proxy for relative age where 0%
is the most ancient value and 100% is the most recent
value. Fold expansion is calculated for a given functional

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

category as the number of folds equal to or less than a
given ancestry value divided by the total number of folds.
Fold expansion can be considered a proxy for functional
sophistication, where 100% represents the current level of
sophistication. Figure 2 shows fold expansion plotted as a
function of ancestry and thus illustrates the increase in
sophistication over time for the three categories of translation proteins.
Three additional datasets are analyzed for comparison.
Recently, a superimposition of metabolic pathways was
used to identify a canonical TCA cycle [30] that is proposed to reflect the core metabolism of the Last Universal
Common Ancestor to all extant life (LUCA). The
enzymes that catalyze the supposedly ancient reactions
within this canonical TCA cycle were used to illustrate an
extremely accelerated fold evolution. In contrast, the full
set of immune system proteins was used to demonstrate a
slower evolutionary expansion given that this category is

Page 3 of 12

unlikely to have any relevance to the origin of life. The
overall expansion of the proteome is also shown.
All three categories of translation proteins show a significantly earlier structural expansion than the expansion
of the immune system proteins or the whole proteome
(Figure 2). tRNA-related proteins show the earliest structural expansion followed by translation regulatory factors, then ribosomal proteins. The earliest fold catalyzing
ribonucleotide reduction is found at an ancestry value of
19%. This ancestry value is used to mark the transition
from an RNA-protein system to a DNA-RNA-protein
system. Wang et al. [26] determined that the first folds
found only in a single taxonomic domain appear at 40%
ancestry. This ancestry value is used to identify the divergence of LUCA into the three domains of life. Thus we
are able to classify three periods of proteome development: the RNA-protein world (0%-19% ancestry), the era
of LUCA (19%-40% ancestry), and the era of modern biology (40%-100% ancestry). Quantitative features of fold

Figure 2 Protein fold expansion plotted as a function of ancestry. Fold expansion is calculated as the cumulative fraction of folds less than or
equal to a given ancestry value. Ancestry values for fold architectures were derived from the phylogenetic tree of all folds by Wang et al. [26] and are
equal to the number of nodes from a given fold to the root of the phylogenetic tree divided by the number of nodes from the most recent fold to the
root of the tree. Fold expansion can be considered a proxy for sophistication while ancestry value can be considered a proxy for evolutionary time.
For reference, the same analysis is performed on canonical TCA cycle enzymes, immune system proteins, and the whole proteome (see Results and
discussion). The first fold of a ribonucleotide reductase catalytic domain appears at 19% ancestry, while the first fold found in only one taxonomic
domain of life appears at 40% ancestry. We use these values to approximate ranges in ancestry value that correspond to the RNA-protein world, the
era of the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA), and the era of modern biology. These results reveal a rapid expansion of translation protein architectures before the divergence of LUCA and even before the establishment of the DNA genome. Quantitative features of these results are presented
in Table 1.

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

Page 4 of 12

expansion within these three periods are summarized in
Table 1. This analysis reveals an early development of
translation proteins and a particularly rapid development
of tRNA-related proteins during the RNA-protein world
and the era of LUCA.
Functional capacity of the primitive translation system

Nine out of the ten most ancestral fold architectures were
found in translation proteins. The molecular functions
imparted by these folds were annotated through a combination of data from the NCBI Conserved Domains Database (CDD) [31] and literature review. A summary of
these functions is presented in Figure 3. A summary of
the genes in which these folds are found and a fully annotated list of these functions are available as additional
online material (Additional files 2 and 3, respectively).
Nearly all of these folds converge on four basic functions:
nucleotide-phosphate transfer, RNA binding, protein
binding, and RNA modification. Amongst these folds are
two noteworthy catalytic domains. The most ancestral
fold (P-loop containing hydrolase) is ubiquitous in regulatory proteins as a GTPase domain [32]. The tenth most
ancestral fold (adenine nucleotide alpha hydrolase-like

fold) is found as the conserved catalytic domain of all
class I tRNA synthetases [33]. These ancestral folds were
likely present as single domain proteins early on in the
RNA-protein world. A model of translation protein functions during the RNA-protein world was developed using
these annotations (Figure 4).
The majority of these ancestral fold functions promote
the modern translation system through binding to other
components of the translation apparatus. Five ancestral
folds are present as single domain ribosomal proteins
with the ability to bind RNA and other proteins (DNA/
RNA binding 3-helical bundle, Ferrodoxin-like fold, Flavidoxin-like fold, Ribonuclease H-like motif, and Oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide binding fold). Three ancestral
folds found in regulatory factors also have the ability to
bind RNA (DNA/RNA binding 3-helical bundle, Ferrodoxin-like fold, and Oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide
binding fold). In one case, the fold simultaneously binds
tRNA and mRNA (Ferrodoxin-like fold). In another case,
the fold simultaneously binds tRNA, mRNA, and rRNA
(Oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide binding fold). These
folds likely played an important role in stabilizing the

Table 1: Quantitative features of fold expansion curves presented in Figure 2.
ancestry ≤ 100%
(all protein folds)

41.5%

72.2%

100%

Regulation of translation

37.5%

50.0%

100%

Ribosomal proteins

25.0%

37.5%

100%

Canonical TCA enzymes

50.0%

85.7%

100%

Immune system proteins

18.2%

27.3%

100%

Whole proteome

6.5%

21.0%

100%

tRNA-related proteins

4.2%

16.7%

70.6%

Regulation of translation

Final fold

Protein category

ancestry ≤ 40%
(prior to divergence
of LUCA)

tRNA-related proteins

Statistic

ancestry ≤ 19%
(prior to DNA genome)

3.9%

12.0%

60.3%

Ribosomal proteins

2.5%

8.8%

62.1%

Canonical TCA enzymes

4.7%

18.0%

77.0%

Immune system proteins

0.4%

5.0%

35.1%

Whole proteome

0.5%

3.3%

40.3%

expansio

Area
under
curve

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

Page 5 of 12

Figure 3 A summary of functional annotation of the most ancestral translation protein folds. Nine of the ten most ancestral folds identified by
Wang et al. [26] are present in translation proteins. The specific functional roles of these folds converge on four general categories: high energy phosphoryl transfer, RNA modification, RNA binding, and protein binding. Exceptions are aminoacylation by tRNA synthetase and tRNA splicing by ribosomal protein S28e. Taken together, the functions imparted by these nine most ancestral folds represent all of the central protein functions in the
modern translation system (Figure 4). A summary of the genes in which these folds are found is available as Additional file 2. A detailed annotation of
functions imparted by these folds is available as Additional file 3.

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

Page 6 of 12

to another more recent network rather than the other
way around. Furthermore, these most ancient proteins
would probably have had a generalized function. Specification to a single network node would have come later in
the development of the proteome. In addition, the majority of these folds are represented by a number of domains
with disparate functions (see Additional file 3) and thus
are reasonably robust such that we can discount exaptation as having only a minor effect on our analysis.

Figure 4 A model of protein enhancement in the primitive translation system. The protein functions illustrated here are imparted by
the earliest translation protein fold architectures and are summarized
in Figure 3. A) The ancestor of the class I aminoacyl tRNA synthetase
(ARS) catalytic domain charges tRNAs with amino acids (lowest ancestry value = 5.7%). B) An ancestor of a noncatalytic ARS domain binds
tRNA anticodon and interacts with protein "A" during aminoacylation
of the tRNA (lowest ancestry value = 1.3%). C) Ancestors of RNA modification enzymes add small organic molecules to tRNA and rRNA to adjust mutual binding affinity (lowest ancestry value = 1.9%). D)
Ancestors of regulatory factor domains bind mRNA and tRNA to stabilize their interaction during peptide chain initiation and elongation
(lowest ancestry value = 1.3%). E) Ancestors of the regulatory factor GTPases drive peptide elongation forward and sensitize the ribosome to
codon-anticodon mismatches (lowest ancestry value = 0.0%). F) Ancestors of ribosomal proteins are able to bind rRNA and one another to
stabilize the primitive ribosome complex (lowest ancestry value =
0.6%). These functions were all present before 6% ancestry, indicating
that a robust translation system existed early on in the RNA-protein
world.

ribosome and coordinating the mRNA:tRNA:rRNA complex in the primitive translation system.
Many ancestral fold functions also contribute to the
fidelity of the modern translation system. In the modern
translation apparatus, codon-anticodon mismatches
cause the ribosome to take a suboptimal structural conformation and the elongation factor GTPase to hydrolyze
additional GTPs [19]. These alterations generally force a
mismatched tRNA to dissociate from the translation
apparatus without adding its amino acid to the peptide
chain. tRNAs are regularly modified by the addition of
small organic molecules in order to give each tRNA the
same binding affinity to the rRNA, thus assuring the
same proofreading potential for each amino acid [19].
The rRNA binding, GTPase, and RNA modifying functions imparted by these ancestral folds may have played
an important role in allowing the primitive translation
apparatus to prevent incorrect codon-anticodon binding.
It is possible that these results may be confounded by
the recent exaptation of translation protein functions
from an unrelated molecular network [34]. Given, however, that translation is a highly conserved and ancient
process [35], it is more likely that protein functions would
originate within the translation network and be exapted

Conclusion
This survey of translation protein folds demonstrates that
all of the major functions required for a stable and capable translation system were present very early on during
the development of the RNA-protein world. Our analyses
suggest that translation proteins underwent major evolutionary expansion well before the first species diverged
from LUCA and even before the DNA genome was established. The original RNA-only translation system
undoubtedly became increasingly efficient and accurate
due to enhancement by the peptides it produced. This
enhanced translation system would allow for the synthesis of more complex proteins. These superior proteins
could once again act on the translation system to further
improve its own functional capabilities. The initial onset
of translation could thus have produced a positive feedback cycle that accelerated its own evolution (Figure 5).
The transition from a primitive translation system to a
sophisticated one may have been not only rapid but also
deterministic.
Methods
Acquiring datasets

Fold architectures from translation proteins and reference category proteins were identified using the Gene
Ontology database (GO) [27,36] in combination with
hand annotation. GO results were filtered for proteins
with known structures entered in the Protein Data Bank
(PDB) [37,38]. The PDB IDs for each protein were crossreferenced with the 40% redundant ASTRAL database
[28,39,40] in order to identify the folds within each protein. The fold data were then cross-referenced with fold
ancestry values from the Molecular Ancestry Network
(MANET) database [29,41]. Separate datasets were created for three functional categories of translation proteins and three reference categories (see Results and
discussion). These datasets are available as Additional file
1. For each functional category, a nonredundant set of all
folds found in all proteins was created for fold expansion
analysis.
Analysis

Ancestry values were derived by Wang et al. [26] using
their phylogenetic tree of all protein folds. The ancestry

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

Page 7 of 12

Figure 5 A positive feedback loop mechanism for the early development of the translation system. At each evolutionary stage, the stability
and fidelity of the translation system is enhanced by the peptides it produces. This new superior translation system is able to synthesize proteins of
even greater functional capability that can, in turn, act on the translation system to further enhance its own functional capability. This mechanism may
have been a central driving force in the transition from the RNA world to modern cellular life.

value is equal to the number of nodes from a given fold to
the root of the tree divided by the number of nodes from
the most recent fold to the root of the tree. For each functional category, fold expansion was calculated as the
cumulative fraction of folds with respect to ancestry
value. That is, at a given ancestry value, the fold expansion is equal to the number of folds with an ancestry
value less than or equal to the given ancestry value
divided by the total number of folds in the functional category. Functional annotation of folds was performed by a
combination of NCBI Conserved Domains Database
(CDD) [31,42] searches and literature review.

List of abbreviations
ARS: Aminoacyl tRNA Synthetase; CDD: Conserved
Domains Database; GO: Gene Ontology; LUCA: Last

Universal Common Ancestor; MANET: Molecular
Ancestry NETworks database; PDB: Protein Data Bank.

Reviewer's report 1
Dr. Janet Siefert, Rice University, Department of Statistics, Houston, TX USA
Reviewer's Comments

1. Is the question posed new and well defined?
The question is very well defined. The question itself is
not new, just unsolved.
2. Are the methods appropriate and well described, and
are sufficient details provided to replicate the work?
The methods used by the authors are what makes the
approach to an old question relevant for investigation.
After the methods of Wang et al, [26] they utilize a com-

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

posite architectural protein motif phylogenetic approach
to place translational proteins and appearance of DNA
within the origin of life timeline provided by the Wang
etal efforts.
3. Are the data sound and well controlled?
The data is typical of extant genome content, annotation, and analyses. The critical assumption in this work is
that parsimony is an accurate model for tracking the evolution of protein fold expansion and reduction in current
sequenced genome architectures. As mentioned, this is a
specific application of the model and analyses performed
by Wang et al. [26]. Under these analyses conditions, this
seems to be a reasonable model. The level of resolution architecture and structure and presence or absence of
fold - is likely to be observed when major changes occur
as opposed to minor changes (eg as in sequence), and
should therefore likely to reflect a more parsimonious
path when using genomes for retrospection. Using the
protein fold data to determine the ancient history of
translation proteins represents sound data and date
under control.
4. Does the manuscript adhere to the relevant standards for reporting and data deposition?
The manuscript adheres to reporting and data deposition standards.
5. Are the discussion and conclusions well balanced and
adequately supported by the data?
The authors conclude that translation proteins are early
developing and that there was a particularly rapid development of tRNA protein prior to the invention and use of
DNA. They support their case through the results from
their analyses, the predominance of described "ancient
protein folds" in these translation proteins, and the identification of these folds in proteins inherent to ribosomal
functions including high energy transfer, RNA and protein binding and RNA modification. They provide an
alternate hypothesis to their conclusion involving speculation that some unknown molecular network might have
produced their results, but conclude that this is unlikely
given the universal and ancient nature of the translation
system this is unlikely.
6. Do the title and abstract accurately convey what has
been found?
The title and abstract are appropriate.
7. Is the writing acceptable?
The writing is straightforward and engaging to read. It
doesn't hurt that the subject and question while old, are
engaging in themselves.
I declare that I have no competing interests.

Reviewer's report 2
Dr. George Fox, Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX USA

Page 8 of 12

Reviewer's Comments

The contribution by Goldman et al. expands our understanding of the importance of the early development of
translation during the final stages of transition to the
modern post-LUCA world and is significant and pending
significant revision is worthy of publication. The authors
examine ribosomal components from the perspective of
fold ancestry using an approach that has previously been
pioneered by Gustavo Caetano-Anolles, Jay Mittenthal
and their colleagues [26]. In particular, the extent to
which the ten folds with the lowest ancestry scores are
associated with ribosomal components and functions is
examined. Of special interest is the reasonable speculation presented in which specific ancestry values are associated with the key transitions between the early RNA
World, LUCA, and modern biology. If these are reasonable values then one obtains significant insight to what
the status of things were at the time of these key transitions in evolutionary history. Although the paper is an
important contribution, it will require significant revision
in several areas. The most significant omission is supporting documentation. In particular, readers should be
provided with a list of which ribosomal components were
considered in each of the three categories, the folds they
contain and the ancestry value of those folds. This table
can be provided as supplementary material. The existing
supplementary material actually provides this information in a very indirect manner but the proposed table
would greatly simplify matters.
Author's Response

We have followed this request and have now made such a
table available as Additional file 1.
Reviewer's Comments

The paper creates, perhaps unwittingly, the impression
that ancestry values equate strongly with actual historical
age. The ancestry values are based on the phylogenetic
distribution of the fold and the extant to which the fold is
put into use in a variety of places, e.g. its expansion. However, the first peptides made by the primitive translation
system were likely relatively simple and hence perhaps
not amenable to "expansion" because they actually had
limited utility. Thus, for example, ribosomal proteins
such as L3 and L4 have folds that are seldom if ever used
elsewhere but nevertheless these proteins and hence their
folds are likely to be very ancient (see [43]). Because these
folds are universal among ribosomal proteins in all three
Domains of life, they will still get rather low ancestry
scores but will not necessarily be among the lowest where
they might actually belong from the historical perspective. Thus, the reader should be cautioned about this
potential limitation of the ancestry values.

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

Page 9 of 12

Author's Response

Author's Response

Actually, in the fold phylogeny created by the CaetanoAnnoles group that is used in this study, fold ancestry is
determined by the number of genomes in which a fold is
found rather than the number of times a fold appears in a
genome. Thus, such folds as described by Dr. Fox would
still be identified as ancient if they appeared in every
genome, even if only once per genome.

We followed this request and have bolstered our explanation of this analysis in both the Results and discussion
and Methods sections.

Reviewer's Comments

The figure entitled "A summary of functional annotation
of the most ancestral translation protein folds" is also
mildly problematic in that it sometimes tabulates function and sometimes specific components. Thus, for
example under ribosomal protein occurrence we find
"peptidyl transfer". This apparently refers to one of the rproteins near the PTC site (L2!?) but in fact none of the
proteins are thought to be involved with peptidyl transferase activity at all, which instead is widely held to be
associated with the large subunit rRNA.
Author's Response

This was a poor annotation that has been eliminated. The
original annotation was referring the observation that the
His229 of L2 promotes (but does not catalyze) peptidyl
transfer [44].
Reviewer's Comments

In other places, specific proteins are mentioned, e.g. "S6
binding". It would greatly simplify things if an additional
table were provided that indicated which ribosomal genes
were associated with each of these 9 low ancestry folds of
this figure. This additional table might partially overlap in
content with the other additional table requested above.
Perhaps the table suggested here would be in main manuscript and the other larger table in supplementary materials.
Author's Response

We have created this table and made it available as Additional file 2. This table is actually larger than Figure 3
because each fold is encoded within many different translation genes. It should be noted that most of these genes
encode several different folds. So, for example, a fold
found in an enzyme does not necessarily impart the catalytic function of the enzyme.
Reviewer's Comments

Other minor problems include (1) The manner in which
the figure entitled "protein fold expansion plotted as
function of ancestry" was obtained is rather confusing. A
stronger explanation is needed as to what data was used
to construct this figure and how it was utilized;

Reviewer's Comments

(2) The figure entitled "A model for the development of
the modern genetic system from the RNA world" is a simple recapitulation of the usual, though not necessarily
completely correct, view of a progression from the RNA
World, to a RNA protein-World to ultimately modern
organisms. This is not conceptually difficult, nor original,
and the figure contributes nothing new and therefore is
not needed;
Author's Response

We absolutely did not intend to take credit for this model
and cite several sources in which it was previously proposed. We opt, however, to keep this figure in the main
article as we feel its value as an illustrative tool broadens
the readership of the manuscript. We have altered the
introduction to both eliminate any confusion over the
credit for this model and acknowledge that other models
for the origin of the genetic system have been proposed.
Reviewer's Comments

(3) The discussion is unnecessarily vague in multiple
places. For example, in the second paragraph of the section entitled "functional capacity of the primitive translation system" we see the statement "Three ancestral folds
found in regulatory factors have the ability to bind RNA."
What are these 3 folds? There are several places in the
discussion where such useful additional information can
be readily provided;
Author's Response

We have amended this discussion and now list the specific folds to which we refer when making these statements.

Reviewer's report 3
Dr. Antonio Lazcano, Departamento de Biología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de México,
Distrito Federal, Mexico
Reviewer's Comments

This is a good, rather interesting paper that approaches
the issue of the relative antiquity of different component
of modern cells in a very original fashion. What the
authors have made a valuable contribution by estimating
the relative antiquity of basic cellular processes in the
absence of other types of evidence that could allow a precise dating. This approach is somewhat similar to the
estimates of relative ages determined by paleontologists

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

and is deeply rooted in evolutionary biology. I endorse its
publication, but would like to offer a few suggestions that
the authors and editors may want to consider.
This work has been written in a rather sober style that
may lead to some misunderstandings. Many would
object, for instance, to the claim that "Proteins are the
primary functional biomolecules of life", since the same
would apply to lipids, for instance.
Author's Response

Lipids have important functional roles in the compartmentalization of cellular components, the storage of
chemical energy, and intercellular communication. However, we do not agree that they stand on equal footing
with proteins as the "primary functional biomolecule of
life". Unlike lipids, proteins exhibit a broad range of functional activities and, via translation, are the direct result
of gene expression. In addition, the functional activities of
lipids described above are all produced, maintained, and
regulated by proteins.
Reviewer's Comments

The title, in fact, may reflect a slight confusion on what is
meant by the origin of life and the distinction between
this event and later processes that may be the outcome of
Darwinian evolution acting over protein-free, RNAdependent living systems.
Author's Response

While we prefer to view the origin of life as a process that
began with the formation of the solar system and ended
with the divergence of the Last Universal Common
Ancestor, the common view is that the origin of life was a
single event in time. We have altered the title to alleviate
any confusion caused by our alternate perspective.
Reviewer's Comments

Goldman et al make a rather splendid one-paragraph
summary of what may have been an RNA world dependent on inorganic catalysts and prebiotic polypeptides,
and that protein synthesis first evolved in an RNA world.
Indeed, as underlined by Kumar and Yarus [45], four of
the central reactions involved in protein biosynthesis are
catalyzed by ribozymes, and their complementary nature
suggests suggestive that they may have first appeared in
the RNA world. However, this is independent from the
proposal that translation predated the emergence of DNA
genomes. Moreover, while it is true that the elegant synthesis of pyrimidine ribonucleotides reported by Powner
et al. [13] has led to new understanding in the chemistry
of nucleobases under possible primitive conditions, the
appearance and accumulation of the polyribonucleotide
molecules required for the RNA world from a prebiotic
soup remains an open question. This issue is, of course,
further complicated by the chemical lability of RNA mol-

Page 10 of 12

ecules. The nature of the predecessor(s) of the RNA
world (if such predecessors actually existed) are completely unknown and can only be surmised.
Author's Response

Dr. Lazcano makes a good point that the prebiotic synthesis of RNA molecules is not requisite for the validity of
the RNA world hypothesis. What's more, it would be
hubristic to maintain that RNA synthesis in the RNA
world occurred exactly as demonstrated by any laboratory synthesis. That said, we only mention this work as
one of several independent lines of evidence supporting
the notion that RNA preceded DNA as the central
genetic molecule.
Reviewer's Comments

The paper by Goldman et al is strongly dependent on two
major assumptions. One of them is what the authors have
termed "ancestry value", and I find their approach valid.
The other major premise is that the earliest protein fold
involved in ribonucleotide reduction has an ancestry
value of 19%. In fact, the evolutionary conservation of
components of the translation apparatus, together with
that of other molecules involved in RNA metabolism [46]
supports the contention that proteins first evolved in systems in which RNA played a major role in catalysis. However, Goldman et al may want to consider that it has also
been suggested that DNA genomes predate the emergence of translation, i.e., that the evolutionary sequence
was actually RNA world -> a RNA+DNA world -> DNA/
RNA/protein world. While I personally consider this
unlikely, mention to this possibility should be given in the
text.
Author's Response

These points are well taken. An extensive review of all
proposed sequences for the origin of the genetic system is
beyond the scope of this article. We suggest Dworkin et
al. [15].
Reviewer's Comments

In contrast with other energetically favorable biochemical
reactions (such as hydrolysis of the phosphodiester backbone, or the transfer of amino groups), the direct removal
of the oxygen from the 2'-C ribonucleotide pentose ring
to form the corresponding deoxy-equivalents is a thermodynamically much less-favored reaction. This is a
major constraint that strongly reduces the likelihood of
multiple, independent origins of biological ribonucleotide reduction, a possibility that will raised by some. In
fact, although the demonstration of the monophyletic
origin of ribonucleotide reductases (RNR) is greatly complicated by their highly divergent primary sequences and
the different mechanisms by which they generate the substrate 3'-radical species required for the removal of the 2'-

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

OH group. However, sequence analysis and biochemical
characterization of RNRs from the three primary biological domains has confimed their structural similarities,
which speaks of their ultimate monophyletic origin. This
supports the contentions and conclusions made by Goldman et al., whose paper I strongly recommend for publication.

Reviewer comments on the final manuscript
Dr. Janet Siefert
This looks good to me and I agree to publishing as
revised.
Dr. George Fox
Fine with me. Really like Additional file 2.
Dr. Antonio Lazcano
I feel perfectly happy with the changes and comments
you have made. I would be very happy to see this paper
published as soon as possible.

Page 11 of 12

4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

Additional material
Additional file 1 Supplementary Data 1. Tab-delimited tables of all folds
from translation proteins with known structures organized by functional
category.
Additional file 2 Supplementary Table 1. A summary of all translation
genes within which the ten most ancient folds are encoded.
Additional file 3 Supplementary Data 2. The full list of functions
imparted by ancestral fold architectures summarized in Figure 3 including
complete references.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
ADG designed and implemented this study and wrote this manuscript. RS and
JAB assisted in the design of this study and the preparation of the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We thank B. Brazelton and K. Fontaine for critical discussions and reading of the
manuscript. This work was primarily supported by the National Science Foundation Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship awarded
through the Center for Astrobiology and Early Evolution at the University of
Washington. Additional funding came from the Whitely Graduate Student Fellowship awarded through the Department of Microbiology at the University of
Washington and the National Science Foundation Career Award DBI-0217241.

16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
Author Details
1Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Box 357242, Seattle,
WA, 98195, USA, 2Center for Astrobiology and Early Evolution, University of
Washington, Box 352192, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA and 3School of
Oceanography, University of Washington, Box 357940, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA
Received: 24 March 2010 Accepted: 8 April 2010
Published: 8 April 2010

28.

29.
30.

© 2010 Goldman et al; from: http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15
This is an Open Access licensee BioMed Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Biology Directavailable article distributed under the
article is 2010, 5:15

References
1. Gilbert W: Origin of life: The RNA world. Nature 1986, 319:618.
2. Copley SD, Smith E, Morowitz HJ: The origin of the RNA world: Coevolution of genes and metabolism. Bioorg Chem 2007, 35:430-443.
3. Lazcano A, Miller SL: The origin and early evolution of life: Prebiotic
chemistry, the pre-RNA world, and time. Cell 1996, 85:793-798.

31.

32.

Huber C, Wächtershäuser G: Activated acetic acid by carbon fixation on
(Fe, Ni)S under primordial conditions. Science 1997, 276:245-247.
Freeland SJ, Knight RD, Landweber LF: Molecular evolution: Do proteins
predate DNA? Science 1999, 286:690-692.
Siefert JL, Martin KA, Abdi F, Widger WR, Fox GE: Conserved gene clusters
in bacterial genomes provide further support for the primacy of RNA.
J Mol Evol 1997, 45:467-472.
Olsen GJ, Woese CR: Archaeal genomics: An overview. Cell 1997,
89:991-994.
Cech TR: The ribosome is a ribozyme. Science 2000, 289:878-879.
Williamson JR: After the ribosome structures: How are the subunits
assembled? RNA 2003, 9:165-167.
Korostelev A, Noller HF: The ribosome in focus: new structures bring
new insights. TRENDS Biochem Sci 2007, 32:434-441.
Brack A: From interstellar amino acids to prebiotic catalytic peptides: A
review. Chem Biodiv 2007, 4:665-679.
Reichard P: From RNA to DNA, why so many ribonucleotide reductases.
Science 1993, 260:1773-1777.
Powner MW, Gerland B, Sutherland JD: Synthesis of activated pyrimidine
ribonucleotides in prebiotically plausible conditions. Nature 2009,
459:239-242.
Higgs PG, Pudritz RE: A thermodynamic basis for prebiotic amino acid
synthesis and the nature of the first genetic code. Astrobiology 2009,
9:483-490.
Dworkin JP, Lazcano A, Miller SL: The roads to and from the RNA world. J
Theoret Biol 2003, 222:127-134.
Proud CG: Peptide-chain elongation in eukaryotes. Mol Biol Rep 1994,
19:161-170.
Nyborg J, Liljas A: Protein biosynthesis: Structural studies of the
elongation cycle. FEBS Lett 1998, 430:95-99.
Pouplana LR, Schimmel P: Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases: Potential
markers of genetic code development. TRENDS Biochem Sci 2001,
26:591-596.
Daviter T, Murphy FV IV, Ramakrishnan V: A Renewed focus on transfer
RNA. Science 2005, 308:1123-1124.
Sonnhammer ELL, Kahn D: Modular arrangement of proteins as inferred
from analysis of homology. Protein Sci 1994, 3:482-492.
Riley M, Labedan B: Protein evolution viewed through Escherichia coli
protein sequences: Introducing the notion of a structural segment of
homology, the module. J Mol Biol 1997, 268:857-868.
Ancel LW, Fontana W: Plasticity, evolvability, and modularity in RNA. J
Exp Zool 2000, 288:242-283.
Wang M, Caetano-Anollés G: The evolutionary mechanics of domain
organization in proteomes and the rise of modularity in the protein
world. Structure 2009, 17:66-78.
Petrey D, Fischer M, Honig B: Structural relationships among proteins
with different global topologies and their implications for function
annotation strategies. Proc Nat Acad Sci 2009, 106:17377-17382.
Caetano-Anollés G, Wang M, Caetano-Anollés D, Mittenthal JE: The origin,
evolution and structure of the protein world. Biochem J 2009,
417:621-637.
Wang M, Yafremava LS, Caetano-Anollés D, Mittenthal JE, Ceatano-Anollés
G: Reductive evolution of architectural repertoires in proteomes and
the birth of the tripartite world. Genome Res 2007, 17:1572-1585.
Gene Ontology Consortium: Gene ontology: Tool for the unification of
biology. Nat Genet 2000, 25:25-29.
Andreeva A, Howorth D, Chandonia J-M, Brenner SE, Hubbard TJP,
Chothia C, Murzin AG: Data growth and its impact on the SCOP
database: New developments. Nucleic Acids Res 2008, 36:D419-D425.
Kim HS, Mittenthal JE, Caetano-Anolles G: MANET: tracing evolution of
protein architecture in metabolic networks. BMC Bioinf 2006, 7:351.
Srinivasan V, Morowitz HJ: The canonical network of autotrophic
intermediary metabolism: minimal metabolome of a reductive
chemoautotroph. Biol Bull 2009, 216:126-130.
Marchler-Bauer A, Anderson JB, Chitsaz F, et al.: CDD: specific functional
annotation with the Conserved Domain Database. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, 37:D205-D210.
Sprang SR: G protein mechanisms: Insights from structural analysis.
Annu Rev Biochem 1997, 66:639-678.

Goldman et al. Biology Direct 2010, 5:15
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/15

33. Buechter DD, Schimmel P: Aminoacylation of RNA minihelices:
Implications for tRNA synthetase structural design and evolution. Crit
Rev Biochem Mol Biol 1993, 28:309-322.
34. Yamada T, Bork P: Evolution of biomolecular networks - lessons from
metabolic and protein interactions. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009,
10:791-803.
35. Olsen GJ, Woese CR: Ribosomal RNA: A key to phylogeny. The FASEB
journal 1997, 7:113-123.
36. Gene Ontology Database [http://www.geneontology.org/]
37. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H,
Shindyalov IN, Bourne PE: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000,
28:235-242.
38. Protein Data Bank [http://www.rcsb.org/]
39. Murzin AG, Brenner SE, Hubbard T, Chothia C: SCOP: A structural
classification of proteins database for the investigation of sequences
and structures. J Mol Biol 1995, 247:536-540.
40. ASTRAL Compendium [http://astral.berkeley.edu/]
41. Molecular Ancestry Networks Database [http://manet.illinois.edu/]
42. NCBI Conserved Domains Database [http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Structure/cdd/cdd.shtml]
43. Fox GE, Naik AK: The Evolutionary History of the Translation Machinery.
The Genetic Code and the Origin of Life 2004:92-102.
44. Diedrich G, Spahn CMT, Stelzl U, Schäfer MA, Wooten T, Bochkariov DE,
Cooperman BS, Traut RR, Nierhaus KH: Ribosomal protein L2 is involved
in the association of the ribosomal subunits, tRNA binding to A and P
sites and peptidyl transfer. EMBO J 2000, 19:5241-5250.
45. Kumar RK, Yarus M: RNA-catalyzed amino acid activation. Biochem 2001,
40:6998-7004.
46. Becerra A, Delaye L, Islas S, Lazcano A: The Very Early Stages of Biological
Evolution and the Nature of the Last Common Ancestor of the Three
Major Cell Domains. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2007, 38:361-379.
doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-5-15
Cite this article as: Goldman et al., The evolution and functional repertoire
of translation proteins following the origin of life Biology Direct 2010, 5:15

Page 12 of 12

</pre>
</body>
</html>
