<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Selective transmission of R5 HIV-1 variants: where is the gatekeeper?</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9:S6. doi:10.1186/1479-5876-9-S1-S6"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jean-Charles Grivel"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

REVIEW

Open Access

Selective transmission of R5 HIV-1 variants:
where is the gatekeeper?
Jean-Charles Grivel1, Robin J Shattock2, Leonid B Margolis1*

Abstract
To enter target cells HIV-1 uses CD4 and a coreceptor. In vivo the coreceptor function is provided either by CCR5
(for R5) or CXCR4 (for X4 HIV-1). Although both R5 and X4 HIV-1 variants are present in body fluids (semen, blood,
cervicovaginal and rectal secretions), R5 HIV-1 appears to transmit infection and dominates early stages of HIV
disease. Moreover, recent sequence analysis of virus in acute infection shows that, in the majority of cases of transmission, infection is initiated by a single virus. Therefore, the existence of a “gatekeeper” that selects R5 over X4
HIV-1 and that operates among R5 HIV-1 variants has been suggested. In the present review we consider various
routes of HIV-transmission and discuss potential gatekeeping mechanisms associated with each of these routes.
Although many mechanisms have been identified none of them explains the almost perfect selection of R5 over
X4 in HIV-1 transmission. We suggest that instead of one strong gatekeeper there are multiple functional gatekeepers and that their superimposition is sufficient to protect against X4 HIV-1 infection and potentially select
among R5 HIV-1 variants. In conclusion, we propose that the principle of multiple barriers is more general and not
restricted to protection against X4 HIV-1 but rather can be applied to other phenomena when one factor has a
selective advantage over the other(s). In the case of gatekeepers for HIV-1 transmission, the task is to identify them
and to decipher their molecular mechanisms. Knowledge of the gatekeepers‘ localization and function may enable
us to enhance existing barriers against R5 transmission and to erect the new ones against all HIV-1 variants.
Introduction
To fuse with the membranes of target cells, human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) uses as receptors two plasma membrane molecules, CD4 and a second one that for historical reasons is called a
“coreceptor” [1-3]. For HIV-1 the coreceptor function
can be provided by two different receptors, C-C chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5) or C-X-C chemokine
receptor type 4 (CXCR4), these have a normal physiological function serving as chemokine receptors (cytokines). HIV-1 variants that use the CCR5 coreceptor are
called R5, those that use CXCR4 are called X4, whilst
those that can use both are designated R5X4 (or dual
tropic) [4]. Although both R5 and X4 HIV-1 variants
are present in body fluids (semen, blood, cervicovaginal
and rectal secretions), with a few exceptions R5 HIV-1
appears to transmit infection and dominate the early
stages of HIV disease whilst X4 HIV-1 evolves at later
* Correspondence: margolis@helix.nih.gov
1
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

stages. If and when this evolution takes place, it is associated with a more rapid loss of CD4 T cells and accelerated progression to the acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) (reviewed in [5]).
Until recently it was not clear whether X4 evolves
from transmitted R5 as a result of env mutations, or
that X4 was initially transmitted but its replication was
restricted during the early stages of the HIV disease.
Recent genetic studies of HIV-1 variants at the earliest
stages of HIV-1 infection have enabled researchers to
reconstruct the HIV-1 variants that were initially transmitted [6,7], known as transmitted/founder virus (TF
virus). These studies confirmed that only R5, and in a
few instances R5X4 HIV-1, but not X4 HIV-1 are transmitted. Therefore, it is reasonable to suggest the existence of a “gatekeeper” that nearly always selects
transmission of R5 over X4 HIV-1.
Such a gatekeeping phenomenon may not only select
R5 over X4 but may operate among R5 HIV-1 variants
as well. Recent studies on TF virus indicate that, in the
majority of cases, infection is transmitted by a single R5
viral isolate [6,7]. It was hypothesized that these

© 2010 Grivel et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

transmitted R5 virions may have subtle differences that
provide advantages for transmission over the majority of
R5 virus in biological fluids. If so the gatekeeping
mechanism may be even more selective than previously
anticipated.
Understanding the scope of potential gatekeeping
mechanisms is important not only from the point of
view of basic science but also for practical reasons.
Indeed, if only selected HIV-1 viruses can transmit
infection, microbicides (or preventive vaccines) should
specifically target these particular variants, provided that
such a strategy will not allow transmission of other
HIV-1 isolates. Also, understanding the molecular
mechanisms of the selective prevention of transmission
of some of the HIV-1 variants, may empower us with
the necessary knowledge to expand such gatekeeping to
those HIV-1 variants that transmit infection, creating
new preventive strategies.
Below, we briefly describe the history of the development of the HIV-1 coreceptor tropism concepts, various
patterns of HIV-1 transmission, and the possible
mechanisms of gatekeeping.

R5 and X4 HIV-1: Development of the concept
The controversial history of the discovery of HIV-1 has
been the subject of many reviews and has recently been
well described by Vahlne [8]. HIV-1 was first called
Human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV-III) or lymphadenopathy-associated virus (LAV) by two competing
groups. CD4 was shown to be the principle receptor for
HIV-1 following a series of observations. These
included: the observed decline in peripheral CD4+ T
cells in homosexual patients presenting a “newly
acquired cellular immunodeficiency syndrome” (AIDS)
[9], the ability of HIV-1 isolated from these patients to
infect CD4 T cells [10,11], the blockade of HIV-1 infection in vitro by anti-CD4 antibodies [12], and infection
of virus-resistant human cells following transfection
with the human CD4 gene (hCD4) [13]. However it was
found that mouse cell lines transfected with hCD4, were
not susceptible to infection. This observation suggested
that additional human factors were required for HIV-1
infection. The failure of hCD4 transfected mouse cells
to form syncitia (cell-cell fusion) with the HIV-1 producing human H9 cell line suggested that viral entry was
the rate limiting step [14]. Furthermore, the inability of
hCD4 positive squamous cell carcinoma (SCL1) and
astroglial cells (U87MG) to form syncitia with cells
expressing HIV-1 envelope demonstrated that infection
with the newly-discovered virus required secondary
receptor(s) in addition to CD4. These results led to the
identification of the HIV-1 co-receptors in 1996. Here,
we review some of the work that led to their discovery
and the understanding that distinct biological properties

Page 2 of 17

of HIV-1 in patients and in vitro are due to the existence of distinct viral strains using different cellular
coreceptors.
Envelope polymorphism meets clinical status

The envelope protein gp120 was identified as the viral
partner interacting with CD4, and the regions involved
in this interaction were mapped by site directed mutagenesis and antibody interference (for review see [15]).
Within two years of the discovery of HIV-1, the nature
of the interactions between CD4 and the viral envelope
gp120 as well as the genetic diversity of HIV-1 isolates,
especially in their envelope-encoding gene, were beginning to be understood [16-18]. However, there was no
biological correlate for this diversity. The development
of diagnostic-tests measuring the presence of the viral
core protein p24 [19], anti-HIV-1 antibodies [20-24],
and the activity of viral reverse transcriptase (RT) [25],
identified HIV-1 infected subjects with a wide spectrum
of clinical manifestations. The first attempt to stage the
clinical status of HIV-1-infected patients came from
Robert Gallo’s group [26] which proposed in 1985 a
6-stage classification of patients positive for gp41 antibodies. This work revealed a linear progression from
asymptomatic subjects to AIDS patients. However, the
lack of viral isolates at the time prevented any correlation of these different stages of disease progression with
in vitro biological properties of the virus. It was Eva
Maria Fenyo and her associates who first showed that
viruses isolated from asymptomatic patients were slow
to replicate in in vitro culture and yielded low RT levels,
while viruses isolated from patients at an advanced stage
of disease were fast to replicate and yielded high levels of
RT [27]. In this seminal work, the authors noted that
“The relation between the severity of illness and in vitroreplication potential of viruses suggests that during the
course of an infection, selection may occur for variants
that replicate efficiently in CD4 T cells”. This “fast/high”,
“slow/low” dichotomy of viral isolates constituted the
first attempt at classifying the biological properties of
HIV-1 and was later confirmed by other groups [28,29]
working with patients’ isolates and HIV-1 molecular
clones [30-34].
Extension of the classification of HIV-1 by additional
biological properties

Later work identified that many viral isolates from
chronically infected patients-induced syncytia, the fusing
of HIV-1-infected cells with other CD4 T cells in vitro
[35] . This was also detected in brain autopsies from
HIV-1 infected patients [36]. This gave rise to a second
HIV-1 classification based on the ability of certain viral
isolates to induce syncytia in culture. Tersmette et al.
[37] reported that all viruses isolated from AIDS

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

patients were able to form syncytia in vitro, whereas
more than 80% of viruses isolated from asymptomatic
patients were not. The former isolates were called syncytia-inducing isolates (SI) and the latter were called
non-syncytia inducing (NSI) isolates. SI isolates could be
easily differentiated from NSI isolates based on their
ability to replicate in H9 cells. The discovery that similar
isolates described earlier by Fenyo [27] also showed this
phenotype lead to adoption of the SI/NSI dichotomy as
an accepted classification for HIV-1 isolates [38-42].
The development of culture methods to differentiate
blood monocytes into macrophages susceptible to HIV1 infection [43] and the use of monocytic indicator cell
lines [44] paved the way to the adoption of yet another
classification of HIV-1 isolates based on their ability to
infect macrophages/monocytes. Isolates able to infect
these cells were called macrophage-(M)-tropic. Although
M-tropic HIV-1 isolates could not grow in T-cell lines
[45], they readily infected primary T cells [46].
As a result, viral isolates were then classified according
to their efficiency of replication (fast/high, slow/low),
their ability to induce syncytia (SI/NSI) in T cell-lines,
and their ability to replicate in T cell-lines or macrophages (T-tropic/ M-tropic). Most primary isolates irrespective of their rapid/high, syncytium-inducing
phenotype or slow/low, non-syncytium-inducing phenotype were able to infect both primary T cells and monocyte-derived macrophages in vitro, although with
unequal efficiencies [47].
Biological implications of the viral phenotypes

The ability of SI isolates, defined on PBMCs, to replicate
in lymphoblastoid T cell lines, H9, MT-2, and MT-4
[48,49], led to the interchangeable use of the terms “SI”
and “T- tropic”. Yet, already from the first report
describing SI viruses [37] it was clear that the two terms
were not interchangeable since not all SI isolates were
T-cell-line tropic. Later, the discovery of co-receptors
clarified this misconception.
The fact that fast-high, SI, T-tropic viruses were isolated at late stages of disease when patients showed
signs of immune suppression and had a declining number of CD4 T cells in their blood, lead to the notion
that these isolates were highly cytopathic [37,40,45,50].
In contrast, slow/low, NSI, M-Tropic viruses, isolated
initially from asymptomatic patients with no sign of
CD4 decline shortly after infection, were thought to be
less cytopathic. This notion also turned out to be
wrong. In clade B, T-cell-line tropic viruses are only
found in 50 % of patients who progress to AIDS
[39,49-51] . Furthermore, NSI viruses can be isolated at
all stages of HIV disease [39] and therefore caused CD4
T cell decline and disease progression in patients whose
viruses did not convert to SI. In addition, the apparent

Page 3 of 17

lack of effects of NSI viruses on CD4 T-cell depletion
was restricted to peripheral blood [52], while significant
CD4 T-cell depletion occurred in the rectal mucosa [53]
and duodenum in asymptomatic patients.
The quest for the co-receptors

Because infection of macrophages by M-tropic virus
could be blocked by anti-CD4 antibodies [54], and
because the cellular tropism of HIV-1 could be mapped
to specific regions of gp120 [55,56], it became clear that
this viral protein recognized the same receptor, CD4, on
the cell surface of both T cells and macrophages. However, it was proposed that secondary receptors differentially expressed on macrophages and T cell lines might
determine infection of these cells by T- and M-tropic
virus [57]. The search for these receptors was undertaken using multiple approaches as described above
[58-60]. The co-receptor for SI virus was identified by
the group of Edward Berger and colleagues [61] as a
7-transmembrane segment G protein-coupled receptor,
named “fusin”, This receptor was soon recognized as the
CXCR4 chemokine receptor for Stroma cell Derived
Factor-1 (SDF-1) [62,63].
The co-receptor for slow/low viruses also turned out
to be a chemokine receptor. This became clear in light
of a seemingly unrelated publication by Paolo Lusso et
al [64] showing that the CC-chemokines Macrophage
Inflammatory Protein (MIP)-1a, MIP-1b and Regulated
upon Activation Normal T-cell Expressed and presumably Secreted (RANTES) inhibited the replication of
M-tropic isolates but not T-tropic isolates. Three different groups [65-67] cloned the CC-chemokine receptor 5
(CCR5), which binds these three CC chemokines and by
linking all these studies together, several groups identified CCR5 as being the missing co-receptor for M-tropic
viruses [1-3,68]. Thus, in 1996, HIV-1 cellular tropism
had finally found a molecular basis: M-tropic viruses
(NSI slow/low) were shown to use CCR5 as a coreceptor
whereas T-tropic (SI, rapid/high) isolates used CXCR4
[69,70]. Dual tropic viral isolates and their derived
clones able to infect primary T cells, T cell lines and
macrophages were shown to use both CCR5 and
CXCR4 [71]. Although, other chemokine receptors were
shown to have HIV-1 co-receptor activity when
expressed in cell lines in vitro (see Berger et al [72]), it
seems that in vivo, only CCR5 and CXCR4 are used to
infect cells (with the possible exception of CCR8 [73],
and BONZO/STRL33 [74]), The importance of chemokine receptors in HIV-1 infection is demonstrated by (i)
an almost absolute [75] resistance to infection of individuals that have a homozygous mutation for CCR5 (delta
32) [76] (although, two cases of infection of such
patients by dual tropic CXCR4/CCR5 HIV-1 have been
reported [77,78]), (ii) slow disease progression in patient

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

heterozygous for this mutation [79], and (iii) the fact
that the switch from CCR5-tropic to CXCR4-tropic
HIV-1 is associated with a massive CD4 T cell depletion
and a rapid progression to AIDS. However without a
switch to X4, R5 HIV-1 variants may undergo mutations
that increase their pathogenicity in the course of HIV
disease [80].
A new classification for HIV-1

The discovery of chemokine receptors used by HIV-1
led to the establishment of a new classification of HIV-1
[4] which relies solely on coreceptor usage. As mentioned CCR5-using HIV-1 variants are called R5,
whereas CXCR4 using HIV-1 variants are called X4; variants that use both co-receptors are called R5X4. While
this classification has been widely adopted, it was also
recommended that the type of cells used to passage
viral stocks, such as T-cell line-adapted (TCLA) for
viruses passaged through a T cell line, should also be
indicated. The latter recommendation has somehow
been forgotten, which led to a challenge of this monoparametric HIV-1 classification [81]. Moreover, whilst
“dual-tropic” HIV-1 variants can utilize both CCR5 and
CXCR4 in transfected cell lines, they are often only able
to effectively use one of these two coreceptors in tissue
displaying either R5 or X4 mono-tropism [82]. Thus,
the widely-adopted, monoparametric classification of
HIV-1 variants may be modified in the future when
more is known about the mechanisms of HIV-1 transmission and pathogenesis.
A few questions answered

The discovery of HIV-1 coreceptors explained some of
the in vitro properties of HIV-1 and facilitated rigorous
analysis of their role in HIV-1 fusion. This analysis highlighted that all HIV-1 variants have the potential to
induce syncitia provided that the target cells express sufficient levels of CD4 and the relevant co-receptor used
by that virus. Indeed the reason M tropic viruses did
not induce syncytia in H9 and MT2 T cell lines was due
to the lack of CCR5 expression on these cells. Furthermore in contrast to the wide distribution of CXCR4
among different subsets of naïve lymphocytes, cells
expressing CCR5 constitute a small fraction of peripheral blood T cells limited to memory T cells [83]. In
lymphoid tissues CCR5 expression is also confined to a
fraction of memory T cells [84] that constitute less than
15% of CD4 T cells [85]. The low abundance of CCR5
expressing CD4 T cells in blood accounts for the apparent low cytopathicity of R5 viruses. However, for cells
expressing CCR5, the R5 variants were shown to be as
cytopathic as their X4 HIV-1 counterparts for CXCR4expressing CD4 T cells and were responsible for the
depletion of CCR5 expressing CD4 T cells [85].

Page 4 of 17

Accordingly, in the small intestine, where the majority
of mucosal T cells express CCR5, infection with CCR5tropic HIV-1 causes massive depletion of CD4 T cells
[53,86-89].
The individual variability in the abundance of CCR5expressing T lymphocytes [90] and macrophages may
determine whether an individual progresses to AIDS
with the dominance of R5 HIV-1 or undergoes a switch
to X4 HIV-1 that triggers accelerated progression of the
disease.

HIV-1 transmission R5 vs. X4: Gatekeeping
It seems that X4/R5 gatekeeping (that is prevention of
X4 HIV-1 from infecting and/or disseminating in the
human body at the early stages of HIV-1 infection)
belongs to a rare class of almost perfect biological phenomena. Among multiple reported HIV-1 transmission
events via sexual acts (between males and females or
between males) or through intravenous injection, at the
early stages of infection R5 HIV-1 was ubiquitously
found. Such precision suggests the existence of a near
perfect barrier that selects against X4 HIV-1 transmission. Where are these gatekeepers and what are their
mechanisms? There is no definitive answer, however we
discuss below potential mechanisms and points at which
selection may occur according to the different routes of
transmission .
Intra-vaginal transmission

World-wide the majority of HIV-1 transmission occurs
through heterosexual intercourse. Women have increasingly bourn the brunt of HIV infection mainly through
vaginal intercourse and this route of infection has been
the one most widely studied in various experimental
models. In vaginal infection genital mucosa serves as the
first port of entry for HIV-1 and the mucosal barrier is
probably one of the gatekeepers not only for X4 HIV-1
but for other HIV-1 variants as well [91].
In vaginal intercourse HIV-1 is ejaculated with semen
and transverse mucus that covers the mucosa of the
lower female genital track. To establish infection HIV-1
needs to access and infect target cells (lymphocytes,
macrophages, possibly dendritic cells (DC), and Langerhans cells (LCs) in particular) in the local mucosa, and
be transmitted to the draining lymph nodes where it
undergoes rapid replication before being disseminated
throughout the entire body. It is believed that a major
site for HIV-1 transition in the female genital tract is
the cervix, especially the endocervix and the transitional
zone, which are covered by a single-layered columnar
epithelium. Such a layer is less protective against HIV-1
than the stratified epithelia of the vagina [92,93],
reviewed in [94]. Also, the endocervix, together with the
transition zone, contains a high number of potential

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

cellular targets for HIV-1 [95]. However, HIV-1 genital
transmission to women with a congenital absence of a
cervix has been reported [96]. SIV has also been transmitted intravaginally to rhesus macaques after hysterectomy [95,97,98].
The fluid of the lower female genital tract which covers the genital epithelia provides the first potential barrier for the virus on its way to dissemination. Female
genital fluids are different in different parts of the genital tract: the vagina is covered by an exudate, which
enters through the stratified epithelia that cover this
organ. The barrier function of this fluid against HIV-1
has not been thoroughly studied. It is believed that vaginal stratified epithelia provides a significant mechanical
barrier to many viruses. Furthermore, the exudate is
increased with sexual arousal and therefore its composition may significantly change during sexual intercourse.
Nevertheless, virus can penetrate the superficial layers of
the stratified epithelium and this may be sufficient to
reach superficial Langerhans cells and CD4 T cells, and
would be enhanced by any micro or macro lesions in
this epithelium.
Higher in the genital tract, the epithelia are covered by
true mucus produced by cervical secretory cells. Mucin
is the main mucus component and in the endocervix it
is mainly a product of two genes: MUC4 and MUC5B
[99]. Mucus can protect underlying epithelia by two
mechanisms: decreasing HIV-1 infectivity via various
soluble factors present in it and/or by temporarily trapping virions in the protein mesh, thus slowing their
movement by several orders of magnitude compared
with water [100-103]. Since HIV-1 is a fragile virus and
cannot remain at normal temperature outside of cells
for a long time, its infectivity may be significantly
decreased if mucus slows viral penetration. Moreover,
during vaginal HIV-1 transmission the acidity of mucus
is decreased because of the mixture with alkaline semen.
This mixture is less viscous than pure mucus, and the
diffusion rate of virions in it is only 15 times slower
than in water [101]. Nevertheless, this slowing of HIV-1
penetration may be sufficient for significantly reducing
HIV-1 infectivity. Since semen contains not only free
virions but also lymphocytes that carry HIV-1 [98],
trapping these lymphocytes in mucus may also reduce
HIV-1 transmission by these carriers.
Chemical defense against HIV-1 is mediated by mucus
soluble factors, in particular by chemokines produced by
epithelial cells. In some experimental models epithelia
was shown to constitutively produce a CXCR4-binding
chemokine, SDF-1, thus selectively reducing X4-HIV-1
transmission [104,105]. Also, cervical mucus contains
beta defensins that may inactivate HIV-1 on its way to
the epithelia (for review see [106]). Defensins are
secreted by epithelial cells under the hormonal control

Page 5 of 17

of oestradiol and progesterone [107,108]. Some of these
defensins are more restrictive against X4 [58,109-112].
However, others do not significantly differentiate
between X4 and R5 HIV-1 [109,110]. Microbicidial
enzymes, surfactant proteins and complement present
in cervical mucus (see[94]), as well as other as-yet
unknown soluble factors observed in proteomics experiments [113], may contribute to the gatekeeping effect.
As a result, mucus and mucins suppress HIV-1 in inhibitory assays [114]. The two protective mechanisms of
mucus may work synergistically, as even temporary trapping of HIV-1 and HIV-1-infected cells provide a longer
exposure to the soluble factors present in mucus as well
as to anti HIV-1 antibodies that may have been generated in one of the partners.
Additional gatekeeping effects of mucus may be
affected by the difference in the surface charges between
R5 and X4 HIV-1. The V3 loop in gp120 of X4 HIV-1
has more exposed cationic charge than R5 HIV-1[115].
In principle, this may result in a stronger binding of X4
HIV-1 to the polyanionic mucin and a preferential clearance of these viruses, or at least impairment of their
infectivity. However, dilution of cervical mucus by
semen may make this effect negligible. The higher cationic charges of X4 HIV-1 gp120 may also make these
viruses more prone to bind to heparin sulphate proteoglycans that cover mucosal surfaces and thus may work
as a sink for these viruses [116,117]. However, these theoretical considerations regarding the difference between
X4 and R5 HIV-1 have to be tested experimentally.
Also, it has been shown that agrin, which plays an
important role in establishing viral synapses through
which HIV-1 can pass from one cell to another, binds
preferentially to R5 HIV-1[118].
Another level of complexity in vaginal HIV-1 transmission is that both mucus and cervical tissue characteristics are not constant but rather undergo changes
during the menstrual cycle. A window of infectivity at 7
to 10 days post-ovulation, when the defense mechanisms
are at a low level, has been identified [119].
Viral particles that go through the cervical mucus
reach the epithelial layer. The epithelial layer itself
seems to be an efficient mechanical barrier against HIV1 and other pathogens [95]. Also, epithelial cells of the
lower genital tract are not infected by HIV-1 in vivo.
Although these cells can express coreceptor molecules,
they do not in general express the HIV-1 receptor CD4,
The possible exception to this rule is the expression of
CD4 by uterine epithelial cells at the proliferative phase
of the menstrual cycle [120]. However, under laboratory
conditions infection of epithelial cells has been reported
[121], and a role in HIV-1 transmission has been
ascribed to them [122]. Nevertheless, it is believed that
for efficient infection it is necessary for HIV-1 to bypass

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

the epithelial layer. This most likely happens through
lesions that commonly occur as a result of various infections and probably environmental factors. Also, microlesions may be generated as a result of coitus [123].
Experiments with cervical explants and fluorescencelabeled HIV-1 showed that HIV-1 penetrates genital
mucosa similarly to inert particles, that is, via the gaps
between cells (T. Hope, personal communication).
When virus encounters and infects its first natural cellular targets, predominantly lymphocytes beneath or
within the epithelial layer, it may be efficiently disseminated in cell-associated form from cell to cell through
viral synapses which seems to be more efficient than
cell-free virus transmission [118,124,125]. This early
stage of HIV-1 transmission when few founding cells
are infected is critical for the further dissemination of
HIV-1 through the body [94]. Surprisingly, although R5
HIV-1 readily infects macrophages in vitro, the first
(founding) infected cells seem to be CD4 lymphocytes
[126].
To characterize HIV-1 targets in cervical tissue more
thoroughly, it is necessary to apply multi-color flow
cytometry. Recently a protocol of cervical tissue
dissociation into single cells that retain their antigenic
characteristics has been developed [127], thus enabling a
thorough analysis of cervical mucosal lymphocytes using
flow cytometry [128]. It was found that cervical tissue is
particularly rich in CCR5-expressing CD4 lymphocytes,
which make this tissue potentially more susceptible to
R5 HIV-1 infection than lymphoid tissue [128]. Accordingly, cervico-vaginal explants express a strong gatekeeping function: on average, dramatically more R5
HIV-1 is released from the ex vivo-inoculated cervicovaginal tissues than X4. Moreover, in a relatively small
fraction of tissues that were capable of replicating X4
HIV-1 a correlate was found: a higher presence of early
differentiated CD4 lymphocytes [128]. The relation of
this fraction to the gatekeeping function of cervical
tissue remains to be understood.
Earlier, it was reported that CD4+/CCR5+ cells are
consistently detected within the stromal papillae that
penetrate the epithelial layer; this location probably
makes them easy targets for HIV-1 [129]. Also, it was
reported that the levels of CCR5 mRNA in the cervix
were up to 10-fold higher than those of CXCR4 mRNA
[130]. However, opposite results have been also reported
[131]. The level of mRNA for surface antigens is not
necessarily translated into the level of expressed proteins. It was shown that cervical lymphocytes express
not only CCR5 but CXCR4 as well [128].
Beneath and within the epithelial layers are situated
DCs and LCs repectively, which may protrude their dendrites through the layer to the lumen. Normally, these
cells capture, and process antigens and deliver them to

Page 6 of 17

the draining lymph nodes where they present them to
T cells. In HIV-1 infection these cells may bind and
deliver HIV-1 from the lumen to the draining lymph
node. Although it was firmly established that cervicovaginal LCs are able to transfer HIV-1 in vitro, it is not
clear whether these cells can be productively infected in
vivo [132]. Nevertheless, they may represent one of the
significant elements of gatekeeping as these cells express
among other HIV-1-binding molecules, CD4 and CCR5
but not CXCR4 [133,134]. Also at various sites these
cells may have different levels of expression of various
HIV-1 coreceptors, providing gatekeeping for particular
viruses. Cells that, upon binding antigens or upon infection with a virus, are capable of moving out of the tissue
are collectively called migratory cells [135]. Such cells
consist of a heterogeneous population with very different features.
The entire list of such cells is not yet known. Their
infection with HIV-1 in cervico-vaginal tissue was
demonstrated using explants (see [136]). Macrophages
do express CCR5 [137] and are particularly susceptible
to R5 HIV-1 infection in vitro and ex vivo. Thus, they
could also play a significant role as gatekeepers against
X4 HIV-1, although in tonsillar explants macrophages
are infected by X4 viruses [138]. However, studies of
early events of infection in non-human primates with
SIV did not reveal infected macrophages [126]. Furthermore, TF virus appears to infect macrophages poorly.
Whether high expression of CCR5 and early macrophage infection with HIV-1 reflects the situation in
humans in vivo or represent an “artifact” from using isolates with high macrophage tropism in the explants system, remains to be clarified.
Thus, although cervical mucosa performs gatekeeping
functions, it is obvious that this performance is not perfect and that X4 HIV-1 can penetrate this barrier,
although much less efficiently than R5 HIV-1.
Penile transmission

Globally 80% of men acquired HIV-1 infection from vaginal intercourse, i.e. through the penis (see [136,139]).
This is also true when infection is acquired through
insertive anal intercourse. However, mechanisms of HIV1 acquisition through the penis are even less understood
than for vaginal transmission in women. Nevertheless, it
is clear that gatekeeping mechanisms operate for this
route of infection, since R5 HIV-1 also starts infection
and dominates its early stages in men.
During intercourse the penis comes into close contact
with the vagina and is bathed in vaginal fluid. Thus, it is
reasonable to assume that all the above-mentioned protective barriers that are associated with female genital
tract fluids and that protect cervical epithelia from viral
infection, including barriers that are selective for R5

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

HIV-1, protect penile epithelia as well. As with the vaginal route of infection, genital fluid may be the first
“gatekeeping” mechanism in penile infection. In the
course of vaginal intercourse, vaginal fluids are mixed
with (pre-) ejaculate. The latter increases mucosal pH
and also contains various soluble factors that may dramatically change the characteristics of the mucus.
Recently, it was reported [124] that such a mixture,
unlike each fluid separately, has an inhibitory effect on
HIV-1 infectivity. Whether this effect is different for R5
and X4 HIV-1 has not yet been determined.
After penetrating the mucus or the mixture of mucus
and semen, HIV-1 reaches the penile epithelium. What
part of the penis is the most vulnerable to HIV-1 transmission? Clinical trials performed over the last several years
have shown that circumcision greatly reduces the probability of penile HIV-1 transmission. Thus, the foreskin (or
other parts of penis that may be indirectly affected by foreskin removal) seems to play a significant role in transmission of HIV-1. The outer foreskin is heavily keratinized
and therefore is considered well protected against pathogen penetration. It was shown [124] in ex vivo experiments
with foreskin explants that it is indeed the case: HIV-1
does not penetrate the outer foreskin well. In contrast, the
inner foreskin and frenulum are covered with a much
thinner layer of keratin. Accordingly, in ex vivo experiments the inner foreskin was shown to be vulnerable to
HIV-1 penetration [124]. However, it was recently shown
that keratinization of the outer and inner foreskin is not
statistically different, and other mechanisms for the differential permeability of these two parts of the foreskin
should be considered [140].
During erection the foreskin is stretched out, revealing
its inner aspect, which becomes accessible both to cellfree HIV-1 in the vagina as well as to HIV-1-infected
cells that may be situated on the surface of the female
genital tract. Another factor that may make the foreskin
an important portal of HIV-1 entry is the abundance of
HIV-1 cellular targets. The entire foreskin is rich in various cells that constitute potential HIV-1 targets including: CD4 T lymphocytes, macrophages, and LCs
[133,139,141,142]. In ex vivo experiments and in autopsied tissues [139] infection was revealed in CD4 T lymphocytes and in LCs. However, in the outer foreskin
these cells are thought to reside beneath the highly keratinized epithelia and are less accessible for HIV-1. In
contrast, in the inner foreskin where the keratin layer is
thin, LCs are probably the first target cells that HIV-1
encounters. Here LCs are more abundant and nearer
the surface and thus cells are more likely to protrude
their dendrites through the epithelial layer towards the
outer surface.
Foreskin LCs seem to play a significant role in gatekeeping. In experiments with foreskin explants these

Page 7 of 17

cells selectively transfer R5 but not X4 HIV-1 to indicator cells. Another gatekeeping process may stem from
the fact that the average density of CCR5-expressing
cells in the inner foreskin is 10-fold higher than that of
CXCR4-expressing cells [139]. However, the extent of
individual variations in this parameter remains to be
confirmed in a large group of subjects.
Although keratinized epithelium is highly protective,
various abrasions, lesions due to STDs, as well as microtrauma, provide access for HIV-1 to the target cells that
reside beneath the surface of the organ. Lesions or
microtrauma would also render the outer foreskin and/
or shaft of the penis vulnerable to HIV-1 infection, providing access to an abundance of cells expressing CD4,
as well as CCR5 and CXCR4. However, even when HIV1 gets direct access to sub-epithelial layers, R5 HIV-1
seems to find more targets than X4 HIV-1 since on
average cells expressing CCR5 are situated in the outer
foreskin, glans, and frenulum closer to the surface than
cells expressing CXCR4. Also the average density of
CCR5-expressing cells in the outer foreskin is higher
than that of CXCR4-expressing cells [139]. All these features of the foreskin clearly indicate that whether HIV-1
enters through the inner foreskin or through defects in
the keratin layer into the outer foreskin, the barriers
against infection are selective and protect the foreskin
against X4 HIV-1 infection more efficiently than R5
HIV-1.
Although the foreskin seems to be an important site
of HIV-1 entry, circumcised men also acquire HIV-1
through the penile route. Thus, other sites of entry
besides the foreskin exist. The glans penis in both circumcised and uncircumcised men is covered by highly
keratinized squamous epithelia and seems to be relatively protected against HIV-1 entry in the absence of
lesions or microtrauma. In contrast, the penile urethra
is less protected as it is covered by a non-keratinized
columnar epithelium that is narrowly stratified at the
meatus and is also populated with CD4 T lymphocytes
and macrophages [93]. Both CXCR4 and CCR5 mRNA
have been isolated from urethra swabs in equal amounts
[143]. However, it is difficult to translate these data into
the relative abundance of CCR5- and CXCR4-expressing
cells on the basis of the mRNA measurements.
In summary, on its way to dissemination within the
body via the penile route of infection, HIV-1 has to
overcome many protective barriers. Some of these barriers can discriminate between R5 and X4 HIV-1 and
are higher for the latter.
Gastro-intestinal mucosal transmission

The probability of infection through receptive anal intercourse is much higher than through vaginal or penile
intercourse. These data were confirmed in experiments

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

with macaques infected with the same amount of SIV
under controlled laboratory conditions [144]. Thus, it
seems that fewer protective barriers exist for this route
of HIV-1 transmission. Nevertheless, the gastro-intestinal route of transmission also exhibits a gatekeeping
mechanism against X4 HIV-1.
The vulnerability of the colorectum to HIV-1 infection
stems from two major factors. First, a single layer of
columnar epithelium separates the lumen from the
inner layers. This layer is fragile and maybe damaged
during intercourse. Also, epithelial cells, although not
infectible by HIV-1, may be damaged directly by the
virus violating the layer’s integrity [145]. Second, lymphocytes in colorectal tissue are constitutively activated,
providing HIV-1 cell targets that efficiently replicate
virus [90,146,147], facilitating its dissemination. This is
probably one of the reasons why this tissue tissue is one
of the first that is damaged by HIV-1 infection, irrespective of the transmission route [86,148]. Although fragile
and not providing sufficient mechanical protection, colorectal epithelium provides some biological protection.
Among other soluble factors it secretes chemokines, in
particular stromal-derived factor 1 (SDF-1) [104], the
natural ligand for CXCR4 that in vitro selectively suppresses X4 HIV-1 but not R5 HIV-1 infection [62].
Even with intact epithelia, HIV-1 may be transmitted
through the epithelial layer by transcytosis [105,149] or
transferred by DCs [150]. Also, more colorectal CD4 T
cells express CCR5 than do tonsillar CD4 T cells [147].
However, colorectal explants can support replication of
both R5 and X4 HIV-1, although X4 less efficient, thus
the barrier to X4 infection is unlikely to be absolute
[90]. Nevertheless, colorectal tissue per se seems to be
more vulnerable to R5 HIV-1 infection than secondary
lymphoid tissue but can be efficiently infected by X4
HIV-1 as well [90].
HIV-1 transmission through oral sex and also motherto-child transmission are most likely to occur through
the gingeva or tonsils. The latter infection is mediated
by swallowing HIV-containing fluids in the birth canal
or with breast milk. There is a gatekeeping mechanism
operating at the upper gastrointestinal site, and again R5
has an advantage over X4 HIV-1 [151-155]. One of the
important defense mechanisms in oral sex is the antiHIV-1 activity of the saliva [156]. Like vaginal mucus,
saliva can trap HIV-1 [157]. However, this mechanism
does not seem to be selective for R5 and X4 HIV-1.
Also, saliva decreases HIV-1 infectivity because of the
presence of various soluble factors [158], including proteases [159] and defensins (see [160]). As discussed
above, some of the latter suppress X4 more efficiently
than R5 HIV-1 providing a basis for another X4 HIV-1
gatekeeping barrier. Vertical transmission mediated by
swallowing breast milk may well occur through infection

Page 8 of 17

via the tonsils or other lymphoid tissue associated with
the Waldeyer’s ring. Indeed exposure of the tonsils to
SIV in neonatal macaques is sufficient to establish infection [161].
Another gatekeeping mechanism may be associated
with transcytosis and related to the fact that epithelial
cells of the small intestine preferentially express CCR5
rather than CXCR4 [147]. Exposure of the small intestine may occur if any virus or infected cells can survive
acidification of the stomach, most likely in the first
hours to days following birth. It is not clear to what
extent this potential pathway for HIV-1 penetration of
the epithelial barrier can discriminate between R5 and
X4 HIV-1 [105,149]. In in vitro experiments it was
reported that primary intestinal (jejunal) epithelial cells
were able to transfer R5 but not X4 HIV-1 through
trancytosis to indicator cells [162].
A few cases of early detection of X4 HIV-1 in vertical
transmission have been reported [152,155,163]. However, in these cases it was not clear whether X4 HIV-1
was actually transmitted or evolved from the earliertransmitted R5 HIV-1. Establishment of a phylogenic
relationship between mother’s and child’s viruses
is required to distinguish between the two abovementioned possibilities. In the absence of such work, it
was widely believed that the gatekeeping mechanisms of
vertical transmission are as tight as those of horizontal
transmission. When the phylogenic analysis of the
mother-to child transmitted variants has been performed it was found that X4 variants always evolves
from the transmitted R5 HIV-1 [164].
However, a recent study has been published that
demonstrated the transmission of X4 HIV-1 (and dualtropic R5X4 variants) from five Ugandian mothers to
their babies [165]. As was shown for cases when X4
evolved as a result of R5 HIV-1 mutation, babies with
X4 HIV-1 dominance quickly progress to AIDS. In the
case referred to above, these babies died earlier than
those to whom R5 HIV-1 was transferred [165].
In conclusion multiple mechanisms for preferential
transmission of R5 HIV-1 through the gastrointestinal
route have been reported. Although the published data
are somewhat controversial, these mechanisms may
include: preferential secretion of chemokines that bind
to CXCR4 rather than CCR5, the higher level of CCR5
expression, and potentially, preferential transcytosis.
However, none of these mechanisms alone seems to
explain the high efficiency of the gastrointestinal “gatekeeper” in protection of X4 HIV-1 transmission
Post-mucosal gatekeepers

Following on from the discussion above, although several
somewhat efficient gatekeepers exist at the mucosal
portals of HIV-1 entry, they are not perfect. Everything we

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

know from studying these gatekeepers indicates that in
spite of them, X4 HIV-1 should be capable of entering the
human body, although less efficiently than R5 HIV-1.
However, in vivo X4 infection rarely occurs, except in a
few recently reported cases of vertical transmission [165].
Thus, it appears that there are additional post-mucosal
gatekeeping mechanisms. This suggestion is supported by
the fact that if HIV-1 bypasses mucosal barriers and is
delivered directly (intravenously, with a non-sterile syringe
needle or with contaminated blood in a blood transfusion)
it is again R5 HIV-1 that is transmitted and that dominates
early stages of HIV disease.
Since, as described above, R5 HIV-1 was initially
thought to be “macrophage-tropic”, macrophages were
first considered to be the infected gatekeepers which
select for R5 HIV-1 in cases of intravenous HIV-1 transmission when the mucosal barriers are circumvented
[166,167]. Although macrophages are thought to be an
important HIV-1 reservoir, studies of the early stages of
HIV-1 infection indicate that lymphocytes (which do
not discriminate between X4 and R5), rather than
macrophages, are the first HIV-1 targets [94,95,97,126].
However, macrophages do become infected and these
cells along with other antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
are less susceptible to cytotoxic T lymphocytes than are
infected T cells. This has been clearly demonstrated in
animal models [168,169]. As a result of this and other
factors, infected macrophages survive longer than lymphocytes, disseminating R5 HIV-1 with which they are
predominantly infected. Although the tissue explant
model seems to be closer to the situation in vivo than
isolated cell cultures, it has its own limitations [127]. In
laboratories, explant models are infected by HIV-1 suspensions, while in vivo it seems that virus is also disseminated from cell to cell through the viral synapses.
Through these synapses R5 HIV-1 is selectively transmitted from DCs to resting CD4+ T cells [170].
Finally, it seems that in vivo some systemic factors
exist that are more restrictive for X4 than for R5 HIV-1.
The first candidate for such a factor is the immune
response, including the innate one. Both X4 and R5
HIV-1 induce cytokines, including RANTES and SDF-1
[171], that bind to the respective HIV-1 coreceptors and
may prevent infection by corresponding X4 or R5 HIV1. In lymphoid tissue explants X4 triggers secretion of
RANTES in concentrations sufficient to suppress R5
HIV-1, however R5 infection does not induce sufficient
SDF-1 to suppress X4 HIV-1 infection [171]. Thus,
rather than explaining the gatekeeping mechanism,
these experiments indicate one of the potential factors
responsible for the “switch” of dominance from R5 to
X4 HIV-1 at the later stages of the disease.
However, in experiments with rhesus macaques that
have been inoculated with both R5 and X4 viruses

Page 9 of 17

(SHIV), R5 outcompeted X4 SHIV [169]. Also, reports
have shown that one of the conserved gp120-neutralization epitopes [172] is cryptic in R5 but is accessible in
X4 HIV-1. These and other immune mechanisms may
selectively suppress X4 HIV-1 preventing rapid evolution of X4 from R5 HIV-1. Indeed, R5 and X4 HIV-1
variants have been described that differ from each other
by only a few amino acids [173] suggesting they should
easily evolve in the absence of any X4 gatekeeping. The
in vivo mechanisms against X4 HIV-1 are so pervasive
that in 50% of individuals infected with clade B HIV-1,
X4 never evolves and viruses retain their R5 phenotype
despite progression to AIDS [174]. Moreover, although
CXCR4-utilizing HIV-1-a variants have been reported
for other clades, there is a relative lack of such variants
among non-B subtypes (especially of C and D clades)
despite aggressive progression of HIV disease [175].

Transmitted/ founder virus: Another level of
gatekeeping?
While the selective transmission of R5 over X4 virus,
irrespective of the route of transmission has been recognized for sometime, more recent studies of transmitted
founder (TF) virus have suggested that there may be
additional levels of gatekeeping amongst R5 viruses
themselves. Detailed sequence analysis of virus in acute
infection has enabled investigators to determine the
sequence of virus associated with transmission [176].
These studies have shown that in <80% of transmissions,
infection is initiated by a single TF virus [7,177,178].
This apparent bottleneck can be reduced by inflammation leading to a higher frequency of multi-variant transmissions of 2-10 viruses [91]. Rectal transmission also
seems to mitigate the genetic bottleneck observed in
cervico-vaginal transmission [179]. However, irrespective
of the route of transmission the majority of these isolates are R5, with a few displaying R5X4 phenotype
[7,177]. These data reinforce the concept of gatekeeping
against X4 virus. Nevertheless, such gatekeepers may
not be absolute, as low frequency (4%) X4 transmission
has been seen in some studies [165].
More recently there has been an increased focus on
determining whether TF virus exhibits certain phenotypic
and or molecular signatures. The first striking observation
is that while TF viruses are exclusively R5, they show
extremely poor infectivity for in vitro derived macrophages
[7]. While this needs to be confirmed using tissue macrophages these early observations suggest that transmission
selects for T cell tropic R5 variants. This phenotypic
observation fits with parallel studies in human mucosal tissue explants [90,128,132,180] and studies delineating the
initial target cells of infection in the macaque model [94],
all of which implicate CD4 T cells as the initial targets for
infection. Furthermore, macaque studies suggest that

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

mucosal infection may be dependent upon the ability of
TF to infect resting CD4 effector memory T cells [94].
However, whether this represents a gatekeeper against
macrophage tropic R5 virus is debatable, as T cell tropic
R5 virus is the dominant phenotype in semen of infected
individuals and indeed isolation of macrophage tropic
HIV-1 in lymph nodes, blood and semen is rare [181].
The second observation, reported in several studies, is
the apparent transmission of R5 virus with reduced Nlinked glycosylation [182-184]. HIV-1 is known to cloak
its envelope protein in N-linked oligomannose to reduce
antibody recognition [185]. At first glance such an apparent reduction in glycosylation is perplexing as this potentially renders TF virus more susceptible to antibody
neutralization. However such neutralization is not
expected to occur for primo HIV-1-exposure and should
only hinder HIV-1 transmission in repeatedly exposed
recipients. Only a systematic comparison of TF isolated
from subjects infected after a single or repeated exposure
could answer this question. Therefore there must be
additional gatekeepers at play that select reduced glycosylation in spite of the consequential increase in susceptibility to antibody neutralization. Current thinking
proposes two possible mechanisms that may not be
mutually exclusive. The first relates to the role of
N-linked glycosylation in the binding of HIV-1 to C-type
lectins. The group of van Kooyk first observed that the
C-type lectin DC-SIGN expressed on dendritic cells
could bind virus via oligomannose residues expressed on
the viral envelope [186]. Such capture of virus can facilitate both direct infection of dendritic cells (cis-infection)
and infection of interacting CD4 T cells (trans-infection).
This led to the rapid speculation that dendritic cell capture of virus may be an important step in the transmission process. Activation of these cells (potentially by
HIV-1 itself) is known to stimulate rapid migration to
draining lymph nodes, thereby disseminating virus to an
environment rich in activated CD4 T cells [187]. However the interaction of HIV-1 with C-type lectins turned
out to be more complex. DC-SIGN is now only one of
several C-type lectins (including Langerin) shown to bind
HIV-1 and, while under certain conditions this may favor
infection, such binding also facilitates viral uptake, degradation and antigen presentation [188]. In vitro only
5-10% of viral uptake by dendritic cells evades destruction by remaining in a tetraspanin-rich compartment but
it is unclear whether this accurately reflects processing of
virus by tissue dendritic cells. Indeed it has been shown
that binding of HIV-1 by the C-type lectin langerin on
Langerhans cells provides an efficient mechanism for
viral degradation [189]. As these cells are highly abundant in stratified epithelium of genital mucosas, the
absence of critical oligomannose residues could provide a
selective advantage by avoidance of triggering the cells

Page 10 of 17

that define the interface between innate and adaptive
immunity. Avoidance of mechanisms that would stimulate cellular and humoral immune responses may be
more important to the establishment of infection than
the potential increased sensitivity to neutralizing antibodies. Clearly this makes sense in a naïve susceptible
population that would have no pre-existing immunity,
however this also opens up a window of potential vulnerability to vaccine induced neutralizing antibodies that
could be expressed at mucosal surfaces.
An alternative hypothesis has been recently proposed
by Anthony Fauci [190]. His team was the first to identify that the HIV-1 envelope of certain viruses could
bind to the alpha-4 beta-7 gut homing integrin [191].
While not essential for infection, this integrin is
expressed on a subset of highly susceptible CD4 T cells
that express high levels of CCR5 and low levels of
CXCR4 and are concentrated in intestinal and, to a lesser extent, cervical mucosa. This preferential binding to
alpha-4 beta-7 cells is thought to be an important factor
in concentrating early viral replication in the intestinal
tract of infected individuals, leading to the massive loss
of CD4 T cells within this compartment in the first few
weeks of infection [192]. Dr. Fauci has proposed that TF
virus binds more efficiently to alpha-4 beta-7 cells than
those in chronically infected subjects. This difference in
binding was shown to be associated with decreased glycosylation within the V1, V2 region of the HIV-1 envelope, putative binding sites for alpha-4 beta-7 [190]. The
suggestion being that glycosylation may block the alpha4 beta-7-mediated virus binding to this highly susceptible population of CCR5 CD4 T cells. Nevertheless,
reported differences in N-linked glycosylation patterns
between TF virus and later isolates are not universally
accepted with a number of studies reporting no reduction in glycosylation [193]. It will be interesting to see
whether differences in glycosylation may be influenced
by differences in exposure of the native trimer to cellular glycosylation enzymes during de novo viral production. Glycosylation may vary according to the phenotype
of infected cells [185]. This raises yet another question
about transmitted viruses and potential gatekeeping
mechanisms as it shifts the spotlight from a virus
defined by its genetic make up, to the cells which produced the infecting virus. Despite such apparent discrepancies there is a growing consensus that not all R5
virus are equal in terms of transmission fitness suggesting that there are further gatekeepers to be discovered.

The multiple barrier principle
Where is the main gatekeeper that selects R5 over X4?
As discussed above many multiple barriers have been
identified. However, no single barrier appears to explain
the almost perfect selection of R5 over X4 in HIV-1

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

transmission. We suggest that a single “Big Barrier” does
not exist [194]. Rather that the superimposition of multiple weak and imperfect barriers is sufficient to protect
against X4 HIV-1 infection. Indeed, X4 HIV-1, associated with accelerated progression to AIDS, only
appears late in the course of the disease, and then only
in 50% of individuals infected with Clade B virus. Indeed
the majority of patients progress to AIDS in the absence
of X4 evolution. These observations suggest a sustained
selective pressure against X4 over R5 replication. A single Big Barrier would be more fragile and breachable by

Page 11 of 17

multiple mechanisms including trauma, mutations,
transformations etc, likely to provide an all or nothing
effect. Thus it seems that sequential barriers of low efficiency would not only be more protective but would
provide ongoing suppression of X4 over R5 replication
within an infected individual.
This can be illustrated by a simple model consisting of
only five sequential barriers each having a selective coefficient of 5 that is the probability ratio for R5 and X4 to
penetrate an individual barrier is 5:1. (Figure 1). In this
over-simplified construction, although selection of an

Figure 1 A set of imperfect multiple barriers provides gatekeeps against HIV-1 better than a single “perfect” barrier (adapted from
[194]). (a) A “perfect” barrier protects against X4 HIV-1 (left panel). If this barrier is breached (right panel), there is no protection against X4 HIV-1
infection. (b) A series of ‘imperfect’ barriers (left panel), each of which protects against X4 virus infection only five times more efficiently than against R5
HIV-1. Nevertheless the chance for X4 HIV-1 to penetrate these barriers is 3125 times lower than for R5. If one of the barriers is breached, (right panel)
the system retains relatively high selectivity: The chance for X4 HIV-1 to penetrate the barriers is still 625 times lower than for R5 HIV-1.

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

individual barrier provides only a 5:1 probability of protection against X4 penetration, five sequential barriers
provide a probability of 3,125 :1. Even if one of these
five barriers is breached and becomes equally permissive
to X4 and R5 HIV-1, the selective power of the construction still remains high at 625:1. It is reasonable to
think that the human body has many more than five
barriers. Also, their selective power against X4 vs. R5
HIV-1 may be much higher than the 5 described in the
above modeling. Although in vivo not all of these barriers may be sequential and/or independent, together
they are sufficient to protect against X4.
The number of potential barriers may be high and
redundant while their efficiency may vary between different individuals. Such a system would make the gatekeeping mechanisms very individualized. Indeed, if in
one individual only a few existing barriers against HIV-1
are needed to ensure perfect gatekeeping against X4
HIV-1, in another individual the set of these selective
barriers may be different. Nevertheless the net result of
the combined gatekeeping of these barriers against X4
HIV-1 would be the same for both individuals. If the
number of barriers is large, the huge number of individual variations would make the study of the gatekeeping
mechanism very complicated. In this case, identification
of individual barriers would require study of large
cohorts to reach statistical power.

Conclusions
In conclusion, we think that the principle of multiple
barriers is more general and is not restricted to protection against X4 HIV-1 but rather can be applied to
other phenomena when one factor has a selective advantage over the other(s). In the case of X4/R5 gatekeepers,
the task of future experiments is to identify each and
every one of the selective gatekeepers and decipher their
molecular mechanisms. Knowledge of the gatekeepers‘
localization and function may enable us to facilitate
existing barriers against R5 transmission and to erect
the new ones against all HIV-1 variants.
Acknowledgements
The work of J-C.G. and LM was supported by the Intramural NICHD Program.
RJS contribution to this manuscript was supported by FP-6-funded
EUROPRISE, EC grant LSHP-CT- 2006- 037611.
LBM is grateful to Dr. Morgane Bomsel for critical reading of the manuscript
and for helpful discussions.
This article has been published as part of Journal of Translational Medicine
Volume 9 Supplement 1, 2011: Differential use of CCR5 vs. CSCR4 by HIV-1.
Pathogenic, Translational and Clinical Open Questions. The full contents of
the supplement are available online at http://www.translational-medicine.
com/supplements/9/S1.
Author details
1
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, USA. 2St George’s,
University of London, London, UK.

Page 12 of 17

Authors’ contributions
J-CG, RS, and LM equally contributed to collecting data, discussing and
writing this review.
Competing interests
The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.
Published: 27 January 2011
References
1. Alkhatib G, Combadiere C, Broder CC, Feng Y, Kennedy PE, Murphy PM,
Berger EA: CC CKR5: a RANTES, MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta receptor as a
fusion cofactor for macrophage-tropic HIV-1. Science 1996, 272:1955-1958.
2. Deng H, Liu R, Ellmeier W, Choe S, Unutmaz D, Burkhart M, Di Marzio P,
Marmon S, Sutton RE, Hill CM, et al: Identification of a major co-receptor
for primary isolates of HIV-1. Nature 1996, 381:661-666.
3. Dragic T, Litwin V, Allaway GP, Martin SR, Huang Y, Nagashima KA,
Cayanan C, Maddon PJ, Koup RA, Moore JP, Paxton WA: HIV-1 entry into
CD4+ cells is mediated by the chemokine receptor CC-CKR-5. Nature
1996, 381:667-673.
4. Berger EA, Doms RW, Fenyo EM, Korber BT, Littman DR, Moore JP,
Sattentau QJ, Schuitemaker H, Sodroski J, Weiss RA: A new classification for
HIV-1. Nature 1998, 391:240.
5. Moore JP, Kitchen SG, Pugach P, Zack JA: The CCR5 and CXCR4
coreceptors–central to understanding the transmission and
pathogenesis of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. AIDS
Res Hum Retroviruses 2004, 20:111-126.
6. Keele BF, Derdeyn CA: Genetic and antigenic features of the transmitted
virus. Curr Opin HIV AIDS 2009, 4:352-357.
7. Salazar-Gonzalez JF, Salazar MG, Keele BF, Learn GH, Giorgi EE, Li H,
Decker JM, Wang S, Baalwa J, Kraus MH, et al: Genetic identity, biological
phenotype, and evolutionary pathways of transmitted/founder viruses in
acute and early HIV-1 infection. J Exp Med 2009, 206:1273-1289.
8. Vahlne A: A historical reflection on the discovery of human retroviruses.
Retrovirology 2009, 6:40.
9. Gottlieb MS, Schroff R, Schanker HM, Weisman JD, Fan PT, Wolf RA,
Saxon A: Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and mucosal
candidiasis in previously healthy homosexual men: evidence of a
new acquired cellular immunodeficiency. N Engl J Med 1981,
305:1425-1431.
10. Klatzmann D, Barre-Sinoussi F, Nugeyre MT, Danquet C, Vilmer E, Griscelli C,
Brun-Veziret F, Rouzioux C, Gluckman JC, Chermann JC, et al: Selective
tropism of lymphadenopathy associated virus (LAV) for helper-inducer T
lymphocytes. Science 1984, 225:59-63.
11. Popovic M, Read-Connole E, Gallo RC: T4 positive human neoplastic cell
lines susceptible to and permissive for HTLV-III. Lancet 1984, 2:1472-1473.
12. Klatzmann D, Champagne E, Chamaret S, Gruest J, Guetard D, Hercend T,
Gluckman JC, Montagnier L: T-lymphocyte T4 molecule behaves as the
receptor for human retrovirus LAV. Nature 1984, 312:767-768.
13. Maddon PJ, Dalgleish AG, McDougal JS, Clapham PR, Weiss RA, Axel R: The
T4 gene encodes the AIDS virus receptor and is expressed in the
immune system and the brain. Cell 1986, 47:333-348.
14. Chesebro B, Buller R, Portis J, Wehrly K: Failure of human
immunodeficiency virus entry and infection in CD4-positive human
brain and skin cells. Journal of virology 1990, 64:215-221.
15. McDougal JS, Klatzmann DR, Maddon PJ: CD4-gp120 interactions. Curr
Opin Immunol 1991, 3:552-558.
16. Benn S, Rutledge R, Folks T, Gold J, Baker L, McCormick J, Feorino P, Piot P,
Quinn T, Martin M: Genomic heterogeneity of AIDS retroviral isolates
from North America and Zaire. Science 1985, 230:949-951.
17. Hahn BH, Gonda MA, Shaw GM, Popovic M, Hoxie JA, Gallo RC, WongStaal F: Genomic diversity of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome
virus HTLV-III: different viruses exhibit greatest divergence in their
envelope genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985, 82:4813-4817.
18. Wong-Staal F, Shaw GM, Hahn BH, Salahuddin SZ, Popovic M, Markham P,
Redfield R, Gallo RC: Genomic diversity of human T-lymphotropic virus
type III (HTLV-III). Science 1985, 229:759-762.
19. di Marzo Veronese F, Sarngadharan MG, Rahman R, Markham PD,
Popovic M, Bodner AJ, Gallo RC: Monoclonal antibodies specific for p24,
the major core protein of human T-cell leukemia virus type III. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1985, 82:5199-5202.

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

20. Brun-Vezinet F, Rouzioux C, Barre-Sinoussi F, Klatzmann D, Saimot AG,
Rozenbaum W, Christol D, Gluckmann JC, Montagnier L, Chermann JC:
Detection of IgG antibodies to lymphadenopathy-associated virus in
patients with AIDS or lymphadenopathy syndrome. Lancet 1984,
1:1253-1256.
21. Palker TJ, Scearce RM, Miller SE, Popovic M, Bolognesi DP, Gallo RC,
Haynes BF: Monoclonal antibodies against human T cell leukemialymphoma virus (HTLV) p24 internal core protein. Use as diagnostic
probes and cellular localization of HTLV. J Exp Med 1984, 159:1117-1131.
22. Schupbach J, Haller O, Vogt M, Luthy R, Joller H, Oelz O, Popovic M,
Sarngadharan MG, Gallo RC: Antibodies to HTLV-III in Swiss patients with
AIDS and pre-AIDS and in groups at risk for AIDS. N Engl J Med 1985,
312:265-270.
23. Barrett JE, Dawson G, Heller J, Bairstow C, Fico R, Webber JS, Gutierrez R,
Decker RH: Performance evaluation of the Abbott HTLV III EIA, a test for
antibody to HTLV III in donor blood. Am J Clin Pathol 1986, 86:180-185.
24. Gallo D, Diggs JL, Shell GR, Dailey PJ, Hoffman MN, Riggs JL: Comparison
of detection of antibody to the acquired immune deficiency syndrome
virus by enzyme immunoassay, immunofluorescence, and Western blot
methods. J Clin Microbiol 1986, 23:1049-1051.
25. Jackson B, Sannerud K, Rhame F, Tsang R, Balfour HH Jr.: Comparison of
reverse transcriptase assay with the Retro-Tek viral capture assay for
detection of human immunodeficiency virus. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
1987, 7:185-192.
26. Kaplan MH, Pahwa SG, Popovic M, Sarngadharan MG, Gallo RC:
A classification of HTLV-III infection based on 75 cases seen in a
suburban community. Cancer Res 1985, 45:4655s-4658s.
27. Asjo B, Morfeldt-Manson L, Albert J, Biberfeld G, Karlsson A, Lidman K,
Fenyo EM: Replicative capacity of human immunodeficiency virus from
patients with varying severity of HIV infection. Lancet 1986, 2:660-662.
28. Cheng-Mayer C, Seto D, Tateno M, Levy JA: Biologic features of HIV-1 that
correlate with virulence in the host. Science 1988, 240:80-82.
29. Castro BA, Cheng-Mayer C, Evans LA, Levy JA: HIV heterogeneity and viral
pathogenesis. Aids 1988, 2(Suppl 1):S17-27.
30. Sakai K, Dewhurst S, Ma XY, Volsky DJ: Differences in cytopathogenicity
and host cell range among infectious molecular clones of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 simultaneously isolated from an
individual. J Virol 1988, 62:4078-4085.
31. Fredriksson R, Stalhanske P, von Gegerfelt A, Lind B, Aman P, Rassart E,
Fenyo EM: Biological characterization of infectious molecular clones
derived from a human immunodeficiency virus type-1 isolate with
rapid/high replicative capacity. Virology 1991, 181:55-61.
32. Fernandez-Larsson R, Srivastava KK, Lu S, Robinson HL: Replication of
patient isolates of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in T cells: a
spectrum of rates and efficiencies of entry. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992,
89:2223-2226.
33. De Rossi A, Giaquinto C, Ometto L, Mammano F, Zanotto C, Dunn D,
Chieco-Bianchi L: Replication and tropism of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 as predictors of disease outcome in infants with vertically
acquired infection. J Pediatr 1993, 123:929-936.
34. Scarlatti G, Hodara V, Rossi P, Muggiasca L, Bucceri A, Albert J, Fenyo EM:
Transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) from
mother to child correlates with viral phenotype. Virology 1993,
197:624-629.
35. Lifson JD, Reyes GR, McGrath MS, Stein BS, Engleman EG: AIDS retrovirus
induced cytopathology: giant cell formation and involvement of CD4
antigen. Science 1986, 232:1123-1127.
36. Epstein LG, Sharer LR, Cho ES, Myenhofer M, Navia B, Price RW: HTLV-III/
LAV-like retrovirus particles in the brains of patients with AIDS
encephalopathy. AIDS Res 1984, 1:447-454.
37. Tersmette M, de Goede RE, Al BJ, Winkel IN, Gruters RA, Cuypers HT,
Huisman HG, Miedema F: Differential syncytium-inducing capacity of
human immunodeficiency virus isolates: frequent detection of
syncytium-inducing isolates in patients with acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS) and AIDS-related complex. J Virol 1988, 62:2026-2032.
38. Fenyo EM, Morfeldt-Manson L, Chiodi F, Lind B, von Gegerfelt A, Albert J,
Olausson E, Asjo B: Distinct replicative and cytopathic characteristics of
human immunodeficiency virus isolates. J Virol 1988, 62:4414-4419.
39. Schuitemaker H, Kootstra NA, de Goede RE, de Wolf F, Miedema F,
Tersmette M: Monocytotropic human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) variants detectable in all stages of HIV-1 infection lack T-cell line

Page 13 of 17

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.
46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.
58.

tropism and syncytium-inducing ability in primary T-cell culture. J Virol
1991, 65:356-363.
Tersmette M, Gruters RA, de Wolf F, de Goede RE, Lange JM,
Schellekens PT, Goudsmit J, Huisman HG, Miedema F: Evidence for a role
of virulent human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) variants in the
pathogenesis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: studies on
sequential HIV isolates. J Virol 1989, 63:2118-2125.
Gruters RA, Terpstra FG, De Goede RE, Mulder JW, De Wolf F,
Schellekens PT, Van Lier RA, Tersmette M, Miedema F: Immunological and
virological markers in individuals progressing from seroconversion to
AIDS. Aids 1991, 5:837-844.
Koot M, Keet IP, Vos AH, de Goede RE, Roos MT, Coutinho RA, Miedema F,
Schellekens PT, Tersmette M: Prognostic value of HIV-1 syncytiuminducing phenotype for rate of CD4+ cell depletion and progression to
AIDS. Ann Intern Med 1993, 118:681-688.
Gendelman HE, Orenstein JM, Martin MA, Ferrua C, Mitra R, Phipps T,
Wahl LA, Lane HC, Fauci AS, Burke DS, et al: Efficient isolation and
propagation of human immunodeficiency virus on recombinant colonystimulating factor 1-treated monocytes. J Exp Med 1988, 167:1428-1441.
Schwartz S, Felber BK, Fenyo EM, Pavlakis GN: Rapidly and slowly
replicating human immunodeficiency virus type 1 isolates can be
distinguished according to target-cell tropism in T-cell and monocyte
cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1989, 86:7200-7203.
Fenyo EM, Albert J, Asjo B: Replicative capacity, cytopathic effect and cell
tropism of HIV. AIDS 1989, 3(Suppl 1):S5-12.
Valentin A, Albert J, Fenyo EM, Asjo B: HIV-1 infection of normal human
macrophage cultures: implication for silent infection. Virology 1990,
177:790-794.
Valentin A, Albert J, Fenyo EM, Asjo B: Dual tropism for macrophages and
lymphocytes is a common feature of primary human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 and 2 isolates. J Virol 1994, 68:6684-6689.
Harada S, Koyanagi Y, Yamamoto N: Infection of HTLV-III/LAV in HTLV-Icarrying cells MT-2 and MT-4 and application in a plaque assay. Science
1985, 229:563-566.
Koot M, Vos AH, Keet RP, de Goede RE, Dercksen MW, Terpstra FG,
Coutinho RA, Miedema F, Tersmette M: HIV-1 biological phenotype in
long-term infected individuals evaluated with an MT-2 cocultivation
assay. Aids 1992, 6:49-54.
Schuitemaker H, Koot M, Kootstra NA, Dercksen MW, de Goede RE, van
Steenwijk RP, Lange JM, Schattenkerk JK, Miedema F, Tersmette M:
Biological phenotype of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 clones at
different stages of infection: progression of disease is associated with a
shift from monocytotropic to T-cell-tropic virus population. J Virol 1992,
66:1354-1360.
Karlsson A, Parsmyr K, Sandstrom E, Fenyo EM, Albert J: MT-2 cell tropism
as prognostic marker for disease progression in human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. J Clin Microbiol 1994, 32:364-370.
Schneider T, Jahn HU, Schmidt W, Riecken EO, Zeitz M, Ullrich R: Loss of
CD4 T lymphocytes in patients infected with human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 is more pronounced in the duodenal mucosa than in the
peripheral blood. Berlin Diarrhea/Wasting Syndrome Study Group. Gut
1995, 37:524-529.
Bishop PE, McMillan A, Gilmour HM: Immunological study of the rectal
mucosa of men with and without human immunodeficiency virus
infection. Gut 1987, 28:1619-1624.
Collman R, Godfrey B, Cutilli J, Rhodes A, Hassan NF, Sweet R, Douglas SD,
Friedman H, Nathanson N, Gonzalez-Scarano F: Macrophage-tropic strains
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 utilize the CD4 receptor. J Virol
1990, 64:4468-4476.
Cordonnier A, Montagnier L, Emerman M: Single amino-acid changes in
HIV envelope affect viral tropism and receptor binding. Nature 1989,
340:571-574.
O’Brien WA, Koyanagi Y, Namazie A, Zhao JQ, Diagne A, Idler K, Zack JA,
Chen IS: HIV-1 tropism for mononuclear phagocytes can be determined
by regions of gp120 outside the CD4-binding domain. Nature 1990,
348:69-73.
Schuitemaker H, Groenink M, Tersmette M, Miedema F: HIV tropism. Nature
1993, 361:310.
Weiner DB, Huebner K, Williams WV, Greene MI: Human genes other than
CD4 facilitate HIV-1 infection of murine cells. Pathobiology 1991,
59:361-371.

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

59. Alkhatib G, Broder CC, Berger EA: Cell type-specific fusion cofactors
determine human immunodeficiency virus type 1 tropism for T-cell lines
versus primary macrophages. J Virol 1996, 70:5487-5494.
60. Harrington RD, Geballe AP: Cofactor requirement for human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 entry into a CD4-expressing human cell
line. J Virol 1993, 67:5939-5947.
61. Feng Y, Broder CC, Kennedy PE, Berger EA: HIV-1 entry cofactor: functional
cDNA cloning of a seven-transmembrane, G protein-coupled receptor.
Science 1996, 272:872-877.
62. Bleul CC, Farzan M, Choe H, Parolin C, Clark-Lewis I, Sodroski J, Springer TA:
The lymphocyte chemoattractant SDF-1 is a ligand for LESTR/fusin and
blocks HIV-1 entry. Nature 1996, 382:829-833.
63. Oberlin E, Amara A, Bachelerie F, Bessia C, Virelizier JL, ArenzanaSeisdedos F, Schwartz O, Heard JM, Clark-Lewis I, Legler DF, et al: The CXC
chemokine SDF-1 is the ligand for LESTR/fusin and prevents infection by
T-cell-line-adapted HIV-1. Nature 1996, 382:833-835.
64. Cocchi F, DeVico AL, Garzino-Demo A, Arya SK, Gallo RC, Lusso P:
Identification of RANTES, MIP-1 alpha, and MIP-1 beta as the major HIVsuppressive factors produced by CD8+ T cells. Science 1995,
270:1811-1815.
65. Combadiere C, Ahuja SK, Tiffany HL, Murphy PM: Cloning and functional
expression of CC CKR5, a human monocyte CC chemokine receptor
selective for MIP-1(alpha), MIP-1(beta), and RANTES. J Leukoc Biol 1996,
60:147-152.
66. Raport CJ, Gosling J, Schweickart VL, Gray PW, Charo IF: Molecular cloning
and functional characterization of a novel human CC chemokine
receptor (CCR5) for RANTES, MIP-1beta, and MIP-1alpha. J Biol Chem
1996, 271:17161-17166.
67. Samson M, Labbe O, Mollereau C, Vassart G, Parmentier M: Molecular
cloning and functional expression of a new human CC-chemokine
receptor gene. Biochemistry 1996, 35:3362-3367.
68. Choe H, Farzan M, Sun Y, Sullivan N, Rollins B, Ponath PD, Wu L, Mackay CR,
LaRosa G, Newman W, et al: The beta-chemokine receptors CCR3 and
CCR5 facilitate infection by primary HIV-1 isolates. Cell 1996,
85:1135-1148.
69. Bjorndal A, Deng H, Jansson M, Fiore JR, Colognesi C, Karlsson A, Albert J,
Scarlatti G, Littman DR, Fenyo EM: Coreceptor usage of primary human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 isolates varies according to biological
phenotype. J Virol 1997, 71:7478-7487.
70. Cheng-Mayer C, Liu R, Landau NR, Stamatatos L: Macrophage tropism of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 and utilization of the CC-CKR5
coreceptor. J Virol 1997, 71:1657-1661.
71. Simmons G, Wilkinson D, Reeves JD, Dittmar MT, Beddows S, Weber J,
Carnegie G, Desselberger U, Gray PW, Weiss RA, Clapham PR: Primary,
syncytium-inducing human immunodeficiency virus type 1 isolates are
dual-tropic and most can use either Lestr or CCR5 as coreceptors for
virus entry. J Virol 1996, 70:8355-8360.
72. Berger EA, Murphy PM, Farber JM: Chemokine receptors as HIV-1
coreceptors: Roles in viral entry, tropism and disease. Ann Rev Immunol
1999, 17:657-700.
73. Lee S, Tiffany HL, King L, Murphy PM, Golding H, Zaitseva MB: CCR8 on
human thymocytes functions as a human immunodeficiency virus type
1 coreceptor. J Virol 2000, 74:6946-6952.
74. Sharron M, Pohlmann S, Price K, Lolis E, Tsang M, Kirchhoff F, Doms RW,
Lee B: Expression and coreceptor activity of STRL33/Bonzo on primary
peripheral blood lymphocytes. Blood 2000, 96:41-49.
75. O’Brien TR, Winkler C, Dean M, Nelson JA, Carrington M, Michael NL,
White GC 2nd: HIV-1 infection in a man homozygous for CCR5 delta 32.
Lancet 1997, 349:1219.
76. Samson M, Libert F, Doranz BJ, Rucker J, Liesnard C, Farber CM, Saragosti S,
Lapoumeroulie C, Cognaux J, Forceille C, et al: Resistance to HIV-1
infection in caucasian individuals bearing mutant alleles of the CCR-5
chemokine receptor gene. Nature 1996, 382:722-725.
77. Gorry PR, Zhang C, Wu S, Kunstman K, Trachtenberg E, Phair J, Wolinsky S,
Gabuzda D: Persistence of dual-tropic HIV-1 in an individual homozygous
for the CCR5 Delta 32 allele. Lancet 2002, 359:1832-1834.
78. Michael NL, Nelson JA, KewalRamani VN, Chang G, O’Brien SJ, Mascola JR,
Volsky B, Louder M, White GC 2nd, Littman DR, et al: Exclusive and
persistent use of the entry coreceptor CXCR4 by human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 from a subject homozygous for CCR5
delta32. Journal of virology 1998, 72:6040-6047.

Page 14 of 17

79. Rowe PM: CKR-5 deletion heterozygotes progress slower to AIDS. Lancet
1996, 348:947.
80. Karlsson I, Grivel JC, Chen SS, Karlsson A, Albert J, Fenyo EM, Margolis LB:
Differential pathogenesis of primary CCR5-using human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 isolates in ex vivo human lymphoid
tissue. Journal of virology 2005, 79:11151-11160.
81. Goodenow MM, Collman RG: HIV-1 coreceptor preference is distinct from
target cell tropism: a dual-parameter nomenclature to define viral
phenotypes. J Leukoc Biol 2006, 80:965-972.
82. Glushakova S, Yi Y, Grivel JC, Singh A, Schols D, De Clercq E, Collman RG,
Margolis L: Preferential coreceptor utilization and cytopathicity by dualtropic HIV-1 in human lymphoid tissue ex vivo. J Clin Invest 1999, 104:
R7-R11.
83. Bleul CC, Wu L, Hoxie JA, Springer TA, Mackay CR: The HIV
coreceptors CXCR4 and CCR5 are differentially expressed and
regulated on human T lymphocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997,
94:1925-1930.
84. Gondois-Rey F, Grivel JC, Biancotto A, Pion M, Vigne R, Margolis LB, Hirsch I:
Segregation of R5 and X4 HIV-1 variants to memory T cell subsets
differentially expressing CD62L in ex vivo infected human lymphoid
tissue. Aids 2002, 16:1245-1249.
85. Grivel J-C, Margolis LB: CCR5- and CXCR4-tropic HIV-1 are equally
cytopathic for their T-cell targets in human lymphoid tissue. Nature
Medicine 1999, 5:344-346.
86. Brenchley JM, Schacker TW, Ruff LE, Price DA, Taylor JH, Beilman GJ,
Nguyen PL, Khoruts A, Larson M, Haase AT, Douek DC: CD4+ T cell
depletion during all stages of HIV disease occurs predominantly in the
gastrointestinal tract. J Exp Med 2004, 200:749-759.
87. Guadalupe M, Reay E, Sankaran S, Prindiville T, Flamm J, McNeil A,
Dandekar S: Severe CD4+ T-cell depletion in gut lymphoid tissue during
primary human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection and substantial
delay in restoration following highly active antiretroviral therapy. Journal
of virology 2003, 77:11708-11717.
88. Lim SG, Condez A, Lee CA, Johnson MA, Elia C, Poulter LW: Loss of
mucosal CD4 lymphocytes is an early feature of HIV infection. Clin Exp
Immunol 1993, 92:448-454.
89. Ullrich R, Zeitz M, Heise W, L’Age M, Ziegler K, Bergs C, Riecken EO:
Mucosal atrophy is associated with loss of activated T cells in the
duodenal mucosa of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected
patients. Digestion 1990, 46(Suppl 2):302-307.
90. Grivel JC, Elliott J, Lisco A, Biancotto A, Condack C, Shattock RJ, McGowan I,
Margolis L, Anton P: HIV-1 pathogenesis differs in rectosigmoid and
tonsillar tissues infected ex vivo with CCR5- and CXCR4-tropic HIV-1. Aids
2007, 21:1263-1272.
91. Haaland RE, Hawkins PA, Salazar-Gonzalez J, Johnson A, Tichacek A, Karita E,
Manigart O, Mulenga J, Keele BF, Shaw GM, et al: Inflammatory genital
infections mitigate a severe genetic bottleneck in heterosexual
transmission of subtype A and C HIV-1. PLoS Pathog 2009, 5:e1000274.
92. O’Connor DM: A tissue basis for colposcopic findings. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 2008, 35:565-582, viii.
93. Pudney J, Quayle AJ, Anderson DJ: Immunological Microenvironments in
the Human Vagina and Cervix: Mediators of Cellular Immunity Are
Concentrated in the Cervical Transformation Zone. Biol Reprod 2005.
94. Haase AT: Targeting early infection to prevent HIV-1 mucosal
transmission. Nature 2010, 464:217-223.
95. Miller CJ, Shattock RJ: Target cells in vaginal HIV transmission. Microbes
Infect 2003, 5:59-67.
96. Kell PD, Barton SE, Edmonds DK, Boag FC: HIV infection in a patient with
Meyer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome. J R Soc Med 1992,
85:706-707.
97. Miller CJ, Alexander NJ, Vogel P, Anderson J, Marx PA: Mechanism of
genital transmission of SIV: a hypothesis based on transmission studies
and the location of SIV in the genital tract of chronically infected female
rhesus macaques. J Med Primatol 1992, 21:64-68.
98. Anderson DJ, Politch JA, Nadolski AM, Blaskewicz CD, Pudney J, Mayer KH:
Targeting Trojan Horse leukocytes for HIV prevention. AIDS 2010,
24:163-187.
99. Argueso P, Spurr-Michaud S, Tisdale A, Gipson IK: Variation in the amount
of T antigen and N-acetyllactosamine oligosaccharides in human
cervical mucus secretions with the menstrual cycle. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2002, 87:5641-5648.

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

100. Olmsted SS, Padgett JL, Yudin AI, Whaley KJ, Moench TR, Cone RA:
Diffusion of macromolecules and virus-like particles in human cervical
mucus. Biophys J 2001, 81:1930-1937.
101. Lai SK, Hida K, Shukair S, Wang YY, Figueiredo A, Cone R, Hope TJ, Hanes J:
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 is trapped by acidic but not by
neutralized human cervicovaginal mucus. Journal of virology 2009,
83:11196-11200.
102. Lai SK, O’Hanlon DE, Harrold S, Man ST, Wang YY, Cone R, Hanes J: Rapid
transport of large polymeric nanoparticles in fresh undiluted human
mucus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007, 104:1482-1487.
103. Boukari H, Brichacek B, Stratton P, Mahoney SF, Lifson JD, Margolis L,
Nossal R: Movements of HIV-virions in human cervical mucus.
Biomacromolecules 2009, 10:2482-2488.
104. Agace WW, Amara A, Roberts AI, Pablos JL, Thelen S, Uguccioni M, Li XY,
Marsal J, Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Delaunay T, et al: Constitutive expression
of stromal derived factor-1 by mucosal epithelia and its role in HIV
transmission and propagation. Curr Biol 2000, 10:325-328.
105. Bomsel M, David V: Mucosal gatekeepers: selecting HIV viruses for early
infection. Nat Med 2002, 8:114-116.
106. Furci L, Sironi F, Tolazzi M, Vassena L, Lusso P: Alpha-defensins block the
early steps of HIV-1 infection: interference with the binding of gp120 to
CD4. Blood 2007, 109:2928-2935.
107. Wira CR, Grant-Tschudy KS, Crane-Godreau MA: Epithelial cells in the
female reproductive tract: a central role as sentinels of immune
protection. Am J Reprod Immunol 2005, 53:65-76.
108. Wira CR, Fahey JV, Sentman CL, Pioli PA, Shen L: Innate and adaptive
immunity in female genital tract: cellular responses and interactions.
Immunol Rev 2005, 206:306-335.
109. Seidel A, Ye Y, de Armas LR, Soto M, Yarosh W, Marcsisin RA, Tran D,
Selsted ME, Camerini D: Cyclic and acyclic defensins inhibit human
immunodeficiency virus type-1 replication by different mechanisms.
PLoS One 2010, 5:e9737.
110. Sun L, Finnegan CM, Kish-Catalone T, Blumenthal R, Garzino-Demo P, La
Terra Maggiore GM, Berrone S, Kleinman C, Wu Z, Abdelwahab S, et al:
Human beta-defensins suppress human immunodeficiency virus
infection: potential role in mucosal protection. Journal of virology 2005,
79:14318-14329.
111. Feng Z, Dubyak GR, Lederman MM, Weinberg A: Cutting edge: human
beta defensin 3–a novel antagonist of the HIV-1 coreceptor CXCR4.
J Immunol 2006, 177:782-786.
112. Quinones-Mateu ME, Lederman MM, Feng Z, Chakraborty B, Weber J,
Rangel HR, Marotta ML, Mirza M, Jiang B, Kiser P, et al: Human epithelial
beta-defensins 2 and 3 inhibit HIV-1 replication. AIDS 2003, 17:F39-48.
113. Zegels G, Van Raemdonck GA, Coen EP, Tjalma WA, Van Ostade XW:
Comprehensive proteomic analysis of human cervical-vaginal fluid using
colposcopy samples. Proteome Sci 2009, 7:17.
114. Habte HH, de Beer C, Lotz ZE, Tyler MG, Schoeman L, Kahn D, Mall AS: The
inhibition of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1 activity by
crude and purified human pregnancy plug mucus and mucins in an
inhibition assay. Virol J 2008, 5:59.
115. Kwong PD, Wyatt R, Sattentau QJ, Sodroski J, Hendrickson WA: Oligomeric
modeling and electrostatic analysis of the gp120 envelope glycoprotein
of human immunodeficiency virus. J Virol 2000, 74:1961-1972.
116. Moulard M, Lortat-Jacob H, Mondor I, Roca G, Wyatt R, Sodroski J, Zhao L,
Olson W, Kwong PD, Sattentau QJ: Selective interactions of polyanions
with basic surfaces on human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120.
J Virol 2000, 74:1948-1960.
117. Vives RR, Imberty A, Sattentau QJ, Lortat-Jacob H: Heparan sulfate targets
the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein gp120 coreceptor binding site. J Biol
Chem 2005, 280:21353-21357.
118. Alfsen A, Yu H, Magerus-Chatinet A, Schmitt A, Bomsel M: HIV-1-infected
blood mononuclear cells form an integrin- and agrin-dependent viral
synapse to induce efficient HIV-1 transcytosis across epithelial cell
monolayer. Mol Biol Cell 2005, 16:4267-4279.
119. Wira CR, Fahey JV: A new strategy to understand how HIV infects
women: identification of a window of vulnerability during the menstrual
cycle. AIDS 2008, 22:1909-1917.
120. Yeaman GR, Howell AL, Weldon S, Demian DJ, Collins JE, O’Connell DM,
Asin SN, Wira CR, Fanger MW: Human immunodeficiency virus receptor
and coreceptor expression on human uterine epithelial cells: regulation

Page 15 of 17

121.

122.

123.
124.

125.

126.

127.
128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.
136.
137.

138.

139.
140.

141.

of expression during the menstrual cycle and implications for human
immunodeficiency virus infection. Immunology 2003, 109:137-146.
Heise C, Miller CJ, Lackner A, Dandekar S: Primary acute simian
immunodeficiency virus infection of intestinal lymphoid tissue is
associated with gastrointestinal dysfunction. J Infect Dis 1994,
169:1116-1120.
Phillips DM, Zacharopoulos VR, Tan X, Pearce-Pratt R: Mechanisms of
sexual transmission of HIV: does HIV infect intact epithelia? Trends
Microbiol 1994, 2:454-458.
Norvell MK, Benrubi GI, Thompson RJ: Investigation of microtrauma after
sexual intercourse. J Reprod Med 1984, 29:269-271.
Ganor Y, Zhou Z, Tudor D, Schmitt A, Vacher-Lavenu MC, Gibault L,
Thiounn N, Tomasini J, Wolf JP, Bomsel M: Within 1 h, HIV-1 uses viral
synapses to enter efficiently the inner, but not outer, foreskin mucosa
and engages Langerhans-T cell conjugates. Mucosal Immunol 2010.
Platt EJ, Kozak SL, Durnin JP, Hope TJ, Kabat D: Rapid dissociation of HIV-1
from cultured cells severely limits infectivity assays, causes the
inactivation ascribed to entry inhibitors, and masks the inherently high
level of infectivity of virions. J Virol 2010, 84:3106-3110.
Zhang Z, Schuler T, Zupancic M, Wietgrefe S, Staskus KA, Reimann KA,
Reinhart TA, Rogan M, Cavert W, Miller CJ, et al: Sexual transmission and
propagation of SIV and HIV in resting and activated CD4+ T cells. Science
1999, 286:1353-1357.
Grivel JC, Margolis L: Use of human tissue explants to study human
infectious agents. Nat Protoc 2009, 4:256-269.
Saba E, Grivel JC, Vanpouille C, Brichacek B, Fitzgerald W, Margolis L,
Lisco A: HIV-1 sexual transmission: early events of HIV-1 infection of
human cervico-vaginal tissue in an optimized ex vivo model. Mucosal
Immunol 2010, 3:280-290.
Yeaman GR, Asin S, Weldon S, Demian DJ, Collins JE, Gonzalez JL, Wira CR,
Fanger MW, Howell AL: Chemokine receptor expression in the human
ectocervix: implications for infection by the human immunodeficiency
virus-type I. Immunology 2004, 113:524-533.
Patterson BK, Landay A, Andersson J, Brown C, Behbahani H, Jiyamapa D,
Burki Z, Stanislawski D, Czerniewski MA, Garcia P: Repertoire of chemokine
receptor expression in the female genital tract: implications for human
immunodeficiency virus transmission. Am J Pathol 1998, 153:481-490.
McClure CP, Tighe PJ, Robins RA, Bansal D, Bowman CA, Kingston M, Ball JK:
HIV coreceptor and chemokine ligand gene expression in the male
urethra and female cervix. Aids 2005, 19:1257-1265.
Hladik F, Sakchalathorn P, Ballweber L, Lentz G, Fialkow M, Eschenbach D,
McElrath MJ: Initial events in establishing vaginal entry and infection by
human immunodeficiency virus type-1. Immunity 2007, 26:257-270.
Hussain LA, Lehner T: Comparative investigation of Langerhans’ cells and
potential receptors for HIV in oral, genitourinary and rectal epithelia.
Immunology 1995, 85:475-484.
Turville SG, Cameron PU, Handley A, Lin G, Pohlmann S, Doms RW,
Cunningham AL: Diversity of receptors binding HIV on dendritic cell
subsets. Nat Immunol 2002, 3:975-983.
Zacharopoulos VR, Perotti ME, Phillips DM: A role for cell migration in the
sexual transmission of HIV-1? Curr Biol 1997, 7:534-537.
Hladik F, McElrath MJ: Setting the stage: host invasion by HIV. Nat Rev
Immunol 2008, 8:447-457.
Spira AI, Marx PA, Patterson BK, Mahoney J, Koup RA, Wolinsky SM, Ho DD:
Cellular targets of infection and route of viral dissemination after an
intravaginal inoculation of simian immunodeficiency virus into rhesus
macaques. J Exp Med 1996, 183:215-225.
Jayakumar P, Berger I, Autschbach F, Weinstein M, Funke B, Verdin E,
Goldsmith MA, Keppler OT: Tissue-resident macrophages are productively
infected ex vivo by primary X4 isolates of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1. Journal of virology 2005, 79:5220-5226.
McCoombe SG, Short RV: Potential HIV-1 target cells in the human penis.
AIDS 2006, 20:1491-1495.
Dinh MH, McRaven MD, Kelley Z, Penugonda S, Hope TJ: Keratinization of
the adult male foreskin and implications for male circumcision. Aids
2010, 24:899-906.
Patterson BK, Landay A, Siegel JN, Flener Z, Pessis D, Chaviano A, Bailey RC:
Susceptibility to human immunodeficiency virus-1 infection of human
foreskin and cervical tissue grown in explant culture. Am J Pathol 2002,
161:867-873.

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

142. Donoval BA, Landay AL, Moses S, Agot K, Ndinya-Achola JO, Nyagaya EA,
MacLean I, Bailey RC: HIV-1 target cells in foreskins of African men with
varying histories of sexually transmitted infections. Am J Clin Pathol 2006,
125:386-391.
143. McClure CP, Tighe PJ, Robins RA, Bansal D, Bowman CA, Kingston M, Ball JK:
HIV coreceptor and chemokine ligand gene expression in the male
urethra and female cervix. AIDS 2005, 19:1257-1265.
144. Chenine AL, Siddappa NB, Kramer VG, Sciaranghella G, Rasmussen RA,
Lee SJ, Santosuosso M, Poznansky MC, Velu V, Amara RR, et al: Relative
transmissibility of an R5 clade C simian-human immunodeficiency virus
across different mucosae in macaques parallels the relative risks of
sexual HIV-1 transmission in humans via different routes. J Infect Dis
2010, 201:1155-1163.
145. Nazli A, Chan O, Dobson-Belaire WN, Ouellet M, Tremblay MJ, GrayOwen SD, Arsenault AL, Kaushic C: Exposure to HIV-1 directly impairs
mucosal epithelial barrier integrity allowing microbial translocation. PLoS
Pathog 2010, 6:e1000852.
146. Olsson J, Poles M, Spetz AL, Elliott J, Hultin L, Giorgi J, Andersson J,
Anton P: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection is associated
with significant mucosal inflammation characterized by increased
expression of CCR5, CXCR4, and beta-chemokines. J Infect Dis 2000,
182:1625-1635.
147. Poles MA, Elliott J, Taing P, Anton PA, Chen IS: A preponderance of CCR5
(+) CXCR4(+) mononuclear cells enhances gastrointestinal mucosal
susceptibility to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. J Virol
2001, 75:8390-8399.
148. Brenchley JM, Price DA, Douek DC: HIV disease: fallout from a mucosal
catastrophe? Nat Immunol 2006, 7:235-239.
149. Bomsel M: Transcytosis of infectious human immunodeficiency virus
across a tight human epithelial cell line barrier. Nat Med 1997, 3:42-47.
150. Shen R, Smythies LE, Clements RH, Novak L, Smith PD: Dendritic cells
transmit HIV-1 through human small intestinal mucosa. J Leukoc Biol
2010, 87:663-670.
151. Wolinsky SM, Wike CM, Korber BT, Hutto C, Parks WP, Rosenblum LL,
Kunstman KJ, Furtado MR, Munoz JL: Selective transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus type-1 variants from mothers to infants. Science
1992, 255:1134-1137.
152. Scarlatti G, Hodara V, Rossi P, Muggiasca L, Bucceri A, Albert J, Fenyo EM:
Transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) from
mother to child correlates with viral phenotype. Virology 1993,
197:624-629.
153. van’t Wout AB, Kootstra NA, Mulder-Kampinga GA, Albrecht-van Lent N,
Scherpbier HJ, Veenstra J, Boer K, Coutinho RA, Miedema F, Schuitemaker H:
Macrophage-tropic variants initiate human immunodeficiency virus type
1 infection after sexual, parenteral, and vertical transmission. J Clin Invest
1994, 94:2060-2067.
154. Scarlatti G, Tresoldi E, Bjorndal A, Fredriksson R, Colognesi C, Deng HK,
Malnati MS, Plebani A, Siccardi AG, Littman DR, et al: In vivo evolution of
HIV-1 co-receptor usage and sensitivity to chemokine-mediated
suppression. Nat Med 1997, 3:1259-1265.
155. Matala E, Hahn T, Yedavalli VR, Ahmad N: Biological characterization of
HIV type 1 envelope V3 regions from mothers and infants associated
with perinatal transmission. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2001, 17:1725-1735.
156. Fultz PN: Components of saliva inactivate human immunodeficiency
virus. Lancet 1986, 2:1215.
157. Malamud D, Davis C, Berthold P, Roth E, Friedman H: Human
submandibular saliva aggregates HIV. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1993,
9:633-637.
158. Nagashunmugam T, Friedman HM, Davis C, Kennedy S, Goldstein LT,
Malamud D: Human submandibular saliva specifically inhibits HIV type 1.
AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 1997, 13:371-376.
159. McNeely TB, Dealy M, Dripps DJ, Orenstein JM, Eisenberg SP, Wahl SM:
Secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor: a human saliva protein exhibiting
anti-human immunodeficiency virus 1 activity in vitro. J Clin Invest 1995,
96:456-464.
160. Weinberg A, Quinones-Mateu ME, Lederman MM: Role of human betadefensins in HIV infection. Adv Dent Res 2006, 19:42-48.
161. Abel K, Pahar B, Van Rompay KK, Fritts L, Sin C, Schmidt K, Colon R,
McChesney M, Marthas ML: Rapid virus dissemination in infant macaques
after oral simian immunodeficiency virus exposure in the presence of
local innate immune responses. Journal of virology 2006, 80:6357-6367.

Page 16 of 17

162. Meng G, Wei X, Wu X, Sellers MT, Decker JM, Moldoveanu Z,
Orenstein JM, Graham MF, Kappes JC, Mestecky J, et al: Primary intestinal
epithelial cells selectively transfer R5 HIV-1 to CCR5+ cells. Nat Med
2002, 8:150-156.
163. Salvatori F, Scarlatti G: HIV type 1 chemokine receptor usage in motherto-child transmission. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2001, 17:925-935.
164. Clevestig P, Maljkovic I, Casper C, Carlenor E, Lindgren S, Naver L, Bohlin AB,
Fenyo EM, Leitner T, Ehrnst A: The X4 phenotype of HIV type 1 evolves
from R5 in two children of mothers, carrying X4, and is not linked to
transmission. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 2005, 21:371-378.
165. Huang W, Eshleman SH, Toma J, Stawiski E, Whitcomb JM, Jackson JB,
Guay L, Musoke P, Parkin N, Petropoulos CJ: Vertical transmission of X4tropic and dual-tropic HIV-1 in five Ugandan mother-infant pairs. AIDS
2009, 23:1903-1908.
166. Fenyo EM: Viral phenotype and severity of HIV-1 infection: are children
different from adults? Aids 1993, 7:1673-1674.
167. Spijkerman IJ, Koot M, Prins M, Keet IP, van den Hoek AJ, Miedema F,
Coutinho RA: Lower prevalence and incidence of HIV-1 syncytiuminducing phenotype among injecting drug users compared with
homosexual men. AIDS 1995, 9:1085-1092.
168. Schutten M, van Baalen CA, Guillon C, Huisman RC, Boers PH, Sintnicolaas K,
Gruters RA, Osterhaus AD: Macrophage tropism of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 facilitates in vivo escape from cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte pressure. J Virol 2001, 75:2706-2709.
169. Harouse JM, Buckner C, Gettie A, Fuller R, Bohm R, Blanchard J, ChengMayer C: CD8+ T cell-mediated CXC chemokine receptor 4-simian/
human immunodeficiency virus suppression in dually infected rhesus
macaques. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003, 100:10977-10982.
170. David SA, Smith MS, Lopez GJ, Adany I, Mukherjee S, Buch S,
Goodenow MM, Narayan O: Selective transmission of R5-tropic HIV type 1
from dendritic cells to resting CD4+ T cells. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses
2001, 17:59-68.
171. Ito Y, Grivel JC, Chen S, Kiselyeva Y, Reichelderfer P, Margolis L: CXCR4tropic HIV-1 suppresses replication of CCR5-tropic HIV-1 in human
lymphoid tissue by selective induction of CC-chemokines. J Infect Dis
2004, 189:506-514.
172. Lusso P, Earl PL, Sironi F, Santoro F, Ripamonti C, Scarlatti G, Longhi R,
Berger EA, Burastero SE: Cryptic nature of a conserved, CD4-inducible V3
loop neutralization epitope in the native envelope glycoprotein
oligomer of CCR5-restricted, but not CXCR4-using, primary human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 strains. J Virol 2005, 79:6957-6968.
173. Pastore C, Ramos A, Mosier DE: Intrinsic obstacles to human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 coreceptor switching. J Virol 2004,
78:7565-7574.
174. Kuhmann SE, Moore JP: The HIV-1 phenotype variants: deadly and
deadlier. J VirEntry 2005, 1:4-16.
175. Tscherning C, Alaeus A, Fredriksson R, Bjorndal A, Deng H, Littman DR,
Fenyo EM, Albert J: Differences in chemokine coreceptor usage between
genetic subtypes of HIV-1. Virology 1998, 241:181-188.
176. Lee HY, Giorgi EE, Keele BF, Gaschen B, Athreya GS, Salazar-Gonzalez JF,
Pham KT, Goepfert PA, Kilby JM, Saag MS, et al: Modeling sequence
evolution in acute HIV-1 infection. J Theor Biol 2009, 261:341-360.
177. Keele BF, Giorgi EE, Salazar-Gonzalez JF, Decker JM, Pham KT, Salazar MG,
Sun C, Grayson T, Wang S, Li H, et al: Identification and characterization of
transmitted and early founder virus envelopes in primary HIV-1
infection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 2008, 105:7552-7557.
178. Keele BF: Identifying and characterizing recently transmitted viruses. Curr
Opin HIV AIDS 2010, 5:327-334.
179. Li H, Bar KJ, Wang S, Decker JM, Chen Y, Sun C, Salazar-Gonzalez JF,
Salazar MG, Learn GH, Morgan CJ, et al: High Multiplicity Infection by HIV1 in Men Who Have Sex with Men. PLoS Pathog 2010, 6:e1000890.
180. Gupta P, Collins KB, Ratner D, Watkins S, Naus GJ, Landers DV, Patterson BK:
Memory CD4(+) T cells are the earliest detectable human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)-infected cells in the female
genital mucosal tissue during HIV-1 transmission in an organ culture
system. Journal of virology 2002, 76:9868-9876.
181. Peters PJ, Sullivan WM, Duenas-Decamp MJ, Bhattacharya J,
Ankghuambom C, Brown R, Luzuriaga K, Bell J, Simmonds P, Ball J,
Clapham PR: Non-macrophage-tropic human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 R5 envelopes predominate in blood, lymph nodes, and semen:

Grivel et al. Journal of Translational Medicine 2010, 9(Suppl 1):S6
http://www.translational-medicine.com/content/9/S1/S6

182.

183.

184.

185.

186.

187.
188.

189.
190.

191.

192.
193.

194.

Page 17 of 17

implications for transmission and pathogenesis. Journal of virology 2006,
80:6324-6332.
Alexander M, Lynch R, Mulenga J, Allen S, Derdeyn CA, Hunter E: Donor
and recipient envs from heterosexual human immunodeficiency virus
subtype C transmission pairs require high receptor levels for entry.
Journal of virology 2010, 84:4100-4104.
Liu Y, Curlin ME, Diem K, Zhao H, Ghosh AK, Zhu H, Woodward AS,
Maenza J, Stevens CE, Stekler J, et al: Env length and N-linked
glycosylation following transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
Type 1 subtype B viruses. Virology 2008, 374:229-233.
Derdeyn CA, Decker JM, Bibollet-Ruche F, Mokili JL, Muldoon M,
Denham SA, Heil ML, Kasolo F, Musonda R, Hahn BH, et al: Envelopeconstrained neutralization-sensitive HIV-1 after heterosexual
transmission. Science 2004, 303:2019-2022.
Doores KJ, Bonomelli C, Harvey DJ, Vasiljevic S, Dwek RA, Burton DR,
Crispin M, Scanlan CN: Envelope glycans of immunodeficiency virions are
almost entirely oligomannose antigens. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2010.
Geijtenbeek TB, Kwon DS, Torensma R, van Vliet SJ, van Duijnhoven GC,
Middel J, Cornelissen IL, Nottet HS, KewalRamani VN, Littman DR, et al: DCSIGN, a dendritic cell-specific HIV-1-binding protein that enhances transinfection of T cells. Cell 2000, 100:587-597.
Geijtenbeek TB, van Kooyk Y: DC-SIGN: a novel HIV receptor on DCs that
mediates HIV-1 transmission. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2003, 276:31-54.
Muratori C, Bona R, Ruggiero E, D’Ettorre G, Vullo V, Andreotti M,
Federico M: DC contact with HIV-1-infected cells leads to high levels of
Env-mediated virion endocytosis coupled with enhanced HIV-1 Ag
presentation. Eur J Immunol 2009, 39:404-416.
van der Vlist M, Geijtenbeek TB: Langerin functions as an antiviral
receptor on Langerhans cells. Immunol Cell Biol 2010, 88:410-415.
Fauci AS: New Concepts in HIV/AIDS Pathogenesis: Implications for
Interventions., In Book New Concepts in HIV/AIDS Pathogenesis:
Implications for Interventions (Editor ed.^eds.), vol. TUPL010. City; 2010.
Cicala C, Martinelli E, McNally JP, Goode DJ, Gopaul R, Hiatt J, Jelicic K,
Kottilil S, Macleod K, O’Shea A, et al: The integrin {alpha}4{beta}7 forms a
complex with cell-surface CD4 and defines a T-cell subset that is highly
susceptible to infection by HIV-1. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2009.
Brenchley JM, Douek DC: HIV infection and the gastrointestinal immune
system. Mucosal Immunol 2008, 1:23-30.
Sagar M, Laeyendecker O, Lee S, Gamiel J, Wawer MJ, Gray RH, Serwadda D,
Sewankambo NK, Shepherd JC, Toma J, et al: Selection of HIV variants
with signature genotypic characteristics during heterosexual
transmission. J Infect Dis 2009, 199:580-589.
Margolis L, Shattock R: Selective transmission of CCR5-utilizing HIV-1: the
‘gatekeeper’ problem resolved? Nat Rev Microbiol 2006, 4:312-317.

doi:10.1186/1479-5876-9-S1-S6
Cite this article as: Grivel et al.: Selective transmission of R5 HIV-1
variants: where is the gatekeeper? Journal of Translational Medicine 2010
9(Suppl 1):S6.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
