<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Uniting sex and eukaryote origins in an emerging oxygenic world</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Biology Direct 2010 5:53. doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-53"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Jeferson Gross"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

HYPOTHESIS

Open Access

Uniting sex and eukaryote origins in an emerging
oxygenic world
Jeferson Gross, Debashish Bhattacharya*

Abstract
Background: Theories about eukaryote origins (eukaryogenesis) need to provide unified explanations for the
emergence of diverse complex features that define this lineage. Models that propose a prokaryote-to-eukaryote
transition are gridlocked between the opposing “phagocytosis first” and “mitochondria as seed” paradigms, neither
of which fully explain the origins of eukaryote cell complexity. Sex (outcrossing with meiosis) is an example of an
elaborate trait not yet satisfactorily addressed in theories about eukaryogenesis. The ancestral nature of meiosis and
its dependence on eukaryote cell biology suggest that the emergence of sex and eukaryogenesis were
simultaneous and synergic and may be explained by a common selective pressure.
Presentation of the hypothesis: We propose that a local rise in oxygen levels, due to cyanobacterial
photosynthesis in ancient Archean microenvironments, was highly toxic to the surrounding biota. This selective
pressure drove the transformation of an archaeal (archaebacterial) lineage into the first eukaryotes. Key is that
oxygen might have acted in synergy with environmental stresses such as ultraviolet (UV) radiation and/or
desiccation that resulted in the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The emergence of eukaryote
features such as the endomembrane system and acquisition of the mitochondrion are posited as strategies to
cope with a metabolic crisis in the cell plasma membrane and the accumulation of ROS, respectively. Selective
pressure for efficient repair of ROS/UV-damaged DNA drove the evolution of sex, which required cell-cell fusions,
cytoskeleton-mediated chromosome movement, and emergence of the nuclear envelope. Our model implies that
evolution of sex and eukaryogenesis were inseparable processes.
Testing the hypothesis: Several types of data can be used to test our hypothesis. These include paleontological
predictions, simulation of ancient oxygenic microenvironments, and cell biological experiments with Archaea
exposed to ROS and UV stresses. Studies of archaeal conjugation, prokaryotic DNA recombination, and the
universality of nuclear-mediated meiotic activities might corroborate the hypothesis that sex and the nucleus
evolved to support DNA repair.
Implications of the hypothesis: Oxygen tolerance emerges as an important principle to investigate
eukaryogenesis. The evolution of eukaryotic complexity might be best understood as a synergic process between
key evolutionary innovations, of which meiosis (sex) played a central role.
Reviewers: This manuscript was reviewed by Eugene V. Koonin, Anthony M. Poole, and Gáspár Jékely.

Background
The birth of eukaryotes was a milestone in the evolution
of life on our planet, yet the initial stages in this process
remain shrouded in mystery. Even the most widely
accepted notion that eukaryotes originated from prokaryotes is problematic because traits unique to eukaryotes,
* Correspondence: bhattacharya@aesop.rutgers.edu
Department of Ecology, Evolution and Natural Resources, and Institute of
Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
Foran Hall 102, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA

such as the nucleus, endomembrane system, cytoskeleton, and mitosis, are found in all taxa with no intermediate stages left as signposts of their evolution [1-3].
This results in the “chicken-and-egg” dilemma when
attempting to explain the origin of eukaryote complexity
from prokaryote ancestors. The best example of this
conundrum is the acquisition of the alphaproteobacterium-derived precursor of mitochondria. Traditional
hypotheses based on the “phagocytosis first” view posit
the existence of a mitochondrion-less ancestor of

© 2010 Gross and Bhattacharya; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

eukaryotes (e.g., an “archezoan”) that engulfed and
retained the alphaproteobacterium via endosymbiosis
[1-4]. The search for amitochondriate eukaryotes has
thus far proved fruitless and the bulk of data suggest all
living eukaryotes (whether currently housing this organelle or a derived version [e.g., hydrogenosome]) once
shared a mitochondrion-containing ancestor [1]. Moreover phagocytosis is a derived property of the endomembrane system and cytoskeleton, both of which are
highly ATP-needy [5], suggesting that the energetic output of aerobic mitochondria might have been required
for the evolution of phagocytosis. The central importance of the mitochondrion to eukaryogenesis is recognized by alternative hypotheses that posit the acquisition
of the mitochondrial forerunner by an archaeon host as
the founding event of eukaryotic evolution (e.g., the
hydrogen hypothesis) [1,2,6]. This “mitochondrion as
seed” perspective fails however to satisfactorily explain
how the mitochondrial forerunner gained entry into the
host cell in the absence of phagocytosis and how the
evolution of eukaryotic complexity evolved after this critical event [2,3].
The origin of sex is another shadowy avenue in eukaryote evolution. Many lines of evidence demonstrate that
sex is beneficial for extant eukaryotes by creating
genetic variability, masking or eliminating deleterious
mutations, and assisting DNA repair processes [7-9].
Meiotic genes are however present in all major eukaryotic clades, suggesting that sex is ancient and predates
diversification of extant eukaryotes [9]. In addition, sex
as outcrossing can only occur if distinct, complex cellular activities, such as syngamy (i.e., fusion of gametes),
karyogamy (i.e., fusion of nuclei), and meiosis, act in
concert [10-12]. These processes depend inextricably on
the dynamics of the cytoskeleton, endomembrane system, and nuclear envelope, on the structure of chromosomes, and are embedded in the complex eukaryote cell
cycle [10-13]. Here we posit that such a global involvement of eukaryote cell biology in the process of sex and
its early appearance in eukaryotes reflect the fact that
the evolution of sex and the emergence of the eukaryote
traits were synergic processes. These might have
occurred in a population of archaeal cells as response to
a unique combination of stressful conditions associated
with the rise of oxygenic microenvironments on Earth.

Presentation of the hypothesis
Were eukaryotes forged by an oxygen crisis?

The paleontological and biomarker record place early
vestiges of eukaryotes around 2.7 - 1.7 billion years ago
(Gya) [14-16]. This suggests that eukaryotic origins may
correlate with a major transition in Earth’s geochemistry; i.e., the global accumulation of cyanobacterialderived oxygen (O2 ) [15]. The large anomalous mass-

Page 2 of 20

independent fractionations of sulfur isotopes, produced
by photoreactions mediated by ultraviolet (UV) light
during the Archean, abruptly disappear by 2.4 Gya
[15,17]. This indicates that O2 had accumulated in the
atmosphere and formed an ozone-like photoscreen
[15,17]. Mounting data, however, suggest that O2 had
already started to spread through local shallow water
environments during the Archean - Paleoproterozoic
boundary (about 2.6 - 2.4 Gya) [17,18]. These observations point to a period in history in which early O2 proliferation likely occurred under an ozone-less
atmosphere. During this exceptional circumstance, it is
conceivable that deep penetrating UV radiation may
have photo-activated a considerable fraction of the oxygenic pools into reactive oxygen species (ROS), such as
the superoxide (O2-) ion and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
[19-22]. In prevalently ferrous rich aquatic systems
[17,18], these could have been further transformed via
Fenton chemistry into highly reactive hydroxyl radicals
[21]. Abundant production of ROS may have also
occurred inside the cells. A key notion explored in this
essay is that molecular oxygen (i.e., O2) alone is only a
mild toxic agent and therefore O2 might have acted in
concert (i.e., in synergism) with environmental stressors
such as UV radiation and/or desiccation. Both of which
are common in surface environments and lead to massive activation of intracellular O 2 into ROS [23-25].
Taken together, these observations suggest that
life forms faced a new challenge to survival when highly
oxidative microenvironments, permeated by UV radiation, first emerged as a result of cyanobacterial
photosynthesis.
Rescuing the metabolic activities of the archaeal plasma
membrane

The nuclear envelope (NE) is traditionally championed
as the defining feature of eukaryotic cells. Despite this
deep-rooted view, modern cell biology demonstrates
that the NE is morphogenetically derived from the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [2,26]. The ER is also the
driver of endomembrane system biogenesis [27,28].
Therefore, does the function and evolution of the ER
provide clues to early events in eukaryogenesis? Among
many activities, the ER is the site of post- and co-translational protein targeting, core glycosylation of proteins,
and biosynthesis of the majority of cell lipids and glycerophospholipids [27-30]. These processes lie at the heart
of biological functions performed by the prokaryotic
plasma membrane (the inner membrane in Gram-negative bacteria) [29-32]. There is also a topological correlation. Signal recognition particles (SRPs) and ribosomes
bind to Sec translocases at the cytosolic face of the
eukaryotic ER and the prokaryotic plasma membrane,
respectively, and nascent proteins are co-translationally

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

directed to the opposite side [29,30,33]. Notably, the
core glycosylation system and subunits of the eukaryotic
Sec, SRP, and ribosomal machineries are phylogenetically more closely related to archaeal counterparts than
to homologs in Eubacteria [29-31,34,35]. Taken together
these observations are consistent with three hypotheses:
1) the eukaryotic ER represents the remnants of the
plasma membrane of ancestral Archaea; therefore, 2)
the process of eukaryogenesis might best be understood
in light of phylogenetic hypotheses that propose an
Archaea-to-eukaryote transformation [34,35]; and finally
3) the origin of the ER might reflect a migration of the
plasma membrane metabolic activities towards the cell
interior. We suggest that the plasma membrane-to-ER
metabolic shift was in fact the reason for the emergence
of the endomembrane system. Might this have occurred
as a response to detrimental environmental factors associated with the incipient raise of O2?
It is possible that the molecular activities at the
archaeal plasma membrane were directly injured by
environmental ROS and/or UV, both known to affect
plasma membrane composition [36-39], and to deplete
molecular factors of the translation machinery [40-42]
and protein targeting [43]. In addition, it is possible that
exposure to cycles of dehydration/rehydration during
desiccation could critically affect plasma membrane
integrity [23,44]. In contrast, the interior of the archaeal
cell might have been protected from this type of peripheral damage. The proto-ER might therefore have been
selected to rescue the metabolic activities of the plasma
membrane in the safe interior milieu of the cell. This
possibility makes sense under the hypothesis of environmental ROS exposure. Current data regarding cellular
ROS detoxification demonstrate that the plasma membrane acts as a semi-permeable barrier that constrains
diffusion rates of O2 and H2O2 (O2- is efficiently halted
by lipid bilayers), allowing the turnover of detoxifying
enzymes, such as catalases, peroxidases, and terminal
oxidases to counterbalance the influx of oxygen species
(Figure 1A-F). The result is a steep extracellular/intracellular gradient of O2 and H2O2 concentrations [45,46].
If we assume that the proto-eukaryote encoded a set of
ROS detoxifying enzymes, increase in cell size may have
maximized the clearance of environmental oxygen species (including the clearance of O2 by the mitochondrion, see below) (Figure 1A-K) [46]. This also implies
that metabolic activities housed in the proto-ER were
shielded by cytoplasmic antioxidants and could proliferate in this compartment, whereas protein targeting in
the plasma membrane was directly exposed to environmental injury and eventually went extinct from the periphery of the cell (Figure 1A-F). Whereas the protein
targeting and metabolic activities proliferated in the
proto-ER, they were under negative selection in the

Page 3 of 20

plasma membrane and eventually were lost from the
periphery of the cell. Such a plasma membrane-to-ER
shift however required that vesicular traffic evolved in
parallel as an alternative avenue to load the plasma
membrane with ER-derived proteins and metabolites
(Figure 1E, F). This consolidated the ER as the metabolic factory of the cell and the secretory pathway as the
driver of endomembrane system biogenesis [27,28,33].
But how did the first ER originate?
Proponents of “phagocytosis first” hypotheses suggest
that the endomembrane system emerged as an organized endocytic pathway that eventually differentiated
into the proto-ER [2,47]. This idea however cannot
readily account for a shift in the plasma membrane-toER metabolic activities. In addition, it contradicts the
actual flow of biogenetic information through the endomembrane system that proceeds from the ER to the
plasma membrane (i.e., an exocytic pathway) [27,28,33].
Empirical observations in Escherichia coli indicate that
endovesicles can directly accumulate as a result of overexpression or depletion of inner membrane proteins and
thereby might provide an alternative and more plausible
scenario for proto-ER emergence [48,49]. In particular,
depletion of the SRP and the SecE subunit from the
inner membrane protein translocon results in the accumulation of endomembranes that resemble the ER
structure, including the co-localization of SRP receptors
and ribosomal particles at the cytosolic leaflet of the
new formed vesicles [48]. These observations support
the idea that endomembranes co-segregating with key
molecular machines (e.g., Sec translocons and ribosomes) could have spontaneously pinched off as a result
of injuries to the plasma membrane of an ancestral
Archaea and thereafter been selected to form the prototypic ER organelle.
Mitochondria, the aerobic buffer of the eukaryotic cell

Was phagocytosis required for acquisition of the alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont precursor of mitochondria
[1-4]? If phagocytosis is a derived property of the endomembrane system and cytoskeleton that consumes high
amounts of ATP [5], the opposite is likely to have
occurred; i.e., the aerobic mitochondrion was required
for the evolution of phagocytosis. The presence in the
ancestral Archaea of fusogenic and membrane deformation mechanisms in the context of a strong selective
pressure might have been necessary and sufficient for
acquisition of the mitochondrial forerunner. Consistent
with this idea, phylogenetic data support the notion that
the ancestral Archaea had homologs of eukaryotic Arp2/
3 actin subunits, which presumably were capable of
polymerization and promoting membrane deformation
to eventually envelop an alphaproteobacterium [50]. In
addition, the presence during conjugation in Haloferax

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

Page 4 of 20

Figure 1 Evolution of the endomembrane system, mitochondrion, and eukaryote cell size. A - F. Model for evolution of the
endomembrane system in response to imbalances in plasma membrane activities. Archaeal cells, containing co-translationally active ribosomes,
are exposed to an environmental stressor (here exemplified by external H2O2, orange background, although UV radiation and/or desiccation may
provide additional sources of stress). The plasma membrane was particularly affected by this external injury. As a result of the peripheral damage,
a vesicle carrying molecular components (e.g., ribosomes) pinched off from the plasma membrane and accumulated in the inner cell, giving rise
to the proto-ER. H2O2 that infiltrated the cell was cleared by enzymes (e.g., catalases and peroxidases). This generated a protected intracellular
zone (white) that allowed proliferation of the proto-ER and associated ribosomes, while H2O2-damaged co-translational targeting gradually
disappeared from the plasma membrane. Vesicular traffic, scaffolded by the incipient cytoskeleton (microtubule-organizing center and
microtubules in red), emerged as an exocytic avenue to target ER-synthesized proteins to the plasma membrane (E and F). G - K. Putative model
for early events in mitochondrial evolution. In a biofilm, archaeal and alphaprotobacterial cells are juxtaposed in a syntrophic association (arrows).
Fusogenic and membrane remodeling activities necessary for cell-cell fusions during archaeal mating allowed the capture and retention of the
alphaproteobacterium precursor of mitochondria. Environmental O2 (blue background) penetrates the cells and is photo-activated to ROS by UV.
Alphaproteobacterial aerobic respiration clears the intracellular O2 (white zones). Intracellular mitochondria propagate and deliver ATP to the
cytoplasm (J and H). Increase in cell size (E, F and J, K) emerges as a crucial eukaryotic strategy to counterbalance the influx of oxygenic species.

(Halobacterium) volcanii of a network of partial fusions
connecting diverse cells by protrusions of the plasma
membrane referred to as cytoplasmic bridges illustrate
that fusogenic and membrane deformation mechanisms
exist in this domain of life [51,52]. Assuming that an
analogous mating pathway was present in the ancestor
of eukaryotes (discussed below) and that both alphaproteobacterial and archaeal populations were densely
packed in a biofilm, it is conceivable that an alphaproteobacterium was “sandwiched” and enclosed between
fusing archaeal cells (Figure 1G, H).
Whatever the mechanism, we suggest that capture of the
alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont was crucial for survival
in local oxidative environments that arose as a result of
cyanobacterium-derived oxygen production. The idea that
eukaryogenesis and alphaproteobacterial acquisition
involved syntrophic symbiosis in the context of biofilms
has been proposed more than once in the literature
[2,6,53-55]. Here we recapitulate this notion by suggesting

that the initial step of archaeal-alphaproteobacterial
symbiosis might have been the formation of a defensive
inter-species biofilm in which anaerobic archaeons were
cross-protected by aerobic respiration provided by the
alphaproteobacterium (i.e., O2 clearance, Figure 1G-K)
[55,56]. Examples within the prokaryotic world are found
in dental plaque biofilms [57] and in mixed cultures of
aerotolerant bacteria with anaerobic sulfate reducing bacteria [58]. Later on, the capture of the aerobic alphaproteobacterium as an endosymbiont was a significant
development that permitted efficient O2 scavenging inside
the archaeal cell (e.g., as in the ciliate Strombidium purpureum) [56,59]. This step was crucial for survival because
the proto-eukaryote was presumably exposed to substantial doses of UV and/or desiccation and therefore a large
fraction of intracellular O2 would be activated into ROS
(Figure 1G) [19,23-25]. Correspondingly, the endosymbiont was protected by the surrounding archaeal cytoplasm that contained ROS-detoxifying enzymes.

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

Endosymbiont-host cross-feeding might also have
been possible. If both the archaeon and the alphaproteobacterium were heterotrophs, formation of syntrophic
links (e.g., based on mono- and di-carboxylates, Figure
1G) between the symbiotic partners might have allowed
dissimilation of archaeal redox equivalents and glycolitic
end products (e.g., pyruvate) via alphaproteobacterial
aerobic respiration [56,57,60]. This laid the foundation
for extant cytosol-to-mitochondrion metabolic connections and eukaryotic aerobic metabolism, a condition
sine qua non for long-term survival under oxidative
stress. Strong selection to optimize incipient aerobic
bioenergetics led the proto-eukaryote to progressively
control activities of the alphaproteobacterium via establishment of host-encoded protein sorting systems in the
endosymbiont [61]. This eventually converted the captured alphaproteobacterium into an ATP-producing
organelle (Figure 1J), thereby providing the energetic
surplus to support novel eukaryotic developments such
as the endomembrane system and cytoskeleton.
Did sex derive from archaeal mating?

Models for the origin of sex usually postulate its appearance in bona fide eukaryotes; i.e., nucleated cells capable
of mitotic division [7,62]. In addition, current hypotheses for the emergence of sex usually suggest that crossover recombination between homologous chromosomes
and ploidy reduction during meiosis evolved before outcrossing [47,62]. However, in modern eukaryotes outcrossing is only possible when features such as syngamy,
karyogamy, and meiosis act in sequence [10-12]. If
meiotic recombination and the nucleus evolved first, it
is difficult to account for a later and simultaneous evolution of syngamy and karyogamy, since neither of these
elaborate cell biological activities has a separate function
to be selected for individually. Here we propose that
outcrossing mediated by syngamy might have been an
ancestral feature already present in the archaeal predecessor of eukaryotes. This idea is supported by the conjugational process observed in H. volcanii in which
cycles of partial cell fusion and splitting allow reciprocal
mobilization of plasmids and chromosomes, leading to
ploidy variation (Figure 2A) [51,52]. This suggests an
intriguing possibility; i.e., eukaryotic sex might have
evolved from archaeal conjugation.
Sulfolobus solfataricus is an extant crenarchaeon in
which conjugation involves tight cell-to-cell apposition
and is mediated by biofilm formation in response to detrimental exposure to UV radiation [63-65]. Similarly,
stressful conditions also trigger syngamy and sex in
eukaryotic protists [66]. In Sulfolobus, UV induces pyrimidine dimers that generate double strand breaks (DSBs)
during DNA replication. These DSBs are the signal for
induction of conjugation-mediated recombination; i.e.,

Page 5 of 20

DSBs generated by chemical agents also trigger conjugation [63,65]. In eukaryotic meiosis, DSBs are also formed
after pre-meiotic DNA replication, however they are
induced enzymatically by Spo11 [11,67], a component
derived from the archaeal topoisomerase VIa subunit
[9,67]. Notably, in taxonomically distantly related eukaryotes such as yeast and the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, requirement of Spo11 can be partially bypassed by
other agents that induce DSBs or single strand damage
[68,69]. These observations indicate that DNA lesions
expressed during replication, usually in the form of DSBs,
represent a central and ancestral feature of both eukaryotic sex and conjugation in Sulfolobus. In eukaryotes,
these DSBs are repaired during meiosis by homologous
recombination between the two parental chromosomes
[11,67-69]. This reaction is catalyzed by a machine whose
central component, Dmc1 is evolutionarily related to
archaeal RecA ([70]; Gross and Bhattacharya, unpublished data). In Sulfolobus and diverse archaeons DSBs
are also presumably repaired by RecA-mediated homologous recombination that uses as intact templates genetic
material mobilized during conjugation [63,65,71,72]. This
RecA pathway for DSB repair involves a complex formed
by Rad50-Mre11-HerA that is often encoded in the same
operon in Archaea [70,73]. This is of interest because
homologs of the HerA ATPase are implicated in DNA
pumping during both binary division and conjugation in
many prokaryotes, whereas Mre11 and Rad50 are core
components of both the meiotic and mitotic recombination machineries [11,70,73]. These parallels between
eukaryotic meiosis and archaeal conjugation not only
strengthen the idea that the former evolved from the latter, but that both serve the same purpose, repair of DNA
damage, in particular DSBs.
The analogies and interpretations above in part recapitulate ideas already elaborated in the traditional DNA
repair hypothesis for the evolution of sex [8,66]. Here
we advance these notions by proposing a scenario in
which sex evolved to cope with the pervasive genotoxicity produced by ROS and UV in the harsh conditions
that accompanied incipient O2 emergence on the surface of the Earth. If the ancestral state of pre-eukaryotic
sex resembled the conjugational process observed in H.
volcanii, it is conceivable that cell-cell fusions allowed
the formation of diploid/polyploid states more resistant
to deleterious mutations. In addition inter-cell mobilization of large chromosome segments by conjugative plasmids allowed DNA repair by homologous
recombination (Figure 2A) [51,52,72]. We propose that
such bidirectional genetic flow that was used for DNA
repair, over time, evolved into meiosis (Figure 2B-F); i.e.,
a highly organized system to bring two parental DNAs
in close proximity, to use whole choromosomes in a
homologous recombination reaction, and to relocate the

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

Page 6 of 20

Figure 2 A putative model for the evolution of meiosis from archaeal conjugation. A. Ancestral archaeal conjugation (as described in H.
volcanii) involving cell fusions, bidirectional flow of plasmids, and recombination between parental chromosomes (dark blue and green,
respectively) [51,52]. B and C. Chromosome linearization permitted efficient pairing of homologues and resolution of crossovers [11,67].
Telomeres (orange) evolved to protect chromosome termini and to nucleate the pairing of homologues [11,67]. A centromere (orange region in
the centre of chromosomes) served as a connection between sister chromatids and as an attachment site, via kinetochores, for the meiotic
spindles [11,13,99]. This consisted of a network of microtubules (red fibers) radiating from a microtubule-organizing center (red circle) that
guided chromosome movement [11,13,99]. The proto-ER progressively (B - F) differentiated into the NE [26] by wrapping segments of
chromosomes to scaffold chromosome pairing (B - E) and to constrain diffusion of broken chromosome segments (C). D. Spindle-mediated
movements approximate parental chromosomes during mating [10,12]. E. Incipient karyogamy mechanics evolved to fuse proto-NE segments
associated with chromosomes to create a common membrane platform to assemble, via clustering of telomeres, the meiotic bouquet [11,13,67].
F. Cytokinesis based on an actomyosin contractile ring (red) facilitated splitting of the fusion partners (i.e., reductional meiotic division) [99]. NE
enclosed the nuclear compartment when nuclear pores (yellow cylinders) evolved to ensure nucleo-cytoplasmic traffic of proteins and RNA [26].

repaired chromosomes back to the donor cells while
splitting the fusion partners (i.e., the meiotic reductional
division). Here we posit that selection for the evolution
of meiosis in addition served as a major driving force
for a global restructuring of the archaeal cell (summarized in Figure 2). This occurred because meiosis
required innovations such as linearization of chromosomes, emergence of telomeres, centromeres, the meiotic spindle, the ER-derived nuclear envelope, nuclear
congression, karyogamy, meiotic bouquet, and cytokinesis mediated by an actomyosin contractile ring (for a
discussion on the fundamental roles of these eukaryotic
features in supporting sex and meiosis see next section
and references [11,13,67]). Because the cytological
dynamics of parental cell splitting during meiosis is
essentially similar to non-meiotic binary division [13], it
is conceivable that the incipient meiotic cell cycle was in
parallel co-opted for mitosis. All these developments are
seen as a result of strong selection to withstand long
term ROS/UV genotoxicity, particularly in the form of
DNA DSBs. However, over time DSBs were deliberately

initiated by Spo11 catalysis after pre-meiotic replication
[11,67-69]. This might imply that the byproduct of
crossovers during homologous recombination, the
genetic shuffling between parental chromosomes [8,11],
might have been under selective pressure, suggesting
that the generation of genetic diversity likely played a
fundamental role in the evolution of primitive eukaryotes. The notable outcome of these complex developments driving the evolution of sex is however the
emergence of the most archetypal of eukaryotic
organelles.
The nucleus, an arena for meiosis

The reason for the origin of the nucleus is still enigmatic. Although many different models have proposed a
singular selective force [47,74-76], it is possible that
diverse factors could have synergistically contributed to
the evolution of the nuclear envelope. Our hypothesis
provides a new perspective on nuclear origins. For meiotic recombination to occur chromosomes from two different parental cells must converge to a common

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

cellular region, find the corresponding homologous
chromosome, and pair in perfect homologous juxtaposition [11,13]. Given the dimensions of the cell, this
remarkably complex task is unlikely to occur solely via
random encounters resulting from the free diffusion of
chromosomes [11]. We propose that the evolution of
the nucleus was a requirement to significantly enhance
the kinetics of homologous chromosome pairing (Figure
2). Following syngamy, the nucleus serves as a transport
capsule to conjunctly move the whole set of chromosomes of one mating cell into close proximity of the
partner nucleus (i.e., nuclear congression) [10,12]. Once
in physical contact, the two nuclei fuse and constrain
the two sets of parental chromosomes into a portion of
the cell delimited by the NE [10]. Physical encounters
between homologous chromosomes that follow karyogamy are orchestrated from the NE by a process that
involves migration of chromosome telomeres towards a
common convergent point in the NE in close contact
with a microtubule-organizing center [11,13,67]. The
meiotic bouquet, resulting from this collective attachment of telomeres to the NE, ensures a rough linear
juxtaposition of the chromosome arms (Figure 2E). The
detailed assessment of homology within the meiotic
bouquet is also contributed by the nucleus via cytoskeleton-mediated nuclear oscillations. These movements
are conveyed to the meiotic bouquet to increase the
rates of encounters between homologous regions in the
pairing chromosomes, while destabilizing weak nonhomologous interactions [11,67]. Finally, stable chromosome pairing between homologues is accomplished by
meiotic recombination. All of these nuclear-mediated
activities are widely conserved among eukaryotes
[11,13], in accordance to the notion that the nucleus
originated to scaffold the process of meiosis.
In addition to meiotic recombination, the protonuclear compartment might also have been crucial to
non-meiotic processes of DNA repair. DSBs resulting
from ionizing radiation are efficiently repaired in radiotolerant bacteria such as Deinococcus species [24,77].
Underlying the extreme radiotolerance of these prokaryotes is a high level of nucleoid compaction, which constrains the dispersal by diffusion of broken chromosome
fragments that are produced by radiation. This process
maintains the original chromosome contiguity and
greatly enhances the kinetics of chromosome reconstruction by homologous recombination and in particular, non-homologous end joining [77,78]. We propose
that in proto-eukaryotes, nuclear confinement of the
genome and its compaction by histones organized in
nucleosomes served the same purpose; i.e., to restrict
dispersal of chromosome fragments (Figure 2C) and to
concentrate and spatially organize the molecular
machines required for chromosome repair. To overcome

Page 7 of 20

the genotoxic load, the nucleus emerged therefore as an
organelle dedicated to a diversity of DNA repair processes. Interestingly, the planctomycete Gemmata
obscuriglobus contains a highly compacted nucleoid
encapsulated in a double-membrane compartment analogous to the eukaryotic nucleus. This taxon has
recently been demonstrated to be highly resistant to
ionizing radiation, suggesting a correlation between
nucleoid compartmentalization and high turnover of
DNA DSB repair [78].
Signatures of aerobic eukaryogenesis

The heterogeneous phylogenetic affiliation of the eukaryotic proteome provides a conundrum in traditional theories of eukaryogenesis [1,2,34]. We propose that the
make-up of the eukaryotic proteome reflects two major
selective forces that acted during eukaryogenesis to
reformat the archaeal proteome via horizontal gene
transfer (HGT), endosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT), and
de novo evolution of a plethora of new proteins. These
are: 1) the emergence of diverse new cellular functions
and, 2) the conversion of archaeal metabolism to aerobiosis. These adaptations demanded a wholesale redesigning of metabolic flow and proteins that have
different substrate affinities, allosteric regulation, redox
sensitivity, and new enzymatic activities [79-81]. This
resulted in a phylogenetic profile that is characterized
by a large number of eukaryotic specific proteins [2,80]
and a substantial fraction of eukaryotic operational proteins (e.g., metabolic enzymes) that have a eubacterial
rather than archaeal provenance [1,2,34]. In contrast,
informational proteins (e.g., those involved in gene
expression, transcription, and translation) were less
affected by replacements via HGT or EGT because they
supported fundamental infrastructural functions in the
newly evolved eukaryotic cell, and were therefore vertically inherited from the archaeal ancestor [1,2,34].
Aerobic eukaryogenesis is also reflected in two major
innovations: 1) The emergence of peroxisomes, which
were ER-derived compartments to house oxygen-using
reactions that generate peroxides, quenched in situ by
catalases [82] and, 2) the biosynthesis of sterols, which
is strictly dependent on O2 (e.g., in yeast 12 O2 are used
per 1 ergosterol that is synthesized) [83-85]. Sterols are
critical for eukaryotes and lineages that cannot produce
these compounds must obtain them from the environment [83-85] (with the notable exception of Tetrahymena pyriformis that synthesizes the sterol surrogate
tetrahymanol [83]). This observation has been confirmed
in yeast using genetic screens, whereby mutations that
affect the critical initial steps of sterol biosynthesis are
lethal [86]. It is conceivable that the catabolic consumption of O2 during sterol biosynthesis might have been a
detoxification strategy for the proto-eukaryote. In

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

addition, synthesized sterols might have provided further
protection, serving as barriers to constrain the influx of
O2 and H2O2 across the plasma membrane [46,83]. In
this regard, diverse viable mutants in yeast impaired in
the late steps of ergosterol biosynthesis show enhanced
sensitivity to oxidative stress [46,87]. This might be
explained by the observation that in wild-type yeast
adaptation to H2O2 stress involves the redistribution of
sterols in the membrane forming sterol-rich microdomains, which may restructure the plasma membrane,
rendering it less permeable to H2O2 [88]. Not surprisingly the phospholipid/sterol ratio in the eukaryote
plasma membrane can range from 0.5 - 1.0 [89]. Such
an enrichment of sterols likely had a major impact on
the lipid composition of the proto-eukaryote. The
plasma membrane of Archaea is based on glycerophospholipids comprised of ether linked isoprenoid chains
[2]. Sterols are also made of isoprenoids [84]. Therefore
it is conceivable that the isoprenoid pool was largely
consumed by the biosynthesis of sterols, leaving the cell
in short supply of isoprenoid-based glycerophospholipids. This constrained the proto-eukaryote to adopt in
their membranes the alternative eubacterial type of glycerophospholipids, based on ester bound fatty acids.
This combination of sterols, eubacterial glycerophospholipids, and diverse lipids (e.g., sphingolipids) allowed
high malleability of the endomembrane system, which is
based on the presence of local domains enriched in particular lipid compositions [89]. Sterols are key modulators of such lipid rafts [84,88,89], therefore their
emergence might have been a fundamental condition for
the evolution of the endomembrane system and hence
eukaryogenesis. It is noteworthy that the planctomycete
Gemmata obscuriglobus, which is one of the rare prokaryotes known to synthesize sterols [84], has a malleable endomembrane system capable of endocytosis [90].

Testing the hypothesis
Several aspects of our hypothesis can be tested using
either direct or indirect means. Our central idea that
eukaryotes evolved in the vicinity of oxygen-producing
cyanobacteria in UV-permeated zones implies that the
earliest fossil record of eukaryotes should be associated
with paleontological sites that were once exposed on the
Earth’s surface. This idea is consistent with the recent
description of potential eukaryote microfossils in 3.2
Gya old geological deposits corresponding to Archean
shallow water marine environments [91]. The early
appearance of eukaryotes is therefore constrained in a
time span that extends from the emergence of cyanobacterial oxygenic photosynthesis (still an open issue
[92]) to about 2.4 Gya, when an ozone layer likely was
in place and shielded our planet from harmful UV-C
radiation [15,17]. In addition, the fundamental role of

Page 8 of 20

oxygen-derived sterols in the evolution of the endomembrane system, as predicted by our hypothesis, suggests that sterol-related biomarkers might be found in
association with the earliest vestiges of eukaryotes in the
fossil record. Such ancient oxygenated and UV permeated environments can be simulated in controlled
laboratory conditions and its impact on production of
ROS measured quantitatively. The feasibility of similar
UV-mediated photo-reactions in the presence of trace
levels of O2 and water vapor was illustrated by simulations of conditions presumably found in Martian soil
that led to substantial production of the O2- ion [22]. It
is therefore of high interest to test how microorganisms,
especially archaeons, would be affected by constant
exposure to UV/ROS. Little is known about the impact
of UV and extracellular ROS on the plasma membrane
components of Archaea. An interesting question that
can be tested experimentally is whether endomembrane
accumulation can be stimulated in Archaea as observed
in E. coli by imbalances of plasma membrane components [48,49], or even by environmental stresses such as
UV/ROS or desiccation.
We predict that the emerging concept in cell biology
of radiotolerant prokaryotes, which posits a positive correlation between efficient DNA DSB repair and nucleoid
compaction [24,77], will provide additional opportunities
to test our idea that the nucleus emerged as an organelle to support general DNA repair. Planctomycetes are
model systems to study the feasibility of this hypothesis.
In particular, the nuclear-type compartment of G.
obscuriglobus [78] might be a scaffold to assist DNA
recombination, analogous to the hypothetical original
function of the eukaryote nucleus in promoting diverse
recombinational processes, including meiosis. Such a
direct correlation between the nucleus and meiosis proposed here might imply that whenever meiosis is present in a given eukaryote, fundamental cytological
features promoted by the nucleus, such as meiotic bouquet formation and cytoskeleton-mediated nuclear oscillations, should also be present [11,13]. We highlighted
syngamy as the hypothetical ancestral feature of eukaryotic sex, possibly derived from its archaeal ancestor.
Archaeal conjugation has thus far only been studied in
H. volcanii and Sulfolobus species [51,52,63-65]. It
would be of high interest to investigate in diverse
archaeal taxa the role of cell-cell fusions and DNA
repair processes mediated by conjugation. This might
provide insights into the evolution of eukaryotic sex. In
this regard it is important to isolate the molecular components involved in both syngamy in eukaryotes and in
the formation of cytoplasmic bridges and/or cell-cell
fusions in Haloferax or other archaeal taxa. A phylogenetic connection between core components involved in
these processes might lend support to the idea of an

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

evolutionary continuity between bacterial conjugation
and eukaryotic sex. Generally, we predict that current
and future molecular studies in extant archaeal taxa will
strengthen the link between fundamental aspects of
eukaryotic and archaeal cell biology (e.g., [93]). This
might ultimately make it feasible in the future to achieve
a more accurate picture of how Archaea were transformed into the first eukaryotes.

Implications of the hypothesis
Here we propose that tolerance to oxygen may explain
several aspects of eukaryote complexity including lineage
origin. If this is true, then oxygen must have profoundly
affected the development of eukaryote cell biology during evolution. This idea appears to be valid for the universal dependence of the endomembrane system on
oxygen-derived sterols [83,84,89]. The fact that anaerobic eukaryotes, which cannot produce sterols, need to
obtain this compound from food might imply that these
organisms have been irreversibly marked by an ancestral
aerobic life style [83,84]. Similarly, the universal biosynthesis of oxygen-sensitive Iron-Sulfur clusters in
mitochondrion-like organelles [1], including the anaerobic mitosomes and hydrogenosomes, suggest a remnant
function that was selected in the ancestral eukaryote to
take place when oxygen is actively depleted by phosphorylative oxidation. The key role of oxygen species in
signal transduction pathways controlling programmed
cell death [94], cell differentiation processes [95], and
adaptation to diverse stresses [66] might provide further
examples of this paradigm. These may include the possible role of oxygen species in intermediate sexual processes [66,96]. In addition, oxygen also made possible
the emergence of a plethora of new metabolic pathways
that shaped eukaryote biochemistry [79]. Taken
together, these observations serve to strengthen the
argument that the highly exergonic respiratory chain
enabled by oxygen was a thermodynamic requirement
for the emergence of eukaryotic complexity [79,97].
Intriguing in this respect is the fact that the rise of oxygen levels in the late Proterozoic (about 0.85 - 0.54 Gya)
[92] is also correlated with a major transition in eukaryote complexity involving sex; i.e., the evolution of multicellular body plans containing meiosis-specialized germ
lines [98]. From oxygenic “Darwin ponds” located near
cyanobacterial primary production, through the rise of
multicellularity, the thermodynamics of oxygen chemistry might have profoundly influenced the trajectory of
eukaryote evolution.
In light of our hypothesis that eukaryotes emerged
from within Archaea it is important to pose the question why only a single archaeal group experienced this
major evolutionary transition in the context of the
broadly applicable selective pressure for oxygen

Page 9 of 20

tolerance. It is likely that the evolutionary success of
the proto-eukaryotic stem lineage is explained not by
single advances, but rather by the exquisitely rare
synergistic establishment of different key innovations,
such as acquisition of the mitochondrial forerunner,
sterol biosynthesis, evolution of exocytic/endocytic
pathways, the emergence of meiotic recombination
(sex), and the nuclear envelope. Understanding the
relative contribution of each of these novelties might
provide a path for future investigations in
eukaryogenesis.

Reviewers’ comments
Reviewer’s report 1

Eugene V. Koonin, The National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
The origin of the key features of the eukaryotic cell
that are conserved in their complete, highly complex
form in (almost) all eukaryotes and so are confidently
mapped to the last common ancestor of all extant
eukaryotes is a major enigma and a challenge to evolutionary biology. The only thing we seem to know
beyond reasonable doubt about eukaryogenesis is that it
involved a unique combination of events, including, in
all likelihood, dramatic changes in the environment that
the protoeukaryotes inhabited. Gross and Bhattacharya
expand on this theme and suggest one key selective factor that could stand behind many if not all major eukaryotic innovations, the early oxygenation of the
environment that, in the absence of the protective
ozone layer, should have been highly damaging through
the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Author’s response

We appreciate these comments and the window it opens
to underline a central point concerning oxygen toxicity
as a driving force for eukaryogenesis. Under the best of
circumstances molecular oxygen (O2) is only mildly toxic
to some iron-sulfur clusters that are more exposed to the
bulk solvent. Oxygen can only be widely damaging to
biological structures when converted to ROS, especially
in the form of the harmful hydroxyl radical. To our
knowledge the major abiotic stresses commonly found in
nature that produce ROS from O2 are UV and desiccation. It is important that these are usually overlapping
stressful conditions that affect prokaryotes exposed to
harsh environments on the Earth’s surface. Therefore,
our idea that eukaryotes were plagued by ROS implies
that UV and/or desiccation were synergistic sources of
stress whose respective contribution to overall biological
damage can only be a matter of conjecture. In other
worlds eukaryogenesis was driven by multiple associated
factors.

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

Indeed, there is strong evidence that such an incipient
oxygenation was triggered by the evolving photosynthetic cyanobacteria, hence a strong selection pressure
to evolve anti-ROS defense mechanisms. Gross and
Bhattacharya discuss the evolution of these defenses. Of
course, the most obvious one is the mitochondrial endosymbiont. We tend to think of mitochondria primary as
“power plants” of eukaryotic cell but it is entirely plausible and indeed likely that the original pressure was for
the more immediate role of the symbiotic alpha-proteobacteria in the defense against ROS. This is by no
means a new idea (see Koonin, Aravind 2002. Cell
Death Differ. 9: 394-404, and references therein) but
Gross and Bhattacharya add specific, interesting ideas
such as an initial stage of a symbiotic relationship within
a biofilm preceding the actual endosymbiosis.
Author’s response

This interesting observation made by the reviewer raises
the opportunity to reinforce an important point in connection to our previous comment. The putative defense
against ROS enabled by the mitochondrial forerunner
was indirect. Our argument is that alphaproteobacteria/
mitochondria could clear the O 2 before it was transformed by UV penetrating the cell and/or desiccation
into intracellular ROS. Some prokaryotes have inducible
terminal oxidases that can also fulfill this task. However
such a tolerance system is of short term efficacy because
it is driven by consumption of NAD(P)H/ATP pools.
Once the available redox equivalents are depleted, the
cell collapses under persistent oxidative stress. The only
way to cope with this condition is to couple oxygen consumption to regeneration of ATP and redox pools; i.e., to
establish robust aerobic respiration. We propose this was
a fundamental role of the alphaproteobacterium. This
could only have been made possible if we assume a syntrophic link in which glycolytic end products of the
Archaea were dissimilated by the aerobic respiration of
the alphaproteobacterium in a way that glycolysis could
constantly regenerate ATP and NAD(P)H pools. It is
tempting to speculate that pyruvate was the key glycolytic end product that fed the mitochondrial forerunner
because this is universally dissimilated by modern-day
mitochondria, although any glycolytic derivative could
have acted as the shuttle between the syntrophic
partners.
Indeed both the idea of oxygen detoxification and syntrophy within biofilms are not new in the literature of
eukaryogenesis and in our revised manuscript we
acknowledge the original contributions.
The second major innovation driven by the ROS stress
is supposed to be the origin of the endomembrane system; here the specific driving force is thought to be protection of various enzymatic systems originally

Page 10 of 20

associated with the plasma membrane. This is quite a
reasonable idea although, in contrast to the obvious
relevance of mitochondria in ROS defense, the ideas on
the involvement of the ER are further removed from the
cause, and to me, have a certain flavor of a “just so
story” (not that there are better ideas around...)
Author’s response

Although we respect the reviewer’s opinion, given his
comment and the objections posed by Anthony Poole (see
below), we suggest that the logic underlying our model
for the evolution of the endomembrane system might not
yet have been clearly enunciated. We think that once
these arguments are fully understood, the idea of a
plasma membrane-to-ER metabolic shift, if not appealing, can at least be considered a plausible idea for discussion. Here we recapitulate the chain of arguments
with the aim of clarifying our model:
1) Why is it reasonable to argue that the ER derives
from a prokaryotic plasma membrane? The ER is the
site of co- and post-translational protein targeting, the
synthesis of most of the membrane lipids, and glycosylation of proteins. All of these metabolic activities are core
functions of the prokaryote plasma membrane. In addition to these obvious functional resemblances, there is a
strict correlation between the ER and prokaryote plasma
membrane with regard to the topological localization of
ribosomes, Sec proteins, translocons, machineries for glycosylation of proteins and biosynthesis of lipids. The
lumen of the ER is topologically analogous to the extracellular leaflet of the plasma membrane in bacteria,
whereas the cytosolic exposed sides of both the ER and
prokaryotic plasma membrane are also analogous with
respect to topology. Taken together, all the topological
and functional correlations described above strongly support the idea that the ER derives from of the plasma
membrane, most likely by inward folding and budding.
2) Which prokaryotic group could be the best candidate to be the progenitor of the eukaryotic ER? We noted
in our text the phylogenetic affiliation of the ER biosynthetic/topogenetic apparatus to Archaea. In addition, Nglycosylation of proteins is rare among Eubacteria, but
widespread in Archaea. In the ER, the main subunit of
the N-glycosylation enzymatic system, STT3, has an
archaeal origin, and the carrier of glycosylated intermediates is dolichol-phosphate, that is also present in
the membrane of Archaea. These observations led one of
the reviewers of this paper to clearly state in a recent
publication that “the topology of eukaryotic endomembranes originated via a single inward budding step from
a precursor state similar to the one in modern archaebacteria” [31]. The idea that membrane topology is a
solid hereditary unit emerged from the original studies of
protein topogenesis and was crystallized by Günther

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

Blobel’s phrase “omnis membrane e membrane” (PNAS,
1980, 77(3): 1245-1247). It is as well championed by
Cavalier Smith’s concept of membrane heredity (Trends
Plant Sci, 2000, 5(4):174-82). Protein translocons in
membranes (and by extension protein sorting systems)
act as replicators, since the assembly of a new translocon
is catalyzed by another one pre-existing in the membrane
(see reference [61]for a discussion). If we discount the
unlikely possibility of en block HGTs, this intrinsic
inheritable property of protein sorting systems, combined
with the evident phylogenetic affiliation of the ER
machinery to Archaea, strengthens the argument that the
ER biosynthetic system was vertically transmitted from
an ancestral Archaea that was the progenitor of
eukaryotes.
3) Is it possible that the protein sorting system and
associated metabolic functions were moved from the
plasma membrane to the ER as a result of natural selection? Was there a problem with the plasma membrane?
If we assume that points 1 and 2 are correct, then these
two fundamental questions above come to mind. We can
only speculate about selective forces that were acting at
the cell periphery at the time of the birth of eukaryotes.
However, since the plasma membrane is the interface
between the cell and the external milieu, it is tempting
to speculate that environmental factors were damaging
the metabolic functions at the cell periphery, hence the
plasma membrane-to-ER shift. Under this scenario the
endomembrane system can be explained as an exocytic
pathway because it evolved to export the fundamental
components of the plasma membrane that can no longer
be synthesized in this original compartment.
4) Is environmental ROS the best explanation for the
plasma membrane-to-ER metabolic shift? In reality, we
consider extracellular ROS as only part of the explanation. Here again the argument that oxidative stress
comes in combination with UV and/or dissection is
worthy of consideration. There exists compelling empirical evidence that ROS, UV, and desiccation cause specific damages to plasma membrane structures and inhibit
the function of the protein sorting apparatus [23,36-44].
Our intention with the model developed in the text and
in Figure 1A-F, which focus on environmental ROS, was
simply to illustrate how environmental damage
explained the plasma membrane-to-ER metabolic shift.
This could have been similarly illustrated by using UV
or desiccation as putative sources of stress. We are aware
that environmental ROS might not offer the complete
explanation and that other still unknown factors contributed to the emergence of the ER from the plasma membrane. However, we hold to our idea that the plasma
membrane-to-ER metabolic shift driven by negative selection at the cell periphery is important to understand
eukaryogenesis, and thus merits serious consideration.

Page 11 of 20

The main focus of the paper is, of course, the origin
of meiosis and sex, put into the same perspective. This
part is strong as it puts together independent observations in archaeal and eukaryotic systems that connect
the formation of DSBs with conjugation and meiosis,
respectively. It is rather striking that in archaea spontaneously produced DSBs induce conjugation, as an entry
into the RadA-mediated repair pathway, whereas in
eukaryotes DSBs are introduced prior to meiosis,
through a Spo11-mediated pathway. This connection is
indeed very well compatible with the idea that archaeal
conjugation is the evolutionary precursor of the eukaryotic meiosis.
Gross and Bhattacharya do not refer to a piece of evidence that seems central to the hypothesis on functional
and evolutionary connections between DSB repair and
cell division. In most archaea, the genes for the HerA
ATPase and the NurA nuclease, the enzymes implicated
in DNA pumping during both binary division and conjugation, appear to be encoded in the same operon with
Mre11 and Rad50, the key enzymes of DSB repair (Iyer
et al. 2004. Nucleic Acids Res. 32: 5260-5279). This evolutionarily conserved genomic association strongly suggests a tight functional connection between DSB repair
and cell division/conjugation, and certainly, is compatible with the hypothesis that these two classes of DNA
manipulation have been inseparable throughout
evolution.
Author’s response

We appreciate this information that has now been
included in the revised version of the manuscript.
Furthermore, biochemical study of the functions of all
these archaeal proteins, including the complexes that
they are predicted to form and more generally the mode
of their cooperation, is the principal direction that has
to be taken to test the hypothesis of the joint evolution
of cell division (meiosis and probably also mitosis in
eukaryotes); it seems to me that the current discussion
of testing in Gross and Bhattacharya’s article is somewhat sketchy and insufficiently concrete.
Author’s response

In the testing section we refer more specifically to the
machinery involved in syngamy in eukaryotes and to the
mechanisms involved in cell-cell fusions in Archaea. If
there is an evolutionary continuity between eukaryotic
syngamy and archaeal cell-cell fusions the identification
of the respective molecular machines should provide a
fundamental correlation between these processes, most
likely involving conservation of core molecular components. We agree with this criticism and have therefore
restated the prediction in a more clear fashion. However
we don’t feel it is necessary to suggest a detailed

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

experimental program. The analogies between DNA
DSB-induced conjugation in Sulfolobus and eukaryotic
meiosis discussed in the text already provide examples of
how these two processes may correlate. We await indepth molecular studies that may uncover more links
between these two processes.
The rest of the discussion in the article to me looks
like a collection of somewhat far-fetched afterthoughts.
In particular, the connection between chromatin compaction and radioresistance is tenuous at best. As far as
I know, the most radioresistant organism currently
known is Pyrococcus but there is no indication of any
special chromatin compaction in this case. Conversely,
Chlamydia with their very compact nucleoids, do not
seem to show any special radiation resistance. Actually,
in my opinion, the entire subject of compartmentalization in Planctomycetes-Verrucomicrobia-Chlamydia
(however interesting in itself) is, at the very best, tangentially relevant to the subjects addressed in the article,
so I think that omission of this part would actually
tighten the argument (in the very least, the mention of
Planctomycetes in the abstract in the same sentence
with archaea is misleading). Furthermore, the suggestion
that chromatin compaction, presumably needed to
increase resistance to ROS and UV, was the driving
force behind the evolution of the nucleus, is weak, in
my opinion.
Author’s response

We respect the fact that this reviewer favors a particular
hypothesis on the origin of the nucleus (see next
reviewer’s comment). It is to be expected that such a controversial subject may divide the opinions of researchers
in the field. However one of the most important ideas
raised in our paper is that the evolution of meiotic
recombination was the major driving force for the emergence of the nucleus in the proto-eukaryote. In the section
“Nucleus, an arena for meiosis” we develop this idea and
emphasize the essential role that the nucleus has in
organizing the process of homology search and recombination during meiosis in all studied eukaryotes (see also
Figure 2). The fact that the nucleus has an intrinsic and
universal role in the process of meiotic recombination
cannot, in our opinion, be ascribed to chance or merely
understood as a late evolutionary outcome. Furthermore,
the argument that linear chromosomes, telomeres, centromeres, meiotic spindles, kinetochores, were pre-requirements for the evolution of meiosis has surfaced many
times in the literature regarding the evolution of sex (i.e.,
from the perspective of the mitosis first hypotheses
[62,67]). Here we simply invert the argument by suggesting that the evolution of these chromosomal structures
was not a pre-adaptation, but rather, originally selected
for meiosis. This connection between nuclear

Page 12 of 20

architecture, chromosome structure, and meiosis, seems
to us to be key to understand the evolution of eukaryotes,
and we believe that such correlations deserve to be seriously considered in eukaryogenesis.
The connection between radioresistance and chromatic
compaction is a minor, though important, point of our
model. Such a correlation was uncovered by recent
research in radiotolerant bacteria, particularly Deinococcae (see [24,77]). To the best of our knowledge the
nucleoid state of Pyrococcus, whether compact or not,
has not been investigated with respect to cellular radioresistance. Nucleoid compaction is found exclusively in
infectious extracellular forms of Chlamydia and presumably has a protective function (PNAS, 2004, 101(19):
7451-7456). Despite this function, it would be naïve for
us to suggest that chromatin compaction and nuclear
envelope in the proto-eukaryote merely served as protective wraps that shielded DNA against UV and ROS. Deinococcus extreme resistance, for example, does not rely
much on shields or protective strategies, but rather
depends on a robust post-damage response to reconstitute the chromosomes [24,77]. It is during this phase
that a compact nucleiod is of extreme selective advantage because it can immobilize the broken DNA fragments relative to their original chromosomal position,
thereby enhancing the kinetics of chromosome reconstitution by DNA repair enzymes. Furthermore, the scaffold
afforded by a compact nucleiod is an ideal platform for
concentration, assembly, and organization of DNA repair
machines.
We brought up these essential ideas above in connection with the hypothesis of nuclear evolution being driven
by meiosis, because concepts such as molecular crowding,
spatial organization of DNA repair machines, and
enhanced kinetics of DNA repair by restricted diffusion
of substrates also apply to the function of the nucleus
during meiotic recombination. There is a growing consensus among cell biologists that processes of DNA recombination involving homologous searching do not occur by
free diffusion, but rather depend on spatial organization
of specific repair foci in the cell (for a discussion see Nat
Rev Microbiol, 2009, 7(10):748-55). In this regard it is
notable that nuclear pore complexes are sites for repair
of recalcitrant DNA DSBs, and that in many species
such as yeast, the nuclear envelope has a fundamental
role in the maintenance of telomeres. In addition, silencing of heterochromatic regions of chromosomes seems to
be a conserved function of the nuclear periphery of
eukaryotes. A plethora of studies have demonstrated that
eukaryotic chromatin is not randomly dispersed within
the nucleus and that nuclear architecture restricts chromosome movements creating territories and orchestrating
the spatial organization of functional subdomains associated with chromosomes (for a discussion of the nuclear

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

functions mentioned above see Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol,
2010, 11(5):317-28). Therefore we consider it plausible
that spatial organization was the original function of the
nucleus and that meiosis, which depends on highly organized physical constraints on chromosome movement,
may have been the driving force behind the evolution of
this compartment.
We prefer to retain the discussion involving Planctomycetes because this prokaryotic group represents a relevant
model system to test ideas about the origin of eukaryotes.
It is conceivable that Planctomycetes have independently
recapitulated the evolution of an endomembrane system
and membrane-bound compartments. It will be interesting to experimentally test in Gemmata obscuriglobus
whether the existence of its nucleus-like compartment is
explained by radioresistance, and it serves to restrict diffusion of chromosome fragments, to concentrate molecular machines, and to kinetically facilitate the process of
DNA repair. This might not prove to be true, but will in
any case test our model for evolution of the eukaryotic
nucleus.
In the least, an alternative and, in my opinion, more
consistent scenario that derives the nucleus as a defense
system against invading introns (Martin, Koonin 2006.
Nature 440: 41-45; Moreira, Lopez-Garcia 2006. BioEssays 28: 525-533). More generally, it is naïve to attribute
the emergence of a highly complex, multifunctional cellular machine like the nucleus to a single selective factor. Beyond doubt, there are multiple forces at play, and
the best we can do, is to infer their relative
contributions.
Author’s response

We agree that a heuristic understanding of the evolution
of the nucleus is a point to be debated and we acknowledge this idea in the new version of the manuscript. We
now cite these and other publications that present alternative hypotheses for the origin of the nuclear
compartment.
To summarize, this review is not supposed to be
strongly critical. I do believe that Gross and Bhattacharya propose a new (even if rooted in previous work)
and viable scenario for the origin of meiosis (and, potentially, mitosis). Under this scenario, the ancient oxygenation of the environment created the pressure on the
emerging eukaryote both to retain the pro-mitochondrial endosymbiont and to evolve efficient mechanisms
of DSB repair that are tightly linked to DNA segregation
mechanisms required for meiosis. Almost inevitably for
this type of analysis, the discussion involves some overstretching as the authors try to explain as many eukaryotic innovations as possible within the framework of
their model.

Page 13 of 20

Author’s response

We appreciated this reviewer’s comments. The response
to his comments helped enrich and further illustrate
many key points of our hypothesis.
Reviewer’s report 2

Anthony M. Poole, PhD, Department of Molecular Biology & Functional Genomics, Arrhenius Laboratories for
Natural Sciences, Stockholm University, SE-106 91
Stockholm, Sweden
This manuscript considers a possible source of selection driving the origin of eukaryote cell architecture,
and presents several interesting ideas. One major part of
the manuscript is devoted to the impact of reactive oxygen species (ROS) on archaeal cells. The basic idea here
seems to be similar to the ox-tox hypothesis (Andersson
& Kurland 1999, Curr Opin Microbiol 2:535 - Note to
authors: it might be fair to cite this paper), though in
the present case the host is an archaeon, not a
protoeukaryote.
Author’s response

Although in the original version we acknowledged the
contributions of Andersson & Kurland to the ox-tox
model by citing their paper of 2000 [56], we agree with
the reviewer that the publication of 1999 is more important because it corresponds to the original formulation of
the hypothesis.
The take on oxygen stress presented by Gross & Bhattacharya is however different from the ox-tox hypothesis
in several respects. Significantly, they argue that the generation of ROS in the environment would have led to
archaeal membrane damage, and that, in turn the eukaryotic ER is a remnant of the plasma membrane of the
archaeal lineage from which eukaryotes are proposed to
have evolved. The emergence of a proto-ER in this
ancestral archaeal population would enable the interior
of the cell to be protected from this stress.
Author’s response

Again we emphasize that environmental ROS acting on
the plasma membrane is only an illustration of a possible environmental stress that damaged the archaeal cell
ancestor of eukaryotes. Other still unknown stress factors
might have as well contributed (see our comments above
to Eugene Koonin’s review).
I particularly liked the point made in the section ‘Signatures of aerobic eukaryogenesis’ that sterol synthesis
is oxygen dependent, and the following suggestion, that
sterol synthesis could in itself serve as a detoxification
strategy since synthesis of a single molecule of ergosterol in yeast consumes 12 O2 molecules. I would like
to see this section elaborated upon, as the idea raises a

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

lot of interesting questions and there may perhaps be
data lurking in the literature that can be brought to
bear on this hypothesis. For example, in the final section, the statement is made that anaerobic eukaryotes
cannot produce sterols and need to obtain these from
food. This fascinating point should be made earlier. It
would also be very useful to provide references for this
statement.
Returning to ergosterol synthesis in yeast, several
questions come to mind. What happens to the sterol
content of yeast kept in anaerobic conditions for
extended periods? Are such yeast are more susceptible
to ROS-related damage? Are there viable knockout yeast
strains that cannot synthesise sterol, and to what degree
are they sensitive to ROSs? Do the authors have any
idea if there are published data relating to this?
Author’s response

We were delighted to see that this referee appreciated
our idea that sterols were crucial for eukaryogenesis and
that this is still reflected by the essential requirement of
sterols for survival in modern-day eukaryotes. This idea
is supported the fact that yeast cannot grow under anaerobic conditions unless sterols are provided in the nutrient medium. We have now expanded the discussion on
sterol requirement in eukaryotes and refer to empirical
data that demonstrate the role of sterols in ROS defense
in yeast.
A weakness with the model as it currently presented is
that it is not clear why all archaea did not adapt to this
environmental stress by evolving additional membranes.
There are plenty of extant archaea that exist in aerobic
environments, yet as far as I am aware, their membranes
are not eukaryote-like. To argue that this is a plausible
source of selection for major membrane reorganisation
in only some ancestral archaeal lineages therefore
requires further explanation. One could ask the same of
bacterial membrane architecture. What is the explanation for this environmental pressure so drastically
impacting only some of the species present at the time,
namely the ancestors of eukaryotes?
Author’s response

This is a fundamental point that merits discussion and
we have done so in the final section “implications of the
hypothesis” that highlights issues that need to be
addressed in future studies of eukaryogenesis. The idea
that a single putative group of Archaea developed eukaryotic features should not be taken as a weakness of our
model. The fact that one can confidently ascribe all
eukaryotic innovations to one single ancestor already
implies that either only a particular group of primitive
prokaryotes was driven to eukaryogenesis or that

Page 14 of 20

eukaryotes are a result of a single, successful “evolutionary experiment”, whereas all other similar and parallel
“evolutionary attempts” have gone extinct. Note that the
same criticism can be leveled at any current model of
eukaryotic origin. To provide an example of this with the
“mitochondrial first” hypotheses, one may similarly pose
the question why all eukaryotes trace their origin to a
single prokaryotic host that acquired an endosymbiont,
thereby triggering the transformation of host cell
architecture?
We suggest that the evolution of eukaryotes was a singularity because it involved a series of determinant innovations that conditioned the emergence of the remaining
eukaryotic features. It was probably the synergism
between different innovations (discussed in the text) that
made the evolution of eukaryotes possible. A similar line
of reasoning is used to explain the widely recognized single origin of the plastid. This event occurred hundreds of
millions of years ago via the engulfment and transformation of a captured cyanobacterium by the putative ancestor of Plantae. Given the broad distribution of
phagotrophy among unicells, why then are there not
thousands of independent derivations of “Plantae"-like
lineages on our planet? Again, because of rare and combinatorial events that favored the Plantae ancestor at
the cost of its competitors, a single lineage rose to prominence and ultimately gave rise to all eukaryotic photosynthetic organelles (except of course for the special case
of photosynthetic Paulinella species).
Regarding the supposed incompatibility of ‘mitochondria-first’ and ‘phagocytosis-first’ models, I agree that
there is disagreement within the community, but I think
the basis of the disagreement has no substance and is
entirely imaginary. If both mitochondria and phagocytosis can be placed in LECA, there is really no need for a
mitochondria-first model. Phagocytosis is not specifically
tied to the defunct archezoa hypothesis or to a sister
relationship between archaea and eukaryotes. If the
hypothesis that eukaryotes evolved from within archaea
is correct, phagocytosis simply evolves before engulfment of the mitochondrial ancestor. The alternative
requires emergence of some alternative mechanism for
entry (for which we currently have no evidence). This
entry mechanism must only have occurred in (or
affected) this specific archaeal lineage (which is the
same as saying the eukaryote stem), but the mechanism
was then lost and replaced by phagocytosis. So, starting
from an archaeal ancestor, one either has one mechanism, still in action today (phagocytosis) or two (one
which evolved and disappeared only in the direct
archaeal lineage ancestral to modern eukaryotes, plus
phagocytosis, which evolved prior to radiation of extant
eukaryotes and is widespread among extant eukaryotes).

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

Author’s response

The reviewer raises here an import point of debate. We
do not favor the “phagocytosis first” hypothesis because
phagocytosis, as a regulated system to engulf cells, represents a highly complex cell biological process. For example, it requires controlled mechanisms for sensing the
presence of an external prey and transducing the signals
into the capture event. This depends on the polymerization of actin filaments that mediate deformation of the
plasma membrane around the prey [50], a highly complex and ATP spending activity [5]. Controlled fusogenic
activities are necessary to seal the prey inside the cell,
already implying the existence of a relatively highly
developed endomembrane system. Important, once
engulfed, the phagosome progressively maturates into a
lysosome. This developmental route is embedded within
the endocytic pathway that, by its turn, depends on
membranes and molecular components derived through
the canonical ER-Golgi route (Molecular cell biology,
2009, 10(9):623-635). In summary, when analyzed under
a cell biological perspective, phagocytosis should be
described as a highly derived trait of the endomembrane
system. If phagocytosis was present in the LECA, we
believe that it was most likely one of the last features
added to the eukaryotic stem lineage. However the interpretation that the endomembrane system emanates from
a rudimentary endocytic pathway that first evolved to
engulf microparticles of food [2], seems to us more realistic and worthy of serious discussion, although this idea
likewise contradicts the fact that the biogenesis and morphogenesis of the endomembrane system in based on an
exocytic pathway.
With regard to the question of how the alphaproteobacterum gained entry to the archaeal ancestor of eukaryotes, it is logical to argue, as the reviewer did, that the
mechanism should be a physiological process, such as
phagocytosis. What we are however pointing out in our
text is that the capture might have been merely accidental. It was necessary that the archaeal ancestor of eukaryotes had a relatively plastic membrane possessing
fusogenic properties. This is conceivable if we assume
that the progenitor of eukaryotes putatively had the ability to form cytoplasmic bridges and cell-cell fusions during conjugation, as observed in H. volcanii (vide Figure
1Gand 1H). It is important to note that by developing
the biosynthesis of sterols, as postulated in our model,
the proto-eukaryote was equipped with special membrane flexibility and fusogenic properties. In addition,
our model implies that the archaeal plasma membrane
was unstable owing to environmental stress and that a
primitive cytoskeleton and endomembrane system had
already started to develop. In the context of biofilms,
where cell-to-cell contacts are optimized, the above-mentioned plastic membrane properties might have

Page 15 of 20

facilitated the accidental entrapment and encapsulation
of an alphaproteobacterial endosymbiont. Its retention
inside the host cell however might be explained by the
strong selective advantage that clearance of oxygen in
the cytosol gave to the proto-eukaryote.
On page 7, the authors present three ‘key ideas’: ‘1)
the eukaryotic ER represents the remnants of the plasma
membrane of ancestral Archaea; therefore, 2) the process of eukaryogenesis might best be understood in light
of phylogenetic hypotheses that propose an Archaea-toeukaryote transformation [34,35]; and finally 3) the origin of the ER might reflect a migration of the plasma
membrane metabolic activities towards the cell interior.’
I do not think the evidence in favour of 1) is sufficiently
strong to state ‘1)...therefore, 2)’ - it would seem more
reasonable to make the 2) the starting assumption, and
then follow with points 1) and 3), since both are suggestions lacking definitive evidence.
Author’s response

We respect the reviewer’s opinion, but we suggest that
there are important existing data indicating that the ER
derived from an archaeal plasma membrane. These are
discussed in depth in our text and in our reply to Eugene
Koonin’s comments.
The second major idea presented here is that sex
evolved to cope with ROS-induced damage of DNA.
The idea here is that cell-cell fusions led to increased
ploidy, thereby buffering against deleterious mutations.
This is an interesting idea, but again fails to explain the
specificity of selection - why do only those archaea
which evolve into eukaryotes develop this trait in
response to a more globally-applied selection pressure.
It is reasonable to suppose that other archaeal lineages
would also be affected – how are these lineages proposed to survive this ‘oxygen crisis’?
Author’s response

What we argue is that the ancestral Archaea was
already fusing, and therefore the fusion of cells was not
an innovation that affected a single lineage. In contrast,
we propose the hypothesis that cell-to-cell fusions might
be a more common feature even in modern-day archaeal
conjugation. Our argument is that meiosis was a development of an existing primordial form of cell-cell conjugation. Although we briefly mention that increased
ploidy would contribute to survival by buffering deleterious mutations, this is not the main argument. The central point in our model is that parental chromosomes
when mixed in the same cell served as templates for a
reciprocal repair reaction by homologous recombination.
How different lineages survive genotoxic injury is illustrated in our text by the example of Sulfolobus, which
evolved bacterial conjugation that apparently serves to

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

limit DNA DSBs [63-65]. Halophilic Archaea tend to be
resistant to UV radiation and ROS by mechanisms that
include homologous recombination, presumably driving
genetic exchange in wild populations (Saline Systems,
2005, 1:3). Integrative conjugative plasmids in Bacillus
subtilis (PNAS, 2005, 102:12554-12559) Streptococcus
thermophilus (J Bacteriol, 2009, 191(8):2764-75), and
Vibrio cholerae (Nature, 2004, 427:72-74) have been
demonstrated to be activated by DNA damage and
cause widespread genetic recombination among cells.
Competence for bacterial transformation (also considered
a sexual process) has been associated with the expression
of RecA in diverse prokaryotic groups and the state of
competence is directly induced by DNA damage agents
in Streptococcus pneumonia. In fact Bacillus subtilis is
more resistant to UV/ROS genotoxicity by the uptake of
DNA from the medium (Infect Genet Evol, 2008, 8:267285). These examples illustrate that sexual processes triggered by DNA damage both in Archaea and Eubacteria
seem to be more widespread than this reviewer may
appreciate, and that globally-applied selection pressure
caused by DNA damage led many times to a similar
solution in distantly related taxa. Of course meiosis is a
unique evolutionary innovation restricted to the eukaryote stem lineage. But here again we should consider the
argument that the evolution of meiosis involved the
implementation of diverse innovations and a special
combination of events that currently are impossible to
specify.
As per the above discussion of membranes, increasing
ploidy via cell fusion does not seem to be a widespread
solution for limiting DNA-damage. Lineages that are
frequently exposed to conditions of extreme DNA
damage, such as the Deinococcaceae do exhibit polyploidy (Cox & Battista 2005, Nat Rev Microbiol 3:882),
but repair is not facilitated by cell fusions – as far as I
know, no cases of syngamy have been reported in radioresistant lineages.
Author’s response

It seems that there is an evolutionary trade-off between
the energetic costs of maintaining multiple polyploid
replicons within a cell and the acquisition by outcrossing
of an external template for homologous recombination.
Polyploid states are common in many prokaryotes during
the exponential growth phase (PLoS One, 2006, 1:e92). In
this case homologous recombination between sister chromosomes is favored. However during stationary phase,
starvation prevails and multiple replicons are energetically costly. At this point conjugation or transformation
is advantageous because it provides external information
for DNA repair (Infect Genet Evol, 2008, 8:267-285). It
might be the case that proto-eukaryotic cells also experienced such a trade-off during their evolution.

Page 16 of 20

Another point is that sex might not have evolved solely
to support DNA repair. The fusion of cells generating
diploid/polyploidy states followed by recombination
could promote selectable genetic diversity. In addition,
sex is a means of propagation for selfish DNA elements.
Integrative conjugative plasmids in prokaryotes act as
“prophages” that excise from the genome under conditions of DNA damage and spread to other genomes
through conjugation (PNAS, 2005, 102:12554-12559).
The balance between these evolutionary forces might
have contributed to a unique combination that led to
the evolution of eukaryotic sex.
The connection between syngamy and radioresistance
in the prokaryotic world should be investigated in more
detail. Halophilic Archaea, such as H. volcanii, display
UV and ROS resistance and prolific environmental
recombination that is probably facilitated via conjugation (Saline Systems, 2005, 1:3). In H. volcanii, cell-cell
fusions and cytoplasmic bridges mediate the process of
DNA recombination between parental chromosomes
[51,52].
Having said that, the discussion of conjugation in
Haloferax volcanii and Sulfolobus solfataricus is certainly
interesting, and the authors provide much food for
thought here. The fascinating phenomenon of zygogenesis in E. coli (Gratia 2005, Microbiol 151:2947) is also
interesting in this regard. Here it seems diploids can
form, possibly via sites of membrane fusion, but I don’t
think there is evidence for recombination; rather, it
seems that one chromosome is inactivated. These examples are perhaps all interesting in regard to the current
proposal, but again, what I am missing is an explanation
as to how come this solution was necessary in only a
subset of the affected archaeal lineages (i.e. the archaeal
ancestors of eukaryotes).
Author’s response

The phenomenon of zygogenesis in E. coli is an interesting observation by this reviewer, noting that cell-cell
fusions exist in the prokaryote world. Once again we
reinforce the idea that cell-to-cell fusions were probably
not a solution exclusive to the ancestor of eukaryotes, but
might be a widespread feature even in modern-day
Archaea. This idea merits testing. The fact that the progenitor of eukaryotes was already fusing was a starting
point for the progressive evolution of organized homologous recombination reactions involving whole parental
chromosomes; i.e., meiotic recombination.
A more general point is whether rare catastrophic
events are central to explanations of major changes in
cell architecture. The very recent demonstration of an
endocytosis-like mechanism for protein uptake in the
planctomycete bacterium Gemmata obscuriglobus (Lonhienne et al. 2010, PNAS, PMID: 20566852) shows that

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

an endomembrane system with vesicles and endocytosis
has evolved more than once.
Author’s response

We agree with the reviewer, however the evolution of this
planctomycete might have included an “oxygen catastrophe”. Radioresistance in G. obscuriglobus might be a
by-product of tolerance to desiccation, a stress that is
widely recognized to cause massive ROS damage to the
cell [24]. This is why we believe it is important to study
Planctomycetes to gain an understanding (however indirect) of fundamental aspects of eukaryogenesis. It is of
note that G. obscuriglobus is a sterol producing bacterium [84].
Reviewer’s report 3

Gáspár Jékely, Max Planck Institute for Developmental
Biology, Tübingen, Germany.
This paper presents an interesting new hypothesis
about the origin of eukaryotes. The authors work out a
scenario in which accumulating oxygen and ROS plays a
major driving factor during the rise of eukaryotes,
including the origin of key cellular features such as the
endomembrane system. There are many interesting
ideas in the paper, it is cell biologically feasible, and it is
well written.
One of my concerns is if the paleontological record
can tell us anything about the role of oxygen as a causative agent in eukaryote origins, given the extremely
broad possible time span for the event (the authors
write 2.7-1.7 Gya). The evidence is convincing in the
case of the Ediacaran fauna, but unfortunately we lack
such evidence for eukaryotes.
Author’s response

The oldest paleontological record is represented by sterol
biomarkers of about 2.7 Gyr that provides evidence for
the existence of a oxygen driven metabolic pathway. We
agree with the reviewer that is difficult to use the fossil
record to prove the influence of oxygen on eukaryogenesis.
This idea however implies that remnants of primitive
eukaryotes should be found in the Archean fossil record
within the photic zone where oxygen was present.
However, given the many ancestral oxygenic cell biological features of eukaryotes (peroxisomes, respiration
etc.) it is clear that we have to consider an oxygenic
world. But then, if oxygen was driving the changes globally and for a billion years, why was it only one lineage
that developed internal membranes to prevent ROS
damage?
Author’s response

See our comments to similar concerns raised by Anthony
Poole.

Page 17 of 20

More generally, one thing that this scenario doesn’t
provide is a unique event (cf. the origin of mitochondria
or the origin of the first phagotrophic cell) that makes
eukaryotes successful. It may be an error to single out
one factor to explain the origin of eukaryotes. It is probably the same trap that ‘phagocytosis only’ and ‘mitochondria only’ scenarios can easily fall into. My feeling
is that in future models we will have to understand the
synergies between mitochondria and phagocytosis in an
emerging oxygenic world.
Author’s response

We fully embrace the idea that the complexity of eukaryotes is a result of synergistic evolution of multiple traits,
and now we bring such a conclusion to the last section of
our paper. Although we don’t favor the notion that phagocytosis was the driver of initial eukaryogenesis, incipient endocytosis to acquire nutrients from environment
can underlie the evolution of the endomembrane system.
This idea deserves to be discussed in parallel to our “exocytosis first” model (which is conceptually similar to a
model proposed by the reviewer himself [31,33]).
The authors posit a fully developed archaebacterial
cell as the ancestor of eukaryotes. They should point
out that this is far from being a resolved issue. Archaebacteria are often shown as sisters to eukaryotes in
sequence trees in which case their last common ancestor need not have been an archaebacterium.
Author’s response

This is a controversial issue, although the association of
eukaryotes to the crenarchaeal group has recently gained
momentum [35]. As some traits putatively placed in the
ancestor of eukaryotes seem to be proximal to what is
observed in modern-day Archaea (e.g., the ER topology/
functions as compared to modern archaeal plasma membrane [31]) we tend to favor the idea that eukaryotes
split from the archaeal supergroup.
The discussion about the origin of mitochondria and
phagocytosis is too speculative and follows an unfortunate trend in the literature. One can just as well say
that the archaebacterial proto-cytoskeleton with Arp2/3
and the ability to fuse already worked as a primitive
phagocytic machinery. At this point it would be fairer to
say that we simply don’t know. It will not take away
anything from the hypothesis.
Author’s response

Although we respect the reviewer’s point of view, we feel
that the discussion about the origin of mitochondria and
phagocytosis is important. In fact it has been a central
focus of debate in the literature of eukaryogenesis. For
the reasons already presented in our reply to Anthony
Poole, we favor the view that a primitive phagocytic

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

machinery cannot be ascribed to the incipient phase of
eukaryogenesis.
The literature on the role of oxygen in eukaryote evolution and compartmentalization should be covered
more extensively. Important papers on the subject are
not mentioned including Nature 445,47 (2006) or BBRC
363, 885 (2007).
Author’s response

We now include the citation to the BBRC paper of 2007.
The hypothesis raised by the Nature 445,47 (2006) paper
remains controversial (see MBE, 2008 25(9):1931-1942),
therefore we did not use it to support our model.
Other hypotheses about the driving forces behind the
origin of the nucleus should be mentioned, including:
Nature 440, 41 (2006); Biol Direct 3, 31 (2008); Biol
Direct 5, 7 (2010). It should also be pointed out that a
role for biofilms and syntrophy in the origin of eukaryotes has already been proposed: J Mol Evol 47, 517
(1998); Nat Rev Genet 8, 395 (2007); Biol Direct 2, 3
(2007).

Page 18 of 20

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

Author’s response

We included the missing citations in the revised version
of the manuscript.

20.

21.
Acknowledgements
DB acknowledges generous support from the US National Science
Foundation through grants EF 0827023 and MCB 0946528. The authors
thank Dr. Lena Struwe and Alison Cariveau for their critical reading of the
manuscript.
Authors’ contributions
JG and DB conceived the hypothesis and wrote the manuscript. Both
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 2 August 2010 Accepted: 23 August 2010
Published: 23 August 2010
References
1. Embley TM, Martin W: Eukaryotic evolution, changes and challenges.
Nature 2006, 440(7084):623-630.
2. de Duve C: The origin of eukaryotes: a reappraisal. Nat Rev Genet 2007,
8(5):395-403.
3. Poole AM, Penny D: Evaluating hypotheses for the origin of eukaryotes.
Bioessays 2007, 29(1):74-84.
4. Cavalier-Smith T: Predation and eukaryote cell origins: a coevolutionary
perspective. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009, 41(2):307-322.
5. Kuiper JW, Pluk H, Oerlemans F, van Leeuwen FN, de Lange F, Fransen J,
Wieringa B: Creatine kinase-mediated ATP supply fuels actin-based
events in phagocytosis. PLoS Biol 2008, 6(3):e51.
6. Martin W, Muller M: The hydrogen hypothesis for the first eukaryote.
Nature 1998, 392(6671):37-41.
7. de Visser JA, Elena SF: The evolution of sex: empirical insights into the
roles of epistasis and drift. Nat Rev Genet 2007, 8(2):139-149.
8. Bernstein H, Byerly HC, Hopf FA, Michod RE: Genetic damage, mutation,
and the evolution of sex. Science 1985, 229(4719):1277-1281.

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.

27.
28.
29.

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

Schurko AM, Logsdon JM Jr: Using a meiosis detection toolkit to
investigate ancient asexual “scandals” and the evolution of sex. Bioessays
2008, 30(6):579-589.
Tartakoff AM, Jaiswal P: Nuclear fusion and genome encounter during
yeast zygote formation. Mol Biol Cell 2009, 20(12):2932-2942.
Bhalla N, Dernburg AF: Prelude to a division. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2008,
24:397-424.
Molk JN, Bloom K: Microtubule dynamics in the budding yeast mating
pathway. J Cell Sci 2006, 119(Pt 17):3485-3490.
Zickler D, Kleckner N: The leptotene-zygotene transition of meiosis. Annu
Rev Genet 1998, 32:619-697.
Knoll AH, Javaux EJ, Hewitt D, Cohen P: Eukaryotic organisms in
Proterozoic oceans. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2006,
361(1470):1023-1038.
Sessions AL, Doughty DM, Welander PV, Summons RE, Newman DK: The
continuing puzzle of the great oxidation event. Curr Biol 2009, 19(14):
R567-574.
Jacob R, Waldbauera LSS, Dawn YSumnerc, Roger ESummonsb: Late
Archean molecular fossils from the Transvaal Supergroup record the
antiquity of microbial diversity and aerobiosis. Precambrian Research 2009,
169(1-4):28-47.
Kaufman AJ, Johnston DT, Farquhar J, Masterson AL, Lyons TW, Bates S,
Anbar AD, Arnold GL, Garvin J, Buick R: Late Archean biospheric
oxygenation and atmospheric evolution. Science 2007,
317(5846):1900-1903.
Anbar AD, Duan Y, Lyons TW, Arnold GL, Kendall B, Creaser RA, Kaufman AJ,
Gordon GW, Scott C, Garvin J, Buick R: A whiff of oxygen before the great
oxidation event? Science 2007, 317(5846):1903-1906.
Kramer GF, Ames BN: Oxidative mechanisms of toxicity of low-intensity
near-UV light in Salmonella typhimurium. J Bacteriol 1987,
169(5):2259-2266.
Clark CD, De Bruyn WJ, Jones JG: Photochemical production of hydrogen
peroxide in size-fractionated Southern California coastal waters.
Chemosphere 2009, 76(1):141-146.
Imlay JA: Cellular defenses against superoxide and hydrogen peroxide.
Annu Rev Biochem 2008, 77:755-776.
Yen AS, Kim SS, Hecht MH, Frant MS, Murray B: Evidence that the
reactivity of the martian soil is due to superoxide ions. Science 2000,
289(5486):1909-1912.
Potts M: Desiccation tolerance of prokaryotes. Microbiol Rev 1994,
58(4):755-805.
Blasius M, Sommer S, Hubscher U: Deinococcus radiodurans: what belongs
to the survival kit? Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 2008, 43(3):221-238.
Singh SP, Hader DP, Sinha RP: Cyanobacteria and ultraviolet radiation
(UVR) stress: mitigation strategies. Ageing Res Rev 9(2):79-90.
Devos D, Dokudovskaya S, Alber F, Williams R, Chait BT, Sali A, Rout MP:
Components of coated vesicles and nuclear pore complexes share a
common molecular architecture. PLoS Biol 2004, 2(12):e380.
Kepes F, Rambourg A, Satiat-Jeunemaitre B: Morphodynamics of the
secretory pathway. Int Rev Cytol 2005, 242:55-120.
Fagone P, Jackowski S: Membrane phospholipid synthesis and
endoplasmic reticulum function. J Lipid Res 2009, 50(Suppl):S311-316.
Stephenson K: Sec-dependent protein translocation across biological
membranes: evolutionary conservation of an essential protein transport
pathway (review). Mol Membr Biol 2005, 22(1-2):17-28.
Pool MR: Signal recognition particles in chloroplasts, bacteria, yeast and
mammals (review). Mol Membr Biol 2005, 22(1-2):3-15.
Jékely G: Evolution of the Golgi complex. In The Golgi Apparatus. Edited
by: Mironov APM. Springer Vienna; 2008:675-691.
Cronan JE: Bacterial membrane lipids: where do we stand? Annu Rev
Microbiol 2003, 57:203-224.
Jekely G: Origin of eukaryotic endomembranes: a critical evaluation of
different model scenarios. Adv Exp Med Biol 2007, 607:38-51.
Yutin N, Makarova KS, Mekhedov SL, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The deep archaeal
roots of eukaryotes. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25(8):1619-1630.
Cox CJ, Foster PG, Hirt RP, Harris SR, Embley TM: The archaebacterial origin
of eukaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008, 105(51):20356-20361.
Ehling-Schulz M, Schulz S, Wait R, Gorg A, Scherer S: The UV-B stimulon of
the terrestrial cyanobacterium Nostoc commune comprises early shock
proteins and late acclimation proteins. Mol Microbiol 2002, 46(3):827-843.

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

37. Tuveson RW, Larson RA, Kagan J: Role of cloned carotenoid genes
expressed in Escherichia coli in protecting against inactivation by nearUV light and specific phototoxic molecules. J Bacteriol 1988,
170(10):4675-4680.
38. Farr SB, Touati D, Kogoma T: Effects of oxygen stress on membrane
functions in Escherichia coli: role of HPI catalase. J Bacteriol 1988,
170(4):1837-1842.
39. Mirzaei H, Baena B, Barbas C, Regnier F: Identification of oxidized proteins
in rat plasma using avidin chromatography and tandem mass
spectrometry. Proteomics 2008, 8(7):1516-1527.
40. Kojima K, Oshita M, Nanjo Y, Kasai K, Tozawa Y, Hayashi H, Nishiyama Y:
Oxidation of elongation factor G inhibits the synthesis of the D1 protein
of photosystem II. Mol Microbiol 2007, 65(4):936-947.
41. Baldeck JD, Marquis RE: Targets for hydrogen-peroxide-induced damage
to suspension and biofilm cells of Streptococcus mutans. Can J Microbiol
2008, 54(10):868-875.
42. Mirzaei H, Regnier F: Protein-RNA cross-linking in the ribosomes of yeast
under oxidative stress. J Proteome Res 2006, 5(12):3249-3259.
43. Ezraty B, Aussel L, Barras F: Methionine sulfoxide reductases in
prokaryotes. Biochim Biophys Acta 2005, 1703(2):221-229.
44. Billi D, Potts M: Life and death of dried prokaryotes. Res Microbiol 2002,
153(1):7-12.
45. Stewart PS, Roe F, Rayner J, Elkins JG, Lewandowski Z, Ochsner UA,
Hassett DJ: Effect of catalase on hydrogen peroxide penetration into
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms. Appl Environ Microbiol 2000,
66(2):836-838.
46. Branco MR, Marinho HS, Cyrne L, Antunes F: Decrease of H2O2 plasma
membrane permeability during adaptation to H2O2 in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J Biol Chem 2004, 279(8):6501-6506.
47. Cavalier-Smith T: Origin of the cell nucleus, mitosis and sex: roles of
intracellular coevolution. Biol Direct 2010, 5:7.
48. Herskovits AA, Shimoni E, Minsky A, Bibi E: Accumulation of endoplasmic
membranes and novel membrane-bound ribosome-signal recognition
particle receptor complexes in Escherichia coli. J Cell Biol 2002,
159(3):403-410.
49. Eriksson HM, Wessman P, Ge C, Edwards K, Wieslander A: Massive
formation of intracellular membrane vesicles in Escherichia coli by a
monotopic membrane-bound lipid glycosyltransferase. J Biol Chem 2009,
284(49):33904-33914.
50. Yutin N, Wolf MY, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: The origins of phagocytosis and
eukaryogenesis. Biol Direct 2009, 4:9.
51. Rosenshine I, Tchelet R, Mevarech M: The mechanism of DNA transfer in
the mating system of an archaebacterium. Science 1989,
245(4924):1387-1389.
52. Ortenberg R, Tchlet R, Mevarech M: A model for the genetic exchange
system of the extremely halophilic archaeon Haloferax volcanii. In
Microbiology and Biogeochemistry of Hypersaline Environments. Edited by:
Oren A. CRC Press; 1998:331-338.
53. Moreira D, Lopez-Garcia P: Symbiosis between methanogenic archaea
and delta-proteobacteria as the origin of eukaryotes: the syntrophic
hypothesis. J Mol Evol 1998, 47(5):517-530.
54. Jekely G: Origin of phagotrophic eukaryotes as social cheaters in
microbial biofilms. Biol Direct 2007, 2:3.
55. Andersson SG, Kurland CG: Origins of mitochondria and
hydrogenosomes. Curr Opin Microbiol 1999, 2(5):535-541.
56. Kurland CG, Andersson SG: Origin and evolution of the mitochondrial
proteome. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2000, 64(4):786-820.
57. Diaz PI, Zilm PS, Rogers AH: Fusobacterium nucleatum supports the
growth of Porphyromonas gingivalis in oxygenated and carbon-dioxidedepleted environments. Microbiology 2002, 148(Pt 2):467-472.
58. Teske A, Sigalevich P, Cohen Y, Muyzer G: Molecular identification of
bacteria from a coculture by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis of
16S ribosomal DNA fragments as a tool for isolation in pure cultures.
Appl Environ Microbiol 1996, 62(11):4210-4215.
59. Fenchel TCB: Endosymbiotic purple non-sulphur bacteria in an anaerobic
ciliated protozoon. FEMS Microbiology Letters 1993, 110(1):21-25.
60. Hosie AH, Allaway D, Poole PS: A monocarboxylate permease of
Rhizobium leguminosarum is the first member of a new subfamily of
transporters. J Bacteriol 2002, 184(19):5436-5448.
61. Gross J, Bhattacharya D: Mitochondrial and plastid evolution in
eukaryotes: an outsiders’ perspective. Nat Rev Genet 2009, 10(7):495-505.

Page 19 of 20

62. Wilkins AS, Holliday R: The evolution of meiosis from mitosis. Genetics
2009, 181(1):3-12.
63. Frols S, Ajon M, Wagner M, Teichmann D, Zolghadr B, Folea M, Boekema EJ,
Driessen AJ, Schleper C, Albers SV: UV-inducible cellular aggregation of
the hyperthermophilic archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus is mediated by
pili formation. Mol Microbiol 2008, 70(4):938-952.
64. Schleper C, Holz I, Janekovic D, Murphy J, Zillig W: A multicopy plasmid of
the extremely thermophilic archaeon Sulfolobus effects its transfer to
recipients by mating. J Bacteriol 1995, 177(15):4417-4426.
65. Frols S, White MF, Schleper C: Reactions to UV damage in the model
archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus. Biochem Soc Trans 2009, 37(Pt 1):36-41.
66. Nedelcu AM, Marcu O, Michod RE: Sex as a response to oxidative stress: a
twofold increase in cellular reactive oxygen species activates sex genes.
Proc Biol Sci 2004, 271(1548):1591-1596.
67. Solari AJ: Primitive forms of meiosis: the possible evolution of meiosis.
Biocell 2002, 26(1):1-13.
68. Dernburg AF, McDonald K, Moulder G, Barstead R, Dresser M,
Villeneuve AM: Meiotic recombination in C. elegans initiates by a
conserved mechanism and is dispensable for homologous chromosome
synapsis. Cell 1998, 94(3):387-398.
69. Pauklin S, Burkert JS, Martin J, Osman F, Weller S, Boulton SJ, Whitby MC,
Petersen-Mahrt SK: Alternative induction of meiotic recombination from
single-base lesions of DNA deaminases. Genetics 2009, 182(1):41-54.
70. Sandler SJ, Satin LH, Samra HS, Clark AJ: recA-like genes from three
archaean species with putative protein products similar to Rad51 and
Dmc1 proteins of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids Res
1996, 24(11):2125-2132.
71. Haseltine CA, Kowalczykowski SC: An archaeal Rad54 protein remodels
DNA and stimulates DNA strand exchange by RadA. Nucleic Acids Res
2009, 37(8):2757-2770.
72. McCready S, Muller JA, Boubriak I, Berquist BR, Ng WL, DasSarma S: UV
irradiation induces homologous recombination genes in the model
archaeon, Halobacterium sp. NRC-1. Saline Systems 2005, 1:3.
73. Iyer LM, Makarova KS, Koonin EV, Aravind L: Comparative genomics of the
FtsK-HerA superfamily of pumping ATPases: implications for the origins
of chromosome segregation, cell division and viral capsid packaging.
Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 32(17):5260-5279.
74. Martin W, Koonin EV: Introns and the origin of nucleus-cytosol
compartmentalization. Nature 2006, 440(7080):41-45.
75. Jekely G: Origin of the nucleus and Ran-dependent transport to
safeguard ribosome biogenesis in a chimeric cell. Biol Direct 2008, 3:31.
76. Lopez-Garcia P, Moreira D: Selective forces for the origin of the
eukaryotic nucleus. Bioessays 2006, 28(5):525-533.
77. Zimmerman JM, Battista JR: A ring-like nucleoid is not necessary for
radioresistance in the Deinococcaceae. BMC Microbiol 2005, 5:17.
78. Lieber A, Leis A, Kushmaro A, Minsky A, Medalia O: Chromatin organization
and radio resistance in the bacterium Gemmata obscuriglobus. J Bacteriol
2009, 191(5):1439-1445.
79. Raymond J, Segre D: The effect of oxygen on biochemical networks and
the evolution of complex life. Science 2006, 311(5768):1764-1767.
80. Aravind L, Iyer LM, Koonin EV: Comparative genomics and structural
biology of the molecular innovations of eukaryotes. Curr Opin Struct Biol
2006, 16(3):409-419.
81. Dupont CL, Yang S, Palenik B, Bourne PE: Modern proteomes contain
putative imprints of ancient shifts in trace metal geochemistry. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2006, 103(47):17822-17827.
82. Tabak HF, van der Zand A, Braakman I: Peroxisomes: minted by the ER.
Curr Opin Cell Biol 2008, 20(4):393-400.
83. Galea AM, Brown AJ: Special relationship between sterols and oxygen:
were sterols an adaptation to aerobic life? Free Radic Biol Med 2009,
47(6):880-889.
84. Desmond E, Gribaldo S: Phylogenomics of sterol synthesis: insights into
the origin, evolution, and diversity of a key eukaryotic feature. Genome
Biol Evol 2009, 1:364-381.
85. Chen LL, Wang GZ, Zhang HY: Sterol biosynthesis and prokaryotes-toeukaryotes evolution. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2007, 363(4):885-888.
86. Parks LW, Casey WM: Physiological implications of sterol biosynthesis in
yeast. Annu Rev Microbiol 1995, 49:95-116.
87. Higgins VJ, Beckhouse AG, Oliver AD, Rogers PJ, Dawes IW: Yeast genomewide expression analysis identifies a strong ergosterol and oxidative

Gross and Bhattacharya Biology Direct 2010, 5:53
http://www.biology-direct.com/content/5/1/53

88.

89.
90.

91.
92.
93.

94.
95.

96.
97.
98.

99.

Page 20 of 20

stress response during the initial stages of an industrial lager
fermentation. Appl Environ Microbiol 2003, 69(8):4777-4787.
Pedroso N, Matias AC, Cyrne L, Antunes F, Borges C, Malho R, de
Almeida RF, Herrero E, Marinho HS: Modulation of plasma membrane lipid
profile and microdomains by H2O2 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Free
Radic Biol Med 2009, 46(2):289-298.
van Meer G, Voelker DR, Feigenson GW: Membrane lipids: where they are
and how they behave. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008, 9(2):112-124.
Lonhienne TG, Sagulenko E, Webb RI, Lee KC, Franke J, Devos DP,
Nouwens A, Carroll BJ, Fuerst JA: Endocytosis-like protein uptake in the
bacterium Gemmata obscuriglobus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
107(29):12883-12888.
Javaux EJ, Marshall CP, Bekker A: Organic-walled microfossils in 3.2-billionyear-old shallow-marine siliciclastic deposits. Nature 463(7283):934-938.
Holland HD: The oxygenation of the atmosphere and oceans. Philos Trans
R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2006, 361(1470):903-915.
Humbard MA, Miranda HV, Lim JM, Krause DJ, Pritz JR, Zhou G, Chen S,
Wells L, Maupin-Furlow JA: Ubiquitin-like small archaeal modifier proteins
(SAMPs) in Haloferax volcanii. Nature 463(7277):54-60.
Perrone GG, Tan SX, Dawes IW: Reactive oxygen species and yeast
apoptosis. Biochim Biophys Acta 2008, 1783(7):1354-1368.
Aguirre J, Rios-Momberg M, Hewitt D, Hansberg W: Reactive oxygen
species and development in microbial eukaryotes. Trends Microbiol 2005,
13(3):111-118.
Bernstein C, Johns V: Sexual reproduction as a response to H2O2 damage
in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. J Bacteriol 1989, 171(4):1893-1897.
Koch LG, Britton SL: Aerobic metabolism underlies complexity and
capacity. J Physiol 2008, 586(1):83-95.
Payne JL, Boyer AG, Brown JH, Finnegan S, Kowalewski M, Krause RA Jr,
Lyons SK, McClain CR, McShea DW, Novack-Gottshall PM, Smith FA,
Stempien JA, Wang SC: Two-phase increase in the maximum size of life
over 3.5 billion years reflects biological innovation and environmental
opportunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106(1):24-27.
Barr FA, Gruneberg U: Cytokinesis: placing and making the final cut. Cell
2007, 131(5):847-860.

doi:10.1186/1745-6150-5-53
Cite this article as: Gross and Bhattacharya: Uniting sex and eukaryote
origins in an emerging oxygenic world. Biology Direct 2010 5:53.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
