<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Modulation of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes and anthocyanins due to virus infection in grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.) leaves</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Plant Biology 2010 10:187. doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-187"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Linga R Gutha"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Modulation of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway
genes and anthocyanins due to virus infection in
grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.) leaves
Linga R Gutha1, Luis F Casassa2, James F Harbertson2, Rayapati A Naidu1*

Abstract
Background: Symptoms of grapevine leafroll disease (GLRD) in red-fruited wine grape (Vitis vinifera L.) cultivars
consist of green veins and red and reddish-purple discoloration of inter-veinal areas of leaves. The reddish-purple
color of symptomatic leaves may be due to the accumulation of anthocyanins and could reflect an up-regulation
of genes involved in their biosynthesis.
Results: We examined six putative constitutively expressed genes, Ubiquitin, Actin, GAPDH, EF1-a, SAND and NAD5,
for their potential as references for normalization of gene expression in reverse transcription-quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). Using the geNorm program, a combination of two genes (Actin and NAD5)
was identified as the stable set of reference genes for normalization of gene expression data obtained from
grapevine leaves. By using gene-specific RT-qPCR in combination with a reliable normalization factor, we compared
relative expression of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes between leaves infected with Grapevine leafrollassociated virus 3 (GLRaV-3) and exhibiting GLRD symptoms and virus-free green leaves obtained from a red-fruited
wine grape cultivar (cv. Merlot). The expression levels of these different genes ranged from two- to fifty-fold
increase in virus-infected leaves. Among them, CHS3, F3’5’H, F3H1, LDOX, LAR1 and MybA1 showed greater than 10fold increase suggesting that they were expressed at significantly higher levels in virus-infected symptomatic
leaves. HPLC profiling of anthocyanins extracted from leaves indicated the presence of cyanidin-3-glucoside and
malvidin-3-glucoside only in virus-infected symptomatic leaves. The results also showed 24% higher levels of
flavonols in virus-infected symptomatic leaves than in virus-free green leaves, with quercetin followed by myricetin
being the predominant compounds. Proanthocyanidins, estimated as total tannins by protein precipitation method,
were 36% higher in virus-infected symptomatic leaves when compared to virus-free green leaves.
Conclusions: The results, the first example to our knowledge, showed that modulation of the flavonoid
biosynthetic pathway occurred in GLRaV-3-infected leaves of a red-fruited wine grape cultivar (cv. Merlot) leading
to de novo synthesis of two classes of anthocyanins. These anthocyanins have contributed to the expression of
reddish-purple color of virus-infected grapevine leaves exhibiting GLRD symptoms.

Background
In plants, three major classes of flavonoids (anthocyanins, proanthocyanidins and flavonols) are synthesized
via the branched flavonoid biosynthetic pathway [1,2].
These secondary metabolites contribute to the ‘colorful’
pigmentation of flowers, fruits, seeds and leaves and are
involved in several physiological and biochemical
* Correspondence: naidu@wsu.edu
1
Department of Plant Pathology, Irrigated Agriculture Research and
Extension Center, Washington State University, Prosser, WA 99350, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

processes in plants such as UV protection, insect attraction, herbivore defense and symbiosis [3-5]. Plants also
utilize various colors conferred by anthocyanins to
recruit pollinators and attract animals to disperse seeds
[2]. The flavonoids are often produced in vegetative tissues as well under stress conditions, such as high light
intensity, cold temperature, nutrient deficiency and
pathogen attack or senescence [6-8]. Due to a multitude
of biological and agricultural importance and favorable
health benefits, the genetics and biochemistry of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway has been intensively

© 2010 Gutha et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

Page 2 of 18

Phenylalanine
PAL

F3' H

4-coumaryl CoA
CHS1
CHS2
CHS3
Naringenin chalcone
CHI1
CHI2

F3' 5' H
Naringenin flavanone
Pentahydroxyflavanone
F3H1
F3H1
F3H2
F3H2
FLS1
FLS1
F3' H
F3' 5' H
Flavonols
Dihydrokaempferol
Dihydroquercetin
Dihydromyricetin
Flavonols
Eriodictoyl
F3H1
F3H2

LAR1
LAR2
Proanthocyanidins
ANR

DFR
Leucocyanidin
LDOX
Cyanidin

MybA1
UFGT
Cyanidin-3-glucoside
MT
Peonidin-3-glucoside

DFR
Leucodelphinidin
LDOX
Delphinidin

LAR1
LAR2
Proanthocyanidins
ANR

MybA1
UFGT
Delphinidin-3-glucoside
MT
Petunidin-3-glucoside Malvidin-3-glucoside

Figure 1 Schematic representation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway. The pathway is drawn based on information from Hummer and
Schreier and Boss et al. [59,81]. PAL, phenylalanine ammonia-lyase; CHS1, CHS2, and CHS3, chalcone synthase 1, 2, and 3, respectively; CHI1 and
CHI2, chalcone isomerase 1 and 2, respectively; F3’H -flavonoid-3’-hydroxylase; F3’5’H - flavonoid-3’, 5’-hydroxylase; F3H1 and F3H2, flavanone-3hydroxylase 1 and 2, respectively; DFR- dihydroflavonol reductase; LDOX- leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase; UFGT, UDP-glucose:flavonoid 3-Oglucosyltransferase, FLS1, flavonol synthase 1, LAR1 and LAR2, leucoanthocyanidin reductase 1 and 2, respectively; ANR, anthocyanidin reductase;
MT, methyl transferase; MybA1, MYB transcription factor gene.

studied in several plant species [9-11]. These studies
indicated that flavonoid composition among plant species and even different tissues of a plant can be remarkably different [1,12-15]. Further details about the
flavonoid biosynthetic pathway are available in many
publications [1-3,5]. A generalized scheme of the pathway is shown in Figure 1.
For many years, berries of the grapevine (Vitis vinifera
L.) have received more attention due to their significance as an important edible source of flavonoid compounds with nutrient and health benefits for humans
[16]. Different flavonoid compounds are largely localized
in berry skin and play a critical role in the quality of
wine by contributing to its astringency and color [2,3].
The major flavonoid classes accumulated in red-fruited
grapevine berries are flavonols, proanthocyanidins (also
called condensed tannins) and anthocyanins, with anthocyanins accumulating mostly in berry skin and the tannins in seed [17,18]. Thus, the flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway in berries is regulated in a temporal and tissue-

specific manner and the expression pattern of the pathway genes correlates to the synthesis of flavonoids in
different grapevine berry tissues during fruit development [14,19]. The synthesis of flavonoids via the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway requires two classes of genes:
structural genes that encode enzymes for synthesis of
anthocyanins and other flavonoids, and the regulatory
genes involved in spatial and temporal regulation of
these structural genes [20]. Although these two classes
of genes are present in both red- and white-fruited
grapevine cultivars, the color pigments are not expressed
in white-fruited cultivars due to multiallelic mutations in
the regulatory genes called MybA1 and MybA2 [21-24].
These two genes regulate expression of the UDP-glucose:flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase (UFGT) gene,
which mediates the conversion of anthocyanidins to
anthocyanins by glycosylation [25,26]. Thus, the last biosynthetic step of UFGT-mediated anthocyanin synthesis
does not occur in white-fruited grapevine cultivars and
hence these cultivars do not express color in their

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

berries. In the case of red-fruited berries, anthocyanins
are transported into vacuoles and ultimately accumulated in berry skin cells [25,27]. In general, berries from
red-fruited cultivars show various grades of color
depending on the quantity and composition of anthocyanins in the berry skin. Proanthocyanidins are synthesized mainly at the green stage of berry development,
whereas synthesis of anthocyanins begins at véraison (a
transitional phase of grapevine berry development representing the beginning of berry ripening) and continue to
accumulate in berry skins during ripening [17,27,28].
Although anthocyanins are present largely in berry skins
of red-fruited grapevine cultivars, they can also accumulate in some cases in various plant organs such as leaves,
flowers, stems, tendrils and berry flesh [29].
Grapevine leafroll disease (GLRD) is the most serious
and complex virus disease known to infect grapevines
worldwide [30]. Up to ten serologically distinct viruses,
termed grapevine leafroll-associated viruses (GLRaVs)
and numbered sequentially GLRaV-1 to -10 in the order
of their discovery, have thus far been documented in
grapevines infected with GLRD [31]. GLRaVs are flexuous rods, 1400-2200 nm long and 10-12 nm diameter
with a monopartite, positive sense, single-stranded RNA
genome. They are phloem-limited and predominantly
dispersed long distances via clonally propagated vegetative planting materials. Some of the currently documented GLRaVs have been shown to be spread by different
species of mealybugs and scale insects [30]. Among
them, GLRaV-3 (genus Ampelovirus, family Closteroviridae) is the most economically important and widely prevalent. The virus has the largest genome size (18,498
nucleotides) encoding 13 open reading frames and represents the most complex gene organization among the
currently known closteroviruses infecting grapevines [32].
It has been documented in several grape-growing
regions that GLRaV-3 can cause reduced plant vigor
and longevity, and significant losses in both yield and
quality of berries [33-35]. In red-fruited wine grape cultivars infected with GLRaV-3, mature leaves at the bottom portions of canes begin to show GLRD symptoms
at or soon after véraison. As the season progresses, the
symptoms extend upward to other leaves and the foliar
discolorations expand and coalesce to form a reddishpurple color within the inter-veinal areas of the leaf; a
narrow strip of leaf tissue often remains green on either
side of the main veins (hence called green veins). By the
later part of the season (August-October), a typical
infection in a red-fruited cultivar will consist of green
veins and red and reddish-purple coloration of interveinal areas [30]. In advanced stages, the margins of
infected leaves roll downward, expressing the symptom
that gives the disease its common name. White-fruited
cultivars may express GLRD symptoms as mild

Page 3 of 18

yellowing or chlorotic mottling and, in some cases, leaf
margins may roll downward toward the end of the season. Unlike white-fruited cultivars, the phenotypic
expression of reddish-purple coloration of leaves in redfruited cultivars due to GLRD may be an indication of
the accumulation of anthocyanins and could reflect the
up-regulation of genes involved in their biosynthesis in
GLRaV-3-infected symptomatic leaves. However, no studies have been conducted to elucidate the expression
pattern of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes or analyze different flavonoids in grapevine leaves showing
GLRD symptoms.
In recent years, reverse transcription-quantitative realtime polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) has been
widely employed as a powerful tool for investigating the
expression of cellular genes in response to biotic and
abiotic stresses [36,37]. Throughout the manuscript, we
used the abbreviation qPCR for quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction, RT-qPCR for reverse transcription-qPCR and RT-PCR for ‘traditional’ RT-PCR.
Due to its high throughput nature, sensitivity and accuracy in quantifying target genes, RT-qPCR is capable of
the relative or absolute quantification of target genes in
a given sample over a large dynamic range of conditions
[38]. Considering its ability to discriminate between the
expression of closely related genes and to quantify very
weekly expressed genes, RT-qPCR is considered particularly useful for elucidating molecular mechanisms that
underlie changes in gene expression [39,40]. Even
though RT-qPCR is a method of choice, the reliability
and reproducibility of experimental results for quantitative gene expression is dependent on the quality of RNA
template and cDNA, primer specificity, assay efficiency,
experimental conditions and rigorous analysis of the
data using appropriate quality controls [41,42]. To circumvent bias, normalization of relative quantities of the
target genes is carried out widely using appropriate
endogenous reference genes, also referred in earlier studies as housekeeping genes [43,44]. One of the most critical issues in RT-qPCR is the choice of reference genes
used for gene expression analysis, since the expression
of a number of such reference genes varies considerably
under each experimental condition in different lab settings [45-48]. Validation of reference genes is necessary,
since the use of a single non-validated reference gene
has been shown to significantly increase bias in experimental validation of gene expression changes ranging
from more than 3-fold in 25% of the results up to 6-fold
in 10% of the results [43].
In this study, we evaluated six reference genes for
their use in gene expression studies in virus-free green
leaves and virus-infected leaves exhibiting GLRD symptoms. Using RT-qPCR assay, based on SYBR green
detection, we analyzed expression stability of these

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

reference genes in grapevine leaves using the geNorm
algorithm [43]. A combination of two genes was identified as suitable candidates for normalization of gene
expression data in both virus-free and virus-infected
leaves. By using gene-specific RT-qPCR, in combination
with a reliable normalization factor, we present evidence
that up-regulation of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway
genes occurred in symptomatic leaves of a red-fruited
wine grape cultivar infected with GLRaV-3. Together
with estimation of anthocyanins, flavonols and
proanthocyanidins, these results indicated modulation of
the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes towards accumulation of certain classes of end-products in grapevine
leaves exhibiting GLRD symptoms.

Results
GLRD symptoms in grapevine leaves

At the time of sampling in mid September, representing
post-véraison stage of berry development, mature leaves
at the bottom portion of canes in GLRD affected Merlot
grapevines showed green veins and red and reddish-purple color in the inter-veinal areas (Figure 2, left). The
margins of some of these leaves showed downward rolling. GLRD symptoms were not observed in adjacent
grapevines (Figure 2, right). Symptomatic leaves from
GLRD affected grapevines and comparable leaves from
adjacent grapevines not affected by GLRD were tested
by single tube-one step RT-PCR for the presence of different grapevine viruses. Symptomatic leaves from
GLRD affected grapevines were tested positive for
GLRaV-3 but not for other viruses (data not shown).
GLRaV-3 was detected in green veins as well as in reddish-purple inter-veinal areas (since minor veins and
veinlets are present in these areas) of symptomatic
leaves from GLRD affected grapevines (Additional file 1,

Page 4 of 18

Figure S1). Green leaves from adjacent grapevines were
tested negative for these viruses.
Chlorophyll and carotenoid pigments in symptomatic
leaves

Total chlorophylls and carotenoids were estimated in
GLRaV-3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green
leaves (Table 1). Total chlorophyll content in symptomatic leaves was less by 20.1% when compared to green
leaves. Similarly, total carotenoids were less by 19.8% in
virus-infected symptomatic leaves. These results indicate
reduced levels of both chrolophylls and carotenoids in
virus-infected leaves exhibiting GLRD symptoms.
Sequence specificity and amplification efficiency analysis
of target genes

In initial experiments using total RNA isolated from
grapevine leaves, gene-specific sequences amplified by
RT-PCR were cloned and nucleotide sequence determined (Table 2). Nucleotide sequence obtained for each
gene showed high level of similarity (97 to 100%) with
corresponding gene sequence available in GenBank, confirming the specificity of each amplicon to the respective
gene. The amplification efficiency (E) of each gene-specific primer pair in RT-qPCR shown in Table 2 indicated the suitability of primer pairs for RT-qPCR-based
amplification and quantification of target genes. Melting
curve analysis for each amplicon showed a single peak
(Additional file 2, Figure S2), further confirming the
homogeneity and specificity of amplicons produced in
qPCR for all target genes. Agarose gel electrophoretic
separation of each amplicon showed a single DNA fragment of the expected size with no visible primer-dimer
products (data not shown). No amplifications were
observed in all control assays. All these results indicated
that the total RNA and the derived cDNA template
were free of contaminating genomic DNA, demonstrating high quality of nucleic acid preparations obtained
for gene expression level analyses by RT-qPCR.
Expression stability analysis of candidate reference genes

A total of six putative reference genes (Table 2) were
evaluated for their expression stability under our experimental conditions. Since all RT-qPCR reactions were
performed with cDNA derived from equal quantity of
total RNA, transcript abundance of these six genes were

Figure 2 GLRD symptoms in GLRaV-3-infected red-fruited wine
grape cv. Merlot. Picture on the left shows leaves from GLRaV-3infected grapevine showing green veins and red and reddish-purple
discoloration between inter-veinal areas and downward rolling of
leaf margins and picture on the right shows green leaves from an
adjacent virus-free grapevine.

Table 1 Total chlorophylls and carotenoids in GLRaV-3infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves
Pigments (mg/g fresh wt)

GLRaV-3-infected*

Virus-free*

Total chlorophylls

4.81 ± 0.45

6.02 ± 0.16

Total carotenoids

2.19 ± 0.19

2.73 ± 0.08

*Values are mean ± SE. Asterisk indicates significant difference between
GLRaV-3-infected and virus-free leaves using one way ANOVA test (*P < 0.05)

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

Page 5 of 18

Table 2 Genes, primers, length of amplicons and amplification efficiency
Gene1

Primer sequence 5’-3’ (forward/reverse)

Amplicon length
(bp)

qPCR
efficiency

Reference GenBank accession
number*

a) Reference genes
Ubiquitin TCTGAGGCTTCGTGGTGGTA/AGGCGTGCATAACATTTGCG
Actin
CTTGCATCCCTCAGCACCTT/TCCTGTGGACAATGGATGGA

99
82

2.16
2.11

[82]
[56]

GU585868
GU585869

GAPDH

TTCTCGTTGAGGGCTATTCCA/CCACAGACTTCATCGGTGACA

70

1.84

[56]

GU585870

EF1-a

GAACTGGGTGCTTGATAGGC/
AACCAAAATATCCGGAGTAAAAGA

164

1.90

[56]

GU585871

SAND

CAACATCCTTTACCCATTGACAGA/
GCATTTGATCCACTTGCAGATAAG

76

1.88

[56]

GU585872

NAD5

GATGCTTCTTGGGGCTTCTTGTT/
CTCCAGTCACCAACATTGGCATAA

181

1.82

[83]

GU585873

GU585850

b) Candidate genes
PAL

TCTGGTGGAAGGAATCCAAG/CAAAGTGCCACCAGGTAGGT

230

1.77

[62]

CHS1

AGCCAGTGAAGCAGGTAGCC/GTGATCCGGAAGTAGTAAT

155

1.74

[61]

GU585851

CHS2

TCTGAGCGAGTATGGGAACA/AGGGTAGCTGCGTAGGTTGG

294

1.80

[61]

GU585852

CHS3

TCACTTGGACAGCCTTGTTG/CAATTCGAACATGGGCTTCT

106

1.87

$

GU585853

CHI1
CHI2

CAGGCAACTCCATTCTTTTC/TTCTCTATCACTGCATTCCC
TCCAGATCAAGTTCACAGCA/GAAACAAGAGCCTCAAAGAA

103
127

1.69
1.60

[84]
[84]

GU585854
GU585855

F3’H

ATTCGCCACCCTGAAATGAT/AGCCGTTGATCTCACAGCTC

196

1.82

[15]

GU585856

F3’5’H

GAAGTTCGACTGGTTATTAACAAAGAT/
AGGAGGAGTGCTTTAATGTTGGTA

156

1.68

[15]

GU585857

F3H1

CCAATCATAGCAGACTGTCC/TCAGAGGATACACGGTTGCC

69

1.83

[84]

GU585858

F3H2

CTGTGGTGAACTCCGACTGC/CAAATGTTATGGGCTCCTCC

129

1.70

[84]

GU585859

DFR

GAAACCTGTAGATGGCAAGA/GGCCAAATCAAACTACCAGA

114

1.85

[84]

GU585860

LDOX

AGGGAAGGGAAAACAAGTAG/ACTCTTTGGGGATTGACTGG

109

1.76

[84]

GU585861

UFGT

GGGATGGTAATGGCTGTGG/ACATGGGTGGAGAGTGAGTT

152

1.74

[84]

GU585862

MybA1

TAGTCACCACTTCAAAAAGG/GAATGTGTTTGGGGTTTATC

66

1.67

[84]

GU585863

FLS1
LAR1

CAGGGCTTGCAGGTTTTTAG/GGGTCTTCTCCTTGTTCACG
AAATGAACTCGCATCTGTGT/CTGTGGGATGATGTTTTCTC

154
109

1.82
1.75

[85]
[82]

GU585864
GU585865

LAR2

TGATATCAGCTGTGGGTGGA/CCCAAATTCTGATGGAAGGA

104

1.74

$

GU585866

ANR

GCTGCTGTTACCATCAATCA/GCAGGATAGCCCCAAGTAGG

113

1.62

[82]

GU585867

1
See legends for Figure 1 and Figure 3 for names of genes
*Accession numbers indicate sequences generated from this study.
$
Primers were designed based on sequence available in GenBank.

analyzed by direct comparison of Cq values, assuming
equal Cq for equal transcript number. As shown in Figure 3, the six reference genes were grouped into two
arbitrary categories based on their Cq values combined
from both GLRaV-3-infected symptomatic and virusfree green leaf samples. Four genes (GAPDH, EF1-a,
Ubiquitin and Actin) showed higher transcript levels,
since they presented Cq values with a median between
15 and 20 cycles. The other two (SAND and NAD5)
were categorized as genes with relatively low transcript
levels, since their median Cq values were between 20
and 25 cycles.
The raw Cq data for each reference gene was subsequently analyzed using geNorm algorithm to evaluate
their expression stability in virus-infected and virus-free
samples and ranked according to their expression stability measure “M” (Figure 4a-c). All six genes showed
high expression stability and had M values lower than

0.8, below the default limit of 1.5 suggested by the geNorm program. From this analysis, Actin and NAD5 genes
were estimated to have the lowest M values, indicating
that these two genes showed high expression stability in
both virus-infected and virus-free samples (Figure
4a&4b). GAPDH gene gave the highest M value and
hence considered as having lowest stability in both types
of samples under our experimental conditions. However,
the M values for SAND, EF1-a and Ubiquitin were variable between the two types of samples, indicating differences in their expression stability due to virus infection.
The expression stability of the six reference genes differed when M values were calculated by combining raw
C q data of each gene from both virus-infected and
virus-free samples (Figure 4c). In this case, EF1-a and
Ubiquitin were estimated to have the lowest M values,
followed by Actin, SAND and NAD5 genes. Based on
these results, a subset of two genes (Actin and NAD5)

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

Figure 3 Box plot representation of raw Cq values obtained
from amplification curves for reference genes. Lower and upper
boundaries of each box indicate the 25th and the 75th percentile,
respectively. Ranges are represented as bars (whiskers) below and
above the box and indicate the 10th and 90th percentiles,
respectively. The horizontal line in each box represents mean and
outliers by (•). SAND: SAND family protein; GAPDH: glyceraldehyde 3phosphate dehydrogenase; EF1-a: elongation factor1-alpha;
Ubiquitin: ubiquitin-60S ribosomal L40 fusion protein; Actin, NAD5:
NADH dehydrogenase subunit 5.

was used to calculate normalization factor (NF) through
the geometrical averaging of their raw C q values. The
resulting NF was used to normalize raw Cq data generated in RT-qPCR for flavonoid biosynthetic pathway
genes in virus-infected and virus-free grapevine leaves.
Expression patterns of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway
genes

The expression patterns of flavonoid upstream pathway
gene (PAL), genes involved in the biosynthesis of different flavonoids (CHS1, CHS2, CHS3, CHI1, CHI2, F3’H,
F3’5’H, F3H1, F3H2, DFR, LDOX, UFGT, FLS1, LAR1,
LAR2 and ANR) and a regulatory gene (MybA1) were
examined in GLRaV-3-infected symptomatic and virusfree green leaves. The distribution overview of expression levels of gene transcripts showed (Additional file 3,
Figure S3) that many of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes from virus-infected samples presented lower
median Cq values. This indicated higher transcript levels
for these genes in virus-infected symptomatic leaves,
assuming equal Cq for equal transcript number, since all
RT-qPCR reactions were performed with equal amount
of cDNA derived from equal quantity of total RNA.
Using the two best reference genes identified (NF[Actin
and NAD5] ) from gene expression stability analyses
described above, we normalized the raw C q data for
each gene from virus-infected and virus-free samples
and their relative expression levels are shown in Figure
5a&5b. In general, flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes
analyzed in this study showed higher expression levels

Page 6 of 18

in virus-infected symptomatic leaves when compared
with expression levels of corresponding genes from
virus-free green leaves. The expression levels of these
genes as fold increase in virus-infected symptomatic
leaves over the corresponding values from virus-free
green leaves is shown in Table 3. Their expression levels
ranged from two- to fifty-fold increase in virus-infected
samples. Among them, CHS3, F3’5’H, F3H1, LDOX and
LAR1 showed greater than 10-fold increase suggesting
that these genes were expressed at higher levels in
virus-infected leaves. MybA1, which regulates anthocyanin biosynthesis in grapevines via expression of the
UFGT gene, was expressed by about 19-fold higher in
virus-infected symptomatic than in virus-free green
leaves (Figure 5b, Table 3). Similar trend in expression
levels of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes and
MybA1 was obtained when the two best reference genes
(NF[EF1-a and Ubiquitin]), identified when expression stability of reference genes was calculated by combining raw
Cq data from both virus-infected and virus-free samples
(Figure 4c), were considered for data normalization
(Table 3). However, the values were slightly lower than
those obtained when Actin and NAD5 were used as
reference genes for data normalization. Based on these
results, it can be concluded that some of the flavonoid
biosynthetic pathway genes are significantly up-regulated
in virus-infected symptomatic leaves when compared to
expression levels of corresponding genes in virus-free
green leaves.
Among the three isogenes of chalcone synthase (CHS1,
CHS2 and CHS3) that are involved in recruitment of flavonoid precursors to enter the flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway, CHS1 and CHS2 showed about 4- and 3-folds
higher expression levels, respectively, while CHS3 exhibited about 37-fold increase in virus-infected leaves.
These results indicate preferential up-regulation of
CHS3 in virus-infected symptomatic leaves when compared with virus-free green leaves. The two flavonoid
hydroxylases, F3’H, which regulates the synthesis of cyanidin-based anthocyanins, and F3’5’H, which regulates
the synthesis of delphinidin-based anthocyanins, were
expressed at about 5- and 11-fold higher, respectively, in
virus-infected symptomatic leaves compared to virusfree green leaves. Higher expression levels of the flavonoid pathway genes like F3H1 (~23-fold), DFR (~6-fold),
LDOX (~40-fold), and UFGT (~9-fold) and LAR1 (~58fold) genes specific to anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins, respectively, in virus-infected symptomatic leaves
indicate enhanced synthesis of anthocyanins and
proanthocyanidins in these leaves. It is likely that the
synthesis of more flavonols was also favored in virusinfected leaves due to ~4-fold higher expression levels
of the FLS1 gene. Higher expression levels of LAR1,
LAR2 and ANR indicate that these genes were

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

Page 7 of 18

Figure 4 Stability of reference genes in grapevine leaves. Stability value (M) for a set of reference genes is analyzed with geNorm algorithm
in (a) GLRaV-3-infected (designated as virus-infected), (b) virus-free and (c) combined (virus-free and virus-infected) samples. Reference genes in
the x-axis are ranked from left to right based on average expression stability. The GAPDH gene in the extreme left in all graphs with the highest
M value denotes lowest expression stability among the reference genes in all samples. Genes at the extreme right in each graph shows the
highest expression stability among the reference genes. See legend for Figure 3 for names of reference genes.

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

Page 8 of 18

Figure 5 Expression patterns of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in GLRaV-3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves.
The relative expression levels of (a) the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes and (b) the MybA1 gene in GLRaV-3-infected (designated as virusinfected) and virus-free leaves are shown as arbitrary units on the y-axis. The raw Cq values for each gene was normalized using two reference
genes (NF[Actin and NAD5]). Columns represent mean value from five biological replicates, except in case of MybA1 that represents only four
biological replicates and vertical bars indicate standard errors. Significant differences between virus-infected and virus-free leaves was determined
by one-way ANOVA, using the SigmaPlot 11 software and indicated by asterisks (* = p < 0.05 and ** = p < 0.001). See legend for Figure 1 for
names of genes.

contributing to the enhanced synthesis of proanthocyanidins in virus-infected leaves.
Estimation of anthocyanins, flavonols and
proanthocyanidins

To be able to correlate gene expression data with the
accumulation of different flavonoid compounds, we analyzed the secondary metabolite constituents of GLRaV-3infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves. Anthocyanins and flavonols were analyzed by HPLC and
proanthocyanidins were estimated by protein precipitation
method as total tannins. Figure 6 shows total amounts of

anthocyanins, flavonols and proanthocyanidins and Figure
7 shows HPLC profiles of anthocyanins and flavonols
from virus-infected and virus-free leaves. Anthocyanins
were not detected in virus-free green leaves (Figure 6a and
7a), whereas two clearly discernible peaks (numbered 1
and 2 with increasing retention times) were observed in
virus-infected leaves (Figure 7b) with no corresponding
peaks in virus-free green leaf samples. Based on their
retention times and spectral data, the two major peaks in
virus-infected leaves were identified as cyanidin-3-glucoside and malvidin-3-glucoside. Further analysis indicated
that cyanidin-3-glucoside accounted for 61% and

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

Page 9 of 18

Table 3 Relative fold increase of flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway genes in GLRaV-3-infected, symptomatic leaves
over virus-free green leaves
Actin + NAD5*

EF1-a + Ubiquitin*

PAL

4.99 ± 2.99

3.00 ± 1.36

CHS1

4.23 ± 1.34

2.93 ± 0.65

CHS2

3.02 ± 0.97

2.05 ± 0.41

CHS3

37.43 ± 5.09

28.91 ± 6.97

CHI1
CHI2

3.42 ± 0.24
4.40 ± 1.35

2.62 ± 0.52
3.40 ± 1.24

F3’H

4.60 ± 1.69

3.14 ± 0.80

F3’5’H

11.33 ± 2.91

8.52 ± 2.62

F3H1

23.62 ± 11.47

15.45 ± 5.46

F3H2

4.83 ± 1.30

3.32 ± 0.62

DFR

5.73 ± 1.13

3.82 ± 0.41

LDOX

40.75 ± 15.59

25.56 ± 6.36

UFGT
MybA1

9.22 ± 1.53
19.03 ± 5.56

6.77 ± 1.11
12.04 ± 1.92

Gene1

FLS1

3.77 ± 1.33

2.54 ± 0.70

LAR1

58.35 ± 18.54

36.90 ± 6.91

LAR2

2.51 ± 0.29

1.82 ± 0.28

ANR

3.84 ± 1.14

3.18 ± 1.50

1

See legend for Figure 1 for names of genes
*Values are mean ± SE.

malvidin-3-glucoside accounted for 39% of total anthocyanins detected in virus-infected leaves. A minor peak, designated as #3 in Figure 7b, was tentatively identified as
Peonidin-3-O-6-coumarilated. Although total flavonols
were detected in both virus-infected and virus-free leaves
(Figure 6b), they were 24% higher in virus-infected leaves
than in virus-free leaves. As shown in Figure 7c&7d,
HPLC analysis showed three clear peaks in both virusinfected and virus-free leaves. Based on retention times,
they corresponded to putative myricetin (peak 1) and
quercetin (peak 5 & 6) derivatives, respectively, with quercetin derivatives accounting for about 69% and myricetin
derivatives accounting for about 20% of total flavonols and
the rest accounting for other unidentified flavonols. Estimation of proanthocyanidins in leaves as total tannins
showed that their concentration was 36% higher in virusinfected than virus-free leaves (Figure 6c). It is important
to note that the method we used to measure proanthocyanidins is limited to estimating total amount of these compounds rather than a method that provides structural
information. Potentially both delphinidin and cyandin subunits are present in both types of leaf tissues. Taken
together, the above results (Figure 6) indicated that the
three classes of flavonoids (anthocyanins, flavonols and
proanthocyanidins) are present in significantly higher
amounts in virus-infected leaves and correlate with upregulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes
shown in Figure 5 and Table 3.

Discussion
The necessity for ensuring quality-assurance measures
in RT-qPCR analysis of gene expression is well recognized and a set of guidelines have been outlined for
appropriate normalization strategy to control for nonspecific variation between samples [49]. Although a
range of endogenous reference genes have been listed as
good candidates for normalization of gene expression,
identification of the most suitable reference genes for
the given experimental conditions, rather than using
reference genes published in the literature, is extremely
important in functional genomics studies [47,48]. In
addition, certain reference genes may be stably
expressed in one plant species but are not be well suited
for use in other species [50]. Apart from other fields of
research, this knowledge is highly relevant to studies in
plant host-virus interactions, as viruses are known to
modulate key cellular processes in plants which may
involve changes in the expression of endogenous host
genes normally used as reference genes in RT-qPCR
[51,52]. Moreover, viruses manipulate different host cellular transcription pathways and the extent to which
these pathways are affected will be dependent on the
specific virus-host combination [53,54]. Consequently,
we evaluated geometric averaging of multiple reference
genes as a means to avoid experimental bias in gene
expression data.
In this study, we analyzed a set of six putative reference genes (Ubiquitin, Actin, GAPDH, EF1-a, SAND
and NAD5) for their expression stability in leaf samples collected from a red-fruited wine grape cultivar
(cv. Merlot) grown under field-conditions. Since
expression stability of reference genes is known to vary
with environmental conditions under which plants are
grown, the type of plant tissue used and under a
diverse set of biotic and abiotic stress conditions, we
validated the expression stability of these six genes
under our experimental conditions using the geNorm
software and selected Actin and NAD5 to normalize
RT-qPCR data obtained for the flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway genes in virus-infected and virus-free grapevine leaves [55]. In a previous study, GAPDH was
ranked as one of the top three reference genes
(GAPDH <Actin <EF1-a/SAND) for gene expression
studies in grape berry development [56]. However, we
found that GAPDH is the least reliable in the context
of our investigations on relative expression of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in grapevine leaf
samples (Figure 4). These results clearly highlight the
importance of validating reference genes as the most
invariant internal controls for a particular experimental
condition prior to investigating the relative expression
of target genes by RT-qPCR.

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

Page 10 of 18

Figure 6 Estimation of flavonoids in GLRaV-3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves. Total amounts of (a) anthocyanins, (b)
flavonols and (c) proanthocyanidins from GLRaV-3-infected (designated as virus-infected) and virus-free samples are shown. Columns represent
mean value from five biological replicates and vertical bars indicate standard errors. NONE in (a) indicates no anthocyanins detected in virus-free
leaves. Significant differences between virus-infected and virus-free leaves were determined by one-way ANOVA using the SigmaPlot 11 software
and indicated by asterisks (* = p < 0.05). C.E. = catechin equivalent.

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

Page 11 of 18

Figure 7 HPLC profiling of anthocyanins and flavonols in GLRaV-3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves. The
chromatograms show profile of anthocyanins from (a) virus-free and (b) GLRaV-3-infected leaves and profile of flavonols from (c) virus-free and
(d) virus-infected leaves. None in (a) indicates no anthocyanins detected in virus-free, green leaves. Anthocyanins identified in (b) are: 1 =
Cyanidin-3-glucoside; 2 = Malvidin-3-glucoside; 3 = Peonidin-3-O-6-coumarilated. Flavonols identified in (c) and (d) are: 1 = Myricetin-3-glucoside;
2 = Unknown; 3 = Unknown; 4 = Unknown; 5 = Quercetin-3-glucoside; 6 = Quercetin-3-glucuronide; 7 = Unknown; 8 = Unknown.

By using gene-specific RT-qPCR, we present evidence
in this study, the first example to our knowledge, that
overall up-regulation of PAL, an enzyme that commits
the flux of primary metabolism into the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway, and both “early” (CHS, CHI, F3’H,
F3’5’H, F3H and FLS) and “late” genes (DFR, LDOX,
UFGT and LAR) of the pathway occurred in GLRaV-3infected symptomatic grapevine leaves (Figure 5). In
red-fruited cultivars of wine grapes, anthocyanin

pigments accumulate predominantly in berry skins displaying various shades of colors ranging from brick red
to dark blue and their biosynthesis is developmentally
triggered at the onset of véraison via the activation of
flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes [25]. Under normal circumstances, these cultivars do not exhibit such
coloration in their foliage during the growing season.
Thus, changes in leaf color (Figure 2) and accumulation
of specific classes of anthocyanins (Figure 6 and 7) only

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

in GLRaV-3-infected symptomatic leaves supported our
hypothesis that expression of the flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway genes was activated in virus-infected leaves.
Although this study was based on the expression analysis of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes and qualitative and quantitative variation of anthocyanins, flavonols
and proanthocyanidins, it should be noted that mRNA
expression is only one aspect of functional gene regulation of the pathway that result in changes in color of
leaves in virus-infected plants. Since changes in leaf coloration begins to occur soon after véraison, even though
GLRaV-3 can be detected in leaves of infected grapevines during the entire season including pre-véraison, it
remains to be studied if the specific induction of anthocyanins in virus-infected leaves during post-véraison is
tightly coupled with a cascade of physiological and/or
molecular events triggered as a consequence of virushost interactions during véraison.
In plants, delphinidin- and cyanidin-based anthocyanins exhibit blue and reddish color, respectively, under
the acidic conditions of plant vacuoles [17]. HPLC profiling of total anthocyanins showed that both cyanidin3-glucoside and malvidin-3-glucoside accumulated in
virus-infected symptomatic leaves and they are virtually
undetected in virus-free green leaves (Figure 6a and Figure 7a&7b). We believe that presence of these two
classes of anthocyanins, although cyanidin-3-glucoside is
slightly but not significantly higher than malvidin-3-glucoside in virus-infected leaves, contributes to red and
reddish-purple discoloration of virus-infected leaves.
Since F3’5’H regulates the synthesis of delphinidin-based
anthocyanins and F3’H regulates the synthesis of cyanidin-based anthocyanins, expression profiles of these two
genes in concert with increased expression of anthocyanin-specific gene UFGT and its transcription factor gene
MybA1 would ensure the flux of flavonoid intermediates
towards the synthesis of these two classes of anthocyanins in virus-infected leaves. The levels of F3’H and
F3’5’H gene transcripts observed in virus-free green
leaves is in agreement with recent reports that F3’H
gene was only slightly detectable and F3’5’H gene was
expressed at non-detectable levels in green, fully
expanded grapevine leaves [15,57]. Our results also
showed significantly higher levels of flavonols in virusinfected leaves than in virus-free leaves, and the predominant flavonols were quercetin followed by myricetin
(Figure 6b and 7c&7d). Bogs et al. showed that total
amounts of proanthocyanidins decline with leaf maturity
and the two LAR isogenes have different patterns of
expression with LAR1 showing seed-specific expression
and insignificant levels in mature leaves and LAR2 readily present in different tissues, including leaves [58].
Hummer and Schreier reported that proanthocyanidins
as condensed tannins can precipitate proteins and

Page 12 of 18

several methods using protein precipitation have been
used to estimate proanthocyanidins in various agricultural products [59]. Using this approach, we showed
that higher amounts of proanthocyanidins are present in
virus-infected leaves than in virus-free leaves (Figure 6c)
and the data correlate with strong induction of
proanthocyanidin-specific genes; namely, LAR1, LAR2
and ANR. Since LAR and ANR genes provide two separate pathways for the synthesis of the terminal units of
proanthocyanidin polymers, specific induction of LAR1
in virus-infected leaves (Figure 5a) would suggest that
this gene may be contributing towards higher amounts
of proanthocyanidins [58]. Overall, these results are
compatible with our hypothesis that activation of the
flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes occurred in
GLRaV-3-infected symptomatic leaves during post-véraison period resulting in de novo synthesis of specific flavonoid classes and leading to phenotypic expression of
GLRD symptoms. It is also likely that these flavonoid
compounds confer protection from oxidative damage
and/or against attack by opportunistic pathogens due to
their antioxidant and free radical scavenging properties
[8,9,60].
The use of more sensitive and gene-specific RT-qPCR
technique enabled us to study relative abundance of the
three highly homologous CHS gene family transcripts in
virus-infected grapevine leaves. The results showed that
three members of the CHS family (CHS1, CHS2 and
CHS3) identified to date in grapevine, accumulated to
varying levels, with CHS3 expression being significantly
higher than the other two isogenes indicating its important role in color development in virus-infected leaves.
This result is consistent with previous studies that
CHS3, which is phylogenetically divergent from a cluster
formed together by CHS1 and CHS2, was predominant
in grape berry skins of red-fruited cultivars during coloration [61,62]. The exact role of CHS1 and CHS2 in
the biosynthesis of flavonoids may be insignificant,
although their expression was implicated in the production of proanthocyanidins in unpigmented tissues of
both red- and white-fruited grapevine cultivars [61,62].
Among the two flavanone-3-hydroxylase isogenes, F3H1
showed higher expression levels than F3H2, and LAR1
of the two LAR isogenes of leucoanthocyanidin reductase was expressed at higher levels in virus-infected
leaves. No such differential expression was observed in
CHI isogenes. Thus, members of multigenic families
appear to be induced differentially during the biosynthesis of flavonoids in virus-infected leaves of cv. Merlot
showing GLRD symptoms.
Induced accumulation of anthocyanins and development of reddish-purple coloration in GLRaV-3 infected
grapevine leaves appears to be analogous in some ways
with stimulation of pigmentation in other plant species

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

infected with taxonomically disparate viruses [63]. It has
been shown that mottling symptoms present on the
seed coats of virus-infected soybean plants or induction
of floral anthocyanin pigmentation in petunias can be
caused by suppression of CHS posttranscriptional gene
silencing (PTGS) via the expression of a virus-encoded
silencing suppressor protein and that the reversion to
pigmentation in virus-infected tissues is correlated with
an increase in the CHS mRNA level [64-66]. Since CHS
is the first committed enzyme in the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway, it is tempting to speculate that modulation of PTGS suppression of CHS isogenes by GLRaV3-encoded silencing suppressor protein(s) occurs during
post-véraison in virus-infected grapevine leaves leading
to a cascade of molecular events resulting in up-regulation of CHS3 and the ensuing production of secondary
metabolites conferring color to otherwise green leaves.
However, identification of silencing suppressors of
GLRaV-3 awaits further validation of this possibility.
An alternative explanation would be that, since grapevine leaves begin to show GLRD symptoms only during
post-véraison even though GLRaV-3 can be detected in
infected plants throughout the season (i.e. both during
pre- and post-véraison) and the virus is phloem-limited,
appearance of reddish-purple coloration in symptomatic
leaves could be due to a consequence of changes occurring in host metabolism and altered phloem translocation during véraison. In this context, up-regulation of
the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in GLRaV-3infected Merlot leaves may not entirely represent a host
defense response to pathogen infection and, therefore,
our results differ somewhat from other compatible
plant-pathogen interactions in grapevine leaves and
hybrid poplar, where genes encoding key enzymes of the
flavonoid biosynthetic pathway were strongly induced
after infection with phytoplasma or fungal pathogens
[67-70]. Nevertheless, the present study contributes
towards a better understanding of virus-host interactions
leading to the development of GLRD symptoms in redfruited wine grape cultivars.
In the present study, we observed higher transcript
levels of MybA1 gene that encodes a MYB transcription
factor in virus-infected leaves (Figure 5b). Although
other MYB transcription factors have recently been
reported in grapevines, our rationale for analyzing only
MybA1 was because of its main role in the regulation of
anthocyanin biosynthesis via expression of the UFGT
gene [20,71]. However, further research is necessary to
determine whether fine regulation of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in virus-infected leaves involves
a combinatorial action(s) of different R2R3-MYB transcription factors, including basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) and WD40 factors expressed in a spatially and
temporally controlled manner [3,72].

Page 13 of 18

It has been documented that the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway in fruits and vegetative tissues of plants
is up-regulated by different environmental stress factors
and in response to nutritional status [73]. It has also
been suggested that in woody perennials like red-osier
dogwood, anthocyanins accumulate during senescence
to provide optical masking of chlorophyll in order to
reduce the risk of photo-oxidative damage to leaf cells
[74]. However, reduced levels of chlorophylls and carotenoids and higher amounts of specific classes of anthocyanins and the resulting changes in coloration of
GLRaV-3-infected grapevine leaves during post-véraison
may represent specific host-virus interactions as discussed above rather than a generalized abiotic stress
response to environmental and/or nutritional imbalances. An integrated approach involving proteomic and
metabolomic analyses combined with studies on modulation of cellular transcriptome would provide additional
data for a comprehensive understanding of events that
underlie changing colors of virus-infected grapevine
leaves in red-fruited cultivars during post-véraison stage
of berry development. Such information would also help
to delineate grapevine’s response to compatible virus
infections from generic stress responses stimulated by a
variety of abiotic and environmental factors.
Since berries in many red-fruited wine grape cultivars
infected with GLRD show uneven ripening with reduced
levels of extractable anthocyanins from berry skins
(Naidu et al., unpublished results), the methodologies
and results described in this study is providing leads for
a deeper exploration of impacts of GLRD on berry skin
pigments at the molecular level. In addition, there are
several outstanding questions in GLRD-grapevine interactions that need to be addressed. They include: Do
other red-fruited wine grape cultivars exhibit similar
responses in the expression of flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway genes and the profile of flavonoids to infection
with GLRaV-3? Do genetically different GLRaVs trigger
homologous responses in different red-fruited wine
grape cultivars? Is the absence of dramatic symptoms in
white-fruited wine grape cultivars an indication of nonresponsiveness of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway to
virus infection? Indeed, GLRD-grapevine offers an excellent model system to address these questions.

Conclusions
In summary, we compared the relative expression of the
flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes between GLRaV3-infected symptomatic and virus-free green leaves in a
red-fruited wine grape cultivar (cv. Merlot) using RTqPCR. The results showed up-regulation of genes in
virus-infected symptomatic leaves suggesting modulation
of the pathway towards de novo synthesis of certain
classes of end-products and laid a foundation for deeper

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

exploration of molecular mechanisms of biosynthesis
and accumulation of flavonoids in virus-infected wine
grape cultivars. The information on evaluation of reference genes suggests that validation of a set of reference
genes as the most invariant internal controls for a particular experimental condition is essential for exploring
genomics of plant-virus interactions in ecologically relevant, agriculturally important non-model perennial
crops like grapevine under field conditions.

Methods
Plant samples

Leaf samples used in this study came from 10 year-old,
own-rooted grapevines (cv. Merlot). The block is located
near Prosser in Washington State, USA (46.2°N latitude,
119.8°W longitude), and the grapevines are grown under
standard viticultural practices with drip irrigation. The
grapevines were spaced 6 ft within rows and 8 ft
between rows and the rows are in North-South orientation. The vineyard soil was classified as sandy loam.
Plants for sampling were selected in such a way that
individual grapevines exhibiting typical GLRD symptoms
are adjacent to disease-free grapevines in a given row to
minimize error in sampling and experimental results
due to variations in growing conditions. Each pair of
symptomatic and adjacent non-symptomatic grapevines
was tested for different grapevine viruses by RT-PCR
[75]. Mature leaves at the 4 th and 5 th node from the
basal portion of primary canes showing typical symptoms of GLRD from virus-infected vines and comparable leaves from adjacent virus-free vines (Figure 2)
were collected at the same time in mid September
(representing post-véraison stage of berry development)
to minimize variation due to developmental stage of
leaves. The leaves were frozen immediately in liquid N2
upon collection in the field, transported to the lab in
liquid N2 and stored at -80°C until required for RNA
extraction. Leaves from individual grapevines were
pooled and a pair of adjacent virus-infected and virusfree grapevines constituted one biological replicate. A
total of five biological replicates (i.e. five virus-infected
and five virus-free grapevines) were used for this study.
Anecdotal evidence suggested that GLRD was introduced into the vineyard block via planting virus-infected
cuttings. Hence, there is no bias in the age of virusinfected and virus-free grapevines used in this study.
Estimation of chlorophylls and carotenoids

Frozen leaf tissue (100 mg) was extracted in 80% acetone
and total chlorophylls and carotenoids were estimated
using a spectrophotometer [76,77]. Leaves from five
virus-infected grapevines along with their respective controls were used separately and pigments estimated by two
independent times using separate batches of tissue.

Page 14 of 18

RNA isolation

Total RNA was isolated from leaves using Spectrum
Plant Total RNA kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO,
USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Any
contaminating genomic DNA was removed by on-column DNase I digestion (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA,
USA). The integrity of RNA was verified by resolving in
1% formaldehyde-agarose gels and subsequent ethidium
bromide staining. RNA purity was assessed based on
absorbance ratio of 1.8 to 2.0 at 260/280 nm using
Nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop
Technologies, Rockland, DE, USA).
Primers, RT-PCR and analysis of gene sequences

Sequences of primers used in this study were retrieved
from literature and used for amplifying partial gene-specific sequences. A list of primer pairs and amplicon
lengths are provided in Table 2. One μg of total RNA
was reverse transcribed in 25 μl reaction mixture containing gene-specific complementary primer using
Superscript III reverse transcriptase kit (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) by following the manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse transcription (RT) was
carried out at 50°C for 30 min followed by thirty five
consecutive cycles of PCR amplification (denaturation at
94°C for 30 s, annealing at 56°C for 30 s, extension at
72°C for 30 s), with a final extension at 72°C for 5 min
using 1 μM each of gene-specific forward and reverse
primers. Amplified fragments specific to each gene were
cloned separately into pCR 2.1-TOPO vector (Invitorgen, Carlsbad, CA) and recombinant clones purified
using QIAGEN plasmid mini-prep kit (Qiagen Inc.,
Valencia, CA, USA). Two independent clones were
sequenced in both orientations by automated DNA
sequencing at Molecular Biology Core facility at the
Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA. The sequences were compared with corresponding sequences in GenBank with
BLAST 2 sequences software (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/Blast.cgi). The partial sequences of genes obtained
in this study were deposited in GenBank with accession
numbers GU585850 to GU585873.
Reverse transcription-quantitative real-time PCR

One μg of total RNA was reverse transcribed in 20 μl
reaction mixture containing oligo d(T)18 primer using
the Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit
(Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) by following
the manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitative real-time
PCR (qPCR) reactions were performed in 384-well
plates with LightCycler® 480 real-time PCR instrument
(Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) using SYBR
Green I Master Mix (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim,
Germany) as described in the manufacturer’s manual.

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

All qPCR assays were performed with proper controls
according to Minimum Information for Publication of
Quantitative Real-Time PCR Experiments (MIQE)
guidelines [49]. Each reaction was carried out in 20 μl
reaction mixture containing 2 μl of cDNA, 0.5 μM each
of gene-specific forward and reverse primer (Table 2)
and 10 μl of 2 × SYBR Green I Master Mix (Roche
Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). The following conditions were used for each qPCR assay: denaturation for
5 min at 95°C, followed by 45 cycles of PCR (10 s at 95°
C for template denaturation, 10 s at 56°C for annealing
and 30 s at 72°C for extension). All assays included noRT and no-template controls to verify non-specific
amplification. At the end of each qPCR, a melting curve
analysis was performed over the range 65-97°C to determine the specificity of amplicons (Additional file 2, Figure S2). The amplicons were also resolved in 1.2%
agarose gels, stained with ethidium bromide and visualized under UV light. cDNA from five biological replicates (virus-infected and virus-free leaves collected from
five individual grapevines for each category) were used
for qPCR analysis, and three technical replicates were
analyzed for each biological replicate. Aliquots from the
same cDNA were used in all technical replications.
LightCycler® 480 Software (version 1.5; Roche Diagnostics) was used to analyze the data. We used the term
quantification cycle (Cq), instead of threshold cycle (Ct),
crossing point (C p ) or take-off point (TOP) currently
used in the literature, to describe the fractional qPCR
cycle used for quantification according to the Real-Time
PCR Data Markup Language (RDML) data standard
[78]. The Cq is defined as the number of cycles at which
the fluorescence signal exceeds a specific threshold level
of detection and is inversely correlated with the amount
of target nucleic acid present in the reaction. qPCR efficiencies (E) were calculated using the equation E = 10-1/
slope
on a standard curve generated based on 10-fold
dilution of gene-specific plasmid DNA (five dilution
points, starting with 10 pg of respective plasmid DNA
of each gene). The LightCycler® 480 Software automatically calculates the efficiency and displays it on the analysis window.
Expression stability analysis of reference genes

Six candidate reference genes were selected for this
study (Table 1). Reference gene stability analyses were
performed with the Microsoft excel-based geNorm software program available at http://medgen.ugent.be/genorm/[43]. The geNorm software uses pairwise
comparison method to calculate gene expression stability measure “M” for a potential reference gene in a
given cDNA sample panel. This measure was demonstrated in many studies to be valuable for selecting
appropriate reference genes across several experimental

Page 15 of 18

conditions and treatments [45]. Using this program, the
average expression stability value M (defined as the constancy of the expression ratio between two reference
genes across samples) for each gene was obtained in a
stepwise fashion excluding the gene with the highest M
for the next calculation round. This process was
repeated until only two genes remained. Genes with an
M value below the default limit of M = 1.5 were considered as having acceptable expression stability (or suitability as normalizing gene) and genes with the lowest
M values were taken as having the most stable expression [43].
The relative expression level of each candidate gene in
a virus-infected sample (target) was analyzed over the
virus-free sample (calibrator) using the geNorm software
[43]. Briefly, the sample with the lowest Cq value was
assigned the value 1, and raw Cq values were calculated
using the delta-Cq formula Q = EΔCq, where E is the primer efficiency and ΔCq is the sample with the highest
expression (minimum Cq value) from the data set minus
Cq value of the sample in question. The raw Cq value (i.
e. non-normalized) for each candidate gene in each sample was divided by the normalization factor (NF). Subsequently, the normalized value for each candidate gene in
the target was divided by the normalized value for the
corresponding gene in the calibrator to generate relative
expression of flavonoid biosynthetic pathway genes in
virus-infected leaves. The relative expression value for
each gene represents mean of five biological replicates,
with each replicate, in turn, representing a mean of
three technical replicates. Each technical replicate, in
turn, is a mean of duplicate values.
Extraction and HPLC analysis of anthocyanins and
flavonols

Anthocyanins and flavonols were extracted and subsequently analyzed by reverse-phase high performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) as described by
Downey and Rochfort with slight modifications [79].
Frozen leaf samples were ground into fine powder in a
mortar using liquid N2 and 100 mg powder per sample
was added separately to 1 ml of 50% methanol. The
samples were sonicated for 20 min, clarified by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 10 min and the supernatant
filtered through a 0.22 uM Nylon Costar Spin-X Centrifuge Tube Filters (Corning Incorporated, Corning,
NY, USA). The filtrate was directly transferred to 1.5
ml brown vials and analyzed for anthocyanins and flavonols. The HPLC system consisted of an Agilent 1100
series with a quaternary pump, coupled with diode
array and multiple wavelength detectors (Palo Alto,
CA). Column temperature was maintained at 40°C and
separation occurred under the following conditions
and gradients: solvent A, water/formic acid (90:10);

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

solvent B, methanol/formic acid (90:10); flow rate at
1.0 ml/min; column: C-18 SS Wakosil (150 mm×4.6
mm, 3 m packing; SGE, Ringwood, Australia) protected
by an SGE C-18 guard column of the same packing
material; gradient program: 0 min 6% B, 10 min 12%
B, 15 min 18% B, 20 min 24% B, 30 min 30% B and 45
min 45% B. Anthocyanins and flavonols were monitored by photodiode array detection (DAD) with the
detection wavelength set at 520 nm and 353 nm,
respectively. Malvidin-3-glucoside (Extrasynthese Co.,
Genay, France), cyanidin-3-glucoside (Extrasynthese
Co., Genay, France) and quercetin-3-glucuronide
(Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) were quantified
with their respective standard curves over three orders
of magnitudes, with linear correlation coefficients
greater than 0.999. Myricetin-3-glucoside, quercetin-3glucoside and peonidin-3-glucoside-p-coumarate were
putatively identified according to spectra and retention
time. Five biological replicates (virus-infected and
virus-free leaves collected from five individual grapevines for each category) were used for these analyses
and measurements for each sample were carried out in
duplicate.

Page 16 of 18

Additional material
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Detection of GLRaV-3 in green veins
and reddish-purple inter-veinal areas of virus-infected grapevine
leaves by single tube RT-PCR. L and V represent reddish-purple interveinal areas and green veins, respectively, and 1408, 1508, 1409, 1509,
3109 are code numbers for virus-infected grapevines. Lanes N and P
represent negative and positive controls, respectively, for GLRaV-3. Lane
M represents DNA molecular weight markers used to estimate the size of
virus-specific DNA fragment amplified by RT-PCR. The 546 nucleotide
DNA band amplified in test samples (indicated by arrow on the right)
represents a portion of the 70-kDa heat-shock protein homolog of
GLRaV-3 [32,75].
Additional file 2: Figure S2. Melting curve analysis of gene-specific
amplicons. The blue colored horizontal line indicates base line
generated with no template control and the red colored curve indicates
dissociation curve for each gene. See legends for Figure 1 and 3 for
names of genes.
Additional file 3: Figure S3. Box plot representation of raw Cq
values obtained from amplification curves for the flavonoid
biosynthetic pathway genes in GLRaV-3-infected and virus-free
leaves. Lower and upper boundaries of each box indicate the 25th and
the 75th percentile, respectively. Ranges are represented as bars
(whiskers) below and above the box and indicate the 10th and 90th
percentiles, respectively. The horizontal line in each box represents mean
and outliers by (·). Suffix -D and -H for each gene denotes virus-infected
and virus-free samples, respectively. See legend for Figure 1 for names of
genes.

Estimation of proanthocyanidins

Proanthocyanidins (PAs) were extracted from leaves
(collected from five virus-infected and five virus-free
grapevines) as described in Harbertson et al. with some
modifications and estimated as total tannins [80].
Briefly, 100 mg of frozen leaf tissue was extracted in 5
ml of 70% aqueous acetone (v/v) for 12 hours and filtered using Whatman No. 1 filter paper. Aqueous
extract containing PAs was collected after removal of
acetone using a rotary evaporator (Buchi Syncore, Buchi
Switzerland) at 40°C and 525 mm Hg pressure. PAs
were precipitated and resuspended in an alkaline detergent buffer and reacted subsequently with ferric chloride. The resulting reaction was monitored after 10 min
at 510 nm using a Beckman DU 640 spectrophotometer
(Beckman Instruments, St. Louis USA). A standard
curve was developed using known amounts of (+)-catechin (a PA sub-unit) reacted with ferric chloride in an
alkaline detergent buffer to interpret PA values. Concentration of PAs in leaf samples were reported in catechin
equivalents (C.E.).

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by Agricultural Research Center of the
College of Agricultural, Human, and Natural Resource Sciences, Washington
State University, Washington Wine Commission’s Wine Advisory Committee,
and USDA-NIFA Specialty Crop Research Initiative Award No. 2009-5118106027. PPNS # 0540, Department of Plant Pathology, College of Agricultural,
Human, and Natural Resource Sciences, Agricultural Research Center Project
No. WNPO 0616, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-6240, USA.
We sincerely thank Dr. Nnadozie Oraguzie for access to LightCycler® 480
real-time PCR instrument, and Drs. Pat Okubara and Roy Navarre for helpful
comments and suggestions.
Author details
1
Department of Plant Pathology, Irrigated Agriculture Research and
Extension Center, Washington State University, Prosser, WA 99350, USA.
2
School of Food Science, Irrigated Agriculture Research and Extension
Center, Washington State University, Prosser, WA 99350, USA.
Authors’ contributions
RAN conceived and coordinated the study. RAN and LRG designed the
research. LRG collected samples, performed experiments related to gene
expression by RT-qPCR and extraction of pigments, and analyzed the data.
LFC and LRG performed HPLC analysis, and LFC and JFH analyzed the HPLC
results. RAN and LRG wrote the manuscript with contributions from LFC and
JFH. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 9 March 2010 Accepted: 23 August 2010
Published: 23 August 2010

Statistical analysis

Differences in total chlorophylls and carotenoids, total
anthocyanins, total flavonols, total proanthocyanidns
and relative gene expression values between virusinfected and virus-free leaves were analyzed by one-way
ANOVA, using the SigmaPlot 11 software. The confidence level of all analyses was set at 95% and values
with p ≤ 0.05 were considered significant.

References
1. Holton TA, Cornish EC: Genetics and biochemistry of anthocyanin
biosynthesis. Plant Cell 1995, 7(7):1071-1083.
2. Winkel-Shirley B: Flavonoid biosynthesis. A colorful model for genetics,
biochemistry, cell biology, and biotechnology. Plant Physiol 2001,
126(2):485-493.
3. Koes R, Verweij W, Quattrocchio F: Flavonoids: a colorful model for the
regulation and evolution of biochemical pathways. Trends Plant Sci 2005,
10(5):236-242.

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

4.

5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Peters DJ, Constabel CP: Molecular analysis of herbivore-induced
condensed tannin synthesis: cloning and expression of dihydroflavonol
reductase from trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides). Plant J 2002,
32(5):701-712.
Gould KS, Lister C: Flavonoid function in plants. In Flavonoids: Chemistry,
biochemistry and applications. Edited by: Andersen M, Markham KR. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2006:397-441.
Dixon RA, Paiva NL: Stress-induced phenylpropanoid metabolism. Plant
Cell 1995, 7(7):1085-1097.
Chalker-Scott L: Environmental significance of anthocyanins in plant
stress responses. Photochem Photobiol 1999, 70(1):1-9.
Hernández I, Alegre L, Van Breusegem F, Munné-Bosch S: How relevant are
flavonoids as antioxidants in plants? Trends Plant Sci 2009, 14:125-132.
Korkina LG: Phenylpropanoids as naturally occurring antioxidants: from
plant defense to human health. Cell Mol Biol 2007, 53:15-25.
Ververidis F, Trantas E, Douglas C, Vollmer G, Kretzschmar G, Panopoulos N:
Biotechnology of flavonoids and other phenylpropanoid-derived natural
products. Part I: chemical diversity, impacts on plant biology and human
health. Biotechnol J 2007, 2:1214-1234.
Crozier A, Jaganath IB, Clifford MN: Dietary phenolics: chemistry,
bioavailability and effects on health. Nat Prod Rep 2009, 26(8):1001-1043.
Espley RV, Hellens RP, Putterill J, Stevenson DE, Kutty-Amma S, Allan AC:
Red colouration in apple fruit is due to the activity of the MYB
transcription factor, MdMYB10. Plant J 2007, 49(3):414-427.
Shirley BW, Kubasek WL, Storz G, Bruggemann E, Koornneef M, Ausubel FM,
Goodman HM: Analysis of Arabidopsis mutants deficient in flavonoid
biosynthesis. Plant J 1995, 8(5):659-671.
Bogs J, Ebadi A, McDavid D, Robinson SP: Identification of the flavonoid
hydroxylases from grapevine and their regulation during fruit
development. Plant Physiol 2006, 140(1):279-291.
Castellarin SD, Di Gaspero G, Marconi R, Nonis A, Peterlunger E, Paillard S,
Adam-Blondon AF, Testolin R: Colour variation in red grapevines (Vitis
vinifera L.): genomic organisation, expression of flavonoid 3’-hydroxylase,
flavonoid 3’,5’-hydroxylase genes and related metabolite profiling of red
cyanidin-/blue delphinidin-based anthocyanins in berry skin. BMC
Genomics 2006, 7:12.
Havsteen BH: The biochemistry and medical significance of the
flavonoids. Pharmacol Ther 2002, 96(2-3):67-202.
Kennedy JA, Hayasaka Y, Vidal S, Waters EJ, Jones GP: Composition of
grape skin proanthocyanidins at different stages of berry development.
J Agric Food Chem 2001, 49(11):5348-5355.
Adams DO: Phenolics and ripening in grape berries. Am J Enol Vitic 2006,
57(3):249-256.
Grimplet J, Deluc LG, Tillett RL, Wheatley MD, Schlauch KA, Cramer GR,
Cushman JC: Tissue-specific mRNA expression profiling in grape berry
tissues. BMC Genomics 2007, 8:187.
Deluc L, Bogs J, Walker AR, Ferrier T, Decendit A, Merillon JM, Robinson SP,
Barrieu F: The transcription factor VvMYB5b contributes to the regulation
of anthocyanin and proanthocyanidin biosynthesis in developing grape
berries. Plant Physiol 2008, 147(4):2041-2053.
Kobayashi S, Goto-Yamamoto N, Hirochika H: Retrotransposon-induced
mutations in grape skin color. Science 2004, 304(5673):982.
Walker AR, Lee E, Robinson SP: Two new grape cultivars, bud sports of
Cabernet Sauvignon bearing pale-coloured berries, are the result of
deletion of two regulatory genes of the berry colour locus. Plant Mol Biol
2006, 62(4-5):623-635.
Walker AR, Lee E, Bogs J, McDavid DA, Thomas MR, Robinson SP: White
grapes arose through the mutation of two similar and adjacent
regulatory genes. Plant J 2007, 49(5):772-785.
This P, Lacombe T, Cadle-Davidson M, Owens CL: Wine grape (Vitis vinifera
L.) color associates with allelic variation in the domestication gene
VvmybA1. Theor Appl Genet 2007, 114(4):723-730.
Boss PK, Davies C, Robinson SP: Anthocyanin composition and
anthocyanin pathway gene expression in grapevine sports differing in
berry skin colour. Aus J Grape Wine Res 1996, 2(3):163-170.
Kobayashi S, Ishimaru M, Ding CK, Yakushiji H, Goto N: Comparison of
UDP-glucose:flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase (UFGT) gene sequences
between white grapes (Vitis vinifera) and their sports with red skin. Plant
Sci 2001, 160(3):543-550.

Page 17 of 18

27. Boss PK, Davies C, Robinson SP: Expression of anthocyanin biosynthesis
pathway genes in red and white grapes. Plant Mol Biol 1996,
32(3):565-569.
28. Verries C, Guiraud JL, Souquet JM, Vialet S, Terrier N, Olle D: Validation of
an extraction method on whole pericarp of grape berry (Vitis vinifera L.
cv. Shiraz) to study biochemical and molecular aspects of flavan-3-ol
synthesis during berry development. J Agric Food Chem 2008,
56(14):5896-5904.
29. Liakopoulos G, Nikolopoulos D, Klouvatou A, Vekkos KA, Manetas Y,
Karabourniotis G: The photoprotective role of epidermal anthocyanins
and surface pubescence in young leaves of grapevine (Vitis vinifera). Ann
Bot 2006, 98(1):257-265.
30. Rayapati AN, O’Neil S, Walsh D: Grapevine leafroll disease. WSU Extension
Bulletin. 2008, 20[http://cru.cahe.wsu.edu/CEPublications/eb2027e/eb2027e.
pdf], EB2027E.
31. Martelli GP: Grapevine virology highlights 2006-09. Proceedings of the 16th
Meeting of International Council for the study of Virus and Virus-like Diseases
of Grapevine: 31 Aug - 4 Sep 2009 Dijon, France 2009, 15-23.
32. Jarugula S, Gowda S, Dawson WO, Naidu RA: 3’-coterminal subgenomic
RNAs and putative cis-acting elements of Grapevine leafroll-associated
virus 3 reveals ‘unique’ features of gene expression strategy in the
genus Ampelovirus. Virology J 2010, 7:180.
33. Cabaleiro C, Segura A, Garcia-berrios JJ: Effects of grapevine leafrollassociated virus 3 on the physiology and must of Vitis vinifera L. cv.
Albarifio following contamination in the field. Am J Enol Vitic 1999,
50(1):40-44.
34. Golino DA, Wolpert J, Sim ST, Benz J, Anderson M, Rowhani A: Virus effects
on vine growth and fruit components of Cabernet Sauvignon on six
rootstocks. Proceedings of the 16th Meeting of International Council for the
study of Virus and Virus-like Diseases of Grapevine: 31 Aug - 4 Sep 2009 Dijon,
France 2009, 245-246.
35. Komar V, Vigne E, Demangeat G, Lemaire O, Fuchs M: Comparative
performance analysis of virus-infected Vitis vinifera cv. Savagnin rose
grafted onto three rootstocks. Am J Enol Vitic 2010, 61(1):68-73.
36. Huggett J, Dheda K, Bustin S, Zumla A: Real-time RT-PCR normalisation;
strategies and considerations. Genes Immun 2005, 6(4):279-284.
37. Nicot N, Hausman JF, Hoffmann L, Evers D: Housekeeping gene selection
for real-time RT-PCR normalization in potato during biotic and abiotic
stress. J Exp Bot 2005, 56(421):2907-2914.
38. Mackay IM, Arden KE, Nitsche A: Real-time PCR in virology. Nucl Acids Res
2002, 30(6):1292-1305.
39. Bustin S: Quantification of mRNA using real-time reverse transcription
PCR (RT-PCR): trends and problems. J Mol Endocrinol 2002, 29(1):23-39.
40. Czechowski T, Bari RP, Stitt M, Scheible WR, Udvardi MK: Real-time RT-PCR
profiling of over 1400 Arabidopsis transcription factors: unprecedented
sensitivity reveals novel root- and shoot-specific genes. Plant J 2004,
38(2):366-379.
41. Gachon C, Mingam A, Charrier B: Real-time PCR: what relevance to plant
studies? J Exp Bot 2004, 55(402):1445-1454.
42. Bustin SA, Benes V, Nolan T, Pfaffl MW: Quantitative real-time RT-PCR–a
perspective. J Mol Endocrinol 2005, 34(3):597-601.
43. Vandesompele J, De Preter K, Pattyn F, Poppe B, Van Roy N, De Paepe A,
Speleman F: Accurate normalization of real-time quantitative RT-PCR
data by geometric averaging of multiple internal control genes. Genome
Biol 2002, 3(7):research0034.0031-research0034.0011.
44. Rieu I, Powers SJ: Real-time quantitative RT-PCR: Design, calculations, and
statistics. Plant Cell 2009, 21:1031-1033.
45. Radonic A, Thulke S, Mackay IM, Landt O, Siegert W, Nitsche A: Guideline
to reference gene selection for quantitative real-time PCR. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2004, 313(4):856-862.
46. Remans T, Smeets K, Opdenakker K, Mathijsen D, Vangronsveld J,
Cuypers A: Normalisation of real-time RT-PCR gene expression
measurements in Arabidopsis thaliana exposed to increased metal
concentrations. Planta 2008, 227(6):1343-1349.
47. Gutierrez L, Mauriat M, Guenin S, Pelloux J, Lefebvre JF, Louvet R,
Rusterucci C, Moritz T, Guerineau F, Bellini C, Van Wuytswinkel : The lack of
a systematic validation of reference genes: a serious pitfall undervalued
in reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis in
plants. Plant Biotechnol J 2008, 6(6):609-618.

Gutha et al. BMC Plant Biology 2010, 10:187
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2229/10/187

48. Gutierrez L, Mauriat M, Pelloux J, Bellini C, Van Wuytswinkel O: Towards a
systematic validation of references in real-time RT-PCR. Plant Cell 2008,
20(7):1734-1735.
49. Bustin SA, Benes V, Garson JA, Hellemans J, Huggett J, Kubista M, Mueller R,
Nolan T, Pfaffl MW, Shipley GL, Vandesompele J, Wittwer CT: The MIQE
guidelines: Minimum information for publication of quantitative realtime PCR experiments. Clin Chem 2009, 55(4):611-622.
50. Hu R, Fan C, Li H, Zhang Q, Fu YF: Evaluation of putative reference genes
for gene expression normalization in soybean by quantitative real-time
RT-PCR. BMC Mol Biol 2009, 10(1):93.
51. Maule A, Leh V, Lederer C: The dialogue between viruses and hosts in
compatible interactions. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2002, 5(4):279-284.
52. Culver JN, Padmanabhan MS: Virus-induced disease: altering host
physiology one interaction at a time. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2007,
45:221-243.
53. Dunoyer P, Voinnet O: The complex interplay between plant viruses and
host RNA-silencing pathways. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2005, 8(4):415-423.
54. Whitham SA, Yang C, Goodin MM: Global impact: elucidating plant
responses to viral infection. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2006,
19(11):1207-1215.
55. Lovdal T, Lillo C: Reference gene selection for quantitative real-time PCR
normalization in tomato subjected to nitrogen, cold, and light stress.
Anal Biochem 2009, 387(2):238-242.
56. Reid KE, Olsson N, Schlosser J, Peng F, Lund ST: An optimized grapevine
RNA isolation procedure and statistical determination of reference
genes for real-time RT-PCR during berry development. BMC Plant Biol
2006, 6:27.
57. Kobayashi H, Suzuki S, Tanzawa F, Takayanagi T: Low expression of
flavonoid 3’,5’-hydroxylase (F3’,5’H) associated with cyanidin-based
anthocyanins in grape leaf. Am J Enol Vitic 2009, 60(3):362-367.
58. Bogs J, Downey MO, Harvey JS, Ashton AR, Tanner GJ, Robinson SP:
Proanthocyanidin synthesis and expression of genes encoding
leucoanthocyanidin reductase and anthocyanidin reductase in
developing grape berries and grapevine leaves. Plant Physiol 2005,
139(2):652-663.
59. Hummer W, Schreier P: Analysis of proanthocyanidins. Mol Nutr Food Res
2008, 52(12):1381-1398.
60. Treutter D: Significance of flavonoids in plant resistance: a review.
Environ Chem Lett 2006, 4(3):147-157.
61. Goto-Yamamoto N, Wan GH, Masaki K, Kobayashi S: Structure and
transcription of three chalcone synthase genes of grapevine (Vitis
vinifera). Plant Sci 2002, 162:867-872.
62. Ageorges A, Fernandez L, Vialet S, Merdinoglu D, Terrier N, Romieu C: Four
specific isogenes of the anthocyanin metabolic pathway are
systematically co-expressed with the red colour of grape berries. Plant
Sci 2006, 170(2):372-383.
63. Griesbach RJ, Beck RM, Hammond J, Stommel JR: Gene expression in the
star mutation of Petunia × hybrida Vilm. J Amer Soc Hort Sci 2007,
132(5):680-690.
64. Teycheney PY, Tepfer M: Virus-specific spatial differences in the
interference with silencing of the chs-A gene in non-transgenic petunia.
J Gen Virol 2001, 82(Pt 5):1239-1243.
65. Senda M, Masuta C, Ohnishi S, Goto K, Kasai A, Sano T, Hong JS,
MacFarlane S: Patterning of virus-infected Glycine max seed coat is
associated with suppression of endogenous silencing of chalcone
synthase genes. Plant Cell 2004, 16(4):807-818.
66. Koseki M, Goto K, Masuta C, Kanazawa A: The star-type color pattern in
Petunia hybrida ’red Star’ flowers is induced by sequence-specific
degradation of chalcone synthase RNA. Plant Cell Physiol 2005,
46(11):1879-1883.
67. Kortekamp A: Expression analysis of defence-related genes in grapevine
leaves after inoculation with a host and a non-host pathogen. Plant
Physiol Biochem 2006, 44(1):58-67.
68. Hren M, Nikolic P, Rotter A, Blejec A, Terrier N, Ravnikar M, Dermastia M,
Gruden K: ’Bois noir’ phytoplasma induces significant reprogramming of
the leaf transcriptome in the field grown grapevine. BMC Genomics 2009,
10:460.
69. Rotter A, Camps C, Lohse M, Kappel C, Pilati S, Hren M, Stitt M, CoutosThevenot P, Moser C, Usadel B, Delrot S, Gruden K: Gene expression
profiling in susceptible interaction of grapevine with its fungal

Page 18 of 18

70.

71.

72.
73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

pathogen Eutypa lata: extending MapMan ontology for grapevine. BMC
Plant Biol 2009, 9:104.
Miranda M, Ralph SG, Mellway R, White R, Heath MC, Bohlmann J,
Constabel CP: The transcriptional response of hybrid poplar (Populus
trichocarpa × P. deltoides) to infection by Melampsora medusae leaf rust
involves induction of flavonoid pathway genes leading to the
accumulation of proanthocyanidins. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 2007,
20(7):816-831.
Kobayashi S, Ishimaru M, Hiraoka K, Honda C: Myb-related genes of the
Kyoho grape (Vitis labruscana) regulate anthocyanin biosynthesis. Planta
2002, 215(6):924-933.
Ramsay NA, Glover BJ: MYB-bHLH-WD40 protein complex and the
evolution of cellular diversity. Trends Plant Sci 2005, 10(2):63-70.
Lovdal T, Olsen KM, Slimestad R, Verheul M, Lillo C: Synergetic effects of
nitrogen depletion, temperature, and light on the content of phenolic
compounds and gene expression in leaves of tomato. Phytochemistry
2010, 71(5-6):605-613.
Field TS, Lee DW, Holbrook NM: Why leaves turn red in autumn. The role
of anthocyanins in senescing leaves of red-osier dogwood. Plant Physiol
2001, 127:566-574.
Mekuria TA, Soule MJ, Jarugula S, Naidu RA: Current status of grapevine
viruses in Washington State vineyards [abstract]. Phytopathology 2009, 99:
S83.
Porra RJ: The chequered history of the development and use of
simultaneous equations for the accurate determination of chlorophylls a
and b. Photosynth Res 2002, 73(1-3):149-156.
Lichtenthaler HK, Welburn : Determination of total carotenoids and
chlorophylls a and b of leaf extracts in different solvents. Biochem Soc
Trans 1983, 11:591-592.
Lefever S, Hellemans J, Pattyn F, Przybylski DR, Taylor C, Geurts R,
Untergasser A, Vandesompele J: RDML: structured language and reporting
guidelines for real-time quantitative PCR data. Nucleic Acids Res 2009,
37(7):2065-2069.
Downey MO, Rochfort S: Simultaneous separation by reversed-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectral
identification of anthocyanins and flavonols in Shiraz grape skin. J
Chromat A 2008, 1201:43-47.
Harbertson JF, Kennedy JA, Adams DO: Tannin in skins and seeds of
cabernet sauvignon, syrah, and pinot noir berries during ripening. Am J
Enol Vitic 2002, 53(1):54-59.
Boss PK, Davies C, Robinson SP: Analysis of the expression of anthocyanin
pathway genes in developing Vitis vinifera L. cv Shiraz grape berries and
the implications for pathway regulation. Plant Physiol 1996,
111(4):1059-1066.
Fujita A, Soma N, Goto-Yamamoto N, Mizuno A, Kiso K, Hashizume K: Effect
of shading on proanthocyanidin biosynthesis in the grape berry. J Japan
Soc Hort Sci 2007, 76(2):112-119.
Menzel W, Jelkmann W, Maiss E: Detection of four apple viruses by
multiplex RT-PCR assays with coamplification of plant mRNA as internal
control. J Virol Methods 2002, 99(1-2):81-92.
Jeong ST, Goto-Yamamoto N, Kobayashi S, Esaka M: Effects of plant
hormones and shading on the accumulation of anthocyanins and the
expression of anthocyanin biosynthetic genes in grape berry skins. Plant
Sci 2004, 167(2):247-252.
Downey MO, Harvey JS, Robinson SP: Synthesis of flavonols and
expression of flavonol synthase genes in the developing grape berries
of Shiraz and Chardonnay (Vitis vinifera L.). Aus J Grape Wine Res 2003,
9(2):110-121.

doi:10.1186/1471-2229-10-187
Cite this article as: Gutha et al.: Modulation of flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway genes and anthocyanins due to virus infection in grapevine
(Vitis vinifera L.) leaves. BMC Plant Biology 2010 10:187.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
