<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Evolutionary diversity of bile salts in reptiles and mammals, including analysis of ancient human and extinct giant ground sloth coprolites</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-133"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Lee R Hagey, Nicolas Vidal, Alan F Hofmann, Matthew D Krasowski"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 8.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 7.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Open Access

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Evolutionary diversity of bile salts in reptiles and
mammals, including analysis of ancient human and
extinct giant ground sloth coprolites
Research article

Lee R Hagey*1, Nicolas Vidal2, Alan F Hofmann1 and Matthew D Krasowski*3

Abstract
Background: Bile salts are the major end-metabolites of cholesterol and are also important in lipid and protein
digestion and in influencing the intestinal microflora. We greatly extend prior surveys of bile salt diversity in both
reptiles and mammals, including analysis of 8,000 year old human coprolites and coprolites from the extinct Shasta
ground sloth (Nothrotherium shastense).
Results: While there is significant variation of bile salts across species, bile salt profiles are generally stable within
families and often within orders of reptiles and mammals, and do not directly correlate with differences in diet. The
variation of bile salts generally accords with current molecular phylogenies of reptiles and mammals, including more
recent groupings of squamate reptiles. For mammals, the most unusual finding was that the Paenungulates (elephants,
manatees, and the rock hyrax) have a very different bile salt profile from the Rufous sengi and South American aardvark,
two other mammals classified with Paenungulates in the cohort Afrotheria in molecular phylogenies. Analyses of the
approximately 8,000 year old human coprolites yielded a bile salt profile very similar to that found in modern human
feces. Analysis of the Shasta ground sloth coprolites (approximately 12,000 years old) showed the predominant
presence of glycine-conjugated bile acids, similar to analyses of bile and feces of living sloths, in addition to a complex
mixture of plant sterols and stanols expected from an herbivorous diet.
Conclusions: The bile salt synthetic pathway has become longer and more complex throughout vertebrate evolution,
with some bile salt modifications only found within single groups such as marsupials. Analysis of the evolution of bile
salt structures in different species provides a potentially rich model system for the evolution of a complex biochemical
pathway in vertebrates. Our results also demonstrate the stability of bile salts in coprolites preserved in arid climates,
suggesting that bile salt analysis may have utility in selected paleontological research.
Background
Bile salts are amphipathic, water-soluble end-metabolites
of cholesterol that facilitate intestinal absorption of lipids,
enhance proteolytic cleavage of dietary proteins, and
exert potent antimicrobial activity in the small intestine
[1]. The synthesis of bile salts is the major route for elimination of cholesterol (a water-insoluble molecule) from
the body [2]. Bile salts are produced by every class of vertebrate animals and show substantial structural diversity
across species [1-5].
* Correspondence: lhagey@ucsd.edu, mkrasows@healthcare.uiowa.edu
1

Department of Medicine, University of California - San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City,
IA, USA

3

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

The two basic structural components of bile salts are
the 19-carbon (C19) steroid nucleus and a side-chain (Figure 1). In all bile salts characterized to date, the four-ring
cyclopentanophenanthrene ('steroid') nucleus (with rings
labelled A, B, C, and D as in cholesterol in Figure 1B) is
fully saturated (i.e., the cholesterol double bond at C5-C6
has been reduced). The A/B ring juncture is variable,
being cis in most bile salts but trans in some species (e.g.,
jawless fish, lobe-finned fish, agamid lizards), a shift that
greatly influences the overall shape of the steroid nucleus.
A/B trans (5α) bile salts have an extended, planar orientation of the steroid rings, while A/B cis (5β) bile salts have
a 'bent' orientation of the A ring relative to the other
three rings. Virtually all bile salts have a hydroxyl group at
C-3 (like cholesterol) and at C-7, because cholesterol 7α-

© 2010 Hagey et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons

BioMed Central Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 2 of 23

Figure 1 Representative bile salts and their structures. (A) Simplified version of the bile salt synthetic pathway showing the three major classes of
compounds that can serve as primary bile salts (C27 bile alcohols, C27 bile acids, and C24 bile acids). (B) All bile salts are derived from cholesterol (topmost
structure), illustrated with the carbon atoms numbered and the steroid rings labelled A, B, C, and D. Iguanian lizards utilize 5α C24 bile acids such as
5α-cholic acid (allocholic acid) that have an A/B ring juncture that is trans, resulting in an overall planar and extended structure of the steroid rings
(see representation of A, B, and C rings on the right side). Crocodylians utilize trihydroxy 5β C27 bile acids with hydroxylation at C-12 in addition to the
default 3α, 7α-dihydroxylation. One of the two most common primary salts in mammals is chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), the stem C24 bile acid that
has the default default 3α, 7α-dihydroxylation.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

hydroxylase is the rate-limiting enzyme in bile salt biosynthesis [6,7]. Additional common sites of hydroxylation
are at C-12 and C-16, but other sites of hydroxylation
have been found, as will be described in our study.
Hydroxyl groups may also vary in whether they project
below (α configuration) or above (β) the plane of the steroid nucleus. In some species, hydroxyl groups have
undergone dehydrogenation to an oxo group [1].
Bile salts that retain all the carbon atoms of cholesterol
have a total of 27 carbon atoms (C27), possessing an 8carbon (C8) side-chain on the D-ring in addition to the
C19 nucleus. In many species, the side-chain is shortened
by three carbon atoms, resulting in a C5 side-chain and
C24 bile acids. Bile salts with total numbers of carbon
atoms other than 24 or 27 are uncommon but can occur,
usually as minor components of bile [1,5]. Other than
length, further structural variation in the side-chain
includes the presence and orientation of hydroxyl groups,
the presence of unsaturation in the side-chain, and above
all, the substituent on the terminal carbon atom, which is
a hydroxyl group in bile alcohols and a carboxyl group in
bile acids. Side-chain length and the state of oxidation at
C-27 is used to assign bile salts to three broad classes (C27
bile alcohols, C27 bile acids, and C24 bile acids), and we use
this classification throughout this manuscript. Primary
bile salts are those synthesized by the liver, while secondary bile salts result from extra-hepatic modifications of
bile salts, typically by host bacteria in the colon and distal
small intestine [1,8]. We use the term 'bile salts' to refer to
the broad class of cholesterol end-metabolites (bile acids
and bile alcohols).
The evolutionarily 'earliest' bile salts are most likely 5αbile alcohols that have a trans A/B junction (resulting in
an overall planar structure) and retain all 27 carbon
atoms of cholesterol [9,10]. C27 5α bile alcohols are the
dominant bile salts of jawless and lobe-finned fish [9-13].
Bile alcohols are esterified with sulfate after their biosynthesis and secreted as the ester sulfate into bile. Cholic
acid (CA; 3α,7α,12α-trihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid)
and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA; 3α,7α-dihydroxy-5βcholan-24-oic acid) are examples of more evolutionarily
recent 24-carbon atom (C24) bile acids that have a 'bent'
shape because of their cis A/B ring juncture (Figure 1B).
We propose that bile acids are the derived or apomorphic
state for bile salts. Bile acids are typically found in bile Nacylamidated ('conjugated') with taurine (or rarely an analog of taurine) or glycine. In prior surveys of bile salts,
conjugation of bile acids with taurine was observed to be
much more common than with glycine [2,3].
The details of bile salt biosynthetic pathways are known
only in humans and rodents, and have not yet been
resolved in other species. The synthetic pathway in
humans and rodents using C24 5β bile acids is long and

Page 3 of 23

complex, involving up to 16 enzymes (Figure 2) and
requiring the transport of intermediates between multiple organelles [6,7]. Although the details of the bile salt
biosynthetic pathways used by non-mammalian species
are unknown, animals using exclusively C27 bile alcohols
likely have simpler and shorter synthetic pathways, as C27
bile alcohols do not require side-chain cleavage or oxidation of the terminal alcohol to a carboxylic acid [10,14].
Classification of bile salts into C27 bile alcohols, C27 bile
acids, or C24 bile acids places bile salts on a spectrum
based on the degree of oxidation (bile alcohol to acid) and
alteration of the length of the side-chain, which correlates
with the number of steps (and likely number of enzymes)
in the bile salt synthetic pathway (Figure 2). C27 bile alcohols require only hydroxylation and reduction of the cholesterol double bond. The minimal or 'stem' C27 bile
alcohol possesses hydroxyl groups at the 3α, 7α, and 27
positions (3α,7α,27-trihydroxy-5α-cholestan or 3α,7α,27trihydroxy-5β-cholestan) [4]. In humans and rodents, the
synthesis of a stem C27 bile alcohol structure is catalyzed
by five enzymes [7]. C27 bile acids additionally require
oxidation of the side-chain to a carboxylic acid group, a
step which is accomplished in humans and rodents by the
multi-functional enzyme cytochrome P450 (CYP) 27A1
that also catalyzes the 25-hydroxylation of 1α-hydroxyvitamin D2 and D3 [15]. Thus, synthesis of a stem C27 bile
acid (3α,7α-dihydroxy-5α-cholestan-27-oic acid or
3α,7α-dihydroxy-5β-cholestan-27-oic acid) also only
requires five enzymes. C24 bile acids require cleavage of
the side-chain, a process involving five peroxisomal
enzymes in humans and rodents [6,7], in addition to the
other steps that are presumed to be shared with the pathways for C27 bile alcohols and C27 bile acids.
We greatly extend prior surveys of bile salt diversity in
reptiles and mammals. The use of multiple analytical
techniques enabled the identification of previously unreported bile salts and detailed resolution of biliary bile salt
profiles. In this manuscript, we analyze and discuss the
patterns of bile salt structural variation across reptiles
and mammals, comparing and contrasting our results
with current phylogenies of reptiles and mammals. We
also discuss the implications for the evolution of the complex bile salt synthetic pathway, with one of the main
goals being to provide background data for future studies
of the molecular evolution of bile salt enzymes. Lastly, we
also present data on analysis of bile salts recovered from
human coprolites that are approximately 8,000 years old
as well as from coprolites of the Shasta ground sloth
(Nothrotherium shastense), a mammal that was one of 33
known genera of large (> 50 kg) North American animals
that disappeared suddenly at the end of the Pleistocene
period approximately 11 000 years ago [16].

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 4 of 23

Figure 2 Bile salt synthetic pathways. The enzymatic pathways involved in bile salt synthesis have so far been elucidated only in humans and rodents. The pathway shown is the 'neutral' pathway, as opposed to the 'acidic' pathway that modifies the side-chain before the steroid nucleus [6,7].
The ultimate production of the default C24 bile acid chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) requires multiple changes to the original cholesterol structure including 7α-hydroxylation, isomerization of the C-5 - C-6 double bond (from cholesterol) to form a Δ4 compound coupled with oxidation of the 3βhydroxy group to a 3-oxo group, stereospecific reduction of the 3-oxo group to a 3α-hydroxy group, hydroxylation of the terminal carbon atom of the
side-chain, oxidation of the side-chain (to form a C27 bile acid), and shortening of the side-chain. Animals using C27 bile alcohols or C27 bile acids as
their primary bile salts presumably require fewer enzymatic steps than those synthesizing C24 bile acids. The enzymes involved in 5α-reduction leading
to 5α-bile salts are currently unknown. The stem C27 5β-bile alcohol would be 3α,7α,27-trihydroxy-5β-cholestan, while the stem C27 5β-bile acid would
be 3α,7α-dihydroxy-5β-cholestan-27-oic acid. Note that some steps in the pathway require more than one enzyme (e.g., isomerization of the 3β-hydroxy group of cholesterol to the 3α configuration), whereas some enzymes (e.g., CYP27A1) can catalyze more than one reaction. Double bonds or
additional hydroxyl groups may be added to the nucleus or side-chain, either on an intermediate or on the completed stem bile alcohol or acid.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Results
Overview of bile salt variation in reptiles and mammals

We analyzed the bile salts in biliary bile from 219 reptile
species (33 Testudines, tuatara, 66 Squamates, 102
snakes, and 17 Crocodylians) and 326 mammalian species (2 monotremes, 18 marsupials, and 306 placental
mammals). We grouped bile salts into three broad types
(C27 bile alcohols, C27 bile acids, and C24 bile acids), which
allowed us to classify each species into one of six categories based on which one or two bile salt types are present
at 10% or greater of the biliary bile salt pool [10]: class I,
C27 bile alcohols only; class II, C27 bile alcohols + C27 bile
acids; class III, C27 bile alcohols + C24 bile acids; class IV,
C27 bile acids only; class V, C27 bile acids + C24 bile acids;
and class VI, C24 bile acids only. This classification makes
no assumptions about the effectiveness or physiological
functions of bile salts.
The bile salt profiles of all species analyzed are in Additional File 1 (reptiles) and Additional File 2 (mammals),
with the bile salt class indicated for each species. Unusual
bile salt profiles are summarized in Table 1. As noted in
prior surveys of vertebrate bile salts [2,3,5], bile salt profiles tend to be conserved within families and even within
orders of animals, especially for reptiles and mammals.
There were only three reptile families (Chelidae, Testudinae, and Scincidae) and only one mammalian family
(Cebidae) that showed different bile salt classes between
species within a family, but even in these cases, there was
always overlap of bile salts within all species of the family
(e.g., some species within a family may have only C24 bile
acids while other species within the family have both C24
and C27 bile acids, as seen in Cebidae).
Bile salts of reptiles

The bile salts of all reptiles analyzed are summarized in
Additional File 1. Two orders of reptiles - Crocodylia and
Testudines - showed little variation of bile salt profiles
across species. Although species within Crocodylia and
Testudines often have biliary bile salt mixtures that are
complex and difficult to resolve analytically [17], each
order is characterized by a single dominant bile salt (see
representative electrospray ionization/tandem mass
spectrometry, ESI/MS/MS, data in Additional File 3, Figures S3A-D, M, N). Crocodylian species share the phenotype of using a C27 bile acid with a hydroxylation pattern
(3α,7α,12α-trihydroxy) common to many bile salts. This
C27 bile acid (3α,7α,12α-trihydroxy-5β-cholestan-27-oic
acid) can be thought of as analogous to CA, the most
common C24 bile acid. Turtles and tortoises, on the other
hand, have C27 bile acids with an additional 22-hydroxylation relative to 3α,7α,12α-trihydroxy-5β-cholestan-27-oic
acid, a modification to C27 bile acids that is so far unique

Page 5 of 23

to Testudines. Turtles from the family Emydidae also had
a portion of their C27 bile acids containing both 15α- and
22S-hydroxylation. Testudines also had the only two reptile species in our survey (Siebenrock's snake-neck turtle
and California desert tortoise) that had C27 bile alcohols
(the plesiomorphic state) present at more than 10% of
total biliary bile salts.
The phylogeny of Squamata (lizards, snakes, and
amphisbaenians) is still under active debate and study.
With the rise of molecular-based phylogenetic studies,
the traditional position of many taxa based on morphology and paleontology has been challenged [18-20]. To
provide an evolutionary framework, we map the bile salt
profiles of Squamata orders onto a tree that represents
the summary of current knowledge on Squamata phylogeny, incorporating the species analyzed in our study (Figure 3).
Our survey of Squamata covered species from five
groups derived from molecular phylogenetic analyses
(Iguania, Anguimorpha, Laterata, Scinciformata, Gekkota; see representative ESI/MS/MS spectra in Additional File 3, Figures S3E-L, Q-T) [18]. All species
examined within three families (Agamidae, Chamaeleonidae, Iguanidae) of Iguania had C24 5α-bile acids
(mainly 5α-CA) as the primary bile salt (see Additional
File 3, Figures S3Q, R). 5α Bile acids, also known as 'allo'
bile acids, are generally uncommon in vertebrates, being
very rare in mammals, fish, and amphibians [9]. Other
than Iguanian lizards, the only other vertebrates that
commonly use 5α bile acids are waterfowl [2]. Some of
the Iguanian species had a minor fraction of 5β bile acids
(mainly CA and CDCA). Outside Iguania, the only other
reptiles in our sample to predominantly use 5α bile acids
were Warren's girdle-tail (Cordylus warreni, Cordylidae)
and the Tokay gecko (Gekko gecko, Gekkonidae). 5α bile
acids were not found at greater than 5% of total biliary
bile salts in any other reptile species examined.
All species examined within Anguimorpha (including
families Anguidae, Helodermatidae, and Varanidae) had a
5β C27 bile acid known as varanic acid (3α,7α,12α,24Rtetrahydroxy-5β-cholestan-27-oic acid) as the primary
bile salt (see representative ESI/MS/MS spectra in Additional File 3, Figures S3E-L), a structure also found in the
tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus). The expression of this
structure in bile as a major primary bile salt is unique to
reptiles, but varanic acid is also synthesized (and a subsequently rapidly consumed intermediate) in the longer
human bile acid synthetic pathway [6,7]. The species
examined with the groups Laterata (including families
Lacertidae and Teiidae) and Gekkota had CA as their
dominant bile salt. We also examined three species
within the group Scinciformata. Two skinks in the family
Scincidae - pygmy spiny-tailed skink (Egernia depressa)

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 6 of 23

Table 1: Unusual bile salt profiles in reptiles and mammals
Bile salt pattern

Examples

Comment

5α ('allo') bile acids

Lizards, especially Iguania

5α bile acids are generally rare in
vertebrates

1α-Hydroxylation

Spotted cuscus (Phalanger maculatus)

Unusual hydroxylation leads to highly
hydrophilic bile acids in this species.

1β-Hydroxylation

Feather-tailed glider (Acrobates pygmaeus)

Unusual hydroxylation site

6α-Hydroxylation

Suidae
Lesser Malay chevrotain (Tragulus
javanicus)

Unusual hydroxylation site. Hyocholic acid
is only detected in Suidae and the
chevrotain.

6β-Hydroxylation

Muridae

Unusual hydroxylation site

7-Oxo bile acids

Queensland koala (Phascolarctos adjustus)

Unusual bile salt modification

15α-Hydroxylation

Common wombat (Vombatus ursinus)

Not seen in other mammals but found in
birds

16α-Hydroxylation

Snakes

Hydroxylation at 16α is common in snakes
(Boidae, Cylindrophiidae, Pythonidae,
Uropeltidae) and birds but not seen in
mammals.

Ursodeoxycholic acid (at > 5%)

Ursidae
Caviomorph rodents

Ursodeoxycholic acid is seen in other
mammals but only as a small percentage
of the bile salt pool.

Agouti (Dasyprocta punctata)
Mountain paca (Cuniculus taczonowskii)
Pacharana (Dinomys branickii)
Some snakes

This unusual bile acid side-chain
modification is seen in a small number of
mammals and is also found in some snakes
in Colubridae.

22-Hydroxylated C27 bile acids

Turtles

This type of bile salt is unique to turtles.

23R-Hydroxylation

Pinnipeds
Some snakes

23R-Hydroxylation of bile acids is common
to Pinnipeds but is not seen in other
Carnivora.

100% Bile alcohols

Paenungulates, rhinoceroses

Profile also seen in lobe-finned fish, jawless
fish, some teleost fish, and some
amphibians.

22 Bile acids

and blotched blue-tailed skink (Mabuya blandingii) - had
24R-hydroxylated C27 bile acids as their major bile acids
including varanic acid and 3α,7α,24R-trihydroxy-5βcholestan-27-oic acid (differing from the root C27 bile
acid by the addition of the 24R-hydroxyl group).
Of the 101 species of snakes examined, the most common major bile salt was the C24 bile acid CA (Figure 4).

Within the family Viperidae, we examined the bile of 32
species, belonging to two subfamilies, the viperines (true
vipers) and the crotalines (pit-vipers) [21]. The viperine
clade that includes the genera Bitis, Cerastes, Daboia,
Eristicophis, and Macrovipera, was notable in having the
7-dehydroxylated bile acid known as bitocholic acid
(3α,12α,23R-trihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid) as well as

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 7 of 23

Allo
CA

●●● Major bile acid

CA

Anolis grahami

●●●
●●●

●

●●●

●

Sauromalus

●●●

●

Cyclura

●●●

Brachylophus

Minor bile acid

Anolis caroliensis
Anolis equestris

●

CDCA C27 bile
acids

●●●

Corytophanes

A

●●●

Chlamydosaurus

●●●

●

Pogona

●●●

●

Physignathus

●●●

●

Agama

●●●

Uromastyx

●●●

Chamaeleonidae

●●●
●●●

Anguidae
Helodermatidae

B

●●●
●●●

Varanidae
●●●

Serpentes*
Lacertidae
Teiidae

C

●

●●●
●

D

Cordylus

●●●

Gekko

●●●

●

●●●
●●●

Phelsuma
Ptychozoon
Hemitheconyx

E
●

●

●●●

Cytrodactylus

A: Iguania
B: Anguimorpha
C: Laterata
D: Scinciformata
E: Gekkota

●●●

●

Egernia
Trachylepis

●●●

●

●●●

●

●●●

●

Figure 3 Bile salts of Squamata. The bile salt variation of lizards is overlaid on a tree that represents a summary of current knowledge of squamate
phylogeny based on molecular data. Groups of squamates are color-coded following the nomenclature in the review by Hedges and Vidal [18]. Major
bile salts are those constituting more than 50% of total biliary bile salts. Minor bile salts account for less than 50% but more than 10% of total bile salts.
The bile salts of Iguania (group A) are dominated by 5α (allo) bile acids. The C27 bile acids of species within Anguimorpha (group B) are almost entirely
varanic acid. The bile salts of Laterata (group C) are mainly CA with minor fractions of alloCA in some species. The bile salts of species sampled within
Scinciformata showed the most diversity of any of the five squamate groups surveyed, with some species having mainly varanic acid (C27 bile acid)
and others having mainly alloCA. Species within Gekkota (group E) had mainly CA and CDCA as major bile salts. Abbreviations: alloCA, allo (5α)-cholic
acid; CA, cholic acid; CDCA, chenodeoxycholic acid.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

C23 bile acids in their biliary bile salts. In contrast, the
crotaline clade that includes the genera Agkistrodon, Azemiops, Bothriechis, Bothrops, Crotalus, Deinagkistrodon,
Lachesis, Trimeresurus, and Tropidolaemus had bile salt
profiles consistently of approximately 100% CA. The phylogenetically most basal snake families examined in our
survey (Boidae, Cylindrophiidae, Pythonidae, and Uropeltidae) were notable in that all species shared the 7deoxy bile acid known as pythocholic acid (3α,12α,16αtrihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid) as a major primary
bile acid. Both bitocholic and pythocholic acids are
unusual, since in humans and rodents (and presumably
the majority of vertebrates) 7-hydroxyation of cholesterol
is the first and rate-limiting step of bile acid biosynthesis
[6,7]. The mechanism by which these 7-dehydroxylated
bile acids are produced in snakes is currently unknown,
although it has been suggested that pythocholic acid is
formed by 16α-hydroxylation of the secondary bile acid
deoxycholic acid (3α,12α-dihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic
acid; DCA) [22]. This mechanism is physiologically plausible (although not proven) if snakes that feed infrequently shut off new bile acid synthesis between meals
and thus have an abundance of 7-deoxy bile acids in their
bile, as a result of intestinal bacteria removing the 7hydroxy group from the original primary bile acids [4]. 7Deoxy bile acids have not been identified as primary bile
acids in any other species [2,9].
Bile salts of mammals

We examined the biliary bile salts of 326 mammals, of
which 300 had type VI bile salt profiles (>90% C24 bile
acids) (Additional File 2). We have mapped the bile salt
profiles of mammals onto a molecular phylogenetic tree
[23], incorporating the species analyzed in our study (Figure 5). Only one mammal analyzed (fox squirrel, Sciurus
niger) had > 50% 5α bile acids; for most mammals, 5α bile
acids were found only at trace levels. Perhaps the most
striking finding was that all five species of Paenungulates
examined (including two elephants, rock hyrax, and two
manatees) had C27 bile alcohols as their primary bile salts
(Additional File 2) [24,25]. The bile alcohols of Paenungulates utilize 25-hydroxylation, a rare substitution in C27
bile salts that is also found in the bile alcohols of lobefinned fish (coelacanths, lungfishes) [9,11,12,26]. In contrast to the Paenungulates, the bile salts of the South African aardvark (Orycteropus afer) and rufous sengi
(Elephantulus rufescens), two animals also grouped by
molecular phylogenetic analyses with Paenungulates in
the cohort Afrotheria [27,28], were typical C24 bile acids
consisting mainly of CA.
The biliary bile salts of 2 species of monotremes (duckbilled platypus and short-nosed echidna) were both composed of greater than 95% C24 bile acids. The bile of both

Page 8 of 23

monotremes analyzed did, however, contain C27 bile acids
at about 2% of total bile salts; the C27 bile acid present was
3α,7α,12α-trihydroxy-5β-cholestan-27-oic acid, the dominant bile salt of Crocodylians (Additional file 1) and also
a primary bile salt of ratite birds (LR Hagey, unpublished
data). We examined 18 species of marsupials, which
revealed uncommon bile acids relative to placental mammals and other vertebrates: 1α-hydroxy-CDCA
(1α,3α,7α-trihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid) in the spotted cuscus (Phalanger maculatus), 1β-hydroxy-CDCA
(1β,3α,7α-trihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid) in the
feather-tailed glider (Acrobates pygmaeus), 3α-hydroxy7-oxo-5β-cholan-24-oic acid in the Queensland koala
(Phascolarctos adjustus), 7-oxo-DCA (3α,12α-dihydroxy7-oxo-5β-cholan-24-oic acid) in both the kowari
(Dasyuroides byrnei) and spotted-tailed quoll (Dasyrus
maculatus maculatus), and 15α-hydroxy bile acids in the
common wombat (Vombatus ursinus) [29]. Some of these
substitutions have also been described in birds, e.g., 1βbile acids in the tinamou [30], fruit pigeons, and doves
[31]; and 15α-hydroxy bile acids in swans, ducks, and
geese [32,33].
In placental mammals, the common occurrence of the
C24 bile acids CA and CDCA limits the phylogenetic
information of bile salt variation. However, there are
groups of mammals which share less common bile salts.
One example is in the pinnipeds, a diverse group of semiaquatic marine mammals that include the families Odobenidae (walrus), Otariidae (eared seals, including fur
seals and sea lions), and Phocidae (earless seals). All were
found to have 23R-tri- and tetrahydroxy bile acids as their
major bile salts. We did not detect 23R-hydroxylated bile
acids in any other mammals in our survey, including 16
species within Mustelidae, currently proposed as the sister taxa to pinnipeds [34], consistent with other studies
suggesting that living pinnipeds comprise a monophyletic
group within Carnivora [34,35].
Ursidae are another example of a family sharing an
uncommon bile acid. Six of eight species within Ursidae
had ursodeoxcholic acid (3α,7β-dihydroxy-5β-cholan-24oic acid) as a primary bile acid constituting more than 6%
of the total biliary bile salts. Ursodeoxycholic acid is
unusual in that the orientation of 7-hydroxyl group is 7β,
as opposed to the 7α orientation common to most bile
salts [36]. Outside Ursidae, ursodeoxycholic acid was not
detected at greater than 5% of total biliary bile salts in any
other species within Carnivora. The only other mammals
in our survey to have more than trace amounts of ursodeoxycholic acid were several rodents, including the North
American beaver (Castor canadensis, Castoridae) and
three caviomorph species within two families (Dasyproctidae, Caviidae) (Additional File 2). Recently published
work by other investigators have identified two additional

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 9 of 23

●●● Major bile acid

CA

allo
CA

23R- Δ22
OH

●●●
●●●

Acanthophis

●●●

Laticauda

●●●

Bungarus

●●●

Dendroaspis

●●●

Ophiophagus

●●●

●

Naja

●●●

●

Calliophis

●●●

●

Lamprophiidae

●●●

Colubridae

●●●

Natricidae

●●●

Dipsadidae

●●●

●

Homalopsidae

●●●

●

Agkistrodon

●●●

Crotalus

●●●

Bothrops

●●●

Bothriechis

●●●

Lachesis

●●●

Trimeresurus

●●●

Tropidolaemus

pytho
CA

●●●

Pseudechis

Minor bile acid

Pelamis
Notechis

●

C23

●●●

●
●

●

●

Deinagkistrodon ●●●
Azemiops

●●●

Daboia
Macrovipera

●●●
●●●

●
●

●
●

Eristicophis

●●●

●

●

Cerastes

●●●

●

●

Bitis

●●●

●

●

Pareatidae

●●●

Acrochordidae

●●●

●●●

Cylindrophiidae
Uropeltidae

●

●●●
●●●

Boidae
Pythonidae

●

●

●●●

Figure 4 Bile salts of snakes. The bile salt variation of snakes is overlaid on a tree that represents a summary of current knowledge of snake phylogeny based on molecular data. Major bile salts are those constituting more than 50% of total biliary bile salts. Minor bile salts account for less than 50%
but more than 10% of total bile salts. Abbreviations: CA, cholic acid; 23R-OH, 23R-hydroxylated C24 bile acids (mainly 23R-hydroxylated cholic acid);
Δ22, C24 bile acids with double bond at C22-23; C23, C23 bile acids; pythoCA, pythocholic acid.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 10 of 23

Figure 5 Bile salts of mammals. The bile salt variation of mammals is overlaid on a mammalian phylogeny based on molecular data [23], with the
single revision to place Afrotheria and Xenarthra as sister groups. In the "Other C24 acids" columns are included the 1α-, 1β-, and 15α-hydroxylated bile
acids found in some marsupials and the 6α- and 6β-hydroxylated bile acids of rodents and Suidae, as well as deoxycholic acid found in various species.
Abbreviations: CDCA, chenodeoxycholic acid; CA, cholic acid; DCA, deoxycholic acid.

novel bile acids in the Asian black bear (Selenaretos thibetanus): 3α,5,7α-trihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid and
3α,7α,9α-trihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid [32].
Hydroxylation at C-6 was also uncommon in mammals,
being found only in Suidae (6α-hydroxylation, 4 species),
the Lesser Malay chevrotain (Tragulus javanicus, Tragulidae), and Muridae. The chevrotain and mammals within
Suidae share the trait of having hyocholic acid (3α,6α,7αtrihydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid), a 6α-hydroxylated bile

acid, as their primary bile salt. Bile salts of Muridae use
6β-hydroxylated bile acids (e.g., 3α,6β,7α-trihydroxy-5βcholan-24-oic acid and 3α,6β,7β-trihydroxy-5β-cholan24-oic acid, also known as α-muricholic acid and βmuricholic acid, respectively).
Relationship of diet to bile salt profile

To examine how diet might be related to bile salt profile,
we divided mammals and reptiles into carnivores (diet >

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

90% meat), herbivores (diet > 90% plant matter), or omnivores (all remaining animals) (Additional Files 1 and 2).
In our mammalian sample, there were 103 carnivores,
149 herbivores, and 74 omnivores. There were no clear
differences between the different dietary groups in terms
of percentage of animals that have CA as the major bile
salt, CDCA as the major bile salt, or a C24 bile acid other
than CA or CDCA as the major bile salt (Additional File
2). We also classified bile salt profiles as 'complex' or
'non-complex', with complex being defined as having a
bile salt profile that includes two bile salt classes (C27 bile
alcohols, C27 bile acids, or C24 bile acids) and/or the presence of three or more bile salts in bile, with each comprising 10% of greater of total biliary bile salts. Using this
classification, 39.8% of carnivores, 70.5% of herbivores,
and 50.0% of omnivores in our mammal sample had complex bile salt profiles.
In reptiles, the majority of animals analyzed were carnivores (n = 183), with fewer herbivores (n = 15) and omnivores (n = 17). In this sample, the majority of herbivores
(66.7%) and omnivores (88.2%) use primarily C27 bile
acids, a bile salt profile less common in carnivores
(24.6%), but the herbivores and omnivores are mainly
found in species from Testudines (Additional File 1).
Using the classification of bile salt profile complexity
defined in the above paragraph, there were few reptiles
with complex bile salt profiles: 9.8% of carnivores, 6.7% of
herbivores, and 5.9% of omnivores.
Evolutionary variation of bile salts across reptiles, birds,
and mammals

Figure 6 shows a tree of reptiles, birds, and mammals,
with lobe-finned fish as the outgroup. This tree fits the
current molecular data and places Testudines as a sistergroup to Crocodylia and Aves [37]. From these relationships, one can speculate about the bile salt profile of the
most recent common ancestors at various nodes on the
tree. For Testudines/Crocodylia/Aves, it can be inferred
that the most recent common ancestor had a bile salt profile consisting mainly of C27 bile alcohols and a trihydroxy
C27 bile acid (3α,7α,12α-trihydroxy-5β-cholestan-27-oic
acid). This profile is still present in paleognath birds [4].
Crocodylia retain this trihydroxy C27 bile acid as their
main primary bile salt but now produce only trace
amounts of C27 bile alcohols. Testudines differ by having a
(so far) unique modification to C27 bile acids, namely 22hydroxylation (and in some cases additional 15α-hydroxylation). As noted above, two turtles in our survey have
more than 10% C27 bile alcohols present as biliary bile
salts and can be hypothesized to have retained the ancestral pathway for a significant fraction of their biliary bile
salts.

Page 11 of 23

For lizards/snakes/tuatara (Lepidosauria), 24R-hydroxylation of C27 bile acids is a trait shared by some lizards
(e.g., varanids) and the tuatara. There have been a number of innovations in bile salt synthesis in snakes relative
to other reptiles including 23R-hydroxylation, 7-dehydroxylation, 16α-hydroxylation, and production of C23
bile acids. It should be noted that a 24R-hydroxy C27 bile
acid would lose the 24R-hydroxyl group upon side-chain
shortening and oxidation to a C24 bile acid, so it is likely
that 24R-hydroxylated C27 bile acids are produced as
intermediates in the bile acid biosynthetic pathways of
lizards and snakes that have primary bile salt profiles consisting of approximately 100% C24 bile acids.
Figure 7 depicts the variation of bile salts among different groups of vertebrates using a generic vertebrate phylogeny (with unresolved relationships depicted as
polyotomies) [37]. Ray-finned fish share the common
trait of using C24 bile acids with snakes, many lizards,
most birds, and most mammals [9]. The inferred ancestral bile salts (5α-bile alcohols) are essentially not found
in extant species outside Agnatha (hagfish, lampreys),
lobe-finned fish, some teleost fish (e.g., Cypriniformes),
and some amphibians (Figure 8). However, other than
fish and amphibians, 5β-bile alcohols are found in some
reptiles, birds, and mammals (Figure 9), either as minor
but significant (> 10%) fraction of total biliary bile salts
(e.g., tortoises, paleognath birds) or as the major primary
bile salts (e.g., Paenungulates, rhinoceroses). C27 bile
acids are common in reptiles (Crocodylia, varanid lizards,
turtles), amphibians, and paleognath birds but uncommon in fish and mammals.
Analysis of human and extinct ground sloth coprolites

To determine whether bile salts could be recovered from
paleontological specimens older than 5 000 years, we
analyzed coprolite samples from ancient humans and the
extinct Shasta ground sloth Nothrotherium shastense.
The human coprolite samples had been collected from
the Danger Cave Archaeological Site, Utah, USA, and
dated as approximately 8,000 years old by radiocarbon
analysis (see Methods). Bile acids were readily recovered
from the human coprolite samples including the primary
bile acid CA as well as the secondary bile acids lithocholic
acid (3α-hydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid; LCA), 12-oxoLCA (3α-hydroxy-12-oxo-5β-cholan-24-oic acid), DCA,
and 7-oxo-DCA (3α,12α-dihydroxy-7-oxo-5β-cholan-24oic acid) (Additional File 3, Figure S3BB), a profile similar
to bile acids in human cecal contents obtained from
autopsy specimens [38].
The Shasta ground sloth coprolite was collected from
Rampart Cave in Arizona (see Methods). The bile acid
concentrations in the Shasta ground sloth coprolite sam-

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 12 of 23

Bile
alcohols

C27 bile
acids

Neognath
birds

●

●

Paleognath
birds

●

●●● Major bile salt
● Minor bile salt

●

C

●●●
22-OH
●●●
24R-OH

Lizards

B

●●●
1β-OH,
12α-OH
●●●
12α-OH only

Crocodiles

Testudines

●●●
24R-OH

Tuatara
A

Lobe-finned
fish

●●●
allo
●●●
7-deoxy,
16α-OH,
23R-OH

Snakes

Mammals

C24 bile
acids
●●●
16α-OH,
23R-OH,
15α-OH

●
25-OH

●
12α-OH only

●●●
6α-OH,
15α-OH,
23R-OH

●
25-OH

Figure 6 Overall bile salt variation in reptiles, birds, and mammals. The phylogeny depicted has Testudines as sister-group to Aves/Crocodylia.
Lizards are paraphyletic but are indicated here as a single group for comparison purposes. Based on the patterns of bile salt variation across vertebrates, the ancestral bile salt profiles at nodes A, B, and C can be inferred by parsimony. The ancestral phenotype at node A would likely be C27 bile
alcohols, the phenotype found in all living lobe-finned, jawless, and cartilaginous fish surveyed to date. The ancestral phenotype at node B would likely
be C27 bile alcohols and trihydroxy-C27 bile acids, the major bile salts of Crocodylia and paleognath birds. The most recent common ancestor to tuatara,
lizards, and snakes (node C) would additionally have the ability to produce 24R-hydroxylated C27 bile acids, the main bile salts of tuatara and lizards
within Anguimorpha and Scinciformata. Based on the phylogeny depicted, there appear to be several 'innovations' unique to certain groups: (1) 24Rhydroxylation of C27 bile acids by lepidosaurs as mentioned above, (2) 22-hydroxylation of C27 bile acids by Testudines, and (3) production of 7-deoxy
and C23 bile acids by snakes. The figure does not show all the known bile salt modifications, but only some of the more common ones within in each
group.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 13 of 23

Figure 7 Overall bile salt variation across vertebrates. Variation of bile salts is overlaid on a vertebrate phylogeny, with turtles placed as sister
group to birds/crocodiles, frogs and salamanders as sister groups, and placental mammals and marsupials as sister groups [37]. Lizards are paraphyletic but are indicated here as a single group for comparison purposes. Unresolved relationships are depicted as polyotomies. The figure shows two
"shifts to the right" from 5α-C27 bile alcohols to C24 bile acids as the bile salt synthetic pathway presumably grew in length: (1) from Agnatha to rayfinned fish and (2) from lobe-finned fish to tetrapods. Note that C27 bile acids are common in reptiles and amphibians but uncommon in fish. Within
amphibians, there is only preliminary data on caecilians based on analysis of two specimens, both of which showed only bile alcohols but with the
orientation of the 5-hydroxyl group as yet undetermined pending additional analyses (LR Hagey, unpublished data).

ples were lower than the human coprolite specimen. To
enable sensitivity at the low concentrations of bile acids
present, the samples were analyzed by ESI/MS/MS. This
analysis revealed peaks with m/z ratios consistent with
the presence of glycine-conjugated mono-, di-, tri-, and
tetra-hydroxylated C24 bile acids, along with additional

peaks with m/z ratios missing two or four protons, consistent with either conversion of hydroxyl groups into oxo
groups, or the presence of singly- and doubly-unsaturated C24 bile acids, or a mixture of both (Additional File
3, Figure S3CC). Taurine-conjugated bile acids were not
detected. A complex mixture of plant sterols and stanols

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 14 of 23

26
27

7

3
5

HO

Cholesterol

A

Presence of 5α-bile salt classes in
reptiles and mammals sorted
by modifications to stem structure

26
27

OH

5

3

HO

D

7

Not yet observed

OH

H

Stem 5α-C27 bile alcohol

B

26
27

OH

O

Not yet observed
5

3

OH

D

7

OH

H

Stem 5α-C27 bile acid

C

O
OH

3

OH

5

H

D

7

12α-OH (allo-CA): Agamidae,
Chamaeleonidae, Gekkonidae,
Iguanidae (Iguania); fox squirrel

OH

Stem 5α-C24 bile acid
Figure 8 Illustration of 5α bile salts. The 5α series of C27 bile alcohol, C27 bile acid, and C24 bile acid structures are illustrated with examples of animals
(if any) whose major bile salts are in these classes. The structures are the stem structures for each of the three major classes of bile salts. Multiple enzymes are involved in the transition indicated by arrow A. The enzymes responsible for 5α-reduction of bile salt precursors are currently unknown. If
5α-bile salt pathways are homologous to 5β pathways, the reaction indicated by arrow B would be carried out by CYP27A1. Side-chain cleavage (arrow
C) is likely a peroxisomal reaction in most or all animals. Arrow D covers all the possible additional modifications to stem bile salt structures (e.g., additional hydroxylation of the nucleus or side-chain, introduction of oxo groups, unsaturation of the side-chain, etc.).

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Page 15 of 23

Figure 9 Illustration of 5β bile salts. The 5β series of C27 bile alcohol, C27 bile acid, and C24 bile acid structures are illustrated with examples of animals
(if any) whose major bile salts are in these classes. The structures are the stem structures for each of the three major classes of bile salts. Multiple enzymes are involved in the transition indicated by arrow A. Arrow B is carried out by CYP27A1 in humans and rodents. Side-chain cleavage (arrow C) is
likely a peroxisomal reaction in most or all animals. Arrow D covers all the possible additional modifications to stem bile salt structures (e.g., additional
hydroxylation of the nucleus or side-chain, introduction of oxo groups, unsaturation of the side-chain, etc.).

were also present, consistent with an herbivorous diet.
(Additional File 3, Figure S3DD). Our samples of living
mammals included two sloth species: Bradypus tridactylus (white-headed sloth) and Bradypus variegatus
(brown-throated three-toed sloth). Both sloth species
had ~100% glycine-conjugated bile acids in their bile,
including the unusual bile acid 7-oxo-DCA (Additional
file 2). We also analyzed the fecal bile salts from Hoff-

mann's two-toed sloth (Choloepus hoffmanni; Supplemental Figures S3Y, Z, AA). The fecal bile salts from this
sloth showed a mixture of glycine-conjugated and unconjugated bile acids, similar to the ground sloth coprolites.
In our mammalian biliary bile survey, only 11 of 326 species surveyed had ~100% glycine conjugation of bile
acids, supporting the conclusion that the bile acids identified are indeed from a sloth.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Comparison of bile salt enzymes across species

As discussed in the Introduction, there are at least 16
enzymes involved in bile salt synthetic pathways in
humans and rodents, with two main pathways (neutral
and acidic) identified so far [6,7]. Figure 2 shows a simplified version of the neutral bile salt synthetic pathway. The
minimal synthetic pathway for a functional bile salt
would involve five enzymes in the production of a stem
C27 bile alcohol with three hydroxyl groups, a bile salt
actually found in a small number of animals surveyed so
far (e.g., ratite birds) (Figures 8 and 9).
The first enzyme is cytochrome P450 (CYP) 7A1 which
converts cholesterol to 7α-hydroxycholesterol. The next
enzyme in the neutral enzyme, 3β-hydroxysteroid-Δ5-C27
steroid oxidoreductase (HSD3B7), catalyzes the simultaneous isomerization of the C-5 - C-6 double bond to C-4
- C-5 and oxidation of the 3β hydroxyl group to a 3-oxo
group. The third enzyme, aldo-keto reductase 1D1
(AKR1D1), mediates stereospecific reduction of the Δ4
double bond to form a 5β (A/B cis) steroid. The fourth
enzyme, AKR1C4, reduces the 3-oxo group to a 3αhydroxy group [39]. The fifth and final enzyme is the
mitochondrial C-27 hydroxylase (CYP27A1) that results
in the formation of a C27 bile alcohol. The multi-functional CYP27A1 also has the ability to catalyze the conversion of a C27 bile alcohol to a C27 bile acid by oxidation
of the hydroxyl group on the terminal carbon atom of the
side-chain to a carboxylic acid group. These five enzymes
(CYP7A1, HSD3B7, AKR1D1, AKR1C4, and CYP27A1)
dictate three key properties of bile salts: (1) orientation of
the C-3 hydroxyl group (3β in hagfish bile alcohols and 3α
in all other known primary bile salts; rarely, there can be a
3-oxo instead of a hydroxyl group), (2) orientation of the
hydrogen atom at C-5 (5α or 5β), which influences the
overall configuration (bent or planar) of the steroid rings,
and (3) synthesis of C27 bile alcohol versus further oxidation to C27 bile acid. The remaining 11 enzymes identified
so far in the bile salt synthetic pathway catalyze a number
of reactions including additional hydroxylation (e.g., 12αhydroxylation by CYP8B1), side-chain shortening and
oxidation (5 peroxisomal enzymes), or alternative reactions such as found in the acidic pathway of bile acid synthesis [6,7].
We utilized BLAST searches to try to identify putative
orthologs of the human enzymes involved in bile salt biosynthesis [6,7]. While assignment of true orthology
depends on both sequence comparison and biochemical
verification, tentative orthology can be assigned by reciprocal BLAST searching. Caution needs to be especially
applied to comparisons of enzymes that are part of large
superfamilies (e.g., aldo-keto reductases, CYPs). Indeed,
we were not able to clearly identify putative orthologs in
non-mammalian species to the gene for human AKR1C4.

Page 16 of 23

Currently, of all the ongoing vertebrate genome
sequencing projects, there are many mammalian species
but only one reptile, the green anole lizard (Anolis caroliensis). The green anole lizard is of interest with respect
to bile salt variation in that this species has nearly 100%
5α (allo) bile acids. Indeed, of the 8 species within Iguanidae analyzed, most had greater than 85% 5α bile acids and
all had at least 50% 5α bile acids (Additional File 1). The
unusual bile salt profile of the anole lizard thus raises the
question of how this animal synthesizes a bile salt pool of
mainly 5α bile acids. Of the model mammalian species in
genome sequencing projects, two are Paenungulates
(African elephant, Loxodonta africana; rock hyrax, Procavia capensis) that have bile salt profiles consisting of
nearly 100% bile alcohols, a phenotype also found in jawless fish, cartilaginous fish, lobe-finned fish, and some
amphibians, but not yet observed in any reptile or bird
species. The elephant and rock hyrax can serve as examples to address how an animal maintains a bile salt pool of
C27 bile alcohols without producing detectable amounts
of bile acids.
Focusing on AKR1D1, the enzyme that catalyzes 5βreduction of the steroid nucleus, we found that putative
orthologs to the human enzyme could be found in mammals, birds, green anole lizard, Xenopus frogs, and multiple teleost fish (Additional File 4). Interestingly, an
AKR1D1 ortholog could not be located for zebrafish [9],
the only model teleost fish for genome sequencing studies
that exclusively produces 5α bile salts. In contrast, an
AKR1D1 ortholog was readily identified for the anole lizard, with an amino acid sequence identity of 78.2% to
human AKR1D1, similar to the sequence identity of
81.6% between human and chicken AKR1D1. Although
an AKR1D1 ortholog could not be detected in the
zebrafish genome, we did find putative zebrafish
orthologs to the mammalian genes for 5α-reductase 1
(SRD5A1) and 2 (SRD5A2): Genbank: NM_001076653
and Genbank: NM_001017703, respectively.
Focusing next on CYP27A1, the enzyme that in some
species catalyzes 27-hydroxyation of bile salt intermediates to form C27 bile alcohols and in other species, continues the oxidation of the side-chain to form C27 bile acids,
we found putative orthologs to the human enzyme
throughout vertebrates, including African elephant, rock
hyrax, anole lizard, and zebrafish. The elephant, hyrax,
and zebrafish all have bile salt profiles consisting of C27
bile alcohols and thus would be predicted to have
CYP27A1 enzymes unable to further catalyze the oxidation of the side-chain from a C27 bile alcohol to C27 bile
acid. As mentioned above, the anole lizard and zebrafish
synthesize 5α bile salts; consequently, CYP27A1 enzymes
in these species would need to accommodate bile salt
precursors with 5α orientation.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

We also identified putative orthologs in many species,
including African elephant and zebrafish, to the four peroxisomal
enzymes
(2-methylacyl-CoA-racemase,
branched-chain acyl-CoA oxidase, D-bifunctional protein, and peroxisomal thiolase 2) involved in shortening
of the side-chain to produce C24 bile acids. In fact, candidates for orthologs to all four peroxisomal enzymes were
identified in the genome of the zebrafish, an animal that
does not shorten the side-chain of its bile salts (Additional File 3). This is not necessarily surprising in that
these enzymes also fulfil other cellular functions such as
β-oxidation of fatty acids [6,7]. However, it does raise the
question of how animals that produce only C27 bile salts
(e.g., Paenungulates, zebrafish) retain the C8 side-chain of
cholesterol.
Lastly, for four of the bile salt synthetic enzymes
(CYP46A1, AMACR, ACOX2, HSD17B4), we identified
putative orthologs in the genomes of model invertebrates
such sea squirt (Ciona intestinalis), Pacific sea squirt
(Ciona savignyi), and purple sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus). Invertebrates are not known to produce
bile salts, so these enzymes likely serve other functions.
These enzymes are thus candidates for the study of how
protein functions changed during the evolution of invertebrates to vertebrates.

Discussion
We have greatly expanded previous surveys of bile salt
structural diversity in reptiles and mammals. The variation of bile salts is consistent with current molecularbased phylogenies of reptiles and mammals, including the
recent reclassification of squamate groups based on DNA
sequencing data and studies showing that pinnipeds form
a monophyletic group with Carnivora [35]. Perhaps the
most unusual finding in our study was that the Paenungulates (elephants, manatees, and the rock hyrax) have a
very different bile salt profile from the Rufous sengi and
South American aardvark, two other mammals classified
with Paenungulates in the cohort Afrotheria by molecular
phylogenetic analysis. It will be of interest to determine
the molecular basis for these differences. As we discuss
below, this finding could be accounted for by differences
in a single enzyme, CYP27A1.
Our analysis did not reveal any obvious relationship
between diet and bile salt profiles, although a major
caveat to this analysis is the non-random nature of the
animals found in our survey of reptiles and mammals. In
reptiles, the analysis is further limited by the preponderance of carnivores in the surveyed sample (e.g. snakes,
varanid lizards, crocodilians), with far fewer herbivores
or omnivores. We also did not find any evidence that bile
salt complexity is associated with a more complex omnivorous diet in either mammals or reptiles. The lack of

Page 17 of 23

association of bile salt profile and diet is also suggested by
groups of animals that have very similar bile salt profiles
but different diets. Examples include primates, Ursidae
(pandas as herbivores, other bears as carnivores or omnivores), other animals in Carnivora excluding pinnipeds,
and Testudines. Overall, common bile acids such as CA
and CDCA, or other C24 bile acids such as ursodeoxycholic acid, are found in species with varied diets. With
uncommon bile acids, there is insufficient data to make
generalizations. For example, pythocholic acid (Boidae
and Pythonidae) or varanic acid (Varanidae) could theoretically be advantageous to a carnivorous diet, pending
more extensive surveys of reptiles and mammals.
Our analysis of ancient human and extinct giant ground
sloth coprolites demonstrates the stability of bile acids in
biological specimens preserved in arid climates. Previous
studies have analyzed bile acids and sterols from human
coprolites or internal organs preserved within mummies,
with ages ranging from approximately 500 to 3,200 years
old [40-42]. Our results suggest that bile salts may be useful markers in select paleontological studies.
Our use of multiple analytical techniques (e.g., HPLC,
ESI/MS/MS, HPLC, NMR) allowed us to precisely
resolve complicated bile salt profiles. We speculate on
what these findings mean for the understanding of the
evolution of bile salt synthesis, a complex and key biochemical pathway that permits cholesterol excretion to
be regulated and at the same time generates amphipathic
molecules with multiple physiological functions. In analyzing the patterns of bile salt variation across vertebrates, there appears to be at least two major pathways in
the evolutionary transition from C27 bile alcohols (ancestral) to C24 bile acids (derived): (a) a 'direct' pathway and
(b) an 'indirect' pathway that uses C27 bile acids as an
'intermediate' step. Evidence to support pathway (a)
comes mainly from teleost fish families (e.g., Perciformes)
where either type III (C27 bile alcohols and C24 bile acids
but no C27 bile acids) or type VI (C24 bile acids only) are
found, but not fish with any appreciable amount of C27
bile acids [9]. This suggests that the ancestors of these
fish followed an evolutionary transition from C27 bile
alcohols directly to C24 bile acids. This differs from reptiles (e.g., Crocodylia, Testudines, varanid lizards), some
mammals, and amphibians, where C27 bile acids are common [2,3,5].
One of the major goals of our study is to provide testable hypotheses for determining what bile salt enzyme
differences underlie cross-species differences in bile salt
profiles. Cross-species comparisons have already yielded
some insights into different in bile salt profiles. An example is the discovery in pigs of CYP4A21, an enzyme that
catalyzes 6α-hydroxylation of bile acids [43], a bile acid

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

modification not found in humans. One unanswered
question is how a bile salt synthetic pathway 'stops' at C27
bile alcohols, as must occur in animals such as Paenungulates, rhinoceroses, and zebrafish whose bile salt profiles
do not show C27 or C24 bile acids. One possible explanation would involve the multi-functional capabilities of
CYP27A1. Animals synthesizing only C27 bile alcohols
would have CYP27A1 enzymes that can 27-hydroxylate
but not oxidize the side-chain of the resulting C27 bile
alcohols. It would be of interest to test the substrate specificities of CYP27A1 from species that synthesize mainly
bile alcohols. No high-resolution crystal structure of
CYP27A1 is currently available, but a homology model of
human CYP27A1 has been developed [44] which could
be used for comparative purposes to rationalize crossspecies differences in substrate and catalytic specificity.
There is the additional question of when did the fatty
acid and bile salt β-oxidation enzymes develop in peroxisomes. Three of these enzymes have strong candidates
for invertebrate orthologs, suggesting a long evolutionary
history, but the parallel ability for bile salt β-oxidation
must have been a strictly vertebrate innovation given the
occurrence of bile salts only in vertebrates. The zebrafish
is an example of an animal that produces only C27 bile
salts, yet possesses putative orthologs to genes for all four
peroxisomal enzymes involved in shortening of the bile
acid side-chain in mammals [9]. Evolutionary changes of
peroxisomal transporters such as ATP-binding cassette
transporter D3 (ABCD3) [45,46] may have been important in this regard by facilitating substrate entry into the
peroxisomes (beyond passive diffusion), possibly explaining how an animal can maintain a bile salt profile of
mainly C27 bile acids while having all the enzymes capable
of C27 bile salt side-chain cleavage to form a C24 bile acid.
There have been limited studies of peroxisomes in nonmammalian species, and we are not aware of any published studies of this organelle in reptiles. Detailed studies
of peroxisomes in reptile groups that produce only C27
bile acids (e.g., turtles, varanid lizards, crocodilians)
could be especially helpful in understanding cross-species differences in bile salt biosynthesis, particularly modification of the side-chain.
Genomic comparisons may also provide some potential
insight into the synthesis of 5α-bile salts. The sporadic
appearance of 5α-bile salts in otherwise evolutionarily
recent animals suggests that it is the result of mutation in
a biosynthetic enzyme (a likely candidate is AKR1D1).
Trace levels of 5α-bile acids are ubiquitous in bile, but the
origins of these small concentrations are likely produced
by microbial flora and not from biosynthesis [47]. The
presence of 5α-bile acids in the bile of germ-free rabbits
indicates that at least some mammals are capable of synthesizing 5α-bile acids [48]. The hepatic enzymes(s) (if

Page 18 of 23

present) that perform 5α-reduction of bile salt intermediates like 4-cholesten-7α,12α-diol-3-one are as yet uncharacterized [7].
Model animals such as the anole lizard and zebrafish
may be helpful in determining the enzymatic pathways
for generating 5α bile salts. For example, we did not find a
putative ortholog to the gene for AKR1D1 in the
zebrafish genome. We did, however, find likely orthologs
to the mammalian genes for 5α-reductase 1 (SRD5A1)
and 2 (SRD5A2) in the zebrafish genome. It is possible
that either or both of these enzymes, or another enzyme
altogether, catalyzes 5α-reduction of the steroid nucleus
in zebrafish bile salt biosynthesis. In contrast, a putative
ortholog for AKR1D1 was identified in the genome of the
anole lizard. Studies of anole lizard AKR1D1 are required
to see if this enzyme catalyzes 5α-reduction of bile acid
intermediates (unlike human and rodent AKR1D1) or 5βreduction for the trace amounts 5β-bile acids present in
anole bile. There are also ongoing sequencing projects for
sea lamprey (Petromyzon marinus) and coelacanth
(Latimeria calumnae), two animals that exclusively produce 5α bile alcohols [9,12,49]. Comparison of the
genomes of anole lizard, zebrafish, lamprey, and coelacanth may also provide insight into how they achieve a
bile salt pool of 5α-bile salts. Additional File 5 includes a
summary of model animals whose study may provide
insight into the mechanisms underlying cross-species differences in bile salt profiles.
Our study does not shed light on how animals regulate
their bile salt profiles. In Additional File 3 we include
some spectra focusing on the minor bile salts of various
species revealing there can be a complex mixture of bile
alcohols at low concentration even in species whose biliary bile salts are comprised of greater than 95% bile
acids. Whether these minor bile salts perform physiological functions or are simply vestigial is currently unknown.
It is logical to assume to that both bile acid biosynthesis
and intestinal conservation are mainly controlled by transcriptional regulators, although this is not well-understood even in mammals.
There is still little understanding of what drives variation in bile salt chemical diversity. As our analysis of reptiles and mammals shows, there is essentially no apparent
link between diet and bile salt structure. Typical 5β-C24
bile acids are found in reptiles and mammals with a wide
variety of diets. It should be noted that all described
hydroxylation sites occur on the hydrophilic face of the
bile salt molecule, keeping the amphipathicity intact [1].
It is also unclear what benefit may be conferred to those
reptiles (e.g., in the group Iguania) that use 5α bile salts.
Studies in mammals have shown that 5α bile acids can be
toxic. One striking example of this occurs in the rabbit.
Rabbits fed 5α-cholestanol (the saturated homolog of
cholesterol) form 5α-cholic acid, which is 7-dehydroxy-

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

lated by gut bacteria to form 5α-deoxycholic acid and
subsequently conjugated with glycine in the liver. However, the glycine conjugate of 5α-deoxycholic acid acid
precipitates from solution in the gallbladder, forming
gallstones [50,51]. Animals with a bile salt pool of mostly
5α-bile acids evidently have mechanisms to avoid toxicity.
The bile salt biosynthetic pathway has apparently
evolved in vertebrates in a considerably different fashion
from the adrenocortical and sex steroid hormones,
another set of compounds derived from cholesterol.
Estrogens are the terminal products of the steroid hormone pathway whereas other steroids such as glucocorticoids or mineralocorticoids are intermediates. The
actions of the steroid hormones are mediated by nuclear
hormone receptors. Thornton and colleagues have used a
variety of techniques, including phylogenetic reconstruction and expression of ancestral proteins, to provide evidence that estrogen receptors have a longer evolutionary
history than receptors for intermediate products (e.g.,
glucocorticoids) in the steroid hormone pathways [52-54]
(although their ancestral reconstruction in invertebrates
have been challenged by other research [55]). In the
'molecular exploitation' model of a biochemical pathway,
the terminal products of a synthetic pathway mediate the
more ancestral activities. During evolution, functions
(and the receptors that mediate these functions) develop
for the intermediate products of the pathway, and structural diversity involving intermediates in the pathway can
increase over time. In the case of the steroid hormones,
the major evolutionary changes probably occurred in
early vertebrate evolution or even earlier.
The diversity of bile salts, starting in fish and amphibians [9] and combined with the data for reptiles and mammals in the present study, suggests a different model of
evolution of bile salts from steroid hormones. In the case
of bile salts, the terminal products are increasing in diversity throughout all vertebrate classes. A parallel to the bile
salt synthetic pathway may be found in the enzymatic
pathways involved in the formation of triterpenoids, isoprene-derived 30-carbon molecules that serve as a building block for many other compounds. Studies of bacteria,
plants, and animals demonstrate at least two independent
pathways for the formation of isoprene units, each involving multiple organelles [56]. Similar to bile salts, the synthetic intermediates in the triterpinoid pathways are low
in diversity but the end-products have impressive biochemical diversity and mediate an array of different physiological functions. Like triterpinoids, the end-products
of bile salt synthesis have substantial structural diversity
by variations in hydroxylation patterns, unsaturation, and
side-chain length. Snakes and marsupials are two groups
that demonstrate ongoing 'innovations' in bile acids not
seen in fish and amphibians (e.g., 1α- and 1β-hydroxyat-

Page 19 of 23

ion in the spotted cuscus and feathered glider, respectively; and Δ22 and C23 bile acids in true viper snakes).
Bile acid synthesis is now known to be catalyzed in
humans and rodents by at least two independent pathways (acidic and neutral), with tight regulation keeping
intermediate products at very low concentrations in the
hepatocytes and biliary bile [6,7]. In some animals such as
the crotaline snakes, the result is a bile salt pool consistently of almost 100% of a single bile salt molecule such as
CA. The bile salt synthetic pathway has evolved from a
relatively simple pathway that produces C27 bile alcohols
(by simple saturation and polyhydroxylation of cholesterol as in hagfish) [9] to more complex pathways that utilize multiple organelles (cytoplasm, endoplasmic
reticulum, mitochondria, and peroxisomes) to produce
C24 bile acids. In the process, many ray-finned fish and
most land animals have bile containing almost exclusively
C24 bile acids and very low amounts of the synthetic precursors including C27 bile alcohols, a process achieved by
the evolution of regulatory control and enzyme modifications.
Although there is extensive data on the physicochemical and physiological properties of common bile acids
such as CA and CDCA (and their conjugated derivatives),
there has been much less study of other classes of bile
salts. In part, this relates to the difficulty of synthesizing
or isolating sufficient material to perform detailed studies. The complicated variation of bile salts may also relate
to other functions of bile salts that are not well understood, including communication, influencing of the
microbial environment in the gut, and regulation of hepatobiliary development and regeneration [1]. It has been
proposed that bile acid structural variation may be driven
by attempts to prevent gut microbial 'damage' of bile
acids that can lead to toxic secondary bile acids such as
DCA and LCA [1,8,57]. Novel modifications to the stem
bile salt structures throughout vertebrate evolution make
it difficult for bacteria to alter the bile salt structure into
molecules that are toxic or have poor aqueous solubility
or both.
Finally, the extensive variation of bile salt structures
across vertebrate species predicts that protein receptors
that bind bile salts will also show variation in structure
and ligand-binding specificity. Indeed, research has
already shown distinct patterns of ligand-receptor coevolution for three nuclear hormone receptors (farnesoid
X receptor, FXR; pregnane X receptor, PXR; and vitamin
D receptor, VDR) that regulate various aspects of bile salt
synthesis, transport, or metabolism [10,14,58-60]. Model
species that have bile salt profiles different from humans,
such as anole lizard, rock hyrax, and African elephant,
may be particularly interesting to study, as their bile saltregulating nuclear hormone receptors would have to bind

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

different ligands (e.g., bile alcohols or 5α-bile salts) than
their human or rodent orthologs which need to recognize
C24 5β-bile acids. Ultimately, we aim to build up a complete multi-dimensional picture of ligand, protein, commensal microbial, and species evolution involving bile
salts.

Conclusions
Bile salts are a biochemical product of varying structures
that tend to be conserved within families or orders of vertebrates. Variations in bile salts do not correlate with diet.
Analysis of the evolution of bile salt synthetic pathways
provides a rich model system for the evolution of a complex biochemical pathway in vertebrates. Our results also
demonstrate the stability of bile salts in coprolites preserved in arid climates suggesting that bile salt analysis
may have utility in selected paleontological research.
Methods
Bile samples

Bile samples were obtained from a number of sources
(see Acknowledgements) over the course of two decades
of analysis. A major portion of the samples analyzed were
obtained during necropsy of animals that died in captivity
at the San Diego Zoo. An additional set of samples analyzed were from an extensive collection of bile samples of
the late G.A.D. Haslewood, donated to the University of
California - San Diego. Many samples were taken from
newly dead animals, but a few were obtained from preserved museum specimens. No animals were specifically
sacrificed for the purposes of this study. All animal studies were performed in conformity with the Public Health
Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals, incorporated in the Institute for Laboratory
Animal Research Guide for Care and use of Laboratory
Animals. All vertebrate animal studies were approved by
the Committee on Animal Studies of the University of
California, San Diego. Fecal samples from the Hoffmann's
two-toed sloth (Choloepus hoffmanni) were generously
collected by staff at the Pittsburgh Zoo.
Coprolite samples

Coprolites of the Shasta ground sloth were collected in
1971 by Dr. P.S. Martin from Rampart Cave, Arizona,
USA, located in the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River.
Two publications detail the analyses of Shasta ground
sloth coprolites from Rampart Cave [61,62]. Radiocarbon
dating revealed ages ranging from approximately 10,000
years old for dung on the cave surface to 35,000 years old
for dung located 54 inches below the surface [62]. The
Shasta ground sloth is thought to have gone extinct
approximately 11,000 years ago [16]. The specimen analyzed consisted of loose, coarse, light-colored fragments.
The coprolite samples were acquired and archived by the

Page 20 of 23

San Diego Zoo. The human coprolite samples were from
Danger Cave Archaeological Site (Hind Cave #3), Utah,
USA, and collected in 1986-1987 by Dr. R.Z. Jones.
Analysis of bile salts

A number of different analytical methods were used to
analyze the bile salts found in animal bile. Thin-layer
chromatography (TLC) was helpful in identifying which
classes of bile salts (bile alcohols, C27 bile acids, C24 bile
acids) were present. Depending on the results of TLC
analysis, the samples were subjected to further analyses
optimized for the bile salt classes present. For C24 bile
acids and some C27 bile acids, high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) analysis with suitable reference
standards was sufficient to resolve the bile salt profiles.
When possible, samples were further subjected to electrospray ionization mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (ESI/MS/MS) analysis. Gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry (GC/MS) was helpful when the orientations of hydroxyl or hydrogen groups were not certain
from other analyses. However, GC/MS requires relatively
large amounts of sample and could not be applied if limited bile was available. For previously unknown bile salts,
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) was needed to provide definitive structural identification.
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC)

Whole bile was separated on silica gel G (E. Merck,
Darmstadt, Germany) using two solvent systems: (1) isoamyl acetate: propionic acid: 1-propanol: water 4: 3: 2: 1
(v/v) [63]; and (2) a double development system for the
resolution of conjugated bile acids, in which the plates
were developed first in chloroform: methanol: water: acetone: propionic acid, 10: 2: 1: 4: 1 (v/v), and after drying
overnight, followed by 1-butanol: propionic acid: water,
10: 1: 1 (v/v) [64]. Bile acids were visualized by spray
reagents for hydroxyl groups (phosphomolybdic acid,
10% w/v in ethanol), oxo groups (2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine), sugars (naphtholresorcinol), or vicinal
hydroxyl group (lead tetra-acetate).
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)

Conjugated bile acids were analyzed by HPLC using a
modification of a previously reported technique [65]. An
octadecylsilane column (RP C-18, Beckman Instruments,
Fullerton, CA, USA) was used with isocratic elution at
0.75 mL/min. The eluting solution was composed of a
mixture of methanol and 0.01 M KH2PO4 (67.4% v/v),
adjusted to an apparent pH of 5.35 with H3PO4. Conjugated bile acids were quantified by measuring the absorbance of their amide bond at 205 nm. Unconjugated bile
acids and bile alcohol sulfates are not detected by this
method. Bile acids were tentatively identified by matching their relative retention times with those of known
standards.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

Mass spectrometry
Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry/mass
spectrometry (ESI/MS/MS)

Biliary contents were dissolved and diluted in methanol
(Burdick & Jackson, Muskegon, MI, USA) and analyzed
using ESI/MS/MS on a Hewlett-Packard HP 1100 MSD
operated in the negative mode. The high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) column was removed,
and the injector output coupled directly to the ESI inlet.
Samples (2 μL) were injected in methanol: water, 90:10 (v/
v) mobile phase running at a flow rate of 0.35 mL/min.
The fragmenter was set to 200 V and the capillary voltage
set to 5000 V.
Liquid secondary ion mass spectrometry (LSI-MS)

LSI-MS was done at the Bio-organic Biomedical Mass
Spectrometry Resource (University of California - San
Francisco, San Franciso, CA, USA) using a Kratos VG 70SE mass spectrometer (Manchester, UK). This instrument used a cesium ion source and operated at approximately 100 μA/cm2 beam flux in the negative ion mode.
The instrument was operated at an accelerating voltage of
8 kV and a mass resolution of 1000 (10% valley definition). The liquid matrix was glycerol on a copper-tip
probe.
Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS)

Glycine and taurine conjugates of bile acids were deconjugated chemically using 1.0 N NaOH at 130°C for 4
hours. Bile alcohol sulfates were deconjugated enzymatically. Unconjugated bile acids were isolated by acidification and extraction into ethyl acetate. They were then
analyzed by capillary GC/MS as methyl ester acetates
(prepared using acetic anhydride in acetic acid with perchloric acid catalyst) or as methyl ester trimethylsilyl
derivatives (prepared using Tri-Sil, Pierce Chemicals,
Rockford, IL). GC was performed using a Hewlett-Packard 5890 Gas Chromatograph-5970 MSD, controlled by
HP/UX Chem Station software. The column was a 30 m
0.25 mm ID intermediate polarity SPB-35 of 35% phenyl
methyl silicone (Supelco Co., Bellefonte, PA) operated at
277°C (isothermal). A splitless injection was used with an
injection temperature of 290°C. Helium was used as the
carrier gas with a 7 psi column head pressure. Relative
retention times and fragmentation spectra of peaks
obtained by GC/MS were compared with those of known
standards for identification.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)

Carbon-13 NMR (13C-NMR) spectra of deconjugated
methyl ester per acetyl derivatives of bile acids were also
recorded. Multiplicities were determined with the APT
sequence. Chemical shifts were recorded in ppm relative
to tetramethylsilan. The central peak of the signal of
Cl3CD was used as a reference (δ77.0 ppm).

Page 21 of 23

Additional material
Additional file 1 Bile salts of reptiles. Table contains data on the bile
salts of all reptiles analyzed, with bile salt profiles color-coded by bile salt
class.
Additional file 2 Bile salts of mammals. Table contains data on the bile
salts of all mammals analyzed, with bile salt profiles color-coded by bile salt
class.
Additional file 3 Annotated bile salt profiles of reptiles and mammals.
Examples of bile salt profiles (annotated ESI/MS/MS and GC/MS spectra) for
reptiles and mammals are included.
Additional file 4 Bile salt synthetic enzymes. Excel spreadsheet contains
the accession numbers for putative orthologs to the enzymes involved in
bile acid biosynthesis in humans. For genes where reliable full-length
sequences are available, the percent identity of the amino acid.
Additional file 5 Model animals that may provide key insight into bile
salt biosynthesis. Table compares and contrasts differences of bile salt
enzymes between 5 model species that have interesting bile salt profiles.
Authors' contributions
LRH performed the analysis of bile salts in vertebrate species, with many species analyzed while working in the laboratory of AFH. NV prepared the phylogenies for reptiles, collating data from multiple studies. All authors helped with
the analysis of the data and comparison with other studies on the evolution of
vertebrates. MDK performed the comparative analysis of bile salt synthetic
enzyme gene sequences and drafted the manuscript. All authors contributed
to, read, and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
MDK is supported by K08-GM074238 from the National Institutes of Health.
AFH and LRH are supported by NIH grant DK 64891 (to AFH). The authors thank
the Pathology Laboratory of the San Diego Zoo. Samples were also provided
by Dr. G.A.D. Haslewood (now deceased), Professor of Biochemistry at Guy's
Hospital (London, UK); Dr. Valentine Lance (Department of Biology, San Diego
State University); Dr. Joseph Barrett and Michelle Becker (University of Memphis); Dr. Hubert Johnston (Veterinarian of the County of San Diego); Dr. Richard Norman (University of Melbourne); Dr. Dan Canfield (California Regional
Primate Research Center); Kelly Glenn (Duke University Primate Center); and Dr.
Cindy Stadler and Pam Body (Pittsburgh Zoo and PPG Aquarium). We thank Dr.
P.S. Martin for the Shasta ground sloth coprolite specimens and Dr. R.Z. Jones
for the human coprolite specimens.
Author Details
1Department of Medicine, University of California - San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
, 2Département Systématique et Evolution, Muséum National d'Histoire
Naturelle, Paris, France and 3Department of Pathology, University of Iowa
Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, IA, USA
Received: 21 August 2009 Accepted: 6 May 2010
Published: 6 May 2010
© 2010 Hagey et al; licensee http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133
This is an Open Access from: BioMed Central Ltd. terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
BMC article is available article distributed under the
Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133

References
1. Hofmann AF, Hagey LR: Bile acids: chemistry, pathochemistry, biology,
pathobiology, and therapeutics. Cell Mol Life Sci 2008, 65:2461-2483.
2. Moschetta A, Xu F, Hagey LR, van Berge Henegouwen GP, van Erpecum
KJ, Brouwers JF, Cohen JC, Bierman M, Hobbs HH, Steinbach JH, et al.: A
phylogenetic survey of biliary lipids in vertebrates. J Lipid Res 2005,
46:2221-2232.
3. Haslewood GAD: Bile salt evolution. J Lipid Res 1967, 8:535-550.
4. Hofmann AF, Hagey LR, Krasowski MD: Bile salts of vertebrates:
structural variation and possible evolutionary significance. J Lipid Res
2010, 51:226-246.
5. Une M, Hoshita T: Natural occurrence and chemical synthesis of bile
alcohols, higher bile acids, and short side chain bile acids. Hiroshima J
Med Sci 1994, 43:37-67.
6. Norlin M, Wikvall K: Enzymes in the conversion of cholesterol into bile
acids. Curr Mol Med 2007, 7:199-218.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

7.
8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

Russell DW: The enzymes, regulation, and genetics of bile acid
synthesis. Annu Rev Biochem 2003, 72:137-174.
Hofmann AF: Detoxification of lithocholic acid, a toxic bile acid:
relevance to drug hepatotoxicity. Drug Metab Rev 2004, 36:703-722.
Hagey LR, Møller PR, Hofmann AF, Krasowski MD: Diversity of bile salts in
fish and amphibians: evolution of a complex biochemical pathway.
Physiol Biochem Zool 2010, 83:308-321.
Reschly EJ, Ai N, Ekins S, Welsh WJ, Hagey LR, Hofmann AF, Krasowski MD:
Evolution of the bile salt nuclear receptor FXR in vertebrates. J Lipid Res
2008, 49:1577-1587.
Amos B, Anderson IG, Haslewood GAD, Tökes L: Bile salts of the
lungfishes Lepidosiren, Neoceratodus and Protopterus and those of the
coelacanth Latimeria chalumnae Smith. Biochem J 1977, 161:201-204.
Anderson IG, Haslewood GAD: Comparative studies of 'bile salts'. 20. Bile
salts of the coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae Smith. Biochem J 1964,
93:34-39.
Anderson IG, Haslewood GA, Cross AD, Tokes L: New evidence for the
structure of myxinol. Biochem J 1967, 104:1061-1063.
Krasowski MD, Yasuda K, Hagey LR, Schuetz EG: Evolution of the
pregnane × receptor: adaptation to cross-species differences in biliary
bile salts. Mol Endocrinol 2005, 19:1720-1739.
Prosser DE, Jones G: Enzymes involved in the activation and
inactivation of vitamin D. Trends Biochem Sci 2004, 29:664-673.
Long A, Martin PS: Death of America ground sloths. Science 1974,
186:638-640.
Tint GS, Dayal B, Batta AK, Shefer S, Joanen T, McNease L, Salen G: Biliary
bile acids, bile alcohols, and sterols of Alligator mississippiensis. J Lipid
Res 1980, 21:110-117.
Hedges SB, Vidal N: Lizards, snakes, and amphisbaenians (Squamata).
In The Timetree of Life Edited by: Hedges SB, Kumar S. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford
University Press; 2009:383-389.
Vidal N, Hedges SB: The phylogeny of squamate reptiles (lizards, snakes,
and amphisbaenians) inferred from nine nuclear protein-coding
genes. C R Biol 2005, 328:1000-1008.
Vidal N, Hedges SB: The molecular evolutionary tree of lizards, snakes,
and amphisbaenians. C R Biol 2009, 332:129-139.
Vidal N, Rage JC, Couloux A, Hedges SB: Snake (Serpentes). In The
Timetree of Life Edited by: Hedges SB, Kumar S. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford
University Press; 2009:390-397.
Bergstrom S, Danielsson H, Kazuno T: Bile acids and steroids. 98. The
metabolism of bile acids in python and constrictor snakes. J Biol Chem
1960, 235:983-988.
Asher RJ: A web-database of mammalian morphology and a reanalysis
of placental phylogeny. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:108.
Agnew DW, Hagey LR, Shoshani J: The elephants of Zoba Gash Barka,
Eritrea: part 4. Cholelithiasis in a wild African elephant (Loxodonta
africana). J Zoo Wildl Med 2005, 36:677-683.
Kuroki S, Schteingart CD, Hagey LR, Cohen BI, Mosbach EH, Rossi SS,
Hofmann AF, Matoba N, Une M, Hoshita T, et al.: Bile salts of the West
Indian manatee, Trichechus manatus latirostris: novel bile alcohol
sulfates and absence of bile acids. J Lipid Res 1988, 29:509-552.
Kihira K, Akashi Y, Kuroki S, Yanagisawa J, Nakayama F, Hoshita T: Bile salts
of the coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae. J Lipid Res 1984, 25:1330-1336.
Murphy WJ, Eizirik E, Johnson WE, Zhang YP, Ryder OA, O'Brien SJ:
Molecular phylogenetics and the origins of placental mammals.
Nature 2001, 409:614-618.
Murphy WJ, Eizirik E, O'Brien SJ, Madsen O, Scally M, Douady CJ, Teeling E,
Ryder OA, Stanhope MJ, de Jong WW, et al.: Resolution of the early
placental mammal radiation using Bayesian phylogenetics. Science
2001, 294:2348-2351.
Kakiyama G, Tamegai H, Iida T, Mitamura K, Ikegawa S, Goto T, Mano N,
Goto J, Holz P, Hagey LR, et al.: Isolation and chemical synthesis of a
major, novel biliary bile acid in the common wombat (Vombatus
ursinus): 15a-hydroxylithocholic acid. J Lipid Res 2007, 48:2682-2692.
Hagey LR, Kakiyama G, Muto A, Iida T, Mushiake K, Goto T, Mano N, Goto J,
Oliveira CA, Hofmann AF: A new, major C27 biliary bile acid in the Redwinged tinamou (Rhynchotus rufescens):(25R)-1b,3a,7a-trihydroxy-5bcholestan-27 -oic acid. J Lipid Res 2009, 50:651-657.
Hagey LR, Schteingart CD, Ton-Nu HT, Hofmann AF: Biliary bile acids of
fruit pigeons and doves (Columbiformes): presence of 1bhydroxychenodeoxycholic acid and conjugation with glycine as well as
taurine. J Lipid Res 1994, 35:2041-2048.

Page 22 of 23

32. Bi D, Chai XY, Song YL, Lei Y, Tu PF: Novel bile acids from bear bile
powder and bile of geese. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 2009, 57:528-531.
33. Kakiyama G, Iida T, Goto T, Mano N, Goto J, Nambara T, Hagey LR,
Schteingart CD, Hofmann AF: Identification of a novel bile acid in swans,
tree ducks, and geese: 3a,7a,15a-trihydroxy-5b-cholan-24-oic acid. J
Lipid Res 2006, 47:1551-1558.
34. Flynn JJ, Finarelli JA, Zehr S, Hsu J, Nedbal MA: Molecular phylogeny of
the carnivora (mammalia): assessing the impact of increased sampling
on resolving enigmatic relationships. Syst Biol 2005, 54:317-337.
35. Sato JJ, Wolsan M, Suzuki H, Hosoda T, Yamaguchi Y, Hiyama K, Kobayashi
M, Minami S: Evidence from nuclear DNA sequences sheds light on the
phylogenetic relationships of Pinnipedia: single origin with affinity to
Musteloidea. Zoolog Sci 2006, 23:125-146.
36. Hagey LR, Crombie DL, Espinoza E, Carey MC, Igimi H, Hofmann AF:
Ursodeoxycholic acid in the Ursidae: biliary bile acids of bears, pandas,
and related carnivores. J Lipid Res 1993, 34:1911-1917.
37. Meyer A, Zardoya R: Recent advances in the (molecular) phylogeny of
vertebrates. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 2003, 34:311-308.
38. Hamilton JP, Xie G, Raufman JP, Hogan S, Griffin TL, Packard CA, Chatfield
DA, Hagey LR, Steinbach JH, Hofmann AF: Human cecal bile acids:
concentration and spectrum. Am J Physiol 2007, 293:G256-G263.
39. Jez JM, Penning TM: The aldo-keto reductase (AKR) superfamily: an
update. Chem Biol Interact 2001, 130-132:499-525.
40. Kuksis A, Child P, Myher JJ, Yousef IM, Lewin PK: Bile acids of a 3200-year
old Egyptian mummy. Can J Biochem 1978, 56:1141-1148.
41. Lin DS, Connor WE: Fecal steroids of the coprolite of a Greenland
Eskimo mummy, AD 1475: a clue to dietary sterol intake. Am J Clin Nutr
2001, 74:44-49.
42. Lin DS, Connor WE, Napton LK, Heizer RF: The steroids of 2000-year-old
human coprolites. J Lipid Res 1978, 19:215-221.
43. Lundell K, Hansson R, Wikvall K: Cloning and expression of a pig liver
taurochenodeoxycholic acid 6alpha-hydroxylase (CYP4A21): a novel
member of the CYP4A subfamily. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:9606-9612.
44. Prosser DE, Guo Y, Jia Z, Jones G: Structural motif-based homology
modeling of CYP27A1 and site-directed mutational analysis affecting
vitamin D hydroxylation. Biophys J 2006, 90:3389-3409.
45. Une M, Iguchi Y, Sakamoto T, Tomita T, Suzuki Y, Morita M, Imanaka T: ATPdependent transport of bile acid intermediates across rat liver
peroxisomal membranes. J Biochem 2003, 134:225-230.
46. Wanders RJ, Visser WF, van Roermund CW, Kemp S, Waterham HR: The
peroxisomal ABC transporter family. Pfluger Archiv 2007, 453:719-734.
47. Kallner A: The transformation of deoxycholic acid into allodeoxycholic
acid in the rat. Bile acids and steroids. 174. Acta Chem Scand 1967,
21:87-92.
48. Hofmann AF, Mosbach EH, Sweeley CC: Bile acid composition of bile
from germ-free rabbits. Biochim Biophys Acta 1969, 176:204-207.
49. Haslewood GAD, Tökés L: Comparative studies of bile salts: bile salts of
the lamprey Petromyzon marinus L. Biochem J 1969, 114:179-184.
50. Hofmann AF, Bokkenheuser V, Hirsch RL, Mosbach EH: Experimental
cholelithiasis in the rabbit induced by cholestanol feeding: effect of
neomycin treatment on bile composition and gallstone formation. J
Lipid Res 1968, 9:244-253.
51. Hofmann AF, Mosbach EH: Identification of Allodeoxycholic Acid as the
Major Component of Gallstones Induced in the Rabbit by 5-AlphaCholestan-3-Beta-Ol. J Biol Chem 1964, 239:2813-2821.
52. Bridgham JT, Carroll SM, Thornton JW: Evolution of hormone-receptor
complexity by molecular exploitation. Science 2006, 312:97-101.
53. Thornton JW: Evolution of vertebrate steroid receptors from an
ancestral estrogen receptor by ligand exploitation and serial genome
expansions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:5671-5676.
54. Thornton JW, Need E, Crews D: Resurrecting the ancestral steroid
receptor: ancient origin of estrogen signaling. Science 2003,
301:1714-1717.
55. Paris M, Pettersson K, Schubert M, Bertrand S, Pongratz I, Escriva H, Laudet
V: An amphioxus orthologue of the estrogen receptor that does not
bind estradiol: insights into estrogen receptor evolution. BMC Evol Biol
2008, 8:219.
56. Rohmer M: From molecular fossils of bacterial hopanoids to the
formation of isoprene units: discovery and elucidation of the
methylerythritol phosphate pathway. Lipids 2008, 43:1095-1107.
57. Hofmann AF, Eckmann L: How bile acids confer gut mucosal protection
against bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:4333-4334.

Hagey et al. BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/133

58. Krasowski MD, Yasuda K, Hagey LR, Schuetz EG: Evolutionary selection
across the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily with a focus on the
NR1I subfamily (vitamin D, pregnane X, and constitutive androstane
receptors). Nucl Recept 2005, 3:2.
59. Reschly EJ, Bainy ACD, Mattos JJ, Hagey LR, Bahary N, Mada SR, Ou J,
Venkataramanan R, Krasowski MD: Functional evolution of the vitamin D
and pregnane × receptors. BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:222.
60. Ekins S, Reschly EJ, Hagey LR, Krasowski MD: Evolution of pharmacologic
specificity in the pregnane × receptor. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:103.
61. Hansen RM: Shasta ground sloth food habits, Rampart Cave, Arizona.
Paleobiology 1978, 4:302-319.
62. Martin PS, Sabels BE, Shutler D: Rampart Cave coprolite and ecology and
the shasta ground sloth. Am J Sci 1961, 259:102-127.
63. Hofmann AF: Thin layer absorption chromatography of free and
conjugated bile acids on silicic acid. J Lipid Res 1962, 3:127-128.
64. Elferink RO, Haan J, Lambert KJ, Hagey LR, Hofmann AF, Jansen PLM:
Selective hepatobiliary transport of nordeoxycholate side chain
conjugates in mutant rats with a canalicular transport defect.
Hepatology 1989, 9:861-865.
65. Rossi SS, Converse JL, Hofmann AF: High pressure liquid
chromatography analysis of conjugated bile acids in human bile:
simultaneous resolution of sulfated and unsulfated lithocholyl
amidates and the common conjugated bile acids. J Lipid Res 1987,
28:589-595.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-133
Cite this article as: Hagey et al., Evolutionary diversity of bile salts in reptiles
and mammals, including analysis of ancient human and extinct giant ground
sloth coprolites BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:133

Page 23 of 23

</pre>
</body>
</html>
