<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1475-2883-3-4.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="petere"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Filaria Journal

BioMed Central

Open Access

Short paper

Genetic heterogeneity in Loa loa parasites from southern
Cameroon: A preliminary study
Tarig B Higazi1, Amy D Klion2, Michel Boussinesq3 and
Thomas R Unnasch*1
Address: 1Division of Geographic Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL USA, 2Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD USA and 3Institut de Recherche pour le Developpement, Departement Societes et Sante, Paris, France
Email: Tarig B Higazi - higazi@uab.edu; Amy D Klion - aklion@niaid.nih.gov; Michel Boussinesq - michel.boussinesq@wanadoo.fr;
Thomas R Unnasch* - trunnasch@geomed.dom.uab.edu
* Corresponding author

Published: 29 June 2004
Filaria Journal 2004, 3:4

doi:10.1186/1475-2883-3-4

Received: 22 April 2004
Accepted: 29 June 2004

This article is available from: http://www.filariajournal.com/content/3/1/4
© 2004 Higazi et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in all
media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Ivermectin (or Mectizan™) is widely used by onchocerciasis and lymphatic filariasis control
programs worldwide. Generally, Mectizan™ is both safe and well tolerated. An exception to this
general pattern is in some areas co-endemic for Onchocerca volvulus and Loa loa, where a number
of severe adverse reactions to Mectizan™ have been noted in L. loa infected individuals. The vast
majority of these severe adverse events have occurred in Southern Cameroon. This suggested the
hypothesis that the parasites endemic to Southern Cameroon might form a distinct population that
exhibited a phenotype of eliciting severe adverse reactions in Loa-infected individuals upon
Mectizan™ exposure. To test this hypothesis, the DNA sequences of three potentially
polymorphic loci were compared among L. loa parasites from Southern Cameroon and other
endemic foci in Sub-Saharan Africa. Analysis of these data suggested that parasites from Southern
Cameroon were at least as genetically diverse as those from other foci. Furthermore, no
polymorphisms were noted that were unique to and shared among the parasite isolates from
Southern Cameroon. Although a limited number of parasite isolates were tested, these results do
not appear to support the hypothesis that L. loa parasites from Southern Cameroon represent a
unique, genetically isolated population.

Findings
Ivermectin (Mectizan™) is a semi-synthetic lactone drug
that exhibits broad anti-helminthic specificity [1]. Mectizan™ has become the drug of choice for mass chemotherapy campaigns to eliminate onchocerciasis as a public
health problem [2]. In general, these mass chemotherapy
projects have been associated with few complications. A
notable exception occurs in some areas where the agent of
onchocerciasis, Onchocerca volvulus, is sympatric with Loa
loa, the causative agent of another filarial infection of
humans. Over the past several years, severe adverse reac-

tions to Mectizan™ treatment have been reported in individuals residing in onchocerciasis endemic areas that are
also endemic for L. loa [3-5]. These adverse reactions are
characterized by severe neurological complications,
including incontinence, coma, and in some cases, death
of the patient [3,5]. Interestingly, a large majority of the
individuals suffering from such severe adverse reactions
have resided in Southern Cameroon [6-8]. The development of severe reactions to Mectizan™ in L. loa infected
individuals has had a negative impact on the design and
implementation of Mectizan™ distribution campaigns to
Page 1 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

Filaria Journal 2004, 3:4

control onchocerciasis in areas where O. volvulus and L. loa
are co-endemic [9].
Parasitological examinations of patients who developed
post-Mectizan™ encephalopathy showed a correlation
between the risk of developing such reactions and the L.
loa microfilarial load [10]. However, the finding that the
vast majority of such severe reactions occurred in a localized geographic area also suggested that the parasites
endemic to this area might represent a genetically distinct
population that is particularly capable of inducing adverse
reactions in the host upon being exposed to Mectizan™. If
the parasites from Southern Cameroon represent a genetically distinct population, it would follow that genetic
exchange with other parasite populations would be
expected to be limited or non-existent. Such reproductively isolated populations often suffer from a genetic
founder effect, resulting in a population in which the level
of genetic heterogeneity is severely limited, and in which
the distribution of alleles in the isolated population is
often strikingly different from that seen in non-reproductively isolated populations. Furthermore, prolonged
reproductive isolation of a population will result in the
accumulation of population specific genetic polymorphisms. If this occurs, phylogenic analyses based upon
data collected from isolates from within and outside of
the isolated population should result in a phylogeny in
which the isolates from within the isolated population are
grouped together.
Very little is known concerning the degree of genetic diversity among different populations of L. loa and the role that
such genetic polymorphisms may play in the adverse
responses to Mectizan™ treatment. Simian and human
strains of L. loa, which differ in the length of the microfilariae and their periodicity in the host have long been
recognized [11,12]. Despite these differences, human and
simian L. loa are believed to be the same species, as experimental studies have shown that parasites from these two
primate hosts can hybridize [12]. Because parasites from
the two hosts differ in periodicity and are transmitted by
different species of the Chrysops genus, it has been proposed that the human and simian parasites "are at an early
stage of radiative evolution" [11]. Whether hybridization
of the simian and human strains is a co-factor in the development of post-Mectizan™ encephalopathy is unknown
[13]. Some biochemical variation has also been reported
among different populations of human L. loa [14],
although these differences have not been explored at the
genetic level.
Perhaps the most well documented case of the importance
of genetic factors in the pathogenesis of a human filarial
infection is in onchocerciasis. Human onchocerciasis
exhibits two distinct clinical and epidemiologic disease

http://www.filariajournal.com/content/3/1/4

patterns in the rain forest and savanna bioclimes of West
Africa [15,16]. Studies have revealed a strong correlation
between the classification based upon the epidemiological disease pattern and the pattern of hybridization to
strain specific DNA sequences derived from a repeated
sequence encoded in the nuclear genome of O. volvulus
[17]. Subsequent studies have demonstrated that variation within this repeat population could be used as a tool
for biogeographic studies [18,19]. In Ascaris suum [20],
Ostertagia osteragi [21] and Haemonchus contortus [22]
mitochondrially encoded sequences have proven to contain useful polymorphisms for population based studies.
Similarly, the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of the
ribosomal RNA gene cluster has been used to develop
markers capable of distinguishing different populations
of Haemonchus contortus [23].
To test the hypothesis that L. loa endemic to Southern
Cameroon represents a distinct population, four parasite
isolates were obtained from Southern Cameroon. These
parasites consisted of infective larvae obtained from four
individual wild caught L. loa infected Chrysops dimidiata
vector flies collected in the village of Ngat (3°25'N,
11°33'E), located approximately 50 km south of the capital of Yaoundé. Previous studies have reported cases of L.
loa encephalopathy in this village [24]. Individual isolates
were also obtained from blood collected from L. loa
infected expatriate former residents of Nigeria, Gabon and
The Democratic Republic of the Congo at the Laboratory
of Parasitic Diseases at the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, MD, USA. DNA was extracted from the parasite
preparations, following previously described methods
[25]. These DNA samples were then used as templates in
PCR amplification reactions targeting three gene
sequences: the mitochondrial 16S rRNA gene, the ITS2
domain of the nuclear rRNA gene cluster, and the 15r3
polyprotein gene in L. loa. The 15r3 gene has previously
been shown to be polymorphic and useful in the development of a DNA based diagnostic assay for this parasite
[26,27]. These gene sequences were chosen for study
because, as discussed above, homologues (or related
sequences) have previously been shown to be informative
population based markers in studies of other parasitic
nematodes. PCR amplicons resulting from these reactions
were subjected to direct DNA sequence analysis to identify
sequence polymorphisms.
All of the DNA templates were successfully amplified with
the primer set derived from the mitochondrial 16S rRNA
gene. However, no polymorphisms were noted in the
amplification products analyzed (data not shown).
Amplification products were also obtained from all of the
samples targeting the 15r3 polyprotein gene. Several polymorphic sites were found in the 15R3 amplicons. Interestingly, sequences derived from DNA extracted from the

Page 2 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

Filaria Journal 2004, 3:4

http://www.filariajournal.com/content/3/1/4

A

B

Nigeria

C

Cameroon B
70
Gabon

Cameroon A

Figure of
Analysis 1 polymorphisms in the 15r3 and ITS2 gene sequences of L. loa
Analysis of polymorphisms in the 15r3 and ITS2 gene sequences of L. loa: Panel A: Pairwise differences in 15r3 amplicon
sequences among L. loa isolates. The 15R3 gene fragment was amplified from L. loa genomic DNA (2.5 µl per reaction) using
primers with the sequences 5' GGCACAAAACACTGCAGCAGTCCT 3' and 5' CAGCTGTCTCAAATCGAAGATTCT 3'. A
total of 2.5 units of Taq polymerase (Roche Applied Biochemicals, Indianapolis, USA) was used in each 50 µl amplification reaction, together with the reaction buffer supplied by the manufacturer. Amplification conditions consisted of an initial denaturation of 5 minutes at 94°C, followed by 40 cycles consisting of 1 minute at 94°C, 1 minute at 49°C, and 2 minutes at 72°C.
Reactions were completed by a final extension at 72°C for 7 minutes. The amplicon analyzed was 318 nucleotides long. Distances were calculated using the two parameter method [28]. Panel B: Pairwise differences in ITS2 amplicon sequences among
L. loa isolates. The ITS2 gene fragment was amplified from L. loa genomic DNA (2.5 µl per reaction) using primers with the
sequences 5' TAACAATGAAGATAAAGCGA 3' and 5' TTAGTTTCTTTTCCTCCGCT 3'. A total of 2.5 units of Taq
polymerase (Roche Applied Biochemicals, Indianapolis, USA) was used in each 50 µl amplification reaction, together with the
reaction buffer supplied by the manufacturer. Amplification conditions consisted of an initial denaturation of 5 minutes at 94°C,
followed by 40 cycles consisting of 1 minute at 94°C, 1 minute at 50°C, and 2 minutes at 72°C. Reactions were completed by
a final extension at 72°C for 7 minutes. The amplicon analyzed was 472 nucleotides long. Distances were calculated using the
two parameter method [28]. Panel C: Phylogenetic tree developed from the ITS2 sequence data. The phylogeny was developed
using parsimony methods, performing an exhaustive search of the data with the parsimony routines in the PAUP program
package (v4.0, release 10) [29]. The robustness of the phylogeny was tested by running 1000 synthetic datasets with the bootstrap method in the PAUP program package. As indicated on the figure, the division of the four sequences into the two clades
shown was supported 70% of the time in the bootstrap analysis.

Page 3 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

Filaria Journal 2004, 3:4

blood of L. loa infected individuals from Gabon, Nigeria
and The Democratic Republic of the Congo were identical
(Figure 1, Panel A). One of the isolates from Southern
Cameroon also contained a 15R3 sequence which was
identical to that found in the parasite isolates from the
other countries. However, the remaining three isolates
from Southern Cameroon contained between 3 and 7 polymorphic sites when compared to the canonical sequence
found in the other parasites (Figure 1, Panel A). These
data suggest that the 15R3 gene sequences from parasites
obtained from Southern Cameroon were at least as polymorphic as those from other L. loa foci in Sub-Saharan
Africa. None of the polymorphisms were consistently
found among the isolates from Southern Cameroon, suggesting that these polymorphisms probably did not arise
from evolution in a genetically homogeneous, reproductively isolated population (data not shown).
Amplification of the ITS2 locus was successful from L. loa
DNA samples from Nigeria, Gabon and two of four samples from Southern Cameroon. Again, several polymorphisms were noted among the four samples examined
(Figure 1, Panel B). However, none of these polymorphisms were specific to and conserved in the two isolates
from Southern Cameroon. Thus, an analysis of the
sequence data using parsimony methods did not support
a phylogeny that grouped the two isolates from Southern
Cameroon (Figure 1, Panel C).
The data presented above are preliminary, and involve the
analysis of a limited number of sequences from a small
number of parasite isolates. Nevertheless, some conclusions are suggested by these results. First, it appears that
genetic variation in parasites from the focus in Southern
Cameroon is at least as frequent as in parasites from other
locations. Second, no polymorphisms were noted which
were unique to the parasites from Southern Cameroon
and also shared among the isolates examined from this
focus. Together, these observations argue against the
hypothesis that the parasites found in Southern Cameroon represent a distinct, reproductively isolated population. Analysis of additional parasite samples and
additional loci will be necessary to confirm this.
This study revealed a considerable amount of sequence
variation in the two nuclearly encoded genes examined. If
this level of sequence heterogeneity is representative of
the rest of the nuclear genome, this suggests that the L. loa
population from Southern Cameroon is fairly genetically
heterogeneous. It is therefore possible that a proportion of
the parasites from Southern Cameroon contain allelic variants of genes that result in enhanced virulence and/or
pathogenicity in the face of Mectizan™ treatment. This
might explain the fact that severe adverse reactions in
response to Mectizan™ treatment are confined to a small

http://www.filariajournal.com/content/3/1/4

proportion of the treated population. To test this hypothesis, it will be necessary to obtain parasites from individuals who exhibit the preliminary symptoms of a severe
adverse reaction shortly following Mectizan™ distribution, when L. loa microfilariae are still likely to be present
in the circulation.

Competing Interests
None declared.

Author's Contributions
TBH was responsible for carrying out the laboratory experiments described in the manuscript, including DNA isolation, PCR amplification and DNA sequence analysis. AK
and MB were involved in the experimental planning and
conducted the field work involved in obtaining the samples. TRU served as the Principal Investigator on the
project. He was responsible for obtaining grant support
for the project, for assisting in the experimental design,
data analysis and for preparation of the manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. M. Demanou, who assisted with collection of
Chrysops from which Loa loa infective larvae were isolated, and Dr. Naomi
Lang-Unnasch for critical reading of this manuscript. This investigation
received financial support from the UNDP/World Bank/WHO Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases (TDR), Project
#991105.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Goa KL, McTavish D, Clissold SP: Ivermectin. A review of its
antifilarial activity, pharmacokinetic properties and clinical
efficacy in onchocerciasis. Drugs 1991, 42:640-658.
Molyneux DH, Davies JB: Onchocerciasis control: Moving
towards the millennium. Parasitology Today 1997, 13:418-424.
Gardon J, Gardon-Wendel N, Demanga N, Kamgno J, Chippaux JP,
Boussinesq M: Serious reactions after mass treatment of
onchocerciasis with ivermectin in an area endemic for Loa
loa infection. Lancet 1997, 350:18-22.
Twum-Danso NA: Serious adverse events following treatment
with ivermectin for onchocerciasis control: a review of
reported cases. Filaria Journal 2003, 2:S3..
Boussinesq M, Gardon J, Gardon-Wendel N, Chippaux JP: Clinical
picture, epidemiology and outcome of Loa-associated serious adverse events related to mass ivermectin treatment of
onchocerciasis in Cameroon. Filaria Journal 2003, 2:S4..
Boussinesq M, Gardon J, Gardon-Wendel N, Kamgno J, Ngoumou P,
Chippaux JP: Three probable cases of Loa loa encephalopathy
following ivermectin treatment for onchocerciasis. American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 1998, 58:461-469.
Twum-Danso NA: Loa loa encephalopathy temporally related
to ivermectin administration reported from onchocerciasis
mass treatment programs from 1989 to 2001: Implications
for the future. Filaria Journal 2003, 2:S7..
Twum-Danso NA, Meredith SE: Variation in incidence of serious
adverse events after onchocerciasis treatment with ivermectin in areas of Cameroon co-endemic for loiasis. Tropical
Medicine and International Health 2003, 8:820-831.
Haselow NJ, Akame J, Evini C, Akongo S: Programmatic and
Communication Issues in Relation to Serious Adverse
Events Following Ivermectin Treatment in areas Coendemic for Onchocerciasis and Loiasis. Filaria Journal 2003,
2:S10..
Duke BOL, Wijers DJB: Studies on loiasis in monkeys. I. The
relationship between human and simian Loa in the rain-for-

Page 4 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

Filaria Journal 2004, 3:4

11.
12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.

25.
26.

27.
28.

est zone of the British Cameroons. Annals of Tropical Medicine
and Parasitology 1958, 52:158-175.
Duke BOL: Studies on loiasis in monkeys. IV. Experimental
hybridization of the human and simian strains of Loa. Annals
of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 1964, 58:390-408.
Duke BOL: Overview: Report of a Scientific Working Group
on Serious Adverse Events following Mectizan(R) treatment
of onchocerciasis in Loa loa endemic areas. Filaria Journal 2003,
2:S1..
Ufomadu GO, Ekejindu OC, I. Tada, Shiwaku K, B.E.B. Nwoke: Acid
phosphatase variations in the microfilariae of Dipetalonema
perstans and Loa loa from the Jos Plateau, Nigeria. Japanese
Journal of Parasitology 1986, 35:279-286.
Remme J, Dadzie KY, Rolland A, Thylefors B: Ocular Onchocerciasis and Intensity of Infection in the Community I. West African Savannah. Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 1989, 40:340-347.
Dadzie KY, Remme J, Rolland A, Thylefors B: Ocular Onchocerciasis and Intensity of Infection in the Community II. West African Rainforest Foci of the Vector Simulium yahense. Tropical
Medicine and Parasitology 1989, 40:348-354.
Zimmerman PA, Dadzie KY, DeSole G, Remme J, Alley E. Soumbey,
Unnasch TR: Onchocerca volvulus DNA probe classification
correlates with epidemiological patterns of blindness. Journal
of Infectious Diseases 1992, 165:964-968.
Zimmerman PA, Katholi CR, Wooten MC, Lang-Unnasch N, Unnasch
TR: Recent evolutionary history of American Onchocerca
volvulus, based on analysis of a tandemly repeated DNA
sequence family. Molecular Biology and Evolution 1994, 11:384-392.
Higazi TB, Katholi CR, Mahmoud BM, Baraka OZ, Mukhtar MM, Al
Qubati Y, Unnasch TR: Onchocerca volvulus: Genetic Diversity
of Parasite Isolates from Sudan. Experimental Parasitology 2001,
97:24-34.
Anderson TJC, Komuniecki R, Komuniecki PR, Jaenike J: Are mitochondria inherited paternally in Ascaris? International Journal for
Parasitology 1995, 25:1001-1004.
Blouin MS, Dame JD, Tarrant CA, Courtney CH: Unusual population genetics of a parasitic nematode: mtDNA variation
within and among populations. Evolution 1992, 46:470-476.
Blouin MS, Yowell CA, Courtney CH, Dame JB: Substitution bias,
rapid saturation, and the use of mtDNA for nematode
systematics. Mole Biol & Evol 1998, 15:1719-1727.
Gasser RB, Zhu X, Chilton NB, Newton LA, Nedergaard T, Guldberg
P: Analysis of sequence homogenisation in rDNA arrays of
Haemonchus contortus by denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis. Electrophoresis 1998, 19:2391-2395.
Chippaux JP, Boussinesq M: [Severe secondary reactions related
to ivermectin treatment in patients with loiasis (letter)].
Medecine Tropicale 1996, 56:312.
Klion AD, Raghavan N, Brindley PJ, Nutman TB: Cloning and characterization of a species-specific repetitive DNA sequence
from Loa loa. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 1991,
45:297-305.
Ajuh PM, Akue JP, Boutin P, Everaere S, Egwang TG: Loa loa: Structural diversity of a 15-kDa repetitive antigen. Experimental
Parasitology 1995, 81:145-153.
Toure FS, Bain O, Nerrienet E, Millet P, Wahl G, Toure Y, Doumbo
O, Nicolas L, Georges AJ, McReynolds LA, Egwang TG: Detection
of Loa loa-specific DNA in blood from occult-infected
individuals. Experimental Parasitology 1997, 86:163-170.
Kimura M: A simple method for estimating evolutionary rates
of base substitutions through comparative studies of nucleotide sequences. Journal of Molecular Evolution 1980, 16:111-120.
Swofford DL: PAUP: Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony (v
4.0). Sunderland, MA, Sinauer Associates; 1998.

http://www.filariajournal.com/content/3/1/4

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 5 of 5
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
