<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>How clinicians make (or avoid) moral judgments of patients: implications of the evidence for relationships and research</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010 5:11. doi:10.1186/1747-5341-5-11"/>
<meta name="Author" content="Terry E Hill"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

REVIEW

Open Access

How clinicians make (or avoid) moral judgments
of patients: implications of the evidence for
relationships and research
Terry E Hill

Abstract
Physicians, nurses, and other clinicians readily acknowledge being troubled by encounters with patients who trigger moral judgments. For decades social scientists have noted that moral judgment of patients is pervasive, occurring not only in egregious and criminal cases but also in everyday situations in which appraisals of patients’ social
worth and culpability are routine. There is scant literature, however, on the actual prevalence and dynamics of
moral judgment in healthcare. The indirect evidence available suggests that moral appraisals function via a complex calculus that reflects variation in patient characteristics, clinician characteristics, task, and organizational factors.
The full impact of moral judgment on healthcare relationships, patient outcomes, and clinicians’ own well-being is
yet unknown. The paucity of attention to moral judgment, despite its significance for patient-centered care, communication, empathy, professionalism, healthcare education, stereotyping, and outcome disparities, represents a
blind spot that merits explanation and repair. New methodologies in social psychology and neuroscience have
yielded models for how moral judgment operates in healthcare and how research in this area should proceed.
Clinicians, educators, and researchers would do well to recognize both the legitimate and illegitimate moral appraisals that are apt to occur in healthcare settings.
Introduction
In 1926 Francis Peabody ended his most celebrated lecture with the oft-repeated conclusion, “the secret of caring for the patient is caring for the patient” [1]. It’s a
compelling line, resonant with wisdom and common
sense, but it begs an obvious question. What if I don’t
care for the patient? In particular, what if my reaction
to the patient is negative, perhaps intensely so, driven
by social and/or moral disapproval? This last question
arises occasionally in bioethics and “difficult patient”
discussions, but beyond assertions as to what should
happen, there is little systematic data on what actually
happens.
Most healthcare professionals have found themselves
treating someone who is flagrantly offensive, whose attitudes and actions have caused others to suffer harm.
Physicians and nurses readily admit that empathy is
more difficult to achieve in these situations and that

their professional ideals feel strained. Two published
reports will illustrate:
Renate Justin’s new patient with emphysema revealed
during her intake history that she was an unrepentant
Nazi anti-Semite who had supervised slave laborers during the war. Justin, a Jewish family physician, struggled
through the turmoil of her feelings and duties before
the second visit.
“I had decided that if she stayed with my practice, I
could probably be a skilled and trustworthy physician to her. Intellectually, I had concluded that my
job as a doctor was to take care of her, regardless of
her history. I felt that I could achieve this: I could
treat her emphysema and suppress or control my
moral outrage. What I did not know was whether I
could be compassionate.” [2]
In a 2004 account of a Midwestern surgical intensive
care unit, anthropologist Joan Cassell found that

Correspondence: thillmd@pacbell.net
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, USA
© 2010 Hill; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

physicians, male and female, tried to avoid thinking
about their patients’ personal stories. Not so the nurses.
“The nurses always know the patients’ stories: the
accidents, tragedies, and sorrows that brought them
to the hospital, their family constellations, and their
clashes with others and, on occasion, with the criminal justice system. As a result, however, some
nurses make harsh moral judgments.”
They nurses freely disparaged criminals, as well as the
woman who was thought to be loaded on heroin and
alcohol when she failed to fasten a seatbelt on her
three-year-old son, with devastating results [3].
In the first example, Dr. Justin girded herself so as to
prevent negative consequences to her patient, a cognitive and emotional maneuver that comes with a cost to
clinician wellbeing. In the surgical ICU, as Cassell documents, it was the patients who reaped the most obvious
negative consequences of clinicians’ judgments.
The prominence of moral judgment in such egregious
situations is self-evident, but this review will stake out
the broader claim that moral emotions and judgments
are active in everyday clinical encounters. The role of
moral judgment is largely unrecognized in the literatures
on healthcare communication, caring, empathy, trust,
disparities, and education. Yet since the mid-twentieth
century, sociologists have noted the prevalence of moral
judgment in healthcare. And increasingly over the last
decade, social psychologists and neuroscientists have
produced a rich body of work on moral emotions and
cognitions that promises to reframe our understandings
of morally charged clinical relationships. This review
will survey these literatures and the scant empirical data
from physician and nurse researchers that are relevant
to moral judgment, highlighting the variation that
emerges from diverse combinations of patients, clinicians, tasks, and settings, as well as the most promising
research strategies.

Methods
The search for studies on moral judgment in healthcare
was largely disappointing, even within the literatures on
empathy and caring. The literature on difficult clinical
relationships is extensive, but moral judgment is at best
a secondary focus in these studies. Research on attitudes
to stigmatized conditions such as obesity, substance
abuse, and self-harm is limited but relevant. Using a
variety of PubMed search strategies, e.g., with MESH
terms “morals,” “empathy,” “physician-patient relations,”
and “nurse-patient relations,” I retrieved 23,240 Englishlanguage references. Of these, I identified 400 potentially
useful articles. Manual searches of these led to additional articles and searches in snowball fashion. Of the

Page 2 of 14

2000 articles I eventually examined, less than a hundred
offered any pertinent data from healthcare settings.
Given the paucity of research on moral dynamics in
healthcare relationships, this review is an exploratory
exercise in “sensemaking,” which Karl Weick likens to
cartography [4]. I worked with my final collection of
articles like a dataset, sorting and coding the observations and results in constant comparative fashion, testing my categories against the data, my experience, and
my own interviews, seeking to identify at least the major
landmarks in this neglected terrain. Tables 1 and 2 illustrate the breadth and creativity of methodologies
employed in the reviewed studies from healthcare and
social psychology, respectively.
The organizational and reciprocal dynamics of difficult
relationships

The difficult patient is one who “makes me feel ineffective,” according to a 1958 study that canvassed a clinic’s
physicians, nurses, social workers, and clerical workers
[5]. Patients who fail to validate clinicians’ sense of
themselves as effective professionals, who threaten their
control, and/or who create fruitless work are all subject
to being labeled “bad patients.” Kelly and May noted
these themes of validation, compliance, and efficiency in
a 1982 review, as well as the methodological weaknesses
and “high moral tone” that still pervade this literature
[6]. A review by John Eisenberg sounded similar themes,
noting that “much of the literature in this field consists
of normative descriptions of how a physician should
behave. Further investigation is needed into how the
clinician does behave” [7].
The best naturalistic studies of how clinicians actually
behave come from sociologists. In a 1963 report, Irving
Zola found that the treatment of medically unexplained
symptoms in three clinics at Massachusetts General
Hospital varied by patient ethnicity, physician specialty,
the spatial layout of the clinic, and the path sequence of
patient contact with physicians and ancillary personnel
[8]. The physicians might have described these patients
as “difficult,” but Zola focused on the organizational factors of care that significantly influenced complex reciprocal interactions between patients and physicians, as
well as the ethnic differences (Italian and Irish) in how
these lower-class patients presented their symptoms.
The classic sociological studies showed no reticence in
reflecting ascribed social and/or moral worth of patients.
According to Glaser and Strauss, “In our society we
value people, more or less, on the basis of various social
characteristics: for example, age, skin color, ethnicity,
education, occupation, family status, social class, beauty,
‘personality,’ talent, and accomplishments” [9]. Their
study found that nurses judged dying patients by their
perceived social loss, often giving “more than routine

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

Page 3 of 14

Table 1 Methodologies of the healthcare studies discussed
Ethnography, participant observation, qualitative interviews, focus groups

Cassell, 2004 [3]; Zola, 1963 [8]; Glaser, 1964 [9]; Roth, 1972 [10]; Varcoe,
2003 [12]; Emerson, 1976 [16]; Jeffery, 1979 [18]; Bolton, 2005 [19];
Willems, 2005 [40]; Monnickendam, 2007 [45]; Fiscella, 1997 [46]; May,
2004 [48]; Wear, 2006 [50]; Hadfield, 2009 [54]; Lyth, 1988 [60]

Survey of clinicians or patients (not both)

Weitzman, 2000 [44]; Malat, 2006 [47]; Mackay, 2005 [53]; Nicolaidis, 2005
[56]; Regan, 2009 [61]; Foster, 2003 [64]; von Hippel, 2008 [66]; Merrill,
1993 [87]

Mixed survey and qualitative interviews

Bowers, 2002 [20]; Regehr, 2002 [129]

Linked qualitative physician and patient interviews

Scott, 2008 [26]

Linked patient and physician surveys with one-year follow-up patient
survey

Hall, 2002 [13]

Videotaped visits followed by linked qualitative interviews of patients and Katz, 2009 [14]
clinicians
Observed and audiotaped visits followed by linked qualitative interviews
of patients and clinicians

Weissmann, 2006 [110]

Qualitative physician interviews linked to patient record review

Shaw, 2004 [17]

Survey of physicians linked to patient records and angiogram data

van Ryn, 2006 [71]

Standardized patient visits (surreptitiously audiotaped) linked to
psychological testing of physicians

Chapman, 2008 [88]

Psychological tests and speech analysis of patients linked to
psychological tests and speech analysis of clinicians

Berry, 2008 [93]

Tests of implicit and explicit attitudes linking clinicians and patients (IAT)

Brener, 2007 [65]

Conversation analysis of videotaped visits

Webb, 2009 [51]; Pillet-Shore, 2006 [52]

Web-based trigger written vignette and photo followed by survey and
implicit attitude tests (IAT)

Green, 2007 [70]

Trigger videotape followed by countertransference instrument

Schwartz, 2007 [59]

Educator interviews of trainees following observed visits

Smith, 2005 [62]

Trigger written vignette followed by survey and empathy instrument

Tait, 2005 [49]

Controlled experiment randomizing medical students into different
teaching programs with quantitative and qualitative performance,
psychological, and sociological data

Hammond, 1959 [42]

The first cluster encompasses a diverse group of qualitative methodologies, often mixed within the same study. The survey methodologies in the second cluster
also vary significantly. Of note are studies that link specific clinicians to data on their specific patients. IAT = Implicit Association Test.

care” to higher status patients and “less than routine
care” to the unworthy. “People dying from a Friday
night knife fight, or the adolescent on the verge of death
who has killed others in a wild car drive, have their own
social loss reinforced by an ‘it’s their own fault’
rationale.”
Julius Roth’s extended study of six emergency departments, published in 1972, found that hospital staff
“make judgments about the worthiness of the person
and the appropriateness of his demands and take these
judgments into account when performing the service”
[10]. Several of Roth’s findings are pertinent. First, he
emphasized that staff will take moral judgments into
account “unless discouraged from doing so by the organizational arrangements under which they work“ (italics in
original). Also, “We observed hints that certain ethnic
groups are discriminated against, but this is very difficult
to detect nowadays because everyone is extremely sensitive to the possibility of accusations of racial discrimination.” These observations suggest that organizational

norms do have impacts on staff’s moral judgments and/
or behavior. Consistent with the clinician effectiveness
theme cited above, in straightforward surgical cases “the
characteristics and behavior of the patient can be largely
ignored.”
Roth detailed how patients acquire labels, sometimes
even before arriving at the hospital, e.g., when police or
paramedics describe someone, more or less accurately,
as a “drunk.” Labeling is not always straightforward or
consistent, however, as more recent research demonstrates. An ethnographic study on a nursing unit found
that patients could acquire a likable label even when
they were non-compliant or demanding or had a stigmatizing illness [11]. Furthermore, their labels could
vary from nurse to nurse and over time, and nurses
could hold multiple appraisals of the same patient.
Demographic data are not necessarily a patient’s destiny.
In a rich ethnographic meta-analysis from three nursing
units, Colleen Varcoe and colleagues elaborated on the
contextual dynamics of labeling [12]. Stereotypical

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

Page 4 of 14

Table 2 Methodologies of illustrative social psychology and neuroscience studies discussed
Web-based survey (psychological instruments including vignette trigger) of students and managers

Reynolds, 2007 [28]

Functional MRI responses and lexical priming tests of stereotype activation to trigger photographs (black and white faces)
under three different social task conditions

Wheeler, 2005 [30]

Functional MRI and emotional responses to trigger photographs illustrating different social groups and objects

Harris, 2006 [31]

Web-based international survey using measures of beliefs, attitudes, and stereotypes

Oldmeadow, 2007
[32]

Moral judgment responses to vignettes under four different conditions stimulating disgust and neutral controls

Schnall, 2008a [33]

Functional MRI responses to moral and non-moral stimuli of disgust

Borg, 2008 [34]

Moral judgment responses to heterosexual and homosexual couples and completion of disgust sensitivity scale; IAT response
to heterosexual and homosexual couples

Inbar, 2009a [35]

Web-based surveys of disgust sensitivity, political orientation and political attitudes

Inbar, 2009b [36]

Moral judgment responses to vignettes following verbal priming for cleanliness or control and following hand-washing or
control

Schnall, 2008b [37]

Measures of automatic evaluations of a person given various positive and negative information, photos with changing
backgrounds, and affective priming

Rydell, 2009 [73]

Measure of egalitarian commitment and priming test of preconscious stereotype activation

Moskowitz, 1999
[75]

Functional MRI responses to written scripts stimulating specific moral emotions

Moll, 2007 [79]

Measures of subjective autonomic awareness, skin conductance, heart rate, and behavior of subjects in an immersive virtual
environment who were told to give electric shocks to a virtual (not real) stranger

Slater, 2006 [84]

Functional MRI responses while playing video games

King, 2006 [85]

Measures of emotional response, generosity, and oxytocin (and 4 other hormones) in response to emotional videos

Barraza, 2009 [98]

Functional MRI responses to unpleasant pictures, including moral violations

Harenski, 2008
[106]

Measures of expressive behavior, subjective feelings, and physiology (pulse, finger temperature, skin conductance, heart rate
and somatic activity) in response to disgusting film stimuli under different instructions to control versus suppress feelings

Gross, 1998 [121]

This table highlights the diversity of research methodologies. MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, IAT = Implicit Association Test.

thinking, moral judgments, and coercive behavior
increased in the context of time pressures and limited
resources, whether actual or perceived. Their analysis
showed, however, that this justificatory “ideology of
scarcity” derives not only from higher management and
policy arenas, but also from the local organizational
microculture, sustained by the nurses’ own matrix of
personal relationships.
Judith Hall and colleagues revealed the reciprocity of
“liking” by surveying both patients (diabetics at Kaiser)
and physicians immediately after a visit [13]. The
patients and physicians were able to gauge whether the
other liked them, and that perception predicted whether
they themselves liked the other. Physicians liked their
healthier patients more than their sick patients, and
healthier patients liked their physicians more. Physician
liking predicted patient satisfaction a year later. Katz
and Alegria examined the reciprocity of appraisals in
greater detail by analyzing videotapes of visits together
with linked qualitative interviews of patients and clinicians in a mental health clinic, revealing the social and
moral judgments involved [14]. This triangulation of
data allowed the researchers to document precise
moments in which clinicians dropped their stereotypes
and became fully present with their patients. Their

patients clearly recognized and responded to those
moments of engagement.
Dirty work expertise

The “dirty work” literature [15] further explores the
contextual dynamics of moral judgment. Dirty work
tends to be designated as such because it is inherently
“odious and onerous” and often ineffective, as described
in a study of community psychiatric emergency intervention [16]. This literature confirms and extends the
earlier finding that patients who fail to legitimize clinicians’ effectiveness acquire negative labels. Patients with
mental illness, for instance, frequently represent dirty
work to primary care physicians, whereas moral or
social judgments may not matter when the same
patients present with remediable problems [17]. As one
physician gleefully noted, “I enjoy anything which
involves bone-setting, plastering, stitching, draining
pus” [18].
Clinicians doing dirty work may be able to transform
their chosen fields, however tainted and stigmatized,
into grounds for pride in their expertise and commitment. Sharon Bolton has described the extraordinary
moral complexity of nurses on a gynecology unit
devoted to failed pregnancies, abortions, cancer,

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

incontinence, and sexually transmitted disease [19].
Experienced nurses in such settings may hold and
express strongly ambivalent feelings and judgments
toward patients as well as toward inexperienced nurses
and the physician staff. In this study, the nurses
described a process of developing both task and emotional expertise over time, e.g., in getting past their
sometimes intense physical repugnance by focusing on
details of the process at hand. The uniqueness of their
challenges and expertise fostered group cohesion, which
helped to sustain them individually and to diminish the
salience of moral issues.
Len Bowers has studied individual and organizational
factors associated with positive attitudes toward work in
three institutions for criminals with dangerous and
severe personality disorders [20-22]. In order to manage
their anger, frustration, disgust, and repulsion, nurses
used a variety of strategies, including high moral and
professional commitments, deep psychosocial understandings of the patients, and appropriately limited
expectations. They also relied on interpersonal, team,
and organizational supports, leading Bowers to recommend sustained managerial commitment to supportive
treatment philosophies, operational practices, training,
and supervision.
The limits and value of professionalism

Apart from recommendations as to how clinicians
should behave, the literatures on bioethics and professionalism are largely silent as to the frequency, impact,
and dynamics of moral appraisals. Mary Catherine
Beach and colleagues have argued that physicians’ moral
obligation includes “recognition of the unconditional
value of patients as persons” (italics in original) [23].
While conceding that feeling respect for all patients may
require “internal work,” they did not describe that internal work or address how it could be accomplished.
Jones and McCullough, considering the case of a death
row inmate with HIV and indications for abdominal
aneurysm repair, simply asserted that the surgeon
should proceed with the repair because “ethical obligations to all patients needing your care do not vary with
their character, social histories, belief systems, or other
features unrelated to their medical condition” [24].
Such exhortations gloss over the internal and interpersonal challenges described, for instance, in Groves’ landmark article about “hateful patients” [25]. There can be
little doubt, however, that many clinicians struggle earnestly to control their emotions and judgments in order
to meet these professional standards. A study of exemplar primary care physician healers found that their first
commitment was “a conscious attempt... to be nonjudgmental” [26]. Indeed, one of these physicians reported,
“I try to love every single patient. And I especially try to

Page 5 of 14

love those I initially hate.” This commitment can sometimes lead to heroic professionalism, as in the case of a
surgeon who dutifully treated terrorists after they had
killed members of his family [27].
Although there is no social psychology literature
addressing how clinicians manage their moral judgments, considerable work suggests the dynamics
involved. Normative behavior can be motivated by a
combination of high social consensus, e.g., as evidenced
in organizational and professional norms to be nonjudgmental, together with a person’s acquired self-image as
a moral individual [28]. Conversely, lack of social consensus or lack of strong moral identity weakens a person’s motivation. Straightforward exhortations in
support of professional standards have their place.
Friend and competent, foe and incompetent, or
ambivalent?

The social psychology research most obviously relevant
to adverse moral judgment in healthcare is that of
Susan Fiske and colleagues. Fiske has hypothesized that
people stereotype groups on two different dimensions,
the first being friend/foe (warmth) and the second being
capability (competence) [29]. While people stereotype
their own group as both warm and competent, they
judge most outgroups ambivalently by ascribing both
negative and positive characteristics to them. For example, Americans tend to think of rich people and feminists as cold and competent, elderly people and
housewives as warm and incompetent. Very few groups,
e.g., homeless people and drug addicts, are stereotyped
as both cold and incompetent, thus triggering contempt
and disgust.
Functional neuroimaging (functional magnetic resonance imaging, or fMRI) substantiates these patterns.
Under time pressure and cognitive load, white Americans seeing black faces activated their stereotypes, as
measured by a priming response time test, and their
amygdala, as measured on fMRI [30]. This automatic
pattern evaporated, however, with a simple prompt to
individuate the photos either by asking subjects to find
a dot on the face or to guess whether the person liked a
particular vegetable. Automatic, stereotypical responses
appear to be mediated by negative emotions such as
fear, anger, disgust, and contempt. Photos of homeless
people and drug addicts, mixed in with other photos of
people and objects, triggered disgust and activated the
amygdala and insula, thought to be associated with fear
and disgust, respectively [31]. Also, photos of homeless
people, drug addicts, and inanimate objects failed to
activate the medial prefrontal cortex, unlike all the other
photos of people, thus offering a neuroscience model of
dehumanization. This line of work presents powerful
evidence for the impact of primitive emotional

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

responses on social judgment, but it also begins to
describe the mechanisms by which such responses are
activated or not. Oldmeadow and Fiske have further
found that a person’s ideological beliefs moderate their
stereotypes. Individuals who are motivated and informed
are more likely to make nuanced judgments [32].
There is now a large social psychology and neuroscience literature describing the particular role of disgust in moral judgment [33,34]. Individuals differ in
disgust sensitivity, which predicts disapproval of gay
men, for instance [35]. Indeed, conservatives have higher
disgust sensitivity than liberals [36]. Unsurprisingly, the
cleanliness of the immediate environment influences the
experience of disgust and the severity of moral judgments [37], a finding with obvious relevance to lessthan-pristine safety-net healthcare settings. Use of ritual
can also moderate disgust. One ethnographer found that
operating room rituals do far more than merely ensure
sterility. She observed surgeons to be dispassionate during surgery that exposed internal organs, secretions, pus,
and feces, yet the same surgeons expressed discomfort
and disgust when sitting in a darkened room watching
movies of similar procedures, deprived of their protective organizing rituals [38].
Poor people risk moral judgment

Poor patients belong to outgroups of particular interest in
healthcare. Public hospitals serving these groups comprise
only 2% of acute care hospitals in the United States but
train 21% of doctors and 36% of allied health professionals
[39]. Primary care physicians serving poor communities
are often troubled by what they perceive as their patients’
inadequate motivation and dysfunctional behavioral characteristics [40]. For two centuries American hospitals placated funders, physicians, and paying patients by carefully
distinguishing between the deserving and undeserving
poor [41]. The social medicine educators who implemented the first “patient-centered” comprehensive medical
education program in 1953 stumbled against the sociological reality–not merely the self-serving stereotype–of this
divide [42]. Students in this University of Colorado program were happy to care for the family-oriented working
poor, who were disproportionately Black or Latino, but
they often became frustrated and angry with “the chronically unemployed, the second–and in rare instances the
third–generation of welfare recipients, the socially inadequate, the fatherless families, the heavy drinkers from Larimer Street, the chronic social agency clients, the unstable
personalities.” One student observed in exasperation, “Mr.
K’s recreation consists of watching the family television set
with an occasional interlude of general mistreatment of
wife and family.”
A recent review highlighted the paucity of more current data available on medical student attitudes toward

Page 6 of 14

the poor [43]. As discussed below, attitudes are multifactorial complexes. In a study of 12 urban hospitals,
the factors predicting whether pediatric residents felt
more anger and less empathy toward underserved
families were whether their clinics were well-run and
whether they themselves felt effective [44]. Black residents felt more positively about both their clinics and
their effectiveness. An Israeli study has looked closely
at the role of physicians’ international ethnicities, attitudes, and behaviors in caring for poor patients [45],
but the moral complexities of interactions between
international medical graduates and the diverse poor
populations in the United States have received scant
attention [46]. Unsurprisingly, patients at risk of moral
judgment, including those who are poor, undereducated, and/or African-American, pay significantly more
attention to impression management than do other
patients [47].
Medical conditions or moral issues?

As suggested by the difficult patient literature, conditions that do not readily fit the clinician’s model of care
and practice can place patients in moral jeopardy. Carl
May and colleagues found that physicians quickly make
evaluative judgments of patients’ motives, the legitimacy
of their symptoms, and the congruence between the
physician’s and the patient’s conceptual model of illness
[48]. Patients with chronic low back pain or medically
unexplained illness, unlike those with menorrhagia, triggered negotiations that often led to unresolved contests
of wills between physician and patient. Patients with
problems and anxieties that could not be referred out or
satisfactorily contained could trigger physician frustration and hostility. Similarly, a vignette study showed
that surgeons were quick to see patients as psychologically culpable for failed back surgery, a tendency moderated by their varying levels of empathy [49].
In a study of the derogatory humor used by medical
students, Delese Wear and colleagues found that obese
patients were the most common targets, particularly in
surgical settings [50]. In part this derision had a practical base: “Obesity makes an easy 20 minute surgery a
difficult 80 minute surgery.” But it also derived from
students’ appraisals of obese patients as blameworthy.
Using the exquisite, fine-grain methodology of conversation analysis, Helena Webb has revealed the pervasive
nature of moral judgment in an obesity clinic [51].
What was remarkable, moreover, was how the patients
themselves described their weight loss progress in moral
terms of good and bad and how actively they shaped the
conversation to reflect their agency or their lack of
blame. Even during the brief and seemingly simple act
of weighing for primary care visits, as studied in another
conversation analysis, the videotaped nurse-patient

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

interactions revealed a discourse in which patients hold
themselves morally accountable [52].
Blameworthy appraisals are more likely for conditions
that appear controllable and that appear to be social as
much as medical in origin. Self-injurious behavior, e.g.,
suicide attempts and cutting, tends to generate anger
and frustration along with diminished optimism and
effort [53], unless, notably, the clinician self-identifies as
having expertise in assisting these patients [54]. Suicidal
patients can also trigger frank malice and aversion, with
sometimes lethal results. Inexperienced clinicians with
aspirations to “heal all, know all and love all” are particularly susceptible to these antitherapeutic impulses
[55]. As for patients who choose to remain in abusive
relationships, a majority of clinicians may be empathetic
if the patient is poor or disabled, but fewer are empathetic if the patient is an educated professional [56].
Such discrepant responses are consistent with the Fiske
ambivalent stereotypes model described above, which
predicts either warmth or perceived competence, but
not both.
Evidence for attitudes as complex systems

The Institute of Medicine committees on medical education and on healthcare disparities both highlighted the
impact of physicians’ attitudes on their patient relationships [57,58]. Evidence from diverse disciplines, however, makes it clear that a person’s attitudes are neither
unitary nor stable. While these studies do not tease out
moral judgment from other cognitive and emotional
processes, they illustrate the spectrum of methodologies
that may prove useful.
Articles on countertransference in clinical medicine
are often insightful but famously lack systematic empirical data. In one exception, Schwartz and colleagues
showed trigger tapes of antisocial personality disorder
and schizophrenia followed by use of a validated instrument that captures emotional and covert interpersonal
responses [59]. Unsurprisingly, in this sample of 73
graduate level mental health professionals, the schizophrenic patient triggered warmth reactions and the antisocial patient triggered challenge and dread. In her
qualitative study of a British hospital, Isabel Menzies
Lyth observed, “The work situation arouses very strong
and mixed feelings in the nurse: pity, compassion and
love; guilt and anxiety; hatred and resentment of the
patients who arouse these strong feelings; envy of the
care given to the patient” [60]. Regan and colleagues
studied unconscious defense mechanisms in nurses and
found that immature defenses, including passive aggression, correlated with emotional exhaustion (burnout),
but they themselves had significant concerns about the
instrument they used [61]. Smith and colleagues have
developed a method of teaching personal awareness,

Page 7 of 14

specifically of previously unrecognized feelings and
behaviors, by having expert medical educators question
and probe trainees following observed clinical interactions. Smith has been able to surface multiple fears,
anxieties, and unhelpful behaviors, including unrecognized anger, disdain, and withdrawal [62].
The Implicit Attitude Test (IAT), which has made its
way from social psychology into healthcare settings,
depends upon subjects’ response time to distinguish
positive from negative unconscious attitudes. Negative
explicit attitudes regarding addiction, including moral
blame, are well-documented among nurses and other
healthcare professionals [63,64]. In studies of physicians
and nurses treating hepatitis C in injection drug users,
Brener and colleagues used a version of the IAT and
found that greater contact with hepatitis C patients was
associated with more positive explicit attitudes but less
positive implicit (unconscious) attitudes [65]. Furthermore, implicit attitudes predicted intention to change
jobs (burnout) independently from the effects of explicit
attitudes and job satisfaction [66].
Multiple concerns have surfaced about the IAT and
related priming techniques, however, suggesting that the
relationship between explicit and implicit attitudes is
not yet clear [67-69]. A vignette study using the IAT
found that physicians had no explicit bias against black
patients but did have implicit biases that predicted their
decisions to use thrombolytic treatment in the scenario
[70]. A study of actual cardiac patients found that surgical recommendations varied by race for Black men, but
not Black women or Hispanics, and that the effects of
race were mediated by physician perceptions of patients’
education and activity levels [71]. The social and psychological dynamics producing racial disparities are as
yet poorly understood [72].
Neuroscience studies have shown that automatic,
unconscious attitudes are highly sensitive to new information and new contexts [73]. While the amygdala produces a rapid, stereotypical initial response to a
stimulus, other brain regions including the prefrontal
cortex can follow with iterative reprocessing at a rate of
eight cycles per second, leading to more complex and
nuanced responses [74]. People who are chronically
committed to egalitarian goals can inhibit stereotype
activation preconsciously, that is, without awareness or
new effort [75]. Social and moral intuitions shaped by
extensive experience and learning can operate without
any conscious awareness [76].
Researchers no longer think of moral judgments as
exclusively cognitive [77]. Even those who minimize the
emotional component acknowledge that emotions play a
powerful role in motivating relevant action [78]. Using
functional MRI, we can now visualize the neural substantiation of moral emotions. Guilt and compassion

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

activate different distributed brain networks than do disgust and indignation [79].
The simple stimuli and vignette studies that are stockin-trade for social psychologists and neuroscientists are
appropriate for research on first impressions in healthcare, where encounters with strangers increasingly characterize the patient experience [80]. But negative
appraisals may develop dynamically over the course of
an encounter and may arise, change, or disappear as
encounters become relationships, much as Goffman
described for the discovery and management of stigma
[81]. Fortunately, social psychologists themselves recognize the need for more naturalistic research strategies
[82,83]. Subjects in an immersion virtual environment
may respond as if the situation is real, as shown by a
virtual replication of the Milgram obedience experiment
[84]. Neuroscientists have begun to use videogames as
stimuli for subjects in functional MRI scanners [85].
Within healthcare, Debra Roter and colleagues have
called for more creative simulations to investigate emotion and non-verbal behavior, not only by using standardized patients but also by having patients or clinicians
respond to vignettes and videotaped interactions [86].
Variation among clinicians

Studies of clinician personalities, habits, and skills have
offered only modest insights into variations in moral
judgment. One study of medical student Machiavellianism–itself predicted by male gender, authoritarianism,
intolerance of ambiguity, and external locus of control–
found that Machiavellian students had more negative
attitudes toward geriatric and hypochondriac patients
[87]. Benjamin Chapman and colleagues studied community primary care physicians in Rochester, Minnesota,
using personality tests and audiotaped standardized
patient visits, and found that personality characteristics
shaped their interviews of depressed patients [88]. Personality explained only 4-7% of the variance, however,
while physician demographic factors explained only
another 4-7%. The authors note that “patients who are
belligerent, distressed, passively noncompliant, medically
complex, or particularly knowledgeable, congenial, and
appreciative” might thereby influence communication,
but their study did not examine that influence.
Emotional intelligence measures appear to be emerging from an infancy troubled by methodological concerns and popular hype [89], but their application in
healthcare [90-92] has yet to focus on difficult patient
relationships. One pilot study of psychiatric patients and
staff suggested that attachment theory may predict the
success of therapeutic relationships: lower attachment
anxiety and avoidance scores of staff members correlated with better relationships as rated by patients [93].
Medical students with secure attachment styles are

Page 8 of 14

more likely to seek relationship-focused primary care
residencies [94].
Gender is often a factor in clinical relationships, as
illustrated by Hall’s reciprocal likability study cited
above in which female physicians said they liked their
patients more than male physicians did. Patients agreed
that female physicians liked them better and also said
that they liked female physicians more than they liked
male physicians [13]. We do not know, however, how
gender may figure in clinicians’ moral judgments of
patients. Sonia Crandall found that female medical students had more favorable attitudes toward poor patients
than male medical students [95], although later studies
have not replicated this finding [44,96]. Women, including female physicians, generally score higher than men
in empathy, but we still lack evidence that such differences are of consequence in clinical interactions [97]. In
a laboratory study using emotional videos as triggers,
women had greater responses than men in empathy,
monetary generosity, and oxytocin levels [98]. In addition to its roles in birth, lactation, and mother-infant
bonding, oxytocin has complex effects upon the brain
and social behavior in females and males [99], but its
roles in moral emotions are far from clear [100,101]. A
single intranasal dose of oxytocin in male students
increased their trust and social risk-taking in interactive
dyads [102]. Carole Gilligan’s hypothesis that women
and men employ different modes of moral reasoning
(care versus justice) has failed to garner strong support
[103]. Indeed, Kohlberg’s theory of developmental moral
stages, on which Gilligan’s work depended, has itself
been significantly modified [104] or abandoned [77].
Nevertheless, studies continue to appear with evidence
of gender differences in emotionally-charged moral
appraisals [105]. Using functional neuroimaging, Carla
Harenski found that even when women and men make
similar moral judgments, they may do so via different
dynamics, activating different brain circuitry [106].
Diverse studies cited here demonstrate the folly of
expecting unifactorial attributes of either patient or clinician to dominate moral judgments. Once the clinician
is engaged in dyad and context, a complex system is in
play. In the course of this review I asked colleagues how
they managed their own moral judgments of patients.
Two simple examples illustrate these dynamic, often
conflicted appraisals. An experienced midwife working
in public sector explained that she felt little moral judgment while caring for wayward pregnant women and
girls. “I’m okay with my patients,” she said, “but I have
trouble with some of their partners when they appear.”
A family practitioner also reported that she had no difficulty with the women who return multiple times with
the consequences of high-risk behavior. But upon learning that a patient had a prison background, “I had to

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

ask why. It was alright with me if he lied about it, but I
had to ask.” One might ask why truth-telling itself rises
so infrequently as a moral issue in the minds of clinicians. In response to continual invasive questioning,
patients routinely withhold, distort, and otherwise injure
the truth, either consciously or not, and yet within the
clinical relationship and its contextual frame, such violations usually do not merit moral notice and do not trigger moral appraisals.

Page 9 of 14

“I go numb, I just shut down.” “I put up walls.” “I switch
gears.” They described shifting from emotional engagement to duty, “falling back on professionalism as a
floor.” Frequently I heard some version of, “It depends.”
Moral judgments of varying intensity are activated or
not, and are problematic or not, depending upon a complex interplay among clinicians, patients, tasks, and
organizational factors. We know little about when such
judgments occur, what impact they have, which corticolimbic “gears” get “switched,” how, and why.

The power of setting and organizational factors

Organizational factors may weigh more than individual
skills and attitudes in the salience of moral judgments,
as suggested in Bowers’ study of facilities for criminal
patients with personality disorders [20]. In the University of Colorado teaching program described above, frustration with the poor and behaviorally difficult patients
occasionally escalated into hostility from students and
teaching staff [42]. The researchers noted that such hostility was “almost always temporary,” however. “The
over-all attitude of the clinic staff toward patients created an atmosphere in which hostile behavior was
immediately conspicuous.”
The importance of setting was obvious in my informal
survey of colleagues. Those in correctional healthcare
had learned how to compartmentalize and/or minimize
their appraisals. After all, a cooperative and appreciative
patient with Nazi tattoos is still a cooperative, appreciative patient. For those in middle-class or well-to-do clinical settings, on the other hand, the issue of morally
reprehensible patients rarely arises. I did not find evidence in the literature to support Jodi Halpern’s assertion that, once physicians have invested in caring for
patients, they then “invest a great deal in idealizing”
them so as to avoid their own negative emotional reactions [107]. Halpern may be right nevertheless. Clinicians with middle-class practices generally do not
ponder what percentage of those men and women have
molested children, whereas moral issues are quite salient
where convicted criminals come labeled as such. Idealizing distorts clinicians’ perceptions and thus limits biopsychosocial comprehension, but it may help motivate
clinicians to provide good care. In some cases, it may
also protect patients from clinicians who would be
unprepared for their own reactions to a more complete
picture.
The landscape between prison and polite suburbia,
based on the literature reviewed above and confirmed
by my own interviews, is one of great variation. I certainly heard people assert that moral appraisals were
off-limits and best avoided. “You can’t go there.” Most
of my respondents acknowledged that when a strong
moral judgment arises, it comes with palpable emotional
impact, sometimes accompanied by a change in strategy.

Promising subjects, settings, and strategies

Progress in understanding professional development and
skills often emerges from close studies of experts [108].
Recent empirical studies have focused on clinicians chosen for expertise in de-escalating aggressive psychiatric
patients [109], in role-modeling humanistic bedside
behavior [110], and in discussing advance directives
[111]. Expertise may be largely tacit [112] and embodied
in habits that operate automatically without conscious
intention [113]. Such expertise may be more or less reliable [114,115]. William Branch and colleagues, noting
that well-intentioned traditional ways of teaching respect
to students generally fail, have begun gathering empirical data on expert approaches to modeling and teaching
humanistic behavior [110,116,117]. They have not, however, addressed issues of moral judgment, nor have they
focused on challenging safety-net and other stigmatized
settings.
Even without knowing exactly what should happen,
understanding what actually happens in such settings
would be invaluable. Safety-net settings concentrate
extreme outgroups, e.g., homeless alcoholics and drug
addicts, as well as groups that trigger ambivalent stereotypes, thus offering challenges that often disconcert or
ensnare clinicians [118]. Who decides to work in such
settings, who performs well there, and who survives
over the long haul? With experience and age, many people improve their emotional regulation and more skillfully defuse negative situations [119]. Do clinicians
demonstrate these improvements over the course of
their careers?
Most of us can point to role models who move with
such capacious modesty, competence, and wisdom that
patients (and trainees) respond with their better humanity. These role models seem to take in, contain, and
transmute negativity and pain. It would be helpful to
know the resources they bring to bear and the strategies
they use.
Research on emotion regulation may help us understand how clinicians manage moral judgment. We can
regulate our emotions by focusing attention to task, as
implied by the dirty work studies cited above, or by
reappraising the situation. Cognitive reappraisal appears

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

to have healthier personal and interpersonal consequences than emotion suppression strategies [120]. A
simple suggestion to control one’s feelings can decrease
disgust reactions to a stimulus. The same stimulus will
increase autonomic stress markers when the instruction
is to hide (suppress) one’s feelings [121]. Emotion regulation can also occur via more global strategies [122].
Mindfulness training, which has well-established physiological and psychological benefits [123], can lead to
improvements in physicians’ wellbeing and strengthening of their patient-centered attitudes [124]. Evidence
for the multilevel benefits of narrative expression, as
described for Balint groups [125] and narrative medicine
[126], is also beginning to emerge from controlled studies in patient populations. Several brief exercises in
expressive writing have increased CD4+ counts for HIV
patients [127] and have decreased infirmary visits for
incarcerated sex offenders [128]. Creation of narratives
facilitates integration of experience into cognitive frameworks, thereby down-regulating disturbing emotions.
Paramedics learn to cope with gore and danger using
cognitive strategies and organizational and interpersonal
support, but they report long-lingering distress from
events that they could not “make sense of” and integrate
into coherent stories [129].
Is interest as an essential quality?

One of the factors that may prevent clinicians from triggering moral appraisals is interest, often equated with
curiosity. Recall that a subject in the Fiske experiment
could avoid lighting up her amygdala by focusing on
whether the person in the photo liked a certain vegetable or by looking for a dot on his face [30]. Good teachers have stressed the value of curiosity for clinical
care [130,131]; one of my teachers insisted that “every
cirrhotic is different.” Writers that quote from Peabody’s
lecture, as I did in the opening paragraph, often neglect
the independent clause of his final sentence: “One of the
essential qualities of the clinician is interest in humanity,
for the secret of the care of the patient is in caring for
the patient.” With current social psychology methodologies, Peabody’s assertion about the critical role of interest is now testable.
Several sociologists have long included interest, surprise, and boredom in their work on emotions [132].
Social psychologist Paul Silvia has recently posited that
interest depends upon a combination of the stimulus
complexity and a person’s appraisal of her ability to
comprehend and cope with the stimulus [133]. Once a
stimulus–or perhaps patient, for our purposes–appears
beyond one’s comprehension and ability to manage,
interest wanes. These appraisals mediate individual personality differences in curiosity and the experience of
interest [134,135]. Carol Sansone points out that we can

Page 10 of 14

use interest to self-regulate our motivation. When
intrinsic motivation lags, we can activate strategies to
engage our interest and thereby remain motivated for
the task [136]. When all else fails, we can try to take
interest in our own boredom, a classic maneuver in
reflective practice. One of the respondents in my informal survey, a psychologist with a police background,
described his strategy in leading therapy groups for sex
offenders, some of whose victims he had met and interviewed: “My goal is to love them [the inmates], and if I
can’t do that, I at least try to love the process.”
Finding one’s way in a looking glass world

The pattern that emerges from this composite literature suggests a looking glass world nested within a
looking glass world, each paneled with both true and
distorting mirrors. In the broader moral communities
outside of healthcare, we make legitimate moral judgments of each other’s behavior on a continuum from
virtuous to contemptuous. Sustained community contributions garner our praise; child abuse, our censure.
We also make distorted-mirror judgments that are
demonstrably inaccurate and illegitimate because of
stereotypes derived from a host of factors such as age,
gender, ethnicity, wealth, and power. The legitimate
and illegitimate appraisals often reflect and interact,
begetting uncertainty.
Within the healthcare setting, barring incapacity,
patients remain moral agents and retain accountability,
so their behavior in this setting is also subject to legitimate moral judgments. Patients’ violent or racist behavior within healthcare facilities, for instance, arouses
clinicians’ legitimate disapproval and triggers sanction.
The illegitimate, distorted-mirror judgments specific to
healthcare include noncompliance with unrealistic or
inappropriate instructions. Clinicians frustrated by such
non-compliance may label patients “bad.”
For better and worse, clinicians are human, so moral
and social judgments from the broader community can
penetrate into the world of healthcare relationships. The
good news for patients who may appear morally dubious
is that clinicians who feel effective are often happy to
overlook transgressions irrelevant to the healthcare task.
Within the bounded and ritualized healthcare setting,
these “outside” judgments may be inactivated or immaterial, especially if the patient presents with a readily
remediable problem, e.g., a minor or straightforward
surgical procedure. In spite of clinicians’ egalitarian
beliefs and professionalism, however, it is unrealistic to
expect that all their moral and social appraisals of
patients as human beings will be immaterial. As noted
by Glaser and Strauss, favored patients are more likely
to get “more than routine care” and less-favored
patients, “less than routine care” [9].

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

Moving from one study to another in these lookingglass spaces has a yes/but quality reflecting these legitimate and illegitimate judgments, a quality sometimes
evident within a single study. Joan Cassell, who in the
introduction described ICU nurses making judgments of
patients, observed that the surgeons and intensivists
attempted to be unaware of patients’ stories and to
reduce their work to technical, biomedical tasks [3]. Isabel Menzies Lyth described similar strategies among
nurses [60]. “The enterprise proposes to toss out the
baby, the moral dimension of medicine, with the bathwater, moral judgments of patients,” noted Cassell. “I
believe that even in the highly charged, technologically
driven atmosphere of the SICU, the effort to perceive
the patients as persons, to attend to their stories rather
than ignoring them, leads to more human and humane
care–of patients and their families.” We have no evidence to support her belief, however, whereas she and
others offer ample evidence that more personalized
knowledge of patients can place them in jeopardy of
clinicians’ moral judgments.
Why have we neglected research on moral judgment?

While speculative, explanations of the research neglect
of moral judgment in healthcare could facilitate understanding and progress in this domain. Researchers may
have assumed that bioethicists own the topic or that it
requires literacy in moral philosophy. The isolation of
the medical and nursing literatures from mainstream
sociology and psychology may play a role. It is also true
that researchers and clinicians who concentrate on
criminals or other deviant populations in jeopardy of
moral judgment are themselves in jeopardy of what
Goffman called “courtesy stigma” [81]. Thus legitimate
concern about risk to reputation might dissuade some
from exploring this terrain. Finally, given that healthcare
leaders colluded in America’s long history of dividing
patients into deserving and undeserving groups, most
modern educators and professionals have emphasized a
nonjudgmental egalitarianism in which clinicians’ moral
appraisals are taboo. Taboo or not, they are pervasive,
and patients know this. Hall’s likability study demonstrates that patients are exquisitely sensitive even to
unspoken and perhaps unconscious appraisals. Egalitarian professionalism puts a brave face over a complex
reality. Nursing in particular is beset by a caring ideology that discourages frank examination of what nurses
actually feel and do [137].
The issue of poverty illustrates the legitimate versus
illegitimate looking-glass complexity of moral judgment. As noted in the review cited above, we have
remarkably limited data on clinician attitudes to poor
people [43]. Even in the data we have, there is a gap
with regard to moral judgment. In their review, Wear

Page 11 of 14

and Kuczewski note that a majority of Americans give
more credence to individual, blameworthy causes of
poverty than to social or structural causes; they also
note that such individualistic attributions are more
common among right-wing or conservative Americans.
The thrust of their article is toward overcoming
stereotypical, illegitimate biases against the poor, but
they never acknowledge the possibility that some people’s behaviors may indeed be responsible for their
poverty. Researchers in the 1950 s University of Colorado study discussed earlier described how faculty and
students were frustrated by the individual behavior
patterns of some poor individuals and families. Such
assessments and frustrations seem to have dropped off
the healthcare research agenda. The only article I
could find from the past two decades directly addressing physician explanations of poverty was from Belgium [40]. The physicians serving a high-poverty area
there showed commendable empathy, understanding,
and concern for their patients, and they cited sociopolitical explanations of the poverty. They cited psychological and individual explanations as well, however,
most commonly patients’ lack of ambition and motivation to improve their situation but also addiction, laziness, and lack of skills or intellectual capacity.
There is reason to be cautious in this looking-glass
space, subject as it is to subtle and not-so-subtle distortions. Many poor people, while themselves suffering
from inaccurate, cruel, and damaging stereotypes, attribute the poverty of other poor people to individual
behavioral causes [138]. More seriously, theories of the
culture of poverty and the underclass, originally
advanced by liberal sociologists, were used by journalists
and politicians to blame and demonize the poor [139].
Sociology is only now recovering enough to get beyond
an individual versus structural either/or dichotomy
toward an understanding of the diversity within poor
communities, even within poor families, and the interplay of malignant structural forces with bad behavior at
the individual level [140].
A final reason for caution and discernment is the
overlap of morality and convention. In naturalistic settings, unlike the laboratory, the line between moral and
non-moral violations of expectations and trust is often
not sharp. Philosopher Margaret Urban Walker reminds
us that our everyday lives are littered with small, ordinary violations to which we take offense, some of which
are moral, others more conventional [141]. From the
sociologists we know that clinicians’ moral and social
appraisals often mingle together, and from the neuroscientists we know that moral reactions, such as disgust,
may ride non-moral, phylogenetically ancient pathways.
Healthcare’s avoidance of this complexity has not
improved our understanding of it.

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

Conclusion
While incomplete, the research base leaves no doubt
that clinicians make moral judgments of their patients.
We know almost nothing about the prevalence of negative judgments or about their impact on patient care
and on the clinicians themselves. We do not know
which combinations of patient, clinician, and situational
factors trigger negative moral appraisals. We have yet to
wonder whether those appraisals follow a linear or curvilinear line from negligible to substantial impact. Wellmeaning advocacy of nonjudgmental attitudes and
patient-centered care is not likely to achieve its goals if
it discourages understanding what actually happens in
healthcare relationships. On the positive side, we have a
wealth of data from social psychology and neuroscience
that is beginning to demonstrate how moral judgment
emerges from the interplay of rival brain neurocircuits
in the context of human interactions. Research methodologies from these sciences are available to facilitate
the study of moral judgments in healthcare. We are now
in a position to explore how healthcare relationships
arise through our biologically makeshift brains and
bodies and how organizational cultures modulate those
relationships. Improvements in the empirical research
base will inform clinicians’ efforts to minimize stereotyping and stigma, honor their own moral feelings and
beliefs, and stay engaged with the patients they find
morally troubling.
Acknowledgements
The author is deeply grateful to an anonymous reviewer and two prison
colleagues for their thoughtful readings and suggestions. He received no
funding for this work.
Authors’ contributions
The author is solely responsible for this manuscript.
Author’s information
Terry Hill, MD, FACP, is an Assistant Clinical Professor in the Department of
Medicine at the University of California, San Francisco. A geriatrician, he has
spent most of his career with stigmatized patients in stigmatized settings,
e.g., nursing homes and safety-net urban hospitals. His most recent position
was Chief Executive Officer for Medical Services, California Prison Healthcare
Receivership.
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
Received: 16 March 2010 Accepted: 9 July 2010 Published: 9 July 2010

Page 12 of 14

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

23.

24.
25.
26.

27.
28.

29.

30.
31.
32.

References
1. Peabody FW: The care of the patient. JAMA 1927, 88:877-882.
2. Justin RG: Can a physician always be compassionate? Hastings Cent Rep
2000, 30:26-7.
3. Cassell J: Stories, moral judgment, and medical care in an intensive care
unit. Qual Health Res 2004, 14:663-74.
4. Weick KE: Making Sense of the Organization Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishing 2001.
5. Schwartz D: Uncooperative patients. Am J Nurs 1958, 58:75-7.

33.
34.

35.

Kelly MP, May D: Good and bad patients: a review of the literature and a
theoretical critique. J Adv Nurs 1982, 7:147-56.
Eisenberg JM: Sociologic influences on decision-making by clinicians. Ann
Intern Med 1979, 90:957-64.
Zola IK: Problems of communication, diagnosis, and patient care: the
interplay of patient, physician and clinic organization. J Med Educ 1963,
38:829-38.
Glaser BG, Strauss AL: The social loss of dying patients. Am J Nurs 1964,
64:119-21.
Roth JA: Some contingencies of the moral evaluation and control of
clientele: the case of the hospital emergency service. AJS 1972, 77:839-56.
Johnson M, Webb C: Rediscovering unpopular patients: the concept of
social judgement. J Adv Nurs 1995, 21:466-75.
Varcoe C, Rodney P, McCormick J: Health care relationships in context: an
analysis of three ethnographies. Qual Health Res 2003, 13:957-73.
Hall JA, Horgan TG, Stein TS, Roter DL: Liking in the physician–patient
relationship. Patient Educ Couns 2002, 48:69-77.
Katz AM, Alegria M: The clinical encounter as local moral world: shifts of
assumptions and transformation in relational context. Soc Sci Med 2009,
68:1238-46.
Ashforth BE, Kreiner GE: “How can you do it?” Dirty work and the
challenge of constructing a positive identity. Acad Management Rev 1999,
24:413-434.
Emerson RM, Pollner M: Dirty work designations: Their features and
consequences in a psychiatric setting. Social Problems 1976, 23:243-254.
Shaw I: Doctors, “dirty work” patients, and “revolving doors.”. Qual Health
Res 2004, 14:1032-45.
Jeffery R: Normal rubbish: deviant patients in casualty departments.
Sociol Health Illn 1979, 1:90-107.
Bolton SC: Women’s work, dirty work: the gynaecology nurse as ‘other’.
Gender, Work and Organization 2005, 12:169-186.
Bowers L: Dangerous and Severe Personality Disorder: Response and Role of
the Psychiatric Team London: Routledge 2002.
Bowers L, Carr-Walker P, Paton J, Nijman H, Callaghan P, Allan T,
Alexander J: Changes in attitudes to personality disorder on a DSPD unit.
Crim Behav Ment Health 2005, 15:171-83.
Bowers L, Carr-Walker P, Allan T, Callaghan P, Nijman H, Paton J: Attitude to
personality disorder among prison officers working in a dangerous and
severe personality disorder unit. Int J Law Psychiatry 2006, 29:333-42.
Beach MC, Duggan PS, Cassel CK, Geller G: What does ‘respect’ mean?
Exploring the moral obligation of health professionals to respect
patients. J Gen Intern Med 2007, 22:692-5.
Jones JW, McCullough LB: Abdominal aortic aneurysm in death row
inmate. Journal J Vasc Surg 2002, 35:621-2.
Groves JE: Taking care of the hateful patient. New Engl J Med 1978, 298:883-7.
Scott JG, Cohen D, Dicicco-Bloom B, Miller WL, Stange KC, Crabtree BF:
Understanding healing relationships in primary care. Ann Fam Med 2008,
6:315-22.
Hall WJ: A piece of my mind. The intervention of Saint George. JAMA
2009, 301:2076-7.
Reynolds SJ, Ceranic TL: The effects of moral judgment and moral
identity on moral behavior: an empirical examination of the moral
individual. J Appl Psychol 2007, 92:1610-24.
Fiske ST, Xu J, Cuddy AC, Glick P: (Dis)respecting versus (dis)liking: Status
and interdependence predict ambivalent stereotypes of competence
and warmth. J Soc Issues 1999, 55:473-489.
Wheeler ME, Fiske ST: Controlling racial prejudice: social-cognitive goals
affect amygdala and stereotype activation. Psychol Sci 2005, 16:56-63.
Harris LT, Fiske ST: Dehumanizing the lowest of the low: neuroimaging
responses to extreme out-groups. Psychol Sci 2006, 17:847-53.
Oldmeadow J, Fiske ST: System-justifying ideologies moderate
status=competence stereotypes: Roles for belief in a just world and
social dominance orientation. Eur J Soc Psychol 2007, 37:1135-1148.
Schnall S, Haidt J, Clore GL, Jordan AH: Disgust as embodied moral
judgment. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 2008, 34:1096-109.
Borg JS, Lieberman D, Kiehl KA: Infection, incest, and iniquity:
investigating the neural correlates of disgust and morality. J Cogn
Neurosci 2008, 20:1529-46.
Inbar Y, Pizarro DA, Knobe J, Bloom P: Disgust sensitivity predicts intuitive
disapproval of gays. Emotion 2009, 9:435-9.

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

36. Inbar Y, Pizarro DA, Bloom P: Conservatives are more easily disgusted
than liberals. Cogn Emot 2009, 23:714-725.
37. Schnall S, Benton J, Harvey S: With a clean conscience: cleanliness
reduces the severity of moral judgments. Psychol Sci 2008, 19:1219-22.
38. Katz P: Ritual in the operating room. Ethnology 1981, 20:335-349.
39. Zaman OS, Cummings LC, Spieler SS: America’s Public Hospitals and Health
Systems, 2008: Results of the Annual NAPH Hospital Characteristics Survey
National Public Health and Hospital Institute 2010 [http://www.naph.org/
Main-Menu-Category/Our-Work/Safety-Net-Financing/Characteristics-Report/
Characteristics-2008.aspx].
40. Willems SJ, Swinnen W, De Maeseneer JM: The GP’s perception of
poverty: a qualitative study. Fam Pract 2005, 22:177-83.
41. Rosenberg CE: The Care of Strangers: The Rise of America’s Hospital System
New York, NY: Basic Books 1987.
42. Hammond KR, Kern F: Teaching Comprehensive Medical Care: A Psychological
Study of a Change in Medical Education Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press 1959.
43. Wear D, Kuczewski MG: Perspective: medical students’ perceptions of the
poor: what impact can medical education have? Acad Med 2008,
83:639-45.
44. Weitzman CC, Freudigman K, Schonfeld DJ, Leventhal JM: Care to
underserved children: Residents’ attitudes and experiences. Pediatrics
2000, 106:1022-7.
45. Monnickendam M, Monnickendam SM, Katz C, Katan J: Health care for the
poor–an exploration of primary-care physicians’ perceptions of poor
patients and of their helping behaviors. Soc Sci Med 2007, 64:1463-74.
46. Fiscella K, Roman-Diaz M, Lue BH, Botelho R, Frankel R: ’Being a foreigner, I
may be punished if I make a small mistake’: assessing transcultural
experiences in caring for patients. Fam Pract 1997, 14:112-6.
47. Malat JR, van Ryn M, Purcell D: Race, socioeconomic status, and the
perceived importance of positive self-presentation in health care. Soc Sci
Med 2006, 62:2479-88.
48. May C, Allison G, Chapple A, Chew-Graham C, Dixon C, Gask L, Graham R,
Rogers A, Roland M: Framing the doctor-patient relationship in chronic
illness: a comparative study of general practitioners’ accounts. Sociol
Health Illn 2004, 26:135-58.
49. Tait RC, Chibnall JT, Luebbert A, Sutter C: Effect of treatment success and
empathy on surgeon attributions for back surgery outcomes. J Behav
Med 2005, 28:301-12.
50. Wear D, Aultman JM, Varley JD, Zarconi J: Making fun of patients: medical
students’ perceptions and use of derogatory and cynical humor in
clinical settings. Acad Med 2006, 81:454-62.
51. Webb H: ’I’ve put weight on cos I’ve bin inactive, cos I’ve ‘ad me knee
done’: moral work in the obesity clinic. Sociol Health Illn 2009, 31:854-71.
52. Pillet-Shore D: Weighing in primary-care nurse-patient interactions. Soc
Sci Med 2006, 62:407-21.
53. Mackay N, Barrowclough C: Accident and emergency staff’s perceptions
of deliberate self-harm: attributions, emotions and willingness to help. Br
J Clin Psychol 2005, 44:255-67.
54. Hadfield J, Brown D, Pembroke L, Hayward M: Analysis of accident and
emergency doctors’ responses to treating people who self-harm. Qual
Health Res 2009, 19:755-65.
55. Maltsberger JT, Buie DH: Countertransference hate in the treatment of
suicidal patients. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1974, 30:625-33.
56. Nicolaidis C, Curry M, Gerrity M: Health care workers’ expectations and
empathy toward patients in abusive relationships. J Am Board Fam Pract
2005, 18:159-65.
57. Smedley BD, Smith AY, Nelson AR: Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial
and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care Washington, DC: National Academies
Press 2003.
58. Cuff PA, Vanselow N: Improving Medical Education: Enhancing the Behavioral
and Social Science Content of Medical School Curricula Washington, DC:
National Academies Press 2004.
59. Schwartz RC, Smith SD, Chopko B: Psychotherapists’ countertransference
reactions toward clients with antisocial personality disorder and
schizophrenia: an empirical test of theory. Am J Psychother 2007,
61:375-93.
60. Lyth IM: The functioning of social systems as a defence against anxiety.
Containing Anxiety in Institutions London: Free Association BooksLyth IM
1988, 43-85.

Page 13 of 14

61. Regan A, Howard RA, Oyebode JR: Emotional exhaustion and defense
mechanisms in intensive therapy unit nurses. J Nerv Ment Dis 2009,
197:330-6.
62. Smith RC, Dwamena FC, Fortin AH 6th: Teaching personal awareness. J
Gen Intern Med 2005, 20:201-7.
63. Howard MO, Chung SS: Nurses’ attitudes toward substance misusers. I.
Surveys. Subst Use Misuse 2000, 35:347-65.
64. Foster JH, Onyeukwu C: The attitudes of forensic nurses to substance
using service users. J Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs 2003, 10:578-84.
65. Brener L, von Hippel W, Kippax S: Prejudice among health care workers
toward injecting drug users with hepatitis C: does greater contact lead
to less prejudice? Int J Drug Policy 2007, 18:381-7.
66. von Hippel W, Brener L, von Hippel C: Implicit prejudice toward injecting
drug users predicts intentions to change jobs among drug and alcohol
nurses. Psychol Sci 2008, 19:7-11.
67. Gawronski B, LeBel EP, Peters KR: What do implicit measures tell us?
Scrutinizing the validity of three common assumptions. Pers Psychol Sci
2007, 2:181-193.
68. Blanton H, Jaccard J: Unconscious racism: A concept in pursuit of a
measure. Annu Rev Sociol 2008, 34:277-297.
69. Brochu PM, Morrison MA: Implicit and explicit prejudice toward
overweight and average-weight men and women: testing their
correspondence and relation to behavioral intentions. J Soc Psychol 2007,
147:681-706.
70. Green AR, Carney DR, Pallin DJ, Ngo LH, Raymond KL, Iezzoni LI, Banaji MR:
Implicit bias among physicians and its prediction of thrombolysis
decisions for black and white patients. J Gen Intern Med 2007, 22:1231-8.
71. van Ryn M, Burgess D, Malat J, Griffin J: Physicians’ perceptions of
patients’ social and behavioral characteristics and race disparities in
treatment recommendations for men with coronary artery disease. Am J
Public Health 2006, 96:351-7.
72. Klonoff EA: Disparities in the provision of medical care: an outcome in
search of an explanation. J Behav Med 2009, 32:48-63.
73. Rydell RJ, Gawronski B: I like you, I like you not: Understanding the
formation of context-dependent automatic attitudes. Cogn Emot 2009,
23:1118-1152.
74. Cunningham WA, Zelazo PD: Attitudes and evaluations: A social cognitive
neuroscience perspective. Trends Cogn Sci 2007, 11:97-104.
75. Moskowitz GB, Gollwitzer PM, Wasel W, Schaal B: Preconscious control of
stereotype activation through chronic egalitarian goals. J Pers Soc Psychol
1999, 77:167-184.
76. Woodward J, Allman J: Moral intuition: its neural substrates and
normative significance. J Physiol Paris 2007, 101:179-202.
77. Haidt J: The new synthesis in moral psychology. Science 2007,
316:998-1002.
78. Huebner B, Dwyer S, Hauser M: The role of emotion in moral psychology.
Trends Cogn Sci 2009, 13:1-6.
79. Moll J, de Oliveira-Souza R, Garrido GJ, Bramati IE, Caparelli-Daquer EM,
Paiva ML, Zahn R, Grafman J: The self as a moral agent: linking the neural
bases of social agency and moral sensitivity. Soc Neurosci 2007, 2:336-52.
80. Potter SJ, McKinlay JB: From a relationship to encounter: an examination
of longitudinal and lateral dimensions in the doctor-patient relationship.
Soc Sci Med 2005, 61:465-79.
81. Goffman E: Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity New York,
NY: Simon & Schuster 1963.
82. Todorov A, Harris LT, Fiske ST: Toward socially inspired social
neuroscience. Brain Res 2006, 1079:76-85.
83. Zaki J, Ochsner K: The need for a cognitive neuroscience of naturalistic
social cognition. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009, 1167:16-30.
84. Slater M, Antley A, Davison A, Swapp D, Guger C, Barker C, Pistrang N,
Sanchez-Vives MV: A virtual reprise of the Stanley Milgram obedience
experiments. PLoS One 2006, 1:e39.
85. King JA, Blair RJ, Mitchell DG, Dolan RJ, Burgess N: Doing the right thing: a
common neural circuit for appropriate violent or compassionate
behavior. Neuroimage 2006, 30:1069-76.
86. Roter DL, Frankel RM, Hall JA, Sluyter D: The expression of emotion
through nonverbal behavior in medical visits. Mechanisms and
outcomes. J Gen Intern Med 2006, 21(Suppl 1):S28-34.
87. Merrill JM, Camacho Z, Laux LF, Thornby JI, Vallbona C: Machiavellianism in
medical students. Am J Med Sci 1993, 305:285-8.

Hill Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010, 5:11
http://www.peh-med.com/content/5/1/11

88. Chapman BP, Duberstein PR, Epstein RM, Fiscella K, Kravitz RL: Patientcentered communication during primary care visits for depressive
symptoms: what is the role of physician personality? Med Care 2008,
46:806-12.
89. Mayer JD, Roberts RD, Barsade SG: Human abilities: emotional intelligence.
Annu Rev Psychol 2008, 59:507-36.
90. Grewal D, Davidson HA: Emotional intelligence and graduate medical
education. JAMA 2008, 300:1200-2.
91. Brannick MT, Wahi MM, Arce M, Johnson HA, Nazian S, Goldin SB:
Comparison of trait and ability measures of emotional intelligence in
medical students. Med Educ 2009, 43:1062-8.
92. Codier E, Kooker BM, Shoultz J: Measuring the emotional intelligence of
clinical staff nurses: an approach for improving the clinical care
environment. Nurs Adm Q 2008, 32:8-14.
93. Berry K, Shah R, Cook A, Geater E, Barrowclough C, Wearden A: Staff
attachment styles: a pilot study investigating the influence of adult
attachment styles on staff psychological mindedness and therapeutic
relationships. J Clin Psychol 2008, 64:355-63.
94. Ciechanowski PS, Worley LL, Russo JE, Katon WJ: Using relationship styles
based on attachment theory to improve understanding of specialty
choice in medicine. BMC Med Educ 2006, 6:3.
95. Crandall SJ, Volk RJ, Loemker V: Medical students’ attitudes toward
providing care for the underserved. Are we training socially responsible
physicians? JAMA 1993, 269:2519-23.
96. Crandall SJ, Davis SW, Broeseker AE, Hildebrandt C: A longitudinal
comparison of pharmacy and medical students’ attitudes toward the
medically underserved. Am J Pharm Educ 2008, 72:148.
97. Hojat M: Empathy in Patient Care: Antecedents, Development, Measurement,
and Outcomes New York, NY: Springer 2007.
98. Barraza JA, Zak PJ: Empathy toward strangers triggers oxytocin release
and subsequent generosity. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009, 1167:182-9.
99. Neumann ID: Brain oxytocin: a key regulator of emotional and social
behaviours in both females and males. J Neuroendocrinol 2008, 20:858-65.
100. Shamay-Tsoory SG, Fischer M, Dvash J, Harari H, Perach-Bloom N,
Levkovitz Y: Intranasal administration of oxytocin increases envy and
schadenfreude (gloating). Biol Psychiatry 2009, 66:864-70.
101. Tops M: Oxytocin: envy or engagement in others? Biol Psychiatry 2010, 67:
e5-6, author reply e7.
102. Kosfeld M, Heinrichs M, Zak PJ, Fischbacher U, Fehr E: Oxytocin increases
trust in humans. Nature 2005, 435:673-6.
103. Jaffee S, Hyde JS: Gender differences in moral orientation: a metaanalysis. Psychol Bull 2000, 126:703-26.
104. Reed DC: A multi-level model of moral functioning revisited. J Moral Educ
2009, 38:299-313.
105. Fumagalli M, Ferrucci R, Mameli F, Marceglia S, Mrakic-Sposta S, Zago S,
Lucchiari C, Consonni D, Nordio F, Pravettoni G, Cappa S, Priori A: Genderrelated differences in moral judgments. Cogn Process 2010.
106. Harenski CL, Antonenko O, Shane MS, Kiehl KA: Gender differences in
neural mechanisms underlying moral sensitivity. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci
2008, 3:313-21.
107. Halpern J: From Detached Concern to Empathy: Humanizing Medical Practice
New York, NY: Oxford University Press 2001.
108. Schon DA: The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action New
York, NY: Basic Books 1983.
109. Johnson ME, Hauser PM: The practices of expert psychiatric nurses:
accompanying the patient to a calmer personal space. Issues Ment Health
Nurs 2001, 22:651-68.
110. Weissmann PF, Branch WT, Gracey CF, Haidet P, Frankel RM: Role modeling
humanistic behavior: learning bedside manner from the experts. Acad
Med 2006, 81:661-7.
111. Roter DL, Larson S, Fischer GS, Arnold RM, Tulsky JA: Experts practice what
they preach: A descriptive study of best and normative practices in endof-life discussions. Arch Intern Med 2000, 160:3477-85.
112. Polanyi M: Personal Knowledge: Toward a Post-Critical Philosophy Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press 1968.
113. Aarts H, Dijksterhuis A: Habits as knowledge structures: automaticity in
goal-directed behavior. J Pers Soc Psychol 2000, 78:53-63.
114. Groopman J: How Doctors Think New York, NY: Mariner Books 2008.
115. Kahneman D, Klein G: Conditions for intuitive expertise: A failure to
disagree. Am Psychol 2009, 64:515-526.

Page 14 of 14

116. Branch WT Jr, Kern D, Haidet P, Weissmann P, Gracey CF, Mitchell G, Inui T:
The patient-physician relationship. Teaching the human dimensions of
care in clinical settings. JAMA 2001, 286:1067-74.
117. Branch WT Jr, Frankel R, Gracey CF, Haidet PM, Weissmann PF, Cantey P,
Mitchell GA, Inui TS: A good clinician and a caring person: longitudinal
faculty development and the enhancement of the human dimensions of
care. Acad Med 2009, 84:117-25.
118. Hill TE: The ER incident. Ann Intern Med 1992, 116:867-8.
119. Charles ST, Carstensen LL: Social and emotional aging. Annu Rev Psychol
2010, 61:383-409.
120. John OP, Gross JJ: Healthy and unhealthy emotion regulation: personality
processes, individual differences, and life span development. J Pers 2004,
72:1301-33.
121. Gross JJ: Antecedent- and response-focused emotion regulation:
divergent consequences for experience, expression, and physiology. J
Pers Soc Psychol 1998, 74:224-37.
122. Koole SL: The psychology of emotion regulation: An integrative review.
Cogn Emot 2009, 23:4-41.
123. Brown KW, Ryan RM, Creswell JD: Mindfulness: Theoretical foundations
and evidence for its salutary effects. Psychol Inq 2007, 18:211-237.
124. Krasner MS, Epstein RM, Beckman H, Suchman AL, Chapman B, Mooney CJ,
Quill TE: Association of an educational program in mindful
communication with burnout, empathy, and attitudes among primary
care physicians. JAMA 2009, 302:1284-93.
125. Balint M: The Doctor, His Patient and the Illness London: Churchill
Livingstone 2000.
126. Charon R: Narrative medicine: form, function, and ethics. Ann Intern Med
2001, 134:83-7.
127. Petrie KJ, Fontanilla I, Thomas MG, Booth RJ, Pennebaker JW: Effect of
written emotional expression on immune function in patients with
human immunodeficiency virus infection: a randomized trial. Psychosom
Med 2004, 66:272-5.
128. Richards JM, Beal WE, Seagal JD, Pennebaker JW: Effects of disclosure of
traumatic events on illness behavior among psychiatric prison inmates. J
Abnorm Psychol 2000, 109:156-60.
129. Regehr C, Goldberg G, Hughes J: Exposure to human tragedy, empathy,
and trauma in ambulance paramedics. Am J Orthopsychiatry 2002,
72:505-13.
130. Fitzgerald FT: Curiosity. Ann Intern Med 1999, 130:70-2.
131. Dyche L, Zayas LH: The value of curiosity and naivete for the crosscultural psychotherapist. Fam Process 1995, 34:389-99.
132. Turner JH, Stets JE: The Sociology of Emotions New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press 2005.
133. Silvia PJ: Interest–The curious emotion. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 2008, 17:57-60.
134. Silvia PJ: Appraisal components and emotion traits: Examining the
appraisal basis of trait curiosity. Cogn Emot 2008, 22:94-113.
135. Silvia PJ, Hensen RA, Templin JL: Are the sources of interest the same for
everyone? Using multilevel mixture models to explore individual
differences in appraisal structures. Cogn Emot 2009, 23:1389-1406.
136. Sansone C, Thoman DB: Interest as the missing motivator in selfregulation. Eur Psychol 2005, 10:175-186.
137. Nelson S, Gordon S: The Complexities of Care: Nursing Reconsidered New
York, NY: Cornell University Press 2006.
138. Reutter LI, Stewart MJ, Veenstra G, Love R, Raphael D, Makwarimba E: “Who
do they think we are, anyway?": perceptions of and responses to
poverty stigma. Qual Health Res 2009, 19:297-311.
139. Young AA: Herbert Gans and the politics of urban ethnography in the
(continued) age of the underclass. City Community 2007, 6:7-20.
140. Welshman J: Searching for social capital: historical perspectives on
health, poverty and culture. J R Soc Promot Health 2006, 126:268-74.
141. Walker MU: Moral Repair: Reconstructing Moral Relations After Wrongdoing
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press 2006.
doi:10.1186/1747-5341-5-11
Cite this article as: Hill: How clinicians make (or avoid) moral
judgments of patients: implications of the evidence for relationships
and research. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2010 5:11.

</pre>
</body>
</html>
