<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Base-By-Base version 2: single nucleotide-level analysis of whole viral genome alignments</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 2011, 1:2. doi:10.1186/2042-5783-1-2"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="William Hillary"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Hillary et al. Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 2011, 1:2
http://www.microbialinformaticsj.com/content/1/1/2

RESEARCH

Open Access

Base-By-Base version 2: single nucleotide-level
analysis of whole viral genome alignments
William Hillary, Song-Han Lin and Chris Upton*

Abstract
Background: Base-By-Base is a Java-based multiple sequence alignment editor. It is capable of working with
protein and DNA molecules, but many of its unique features relate to the manipulation of the genomes of large
DNA viruses such as poxviruses, herpesviruses, baculoviruses and asfarviruses (1-400 kb). The tool was built to serve
as a platform for comparative genomics at the level of individual nucleotides.
Results: In version 2, BBB-v2, of Base-By-Base we have added a series of new features aimed at providing the
bench virologist with a better platform to view, annotate and analyze these complex genomes. Although a
poxvirus genome, for example, may be less than 200 kb, it probably encodes close to 200 proteins using multiple
classes of promoters with frequent overlapping of promoters and coding sequences and even some overlapping
of genes. The new features allow users to 1) add primer annotations or other data sets in batch mode, 2) export
differences between sequences to other genome browsers, 3) compare multiple genomes at a single nucleotide
level of detail, 4) create new alignments from subsets/subsequences of a very large master alignment and 5) allow
display of summaries of deep RNA sequencing data sets on a genome sequence.
Conclusion: BBB-v2 significantly improves the ability of virologists to work with genome sequences and provides a
platform with which they can use a multiple sequence alignment as the basis for their own editable documents.
Also, a .bbb document, with a variety of annotations in addition to the basic coding regions, can be shared among
collaborators or made available to an entire research community. The program is available via Virology.ca using
Java Web Start and is platform independent; the Java 1.5 virtual machine is required.

Background
The original version of Base-By-Base (BBB) [1] was developed by the Virus Bioinformatics Resource Center primarily because of a need for a customizable, platformindependent (Java), multiple sequence alignment (MSA)
editor that could be used for the comparison, annotation
and analysis of viral genomes, and also integrated directly
with our MySQL database. There are now several somewhat related MSA tools; however, each has their own set
of distinctive features that make them especially valuable
in their niche environments. For example, JalView [2] and
STRAP [3] focus on features for display and analysis of
proteins, whereas SeaView [4] adds phylogenetic analyses
to a nucleic acid alignment editor. Key distinctive features
of the original BBB were its ability to read annotations
(CDS positions) from GenBank files, an explicit display of
* Correspondence: cupton@uvic.ca
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, 213 Petch Building,
Ring Road, Victoria, B.C., V8W 3P6, Canada

differences between sequences and a tool to compare genomes, including the ability to summarize the consequences
of all nucleotide changes on encoded proteins throughout
a genome. These basic features have been retained and
frequently improved upon in Base-By-Base version 2
(BBB-v2), and a series of new features have been added.
Throughout the development of BBB-v2, our focus has
been on the user experience. We have endeavoured to
make the tool intuitive and to add features that are useful
to molecular biologists working daily with large viral genomes (up to 300 kb) that contain approximately 1 gene/
kb of sequence. To this end, we also link BBB-v2 to our
graphical database interface so that it can be used to
select genomes, genes and proteins, which are then
opened in BBB; this provides much easier access to data.

Results and Discussion
Many of the features of version 1 of BBB were intended
to optimize the visualization of MSAs; for example,

© 2011 Hillary et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Hillary et al. Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 2011, 1:2
http://www.microbialinformaticsj.com/content/1/1/2

using a novel display of differences between sequences,
collection and summary of all differences between pairs
of sequences, providing a summary view on complete
MSAs and the display of the results of motif searches
through the sequences. In BBB-v2, the addition of a
variety of new features creates a more interactive workspace/notebook for the bench scientist.
User annotation of sequences

Navigation through complex MSAs of many large
sequences is usually very cumbersome and notes are
normally kept separate from the alignment in a notebook or on a multi-sheet paper copy of the alignment.
BBB allowed users to add comments to any sequence in
a MSA, which were displayed in the MSA window and
could also be used for navigation through the alignment.
At the request of a user, in BBB-v2 we have used a similar style of annotation, for interface consistency, to
associate DNA primer sequences with an alignment
sequence (see menu: Tools/Primer). The primer
sequences can be added singly or in a batch from a text
file in which primer sequence and primer name are
essential data items whereas freezer locations, Tm and
comments represent optional information (Figure 1).
The primer sequences, which need not be perfect
matches to the DNA sequence, are found within the
MSA sequences using a fuzzy-sequence matching algorithm, and the information is added to the .bbb XML
file, which must be save locally. The primer information
can be navigated and searched in the same way that
comments are searched; it could serve as a resource for
an entire lab.
A second new annotation method allows the temporary decorating of a sequence or multiple sequences
within a MSA with data from an external analysis, for

Page 2 of 6

example the prediction of promoter motifs in a viral
genome (see menu: File/Import Analysis from File).
Simply, a series of Comment arrows are drawn connected to a sequence, in the MSA window, following
the instructions in a text file that specify start/stop position for the arrow, strand of DNA (POSITIVE/NEGATIVE) with which to associate the comment, description
(text) and color (hexadecimal format). Figure 2 shows
the use of a manually edited text file to display 3 comments with information about the start of the VACVWR thymidylate kinase gene with RNA sequencing data
that suggests the correct gene start is the 2nd methionine of the open reading frame.
Finally, we became aware that it would be very useful
to attach a variety of information to particular MSAs
that were being used for multiple analyses. For example,
the name of the program used for alignment with any
deviations from default settings, manual edits made to
the MSA and results of previous searches and analyses.
To this end, we added a new module to BBB-v2 to
allow textual information (up to 500 lines) to be incorporated into the .bbb file. This is edited and saved
together with the MSA as a single file, so there is no
extra work involved or chance that important notes will
be lost (see menu: Edit/Edit MSA Notes).
Manipulation of sequences within a MSA

After aligning and viewing sequences/genomes retrieved
from web-based resources, the researcher may still face
a number of problems. These large sets of sequences
often contain multiple copies of identical sequences
from different virus isolates. BBB-v2 offers the ability to
remove these extra sequences (see menu: Edit/Remove
identical sequence(s)). Likewise, sequences from these
resources often have complex names with Accession,

Figure 1 Annotation of VACV-WR with primer sequences. A section of the VACV-WR genome, with 3-frame translation, is displayed at the
top of the MSA together with 3 primer annotations. Mouse-over of the primer region shows primer information, which is also searchable from
within BBB-v2. Although in this view, BBB-v2 shows the top strand of the genome with the rightward-transcribed gene highlighted in pink,
primers associated with both DNA strands are always shown; primers associated with the non-selected strand are shown in a paler colour.

Hillary et al. Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 2011, 1:2
http://www.microbialinformaticsj.com/content/1/1/2

Page 3 of 6

Figure 2 Addition of multiple comments using a text file. A section of the VACV-WR genome, with 3-frame translation, is displayed with
RNA sequencing data (see below). The comments were added by using the File/Import Analysis from File menu with the test illustrated in the
green box. Most orthologs of this thymidylate kinase gene are annotated to start at the 2nd methionine of this VACV-WR ORF; the RNA
sequencing data displayed in the lower panel supports a similar conclusion for VACV-WR.

Locus and Version information that obscures viewing of
more human-intelligible names. To simplify the process
of changing names, BBB-v2 has an easy to use tool to
edit the sequence names (see menu: Edit/Edit
Sequence Names).
Furthermore, the viewing and maneuvering through
very large MSAs is often slow and usually tedious. One
possibility to deal with this problem may be to save a
copy of the alignment and remove some sequences (see
menu: File/Remove Sequences) from the MSA, however, this doesn’t overcome problems with long genomic
sequences. Therefore in BBB-v2 we have incorporated
several simple methods to create new alignments from
subsets of the sequences and also to use sub-sequences.
After selecting the required subset of sequences in the
MSA, the researcher can also select a region of the
sequences before 1) Saving to a .bbb file (see menu:
File/Save Selected Regions to BBB file), 2) opening in
a new alignment window (see menu: File/Open
Selected Regions to new BBB file), or 3) Sending to a
new text file (see menu: File/Export Selected Regions
to fasta). These features allow users to maintain a master MSA for reference purposes, but to work on different subsets of the data when expeditious; user
annotations are also exported with the subsequences.
Display of sequence variability within a MSA

Although the display of aa/nt differences between adjacent sequences was a feature of BBB and provides a
very visual representation of sequence variation, including a Visual Summary (see menu: Reports/Visual Summary), users requested additional flexibility in this
display. Therefore we have implemented two additional
methods for showing differences within a MSA: compare
against consensus (see menu: View/Comparison
Method/Against Consensus) and compare to the top

sequence in alignment (Figure 3a) (see menu: View/
Comparison Method/Against Top Sequence). The latter allows the researcher to choose any sequence as the
reference since BBB-v2 allows the user to easily re-order
the sequences within the MSA.
If the length of the sequences and/or the number of
differences between them is large, the Visual Summary
display may be inadequate for resolving single events;
therefore the differences can be exported from a BBB-v2
alignment to a text file suitable to importing into our
genome browser, the Viral Genome Organizer [5] (see
menu: Tools/Export Differences to VGO). A user may
require this feature to get an overall picture of the distribution of differences along two genomes being
compared.
Alternatively, a new feature that displays identity plots
for DNA sequences and similarity plots for protein
sequences (PAM250 matrix) can be used to show the
relationship between multiple sequences in an alignment
(see menu: Reports/Sequence Similarity Graph). This
feature was inspired by SimPlot [6] and allows the user
to change the size of the Sliding Window and the Step
Size as well as to choose which sequence from the MSA
should be used as the reference (Figure 3b). A user can
also Zoom into a region of the plot.
One of the unique features of BBB was the ability to
use annotations from a sequence to identify differences
in genes within 2 genomes being compared; this was
intended for assessing variation between very similar genomes. BBB-v2 now can summarize the differences among
multiple genomes and was used in a comparison of varicella zoster genomes from vaccinated individuals [7,8].
Display of deep RNA sequencing data

During the design of BBB-v2, we have focused on adding features that help the bench scientist manipulate

Hillary et al. Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 2011, 1:2
http://www.microbialinformaticsj.com/content/1/1/2

Page 4 of 6

Figure 3 Comparison of sequences. a) Alignment of 5 poxvirus DNA polymerase proteins. In this example, the blue boxes, shown under a
sequence, indicate a difference to the top sequence in the MSA. b) Similarity plot calculated with a PAM250 matrix of the MSA shown in (a).
The Reference Sequence, Window Size and Step Size can be changed, and the user can zoom into a particular region by using the cursor to
draw box on the plot; Re-centre returns the plot to the full size.

and view information present in multiple alignments.
However, there are other types of data that need to be
displayed at a nucleotide level, but across relatively large
sequences. An example is the data from transcriptome
mapping by deep RNA sequencing. Although there are
multiple software tools to work with Next Generation
Sequence data, these tend to be too complex for the
casual user who wants to browse the “bottom line”
results, which can be summarized as “number of
sequences mapping to a particular nucleotide”. Recently,
Yang et al. published the mapping of early VACV-strain
WR transcripts using deep RNA sequencing [9] and
kindly supplied us with a MochiView [10] summary file
that lists every base-pair position in the VACV-strain
WR genome together with the number of sequencing
reads that map to it (both plus and minus sense). While
attempting to view the data in MochiView, it became
apparent that a simpler system would be necessary for
most virologists to be able to make use of this wonderful data set and the many more to come as researchers
begin to use Next Generation Sequencing tools. Therefore we added a new module to BBB-v2 to plot this type
of transcriptome data in association with a genome
sequence and its gene annotation information. This
transcription data is available in two complementary
views (Figure 4; Additional files 1 and 2). The first is as

a plot directly below the sequence (x-axis) with a scalable number of RNA sequences (y-axis) to allow viewing
of the complete data range. This is similar to the way a
bar graph is used to represent conservation in the consensus plot of BBB. The second provides a view in a
new window and can be zoomed-out along the x-axis to
display the entire poxvirus genome as well as changing
the scale of the y-axis. Although Next Generation
Sequencing data, by necessity, is processed a number of
times before it reaches the user, it is important to keep
the researcher as close as possible to the raw data. Since
BBB was originally created to support bioinformatics of
poxviruses (and other viruses), this new display feature
should allow virologists to visualize most of the key
information from such deep RNA sequencing studies
without needing to learn a new and complex software
package. Other types of data could also be plotted if the
input was formatted similarly.

Conclusions
A significant number of new features have been added
to the original BBB alignment editor. Although at the
heart of this program is the ability to display and edit
MSAs, it is unique in that many of its functions focus
on the analysis and annotation of viral genomes,
sequences in the 10-300 kb range. BBB-v2 also aims to

Hillary et al. Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 2011, 1:2
http://www.microbialinformaticsj.com/content/1/1/2

Page 5 of 6

Figure 4 Mapping of RNA sequencing data to VACV-WR genome in BBB-v2. (a) Upper panel shows genome sequence and 3-frame
translation. BBB-v2 displays position of gene WR-103 (VLTF-4); gene name is displayed by mouse-over. Lower panel plots the MochiView data
(RNA sequence counts) at each nucleotide position. The scale of the plot can be changed using the slider at the left or typing a value into the
Divisor box; in this plot, 1 pixel in height represents a count of 5 sequences. The actual count value and nucleotide position is displayed by
mouse-over above the plot. (b) The Visual Overview allows the user to get a birds-eye view of the RNA sequence counts over the complete
genome. The vertical scale can be changed with the slider on the left and the Sequence Zoom slider allows the user to magnify the horizontal
scale approximately 60 fold. The vertical green lines (updated live) encompass the region of the sequence that is currently displayed in the
primary BBB-v2 window.

present the user, a bench scientist, with a MSA that can
be further analyzed/searched and annotated by the user.
In BBB-v2, we have added 2 new categories of annotation in addition to the sequence comments that could be
attached to these regions of sequences in BBB. The ability to save genome-linked primer sequences with a variety of annotations, together with an editable text page
allows the research scientist to use a particular MSA .
bbb document as an extension of their lab notebook.
The addition of a module to view MochiView summary data provides virologists a familiar intuitive way to
examine RNA sequencing data that is critical for development of new, more accurate transcription maps of
viral genomes.

Methods
Essentially, BBB-v2 builds directly upon the original BBB
Java code, which was chosen to enable support of Mac
OS X, MS Windows and LINUX computer platforms. A
user opens the application (client) using Java Web Start
from a Virology.ca web page. This approach, which
automatically downloads the application from the host

server computer whenever a new version is available,
greatly simplifies the distribution of updates and ensures
users are taking advantage of the latest version of the
software.
BBB was developed to be used as an editor for MSAs
generated from the Virus Orthologous Clusters (VOCs)
[11] database at Virology.ca [12], with sequences being
selected in the VOCs GUI, sent to an alignment program (ClustalW [13], T-Coffee [14] or MUSCLE [15])
and finally displayed in BBB. However, the program can
also save/load alignments and sequences from the user’s
local computer; these can be in FASTA, GenBank (read
only) or the native file format .bbb, which is based on
the XML Bioinformatics Sequence Markup Language
(BSM) standard. The BBB file format is required if the
user needs to store information other that the sequence
alignment, such as CDS features, DNA primers and
user-added annotations for the sequences. The XML
format of BBB files also simplifies the sharing of this
information between tools.
Relatively small alignments can be performed within
BBB, but because users may have favourite tools or

Hillary et al. Microbial Informatics and Experimentation 2011, 1:2
http://www.microbialinformaticsj.com/content/1/1/2

specific needs in the alignment of large DNA sequences
it is expected that large alignments from tools such as
DIALIGN [16] or MAFFT [17] will be loaded as FASTA
alignments (output files of these programs). Importantly,
BBB-v2 permits the user to add genome annotations, for
example from a GenBank file, back to a gapped
sequence within a MSA after alignment of FASTA formatted sequences in another program.

Page 6 of 6

5.
6.

7.

8.

Availability and requirements
Project name: Base-By-Base
Project home page: http://athena.bioc.uvic.ca/tools/
BaseByBase
Operating system(s): Platform independent
Programming language: Java
Other requirements: Java 1.5 or higher, this requires
at least system 10.5 on Apple OS X.
License: GNU General Public License
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: Contact
authors

9.

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.

Additional material
Additional file 1: VACV-WR. This file contains the VACV strain Western
Reserve genome in GenBank format, including gene annotations.
Additional file 2: mochi-wr-exampleThis file contains MochiView
summary data for RNA sequencing from a sample isolated 1 hr after
infection by VACV-WR. It should be loaded into BBB-v2 with the VACVWR.gb file.

15.
16.

17.

Upton C, Hogg D, Perrin D, Boone M, Harris NL: Viral genome organizer: a
system for analyzing complete viral genomes. Virus Res 2000, 70:55-64.
Lole KS, Bollinger RC, Paranjape RS, Gadkari D, Kulkarni SS, Novak NG,
Ingersoll R, Sheppard HW, Ray SC: Full-length human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 genomes from subtype C-infected seroconverters in India,
with evidence of intersubtype recombination. J. Virol 1999, 73:152-160.
Peters GA, Tyler SD, Grose C, Severini A, Gray MJ, Upton C, Tipples GA: A
full-genome phylogenetic analysis of varicella-zoster virus reveals a
novel origin of replication-based genotyping scheme and evidence of
recombination between major circulating clades. J. Virol 2006,
80:9850-9860.
Tyler SD, Peters GA, Grose C, Severini A, Gray MJ, Upton C, Tipples GA:
Genomic cartography of varicella-zoster virus: a complete genomebased analysis of strain variability with implications for attenuation and
phenotypic differences. Virology 2007, 359:447-458.
Yang Z, Bruno DP, Martens CA, Porcella SF, Moss B: Simultaneous highresolution analysis of vaccinia virus and host cell transcriptomes by
deep RNA sequencing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107:11513-11518.
Homann O, Johnson A: MochiView: versatile software for genome
browsing and DNA motif analysis. BMC Biology 2010, 8:49.
Upton C, Slack S, Hunter AL, Ehlers A, Roper RL: Poxvirus orthologous
clusters: toward defining the minimum essential poxvirus genome. J.
Virol 2003, 77:7590-7600.
Lefkowitz EJ, Wang C, Upton C: Poxviruses: past, present and future. Virus
Res 2006, 117:105-118.
Thompson JD, Gibson TJ, Higgins DG: Multiple sequence alignment using
ClustalW and ClustalX. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics 2002, Chapter 2:Unit 2.3.
Notredame C, Higgins DG, Heringa J: T-Coffee: A novel method for fast
and accurate multiple sequence alignment. J. Mol. Biol 2000, 302:205-217.
Edgar RC: MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced
time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 2004, 5:113.
Subramanian AR, Hiran S, Steinkamp R, Meinicke P, Corel E, Morgenstern B:
DIALIGN-TX and multiple protein alignment using secondary structure
information at GOBICS. Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38(Suppl):W19-22.
Katoh K, Toh H: Parallelization of the MAFFT multiple sequence
alignment program. Bioinformatics 2010, 126(15):1899-900.

doi:10.1186/2042-5783-1-2
Cite this article as: Hillary et al.: Base-By-Base version 2: single
nucleotide-level analysis of whole viral genome alignments. Microbial
Informatics and Experimentation 2011 1:2.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by a Canadian NSERC Discovery grant. We would like
to thank all the University of Victoria Co-op students that have contributed
to the Virology.ca Bioinformatics Resource. We are grateful to Dr. B. Moss for
the MochiView summary of VACV RNA sequencing data.
Authors’ contributions
WH and SL were principle programmers of the BBB-v2 software. CU
contributed ideas for features and display requirements, tested the program
and wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 5 August 2010 Accepted: 14 June 2011
Published: 14 June 2011
References
1. Brodie R, Smith AJ, Roper RL, Tcherepanov V, Upton C: Base-By-Base: single
nucleotide-level analysis of whole viral genome alignments. BMC
Bioinformatics 2004, 5:96.
2. Waterhouse AM, Procter JB, Martin DMA, Clamp M, Barton GJ: Jalview
Version 2–a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis
workbench. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:1189-1191.
3. Gille C, Frömmel C: STRAP: editor for STRuctural Alignments of Proteins.
Bioinformatics 2001, 17:377-378.
4. Gouy M, Guindon S, Gascuel O: SeaView version 4: A multiplatform
graphical user interface for sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree
building. Mol. Biol. Evol 2010, 27:221-224.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
