<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>There is more than one way to turn a spherical cellular monolayer inside out: type B embryo inversion in Volvox globator</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Biology 2011, 9:89. doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-89"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Stephanie Höhn"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.4.2 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

There is more than one way to turn a spherical
cellular monolayer inside out: type B embryo
inversion in Volvox globator
Stephanie Höhn and Armin Hallmann*

Abstract
Background: Epithelial folding is a common morphogenetic process during the development of multicellular
organisms. In metazoans, the biological and biomechanical processes that underlie such three-dimensional (3D)
developmental events are usually complex and difficult to investigate. Spheroidal green algae of the genus Volvox
are uniquely suited as model systems for studying the basic principles of epithelial folding. Volvox embryos begin
life inside out and then must turn their spherical cell monolayer outside in to achieve their adult configuration; this
process is called ‘inversion.’ There are two fundamentally different sequences of inversion processes in Volvocaceae:
type A and type B. Type A inversion is well studied, but not much is known about type B inversion. How does the
embryo of a typical type B inverter, V. globator, turn itself inside out?
Results: In this study, we investigated the type B inversion of V. globator embryos and focused on the major
movement patterns of the cellular monolayer, cell shape changes and changes in the localization of cytoplasmic
bridges (CBs) connecting the cells. Isolated intact, sectioned and fragmented embryos were analyzed throughout
the inversion process using light microscopy, confocal laser scanning microscopy, scanning electron microscopy
and transmission electron microscopy techniques. We generated 3D models of the identified cell shapes, including
the localizations of CBs. We show how concerted cell-shape changes and concerted changes in the position of
cells relative to the CB system cause cell layer movements and turn the spherical cell monolayer inside out. The
type B inversion of V. globator is compared to the type A inversion in V. carteri.
Conclusions: Concerted, spatially and temporally coordinated changes in cellular shapes in conjunction with
concerted migration of cells relative to the CB system are the causes of type B inversion in V. globator. Despite
significant similarities between type A and type B inverters, differences exist in almost all details of the inversion
process, suggesting analogous inversion processes that arose through parallel evolution. Based on our results and
due to the cellular biomechanical implications of the involved tensile and compressive forces, we developed a
global mechanistic scenario that predicts epithelial folding during embryonic inversion in V. globator.

Background
One of the most fascinating problems in developmental
biology is how embryonic cells work together to produce highly organized multicellular organisms. Although
embryonic tissues may ultimately be shaped in a species-specific manner, there are basic remodeling events
that are shared, even among distantly related species.
Epithelial folding is one of these common morphogenetic processes and is involved in metazoan
* Correspondence: armin.hallmann@gmx.de
Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology of Plants, University of
Bielefeld, Universitätsstrasse 25, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany

developmental stages including gastrulation, neurulation
and organogenesis. Epithelia are composed of closely
arranged epithelial cells that adhere together at intercellular junctions that give the epithelial sheet mechanical
strength. This adherence of the cells is thought to be
the key for the transmission of forces between neighboring cells through the links between the actomyosin
cytoskeleton and the adherens junctions [1]. In
metazoan development, folding or bending of the cell
sheet is achieved by cells at the bend points that change
from a cuboidal to a wedge shape. This cell wedging is
observed in several invaginations, including blastopore

© 2011 Höhn and Hallmann; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

groove formation and neurulation in amphibians and
the formation of the primitive groove in birds [1-7]. It
also exists in other cases, such as gastrulation in some
echinoderms [8], but is less obvious in these cases, likely
because mechanisms other than cell wedging are
involved [1]. The bending and folding of a sheet of cells
is fundamentally a biomechanical, supercellular process
involving coordinated changes in the shapes of many
neighboring cells that interact; however, the biological
and biomechanical processes that underlie such threedimensional (3D) morphogenetic events in metazoans
are usually complex and difficult to investigate
[2-7,9-19].
In the simple multicellular green algae Volvox, a morphogenetic process known as inversion occurs during
embryogenesis. Volvox inversion bears significant similarity to metazoan gastrulation and has been suggested
as a model system for studying the curling of an epithelium [20-25]. The similarities between the morphogenetic process of inversion in Volvox carteri and
epithelial folding events in metazoans include cell adherence, cell shape changes, cell movements, transmission
of forces between neighboring cells and the involvement
of cytoskeletal elements [20,22-24,26-29]. However,
embryonic Volvox cells have no adherens junctions;
instead, they adhere together through a network of
numerous and quite robust cytoplasmic bridges (CBs)
that are the result of incomplete cytokinesis [22] and
allow for force transmission. As in metazoans, folding or
bending of the embryonic cell sheet in V. carteri is
achieved by cells at the bend points, which undergo a
distinct transition in cell shape [20,22-24,26-29]. Moreover, concerted movements of cells with respect to the
CB system are crucial for the process of inversion in V.
carteri [20,22-24,26-29].
Most previous research on inversion was performed in
V. carteri [20-25]; however, this process also occurs, but
has been studied in much less detail, in other species of
the genus Volvox such as V. tertius [30-32], V. obversus
[33,34], V. aureus [35,36], V. globator [37,38], V. rousseletii [38-40] and V. capensis [38]. Inversion also exists in
more basal volvocine relatives of Volvox [25,41], such as
Pleodorina californica [42], Eudorina elegans [43-45], E.
indica [46], Pandorina morum [47], Platydorina caudata
[48] and Gonium pectorale [44,49,50], even if the process is less distinct in these species.
Inversion is the solution to the awkward inside-out
situation of the embryo in multicellular volvocine algae.
After completion of embryonic cleavage divisions, the
embryo contains all of the cells that will be present in
the adult alga, but the flagellar ends of all of the cells
point toward the interior, rather than the exterior,
where they need to be to function during locomotion.
Moreover, in more advanced species, which already

Page 2 of 26

exhibit large reproductive cells before inversion (for
example, V. carteri), the reproductive cells point outward. This inside-out orientation is corrected as the
embryo turns itself right-side out during inversion.
The process of inversion was discovered in V. carteri f.
weismannia approximately 100 years ago, but it was
initially misinterpreted as a pathological phenomenon
[51]. The correct interpretation of inversion was provided by Kuschakewitsch approximately a decade later
[52,53]. Subsequent work revealed that inversion in Volvox involves two cellular events: dramatic changes in
cell shapes and coordinated movements of cells relative
to the CBs [20-24,26-29,31,54-57]. However, there are
two fundamentally different sequences through which
embryos of the genus Volvox turn right-side out: type A
and type B (Figure 1) [25,58]. In type A inversion, which
occurs in V. carteri and species such as V. obversus, V.
africanus, V. gigas and V. tertius, an opening, called the
phialopore, appears at the anterior pole; the anterior
hemisphere inverts through the phialopore; the posterior
hemisphere then inverts; and finally, the phialopore
closes (Figure 1A) [22,32-34,54]. (It should be noted
that by convention, the anterior pole of a pre-inversion
embryo becomes the posterior pole of the inverted
embryo [22,25].) In type B inversion (Figure 1B), as
observed in species such as V. globator, V. capensis, V.
dissipatrix, V. rousseletii and V. barberi, the posterior
hemisphere inverts before the phialopore opens, followed by inversion of the anterior hemisphere; finally,
the phialopore closes [26,38-40]. Thus, in type B inversion, the opening of the phialopore does not indicate
the beginning of inversion, and the hemispheres invert
in reverse order compared to type A inversion.
In terms of evolution, inversion must have arisen quite
recently because phylogenetic analyses indicate that multicellularity evolved in volvocine green algae ‘only’
approximately 200 million years ago [59], which is much
more recently than in any other group, and inversion
must have evolved in parallel with the transition to multicellularity or even later. Phylogenetic analyses have also
indicated a polyphyletic origin of the genus Volvox
[22,60-66] (see Additional File 1) suggesting that it is not
a true genus. A few species of this genus, including V.
globator, form a small but robust monophyletic group
that is referred to as the section Volvox [58,62,64,67,68].
All Volvox species within the section Volvox exhibit type
B inversion (see Additional File 1). The other species of
the genus Volvox and the genera Eudorina and Pleodorina constitute another, much larger, monophyletic group,
the Eudorina group [58,69]. The Volvox species within
the Eudorina group include both type A and type B
inverters (see Additional File 1).
The type A inversion of V. carteri has been analyzed
previously in great detail (Figure 1A) [20,23-27,29,70-74].

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 3 of 26

Figure 1 Stylized sequences of the different inversion processes in Volvocaceae: type A and type B. Schematic representation of
midsagittal cross sections of embryos showing inversion of type A and type B inverters. (A) Type A inversion in Volvox carteri. (A1) Before the
initiation of inversion. (A2) Inversion begins with the appearance of a swastika-shaped opening, the phialopore, at the anterior pole. (A2 to A8)
The cell monolayer curls outward and backward over the simultaneously contracting posterior hemisphere and the phialopore widens; the
posterior hemisphere moves toward the phialopore; the region of maximum cell-sheet curvature, the bend region, moves progressively to the
posterior pole. (A9,A10) Inversion ends with the closure of the phialopore. (B) Type B inversion in Volvox globator. (B1) Before the initiation of
inversion. (B2) Inversion begins with the contraction of the posterior hemisphere. (B3) Contraction proceeds and accompanies movement of the
posterior hemisphere into the anterior hemisphere; this invagination of the cell sheet generates a ring of maximum curvature between the two
hemispheres, the bend region. (B4,B5) The posterior hemisphere lies completely within the anterior hemisphere but moves further still in
direction of the anterior pole; a circular opening, the phialopore, appears at the anterior pole and widens. (B5 to B7) The widening of the
phialopore proceeds and the anterior hemisphere moves over the already inverted posterior hemisphere. (B7,B8) The last third of the anterior
hemisphere moves over the already inverted cell monolayer. (B9,B10) Inversion ends with the closure of the phialopore. In both species, the
side of the cell layer that is outside in the adult configuration and from which the flagella will emerge is presented in brown, and the side of
the cell layer that is inside in the adult configuration and where the reproductive cells are located, is presented in green.

Inversion in V. carteri begins about 1 h after the end of
embryonic cleavages with the appearance of a swastikashaped phialopore at the anterior pole of the embryo
(Figure 1A1, A2). At this opening, the four lips of the cell
monolayer curl outward and backward over the simultaneously contracting posterior hemisphere (Figure 1A2,
A3, A4, A5, A6, A7, A8). During inversion, the circular
region of maximum cell-sheet curvature moves

progressively along the anterior-posterior axis. Finally,
the phialopore closes, and the embryo regains its spherical phenotype (Figure 1A9, A10). The flagellar ends of
the somatic cells now point outward, and the reproductive cells (gonidia) point inward. The entire inversion
process lasts approximately 45 min [23,25]. Analyses of
the cytological changes that occur during this epithelial
folding using light microscopy (LM), transmission

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) have led to the development of a model that
describes inversion in V. carteri based on cell shape
changes and active movements of cells relative to the
CBs connecting them [20,21,27,28]. At the beginning of
inversion in a V. carteri embryo, all cells are spindle
shaped and are joined at their widest points by CBs [27].
The cells surrounding the phialopore first develop long,
microtubule-reinforced stalks. In V. carteri, a motor protein, the kinesin InvA, is thought to generate the force
that drives the movement of the cells relative to the CBs
until they are linked at their narrowest, outermost tips
[24,25,27]. These combined actions cause the phialopore
lips in V. carteri to bend outward. All cells gradually
undergo these changes in cell shape, and a ring of maximum curvature, known as the bend region, moves from
the anterior to the posterior pole until inversion is completed (Figure 1A). After passing the region of maximum
curvature, the cells, which are linked by their inner ends,
develop a columnar shape.
In contrast to the type A inversion of V. carteri, type
B inversion has only been studied by LM and, therefore,
only basic information about the sequence and mechanism of inversion in type B inverters is available
[25,26,36-38,54,75]. Although the subcellular mechanisms underlying inversion might be similar in type A
and type B inverters, there must be significant differences between the two types of inversion to explain the
different inversion sequences observed.
Therefore, in the present study, we provide a detailed
description of the cellular mechanism of type B embryonic inversion in Volvox globator, compare type A inversion (as previously studied in V. carteri) and type B
inversion (as studied here) in terms of the key similarities and differences in the cellular events that are
involved, deal with the pathways by which these two
types of inversion may have evolved and discuss a
hypothesis that integrates our results and biomechanical
implications about the involved tensile and compressive
forces into a global mechanistic scenario that predicts
epithelial folding in V. globator.

Results
Epithelial folding of the typical type B inverter V. globator (Figure 1) was investigated in detail, focusing on
major movement patterns of the cellular monolayer,
region and stage-specific changes in cell shape and
changes in the localization of CBs. To describe the
major aspects of inversion separately but in ontogenetic
order of appearance, we go through the inversion process several times by calling attention to the relevant
panels of Figures 2, 3, 4 and 5; each of these figures
shows an image series of inversion in ontogenetic order
made with four different techniques: LM time-lapse in

Page 4 of 26

vivo imaging (Figure 2), SEM (Figure 3), LM of mechanical, midsagittal sections (Figure 4) and optical sections
by confocal laser scanning microscopy (cLSM) (Figure
5).
Major movement patterns of the cellular monolayer
Pre-inversion stage

At the stage immediately (5 min to 10 min) before the
beginning of inversion, a V. globator embryo is fully
cleaved. The embryo completed 11 to 13 rounds of cell
division and has 2,000 to 6,000 cells arranged in a spherical cellular monolayer with a diameter of approximately 80 μm (70 μm to 90 μm) (Figures 1B1, 2A, 3B,
4A and 5A). At this time, the spheroidal embryo exhibits sporadic movements of the cell monolayer, and several dents quickly appear and disappear (Figure 6A).
This phenomenon was also observed in V. carteri, V.
aureus and V. rousseletii embryos and is known as
‘denting’ [20,26,39]. Denting ends once the process of
inversion starts.
Early inversion stage

The inversion process begins with the contraction of the
posterior hemisphere of the embryo (Figures 1B2, 2B and
4B). During the first approximately 10 min of inversion,
contraction proceeds and accompanies movement of the
posterior hemisphere in the direction of the anterior
pole; thus, the posterior hemisphere moves into the anterior hemisphere (Figures 1B2, B3, 2B, C, D, E, F, 3C, 4B,
C and 5B). This ring-shaped invagination of the cell sheet
generates the bend region (Figures 1B3, 2B, C, D, 3C, 4B,
C and 7A). In midsagittal cross-sections of embryos at
this stage, the bend region forms more or less a half circle with a radius of approximately 2 μm (Figure 7H).
Mid-inversion stage

The mid-inversion stage spans from approximately 10
min to approximately 35 min after the beginning of
inversion. Approximately 15 min to 20 min after the
initiation of inversion, the posterior hemisphere lies
completely within the anterior hemisphere and moves
further yet toward the anterior pole (Figures 1B4, 2G,
H, I, J, K, 3D, E, 4D, E, F and 5C). During this movement of the posterior hemisphere, the radius of the curvature in the bend region increases considerably from 3
μm to 5 μm up to 15 μm to 20 μm within approximately 10 min (Figure 8C, D). Approximately 20 min to
25 min after the beginning of inversion, a circular opening, the phialopore, appears at the anterior pole (Figures
1B5, 2G, H and 3F). The phialopore widens continuously while the anterior hemisphere moves over the
already almost completely inverted posterior hemisphere
(Figures 1B5, B6, 2H, I, J, K, L, 3F, 5C and 8B). The
inner diameter of the opening increases until it is somewhat greater than the outer diameter of the inverted
posterior hemisphere (Figures 1B6 and 2K, L).

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 5 of 26

Figure 2 Sequence of light micrographs of an inverting V. globator embryo in situ and in vivo. Time-lapse sequence of a single living
embryo inside its parental spheroid. The embryo was captured in side view at 3.5-min intervals throughout inversion. (A) The embryo 3.5 min
before the initiation of inversion. (B) Inversion begins with the contraction of the posterior hemisphere. (C to F) 3.5 min, 7 min, 10.5 min and 14
min after the initiation of inversion; contraction proceeds and accompanies movement of the posterior hemisphere into the anterior
hemisphere; invagination of the cell sheet generates a ring of maximum curvature between the two hemispheres. (G to K) 17.5 min, 21 min,
24.5 min, 28 min and 31.5 min after initiation of inversion; the posterior hemisphere lies completely within the anterior hemisphere but moves
further still toward the anterior pole; the phialopore appears at the anterior pole and widens continuously. (H to L) 21 min, 24.5 min, 28 min,
31.5 min and 35 min after the initiation of inversion; the widening of the phialopore proceeds and the anterior hemisphere moves over the
already inverted posterior hemisphere. (L to O) 35 min, 38.5 min, 42 min and 45.5 min after the initiation of inversion; the last third of the
anterior hemisphere moves over the already inverted cell monolayer. (O,P) 45.5 min and 49 min after the initiation of inversion; inversion ends
with the closure of the phialopore. Directions of cell layer movements are indicated by black arrows. Scale bars: 20 μm.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 6 of 26

Figure 3 Scanning electron micrographs of V. globator embryos in successive stages of inversion. Embryos were removed from their
mother spheroids and their embryonic vesicle and analyzed by scanning electron microscopy. (A) An early embryo during cell division (400-cell
stage) several hours before the initiation of inversion. (B) A fully cleaved embryo 5 min to 10 min before the initiation of inversion; the embryo
contains all of the cells that will be present in the adult (approximately 3,000 cells); details are shown in Figure 6B, C, D, E. (C) An embryo 5 min
to 10 min after the initiation of embryonic inversion; details are shown in Figure 7. (D) An embryo 10 min to 15 min after the initiation of
inversion; details are shown in Figure 8A, C. (E) An embryo 20 min to 25 min after the initiation of inversion, as observed from a slanted side
view; details are shown in Figure 8D, E, F. (F) Embryo 20 min to 25 min after the initiation of inversion; view of the anterior hemisphere of the
same embryo as in E; a broken line indicates the phialopore; details are shown in Figure 8B. (G) Embryo 35 min to 40 min after the initiation of
inversion; details are shown in Figure 9. (H) Embryo 5 min to 10 min after the end of inversion (that is, 55 min to 60 min after the beginning of
inversion); details are shown in Figure 10A, B, C, D, E, F, G. Details shown at higher magnification in the figures below are indicated by
rectangles; details shown in sections or from a different angle are indicated by ovals; arrows indicate the viewing direction for regions that are
shown in the referenced figures but are hidden in the given figure. Scale bars: 20 μm.

Late inversion stage

During the late stage of inversion, 35 min to 45 min
after its onset, the last third of the anterior hemisphere
moves over the already inverted cell monolayer (Figures
1B7, B8, B9, 2L, M, N, O, 3G, 4G, 5D and 9A, B, C).
During this last part of inversion, the diameter of the
opening decreases continuously (Figures 1B9 and 2L, M,
N, O). Approximately 50 min after it started, inversion
ends with the closure of the phialopore (Figures 1B10
and 2O, P).
Early and late post-inversion stage

Immediately after inversion, the embryo has a diameter
of only approximately 60 μm (50 μm to 70 μm) (Figures
2P, 3H, 4H and 5E), which is approximately 20 μm less
than at the initiation of inversion (Figures 2A, 3B, 4A
and 5A). Not only before (see above) but even shortly
after the completion of inversion, we observed sporadic
movements of the cell monolayer causing dents that
quickly appear and disappear (Figure 10H, I). To our
knowledge, this denting after inversion has never been
observed in any other Volvox species. Approximately 1

h after the completion of inversion, denting is no longer
observed (Figure 10J), and the juveniles remain
spheroidal.
Region and stage-specific changes in cell shape
Pre-inversion stage

During cleavage, all cells are roughly spherical or, particularly immediately before each cleavage division, somewhat elongated (Figure 3A). The cells exhibit a length of
4.5 μm to 6.5 μm and a width of 2.5 μm to 5 μm.
Between the end of cleavage and the beginning of inversion, all cells within the spherical cellular monolayer
develop into what we refer to as teardrop-shaped cells
(Figures 3B, 4A, 5A1, A3, and 6B, C, D, E, F). Each of
these approximately radially symmetrical cells is coneshaped at the cell end that faces the interior (Figure 6B,
D, F); we refer to the cone-shaped (apical) end of the
cell as the flagellar end because the flagella will develop
on this side of the cell. The opposite end of the teardrop-shaped cells, facing the exterior, shows a roughly
hexagonal cross-section (Figure 6E); we call this end of

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 7 of 26

Figure 4 Midsagittal sections of V. globator embryos in successive stages of inversion. Stained sections were analyzed by light
microscopy. (A) An embryo 5 min to 10 min before the initiation of inversion; details are shown in Figure 6B, C, D, E, F. (B) An embryo 3 min to
5 min after the initiation of inversion. (C) An embryo 5 min to 10 min after the initiation of inversion; details are shown in Figure 7. (D) An
embryo 10 min to 15 min after the initiation of inversion; details are shown in Figure 8A, C. (E) An embryo 20 min to 25 min after the initiation
of inversion; details are shown in Figure 8D, E, F. (F) An embryo 30 min to 35 min after the initiation of inversion; details are shown in Figure 8B.
(G) An embryo 35 min to 40 min after the initiation of inversion; details are shown in Figure 9. (H) An embryo 5 min to 10 min after the end of
inversion (that is, 55 min to 60 min after initiation of inversion); details are shown in Figure 10A, B, C, D, E, F, G. Rectangles, ovals and arrows
indicate details shown in other figures as described in the legend to Figure 3; a broken line refers to a detailed view that is perpendicular to the
image plane. Scale bars: 20 μm.

the cell the chloroplast end because the single chloroplast largely localizes on this side of the cell. Teardropshaped cells have a length of 8 μm to 10 μm and a maximal width of 3 μm to 5 μm.
For all optical sections of embryos, we used phalloidin-tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate (TRITC) as
a cytoplasmic stain because it stains filamentous actin
(F-actin) in embryonic cells [72], and F-actin was more
or less uniformly distributed in the cytoplasm (both in
this and in a previous study [72], the resolution of the
cLSM was insufficient to see individual actin filaments).
However, there was one exception: in teardrop-shaped
cells, F-actin was mainly localized at the flagellar (apical)
ends of the cells (Figure 6B, C).
Early inversion stage

At the beginning of inversion, the cells of the anterior
hemisphere remain teardrop shaped (Figure 4B, C), but
the cells of the posterior hemisphere become elongated
along their chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axis. The latter cells attain a length of 10 μm to 12 μm with more or
less pointed ends on both sides; therefore, these cells are
referred to as spindle-shaped cells (Figures 4B, C, 5B1,
B3 and 7C, I). At the cell’s equator, which is the broadest point, the spindle-shaped cells have a diameter of 2

μm to 3 μm and exhibit a hexagonal cross-section (Figure 7C and inset in 7C).
The conversion of teardrop-shaped cells into spindleshaped cells in the posterior hemisphere occurs in conjunction with the formation of the bend region somewhat below the equator of the embryo (Figures 1B1, B2,
2A, B, 3C, 4B, C and 7H). In the emerging bend region,
the shapes of the just developed spindle cells changes
again and increasingly reflects the maximum curvature
of the cell sheet in this area. The elongated cells of this
region stay pointed and radially symmetrical only at
their flagellar ends, whereas they become increasingly
wedge-shaped at their chloroplast ends; we refer to
these cells as paddle-shaped cells. In a cross-section of
the embryo, the cells of the bend region are arranged in
the form of a spread fan (Figures 4C and 7H), exhibit a
length of 9 μm to 10 μm and are approximately 2 μm to
3 μm in diameter at the broadest point (Figure 7D). At
the outermost chloroplast ends, the major axis of the
cell’s cross-section is 1.5 μm to 2 μm, while the minor
axis is only approximately 0.5 μm (middle part of Figure
7A, B); that is, there is a difference in length by a factor
of three to four between the two axes. The bases of the
cells at the chloroplast ends frequently appear as

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 8 of 26

Figure 5 In situ localization of F-actin and nuclei in optical sections of successive stages of inversion. cLSM and transmitted light images
of intact embryos. F-actin was visualized with phalloidin-TRITC (red, first column), and DNA was stained with DAPI to visualize nuclei (blue,
second column). The third column shows phalloidin-TRITC/DAPI overlays, and the fourth column shows transmitted light brightfield micrographs.
(A1 to A4) An embryo 5 min to 10 min before the initiation of inversion (A1,2,3, midsagittal section); details are shown in Figure 6B, C. (B1 to
B4) An embryo 5 min to 10 min after the initiation of inversion (B1,2,3, oblique lateral section); the embryo was somewhat compressed by the
weight of the coverslip. (C1 to C4) An embryo 20 min to 25 min after the initiation of inversion (C1,2,3, midsagittal section). (D1 to D4) An
embryo 35 min to 40 min after the initiation of inversion (D1,2,3, midsagittal section); details are shown in Figure 9A, B, D, E, F, G. (E1 to E4) An
embryo 5 min to 10 min after the end of inversion, that is, 55 min to 60 min after the initiation of inversion (E1,2,3, midsagittal section); details
are shown in Figure 10A, B. (F1 to F4) An embryo approximately 1 h after the end of inversion, that is, approximately 2 h after the initiation of
inversion (F1,2,3, midsagittal section); details are shown in Figure 11A, B. Details that are shown at higher magnification in figures below are
indicated by rectangles; broken lines refer to detailed views that are perpendicular to the image plane. Scale bars: 20 μm. cLSM: confocal laser
scanning microscopy; DAPI: 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride; F-actin: filamentous actin; TRITC: tetramethylrhodamine B
isothiocyanate.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 9 of 26

Figure 6 Details of embryos 5 min to 10 min before the initiation of inversion (pre-inversion stage). cLSM, SEM and LM images of intact
or fragmented embryos, and an LM image of a physical cross-section. (A) LM side view of a juvenile inside the intact parental spheroid.
Arrowheads point to minor dents that quickly appear and disappear immediately before the initiation of inversion. (B) Midsagittal cLSM optical
cross-section of an embryo showing the localization of F-actin (red) using phalloidin-TRITC (see Figure 5A1 for an overview). (C) Midsagittal cLSM
optical cross-section of an embryo showing the localization of both F-actin (red) and nuclei (blue) with a phalloidin-TRITC/DAPI overlay (see
Figure 5A3 for an overview). (D) LM image of a physical midsagittal cross-section. Arrows indicate the viewing direction in (E) and (F) (see Figure
4A for an overview). (E) SEM view of the cell monolayer observed from outside an embryo (see D and Figure 3B for an overview); arrowheads
point to some of the numerous CBs. (F) SEM view of the cell monolayer observed from inside a fragmented embryo (see D for an overview).
Scale bars: (A) 20 μm; (B, C, D) 10 μm; (E, F) 3 μm. CB: cytoplasmic bridge; cLSM: confocal laser scanning microscopy; DAPI: 4’,6-diamidino-2phenylindole dihydrochloride; F-actin: filamentous actin; LM: light microscopy; SEM: scanning electron microscopy; TRITC: tetramethylrhodamine
B isothiocyanate.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 10 of 26

Figure 7 Detailed characteristics of embryos 5 min to 10 min after the initiation of inversion (early inversion stage). SEM images of
isolated intact or fragmented embryos and LM images of physical midsagittal cross-sections (see Figures 3C and 4C for an overview). (A) SEM
view of the bend region; the anterior hemisphere is in the upper part of the image; arrow with asterisk: the viewing direction of the cells from
the posterior hemisphere shown in the inset in the lower left corner; arrow with circle: the area shown in the inset in the upper right corner;
arrowheads: CBs; rectangle: detail shown in (B). (B) SEM view of cells in the bend region; arrowheads: CBs. (C) SEM side view of cells of the
posterior hemisphere (fragmented embryo); arrowheads: outgrowing flagella; rectangle: detail shown in the inset; arrowheads in the inset: CBs.
(D) Slanted SEM side view of cells of the bend region (fragmented embryo); arrowheads: outgrowing flagella; rectangle: detail shown in (E). (E)
Slanted SEM side view of the chloroplast ends of the cells shown in (D); arrowheads: CBs. (F) SEM view of the anterior pole of the embryo;
arrowheads: ring of broken CBs that connected the embryo with the somatic cells of its parent spheroid. (G) Slanted SEM top view of cells of
the anterior hemisphere (fragmented embryo); arrowheads: outgrowing flagella. (H, I) LM images of a physical midsagittal cross-section of the
bend region and the posterior hemisphere, respectively. Arrow in (H): the viewing direction of the cells shown in (A); however, the stage in (H) is
somewhat earlier than the stage in (A). (C, G and I) The inside and outside of the embryo are indicated. Scale bars: (A, C, D, G and insets in A) 3
μm; (B, E and inset in C) 1 μm; (F) 10 μm; (H, I) 5 μm. CB: cytoplasmic bridge; LM: light microscopy; SEM: scanning electron microscopy.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 11 of 26

Figure 8 Details of embryos 10 min to 35 min after the initiation of inversion (mid-inversion stage). SEM images of isolated embryos and
LM and TEM images of physical midsagittal cross-sections (see Figures 3D, E, F and 4D, E, F for an overview). (A) SEM view of the bend region;
two broken lines encompass the region with maximum curvature; a rectangle indicates an image detail shown in the inset; and arrowheads
point to some of the numerous CBs. (B) SEM view of the opening of the phialopore; the anterior hemisphere is in the upper right corner, and
the already inverted posterior hemisphere is in the lower left corner (highlighted in green); passively stretched cells bordering the phialopore are
colored in blue; and CBs are colored in red. (C, D) LM images of physical midsagittal cross-sections of the bend region. The developmental stage
in (D) is approximately 10 min later than the stage in (C); during this period, the radius of the curvature in the bend region increases
significantly as indicated; and a rectangle indicates an image detail shown in (F). (E) LM image of a physical midsagittal cross-section with cells
of the anterior hemisphere; the inside and outside of the embryo are indicated. (F) TEM image of a physical midsagittal cross-section of the
bend region showing the position of CBs (arrowheads) (see D for an overview). Scale bars: (A, E) 3 μm; (B, C, D) 5 μm; (F and inset in A) 1 μm.
CB: cytoplasmic bridge; LM: light microscopy; SEM: scanning electron microscopy; TEM: transmission electron microscopy.

elongated hexagons. The major axis of these elongated
hexagons at the outermost chloroplast ends of paddleshaped cells is oriented along a circular line described
by the ring-shaped invagination of the posterior hemisphere; this circular line shows only minor curvature
due to its relatively large radius of approximately 30 μm.
The minor axis of the outermost chloroplast end of paddle-shaped cells is perpendicular to the circular line
around the embryo and is oriented along a line that
more or less forms a half circle in the bend region when
a midsagittal cross-section of an embryo is observed
(Figures 4C and 7H).
While invagination of the posterior hemisphere proceeds and the transition from spindle to paddle shapes
progresses from the equator toward the posterior pole,
the teardrop-shaped cells of the anterior hemisphere

become increasingly elongated flat cells that partially
overlap each other. The conversion from teardropshaped to elongated progresses from the rim of the
anterior cap of the embryo toward its anterior pole. We
refer to the elongated flat cells as disc shaped (Figures
4B, C and 7A (upper right part of the image) and 7G).
However, these cells are not uniformly shaped, and
quite a few are buckled. Disc-shaped cells are elongated
in the anterior-posterior direction of the embryo and
frequently have a length of 4 μm to 6 μm, a width of 2
μm to 3.5 μm and a height of 0.8 μm to 2 μm.
Mid-inversion stage

At the beginning of the mid-inversion stage, the cells in
the bend region still have the appearance of paddles
that are flattened at one end (the chloroplast end) and
are arranged in the form of a spread fan (Figures 4D

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

and 8A, C) but at this stage, these cells have a length of
11 μm to 12 μm and, thus, are longer than the corresponding cells in the early inversion stage. The bases of
the paddle-shaped cells at the chloroplast ends still have
the appearance of elongated hexagons (Figure 8A).
In the mid-inversion stage, the transition from the
remaining spindle to paddle cells seems to progress
from the equator of the embryo toward its posterior
pole and, as mentioned above, the radius of the curvature in the bend region increases considerably. The
greater that the radius of the curvature in the bend
region is, the thicker the chloroplast ends are on their
narrow side (Figures 4D, E and 8C, D). With a further
increase of this radius, the paddle-shaped cells change
into cells that are radially symmetrical throughout their
length (Figures 4E, F and 8D); these cells still have
pointed flagellar ends but the bases of the cells at the
flattened chloroplast ends appear as elongated hexagons
(Figures 4E, F and 8A, D, F), and we refer to these cells
as pencil shaped. Pencil-shaped cells have a length of
11.5 μm to 12.5 μm and a diameter of 1.5 μm to 2 μm
(at the chloroplast end).
During most of the mid-inversion stage, cells close to
the not yet inverted posterior pole are still spindleshaped (Figure 4D, E). When these cells have their turn
in inversion, the radius of the curvature in the bend
region reaches its maximum. These spindle-shaped cells
do not seem to become paddle shaped but directly
change into the pencil shape (Figure 4D, E, F).
Before inversion of the posterior hemisphere is complete, disc-shaped cells at the rim of the anterior cap
become increasingly pencil shaped (also without passing
through the paddle stage) and, at the same time, seem to
move over the rim of the anterior cap toward the posterior
pole (Figures 3E, F, G, 4C, D, E and 5C1, C3). This process
appears to be the initiation of inversion of the anterior
hemisphere. Shortly after the beginning of the change
from disc to pencil shape at the rim of the anterior cap,
the phialopore appears at the anterior pole and the opening widens continuously. The transition from disc to pencil shape seems to progress toward the phialopore. Discshaped cells around the phialopore alone become increasingly elongated along a circular line described by the edge
of the opening (Figures 3F and 8B). Cells in the not yet
inverted part of the anterior hemisphere are still disc
shaped (Figures 4E, F, 5C1, C3 and 8E).
Late inversion stage

During this last stage of inversion, the remaining discshaped cells of the not yet inverted portion of the anterior hemisphere become pencil-shaped (Figures 3G, 4G,
5D1, D3 and 9A, C, D, F) and simultaneously seem to
move over the rim of the remaining portion of the anterior cap. In the late inversion stage, pencil-shaped cells
have a length of 11.5 μm to 12.5 μm, are 1.5 μm to 2

Page 12 of 26

μm in diameter, have a more or less hexagonal base at
their chloroplast ends (Figure 9H, I, J) and show pointed
flagellar ends (Figure 9J). Once all cells changed into
pencil shape, the phialopore closes and inversion is
completed.
Early and late post-inversion stage

Right after inversion is complete, the cells of the embryo
change their shape again, but this time all cells do it
concertedly. The pencil-shaped cells become shorter and
end up at a length of 4.5 μm to 6.5 μm and as a result
the diameter increases to 2 μm to 4 μm (Figures 3H,
4H, 5E1, E3 and 10A, C, D, E, F, G). We refer to these
cells as column shaped. The column-shaped cells present a hexagonal cross-section along their entire length,
except for at the slightly rounded flagellar ends, while
the chloroplast ends are flattened (Figure 10C, D).
Approximately 1 h after the completion of inversion,
the cell shapes change for the last time: all the columnshaped cells gradually develop into what we refer to as
gemstone-shaped cells (Figures 5F1, F3 and 11A). At the
flagellar end, these cells exhibit shapes similar to flat,
radially symmetrical cones but have more or less hexagonal bases at their chloroplast ends. The cells with the
final gemstone shape have a diameter of 4.5 μm to 5
μm and a height of 5 μm to 6 μm.
Region- and stage-specific changes in the locations of
CBs
Pre-inversion stage

At the pre-inversion stage, the CB system connects all
teardrop-shaped cells at their chloroplast ends (Figures
6E); there are no CBs at the flagellar ends (Figure 6D,
F).
Early inversion stage

In early inversion, the teardrop-shaped cells of the anterior hemisphere are still connected at their chloroplast
ends, but the cells of the posterior hemisphere with the
just developed spindle shape have their CBs in the equatorial region of the cells (Figure 7C and inset in 7C). At
the same time that the bend region forms between the
two hemispheres, the spindle-shaped cells in the equatorial region of the embryo seem to move concertedly
relative to the CB system until the CBs localize at their
chloroplast ends; this transition seems to progress from
the equator of the embryo toward its posterior pole.
Cells in the bend region with the just developed paddle
shape exhibit CBs only at their outermost chloroplast
ends (Figure 7A, B, D, E, H), which allows for the smallest possible radius of the curvature of the cell monolayer. In disc-shaped cells, which result from the
conversion of teardrop-shaped cells in the anterior
hemisphere, the cytoplasmic connections to other cells
are found at the edges of the discs (Figure 7A (upper
right part of the image) and 7G).

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 13 of 26

Figure 9 Details of embryos 35 min to 40 min after the initiation of inversion (late-inversion stage). cLSM and SEM images of intact
embryos and an LM image of a physical cross-section. (A, F) Midsagittal cLSM optical cross-section of an embryo showing the localization of Factin (red) using phalloidin-TRITC (see Figure 5D1 for an overview). (B, G) Midsagittal cLSM optical cross-section of an embryo showing the
localization of both F-actin (red) and nuclei (blue) with a phalloidin-TRITC/DAPI overlay (see Figure 5D3 for an overview). (C) LM image of a
physical midsagittal cross-section (see Figure 4G for an overview). (D, E) cLSM optical cross-sections perpendicular to the midsagittal crosssections showing the localization of (D) F-actin (red) alone or (E) both F-actin (red) and the nuclei (blue). (H) SEM view of a mostly inverted
embryo (see Figures 3G and 4G for an overview); a broken line indicates the edge of the opening, and a rectangle highlights an image detail
shown in (I); and arrowheads point to a reproductive cell (gonidium). (I) Detailed SEM view of the cell monolayer from inside the spheroid (see
H for an overview); arrowheads point to some of the numerous CBs. (J) Detailed SEM view of the cell monolayer from outside the spheroid (see
Figures 3G and 4G for an overview); arrowheads point to some of the outgrowing flagella. (A, B, D, E) Broken lines refer to views that are
perpendicular to the image plane. Scale bars: (A, B, C, D, E, F, G) 10 μm; (H) 5 μm; (I, J) 3 μm. CB: cytoplasmic bridge; cLSM: confocal laser
scanning microscopy; DAPI: 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride; F-actin: filamentous actin; LM: light microscopy; SEM: scanning
electron microscopy; TRITC: tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 14 of 26

Figure 10 Details of juveniles 5 min to 10 min after the completion of inversion (early post-inversion stage). cLSM, SEM and LM images
of intact or fragmented juveniles and LM and TEM images of physical cross-sections. (A) Midsagittal cLSM optical cross-section of a juvenile
showing the localization of F-actin (red) using phalloidin-TRITC (see Figure 5E1 for an overview). (B) Midsagittal cLSM optical cross-section of a
juvenile showing the localization of both F-actin (red) and nuclei (blue) with a phalloidin-TRITC/DAPI overlay (see Figure 5E3 for an overview). (C)
SEM view of the cell monolayer from outside the spheroid (see Figures 3H and 4H for an overview); arrowheads point to some of the flagella.
(D) Slanted SEM side view of cells (fragmented juvenile); arrowheads point to the flagella. (E) LM image of a physical midsagittal cross-section
(see Figures 3H and 4H for an overview); arrowheads point to some of the flagella. (F) SEM side view of cells of the cell monolayer (fragmented
juvenile); arrowheads point to the CBs (see Figures 3H and 4H for an overview). (G) TEM image of a physical midsagittal cross-section of the cell
monolayer showing some of the zones of the ECM (see Figures 3H and 4H for an overview); flagellar zone (FZ), boundary zone (BZ), cellular
zone (CZ) and ECM zones and subzones are described in [77] and [78]. (H to J) LM side view of a juvenile inside the intact parental spheroid. (H,
I) Arrowheads point to minor dents that quickly appear and disappear immediately after inversion. (J) After the short period of denting, the
embryos remain spherical. Scale bars: (A, B, E) 10 μm; (C) 3 μm; (D, F) 5 μm; (G) 1 μm; (H, I, J) 20 μm. BZ: boundary zone; CB: cytoplasmic bridge;
CZ, cellular zone; cLSM: confocal laser scanning microscopy; DAPI: 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride; ECM: extracellular matrix; Factin: filamentous actin; FZ: flagellar zone; LM: light microscopy; SEM: scanning electron microscopy; TEM: transmission electron microscopy;
TRITC: tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Despite beginning the inversion process, the V. globator embryo is still connected with the parent spheroid
(in contrast to the V. carteri embryo [22]). In the V. globator embryo, a ring of cells at the anterior pole maintain CBs to the somatic cells of its parent (Figure 7F).

Page 15 of 26

the just developed column-shaped cells (which result
from the conversion of pencil-shaped cells) at the chloroplast ends (Figure 10F). All cells remain interconnected
by CBs after inversion and throughout their lifetime (in
contrast to cells of V. carteri [22]).

Mid-inversion stage

Inversion progresses during the mid-inversion stage, and
the CBs localize in spindle-, paddle- and disc-shaped
cells just as described for the early inversion stage. The
CBs of the just developed pencil-shaped cells of the
already inverted posterior hemisphere localize at their
outermost chloroplast ends (Figure 8F), just as in paddle-shaped cells.
When the phialopore opens in the mid-inversion
stage, the CBs between cells at the anterior pole of the
embryo and somatic cells of its parent break off
mechanically. While the phialopore widens continuously,
the CBs around the phialopore become elongated along
a circular line described by the edge of the opening (Figure 8B). These elongated CBs reach a length of up to 10
μm.
Late inversion and post-inversion stage

During the last part of the inversion process, the CBs
localize in disc- and pencil-shaped cells (Figure 9H, I)
just as described above. After inversion, CBs connect

Changes in shapes of nuclei, growth of flagella and
biosynthesis of extracellular matrix

Before inversion, the nuclei of all teardrop-shaped cells
are either spherical or somewhat conical and are localized at the flagellar ends of the cells; the nuclei have a
diameter of 3 μm to 4 μm (Figures 5A2, A3 and 6C).
During inversion of a V. globator embryo, the shapes
of the nuclei undergo major changes (in contrast to
the nuclei of a V. carteri embryo [20]), but the shapes
always reflect the shapes of the corresponding cells
(Figures 5B2, B3, C2, C3, D2, D3, E2, E3, 9B, E, G and
10B). Nuclei of spindle-, disc-, paddle-, pencil- and
column-shaped cells are elongated along the chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axis and have a length of 3
μm to 5 μm and a width of 1 μm to 2.5 μm (Figures
5B2, B3, C2, C3, D2, D3, E2, E3, 9B, E, G and 10B).
The nuclei of gemstone-shaped cells are spherical with
a diameter of 2 μm to2.5 μm (Figures 5F2, F3 and
11B).

Figure 11 Details of juveniles approximately 1 h after the completion of inversion (late post-inversion stage). cLSM and SEM images of
intact or fragmented juveniles. (A) Midsagittal cLSM optical cross-section of a juvenile showing the localization of F-actin (red) with phalloidinTRITC (see Figure 5F1 for an overview). (B) Midsagittal cLSM optical cross-section of a juvenile showing the localization of both F-actin (red) and
nuclei (blue) with a phalloidin-TRITC/DAPI overlay (see Figure 5F3 for an overview). (C) SEM view of the cell monolayer from outside the
spheroid; the conspicuous zones of the ECM are the BZ and FZ3, as described in [77] and [78]; and at regions where flagella partially broke off
during preparation, double-headed arrows highlight the regular distance and orientation of flagellar pairs. Scale bars: (A, B, C) 10 μm. BZ:
boundary zone; cLSM: confocal laser scanning microscopy; DAPI: 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride; ECM: extracellular matrix; F-actin:
filamentous actin; FZ: flagellar zone; SEM: scanning electron microscopy; TRITC: tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

The outgrowth of the flagella starts around the beginning of embryonic inversion. In the early inversion
stage, cells of the embryo show short flagellar stubs,
approximately 2 μm in length, at their flagellar ends
(Figure 7C, D, G). During inversion, the flagella of a V.
globator embryo grow continuously (in contrast to the
flagella of a V. carteri embryo [76]), from approximately
2 μm to around 15 μm to 17 μm at the stage immediately after inversion (Figure 10D). In adult spheroids,
the flagella reach a length of 20 μm to 25 μm; thus,
immediately after inversion, the flagella have reached
two-thirds of their final length. However, these growing
flagella have already begun to beat; therefore, the juveniles rotate (slowly) within the parent spheroid.
The synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) begins at
approximately the end of inversion. The main zones and
subzones of the ECM are detectable even in this early
stage of ECM synthesis (Figure 10G) [77,78]. In particular, the characteristic ECM subzone cellular zone 3
(CZ3) becomes apparent; CZ3 consists of coherent
fibrous material that creates honeycomb-like chambers
at a significant distance around individual cells (Figure
10G). After inversion, the juveniles continuously grow in
size by depositing increasing amounts of ECM. The
rapid growth of juveniles after inversion is only affected
by the secretion of ECM material, which causes each
cell to move away from its neighbors (Figure 11).
Modeling of cell shapes, CB locations and illustration of
the entire inversion process

To model cell shapes, the locations and dimensions of
numerous cells on LM, cLSM, SEM and TEM images
of intact and sectioned embryos were determined
before, during and after inversion (see Methods). Based
on these results, we developed 3D models with consensus cell shapes for the teardrop-, spindle-, disc-, paddle-, pencil-, column- and gemstone-shaped cells
(Figure 12A, B, C, D, E, F, G). Moreover, we determined the locations of CBs for each cell shape, particularly in relation to the chloroplast-end-to-flagellarend axis (Figures 12A, B, C, D, E, F, G), and we established consensus curvatures of the cell monolayer
throughout all stages of inversion using LM, cLSM and
SEM images.
Based on all of our findings, we developed a summary
model for the complete process of embryonic type B
inversion in V. globator, which is presented in Figure 13.
The model includes the localization of the observed cell
shapes; the directions of cell layer movements; the relative position of the CB system; the length of flagella;
and the localization and shapes of nuclei during the pre, early, mid-, late and post-inversion stages. The summary model is discussed below.

Page 16 of 26

Discussion
Comparison of the type A and type B inversions

When the type B inversion of V. globator is compared to
the type A inversion of V. carteri, both similarities and
differences are apparent (Table 1). The sequence of the
major movement patterns of the cellular monolayer is
quite different in both species. In V. carteri embryos,
the phialopore opens; the anterior hemisphere inverts;
the posterior hemisphere contracts; the posterior hemisphere inverts; and finally, the phialopore closes
[20,22,26] (Figure 1A). In V. globator embryos, the posterior hemisphere contracts; the posterior hemisphere
inverts; the phialopore opens; the anterior hemisphere
inverts; and the phialopore closes [25,36,37] (Figures 1B
and 13).
The presence of CBs between the cells of the embryo’s
cell monolayer and the coordinated movements of cells
relative to the CB system appear to be essential for
inversion in both V. carteri [20-22,24,27-29] and V. globator. Likewise, cell shapes and the order of coordinated
cell shape changes are important for a successful inversion of embryos in both species. However, the order of
the coordinated shape changes is different between the
species, and the shapes also show differences. In V. carteri embryos, all cells are spindle shaped immediately
before inversion [20,22]. V. globator embryos exhibit
spindle-shaped cells only in the contracted posterior
hemisphere, whereas cells in the anterior hemisphere
are teardrop-shaped (Figure 12A, B and Table 1). The
presence of flask-shaped cells in the bend region during
inversion is characteristic of V. carteri embryos
[20,22,24]. The long ‘bottlenecks’ of these cells, which
localize at the chloroplast ends of the cells, are radially
symmetrical. The paddle-shaped cells in the bend region
of inverting V. globator embryos (Figure 12D) resemble
the flask-shaped cells in the bend region of V. carteri
embryos, in particular because both are arranged in the
form of a spread fan. However, paddle-shaped cells are
not radially symmetrical at their chloroplast ends but
instead are wedge shaped (Figure 12D and Table 1), and
they present no bottlenecks or stalks. Cells that have
passed the bend region in V. carteri embryos are column shaped [20,22]. V. globator cells at the same developmental stage are pencil shaped (Figure 12E and Table
1), which means that these cells are more elongated
along the chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axis than the
corresponding cells in V. carteri. In V. carteri embryos,
all (somatic) cells undergo the same consecutive cell
shape changes from spindle to flask to column shaped
[20,22]. In V. globator embryos, the posterior and anterior hemispheres invert associated with different cell
shapes and a different order of shape changes. In the
posterior hemisphere, embryonic cells change from

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

teardrop to spindle to paddle (except for the cells close
to the posterior pole) to pencil and then to column
shaped. In contrast, cells from the anterior hemisphere
change from teardrop to disc to pencil and then to column shaped (Figure 12).
In V. globator, cells appear to change their total
volume during inversion, but it is unknown how this
change occurs. Changes in volume might be achieved by
emptying or filling contractile vacuoles; alternatively,
cells might change their volume by exporting or importing cytoplasm to or from their neighbor cells through
the CB system. In contrast, the cell volume is constant
throughout inversion in V. carteri [27].
In a V. carteri embryo, inversion begins at a defined
point at the anterior pole of the spheroid; the phialopore
opens, and from this opening dramatic changes in cell
shapes and coordinated movements of cells with respect
to the CB system proceed from the anterior pole to the
posterior pole [22] (Figure 1A). In contrast, a V. globator
embryo shows a ring-shaped initiation of inversion
somewhat below the equator of the spheroid. Changes
in cell shape and coordinated movements of cells relative to the CBs start somewhat below the equator and
proceed to the posterior pole; then a second process
with changes in cell shape and coordinated movements
of cells relative to the CBs begins at the former equator
and proceeds to the anterior pole. In contrast to the V.
carteri embryo, which starts inversion by opening the
cellular monolayer, the V. globator embryo begins folding the cell layer without having a cell sheet with a free
edge.
The phialopores in V. carteri and V. globator open in
different ways. In V. carteri, a swastika-shaped opening
appears, and the four lips of the cell monolayer curl outward and backward [20,22]. In V. globator, the opening
is circular, and there is no curling of the cell layer. In
contrast, the opening widens, while the anterior hemisphere moves over the posterior hemisphere (Figures 3F
and 8B and Table 1).
In V. carteri (and two other Volvox species), the
sporadic movements of the cell monolayer, referred to
as denting, have only been observed immediately before
inversion [20,26,39], while V. globator shows denting
both shortly before and shortly after completion of
inversion (Figures 6A and 10H, I and Table 1). Denting
may be caused by non-simultaneous cell shape changes
of individual cells or a patch of a few cells.
In summary, the comparison of type A and type B
inverters suggests that both species follow the same
basic principle: concerted, spatially and temporally coordinated changes in cellular shapes and concerted migration of cells relative to the CBs connecting them.
However, differences exist in almost all details of the
inversion process.

Page 17 of 26

Evolution of inversion

When the A and B types of inversion are mapped on
the evolutionary tree of volvocine algae (see Additional
File 1) [25,29,58,59,66,73,79-83], type B inversion seems
to have been the earlier form of Volvox inversion
because it appears on a deeper branch than type A
inversion. However, if this hypothesis is true, type A
inversion must have evolved independently in four different lineages from a type B ancestor [25,66]. If type A
evolved before type B, it would mean that type B inversion evolved independently in three different lineages
from a type A ancestor: in the section Volvox lineage,
including V. globator, V. rousseletii and V. barberi, and
in the lineages leading to V. aureus and to V. dissipatrix.
Even if the repeated, independent evolution of type B
from type A (or the other way round) is possible, the
number of differences observed between type A and
type B inverters makes it more reasonable that type A
and type B inversion evolved in parallel. However, the
true course of evolutionary events remains unclear. The
different types of inversion and other differences
observed during inversion described above substantiate
a polyphyletic origin of the genus Volvox; this conclusion was also reached in earlier studies based on phylogenetic analyses of internal transcribed spacer sequences
[63], sequences of five chloroplast genes [58,73] and
comparison of flagellar beating patterns [83,84]. Thus,
reclassification of this genus is required. A few species
of this genus, including V. globator, form a small but
robust monophyletic group, the section Volvox. The
developmental and morphological differences of the species within the section Volvox compared to other Volvox
species outside this section support the creation of a
new genus for the species of the section Volvox.
Biomechanical possibilities and implications about the
involved tensile and compressive forces: a global
mechanistic scenario

Epithelial folding during inversion is basically a biomechanical process whereby individual cells and cohorts of
cells produce and respond to forces to generate the
complex form of a developing multicellular organism
[85]. Based on our results, which are summarized in Figures 12 and 13, and due to biomechanical possibilities
and implications about the involved tensile and compressive forces, we developed the following global
mechanistic scenario that predicts how a spherical cellular monolayer can turn itself inside out.
Before inversion in the spheroidal V. globator embryo
begins, all cells are teardrop shaped (Figures 12A and
13A). This shape suggests that anisotropic cytoskeletal
events along their chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axes
formed these cells (Figure 12A1). The trigger for the
beginning of the inversion process seems to be a so-far

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 18 of 26

Figure 12 3D representation of cell shapes and localization CBs observed before, during and after embryonic inversion. The
localization of the different cell shapes within the embryo is indicated in Figure 13.(A1 to A4) Teardrop-shaped cells: radially symmetrical cells
that are cone shaped at the flagellar ends but have hexagonal cross-sections at the chloroplast ends (Figure 13A, B, C, D). (B1 to B4) Spindleshaped cells: radially symmetrical, elongated cells with pointed ends on both sides (Figure 13B, C, D, E). (C1 to C4) Disc-shaped cells: elongated,
flat cells that partially overlap each other; (C1a) broad and (C1b) narrow side of the cell (Figure 13C, D, E, F, GH). (D1 to D4) Paddle-shaped cells:
elongated cells that are pointed and radially symmetrical only at the flagellar ends but wedge shaped at the chloroplast ends (Figure 13C, D);
(D1a) broad and (D1b) narrow side of the cell. (E1 to E4) Pencil-shaped cells: radially symmetrical, elongated cells that are pointed at the
flagellar ends and flattened at the chloroplast ends (Figure 13E, F, G, H). (F1 to F4) Column-shaped cells: radially symmetrical, elongated cells

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 19 of 26

that are flattened at the chloroplast ends and rounded at the flagellar ends (Figure 13I). (G1 to G4) Gemstone-shaped cells: radially symmetrical
cells that are shaped like flat cones at the flagellar ends but have hexagonal cross-sections at the chloroplast ends.(A1 to G1) Wire frame
models; cell sizes and the flagellar (fla) and chloroplast (chl) ends of the cells are indicated. All other parts of the figure depict the in vivo
arrangement of the cells (with a green surface texture) from different viewing directions. The positions of CBs are indicated by red connections
between cells. (A2 to G2) Frontal side view. (A3 to G3) View of the chloroplast ends. (A4 to G4) Slanted side view. Arrows indicate the viewing
directions in other parts of the figure. CB: cytoplasmic bridge.

Figure 13 Model of the inversion process in V. globator. A diagrammatic representation of inversion as deduced from the LM, SEM, TEM and
cLSM analyses showing 2D midsagittal cross sections of inverting embryos. Cell content is shown in green; red lines indicate the position of the
CB system; and nuclei are shown in blue. Frames show examples of the location of the cell shapes represented in 3D in Figure 12. The
directions of the cell layer movements are indicated by black arrows. (A) Pre-inversion stage. (B, C) Early inversion stage; inversion begins with
the contraction of the posterior hemisphere and the formation of the bend region. (D to F) Mid-inversion stage; the posterior hemisphere
continuously moves into the anterior hemisphere and inverts at the same time; the phialopore opens at the anterior pole and widens; and the
anterior hemisphere begins to move over the already inverted posterior hemisphere and inverts at the same time. (G, H) Late inversion stage;
the anterior hemisphere continues to move over the already inverted cell monolayer; and inversion ends with the closure of the phialopore. (I)
Early post-inversion stage. CB: cytoplasmic bridge; cLSM: confocal laser scanning microscopy; LM: light microscopy; SEM: scanning electron
microscopy; TEM: transmission electron microscopy.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

Page 20 of 26

Table 1 Comparison of inversion in V. globator and V. carteri.
Characteristic

V. carteri

V. globator

Type of inversion

A

B

Duration of inversion

Approximately 45 min [20,22]

Approximately 50 min

Sequence of processes

The phialopore opens;
the anterior hemisphere inverts;
the posterior hemisphere contracts;
the posterior hemisphere inverts;
the phialopore closes [20,22,26]

The posterior hemisphere contracts;
the posterior hemisphere inverts;
the phialopore opens;
the anterior hemisphere inverts;
the phialopore closes
[25,36,37]

Site of the initiation of
inversion

Point-shaped initiation site at the anterior pole of the
spheroid [22]

Ring-shaped initiation site at the equator of the spheroid

Direction of cell shape
changes

From the anterior pole to the posterior pole [22]

Initially, from the equator to the posterior pole; then, from
the equator to the anterior pole

Diameter of embryo

Immediately before inversion: approximately 65 μm [22]
immediately after inversion: approximately 60 μm [22]

Immediately before inversion: approximately 80 μm
Immediately after inversion: approximately 60 μm

Relative size (volume) of the Reproductive cells are roughly 100 to 200 times larger
cells of the embryo during than somatic cells [22]
inversion

Reproductive cells are roughly one to five times larger
than somatic cells

Cell shape immediately
before inversion

All cells are spindle shaped [20,22]

All cells are teardrop shaped

Cell shape in bend region
during inversion

Flask-shaped cells
(radially symmetrical at the chloroplast ends) [20,22,24]

Paddle-shaped cells (wedge shaped at the chloroplast
ends)

Cell shape of cells that have Column-shaped cells [20,22]
passed the bend region

Pencil-shaped cells (the column shape does not appear
until inversion is completed)

Order of cell shape changes All cells undergo the same consecutive cell shape
changes: spindle ® flask ® column [20,22,24]

Posterior and anterior hemispheres invert with different
cell shapes changes;
cells in the posterior hemisphere: teardrop ® spindle ®
paddle (except for the cells close to the posterior pole) ®
pencil ® column;
cells in the anterior hemisphere: teardrop ® disc ®
pencil ® column

Shape of nuclei throughout
inversion

Minor changes [20]

Major changes

Cytoplasmic bridges

Only between cells of the embryo [20,22,24,29]

Between cells of the embryo and between embryonic and
parent cells

Phialopore

Swastika-shaped opening; four lips of the cell monolayer
curl outward and backward [20,22]

Circular opening; while the opening widens, the cells and
cytoplasmic bridges around the phialopore become
passively stretched

Denting

Only before inversion [20,26,39]

Before and after inversion

Flagella

Only flagellar stubs approximately 2 μm in length that do Flagella grow symmetrically throughout inversion
not grow during inversion; flagella grow asymmetrically
after inversion [76]

unknown signaling molecule or morphogen that does
not appear to be uniformly distributed throughout the
pre-inversion embryo (Figure 13A) but appears to be
localized only, or at least mainly, in the posterior hemisphere of the embryo. Therefore, this putative trigger
seems to operate only on the teardrop-shaped cells of
the posterior hemisphere, which become increasingly
spindle shaped (Figures 12B and 13B), while the cells of
the anterior hemisphere remain teardrop shaped (Figures 12A and 13B).
The cross-section of spindle-shaped cells is smaller
than the cross-section of teardrop-shaped cells (compare
Figures 12A1 and 12B1), which may explain the contraction of the posterior hemisphere of the embryo

(Figure 13B). This contraction occurs in conjunction
with the formation of the bend region somewhat below
the equator of the embryo (Figure 13B). Thus, the spherical embryo begins epithelial folding without having a
cell sheet with a free edge (in contrast to the V. carteri
embryo). In the bend region (Figure 13C), the spindleshaped cells (Figure 12B) change more and more into
paddle-shaped cells (Figure 12D). Simultaneously, these
cells seem to move relative to the CBs so that the CBs
of paddle-shaped cells eventually are at their chloroplast
ends, which face the inner side of the curve (Figures
12D and 13C). The network of CBs appears to be the
substrate upon which the coordinated cell shape
changes operate to deform the cell sheet. The cell shape

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

conversions together with the movements of cells relative to the CBs seem to progress from the equator of
the embryo toward its posterior pole (compare Figure
13B to 13E), and appear to drive inversion of the posterior hemisphere and its simultaneous movement into the
anterior hemisphere (Figure 13B, C, D, E, F).
However, how is the signal to change shape and CB
positions forwarded to neighboring cells, and how is it
coordinated? Once epithelial folding is initiated in the
(circular) bend region, a radially symmetrical wave of a
trigger molecule or simply of a mechanical force transmission might perpetuate and forward the folding command from cells in the bend region of the embryo
toward the posterior pole of the embryo by inducing
cell shape changes and movements of cells relative to
the CBs in neighboring cells.
What shapes the paddle cells of the bend region? Fundamentally, the paddle-shaped cells (Figure 12D) in the
bend region seem to be shaped by anisotropic cytoskeletal events along the chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axis
(Figure 12D1), which produce strongly elongated cells
that get thinner toward the chloroplast end (Figures
12D and 13C). Basically, these cells seem to be radially
symmetrical throughout the length of the cell; thus, the
cytoskeletal forces in radial directions of the cell seem
to be isotropic. However, due to the increasing curvature of the bend region (especially in early inversion),
the chloroplast ends of the cells come very close
together, and a lack of space seems to arise at these
ends of the cells. Finally, the cells appear to get compressed at the chloroplast end; thus, the minor axes of
the cross-sections at these ends are only one-third or
one-fourth the length of the major axes (Figure 12D3,
D4). The smaller the radius of the bend region, the
stronger the compression of the chloroplast end of the
paddle-shaped cells appears to be. Therefore, the shape
of the paddle cells at the chloroplast end (Figure 12D3,
D4) seems to reflect an isotropic cytoskeletal activity in
radial directions in the context of an anisotropic
mechanical environment.
Once inversion of the posterior hemisphere is well
advanced and the radius of the curvature in the bend
region increases (Figure 13E), the paddle-shaped cells
(Figure 12D) change into pencil-shaped cells (Figure
12E). The remaining spindle-shaped cells (Figure 12B)
close to the not yet inverted posterior pole never
become paddle shaped but directly change into the pencil shape (Figure 13E).
The invagination of the posterior cell sheet seems to
generate circumferential tension along the rim of the
anterior cap (Figure 13C, D). Therefore, the teardropshaped cells (Figure 12A) at the rim of the anterior cap
(Figure 13C, D) become increasingly disc shaped (Figure
12C).

Page 21 of 26

What shapes the disc cells? Basically, the disc-shaped
cells (Figure 12C) might show a more or less isotropic
cytoskeletal activity but, due to tensions on the cell
sheet in the anterior-posterior direction of the embryo
in response to pulling at the site of bending (Figure
13D), the cells get elongated and flattened (Figures 12C
and 13D). Thus, disc-shaped cells seem to be shaped by
an anisotropic mechanical environment. This anisotropic
mechanical environment has a second consequence: the
disc-shaped cells appear to begin to move over the rim
of the anterior cap (Figure 13C, D), which seems to be
the beginning of the inversion of the anterior hemisphere. The conversion of teardrop-shaped into elongated cells appears to progress in a radially symmetrical
wave from the rim of the anterior cap of the embryo
toward its anterior pole (compare Figure 13D and 13E).
Eventually, tension in the anterior-posterior direction of
the embryo produces thinning and elongation of the
whole anterior cell layer (Figure 13D, E). It remains
unclear whether the movement of the CBs to opposite
ends of the disc-shaped cells (Figures 12C2 and 13E) is
a passive response to pulling at the site of bending or
whether there is an active remodeling of the cytoskeleton including active movement of the CBs; the latter
seems more likely because embryonic cells can actively
move the CBs [24].
Disc-shaped cells (Figure 12C) that moved over the
rim of the anterior cap (Figure 13D, E) appear to condense into a smaller area beyond the rim, compared to
the area they occupied before they rolled over the rim,
that is, they reduce their cross-sections at the chloroplast ends and become pencil-shaped cells; simultaneously, these cells also seem to move relative to the
CBs so that the CBs eventually are at their chloroplast
ends (Figures 12E and 13E). Again, the network of CBs
appears to be the substrate upon which the coordinated
cell shape changes operate to act on the cell sheet. The
conversions from disc to pencil shapes together with the
concerted movements of the cells with respect to the
CB system seems to maintain the circumferential tension on the rim of the remaining portion of the anterior
cap and, as a consequence, on the not yet inverted cell
sheet of the anterior hemisphere.
Because more and more disc-shaped cells (Figure 12C)
move over the rim, the circumferential tension on the
cell sheet of the anterior hemisphere increases continuously. When the remaining disc-shaped cells of the
anterior hemisphere and their CBs are stretched to their
maximum length, further tension on the anterior hemisphere results in the opening of the phialopore (Figure
13E).
The appearance of a circular opening means that the
dominant tensions on the anterior hemisphere are likely
to be circumferential. While the phialopore widens

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

(Figure 13E, F, G), both the cells and the CBs around
the phialopore as well as submarginal cells in the sheet
and their CBs appear to become passively stretched
along a circular line described by the edge of the opening (Figures 3F and 8B). However, the phialopore
widens dramatically until the diameter of the opening is
even greater than the outer diameter of the inverted
posterior hemisphere (Figure 13F, G). This expansion of
the phialopore cannot be explained only by stretching of
the cell sheet; there also seems to be a rearrangement of
cells at the phialopore.
The movement of disc-shaped cells (Figure 12C) over
the rim of the remaining anterior cap and the conversion of disc-shaped cells into pencil-shaped cells (Figure
12E) continues; thus, the remaining anterior hemisphere
appears to glide over the already inverted posterior
hemisphere until the anterior cap is completely inverted
(compare Figure 13E to 13H). This in-turning of the cell
sheet over the surface of the outer layer is comparable
to involution, one of the major morphogenetic movements that occur during gastrulation; involution can be
observed, for example, in mesoderm migration in the
Amphibian gastrula [86]. At the end of inversion, the
phialopore gets smaller and smaller (Figure 13H).
Relaxation of the previous circumferential tension that
occurred during opening of the phialopore might be one
reason but is probably not the only reason for this process, there also seems to be a rearrangement of cells at
the opening. Finally, the phialopore closes without leaving any visible trace of the previous opening behind
(Figure 13H, I).
Right after the completion of inversion, all cells of the
embryo change concertedly from pencil (Figure 12E) to
column shapes (Figures 12F and 13I). Somewhat later,
they develop gradually into gemstone-shaped cells (Figure 12G). Following inversion, the juvenile organism
resembles a miniature adult; it will increase in size
(without further cell division) by depositing large quantities of ECM.

Conclusions
Both type A and type B inverters must solve the same
developmental problem: they begin their lives inside out
and must turn their spherical cell monolayer outside in
to achieve their adult configuration. Inverters of both
types follow the same basic principle: concerted, spatially
and temporally coordinated changes in cellular shapes
act together with concerted migration of the cells relative
to the CB system. However, differences exist in almost all
details of the inversion process, suggesting analogous
inversion processes that arose through parallel evolution.
Based on our results showing the cellular mechanisms
of type B embryonic inversion in V. globator and due to
biomechanical possibilities and implications about the

Page 22 of 26

involved tensile and compressive forces, we developed a
global mechanistic scenario that predicts how a spherical cellular monolayer can turn itself inside out in V.
globator. This mechanistic scenario might lay the
groundwork for some interesting opportunities to learn
how the cell biology, the biomechanical mechanisms of
force generation, the dynamic regulation in space and
time and the underlying signaling events are integrated
such that they produce the global mechanical consequences driving epithelial folding.

Methods
Strain and culture conditions

The wild-type Volvox globator Linné strain SAG 199.80
was obtained from the Sammlung von Algenkulturen
der Universität Göttingen (Culture Collection of Algae
at the University of Göttingen, SAG), Germany [87].
Cultures were grown in standard Volvox medium (SVM)
[88] at 22°C to 23°C under a cycle of 8 h dark/16 h light
[89] with an average of approximately 100 μmol photons
m-2 s-1 of photosynthetically active radiation. Small cultures were grown in a growth chamber in 10-mL glass
tubes with caps that allow for gas exchange. Larger cultures were grown in a thermostat (COM 7865; Edwards,
Kniese & Co., Marburg, Germany) in 1-L glass tubes
aerated with sterile air at 150 cm3 min-1.
High-resolution in vivo stereo LM

High-resolution in vivo stereo LM was performed using
a motorized and automated Leica MZ16A stereomicroscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) with
fully apochromatic optics and a transmitted light illuminator with cold light sources [25]. In this system, a resolution of up to 840 Lp mm-1 (= 0.6 μm) was obtained.
For higher magnifications, an Axioskop 40 FL upright
microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany)
equipped with Achroplan, Fluar and Plan-Neofluar
objectives of up to 100× magnification was used. A digital PowerShot S50 camera (Canon, Tokyo, Japan) with a
1/1.8” charge-coupled device sensor was used for photographic documentation.
Microsurgery

For all SEM experiments, whole V. globator spheroids
were fixed as described below. Using two tungsten needles (Plano, Wetzlar, Germany), the embryos were
removed from their mother spheroids and were also
removed from their embryonic vesicle under a stereomicroscope. In some experiments, embryos were subsequently fragmented using the tungsten needles. The
tungsten needles were sharpened electrolytically [90].
For this step, a carbon electrode was placed into a saturated solution of potassium nitrate containing 10%
potassium hydroxide. A tungsten needle was dipped into

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

the solution (30×) while being subjected to low voltage
(9.3 V) and alternating current.
Fixation and dehydration of embryos

For LM of sections and for TEM and SEM, spheroids
were fixed as described previously [20] with the following modifications. Fixation was performed in 5% glutaraldehyde (Agar Scientific, Stansted, UK) in SVM for
approximately 16 h. Specimens were washed three times
with 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) for 10 min each
and postfixed in 2% osmium tetroxide (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) for 1 h.
For LM of sections and for TEM, the fixed spheroids
were dehydrated by passage (30 min each) through 30%,
60%, 90% and 100% (2×) ethanol.
For SEM, coverslips were coated with 0.1% polyethylene imine (PEI; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA),
incubated at 20°C for 15 min, rinsed with deionized
water and dried at 20°C. The PEI-coated coverslips were
fractured, and a suspension of spheroids containing
embryos (approximately 2 μL to 5 μL) was transferred
onto a small fragment of a coverslip. The fixed embryos
were removed from their mother spheroids and simultaneously from the surrounding embryonic vesicle, as
described above. For some experiments, embryos were
fragmented (see above). Intact and fragmented embryos
were allowed to settle on the same piece of PEI-coated
coverslip. The embryos that settled on the coverslip
fragment were dehydrated by passage through increasing
concentrations of ethanol (see above) and then critical
point dried using a Bal-Tec CPD 030 critical point dryer
(Leica Microsystems).
For cLSM, intact spheroids were fixed as described previously [72]. Samples were maintained under gentle
motion throughout the fixation period using a LD-79
test-tube rotator (Labinco, Breda, Netherlands) at 5 rpm.
Spheroids were fixed for 15 min in 3.7% formaldehyde,
0.1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.1% Triton X-100, 2 mM
magnesium chloride, 5 mM ethylene glycol-bis(2-aminoethylether)-N, N, N’, N’-tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 150
mM potassium chloride, 10 mM sodium glycerophosphate and 10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (pH 7.0), washed three times for 2 min
with 0.1% Tween in phosphate-buffered saline (TPBS)
and incubated for 4 h in 1% (tergitol-type) nonyl phenoxypolyethoxylethanol, 1 mM DTT, 1% BSA, 2 mM magnesium chloride, 5 mM EGTA, 150 mM potassium chloride
and 10 mM sodium glycerophosphate to extract chlorophyll and minimize autofluorescence. Finally, specimens
were washed three times for 5 min each in TPBS.
Embedding and sectioning

For LM of sections and for TEM, the dehydrated specimens were infiltrated in a 1:1 solution of TAAB

Page 23 of 26

transmit resin (Agar Scientific) to ethanol (v/v) for 1 h,
followed by a 2:1 solution of TAAB transmit resin to
ethanol (v/v) for approximately 16 h. After evaporation
of the ethanol, specimens were infiltrated twice in pure
TAAB transmit resin in an evacuated dessicator for 2 h
each. Specimens in resin were transferred to BEEM capsules (Agar Scientific), and the resin was then polymerized through a 16-h exposure at 70°C. The polymerized
blocks were removed from the BEEM capsules, and
most of the excess resin was trimmed away with a razor
blade under a stereo-microscope.
For LM, sections with a thickness of approximately 2
μm were cut with glass knives on a Reichert-Jung Ultracut E ultramicrotome (Reichert Microscope Services,
Depew, NY, USA) and transferred to glass slides.
For TEM, sections with a thickness of approximately
80 nm were cut with a diamond knife (6620 SU; Micro
Star Diamond Knives, Huntsville, TX, USA) on the
Ultracut E ultramicrotome and mounted on 400 mesh
copper grids (Plano).
Staining

Sections on glass slides (approximately 2 μm in thickness) were stained for LM by incubating the slides in
0.1% toluidine blue (Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 s on a Combimag RCT hot plate stirrer (IKA-Werke, Staufen, Germany) at 70°C. Thereafter, the slides were rinsed in
deionized water; the sections were covered with droplets
of deionized water; and the slides were placed on the
hot plate stirrer until the water had evaporated. The
sections were then mounted in Entellan rapid mounting
medium (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).
Sections for TEM (approximately 80 nm in thickness)
on grids were stained with 0.1% uranyl acetate (Plano)
for 10 s, washed by dipping them in deionized water,
stained with 2% lead citrate (Agar Scientific) for 10 s,
and washed again with deionized water.
Intact, fixed spheroids for cLSM analysis were stained
with 38 μM phalloidin-TRITC (Sigma-Aldrich) in TPBS
for 3 h.
Phalloidin-TRITC stains F-actin specifically [72]. In
our experiments, phalloidin-TRITC was used primarily
as a cytoplasmic stain. While the resolution of the
cLSM (Leica TCS SP2; Leica Microsystems) is insufficient to see individual actin filaments, a rough intracellular localization of F-actin is feasible. After phalloidinTRITC staining, 4 μg/mL 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
dihydrochloride (DAPI; Sigma-Aldrich) was added to
visualize the nuclei, and incubation continued for 1 h.
The spheroids were washed three times in TPBS and
allowed to settle on PEI-coated coverslips. Attached
spheroids were mounted in 50% glycerol (Merck) in
PBS. The specificity of the phalloidin staining was confirmed by comparison of embryos treated only with

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

TRITC-labeled phalloidin with embryos treated with
TRITC-labeled phalloidin plus unlabeled phalloidin.
Sputter coating

For SEM, critical point-dried specimens were coated
with gold in a Bal-Tec SCD 005 cool sputter coating
system (Leica Microsystems). The working distance was
50 mm; the current was 30 mA; the argon sputtering
pressure was 5 Pa; and the sputtering time was 300 s.
The thickness of the gold layer was approximately 35
nm.

Page 24 of 26

of cells were assigned to the categories teardrop, spindle,
disc, paddle, pencil, column and gemstone shaped.
Dimensions (for example, diameters and lengths) and
arithmetical means of all dimensions of anatomical characteristics were determined. At least 30 contours of the
same anatomical structures were laid on top of the
others to develop two-dimensional (2D) and 3D consensus shapes. 3D wireframe modeling and texturing was
performed using Blender (version 2.49b) software
(Stichting Blender, Amsterdam, Netherlands). 2D vector
graphics were developed using CorelDRAW Graphics
Suite X5 (version 15) software (Corel, Ottawa, Canada).

LM of sections

Toluidine blue-stained sections (approximately 2 μm in
thickness) of embryos were analyzed with an Axioskop
40 FL upright microscope (Carl Zeiss) using oil immersion objectives.
TEM

Heavy metal-stained sections (approximately 80 nm)
were examined with a Hitachi H-500 TEM (Hitachi,
Tokyo, Japan) operated at 75 kV and with a Philips
CM-100 TEM (Philips, Eindhoven, Netherlands) operated at 80 kV.
SEM

Gold sputter-coated specimens were analyzed with a
Hitachi S-450 SEM (Hitachi) operated at 15 kV.
cLSM

Fixed and stained specimens were examined with an
upright Leica TCS SP2 cLSM (Leica Microsystems).
DAPI was excited at 405 nm, and the emitted blue
fluorescence was detected with a band-pass filter at 430
nm to 490 nm. TRITC was excited at 543 nm, and the
emitted red fluorescence was detected with a band-pass
filter at 580 nm to 650 nm.
Two-dimensional and 3D modeling

LM, cLSM, SEM and TEM images of intact and sectioned embryos before, during and after inversion were
adjusted to the same magnification. In this adjustment,
shrinkage during processing (for example, through fixation and dehydration) was taken into account and corrected with the help of images of live material. Adjusted
images were screened for the anatomical characteristics
of interest and all appropriate images with a non-ambiguous assignment to a certain area of the cell monolayer
relative to the anterior and posterior pole of the embryo
were selected for further analysis. In these images, contours of cells and nuclei, the position of CBs relative to
the cell and the curvature of the cell monolayer were
plotted in separate image layers using Photoshop CS5
software (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA, USA). Contours

Additional material
Additional file 1: Evolutionary tree of volvocine algae. An
evolutionary tree of volvocine algae based on the nucleotide sequences
of five chloroplast genes. This phylogenetic analysis indicates that
multicellularity evolved only once in this group. There are two
fundamentally different sequences through which embryos of the genus
Volvox turn right-side out: type A and type B inversion. The type of
inversion is indicated for all species of the genus Volvox.

Abbreviations
2D: two-dimensional; 3D: three-dimensional; BSA: bovine serum albumin; CB:
cytoplasmic bridge; cLSM: confocal laser scanning microscopy/microscope;
CZ: cellular zone; DAPI: 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride; DTT:
dithiothreitol; ECM: extracellular matrix; EGTA: ethylene glycol-bis(2aminoethylether)-N, N, N’,N’-tetraacetic acid; F-actin: filamentous actin; LM:
light microscopy/microscope; PBS: phosphate buffered saline; PEI:
polyethylene imine; SEM: scanning electron microscopy/microscope; SVM:
standard Volvox medium; TEM: transmission electron microscopy/microscope;
TPBS: Tween in phosphate-buffered saline; TRITC: tetramethylrhodamine B
isothiocyanate.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. U. Kahmann for expert advice in the course of the electron
microscopy studies and K. Puls for technical assistance. This work was
supported in part by a grant from the FAZIT-Stiftung (to SH). We
acknowledge support of the publication fee by Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Open Access Publication Funds of
Bielefeld University.
Authors’ contributions
SH conducted the experiments and analyzed the data. AH conceived and
coordinated the study, critically evaluated the data, and wrote the
manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Received: 25 August 2011 Accepted: 29 December 2011
Published: 29 December 2011
References
1. Stern CD: Gastrulation: from cells to embryo. 1 edition. Cold Spring Harbor,
NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2004.
2. Solnica-Krezel L: Conserved patterns of cell movements during vertebrate
gastrulation. Curr Biol 2005, 15:R213-228.
3. Pilot F, Lecuit T: Compartmentalized morphogenesis in epithelia: from
cell to tissue shape. Dev Dyn 2005, 232:685-694.
4. Paluch E, Heisenberg CP: Biology and physics of cell shape changes in
development. Curr Biol 2009, 19:R790-799.
5. Blanchard GB, Kabla AJ, Schultz NL, Butler LC, Sanson B, Gorfinkiel N,
Mahadevan L, Adams RJ: Tissue tectonics: morphogenetic strain rates, cell
shape change and intercalation. Nat Methods 2009, 6:458-464.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.
31.
32.
33.

34.
35.
36.

Watanabe T, Takahashi Y: Tissue morphogenesis coupled with cell shape
changes. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2010, 20:443-447.
Zartman JJ, Shvartsman SY: Unit operations of tissue development:
epithelial folding. Annu Rev Chem Biomol 2010, 1:231-246.
Ettensohn CA: Primary invagination of the vegetal plate during sea
urchin gastrulation. Am Zool 1984, 24:571-588.
Fristrom D: The cellular basis of epithelial morphogenesis. A review.
Tissue Cell 1988, 20:645-690.
Leptin M: Gastrulation movements: the logic and the nuts and bolts. Dev
Cell 2005, 8:305-320.
Quintin S, Gally C, Labouesse M: Epithelial morphogenesis in embryos:
asymmetries, motors and brakes. Trends Genet 2008, 24:221-230.
Keller R, Shook D, Skoglund P: The forces that shape embryos: physical
aspects of convergent extension by cell intercalation. Phys Biol 2008,
5:015007.
Butler LC, Blanchard GB, Kabla AJ, Lawrence NJ, Welchman DP,
Mahadevan L, Adams RJ, Sanson B: Cell shape changes indicate a role for
extrinsic tensile forces in Drosophila germ-band extension. Nat Cell Biol
2009, 11:859-864.
Wang Y, Steinbeisser H: Molecular basis of morphogenesis during
vertebrate gastrulation. Cell Mol Life Sci 2009, 66:2263-2273.
Rauzi M, Lenne PF: Cortical forces in cell shape changes and tissue
morphogenesis. Curr Top Dev Biol 2011, 95:93-144.
Lye CM, Sanson B: Tension and epithelial morphogenesis in Drosophila
early embryos. Curr Top Dev Biol 2011, 95:145-187.
St Johnston D, Sanson B: Epithelial polarity and morphogenesis. Curr Opin
Cell Biol 2011, 23:540-546.
Spence JR, Lauf R, Shroyer NF: Vertebrate intestinal endoderm
development. Dev Dyn 2011, 240:501-520.
Davidson LA: Embryo mechanics: balancing force production with elastic
resistance during morphogenesis. Curr Top Dev Biol 2011, 95:215-241.
Viamontes GI, Kirk DL: Cell shape changes and the mechanism of
inversion in Volvox. J Cell Biol 1977, 75:719-730.
Kirk DL, Viamontes GI, Green KJ, Bryant JL Jr: Integrated morphogenetic
behavior of cell sheets Volvox as a model. In Developmental Order: Its
Origin and Regulation. Edited by: Subtelny S, Green PB. New York: Alan R.
Liss; 1982:247-274.
Kirk DL: Volvox: molecular-genetic origins of multicellularity and cellular
differentiation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press; 1998.
Kirk DL, Nishii I: Volvox carteri as a model for studying the genetic and
cytological control of morphogenesis. Dev Growth Differ 2001, 43:621-631.
Nishii I, Ogihara S, Kirk DL: A kinesin, invA, plays an essential role in
Volvox morphogenesis. Cell 2003, 113:743-753.
Hallmann A: Morphogenesis in the family Volvocaceae: different tactics
for turning an embryo right-side out. Protist 2006, 157:445-461.
Kelland JL: Inversion in Volvox (Chlorophyceae). J Phycol 1977, 13:373-378.
Viamontes GI, Fochtmann LJ, Kirk DL: Morphogenesis in Volvox: analysis of
critical variables. Cell 1979, 17:537-550.
Green KJ, Viamontes GI, Kirk DL: Mechanism of formation, ultrastructure,
and function of the cytoplasmic bridge system during morphogenesis in
Volvox. J Cell Biol 1981, 91:756-769.
Hoops HJ, Nishii I, Kirk DL: Cytoplasmic bridges in Volvox and its relatives.
In Cell-Cell Channels. Edited by: Baluska F, Volkmann D, Barlow PW.
Georgetown, Texas: Eurekah.com; 2005:1-20[http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK6424/].
Ireland GW, Hawkins SE: Inversion in Volvox tertius: the effects of con A. J
Cell Sci 1981, 48:355-366.
Pickett-Heaps JD: Some ultrastructural features of Volvox, with particular
reference to the phenomenon of inversion. Planta 1970, 90:174-190.
Pocock MA: Volvox tertius Meyer. With notes on the two other British
species of Volvox. J Quek Micr Club ser 4 1938, ser. 4, 1:33-58.
Karn RC, Starr RC, Hudcock GA: Sexual and asexual differentiation in
Volvox obversus (Shaw) Printz, strains Wd3 and Wd7. Arch Protistenkd
1974, 116:142-148.
Ransick A: Reproductive cell specification during Volvox obversus
development. Dev Biol 1991, 143:185-198.
Darden WH: Sexual differentiation in Volvox aureus. J Protozool 1966,
13:239-255.
Janet C: Le Volvox. Troisième Mémoire. Ontogénèse de la blastéa
volvocéenne. In Première partie. Volume 3. Mâcon: Protat Frères; 1923,
[http://www.archive.org/stream/levolvox351923jane/

Page 25 of 26

37.

38.
39.

40.
41.

42.
43.
44.

45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.

52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.

60.
61.
62.

63.
64.

65.

66.

levolvox351923jane_djvu.txt], [Études sur les fourmis, les guêpes et les
abeilles, vol 35.].
Zimmermann W: Die ungeschlechtliche Entwicklung von Volvox.
Naturwissenschaften 1925, 19:397-402[http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01560949
].
Pocock MA: Volvox in South Africa. Ann South Afr Mus 1933, 16:523-646.
McCracken MD, Starr RC: Induction and development of reproductive
cells in the K-32 strains of Volvox rousseletii. Arch Protistenkd 1970,
112:262-282.
McCracken MD: Differentiation in Volvox. Carolina Tips 1970, 33:37-38.
Nozaki H, Itoh M: Phylogenetic relationships within the colonial
Volvocales (Chlorophyta) inferred from cladistic analysis based on
morphological data. J Phycol 1994, 30:353-365.
Kikuchi K: Cellular differentiation in Pleodorina californica. Cytologia
(Tokyo) 1978, 43:153-160.
Gottlieb B, Goldstein ME: Colony development in Eudorina elegans
(Chlorophyta, Volvocales). J Phycol 1977, 13:358-364.
Hartmann M: Über die Veränderung der Koloniebildung von Eudorina
elegans und Gonium pectorale unter dem Einfluss äußerer Bedingungen.
IV. Mitt. der Untersuchungen über die Morphologie und Physiologie des
Formwechsels der Phytomonadinen (Volvocales). Arch Protistenkd 1924,
49:375-395.
Marchant HJ: Colony formation and inversion in the green alga Eudorina
elegans. Protoplasma 1977, 93:325-339.
Doraiswami S: On the morphology and cytology of Eudorina indica
Iyengar. J Ind Bot Soc 1940, 19:113-139.
Taft CE: Inversion of the developing coenobium in Pandorina morum
Bory. Trans Am Microsc Soc 1941, 60:327-328.
Iida H, Nishii I, Inouye I: Embryogenesis and cell positioning in Platydorina
caudata (Volvocaceae, Chlorophyta). Phycologia 2011, 50:530-540.
Stein JR: A morphologic and genetic study of Gonium pectorale. Am J Bot
1958, 45:664-672.
Stein JR: On cytoplasmic strands in Gonium pectorale (Volvocales). J
Phycol 1965, 1:1-5.
Powers JH: Further studies on Volvox, with description of three new
species. Trans Am Microsc Soc 1908, 28:141-175[http://www.jstor.org/stable/
3220908 ].
Kuschakewitsch S: Zur Kenntnis der Entwicklungsgeschichte von Volvox.
Arch Protistenkd 1931, 73:323-330.
Kuschakewitsch S: Zur Kenntnis der Entwicklungsgeschichte von Volvox.
Bull de l’Acad d Sc de l’Oukraine 1922, 1:31-36.
Pocock MA: Volvox and associated algae from Kimberley. Ann South Afr
Mus 1933, 16:473-521.
Metzner J: A morphological and cytological study of a new form of
Volvox-I. Bull Torrey Bot Club 1945, 72:86-113.
Kochert G: Differentiation of reproductive cells in Volvox carteri. J
Protozool 1968, 15:438-452.
Starr RC: Control of differentiation in Volvox. Dev Biol Suppl 1970, 4:59-100.
Nozaki H: Origin and evolution of the genera Pleodorina and Volvox
(Volvocales). Biologia (Bratisl) 2003, 58:425-431.
Herron MD, Hackett JD, Aylward FO, Michod RE: Triassic origin and early
radiation of multicellular volvocine algae. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:3254-3258.
Hoops HJ: Somatic cell flagellar apparatuses in two species of Volvox
(Chlorophyceae). J Phycol 1984, 20:20-27.
Larson A, Kirk MM, Kirk DL: Molecular phylogeny of the volvocine
flagellates. Mol Biol Evol 1992, 9:85-105.
Nozaki H, Itoh M, Sano R, Uchida H, Watanabe MM, Kuroiwa T:
Phylogenetic relationships within the colonial Volvocales (Chlorophyta)
inferred from rbcL gene sequence data. J Phycol 1995, 31:970-979.
Coleman AW: Phylogenetic analysis of «Volvocaceae» for comparative
genetic studies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999, 96:13892-13897.
Nozaki H, Ohta N, Takano H, Watanabe MM: Reexamination of
phylogenetic relationships within the colonial Volvocales (Chlorophyta):
an analysis of atpB and rbcL gene sequences. J Phycol 1999, 35:104-112.
Nozaki H, Takahara M, Nakazawa A, Kita Y, Yamada T, Takano H, Kawano S,
Kato M: Evolution of rbcL group IA introns and intron open reading
frames within the colonial Volvocales (Chlorophyceae). Mol Phylogenet
Evol 2002, 23:326-338.
Hallmann A: Evolution of reproductive development in the volvocine
algae. Sex Plant Reprod 2011, 24:97-112.

Höhn and Hallmann BMC Biology 2011, 9:89
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/9/89

67. Smith GM: A comparative study of the species of Volvox. Trans Am
Microsc Soc 1944, 63:265-310.
68. Nozaki H, Ito M, Sano R, Uchida H, Watanabe MM, Takahashi H, Kuroiwa T:
Phylogenetic analysis of Yamagishiella and Platydorina (Volvocaceae,
Chlorophyta) based on rbcL gene sequences. J Phycol 1997, 33:272-278.
69. Nozaki H, Ott FD, Coleman AW: Morphology, molecular phylogeny and
taxonomy of two new species of Pleodorina (Volvoceae, Chlorophyceae).
J Phycol 2006, 42:1072-1080.
70. Green KJ, Kirk DL: Cleavage patterns, cell lineages, and development of a
cytoplasmic bridge system in Volvox embryos. J Cell Biol 1981, 91:743-755.
71. Kirk DL: The ontogeny and phylogeny of cellular differentiation in
Volvox. Trends Genet 1988, 4:32-36.
72. Nishii I, Ogihara S: Actomyosin contraction of the posterior hemisphere is
required for inversion of the Volvox embryo. Development 1999,
126:2117-2127.
73. Herron MD, Michod RE: Evolution of complexity in the volvocine algae:
transitions in individuality through Darwin’s eye. Evolution 2008,
62:436-451.
74. Ueki N, Nishii I: Controlled enlargement of the glycoprotein vesicle
surrounding a Volvox embryo requires the InvB nucleotide-sugar
transporter and is required for normal morphogenesis. Plant Cell 2009,
21:1166-1181.
75. Janet C: Note préliminaire sur l’oeuf du Volvox globator. Limoges:
Ducourtieux et Gout; 1914.
76. Coggin SJ, Kochert G: Flagellar development and regeneration in Volvox
carteri (Chlorophyta). J Phycol 1986, 22:370-381.
77. Kirk DL, Birchem R, King N: The extracellular matrix of Volvox: a
comparative study and proposed system of nomenclature. J Cell Sci
1986, 80:207-231.
78. Hallmann A: Extracellular matrix and sex-inducing pheromone in Volvox.
Int Rev Cytol 2003, 227:131-182.
79. Nozaki H, Ito M, Uchida H, Watanabe MM, Kuroiwa T: Phylogenetic analysis
of Eudorina species (Volvocaceae, Chlorophyta) based on rbcL gene
sequences. J Phycol 1997, 33:859-863.
80. Sachs JL: Resolving the first steps to multicellularity. Trends Ecol Evol 2008,
23:245-248.
81. Herron MD, Desnitskiy AG, Michod RE: Evolution of developmental
programs in Volvox (Chlorophyta). J Phycol 2010, 46:316-324.
82. Lerche K, Hallmann A: Stable nuclear transformation of Gonium pectorale.
BMC Biotechnol 2009, 9:64.
83. Ueki N, Matsunaga S, Inouye I, Hallmann A: How 5000 independent
rowers coordinate their strokes in order to row into the sunlight:
phototaxis in the multicellular green alga Volvox. BMC Biol 2010, 8:103.
84. Solari CA, Drescher K, Goldstein RE: The flagellar photoresponse in Volvox
species (Volvocaceae, Chlorophyceae). J Phycol 2011, 47:580-583.
85. Keller R, Davidson LA, Shook DR: How we are shaped: the biomechanics
of gastrulation. Differentiation 2003, 71:171-205.
86. Winklbauer R, Nagel M, Selchow A, Wacker S: Mesoderm migration in the
Xenopus gastrula. Int J Dev Biol 1996, 40:305-311.
87. Schlösser UG: SAG-Sammlung von Algenkulturen at the University of
Göttingen, Catalogue of Strains 1994. Bot Acta 1994, 107:111-186.
88. Provasoli L, Pintner IJ: Artificial media for fresh-water algae: problems and
suggestions. In The Ecology of Algae, a symposium held at the Pymatuning
Laboratory of Field Biology on June 18 and 19, 1959. Edited by: Tryon CA,
Hartman RT. Pittsburgh, PA: Pymatuning Laboratory of Field Biology,
University of Pittsburgh; 1959:84-96, [The Pymatuning Symposia in Ecology,
Special Publication No. 2.].
89. Starr RC, Jaenicke L: Purification and characterization of the hormone
initiating sexual morphogenesis in Volvox carteri f. nagariensis Iyengar.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1974, 71:1050-1054.
90. Brady A: A simple technique for making very fine, durable dissecting
needles by sharpening tungsten wire electrolytically. Bull World Health
Organ 1965, 32:143-144.

Page 26 of 26

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review

doi:10.1186/1741-7007-9-89
Cite this article as: Höhn and Hallmann: There is more than one way to
turn a spherical cellular monolayer inside out: type B embryo inversion
in Volvox globator. BMC Biology 2011 9:89.

• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
