<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Assembling networks of microbial genomes using linear programming</title>
<meta name="Subject" content="BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-360"/>
<meta name="Keywords" content=" "/>
<meta name="Author" content="Catherine Holloway"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 10.0.1082/W Unicode"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 9.0.0 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
Assembling networks of microbial genomes using
linear programming
Holloway and Beiko

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360 (20 November 2010)

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Assembling networks of microbial genomes using
linear programming
Catherine Holloway1,2,3, Robert G Beiko1*

Abstract
Background: Microbial genomes exhibit complex sets of genetic affinities due to lateral genetic transfer. Assessing
the relative contributions of parent-to-offspring inheritance and gene sharing is a vital step in understanding the
evolutionary origins and modern-day function of an organism, but recovering and showing these relationships is a
challenging problem.
Results: We have developed a new approach that uses linear programming to find between-genome
relationships, by treating tables of genetic affinities (here, represented by transformed BLAST e-values) as an
optimization problem. Validation trials on simulated data demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach in
recovering and representing vertical and lateral relationships among genomes. Application of the technique to a
set comprising Aquifex aeolicus and 75 other thermophiles showed an important role for large genomes as ‘hubs’
in the gene sharing network, and suggested that genes are preferentially shared between organisms with similar
optimal growth temperatures. We were also able to discover distinct and common genetic contributors to each
sequenced representative of genus Pseudomonas.
Conclusions: The linear programming approach we have developed can serve as an effective inference tool in its
own right, and can be an efficient first step in a more-intensive phylogenomic analysis.

Background
Although lateral genetic transfer (LGT) has been recognized for many decades as a potentially important force
driving the evolution of prokaryotes [1-3], only in the
genome sequencing era has its frequency and importance been fully appreciated [4-6]. LGT mediated by
processes of DNA transfer and recombination occurs
within populations of closely related bacterial strains
[7,8], can operate at great phylogenetic distances [9-11],
and can affect bacteriophage, viruses, protists and multicellular eukaryotes [12]. Some observed LGT events are
obviously transient and likely part of a cycle of saltation
and purging [13], while others confer clear adaptive
advantages to their host, and have become fixed in a set
of descendent lineages [14,15]. The principal evolutionary consequence of LGT is that traits do not need to be
invented ab initio within a genome through (for example) neofunctionalization of a paralogous sequence, but
* Correspondence: beiko@cs.dal.ca
1
Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, 6050 University Avenue,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3 H 1W5, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

can instead be rapidly acquired from another organism
and integrated into the host regulatory and metabolic
apparatuses [16]. Grasping the nature and extent of
LGT is fundamental to our understanding of evolution,
but at the same time is essential if we are to understand
how specific microorganisms and communities of
microorganisms can change in response to new environmental challenges and opportunities.
The inference of historical events from modern genome sequences is a challenging task that has spurred
the development of many phylogenetic and non-phylogenetic methods. Technical problems include defining
models of sequence similarity and evolution, choosing a
sequence data set of interest (which is often much less
than the entire suite of genes from a set of genomes),
and implementing thresholds that demarcate vertical,
lateral, and ‘uncertain’ relationships: each of these will
influence the recovered frequency of LGT, the types of
genes implicated, and the genomes that preferentially
share genes. The very definition of ‘vertical’ vs. ‘lateral’
requires that some component of the evolutionary signal
recovered from a set of genes be accorded privileged

© 2010 Holloway and Beiko; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

status, tracking a Tree of Life or, more weakly, a tree of
cellular divisions. Decisions on which signals are to be
treated as vertical are often based on a plurality consensus or a subset of core genes that are thought to be
recalcitrant to transfer [17-20].
The problems with using an aggregated or consensus
signal to define vertical inheritance are twofold. First,
while overwhelming support for a particular relationship
might be taken to indicate vertical inheritance, the phylogenetic signal becomes less clear as deeper and deeper
relationships are examined, to the point where little can
be confidently said about the relationships among bacterial phyla, either in phylogenetic or phylogenomic
terms [21]. Second, in any case where conflicting phylogenetic signals are combined, the obtained consensus
may reflect phylogenetic averaging artifacts that capture
none of the input evolutionary signals [22,23]. In such
cases, relationships that appear to be lateral in nature
may in fact be vertical or vice versa, or the entire set of
implied evolutionary connections may be invalid. A frequently cited example of this is the thermophilic bacterium Aquifex aeolicus, which has been described as an
early-branching bacterium with similarities to Thermotoga and other thermophiles including many Archaea
[24,25], or as an unusual Proteobacterium with strong
LGT connections to other thermophiles [26,27].
Detailed analysis of many phylogenetic trees can reveal
the complex relationships of such lineages, whereas
aggregation of these signals conflates the set of affinities
they have to other lineages. However, alignments of single genes or proteins may not harbor enough information to recover evolutionary relationships with high
confidence.
In spite of these limitations, building a comprehensive
profile or map of genetic affinities is a worthwhile goal.
Recent efforts have characterized phylogenetic discordance without reference to a ‘central tendency’ tree.
Puigbò et al. [11] searched for trends of phylogenetic
consistency, first among 102 large, ‘nearly universal’
trees and then using several thousand trees with no
taxonomic restriction, and found rampant discordance
but also a statistically supported central trend of concordance. Consistent with previous work [5,21], concordance was highest among closely related lineages,
whereas little or no consistency was found in the deeper
relationships within Bacteria and Archaea. Susko et al.
[28] used a heatmap approach to characterize the
consistency of relationships within the Gammaproteobacteria, and found weak phylogenetic agreement
within the data set. However, their results also highlighted a pitfall of many analyses: the majority of genes
failed to strongly support any relationship, and treating
these genes as if they agreed with the plurality signal
would overestimate the support for a single evolutionary

Page 2 of 21

path. Lima-Mendez et al. [29] developed a novel
approach for bacteriophage genomes based on Markov
clustering and graph reconstruction, with nodes representing individual phage genomes and edges representing
genes common to both linked genomes. Phage relationships are not generally thought of in terms of a phylogenetic tree, and indeed the authors were aiming to define
coherent ‘modi’ [30] for multidimensional classification.
It is perhaps natural that such a scheme, which presumes
nothing about the laterality or verticality of relationships,
was first developed for phage genomes. More recently, a
similar network approach was applied to gene sets from
> 100 prokaryotic chromosomes and > 100,000 vector
(phage and plasmid) sequences, with analysis of graph
connectivity suggesting that plasmids and not phage are
key elements linking genomes [31].
While networks that capture all affinities or the best
affinities of all genes in a genome can usefully display
lateral connections, it is worth considering the entire
spectrum of relationships for each gene under consideration. This can be important if, for instance, the
best few BLAST matches to a given query protein are
statistically indistinguishable. We have developed an
approach to analyze and visualize the affinities among
genomes which is based on linear programming (LP).
This algorithm considers the relative strength of different matches and aims to recover distinct affinities of different members of a set of genomes. For each genome
in turn, the method uses a series of similarity scores
(here, tables of BLASTP scores between the candidate
genome and the full set of microbial genomes) to construct a weighted, directed graph which we term an
intergenomic affinity graph with large connection
weights reflecting strong affinities between genomes.
The use of a directed graph allows us to observe asymmetric relationships in which a given genome A has
contributed genetic material to another genome B, but
not vice versa. We first demonstrate the utility of our
method by benchmarking on genome data simulated
under various regimes of LGT, then apply it to two distinct sets of microorganisms: a set of thermophiles with
affinities to A. aeolicus, and the Pseudomonads, a group
with highly plastic genomes that can thrive in many
habitats.

Results
We start this section by defining the intergenomic
affinity graph, and introducing the idea of ‘comparison
genomes’ that are used as the building blocks for this
graph. Following this, we formulate several candidate
techniques for computing comparison genomes, several
variants of which are based on LP. Details of the parameter settings used for BLAST and EvolSimulator can
be found in the Methods section.

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Intergenomic affinity graphs and optimal
comparison genomes

An intergenomic affinity graph G for a set of genomes
 = {C1, C2, ..., Cm} is defined as a set of vertices V =
{V1, V2, ..., Vm}, each corresponding to a genome in set
 , and a set of edges E. An edge from vertex V1 to vertex V2 implies that a subset of C1’s genome has an affinity to a subset of C2’s genome that is relatively strong
in comparison to other members of  . A vertex may
have multiple outgoing edges if it has strong affinities to
several other genomes, or it may have a single outgoing
edge if a single other genome in  is its strongest
genetic partner. The latter case might arise, for example,
if genome C i shares a recent common ancestry with
genome C j, and has not been impacted by LGT since
that divergence. Edges in G are directed because relative
affinities are not guaranteed to be symmetric; Ci may be
a significant contributor to Cj, but not vice versa. Edges
carry weights that reflect the relative contribution of different genomes to the target genome; outgoing edges
from a genome are normalized to sum to 1.0.
The intergenomic affinity graph shows a complete set
of genetic relationships among a set of genomes, but the
graph formulation is based on a genome-by-genome
approach to identifying genetic similarities. The gene
content of a genome Ci is evaluated against all other
genomes to identify elements (genes or sets of genes) of
these genomes that are highly similar to elements of Ci,
and therefore represent likely contributors to the gene
content of Ci. The union of these contributing elements
defines the optimal comparison genome (OCG) for Ci;
the OCG may contain components of one, several, or all
members of the set  - Ci. In the intergenomic affinity
graph, the set of edges leading to vertex Vi and their
relative weights reflect the relative contribution of other
genomes to the OCG. The composition of the OCG and
the evolutionary interpretation of the affinity graph
depend on the choice of function used to build the
OCG; ideally the graph should capture all significant
vertical and lateral evolutionary relationships that exist
in a set of genomes. We introduce several alternative
functions in the next section.
Techniques for constructing optimal
comparison genomes

LP is a method of maximizing or minimizing a linear
equation (called the objective function) subject to a set
of constraining linear equations and inequalities. Previous applications of LP in bioinformatics include gene
and species tree reconstruction [32-34] and protein
structural inference via threading [35]. Our LP formulation is intended to capture distinct affinities between a
reference genome X consisting of n0 genes X1 , X2 , ...,

Page 3 of 21

Xn, and a set of m comparison genomes  = {Y1, Y2,
..., Ym}, each consisting of nj genes e.g. Y1,1,Y1,2, ... Y1,n1.
The basis for identifying relationships is an n × m similarity matrix A, with each row Ai.corresponding to protein-coding gene i from X, and each entry A ij
representing the similarity between gene i and the bestmatching gene gj from Yj, 1 ≤ j ≤ m. Each row Ai. therefore constitutes a weighted phylogenetic profile [36] that
captures the relative genetic affinity of Xi for each member of  . The aim of our approach is to construct the
OCG for X from members of set  . Our initial analyses use a transformed matrix of BLASTP results, with
A i , j = − log( ij )

(1)

where a i,j is the expectation value of the BLASTP
score with xi as query and gj as subject.
A simple approach to inferring genomic affinities from
these BLASTP scores would be to directly use matrix A
to identify incoming edges to X in the intergenomic affinity graph, with weights wj computed as follows:
n0

wj =

∑A

ij

i =0
x0 m

∑∑ A

(2)
ik

i =0 k =1

Repeating this procedure using each genome in (  ∪
X) as the reference genome in turn would produce an
intergenomic affinity graph showing the complete set of
genetic affinities between all pairs of genomes. We term
this approach to generating wj the weighted maximum
(wmax) technique.
However, such an approach ignores the potential for
repeated structure in different rows of the BLAST table:
for example, if two genomes Y1 and Y2 are both closely
related to genome X, with Y1 and X as sisters and Y2 a
close outgroup to the other two, then we would expect
to see many rows in the transformed BLAST table
where A X1 is only slightly greater than A X2 . Based on
these rows, wmax would assign weights such that
wY1 >wY2, but with wY1 only slightly greater than wY2.
The averaging effect of wmax does not distinguish
between the case above, where A X1 is consistently if
only slightly greater than A X2 in many rows, versus a
situation where AX2 is sometimes greater and sometimes
less than A X1 , but the mean affinity for Y 1 is greater
than that for Y2. To distinguish these cases, we need an
approach that emphasizes the consistently greater similarity of partner genome Y 1 in a weighted network of
genome affinities. If we consider construction of the

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 4 of 21

comparison genome as an optimization problem on the
set of genetic affinities in A, we can formulate an LP
approach to find the optimal weighting of genomes in
 with respect to X that achieves this aim. The goal of
the strategy is to maximize ε and choose wj such that:

∑w

j

=1

(3)

j∈Y

wj ≥ 0

∀ j∈

A1 j w1 +  + A ij w i +  + A mj w m ≥ 

(4)
i ≤ j ≤ m.

(5)

A given wj value will be applied uniformly to the corresponding column A.j, and therefore allow Aij terms to
contribute to the sum (which must be ≥ ε for each row,
due to the constraint that (5) imposes) even when they
are not the maximum term from that row.
One potentially misleading implication of the above
approach is that rare genetic affinities, i.e. Xi genes with
best matches to unusual target Yj genomes, can lead to
a very high wj, since the sum of scores for Xi’s row is
still constrained to be ≥ ε. A large wj in this situation is
indicative of very distinctive matching patterns such as
an LGT connection between distantly related genomes.
To better quantify the relative abundance of different
relationships to the various Xi, we multiply ε for each
row i by the sum of Ai,j for all reference genomes j. As
a consequence, the limiting constraints will be those
with the greatest total distance scores. This reweighting
will increase wj values for Yj genomes with many strong
affinities to X, and will diminish but not eliminate rare
affinities. We refer to this reweighting approach as the
rLP strategy.
As an alternative to reweighting, we also considered
the application of thresholds to matrix A prior to computing the LP solution. In this scenario, any A i,j <
threshold T was set to zero, with the effect that any
BLAST matches with e-value > 10 T are ignored. We
refer to this as the tLP-T strategy, where T = the chosen
threshold.
Finally, we considered a strategy in which proteins we
defined as ‘dominated’ were removed. Given two proteins from the query genome, p1 and p2, we say that p1
dominates p2 if A1,m ≥ A2,m for all target genomes m.
The removal of dominated proteins yields a reduced set
that includes (i) proteins from X that constitute the best
overall matches to each of the genomes in  ; and (ii)
proteins that are not in set (i), but nonetheless have sufficiently distinct match profiles that they are dominated
by no single protein in set (i). This strategy emphasizes

slowly evolving proteins (since their Ai,j entries will tend
to be larger) and is expected to highlight particularly
strong (vertical and frequent lateral) connections
between X and members of  . The strategy is analogous to that employed by others [18,37] to isolate genes
that are particularly informative, although our criteria
are different, particularly in that we do not require all
retained genes to exhibit the same distribution pattern
or phylogenetic history. This final strategy is referred to
as ndLP.
All LP approaches outlined above have a total of m +
1 variables to optimize, with one variable per genome in
 in addition to ε. The maximum number of constraints for the problem is equal to m (a nonnegativity
constraint for each genome weight) + n0 (the set of constraints imposed by each gene’s phylogenetic profile) + 1
(since all genome weights must sum to 1.0). Fewer constraints will exist if the number of genes under consideration is less than n 0 due to some genes having no
BLAST matches, and/or genes being removed by the
ndLP strategy. The procedures described above will produce a set of weighted edges originating from genome X
and terminating in a subset of genomes in  . To build
the intergenomic affinity graph, we repeat the analysis
for each genome in (  ∪ X).
Validation on simulated genomes

We first evaluated the efficiency of the LP approach on
data with a similar structure and magnitude to BLAST
comparisons of genomes. The simplex method we use
for optimization is exponential with respect to the number of inputs, but runs in polynomial time in the average case [38]. For genomic data sets of size k = 2 to 40
in increments of 2, we generated affinity tables with
3000 rows and k - 1 columns. Each table entry was filled
with a random number. We then applied the ndLP and
rLP techniques using the glpk solver (see Methods) to
these tables and evaluated the total running time. The
scaling of runtime (Supporting Figure S1 in Additional
File 1) with input number of genomes was slightly
greater than linear in the number of input genomes,
with times < 0.01 seconds for k ≤ 10, up to 0.0835 seconds for k = 40. This is a tiny fraction of the time
needed to generate BLAST results for a comparable
number of microbial genomes, and suggests that the
time taken by the LP solver will not be limiting in the
analysis of datasets with k much greater than size 40.
EvolSimulator [39] is a program that simulates the
evolution of genomic lineages via processes of speciation
and extinction. Each EvolSimulator run starts with a
single genome containing an ancestral set of genes;
as lineages diverge, gene content can change via

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 5 of 21

duplication, loss, and LGT, with different user-specified
models of LGT available. We used EvolSimulator to
generate populations of up to 50 genomes (see Methods
for details) with different regimes of LGT influencing
the success of attempted transfer events for a given
donor-recipient pair. The simplest scenario allowed no
gene content change whatsoever (noLGT-noLoss), so all
genomes at the end of this simulation contained a single
copy of each ancestral gene that was modified through
mutation and substitution events. All other scenarios
allowed genome sizes to change via duplication or loss
at each step of the simulation. A single simulation was
run without LGT, but with the possibility of gene duplication and loss (noLGT). Three separate regimes of
LGT were then imposed in separate sets of runs: (i)
unconstrained or ‘random’ LGT (randLGT), where any
donor-recipient genome pair is equally likely to participate in LGT; (ii) divergence-restricted LGT (divLGT), in
which the probability of successful transfer decreases
with increasing divergence (i.e., number of iterations
since the most common recent ancestor); and (iii) habitat-restricted LGT (habLGT), in which genomes occupy
specific habitats and niches with rare switching events,
and transfers can occur only between genome pairs that
occupy the same habitat at a given iteration. For each
regime, we varied the intrinsic rate at which LGT events
were proposed by two orders of magnitude in three
separate runs. All combinations of regime and rate were
repeated 50 times, except for the habitat simulations
which were replicated 250 times each.
Since EvolSimulator records the complete history of
all genomes in a given simulation, we were able to evaluate our network inference strategies in the ‘vertical’
context of known speciation histories, in light of known
LGT events, and with knowledge of currently assigned
genomic habitats and complete habitat histories. We
devised statistics that characterize the structure of graph
G in light of the known connections between genomes.
The treeness score T expresses the match between
the reconstructed evolutionary network and the simulated genome tree:
T=

∑∑w
i

i→ j

(

× 1.0 − dist i → j / dist max

)

overall values for T. Since the treeness score scales with
the number of genomes, we divided T by the total number of genomes considered to yield a normalized treeness score, Tnorm, with range 0.0 <Tnorm ≤ 1.0.
The habitat score H is defined as:
H=

∑∑w
i

i→ j

(

)

× dist i → j / dist max × Z i , j

(7)

j

with Zi,j an indicator function which is equal to 1.0 if i
and j are in the same habitat and 0.0 otherwise. Since
we set habitat changes to occur relatively infrequently in
our simulations, habitat similarity and evolutionary history were conflated to a large degree. To minimize the
impact of this conflation and to emphasize the detection
of habitat-directed LGT connections between distant
relatives, we use the raw distance ratio (i.e., not subtracted from 1.0) to maximize the contribution of distantly related genomes from the same habitat. As with
the treeness scores, we divided H by the number of genomes to yield the normalized habitat score Hnorm, with
range 0.0 ≤ Hnorm ≤ 1.0.
The normalized treeness scores Tnorm ranged between
0.549 and 0.794 across all combinations of simulated
LGT regime and network reconstruction method (Figure
1 and Supporting Table S1 in Additional File 2).
Although Tnorm varied across different approaches, the
non-LP wmax approach always yielded the lowest treeness scores (0.549 ≤ Tnorm ≤ 0.611). In addition to comparing raw treeness scores, we also used the distribution
of 50 or 250 wmax scores as the basis for paired-sample
t-test comparisons against the LP-based techniques,

(6)

j

where i and j are two genomes for which a connection
i ® j is defined, wi®j is the edge weight from i to j, dist i®j is the number of internal nodes in the reference
tree that are traversed by the shortest path from leaf i’s
closest parent (internal node) to leaf j’s closest parent in
the reference tree, and distmax is the largest such distance in the entire tree. The assignment of relatively
large weights to siblings in the tree (dist i®j = 0) will
minimize the ratio of distances in (6), leading to large

Figure 1 Treeness scores for all combinations of simulation
type and network inference method. None = NoLGT, NL = No
loss, L = low, M = medium, H = high.

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

with a null hypothesis of no difference between wmax
and the LP alternative. Of the eleven different rate/
regime combinations, the removal of dominated proteins
(ndLP) yielded the best treeness score in eight cases,
with reweighting (rLP) best in two of the remaining
cases, and thresholding at an e-value cutoff of 1.0 × 10-80
(tLP-80) best in one case. In general the tLP-T strategies
yielded slightly smaller Tnorm scores, with the progressive
decrease from T = 40 to T = 120 suggesting that the
genes removed due to thresholding did contain a small
additional amount of information about genomic affinities. In ten out of eleven cases, the ndLP treeness scores
were significantly better than the wmax scores, with maximal improvements (corrected p = 1.21 × 10-14, the minimum possible value retrievable from R after Bonferroni
correction) in cases where the tree signal was strong due
to minimal LGT (noLGT and all low levels of LGT), or
LGT that reinforces the vertical signal in the tree (medium and high rates of divergence-biased LGT). The
noLGT-noLoss simulations provided a curious exception
to this rule; since duplication and loss were the only phenomena that distinguished these simulations from the
noLGT runs, it may be that the presence of paralogous
sequences in the phylogenetic profile matrix actually
reinforced the treelike signal. Improved recovery of treelike signals under divergence-biased regimes of LGT has
been seen before [23], with preferential exchange
between close relatives reinforcing their overall similarity.
The T norm of all approaches decreased in cases where
LGT did not explicitly reinforce the reference tree signal,
with the effect more pronounced under random LGT
than under habitat-directed LGT (since habitat-directed
LGT will to some extent preferentially occur among closely related genomes that share the same habitat due to
common ancestry).
Although the performance of ndLP, tLP-T and rLP
was roughly similar in most simulations, rLP performed
considerably worse in four cases: the three habitatrestricted LGT scenarios, and the unusual noLGTnoLoss simulation. It is unclear why rLP performed
poorly (although still significantly better than wmax:
corrected p = 2.96 × 10-5) in the latter case, but inspection of the habitat scores (Figure 2, and Supporting
Table S2 in Additional File 2) showed that reduced treeness in habLGT simulations was due to more-accurate
recovery of habitat-driven relationships. The habitat
scores were significantly better than the wmax baseline
for rLP (corrected p between 1.42 × 10 -5 and
9.17 × 10-12) and ndLP (corrected p between 1.36 × 10-3
and 1.2 × 10-7), with no improvement seen in any of the
tLP-T analyses. In both the rLP and ndLP cases, the
habitat score increased with increasing rates of LGT,
successfully capturing the greater contribution of biased
LGT to the composition of genomes under these

Page 6 of 21

Figure 2 Habitat scores for simulations carried out with
habitat-restricted LGT under different network inference
methods. L = low, M = medium, and H = high rates of LGT.

simulation conditions. Based on these results, rLP and
ndLP give results that are somewhat complementary,
with rLP capturing a broader range of patterns and
ndLP focusing on those patterns that are strongest in
the data.
To further investigate the relationship between the
rLP and ndLP approaches, we chose one simulation run
and visualized the corresponding species tree (Supporting Figure S2 in Additional File 1) and constructed
graphs for the noLGT (Figure 3) and habLGT-high
(Figure 4) simulations. The graphs recovered in the
absence of LGT are disconnected, with the rLP
approach producing three components and 174 links
(Figure 3A) and ndLP yielding seven components and
94 links (Figure 3B). In both networks, each genome is
connected to at least one genome in the group that is a
sister to it. But the rLP graph has many more connections both within and between clades: in the rLP case,
clades 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 8 identified in Figure S1 are connected to one another, mostly through the early-branching “lonely lineage” 997. This genome also links clades 4
and 5 in the ndLP graph, although all other connections
are lost. Within each identified clade (except clade 5
which contains only two genomes), the number of connections dropped by 28%-56%. The connections lost
were predominantly more-distant ones, with the average
phylogenetic distance between connected genomes
dropping by approximately half.
The habitat-restricted LGT simulations yielded connected graphs with many more links: 669 when rLP was
used for reconstruction (Figure 4A), and 440 when
ndLP was used (Figure 4B). The automated layout performed by Cytoscape [40] suggests good separation of
genomes based on shared habitats, with higher apparent

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 7 of 21

Figure 3 Network of genome affinities and underlying speciation tree for one replicate of the noLGT simulation. The network is based
on the genome tree shown in Figure S2, using the wLP (panel A) and ndLP (panel B) methods. The edge color represents the distance in the
tree measure, where black represents a distance of 0, and lighter colors represent larger distances up to 9 (lightest blue). The edge widths
represent the degree of affinity between two nodes, corresponding to the weights obtained from the LP solution. Clades described in the main
text are indicated with numbers 1-8, and genome 997 is highlighted with an asterisk.

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 8 of 21

Figure 4 Network of genome affinities and underlying speciation tree for one replicate of the habLGT-high simulation. The network is
based on the genome tree shown in Figure S1, using the wLP (panel A) and ndLP (panel B) methods. The edge color represents the distance in
the tree measure, where black represents a distance of 0, and lighter colors represent larger distances up to 9 (lightest blue). The edge widths
represent the degree of affinity between two nodes, corresponding to the weights obtained from the LP solution.

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

separation achieved by the ndLP solution. Only 22.4%
(rLP) and 35.9% (ndLP) of links were between members
of the same clade, as compared with 89.0% (rLP) and
98.9% (ndLP) of links inferred from the noLGT simulation. In assessing the influence of shared habitats, we
distinguish between the current habitat of each genome
(represented by the colored borders in Figures S2, 3,
and 4) and the habitat of longest residence (represented
by the colored rectangles) for each genome. Two genomes currently occupying the same habitat may have
many opportunities to share genes, but if one of the two
genomes was until recently present in a different habitat,
and was present in that habitat for a long time, then its
genomic composition may still be more reflective of its
former habitat. Although, as indicated above, fewer than
36% of links were to members of the same clade, a great
many links could be attributed to shared habitats: in the
rLP network reconstruction, 47.2% of links were
between genomes sharing the same current habitat, and
49.8% of links were between genomes with the same
habitat of longest residence. The numbers for ndLP
were even higher: 65.7% of links were between genomes
in the same current habitat, and 74.5% were between
genomes sharing the same habitat of longest residence.
Most strikingly, between 49% and 62% of these links
were between members of the same habitat, but of different clades. This demonstrates the ability of the rLP
and ndLP approaches to recover complementary vertical
and lateral evolutionary signals.
The proportion of the original protein data set retained
by the ndLP strategy under different simulation conditions was itself informative about the extent of discordant
phylogenetic signal (Supporting Table S3 in Additional
File 2). The largest proportion of proteins (>80%) were
removed in the datasets simulated without LGT. Among
LGT-containing datasets, divergence-biased LGT had the
highest rate of removal (70-77%), while approximately
66% of proteins were removed from the datasets simulated with random LGT. Low rates of habitat-restricted
LGT yielded similar removal rates, but removal decreased
for medium (62.2%) and high (22.5%) rates of LGT. Protein removal therefore appears to correlate with the
expected strength of relationships that are in conflict
with the species tree: against a baseline established by
random LGT, divergence-biased LGT has a higher rate of
removal, while habitat-restricted LGT has a much lower
rate. Given the apparent complementarity of the rLP and
ndLP approaches, we applied these two techniques to the
inference of evolutionary patterns from microbial genomic data sets.
Affinities of Aquifex aeolicus and other thermophiles

Although Aquifex aeolicus is considered to be among
the earliest-diverging bacteria on the basis of 16S rDNA

Page 9 of 21

phylogeny, phylogenomic analyses have identified a
number of alternative partner lineages, including the
Epsilon-proteobacteria and various Archaeal lineages
[5,24]. Lateral genetic transfer appears to have played an
important role in the evolution of bacterial thermophily
and hyperthermophily [41,42], and the identification of
partner lineages, as well as the different types of
molecular functions shared with these lineages, can
indicate the route by which A. aeolicus became a
hyperthermophile.
We first performed a comparison of 865 sequenced
genomes covering 34 distinct phyla against A. aeolicus,
to determine which of these had strong affinities.
A total of ten genomes from five phyla were retained in
the ndLP solution (Figure 5, and Supporting Table S4 in
Additional File 2). Two types of organisms are represented in the A. aeolicus solution: other thermophiles
and hyperthermophiles, and very large genomes.
Included among the thermophiles are the other two
sequenced representatives of phylum Aquificae, Hydrogenobaculum sp. Y04AAS1 and Sulfurihydrogenibium
sp. YO3AOP1; two Archaea including a methanogen
and Pyrococcus horikoshii; Thermodesulfovibrio yellowstonii, a hot spring bacterium from phylum Nitrospirae;
and a rare thermophilic proteobacterium. Mesophilic
genomes in the solution set originate from the Acidobacteria and Proteobacteria and include the giant (~10
megabase) genome of the acidobacterium Solibacter usitatus and one member of the Delta-proteobacteria, a
group often implicated in LGT with other phyla [43,44].
Consistently with our benchmarking results above, the
rLP solution returned a much larger number of genomes (29 as opposed to ten): of these, none was shared
between the two lists but two genera (Geobacter and
Pyrococcus) were represented in both solutions. Interestingly, while both other Aquificae were missing from the
rLP solution, Thermosipho melanesiensis and Nitratiruptor sp. SB155-2 which represent alternative affinities for
the Aquificae lineage were both present. Many of the
other genomes in the rLP solution set were also thermophiles or hyperthermophiles from groups including Crenarchaeota, Euryarchaeota, Dictyoglomi and Clostridia.
We repeated the ndLP analysis for both of the other
Aquificae in our set, and recovered solution sets consisting of 14 genomes (Hydrogenobaculum: Supporting
Table S5 in Additional File 2) and ten genomes (Sulfurihydrogenibium: Supporting Table S6 in Additional File
2). Like the A. aeolicus ndLP solution, both the Hydrogenobaculum and Sulfurihydrogenibium lists contained the
two non-self Aquificae genomes. Beyond this, however,
no single genome appeared in all three solution sets,
although all three solutions contained representatives
from the Delta-proteobacteria (either Geobacter, Anaeromyxobacter, or both). The Hydrogenobaculum set

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 10 of 21

Figure 5 Genomes comprising the ndLP solution in a comparison of 865 genomes against A. aeolicus. Edge thicknesses are proportional
to the corresponding weight assigned to each genome in the ndLP solution. Each genome’s oxygen usage is shown with the border color of
its corresponding node (light blue = aerobic, orange = anaerobic, gray = facultative aerobe), and its temperature preference with the node color
(red = hyperthermophilic, orange = thermophilic, yellow = mesophilic).

included five representatives of phylum Chlorobi and
two thermophilic Chloroflexi, all other non-Aquificae
genomes belonging to the Proteobacteria including two
methylotrophs and an acidophile. Linkages to Chlorobi,
Chloroflexi and other genomes may reflect LGT related
to hot, acidic habitats or to the use of particular compounds as sources of energy and nutrients. Genomes in
the Sulfurihydrogenibium solution set include several
soil bacteria and bacteria with large genomes (e.g., Burkholderia cenocepacia J2315, > 8 Mb in size). In addition
to the two Aquificae, two extremophiles are present in
the set: T. yellowstonii and a halophilic euryarchaeote.
Different functional classes of proteins show different
propensities toward LGT [5,45], and are thus likely to
show different taxonomic affinities if LGT is sufficiently
frequent. We explored this question for A. aeolicus by
repeating the ndLP analysis on subsets of genes,

grouped by TIGR Role Category http://cmr.jcvi.org/cgibin/CMR/shared/RoleList.cgi. Since these optimizations
are performed on distinct subsets of the full dataset,
genomes appearing in the full solution may not appear
in the functional subset solutions, and vice versa. Figure
6 shows the breakdown of LP solutions for each category. The Aquificae are represented in 16 of 18 categories, and represent the entire solution in the ‘fatty
acid and phospholipid metabolism’ category. Within the
informational categories, DNA metabolism is dominated
by hyperthermophilic Thermotogae and Archaea, possibly reflecting the effects of recent transfer to assist in
stabilization of the bacterial chromosome. The solution
for the ‘protein synthesis’ category includes two thermophiles: the actinobacterium Rubrobacter xylanophilus
and Symbiobacterium thermophilum, a member of class
Clostridia. While protein synthesis genes are thought to

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 11 of 21

Figure 6 Taxonomic breakdown of ndLP solutions across 18 TIGR role categories. The width of each colored bar indicates the proportional
contribution of the relevant taxonomic class to the overall ndLP solution. The number of proteins retained in each category is indicated after the
category name, and the number of aggregated classes is indicated when Archaea or ‘other’ Bacteria constitute part of a solution.

be particularly recalcitrant to LGT, the alternative affinities here may be due to aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
and other proteins that do not form part of large complexes [46]. Transcriptional proteins are associated with
Thermotogae and two Delta-proteobacteria in the ndLP
solution. Cellular process proteins are less closely tied
to the Aquificae: other important groups include
the Epsilon-proteobacteria (especially the thermal
vent bacterium Nitratiruptor sp. SB155-2), Gammaproteobacteria, and the Alpha-proteobacteria Rhodopseudomonas palustris and Sphingopyxis alaskensis, which
constitute > 50% of the solution in the ‘Cellular process’
category. Metabolic enzymes show evidence of heterogeneous origins as well, particularly those involved in cofactor and carrier biosynthesis, which include genomes from
phyla Cyanobacteria (Thermosynechococcus elongatus),
Chlorobi (Chlorobium tepidum and Chloroherpeton thalassium), Flavobacteria (Flavobacterium johnsoniae) and
Nitrospirae (T. yellowstonii) in their ndLP solution set.
Not surprisingly, mobile elements and hypothetical proteins show a great deal of heterogeneity as well, including
contributions from thermophilic Archaea, Clostridia,
Cyanobacteria, and Dictyoglomi, as well as a number of
mesophiles from across several phyla.
The A. aeolicus solutions indicated a strong contribution of genetic material from other thermophilic and

hyperthermophilic lineages. But the broader picture of
thermophile evolution may involve gene sharing relationships that do not directly implicate the Aquificae.
To further investigate the relationships among thermophiles, we inferred an all-versus-all ndLP network for
the 80 out of 865 genomes in our set that were labeled
as thermophilic or hyperthermophilic, which included
48 Bacteria from 12 phyla, and 32 Archaea from four
phyla. From this set we removed one genome from each
of two named species (Streptococcus thermophilus and
Thermus thermophilus) that were represented twice. Six
phyla (Chlorobi, Deinococcus-Thermus, Korarchaeota,
Nanoarchaeota, Nitrospirae, and Verrucomicrobia) had
only a single thermophilic or hyperthermophilic representative, while the Firmicutes (18 genomes from classes
Bacilli and Clostridia), Crenarchaeota (16 genomes) and
Euryarchaeota (14 genomes) were the largest sets.
The resulting ndLP graph (Figure 7) is connected,
with an average node (in + out) degree of 8.68 indicating that genomes are connected to 11.3% of other members of the set, on average. Nodes with a low in-degree
have few genomes contributing to their overall solution;
these genomes typically had close relatives (congeners)
present in the data set. For example, Thermotoga petrophila (in-degree: 1) and Thermotoga maritima
(in-degree: 2) had large incoming weights from other

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 12 of 21

Figure 7 ndLP graph for 78 thermophilic and hyperthermophilic organisms. Nodes are colored by phylum, with white used to indicate the
six phyla with only a single representative (see text). Node borders indicate OGT of the associated organism, ranging from cyan = 45°C (S.
thermophilus, Sth4) to red = 103°C (Pyrococcus abyssi).

members of genus Thermotoga. The solution for Synechococcus sp. JA-2-3B’a included a closely related strain
of the same genus, and the actinobacterium Thermobifida fusca. The maximum in-degree of any vertex in the
graph was 15, which was observed for M. capsulatis
(covering nine distinct phyla), Petrotoga mobilis (seven
distinct phyla), Moorella thermoacetica (nine distinct
phyla), and Candidatus “Korarchaeum cryptofilum” (six
distinct phyla). Each of these organisms is among the
most taxonomically distinct in its group, with K. cryptophilum the lone representative of phylum Korarchaeota.
Genomes with a large out-degree are significant contributors to the thermophilic gene pool in other organisms: out-degrees in the graph ranged from 0
(Nanoarchaeum equitans and S. thermophilus) to 30

(Halobacterium salinarum; ten distinct phyla). A. aeolicus has an in-degree of seven and an out-degree of four:
affinities with its sister lineage Hydrogenobaculum are
retained, but the elimination of the large, mesophilic
genomes that were present in Figure 5 introduces new
thermophiles into its solution set, including Nitratiruptor and organisms from phyla Dictyoglomi, Crenarchaeota and Firmicutes. No edges connect genomes from
phyla Aquificae to Thermotogae or vice versa.
The thermophiles and hyperthermophiles in our dataset cover a range of optimal growth temperatures
(OGT) from 45°C to 103°C. We considered whether affinities were stronger between genomes with similar temperature preferences relative to a null model by
considering the weight and temperature differential

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 13 of 21

associated with each edge. Summing the product of edge
weight and OGT difference for each of the 677 edges in
our graph, we obtained a score of 9822.5. Performing
the same summation with randomized genomic OGTs
yielded an average score of 12,334.6, with a standard
deviation of 471.7. The p-value of 6.40 × 10-8 associated
with the resulting Z-score strongly suggests that genomes with similar OGT tend to have stronger associations in the LP solution. To remove the effect of
taxonomic similarity from this result, we next considered only those edges that connected members of different phyla. The p-value in this case was several orders of
magnitude larger (0.002) but still supported a stronger
association between genomes with similar OGT.
Vertical and lateral signal in genus Pseudomonas

Pseudomonas is a highly diverse genus within the
Gamma-proteobacteria, comprising > 120 named species with a wide diversity of lifestyles, including saprophytes, plant, fungal and animal pathogens, and marine
and soil organisms [47]. This diversity is supported by
large genome sizes and the ready acquisition of plasmids and genomic islands [48]. In the case of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, pathogenicity and resistance traits
can also be rapidly acquired due to the presence of
integrons [49]. Pseudomonas-associated mobile elements can have very broad host ranges, raising the
possibility of significant genetic flux between members
of this genus and other groups of microorganisms.
Indeed, the taxonomic affinities of open reading frames
in P. aeruginosa islands are extremely broad, mapping
to a wide range of phyla [50].

To assess the relative influence of within- and
between-species gene flow, we constructed a network
based on ndLP weights between 16 different members
of genus Pseudomonas covering a total of seven named
species (Table 1 and Supporting Figure S3 in Additional
File 1). Although Table 1 indicates the primary ecological motivations for studying the various species of Pseudomonas, the niche range of members of this genus
tends to be very broad and has not been fully mapped
for many of the listed isolates, so the full extent of ecological overlap between the various species and strains
cannot be precisely quantified. Figure 8 shows the connected graph of Pseudomonas genomes based on the
ndLP solution. A total of 45 edges connect the 16 nodes
in the graph, yielding an average node degree (incoming
+ outgoing edges) of 2.81. Each genome is therefore
connected (in the undirected sense) to 17.6% of the
other members of the data set. A considerable amount
of vertical signal is captured by the graph, with members of the same species typically connected by edges
with strong weights. The exception to this trend is P.
fluorescens; although these genomes are weakly connected to one another, strain Pf0-1 has a strong connection to P. putida F1, and strain Pf-5 has connections
to every other named species except P. entomophila.
Two of the three species with a single representative (P.
stutzeri and P. mendocina) are strongly connected to
one other genome, while P. entomophila has affinities to
all six other species in the set. The difference in connectivity patterns may relate to the status of P. stutzeri
and P. mendocina as the smallest genomes (4.6 and 5.1
Mbp, respectively) in our data set, while P. entomophila

Table 1 Pseudomonas genomes used in this analysis
Name

Size

Prot

Pl

Primary description

Abbreviation

P. aeruginosa LESB58

6.6

5925

0

Epidemic strain

Pae LESB58

P. aeruginosa PA7

6.6

6446

0

Non-respiratory

Pae PA7

P. aeruginosa PAO1

6.3

5742

0

Lab strain, moderately virulent

Pae PAO1

P. aeruginosa UCBPP PA14

6.5

6039

0

Highly virulent

Pae PA14

P. entomophila L48

5.9

5274

0

Insect pathogen, orally ingested

Pen

P. fluorescens Pf0-1

6.4

5852

0

Saprophyte, promotes plant nutrition

Pfl Pf0-1

P. fluorescens Pf-5

7.1

6270

0

Saprophyte, promotes plant nutrition

Pfl Pf-5

P. mendocina ymp

5.1

4782

0

Bioremediation of toluene

Pme

P. putida F1

6

5494

0

Saprophyte, bioremediation

Ppu F1

P. putida GB-1

6.1

5611

0

Saprophyte, bioremediation

Ppu GB-1

P. putida KT2440

6.2

5501

0

Saprophyte, bioremediation

Ppu KT2440

P. putida W619

5.8

5389

0

Saprophyte, bioremediation

Ppu W619

P. stutzeri A1501

4.6

4219

0

Nitrogen fixation

Pst

P. syringae pv. Phaseolicola 1448A

5.9

5511

2

Plant pathogen

Psy phaseolicola

P. syringae syringae B728a

6.1

5258

0

Plant pathogen

Psy syringae

P. syringae tomato str. DC3000

6.4

5796

2

Plant pathogen

Psy tomato

Size in megabases, number of predicted proteins (Prot), and the number of plasmids (Pl) are indicated.

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Figure 8 ndLP graph for 16 genomes from genus
Pseudomonas, with colors used to distinguish species.
Abbreviations used in this graph are defined in Table 1.

is considerably larger at 5.9 Mbp. The relatively small
genomes and few affinities may also reflect reduced
interactions with eukaryotic hosts (as epiphytes, pathogens, etc.) relative to other Pseudomonas species, diminishing the importance of host-adaptive LGT.
We extended this core network by including comparisons of all 16 Pseudomonads against the other 849 genomes in our data set. All possible pairwise comparisons
between Pseudomonas genomes were performed, but
other genomes were compared only to members of this
genus, and not to each other. The ndLP solution includes
196 non-Pseudomonas genomes (23.1% of the original
dataset) of which 157 are other Proteobacteria. Apart
from the Chlorobi (3/11 genomes retained), no phylum
with > 2 representative genomes had more than 25% of
its genomes retained. Major underrepresented groups
included the Actinobacteria (6/57 = 10.5% retained), Firmicutes (12/145 = 8.3% retained), Archaea (2/55 = 3.6%
retained), and eukaryotes (1/46 = 2.2% retained). There is
a clear preference for proteobacterial genomes in the
ndLP solution: over 64% of Beta-proteobacterial genomes
were included in the solution, primarily from order Burkholderiales. Within the Gamma-proteobacteria, over
50% of orders Alteromonadales, non-Pseudomonas Pseudomonadales, Vibrionales, and Xanthomonadales were
retained. Most of the included Alpha-proteobacteria were
soil organisms from classes Caulobacterales, Rhizobiales,
Rhodobacterales, and Rhodospirillales.

Page 14 of 21

The most striking feature of the Pseudomonas ndLP
graph (Figure 9) is the presence of ‘plumes’ of nonPseudomonas genomes that are matched by only a single
genome within the genus. Taxonomic summaries of
connecting genomes are shown in Figure 10. The most
highly connected genome is that of P. mendocina, which
is linked to a total of 66 non-Pseudomonas genomes; 35
of these are connected to no other Pseudomonas genome and therefore constitute its plume of unique connections. Groups that are particularly prominent in the
P. mendocina solution include orders Burkholderiales
(12 genomes), Rhizobiales (6 genomes), and Alteromonadales (5 genomes). Mobile elements and the ~200
hypothetical proteins with no match to other Pseudomonads likely account for many of the connected genomes. P. stutzeri has connections to 33 other genomes
including 13 in its plume, which includes genomes of
the root-associated organisms Bacillus pumilus and
Sinorhizobium meliloti, other plant-associated bacteria
such as Xanthomonas oryzae and Burkolderia thailandensis, and several marine bacteria. Its shared affinities
comprise additional nitrogen-metabolising genomes
such as Azoarcus sp. BH72 and Nitrosomonas eutropha
and several additional marine bacteria. The last uniquely
represented species in our dataset, the insect pathogen
P. entomophila, connects to 15 genomes of which five
are not connected to any other Pseudomonas genome.
Its plume covers five different phyla and includes Aspergillus fumigatus, the only eukaryotic genome in the solution set; Clostridium botulinum; Photobacterium
profundum; Frankia sp. Ccl3; and Gramella forsetii. Of
these, A. fumigatus and C. botulinum have pathogenic
potential, while G. forsetii is able to degrade large
organic compounds. Its other partners include nitrogen
metabolizers and pathogens.
Genomes from the same species differed considerably
of the strength of their connections. The most dramatic example of this was seen in P. aeruginosa PAO1,
which connected to only four other genomes: the
other three strains of P. aeruginosa and the metabolically diverse Ralstonia eutropha. This dearth of connections may reflect the high degree of similarity
between strain PAO1 and its conspecific isolates, as
well as the fact that the genome of strain PAO1 is
200-300 kb smaller than the other P. aeruginosa genomes. Other P. aeruginosa genomes match pathogens
including Serratia proteamaculans, Neisseria meningitidis and various enteric bacteria, but include a wide
range of environmental bacteria as well. P. putida GB1 has connections to 50 other non-Pseudomonas genomes: like P. mendocina, many of the connections are
to Burkholderiales and Rhizobiales, with strong representation from the Enterobacteriales and genera Acinetobacter and Geobacter. At the other extreme of

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 15 of 21

Figure 9 ndLP Network of genome affinities recovered from a comparison of 865 sequenced genomes against the 16 members of
Pseudomonas. Nodes corresponding to Pseudomonas genomes are colored as in Figure 8; all other genomes all colored in gray.

connectivity, P. putida KT2440 connects only to Chlorobium chlorochromatii, Halorhodospira halophila, and
Salmonella enterica. Similarly, P. putida F1 connects
to only four non-Pseudomonas genomes, from genera
Aeromonas, Proteus, Xanthomonas and Streptomyces.
Contrary to the general tendencies of larger genomes
to have more connections, strains KT2440 and F1 are
the largest and third-largest members of their group.
The remaining species, P. fluorescens and P. syringae,
had similar distributions of affinities to environmental
and pathogenic bacteria.

Discussion
We have developed and validated an LP approach to
the reconstruction of genomic affinities. Based on the
EvolSimulator results reported above, these LP
approaches (particularly the rLP and ndLP variants we
focus on) are better able to recover strong, distinctive
vertical and lateral inheritance patterns than are network approaches that make direct use of BLASTP similarities. The LP solution can be used to generate graphs
of genomes, which carry some advantages relative to
genome phylogeny-based approaches. Many genome

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 16 of 21

Figure 10 Taxonomic breakdown of ndLP solutions for each of 16 Pseudomonas genomes. The width of each colored bar represents the
proportional contribution of the relevant taxonomic group to the overall ndLP solution. Numbers next to ‘other phyla’ bars indicate the number
of other phyla contained within this solution.

phylogeny approaches generate partitionings of taxa
which are visualized as branches and intersecting sets of
parallel lines. Such graphs are typically subject to a circular compatibility or similar constraints [51,52], which
complicates the representation of long-distance transfer
relationships. Newer approaches such as cluster networks can circumvent these limitations by adding reticulate nodes, which are not constrained by phylogenetic
distance, to a tree, but these approaches are NP-complete and have thus far been applied to a relatively
small number of gene sets [53]. Unlike the above
approaches, which are explicitly phylogenetic in nature,
our approach relies on the inference of directed edges
and edge weights by the LP solver to generate a graphical representation of genomic affinities. This approach
mirrors most closely the approaches of Lima-Mendez et
al. [29] and Halary et al. [31] mentioned in the Introduction, but the filtering of data and inference of
weighted, directed edges by our LP approach yields
more information about the magnitude and direction of
transfer.
The LP solution is based on the calculation of weights
for different genomes; for a given target genome X, a
large weight attached to a comparison genome Yj indicates that Yj is an important part of the solution. This
importance, however, does not necessarily correlate with

the number of genes in X that appear to originate from
Y j ; rather, if Y j has a small number of genes that are
very similar to genes in X, and which cannot easily be
accounted by other genomes in the set, then a high
weight for Yj is likely to be recovered in the LP solution.
Very recent LGT events will tend to be highlighted by
this approach, since the resulting similarity profile will
be distinct and the affinity (BLAST e-value) extremely
high. The removal of dominated strategies further
accentuates this effect, since genes whose inheritance is
mostly vertical and that therefore have ‘canonical’ patterns of similarity to other genomes will tend to be
removed en masse due to the presence of highly conserved proteins that follow the same pattern of similarity
and have lower BLAST expectation values. Although the
use of our approach inevitably filters out some lateral
relationships among the genomes under consideration,
filtering is necessary in any approach to try and distinguish signal from noise. Splits graphs are often controlled by restricting the dimensionality of the solution,
imposing a uniform constraint on all relationships without regard to the number of affinities within any particular set of genomes [54]. Our approach has the
capacity to return many connections where appropriate,
as demonstrated in our analyses of data sets with high
levels of LGT.

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Our case studies illustrated particular strengths of the
method, as well as highlighting challenges in the interpretation of the results. The analysis of A. aeolicus
returned a plausible set of genomes, although the exclusion of groups such as Thermotogae and Epsilonproteobacteria from the main solution set (both groups
were represented in the role category breakdown solution set) was surprising. It is likely that at least some of
the proteins previously observed to support these affinities are also present in Hydrogenobaculum and Sulfurihydrogenibium, thus making these other Aquificae the
natural partners for A. aeolicus and eliminating the distinctive contributions of the other two groups. The presence of large genomes in the solution set suggests that
large, versatile genomes may act as hubs in the global
LGT network [55], since so many of the genes they possess can be adaptive in different environments. Although
we made no effort to correct for sampling effort in different groups, most of the global and functional results
appeared to be driven by genuine affinities rather than
raw counts of sequenced genomes. For instance, while
the heavily sequenced Gamma-proteobacteria were
indeed present in the role category solution sets of A.
aeolicus (Figure 6), their contribution was limited to a
few categories and was similar in importance to much
smaller groups such as the Epsilon-proteobacteria. Conversely, Proteobacteria dominated the Pseudomonas
solution set, with substantial contributions from soil
bacteria, marine bacteria and some pathogens. Although
it is difficult to extract ecological narratives from large
lists of genomes, in a broad sense these habitats
are consistent with the primary known roles of members
of genus Pseudomonas. The high degree of
heterogeneity seen in the solution sets of some genomes
(particularly P. mendocina) is interesting and worthy of
further exploration using more-explicit phylogenomic
techniques.
An important challenge in interpreting the results of
an LP analysis is the construction of an appropriate
summary of all genomes in the solution set. This was
more straightforward for A. aeolicus than for genus
Pseudomonas. When a particular group such as the Burkholderiales is assigned a large weight in a solution set,
we can appreciate that this group may have made
important genetic contributions to our genomes of
interest. But genomes encode a complex set of processes, and the most reasonable hypothesis for a given
connection such as the exchange of pathogenesis genes
between Escherichia coli and P. aeruginosa may not be
the correct one; genetic affinities may instead reflect
gene transfers related to respiration, metabolism of
available compounds, or other cellular processes. Also,
transfers of genetic material that produce an edge in the
LP graph may in fact have no adaptive role, having

Page 17 of 21

arisen as a consequence of random integration and
rapid but not immediate turnover of introgressed genes,
or due to the activity of phages, plasmids and other
mobile elements. One way to address the question of
which genomes have contributed which functions is to
carry out a refined analysis as shown in Figure 6; a set
of such optimizations can reveal which functions can be
attributed to which originating taxonomic groups.
Another approach is to refer back to the original set of
genes, either through inspection of the BLAST tables
and comparison of affinities, or by performing a phylogenomic analysis to identify the affinities of genes in the
genome of interest. In such a situation the LP optimization can play the additional role of filtering the initial
set of genomes: for example, in the Pseudomonas ndLP
analysis we reduced the candidate set of ‘interesting’
genomes from 849 to 203, which would accelerate subsequent steps of orthologous set inference, sequence
alignment and phylogenetic analysis. Another alternative
we did not explore here is the pooling of genomes
within a particular species or genus prior to performing
the LP analysis; such an approach would simplify the
solution (for example, by representing genus Burkholderia as a single node in the Pseudomonas solution
above) while still showing key affinities among the genomes of interest.
In this work we used BLAST results as the raw material, without attempting to define orthologs and paralogs, to infer genomic relationships. The technique
could also be applied to orthologous gene profiles generated using a technique such as COG [56], or to structural indices that can potentially identify homologous
genes that are too distantly related to be detected by
BLAST. The efficient nature of the LP solver suggests
that much larger data sets can be handled by this technique once the appropriate input affinity data have been
generated.

Conclusions
The intergenomic relationships among microbes are a
complex mix of vertical signal and recent and ancient
LGT events. Our approach does not aim to describe the
full set of evolutionary relationships among a set of genomes, but instead emphasizes a genome’s closest genetic
neighbours. Recent events may reflect adaptive changes
that are most relevant to an organism’s current ecological range and interactions with other organisms. Challenges remain in understanding which optimization
technique is most appropriate to the question at hand,
and how complex sets of intergenomic affinities should
be interpreted. Future work will aim to refine the optimization techniques to improve their robustness and
make the interpretation of connection weights more
explicit. An important challenge that is not specific to

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

our approach lies in the use of affinity graphs or networks to explore ecological and evolutionary hypotheses.
Microorganisms have complex sets of ecological attributes, and in many cases similarities of organisms in
their habitat range, uptake of mobile elements, and tolerance of different environmental conditions cannot be
precisely quantified. While it is possible to draw some
conclusions from the topology of affinity graphs and the
functional categories associated with different edges in
the graph, more-detailed experimental characterization
of microorganism ranges will ultimately be needed to
enable a deeper understanding of intergenomic affinities.

Methods
Datasets and functional annotations

Simulated datasets were constructed using EvolSimulator 2.1.0 [39]. EvolSimulator allows replicated analyses
to be carried out, with most parameters of a run including species tree topology and gene mutation and substitution parameters kept constant across multiple runs,
but with variable rates and regimes of gene gain, gene
loss, and LGT. Identical random number seeds and
similar configuration files were used for all runs in a
given replicate: for example, the ‘-s’ and ‘-z’ seeds which
control stochastic events in gene and genome evolution
respectively, were set to 1248706227 and 1649402786
for the first replicate. The configuration files used for all
11 EvolSimulator runs are available as supporting text in
Additional File 3. Each simulation was performed for
2500 iterations, with the speciation/extinction probability set to 0.7. The maximum number of lineages was set
to 50. Genomes in each run were assigned to one of five
habitats, with the probability of habitat migration set to
0.0015 per iteration, with the consequence that most
genomes had between 0 and 5 habitat changes in their
history.
All simulated genes had a length of 900 nucleotides,
with an average mutation rate of 0.01 substitutions per
site per iteration. In the noLGT-noLoss simulation, genome size was kept constant at 800 genes, whereas in the
other 10 simulations genome size was allowed to drift
(via gene gains, losses, and LGT where appropriate)
between 500 and 1000 genes. Genome size could
increase or decrease by a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 5 genes per iteration. Three underlying rates
(25, 250, and 2500 LGT events per iteration) and three
regimes (unconstrained, divergence-restricted, and habitat-restricted LGT) were combined to yield a total of
nine runs with simulated LGT events. The rate of LGT
specifies the average (drawn from a Poisson distribution)
number of proposed LGT events between donorrecipient pairs for a given iteration: this is potentially
problematic because all proposed events are successful
in the unconstrained regime, whereas proposed events

Page 18 of 21

may be rejected due to excessive genome divergence or
habitat incompatibility in the other two regimes. To
avoid mismatches in the number of successful events for
a given underlying rate of LGT, we used the ‘-retryLGT
= 100’ argument to EvolSimulator, which proposes
another donor/recipient pair if a proposed LGT event is
rejected due to regime-specific constraints, up to a maximum of 100 times. Consequently the number of LGT
events should be comparable across regimes for a given
fixed rate, but the distribution of donor/recipient pairs
will differ. In the case of divergence-restricted LGT, the
probability of success for a proposed transfer decreased
linearly with increasing number of iterations separating
two genomes (i.e., # of iterations since their last common ancestor) up to 500, and LGT forbidden between
genomes whose common ancestor was > 500 generations in the past.
Gene sequences and habitat histories were output
from EvolSimulator in GenBank and FASTA-formatted
files, which were used for the subsequent analyses
described below. Node distances used in the treeness
and habitat scores (see Results) were computed from
Newick-formatted files using the Bio::Phylo library of
BioPerl http://search.cpan.org/dist/Bio-Phylo/. All statistical analyses were carried out using version 2.7.1 of the
R software package http://r-project.org.
The 865 sequenced genomes used in this analysis were
obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) via rsync on 28 November, 2008.
The set included the genomes of 46 eukaryotes, 55
archaea and 764 bacteria. Conceptually translated open
reading frames from each retrieved file were stored in a
local relational database, and subjected to BLAST analysis as described in the following section. OGT data were
retrieved from NCBI or from the primary literature if
OGT data were unavailable at NCBI.
Genome-scale sequence similarity analysis and graph
construction

Simulated or predicted proteomes were subjected to allversus-all BLASTP analysis using version 2.2.18 of the
NCBI ‘blastall’ program. Parameters of the BLAST runs
were chosen according to the recommendations of Moreno-Hagelsieb et al. [57], particularly the soft filtering of
low-information segments using the -F “m S” option.
The BLOSUM62 matrix was used to score local alignments, with gap opening and extension costs of 1 during
the dynamic programming phase. The default choice of
composition-based score adjustments (-T) was used.
All-versus-all BLASTP results were stored in database
tables showing all query/subject pairs having an e-value
of 0.001 or less. These were converted into the necessary format by identifying, for each gene Xi in genome
X, the best-matching protein j in genome yj, for all y in

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

the set of genomes  . The resulting table of e-values a
contained one row for each X i , and one column for
each yj, with ai,j the e-value of the best-matching protein. This matrix was transformed to matrix A as in
equation (1). Any proteins that were identical across all
genomes were removed from matrix A, since the presence of such proteins would lead to all possible LP
solutions being equally good. This removal was performed on the Pseudomonas dataset; a total of 62 identical homologous sets of proteins were removed prior to
the LP step.
Matrix A was used to construct the constraints in a
LP problem, either by dividing the rows by the row
sums (rLP), applying a threshold number to the matrix
(tLP-T), or by removing all dominated rows (ndLP). The
constraints were implemented in the GNU MathProg
modeling language, described by equation (5), where the
comparison genomes were variables to be optimized.
The LP problems were solved using GNU linear programming kit (GLPK: http://www.gnu.org/software/
glpk). Edge weights of the genome networks were determined by the activity on the genomes from the GLPK
solution files. The total activity for each test genome
was constrained to 1. All graphs were visualized in
Cytoscape 2.7.0 [40]. Different layout algorithms were
used for different visualizations: EvolSimulator reference
trees were organized using the hierarchical layout algorithm, graphs centered on A. aeolicus with a forcedirected layout, and more-highly-connected graphs
(thermophiles and Pseudomonas) with an organic layout.
Pseudomonas reference tree

We elected to use the RNA polymerase subunit beta
(rpoB) gene as the reference for relationships among
Pseudomonas genomes. rpoB has been used in such a
way for other groups [58,59], and is expected to be less
prone to LGT due to its participation in a multisubunit
complex. Sixteen annotated rpoB gene sequences, one
for each genome, were retrieved, and we retrieved the
rpoB sequence from Cellvibrio japonicus, a member of
the family Pseudomonadaceae, to serve as a putative
outgroup. A multiple sequence alignment was built
using FSA 1.14.5 [60], with default parameters and the
‘-nucprot’ flag to align conceptual translations of the
rpoB genes, rather than the raw DNA sequence, in
order to preserve the correct reading frame in all
sequences. A phylogenetic tree was constructed with
RAxML 7.2.5 [61], with a general time reversible model
of nucleotide substitution, eight discrete gamma rate
categories, and an invariant category. One hundred fast
bootstrap replicates were performed to assess the support for each internal node. The resulting tree was
visualized using Dendroscope 2.7.4 [62].

Page 19 of 21

Additional material
Additional file 1: Supporting Figures S1-S3. Supporting Figure S1.
Relationship between data set size and running time in seconds.
Times are shown for rLP (white circles) and ndLP (black circles).
Supporting Figure S2. Species tree showing the evolutionary
relationships among all simulated genomes for one replicate
EvolSimulator run. Leaves represent extant genomes after 2500
simulation iterations. Colored borders indicate the current habitat
occupied by each genome, while filled rectangles indicate the habitat
occupied by that genome and its ancestors for the longest period of
time during the 2500 simulated iterations. Clades described in the main
text are indicated with numbers 1-8, and genome 997 is highlighted
with an asterisk. Supporting Figure S3. Phylogenetic tree of RNA
polymerase beta subunit (RpoB) proteins from 16 genomes of
genus Pseudomonas. Leaf labels correspond to abbreviations defined in
Table 1. Numbers at each internal node represent the support for the
implied partitioning of taxa from 100 bootstrap replicates.
Additional file 2: Supporting Tables S1-S6. Supporting Table S1.
Treeness scores (T) for simulated data sets under different network
reconstruction approaches. Statistical significance is indicated using the
exponent E of the Bonferroni-corrected p-value for the treeness statistic.
Supporting Table S2. Habitat scores (H) for simulated data sets under
different network reconstruction approaches. Statistical significance is
indicated using the exponent E of the Bonferroni-corrected p-value for
the treeness statistic. Supporting Table S3. Removal of dominated
proteins from simulated data sets. For each combination of regime
and rate, the proportion of all simulated proteins that were removed in
the ndLP strategy is shown. Supporting Table S4. Genomes included in
the ndLP solution for A. aeolicus. For each genome, the domain (Dom:
Bac = Bacteria, Arch = Archaea, phylum, class, species name, abbreviation
(Abbr) in Figure 5, and weight (Wt) in the ndLP solution are shown.
Supporting Table S5. Genomes included in the ndLP solution for
Hydrogenobaculum sp. Y04AAS1. For each genome, the phylum, class,,
and weight (Wt) in the ndLP solution are shown. All genomes in this
solution are from domain Bacteria. Supporting Table S6. Genomes
included in the ndLP solution for Sulfurihydrogenibium sp.
YO3AOP1. For each genome, the phylum, class,, and weight (Wt) in the
ndLP solution are shown. Apart from H. marismortui (Archaea), all
genomes in this solution are from domain Bacteria.
Additional file 3: Supporting Text. Supporting Text. Generic
configuration file for EvolSimulator, with run-specific settings indicated at
the end of the file.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dennis Wong and Karl Vollmer for assistance with configuration of
software and genomic databases, and Norman MacDonald for comments on
earlier drafts of the manuscript.
Author details
1
Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, 6050 University Avenue,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3 H 1W5, Canada. 2Department of Physics and
Atmospheric Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3 H 3J5,
Canada. 3Institute for Quantum Computing, University of Waterloo 200
University Ave. West, Waterloo, Ontario, N2L 3G1, Canada.
Authors’ contributions
CH developed the LP approach and performed the experiments. Both
authors made significant contributions to experimental design, analysis of
results, and manuscript writing. Both authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Received: 19 July 2010 Accepted: 20 November 2010
Published: 20 November 2010

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

References
1. Jones D, Sneath PH: Genetic transfer and bacterial taxonomy. Bacteriol
Rev 1970, 34:40-81.
2. Woese CR, Gibson J, Fox GE: Do genealogical patterns in purple
photosynthetic bacteria reflect interspecific gene transfer? Nature 1980,
283:212-214.
3. Hilario E, Gogarten JP: Horizontal transfer of ATPase genes–the tree of
life becomes a net of life. Biosystems 1993, 31:111-119.
4. Doolittle WF: Phylogenetic classification and the universal tree. Science
1999, 284:2124-2129.
5. Beiko RG, Harlow TJ, Ragan MA: Highways of gene sharing in prokaryotes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:14332-14337.
6. Dagan T, Martin W: Ancestral genome sizes specify the minimum rate of
lateral gene transfer during prokaryote evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007, 104:870-875.
7. Papke RT, Koenig JE, Rodríguez-Valera F, Doolittle WF: Frequent
recombination in a saltern population of Halorubrum. Science 2004,
306:1928-1929.
8. Hanage WP, Fraser C, Tang J, Connor TR, Corander J: Hyper-recombination,
diversity, and antibiotic resistance in pneumococcus. Science 2009,
324:1454-1457.
9. Nelson KE, Clayton RA, Gill SR, Gwinn ML, Dodson RJ, Haft DH, Hickey EK,
Peterson JD, Nelson WC, Ketchum KA, McDonald L, Utterback TR, Malek JA,
Linher KD, Garrett MM, Stewart AM, Cotton MD, Pratt MS, Phillips CA,
Richardson D, Heidelberg J, Sutton GG, Fleischmann RD, Eisen JA, White O,
Salzberg SL, Smith HO, Venter JC, Fraser CM: Evidence for lateral gene
transfer between Archaea and bacteria from genome sequence of
Thermotoga maritima. Nature 1999, 399:323-329.
10. Mongodin EF, Nelson KE, Daugherty S, Deboy RT, Wister J, Khouri H,
Weidman J, Walsh DA, Papke RT, Sanchez Perez G, Sharma AK, Nesbø CL,
MacLeod D, Bapteste E, Doolittle WF, Charlebois RL, Legault B, RodriguezValera F: The genome of Salinibacter ruber: convergence and gene
exchange among hyperhalophilic bacteria and archaea. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2005, 102:18147-18152.
11. Puigbò P, Wolf YI, Koonin EV: Search for a ‘Tree of Life’ in the thicket of
the phylogenetic forest. J Biol 2009, 8:59.
12. Hotopp JC, Clark ME, Oliveira DC, Foster JM, Fischer P, Torres MC, Giebel JD,
Kumar N, Ishmael N, Wang S, Ingram J, Nene RV, Shepard J, Tomkins J,
Richards S, Spiro DJ, Ghedin E, Slatko BE, Tettelin H, Werren JH: Widespread
lateral gene transfer from intracellular bacteria to multicellular
eukaryotes. Science 2007, 317:1753-1756.
13. Hao W, Golding GB: The fate of laterally transferred genes: life in the fast
lane to adaptation or death. Genome Res 2006, 16:636-643.
14. Lerat E, Daubin V, Ochman H, Moran NA: Evolutionary origins of genomic
repertoires in bacteria. PLoS Biol 2005, 3:e130.
15. Huang J, Gogarten JP: Ancient gene transfer as a tool in phylogenetic
reconstruction. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 532:127-139.
16. Pál C, Papp B, Lercher MJ: Adaptive evolution of bacterial metabolic
networks by horizontal gene transfer. Nat Genet 2005, , 37: 1372-1375.
17. Brochier C, Forterre P, Gribaldo S: Archaeal phylogeny based on proteins
of the transcription and translation machineries: tackling the
Methanopyrus kandleri paradox. Genome Biol 2004, 5:R17.
18. Ciccarelli FD, Doerks T, von Mering C, Creevey CJ, Snel B, Bork P: Toward
automatic reconstruction of a highly resolved tree of life. Science 2006,
311:1283-1287.
19. Comas I, Moya A, González-Candelas F: Phylogenetic signal and functional
categories in Proteobacteria genomes. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 7(Suppl 1):S7.
20. Wu D, Hugenholtz P, Mavromatis K, Pukall R, Dalin E, Ivanova NN, Kunin V,
Goodwin L, Wu M, Tindall BJ, Hooper SD, Pati A, Lykidis A, Spring S,
Anderson IJ, D’haeseleer P, Zemla A, Singer M, Lapidus A, Nolan M,
Copeland A, Han C, Chen F, Cheng JF, Lucas S, Kerfeld C, Lang E,
Gronow S, Chain P, Bruce D, Rubin EM, Kyrpides NC, Klenk HP, Eisen JA: A
phylogeny-driven genomic encyclopaedia of Bacteria and Archaea.
Nature 2009, 462:1056-1060.
21. Creevey CJ, Fitzpatrick DA, Philip GK, Kinsella RJ, O’Connell MJ, Pentony MM,
Travers SA, Wilkinson M, McInerney JO: Does a tree-like phylogeny only
exist at the tips in the prokaryotes? Proc Biol Sci 2004, 271:2551-2558.
22. Posada D, Crandall KA: The effect of recombination on the accuracy of
phylogeny estimation. J Mol Evol 2002, 54:396-402.
23. Beiko RG, Doolittle WF, Charlebois RL: The impact of reticulate evolution
on genome phylogeny. Syst Biol 2008, 57:844-856.

Page 20 of 21

24. Boussau B, Guéguen L, Gouy M: Accounting for horizontal gene transfers
explains conflicting hypotheses regarding the position of Aquificales in
the phylogeny of Bacteria. BMC Evol Biol 2008, 8:272.
25. Zhaxybayeva O, Swithers KS, Lapierre P, Fournier GP, Bickhart DM,
DeBoy RT, Nelson KE, Nesbø CL, Doolittle WF, Gogarten JP, Noll KM: On the
chimeric nature, thermophilic origin, and phylogenetic placement of the
Thermotogales. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:5865-5870.
26. Griffiths E, Gupta RS: Signature sequences in diverse proteins provide
evidence for the late divergence of the Order Aquificales. Int Microbiol
2004, 27:313-322.
27. Cavalier-Smith T: Rooting the tree of life by transition analyses. Biol Direct
2006, 1:19.
28. Susko E, Leigh J, Doolittle WF, Bapteste E: Visualizing and assessing
phylogenetic congruence of core gene sets: a case study of the gammaproteobacteria. Mol Biol Evol 2006, 23:1019-1030.
29. Lima-Mendez G, Van Helden J, Toussaint A, Leplae R: Reticulate
representation of evolutionary and functional relationships between
phage genomes. Mol Biol Evol 2008, 25:762-777.
30. Lawrence JG, Hatfull GF, Hendrix RW: Imbroglios of viral taxonomy:
genetic exchange and failings of phenetic approaches. J Bacteriol 2002,
184:4891-4905.
31. Halary S, Leigh JW, Cheaib B, Lopez P, Bapteste E: Network analyses
structure genetic diversity in independent genetic worlds. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2010, 107:127-132.
32. Sridhar S, Lam F, Blelloch GE, Ravi R, Schwartz R: Efficiently finding the
most parsimonious phylogenetic tree via linear programming. In
Bioinformatics Research and Applications, Third International Symposium,
ISBRA 2007. Edited by: Mandoiu II, Zelikovsky A. Atlanta, GA, USA; 2007.
33. Than C, Nakhleh L: Species tree inference by minimizing deep
coalescences. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000501.
34. Chimani M, Rahmann S, Böcker S: Exact ILP solutions for phylogenetic
minimum flip problems. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology: 2010; Niagara Falls, NY 2010,
147-153.
35. Xu J, Li M, Kim D, Xu Y: Raptor: optimal protein threading by linear
programming. J Bioinform Comput Biol 2003, 1:95-117.
36. Ragan MA, Gaasterland T: Constructing multigenome views of whole
microbial genomes. Microb Comp Genomics 1998, 3:177-192.
37. Wu D, Eisen JA: A simple, fast, and accurate method of phylogenomic
inference. Genome Biol 2008, 9:R151.
38. Spielman DA, Teng S-H: Smoothed analysis of algorithms: Why the
simplex algorithm usually takes polynomial time. JACM 2004, 51:385-463.
39. Beiko RG, Charlebois RL: A simulation test bed for hypotheses of genome
evolution. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:825-831.
40. Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N,
Schwikowski B, Ideker T: Cytoscape: a software environment for
integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res
2003, 13:2498-2504.
41. Brochier-Armanet C, Forterre P: Widespread distribution of archaeal
reverse gyrase in thermophilic bacteria suggests a complex history of
vertical inheritance and lateral gene transfers. Archaea 2007, 2:83-93.
42. Koonin EV, Makarova KS, Aravind L: Horizontal gene transfer in
prokaryotes: quantification and classification. Annu Rev Microbiol 2001,
55:709-742.
43. Gophna U, Charlebois RL, Doolittle WF: Ancient lateral gene transfer in
the evolution of Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus. Trends Microbiol 2006, , 14:
64-69.
44. Allen MA, Lauro FM, Williams TJ, Burg D, Siddiqui KS, De Francisci D,
Chong KW, Pilak O, Chew HH, De Maere MZ, Ting L, Katrib M, Ng C,
Sowers KR, Galperin MY, Anderson IJ, Ivanova N, Dalin E, Martinez M,
Lapidus A, Hauser L, Land M, Thomas T, Cavicchioli R: The genome
sequence of the psychrophilic archaeon, Methanococcoides burtonii: the
role of genome evolution in cold adaptation. ISME J 2009, , 3: 1012-1035.
45. Nakamura Y, Itoh T, Matsuda H, Gojobori T: Biased biological functions of
horizontally transferred genes in prokaryotic genomes. Nat Genet 2004,
36:760-766.
46. Woese CR, Olsen GJ, Ibba M, Söll D: Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, the
genetic code, and the evolutionary process. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1990,
64:202-236.

Holloway and Beiko BMC Evolutionary Biology 2010, 10:360
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2148/10/360

Page 21 of 21

47. Peix A, Ramírez-Bahena MH, Velázquez E: Historical evolution and current
status of the taxonomy of genus Pseudomonas. Infect Genet Evol 2009,
9:1132-1147.
48. Spiers AJ, Buckling A, Rainey PB: The causes of Pseudomonas diversity.
Microbiology 2000, 146:2345-2350.
49. Chowdhury PR, Merlino J, Labbate M, Cheong EY, Gottlieb T, Stokes HW:
Tn6060, a transposon from a genomic island in a Pseudomonas
aeruginosa clinical isolate that includes two class 1 integrons. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2009, 53:5294-5296.
50. Winstanley C, Langille MG, Fothergill JL, Kukavica-Ibrulj I, Paradis-Bleau C,
Sanschagrin F, Thomson NR, Winsor GL, Quail MA, Lennard N, Bignell A,
Clarke L, Seeger K, Saunders D, Harris D, Parkhill J, Hancock RE, Brinkman FS,
Levesque RC: Newly introduced genomic prophage islands are critical
determinants of in vivo competitiveness in the Liverpool Epidemic
Strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Genome Res 2009, , 19: 12-23.
51. Bryant D, Moulton V: Neighbor-Net: An agglomerative method for the
construction of phylogenetic networks. Mol Biol Evol 2004, 21:255-265.
52. Huson DH, Dezulian T, Klopper T, Steel MA: Phylogenetic super-networks
from partial trees. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform 2004, 1:151-158.
53. Huson DH, Rupp R, Berry V, Gambette P, Paul C: Computing galled
networks from real data. Bioinformatics 2009, 25:i85-i93.
54. Whitfield JB, Cameron SA, Huson DH, Steel MA: Filtered Z-closure
supernetworks for extracting and visualizing recurrent signal from
incongruent gene trees. Syst Biol 2008, 57:939-947.
55. Kunin V, Goldovsky L, Darzentas N, Ouzounis CA: The net of life:
reconstructing the microbial phylogenetic network. Genome Res 2005,
15:954-959.
56. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ: A genomic perspective on protein
families. Science 278:631-637.
57. Moreno-Hagelsieb G, Latimer K: Choosing BLAST options for better
detection of orthologs as reciprocal best hits. Bioinformatics 2008,
24:319-324.
58. Mollet C, Drancourt M, Raoult D: rpoB sequence analysis as a novel basis
for bacterial identification. Mol Microbiol 1997, 26:1005-1011.
59. Taillardat-Bisch AV, Raoult D, Drancourt M: RNA polymerase beta-subunitbased phylogeny of Ehrlichia spp., Anaplasma spp., Neorickettsia spp.
and Wolbachia pipientis. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2003, 53:455-458.
60. Bradley RK, Roberts A, Smoot M, Juvekar S, Do J, Dewey C, Holmes I,
Pachter L: Fast statistical alignment. PLoS Comput Biol 2009, 5:e1000392.
61. Stamatakis A, Ludwig T, Meier H: RAxML-III: a fast program for maximum
likelihood-based inference of large phylogenetic trees. Bioinformatics
2005, 21:456-463.
62. Huson DH, Richter DC, Rausch C, Dezulian T, Franz M, Rupp R:
Dendroscope: An interactive viewer for large phylogenetic trees. BMC
Bioinformatics 2007, 8:460.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-360
Cite this article as: Holloway and Beiko: Assembling networks of
microbial genomes using linear programming. BMC Evolutionary Biology
2010 10:360.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

</pre>
</body>
</html>
