<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd"><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>1471-2105-4-7.fm</title>
<meta name="Author" content="csproduction"/>
<meta name="Creator" content="FrameMaker 7.0"/>
<meta name="Producer" content="Acrobat Distiller 5.0.5 (Windows)"/>
<meta name="CreationDate" content=""/>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
BMC Bioinformatics

BioMed Central

Open Access

Research article

A format for databasing and comparison of AFLP fingerprint
profiles
Yan Hong* and Aaron Chuah
Address: Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1 Research Link, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117604
Email: Yan Hong* - hongy@tll.org.sg; Aaron Chuah - aaron@tll.org.sg
* Corresponding author

Published: 25 February 2003
BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:7

Received: 17 November 2002
Accepted: 25 February 2003

This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/7
© 2003 Hong and Chuah; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article: verbatim copying and redistribution of this article are permitted in
all media for any purpose, provided this notice is preserved along with the article's original URL.

Abstract
Background: Amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) is a PCR-based technique that
involves restriction of genomic DNA followed by ligation of adaptors to the fragments generated
and selective PCR amplification of a subset of these fragments. The amplified fragments are
separated on a sequencing gel and visualized by autoradiography or fluorescent sequencing
equipment. AFLP allows high-resolution genotyping but the lack of a format for databasing and
comparison of AFLP fingerprint profiles limits its wider applications in profiling large numbers of
biological samples.
Results: A scheme is described to represent a DNA fingerprint profile with a nucleotide sequencelike format in which the information line contains the minimal necessary details to interpret an
AFLP DNA fingerprint profile. They include technique used, information on restriction enzymes,
primer combination, biological source for DNA materials, fragment sizing and annotation. The
bodylines contain information on size and relative intensity of DNA fragments by a string of defined
alphabets or symbols. Algorithms for normalizing raw data, binning of fragments and comparing
AFLP DNA fingerprint profiles are described. Firstly, the peak heights are normalized against their
average and then represented by five symbols according to their relative intensities. Secondly, a
binning algorithm based loosely on common springs and rubber bands is applied, which positions
sequence fragments into their best possible integer approximations. A BLAST-like reward-penalty
concept is used to compare AFLP fingerprint profiles by matching peaks using two metrics: score
and percentage of similarity. A software package was developed based on our scheme and
proposed algorithms. Example of use this software is given in evaluating novelty of a new tropical
orchid cultivar by comparing its AFLP fingerprint profile against those of related commercial
cultivars in a database.
Conclusions: AFLP DNA fingerprint profiles can be databased and compared effectively with
software developed based on our scheme and algorithms. It will facilitate wider use of this DNA
fingerprinting technique in areas such as forensic study, intellectual property protection for
biological materials and biodiversity management. Moreover, the same concepts can be applied to
databasing and comparing DNA fingerprint profiles obtained with other DNA fingerprint
techniques.

Page 1 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

Background
DNA markers reflect difference in the DNA sequences of
chromosomes derived from different progenitors. They
arise as a result of mutations as well as rearrangements in
the DNA intervening between two restriction sites, or two
priming sites. "DNA fingerprint" refers to applying combined multilocus profile of DNA markers for identification of individual, clonal identical individuals (cultivar)
or species. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology
has promoted the development of a range of molecular assay systems that detect polymorphism at the DNA level
and offer an alternative to the hybridization based method of Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP)
[1]. Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism (AFLP)
developed by Vos et al. [2] is based on the amplification
of short restriction endonuclease-digested genomic DNA
fragments onto which adaptors have been ligated at both
ends. Primers complementary to the adaptors and possessing 3' selective nucleotides of one to four bases are
used in a selective amplification reaction. The presence or
absence of these selective nucleotides in the genomic fragments being amplified provide the basis for revealing polymorphism. Besides being relatively cheap, easy and fast,
it is a very robust and reliable technique, especially with
the use of fluorescent DNA sequencing equipment. AFLP
has been used to uncover cryptic genetic variation of
strains, or closely related species in plants, fungi, animals
and bacteria [3], genetic mapping [4] as well as study genetic variation within populations [5]. Because of the high
level of polymorphism it provides, a few primer combinations will suffice to generate fingerprint with hundreds of
highly replicable markers that allow high resolution genotyping any individual or clonally identical individuals
(e.g. plant cultivars). However, the lack of solution to database and compare AFLP fingerprint profiles impedes full
exploitation of its potentials in areas such as individual
profiling, help manage plant breeder rights and management of biodiversity.
In AFLP analysis, amplified DNA fragments are separated
by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis after selective PCR
reactions. Radioisotope labeled fragments are detected by
either autoradiography followed by densitometer scanning or directly by phosphoimagers. Fluorescence labeled
DNA fragment data is acquired by built in fluorescence
detectors in genetic analysis instruments or by fluorescent
imagers. Software has been developed to optimize raw
data collected, mainly through reducing noise while
maintaining data integrity; and to size and quantitate
DNA fragments with reference to standard samples.
Quantity One® from Biorad and Genotyper® by Applied
Biosystem are two examples. Least square method that
uses regression analysis to build a best-fit size calling
curve from size standards is a popular option for sizing
DNA fragments. Other choices like point to point, cubi

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/7

spline interpolation, local southern method and global
southern methods often give very similar results. Results
from such software are given in tabular form with size and
quantitation information but without other minimal information to interpret an AFLP fingerprint profile like biological source of DNA and primer information. Data in
such a format is hard to database and compare in an efficient manner. There is the need for a common format or
guideline that allows the unambiguous interpretation,
and potential reproduction, of an AFLP fingerprinting experiment. Such format should also allow easy databasing
and comparing AFLP fingerprint profiles.
In this paper, we suggest a simple format containing the
minimal-necessary information about a DNA fingerprint
(MIADF) which is compatible with all techniques of DNA
fingerprinting. A DNA fingerprint profile is represented by
a few informational fields and a pure-text signature, with
DNA bands represented by a sequence of predefined alphanumeric symbols indicating different relative intensities. The specification of this format and accompanying
algorithms for the normalization of raw data, binning
DNA fragments and compare and score AFLP fingerprint
profiles are described in detail.

Results
Ampsig format
We propose an Amplified-type signature (Ampsig) as an
informative, highly specific, yet extremely compact format
for a DNA fingerprint profile (Table 1).

The following is a sample AFLP fingerprint, written out as
bar- and line-delimited entries in a FASTA-style text file
(alternatively, this data can be stored as ordinary text
fields in a relational database):
{AFLP|EcoRI_ACA-MseI_CAC|D
id0011|1|50|101|AFLP profile for D. sonia

Sonia

B...A.B.D.DD..BB..A..DD.B.A..DC..ABB..BBA..DCB..D..B
The application of Ampsig in AFLP data analysis and
algorithms
An AFLP fingerprint comprises of many PCR fragments.
Either radioisotope or fluorescent DNA fragment data is
obtained depending on whether radioisotope-labeled
primers or fluorescent-labeled primers are used for the final selective amplification. The popular ABI PRISM genetic analysis instruments detect DNA fragments by
automated fluorescent scanning detection. The GeneScan® analysis software analyzes data to size and quantify
DNA fragments and gives result for each sample in a table
listing fragment sizes and intensities (see table 2 for an example). Such results are difficult for multiple sample comparison, can't be interpreted without other minimum

Page 2 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/7

Table 1: Illustration of the Ampsig format with example values

#

Field

Example Value

Information

1

Technique

AFLP

2

Experiment

EcoRI_ACA-MseI_CAC

3

Source

D Sonia id0011

4

UnitSize

1

5
6

StartSize
EndSize

50
90

7
8

Annotation
Signature

AFLP profile for D. Sonia
A..B..DC..B.D.....CC...A.....DDA.A....C..D..BB

Full abbreviation of type of DNA markers, such as AFLP, SSR,
RAPD
For VNTR, RAPD and SSR markers, primer sequences will be
given in full. In this example, a six-nucleotide cutting enzyme
EcoRI and a four-nucleotide cutting enzyme MseI were used to
digest genomic DNA. PCR reaction was conducted with an EcoRI
primer with selective nucleotides ACA, and a MseI primer with
selective nucleotides CAC
Biological source of DNA. The binomial system with abbreviation
of genus followed by species name is used to designate biological
species. It is followed by a four-digit ID number to identify individual samples. In this example, DNA was isolated from a plant
belonging to genus Dendrobium, species Sonia, with a labassigned ID 0011
Unit size of DNA fragment to define the unit spacing. It can also
be interpreted as the sequence resolution. In this example, the 1
indicates that the sequence spacing is 1 base pair.
Size of the first DNA fragment (in base pairs)
Size of the last DNA fragment. This field is redundant, and is kept
mainly for proof-reading
Annotation of the fingerprint (only if required)
Alternatively, a system employing the symbols [4,3,2,1] for peaks
and [0] for peak-absence may also be used.

Table 2: Example of GeneScan analysis result in a simple text file

Peak

time

size

height

area

point

G,1
G,2
G,3
G,4
G,5
G,6
G,7
G,8

35.29
35.65
36.12
36.32
36.73
37.35
37.72
38.03

51.49
53.22
67.34
68.52
69.41
70.23
71.42
72.64

151
296
299
378
765
156
171
514

544
2046
1834
1529
6140
963
979
2982

683
690
699
703
711
723
730
736

necessary information, can't be stored in a database readily and contains less reproducible numeric quantitative
data (fluorescence counting). They are transformed into
Ampsig entries in the following manner:
Normalization
Peak data was obtained in text form using the Export Lane
to Raw command on the ABI GeneScan software, and a
space-delimited plain text file is obtained, an example is
shown in Table 2.

The labels for the 6 columns are peak (peak ID), time (time
of detection), size (calculated size in reference to internal
size standards), height (height of a peak), area (area of
peak) and point (data point at maximum peak height), re-

spectively. In our analysis, we only use data in size and
height columns though area data can also be used.
We found that normalizing the height according to the
highest peak was inadequate in producing consistent signatures because fluctuations in the amplitude (intensity)
of the highest peak have too great an effect in skewing the
rest of the data. We finally decided instead on normalizing
the waveform by average amplitude of the reported peaks.
In this case, one unit would simply represent the average
height of the peaks over the waveform's size range.
We visually ranked peaks on gel images based on intensity
and concluded that categorizing peaks into five scales is
visually achievable without much difficulty (A for very
strong intensity, B for moderately strong intensity, C for
Page 3 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/7

Table 3: Peak Scales after normalization (1 represents the average peak height)

Peak symbol

Range (normalized against average height)

A
B
C
D
.

[6.4, +∞)
[3.2, 6.4)
[1.6, 3.2)
(0, 1.6)
0 (no peak)

moderately weak intensity, D for very weak intensity and
[.] for absence of peak) and this is minimum necessary to
represent quantitative data. Range definitions were adjusted to maximize agreement of computer sorting with visual
sorting. Finally we decided the following optimal ranges
for scaling peaks (Table 3).
Binning
Theoretically, an AFLP gel run should only register peaks
at integral sizes (since only a round number of base pairs
should be present). However, nucleotides composition of
gel fragments, uniformity of gel, size markers used, position of tracking lines and method of calibration for a
standard curve all contribute to fractional-length fragments. Resolution of one base pair is required for analysis
of AFLP results but simple rounding might cancel out
bands that contain important information. In the example given in table 2, simple rounding will merge G,4 and
G,5 as one band of size 69 bp in spite of the fact that they
are clearly two neighboring bands. Thus, the relative distance between peaks as well as their sizes before rounding
up should both be considered in order to arrive at a good
fit. We developed a binning algorithm based on the familiar physical models of spring and elastic (rubberband) energy. Spring and Rubberband model draws the analogy of
a spring maintaining the relative distance between the
peaks, and rubberbands pulling the real-valued peaks towards integral points. This is to allow sequence fragments
to move as a whole and maintain their relative distance.
With this scheme, consecutive fragments less than 2.5
units from each other are clustered into a sequence. If the
potential energy function of a binned sequence is defined
as the sum of its Spring energy and its Rubberband energy,
the 'best fit' simply involves minimizing the fragment's
potential energy function.

If simple rounding is used to bin the sequence of fragments (67.3, 68.5, 69.4, 70.2, 71.9 see Figure 1A), it results in the minimum rubberband energy for the system
since all peaks are binned to their closest integer values, as
shown by the dotted lines). However, its spring energy is
quite high (The first spring segment, shown as double

lines, is stretched from 1.2 to 2 units in length, while the
second segment is compressed from 0.9 to 0 units).
Our binning algorithm involves optimizing for the best fit
i.e. minimizing on the sum of rubber band energy and
spring energy after displacement bands into integers. We
then tweaked the formulae to see what adjustments produced the most satisfactory results. By comparing binning
results with gel image and electrophoregram of 20 fingerprints, we found that the system worked best when the
rubberband energy function was proportional to the cube
of the displacement, spring energy function was proportional to the square of the displacement and weightage of
the spring energy was tripled (Figure 2). The same fragments will then be binned with this spring and rubber
band model as 67,68,69,70,71 (Figure 1B).
Where x is the displacement and kr and ks are proportionality constants.
Since the system works best when ks/kr = 3, we can set kr
= 1 and ks = 3 to give the optimized formula:
E = xr3 + 3xs2
The peaks in the above example will then be binned as
shown in Figure 3 and it is easy to appreciate it as the optimal binning.
Profile comparison
Consisting of pure text, Amptype signature files can be
easily aligned and compared. A method to quantitate similarity is then required. We reason that more intense
bands should be given higher weightage due to the fact
that they are the most reproducible bands and higher intensity may be attributed to high copy numbers. That
higher intensity may also be attributed to comigration of
non-allelic fragments also justifies higher weightage. The
commonly used methods for calculating genetic distances
like DICE, Jaccard and Pearson [6] are based on the assumption that each band carries equal amount of information and are therefore not applicable. We adapted the
reward-penalty concept used in BLAST sequence compar-

Page 4 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/7

Figure 1
Comparison of two binning models. A sequence of AFLP markers (67,3, 68.5, 69.4, 70.2, 71.9) are binned by: A. Simple rounding B. Spring and rubber band model

isons, i.e. a positive score will be awarded for every matching character, and a penalty will be incurred for every
mismatch. Matching peaks of different intensities will be
scored less (see table 4).
e.g. AB..C.D scored against AB..C.D gives a score of 22
(=10+6+4+2)
Alternatively, for every peak that exists on one sequence
but is absent from the other, a penalty is incurred to the
score, depending on the peak's intensity. e.g. If CB..A.D is
scored against CB....D, a -4 penalty is incurred for the
missing A peak.

1) Firstly search for exact matching peaks. All such matching characters are replaced in the string by a dummy character (in this case, a dot '.') to avoid repeated calculation.
2) A second search is then performed for matching peaks
of differing intensity.
3) The peaks remaining are all mismatches which contribute to the total score penalty.
4) The final score is simply the score awarded for matching peaks, minus the penalties incurred by unmatched
ones.

The scoring will proceed as following:

Page 5 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/7

Figure 2
Formula for Rubberband and Spring energy, Er, Es and E are rubberband energy, spring energy and potential energy, respectively. x is the displacement and kr and ks are proportionality constants.

Score by this method depends on both intensity of matching and width of the scoring window.

Percent (A,B) = 100% × score(A,B) / Max {score(A,A),
score(B,B)}

new orchid cultivar is compared with those of related
commercial Dendrobium cultivars in a database with >70
profiles. The search result is shown as a list of fingerprint
profiles in the order of their similarity to this fingerprint
(score and percentage similarity). The new cultivar is
found closest to cultivar Dendrobium Tay Swee Keng with
a score of 297 out of maximum possible score of 418 and
72.8% similarity. The result makes very good sense since
Dendrobium Tay Swee Keng was one parent for this new
cultivar. Since the AFLP DNA fingerprint profile of this
new cultivar has no stronger similarity to any other profile
in this database, we conclude that it is a novel cultivar
judging from its unique AFLP fingerprint profile.

This score is symmetric since Score(A,B) = Score (B,A)

Discussion

We introduce a second scoring method, percentage, to
make it easier to comprehend similarity of two fingerprints. It is expressed as a percentage value with a maximum of 100%. Within a designated scoring window, the
percentage score of sequence B against sequence A is defined as the ratio of the score of B against A to the highest
possible score within the scoring window.

Example of use: novelty of plant variety
Based on the scheme and algorithms described above, we
have developed a software for databasing and managing
AFLP DNA fingerprint profiles. The web-interfaced and
user-friendly software can upload raw data files generated
by GeneScan software, normalization is conducted during
the uploading process. It also provides the flexibility of
manual imput, edit or delete operations of fingerprint
profiles. A profile can be compared with all fingerprint
profiles in the same database, resulting in a list of profiles
in the order of score and percentage of similarity. It can be
used for profile matching as well as for those purposes requiring evaluating difference of a fingerprint profile
against all others in a database. One such use is to prove
novelty of new plant varieties to satisfy DUS requirements
(novel, distinct, unique and stable) under Plant Breeder
Rights. In this example (Figure 3), AFLP fingerprint of one

DNA fingerprinting reveals differences in genomic DNAs,
is independent of developmental stage and environmental factors, therefore such information is not necessary to
interpret a DNA fingerprint profile. Besides the minimum
necessary information we suggest in this paper, other factors will also affect DNA fingerprinting patterns to a lesser
extent. These factors include the set-up of a laboratory,
skill level of technicians, DNA quality, type of labeling
(radioisotope or fluorescent dye), methods of detection
and data analysis software, among several others. We reason that these factors affect mostly data quality but are not
critical to interpret and for others to repeat an experiment.
The Ampsig format is simple, compact, yet keeps the essence of DNA fingerprint profiles. It allows manual editing using any text editor. It is an open format to
accommodate results from other DNA fingerprinting
techniques like Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA

Page 6 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/7

Figure 3
Evaluation novelty of an orchid cultivar by using PAPA software. A. After uploading data into the software, the query AFLP fingerprint profile for the cultivar "unknown" is shown, together with other profiles in the database "orchidb1", as a string of letters representing fragments of different relative intensities. Different colors were used for different relative intensities to
enhance visual effects. Size bar on top enables easy sizing of DNA fragments. Five columns on the left contain information on
score, percentage, sample ID, start size and ending size for a profile. Click to select the "unknown" profile (as indicated by the
arrow) to compare with other profiles in the database. B: After database search, profiles are rearranged in the order of their
score and percentage against the query profile.

Page 7 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/7

Table 4: Reward and Penalty score chart

Peaks

A

B

C

D

.

A
B
C
D
.

+10
+3
0
-2
-4

+3
+6
+2
-1
-3

0
+2
+4
0
-2

-2
-1
0
+2
-1

-4
-3
-2
-1
0

(RAPD) [7] and RFLP with minimum changes in experiment field to include contents specific to each technique.
For RFLP technique, we suggest to include information on
restriction enzymes, probe used in the form of accession
number for public databases like genebank. For RAPD,
Variable Number Tandem Repeats (VNTR) [8] and Simple
Sequence Repeats (SSR) markers [9], primer sequences
can be given in full in the experiment field. Some of the
information fields can serve as a unique accession or 'key'
fields in high performance database systems, and can also
be split up into separate fields to enable useful indexing.
The UnitSize field keeps the format flexible enough to
adapt to different type of DNA markers. A UnitSize of 1
base pair is suitable for AFLP, SSR and DNA Amplification
Fingerprinting (DAF) [10] while a UnitSize of 100 base
pairs may be necessary for RFLP and VNTR markers. The
sizes of the fragments can be easily deduced from its StartSize, Signature length and UnitSize definition. The seemingly redundant EndSize for the sequence is also recorded
as a validation check, eg. to ensure that the full length of
the Signature is indeed present.
Normalization of raw data reflects our understanding that
relative intensity of a band is more reproducible than its
absolute counts. Absolute values of fluorescence counting
or density value after autoradiography for each DNA fragment are much less important to a DNA fingerprint profile than relative intensity. These values tend to fluctuate
even in different batches of experiment by the same researcher. Normalization of raw data makes a profile more
robust and repetitive.
The five scales we suggested match well with our visual
sorting. More scales can be adapted if more detail of relative intensity needs to be recorded. Alternatively, it can
also accommodate the practice of using binary symbols
(1,0) for the presence or absence of bands if less information is required.
The Ampsig format makes large-scale data analysis and
comparison possible because the data can be easily stored
and indexed for fast retrieval in any high-performance
SQL database server. Software can also be developed to

perform in-depth analysis of additional related data along
with their Ampsig fingerprints.
We introduce a binning algorithm based on physical
springs and rubberbands to position the sequence fragments into their best possible integer approximations.
Theoretically, the entire run of peaks may well be treated
as a single sequence for binning purposes but this proved
to be too computationally intensive without significant
improvement in the quality of the results. We have verified that this algorithm reduces variation among different
samples and provides consistently reproducible compact
biological signature sequences in our lab.
For the purpose of comparison, we give more weightage to
more intense bands and adapt the reward-penalty concept
used in BLAST sequence comparisons, with gap penalties
set high, because the position of peaks (DNA fragment
sizes) are absolute, and deviation should be penalized
heavily. The absolute score is the sum of scores awarded
for matching peaks minus penalties for unmatched peaks.
It evaluates the level of similarity of two fingerprint profiles. Our suggestions of award/penalty points are empirical and may not be the optimal. Another scoring method,
percentage scoring, is easier to comprehend and compare
similarity within a defined window. Results can be used to
build a similarity matrix among multiple samples and be
used for phylogenic analysis.
Rigid adaptation of this scoring method may result in
poor scoring of DNA fingerprint profiles with a similar
pattern but with slight deviations in position. To overcome this problem, modifications can be incorporated to
allow a single position deviation while searching for
matching peaks, but the score awarded should be reduced.
These concepts have been put into practice and continue
to be feature-updated in the form of a software package titled Public Ampsig Peak Analysis (PAPA) that uses SQL
for databasing fingerprints. The open and non-binary
(text) form can be shared across many current applications and formats including XML.

Page 8 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4

http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/4/7

In the example, we demonstrate utility of our scheme and
algorithms by using this software to evaluate novelty of a
new plant cultivar by comparing its AFLP fingerprint profile with those of related commercial hybrids in the database. Caution needs to be taken to accept such conclusion
of "novelty" since it is directly affected by number of profiles in the database and cut off value for "novelty". Moreover, profiles in this database were obtained by using only
one AFLP primer combination, conclusion may vary with
data from other primer combinations or with combined
data of several primer combinations.

Authors' contributions
Y Hong conceived of and coordinated the study, participated in algorithm design and prepared manuscript. A
Chuah designed the algorithms, performed optimization
of the formula and helped in preparing the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. Wong Lim Soon of the Kent Ridge Digital Labs
and Dr Laszlo Orban of Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory for their invaluable suggestions and critiques.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.

Bostein D, White R, Skolnick M and Davis R American Journal of Human Genetics 1980, 32:314-331
Vos P, Hogers R, Bleeker M, Reijans M, van de Lee T, Hornes M, Frijters A, Pot J, Peleman J and Kuiper M AFLP: a new technique for
DNA fingerprinting. Nucleic Acids Res 1995, 23:4407-4414
Mueller UG and Wolfenbarger LL AFLP genotyping and
fingerprinting. Trends In Ecology And Evolution 1999, 14:389-394
Lionneton E, Ravera S, Sanchez L, Aubert G, Delourme R and Ochatt
S Development of an AFLP-based linkage map and localization of QTLs for seed fatty acid content in condiment mustard (Brassica juncea). Genome 2002, 45:1203-15
Steinger T, Haldimann P, Leiss KA and Muller-Scharer H Does natural selection promote population divergence? A
comparative analysis of population structure using amplified
fragment length polymorphism markers and quantitative
traits. Mol Ecol 2002, 11:2583-90
Sneath PHA and Sokal RR Numerical taxonomy: the principles
and practice of numerical classification. WH Freeman and
Company 1973,
Welsh J and McClelland M Fingerprinting genomes using PCR
with arbitrary primers. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 17:7213-7218
Nakamura Y, Leppert M, O'Connell P, Wolff R, Holm T, Culver M,
Martin C, Fujimoto E, Hoff M and Kumlin E Variable number of
tandem repeat (VNTR) markers for human gene mapping.
Science 1987, 235:1616-1622
Love JM, Knight AM, McAleer MA and Todd JA Towards construction of a high resolution map of the mouse genome using
PCR-analysed microsatellites. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18:41234130
Caetano-Anolles G, Bassam BJ and Gresshoff PM DNA amplification fingerprinting using very short arbitrary oligonucleotide
primers. Biotechnology 1991, 9:553-557

Publish with Bio Med Central and every
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for
disseminating the results of biomedical researc h in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK

Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours — you keep the copyright

BioMedcentral

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp

Page 9 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)

</pre>
</body>
</html>
